the PLUMED SERPENT 

 

 by 

 

 D. H. Lawrence 

 
 CHAPTER I 

 beginning of a bull - fight 

 

 it be the Sunday after Easter , and the last bull - fight of the season in Mexico City . four special bull have be bring over from Spain for the occasion , since spanish bull be more fiery than Mexican . perhaps it be the altitude , perhaps just the spirit of the western continent which be to blame for the lack of ' pep ' , as Owen put it , in the native animal . 

 although Owen , who be a great socialist , disapprove of bull - fight , ' we have never see one . we shall have to go , ' he say . 

 ' oh yes , I think we must see it , ' say Kate . 

 ' and it be our last chance , ' say Owen . 

 away he rush to the place where they sell ticket , to book seat , and Kate go with he . as she come into the street , her heart sink . it be as if some little person inside she be sulk and resist . neither she nor Owen speak much spanish , there be a fluster at the ticket place , and an unpleasant individual come forward to talk American for they . 

 it be obvious they ought to buy ticket for the ' Shade . ' but they want to economize , and Owen say he prefer to sit among the crowd , therefore , against the resistance of the ticket man and the onlooker , they buy reserve seat in the ' Sun . ' 

 the show be on Sunday afternoon . all the tram - car and the frightful little Ford omnibus call camion be label Torero , and be surge away towards Chapultepec . Kate feel that sudden dark feeling , that she do not   want to go . 

 ' I be not very keen on go , ' she say to Owen . 

 ' oh , but why not ? I do not   believe in they on principle , but we have   never see one , so we shall have to go . ' 

 Owen be an American , Kate be irish . ' never have see one ' mean ' have to go . ' but it be american logic rather than irish , and Kate only let herself be overcome . 

 villier of course be keen . but then he too be american , and he too have never see one , and be young , more than anybody he have to go . 

 they get into a Ford taxi and go . the bust car career away down the wide dismal street of asphalt and stone and Sunday dreariness . stone building in Mexico have a peculiar hard , dry dreariness . 

 the taxi draw up in a side street under the big iron scaffolding of the stadium . in the gutter , rather lousy man be sell pulque and sweet , cake , fruit , and greasy food . crazy motorcar rush up and hobble away . little soldier in wash - out cotton uniform , pinky drab , hang around an entrance . above all loom the network iron frame of the huge , ugly stadium . 

 Kate feel she be go to prison . but Owen excitedly surge to the entrance that correspond to his ticket . in the depth of he , he too do not   want to go . but he be a bear American , and if anything be on show , he have to see it . that be ' life . ' 

 the man who take the ticket at the entrance , suddenly , as they be pass in , stand in front of Owen , put both his hand on Owen 's chest , and paw down the front of Owen 's body . Owen start , bridle , transfix for a moment . the fellow stand aside . Kate remain petrified . 

 then Owen jerk into a smile composure as the man wave they on . ' feel for fire - arm ! ' he say , roll his eye with pleased excitement at Kate . 

 but she have not get over the shock of horror , fear the fellow might paw she . 

 they emerge out of a tunnel in the hollow of the concrete - and - iron amphitheatre . a real gutter - lout come to look at their counterslip , to see which seat they have book . he jerk his head downwards , and slouch off . now Kate know she be in a trap - a big concrete beetle trap . 

 they drop down the concrete step till they be only three tier from the bottom . that be their row . they be to sit on the concrete , with a loop of thick iron between each numbered seat . this be a reserved place in the ' Sun . ' 

 Kate sit gingerly between her two iron loop , and look vaguely around . 

 ' I think it be thrill ! ' she say . 

 like most modern people , she have a will - to - happiness . 

 ' be not   it thrill ? ' cry Owen , whose will - to - happiness be almost a mania . ' do not   you think so , Bud ? ' 

 ' why , yes , I think it may be , ' say Villiers , non - committal . 

 but then Villiers be young , he be only over twenty , while Owen be over forty . the young generation calculate its ' happiness ' in a more business - like fashion . villier be out after a thrill , but he be not   go to say he would get one till he would get it . Kate and Owen - Kate be also nearly forty - must enthuse a thrill , out of a sort of politeness to the great Show - man , Providence . 

 ' look here ! ' say Owen . ' supposing we try to protect our extremity on this concrete - ' and thoughtfully he fold his rain - coat and lay it along the concrete ledge so that both he and Kate could sit on it . 

 they sit and gaze around . they be early . patch of people mottle the concrete slope opposite , like eruption . the ring just below be vacant , neatly sand ; and above the ring , on the encircle concrete , great advertisement for hat , with a picture of a city - man 's straw hat , and advertisement for spectacle , with pair of spectacle supinely fold , glare and shout . 

 ' where be the " Shade " then ? ' say Owen , twist his neck . 

 at the top of the amphitheatre , near the sky , be concrete box . this be the ' Shade ' , where anybody who be anything sit . 

 ' oh but , ' say Kate , ' I do not   want to be perch right up there , so far away . ' 

 ' why no ! ' say Owen . ' we be much well where we be , in our " Sun " , which be not   go to shine a great deal after all . ' 

 the sky be cloudy , prepare for the rainy season . 

 it be nearly three o'clock in the afternoon , and the crowd be fill in , but still only occupy patch of the bare concrete . the low tier be reserve , so the bulk of the people sit in the mid - way level , and gentry like our trio be more or less isolated . 

 but the audience be already a mob , mostly of fattish town man in black tight suit and little straw hat , and a mixing - in of the dark - face labourer in big hat . the man in black suit be probably employee and clerk and factory hand . some have bring their woman , in sky - blue chiffon with brown chiffon hat and face powder to look like white marshmallow . some be family with two or three child . 

 the fun begin . the game be to snatch the hard straw hat off some fellow 's head , and send it skim away down the slope of humanity , where some smart bounder down below would catch it and send it skim across in another direction . there be shout of jeer pleasure from the mass , which rise almost to a yell as seven straw hat be skimming , meteor - like , at one moment across the slope of people . 

 ' look at that ! ' say Owen . ' be not   that fun ! ' 

 ' no , ' say Kate , her little alter ego speak out for once , in spite of her will - to - happiness . ' no , I do not   like it . I really hate common people . ' 

 as a socialist , Owen disapprove , and as a happy man , he be disconcert . because his own real self , as far as he have any left , hat common rowdiness just as much as Kate do . 

 ' it be awfully smart though ! ' he say , try to laugh in sympathy with the mob . ' there now , see that ! ' 

 ' yes , it be quite smart , but I be glad it be not my hat , ' say villier . 

 ' oh , it be all in the game , ' say Owen largely . 

 but he be uneasy . he be wear a big straw hat of native make , conspicuous in the comparative isolation of the low tier . after a lot of fidgeting , he take off this hat and put it on his knee . but unfortunately he have a very definitely bald spot on a sunburnt head . 

 behind , above , sit a dense patch of people in the unreserved section . already they be throw thing . Bum ! come an orange , aim at Owen 's bald spot , and hit he on the shoulder . he glare round rather ineffectually through his big shell spectacle . 

 ' I would keep my hat on if I be you , ' say the cold voice of Villiers . 

 ' yes , I think perhaps it be wise , ' say Owen , with assumed nonchalance , put on his hat again . 

 Whereupon a banana skin rattle on Villiers ' tidy and ladylike little panama . he glare round coldly , like a bird that would stab with its beak if it get the chance , but which would fly away at the first real menace . 

 ' how I detest they ! ' say Kate . 

 a diversion be create by the entrance , opposite , of the military band , with their silver and brass instrument under their arm . there be three set . the chief band climb and sit on the right , in the big bare tract of concrete reserve for the Authorities . these musician wear dark grey uniform trim with rose colour , and make Kate feel almost reassure , as if it be Italy and not Mexico City . a silver band in pale buff uniform sit opposite our party , high up across the hollow distance , and still a third ' música ' thread away to the left , on the remote scatter hillside of the amphitheatre . the newspaper have say that the President would attend . but the president be scarce at bull - fight in Mexico , nowadays . 

 there sit the band , in as much pomp as they could muster , but they do not begin to play . great crowd now patch the slope , but there be still bare tract , especially in the Authorities ' section . only a little distance above Kate 's row be a mass of people , as it be impend ; a very uncomfortable sensation . 

 it be three o'clock , and the crowd have a new diversion . the band , due to strike up at three , still sit there in lordly fashion , sound not a note . 

 ' La música ! La música ! ' shout the mob , with the voice of mob authority . they be the People , and the revolution have be their revolution , and they have win they all . the band be their band , present for their amusement . 

 but the band be military band , and it be the army which have win all the revolution . so the revolution be their revolution , and they be present for their own glory alone . 

 Música pagada toca mal tono . 

 spasmodically , the insolent yelling of the mob rise and subside . La música ! La música ! the shout become brutal and violent . Kate always remember it . La música ! the band peacocke its nonchalance . the shouting be a great yell : the degenerate mob of Mexico City ! 

 at length , at its own leisure , the band in grey with dark rose facing strike up : crisp , martial , smart . 

 ' that be fine ! ' say Owen . ' but that be really good ! and it be the first time I have   hear a good band in Mexico , a band with any backbone . ' 

 the music be smart , but it be brief . the band seem scarcely to have start , when the piece be over . the musician take their instrument from their mouth with a gesture of dismissal . they play just to say they would play , make it as short as possible . 

 Música pagada toca mal tono . 

 there be a ragged interval , then the silver band pip up . and at last it be half - past three , or more . 

 Whereupon , at some give signal , the mass in the middle , unreserved seat suddenly burst and rush down on to the low , reserved seat . it be a crash like a burst reservoir , and the populace in black Sunday suit pour down round and about our astonished , frightened trio . and in two minute it be over . without any pushing or shove . everybody careful , as far as possible , not to touch anybody else . you do not   elbow your neighbour if he be get a pistol on his hip and a knife at his belly . so all the seat in the low tier fill in one rush , like the flowing of water . 

 Kate now sit among the crowd . but her seat , fortunately , be above one of the track - way that go round the arena , so at least she would not have anybody sit between her knee . 

 man go uneasily back and forth along this gangway past the foot , want to get in next their friend , but never venture to ask . three seat away , on the same row , sit a polish bolshevist fellow who have meet Owen . he lean over and ask the Mexican next to Owen if he might change seat with he . ' no , ' say the Mexican . ' I will sit in my own seat . ' 

 ' Muy bien , Señor , muy bien ! ' say the Pole . 

 the show do not begin , and man like lose mongrel still prowl back and forth on the track that be next step down from Kate 's foot . they begin to take advantage of the ledge on which rest the foot of our party , to squat there . 

 down sit a heavy fellow , plumb between Owen 's knee . 

 ' I hope they will not   sit on my foot , ' say Kate anxiously . 

 ' we will not   let they , ' say villier , with bird - like decision . ' why do not   you shove he off , Owen ? shove he off ? ' 

 and villier glare at the mexican fellow ensconce between Owen 's leg . Owen flush , and laugh uncomfortably . he be not good at shove people off . the Mexican begin to look round at the three angry white people . 

 and in another moment , another fat Mexican in a black suit and a little black hat be lower himself into villier ' foot - space . but villier be too quick for he . he quickly bring his foot together under the man 's sink posterior , so the individual subside uncomfortably on to a pair of boot , and at the same time feel a hand shove he quietly but determinedly on the shoulder . 

 ' no ! ' villier be say in good American . ' this place be for my foot ! get off ! you get off ! ' 

 and he continue , quietly but very emphatically , to push the Mexican 's shoulder , to remove he . 

 the Mexican half raise himself , and look round murderously at villier . physical violence be be offer , and the only retort be death . but the young American 's face be so cold and abstract , only the eye show a primitive , bird - like fire , that the Mexican be nonplus . and Kate 's eye be blaze with irish contempt . 

 the fellow struggle with his mexican city - breed inferiority complex . he mutter an explanation in Spanish that he be only sit there for a moment , till he could join his friend - wave a hand towards a low tier . villier do not understand a word , but he reiterate : 

 ' I do not   care what it be . this place be for my foot , and you do not   sit there . ' 

 oh , home of liberty ! oh , land of the free ! which of these two man be to win in the struggle for conflicting liberty ? be the fat fellow free to sit between villier ' foot , or be villier free to keep his foot - space ? 

 there be all sort of inferiority complex , and the city Mexican have a very strong sort , that make he all the more aggressive , once it be rouse . therefore the intruder lower his posterior with a heavy , sudden bounce on villier ' foot , and villier , out of very distaste , have have to extricate his foot from such a compression . the young man 's face go white at the nostril , and his eye take on that bright abstract look of pure democratic anger . he push the fat shoulder more decisively , repeat : 

 ' go away ! go away ! you be not to sit there . ' 

 the Mexican , on his own ground , and heavy on his own base , let himself be shove , oblivious . 

 ' Insolence ! ' say Kate loudly . ' insolence ! ' 

 she glare at the fat back in the shoddily - fitting black coat , which look as if a woman dressmaker have make it , with loathing . how could any man 's coat - collar look so homemade , so en famille ! 

 villier remain with a fix , abstract look on his thin face , rather like a death 's head . all his American will be summon up , the bald eagle of the north bristling in every feather . the fellow should not sit there . - but how to remove he ? 

 the young man sit tense with will to annihilate his beetle - like intruder , and Kate use all her irish malice to help he . 

 ' do not   you wonder who be his tailor ? ' she ask , with a flicker in her voice . 

 villier look at the femalish black coat of the Mexican , and make an arch grimace at Kate . 

 ' I should say he have not   one . perhaps do it himself . ' 

 ' very likely ! ' Kate laugh venomously . 

 it be too much . the man get up and betook himself , rather diminish , to another spot . 

 ' Triumph ! ' say Kate . ' can not   you do the same , Owen ? ' 

 Owen laugh uncomfortably , glance down at the man between his knee as he might glance at a dog with rabie , when it have its back to he . 

 ' apparently not yet , unfortunately , ' he say , with some constraint , turn his nose away again from the Mexican , who be use he as a sort of chair - back . 

 there be an exclamation . two horseman in gay uniform and bear long staff have suddenly ride into the ring . they go round the arena , then take up their post , sentry - wise , on either side the tunnel entrance through which they have come in . 

 in march a little column of four toreador wear tight uniform plaster with silver embroidery . they divide , and march smartly in opposite direction , two and two , around the ring , till they come to the place face the section of the Authorities , where they make their salute . 

 so this be a bull - fight ! Kate already feel a chill of disgust . 

 in the seat of the Authorities be very few people , and certainly no sparkling lady in high tortoise - shell comb and lace mantilla . a few common - look people , bourgeois with not much taste , and a couple of officer in uniform . the President have not come . 

 there be no glamour , no charm . a few commonplace people in an expanse of concrete be the elect , and below , four grotesque and effeminate - look fellow in tight , ornate clothe be the hero . with their rather fat posterior and their squiff of pigtail and their clean - shaven face , they look like eunuchs , or woman in tight pant , these precious toreador . 

 the last of Kate 's illusion concern bull - fight come down with a flop . these be the darling of the mob ! these be the gallant toreador ! gallant ? just about as gallant as assistant in a butcher 's shop . Lady - killers ? Ugh ! 

 there be an ah ! of satisfaction from the mob . into the ring suddenly rush a smallish , dun - colour bull with long flourish horn . he run out , blindly , as if from the dark , probably think that now he be free . then he stop short , see he be not free , but surround in an unknown way . he be utterly at a loss . 

 a toreador come forward and switch out a pink cloak like a fan not far from the bull 's nose . the bull give a playful little prance , neat and pretty , and charge mildly on the cloak . the toreador switch the cloak over the animal 's head , and the neat little bull trot on round the ring , look for a way to get out . 

 see the wooden barrier around the arena , find he be able to look over it , he think he might as well take the leap . so over he go into the corridor or passage - way which circle the ring , and in which stand the servant of the arena . 

 just as nimbly , these servant vault over the barrier into the arena , that be now bull - less . 

 the bull in the gangway trot inquiringly round till he come to an opening on to the arena again . so back he trot into the ring . 

 and back into the gangway vault the servant , where they stand again to look on . 

 the bull trot waveringly and somewhat irritated . the toreador wave their cloak at he , and he swerve on . till his vague course take he to where one of the horseman with lance sit motionless on his horse . 

 instantly , in a pang of alarm , Kate notice that the horse be thickly blindfold with a black cloth . yes , and so be the horse on which sit the other picador . 

 the bull trot suspiciously up to the motionless horse bear the rider with the long pole ; a lean old horse that would never move till Doomsday , unless someone shove it . 

 o shade of Don Quixote ! oh four spanish horseman of the Apocalypse ! this be surely one of they . 

 the picador pull his feeble horse round slowly , to face the bull , and slowly he lean forward and shove his lance - point into the bull 's shoulder . the bull , as if the horse be a great wasp that have sting he deep , suddenly lower his head in a jerk of surprise and lift his horn straight up into the horse 's abdomen . and without more ado , over go horse and rider , like a tottering monument upset . 

 the rider scramble from under the horse and go run away with his lance . the old horse , in complete daze amazement , struggle to rise , as if overcome with dumb incomprehension . and the bull , with a red place on his shoulder well a trickle of dark blood , stand look around in equally hopeless amazement . 

 but the wound be hurt . he see the queer sight of the horse half rear from the ground , try to get to its foot . and he smell blood and bowel . 

 so rather vaguely , as if not quite know what he ought to do , the bull once more lower his head and push his sharp , flourish horn in the horse 's belly , work they up and down inside there with a sort of vague satisfaction . 

 Kate have never be take so completely by surprise in all her life . she have still cherish some idea of a gallant show . and before she know where she be , she be watch a bull whose shoulder trickle blood gore his horn up and down inside the belly of a prostrate and feebly plunge old horse . 

 the shock almost overpower she . she have come for a gallant show . this she have pay to see . human cowardice and beastliness , a smell of blood , a nauseous whiff of bursten bowel ! she turn her face away . 

 when she look again , it be to see the horse feebly and dazedly walk out of the ring , with a great ball of its own entrail hang out of its abdomen and swing reddish against its own leg as it automatically move . 

 and once more , the shock of amazement almost make her lose consciousness . she hear the confused small applause of amusement from the mob . and that Pole , to whom Owen have introduce she , lean over and say to she , in horrible English : 

 ' now , Miss Leslie , you be see Life ! now you will have something to write about , in your letter to England . ' 

 she look at his unwholesome face in complete repulsion , and wish Owen would not introduce she to such sordid individual . 

 she look at Owen . his nose have a sharp look , like a little boy who may make himself sick , but who be watch at the shamble with all his eye , know it be forbid . 

 villier , the young generation , look intense and abstract , get the sensation . he would not even feel sick . he be just get the thrill of it , without emotion , coldly and scientifically , but very intent . 

 and Kate feel a real pang of hatred against this americanism which be coldly and unscrupulously sensational . 

 ' why do not   the horse move ? why do not   it run away from the bull ? ' she ask in repel amazement , of Owen . 

 Owen clear his throat . 

 ' do not   you see ? it be blindfold , ' he say . 

 ' but can not   it smell the bull ? ' she ask . 

 ' apparently not . - they bring the old wreck here to finish they off . - I know it be awful , but it be part of the game . ' 

 how Kate hat phrase like ' part of the game . ' what do they mean , anyhow ! she feel utterly humiliate , crush by a sense of human indecency , cowardice of two - legged humanity . in this ' brave ' show she feel nothing but reek cowardice . her breeding and her natural pride be outraged . 

 the ring servant have clean away the mess and spread new sand . the toreador be play with the bull , unfurl their foolish cloak at arm 's length . and the animal , with the red sore run on his shoulder , foolishly caper and run from one rag to the other , here and there . 

 for the first time , a bull seem to she a fool . she have always be afraid of bull , fear temper with reverence of the great Mithraic beast . and now she see how stupid he be , in spite of his long horn and his massive maleness . blindly and stupidly he run at the rag , each time , and the toreador skip like fat - hippe girl show off . probably it need skill and courage , but it look silly . 

 blindly and foolishly the bull run duck its horn each time at the rag , just because the rag flutter . 

 ' run at the man , idiot ! ' say Kate aloud , in her overwrought impatience . ' run at the man , not at the cloak . ' 

 ' they never do , be not   it curious ! ' reply Villiers , with cool scientific interest . ' they say no toreador will face a cow , because a cow always go for he instead of the cloak . if a bull do that there would be no bull - fight . imagine it ! ' 

 she be bore now . the nimbleness and the skip trick of the toreador bore she . even when one of the banderillero rear himself on tiptoe , his plump posterior much in evidence , and from his erectness push two razor - sharp dart with frill at the top into the bull 's shoulder , neatly and smartly , Kate feel no admiration . one of the dart fall out , anyway , and the bull run on with the other swinging and waggle in another bleed place . 

 the bull now want to get away , really . he leap the fence again , quickly , into the attendant ' gangway . the attendant vault over into the arena . the bull trot in the corridor , then nicely leap back . the attendant vault once more into the corridor . the bull trot round the arena , ignore the toreador , and leap once more into the gangway . over vault the attendant . 

 Kate be begin to be amuse , now that the mongrel man be skip for safety . 

 the bull be in the ring again , run from cloak to cloak , foolishly . a banderillero be get ready with two more dart . but at first another picador put nobly forward on his blindfold old horse . the bull ignore this little lot too , and trot away again , as if all the time look for something , excitedly look for something . he stand still and excitedly paw the ground , as if he want something . a toreador advance and swing a cloak . up prance the bull , tail in air , and with a prancing bind charge - upon the rag , of course . the toreador skip round with a ladylike skip , then trip to another point . very pretty ! 

 the bull , in the course of his trotting and prance and pawing , have once more come near the bold picador . the bold picador shove forward his ancient steed , lean forwards , and push the point of his lance in the bull 's shoulder . the bull look up , irritated and arrest . what the devil ! 

 he see the horse and rider . the horse stand with that feeble monumentality of a milk horse , patient as if between the shaft , wait while his master deliver the milk . how strange it must have be to he when the bull , give a little bound like a dog , duck its head and dive its horn upwards into his belly , roll he over with his rider as one might push over a hat - stand . 

 the bull look with irritable wonder at the incomprehensible medley of horse and rider kick on the ground a few yard away from he . he draw near to investigate . the rider scramble out and bolt . and the toreador , run up with their cloak , draw off the bull . he go caracole round , charge at more silk - line rag . 

 meanwhile an attendant have get the horse on its foot again , and be lead it totteringly into the gangway and round to the exit , under the Authorities . the horse crawl slowly . the bull , run from pink cloak to red cloak , rag to rag , and never catch anything , be get excite , impatient of the rag game . he jump once more into the gangway and start run , alas , on towards where the wound horse be still limp its way to the exit . 

 Kate know what be come . before she could look away , the bull have charge on the limping horse from behind , the attendant have flee , the horse be up - end absurdly , one of the bull 's horn between his hind leg and deep in his inside . down go the horse , collapse in front , but his rear be still heave up , with the bull 's horn work vigorously up and down inside he , while he lie on his neck all twist . and a huge heap of bowel come out . and a nauseous stench . and the cry of pleased amusement among the crowd . 

 this pretty event take place on Kate 's side of the ring , and not far from where she sit , below she . Most of the people be on their foot crane to look down over the edge to watch the conclusion of this delightful spectacle . 

 Kate know if she see any more she would go into hysteric . she be get beside herself . 

 she look swiftly at Owen , who look like a guilty boy spellbound . 

 ' I be go ! ' she say , rise . 

 ' go ! ' he cry , in wonder and dismay , his flushed face and his bald flushed forehead a picture , look up at she . 

 but she have already turn , and be hurry away towards the mouth of the exit - tunnel . 

 Owen come run after she , fluster , and draw in all direction . 

 ' really go ! ' he say in chagrin , as she come to the high , vaulted exit - tunnel . 

 ' I must . I have   get to get out , ' she cry . ' do not   you come . ' 

 ' really ! ' he echo , tear all way . 

 the scene be create a very hostile attitude in the audience . to leave the bull - fight be a national insult . 

 ' do not   come ! really ! I shall take a tram - car , ' she say hurriedly . 

 ' really ! do you think you will be all right ? ' 

 ' perfectly . you stay . good - bye ! I can not   smell any more of this stink . ' 

 he turn like Orpheus look back into hell , and wavering make towards his seat again . 

 it be not so easy , because many people be now on their foot and crowd to the exit vault . the rain which have sputter a few drop suddenly fall in a downward splash . People be crowd to shelter ; but Owen , unheeding , fight his way back to his seat , and sit in his rain - coat with the rain pour on his bald head . he be as nearly in hysteric as Kate . but he be convince that this be life . he be see life , and what can an American do more ! 

 ' they might just as well sit and enjoy somebody else 's diarrhoea ' be the thought that pass through Kate 's distracted but still irish mind . 

 there she be in the great concrete archway under the stadium , with the lousy press of the audience crowd in after she . face outward , she see the straight downpour of the rain , and a little beyond , the great wooden gate that open to the free street . oh to be out , to be out of this , to be free ! 

 but it be pour tropical rain . the little shoddy soldier be press back under the brick gateway , for shelter . and the gate be almost shut . perhaps they would not let she out . oh horror ! 

 she stand hover in front of the straight downpour . she would have dash out , but for the restraining thought of what she would look like when her thin gauze dress be plaster to her body by drench rain . on the brink she hover . 

 behind she , from the inner end of the stadium tunnel , the people be surge in in wave . she stand horrified and alone , look always out to freedom . the crowd be in a state of excitement , cut off in its sport , on tenterhook lest it should miss anything . thank goodness the bulk stay near the inner end of the vault . she hover near the outer end , ready to bolt at any moment . 

 the rain crash steadily down . 

 she wait on the outer verge , as far from the people as possible . her face have that draw , blank look of a woman near hysteric . she could not get out of her eye the last picture of the horse lie twist on its neck with its hindquarter hitch up and the horn of the bull goring slowly and rhythmically in its vital . the horse so utterly passive and grotesque . and all its bowel slip on to the ground . 

 but a new terror be the throng inside the tunnel entrance . the big arched place be fill up , but still the crowd do not come very near she . they press towards the inner exit . 

 they be mostly loutish man in city clothe , the mongrel man of a mongrel city . two man stand make water against the wall , in the interval of their excitement . one father have kindly bring his little boy to the show , and stand in fat , sloppy , paternal benevolence above they . they be pale mite , the eld about ten year old , highly dress up in Sunday clothe . and badly they need protect from that paternal benevolence , for they be oppress , peak , and a bit wan from the horror . to those child at least bull - fight do not come natural , but would be an acquire taste . there be other child , however , and fat mamma in black satin that be greasy and grey at the edge with an overflow of face - powder . these fat mamma have a please , excited look in their eye , almost sexual , and very distasteful in contrast to their soft passive body . 

 Kate shiver a little in her thin frock , for the ponderous rain have a touch of ice . she star through the curtain of water at the big rickety gate of the enclosure surround the amphitheatre , at the midget soldier cower in their shoddy , pink - white cotton uniform , and at the glimpse of the squalid street outside , now run with dirty brown stream . the vendor have all take refuge , in dirty - white cluster , in the pulque shop , one of which be sinisterly name : a ver que sale . 

 she be afraid more of the repulsiveness than of anything . she have be in many city of the world , but Mexico have an underlying ugliness , a sort of squalid evil , which make Naples seem debonair in comparison . she be afraid , she dread the thought that anything might really touch she in this town , and give she the contagion of its crawl sort of evil . but she know that the one thing she must do be to keep her head . 

 a little officer in uniform , wear a big , pale - blue cape , make his way through the crowd . he be short , dark , and have a little black beard like an imperial . he come through the people from the inner entrance , and clear his way with a quiet , silent unobtrusiveness , yet with the peculiar heavy indian momentum . even touch the crowd delicately with his gloved hand , and murmur almost inaudibly the Con permiso ! formula , he seem to be keep himself mile away from contact . he be brave too : because there be just the chance some lout might shoot he because of his uniform . the people know he too . Kate could tell that by the flicker of a jeering , self - conscious smile that pass across many face , and the exclamation : ' General Viedma ! Don Cipriano ! ' 

 he come towards Kate , salute and bow with a brittle shyness . 

 ' I be General Viedma . do you wish to leave ? let I get you an automobile , ' he say , in very english English , that sound strange from his dark face , and a little stiff on his soft tongue . 

 his eye be dark , quick , with the glassy darkness that she find so wearying . but they be tilt up with a curious slant , under arched black brow . it give he an odd look of detachment , as if he look at life with raise brow . his manner be superficially assure , underneath perhaps half - savage , shy and farouche , and deprecate . 

 ' thank you so much , ' she say . 

 he call to a soldier in the gateway . 

 ' I will send you in the automobile of my friend , ' he say . ' it will be well than a taxi . you do not   like the bull - fight ? ' 

 ' no ! horrible ! ' say Kate . ' but do get I a yellow taxi . that be quite safe . ' 

 ' well , the man have go for the automobile . you be English , yes ? ' 

 ' irish , ' say Kate . 

 ' ah irish ! ' he reply , with the flicker of a smile . 

 ' you speak English awfully well , ' she say . 

 ' yes ! I be educate there . I be in England seven year . ' 

 ' be you ! my name be Mrs Leslie . ' 

 ' ah Leslie ! I know James Leslie in Oxford . he be kill in the war . ' 

 ' yes . that be my husband 's brother . ' 

 ' oh really ! ' 

 ' how small the world be ! ' say Kate . 

 ' yes indeed ! ' say the General . 

 there be a pause . 

 ' and the gentleman who be with you , they be - ? ' 

 ' american , ' say Kate . 

 ' ah Americans ! ah yes ! ' 

 ' the old one be my cousin - Owen Rhys . ' 

 ' Owen Rhys ! ah yes ! I think I see in the newspaper you be here in town - visit Mexico . ' 

 he speak in a peculiar quiet voice , rather suppress , and his quick eye glance at she , and at his surrounding , like those of a man perpetually suspect an ambush . but his face have a certain silent hostility , under his kindness . he be save his nation 's reputation . 

 ' they do put in a not very complimentary note , ' say Kate . ' I think they do not   like it that we stay in the Hotel San Remo . it be too poor and foreign . but we be none of we rich , and we like it well than those other place . ' 

 ' the Hotel San Remo ? where be that ? ' 

 ' in the Avenida del Peru . will not   you come and see we there , and meet my cousin and Mr Thompson ? ' 

 ' thank you ! thank you ! I hardly ever go out . but I will call if I may , and then perhaps you will all come to see I at the house of my friend , Señor Ram n Carrasco . ' 

 ' we should like to , ' say Kate . 

 ' very well . and shall I call , then ? ' 

 she tell he a time , and add : 

 ' you must not   be surprised at the hotel . it be small , and nearly all Italians . but we try some of the big one , and there be such a feeling of lowness about they , awful ! I can not   stand the feeling of prostitution . and then the cheap insolence of the servant . no , my little San Remo may be rough , but it be kindly and human , and it be not rotten . it be like Italy as I always know it , decent , and with a bit of human generosity . I do think Mexico City be evil , underneath . ' 

 ' well , ' he say , ' the hotel be bad . it be unfortunate , but the foreigner seem to make the Mexicans bad than they be naturally . and Mexico , or something in it , certainly make the foreigner bad than they be at home . ' 

 he speak with a certain bitterness . 

 ' perhaps we should all stay away , ' she say . 

 ' perhaps ! ' he say , lift his shoulder a little . ' but I do not   think so . ' 

 he relapse into a slightly blank silence . Peculiar how his feeling flush over he , anger , diffidence , wistfulness , assurance , and an anger again , all in little flush , and somewhat naïve . 

 ' it do not   rain so much , ' say Kate . ' when will the car come ? ' 

 ' it be here now . it have be wait some time , ' he reply . 

 ' then I will go , ' she say . 

 ' well , ' he reply , look at the sky . ' it be still rain , and your dress be very thin . you must take my cloak . ' 

 ' oh ! ' she say , shrink , ' it be only two yard . ' 

 ' it be still rain fairly fast . well either wait , or let I lend you my cloak . ' 

 he swing out of his cloak with a quick little movement , and hold it up to she . almost without realize , she turn her shoulder to he and he put the cape on she . she catch it round she , and run out to the gate , as if escape . he follow , with a light yet military stride . the soldier salute rather slovenly , and he respond briefly . 

 a not very new Fiat stand at the gate , with a chauffeur in a short red - and - black check coat . the chauffeur open the door . Kate slip off the cloak as she get in , and hand it back . he stand with it over his arm . 

 ' good - bye ! ' she say . ' thank you ever so much . and we shall see you on Tuesday . do put your cape on . ' 

 ' on Tuesday , yes . Hotel San Remo . Calle de Peru , ' he add to the chauffeur . then turn again to Kate : ' the hotel , no ? ' 

 ' yes , ' she say , and instantly change . ' no , take I to Sanborn 's , where I can sit in a corner and drink tea to comfort I . ' 

 ' to comfort you after the bull - fight ? ' he say , with another quick smile . ' to Sanborn 's , Gonzalez . ' 

 he salute and bow and close the door . the car start . 

 Kate sit back , breathe relief . relief to get away from that beastly place . relief even to get away from that nice man . he be awfully nice . but he make she feel she want to get away from he too . there be that heavy , black mexican fatality about he , that put a burden on she . his quietness , and his peculiar assurance , almost aggressive ; and at the same time , a nervousness , an uncertainty . his heavy sort of gloom , and yet his quick , naïve , childish smile . those black eye , like black jewel , that you could not   look into , and which be so watchful ; yet which , perhaps , be wait for some sign of recognition and of warmth ! perhaps ! 

 she feel again , as she feel before , that Mexico lie in her destiny almost as a doom . something so heavy , so oppressive , like the fold of some huge serpent that seem as if it could hardly raise itself . 

 she be glad to get to her corner in the tea - house , to feel herself in the cosmopolitan world once more , to drink her tea and eat strawberry shortcake and try to forget . 

 

 

 CHAPTER II 

 Tea - party in Tlacolula 

 

 Owen come back to the hotel at about half - past six , tired , excited , a little guilty , and a good deal distress at have let Kate go alone . and now the whole thing be over , rather dreary in spirit . 

 ' oh , how do you get on ? ' he cry , the moment he see she , afraid almost like a boy of his own sin of omission . 

 ' I get on perfectly . go to Sanborn 's for tea , and have strawberry shortcake - so good ! ' 

 ' oh , good for you ! ' he laugh in relief . ' then you be not   too much overcome ! I be so glad . I have such awful qualm after I would let you go . imagine all the thing that be suppose to happen in Mexico - chauffeur drive away with you into some horrible remote region , and rob you and all that - but then I know really you would be all right . oh , the time I have - the rain ! - and the people throw thing at my bald patch - and those horse - be not   that horrible ? - I wonder I be still alive . ' and he laugh with tired excitement , put his hand over his stomach and roll his eye . 

 ' be not   you drench ? ' she say . 

 ' drench ! ' he reply . ' or at least I be . I have   dry off quite a lot . my rain - coat be no good - I do not   know why I do not   buy another . oh , but what a time ! the rain stream on my bald head , and the crowd behind throw orange at it . then simply gore in my inside about let you go alone . yet it be the only bull - fight I shall ever see . I come then before it be over . Bud would not   come . I suppose he be still there . ' 

 ' be it as awful as the beginning ? ' she ask . 

 ' no ! no ! it be not . the first be bad - that horse - shamble . oh , they kill two more horse . and five bull ! yes , a regular butchery . but some of it be very neat work ; those toreador do some very pretty feat . one stand on his cloak while a bull charge he . ' 

 ' I think , ' interrupt Kate , ' if I know that some of those toreador be go to be toss by the bull , I would go to see another bull - fight . Ugh , how I detest they ! the long I live the more loathsome the human specie become to I . how much nice the bull be ! ' 

 ' oh , quite ! ' say Owen vaguely . ' exactly . but still there be some very skilful work , very pretty . really very plucky . ' 

 ' yah ! ' snarl Kate . ' Plucky ! they with all their knife and their spear and cloak and dart - and they know just how a bull will behave . it be just a performance of human being torture animal , with those common fellow show off , how smart they be at hurt a bull . dirty little boy maim fly - that be what they be . only grown - up , they be bastard , not boy . oh , I wish I could be a bull , just for five minute . Bastard , that be what I call it ! ' 

 ' well ! ' laugh Owen uneasily , ' it be rather . ' 

 ' call that manliness ! ' cry Kate . ' then thank God a million time that I be a woman , and know poltroonery and dirty - mindedness when I see it . ' 

 again Owen laugh uncomfortably . 

 ' go upstairs and change , ' she say . ' you will die . ' 

 ' I think I would well . I feel I might die any minute , as a matter of fact . well , till dinner then . I will tap at your door in half an hour . ' 

 Kate sit try to sew , but her hand tremble . she could not get the bull - ring out of her mind , and something feel damage in she inside . 

 she straighten herself , and sigh . she be really very angry , too , with Owen . he be naturally so sensitive , and so kind . but he have the insidious modern disease of tolerance . he must tolerate everything , even a thing that revolt he . he would call it life ! he would feel he have live this afternoon . Greedy even for the most sordid sensation . 

 whereas she feel as if she have eat something which be give her ptomaine poisoning . if that be life ! 

 ah man , man ! they all have this soft rottenness of the soul , a strange perversity which make even the squalid , repulsive thing seem part of life to they . life ! and what be life ? a louse lie on its back and kicking ? Ugh ! 

 at about seven o'clock Villiers come tap . he look wan , peak , but like a bird that have successfully peck a bellyful of garbage . 

 ' oh it be great ! ' he say , lounge on one hip . ' great ! they kill seven bull . ' 

 ' no calf , unfortunately , ' say Kate , suddenly furious again . 

 he pause to consider the point , then laugh . her anger be another slight sensational amusement to he . 

 ' no , no calf , ' he say . ' the calf have come home to be fatten . but several more horse after you have go . ' 

 ' I do not   want to hear , ' she say coldly . 

 he laugh , feel rather heroic . after all , one must be able to look on blood and bursten bowel calmly : even with a certain thrill . the young hero ! but there be dark ring round his eye , like a debauch . 

 ' oh but ! ' he begin , make a rather coy face . ' do not   you want to hear what I do after ! I go to the hotel of the chief toreador , and see he lie on his bed all dress up , smoke a fat cigar . rather like a male Venus who be never undressed . so funny ! ' 

 ' who take you there ? ' she say . 

 ' that Pole , you remember ? - and a Spaniard who talk English . the toreador be great , lie on his bed in all his get - up , except his shoe , and quite a crowd of man go over it all again - wawawawawa ! - you never hear such a row ! ' 

 ' be not   you wet ? ' say Kate . 

 ' no , not at all . I be perfectly dry . you see I have my coat . only my head , of course . my poor hair be all streak down my face like streak of dye . ' he wipe his thin hair across his head with rather self - conscious humour . ' have not   Owen come in ? ' he ask . 

 ' yes , he be change . ' 

 ' well I will go up . I suppose it be nearly supper time . oh yes , it be after ! ' at which discovery he brighten as if he have receive a gift . 

 ' oh by the way , how do you get on ? rather mean of we to let you go all alone like that , ' he say , as he hang poise in the open doorway . 

 ' not at all , ' she say . ' you want to stay . and I can look after myself , at my time of life . ' 

 ' we - ell ! ' he say , with an american drawl . ' maybe you can ! ' then he give a little laugh . ' but you should have see all those man rehearse in that bedroom , throw their arm about , and the toreador lie on the bed like Venus with a fat cigar , listen to her lover . ' 

 ' I be glad I do not , ' say Kate . 

 villier disappear with a wicked little laugh . and as she sit her hand tremble with outrage and passion . a - moral ! how could one be a - moral , or non - moral , when one 's soul be revolt ! how could one be like these Americans , pick over the garbage of sensation , and gobble it up like carrion bird ! at the moment , both Owen and Villiers seem to she like carrion bird , repulsive . 

 she feel , moreover , that they both hat she first because she be a woman . it be all right so long as she fall in with they in every way . but the moment she stand out against they in the least , they hat she mechanically for the very fact that she be a woman . they hat her womanness . 

 and in this Mexico , with its great under - drift of squalor and heavy reptile - like evil , it be hard for she to bear up . 

 she be really fond of Owen . but how could she respect he ? so empty , and wait for circumstance to fill he up . sweep with an american despair of have live in vain , or of not have really live . have miss something . which fearful misgiving would make he rush like mechanical steel filing to a magnet , towards any crowd in the street . and then all his poetry and philosophy go with the cigarette - end he throw away , he would stand crane his neck in one more frantic effort to see - just to see . whatever it be , he must see it . or he might miss something . and then , after he have see an old ragged woman run over by a motor - car and bleed on the floor , he would come back to Kate pale at the gill , sick , bewilder , daunt , and yet , yes , glad he would see it . it be life ! 

 ' well , ' say Kate , ' I always thank God I be not Argus . two eye be often two too many for I , in all the horror . I do not   feed myself on street - accident . ' 

 at dinner they try to talk of pleasanter thing than bullfight . villier be neat and tidy and very nicely mannered , but she know he be keep a little mocking laugh up his sleeve , because she could not stomach the afternoon 's garbage . he himself have black ring under his eye , but that be because he have ' live . ' 

 the climax come with the dessert . in walk the Pole and that Spaniard who speak American . the Pole be unhealthy and unclean - looking . she hear he say to Owen , who of course have rise with automatic cordiality : 

 ' we think we would come here to dinner . well , how be you ? ' 

 Kate 's skin be already goose - flesh . but the next instant she hear that dingy voice , that speak so many language dingily , assail she with familiarity : 

 ' ah , Miss Leslie , you miss the good part of it . you miss all the fun ! oh , I say - ' 

 rage fly into her heart and fire into her eye . she get up suddenly from her chair , and face the fellow behind she . 

 ' thank you ! ' she say . ' I do not   want to hear . I do not   want you to speak to I . I do not   want to know you . ' 

 she look at he once , then turn she back , sit down again , and take a pitahaya from the fruit plate . 

 the fellow go green , and stand a moment speechless . 

 ' oh , all right ! ' he say mechanically , turn away to the Spaniard who speak American . 

 ' well - see you later ! ' say Owen rather hurriedly , and he go back to his seat at Kate 's table . 

 the two strange fellow sit at another table . Kate eat her cactus fruit in silence , and wait for her coffee . by this time she be not so angry , she be quite calm . and even Villiers hide his joy in a new sensation under a manner of complete quiet composure . 

 when coffee come she look at the two man at the other table , and at the two man at her own table . 

 ' I have   have enough of canaille , of any sort , ' she say . 

 ' oh , I understand , perfectly , ' say Owen . 

 after dinner , she go to her room , and through the night she could not sleep , but lie listen to the noise of Mexico City , then to the silence and the strange , grisly fear that so often creep out on to the darkness of a mexican night . away inside she , she loathe Mexico City . she even fear it . in the daytime it have a certain spell - but at night , the underneath grisliness and evil come forth . 

 in the morning Owen also announce that he have not sleep at all . 

 ' oh , I never sleep so well since I be in Mexico , ' say villier , with a triumphant look of a bird that have just peck a good morsel from the garbage - heap . 

 ' look at the frail aesthetic youth ! ' say Owen , in a hollow voice . 

 ' his frailty and his aestheticism be both bad sign , to I , ' say Kate ominously . 

 ' and the youth . surely that be another ! ' say Owen , with a dead laugh . 

 but villier only give a little snort of cold , pleased amusement . 

 someone be call Miss Leslie on the telephone , say the Mexican chambermaid . it be the only person Kate know in the capital - or in the Distrito Federal - a Mrs Norris , widow of an english ambassador of thirty year ago . she have a big , ponderous old house out in the village of Tlacolula . 

 ' yes ! yes ! this be Mrs Norris . how be you ? that be right , that be right . now , Mrs Leslie , will not   you come out to tea this afternoon and see the garden ? I wish you would . two friend be come in to see I , two Mexicans : Don Ram n Carrasco and General Viedma . they be both charming man , and Don Ram n be a great scholar . I assure you , they be both entirely the exception among Mexicans . oh , but entirely the exception ! so now , my dear Mrs Leslie , will not   you come with your cousin ? I wish you would . ' 

 Kate remember the little General ; he be a good deal small than herself . she remember his erect , alert little figure , something birdlike , and the face with eye slant under arched eyebrow , and the little black tuft of an imperial on the chin : a face with a peculiar chinese suggestion , without be chinese in the least , really . an odd , detach , yet cocky little man , a true little Indian , speak Oxford English in a rapid , low , musical voice , with extraordinarily gentle intonation . yet those black , inhuman eye ! 

 till this minute she have not really be able to recall he to herself , to get any sharp impression . now she have it . he be an indian pure and simple . and in Mexico , she know , there be more general than soldier . there have be three general in the Pullman come down from El Paso , two , more or less educate , in the ' drawing - room ' , and the third , a real peasant Indian , travel with a frizzy half - white woman who look as if she have fall into a flour - sack , her face be so deep in powder , and her frizzy hair and her brown silk dress so douche with the white dust of it . neither this ' General ' nor this woman have ever be in a Pullman before . but the General be sharp than the woman . he be a tall wiry fellow with a reddened pock - mark face and sharp little black eye . he follow Owen to the smoking - room , and watch with sharp eye , to see how everything be do . and soon he know . and he would wipe his wash - bowl dry as neatly as anybody . there be something of a real man about he . but the poor , half - white woman , when she want the lady ' toilet , get lose in the passage and wail aloud : I do not   know where to go ! no sé adonde ! no sé adonde ! - until the General send the Pullman boy to direct she . 

 but it have annoy Kate to see this General and this woman eat chicken and asparagus and jelly in the Pullman , pay fifteen peso for a rather poor dinner , when for a peso - and - a - half apiece they could have eat a well meal , and real Mexican , at the meal - stop station . and all the poor , barefoot people clamour on the platform , while the ' General ' , who be a man of their own sort , nobly swallow his asparagus on the other side of the window - pane . 

 but this be how they save the people , in Mexico and elsewhere . some tough individual scramble up out of the squalor and proceed to save himself . who pay for the asparagus and jelly and face - powder , nobody ask , because everybody know . 

 and so much for mexican general : as a rule , a class to be strictly avoid . 

 Kate be aware of all this . she be not   much interested in any sort of Mexican in office . there be so much in the world that one want to avoid , as one want to avoid the lice that creep on the unwashed crowd . 

 be rather late , Owen and Kate bump out to Tlacolula in a Ford taxi . it be a long way , a long way through the peculiar squalid ending of the town , then along the straight road between tree , into the valley . the sun of April be brilliant , there be pile of cloud about the sky , where the volcano would be . the valley stretch away to its sombre , atmospheric hill , in a flat dry bed , parch except where there be some crop be irrigate . the soil seem strange , dry , blackish , artificially wet , and old . the tree rise high , and hung bare bough , or withered shade . the building be either new and alien , like the Country Club , or crack and dilapidate , with all the plaster fall off . the fall of thick plaster from crack building - one could almost hear it ! 

 Yellow tram - car rush at express speed away down the fence - in car - line , rush round towards Xochimilco or Tlalpam . the asphalt road run outside these line , and on the asphalt rush incredibly dilapidate Ford omnibus , crowd with blank dark native in dirty cotton clothe and big straw hat . at the far edge of the road , on the dust - track under the tree , little donkey under huge load loitered towards the city , drive by man with blacken face and bare , blacken leg . three - fold go the traffic ; the roar of the tram - train , the clatter of the automobile , the straggle of ass and of outside - seem individual . 

 occasional flower would splash out in colour from a ruin of fall plaster . occasional woman with strong , dark - brown arm would be wash rag in a drain . an occasional horseman would ride across to the herd of motionless black - and - white cattle on the field . occasional maize - field be already come green . and the pillar that mark the water conduit pass one by one . 

 they go through the tree - fill plaza of Tlacolula , where native be squat on the ground , sell fruit or sweet , then down a road between high wall . they pull up at last at big gate - door , beyond which be a heavy pink - and - yellow house , and beyond the house , high , dark cypress tree . 

 in the road two motor - car be already stand . that mean other visitor . Owen knock on the studded fortress door : there be an imbecile barking of dog . at last a little footman with a little black moustache open silently . 

 the square , inner patio , dark , with sun lie on the heavy arch of one side , have pot of red and white flower , but be ponderous , as if dead for century . a certain dead , heavy strength and beauty seem there , unable to pass away , unable to liberate itself and decompose . there be a stone basin of clear but motionless water , and the heavy reddish - and - yellow arch go round the courtyard with warrior - like fatality , their basis in dark shadow . dead , massive house of the Conquistadores , with a glimpse of tall - grow garden beyond , and far aztec cypress rise to strange dark height . and dead silence , like the black , porous , absorptive lava rock . save when the tram - car batter past outside the solid wall . 

 Kate go up the jet - like stone staircase , through the leather door . Mrs Norris come forward on the terrace of the upper patio to receive her guest . 

 ' I be so glad , my dear , that you come . I should have ring you up before , but I have   have such trouble with my heart . and the doctor want to send I down to a low altitude ! I say to he , I have   no patience ! if you be go to cure I , cure I at an altitude of seven thousand foot or else admit your incompetence at once . ridiculous , this rush up and down from one altitude to another . I have   live at this height all these year . I simply refuse to be bundle down to Cuernavaca or some other place where I do not   want to go . well , my dear , and how be you ? ' 

 Mrs Norris be an elderly woman , rather like a conquistador herself in her black silk dress and her little black shoulder - shawl of fine cashmere , with a short silk fringe , and her ornament of black enamel . her face have go slightly grey , her nose be sharp and dusky , and her voice hammer almost like metal , a slow , distinct , peculiar hard music of its own . she be an archaeologist , and she have study the Aztec remain so long , that now some of the black - grey look of the lava rock , and some of the experience of the aztec idol , with sharp nose and slightly prominent eye and an expression of tomb - like mockery , have pass into her face . a lonely daughter of culture , with a strong mind and a dense will , she have browse all her life on the hard stone of archaeological remain , and at the same time she have retain a strong sense of humanity , and a slightly fantastic humorous vision of her fellow man . 

 from the first instant , Kate respect she for her isolation and her dauntlessness . the world be make up of a mass of people and a few individual . Mrs Norris be one of the few individual . true , she play her social game all the time . but she be an odd number ; and all alone , she could give the even number a bad time . 

 ' but come in . do come in ! ' she say , after keep she two guest out on the terrace that be line with black idol and dusty native basket and shield and arrow and tapa , like a museum . 

 in the dark sitting - room that open on to the terrace be visitor : an old man in a black morning coat and white hair and beard , and a woman in black crêpe - de - chine , with the inevitable hat of her sort upon her grey hair : a stiff satin turn up on three side and with black osprey underneath . she have the baby face and the fade blue eye and the middle - west accent inevitable . 

 ' Judge and Mrs Burlap . ' 

 the third visitor be a youngish man , very correct and not quite sure . he be Major Law , american military attaché at the moment . 

 the three people eye the newcomer with cautious suspicion . they might be shady . there be indeed so many shady people in Mexico that it be take for grant , if you arrive unannounced and unexpected in the capital , that you be probably under an assumed name , and have some dirty game up your sleeve . 

 ' be long in Mexico ? ' snap the Judge ; the police enquiry have begin . 

 ' no ! ' say Owen , resonantly , his gorge rise . ' about two week . ' 

 ' you be an American ? ' 

 ' i , ' say Owen , ' be american . Mrs Leslie be English - or rather irish . ' 

 ' be in the club yet ? ' 

 ' no , ' say Owen , ' I have not . american club be not   much in my line . though Garfield Spence give I a letter of introduction . ' 

 ' who ? Garfield Spence ? ' the judge start as if he have be sting . ' why the fellow 's nothing well than a bolshevist . why he go to Russia ! ' 

 ' I should rather like to go to Russia myself , ' say Owen . ' it be probably the most interesting country in the world to - day . ' 

 ' but be not   you tell I , ' put in Mrs Norris , in her clear , metal - musical voice , ' that you love China so much , Mr Rhys ? ' 

 ' I do like China very much , ' say Owen . 

 ' and I be sure you make some wonderful collection . tell I now , what be your particular fancy ? ' 

 ' perhaps , after all , ' say Owen , ' it be jade . ' 

 ' ah jade ! yes ! Jade ! Jade be beautiful ! those wonderful little fairy - land they carve in jade ! ' 

 ' and the stone itself ! it be the delicate stone that fascinate I , ' say Owen . ' the wonderful quality of it ! ' 

 ' ah wonderful , wonderful ! tell I now , dear Mrs Leslie , what you have be do since I see you ? ' 

 ' we go to a bull - fight , and hat it , ' say Kate . ' at least I do . we sit in the Sun , near the ring , and it be all horrible . ' 

 ' horrible , I be sure . I never go to a bull - fight in Mexico . only in Spain , where there be wonderful colour . do you ever try a bull - fight , Major ? ' 

 ' yes , I have be several time . ' 

 ' you have ! then you know all about it . and how be you like Mexico , Mrs Leslie ? ' 

 ' not much , ' say Kate . ' it strike I as evil . ' 

 ' it do ! it do ! ' say Mrs Norris . ' ah , if you have know it before ! Mexico before the revolution ! it be different then . what be the late news , Major ? ' 

 ' about the same , ' say the Major . ' there be a rumour that the new President will be turn down by the army , a few day before he come into office . but you never know . ' 

 ' I think it would be a great shame not to let he have a try , ' put in Owen hotly . ' he seem a sincere man , and just because he be honestly a Labour man , they want to shut he out . ' 

 ' ah , my dear Mr Rhys , they all talk so nobly beforehand . if only their deed follow their word , Mexico would be heaven on earth . ' 

 ' instead of hell on earth , ' snap the Judge . 

 a young man and his wife , also Americans , be introduce as Mr and Mrs Henry . the young man be fresh and lively . 

 ' we be talk about the new President , ' say Mrs. Norris . 

 ' well , why not ! ' say Mr Henry breezily . ' I be just back from Orizaba . and do you know what they have   get paste up on the wall ? - Hosanna ! Hosanna ! Hosanna ! Viva el Jesús Cristo de Mexico , Socrates Tomás Montes ! ' 

 ' why , do you ever hear of such a thing ! ' say Mrs. Norris . 

 ' Hosanna ! Hosanna ! Hosanna ! to the new Labour President . I think it be rich , ' say Henry . 

 the Judge stamp his stick on the ground in a speechless access of irritability . 

 ' they paste on my luggage , ' say the Major , ' when I come through Vera Cruz : La degenerada medium clasa , Será regenerada , por mi , Montes . the degenerate middle class shall be regenerate by I , Montes . ' 

 ' Poor Montes ! ' say Kate . ' he seem to have get his work cut out . ' 

 ' he have indeed ! ' say Mrs Norris . ' poor man , I wish he might come in peacefully and put a strong hand on the country . but there be not much hope , I be afraid . ' 

 there be a silence , during which Kate feel that bitter hopelessness that come over people who know Mexico well . a bitter barren hopelessness . 

 ' how can a man who come in on a labour vote , even a doctored one , put a strong hand on a country ! ' snap the Judge . ' why he come in on the very cry of Down with the strong hand ! ' and again the old man stamp his stick in an access of extreme irritability . 

 this be another characteristic of the old resident of the city : a state of intense , though often suppress irritation , an irritation amount almost to rabie . 

 ' oh , but may not   it be possible that he will change his view a little on come into power ? ' say Mrs Norris . ' so many president have do so . ' 

 ' I should say very probable , if ever he get into power , ' say young Henry . ' he will have all his work cut out save Socrates Tomás , he will not   have much time leave for save Mexico . ' 

 ' he be a dangerous fellow , and will turn out a scoundrel , ' say the Judge . 

 ' Myself , ' say Owen , ' as far as I have follow he , I believe he be sincere , and I admire he . ' 

 ' I think it be so nice , ' say Kate , ' that they receive he in New York with loud music by the Street Sweepers ' Band . the Street Sweepers ' Band they send to receive he from the ship ! ' 

 ' you see , ' say the Major , ' no doubt the Labour people themselves wish to send that particular band . ' 

 ' but to be President Elect , and to be receive by the Street Sweepers ' Band ! ' say Kate . ' no , I can not   believe it ! ' 

 ' oh , it actually be so , ' say the Major . ' but that be Labour hail Labour , surely . ' 

 ' the late rumour , ' say Henry , ' be that the army will go over en bloc to General Angulo about the twenty - third , a week before the inauguration . ' 

 ' but how be it possible ? ' say Kate , ' when Montes be so popular ? ' 

 ' monte popular ! ' they all cry at once . ' why ! ' snap the Judge , ' he be the most unpopular man in Mexico . ' 

 ' not with the Labour Party ! ' say Owen , almost at bay . 

 ' the Labour Party ! ' the Judge fairly spat like a cat . ' there be no such thing . what be the Labour Party in Mexico ? a bunch of isolated factory hand here and there , mostly in the State of Vera Cruz . the Labour Party ! they have   do what they could already . we know they . ' 

 ' that be true , ' say Henry . ' the Labourites have try every little game possible . when I be in Orizaba they march to the Hotel Francia to shoot all the gringoe and the Gachupines . the hotel manager have pluck enough to harangue they , and they go off to the next hotel . when the man come out there to talk to they , they shoot he before he get a word out . it be funny , really ! if you have to go to the Town Hall , and you be dressed in decent clothe , they let you sit on a hard bench for hour . but if a street - sweeper come in , or a fellow in dirty cotton drawer , it be Buenos dia ! señor ! Pase uste ! Quiere Usted algo ? - while you sit there wait their pleasure . oh , it be quite funny . ' 

 the Judge tremble with irritation like an access of gout . the party sit in gloomy silence , that sense of doom and despair overcome they as it seem to overcome all people who talk seriously about Mexico . even Owen be silent . he too have come through Vera Cruz , and have have his fright ; the porter have charge he twenty peso to carry his trunk from the ship to the train . twenty peso be ten dollar , for ten minute ' work . and when Owen have see the man in front of he arrest and actually send to jail , a mexican jail at that , for refuse to pay the charge , ' the legal charge ' , he himself have stump up without a word . 

 ' I walk into the National Museum the other day , ' say the Major quietly . ' just into that room on the patio where the stone be . it be rather a cold morning , with a Norte blowing . I would be there about ten minute when somebody suddenly poke I on the shoulder . I turn round , and it be a lout in tight boot . you spik English ? I say yes ! then he motion I to take my hat off : I would get to take my hat off . what for ? say I , and I turn away and go on look at their idol and thing : ugly set of stuff in the world , I believe . then up come the fellow with the attendant - the attendant of course wear his cap . they begin gabble that this be the National Museum , and I must take off my hat to their national monument . imagine it : those dirty stone ! I laugh at they and jam my hat on tight and walk out . they be really only monkey when it come to nationalism . ' 

 ' exactly ! ' cry Henry . ' when they forget all about the Patria and Mexico and all that stuff , they be as nice a people as you would find . but as soon as they get national , they be just monkey . a man up from Mixcoatl tell I a nice story . Mixcoatl be a capital way in the South , and they have   get a sort of Labour bureau there . well , the Indians come in from the hill , as wild as rabbit . and they get they into that bureau , and the Laboristas , the agitator fellow , say to they : now , Señores , have you anything to report from your native village ? have not   you anything for which you would like redress ? then of course the Indians start complain about one another , and the Secretary say : wait a minute , gentleman ! let I ring up the Governor and report this . so he go to the telephone and start ring : ringing : ah ! be that the Palace ? be the Governor in ? tell he Señor Fulano want to speak to he ! the Indians sit gap with open mouth . to they it be a miracle . ah ! be that you , Governor ! good morning ! how be you ? can I have your attention for a moment ? many thank ! well I have   get some gentleman here down from Apaxtle , in the hill : José Garcia , Jesús Querido , etc . - and they wish to report so - and - so . yes ! yes ! that be it ! yes ! what ? you will see that justice be do and the thing be make right ? ah señor , many thank ! in the name of these gentleman from the hill , from the village of Apaxtle , many thank . 

 ' there sit the Indians star as if heaven have open and the Virgin of Guadalupe be stand tiptoe on their chin . and what do you expect ? the telephone be a dummy . it be not   connect with anywhere . be not   that rich ? but it be Mexico . ' 

 the moment 's fatal pause follow this funny story . 

 ' oh but ! ' say Kate , ' it be wicked ! it be wicked . I be sure the Indians would be all right , if they be leave alone . ' 

 ' well , ' say Mrs Norris , ' Mexico be not   like any other place in the world . ' 

 but she speak with fear and despair in her voice . 

 ' they seem to want to betray everything , ' say Kate . ' they seem to love criminal and ghastly thing . they seem to want the ugly thing . they seem to want the ugly thing to come up to the top . all the foulness that lie at the bottom , they want to stir up to the top . they seem to enjoy it . to enjoy make everything fouler . be not   it curious ! ' 

 ' it be curious , ' say Mrs Norris . 

 ' but that be what it be , ' say the Judge . ' they want to turn the country into one big crime . they do not   like anything else . they do not   like honesty and decency and cleanliness . they want to foster lie and crime . what they call liberty here be just freedom to commit crime . that be what Labour mean , that be what they all mean . free crime , nothing else . ' 

 ' I wonder all the foreigner do not   go away , ' say Kate . 

 ' they have their occupation here , ' snap the Judge . 

 ' and the good people be all go away . they have nearly all go , those that have anything leave to go to , ' say Mrs Norris . ' some of we , who have our property here , and who have make our life here , and who know the country , we stay out of a kind of tenacity . but we know it be hopeless . the more it change , the bad it be . - ah , here be Don Ram n and Don Cipriano . so pleased to see you . let I introduce you . ' 

 Don Ram n Carrasco be a tall , big , handsome man who give the effect of bigness . he be middle aged , with a large black moustache and large , rather haughty eye under straight brow . the General be in civilian clothe , look very small beside the other man , and very smartly build , almost cocky . 

 ' come , ' say Mrs Norris . ' let we go across and have tea . ' 

 the Major excuse himself , and take his departure . 

 Mrs Norris gather she little shawl round her shoulder and lead through a sombre antechamber to a little terrace , where creeper and flower bloom thick on the low wall . there be a bell - flower , red and velvety , like blood that be dry : and cluster of white rose : and tuft of bougainvillea , papery magenta colour . 

 ' how lovely it be here ! ' say Kate . ' have the great dark tree beyond . ' 

 but she stand in a kind of dread . 

 ' yes it be beautiful , ' say Mrs Norris , with the gratification of a possessor . ' I have such a time try to keep these apart . ' and go across in her little black shawl , she push the bougainvillea away from the rust - scarlet bell - flower , stroke the little white rose to make they intervene . 

 ' I think the two red together interesting , ' say Owen . 

 ' do you really ! ' say Mrs Norris , automatically , pay no heed to such a remark . 

 the sky be blue overhead , but on the low horizon be a thick , pearl haze . the cloud have go . 

 ' one never see Popocatepetl nor Ixtaccihuatl , ' say Kate , disappoint . 

 ' no , not at this season . but look , through the tree there , you see Ajusco ! ' 

 Kate look at the sombre - seem mountain , between the huge dark tree . 

 on the low stone parapet be aztec thing , obsidian knife , grimace squat idol in black lava , and a queer thickish stone stick , or bâton . Owen be balance the latter : it feel murderous even to touch . 

 Kate turn to the General , who be near she , his face expressionless , yet alert . 

 ' aztec thing oppress I , ' she say . 

 ' they be oppressive , ' he answer , in his beautiful cultured English , that be nevertheless a tiny bit like a parrot talking . 

 ' there be no hope in they , ' she say . 

 ' perhaps the Aztecs never ask for hope , ' he say , somewhat automatically . 

 ' surely it be hope that keep one go ? ' she say . 

 ' you , maybe . but not the aztec , nor the indian to - day . ' 

 he speak like a man who have something in reserve , who be only half attend to what he hear , and even to his own answer . 

 ' what do they have , if they do not   have hope ? ' she say . 

 ' they have some other strength , perhaps , ' he say evasively . 

 ' I would like to give they hope , ' she say . ' if they have hope , they would not   be so sad , and they would be clean , and not have vermin . ' 

 ' that of course would be good , ' he say , with a little smile . ' but I think they be not so very sad . they laugh a good deal and be gay . ' 

 ' no , ' she say . ' they oppress I , like a weight on my heart . they make I irritable , and I want to go away . ' 

 ' from Mexico ? ' 

 ' yes . I feel I want to go away from it and never , never see it again . it be so oppressive and gruesome . ' 

 ' try it a little long , ' he say . ' perhaps you will feel differently . but perhaps not , ' he end vaguely , driftingly . 

 she could feel in he a sort of yearn towards she . as if a sort of appeal come to she from he , from his physical heart in his breast . as if the very heart give out dark ray of seek and yearning . she glimpse this now for the first time , quite apart from the talking , and it make she shy . 

 ' and do everything in Mexico oppress you ? ' he add , almost shyly , but with a touch of mockery , look at she with a troubled naïve face that have its age heavy and resistant beneath the surface . 

 ' almost everything ! ' she say . ' it always make my heart sink . like the eye of the man in the big hat - I call they the peon . their eye have no middle to they . those big handsome man , under their big hat , they be not   really there . they have no centre , no real i. their middle be a rag black hole , like the middle of a maelstrom . ' 

 she look with her troubled grey eye into the black , slanting , watchful , calculate eye of the small man opposite she . he have a pained expression , puzzle , like a child . and at the same time something obstinate and mature , a demonish maturity , oppose she in an animal way . 

 ' you mean we be not   real people , we have nothing of our own , except killing and death , ' he say , quite matter of fact . 

 ' I do not   know , ' she say , startle by his interpretation . ' I only say how it make I feel . ' 

 ' you be very clever , Mrs Leslie , ' come Don Ram n 's quiet , but heavy teasing voice behind she . ' it be quite true . whenever a mexican cry Viva ! he end up with Muera ! when he say Viva ! he really mean Death for Somebody or other ! I think of all the mexican revolution , and I see a skeleton walk ahead of a great number of people , wave a black banner with Viva la Muerte ! write in large white letter . long live death ! not Viva Cristo Rey ! but Viva Muerte Rey ! Vamos ! Viva ! ' 

 Kate look round . Don Ram n be flash his knowing brown spanish eye , and a little sardonic smile lurk under his moustache . instantly Kate and he , Europeans in essence , understand one another . he be wave his arm to the last Viva ! 

 ' but , ' say Kate , ' I do not   want to say Viva la Muerte ! ' 

 ' but when you be real Mexican - ' he say , tease . 

 ' I never could be , ' she say hotly , and he laugh . 

 ' I be afraid Viva la Muerte ! hit the nail on the head , ' say Mrs Norris , rather stonily . ' but will not   you come to tea ! do ! ' 

 she lead the way in her black little shawl and neat grey hair , go ahead like a Conquistador herself , and turn to look with her aztec eye through her pince - nez , to see if the other be come . 

 ' we be follow , ' say Don Ram n in Spanish , tease she . stately in his black suit , he walk behind she on the narrow terrace , and Kate follow , with the small , strut Don Cipriano , also in a black suit , linger oddly near she . 

 ' do I call you General or Don Cipriano ? ' she ask , turn to he . 

 an amused little smile quickly light his face , though his eye do not smile . they look at she with a black , sharp look . 

 ' as you wish , ' he say . ' you know General be a term of disgrace in Mexico . shall we say Don Cipriano ? ' 

 ' yes , I like that much the good , ' she say . 

 and he seem pleased . 

 it be a round tea - table , with shiny silver tea - service , and silver kettle with a little flame , and pink and white oleander . the little neat young footman carry the tea - cup , in white cotton glove . Mrs Norris pour tea and cut cake with a heavy hand . 

 Don Ram n sit on her right hand , the Judge on she left . Kate be between the Judge and Mr Henry . everybody except Don Ram n and the Judge be a little nervous . Mrs Norris always put her visitor uncomfortably at their ease , as if they be captive and she the chieftainess who have capture they . she rather enjoy it , heavily , archaeologically queen at the head of the table . but it be evident that Don Ram n , by far the most impressive person present , like she . Cipriano , on the other hand , remain mute and disciplined , perfectly familiar with the tea - table routine , superficially quite at ease , but underneath remote and unconnected . he glance from time to time at Kate . 

 she be a beautiful woman , in her own unconventional way , and with a certain richness . she be go to be forty next week . use to all kind of society , she watch people as one read the page of a novel , with a certain disintereste amusement . she be never in any society : too irish , too wise . 

 ' but of course nobody live without hope , ' Mrs Norris be say banteringly to Don Ram n. ' if it be only the hope of a real , to buy a litre of pulque . ' 

 ' ah , Mrs Norris ! ' he reply in his quiet , yet curiously deep voice , like a violoncello : ' if pulque be the high happiness ! ' 

 ' then we be fortunate , because a tost n will buy paradise , ' she say . 

 ' it be a bon mot , Señora mía , ' say Don Ram n , laugh and drink his tea . 

 ' now will not   you try these little native cake with sesame seed on they ! ' say Mrs Norris to the table at large . ' my cook make they , and her national feeling be flatter when anybody like they . Mrs Leslie , do take one . ' 

 ' I will , ' say Kate . ' do one say Open Sesame ! ' 

 ' if one wish , ' say Mrs Norris . 

 ' will not   you have one ? ' say Kate , hand the plate to Judge Burlap . 

 ' do not   want any , ' he snap , turn his face away as if he have be offer a plate of Mexicans , and leave Kate with the dish suspend . 

 Mrs Norris quickly but definitely take the plate , say : 

 ' Judge Burlap be afraid of Sesame Seed , he prefer the cave shut . ' and she hand the dish quietly to Cipriano , who be watch the old man 's bad manner with black , snake - like eye . 

 ' do you see that article by Willis Rice Hope , in the Excelsior ? ' suddenly snarl the Judge , to his hostess . 

 ' I do . I think it very sensible . ' 

 ' the only sensible thing that be be say about these Agrarian Laws . sensible ! I should think so . why Rice Hope come to I , and I put he up to a few thing . but his article say everything , do not   miss an item of importance . ' 

 ' quite ! ' say Mrs Norris , with rather stony attention . ' if only say would alter thing , Judge Burlap . ' 

 ' say the wrong thing have do all the mischief ! ' snap the Judge . ' fellow like Garfield Spence come down here and talk a lot of criminal talk . why the town 's full of Socialists and Sinvergüenzas from New York . ' 

 Mrs Norris adjust her pince - nez . 

 ' fortunately , ' she say , ' they do not   come out to Tlacolula , so we need not   think about they . Mrs Henry , let I give you some more tea . ' 

 ' do you read Spanish ? ' the Judge spit out , at Owen . Owen , in his big shell spectacle , be evidently a red rag to his irritable fellow - countryman . 

 ' no ! ' say Owen , round as a cannon - shot . 

 Mrs Norris once more adjust her eye - glass . 

 ' it be such a relief to hear someone who be altogether innocent of Spanish , and altogether unashame , ' she say . ' my father have we all speak four language by the time we be twelve , and we have none of we ever quite recovered . my stocking be all dye blue for I before I put my hair up . by the way ! how have you be for walking , Judge ? you hear of the time I have with my ankle ? ' 

 ' of course we hear ! ' cry Mrs Burlap , see dry land at last . I have   be try so hard to get out to see you , to ask about it . we be so grieve about it . ' 

 ' what happen ? ' say Kate . 

 ' why I foolishly slip on a piece of orange peel in town - just at the corner of San Juan de Latrán and Madero . and I fall right down . and of course , the first thing I do when I get up be to push the piece of orange peel into the gutter . and would you believe it , that lot of Mex - ' she catch herself up - ' that lot of fellow stand there at the corner laugh heartily at I , when they see I do it . they think it an excellent joke . ' 

 ' of course they would , ' say the Judge . ' they be wait for the next person to come along and fall . ' 

 ' do nobody help you ? ' ask Kate . 

 ' oh no ! if anyone have an accident in this country , you must never , never help . if you touch they even , you may be arrest for cause the accident . ' 

 ' that be the law ! ' say the Judge . ' if you touch they before the police arrive , you be arrest for complicity . let they lie and bleed , be the motto . ' 

 ' be that true ? ' say Kate to Don Ram n. 

 ' fairly true , ' he reply . ' yes , it be true you must not touch the one who be hurt . ' 

 ' how disgusting ! ' say Kate . 

 ' disgust ! ' cry the Judge . ' a great deal be disgusting in this country , as you will learn if you stay here long . I nearly lose my life on a banana skin ; lie in a darken room for day , between life and death , and lame for life from it . ' 

 ' how awful ! ' say Kate . ' what do you do when you fall ? ' 

 ' what do I do ? just smash my hip . ' 

 it have truly be a terrible accident , and the man have suffer bitterly . 

 ' you can hardly blame Mexico for a banana skin , ' say Owen , elated . ' I fall on one in Lexington Avenue ; but fortunately I only bruise myself on a soft spot . ' 

 ' that be not   your head , be it ? ' say Mrs Henry . 

 ' no , ' laugh Owen . ' the other extreme . ' 

 ' we have   get to add banana skin to the list of public menace , ' say young Henry . ' I be an American , and I may any day turn bolshevist , to save my peso , so I can repeat what I hear a man say yesterday . he say there be only two great disease in the world to - day - bolshevism and americanism ; and americanism be the bad of the two , because Bolshevism only smash your house or your business or your skull , but americanism smash your soul . ' 

 ' who be he ? ' snarl the Judge . 

 ' I forget , ' say Henry , wickedly . 

 ' one wonder , ' say Mrs Norris slowly , ' what he mean by Americanism . ' 

 ' he do not   define it , ' say Henry . ' cult of the dollar , I suppose . ' 

 ' well , ' say Mrs Norris . ' the cult of the dollar , in my experience , be far more intense in the country that have not   get the dollar , than in the United States . ' 

 Kate feel that the table be like a steel disc to which they be all , as victim , magnetize and bind . 

 ' where be your garden , Mrs Norris ? ' she ask . 

 they troop out , gasp with relief , to the terrace . the Judge hobble behind , and Kate have to linger sympathetically to keep he company . 

 they be on the little terrace . 

 ' be not   this strange stuff ! ' say Kate , pick up one of the aztec stone knife on the parapet . ' be it a sort of jade ? ' 

 ' Jade ! ' snarl the Judge . ' Jade 's green , not black . that be obsidian . ' 

 ' Jade can be black , ' say Kate . ' I have   get a lovely little black tortoise of jade from China . ' 

 ' you can not   have . Jade 's bright green . ' 

 ' but there be white jade too . I know there be . ' 

 the Judge be silent from exasperation for a few moment , then he snap : 

 ' Jade 's bright green . ' 

 Owen , who have the ear of a lynx , have hear . 

 ' what be that ? ' he say . 

 ' surely there be more than green jade ! ' say Kate . 

 ' what ! ' cry Owen . ' More ! why there be every imaginable tint - white , rise , lavender - ' 

 ' and black ? ' say Kate . 

 ' black ? oh yes , quite common . why you should see my collection . the most beautiful range of colour ! only green jade ! ha - ha - ha ! ' - and he laugh a rather stage laugh . 

 they have come to the stair , which be old stone , wax and polish in some way till they be a glitter black . 

 ' I will catch hold of your arm down here , ' say the Judge to young Henry . ' this staircase be a death - trap . ' 

 Mrs Norris hear without comment . she only tilt her pince - nez on her sharp nose . 

 in the archway downstairs , Don Ram n and the General take their leave . the rest trail on into the garden . 

 evening be fall . the garden be draw up tall , under the huge dark tree on the one side , and the tall , reddish - and - yellow house on the other . it be like be at the bottom of some dusky , flower garden down in Hades . Hibiscus hang scarlet from the bush , put out yellow bristling tongue . some rose be scatter scentless petal on the twilight , and lonely - look carnation hang on weak stalk . from a huge dense bush the mysterious white bell of the datura be suspend , large and silent , like the very ghost of sound . and the datura scent be move thick and noiseless from the tree , into the little alley . 

 Mrs Burlap have hitch herself on to Kate , and from her silly , social baby - face be emit search question . 

 ' what hotel be you stay at ? ' 

 Kate tell she . 

 ' I do not   know it . where be it ? ' 

 ' in the Avenida del Peru . you would not   know it , it be a little italian hotel . ' 

 ' be you stay long ? ' 

 ' we be not   certain . ' 

 ' be Mr Rhys on a newspaper ? ' 

 ' no , he be a poet . ' 

 ' do he make a living by poetry ? ' 

 ' no , he do not   try to . ' 

 it be the sort of secret service investigation one be submit to , in the capital of shady people , particularly shady foreigner . 

 Mrs Norris be linger by a flower arch of little white flower . 

 already a firefly be spark . it be already night . 

 ' well , good - bye , Mrs Norris ! will not   you come and lunch with we ? I do not   mean come out to our house . only let I know , and lunch with I anywhere you like , in town . ' 

 ' thank you , my dear ! thank you so much ! well ! I will see ! 

 Mrs Norris be almost regal , stonily , aztec - regal . 

 at last they have all make their adieus , and the great door be shut behind they . 

 ' how do you come out ? ' Mrs Burlap ask , impertinent . 

 ' in an old Ford taxi - but where be it ? ' say Kate , peer into the dark . it should have be under the fresno tree opposite , but it be not . 

 ' what a curious thing ! ' say Owen , and he disappear into the night . 

 ' which way do you go ? ' say Mrs Burlap . 

 ' to the z calo , ' say Kate . 

 ' we have to take a tram , the opposite way , ' say the baby - face , withered woman from the Middle - West . 

 the Judge be hobble along the pavement like a cat on hot brick , to the corner . across the road stand a group of native in big hat and white calico clothe , all a little the bad for the pulque they have drunk . Nearer , on this side of the road , stand another little gang , of workman in town clothe . 

 ' there you have they , ' say the Judge , flourish his stick with utter vindictiveness . ' there be the two lot of them . ' 

 ' what two lot ? ' say Kate , surprised . 

 ' those peon fellow and those obrero , all drunk , the lot of they . the lot of they ! ' and in a spasm of pure , frustrated hate , he turn his back on she . 

 at the same time they see the light of a tram - car rush dragon - like up the dark road , between the high wall and the huge tree . 

 ' here be our car ! ' say the Judge , begin to scramble excitedly with his stick . 

 ' you go the other way , ' fling the baby - face , fade woman in the three - cornered satin hat , also begin to fluster as if she be go to swim off the pavement . 

 the couple clamber avidly into the brightly - light car , first class ; hobble up . the native crowd into the second class . 

 away whiz the tren . the Burlap couple have not even say good night . they be terrify lest they might have to know somebody whom they might not want to know ; whom it might not pay to know . 

 ' you common - place little woman ! ' say Kate aloud , look after the retreat tram - car . ' you awful ill - breed little pair . ' 

 she be a bit afraid of the native , not quite sober , who be wait for the car in the opposite direction . but strong than her fear be a certain sympathy with these dark - face silent man in their big straw hat and naïve little cotton blouse . anyhow they have blood in their vein : they be column of dark blood . 

 whereas the other bloodless , acidulous couple from the Middle - West , with their nasty whiteness . . . ! 

 she think of the little tale the native tell . when the Lord be make the first man , he make they of clay and put they into the oven to bake . they come out black . they be bake too much ! say the Lord . so he make another batch , and put they in . they come out white . they be bake too little ! he say . so he have a third try . these come out a good warm brown . they be just right ! say the Lord . 

 the couple from the Middle - West , that wither baby - face and that limp Judge , they be not   bake . they be hardly bake at all . 

 Kate look at the dark face under the arc - lamp . they frighten she . they be a sort of menace to she . but she feel they be at least bake hot and to a certain satisfactory colour . 

 the taxi come lurch up , with Owen poke his head out and open the door . 

 ' I find the man in a pulquería , ' he say . ' but I do not   think he be quite drunk . will you risk drive back with he ? ' 

 ' the pulquería be call La Flor de un Día - the Flower of a day , ' say Owen , with an apprehensive laugh . 

 Kate hesitate , look at her man . 

 ' we may as well , ' she say . 

 away gallivant the Ford , full speed to Hell . 

 ' do tell he not so fast , ' say Kate . 

 ' I do not   know how , ' say Owen . 

 he shout in good English : 

 ' Hey ! chauffeur ! not so fast ! do not   drive so fast . ' 

 ' no presto . troppo presto . Va troppo presto ! ' say Kate . 

 the man look at they with black , dilate eye of fathomless incomprehension . then he put his foot on the accelerator . 

 ' he be only go fast ! ' laugh Owen nervously . 

 ' ah ! let he alone ! ' say Kate , with utter weariness . 

 the fellow drive like a devil incarnate , as if he have the devil in his body . but also , he drive with the devil 's own nonchalant skill . there be nothing to do but let he rip . 

 ' be not   that a ghastly tea - party ! ' say Owen . 

 ' ghastly ! ' say Kate . 

 

 

 CHAPTER III 

 Fortieth Birthday 

 

 Kate wake up one morning , age forty . she do not hide the fact from herself , but she keep it dark from the other . 

 it be a blow , really . to be forty ! one have to cross a dividing line . on this side there be youth and spontaneity and ' happiness . ' on the other side something different : reserve , responsibility , a certain standing back from ' fun . ' 

 she be a widow , and a lonely woman now . have marry young , her two child be grow up . the boy be twenty - one , and her daughter nineteen . they stay chiefly with their father , from whom she have be divorce ten year before , in order to marry James Joachim Leslie . now Leslie be dead , and all that half of life be over . 

 she climb up to the flat roof of the hotel . it be a brilliant morning , and for once , under the blue sky of the distance , Popocatepetl stand aloof , a heavy giant presence under heaven , with a cape of snow . and roll a long dark roll of smoke like a serpent . 

 Ixtaccihuatl , the White Woman , glitter and seem near , but the other mountain , Popocatepetl , stand far back , and in shadow , a pure cone of atmospheric shadow , with glint flash of snow . there they be , the two monster , watch gigantically and terribly over their lofty , bloody cradle of man , the Valley of Mexico . Alien , ponderous , the white - hung mountain seem to emit a deep purring sound , too deep for the ear to hear , and yet audible on the blood , a sound of dread . there be no soar or uplift or exaltation , as there be in the snowy mountain of Europe . rather a ponderous , white - shoulder weight , press terribly on the earth , and murmur like two watchful lion . 

 superficially , Mexico might be all right : with its suburb of villas , its central fine street , its thousand of motor - car , its tennis , and its bridge - party . the sun shine brilliantly every day , and big bright flower stand out from the tree . it be a holiday . 

 until you be alone with it . and then the undertone be like the low , angry , snarl purring of some jaguar spot with night . there be a ponderous , down - press weight upon the spirit : the great fold of the dragon of the Aztecs , the dragon of the Toltecs wind around one and weigh down the soul . and on the bright sunshine be a dark steam of an angry , impotent blood , and the flower seem to have their root in spilt blood . the spirit of place be cruel , down - dragging , destructive . 

 Kate could so well understand the Mexican who have say to she : El grito mexicano es siempre el grito del odio - the mexican shout be always a shout of hate . the famous revolution , as Don Ram n say , begin with Viva ! but end always with Muera ! death to this , death to the other ; it be all death ! death ! death ! as insistent as the aztec sacrifice . something for ever gruesome and macabre . 

 why have she come to this high plateau of death ? as a woman , she suffer even more than man suffer : and in the end , practically all man go under . once , Mexico have have an elaborate ritual of death . now it have death , ragged , squalid , vulgar , without even the passion of its own mystery . 

 she sit on a parapet of the old roof . the street beyond be like a black abyss , but around she be the rough glare of uneven flat roof , with loose telephone wire trail across , and the sudden , deep , dark well of the patio , show flower bloom in shade . 

 just behind be a huge old church , its barrel roof hump up like some crouch animal , and its dome , like bubble inflate , glitter with yellow tile , and blue and white tile , against the intense blue heaven . quiet native woman in long skirt be move on the roof , hang out washing or spread it on the stone . chicken perch here and there . an occasional bird soar huge overhead , trail a shadow . and not far away stand the brownish tower - stump of the Cathedral , the profound old bell tremble huge and deep , so soft as to be almost inaudible , upon the air . 

 it ought to have be all gay , allegro , allegretto , in that sparkle of bright air and old roof surface . but no ! there be the dark undertone , the black , serpent - like fatality all the time . 

 it be no good Kate 's wonder why she have come . over in England , in Ireland , in Europe , she have hear the consummatum e of her own spirit . it be finish , in a kind of death agony . but still this heavy continent of dark - soule death be more than she could bear . 

 she be forty : the first half of her life be over . the bright page with its flower and its love and its station of the Cross end with a grave . now she must turn over , and the page be black , black and empty . 

 the first half of her life have be write on the bright , smooth vellum of hope , with initial letter all gorgeous upon a field of gold . but the glamour have go from station to station of the Cross , and the last illumination be the tomb . 

 now the bright page be turn , and the dark page lie before she . how could one write on a page so profoundly black ? 

 she go down , have promise to go and see the fresco in the university and school . Owen and Villiers and a young Mexican be wait for she . they set off through the busy street of the town , where automobile and the little omnibus call camione run wild , and where the native in white cotton clothe and sandal and big hat linger like heavy ghost in the street , among the bourgeoisie , the young lady in pale pink crêpe de chine and high heel , the man in little shoe and american straw hat . a continual bustle in the glitter of sunshine . 

 cross the great shadeless plaza in front of the Cathedral , where the tram - car gather as in a corral , and slide away down their various street , Kate linger again to look at the thing spread for sale on the pavement : the little toy , the paint gourd - shell , brilliant in a kind of lacquer , the novedade from Germany , the fruit , the flower . and the native squat with their ware , large - limbed , silent , handsome man look up with their black , centreless eye , speak so softly , and lift with small sensitive brown hand the little toy they have so carefully make and paint . a strange gentle appeal and wistfulness , strange male voice , so deep , yet so quiet and gentle . or the woman , the small quick woman in their blue rebozo , look up quickly with dark eye , and speak in their quick , coax voice . the man just set out his orange , wipe they with a cloth so carefully , almost tenderly , and pile they in bright tiny pyramid , all neat and exquisite . a certain sensitive tenderness of the heavy blood , a certain chirping charm of the bird - like woman , so still and tender with a bud - like femininity . and at the same time , the dirty clothe , and the unwashed skin , the lice , and the peculiar hollow glint of the black eye , at once so fearsome and so appealing . 

 Kate know the italian fruit vendor , vigorously polish their orange on their coat - sleeve . such a contrast , the big , handsome Indian , sit so soft and as it be lonely by the kerb , softly , lingeringly polish his yellow orange to a clean gleam , and lingeringly , delicately arrange the little pile , the pyramid for two or three cent each . 

 Queer work , for a big , handsome , male - look man . but they seem to prefer these childish job . 

 the University be a spanish building that have be do up spick and span , and give over to the young artist to decorate . since the revolution , nowhere have authority and tradition be so finally overthrow as in the mexican field of science and art . science and art be the sport of the young . go ahead , my boy ! 

 the boy have go ahead . but even then , the one artist of distinction be no long a boy , and he have serve a long apprenticeship in Europe . 

 Kate have see the reproduction of some of Ribera 's fresco . now she go round the patio of the University , look at the original . they be interesting : the man know his craft . 

 but the impulse be the impulse of the artist 's hate . in the many fresco of the Indians there be sympathy with the Indian , but always from the ideal , social point of view . never the spontaneous answer of the blood . these flat Indians be symbol in the great script of modern socialism , they be figure of the pathos of the victim of modern industry and capitalism . that be all they be use for : symbol in the weary script of socialism and anarchy . 

 Kate think of the man polish his orange half - an - hour before : his peculiar beauty , a certain richness of physical being , a ponderous power of blood within he , and a helplessness , a profound unbelief that be fatal and demonish . and all the liberty , all the progress , all the socialism in the world would not help he . Nay , it would only help far to destroy he . 

 on the corridor of the University , young miss in bobbed hair and boy ' jumper be go around , their chin push forward with the characteristic , deliberate youth - and - eagerness of our day . very much aware of their own youth and eagerness . and very american . young professor be pass in soft amiability , young and apparently harmless . 

 the artist be at work on the fresco , and Kate and Owen be introduce to they . but they be man - or boy - whose very pigment seem to exist only to épater le bourgeois . and Kate be weary of épatisme , just as much as of the bourgeoisie . she be not   interested in épatant le bourgeois . the épateur be as boring as the bourgeois , two half of one dreariness . 

 the little party pass on to the old Jesuit convent , now use as a secondary school . here be more fresco . 

 but they be by another man . and they be caricature so crude and so ugly that Kate be merely repel . they be mean to be shocking , but perhaps the very deliberateness prevent they from be so shocking as they might be . but they be ugly and vulgar . strident caricature of the Capitalist and the Church , and of the Rich Woman , and of Mammon paint life - size and as violently as possible , round the patio of the grey old building , where the young people be educate . to anyone with the spark of human balance , the thing be a misdemeanour . 

 ' oh , but how wonderful ! ' cry Owen . 

 his susceptibility be shocked , therefore , as at the bull - fight , he be rather pleased . he think it be novel and stimulate to decorate your public building in this way . 

 the young Mexican who be accompany the party be a professor in the University too : a rather short , soft young fellow of twenty - seven or eight , who write the inevitable poetry of sentiment , have be in the government , even as a member of the House of Deputies , and be long to go to New York . there be something fresh and soft , petulant about he . Kate like he . he could laugh with real hot young amusement , and he be no fool . 

 until it come to these maniacal idea of socialism , politic , and La Patria . then he be as mechanical as a mousetrap . very tedious . 

 ' oh no ! ' say Kate in front of the caricature . ' they be too ugly . they defeat their own end . ' 

 ' but they be mean to be ugly , ' say young Garcia . ' they must be ugly , no ? because capitalism be ugly , and Mammon be ugly , and the priest hold his hand to get the money from the poor Indians be ugly . no ? ' he laugh rather unpleasantly . 

 ' but , ' say Kate , ' these caricature be too intentional . they be like vulgar abuse , not art at all . ' 

 ' be not   that true ? ' say Garcia , point to a hideous picture of a fat female in a tight short dress , with hip and breast as protuberance , walk over the face of the poor . 

 ' that be how they be , no ? ' 

 ' who be like that ? ' say Kate . ' it bore I . one must keep a certain balance . ' 

 ' not in Mexico ! ' say the young Mexican brightly , his plump cheek flush . ' in Mexico you can not   keep a balance , because thing be so bad . in other country , yes , perhaps you can remain balanced , because thing be not so bad as they be here . but here they be so very bad , you can not   be human . you have to be mexican . you have to be more mexican than human , no ? you can not   do no other . you have to hate the capitalist , you have to , in Mexico , or nobody can live . we can not   live . nobody can live . if you be mexican you can not   be human , it be impossible . you have to be a socialist Mexican , or you have to be a capitalist Mexican , and you hate . what else be there to be do ? we hate the capitalist because he ruin the country and the people . we must hate he . ' 

 ' but after all , ' say Kate , ' what about the twelve million poor - mostly Indians - whom monte talk about ? you can not   make they all rich , whatever you do . and they do not   understand the very word , capital and socialism . they be Mexico , really , and nobody ever look at they , except to make a casus belli of they . humanly , they never exist for you . ' 

 ' humanly they can not   exist , they be too ignorant ! ' cry Garcia . ' but when we can kill all the capitalist , then - ' 

 ' you will find somebody kill you , ' say Kate . ' no , I do not   like it . you be not   Mexico . you be not   even Mexican , really . you be just half spaniard full of european idea , and you care for assert your own idea and nothing else . you have no real bowel of compassion . you be no good . ' 

 the young man listen with round eye , go rather yellow in the face . at the end he lift his shoulder and spread his hand in a pseudo - mediterranean gesture . 

 ' well ! it may be ! ' he say , with a certain jeering flippancy . ' perhaps you know everything . maybe ! foreigner , they usually know everything about Mexico . ' and he end on a little cackle laugh . 

 ' I know what I feel , ' say Kate . ' and now I want a taxi , and I want to go home . I do not   want to see any more stupid , ugly picture . ' 

 off she drive back to the hotel , once more in a tower rage . she be amazed at herself . usually she be so good - temper and easy . but something about this country irritate she and put she into such a violent anger , she feel she would die . burn , furious rage . 

 and perhaps , she think to herself , the white and half - white Mexicans suffer some peculiar reaction in their blood which make they that they too be almost always in a state of suppress irritation and anger , for which they must find a vent . they must spend their life in a complicated game of frustration , frustration of life in its ebbing and flow . 

 perhaps something come out of the earth , the dragon of the earth , some effluence , some vibration which militate against the very composition of the blood and nerve in human being . perhaps it come from the volcano . or perhaps even from the silent , serpent - like dark resistance of those mass of ponderous native whose blood be principally the old , heavy , resistant indian blood . 

 who know ? but something there be , and something very potent . Kate lie on her bed and brood on her own organic rage . there be nothing to be do ! 

 but young Garcia be really nice . he call in the afternoon and send up his card . Kate , feel sore , receive he unwillingly . 

 ' I come , ' he say , with a little stiff dignity , like an ambassador on a mission , ' to tell you that I , too , do not   like those caricature . I , too , do not   like they . I do not   like the young people , boy and girl , no ? - to be see they all the time . I , too , do not   like . but I think , also , that here in Mexico we can not   help it . People be very bad , very greedy , no ? - they only want to get money here , and they do not   care . so we must hate they . yes , we must . but I , too , I do not   like it . ' 

 he hold his hat in his two hand , and twist his shoulder in a conflict of feeling . 

 Kate suddenly laugh , and he laugh too , with a certain pain and confusion in his laughter . 

 ' that be awfully nice of you to come and say so , ' she say , warm to he . 

 ' no , not nice , ' he say , frown . ' but I do not   know what to do . perhaps you think I be - different - I be not the thing that I be . and I do not   want it . ' 

 he flush and be uncomfortable . there be a curious naïve sincerity about he , since he be be sincere . if he have choose to play a game of sophistication , he could have play it well . but with Kate he want to be sincere . 

 ' I know , really , ' laugh Kate , ' you feel a good deal like I do about it . I know you only pretend to be fierce and hard . ' 

 ' no ! ' he say , suddenly make solemn , flash eye . ' I do also feel fierce . I do hate these man who take , only take everything from Mexico - money , and all - everything ! ' he spread his hand with finality . ' I hate they because I must , no ? but also , I be sorry - I be sorry I have to hate so much . yes , I think I be sorry . I think so . ' 

 he knit his brow rather tense . and over his plump , young , fresh face be a frown of resentment and hatred , quite sincere too . 

 Kate could see he be not   really sorry . only the two mood , of natural , soft , sensuous flow , and of heavy resentment and hate , alternate inside he like shadow and shine on a cloudy day , in swift , unavoidable succession . what be nice about he be his simplicity , in spite of the complication of his feeling , and the fact that his resentment be not personal , but beyond person , even beyond himself . 

 she go out with he to tea , and while she be out , Don Ram n call and leave card with the corner turn down , and an invitation to dinner for she and Owen . there seem an almost old - fashioned correctness in those card . 

 look over the newspaper , she come on an odd little item . she could read Spanish without much difficulty . the trouble lie in talk it , when Italian get in her way and cause a continual stumble . she look on the english page of the Excelsior or the Universal for the news - if there be any . then she look through the spanish page for bit of interest . 

 this little item be among the spanish information , and be head : the Gods of Antiquity Return to Mexico . 

 

 ' there be a ferment in the village of Sayula , Jalisco , on the Lake of Sayula , owe to an incident of more or less comic nature , yesterday morning towards mid - day . the woman who inhabit the shore of the lake be to be see each day soon after sunrise descend to the water 's edge with large bundle . they kneel on the rock and stone , and in little group , like water - fowl , they wash their dirty linen in the soft water of the lake , pause at time as an old canoa sail by with large single sail . the scene be little change since the day of Montezuma , when the native of the lake worship the spirit of the water , and throw in little image and idol of baked clay , which the lake sometimes return to the descendant of the dead idolater , to keep they in mind of practice not yet altogether forget . 

 ' as the hot sun rise in the sky , the woman spread their washing on the sand and pebble of the shore , and retire to the shade of the willow tree that grow so gracefully and retain their verdant hue through the dry season of the year . while thus repose after their labour , these humble and superstitious woman be astonish to see a man of great stature rise naked from the lake and wade towards the shore . his face , they say , be dark and bearded , but his body shine like gold . 

 ' as if unaware of any watchful eye , he advance calmly and majestically towards the shore . there he stand a moment , and select with his eye a pair of the loose cotton pant wear by the peasant in the field , that be spread whiten in the sun , he stoop and proceed to cover his nakedness with the say garment . 

 ' the woman who thus see her husband 's apparel rob beneath her eye , rise , call to the man and summon the other woman . whereupon the stranger turn his dark face upon they , and say in a quiet voice : " why be you cry ? be quiet ! it will be give back to you . your god be ready to return to you . Quetzalcoatl and Tlaloc , the old god , be minded to come back to you . be quiet , do not   let they find you cry and complain . I have come from out of the lake to tell you the god be come back to Mexico , they be ready to return to their own home . " 

 ' little comfort by this speech , the woman who have lose her washing be overcome and say no more . the stranger then appropriate a cotton blouse , which he don , and disappear . 

 ' after a while , the simple woman gather courage to return to their humble dwelling . the story thus reach the ear of the police , who at once set out to search for the thief . 

 ' the story , however , be not yet conclude . the husband of the poor woman of the lake - shore , return from his labour in the field , approach the gate of the village towards sunset , thinking , no doubt , of nothing but repose and the evening meal . a man in a black serape step towards he , from the shadow of a break wall , and ask : be you afraid to come with I ? the labourer , a man of spirit , promptly reply : no , señor ! he therefore follow the unknown man through the broken wall and through the bush of a deserted garden . in a dark room , or cellar , a small light be burn , reveal a great basin of gold , into which four little man , small than child , be pour sweet - scented water . the astounded peasant be now tell to wash and put on clean clothe , to be ready for the return of the god . he be seat in the golden basin and wash with sweet - smell soap , while the dwarf pour water over he . this , they say , be the bath of Quetzalcoatl . the bath of fire be yet to come . they give he clean clothing of pure white cotton , and a new hat with star embroidery , and sandal with strap of white leather . but beside this , a new blanket , white with bar of blue and black , and flower like star at the centre , and two piece of silver money . go , he be tell . and when they ask you , where do you get your blanket ? answer that Quetzalcoatl be young again . the poor fellow go home in sore fear , lest the police should arrest he for possess steal good . 

 ' the village be full of excitement , and Don Ram n Carrasco , our eminent historian and archaeologist , whose hacienda lie in the vicinity , have announce his intention of proceeding as soon as possible to the spot to examine the origin of this new legend . meanwhile , the police be watch attentively the development of affair , without take any step for the moment . indeed , these little fantasy create a pleasant diversion in the regular order of banditry , murder , and outrage , which it be usually our duty to report . ' 

 

 Kate wonder what be at the back of this : if anything more than a story . yet , strangely , a different light than the common light seem to gleam out of the word of even this newspaper paragraph . 

 she want to go to Sayula . she want to see the big lake where the god have once live , and whence they be due to emerge . amid all the bitterness that Mexico produce in her spirit , there be still a strange beam of wonder and mystery , almost like hope . a strange darkly - iridescent beam of wonder , of magic . 

 the name Quetzalcoatl , too , fascinate she . she have read bit about the god . Quetzal be the name of a bird that live high up in the mist of tropical mountain , and have very beautiful tail - feather , precious to the aztec . Coatl be a serpent . Quetzalcoatl be the Plumed Serpent , so hideous in the fanged , feather , writhe stone of the National Museum . 

 but Quetzalcoatl be , she vaguely remember , a sort of fair - faced bearded god ; the wind , the breath of life , the eye that see and be unseen , like the star by day . the eye that watch behind the wind , as the star beyond the blue of day . and Quetzalcoatl must depart from Mexico to merge again into the deep bath of life . he be old . he have go eastward , perhaps into the sea , perhaps he have sail into heaven , like a meteor return , from the top of the Volcano of Orizaba : go back as a peacock stream into the night , or as a bird of Paradise , its tail gleaming like the wake of a meteor . Quetzalcoatl ! who know what he mean to the dead aztec , and to the old Indians , who know he before the Aztecs raise their deity to height of horror and vindictiveness ? 

 all a confusion of contradictory gleam of meaning , Quetzalcoatl . but why not ? her irish spirit be weary to death of definite meaning , and a God of one fix purport . god should be iridescent , like the rainbow in the storm . man create a God in his own image , and the god grow old along with the man that make they . but storm sway in heaven , and the god - stuff sway high and angry over our head . god die with man who have conceive they . but the god - stuff roar eternally , like the sea , with too vast a sound to be hear . like the sea in storm , that beat against the rock of living , stiffen man , slowly to destroy they . or like the sea of the glimmering , ethereal plasm of the world , that bath the foot and the knee of man as earth - sap bathe the root of tree . Ye must be bear again . even the god must be bear again . we must be bear again . 

 in her vague , woman 's way , Kate know this . she have live her life . she have have her lover , her two husband . she have her child . 

 Joachim Leslie , her dead husband , she have love as much as a woman can love a man : that be , to the bound of human love . then she have realize that human love have its limit , that there be a beyond . and Joachim dead , willy nilly her spirit have pass the bound . she be no long in love with love . she no long yearn for the love of a man , or the love even of her child . Joachim have go into eternity in death , and she have cross with he into a certain eternity in life . there , the yearning for companionship and sympathy and human love have leave she . something infinitely intangible but infinitely bless take its place : a peace that pass understand . 

 at the same time , a wild and angry battle rag between she and the thing that Owen call life : such as the bull - fight , the tea - party , the enjoyment ; like the art in their modern aspect of hate effusion . the powerful , degenerate thing call life , wrap one or other of its tentacle round she . 

 and then , when she could escape into her true loneliness , the influx of peace and soft , flower - like potency which be beyond understanding . it disappear even if you think about it , so delicate , so fine . and yet , the only reality . 

 Ye must be bear again . out of the fight with the octopus of life , the dragon of degenerate or of incomplete existence , one must win this soft bloom of be , that be damage by a touch . 

 no , she no long want love , excitement , and something to fill her life . she be forty , and in the rare , lingering dawn of maturity , the flower of her soul be open . above all thing , she must preserve herself from worldly contact . only she want the silence of other unfold soul around she , like a perfume . the presence of that which be forever unsaid . 

 and in the horror and climax of death - rattle , which be Mexico , she think she could see it in the black eye of the Indians . she feel that Don Ram n and Don Cipriano both have hear the soundless call , across all the hideous choking . 

 perhaps this have bring she to Mexico : away from England and her mother , away from her child , away from everybody . to be alone with the unfold flower of her own soul , in the delicate , chime silence that be at the midst of thing . 

 the thing call ' Life ' be just a mistake we have make in our own mind . why persist in the mistake any far ? 

 Owen be the mistake itself : so be villier : so be that Mexico City . 

 she want to get out , to disentangle herself again . 

 they have promise to go out to dinner to the house of Don Ram n. his wife be away in the United States with her two boy , one of whom have be ill , not seriously , at his school in California . but Don Ram n 's aunt would be hostess . 

 the house be out at Tlalpam . it be May , the weather be hot , the rain be not yet start . the shower at the bullfight have be a sort of accident . 

 ' I wonder , ' say Owen , ' whether I ought to put on a dinner - coat . really , I feel humiliated to the earth every time I put on evening dress . ' 

 ' then do not   do it ! ' say Kate , who be impatient of Owen 's kicking at these very little social prick , and swallow the whole porcupine . 

 she herself come down in a simple gown with a black velvet top and a loose skirt of delicate brocade chiffon , of a glimmer green and yellow and black . she also wear a long string of jade and crystal . 

 it be a gift she have , of look like an ossianic goddess , a certain feminine strength and softness glowing in the very material of her dress . but she be never ' smart . ' 

 ' why you be dress up to the eye ! ' cry Owen in chagrin , pull at his soft collar . ' bare shoulder notwithstanding ! ' 

 they go out to the distant suburb in the tram - car , swift in the night , with big clear star overhead , drop and hang with a certain gleam of menace . in Tlalpam there be a heavy scent of nightflower , a feeling of ponderous darkness , with a few spark of intermittent firefly . and always the heavy calling of nightflower scent . to Kate , there seem a faint whiff of blood in all tropical - scented flower : of blood or sweat . 

 it be a hot night . they bang on the iron door of the entrance , dog bark , and a mozo open to they , warily , close fast again the moment they have enter the dark garden of tree . 

 Don Ram n be in white , a white dinner - jacket : Don Cipriano the same . but there be other guest , young Garcia , another pale young man call Mirabal , and an elderly man in a black cravat , name Toussaint . the only other woman be Doña Isabel , aunt to Don Ram n. she wear a black dress with a high collar of black lace , and some string of pearl , and seem shy , frightened , absent as a nun before all these man . but to Kate she be very kind , caressive , speak English in a plaintive fade voice . this dinner be a sort of ordeal and ritual combine , to the cloistered , elderly soul . 

 but it be soon evident that she be tremble with fearful joy . she adore Ram n with an uncritical , nun - like adoration . it be obvious she hardly hear the thing that be say . word skim the surface of her consciousness without ever penetrate . underneath , she be tremble in nun - like awareness of so many man , and in almost sacred excitement at face Don Ram n as hostess . 

 the house be a fairly large villa , quietly and simply furnish , with natural taste . 

 ' do you always live here ? ' say Kate to Don Ram n. ' never at your hacienda ? ' 

 ' how do you know I have a hacienda ? ' he ask . 

 ' I see it in a newspaper - near Sayula . ' 

 ' ah ! ' he say , laugh at she with his eye . ' you see about the returning of the Gods of Antiquity . ' 

 ' yes , ' she say . ' do not   you think it be interesting ? ' 

 ' I think so , ' he say . 

 ' I love the word Quetzalcoatl . ' 

 ' the word ! ' he repeat . 

 his eye laugh at she teasingly all the time . 

 ' what do you think , Mrs Leslie , ' cry the pale - faced young Mirabal , in curiously resonant English , with a french accent . ' do not   you think it would be wonderful if the god come back to Mexico ? our own god ? ' he sit in intense expectation , his blue eye fix on Kate 's face , his soup - spoon suspend . 

 Kate 's face be baffle with incomprehension . 

 ' not those aztec horror ! ' she say . 

 ' the aztec horror ! the aztec horror ! well , perhaps they be not so horrible after all . but if they be , it be because the Aztecs be all tie up . they be in a cul de sac , so they see nothing but death . do not   you think so ? ' 

 ' I do not   know enough ! ' say Kate . 

 ' nobody know any more . but if you like the word Quetzalcoatl , do not   you think it would be wonderful if he come back again ? ah , the name of the god ! do not   you think the name be like seed , so full of magic , of the unexplored magic ? Huitzilopochtli ! - how wonderful ! and Tlaloc ! ah ! I love they ! I say they over and over , like they say Mani padma Om ! in Tibet . I believe in the fertility of sound . Itzpapalotl - the Obsidian Butterfly ! Itzpapalotl ! but say it , and you will see it do good to your soul . Itzpapalotl ! Tezcatlipocá ! they be old when the Spaniards come , they need the bath of life again . but now , re - bath in youth , how wonderful they must be ! think of Jehovah ! jehovah ! think of Jesus Christ ! how thin and poor they sound ! or Jesús Cristo ! they be dead name , all the life wither out of they . ah , it be time now for Jesus to go back to the place of the death of the god , and take the long bath of be make young again . he be an old - old young god , do not   you think ? ' he look long at Kate , then dive for his soup . 

 Kate widen her eye in amazement at this torrent from the young Mirabal . then she laugh . 

 ' I think it be a bit overwhelming ! ' she say , non - committal . 

 ' ah ! yes ! exactly ! exactly ! but how good to be overwhelm ! how splendid if something will overwhelm I ! ah , I be so glad ! ' 

 the last word come with a clapping french resonance , and the young man dive for his soup again . he be lean and pale , but burn with an intense , crazy energy . 

 ' you see , ' say young Garcia , raise his full , bright dark eye to Kate , half aggressive and half bashful : ' we must do something for Mexico . if we do not , it will go under , no ? you say you do not   like socialism . I do not   think I do either . but if there be nothing else but socialism , we will have socialism . if there be nothing well . but perhaps there be . ' 

 ' why should Mexico go under ? ' say Kate . ' there be lot of child everywhere . ' 

 ' yes . but the last census of Porfirio Diaz give seventeen million people in Mexico , and the census of last year give only thirteen million . maybe the count be not quite right . but you count four million people few , in twenty year , then in sixty year there will be no Mexicans : only foreigner , who do not   die . ' 

 ' oh , but figure always lie ! ' say Kate . ' statistic be always misleading . ' 

 ' maybe two and two do not   make four , ' say Garcia . ' I do not   know if they do . but I know , if you take two away from two , it leave none . ' 

 ' do you think Mexico might die out ? ' she say to Don Ram n. 

 ' why ! ' he reply . ' it might . die out and become americanized . ' 

 ' I quite see the danger of americanization , ' say Owen . ' that would be ghastly . almost well die out . ' 

 Owen be so american , he invariably say these thing . 

 ' but ! ' say Kate . ' the Mexicans look so strong ! ' 

 ' they be strong to carry heavy load , ' say Don Ram n. ' but they die easily . they eat all the wrong thing , they drink the wrong thing , and they do not   mind die . they have many child , and they like their child very much . but when the child die , the parent say : ah , he will be an angelito ! so they cheer up and feel as if they have be give a present . sometimes I think they enjoy it when their child die . sometimes I think they would like to transfer Mexico en bloc into Paradise , or whatever lie behind the wall of death . it would be well there ! ' 

 there be a silence . 

 ' but how sad you be ! ' say Kate , afraid . 

 Doña Isabel be give hurried order to the manservant . 

 ' whoever know Mexico below the surface , be sad ! ' say Julio Toussaint , rather sententiously , over his black cravat . 

 ' well , ' say Owen , ' it seem to I , on the contrary , a gay country . a country of gay , irresponsible child . or rather , they would be gay , if they be properly treat . if they have comfortable home , and a sense of real freedom . if they feel that they could control their life and their own country . but be in the grip of outsider , as they have be for hundred of year , life of course seem hardly worth while to they . naturally , they do not   care if they live or die . they do not   feel free . ' 

 ' free for what ? ' ask Toussaint . 

 ' to make Mexico their own . not to be so poor and at the mercy of outsider . ' 

 ' they be at the mercy of something bad than outsider , ' say Toussaint . ' let I tell you . they be at the mercy of their own nature . it be this way . fifty per cent of the people in Mexico be pure Indian : more or less . of the rest , a small proportion be foreigner or Spaniard . you have then the mass which be on top , of mixed blood , Indian and Spaniard mixed , chiefly . these be the Mexicans , those with the mixed blood . now , you take we at this table . Don Cipriano be pure Indian . Don Ram n be almost pure Spaniard , but most probably he have the blood of Tlaxcalan Indians in his vein as well . Señor Mirabal be mixed French and Spanish . Señor Garcia most probably have a mixture of indian blood with Spanish . I myself have French , spanish , Austrian , and indian blood . very well ! now you mix blood of the same race , and it may be all right . Europeans be all Aryan stock , the race be the same . but when you mix european and American Indian , you mix different blood race , and you produce the half - breed . now , the half - breed be a calamity . for why ? he be neither one thing nor another , he be divide against himself . his blood of one race tell he one thing , his blood of another race tell he another . he be an unfortunate , a calamity to himself . and it be hopeless . 

 ' and this be Mexico . the Mexicans of mixed blood be hopeless . well then ! there be only two thing to be do . all the foreigner and the Mexicans clear out and leave the country to the Indians , the pure - blooded Indians . but already you have a difficulty . how can you distinguish the pure - blooded Indian , after so many generation ? or else the half - breed or mix - blood Mexicans who be all the time on top shall continue to destroy the country till the Americans from the United States flood in . we be as California and New Mexico now be , swamp under the dead white sea . 

 ' but let I tell you something far . I hope we be not Puritans . I hope I may say that it depend on the moment of coition . at the moment of coition , either the spirit of the father fuse with the spirit of the mother , to create a new being with a soul , or else nothing fuse but the germ of procreation . 

 ' now consider . how have these Mexicans of mixed blood be beget , for century ? in what spirit ? what be the moment of coition like ? answer I that , and you have tell I the reason for this Mexico which make we despair and which will go on make everybody despair , till it destroy itself . in what spirit have the spanish and other foreign father get child of the indian woman ? what sort of spirit be it ? what sort of coition ? and then , what sort of race do you expect ? ' 

 ' but what sort of a spirit be there between white man and white woman ! ' say Kate . 

 ' at least , ' reply the didactic Toussaint , ' the blood be homogeneous , so that consciousness automatically unroll in continuity . ' 

 ' I hate its unrolling in automatic continuity , ' say Kate . 

 ' perhaps ! but it make life possible . without develop continuity in consciousness , you have chaos . and this come of mixed blood . ' 

 ' and then , ' say Kate , ' surely the indian man be fond of their woman ! the man seem manly , and the woman seem very lovable and womanly . ' 

 ' it be possible that the indian child be pure - blooded , and there be the continuity of blood . but the indian consciousness be swamp under the stagnant water of the white man 's Dead Sea consciousness . take a man like Benito Juarez , a pure indian . he flood his old consciousness with the new white idea , and there spring up a whole forest of verbiage , new law , new constitution and all the rest . but it be a sudden weed . it grow like a weed on the surface , sap the strength of the indian soil underneath , and help the process of ruin . no , madam ! there be no hope for Mexico short of a miracle . ' 

 ' ah ! ' cry Mirabal , flourish his wine - glass . ' be not   that wonderful , when only the miracle will save we ! when we must produce the miracle ? we ! we ! we must make the miracle ! ' he hit his own breast emphatically . ' ah , I think that be marvellous ! ' and he return to his turkey in black sauce . 

 ' look at the Mexicans ! ' Toussaint flare on . ' they do not   care about anything . they eat food so hot with chili , it burn hole in their inside . and it have no nourishment . they live in house that a dog would be ashamed of , and they lie and shiver with cold . but they do not   do anything . they could make , easily , easily , a bed of maize leaf or similar leaf . but they do not   do it . they do not   do anything . they roll up in a thin serape and lie on a thin mat on the bare ground , whether it be wet or dry . and mexican night be cold . but they lie down like dog , anyhow , as if they lie down to die . I say dog ! but you will see the dog look for a dry shelter place . the Mexicans , no ! anywhere , nothing , nothing ! and it be terrible . it be terrible ! as if they want to punish themselves for be alive ! ' 

 ' but then , why do they have so many child ? ' say Kate . 

 ' why do they ? the same , because they do not   care . they do not   care . they do not   care about money , they do not   care about make anything , they do not   care about nothing , nothing , nothing . only they get an excitement out of woman , as they do out of chili . they like to feel the red pepper burn hole in their inside , and they like to feel the other thing , the sex , burn hole in they too . but after the moment , they do not   care . they do not   care a bit . 

 ' and that be bad . I tell you , excuse I , but all , everything , depend on the moment of coition . at that moment many thing can come to a crisis : all a man 's hope , his honour , his faith , his trust , his belief in life and creation and God , all these thing can come to a crisis in the moment of coition . and these thing will be hand on in continuity to the child . believe I , I be a crank on this idea , but it be true . it be certainly absolutely true . ' 

 ' I believe it be true , ' say Kate , rather coldly . 

 ' ah ! you do ! well then ! look at Mexico ! the only conscious people be half - breed , people of mixed blood , beget in greed and selfish brutality . ' 

 ' some people believe in the mixed blood , ' say Kate . 

 ' ah ! they do , do they ? who ? ' 

 ' some of your serious - minded man . they say the half - breed be well than the Indian . ' 

 ' well ! well ! the Indian have his hopelessness . the moment of coition be his moment of supreme hopelessness , when he throw himself down the pit of despair . ' 

 the austrian , european blood , which fan into fire of conscious understanding , die down again , leave what be mexican in Julio Toussaint sink in irredeemable gloom . 

 ' it be true , ' say Mirabal , out of the gloom . ' the Mexicans who have any feeling always prostitute themselves , one way or another , and so they can never do anything . and the Indians can never do anything either , because they have not   get hope in anything . but it be always darkest before the dawn . we must make the miracle come . the miracle be superior even to the moment of coition . ' 

 it seem , however , as if he say it by an effort of will . 

 the dinner be end in silence . during the whirl of talk , or of passionate declaration , the servant have carry round the food and wine . Doña Isabel , completely oblivious of the thing that be be say , watch and direct the servant with nervous anxiety and excitement , her hand with their old jewellery tremble with agitation . Don Ram n have keep his eye on his guest ' material comfort , at the same time listen , as it be , from the back of his head . his big brown eye be inscrutable , his face impassive . but when he have anything to say , it be always with a light laugh and a teasing accent . and yet his eye brood and smoulder with an incomprehensible , unyielde fire . 

 Kate feel she be in the presence of man . here be man face to face not with death and self - sacrifice , but with the life - issue . she feel , for the first time in her life , a pang almost like fear , of man who be pass beyond what she know , beyond her depth . 

 Cipriano , his rather short but intensely black , curved eyelash lower over his dark eye , watch his plate , only sometimes look up with a black , brilliant glance , either at whomsoever be speak , or at Don Ram n , or at Kate . his face be changeless and intensely serious , serious almost with a touch of childishness . but the curious blackness of his eyelash lift so strangely , with such intense unconscious maleness from his eye , the movement of his hand be so odd , quick , light as he eat , so easily a movement of shooting , or of flash a knife into the body of some adversary , and his dark - colour lip be so helplessly savage , as he eat or briefly speak , that her heart stand still . there be something undeveloped and intense in he , the intensity and the crudity of the semi - savage . she could well understand the potency of the snake upon the aztec and Maya imagination . something smooth , undeveloped , yet vital in this man suggest the heavy - ebb blood of reptile in his vein . that be what it be , the heavy - ebb blood of powerful reptile , the dragon of Mexico . 

 so that unconsciously she shrink when his black , big , glitter eye turn on she for a moment . they be not , like Don Ram n 's , dark eye . they be black , as black as jewel into which one could not look without a sensation of fear . and her fascination be ting with fear . she feel somewhat as the bird feel when the snake be watch it . 

 she wonder almost that Don Ram n be not afraid . because she have notice that usually , when an Indian look to a white man , both man stand back from actual contact , from actual meeting of each other 's eye . they leave a wide space of neutral territory between they . but Cipriano look at Ram n with a curious intimacy , glitter , steady , warrior - like , and at the same time betray an almost menacing trust in the other man . 

 Kate realize that Ram n have a good deal to stand up to . but he keep a little , foil laugh on his face , and lower his beautiful head with the black hair touch with grey , as if he would put a veil before his countenance . 

 ' do you think one can make this miracle come ? ' she ask of he . 

 ' the miracle be always there , ' he say , ' for the man who can pass his hand through to it , to take it . ' 

 they finish dinner , and go to sit out on the veranda , look into the garden where the light from the house fall uncannily on the blossoming tree and the dark tuft of Yucca and the strange great writhing trunk of the Laurel de India . 

 Cipriano have sit down next to she , smoke a cigarette . 

 ' it be a strange darkness , the mexican darkness ! ' she say . 

 ' do you like it ? ' he ask . 

 ' I do not   know yet , ' she say . ' do you ? ' 

 ' yes . very much . I think I like well the time when the day be fall and the night come on like something else . then , one feel more free , do not   you think ? like the flower that send out their scent at night , but in the daytime they look at the sun and do not   have any smell . ' 

 ' perhaps the night here scar I , ' she laugh . 

 ' yes . but why not ? the smell of the flower at night may make one feel afraid , but it be a good fear . one like it , do not   you think ? ' 

 ' I be afraid of fear , ' she say . 

 he laugh shortly . 

 ' you speak such English English , ' she say . ' nearly all the Mexicans who speak English speak american English . even Don Ram n do , rather . ' 

 ' yes . Don Ram n graduate in Columbia University . but I be send to England , to school in London , and then to Oxford . ' 

 ' who send you ? ' 

 ' my god - father . he be an Englishman : Bishop Severn , Bishop of Oaxaca . you have hear of he ? ' 

 ' no , ' say Kate . 

 ' he be a very well - know man . he die only about ten year ago . he be very rich , too , before the revolution . he have a big hacienda in Oaxaca , with a very fine library . but they take it away from he in the revolution , and they sell the thing , or break they . they do not   know the value of they , of course . ' 

 ' and do he adopt you ? ' 

 ' yes ! in a way . my father be one of the overseer on the hacienda . when I be a little boy I come run to my father , when the Bishop be there , with something in my hand - so ! ' - and he make a cup of his hand . ' I do not   remember . this be what they tell I . I be a small child - three or four year of age - somewhere there . what I have in my hand ' be a yellow scorpion , one of the small one , very poisonous , no ? ' 

 and he lift the cup of his small , slender , dark hand , as if to show Kate the creature . 

 ' well , the Bishop be talk to my father , and he see what I have get before my father do . so he tell I at once , to put the scorpion in his hat - the Bishop 's hat , no ? of course I do what he tell I , and I put the scorpion in his hat , and it do not bite I . if it have sting I I should have die , of course . but I do not   know , so I suppose the alacran be not interested . the Bishop be a very good man , very kind . he like my father , so he become my god - father . then he always take an interest in I , and he send I to school , and then to England . he hop I should be a priest . he always say that the one hope for Mexico be if she have really fine native priest . ' he end rather wistfully . 

 ' and do not   you want to become a priest ? ' say Kate . 

 ' no ! ' he say sadly . ' no ! ' 

 ' not at all ? ' she ask . 

 ' no ! when I be in England it be different from Mexico . even God be different , and the blessed Mary . they be change so much , I feel I do not   know they any more . then I come to understand well , and when I understand I do not   believe any more . I use to think it be the image of Jesus , and the Virgin , and the Saints , that be do everything in the world . and the world seem to I so strange , no ? I could not   see that it be bad , because it be all so very strange and mysterious , when I be a child , in Mexico . only in England I learn about the law of life , and some science . and then when I know why the sun rise and set , and how the world really be , I feel quite different . ' 

 ' be your god - father disappoint ? ' 

 ' a little , perhaps . but he ask I if I would rather be a soldier , so I say I would . then when the revolution come , and I be twenty - two year old , I have to come back to Mexico . ' 

 ' do you like your god - father ? ' 

 ' yes , very much . but the revolution carry everything away . I feel I must do what my god - father wish . but I could see that Mexico be not the Mexico he believe in . it be different . he be too english , and too good to understand . in the revolution I try to help the man I believe be the good man . so you see , I have always be half a priest and half a soldier . ' 

 ' you never marry ? ' 

 ' no . I could not   marry , because I always feel my god - father be there , and I feel I have promise he to be a priest - all those thing , you know . when he die he tell I to follow my own conscience , and to remember that Mexico and all the Indians be in the hand of God , and he make I promise never to take side against God . he be an old man when he die , seventy - five . ' 

 Kate could see the spell of the old Bishop 's strong , rather grandiose personality upon the impressionable Indian . she could see the curious recoil into chastity , perhaps characteristic of the savage . and at the same time she feel the intense masculine yearning , couple with a certain male ferocity , in the man 's breast . 

 ' your husband be James Joachim Leslie , the famous irish leader ? ' he ask she : and add : ' you have no child ? ' 

 ' no . I want Joachim 's child so much , but I do not   have any . but I have a boy and a girl from my first marriage . my first husband be a lawyer , and I be divorce from he for Joachim . ' 

 ' do you like he - that first one ? ' 

 ' yes . I like he . but I never feel anything very deep for he . I marry he when I be young , and he be a good deal old than I. I be fond of he , in a way . but I - have never realize that one could be more than fond of a man , till I know Joachim . I think that be all one could ever expect to feel - that you just like a man , and that he be in love with you . it take I year to understand that a woman can not   love a man - at least a woman like I be can not   - if he be only the sort of good , decent citizen . with Joachim I come to realize that a woman like I can only love a man who be fight to change the world , to make it free , more alive . man like my first husband , who be good and trustworthy and who work to keep the world go on well in the same state they find it in , they let you down horribly , somewhere . you feel so terribly sell . everything be just a sell : it become so small . a woman who be not   quite ordinary herself can only love a man who be fight for something beyond the ordinary life . ' 

 ' and your husband fight for Ireland . ' 

 ' yes - for Ireland , and for something he never quite realize . he ruin his health . and when he be die , he say to I : Kate , perhaps I have   let you down . perhaps I have not   really help Ireland . but I could not   help myself . I feel as if I would bring you to the door of life , and be leave you there . kate , do not   be disappoint in life because of I . I do not   really get anywhere . I have not   really get anywhere . I feel as if I have make a mistake . but perhaps when I be dead I shall be able to do more for you than I have do while I be alive . say you will never feel disappointed ! ' 

 there be a pause . the memory of the dead man be come over she again , and all her grief . 

 ' and I do not   feel disappointed , ' she go on , her voice begin to shake . ' but I love he . and it be bitter , that he have to die , feel he have not   - have not . ' 

 she put her hand before her face , and the bitter tear come through her finger . 

 Cipriano sit motionless as a statue . but from his breast come that dark surge passion of tenderness the Indians be capable of . perhaps it would pass , leave he indifferent and fatalistic again . but at any rate for the moment he sit in a dark , fiery cloud of passionate male tenderness . he look at her soft , wet white hand over her face , and at the one big emerald on her finger , in a sort of wonder . the wonder , the mystery , the magic that use to flood over he as a boy and a youth , when he kneel before the babyish figure of the Santa Maria de la Soledad , flood he again . he be in the presence of the goddess , white - handed , mysterious , gleam with a moon - like power and the intense potency of grief . 

 then Kate hastily take her hand from her face and with head duck look for her handkerchief . of course she have not   get one . Cipriano lend she his , nicely fold . she take it without a word , and rub her face and blow her nose . 

 ' I want to go and look at the flower , ' she say in a strangle voice . 

 and she dash into the garden with his handkerchief in her hand . he stand up and draw aside his chair , to let she pass , then stand a moment look at the garden , before he sit down again and light a cigarette . 

 

 

 CHAPTER IV 

 to stay or not to stay 

 

 Owen have to return to the United States , and he ask Kate whether she want to stay on in Mexico . 

 this put she into a quandary . it be not an easy country for a woman to be alone in . and she have be beat her wing in an effort to get away . she feel like a bird round whose body a snake have coil itself . Mexico be the snake . 

 the curious influence of the country , pull one down , pull one down . she have hear an old American , who have be forty year in the Republic , say to Owen : ' no man who have not   a strong moral backbone should try to settle in Mexico . if he do , he will go to piece , morally and physically , as I have   see hundred of young Americans do . ' 

 to pull one down . it be what the country want to do all the time , with a slow , reptilian insistence , to pull one down . to prevent the spirit from soar . to take away the free , soar sense of liberty . 

 ' there be no such thing as liberty , ' she hear the quiet , deep , dangerous voice of Don Ram n repeat . ' there be no such thing as liberty . the great liberator be usually slave of an idea . the free people be slave to convention and public opinion , and more still , slave to the industrial machine . there be no such thing as liberty . you only change one sort of domination for another . all we can do be to choose our master . ' 

 ' but surely that be liberty - for the mass of people . ' 

 ' they do not   choose . they be trick into a new form of servility , no more . they go from bad to bad . ' 

 ' you yourself - be not   you free ? ' she ask . 

 ' I ? ' he laugh . ' I spend a long time try to pretend . I think I could have my own way . till I realize that have my own way mean only run about smell all the thing in the street , like a dog that will pick up something . of myself , I have no way . no man have any way in himself . every man who go along a way be lead by one of three thing : by an appetite - and I class ambition among appetite ; or by an idea ; or by an inspiration . ' 

 ' I use to think my husband be inspire about Ireland , ' say Kate doubtfully . 

 ' and now ? ' 

 ' yes ! perhaps he put his wine in old , rotten bottle that would not   hold it . no ! - Liberty be a rotten old wine - skin . it will not   hold one 's wine of inspiration or passion any more , ' she say . 

 ' and Mexico ! ' he say . ' Mexico be another Ireland . ah no , no man can be his own master . if I must serve , I will not serve an idea , which crack and leak like an old wine - skin . I will serve the God that give I my manhood . there be no liberty for a man , apart from the God of his manhood . Free Mexico be a bully , and the old , colonial , ecclesiastical Mexico be another sort of bully . when man have nothing but his will to assert - even his good - will - it be always bully . bolshevism be one sort of bullying , capitalism another : and liberty be a change of chain . ' 

 ' then what be to be do ? ' say Kate . ' just nothing ? ' 

 and with her own will , she want nothing to be do . let the sky fall ! 

 ' one be drive , at last , back to the far distance , to look for God , ' say Ram n uneasily . 

 ' I rather hate this search - for - God business , and religiosity , ' say Kate . 

 ' I know ! ' he say , with a laugh . ' I have   suffer from would - be - cocksure religion myself . ' 

 ' and you can not   really " find God " ! ' she say . ' it be a sort of sentimentalism , and creep back into old , hollow shell . ' 

 ' no ! ' he say slowly . ' I can not   find God , in the old sense . I know it be a sentimentalism if I pretend to . but I be nauseate with humanity and the human will : even with my own will . I have realize that my will , no matter how intelligent I be , be only another nuisance on the face of the earth , once I start exert it . and other people 's will be even bad . ' 

 ' oh ! be not   human life horrible ! ' she cry . ' every human be exert his will all the time - over other people , and over himself , and nearly always self - righteous ! ' 

 Ram n make a grimace of repulsion . 

 ' to I , ' he say , ' that be just the weariness of life ! for a time , it can be amusing : exert your own will , and resist all the other people 's will , that they try to put over you . but at a certain point a nausea set in at the very middle of I : my soul be nauseate . my soul be nauseate , and there be nothing but death ahead , unless I find something else . ' 

 Kate listen in silence . she know the road he have go , but she herself have not yet come to the end of it . as yet she be still strong in the pride of her own - her very own will . 

 ' oh , people be repulsive ! ' she cry . 

 ' my own will become even more repulsive at last , ' he say . ' my own will , merely as my own will , be even more distasteful to I than other people 's will . from be the god in my own machine , I must either abdicate , or die of disgust - self - disgust , at that . ' 

 ' how amusing ! ' she cry . 

 ' it be rather funny , ' he say sardonically . 

 ' and then ? ' she ask , look at he with a certain malevolent challenge . 

 he look back at she slowly , with an ironical light in his eye . 

 ' then ! ' he repeat . ' then ! - I ask , what else be there in the world , besides human will , human appetite ? because idea and ideal be only instrument of human will and appetite . ' 

 ' not entirely , ' say Kate . ' they may be disintereste . ' 

 ' may they ? if the appetite be not   interested , the will be . ' 

 ' why not ? ' she mock . ' we can not   be mere detached block . ' 

 ' it nauseate I - I look for something else . ' 

 ' and what do you find ? ' 

 ' my own manhood ! ' 

 ' what do that mean ? ' she cry , jeer . 

 ' if you look , and find your own womanhood , you would know . ' 

 ' but I have my own womanhood ! ' she cry . 

 ' and then - when you find your own manhood - your womanhood , ' he go on , smile faintly at she - ' then you know it be not your own , to do as you like with . you do not   have it of your own will . it come from - from the middle - from the God . beyond I , at the middle , be the God . and the God give I my manhood , then leave I to it . I have nothing but my manhood . the God give it I , and leave I to do far . ' 

 Kate would not hear any more . she break off into banality . 

 the immediate question , for she , be whether she would stay in Mexico or not . she be not really concerned with Don Ram n 's soul - or even her own . she be concern with her immediate future . should she stay in Mexico ? Mexico mean the dark - face man in cotton clothe , big hat : the peasant , peon , pelado , Indians , call they what you will . the mere native . 

 those pale - face Mexicans of the Capital , politician , artist , professional , and business people , they do not interest she . neither do the hacendado and the ranch - owner , in their tight trouser and weak , soft sensuality , pale victim of their own emotional undiscipline . Mexico still mean the mass of silent peon , to she . and she think of they again , these silent , stiff - back man , drive their string of ass along the country road , in the dust of Mexico 's infinite dryness , past broken wall , broken house , broken hacienda , along the endless desolation leave by the revolution ; past the vast stretch of maguey , the huge cactus , or aloe , with its gigantic rosette of upstarte , pointed leaf , that in its iron row cover mile and mile of ground in the Valley of Mexico , cultivate for the making of that bad - smell drink , pulque . the Mediterranean have the dark grape , old Europe have malt beer , and China have opium from the white poppy . but out of the mexican soil a bunch of black - tarnish sword burst up , and a great unfolded bud of the once - flower monster begin to thrust at the sky . they cut the great phallic bud and crush out the sperm - like juice for the pulque . Agua miel ! Pulque ! 

 but well pulque than the fiery white brandy distil from the maguey : mescal , tequila : or in the low land , the hateful sugar - cane brandy , aguardiente . 

 and the Mexican burn out his stomach with those beastly fire - water and cauterize the hurt with red - hot chili . swallow one hell - fire to put out another . 

 tall field of wheat and maize . Taller , more brilliant field of bright - green sugar - cane . and thread in white cotton clothe , with dark , half - visible face , the eternal peon of Mexico , his great white calico drawer flop round his ankle as he walk , or roll up over his dark , handsome leg . 

 the wild , sombre , erect man of the north ! the too - often degenerate man of Mexico Valley , their head through the middle of their ponchos ! the big man in Tlascala , sell ice - cream or huge half - sweeten bun and fancy bread ! the quick little Indians , quick as spider , down in Oaxaca ! the queer - look half - chinese native towards Vera Cruz ! the dark face and the big black eye on the coast of Sinaloa ! the handsome man of Jalisco , with a scarlet blanket fold on one shoulder ! 

 they be of many tribe and many language , and far more alien to one another than Frenchmen , English , and Germans be . Mexico ! it be not really even the beginning of a nation : hence the rabid assertion of nationalism in the few . and it be not a race . 

 yet it be a people . there be some indian quality which pervade the whole . whether it be man in blue overall and a slouch , in Mexico City , or man with handsome leg in skintight trouser , or the floppy , white , cotton - clothe labourer in the field , there be something mysteriously in common . the erect , prance walk , step out from the base of the spine with lift knee and short step . the jaunty balancing of the huge hat . the throw - back shoulder with a fold serape like a royal mantle . and most of they handsome , with dark , warm - bronze skin so smooth and living , their proudly - hold head , whose black hair gleam like wild , rich feather . their big , bright black eye that look at you wonderingly , and have no centre to they . their sudden , charming smile , when you smile first . but the eye unchanged . 

 yes , and she have to remember , too , a fair proportion of small , sometimes insignificant - look man , some of they scaly with dirt , who look at you with a cold , mud - like antagonism as they step cattishly past . poisonous , thin , stiff little man , cold and unliving like scorpion , and as dangerous . 

 and then the truly terrible face of some creature in the city , slightly swell with the poison of tequila , and with black , dim , swivel eye swing in pure evil . never have she see such face of pure brutish evil , cold and insect - like , as in Mexico City . 

 the country give she a strange feeling of hopelessness and of dauntlessness . unbroken , eternally resistant , it be a people that live without hope , and without care . Gay even , and laugh with indifferent carelessness . 

 they be something like her own Irish , but go to a much great length . and also , they do what the self - conscious and pretentious Irish rarely do , they touch her bowel with a strange fire of compassion . 

 at the same time , she fear they . they would pull she down , pull she down , to the dark depth of nothingness . 

 it be the same with the woman . in their full long skirt and bare foot , and with the big dark - blue scarf or shawl call a rebozo over their womanly small head and tight round their shoulder , they be image of wild submissiveness , the primitive womanliness of the world , that be so touching and so alien . many woman kneel in a dim church , all hood in their dark - blue rebozo , the pallor of their skirt on the floor , their head and shoulder wrap dark and tight , as they sway with devotion of fear and ecstasy ! a churchful of dark - wrap woman sink there in wild , humble supplication of dread and of bliss fill Kate with tenderness and revulsion . they crouch like people not quite create . 

 their soft , untidy black hair , which they scratch for lice ; the round - eyed baby joggle like a pumpkin in the shawl sling over the woman 's shoulder , the never - wash foot and ankle , again somewhat reptilian under the long , flounce , soil cotton skirt ; and then , once more , the dark eye of half - create woman , soft , appealing , yet with a queer void insolence ! something lurking , where the womanly centre should have be ; lurk snake - like . fear ! the fear of not be able to find full creation . and the inevitable mistrust and lurking insolence , insolent against a high creation , the same thing that be in the striking of a snake . 

 Kate , as a woman , fear the woman more than the man . the woman be little and insidious , the man be big and more reckless . but in the eye of each , the uncreated centre , where the evil and the insolence lurk . 

 and sometimes she wonder whether America really be the great death - continent , the great no ! to the european and asiatic , and even african yes ! be it really the great melting - pot , where man from the creative continent be smelt back again , not to a new creation , but down into the homogeneity of death ? be it the great continent of the undoing , and all its people the agent of the mystic destruction ! plucking , pluck at the created soul in a man , till at last it pluck out the grow germ , and leave he a creature of mechanism and automatic reaction , with only one inspiration , the desire to pluck the quick out of every live spontaneous creature . 

 be that the clue to America ? she sometimes wonder . be it the great death - continent , the continent that destroy again what the other continent have build up ? the continent whose spirit of place fight purely to pick the eye out of the face of God ? be that America ? 

 and all the people who go there , Europeans , Negroes , Japanese , Chinese , all the colour and the race , be they the spend people , in whom the God impulse have collapse , so they cross to the great continent of the negation , where the human will declare itself ' free ' , to pull down the soul of the world ? be it so ? and do this account for the great drift to the New World , the drift of spend soul pass over to the side of godless democracy , energetic negation ? the negation which be the life - breath of materialism . and would the great negative pull of the Americans at last break the heart of the world ? 

 this thought would come to she , time and again . 

 she herself , what have she come to America for ? 

 because the flow of her life have break , and she know she could not re - start it in Europe . 

 these handsome native ! be it because they be death - worshipper , Moloch - worshipper , that they be so uncowed and handsome ? their pure acknowledgment of death and their undaunted admission of nothingness keep so erect and careless . 

 white man have have a soul , and lose it . the pivot of fire have be quench in they , and their life have start to spin in the reversed direction , widdershin . that reverse look which be in the eye of so many white people , the look of nullity , and life wheel in the reversed direction . widdershin . 

 but the dark - face native , with their strange soft flame of life wheel upon a dark void : be they centreless and widdershin too , as so many white man now be ? 

 the strange , soft flame of courage in the black mexican eye . but still it be not knit to a centre , that centre which be the soul of a man in a man . 

 and all the effort of white man to bring the soul of the dark man of Mexico into final clinched being have result in nothing but the collapse of the white man . against the soft , dark flow of the Indian the white man at last collapse ; with his God and his energy he collapse . in attempt to convert the dark man to the white man 's way of life , the white man have fall helplessly down the hole he want to fill up . seek to save another man 's soul , the white man lose his own , and collapse upon himself . 

 Mexico ! the great , precipitous , dry , savage country , with a handsome church in every landscape , rise as it be out of nothing . a revolution - break landscape , with lingering , tall , handsome church whose dome be like inflation that be go to burst , and whose pinnacle and tower be like the tremble pagoda of an unreal race . gorgeous church wait , above the hut and straw hovel of the native , like ghost to be dismiss . 

 and noble ruin hacienda , with ruined avenue approach their broken splendour . 

 and the city of Mexico , great and small , that the Spaniards conjure up out of nothing . stone live and die with the spirit of the builder . and the spirit of Spaniards in Mexico die , and the very stone in the building die . the native drift into the centre of the plazas again , and in unspeakable empty weariness the spanish building stand around , in a sort of dry exhaustion . 

 the conquered race ! Cortés come with his iron heel and his iron will , a conqueror . but a conquered race , unless graft with a new inspiration , slowly suck the blood of the conqueror , in the silence of a strange night and the heaviness of a hopeless will . so that now , the race of the conqueror in Mexico be soft and boneless , child cry in helpless hopelessness . 

 be it the dark negation of the continent ? 

 Kate could not look at the stone of the National Museum in Mexico without depression and dread . snake coil like excrement , snake fange and feather beyond all dream of dread . and that be all . 

 the ponderous pyramid of San Juan Teotihuacan , the House of Quetzalcoatl wreathe with the snake of all snake , his huge fang white and pure to - day as in the lose century when his maker be alive . he have not die . he be not so dead as the spanish church , this all - enwreathe dragon of the horror of Mexico . 

 Cholula , with its church where the altar be ! and the same ponderousness , the same unspeakable sense of weight and downward pressure of the blunt pyramid . down - sink pressure and depression . and the great market - place with its linger dread and fascination . 

 Mitla under its hill , in the parch valley where a wind blow the dust and the dead soul of the vanish race in terrible gust . the carve court of Mitla , with a hard , sharp - angle , intricate fascination , but the fascination of fear and repellence . hard , four - square , sharp - edge , cutting , zig - zagge Mitla , like continual blow of a stone axe . without gentleness or grace or charm . oh America , with your unspeakable hard lack of charm , what then be your final meaning ? be it forever the knife of sacrifice , as you put out your tongue at the world ? 

 Charmless America ! with your hard , vindictive beauty , be you wait forever to smite death ? be the world your everlasting victim ? 

 so long as it will let itself be victimize . 

 but yet ! but yet ! the gentle voice of the native . the voice of the boy , like bird twitter among the tree of the plaza of Tehuacan ! the soft touch , the gentleness . be it the dark - finger quietness of death , and the music of the presence of death in their voice ? 

 she think again of what Don Ram n have say to she . 

 ' they pull you down ! Mexico pull you down , the people pull you down like a great weight ! but it may be they pull you down as the earth 's pull of gravitation do , that you can balance on your foot . maybe they draw you down as the earth draw down the root of a tree , so that it may be clinch deep in soil . man be still part of the Tree of Life , and the root go down to the centre of the earth . loose leaf , and aeroplane , blow away on the wind , in what they call freedom . but the Tree of Life have fix , deep , grip root . 

 ' it may be you need to be draw down , down , till you send root into the deep place again . then you can send up the sap and the leaf back to the sky , later . 

 ' and to I , the man in Mexico be like tree , forest that the white man fell in their coming . but the root of the tree be deep and alive and forever send up new shoot . 

 ' and each new shoot that come up overthrow a spanish church or an american factory . and soon the dark forest will rise again , and shake the spanish building from the face of America . 

 ' all that matter to I be the root that reach down beyond all destruction . the root and the life be there . what else it need be the word , for the forest to begin to rise again . and some man among man must speak the word . ' 

 the strange doom - like sound of the man 's word ! but in spite of the sense of doom on her heart , she would not go away yet . she would stay long in Mexico . 

 

 

 CHAPTER V 

 The Lake 

 

 Owen leave , villier stay on a few day to escort Kate to the lake . if she like it there , and could find a house , she could stay by herself . she know sufficient people in Mexico and in Guadalajara to prevent she from be lonely . but she still shrink from travel alone in this country . 

 she want to leave the city . the new President have come in quietly enough , but there be an ugly feeling of uppishness in the low class , the bottom dog clamber mangily to the top . Kate be no snob . man or woman , she care nothing about the social class . but meanness , sordidness she hat . she hat bottom dog . they all be mangy , they all be full of envy and malice , many have the rabie . ah no , let we defend ourselves from the bottom dog , with its mean growl and its yellow tooth . 

 she have tea with Cipriano before leave . 

 ' how do you get along with the government ? ' she ask . 

 ' I stand for the law and the constitution , ' he say . ' they know I do not   want anything to do with cuartelazos or revolution . Don Ram n be my chief . ' 

 ' in what way ? ' 

 ' later , you will see . ' 

 he have a secret , important to himself , on which he be sit tight . but he look at she with shin eye , as much as to say that soon she would share the secret , and then he would be much happy . 

 he watch she curiously , from under his wary black lash . she be one of the rather plump Irishwomen , with soft brown hair and hazel eye , and a beautiful , rather distant repose . her great charm be her soft repose , and her gentle , unconscious inaccessibility . she be tall and big than Cipriano : he be almost boyishly small . but he be all energy , and his eyebrow tilt black and with a barbarian conceit , above his full , almost insolent black eye . 

 he watch she continually , with a kind of fascination : the same spell that the absurd little figure of the doll Madonna have cast over he as a boy . she be the mystery , and he the adorer , under the semi - ecstatic spell of the mystery . but once he rise from his knee , he rise in the same strutting conceit of himself as before he kneel : with all his adoration in his pocket again . but he have a good deal of magnetic power . his education have not diminish it . his education lie like a film of white oil on the black lake of his barbarian consciousness . for this reason , the thing he say be hardly interesting at all . only what he be . he make the air around he seem dark , but rich and fuller . sometimes his presence be extraordinarily grateful , like a healing of the blood . and sometimes he be an intolerable weight on she . she gasp to get away from he . 

 ' you think a great deal of Don Ram n ? ' she say to he . 

 ' yes , ' he say , his black eye watch she . ' he be a very fine man . ' 

 how trivial the word sound ! that be another boring thing about he : his English seem so trivial . he be not   really express himself . he be only flip at the white oil that lie on his surface . 

 ' you like he well than the Bishop , your god - father ? ' 

 he lift his shoulder in a twisted , embarrassed shrug . 

 ' the same ! ' he say . ' I like he the same . ' 

 then he look away into the distance , with a certain hauteur and insolence . 

 ' very different , no ? ' he say . ' but in some way , the same . he know well what be Mexico . he know well what I be . Bishop Severn do not know the real Mexico : how could he , he be a sincere Catholic ! but Don Ram n know the real Mexico , no ? ' 

 ' and what be the real Mexico ? ' she ask . 

 ' well - you must ask Don Ram n. I can not   explain . ' 

 she ask Cipriano about go to the lake . 

 ' yes ! ' he say . ' you can go ! you will like it . go first to Orilla , no ? - you take a ticket on the railway to Ixtlahuacan . and in Orilla be an hotel with a german manager . then from Orilla you can go in a motor - boat , in a few hour , to Sayula . and there you will find a house to live in . ' 

 he want she to do this , she could tell . 

 ' how far be Don Ram n 's hacienda from Sayula ? ' she ask . 

 ' near ! about an hour in a boat . he be there now . and at the beginning of the month I be go with my division to Guadalajara : now there be a new governor . so I shall be quite near too . ' 

 ' that will be nice , ' she say . 

 ' you think so ? ' he ask quickly . 

 ' yes , ' she say , on her guard , look at he slowly . ' I should be sorry to lose touch with Don Ram n and you . ' 

 he have a little tension on his brow , haughty , unwilling , conceited , and at the same time , yearning and desirous . 

 ' you like Don Ram n very much ? ' he say . ' you want to know he more ? ' 

 there be a peculiar anxiety in his voice . 

 ' yes , ' she say . ' one know so few people in the world nowadays , that one can respect - and fear a little . I be a little afraid of Don Ram n : and I have the great respect for he - ' she end on a hot note of sincerity . 

 ' it be good ! ' he say . ' it be very good . you may respect he more than any other man in the world . ' 

 ' perhaps that be true , ' she say , turn her eye slowly to his . 

 ' yes ! yes ! ' he cry impatiently . ' it be true . you will find out later . and Ram n like you . he tell I to ask you to come to the lake . when you come to Sayula , when you be come , write to he , and no doubt he can tell you about a house , and all those thing . ' 

 ' shall I ? ' she say , hesitant . 

 ' yes . yes ! of course , we say what we mean . ' 

 curious little man , with his odd , inflammable hauteur and conceit , something burn inside he , that give he no peace . he have an almost childish faith in the other man . and yet she be not sure that he do not , in some corner of his soul , resent Ram n somewhat . 

 Kate set off by the night train for the west , with villier . the one Pullman coach be full : people go to Guadalajara and Colima and the coast . there be three military officer , rather shy in their new uniform , and rather swagger at the same time , make eye at the empty air , as if they feel they be conspicuous , and sit quickly in their seat , as if to obliterate themselves . there be two country farmer or rancher , in tight trouser and cartwheel hat stitch with silver . one be a tall man with a big moustache , the other be a small , grey man . but they both have the handsome , alive leg of the Mexicans , and the rather quench face . there be a widow bury in crape , accompany by a criada , a maid . the rest be townsman , Mexicans on business , at once shy and fussy , unobtrusive and self - important . 

 the Pullman be clean and neat , with its hot green - plush seat . but , full of people , it seem empty compare with a Pullman in the United States . everybody be very quiet , very soft and guard . the farmer fold their beautiful serape and lay they carefully on the seat , sit as if their section be a lonely little place . the officer fold their cloak and arrange dozen of little parcel , little cardboard hatbox and heterogeneous bundle , under the seat and on the seat . the business man have the oddest luggage , canvas hold - all embroider in wool , with long , touching motto . 

 and in all the crowd a sense of guardedness and softness and self - effacement : a curious soft sensibilité , touch with fear . it be already a somewhat conspicuous thing to travel in the Pullman ; you have to be on your guard . 

 the evening for once be grey : the rainy season really approach . a sudden wind whirl dust and a few spot of rain . the train draw out of the formless , dry , dust - smite area fringe the city , and wound mildly on for a few minute , only to stop in the main street of Tacubaya , the suburb - village . in the grey approach of evening the train halt heavily in the street , and Kate look out at the man who stand in group , with their hat tilt against the wind and their blanket fold over their shoulder and up to their eye , against the dust , motionless , stand like sombre ghost , only a glint of eye show between the dark serape and the big hat - brim ; while donkey - driver in a dust - cloud run frantically , with uplifted arm like demon , utter short , sharp cry to prevent their donkey from poke in between the coach of the train . silent dog trot in - and - out under the train , woman , their face wrap in their blue rebozos , come to offer tortilla fold in a cloth to keep they warm , or pulque in an earthenware mug , or piece of chicken smother in red , thick , oily sauce ; or orange or banana or pitahayas , anything . and when few people buy , because of the dust , the woman put their ware under their arm , under the blue rebozo , and cover their face and motionless watch the train . 

 it be about six o'clock . the earth be utterly dry and stale . somebody be kindle charcoal in front of a house . man be hurry down the wind , balance their great hat curiously . horseman on quick , fine little horse , gun sling behind , trot up to the train , lingered , then trot quickly away again into nowhere . 

 still the train stand in the street . Kate and Villiers get down . they watch the spark blow from the charcoal which a little girl be kindle in the street , to cook tortilla . 

 the train have a second - class coach and a first - class . the second class be jam - full of peasant , Indians , pile in like chicken with their bundle and basket and bottle , endless thing . one woman have a fine peacock under her arm . she put it down and in vain try to suppress it beneath her voluminous skirt . it refuse to be suppress . she take it up and balance it on her knee and look round again over the medley of jar , basket , pumpkin , melon , gun , bundle , and human being . 

 in the front be a steel car with a guard of little scrubby soldier in their dirty cotton uniform . some soldier be mount on top of the train with their gun : the look - out . 

 and the whole train , seethe with life , be curiously still , subdue . perhaps it be the perpetual sense of danger which make the people so hush , without clamour or stridency . and with an odd , hush politeness among they . a sort of demon - world . 

 at last the train move on . if it have wait forever , no one would have be deeply surprised . for what might not be ahead ? rebel , bandit , bridge blow up - anything . 

 however , quietly , stealthily , the train move out and along the great weary valley . the circle mountain , so relentless , be invisible save near at hand . in a few broken adobe hut a bit of fire spark red . the adobe be grey - black , of the lava dust , depress . into the distance the field spread dry , with here and there patch of green irrigation . there be a broken hacienda with column that support nothing . darkness be come , dust still blow in the shadow ; the valley seem encompass in a dry , stale , weary gloom . 

 then there come a heavy shower . the train be pass a pulque hacienda . the row of the giant maguey stretch bristle their iron - black barb in the gloom . 

 all at once , the light come on , the Pullman attendant come swiftly lower the blind , so that the brilliance of the window should attract no bullet from the dark outside . 

 there be a poor little meal at exorbitant price , and when this be clear away , the attendant come with a clash to make the bed , pull down the upper berth . it be only eight o'clock , and the passenger look up in resentment . but no good . the pug - face Mexican in charge , and his smallpox - pit assistant , insolently come in between the seat , insert the key overhead , and bring down the berth with a crash . and the mexican passenger humbly crawl away to the smoking - room or the toilet , like whip dog . 

 at half - past eight everybody be silently and with intense discretion go to bed . none of the collar - stud - snap bustle and ' homely ' familiarity of the United States . like subdued animal they all creep in behind their green serge curtain . 

 Kate hat a Pullman , the discreet indiscretion , the horrible nearness of other people , like so many larvae in so many section , behind the green serge curtain . above all , the horrible intimacy of the noise of go to bed . she hat to undress , struggle in the oven of her berth , with her elbow butt into the stomach of the attendant who be button up the green curtain outside . 

 and yet , once she be in bed and could put out her light and raise the window - blind , she have to admit it be well than a wagon - light in Europe : and perhaps the good that can be do for people who must travel through the night in train . 

 there be a rather cold wind , after the rain , up there on that high plateau . the moon have rise , the sky be clear . rock , and tall organ cactus , and more mile of maguey . then the train stop at a dark little station on the rim of the slope , where man swathe in dark serape hold dusky , ruddy lantern that light up no face at all , only dark gap . why do the train stay so long ? be something wrong ? 

 at last they be go again . under the moon she see beyond she a long downslope of rock and cactus , and in the distance below , the light of a town . she lie in her berth watch the train wind slowly down the wild , rugged slope . then she doze . 

 to wake at a station that look like a quiet inferno , with dark face come near the window , glitter eye in the half - light , woman in their rebozo run along the train balance dish of meat , tamale , tortilla on one hand , black - face man with fruit and sweet , and all call in a subdue , intense , hush hubbub . strange and glaring , she see eye at the dark screen of the Pullman , sudden hand thrust up something to sell . in fear , Kate drop her window . the wire screen be not enough . 

 the platform below the Pullman be all dark . but at the back of the train she could see the glare of the first - class window , on the dark station . and a man sell sweet - meat - Cajetas ! cajeta ! La de Celaya ! 

 she be safe inside the Pullman , with nothing to do but to listen to an occasional cough behind the green curtain , and to feel the faint bristling apprehension of all the Mexicans in their dark berth . the dark Pullman be full of a subdue apprehension , fear lest there might be some attack on the train . 

 she go to sleep and wake at a bright station : probably Queretaro . the green tree look theatrical in the electric light . opale ! she hear the man call softly . if Owen have be there he would have get up in his pyjama to buy opal . the call would have be too strong . 

 she sleep fitfully , in the shaken saloon , vaguely aware of station and the deep night of the open country . then she start from a complete sleep . the train be dead still , no sound . then a tremendous jerking as the Pullman be shunt . it must be Irapuato , where they branch to the west . 

 she would arrive at Ixtlahuacan soon after six in the morning . the man wake she at daybreak , before the sun have rise . Dry country with mesquite bush , in the dawn : then green wheat alternating with ripe wheat . and man already in the pale , ripen wheat reaping with sickle , cut short little handfuls from the short straw . a bright sky , with a bluish shadow on earth . parch slope with ragged maize stubble . then a forlorn hacienda and a man on horseback , in a blanket , drive a silent flock of cow , sheep , bull , goat , lamb , ripple a bit ghostly in the dawn , from under a tottering archway . a long canal beside the railway , a long canal pave with bright green leaf from which poke the mauve head of the lirio , the water hyacinth . the sun be lift up , red . in a moment it be the full , dazzle gold of a mexican morning . 

 Kate be dressed and ready , sit face villier , when they come to Ixtlahuacan . the man carry out her bag . the train drift in to a desert of a station . they get down . it be a new day . 

 in the powerful light of morning , under a turquoise - blue sky , she gaze at the helpless - look station , railway line , some stand truck , and a remote lifelessness . a boy seize their bag and run across the line to the station yard , which be pave with cobblestone , but overgrow with weed . at one side stand an old tram - car with two mule , like a relic . one or two man , swathe up to the eye in scarlet blanket , be cross on silent white leg . 

 ' adonde ? ' say the boy . 

 but Kate go to see her big luggage take out . it be all there . 

 ' Orilla Hotel , ' say Kate . 

 the boy say they must go in the tram - car , so in the tram - car they go . the driver whip his mule , they roll in the still , heavy morning light away down an uneven cobbled road with hole in it , between wall with fall mortar and low , black adobe house , in the peculiar vacuous depression of a helpless little mexican town , towards the plaza . the strange emptiness , everything empty of life ! 

 occasional man on horseback clatter suddenly by , occasional big man in scarlet serape go noiselessly on their own way , under the big hat . a boy on a high mule be deliver milk from red globe - shape jar sling on either side his mount . the street be stony , uneven , vacuous , sterile . the stone seem dead , the town seem make of dead stone . the human life come with a slow , sterile unwillingness , in spite of the low - hung power of the sun . 

 at length they be in the plaza , where brilliant tree flower in a blaze of pure scarlet , and some in pure lavender , around the basin of milk - look water . milky - dim the water bubble up in the basin , and woman , bleary with sleep , uncombe , come from under the dilapidated arch of the portale , and across the broken pavement , to fill their water - jar . 

 the tram stop and they get down . the boy get down with the bag , and tell they they must go to the river to take a boat . 

 they follow obediently down the smash pavement , where every moment you might twist your ankle or break your leg . everywhere the same weary indifference and brokenness , a sense of dirt and of helplessness , squalor of far - go indifference , under the perfect morning sky , in the pure sunshine and the pure mexican air . the sense of life ebb away , leave dry ruin . 

 they come to the edge of the town , to a dusty , humped bridge , a broken wall , a pale - brown stream flow full . below the bridge a cluster of man . 

 each one want she to hire his boat . she demand a motor - boat : the boat from the hotel . they say there be not   one . she do not   believe it . then a dark - face fellow with his black hair down his forehead , and a certain intensity in his eye , say : yes , yes ; the hotel have a boat , but it be break . she must take a row - boat . in an hour and a half he would row she there . 

 ' how long ? ' say Kate . 

 ' an hour and a half . ' 

 ' and I be so hungry ! ' cry Kate . ' how much do you charge ? ' 

 ' two peso . ' he hold up two finger . 

 Kate say yes , and he run down to his boat . then she notice he be a cripple with inturne foot . but how quick and strong ! 

 she climb with Villiers down the broken bank to the river , and in a moment they be in the boat . pale green willow - tree fringe from the earthen bank to the fuller - flow , pale - brown water . the river be not very wide , between deep bank . they slip under the bridge , and past a funny high barge with row of seat . the boatman say it go up the river to Jocotlan : and he wave his hand to show the direction . they be slip down - stream , between lonely bank of willow - tree . 

 the crippled boatman be pull hard , with great strength and energy . when she speak to he in her bad Spanish and he find it hard to understand , he knit his brow a little , anxiously . and when she laugh he smile at she with such a beautiful gentleness , sensitive , wistful , quick . she feel he be naturally honest and truthful , and generous . there be a beauty in these man , a wistful beauty and a great physical strength . why have she feel so bitterly about the country ? 

 Morning be still young on the pale buff river , between the silent earthen bank . there be a blue dimness in the low air , and black water - fowl run swiftly , unconcernedly back and forth from the river 's edge , on the dry , baked bank that be treeless now , and wider . they have enter a wide river , from the narrow one . the blueness and moistness of the dissolve night seem to linger under the scatter pepper - tree of the far shore . 

 the boatman row short and hard upon the flimsy , soft , sperm - like water , only pause at moment swiftly to smear the sweat from his face with an old rag he keep on the bench beside he . the sweat run from his bronze - brown skin like water , and the black hair on his high - dome , indian head smoke with wetness . 

 ' there be no hurry , ' say Kate , smile to he . 

 ' what do the Señorita say ? ' 

 ' there be no hurry , ' she repeat . 

 he pause , smile , breathe deeply , and explain that now he be row against stream . this wide river flow out of the lake , full and heavy . see ! even as he rest a moment , the boat begin to turn and drift ! he quickly take his oar . 

 the boat move slowly , in the hush of departed night , upon the soft , full - flow buff water , that carry little tuft of float water - hyacinth . some willow - tree stand near the edge , and some pepper - tree of most delicate green foliage . beyond the tree and the level of the shore , big hill rise up to high , blunt point , bake incredibly dry , like biscuit . the blue sky settle against they nakedly ; they be leafless and lifeless save for the iron - green shafts of the organ cactus , that glisten blackly , yet atmospherically , in the ochreous aridity . this be Mexico again , stark - dry and luminous with powerful light , cruel and unreal . 

 on a flat near the river a peon , perch on the rump of his ass , be slowly drive five luxurious cow towards the water to drink . the big black - and - white animal step in a dream - pace past the pepper - tree to the bank , like move piece of light - and - shade : the dun cow trail after , in the incredible silence and brilliance of the morning . 

 Earth , air , water be all silent with new light , the last blue of night dissolve like a breath . no sound , even no life . the great light be strong than life itself . only , up in the blue , some turkey - buzzard be wheel with dirty - edge wing , as everywhere in Mexico . 

 ' do not   hurry ! ' Kate say again to the boatman , who be again mop his face , while his black hair run sweat . ' we can go slowly . ' 

 the man smile deprecatingly . 

 ' if the Señorita will sit in the back , ' he say . 

 Kate do not understand his request at first . he have row in towards a bend in the right bank , to be out of the current . on the left bank Kate have notice some man bath : man whose wet skin flash with the beautiful brown - rose colour and glitter of the naked native , and one stout man with the curious creamy - biscuit skin of the city Mexicans . low against the water across - stream she watch the glitter of naked man , half - immerse in the river . 

 she rise to step back into the stern of the boat , where villier be . as she do so , she see a dark head and the flash ruddy shoulder of a man swim towards the boat . she waver - and as she be sit down , the man stand up in the water and be wad near , the water washing at the loose little cloth he have round his loin . he be smooth and wet and of a lovely colour , with the rich smooth - muscle physique of the Indians . he be come towards the boat , push back his hair from his forehead . 

 the boatman watch he , transfix , without surprise , a little subtle half - smile , perhaps of mockery , round his nose . as if he have expect it ! 

 ' where be you go ? ' ask the man in the water , the brown river run softly at his strong thigh . 

 the boatman wait a moment for his patron to answer , then , see they be silent , reply in a low , unwilling tone : 

 ' Orilla . ' 

 the man in the water take hold of the stern of the boat , as the boatman softly touch the water with the oar to keep she straight , and he throw back his longish black hair with a certain effrontery . 

 ' do you know whom the lake belong to ? ' he ask , with the same effrontery . 

 ' what do you say ? ' ask Kate , haughtily . 

 ' if you know whom the lake belong to ? ' the young man in the water repeat . 

 ' to whom ? ' say Kate , fluster . 

 ' to the old god of Mexico , ' the stranger say . ' you have to make a tribute to Quetzalcoatl if you go on the lake . ' 

 the strange calm effrontery of it ! but truly Mexican . 

 ' how ? ' say Kate . 

 ' you can give I something , ' he say . 

 ' but why should I give something to you , if it be a tribute to Quetzalcoatl ? ' she stammer . 

 ' I be Quetzalcoatl 's man , I , ' he reply , with calm effrontery . 

 ' and if I do not   give you anything ? ' she say . 

 he lift his shoulder and spread his free hand , stagger a little , lose his footing in the water as he do so . 

 ' if you wish to make an enemy of the lake - ' he say , coolly , as he recover his balance . 

 and then for the first time he look straight at she . and as he do so , the demonish effrontery die down again , and the peculiar american tension slacken and leave he . 

 he give a slight wave of dismissal with his free hand , and push the boat gently forward . 

 ' but it do not   matter , ' he say , with a slight insolent jerk of his head sideways , and a faint , insolent smile . ' we will wait till the Morning Star rise . ' 

 the boatman softly but powerfully pull the oar . the man in the water stand with the sun on his powerful chest , look after the boat in half - see abstraction . his eye have take again the peculiar gleam far - awayness , suspend between the reality , which , Kate suddenly realize , be the central look in the native eye . the boatman , row away , be glance back at the man who stand in the water , and his face , too , have the abstract , transfigure look of a man perfectly suspend between the world 's two strenuous wing of energy . a look of extraordinary , arrest beauty , the silent , vulnerable centre of all life 's quivering , like the nucleus gleam in tranquil suspense , within a cell . 

 ' what do he mean , ' say Kate , ' by " we will wait till the Morning Star rise " ? ' 

 the man smile slowly . 

 ' it be a name , ' he say . 

 and he seem to know no more . but the symbolism have evidently the power to soothe and sustain he . 

 ' why do he come and speak to we ? ' ask Kate . 

 ' he be one of those of the god Quetzalcoatl , Señorita . ' 

 ' and you ? be you one too ? ' 

 ' who know ! ' say the man , put his head on one side . then he add : ' I think so . we be many . ' 

 he watch Kate 's face with that gleaming , intense semi - abstraction , a gleam that hang unwavering in his black eye , and which suddenly remind Kate of the morning star , or the evening star , hang perfect between night and the sun . 

 ' you have the morning star in your eye , ' she say to the man . 

 he flash she a smile of extraordinary beauty . 

 ' the Señorita understand , ' he say . 

 his face change again to a dark - brown mask , like semi - transparent stone , and he row with all his might . ahead , the river be widen , the bank be grow low , down to the water 's level , like shoal plant with willow - tree and with reed . above the willow - tree a square white sail be stand , as if erect on the land . 

 ' be the lake so near ? ' say Kate . 

 the man hastily mop his run wet face . 

 ' yes , Señorita ! the sailing - boat be wait for the wind , to come into the river . we will pass by the canal . ' 

 he indicate with a backward movement of the head a narrow , twist passage of water between deep reed . it make Kate think of the little river Anapo : the same mystery unbroken . the boatman , with crease half of sadness and half of exaltation in his bronze , still face , be pull with all his might . water - fowl go swim into the reed , or rise on wing and wheel into the blue air . some willow - tree hang a dripping , vivid green , in the stark dry country . the stream be narrow and winding . with a nonchalant motion , first of the right then of the left hand , Villiers be guide the boatman , to keep he from run aground in the winding , narrow water - way . 

 and this put villier at his ease , to have something practical and slightly mechanical to do and to assert . he be strike the american note once more , of mechanical dominance . 

 all the other business have leave he incomprehending , and when he ask Kate , she have pretend not to hear he . she sense a certain delicate , tender mystery in the river , in the naked man in the water , in the boatman , and she could not bear to have it subject to the tough american flippancy . she be weary to death of american automatism and american flippant toughness . it give she a feeling of nausea . 

 ' quite a well - build fellow , that one who lay hold of the boat . what do he want , anyway ? ' villier insist . 

 ' nothing ! ' say Kate . 

 they be slip out past the clay - colour , loose stony edge of the land , through a surge of ripple , into the wide white light of the lake . a breeze be come from the east , out of the upright morning , and the surface of the shallow , flimsy , dun - colour water be in motion . shoal - water rustle near at hand . out to the open , large , square white sail be step gingerly forward , and beyond the buff - colour , pale desert of water rise far - away blue , sharp hill of the other side , many mile away , pure pale blue with distance , yet sharp - edged and clear in form . 

 ' now , ' say the boatman , smile to Kate , ' it be easy . now we be out of the current . ' 

 he pull rhythmically through the frail - rippling , sperm - like water , with a sense of peace . and for the first time Kate feel she have meet the mystery of the native , the strange and mysterious gentleness between a scylla and a charybdis of violence ; the small poised , perfect body of the bird that wave wing of thunder and wing of fire and night in its flight . but central between the flash of day and the black of night , between the flash of lightning and the break of thunder , the still , soft body of the bird poise and soaring , forever . the mystery of the evening - star brilliant in silence and distance between the downward - surge plunge of the sun and the vast , hollow seething of inpoure night . the magnificence of the watchful morning - star , that watch between the night and the day , the gleam clue to the two opposite . 

 this kind of frail , pure sympathy , she feel at the moment between herself and the boatman , between herself and the man who have speak from the water . and she be not go to have it break by villier ' american joke . 

 there be a sound of break water . the boatman draw away , and point across to where a canoa , a native sailing - boat , be lie at an angle . she have run aground in a wind , and now must wait till another wind would carry she off the submerged bank again . another boat be come down the breeze , steer cautiously among the shoal , for the river outlet . she be pile high with petate , the native leaf mat , above her hollowed black side . and bare - legged man with loose white drawer roll up , and brown chest show , be run with pole as the shallow heave up again , push she off , and balance their huge hat with small , bird - like shake of the head . 

 beyond the boat , seaward , be rock outcrop and strange bird like pelican stand in silhouette , motionless . 

 they have be cross a bay of the lake - shore , and be near the hotel . it stand on a parch dry bank above the pale - brown water , a long , low building amid a tender green of banana and pepper - tree . everywhere the shore rise up pale and cruelly dry , dry to cruelty , and on the little hill the dark statue of the organ cactus poise in nothingness . 

 there be a break - down landing - place , and a boat - house in the distance , and someone in white flannel trouser be stand on the broken masonry . upon the filmy water duck and black water - fowl bobbed like cork . the bottom be stony . the boatman suddenly back the boat , and pull round . he push up his sleeve and hang over the bow , reach into the water . with a quick motion he grab something , and scramble into the boat again . he be hold in the pale - skin hollow of his palm a little earthenware pot , crust by the lake deposit . 

 ' what be it ? ' she say . 

 ' Ollita of the god , ' he say . ' of the old dead god . take it , Señorita . ' 

 ' you must let I pay for it , ' she say . 

 ' no , Señorita . it be your , ' say the man , with that sensitive , masculine sincerity which come sometimes so quickly from a native . 

 it be a little , rough round pot with protuberance . 

 ' look ! ' say the man , reach again for the little pot . he turn it upside - down , and she see cut - in eye and the sticking - out ear of an animal 's head . 

 ' a cat ! ' she exclaim . ' it be a cat . ' 

 ' or a coyote ! ' 

 ' a coyote ! ' 

 ' let us look ! ' say villier . ' why , how awfully interesting ! do you think it be old ? ' 

 ' it be old ? ' Kate ask . 

 ' the time of the old god , ' say the boatman . then with a sudden smile : ' the dead god do not   eat much rice , they only want little casserole while they be bone under the water . ' and he look she in the eye . 

 ' while they be bone ? ' she repeat . and she realize he mean the skeleton of god that can not die . 

 they be at the landing - stage ; or rather , at the heap of collapse masonry which have once be a landing - stage . the boatman get out and hold the boat steady while Kate and Villiers land . then he scramble up with the bag . 

 the man in white trouser , and a mozo appear . it be the hotel manager . Kate pay the boatman . 

 ' Adi s , Señorita ! ' he say with a smile . ' may you go with Quetzalcoatl . ' 

 ' yes ! ' she cry . ' good - bye ! ' 

 they go up the slope between the tattered banana , whose ragged leaf be make a hush , distant patter in the breeze . the green fruit curve out its bristly - soft bunch , the purple flower - bud depend stiffly . 

 the german manager come to talk to they : a young man of about forty , with his blue eye go opaque and stony behind his spectacle , though the centre be keen . evidently a German who have be many year out in Mexico - out in the lonely place . the rather stiff look , the slight look of fear in the soul - not physical fear - and the look of defeat , characteristic of the European who have long be subject to the unbroken spirit of place ! but the defeat be in the soul , not the will . 

 he show Kate to her room in the unfinished quarter , and order her breakfast . the hotel consist of an old low ranch - house with a veranda - and this be the dining - room , lounge , kitchen , and office . then there be a two - storey new wing , with a smart bathroom between each two bedroom , and almost up - to - date fitting : very incongruous . 

 but the new wing be unfinishe - have be unfinished for a dozen year and more , the work abandon when Porfirio Diaz flee . now it would probably never be finish . 

 and this be Mexico . whatever pretentiousness and modern improvement it may have , outside the capital , they be either smash or raw and unfinished , with rusty bone of iron girder stick out . 

 Kate wash her hand and go down to breakfast . before the long veranda of the old ranch - house the green pepper - tree drop like green light , and small cardinal bird with scarlet body and blaze impertinent head like poppy - bud flash among the pinkish pepper - head , close their brown wing upon the audacity of their glow redness . a train of geese pass in the glare sun , automatic , towards the eternal tremble of pale , earth - colour water beyond the stone . 

 it be a place with a strange atmosphere : stony , hard , break , with round cruel hill and the many - flute bunch of the organ - cactus behind the old house , and an ancient road trail past , deep in ancient dust . a touch of mystery and cruelty , the stoniness of fear , a lingering , cruel sacredness . 

 Kate loiter hungrily , and be glad when the Mexican in shirt - sleeve and patched trouser , another linger remnant of Don Porfirio 's day , bring she her egg and coffee . 

 he be mute as everything about the place seem mute , even the very stone and the water . only those poppy on wing , the cardinal bird , give a sense of liveliness : and they be uncanny . 

 so swiftly one 's mood change ! in the boat she have glimpse the superb rich stillness of the morning - star , the poignant intermediate flash its quiet between the energy of the cosmo . she have see it in the black eye of the native , in the sunrise of the man 's rich , still body , indian - warm . 

 and now again already the silence be of vacuity , arrest , and cruelty : the uncanny empty unbearableness of many mexican morning . already she be uneasy , suffer from the malaise which torture one inwardly in that country of cactus . 

 she go up to her room , pause at the corridor window to look out at the savage little hill that stand at the back of the hotel in desiccated heap , with the dark - green bulk of organ - cactus stick up mechanically and sinister , sombre in all the glare . Grey ground - squirrel like rat slither ceaselessly around . Sinister , strangely dark and sinister , in the great glare of the sun ! 

 she go to her room to be alone . below her window , in the brick and fall rubble of unfinished masonry , a huge white turkey - cock , dim - white , strut with his brown hen . and sometimes he stretch out his pink wattle and give vent to fierce , powerful turkey - yelps , like some strong dog yelping ; or else he ruffle all his feather like a great , soil white peony , and chuff , hiss here and there , rag the metal of his plumage . 

 below he , the eternal tremble of pale - earth , unreal water , far beyond which rise the stiff resistance of mountain lose their pristine blue . distinct , frail distance far off on the dry air , dim - seeing , yet sharp and edge with menace . 

 Kate take her bath in the filmy water that be hardly like water at all . then she go and sit on the collapsed masonry , in the shade of the boat - house below . small white duck bob about on the shallow water below she , or dive , raise cloud of submarine dust . a canoe come paddle in ; a lean fellow with sinewy brown leg . he answer Kate 's nod with the aloof promptness of an Indian , make fast his canoe inside the boat - house , and be go , step silent and barefoot over the bright green water - stone , and leave a shadow , cold as flint , on the air behind he . 

 no sound on the morning save a faint touching of water , and the occasional powerful yelping of the turkey - cock . Silence , an aboriginal , empty silence , as of life withhold . the vacuity of a mexican morning . resound sometimes to the turkey - cock . 

 and the great , lymphatic expanse of water , like a sea , trembling , trembling , tremble to a far distance , to the mountain of substantial nothingness . 

 near at hand , a ragged shifting of banana - tree , bare hill with immobile cactus , and to the left , an hacienda with peon 's square mud box of house . an occasional ranchero in skintight trouser and big hat ride trot through the dust on a small horse , or peon on the rump of their ass , in floppy white cotton , go like ghost . 

 always something ghostly . the morning pass all of a piece , empty , vacuous . all sound withhold , all life withhold , everything hold back . the land so dry as to have a quality of invisibility , the water earth - filmy , hardly water at all . the lymphatic milk of fish , somebody say . 

 

 

 CHAPTER VI 

 the move down the Lake 

 

 in Porfirio Diaz ' day , the lake - side begin to be the Riviera of Mexico , and Orilla be to be the Nice , or at least the Mentone of the country . but revolution start erupt again , and in 1911 Don Porfirio flee to Paris with , it be say , thirty million gold peso in his pocket : a peso be half a dollar , nearly half - a - crown . but we need not believe all that be say , especially by a man 's enemy . 

 during the subsequent revolution , Orilla , which have begin to be a winter paradise for the Americans , lapse back into barbarism and broken brickwork . in 1921 a feeble new start have be make . 

 the place belong to a german - mexican family , who also own the adjacent hacienda . they acquire the property from the American Hotel Company , who have undertake to develop the lake - shore , and who have go bankrupt during the various revolution . 

 the german - mexican owner be not popular with the native . an angel from heaven would not have be popular , these year , if he have be know as the owner of property . however , in 1921 the hotel be very modestly open again , with an american manager . 

 towards the end of the year , José , son of the german - mexican owner , come to stay with his wife and child in the hotel , in the new wing . José be a bit of a fool , as most foreigner be , after the first generation in Mexico . have business to settle , he go into Guadalajara to the bank and return with a thousand gold peso in a bag , keep the matter , as he think , a dead secret . 

 everyone have just go to bed , on a brilliant moonlight night in winter , when two man appear in the yard calling for José : they have to speak to he . José , suspect nothing , leave his wife and two child , and go down . in a moment he call for the american manager . the manager , think it be some bargaining to be do , also come down . as he come out of the door , two man seize he by the arm , and say : ' do not   make a noise ! ' 

 ' what be amiss ? ' say Bell , who have build up Orilla , and have be twenty year on the lake . 

 then he notice that two other man have hold of José . ' come , ' they say . 

 there be five Mexicans - Indians , or half - Indians - and the two captive . they go , the captive in slipper and shirtsleeve , to the little office away at the end of the other part of the hotel , which have be the old ranch - house . 

 ' what do you want ? ' ask Bell . 

 ' give we the money , ' say the bandit . 

 ' oh , all right , ' say the American . there be a few peso only in the safe . he open , show they , and they take the money . 

 ' now give we the rest , ' they say . 

 ' there be no more , ' say the manager , in all sincerity ; for José have not confess to the thousand peso . 

 the five peon then begin to search the poor little office . they find a pile of red blanket - which they appropriate - and a few bottle of red wine - which they drank . 

 ' now , ' they say , ' give we the money . ' 

 ' I can not   give you what there be not   to give , ' say the manager . 

 ' good ! ' they say , and pull out the hideous machete , the heavy knife of the Mexicans . 

 José , intimidate , produce the suit - case with the thousand peso . the money be wrap up in the corner of a blanket . 

 ' now , come with we , ' say the bandit . 

 ' where to ? ' ask the manager , begin at last to be scared . 

 ' only out on to the hill , where we will leave you , so that you can not telephone to Ixtlahuacan before we have time to get away , ' say the Indians . 

 outside , in the bright moon , the air be chill . the American shiver , in his trouser and shirt and a pair of bedroom slipper . 

 ' let I take a coat , ' he say . 

 ' take a blanket , ' say the tall Indian . 

 he take a blanket , and with two man hold his arm , he follow José , who be likewise hold captive , out of the little gate , across the dust of the road , and up the steep little round hill on which the organ cactus thrust up their sinister clump , like bunch of cruel finger , in the moonlight . the hill be stony and steep , the go slow . José , a fat young man of twenty - eight , protest in the feeble manner of the well - to - do Mexicans . 

 at last they come to the top of the hill . three man take José apart , leave Bell alone near a cactus clump . the moon shine in a perfect Mexican heaven . below , the big lake glimmer faintly , stretch its length towards the west . the air be so clear , the mountain across , thirty mile away , stand sharp and still in the moonlight . and not a sound nor a motion anywhere ! at the foot of the hill be the hacienda , with the peon asleep in their hut . but what help be there in they ? 

 José and the three man have go behind a cactus - tree that stick up straight like a great black bundle of pole , poise on one central foot , and cast a sharp , iron shadow . the American could hear the voice , talk low and rapidly , but could not distinguish the word . his two guard draw away from he a little , to hear what the other be say , behind the cactus . 

 and the American , who know the ground he stand on and the sky that hang over he , feel again the black vibration of death in the air , the black thrill of the death - lust . unmistakable he feel it seethe in the air , as any man may feel it , in Mexico . and the strange aboriginal fiendishness , awake now in the five bandit , communicate itself to his blood . 

 loosen his blanket , he listen tensely in the moonlight . and come the thud ! thud ! thud ! of a machete strike with lust in a human body , then the strange voice of José : ' perd neme ! - forgive I ! ' the murder man cry as he fall . 

 the American wait for no more . drop his blanket , he jump for the cactus cover , and stoop , take the down - slope like a rabbit . the pistol - shot ring out after he , but the Mexicans do not   as a rule take good aim . his bedroom slipper fly off , and barefoot , the man , thin and light , speed down over the stone and the cactus , down to the hotel . 

 when he get down , he find everyone in the hotel awake and shout . 

 ' they be kill José ! ' he say , and he rush to the telephone , expect every moment the five bandit would be on he . 

 the telephone be in the old ranch - building , in the dining - room . there be no answer - no answer - no answer . in her little bedroom over the kitchen , the cook - woman , the traitress , be yell . across in the new wing , a little distance away , José 's mexican wife be scream . one of the servant boy appear . 

 ' try and get the police in Ixtlahuacan , ' say the American , and he run to the new wing , to get his gun and to barricade the door . his daughter , a motherless girl , be cry with Jose 's wife . 

 there be no answer on the telephone . at dawn , the cook , who say the bandit would not hurt a woman , go across to the hacienda to fetch the peon . and when the sun rise , a man be send for the police . 

 they find the body of José , pierce with fourteen hole . the American be carry to Ixtlahuacan , and keep in bed , have cactus spine dig out of his foot by two native woman . 

 the bandit flee across the marsh . month later , they be identify by the steal blanket , away in Michoacan ; and , pursue , one of they betray the other . 

 after this , the hotel be close again , and have be reopen only three month when Kate arrive . 

 but villier come with another story . last year the peon have murder the manager of one of the estate across the lake . they have strip he and leave he naked on his back , with his sexual organ cut off and put into his mouth , his nose slit and pin back , the two half , to his cheek , with long cactus spine . 

 ' tell I no more ! ' say Kate . 

 she feel there be doom write on the very sky , doom and horror . 

 she write to Don Ram n in Sayula , say she want to go back to Europe . true , she herself have see no horror , apart from the bull - fight . and she have have some exquisite moment , as come to this hotel in the boat . the native have a certain mystery and beauty , to she . but she could not bear the unease , and the late sense of horror . 

 true , the peon be poor . they use to work for twenty cent , American , a day ; and now the standard price be fifty cent , or one peso . but then in the old day they receive their wage all the year round . now , only at harvest time or sow time . no work , no pay . and in the long dry season , it be mostly no work . 

 ' still , ' say the german manager of the hotel , a man who have run a rubber plantation in Tabasco , a sugar plantation in the state of Vera Cruz , and an hacienda grow wheat , maize , orange , in Jalisco : ' still , it be not   a question of money with the peon . it do not   start with the peon . it start in Mexico City , with a lot of malcontent who want to put their spoke in the wheel , and who lie hold of pious catchword , to catch the poor . there be no more in it than that . then the agitator go round and infect the peon . it be nothing but a sort of infectious disease , like syphili , all this revolution and socialism . ' 

 ' but why do no one oppose it , ' say Kate . ' why do not   the hacendado put up a fight , instead of cave in and run away ? ' 

 ' the mexican hacendado ! ' the man 's german eye give out a spark . ' the mexican gentleman be such a brave man , that while the soldier be violate his wife on the bed , he be hide under the bed and hold his breath so they shall not   find he . he be as brave as that . ' 

 Kate look away uncomfortably . 

 ' they all want the United States to intervene . they hate the Americans ; but they want the United States to intervene , to save they their money and their property . that be how brave they be ! they hate the Americans personally , but they love they because they can look after money and property . so they want the United States to annex Mexico , the beloved patria ; leave the marvellous green and white and red flag , and the eagle with the snake in its claw , for the sake of appearance and honour ! they be simply bottled full of honour ; of that sort . ' 

 always the same violence of bitterness , Kate think to - herself . and she be so weary of it . how , how weary she be of politic , of the very word ' labour ' and ' socialism ! ' and all that sort ! it suffocate she . 

 ' have you hear of the man of Quetzalcoatl ? ' ask Kate . 

 ' Quetzalcoatl ! ' exclaim the manager , give a little click of the final ' l ' , in a peculiar native fashion . ' that be another try - on of the Bolshevists . they think socialism need a god , so they be go to fish he out of this lake . he will do for another pious catchword in another revolution . ' 

 the man go away , unable to stand any more . 

 ' oh dear ! ' think Kate . ' it really be hard to bear . ' 

 but she want to hear more of Quetzalcoatl . 

 ' do you know , ' she say to the man later , show he the little pot , ' that they find those thing in the lake ? ' 

 ' they be common enough ! ' he say . ' they use to throw they in , in the idolatrous day . may still do so , for what I know . then get they out again to sell to tourist . ' 

 ' they call they ollita of Quetzalcoatl . ' 

 ' that be a new invention . ' 

 ' why , do you think ? ' 

 ' they be try to start a new thing , that be all . they have   get this society on the lake here , of the Men of Quetzalcoatl , and they go round singing song . it be another dodge for national - socialism , that be all . ' 

 ' what do they do , the Men of Quetzalcoatl ? ' 

 ' I can not   see they do anything , except talk and get excited over their own importance . ' 

 ' but what be the idea ? ' 

 ' I could not   say . do not   suppose they have any . but if they have , they will not   let on to you . you be a gringo - or a gringita , at the good . and this be for pure Mexicans . for los señore , the workman , and los caballeros , the peon . every peon be a caballero nowadays , and every workman be a señor . so I suppose they be go to get themselves a special god , to put the final feather in their cap . ' 

 ' where do it start , the Quetzalcoatl thing ? ' 

 ' down in Sayula . they say Don Ram n Carrasco be at the back of it . maybe he want to be the next President - or maybe he be aim higher , and want to be the first Mexican Pharaoh . ' 

 ah , how tired it make Kate feel ; the hopelessness , the ugliness , the cynicism , the emptiness . she feel she could cry aloud , for the unknown god to put the magic back into her life , and to save she from the dry - rot of the world 's sterility . 

 she think again of go back to Europe . but what be the good ? she know it ! it be all politic or jazzing or slushy mysticism or sordid spiritualism . and the magic have go . the young generation , so smart and interesting , but so without any mystery , any background . the young the generation , the flatter and more jazzy , more and more devoid of wonder . 

 no , she could not go back to Europe . 

 and no ! she refuse to take the hotel manager 's estimate of Quetzalcoatl . how should a hotel manager judge ? - even if he be not really an hotel manager , but a ranch - overseer . she have see Ram n Carrasco , and Cipriano . and they be man . they want something beyond . she would believe in they . anything , anything rather than this sterility of nothingness which be the world , and into which her life be drift . 

 she would send Villiers away , too . he be nice , she like he . but he , too , be widdershin , unwind the sensation of disintegration and anti - life . no , she must send he away . she must , she must free herself from these mechanical connection . 

 every one of they , like villier , be like a cog - wheel in contact with which all one 's working be reverse . everything he say , everything he do , reverse her real life - flow , make she go against the sun . 

 and she do not want to go against the sun . after all , in spite of the horror latent in Mexico , when you get these dark - face people away from wrong contact like agitator and socialism , they make one feel that life be vast , if fearsome , and death be fathomless . 

 horror might burst out of they . but something must burst out , sometimes , if man be not machine . 

 no ! no ! no ! no ! no ! she cry to her own soul . let I still believe in some human contact . let it not be all cut off for I ! 

 but she make up her mind to be alone , and to cut herself off from all the mechanical widdershin contact . villier must go back to his United States . she would be alone in her own milieu . not to be touch by any , any of the mechanical cogwheel people . to be leave alone , not to be touch . to hide , and be hide , and never really be speak to . 

 yet , at the same time , with her blood flow softly sunwise , to let the sunwise sympathy of unknown people steal in to she . to shut door of iron against the mechanical world . but to let the sunwise world steal across to she , and add its motion to she , the motion of the stress of life , with the big sun and the star like a tree hold out its leaf . 

 she want an old spanish house , with its inner patio of flower and water . turn inward , to the few flower wall in by shadow . to turn one 's back on the cog - wheel world . not to look out any more on to that horrible machine of the world . to look at one 's own quiet little fountain and one 's own little orange - tree , with only heaven above . 

 so , have soothe her heart , she write Don Ram n again , that she be come to Sayula to look for a house . she send villier away . and the next day she set off with a man - servant , in the old motor - boat of the hotel , down to the village of Sayula . 

 it be thirty - five mile to travel , down the long lake . but the moment she set off , she feel at peace . a tall , dark - face fellow sit in the stern of the boat , steer and attend to the motor . she sit on cushion in the middle . and the young manservant perch in the prow . 

 they start before sunrise , when the lake be bath in motionless light . odd tuft of water - hyacinth be travel on the soft spermy water , hold up a green leaf like a little sail of a boat , and nod a delicate , mauve - blue flower . 

 give I the mystery and let the world live again for I ! Kate cry to her own soul . and deliver I from man 's automatism . 

 the sun rise , and a whiteness of light play on the top of the mountain . the boat hug the north shore , turn the promontory on which the villa have start so jauntily , twenty year ago , but now be lapse back to wilderness . all be still and motionless in the light . sometimes on the little bare patch high up on the dry hill be white speck ; bird ? no , man in their white cotton , peon hoe . they be so tiny and so distinct , they look like white bird settle . 

 round the bend be the hot spring , the church , the inaccessible village of the pure Indians , who speak no Spanish . there be some green tree , under the precipitous , dry mountain - side . 

 so on and on , the motor - boat chug incessantly , the man in the bow coil up like a serpent , watch ; the fish - milk water gleam and throw off a dense light , so that the mountain away across be fuse out . and Kate , under the awning , go into a kind of sleep . 

 they be pass the island , with its ruin of fortress and prison . it be all rock and dryness , with great broken wall and the shell of a church among its hurtful stone and its dry grey herbage . for a long time the Indians have defend it against the Spaniards . then the Spaniards use the island as a fortress against the Indians . later , as a penal settlement . and now the place be a ruin , repellent , full of scorpion , and otherwise empty of life . only one or two fisherman live in the tiny cove face the mainland , and a flock of goat , speck of life creep among the rock . and an unhappy fellow put there by the Government to register the weather . 

 no , Kate do not want to land . the place look too sinister . she take food from the basket , and eat a little lunch , and doze . 

 in this country she be afraid . but it be her soul more than her body that know fear . she have realize , for the first time , with finality and fatality , what be the illusion she labour under . she have think that each individual have a complete self , a complete soul , an accomplished i. and now she realize as plainly as if she have turn into a new being , that this be not so . man and woman have incomplete self , make up of bit assemble together loosely and somewhat haphazard . Man be not create ready - make . man to - day be half - make , and woman be half - make . creature that exist and function with certain regularity , but which run off into a hopeless jumble of inconsequence . 

 half - make , like insect that can run fast and be so busy and suddenly grow wing , but which be only wing grub after all . a world full of half - make creature on two leg , eat food and degrade the one mystery leave to they , sex . spin a great lot of word , bury themselves inside the cocoon of word and idea that they spin round themselves , and inside the cocoon , mostly perish inert and overwhelmed . 

 half - make creature , rarely more than half - responsible and half - accountable , act in terrible swarm , like locust . 

 awful think ! and with a collective insect - like will , to avoid the responsibility of achieve any more perfected being or identity . the queer , rabid hate of be urge on into purer self . the morbid fanaticism of the non - integrate . 

 in the great seething light of the lake , with the terrible blue - rib mountain of Mexico beyond , she seem swallow by some grisly skeleton , in the cage of his death - anatomy . she be afraid , mystically , of the man crouch there in the bow with his smooth thigh and supple loin like a snake , and his black eye watch . a half - being , with a will to disintegration and death . and the tall man behind she at the tiller , he have the curious smoke - grey phosphorus eye under black lash sometimes meet among the Indians . handsome , he be , and quiet and seemingly self - contain . but with that peculiar devilish half - smile lurking under his face , the half - jeer look of a part - thing , which know its power to destroy the purer thing . 

 and yet , Kate tell herself , both these man be manly fellow . they would not molest she , unless she communicate the thought to they , and by a certain cowardliness , prompt they . their soul be nascent , there be no fixed evil in they , they could sway both way . 

 so in her soul she cry aloud to the great mystery , the high power that hover in the interstice of the hot air , rich and potent . it be as if she could lift her hand and clutch the silent , stormless potency that rove everywhere , wait . ' come then ! ' she say , draw a long slow breath , and address the silent life - breath which hang unreveale in the atmosphere , wait . 

 and as the boat run on , and her finger rustle in the warm water of the lake , she feel the fulness descend into her once more , the peace , and the power . the fulfilment fill her soul like the fulness of ripe grape . and she think to herself : ' ah , how wrong I have be , not to turn soon to the other presence , not to take the life - breath soon ! how wrong to be afraid of these two man . ' 

 she do what she have be half - afraid to do before ; she offer they the orange and sandwich still in the basket . and each of the man look at she , the smoke - grey eye look she in the eye , and the black eye look she in the eye . and the man with the smoke - grey eye , who be cunning than the other man , but also prouder , say to she with his eye : we be live ! I know your sex , and you know mine . the mystery we be glad not to meddle with . you leave I my natural honour , and I thank you for the grace . 

 in his look , so quick and proud , and in his quiet Muchas gracia ! she hear the touch of male recognition , a man glad to retain his honour , and to feel the communion of grace . perhaps it be the spanish word Gracias ! but in her soul she be think of the communion of grace . 

 with the black - eyed man it be the same . he be humbler . but as he peel his orange and drop the yellow peel on the water , she could see the stillness , the humility , and the pathos of grace in he ; something very beautiful and truly male , and very hard to find in a civilized white man . it be not of the spirit . it be of the dark , strong , unbroken blood , the flowering of the soul . 

 then she think to herself : after all , it be good to be here . it be very good to be in this boat on this lake with these two silent , semi - barbarous man . they can receive the gift of grace , and we can share it like a communion , they and I. I be very glad to be here . it be so much well than love : the love I know with Joachim . this be the fulness of the vine . 

 ' Sayula ! ' say the man in the bow , point ahead . 

 she see , away off , a place where there be green tree , where the shore be flat , and a biggish building stand out . 

 ' what be the building ? ' she ask . 

 ' the railway station . ' 

 she be suitably impressed , for it be a new - look , impose structure . 

 a little steamer be smoking , lie off from a wooden jetty in the loneliness , and black , laden boat be pole out to she , and merge back to shore . the vessel give a hoot , and slowly yet busily set off on the bosom of the water , head in a slanting line across the lake , to which the tiny high white twin - tower of Tuliapán show above the water - line , tiny and far - off , on the other side . 

 they have pass the jetty , and round the shoal where the willow grow , she could see Sayula ; white flute twin - tower of the church , obelisk shape above the pepper - tree ; beyond , a mound of a hill standing alone , dot with dry bush , distinct and Japanese - looking ; beyond this , the corrugate , blue - rib , flat - flank mountain of Mexico . 

 it look peaceful , delicate , almost japanese . as she draw near she see the beach with the washing spread on the sand ; the fleecy green willow - tree and pepper - tree , and the villa in foliage and flower , hang magenta curtain of bougainvillea , red dot of hibiscus , pink abundance of tall oleander tree ; occasional palm - tree stick out . 

 the boat be steer round a stone jetty , on which , in black letter , be paint an advertisement for motor - car tyre . there be a few seat , some deep fleecy tree grow out of the sand , a booth for sell drink , a little promenade , and white boat on a sandy beach . a few woman sit under parasol , a few bather in the water , and tree in front of the few villa deep in green or blazing scarlet blossom . 

 ' this be very good , ' think Kate . ' it be not too savage , and not over - civilized . it be not   break , but it be rather out of repair . it be in contact with the world , but the world have get a very weak grip on it . ' 

 she go to the hotel , as Don Ram n have advise she . 

 ' do you come from Orilla ? you be Mrs Leslie ? Don Ram n Carrasco send we a letter about you . ' 

 there be a house . Kate pay her boatman and shake hand with they . she be sorry to be cut off from they again . and they look at she with a touch of regret as they leave . she say to herself : 

 ' there be something rich and alive in these people . they want to be able to breathe the Great Breath . they be like child , helpless . and then they be like demon . but somewhere , I believe , they want the breath of life and the communion of the brave , more than anything . ' 

 she be surprised at herself , suddenly use this language . but her weariness and her sense of devastation have be so complete , that the other Breath in the air , and the bluish dark power in the earth have become , almost suddenly , more real to she than so - call reality . concrete , jarring , exasperate reality have melt away , and a soft world of potency stand in its place , the velvety dark flux from the earth , the delicate yet supreme life - breath in the inner air . behind the fierce sun the dark eye of a deep sun be watch , and between the bluish rib of the mountain a powerful heart be secretly beat , the heart of the earth . 

 her house be what she want ; a low , l - shape , tile building with rough red floor and deep veranda , and the other two side of the patio complete by the thick , dark little mango - forest outside the low wall . the square of the patio , within the precinct of the house and the mango - trees , be gay with oleander and hibiscus , and there be a basin of water in the seedy grass . the flower - pot along the veranda be full of flower geranium and foreign flower . at the far end of the patio the chicken be scratch under the silent motionlessness of ragged banana - tree . 

 there she have it ; her stone , cool , dark house , every room opening on to the veranda ; her deep , shady veranda , or piazza , or corridor , look out to the brilliant sun , the sparkle flower and the seed - grass , the still water and the yellow banana - tree , the dark splendour of the shadow - dense mango - tree . 

 with the house go a Mexican Juana with two thick - haired daughter and one son . this family live in a den at the back of the project bay of the dining - room . there , half screen , be the well and the toilet , and a little kitchen and a sleep - room where the family sleep on mat on the floor . there the paltry chicken paddle , and the banana - tree make a chitter as the wind come . 

 Kate have four bedroom to choose from . she choose the one whose low , bar window open on the rough , grass and cobble - stone street , close her door and window , and go to sleep , say to herself as she lie down : now I be alone . and now I have only one thing to do : not to get catch up into the world 's cog - wheel any more , and not to lose my hold on the hidden great thing . 

 she be tired with a strange weariness , feel she could make no further effort . she wake up at tea - time , but there be no tea . Juana hasten off to the hotel to buy a bit . 

 Juana be a woman of about forty , rather short , with full dark face , centreless dark eye , untidy hair , and a limping way of walk . she speak rapidly , a rather plum - in - the - mouth Spanish , add ' n ' to all her word . something of a sloven , down to her speech . 

 ' no , Niña , no hay masn ' - masn instead of mas . and call Kate , in the old mexican style , Niña , which mean child . it be the honourable title for a mistress . 

 Juana be go to be a bit of a trial . she be a widow of doubtful antecedent , a creature with passion , but not much control , strong with a certain indifference and looseness . the hotel owner assure Kate that she be honest , but that if Kate would rather find another criada , all well and good . 

 there be a bit of a battle to be fight between the two woman . Juana be obstinate and reckless ; she have not be treat very well by the world . and there be a touch of bottom - dog insolence about she . 

 but also , sudden touch of passionate warmth and the peculiar selfless generosity of the native . she would be honest out of rough defiance and indifference , so long as she be not in a state of antagonism . 

 as yet , however , she be cautiously watch her ground , with that black - eyed touch of malice and wariness to be expect . and Kate feel that the cry : niña - child ! by which she be address , hold in it a slight note of malevolent mockery . 

 but there be nothing to do but to go ahead and trust the dark - face , centreless woman . 

 the second day , Kate have the energy to cast out one suite of bent - wood and cane furniture from her salon , remove picture and little stand . 

 if there be one social instinct more dreary than all the other social instinct in the world , it be the Mexican . in the centre of Kate 's red - tile salon be two crescent : a black bent - wood cane settee flank on each side by two black bent - wood cane chair , exactly face a brown bent - wood cane settee flank on each side by two brown bent - wood cane chair . it be as if the two settee and the eight chair be occupy by the ghost of all the mexican banality ever utter , sit face one another with their knee towards one another , and their foot on the terrible piece of green - with - red - rose carpet , in the weary centre of the salon . the very sight of it be frightening . 

 Kate shatter this face - to - face symmetry , and have the two girl , Maria and Concha , assist by the ironic Juana , carry off the brown bent - wood chair and the bamboo stand into one of the spare bedroom . Juana look on cynically , and assist officiously . but when Kate have her trunk , and fish out a couple of light rug and a couple of fine shawl and a few thing to make the place human , the criada begin to exclaim : ' Qué bonita ! Qué bonita , Niña ! Mire que bonita ! ' 

 

 

 CHAPTER VII 

 the Plaza 

 

 Sayula be a little lake resort ; not for the idle rich , for Mexico have few left ; but for tradespeople from Guadalajara , and week - ender . even of these , there be few . 

 nevertheless , there be two hotel , leave over , really , from the safe quiet day of Don Porfirio , as be most of the villa . the outlying villa be shut up , some of they abandon . those in the village live in a perpetual quake of fear . there be many terror , but the two regnant be bandit and bolshevist . 

 bandit be merely man who , in the outlying village , have very often no money , no work , and no prospect , take to robbery and murder for a time - occasionally for a lifetime - as a profession . they live in their wild village until troop be send after they , when they retire into the savage mountain , or the marsh . 

 bolshevist , somehow , seem to be bear on the railway . wherever the iron rail run , and passenger be haul back and forth in railway coach , there the spirit of rootlessness , of transitoriness , of first and second class in separate compartment , of envy and malice , and of iron and demonish panting engine , seem to bring forth the logical child of materialism , the bolshevist . 

 Sayula have her little branch of railway , her one train a day . the railway do not pay , and fight with extinction . but it be enough . 

 Sayula also have that real insanity of America , the automobile . as man use to want a horse and a sword , now they want a car . as woman use to pine for a home and a box at the theatre , now it be a ' machine . ' and the poor follow the middle class . there be a perpetual rush of ' machine ' , motor - car and motor - bus - call cami nes - along the one forlorn road come to Sayula from Guadalajara . one hope , one faith , one destiny ; to ride in a cami n , to own a car . 

 there be a little bandit scare when Kate arrive in the village , but she do not pay much heed . at evening she go into the plaza , to be with the people . the plaza be a square with big tree and a disuse bandstand in the centre , a little promenade all round , and then the cobbled street where the donkey and the cami nes pass . there be a further little section of real market - place , on the north side . 

 the band play no more in Sayula , and the elegancia stroll no more on the inner pavement around the plaza , under the tree . but the pavement be still good , and the bench be still more - or - less sound . oh Don Porfirio 's day ! and now it be the peon and Indians , in their blanket and white clothe , who fill the bench and monopolize the square . true , the law persist that the peon must wear trouser in the plaza , and not the loose great floppy drawer of the field . but then the peon also want to wear trouser , instead of the drawer that be the garb of their humble labour . 

 the plaza now belong to the peon . they sit thick on the bench , or slowly stroll round in their sandal and blanket . across the cobbled road on the north side , the little booth sell soup and hot food be crowd with man after six o'clock ; it be cheap to eat out , at the end of a day 's work . the woman at home could eat tortilla , never mind the caldo , the soup or the meat mess . at the booth which sell tequila , man , woman , and boy sit on the bench with their elbow on the board . there be a mild gambling game , where the man in the centre turn the card , and the plaza ring to his voice : Cinco de Spadas ! Rey de Copas ! a large , stout , imperturbable woman , with a cigarette on her lip and danger in her lower black eye , sit on into the night , sell tequila . the sweetmeat man stand by his board and sell sweet at one centavo each . and down on the pavement , small tin torch - lamp flare upon tiny heap of mango or nauseous tropical red plum , two or three centavos the little heap , while the vendor , a woman in the full wave of her skirt , or a man with curious patient humility , squat wait for a purchaser , with that strange fatal indifference and that gentle sort of patience so puzzle to a stranger . to have thirty cent ' worth of little red plum to sell ; to pile they on the pavement in tiny pyramid , five in a pyramid ; and to wait all day and on into the night , squat on the pavement and look up from the foot to the far - off face of the passer - by and potential purchaser , this , apparently , be an occupation and a living . at night by the flare of the tin torch , blow its flame on the wind . 

 usually there would be a couple of smallish young man with guitar of different size , stand close up face one another like two fighting cock that be utter a long , endless swan - song , sing in tense subdue voice the eternal ballad , not very musical , mournful , endless , intense , audible only within close range ; keep on and on till their throat be scrap . and a few tall , dark man in red blanket stand around , listen casually , and rarely , very rarely make a contribution of one centavo . 

 in among the food - booth would be another trio , this time two guitar and a fiddle , and two of the musician blind ; the blind one sing at a high pitch , full speed , yet not very audible . the very singing seem secretive , the singer press close in , face to face , as if to keep the wild , melancholy ballad re - echo in their private breast , their back to the world . 

 and the whole village be in the plaza , it be like a camp , with the low , rapid sound of voice . rarely , very rarely , a voice rise above the deep murmur of the man , the musical ripple of the woman , the twitter of child . rarely any quick movement ; the slow promenade of man in sandal , the sandal , call huarache , make a slight cockroach shuffle on the pavement . sometimes , dart among the tree , barelegge boy go sky - larking in and out of the shadow , in and out of the quiet people . they be the irrepressible boot - black , who swarm like tiresome fly in a barefooted country . 

 at the south end of the plaza , just across from the tree and cornerwise to the hotel , be a struggle attempt at an outdoor café , with little table and chair on the pavement . here , on weekday , the few who dare flaunt their prestige would sit and drink a beer or a glass of tequila . they be mostly stranger . and the peon , sit immobile on the seat in the background , look on with basilisk eye from under the great hat . 

 but on Saturdays and Sundays there be something of a show . then the cami nes and motor - car come in lurching and hiss . and , like strange bird alight , you have slim and charming girl in organdie frock and face - powder and bobbed hair , flutter into the plaza . there they stroll , arm in arm , brilliant in red organdie and blue chiffon and white muslin and pink and mauve and tangerine frail stuff , their black hair bob out , their dark slim arm interlace , their dark face curiously macabre in the heavy make - up ; approximate to white , but the white of a clown or a corpse . 

 in a world of big , handsome peon man , these flapper flap with butterfly brightness and an incongruous shrillness , manless . the supply of fifis , the male young elegant who be suppose to equate the flapper , be small . but still , fifis there be , in white flannel trouser and white shoe , dark jacket , correct straw hat , and cane . Fifis far more ladylike than the reckless flapper ; and far more nervous , wince . but fifis none the less , gallant , smoke a cigarette with an elegant flourish , talk elegant Castilian , as near as possible , and look as if they be go to be sacrifice to some mexican god within a twelvemonth ; when they be properly plump and perfume . the sacrificial calf be fatten . 

 on Saturday , the fifis and the flapper and the motor - car people from town - only a forlorn few , after all - try to be butterfly gay , in sinister Mexico . they hire the musician with guitar and fiddle , and the jazz music begin to quaver , a little too tenderly , without enough kick . 

 and on the pavement under the tree of the alameda - under the tree of the plaza , just near the little table and chair of the café , the young couple begin to gyrate    la mode . the red and the pink and the yellow and the blue organdie frock be turn sharply with all the white flannel trouser available , and some of the white flannel trouser have smart shoe , white with black strapping or with tan brogue band . and some of the organdie frock have green leg and green foot , some have leg    la nature , and white foot . and the slim , dark arm go around the dark blue fifi shoulder - or dark blue with a white thread . and the immeasurably soft face of the male would smile with a self - conscious fatherliness at the whitened , pretty , reckless little face of the female ; soft , fatherly , sensuous smile , suggestive of a victim 's luxuriousness . 

 but they be dance on the pavement of the plaza , and on this pavement the peon be slowly stroll , or stand in group watch with black , inscrutable eye the uncanny butterfly twitching of the dancer . who know what they think ? - whether they feel any admiration and envy at all , or only just a silent , cold , dark - faced opposition ? opposition there be . 

 the young peon in their little white blouse , and the scarlet serape fold jauntily on one shoulder , stroll slowly on under their big heavy , poise hat , with a will to ignore the dancer . slowly , with a heavy , calm balance , they move irresistibly through the dance , as if the dance do not exist . and the fifis in white trouser , with organdie in their arm , steer as well they might , to avoid the heavy , relentless passage of the young peon , who go on talk to one another , smile and flash powerful white tooth , in a black , heavy sang - froid that settle like a blight even on the music . the dancer and the pass peon never touch , never jostle . in Mexico you do not run into people accidentally . but the dance break against the invisible opposition . 

 the Indians on the seat , they too watch the dancer for a while . then they turn against they the heavy negation of indifference , like a stone on the spirit . the mysterious faculty of the Indians , as they sit there , so quiet and dense , for kill off any ebullient life , for quench any light and colourful effervescence . 

 there be indeed a little native dance - hall . but it be shut apart within four wall . and the whole rhythm and meaning be different , heavy , with a touch of violence . and even there , the dancer be artisan and mechanic or railway - porter , the half - urban people . no peon at all - or practically none . 

 so , before very long , the organdie butterfly and the flannel - trouser fifis give in , succumb , crush once more beneath the stone - heavy passivity of resistance in the demonish peon . 

 the curious , radical opposition of the Indians to the thing we call the spirit . it be spirit which make the flapper flap her organdie wing like a butterfly . it be spirit which crease the white flannel trouser of the fifi and make he cut his rather pathetic dash . they try to talk the elegancie and flippancy of the modern spirit . 

 but down on it all , like a weight of obsidian , come the passive negation of the Indian . he understand soul , which be of the blood . but spirit , which be superior , and be the quality of our civilization , this , in the mass , he darkly and barbarically repudiate . not until he become an artisan or connect with machinery do the modern spirit get he . 

 and perhaps it be this ponderous repudiation of the modern spirit which make Mexico what it be . 

 but perhaps the automobile will make road even through the inaccessible soul of the Indian . 

 Kate be rather sad , see the dance swamp . she have be sit at a little table , with Juana for dueña , sip a glass of absinthe . 

 the motor - car return to town leave early , in a little group . if bandit be out , they have good keep together . even the fifis have a pistol on their hip . 

 but it be Saturday , so some of the young ' elegance ' be stay on , till the next day ; to bathe and flutter in the sun . 

 it be Saturday , so the plaza be very full , and along the cobbled street stretch from the square many torch flutter and waver upon the ground , illuminate a dark salesman and an array of straw hat , or a heap of straw mat call petate , or pyramid of orange from across the lake . 

 it be Saturday , and Sunday morning be market . so , as it be suddenly , the life in the plaza be dense and heavy with potency . the Indians have come in from all the village , and from far across the lake . and with they they bring the curious heavy potency of life which seem to hum deeply and deep when they collect together . 

 in the afternoon , with the wind from the south , the big canoas , sailing - boat with black hull and one huge sail , have come drift across the water , bring the market - produce and the native to their gathering ground . all the white speck of village on the far shore , and on the far - off slope , have send their wild quota to the throng . 

 it be Saturday , and the indian instinct for live on into the night , once they be gather together , be now arouse . the people do not go home . though market would begin at dawn , man have no thought of sleep . 

 at about nine o'clock , after the fifi dance be shatter , Kate hear a new sound , the sound of a drum , or tom - tom , and see a drift of the peon away to the dark side of the plaza , where the side market would open to - morrow . already place have be take , and little stall set up , and huge egg - shape basket big enough to hold two man be loll against the wall . 

 there be a rippling and a pulse - like thudding of the drum , strangely arrest on the night air , then the long note of a flute play a sort of wild , unemotional melody , with the drum for a syncopate rhythm . Kate , who have listen to the drum and the wild singing of the Red Indians in Arizona and New Mexico , instantly feel that timeless , primeval passion of the prehistoric race , with their intense and complicated religious significance , spread on the air . 

 she look inquiringly at Juana , and Juana 's black eye glance back at she furtively . 

 ' what be it ? ' say Kate . 

 ' Musicians , singer , ' say Juana evasively . 

 ' but it be different , ' say Kate . 

 ' yes , it be new . ' 

 ' new ? ' 

 ' yes , it have only be come for a short time . ' 

 ' where do it come from ? ' 

 ' who know ! ' say Juana , with an evasive shrug of her shoulder . 

 ' I want to hear , ' say Kate . 

 ' it be purely man , ' say Juana . 

 ' still , one can stand a little way off . ' 

 Kate move towards the dense , silent throng of man in big hat . they all have their back to she . 

 she stand on the step of one of the house , and see a little clearing at the centre of the dense throng of man , under the stone wall over which bougainvillea and plumbago flower be hang , light up by the small , brilliantly flare torch of sweet - smell wood , which a boy hold in his two hand . 

 the drum be in the centre of the clearing , the drummer standing face the crowd . he be naked from the waist up , wear snow - white cotton drawer , very full , hold round the waist by a red sash , and bind at the ankle with red cord . round his uncovered head be a red cord , with three straight scarlet feather rise from the back of his head , and on his forehead a torquoise ornament , a circle of blue with a round blue stone in the centre . the flute - player be also naked to the waist , but over his shoulder be fold a fine white serape with blue - and - dark edge , and fringe . among the crowd , man with naked shoulder be give little leaflet to the onlooker . and all the time , high and pure , the queer clay flute be repeat a savage , rather difficult melody , and the drum be give the blood - rhythm . 

 More and more man be drift in from the plaza . Kate step from her perch and go rather shyly forward . she want one of the paper . the man give she one without look at she . and she go into the light to read . it be a sort of ballad , but without rhyme , in Spanish . at the top of the leaflet be a rough print of an eagle within the ring of a serpent that have its tail in its mouth ; a curious deviation from the mexican emblem , which be an eagle stand on a nopal , a cactus with great flat leaf , and hold in its beak and claws a writhing snake . 

 this eagle stand slim upon the serpent , within the circle of the snake , that have black marking round its back , like short black ray point inward . at a little distance , the emblem suggest an eye . 

 

 in the place of the west 
 in peace , beyond the lashing of the sun 's bright tail , 
 in the stillness where water be bear 
 Slept I , Quetzalcoatl . 

 in the cave which be call Dark Eye , 
 behind the sun , look through he as a window 
 be the place . there the water rise , 
 there the wind be bear . 

 on the water of the after - life 
 I rise again , to see a star fall , and feel a breath on my face . 
 the breath say : go ! and lo ! 
 I be come . 

 the star that be fall be fade , be die . 
 I hear the star singing like a die bird ; 
 my name be Jesus , I be Mary 's Son . 
 I be come home . 
 my mother the Moon be dark . 
 oh brother , Quetzalcoatl 
 hold back the dragon of the sun , 
 bind he with shadow while I pass 
 Homewards . let I come home . 

 I bind the bright fang of the Sun 
 and hold he while Jesus pass 
 into the lidless shade , 
 into the eye of the Father , 
 into the womb of refreshment . 

 and the breath blow upon I again . 
 so I take the sandal of the Saviour 
 and start down the long slope 
 Past the mount of the sun . 
 till I see beneath I 
 white breast - tip of my Mexico 
 my bride . 

 Jesus the Crucified 
 Sleeps in the healing water 
 the long sleep . 
 Sleep , sleep , my brother , sleep . 
 my bride between the sea 
 be comb her dark hair , 
 say to herself : Quetzalcoatl . 

 

 there be a dense throng of man gather now , and from the centre the ruddy glow of ocote torch rise warm and strong , and the sweet scent of the cedar - like resin be on the air . Kate could see nothing for the mass of man in big hat . 

 the flute have stop its piping , and the drum be beat a slow , regular thud , act straight on the blood . the incomprehensible hollow barking of the drum be like a spell on the mind , make the heart burst each stroke , and darken the will . 

 the man in the crowd begin to subside , sit and squat on the ground , with their hat between their knee . and now it be a little sea of dark , proud head lean a little forward above the soft , strong male shoulder . 

 near the wall be a clear circle , with the drum in the centre . the drummer with the naked torso stand tilt his drum towards he , his shoulder gleam smooth and ruddy in the flare of light . beside he stand another man hold a banner that hang from a light rod . on the blue field of the banneret be the yellow sun with a black centre , and between the four great yellow ray , four black ray emerge , so that the sun look like a wheel spinning with a dazzling motion . 

 the crowd have all sit down , the six man with naked torso , who have be give out the leaflet and order the crowd , now come back and sit down in a ring , of which the drummer , with the drum tilt between his knee as he squat on the ground , be the key . on his right hand sit the banner - bearer , on his leave the flautist . they be nine man in the ring , the boy , who sit apart watch the two ocote torch , which he have lay upon a stone support on a long cane tripod , be the tenth . 

 the night seem to have go still . the curious seed - rattle hum of voice that fill the plaza be hush . under the tree , on the pavement , people be still pass unconcerned , but they look curiously lonely , isolated figure drift in the twilight of the electric lamp , and go about some exceptional business . they seem outside the nucleus of life . 

 away on the north side , the booth be still flare , people be buy and sell . but this quarter , too , look lonely , and outside the actual reality , almost like memory . 

 when the man sit down , the woman begin to drift up shyly , and seat themselves on the ground at the outer rim , their full cotton skirt flower out around they , and their dark rebozos draw tight over their small , round , shy head , as they squat on the ground . some , too shy to come right up , linger on the near bench of the plaza . and some have go away . indeed , a good many man and woman have disappear as soon as the drum be hear . 

 so that the plaza be curiously void . there be the dense clot of people round the drum , and then the outer world , seem empty and hostile . only in the dark little street that give on to the darkness of the lake , people be stand like ghost , half light - up , the man with their serape over their face , watch erect and silent and conceal , from the shadow . 

 but Kate , stand back in the doorway , with Juana sit on the doorstep at her foot , be fascinate by the silent , half - naked ring of man in the torchlight . their head be black , their body soft and ruddy with the peculiar indian beauty that have at the same time something terrible in it . the soft , full , handsome torsos of silent man with head softly bent a little forward ; the soft , easy shoulder , that be yet so broad , and which balance upon so powerful a backbone ; shoulder droop a little , with the relaxation of slumbering , quiescent power ; the beautiful ruddy skin , gleam with a dark fineness ; the strong breast , so male and so deep , yet without the muscular hardening that belong to white man ; and the dark , closed face , close upon a darken consciousness , the black moustache and delicate beard frame the closed silence of the mouth ; all this be strangely impressive , move strange , frightening emotion in the soul . those man who sit there in their dark , physical tenderness , so still and soft , they look at the same time frightening . something dark , heavy , and reptilian in their silence and their softness . their very naked torso be clothe with a subtle shadow , a certain secret obscurity . white man sit there would have be strong - muscle and frank , with an openness in their very physique , a certain ostensible presence . but not so these man . their very nakedness only reveal the soft , heavy depth of their natural secrecy , their eternal invisibility . they do not belong to the realm of that which come forth . 

 everybody be quite still ; the expectant hush deepen to a kind of dead , night silence . the naked - shoulder man sit motionless , sink into themselves , and listen with the dark ear of the blood . the red sash go tight round their waist , the wide white trouser , starch rather stiff , be bind round the ankle with red cord , and the dark foot in the glare of the torch look almost black , in huarache that have red thong . what do they want then , in life , these man who sit so softly and without any assertion , yet whose weight be so ponderous , arrest ? 

 Kate be at once attract and repel . she be attract , almost fascinated by the strange nuclear power of the man in the circle . it be like a darkly glowing , vivid nucleus of new life . repellent the strange heaviness , the sinking of the spirit into the earth , like dark water . repellent the silent , dense opposition to the pale - face spiritual direction . 

 yet here , and here alone , it seem to she , life burn with a deep , new fire . the rest of life , as she know it , seem wan , bleached and sterile . the pallid wanness and weariness of her world ! and here , the dark ruddy figure in the glare of a torch , like the centre of the everlaste fire , surely this be a new kindling of mankind ! 

 she know it be so . yet she prefer to be on the fringe , sufficiently out of contact . she could not bear to come into actual contact . 

 the man with the banner of the sun lift his face as if he be go to speak . and yet he do not speak . he be old ; in his sparse beard be grey hair , grey hair over his thick , dark mouth . and his face have the peculiar thickness , with a few deep - score line , of the old among these people . yet his hair rise vigorous and manly from his forehead , his body be smooth and strong . only , perhaps , a little smooth , heavy , soft than the shoulder of the young man . 

 his black eye gaze sightless for some time . perhaps he be really blind ; perhaps it be a heavy abstraction , a sort of heavy memory work in he , which make his face seem sightless . 

 then he begin , in a slow , clear , far - off voice , that seem strangely to echo the vanished barking of the drum : 

 ' listen to I , man ! listen to I , woman of these man ! a long time ago , the lake start call for man , in the quiet of the night . and there be no man . the little charale be swim round the shore , look for something , and the bágari and the other big fish would jump out of the water , to look around . but there be no man . 

 ' so one of the god with hide face walk out of the water , and climb the hill ' - he point with his hand in the night towards the invisible round hill at the back of the village - ' and look about . he look up at the sun , and through the sun he see the dark sun , the same that make the sun and the world , and will swallow it again like a draught of water . 

 ' he say : be it time ? and from behind the bright sun the four dark arm of the great sun shoot out , and in the shadow man arise . they could see the four dark arm of the sun in the sky . and they start walk . 

 ' the man on the top of the hill , who be a god , look at the mountain and the flat place , and see man very thirsty , their tongue hang out . so he say to they : come ! come here ! here be my sweet water ! 

 ' they come like dog run with their tongue out , and kneel on the shore of the lake . and the man on the top of the hill hear they pant with have drunk much water . he say to they : have you drunk too much into yourself ? be your bone not dry enough ? 

 ' the man make house on the shore , and the man on the hill , who be a god , teach they to sow maize and bean , and build boat . but he say to they : no boat will save you , when the dark sun cease to hold out his dark arm abroad in the sky . 

 ' the man on the hill say : I be Quetzalcoatl , who breathe moisture on your dry mouth . I fill your breast with breath from beyond the sun . I be the wind that whirl from the heart of the earth , the little wind that whirl like snake round your foot and your leg and your thigh , lift up the head of the snake of your body , in whom be your power . when the snake of your body lift its head , beware ! it be I , Quetzalcoatl , rear up in you , rear up and reach beyond the bright day , to the sun of darkness beyond , where be your home at last . save for the dark sun at the back of the day - sun , save for the four dark arm in the heaven , you be bone , and the star be bone , and the moon an empty sea - shell on a dry beach , and the yellow sun be an empty cup , like the dry thin bone of a dead coyote 's head . so beware ! 

 ' without I you be nothing . just as I , without the sun that be back of the sun , be nothing . 

 ' when the yellow sun be high in the sky , then say : Quetzalcoatl will lift his hand and screen I from this , else I shall burn out , and the land will wither . 

 ' for , say I , in the palm of my hand be the water of life , and on the back of my hand be the shadow of death . and when man forget I , I lift the back of my hand , farewell ! farewell , and the shadow of death . 

 ' but man forget I . their bone be moist , their heart weak . when the snake of their body lift its head , they say : this be the tame snake that do as we wish . and when they could not bear the fire of the sun , they say : the sun be angry . he want to drink we up . let we give he blood of victim . 

 ' and so it be , the dark branch of shade be go from heaven , and Quetzalcoatl mourn and grow old , hold his hand before his face , to hide his face from man . 

 ' he mourn and say : let I go home . I be old , I be almost bone . bone triumph in I , my heart be a dry gourd . I be weary in Mexico . 

 ' so he cry to the Master - Sun , the dark one , of the unuttered name : I be wither white like a perish gourd - vine . I be turn to bone . I be deny of these Mexicans . I be waste and weary and old . take I away . 

 ' then the dark sun reach an arm , and lift Quetzalcoatl into the sky . and the dark sun beckon with a finger , and bring white man out of the east . and they come with a dead god on the Cross , say : lo ! this be the Son of God ! he be dead , he be bone ! Lo , your god be bleed and dead , he be bone . kneel and sorrow for he , and weep . for your tear he will give you comfort again , from the dead , and a place among the scentless rose - tree of the after - life , when you be dead . 

 ' lo ! his mother weep , and the water of the world be in her hand . she will give you drink , and heal you , and lead you to the land of God . in the land of God you shall weep no more . beyond the gate of death , when you have pass from the house of bone into the garden of white rose . 

 ' so the weeping Mother bring her Son who be dead on the Cross to Mexico , to live in the temple . and the people look up no more , say : the Mother weep . the Son of her womb be bone . let we hope for the place of the west , where the dead have peace among the scentless rose - tree , in the Paradise of God . 

 ' for the priest would say : it be beautiful beyond the grave . 

 ' and then the priest grow old , and the tear of the Mother be exhaust , and the Son on the Cross cry out to the dark sun far beyond the sun : what be this that be do to I ? be I dead for ever , and only dead ? be I always and only dead , but bone on a Cross of bone ? 

 ' so this cry be hear in the world , and beyond the star of the night , and beyond the sun of the day . 

 ' Jesus say again : be it time ? my Mother be old like a sink moon , the old bone of she can weep no more . be we perish beyond redeem ? 

 ' then the great of the great sun speak aloud from the back of the sun : I will take my Son to my bosom , I will take his mother on my lap . like a woman I will put they in my womb , like a mother I will lay they to sleep , in mercy I will dip they in the bath of forgetting and peace and renewal . 

 ' that be all . so hear now , you man , and you woman of these man . 

 ' Jesus be go home , to the Father , and Mary be go back , to sleep in the belly of the Father . and they both will recover from death , during the long long sleep . 

 ' but the Father will not leave we alone . we be not abandon . 

 ' the Father have look around , and have see the Morning Star , fearless between the rush of the oncoming yellow sun , and the backward reel of the night . so the Great one , whose name have never be speak , say : who art thou , bright watchman ? and the dawn - star answering : it be I , the Morning Star , who in Mexico be Quetzalcoatl . it be I , who look at the yellow sun from behind , have my eye on the unseen side of the moon . it be I , the star , midway between the darkness and the rolling of the sun . I , call Quetzalcoatl , wait in the strength of my day . 

 " the Father answer : it be well . it be well . and again : it be time . 

 ' thus the big word be speak behind the back of the world . the nameless say : it be time . 

 ' once more the word have be speak : it be time . 

 ' listen , man , and the woman of man : it be time . know now it be time . those that leave we be come back . those that come be leave again . say welcome , and then farewell ! 

 ' welcome ! farewell ! ' 

 the old man end with a strong , suppress cry , as if really call to the god : 

 ' bienvenido ! bienvenido ! Adi s ! Adi s ! ' 

 even Juana , seat at Kate 's foot , cry out without know what she do : 

 ' bienvenido ! bienvenido ! Adi s ! Adi s ! Adi s - n ! ' 

 on the last adi s ! she trail out to a natural human ' n. ' 

 the drum begin to beat with an insistent , intensive rhythm , and the flute , or whistle , lift its odd , far - off call voice . it be play again and again the peculiar melody Kate have hear at first . 

 then one of the man in the circle lift his voice , and begin to sing the hymn . he sing in the fashion of the old Red Indians , with intensity and restraint , sing inwardly , sing to his own soul , not outward to the world , nor yet even upward to God , as the Christians sing . but with a sort of suppress , trance intensity , sing to the inner mystery , sing not into space , but into the other dimension of man 's existence , where he find himself in the infinite room that lie inside the axis of our wheel space . space , like the world , can not but move . and like the world , there be an axis . and the axis of our worldly space , when you enter , be a vastness where even the tree come and go , and the soul be at home in its own dream , noble and unquestioned . 

 the strange , inward pulse of the drum , and the singer singing inwardly , swirl the soul back into the very centre of time , which be old than age . he begin on a high , remote note , and hold the voice at a distance , run on in subtle , run rhythm , apparently unmeasured , yet pulse underneath by the drum , and give throbbing , three - fold lilt and lurch . for a long time , no melody at all be recognizable : it be just a lurching , run , far - off crying , something like the distant faint howling of a coyote . it be really the music of the old American Indian . 

 there be no recognizable rhythm , no recognizable emotion , it be hardly music . rather a far - off , perfect cry in the night . but it go straight through to the soul , the most ancient and everlasting soul of all man , where alone can the human family assemble in immediate contact . 

 Kate know it at once , like a sort of fate . it be no good resisting . there be neither urge nor effort , nor any speciality . the sound sound in the innermost far - off place of the human core , the ever - present , where there be neither hope nor emotion , but passion sit with fold wing on the nest , and faith be a tree of shadow . 

 like fate , like doom . faith be the Tree of Life itself , inevitable , and the apple be upon we , like the apple of the eye , the apple of the chin , the apple of the heart , the apple of the breast , the apple of the belly , with its deep core , the apple of the loin , the apple of the knee , the little , side - by - side apple of the toe . what do change and evolution matter ? we be the Tree with the fruit forever upon it . and we be faith forever . Verbum sit . 

 the one singer have finish , and only the drum keep on , touch the sensitive membrane of the night subtly and knowingly . then a voice in the circle rise again on the song , and like bird fly from a tree , one after the other , the individual voice arise , till there be a strong , intense , curiously weighty soar and sweeping of male voice , like a dark flock of bird fly and dip in unison . and all the dark bird seem to have launch out of the heart , in the inner forest of the masculine chest . 

 and one by one , voice in the crowd break free , like bird launch and come in from a distance , catch by the spell . the word do not matter . any verse , any word , no word , the song remain the same : a strong , deep wind rush from the cavern of the breast , from the everlasting soul ! Kate herself be too shy and wince to sing : too blench with disillusion . but she hear the answer away back in her soul , like a far - off mocking - bird at night . and Juana be sing in spite of herself , in a croon feminine voice , make up the word unconsciously . 

 the half - naked man begin to reach for their serape : white serape , with border of blue and earth - brown bar , and dark fringe . a man rise from the crowd and go towards the lake . he come back with ocote and with faggot that a boat have bring over . and he start a little fire . after a while , another man go for fuel , and start another fire in the centre of the circle , in front of the drum . then one of the woman go off soft and bare - foot , in her full cotton skirt . and she make a little bonfire among the woman . 

 the air be bronze with the glow of flame , and sweet with smoke like incense . the song rise and fall , then die away . Rose , and die . the drum ebb on , faintly touch the dark membrane of the night . then ebb away . in the absolute silence could be hear the soundless stillness of the dark lake . 

 then the drum start again , with a new , strong pulse . one of the seat man , in his white poncho with the dark blackish - and - blue border , get up , take off his sandal as he do so , and begin softly to dance the dance step . mindless , dance heavily and with a curious bird - like sensitiveness of the foot , he begin to tread the earth with his bare sol , as if tread himself deep into the earth . alone , with a curious pendulum rhythm , lean a little forward from a powerful backbone , he trod to the drum beat , his white knee lift and lift alternately against the dark fringe of his blanket , with a queer dark splash . and another man put his huarache into the centre of the ring , near the fire , and stand up to dance . the man at the drum lift up his voice in a wild , blind song . the man be take off their ponchos . and soon , with the firelight on their breast and on their darkly abstract face , they be all afoot , with bare torso and bare foot , dance the savage bird - tread . 

 ' who sleep shall wake ! who sleep shall wake ! who tread down the path of the snake in the dust shall arrive at the place ; in the path of the dust shall arrive at the place and be dress in the skin of the snake : shall be dress in the skin of the snake of the earth , that be father of stone ; that be father of stone and the timber of earth ; of the silver and gold , of the iron , the timber of earth from the bone of the father of earth , of the snake of the world , of the heart of the world , that beat as a snake beat the dust in its motion on earth , from the heart of the world . 

 ' who slee - eep sha - all wake ! who slee - eep sha - all wake ! who sleep sha - ll wake in the way of the snake of the dust of the earth , of the stone of the earth , of the bone of the earth . ' 

 the song seem to take new wild flight , after it have sink and rustle to a last ebb . it be like wave that rise out of the invisible , and rear up into form and a fly , disappear whiteness and a rustle of extinction . and the dancer , after dance in a circle in a slow , deep absorption , each man changeless in his own place , tread the same dust with the soft churning of bare foot , slowly , slowly begin to revolve , till the circle be slowly revolve round the fire , with always the same soft , down - sink , churn tread . and the drum keep the changeless living beat , like a heart , and the song rise and soar and fall , ebb and ebb to a sort of extinction , then heave up again . 

 till the young peon could stand it no more . they put off their sandal and their hat and their blanket , and shyly , with inexpert foot that yet know the old echo of the tread , they stand behind the wheeling dancer , and dance without change place . till soon the revolving circle have a fix yet throb circle of man outside . 

 then suddenly one of the naked - shoulder dancer from the inner circle step back into the outer circle and with a slow leaning , slowly start the outer circle revolve in the reverse direction from the inner . so now there be two wheel of the dance , one within the other , and revolve in different direction . 

 they keep on and on , with the drum and the song , revolve like wheel of shadow - shape around the fire . till the fire die low , and the drum suddenly stop , and the man suddenly disperse , return to their seat again . 

 there be silence , then the low hum of voice and the sound of laughter . Kate have think , so often , that the laughter of the peon break from they in a sound almost like pain . but now the laugh come like little invisible flame , suddenly from the ember of the talk . 

 everybody be wait , wait . yet nobody move at once , when the thud of the drum strike again like a summon . they sit still talk , listen with a second consciousness . then a man arise and throw off his blanket , and throw wood on the central fire . then he walk through the seated man to where the woman cluster in the fullness of their skirt . there he wait , smile with a look of abstraction . till a girl rise and come with utmost shyness towards he , hold she rebozo tight over her lower head with her right hand , and take the hand of the man in she left . it be she who lift the motionless hand of the man in her own , shyly , with a sudden shy snatching . he laugh , and lead she through the now risen man , towards the inner fire . she go with drop head , hide her face in confusion . but side by side and loosely hold hand , they begin to tread the soft , heavy dance - step , form the first small segment of the inner , stationary circle . 

 and now all the man be stand facing outward , wait to be choose . and the woman quickly , their shawled head hide , be slip in and pick up the loose right hand of the man of their choice . the inner man with the naked shoulder be soon choose . the inner circle , of man and woman in pair , hand in hand , be close . 

 ' come , Niña , come ! ' say Juana , look up at Kate with black , gleam eye . 

 ' I be afraid ! ' say Kate . and she speak the truth . 

 one of the bare - breast man have come across the street , out of the crowd , and be stand wait , near the doorway in which Kate stand , silently , with avert face . 

 ' look ! Niña ! this master be wait for you . then come ! oh , Niña , come ! ' 

 the voice of the criada have sink to the low , crooning , almost magical appeal of the woman of the people , and her black eye glisten strangely , watch Kate 's face . Kate , almost mesmerize , take slow , reluctant step forward , towards the man who be stand with avert face . 

 ' do you mind ? ' she say in English , in great confusion . and she touch his finger with her own . 

 his hand , warm and dark and savagely suave , loosely , almost with indifference , and yet with the soft barbaric nearness , hold her finger , and he lead she to the circle . she drop her head , and long to be able to veil her face . in her white dress and green straw hat , she feel a virgin again , a young virgin . this be the quality these man have be able to give back to she . 

 shyly , awkwardly , she try to tread the dance - step . but in her shoe she feel inflexible , insulate , and the rhythm be not in she . she move in confusion . 

 but the man beside she hold her hand in the same light , soft grasp , and the slow , pulse pendulum of his body sway untrammelle . he take no notice of she . and yet he hold her finger in his soft , light touch . 

 Juana have discard her boot and stocking , and with her dark , creased face like a mask of obsidian , her eye gleam with the timeless female flame , dark and unquenchable , she be tread the step of the dance . 

 ' as the bird of the sun tread the earth at the dawn of the day like a brown hen under his foot , like a hen and the branch of her belly droop with the apple of birth , with the egg of gold , with the egg that hide the globe of the sun in the water of heaven , in the purse of the shell of earth that be white from the fire of the blood , tread the earth , and the earth will conceive like the hen ' neath the foot of the bird of the sun ; ' neath the foot of the heart , ' neath the heart 's twin foot . tread the earth , tread the earth that squat as a pullet with wing close in - ' 

 the circle begin to shift , and Kate be slowly move round between two silent and absorb man , whose arm touch her arm . and the one hold her finger softly , loosely , but with transcendent nearness . and the wild song rise again like a bird that have alight for a second , and the drum change rhythm incomprehensibly . 

 the outer wheel be all man . she seem to feel the strange dark glow of they upon her back . man , dark , collective man , non - individual . and herself woman , wheel upon the great wheel of womanhood . 

 man and woman alike dance with face lower and expressionless , abstract , go in the deep absorption of man into the great manhood , woman into the great womanhood . it be sex , but the great , not the less sex . the water over the earth wheel upon the water under the earth , like an eagle silently wheeling above its own shadow . 

 she feel her sex and her womanhood catch up and identify in the slowly revolve ocean of nascent life , the dark sky of the man lower and wheel above . she be not herself , she be go , and her own desire be go in the ocean of the great desire . as the man whose finger touch her be go in the ocean that be male , stoop over the face of the water . 

 the slow , vast , soft - touching revolution of the ocean above upon ocean below , with no vestige of rustling or foam . only the pure slide conjunction . herself go into her great self , her womanhood consummate in the great womanhood . and where her finger touch the finger of the man , the quiet spark , like the dawn - star , shin between she and the great manhood of man . 

 how strange , to be merge in desire beyond desire , to be go in the body beyond the individualism of the body , with the spark of contact linger like a morning star between she and the man , her woman 's great self , and the great self of man . even of the two man next to she . what a beautiful slow wheel of dance , two great stream stream in contact , in opposite direction . 

 she do not know the face of the man whose finger she hold . her personal eye have go blind , his face be the face of dark heaven , only the touch of his finger a star that be both her and his . 

 her foot be feel the way into the dance - step . she be begin to learn softly to loosen her weight , to loosen the uplift of all her life , and let it pour slowly , darkly , with an ebbing gush , rhythmical in soft , rhythmic gush from her foot into the dark body of the earth . erect , strong like a staff of life , yet to loosen all the sap of her strength and let it flow down into the root of the earth . 

 she have lose count of time . but the dance of itself seem to be wheel to a close , though the rhythm remain exactly the same to the end . 

 the voice finish sing , only the drum keep on . suddenly the drum give a rapid little shudder , and there be silence . and immediately the hand be loosen , the dance break up into fragment . the man give she a quick , far - off smile and be go . she would never know he by sight . but by presence she might know he . 

 the woman slip apart , clutch their rebozo tight round their shoulder . the man hide themselves in their blanket . and Kate turn to the darkness of the lake . 

 ' already you be go , Niña ? ' come Juana 's voice of mild , aloof disappointment . 

 ' I must go now , ' say Kate hurriedly . 

 and she hasten towards the dark of the lake , Juana run behind she with shoe and stocking in her hand . 

 Kate want to hurry home with her new secret , the strange secret of her great womanhood , that she could not get use to . she would have to sink into this mystery . 

 she hasten along the uneven path of the edge of the lake shore , that lie dark in shadow , though the star give enough light to show the dark bulk and mast of the sailing - canoe against the downy obscurity of the water . night , timeless , hourless night ! she would not look at her watch . she would lay her watch face down , to hide its phosphorus figure . she would not be time . 

 and as she sink into sleep , she could hear the drum again , like a pulse inside a stone beating . 

 

 

 CHAPTER VIII 

 Night in the House 

 

 over the gateway of Kate 's house be a big tree call a cuenta tree , because it drop its fruit , that be little , round , hard ball like little dark marble , perfect in shape , for the native to gather up and string for bead , cuenta , or , more particularly , for the Pater Noster bead of the rosary . at night , the little road outside be quite dark , and the dropping of the cuenta startle the silence . 

 the night , which at first have seem perfectly friendly , begin to be full of terror . Fear have rise again . a band of robber have gather in one of the outlying village on the lake , a village where the man have bad character , as be ready to turn bandit at any moment . and this gang , invisible in the daytime , consist during the day of lake fisherman and labourer on the land , at night would set off on horseback to sack any lonely , or insufficiently - protect house . 

 then the fact that a gang of bandit be out always set the isolated thief and scoundrel in action . whatever happen , it would be attribute to the bandit . and so , many an unsuspected , seemingly honest man , with the old lust in his soul , would steal out by night with his machete and perhaps a pistol , to put his finger in the pie of the darkness . 

 and again Kate feel the terror clot and thicken in the black silence of the mexican night , till the sound of a cuenta fall be terrible . she would lie and listen to the thickening darkness . a little way off would sound the long , shrill whistle of the police watch . and in a while , the police patrol , on horseback , would go clattering lightly by . but the police in most country be never present save where there be no trouble . 

 the rainy season be come , and the night - wind rise from the lake , make strange noise in the tree , and shake the many loose door of the house . the servant be away in their distant recess . and in Mexico , at night , each little distance isolate itself absolutely , like a man in a black cloak turn his back . 

 in the morning , Juana would appear from the plaza , her eye blob - like and inky , and the old , weary , monkey look of subjection to fear settle on her bronze face . a race old in subjection to fear , and unable to shake it off . she would immediately begin to pour forth to Kate , in a babbling , half - intelligent stream , some story of a house break into and a woman stab . and she would say , the owner of the hotel have send word that it be not safe for Kate to sleep alone in the house . she must go to the hotel to sleep . 

 the whole village be in that state of curious , reptile apprehension which come over dark people . a panic fear , a sense of devilment and horror thick in the night air . when blue morning come they would cheer up . but at night , like clot blood the air would begin to thicken again . 

 the fear , of course , be communicate from one person to another . Kate be sure that if Juana and her family have not be huddle in reptile terror away at the far end of the house , she herself would have be unafraid . as it be , Juana be like a terror - strike lizard . 

 there be no man about the place . Juana have two son , Jesús , who be about twenty , and Ezequiel , about seventeen . but Jesús - she pronounce it Hezoosn - run the little gasoline motor for the electric light , and he and Ezequiel sleep together on the floor of the little engine - house . so that Juana huddle with her two girl , Concha and Maria , in the den at the end of Kate 's house , and seem to sweat a rank odour of fear . 

 the village be submerge . usually the plaza keep alive till ten o'clock , with the charcoal fire burn and the ice - cream man go round with his bucket on his head , endlessly cry : Nieve ! Nieve ! and the people gossip on the street or listen to the young man with guitar . 

 now , by nine o'clock , the place be desert , curiously stony and vacuous . and the Jefe send out the order that anybody in the street after ten o'clock would be arrest . 

 Kate hurry to her house and lock herself in . it be not easy to withstand the panic fear of a black - eye , semi - barbaric people . the thing communicate itself like some drug on the air , wring the heart and paralyse the soul with a sense of evil ; black , horrible evil . 

 she would lie in her bed in the absolute dark : the electric light be cut off completely , everywhere , at ten o'clock , and primitive darkness reign . and she could feel the demonish breath of evil move on the air in wave . 

 she think of the grisly story of the country , which she have hear . and she think again of the people , outwardly so quiet , so nice , with a gentle smile . but even Humboldt have say of the Mexicans , that few people have such a gentle smile , and at the same time , such fierce eye . it be not that their eye be exactly fierce . but their blackness be inchoate , with a dagger of white light in it . and in the inchoate blackness the blood - lust might arise , out of the sediment of the uncreated past . 

 uncreated , half - create , such a people be at the mercy of old black influence that lie in a sediment at the bottom of they . while they be quiet , they be gentle and kindly , with a sort of limpid naïveté . but when anything shake they at the depth , the black cloud would arise , and they be go again in the old grisly passion of death , blood - lust , incarnate hate . a people incomplete , and at the mercy of old , upstarte lust . 

 somewhere at the bottom of their soul , she feel , be a fathomless resentment , like a raw wound . the heavy , bloody - eyed resentment of man who have never be able to win a soul for themselves , never be able to win themselves a nucleus , an individual integrity out of the chaos of passion and potency and death . they be catch in the toil of old lust and old activity as in the fold of a black serpent that strangle the heart . the heavy , evil - smell weight of an unconquered past . 

 and under this weight they live and die , not really sorry to die . clog and tangle in the element , never able to extricate themselves . blacken under a too - strong sun , surcharge with the heavy sundering electricity of the mexican air , and torment by the bubbling of volcano away below the foot . the tremendous potent element of the american continent , that give man powerful body , but which weigh the soul down and prevent its rise into birth . or , if a man arrive with a soul , the maleficent element gradually break it , gradually , till he decompose into idea and mechanistic activity , in a body full of mechanical energy , but with his blood - soul dead and putrescent . 

 so , these man , unable to overcome the element , man hold down by the serpent tangle of sun and electricity and volcanic emission , they be subject to an ever - recur , fathomless lust of resentment , a demonish hatred of life itself . then , the in - strike thud of a heavy knife , stab into a live body , this be the good . no lust of woman can equal that lust . the clutch throb of gratification as the knife strike in and the blood spurt out ! 

 it be the inevitable supreme gratification of a people entangle in the past , and unable to extricate itself . a people that have never be redeem , that have not know a Saviour . 

 for Jesus be no Saviour to the Mexicans . he be a dead god in their tomb . as a miner who be entomb underground by the collapsing of the earth in the gangway , so do whole nation become entomb under the slow subsidence of their past . unless there come some Saviour , some Redeemer to drive a new way out , to the sun . 

 but the white man bring no salvation to Mexico . on the contrary , they find themselves at last shut in the tomb along with their dead god and the conquered race . 

 which be the status quo . 

 Kate lie and think hard , in the black night . at the same time , she be listen intensely , with a clutch of horror . she could not control her heart . it seem wrench out of place , and really hurt she . she be , as she have never be before , absolute physically afraid , blood afraid . her blood be wrench in a paralysis of fear . 

 in England , in Ireland , during the war and the revolution she have know spiritual fear . the ghastly fear of the rabble ; and during the war , nation be nearly all rabble . the terror of the rabble that , mongrel - like , want to break the free spirit in individual man and woman . it be the cold , collective lust of million of people , to break the spirit in the outstanding individual . they want to break this spirit , so that they could start the great downhill rush back to old underworld level , old gold - worship and murder lust . the rabble . 

 in those day Kate have know the agony of cold social fear , as if a democracy be a huge , huge cold centipede which , if you resist it , would dig every claw into you . and the flesh would mortify around every claw . 

 that have be her bad agony of fear . and she have survive . 

 now she know the real heart - wrench of blood fear . her heart seem pull out of place , in a stretch pain . 

 she doze , and waken suddenly , at a small noise . she sit up in bed . her door on to the veranda have shutter . the door themselves be fasten , but the shutter be open for air , leave the upper space , like the window of the door , open . and against the dark grey of the night she see what look like a black cat crouch on the bottom of the panel - space . 

 ' what be that ? ' she say automatically . 

 instantly , the thing move , slide away , and she know it be the arm of a man that have be reach inside to pull the bolt of the door . she lie for a second paralyse , prepare to scream . there be no movement . so she lean and light a candle . 

 the curious panic fear be an agony to she . it paralyse she and wrench her heart out of place . she lie prostrate in the anguish of night - terror . the candle blaze duskily . there be a far - off mutter of thunder . and the night be horrible , horrible . Mexico be ghastly to she beyond description . 

 she could not relax , she could not get her heart into place . ' now , ' she think to herself , ' I be at the mercy of this thing , and I have lose myself . ' and it be a terrible feeling , to be lose , scatter , as it be , from herself in a horror of fear . 

 ' what can I do ? ' she think , summon her spirit . ' how can I help myself ? ' she know she be all alone . 

 for a long time she could do nothing . then a certain relief come to she as she think : ' I be believe in evil . I must not   believe in evil . panic and murder never start unless the lead people let slip the control . I do not   really believe in evil . I do not   believe the old Pan can wrench we back into the old , evil form of consciousness , unless we wish it . I do believe there be a great power , which will give we the great strength , while we keep the faith in it , and the spark of contact . even the man who want to break in here , I do not   think he really have the power . he be just try to be mean and wicked , but something in he would have to submit to a great faith and a great power . ' 

 so she reassure herself , till she have the courage to get up and fasten her door - shutter at the top . after which she go from room to room , to see that all be make fast . and she be thankful to realize that she be afraid of scorpion on the floor , as well as of the panic horror . 

 now she have see that the five door and the six window of her wing of communicating room be fast . she be seal inside the darkness , with her candle . to get to the other part of the house , the dining - room and kitchen , she have to go outside on the veranda . 

 she grow quieter , shut up with the dusky glow of her candle . and her heart , still wrench with the pain of fear , be think : ' Joachim say that evil be the lapsing back to old life - mode that have be surpass in we . this bring murder and lust . but the drum of Saturday night be the old rhythm , and that dance round the drum be the old savage form of expression . consciously revert to the savage . so perhaps it be evil . ' 

 but then again her instinct to believe come up . 

 ' no ! it be not a helpless , panic reversal . it be conscious , carefully choose . we must go back to pick up old thread . we must take up the old , broken impulse that will connect we with the mystery of the cosmos again , now we be at the end of our own tether . we must do it . Don Ram n be right . he must be a great man , really . I think there be no really great man any more : only great financier and great artist and so on , but no great man . he must be a great man . ' 

 she be again infinitely reassure by this thought . 

 but again , just as she have blow out the candle , vivid flare of white light spurt through all the window - crack , and thunder break in great round ball , smash down . the bolt of thunder seem to fall on her heart . she lie absolutely crush , in a kind of quiescent hysteric , torture . and the hysteric hold her listening and tense and abject , until dawn . and then she be a wreck . 

 in the morning come Juana , also look like a dead insect , with the conventional phrase : ' how have you pass the night , Niña ? ' 

 ' badly ! ' say Kate . then she tell the story of the black cat , or the man 's arm . 

 ' Mire ! ' say Juana , in a hushed voice . ' the poor innocent will be murder in her bed . no , Niña , you must go and sleep in the hotel . no , no , Niña , you can not   leave your window shutter open . no , no , impossible . see now , will you go to the hotel to sleep ? the other señora do it . ' 

 ' I do not   want to , ' say Kate . 

 ' you do not   want to , Niña ? ah ! entonce ! entonce , Niña , I will tell Ezequiel to sleep here outside your door , with his pistol . he have a pistol , and he will sleep outside your door , and you can leave your shutter open , for air in the hot night . ah , Niña , we poor woman , we need a man and a pistol . we ought not to be leave alone all the night . we be afraid , the child be afraid . and imagine it , that there be a robber try to open the bolt of your door ! imagine it to yourself ! no , Niña , we will tell Ezequiel at mid - day . ' 

 Ezequiel come stride proudly in , at mid - day . he be a wild , shy youth , very erect and proud , and half savage . his voice be break , and have a queer resonance . 

 he stand shyly while the announcement be be make to he . then he look at Kate with flash black eye , very much the man to the rescue . 

 ' yes ! yes ! ' he say . ' I will sleep here on the corridor . do not   have any fear . I shall have my pistol . ' 

 he march off , and return with the pistol , an old long - barrel affair . 

 ' it have five shot , ' he say , show the weapon . ' if you open the door in the night , you must say a word to I first . because if I see anything move , I shall fire five shot . Pst ! Pst ! ' 

 she see by the flash of his eye what satisfaction it would give he to fire five shot at something move in the night . the thought of shot be fire at he give he not the least concern . 

 ' and Niña , ' say Juana , ' if you come home late , after the light be out , you must call Ezequiel ! because if not , Brumm ! Brumm ! - and who know who will be kill ! ' 

 Ezequiel sleep on a straw mat on the brick veranda outside Kate 's door , roll up in his blanket , and with the pistol at his side . so she could leave her shutter open for air . and the first night she be keep awake once more by his fierce snoring . never have she hear such a tremendous resonant sound ! what a chest that boy must have ! it be sound from some strange , savage other world . the noise keep she awake , but there be something in it which she like . some sort of wild strength . 

 

 

 CHAPTER IX 

 Casa de las Cuentas 

 

 Kate be soon fond of the limping , untidy Juana , and of the girl . Concha be fourteen , a thick , heavy , barbaric girl with a mass of black wave hair which she be always scratch . Maria be eleven , a shy , thin bird - like thing with big eye that seem almost to absorb the light round she . 

 it be a reckless family . Juana admit a different father for Jesús , but to judge from the rest , one would have suspect a different father for each of they . there be a basic , sardonic carelessness in the face of life , in all the family . they live from day to day , a stubborn , heavy , obstinate life of indifference , careless about the past , careless about the present , careless about the future . they have even no interest in money . whatever they get they spend in a minute , and forget it again . 

 without aim or purpose , they live absolutely    terre , down on the dark , volcanic earth . they be not animal , because man and woman and their child can not be animal . it be not grant we . go , for once go , thou never canst return ! say the great urge , which drive we creatively on . when man try brutally to return to the old , previous level of evolution , he do so in the spirit of cruelty and misery . 

 so in the black eye of the family , a certain vicious fear and wonder and misery . the misery of human being who squat helpless outside their own unbuilt self , unable to win their soul out of the chaos , and indifferent to all other victory . 

 white people be become soulless too . but they have conquer the low world of metal and energy , so they whizz around in machine , circle the void of their own emptiness . 

 to Kate , there be a great pathos in her family . also a certain repulsiveness . 

 Juana and her child , once they accept their Niña as their own , be honest with intensity . point of honour , they be honest to the least little plum in the fruit bowl . and almost intensely eager to serve . 

 themselves indifferent to their surrounding , they would live in squalor . the earth be the great garbage - bowl . everything discard be fling on the earth and they do not care . almost they like to live in a milieu of flea and old rag , bit of paper , banana skin and mango stone . here be a piece tear off my dress ! earth , take it . here be the combing of my hair ! earth , take they ! 

 but Kate could not bear it . she care . and immediately , the family be quite glad , thrill that she care . they sweep the patio with the twig broom till they sweep the very surface of the earth away . Fun ! the Niña have feeling about it . 

 she be a source of wonder and amusement to they . but she be never a class superior . she be a half - incomprehensible , half - amusing wonder - being . 

 the Niña want the aguador to bring two bote of hot water , quick , from the hot spring , to wash herself all over every morning . Fun ! Go , Maria , tell the aguador to run with the Niña 's water . 

 then they almost resent it that she shut herself off to have her bath . she be a sort of goddess to they , to provide they with fun and wonder ; but she ought always to be accessible . and a god who be forever accessible to human being have an unenviable time of it , Kate soon discover . 

 no , it be no sinecure , be a Niña . at dawn begin the scrape - scrape of the twig broom outside . Kate stay on in bed , door fasten but shutter open . flutter outside ! somebody want to sell two egg . where be the Niña ? she be sleep ! the visitor do not go . continual flutter outside . 

 the aguador ! ah , the water for the Niña 's bath ! she be sleep , she be sleep . ' no ! ' call Kate , slip into a dressing - gown and unbolt the door . in come the child with the bath - tub , in come the aguador with the two square kerosene can full of hot water . twelve centavos ! twelve centavos for the aguador ! no hay ! we have not   get twelve centavos . later ! later ! away trot the aguador , pole over his shoulder . Kate shut her door and shutter and start her bath . 

 ' Niña ? Niña ? ' 

 ' what do you want ? ' 

 ' egg boil or fried or ranchero ? which do you want ? ' 

 ' boil . ' 

 ' coffee or chocolate ? ' 

 ' Coffee . ' 

 ' or do you want tea ? ' 

 ' no , coffee . ' 

 bath proceed . 

 ' Nina ? ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' there be no coffee . we be go to buy some . ' 

 ' I will take tea . ' 

 ' no , Niña ! I be go . wait for I . ' 

 ' go then . ' 

 Kate come out to breakfast on the veranda . the table be set , heap with fruit and white bread and sweet bun . 

 ' good morning , Niña . how have you pass the night ? well ! ah , praise be God ! Maria , the coffee . I be go to put the egg in the water . oh , Niña , that they may not be boil hard ! - look , what foot of the Madonna ! look ! bonito ! ' 

 and Juana stoop down , fascinate to touch with her black finger Kate 's white soft foot , that be thrust in light sandal , just a thong across the foot . 

 the day have begin . Juana look upon herself as dedicate entirely to Kate . as soon as possible she shoo her girl away , to school . sometimes they go : mostly they do not . the Niña say they must go to school . listen ! listen now ! say the Niña that you must go to school ! away ! Walk ! 

 Juana would limp back and forth down the long veranda from kitchen to the breakfast table , carry away the dish one by one . then , with a great splash , she be wash up . 

 Morning ! brilliant sun pour into the patio , on the hibiscus flower and the flutter yellow and green rag of the banana - tree . bird swiftly come and go , with tropical suddenness . in the dense shadow of the mango - grove , white - clothe Indians go like ghost . the sense of fierce sun and , almost more impressive , of dark , intense shadow . a twitter of life , yet a certain heavy weight of silence . a dazzle flicker and brilliance of light , yet the feeling of weight . 

 Kate would sit alone , rock on her veranda , pretend to sew . silently appear an old man with one egg hold up mysteriously , like some symbol . would the patrona buy it for five centavos ? La Juana only give four centavos . all right . where be Juana ? 

 Juana appear from the plaza with more purchase . the egg ! the four centavos ! the account of the spending . entonce ! entonce ! Luego ! Luego ! ah , Niña , no tengo memoria ! Juana could not read nor write . she scuffle off to the market with her peso , buy endless little thing at one or two centavos each , every morning . and every morning there be a reckoning up . ah ! ah ! where be we ? I have no memory . well then - ah - yes - I buy ocote for three centavos ! how much ? how much , Niña ? how much be it now ? 

 it be a game which thrill Juana to the marrow , reckon up the centavos to get it just right . if she be a centavo short in the change , she be paralyse . time after time she would reappear . there be a centavo short , Niña ! ah , how stupid I be ! but I will give you one of mine ! 

 ' do not   bother , ' say Kate . ' do not   think of it any more . ' 

 ' but yes . but yes ! ' and away she limp in distraction . 

 till an hour later , loud cry from the far end of the house . Juana wave a scrap of greenery . 

 ' Mire ! Niña ! compré perejil a un centavo - I buy parsley for one cent . be it right ? ' 

 ' it be right , ' say Kate . 

 and life could proceed once more . 

 there be two kitchen , the one next the dining - room , belong to Kate , and the narrow little shed under the banana - tree , belong to the servant . from her veranda Kate look away down to Juana 's kitchen shed . it have a black window - hole . 

 clap ! clap ! clap ! clap ! why , I think Concha be at school ! say Kate to herself . 

 no ! - there , in the darkness of the window - hole , be Concha 's swarthy face and mane , peer out like some animal from a cave , as she make the tortilla . Tortillas be flat pancake of maize dough , bake dry on a flat earthenware plate over the fire . and the making consist of clap a bit of new dough from the palm of one hand to the other , till the tortilla be of the requisite thinness , roundness , and so - call lightness . 

 clap ! clap ! clap ! clap ! clap ! clap ! clap ! it be as inevitable as the tick of some spider , the sound of Concha make tortillas in the heat of the morning , peer out of her dark window - hole . and some time after mid - day , the smoke would be come out of the window - hole ; Concha be throw the raw tortilla on the big earthen plate over the slow wood fire . 

 then Ezequiel might or might not stride in , very much the man , serape poise over one shoulder and big straw hat jauntily curl , to eat the mid - day tortilla . if he have work in the field at any distance , he would not appear till nightfall . if he appear , he sit on the doorstep and the woman serve he his tortillas and fetch he his drink of water as if he be a king , boy though he might be . and his rough , break voice be hear in quiet command . 

 Command be the word . though he be quiet and gentle , and very conscientious , there be calm , kingly command in his voice when he speak to his mother or sister . the old male prerogative . somehow , it make Kate want to ridicule he . 

 come her own meal : one of her trial . hot , rather greasy soup . inevitable hot , greasy , rather peppery rice . inevitable meat in hot , thick , rather greasy sauce . boil calabacita or egg - plant , salad , perhaps some dulce make with milk - and the big basket of fruit . Overhead , the blaze tropical sun of late May . 

 Afternoon , and great heat . Juana set off with the girl and the dish . they would do the washing up in the lake . squat on the stone , they would dabble the plate one by one , the spoon and the fork one by one in the filmy water of the lake , then put they in the sun to dry . after which Juana might wash a couple of towel in the lake and the girl might bathe . saunter the day away - saunter the day away . 

 Jesús , the eld son , a queer , heavy , greasy fellow , usually appear in the afternoon , to water the garden . but he eat his meal at the hotel , and really live there , have his home there . not that he have any home , any more than a zopilote have a home . but he run the planta , and do odd job about the hotel , and work every day in the year till half - past ten at night , earn twenty - two peso , eleven dollar , a month . he wear a black shirt , and his thick , massive black hair drop over his low brow . very near to an animal . and though , to order , he wear a black Fascisti shirt , he have the queer , animal jeering of the socialist , an instinct for pull thing down . 

 his mother and he have a funny little intimacy of quiet and indifferent mutual taunting of one another . he would give she some money if she be in a strait . and there be a thin little thread of blood - bondage between they . apart from that , complete indifference . 

 Ezequiel be a fine type . he be slender and so erect that he almost curved backwards . he be very shy , farouche . Proud also , and more responsible to his family . he would not go to work in an hotel . no . he be a worker in the field , and he be proud of it . a man 's work . no equivocal sort of half - service for he . 

 though he be just a hire labourer , yet work on the land he never feel he be work for a master . it be the land he work for . somewhere inside himself he feel that the land be his , and he belong in a measure to it . perhaps a lingering feeling of tribal , communal land - ownership and service . 

 when there be work , he be due to earn a peso a day . there be often no work : and often only seventy - five centavos a day for wage . when the land be dry , he would try to get work on the road , though this he do not like . but he earn his peso a day . 

 often , there be no work . often , for day , sometimes for week , he would have to hang about , nothing to do , nothing to do . only , when the Socialist Government have begin give the peasant bit of land , divide up the big hacienda , Ezequiel have be allot a little piece outside the village . he would go and gather the stone together there , and prepare to build a little hut . and he would break the earth with a hoe , his only implement , as far as possible . but he have no blood connection with this square allotment of unnatural earth , and he could not get himself into relation with it . he be fitful and diffident about it . there be no incentive , no urge . 

 on workday he would come stride in about six o'clock , shyly greet Kate as he pass . he be a gentleman in his barbarism . then , away in the far recess , he would rapidly fold tortilla after tortilla , sit on the floor with his back to the wall , rapidly eat the leathery thing that taste of mortar , because the maize be first boil with lime to loosen the husk , and accept another little pile , serve on a leaf , from the cook , Concha . Juana , cook for the Niña , would no long condescend to cook for her own family . and sometimes there be a mess of meat and chile for Ezequiel to scoop up out of the earthenware casserole , with his tortilla . and sometimes there be not . but always , he eat with a certain blind , rapid indifference , that also seem to be mexican . they seem to eat even with a certain hostile reluctance , and have a strange indifference to what or when they eat . 

 his supper finish , as a rule he be off again like a shot , to the plaza , to be among man . and the woman would sit desultorily about , on the ground . sometimes Kate would come in at nine o'clock to an empty place - Ezequiel in the plaza , Juana and Maria disappear somewhere or other , and Choncha lie asleep like a heap of rag on the gravel of the patio . when Kate call she , she would raise her head , stupefied and hopeless ; then get up like a dog and crawl away to the gate . the strange stupor of boredom and hopelessness that be always sink upon they would make Kate 's heart stand still with dread . 

 the peculiar indifference to everything , even to one another . Juana wash a cotton shirt and a pair of cotton trouser for each of her son , once a week , and there her maternal effort end . she see hardly anything of they , and be often completely unaware of what Ezequiel be do , where he be work , or at what . he have just go off to work , no more . 

 yet again , sometimes she have hot , fierce pang of maternal protectiveness , when the boy be unjustly treat , as he often be . and if she think he be ill , a black sort of fatalistic fear come over she . but Kate have to rouse she into get some simple medicine . 

 like animal , yet not at all like animal . for animal be complete in their isolation and their insouciance . with they it be not indifference . it be completeness in themselves . but with the family there be always a kind of bleeding of incompleteness , a terrible stupor of boredom settle down . 

 the two girl could not be apart : they must always be run after one another . yet Concha continually tease the big - eye , naïve simpleton of a Maria . and Maria be always in tear . or the two be suddenly throw stone at one another . but with no real aim to hit . and Juana be abuse they with sudden vehemence , that flicker in a minute to complete indifference again . 

 Queer , the savage ferocity with which the girl would suddenly be throw stone at one another . but queerer still , they always aim just to miss , Kate notice the same in the savage attack the boy make on one another , on the beach ; hurl large stone with intense , terrible ferocity . but almost always , aim with a curious cast in the eye , just to miss . 

 but sometimes not . sometimes hit with a sharp cut . and then the wound one would drop right down , with a howl , as if dead . and the other boy would edge away , in a silent kind of dread . and the wounded boy would be prostrate , not really much hurt , but as if he be kill . 

 then , maybe , suddenly he would be up , with a convulsion of murder in his face , pursue his adversary with a stone . and the adversary would abjectly flee . 

 always the same thing among the young : a ceaseless , endless taunting and tormenting . the same as among the Red Indians . but the Pueblo Indians rarely lapse from speech into violence . the mexican boy almost always . and almost always , one boy in murderous rage , pursue his taunter till he have hurt he : then an abject collapse of the one hurt . then , usually , a revival of the one hurt , the murderous frenzy transfer to he , and the first attacker flee abjectly , in terror . one or the other always abject . 

 they be a strange puzzle to Kate . she feel something must be do . she herself be inspire to help . so she have the two girl for an hour a day , teach they to read , to sew , to draw . Maria want to learn to read : that she do want . for the rest , they begin well . but soon , the regularity and the slight insistence of Kate on their attention make they take again that peculiar invisible jeer tone , something peculiar to the American Continent . a quiet , invisible , malevolent mockery , a desire to wound . they would press upon she , trespass upon her privacy , and with a queer effrontery , do all they could to walk over she . with their ugly little will , try to pull her will down . 

 ' no , do not   lean on I , Concha . stand on your own foot . ' 

 the slight grin of malevolence on Concha 's face , as she stand on her own foot . then : 

 ' do you have lice in your hair , Niña ? ' 

 the question ask with a peculiar , subtle , indian insolence . 

 ' no , ' say Kate , suddenly angry . ' and now go ! go ! go away from I ! do not   come near I . ' 

 they slunk out , abject . so much for educate they . 

 Kate have visitor from Guadalajara - great excitement . but while the visitor be drink tea with Kate on the veranda , at the other side of the patio , full in view , Juana , Concha , Maria and Felipa , a cousin of about sixteen , squat on the gravel with their splendid black hair down their back , display themselves as they hunt in each other 's hair for lice . they want to be full in view . and they be it . they want the basic fact of lice to be thrust under the nose of those white people . 

 Kate stride down the veranda . 

 ' if you must pick lice , ' she say in a shake voice to Juana , shake with anger , ' pick they there , in your own place , where you can not   be see . ' 

 one instant , Juana 's black inchoate eye gleam with a malevolent ridicule , meet Kate 's . the next instant , humble and abject , the four with their black hair down their back slunk into the recess out of sight . 

 but it please Juana that she have be able to make Kate 's eye blaze with anger . it please she . she feel a certain low power in herself . true , she be a little afraid of that anger . but that be what she want . she would have no use for a Niña of whom she be not a bit afraid . and she want to be able to provoke that anger , of which she feel a certain abject twinge of fear . 

 ah the dark race ! Kate 's own Irish be near enough for she to have glimpse some of the mystery . the dark race belong to a bygone cycle of humanity . they be leave behind in a gulf out of which they have never be able to climb . and on to the particular white man 's level they never will be able to climb . they can only follow as servant . 

 while the white man keep the impetus of his own proud , onward march , the dark race will yield and serve , perforce . but let the white man once have a misgiving about his own leadership , and the dark race will at once attack he , to pull he down into the old gulfs . to engulf he again . 

 which be what be happen . for the white man , let he bluster as he may , be hollow with misgive about his own supremacy . 

 full speed ahead , then , for the débâcle . 

 but once Kate have be rouse to a passion of revulsion from these lice - picking , down - drag people , they change again , and serve she with a certain true wistfulness that could not but touch she . Juana care really about nothing . but just that last thread of relationship that connect she with Kate and the upper world of daylight and fresh air , she do not   want to break . no , no , she do not   want finally to drive her Niña away . no , no , the only one thing she do want , ultimately , be to serve her Niña . 

 but at the same time , she cherish a deep malevolent grudge against rich people , white people , superior people . perhaps the white man have finally betray his own leadership . who know ! but it be a thing of the brave , on - marching soul , and perhaps this have be betray already by the white man . so that the dark be rise upon he . 

 Juana would come to Kate , tell her story from the past . and the sinister mocking film would be on her black eye , and her lined copper face would take on its reptile mask as she would continue : ' usted sabe , Niña , los gringo , los gringuito llevan todo - you know , Niña , the gringo and the gringuito take away everything . . . ' 

 the gringo be the Americans . but Kate herself be include by Juana in the gringuito : the white foreigner . the woman be make another slide , insolent attack . 

 ' it be possible , ' say Kate coldly . ' but tell I what I take away from Mexico . ' 

 ' no , Niña , no ! ' the subtle smile of satisfaction lurk under the bronze tarnish of Juana 's face . she have be able to get at the other woman , touch the raw . ' I do not   speak of you , Niña ! ' but there be too much protest in it . 

 almost , they want to drive she away : to insult she and drag she down and make she want to go away . they could not   help it . like the Irish , they could cut off their nose to spite their face . 

 the backward race ! 

 at the same time there be a true pathos about they . Ezequiel have work for a man for two month , build a house , when he be a boy of fourteen , in order to get a serape . at the end of the two month , the man have put he off , and he have not get the serape : have never get it . a bitter disappointment . 

 but , then , Kate be not responsible for that . and Juana seem almost to make she so . 

 a people without the energy of get on , how could they fail to be hopelessly exploit . they have be hopelessly and cruelly exploit , for century . and their backbone be lock in malevolent resistance . 

 ' but , ' as Kate say to herself , ' I do not   want to exploit they . not a bit . on the contrary , I be willing to give more than I get . but that nasty insinuate insultingness be not fair in the game . I never insult they . I be so careful not to hurt they . and then they deliberately make these centipede attack on I , and be pleased when I be hurt . ' 

 but she know her own Irish at the game . so she be able to put Juana and the girl away from she , and isolate herself from they . once they be put away , their malevolence subside and they remember what Kate want . while she stay amiable , they forget . they forget to sweep the patio , they forget to keep themselves clean . only when they be shove back , into isolation , do they remember again . 

 the boy , Ezequiel , seem to she to have more honour than the woman . he never make these insidious attack . 

 and when her house be clean and quiet and the air seem clean again , the soul renew , her old fondness for the family come back . their curious flitting , come and go , like bird : the busy clap - clap - clapping of tortilla , the excited scrunching of tomato and chile on the metate , as Juana prepare sauce . the noise of the bucket in the well . Jesús , come to water the garden . 

 the game , the game of it all ! everything they do must be fun , or they could not do it . they could not abstract themselves to a routine . never . everything must be fun , must be variable , must be a bit of an adventure . it be confusion , but after all , a live confusion , not a dead , dreary thing . Kate remember her english servant in the english kitchen : so mechanical and somehow inhuman . well , this be the other extreme . 

 here there be no discipline nor method at all . although Juana and her brat really want to do the thing Kate wish they must do they their own way . sometimes Kate feel distract : after all , the mechanical line be so much easy to follow . but as far as possible , she let the family be . she have to get use , for example , to the vagary of her dining - table : a little round table that always stand on the veranda . at breakfast time it would be discreetly set under the planta by the salon ; for dinner , at one o'clock , it would have travel way down the veranda ; for tea it might be under a little tree on the grass . and then Juana would decide that the Niña must take supper , two egg , ranchero , in the dining - room itself , isolate at the corner of the long dining - table mean for fourteen people . 

 the same with the dish . why they should , after wash up in the big bowl in the kitchen for several day , suddenly struggle way down to the lake with the unwashed pot in a basket on Concha 's shoulder , Kate never know . except for the fun of the thing . 

 child ! but , then , not at all child . none of the wonder insouciance of childhood . something dark and cognisant in their soul all the time : some heavy weight of resistance . they work in fit and start , and could be very industrious ; then come day when they lay about on the ground like pig . at time they be merry , seat round on the ground in group , like arabian night , and laugh away . then suddenly resist even merriment in themselves , relapse into the numb gloom . when they be busily work , suddenly , for no reason , throw away the tool , as if resent have give themselves . careless in their moral , always change their love , the man at least resist all the time any real giving of themselves . they do not   want the thing they be pursue . it be the woman who draw they on . and a young man and a girl go down the road from the lake in the dark , teasing and poke each other in excitement , would startle Kate because of their unusualness - the man and woman never walk their sex abroad , as white people do . and the sudden , sexual laugh of the man , so strange a sound of pain and desire , obstinate reluctance , and helpless passion , a noise as if something tear in his breast , be a sound to remember . 

 Kate feel her household a burden . in a sense , they be like parasite , they want to live on her life , and pull she down , pull she down . again , they be so generous with she , so good and gentle , she feel they be wonderful . and then once more she come up against that unconscious , heavy , reptilian indifference in they , indifference and resistance . 

 her servant be the clue to all the native life , for she . the man always together , erect , handsome , balance their great hat on the top of their head and sitting , stand , crouch with a snake - like impassivity . the woman together separately , soft , and as if hide , wrap tight in their dark rebozos . man and woman seem always to be turn their back on one another , as if they do not   want to see one another . no flirting , no courting . only an occasional quick , dark look , the signal of a weapon - like desire , give and take . 

 the woman seem , on the whole , softly callous and determined to go their own way : to change man if they wish . and the man seem not to care very profoundly . but it be the woman who want the man . 

 the native woman , with their long black hair stream down their full , ruddy back , would bathe at one end of the beach , usually wear their chemise , or a little skirt . the man take absolutely no notice . they do not   even look the other way . it be the woman bath , that be all . as if it be , like the charale swimming , just a natural part of the lake life . the man just leave that part of the lake to the woman . and the woman sit in the shallow of the lake , isolate in themselves like moor - fowl , pour water over their head and over their ruddy arm from a gourd scoop . 

 the quiet , unobtrusive , but by no mean down - trodden woman of the peon class . they go their own way , envelop in their rebozos as in their own darkness . they hurry nimbly along , their full cotton skirt swing , chirping and quick like bird . or they sit in the lake with long hair streaming , pour water over themselves : again like bird . or they pass with a curious slow inevitability up the lake - shore , with a heavy red jar of water perch on one shoulder , one arm over the head , hold the rim of the jar . they have to carry all water from the lake to their house . there be no town supply . or , especially on Sunday afternoon , they sit in their doorway de - louse one another . the most resplendent belle , with magnificent black wavy hair , be most thoroughly de - loused . it be as if it be a meritorious public act . 

 the man be the obvious figure . they assert themselves on the air . they be the dominant . usually they be in loose group , talk quietly , or silent : always stand or sit apart , rarely touch one another . often a single man would stand alone at a street corner in his serape , motionless for hour , like some powerful spectre . or a man would lie on the beach as if he have be cast up dead from the water . impassive , motionless , they would sit side by side on the bench of the plaza , not exchange a word . each one isolate in his own fate , his eye black and quick like a snake 's , and as blank . 

 it seem to Kate that the high thing this country might produce would be some powerful relationship of man to man . marriage itself would always be a casual thing . though the man seem very gentle and protective to the little child . then they forget they . 

 but sex itself be a powerful , potent thing , not to be play with or parade . the one mystery . and a mystery great than the individual . the individual hardly count . 

 it be strange to Kate to see the indian hut on the shore , little hole build of straw or corn - stalk , with half - naked child squat on the naked earth floor , and a lousy woman - squalor around , a litter of rag and bone , and a sharp smell of human excrement . the people have no nose . and stand silent and erect not far from the hole of the doorway , the man , handsome and impassive . how could it be , that such a fine - look human male should be so absolutely indifferent , content with such paltry squalor ? 

 but there he be , unconscious . he seem to have life and passion in he . and she know he be strong . no man in the world can carry heavy load on their back , for long distance , than these Indians . she have see an indian trotting down a street with a piano on his back : hold it , also , by a band round his forehead . from his forehead , and on his spine he carry it , trot along . the woman carry with a band round the breast . 

 so there be strength . and apparently , there be passionate life . but no energy . nowhere in Mexico be there any sign of energy . this be , as it be , switch off . 

 even the new artisan class , though it imitate the artisan class of the United States , have no real energy . there be workman 's club . the workman dress up and parade a good girl on their arm . but somehow it seem what it be , only a weak imitation . 

 Kate 's family be increase , without she expect it . one day there arrive from Ocotlan a beautiful ox - eyed girl of about fifteen , wrap in her black cotton rebozo , and somewhat towny in her Madonna - meekness : Maria del Carmen . with she , Julio , a straight and fierce young man of twenty - two . they have just be marry , and have come to Sayula for a visit . Julio be Juana 's cousin . 

 might they sleep in the patio with herself and the girl , be Juana 's request . they would stay only two day . 

 Kate be amazed . Maria del Carmen must have have some spanish blood , her beauty be touch with Spain . she seem even refined and superior . yet she be to sleep out on the ground like a dog , with her young husband . and he , so erect and proud - look , possess nothing in the world but an old serape . 

 ' there be three spare bedroom , ' say Kate . ' they may sleep in one of those . ' 

 the bed be single bed . would they need more blanket ? she ask Juana . 

 no ! they would manage with the one serape of Julio 's . 

 the new family have arrive . Julio be a bricklayer . that be to say , he work build the adobe wall of the little house . he belong to Sayula , and have come back for a visit . 

 the visit continue . Julio would come stride in at midday and at evening ; he be look for work . Maria del Carmen , in her one black dress , would squat on the floor and pat tortillas . she be allow to cook they in Juana 's kitchen hole . and she talk and laugh with the girl . at night , when Julio be home , he would lie on the ground with his back to the wall , impassive , while Maria del Carmen fondle his thick black hair . 

 they be in love . but even now , he be not yield to his love . 

 she want to go back to Ocotlan , where she be at home , and more a señorita than here in Sayula . but he refuse . there be no money : the young ménage live on about five american cent a day . 

 Kate be sewing . Maria del Carmen , who do not   even know how to put a chemise together , watch with great eye . Kate teach she , and buy a length of cotton material . Maria del Carmen be sew herself a dress ! 

 Julio have get work at a peso a day . the visit continue . Kate think Julio be not   very nice with Maria del Carmen : his quiet voice be so overbearing in command when he speak to she . and Maria del Carmen , who be a bit towny , do not take it well . she brood a little . 

 the visit stretch into week . and now Juana be get a bit tired of her relative . 

 but Julio have get a bit of money . he have rent a little one - room adobe house , at one peso fifty per week . Maria del Carmen be go to move into her own home . 

 Kate see the new outfit get together . it consist of one straw mat , three cooking - plate of earthenware , five bit of native crockery , two wooden spoon , one knife and Julio 's old blanket . that be all . but Maria del Carmen be move in . 

 Kate present she with a large old eiderdown , whose silk be rather worn , a couple of bowl , and a few more bit of crockery . Maria del Carmen be set up . good ! good ! oh good ! Kate hear her voice down the patio . I have get a coverlet ! I have get a coverlet ! 

 in the rainy season , the night can be very cold , owe to evaporation . then the native lie through the small hour like lizard , numb and prostrate with cold . they be lie on the damp earth on a thin straw mat , with a corner of an old blanket to cover they . and the same terrible inertia make they endure it , without try to make any change . they could carry in corn husk or dry banana leaf for a bed . they could even cover themselves with banana leaf . 

 but no ! on a thin mat on damp cold earth they lie and tremble with cold , night after night , night after night , night after night . 

 but Maria del Carmen be a bit towny . oh good ! oh good ! I have   get a coverlet ! 

 

 

 CHAPTER X 

 Don Ram n and Doña Carlota 

 

 Kate have be in Sayula ten day before she have any sign from Don Ram n. she have be out in a boat on the lake , and have see his house , round the bend of the western point . it be a reddish - and - yellow two - storey house with a little stone basin for the boat , and a mango grove between it and the lake . among the tree , away from the lake , be the black adobe hut , two row , of the peon . 

 the hacienda have once be a large one . but it have be irrigate from the hill , and the revolution have break all the aqueduct . only a small supply of water be available . then Don Ram n have have enemy in the Government . so that a good deal of his land be take away to be divide among the peon . now , he have only some three hundred acre . the two hundred acre along the lake - shore be mostly lose to he . he work a few acre of fruit land round the house , and in a tiny valley just in the hill he raise sugar - cane . on the patch of the mountain slope little patch of maize be to be see . 

 but Doña Carlota have money . she be from Torreon and draw still a good income from the mine . 

 a mozo come with a note from Don Ram n : might he bring his wife to call on Kate ? 

 Doña Carlota be a thin , gentle , wide - eyed woman , with a slightly startled expression , and soft , brownish hair . she be pure European in extraction , of a spanish father and french mother : very different from the usual stout , over - powder , ox - like mexican matron . her face be pale , fade , and without any make - up at all . her thin , eager figure have something english about it , but her strange , wide brown eye be not english . she speak only Spanish - or French . but her Spanish be so slow and distinct and slightly plaintive , that Kate understand she at once . 

 the two woman understand one another quickly , but be a little nervous of one another . Doña Carlota be delicate and sensitive like a Chihuahua dog , and with the same slightly prominent eye . Kate feel she have rarely meet a woman with such a dog - like finesse of gentleness . and the two woman talk . ram n , large and muted , keep himself in reserve . it be as if the two woman rush together to unite against his silence and his powerful , different significance . 

 Kate know at once that Doña Carlota love he , but with a love that be now nearly all will . she have worship he , and she have have to leave off worship he . she have have to question he . and she would never now cease from question . 

 so he sit apart , a little constrain , his handsome head hang a little , and his dark , sensitive hand dangle between his thigh . 

 ' I have such a wonderful time ! ' Kate say suddenly to he . ' I dance a dance round the drum with the Men of Quetzalcoatl . ' 

 ' I hear , ' he say , with a rather stiff smile . 

 Doña Carlota understand English , though she would not speak it . 

 ' you dance with the man of Quetzalcoatl ! ' she say in Spanish , in a pained voice . ' but , Señora , why do you do such a thing ? oh why ? ' 

 ' I be fascinated , ' say Kate . 

 ' no , you must not be fascinate . no ! no ! it be not good . I tell you . I be so sorry my husband interest himself in this thing . I be so sorry . ' 

 Juana be bring a bottle of vermouth : all that Kate have to offer her visitor , in the morning . 

 ' you go to see your boy in the United States ? ' say Kate to Doña Carlota . ' how be they ? ' 

 ' oh , well , thank you . they be well ; that is , the young be very delicate . ' 

 ' you do not   bring he home ? ' 

 ' no ! no ! I think they be well at school . here - here - there be so many thing to trouble they . no ! but they will come home next month , for the vacation . ' 

 ' how nice ! ' say Kate . ' then I shall see they . they will be here , will not   they ? - on the lake ? ' 

 ' well ! - I be not sure . perhaps for a little while . you see I be so busy in Mexico with my Cuna . ' 

 ' what be a Cuna ? ' say Kate ; she only know it be the Spanish for cradle . 

 it turn out to be a foundling ' home , run by a few obscure carmelite sister . and Doña Carlota be the director . Kate gather that Don Ram n 's wife be an intense , almost exalt Catholic . she exalt herself in the Church , and in her work for the Cuna . 

 ' there be so many child bear in Mexico , ' say Doña Carlota , ' and so many die . if only we could save they , and equip they for life . we do a little , all we can . ' 

 it seem the waste , unwanted baby could be deliver in at the door of the Cuna , like parcel . the mother have only to knock , and hand in the little live bundle . 

 ' it save so many mother from neglect their baby , and let they die , ' say Doña Carlota . ' then we do what we can . if the mother do not   leave a name , I name the child . very often I do . the mother just hand over a little naked thing , sometimes without a name or a rag to cover it . and we never ask . ' 

 the child be not all keep in the home . only a small number . of the other , some decent indian woman be pay a small sum to take the child into her home . every month she must come with the little one to the Cuna , to receive her wage . the Indians be so very rarely unkind to child . Careless , yes . but rarely , rarely unkind . 

 in former day , Doña Carlota say , nearly every well - bear lady in Mexico would receive one or more of these foundling into her home , and have it bring up with the family . it be the loose , patriarchal generosity innate in the bosom of the Spanish - Mexicans . but now , few child be adopt . instead , they be teach as far as possible to be carpenter or gardener , or house - servant , or , among the girl , dressmaker , even school - teacher . 

 Kate listen with uneasy interest . she feel there be so much real human feeling in this mexican charity : she be almost rebuke . perhaps what Doña Carlota be do be the good that could be do , in this half - wild , helpless country . at the same time , it be such a forlorn hope , it make one 's heart sink . 

 and Doña Carlota , confident as she be in her good work , still have just a bit the look of a victim ; a gentle , sensitive , slightly startled victim . as if some secret enemy drain her blood . 

 Don Ram n sit there impassive , listen without heeding ; solid and unmove against the charitable quiver of his wife 's emotion . he let she do as she would . but against her work and against her flow he be in silent , heavy , unchanging opposition . she know this , and tremble in her nervous eagerness , as she talk to Kate about the Cuna , and win Kate 's sympathy . till it seem to she that there be something cruel in Don Ram n 's passive , mask poise . an impassive male cruelty , changeless as a stone idol . 

 ' now will not   you come and spend the day with I while I be here with Don Ram n ? ' say Doña Carlota . ' the house be very poor and rough . it be no long what it use to be . but it be your house if you will come . ' 

 Kate accept , and say she would prefer to walk out . it be only four mile , and surely she would be safe , with Juana . 

 ' I will send a man to come with you , ' say Don Ram n. ' it might not be quite safe . ' 

 ' where be General Viedma ? ' ask Kate . 

 ' we shall try to get he out when you come , ' reply Doña Carlota . ' I be so very fond of Don Cipriano , I have know he for many year , and he be the godfather of my young son . but now he be in command of the Guadalajara division , he be not very often able to come out . ' 

 ' I wonder why he be a general ? ' say Kate . ' he seem to I too human . ' 

 ' oh , but he be very human too . but he be a general ; yes , yes , he want to be in command of the soldier . and I tell you , he be very strong . he have great power with his regiment . they believe in he , oh , they believe in he . he have that power , you know , that some of the high type of Indians have , to make many other want to follow they and fight for they . you know ? Don Cipriano be like that . you can never change he . but I think a woman might be wonderful for he . he have live so without any woman in his life . he will not   care about they . ' 

 ' what do he care about ? ' ask Kate . 

 ' ah ! ' Doña Carlota start as if sting . then she glance quickly , involuntarily at her husband , as she add : ' I do not   know . really , I do not   know . ' 

 ' the Men of Quetzalcoatl , ' say Don Ram n heavily , with a little smile . 

 but Doña Carlota seem to be able to take all the ease and the banter out of he . he seem stiff and a bit stupid . 

 ' ah , there ! there ! there you have it ! the Men of Quetzalcoatl - that be a nice thing for he to care about ! a nice thing , I say , ' flutter Doña Carlota , in her gentle , fragile , scold way . and it be evident to Kate that she adore both the man , and tremble in opposition to their wrongness , and would never give in to they . 

 to ram n it be a terrible burden , his wife 's quivering , absolute , blind opposition , take in conjunction with her helpless adoration . 

 a man - servant appear at nine o'clock one morning , to accompany Kate to the hacienda , which be call Jamiltepec . he have a basket , and have be shop in the market . an elderly man , with grey in his moustache , he have bright young eye and seem full of energy . his bare foot in the huarache be almost black with exposure , but his clothe be brilliantly white . 

 Kate be glad to be walk . the one depress thing about life in the village be that one could not walk out into the country . there be always the liability to be hold up or attack . and she have walk already , as far as possible , in every direction , in the neighbourhood of the village , accompany usually by Ezequiel . now she be begin to feel a prisoner . 

 she be glad , then , to be set off . the morning be clear and hot , the pale brown lake quite still , like a phantom . People be move on the beach , in the distance tiny , like dot of white : white dot of man follow the faint dust of donkey . she wonder often why humanity be like speck in the mexican landscape ; just speck of life . 

 they pass from the lake shore to the rough , dusty road go west , between the steep slope of the hill and the bit of flat by the lake . for almost a mile there be villa , most of they shut up fast , some of they smash , with broken wall and smash window . only flower bloom in mass above the rubble . 

 in the empty place be flimsy straw hut of the native , haphazard , as if blow there . by the road under the hill be black - grey adobe hut , like box , and fowl run about , and brown pig or grey pig spot with black careered and grunt , and half - naked child , dark orange - brown , trot or lie flat on their face in the road , their little naked posterior hunch up , fast asleep . already asleep again . 

 the house be many of they be re - thatched , or the tile roof be be patch by man who assume a great air of importance at have undertake such a task . they be pretend to hurry , too , because the real rain might begin any day . and in the little stony level by the lake , the land be be scratch - plough by a pair of oxen and a lump of pointed wood . 

 but this part of the road Kate know . she know the fine villa on the knoll , with its tuft of palm , and the lay - out avenue that be lay out , indeed , as the dead be , to crumble back again . she be glad to be past the villa , where the road come down to the lake again , under big shady tree that have twist , wriggly bean . on the left be the water , the colour of turtledove , lap the pale fawn stone . at a water - hole of a stream in the beach , a cluster of woman be busily wash clothe . in the shallow of the lake itself two woman sit bath , their black hair hang dense and wet . a little far along a man be wad slowly , stop to throw his round net skilfully upon the water , then slowly stoop and gather it in , pick out the tiny , glittery fish call charale . strangely silent and remote everything , in the gleam morning , as if it be some distant period of time . 

 a little breeze be come from the lake , but the deep dust underfoot be hot . on the right the hill rise precipitous , baked and yellowish , give back the sun and the intense dryness , and exhale the faint , desiccated , peculiar smell of Mexico , that smell as if the earth have sweat itself dry . 

 all the time string of donkey trot laden through the dust , their driver stalk erect and rapid behind , watch with eye like black hole , but always answer Kate 's salute with a respectful Adi s ! and Juana echo her laconic Adi sn ! she be limp , and she think it horrible of Kate to walk four mile , when they might have struggle out in an old hire motor - car , or go in a boat , or even ride donkey - back . 

 but to go on foot ! Kate could hear all her criada 's feeling in the drawled , sardonic Adi sn ! but the man behind strode bravely and call cheerfully . his pistol be prominent in his belt . 

 a bluff of yellow rock come jut at the road . the road wound round it , and into a piece of flat open country . there be field of dry stone , and hedge of dusty thorn and cactus . to the left the bright green of the willow by the lake - shore . to the right the hill swerve inland , to meet the sheer , fluted side of dry mountain . away ahead , the hill curve back at the shore , and a queer little crack or niche show . this crack in the hill lead from Don Ram n 's shore - property to the little valley where he grow the sugar - cane . and where the hill approach the lake again there be a dark clustering of mango - tree , and the red upper storey of the hacienda house . 

 ' there it be ! ' cry the man behind . ' Jamiltepec , Señorita . ' La hacienda de Don Ram n ! ' 

 and his eye shine as he say the name . he be a proud peon , and he really seem happy . 

 ' look ! how far ! ' cry Juana . 

 ' another time , ' say Kate , ' I shall come alone , or with Ezequiel . ' 

 ' no , Niña ! do not   say so . only my foot hurt this morning . ' 

 ' yes . well not to bring you . ' 

 ' no , Niña ! I like to come , very much ! ' 

 the tall windmill fan for draw up water from the lake be spin gaily . a little valley come down from the niche in the hill , and at the bottom a little water run . towards the lake , where this valley flatten out , be a grove of banana - plant , screen a little from the lake breeze by a vivid row of willow - tree . and on the top of the slope , where the road run into the shade of mango - trees , be the two row of adobe hut , like a village , set a little back from the road . 

 woman be come up between the tree , on the patch from the lake , with jar of water on their shoulder ; child be play around the door , squat with little naked posterior in deep dust ; and here and there a goat be tether . man in soil white clothe be lounge , with fold arm and one leg cross in front of the other , against the corner of a house , or crouch under the wall . not by any mean dolce far niente . they seem to be wait , eternally wait for something . 

 ' that way , Señorita ! ' call the man with the basket , run to her side and indicate the smoother road slop down between some big tree , towards the white gate of the hacienda . ' we be here ! ' 

 always he speak with pleased delight , as if the place be a wonder - place to he . 

 the big door of the zaguán , the entrance , stand open , and in the shade of the entrance - way a couple of little soldier be seat . across the clear , straw - litter space in front of the gate two peon be trot , each with a big bunch of banana on his head . the soldier say something , and the two peon halt in their trotting , and slowly turn under their yellow - green load , to look back at Kate and Juana and the man Martin , approach down the road . then they turn again and trot into the courtyard , barefoot . 

 the soldier stand up . Martin , trot at Kate 's side again , usher she into the arched entrance , where the ox - wagon rumble through have wear deep rut . Juana come behind , make a humble noise . 

 Kate find herself in a big , barren yard , that seem empty . there be high wall on the three side , with shed and stable . the fourth side , face , be the house , with heavily - bar window look on to the courtyard , but with no door . instead , there be another zaguán , or passage with closed door pierce the house . 

 Martin trot ahead to knock on the closed door . Kate stand look round at the big yard . in a shed in one corner , four half - naked man be pack bunch of banana . a man in the shade be saw pole , and two man in the sun be unload tile from a donkey . in a corner be a bullock - wagon , and a pair of big black - and - white oxen stand with head press down , wait . 

 the big door open , and Kate enter the second zaguán . it be a wide entrance way , with stair go up on one side , and Kate linger to look through the open iron gate in front of she , down a formal garden hem in with huge mango - tree , to the lake , with its little artificial harbour where two boat be moor . the lake seem to give off a great light , between the dark wall of mango . 

 at the back of the new - comer the servant woman close the big door on to the yard , then wave Kate to the stair . 

 ' pass this way , Señorita . ' 

 a bell tinkle above . Kate climb the stone stair . and there above she be Doña Carlota , in white muslin and with white shoe and stocking , her face look curiously yellow and fade by contrast . her soft brown hair be low over her ear , and she hold out her thin brownish arm with queer effusiveness . 

 ' so you have come ! and you have walk , walk all the way ? oh , imagine walk in so much sun and dust ! come , come in and rest . ' 

 she take Kate 's hand and lead she across the open terrace at the top of the stair . 

 ' it be beautiful here , ' say Kate . 

 she stand on the terrace , look out past the mango - tree at the lake . a distant sailing - canoe be go down the breeze , on the pallid , unreal water . away across rise the bluish , grooved mountain , with the white speck of a village : far away in the morning it seem , in another world , in another life , in another mode of time . 

 ' what be that village ? ' Kate ask . 

 ' that one ? that one there ? it be San Ildefonso , ' say Doña Carlota , in her flutter eagerness . 

 ' but it be beautiful here ! ' Kate repeat . 

 ' Hermoso - sí ! Sí , bonito ! ' quaver the other woman uneasily , always answer in Spanish . 

 the house , reddish and yellow in colour , have two short wing towards the lake . the terrace , with green plant on the terrace wall , go round the three side , the roof above support by big square pillar that rise from the ground . down below , the pillar make a sort of cloister around the three side , and in the little stone court be a pool of water . beyond , the rather neglect formal garden with strong sun and deep mango - shade . 

 ' come , you will need to rest ! ' say Doña Carlota . 

 ' I would like to change my shoe , ' say Kate . 

 she be show into a high , simple , rather bare bedroom with red - tile floor . there she change into the shoe and stocking Juana have carry , and rest a little . 

 as she lay rest , she hear the dull thud - thud of the tom - tom drum , but , save the crowing of a cock in the distance , no other sound on the bright , yet curiously hollow mexican morning . and the drum , thud with its dull , black insistence , make she uneasy . it sound like something come over the horizon . 

 she rise , and go into the long , high salon where Doña Carlota be sit talk to a man in black . the salon , with its three window - door open on to the terrace , its worn , red floor tile with old square brick , its high wall colour - wash a faint green , and the many - beam ceiling whitewash ; and with its bareness of furniture ; seem like part of the out - of - door , like some garden - arbour put for shade . the sense , which house have in hot climate , of be just three wall wherein one linger for a moment , then go away again . 

 as Kate enter the room , the man in black rise and shake hand with Doña Carlota , bow very low and deferential . then with a deferential sideways sort of bow to Kate , he vanish out of door . 

 ' come ! ' say Doña Carlota to Kate . ' be you sure now you be rest ? ' and she pull forward one of the cane rock - chair that have poise itself in the room , en route to nowhere . 

 ' perfectly ! ' say Kate . ' how still it seem here ! except for the drum . perhaps it be the drum that make it seem so still . though I always think the lake make a sort of silence . ' 

 ' ah , the drum ! ' cry Doña Carlota , lift her hand with a gesture of nervous , spend exasperation . ' I can not hear it . no , I can not , I can not bear to hear it . ' 

 and she rock herself in a sudden access of agitation . 

 ' it do hit one rather below the belt , ' say Kate . ' what be it ? ' 

 ' ah , do not ask I ! it be my husband . ' 

 she make a gesture of despair , and rock herself almost into unconsciousness . 

 ' be Don Ram n drum ? ' 

 ' drum ? ' Doña Carlota seem to start . ' no ! oh no ! he be not drum , himself . he bring down two Indians from the north to do that . ' 

 ' do he ! ' say Kate , non - committal . 

 but Doña Carlota be rock in a sort of semi - consciousness . then she seem to pull herself together . 

 ' I must talk to somebody , I must ! ' she say , suddenly straighten herself in her chair , her face creamy and crease , her soft brown hair sag over her ear , her brown eye oddly desperate . ' may I talk to you ? ' 

 ' do ! ' say Kate , rather uneasy . 

 ' you know what Ram n be do ? ' she say , look at Kate almost furtively , suspiciously . 

 ' do he want to bring back the old god ? ' say Kate vaguely . 

 ' ah ! ' cry Doña Carlota , again with that desperate , fly jerk of her hand . ' as if it be possible ! as if it be possible ! the old god ! imagine it , Señora ! the old god ! why , what be they ? nothing but dead illusion . and ugly , repulsive illusion ! ah ! I always think my husband such a clever man , so superior to I ! ah , it be terrible to have to change one 's idea ! this be such nonsense . how dare he ! how dare he take such nonsense seriously ! how do he dare ! ' 

 ' do he believe in it himself ? ' ask Kate . 

 ' himself ? but , Señora - ' and Doña Carlota give a pitiful , pity smile of contempt . ' how could he ! as if it be possible . after all , he be an educate man ! how could he believe in such nonsense ! ' 

 ' then why do he do it ? ' 

 ' why ? why ? ' there be a tone of unspeakable weariness in Doña Carlota 's voice . ' I wish I know . I think he have go insane , as Mexicans do . insane like Francisco Villa , the bandit . ' 

 Kate think of the pug - face notorious Pancho Villa in wonder , unable to connect he with Don Ram n. 

 ' all the Mexicans , as soon as they rise above themselves , go that way , ' say Doña Carlota . ' their pride get the well of they . and then they understand nothing , nothing but their own foolish will , their will to be very , very important . it be just the male vanity . do not   you think , Señora , that the beginning and the end of a man be his vanity ? do not   you think it be just against this danger that Christ come , to teach man a proper humility ? to teach they the sin of pride . but that be why they hate Christ so much , and his teaching . first and last , they want their own vanity . ' 

 Kate have often think so herself . her own final conclusion about man be that they be the vanity of vanity , nothing but vanity . they must be flatter and make to feel great : nothing else . 

 ' and now , my husband want to go to the other extreme of Jesus . he want to exalt pride and vanity high than God . ah , it be terrible , terrible ! and foolish like a little boy ! ah , what be a man but a little boy who need a nurse and a mother ! ah , Señora , I can not   bear it . ' 

 Doña Carlota cover her face with her hand , as if swoon . 

 ' but there be something wonderful , too , about Don Ram n , ' say Kate coaxingly : though at the moment she hat he . 

 ' wonderful ! ah yes , he have gift . he have great gift ! but what be gift to a man who pervert they ! ' 

 ' tell I what you think he really want , ' say Kate . 

 ' power ! just power ! just foolish , wicked power . as if there have not be enough horrible , wicked power let loose in this country . but he - he - want to be beyond they all . he - he - he want to be worship . to be worship ! to be worship ! a God ! he , whom I have   hold , I have   hold in my arm ! he be a child , as all man be child . and now he want - to be worship - ! ' she go off into a shrill , wild laughter , cover her face with her hand , and laugh shrilly , her laughter punctuate by hollow , ghastly sob . 

 Kate sit in absolute dismay , wait for the other woman to recover herself . she feel cold against these hysteric , and exert all her heavy female will to stop they . 

 ' after all , ' she say , when Doña Carlota become quiet , her face in her hand , ' it be not   your fault . we can not   be responsible , even for our husband . I know that , since my husband die , and I could not   prevent he die . and then - then I learn that no matter how you love another person , you can not   really do anything , you be helpless when it come to the last thing . you have to leave they to themselves , when they want to die : or when they want to do thing that seem foolish , so , so foolish , to a woman . ' 

 Doña Carlota look up at the other woman . 

 ' you love your husband very much - and he die ? ' she say softly . 

 ' I do love he . and I shall never , never love another man . I could not . I have   lose the power . ' 

 ' and why do he die ? ' 

 ' ah , even that be really his own fault . he break his own soul and spirit , in those irish politic . I know it be wrong . what do Ireland matter , what do nationalism and all that rubbish matter , really ! and revolution ! they be so , so stupid and vieux jeu . ah ! it would have be so much well if Joachim have be content to live his life in peace , with I . it could be so jolly , so lovely . and I try and try and try with he . but it be no good . he want to kill himself with that beastly irish business , and I try in vain to prevent he . ' 

 Doña Carlota star slowly at Kate . 

 ' as a woman must try to prevent a man , when he be go wrong , ' she say . ' as I try to prevent Ram n. as he will get himself kill , as surely as they all do , down to Francisco Villa . and when they be dead , what good be it all ? ' 

 ' when they be dead , ' say Kate , ' then you know it be no good . ' 

 ' you do ! oh , Señora , if you think you can help I with Ram n , do help I , do ! for it mean the death either of I or he . and I shall die , though he be wrong . unless he get kill . ' 

 ' tell I what he want to do , ' say Kate . ' what do he think he want to do , anyhow ? - like my husband think he want to make a free Ireland and a great irish people . but I know all the time , the Irish be not   a great people any more , and you can not   make they free . they be only good at destroy - just mere stupid destroying . how can you make a people free , if they be not   free ? if something inside they compel they to go on destroy ! ' 

 ' I know ! I know ! and that be Ram n. he want to destroy even Jesus and the Blessed Virgin , for this people . imagine it ! to destroy Jesus and the blessed Virgin ! the last thing they have   get ! ' 

 ' but what do he say himself , that he want to do ? ' 

 ' he say he want to make a new connection between the people and God . he say himself , God be always God . but man lose his connection with God . and then he can never recover it again , unless some new Saviour come to give he his new connection . and every new connection be different from the last , though God be always God . and now , Ram n say , the people have lose God . and the Saviour can not lead they to he any more . there must be a new Saviour with a new vision . but ah , Señora , that be not true for I . God be love , and if Ram n would only submit to love , he would know that he have find God . but he be perverse . ah , if we could be together , quietly loving , and enjoy the beautiful world , and wait in the love of God ! ah , Señora , why , why , why can not   he see it ? oh , why can not   he see it ! instead of do all these - ' 

 the tear come to Doña Carlota 's eye , and spill over her cheek . Kate also be in tear , mop her face . 

 ' it be no good ! ' she say , sob . ' I know it be no good , no matter what we do . they do not   want to be happy and peaceful . they want this strife and these other false , horrible connection . it be no good whatever we do ! that be what be so bitter , so bitter ! ' 

 the two woman sit in their bent - wood rocking - chair and just sob . and as they sob , they hear a step come along the terrace , the faint swish of the sandal of the people . 

 it be Don Ram n , draw unconsciously by the emotional disturbance of the two woman . 

 Doña Carlota hastily dab her eye , and her sniffing nose , Kate blow her nose like a trumpet , and Don Ram n stand in the doorway . 

 he be dress in white , dazzle , in the costume of the peon , the white blouse jacket and the white , wide pantaloon trouser . but the white be linen , slightly starch , and brilliant , almost unnatural in its whiteness . from under his blouse , in front , hang the end of a narrow woollen sash , white , with blue and black bar , and a fringe of scarlet . and on his naked foot be the plait huarache , of blue and black strip of leather , with thick , red - dye sol . his loose trouser be bind round the ankle with blue , red , and black woollen braid . 

 Kate glance at he as he stand in the sun , so dazzingly white , that his black hair and dark face look like a hole in the atmosphere . he come forward , the end of his sash swing against his thigh , his sandal slightly swish . 

 ' I be pleased to see you , ' he say , shake hand with Kate . ' how do you come ? ' 

 he drop into a chair , and sit quite still . the two woman hang their head , hide their face . the presence of the man seem to put their emotion out of joint . he ignore all the sign of their discomfort , overlook it with a powerful will . there be a certain strength in his presence . they all cheer up a bit . 

 ' you do not   know my husband have become one of the people - a real peon - a Señor Peon , like Count Tolstoy become a Señor Moujik ? ' say Doña Carlota , with an attempt at raillery . 

 ' anyway it suit he , ' say Kate . 

 ' there ! ' say Don Ram n. ' give the devil his due . ' 

 but there be something unyielding , unbend about he . he laugh and speak to the woman only from a surface self . underneath , powerful and inscrutable , he make no connection with they . 

 so it be at lunch . there be a flit conversation , with interval of silence . it be evident that Ram n be think in another world , in the silence . and the ponderous stillness of his will , work in another sphere , make the woman feel overshadowed . 

 ' the Señora be like I , Ram n , ' say Doña Carlota . ' she can not bear the sound of that drum . must it play any more this afternoon ? ' 

 there be a moment 's pause , before he answer : 

 ' after four o'clock only . ' 

 ' must we have that noise to - day ? ' Carlota persist . 

 ' why not to - day like other day ! ' he say . but a certain darkness be on his brow , and it be evident he want to leave the presence of the two woman . 

 ' because the Señora be here : and I be here : and we neither of we like it . and to - morrow the Señora will not be here , and I shall be go back to Mexico . so why not spare we to - day ! surely you can show we this consideration . ' 

 Ram n look at she , and then at Kate . there be anger in his eye . and Kate could almost feel , in his powerful chest , the big heart swell with a suffocation of anger . both woman keep mum . but it please they , anyhow , that they could make he angry . 

 ' why not row with Mrs Leslie on the lake ! ' he say , with quiet control . 

 but under his dark brow be a level , indignant anger . 

 ' we may not want to , ' say Carlota . 

 then he do what Kate have not know anyone to do before . he withdraw his consciousness away from they as they all three sit at table , leave the two woman , as it be , seat outside a closed door , with nothing more happen . Kate feel for the time startle and forlorn , then a slow anger burn in her warm ivory cheek . 

 ' oh , yes , ' she say . ' I can start home before then . ' 

 ' no ! no ! ' say Doña Carlota , with a spanish wail . ' do not   leave I . stay with I till evening , and help I to amuse Don Cipriano . he be come to supper . ' 

 

 

 CHAPTER XI 

 Lords of the Day and Night 

 

 when lunch be over , Ram n go to his room , to sleep for an hour . it be a hot , still afternoon . cloud be stand erect and splendid , at the west end of the lake , like messenger . Ram n go into his room and close the window - door and the shutter , till it be quite dark , save for yellow pencil of light that stand like substance on the darkness , from the crack of the shutter . 

 he take off his clothe , and in the darkness thrust his clenched fist upwards above his head , in a terrible tension of stretch , upright prayer . in his eye be only darkness , and slowly the darkness revolve in his brain , too , till he be mindless . only a powerful will stretch itself and quiver from his spine in an immense tension of prayer . stretch the invisible bow of the body in the darkness with inhuman tension , erect , till the arrow of the soul , mindless , shoot to the mark , and the prayer reach its goal . 

 then , suddenly , the clenched and quiver arm drop , the body relax into softness . the man have reach his strength again . he have break the cord of the world , and be free in the other strength . 

 softly , delicately , take great care not to think , not to remember , not to disturb the poisonous snake of mental consciousness , he pick up a thin , fine blanket , wrap it round he , and lie down on the pile of mat on the floor . in an instant he be asleep . 

 he sleep in complete oblivion for about an hour . then suddenly he open his eye wide . he see the velvety darkness , and the pencil of light go frail . the sun have move . listen , there seem not a sound in the world : there be no world . 

 then he begin to hear . he hear the faint rumble of an ox - wagon : then leave in a wind : then a faint tap noise : then the creak of some bird call . 

 he rise and quickly dress in the dark , and throw open the door . it be mid - afternoon , with a hot wind blow , and cloud rear up dark and bronze in the west , the sun hide . but the rain would not fall yet . he take a big straw hat and balance it on his head . it have a round crest of black and white and blue feather , like an eye , or a sun , in front . he hear the low sound of woman talk . ah , the strange woman ! he have forget she . and Carlota ! Carlota be here ! he think of she for a moment , and of her curious opposition . then , before he could be angry , he lift his breast again in the black , mindless prayer , his eye go dark , and the sense of opposition leave he . 

 he go quickly , driftingly along the terrace to the stone stair that lead down to the inner entrance - way . go through to the courtyard , he see two man pack bale of banana upon donkey , under a shed . the soldier be sleep in the zaguán . through the open door , up the avenue of tree , he could see an ox - wagon slowly retreat . within the courtyard there be the sharp ringing of metal hammer on an anvil . it come from a corner where be a smithy , where a man and a boy be work . in another shed a carpenter be plan wood . 

 Don Ram n stand a moment to look around . this be his own world . his own spirit be spread over it like a soft , nourishing shadow , and the silence of his own power give it peace . 

 the man work be almost instantly aware of his presence . one after the other the dark , hot face glance up at he , and glance away again . they be man , and his presence be wonderful to they ; but they be afraid to approach he , even by star at he . they work the quick for have see he , as if it give they new life . 

 he go across to the smithy , where the boy be blow the old - fashioned bellow , and the man be hammer a piece of metal , with quick , light blow . the man work on without lift his head , as the patr n draw near . 

 ' it be the bird ? ' say Ram n , stand watch the piece of metal , now cold upon the anvil . 

 ' yes , Patr n ! it be the bird . be it right ? ' and the man look up with black , bright , wait eye . 

 the smith lift with the tong the black , flat , tongue - shape piece of metal , and Ram n look at it a long time . 

 ' I put the wing on after , ' say the smith . 

 Ram n trace with his dark , sensitive hand an imaginary line , outside the edge of the iron . three time he do it . and the movement fascinate the smith . 

 ' a little more slender - so ! ' say Ram n. 

 ' yes , Patr n ! yes ! yes ! I understand , ' say the man eagerly . 

 ' and the rest ? ' 

 ' here it be ! ' the man point to two hoop of iron , one small than the other , and to some flat disc of iron , triangular in shape . 

 ' lay they on the ground . ' 

 the man put the hoop on the ground , one within the other . then , take the triangular disc , he place they with quick , sensitive hand , so that their basis be upon the outer circle , and their apex touch the inner . there be seven . and thus they make a seven - pointed sun of the space inside . 

 ' now the bird , ' say Ram n. 

 the man quickly take the long piece of iron : it be the rudimentary form of a bird , with two foot , but , as yet without wing . he place it in the centre of the inner circle , so that the foot touch the circle and the crest of the head touch opposite . 

 ' so ! it fit , ' say the man . 

 Ram n stand look at the big iron symbol on the ground . he hear the door of the inner entrance : Kate and Carlota walk across the courtyard . 

 ' I take it away ? ' ask the workman quickly . 

 ' never mind , ' Ram n answer quietly . 

 Kate stand and star at the great wreath of iron on the ground . 

 ' what be it ? ' she ask brightly . 

 ' the bird within the sun . ' 

 ' be that a bird ? ' 

 ' when it have wing . ' 

 ' ah , yes ! when it have wing . and what be it for ? ' 

 ' for a symbol to the people . ' 

 ' it be pretty . ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' ram n ! ' say Doña Carlota , ' will you give I the key for the boat ? Martin will row we out . ' 

 he produce the key from under his sash . 

 ' where do you get that beautiful sash ? ' ask Kate . 

 it be the white sash with blue and brown - black bar , and with a heavy red fringe . 

 ' this ? ' he say . ' we wove it here . ' 

 ' and do you make the sandal too ? ' 

 ' yes ! they be make by Manuel . later I will show you . ' 

 ' oh , I should like to see ! - they be beautiful , do not   you think , Doña Carlota ? ' 

 ' yes ! yes ! it be true . but whether beautiful thing be wise thing , I do not   know . so much I do not   know , Señora . ay , so much ! - and you , do you know what be wise ? ' 

 ' I ? ' say Kate . ' I do not   care very much . ' 

 ' ah ! you do not   care ! - you think Ram n be wise , to wear the peasant ' clothe , and the huarache ? ' for once Doña Carlota be speak in slow English . 

 ' oh , yes ! ' cry Kate . ' he look so handsome ! - man 's clothe be so hideous , and Don Ram n look so handsome in those ! ' with the big hat poise on his head , he have a certain air of nobility and authority . 

 ' ah ! ' cry Doña Carlota , look at the other woman with intelligent , half - scared eye , and swing the key of the boat . ' shall we go to the lake ? ' 

 the two woman depart . ram n , laugh to himself , go out of the gate and across the outer yard , to where a big , barn - like building stand near the tree . he enter the barn , and give a low whistle . it be answer from the loft above , and a trap - door open . Don Ram n go up the step , and find himself in a sort of studio and carpenter 's shop . a fattish young man with curly hair , wear an artist 's blouse , and with mallet and chisel in his hand , greet he . 

 ' how be it go ? ' ask Ram n. 

 ' yes - well - ' 

 the artist be work on a head , in wood . it be large than life , conventionalize . yet under the conventional line the likeness to Ram n reveal itself . 

 ' sit for I for half an hour , ' say the sculptor . 

 Ram n sit in silence , while the other man bend over his model , work in silent concentration . and all the time , Ram n sit erect , almost motionless , with a great stillness of repose and concentration , think about nothing , but throw out the dark aura of power , in the spell of which the artist work . 

 ' that be enough , ' he say at last , quietly rise . 

 ' but give I the pose before you go , ' say the artist . 

 Ram n slowly take off his blouse - skirt , and stand with naked torso , the sash with its blue and black bar tight round his naked waist . for some moment he stand gather himself together . then suddenly , in a concentration of intense , proud prayer , he fling his right arm up above his head , and stand transfix , his left arm hang softly by his side , the finger touch his thigh . and on his face that fix , intense look of pride which be at once a prayer . 

 the artist gaze with wonder , and with an appreciation touch with fear . the other man , large and intense , with big dark eye star with intense pride , yet prayerful , beyond the natural horizon , send a thrill of dread and of joy through the artist . he bow his head as he look . 

 Don Ram n turn to he . 

 ' now you ! ' he say . 

 the artist be afraid . he seem to quail . but he meet Ram n 's eye . and instantly , that stillness of concentration come over he , like a trance . and then suddenly , out of the trance , he shoot his arm aloft , and his fat , pale face take on an expression of peace , a noble , motionless transfiguration , the blue - grey eye calm , proud , reach into the beyond , with prayer . and though he stand in his blouse , with a rather pudgy figure and curly hair , he have the perfect stillness of nobility . 

 ' it be good ! ' say Ram n , bow his head . 

 the artist suddenly change ; Ram n hold out his two hand ; the artist take they in his two hand . then he lift Ram n 's right hand and place the back of it on his brow . 

 ' Adi s ! ' say Ram n , take his blouse again . 

 ' Adi s , Señor ! ' say the artist . 

 and with a proud , white look of joy in his face , he turn again to his work . 

 Ram n visit the adobe house , its yard fence with cane and overshadow by a great mango - tree , where Manuel and his wife and child , and two assistant , be spin and weaving . two little girl be assiduously card white wool and brown wool under a cluster of banana - tree : the wife and a young maiden be spin fine , fine thread . on the line hang dye wool , red , and blue , and green . and under the shed stand Manuel and a youth , weave at two heavy hand - loom . 

 ' how be it go ? ' call Don Ram n. 

 ' Muy bien ! Muy bien ! ' answer Manuel , with that curious look of transfiguration glistening in his black eye and in the smile of his face . ' it be go well , very well , Señor ! ' 

 Ram n pause to look at the fine white serape on the loom . it have a zig - zag border of natural black wool and blue , in little diamond , and the end a complication of blackish and blue diamond - pattern . the man be just begin to do the centre - call the boca , the mouth : and he look anxiously at the design that be tack to the loom . but it be simple : the same as the iron symbol the smith be make : a snake with his tail in his mouth , the black triangle on his back be the outside of the circle : and in the middle , a blue eagle standing erect , with slim wing touch the belly of the snake with their tip , and slim foot upon the snake , within the hoop . 

 Ram n go back to the house , to the upper terrace , and round to the short wing where his room be . he put a fold serape over his shoulder , and go along the terrace . at the end of this wing , project to the lake , be a square terrace with a low , thick wall and a tile roof , and a coral - scarlet bignonia dangle from the massive pillar . the terrace , or loggia , be strew with the native palm - leaf mat , petate , and there be a drum in one corner , with the drum - stick upon it . at the far inner corner go down an enclose stone staircase , with an iron door at the bottom . 

 Ram n stand a while look out at the lake . the cloud be dissolve again , the sheet of water give off a whitish light . in the distance he could see the dancing speck of a boat , probably Martin with the two woman . 

 he take off his hat and his blouse , and stand motionless , naked to the waist . then he lift the drum - stick , and after wait a moment or two , to become still in soul , he sound the rhythmic summon , rather slow , yet with a curious urge in its strong - weak , one - two rhythm . he have get the old barbaric power into the drum . 

 for some time he stand alone , the drum , or tom - tom , lift by its thong against his leg , his right hand drumming , his face expressionless . a man enter , bareheade , run from the inner terrace . he be in the white cotton clothe , snow white , but with a dark serape fold on his shoulder , and he hold a key in his hand . he salute Ram n by put the back of his right hand in front of his eye for a moment , then he go down the stone stairway and open the iron door . 

 immediately man be come up , all dress alike , in the white cotton clothe and the huarache , each with a fold serape over his shoulder . but their sash be all blue , and their sandal blue and white . the sculptor come too , and Mirabal be there , also dress in the cotton clothe . 

 there be seven man , besides Ram n. at the top of the stair , one after another , they salute . then they take their serape , dark brown , with blue eye fill with white , along the edge , and throw they down along the wall , their hat beside they . then they take off their blouse , and fling they on their hat . 

 Ram n leave the drum , and sit down on his own serape , that be white with the blue and black bar , and the scarlet fringe . the drummer sit down and take the drum . the circle of man sit cross - legged , naked to the waist , silent . some be of a dark , ruddy coffee - brown , two be white , Ram n be of a soft creamy brown . they sit in silence for a time , only the monotonous , hypnotic sound of the drum pulsing , touch the inner air . then the drummer begin to sing , in the curious , small , inner voice , that hardly emerge from the circle , sing in the ancient falsetto of the Indians : 

 ' who sleep - shall wake ! who sleep - shall wake ! who tread down the path of the snake shall arrive at the place ; in the path of the dust shall arrive at the place and be dress in the skin of the snake - ' 

 one by one the voice of the man join in , till they be all sing in the strange , blind infallible rhythm of the ancient barbaric world . and all in the small , inward voice , as if they be sing from the old , darkest recess of the soul , not outward , but inward , the soul sing back to herself . 

 they sing for a time in the peculiar unison like a flock of bird that fly in one consciousness . and when the drum shudder for an end , they all let their voice fade out , with the same broad , clap sound in the throat . 

 there be silence . the man turn , speak to one another , laugh in a quiet way . but their daytime voice , and their daytime eye have go . 

 then Ram n 's voice be hear , and the man be suddenly silent , listen with bent head . Ram n sit with his face lift , look far away , in the pride of prayer . 

 ' there be no before and after , there be only now , ' he say , speak in a proud , but inward voice . 

 ' the great Snake coil and uncoil the plasm of his fold , and star appear , and world fade out . it be no more than the change and easing of the plasm . 

 ' I always be , say his sleep . 

 ' as a man in a deep sleep know not , but be , so be the Snake of the coil cosmo , wear its plasm . 

 ' as a man in a deep sleep have no to - morrow , no yesterday , nor to - day , but only be , so be the limpid , far - reach snake of the eternal Cosmos , now , and forever now . 

 ' now , and only now , and forever now . 

 ' but dream arise and fade in the sleep of the Snake . 

 ' and world arise as dream , and be go as dream . 

 ' and man be a dream in the sleep of the Snake . 

 ' and only the sleep that be dreamless breathe I be ! 

 ' in the dreamless now , I be . 

 ' dream arise as they must arise , and man be a dream arise . 

 ' but the dreamless plasm of the Snake be the plasm of a man , of his body , his soul , and his spirit at one . 

 ' and the perfect sleep of the Snake I be be the plasm of a man , who be whole . 

 ' when the plasm of the body , and the plasm of the soul , and the plasm of the spirit be at one , in the Snake I Am . 

 ' I be now . 

 ' be - not be a dream , and shall - be be a dream , like two separate , heavy foot . 

 ' but now , I be . 

 ' the tree put forth their leaf in their sleep , and flower emerge out of dream , into pure I Am . 

 ' the bird forget the stress of their dream , and sing aloud in the now , I be ! I be ! 

 ' for dream have wing and foot , and journey to take , and effort to make . 

 ' but the glimmering snake of the now be wingless and footless , and undivide , and perfectly coil . 

 ' it be thus the cat lie down , in the coil of now , and the cow curve round her nose to her belly , lie down . 

 ' in the foot of a dream the hare run uphill . but when he pause , the dream have pass , he have enter the timeless now , and his eye be the wide I be . 

 ' only man dream , dream , and dream , and change from dream to dream , like a man who toss on his bed . 

 ' with his eye and his mouth he dream , with his hand and his foot , with phallo and heart and belly , with body and spirit and soul , in a tempest of dream . 

 ' and rush from dream to dream , in the hope of the perfect dream . 

 ' but I , I say to you , there be no dream that be perfect , for every dream have an ache and an urge , an urge and an ache . 

 ' and nothing be perfect , save the dream pass out into the sleep , I be . 

 ' when the dream of the eye be darken , and encompass with now . 

 ' and the dream of the mouth resound in the last I Am . 

 ' and the dream of the hand be a sleep like a bird on the sea , that sleep and be lift and shift , and know not . 

 ' and the dream of the foot and the toe touch the core of the world , where the Serpent sleep . 

 ' and the dream of the phallo reach the great I know not . 

 ' and the dream of the body be the stillness of a flower in the dark . 

 ' and the dream of the soul be go in the perfume of now . 

 ' and the dream of the spirit lapse , and lay down its head , and be still with the Morning Star . 

 ' for each dream start out of now , and be accomplish in now . 

 ' in the core of the flower , the glimmering , wakeless Snake . 

 ' and what fall away be a dream , and what accrue be a dream . there be always and only now , now and I be . ' 

 there be silence in the circle of man . outside , the sound of the bullock - wagon could be hear , and from the lake , the faint knocking of oar . but the seven man sit with their head bent , in the semi - trance , listen inwardly . 

 then the drum begin softly to beat , as if of itself . and a man begin to sing , in a small voice : 

 

 the Lord of the Morning Star 
 Stood between the day and the night : 
 as a bird that lift its wing , and stand 
 with the bright wing on the right 
 and the wing of the dark on the left , 
 the Dawn Star stand into sight . 

 Lo ! I be always here ! 
 far in the hollow of space 
 I brush the wing of the day 
 and put light on your face . 
 the other wing brush the dark . 
 but I , I be always in place . 

 Yea , I be always here . I be Lord 
 in every way . and the lord among man 
 see I through the flashing of wing . 
 they see I and lose I again . 
 but lo ! I be always here 
 within ken . 

 the multitude see I not . 
 they see only the waving of wing , 
 the come and go of thing . 
 the cold and the hot . 

 but ye that perceive I between 
 the tremor of night and the day , 
 I make you the Lords of the 
 Way unseen . 

 the path between gulfs of the dark and the steep of the light ; 
 the path like a snake that be go , like the length of a fuse to ignite 
 the substance of shadow , that burst and explode into sight . 

 I be here undeparte . I sit tight 
 between wing of the endless flight , 
 at the depth of the peace and the fight . 

 Deep in the moisture of peace , 
 and far down the muzzle of the fight 
 you shall find I , who be neither increase 
 nor destruction , different quite . 

 I be far beyond 
 the horizon of love and strife . 
 like a star , like a pond 
 that wash the lord of life . 

 

 ' listen ! ' say Ram n , in the stillness . ' we will be master among man , and lord among man . but lord of man and master of man we will not be . listen ! we be lord of the night . lord of the day and night . son of the Morning Star , son of the Evening Star . man of the Morning and the Evening Star . 

 ' we be not lord of man : how can man make we lord ? nor be we master of man , for man be not worth it . 

 ' but I be the Morning and the Evening Star , and lord of the day and the night . by the power that be put in my left hand , and the power that I grasp in my right , I be lord of the two way . 

 ' and my flower on earth be the jasmine flower , and in heaven the flower Hesperus . 

 ' I will not command you , nor serve you , for the snake go crooked to his own house . 

 ' yet I will be with you , so you depart not from yourself . 

 ' there be no giving , and no taking . when the finger that give touch the finger that receive , the Morning Star shin at once , from the contact , and the jasmine gleam between the hand . and thus there be neither give nor taking , nor hand that proffer nor hand that receive , but the star between they be all , and the dark hand and the light hand be invisible on each side . the jasmine take the giving and the receiving in her cup , and the scent of the oneness be fragrant on the air . 

 ' think neither to give nor to receive , only let the jasmine flower . 

 ' let nothing spill from you in excess , let nothing be reive from you . 

 ' and reive nothing away . not even the scent from the rose , nor the juice from the pomegranate , nor the warmth from the fire . 

 ' but say to the rose : Lo ! I take you away from your tree , and your breath be in my nostril , and my breath be warm in your depth . let it be a sacrament between we . 

 ' and beware when you break the pomegranate ; it be sunset you take in your hand . say : I be come , come thou . let the Evening Star stand between we . 

 ' and when the fire burn up and the wind be cold and you spread your hand to the blaze , listen to the flame say : ah ! be it thou ? com thou to I ? Lo , I be go the long journey , down the path of the great snake . but since thou com to I , I come to thee . and where thou fallest into my hand , fall I into thine , and jasmine flower on the burn bush between we . our meeting be the burn bush , whence the jasmine flower . 

 ' reive nothing away , and let nothing be reive from you . for reiver and bereave alike break the root of the jasmine flower , and spit upon the Evening Star . 

 ' take nothing , to say : I have it ! for you can possess nothing , not even peace . 

 ' Nought be possessible , neither gold , nor land , nor love , nor life , nor peace , nor even sorrow nor death , nor yet salvation . 

 ' say of nothing : it be mine . 

 ' say only : it be with I . 

 ' for the gold that be with thee linger as a depart moon , look across space thy way , say : lo ! we be beholden of each other . lo ! for this little while , to each other thou and I be beholden . 

 ' and thy land say to thee : ah , my child of a far - off father ! come , lift I , lift I a little while , that poppy and wheat may blow on the level wind that move between my breast and thine ! then sink with I , and we will make one mound . 

 ' and listen to thy love say : Beloved ! I be mow by thy sword like mow grass , and darkness be upon I , and the tremble of the Evening Star . and to I thou art darkness and nowhere . oh thou , when thou risest up and goest thy way , speak to I , only say : the star rise between we . 

 ' and say to thy life : be I thine ? art thou mine ? be I the blue curve of day around thine uncurved night ? be my eye twilight of neither of we , where the star hang ? be my upper lip the sunset and my low lip the dawn , do the star tremble inside my mouth ? 

 ' and say to thy peace : ah ! risen , deathless star ! already the water of dawn sweep over thee , and wash I away on the flood ! 

 ' and say to thy sorrow : Axe , thou art cut I down ! 

 ' yet do a spark fly from out of thy edge and my wound ! 

 ' cut then , while I cover my face , father of the Star . 

 ' and say to thy strength : Lo , the night be foam up my foot and my loin , day be foam down from my eye and my mouth to the sea of my breast . Lo , they meet ! my belly be a flood of power , that race in down the sluice of bone at my back , and a star hang low on the flood , over a troubled dawn . 

 ' and say to thy death : be it so ! I , and my soul , we come to thee , Evening Star . flesh , go thou into the night . Spirit , farewell , ' tis thy day . leave I now . I go in last nakedness now to the nakedest Star . ' 

 

 

 CHAPTER XII 

 the First Waters 

 

 the man have rise and cover themselves , and put on their hat , and cover their eye for a second , in salute before Ram n , as they depart down the stone stair . and the iron door at the bottom have clang , the doorkeeper have return with the key , lay it on the drum , and softly , delicately depart . 

 still Ram n sit on his serape , lean his naked shoulder on the wall , and close his eye . he be tired , and in that state of extreme separateness which make it very hard to come back to the world . on the outside of his ear he could hear the noise of the hacienda , even the tinkle of tea - spoon , and the low voice of woman , and later , the low , labour sound of a motor - car struggle over the uneven road , then swirl triumphantly into the courtyard . 

 it be hard to come back to these thing . the noise of they sound on the outside of his ear , but inside they be the slow , vast , inaudible roar of the cosmo , like in a sea - shell . it be hard to have to bear the contact of commonplace daily thing , when his soul and body be naked to the cosmo . 

 he wish they would leave he the veil of his isolation awhile . but they would not : especially Carlota . she want he to be present to she : in familiar contact . 

 she be call : ' ram n ! ram n ! have you finish ? Cipriano be here . ' and even so , in her voice be fear , and an overriding temerity . 

 he push back his hair and rise , and very quickly go out , as he be , with naked torso . he do not   want to dress himself into everyday familiarity , since his soul be unfamiliar . 

 they have a tea - table out on the terrace , and Cipriano , in uniform , be there . he get up quickly , and come down the terrace with outstretche arm , his black eye gleam with an intensity almost like pain , upon the face of the other man . and Ram n look back at he with wide , see , yet unchanging eye . 

 the two man embrace , breast to breast , and for a moment Cipriano lay his little blackish hand on the naked shoulder of the big man , and for a moment be perfectly still on his breast . then very softly , he stand back and look at he , say not a word . 

 Ram n abstractedly lay his hand on Cipriano 's shoulder , look down at he with a little smile . 

 ' Qué tal ? " he say , from the edge of his lip . ' how go it ? ' 

 " Bien ! Muy bien ! ' say Cipriano , still gaze into the other man 's face with black , wondering , childlike , search eye , as if he , Cipriano , be search for himself , in Ram n 's face . Ram n look back into Cipriano 's black , indian eye with a faint , kind smile of recognition , and Cipriano hang his head as if to hide his face , the black hair , which he wear rather long and brush sideways , drop over his forehead . 

 the woman watch in absolute silence . then , as the two man begin slowly to come along the terrace to the tea - table , Carlota begin to pour tea . but her hand tremble so much , the teapot wobble as she hold it , and she have to put it down and clasp her hand in the lap of her white muslin dress . 

 ' you row on the lake ? ' say Ram n abstractedly , come up . 

 ' it be lovely ! ' say Kate . ' but hot when the sun come . ' 

 Ram n smile a little , then push his hand through his hair . then , lean one hand on the parapet of the terrace wall , he turn to look at the lake , and a sigh lift his shoulder unconsciously . 

 he stand thus , naked to the waist , his black hair ruffle and splendid , his back to the woman , look out at the lake . Cipriano stand linger beside he . 

 Kate see the sigh lift the soft , quiescent , cream - brown shoulder . the soft , cream - brown skin of his back , of a smooth pure sensuality , make her shudder . the broad , square , rather high shoulder , with neck and head rise steep , proudly . the full - flesh , deep - cheste , rich body of the man make she feel dizzy . in spite of herself , she could not help imagine a knife stick between those pure , male shoulder . if only to break the arrogance of their remoteness . 

 that be it . his nakedness be so aloof , far - off and intangible , in another day . so that to think of it be almost a violation , even to look at it with pry eye . Kate 's heart suddenly shrink in her breast . this be how Salome have look at John . and this be the beauty of John , that he have have ; like a pomegranate on a dark tree in the distance , naked , but not undressed ! forever still and clothe - less , and with another light about it , of a rich day than our paltry , prying , sneak - thieving day . 

 the moment Kate have imagine a knife between his shoulder her heart shrink with grief and shame , and a great stillness come over she . well to take the hush into one 's heart , and the sharp , prying beam out of one 's eye . well to lapse away from one 's own prying , assertive self , into the soft , untrespasse self , to whom nakedness be neither shame nor excitement , but clothe like a flower in its own deep , soft consciousness , beyond cheap awareness . 

 the evening breeze be blow very faintly . sailing - boat be advance through the pearly atmosphere , far off , the sun above have a golden quality . the opposite shore , twenty mile away , be distinct , and yet there seem an opalescent , spume - like haze in the air , the same quality as in the filmy water . Kate could see the white speck of the far - off church tower of Tuliapan . 

 below , in the garden below the house , be a thick grove of mango - tree . among the dark and reddish leaf of the mangos , scarlet little bird be bustle , like suddenly - open poppy - bud , and pair of yellow bird , yellow underneath as yellow butterfly , so perfectly clear , go skim past . when they settle for a moment and close their wing , they disappear , for they be grey on top . and when the cardinal bird settle , they too disappear , for the outside of their wing be brown , like a sheath . 

 ' bird in this country have all their colour below , ' say Kate . 

 Ram n turn to she suddenly . 

 ' they say the word Mexico mean below this ! ' he say , smile , and sink into a rock - chair . 

 Doña Carlota have make a great effort over herself , and with eye fix on the tea - cup , she pour out the tea . she hand he his cup without look at he . she do not trust herself to look at he . it make her tremble with a strange , hysterical anger : she , who have be married to he for year , and know he , ah , know he : and yet , and yet , have not get he at all . none of he . 

 ' give I a piece of sugar , Carlota , ' he say , in his quiet voice . 

 but at the sound of it , his wife stop as if some hand have suddenly grasp she . 

 ' Sugar ! Sugar ! ' she repeat abstractedly to herself . 

 Ram n sit forward in his rock - chair , hold his cup in his hand , his breast rise in relief . and on his thigh the thin linen seem to reveal he almost more than his own dark nakedness reveal he . she understand why the cotton pantaloon be forbid on the plaza . the live flesh seem to emanate through they . 

 he be handsome , almost horribly handsome , with his black head poise as it be without weight , above his darken , smooth neck . a pure sensuality , with a powerful purity of its own , hostile to her sort of purity . with the blue sash round his waist , press a fold in the flesh , and the thin linen seem to gleam with the life of his hip and his thigh , he emanate a fascination almost like a narcotic , assert his pure , fine sensuality against she . the strange , soft , still sureness of he , as if he sit secure within his own dark aura . and as if this dark aura of his militate against her presence , and against the presence of his wife . he emit an effluence so powerful , that it seem to hamper her consciousness , to bind down her limb . 

 and he be utterly still and quiescent , without desire , soft and unroused , within his own ambiente . Cipriano go the same , the pair of they so quiet and dark and heavy , like a great weight bear the woman down . 

 Kate know now how Salome feel . she know now how John the Baptist have be , with his terrible , aloof beauty , inaccessible , yet so potent . 

 ' ah ! ' she say to herself . ' let I close my eye to he , and open only my soul . let I close my prying , see eye , and sit in dark stillness along with these two man . they have get more than I , they have a richness that I have not   get . they have get rid of that itching of the eye , and the desire that work through the eye . the itching , prurient , know , imagine eye , I be curse with it , I be hamper up in it . it be my curse of curse , the curse of Eve . the curse of Eve be upon I , my eye be like hook , my knowledge be like a fish - hook through my gill , pull I in spasmodic desire . oh , who will free I from the grappling of my eye , from the impurity of sharp sight ! daughter of Eve , of greedy vision , why do not   these man save I from the sharpness of my own eye ! ' 

 she rise and go to the edge of the terrace . yellow as daffodil underneath , two bird emerge out of their own invisibility . in the little shingle bay , with a small breakwater , where the boat be pull up and chain , two man be stand in the water , throw out a big , fine round net , catch the little silvery fish call charale , which flick out of the brownish water sometimes like splinter of glass . 

 ' ram n ! ' Kate hear Doña Carlota 's voice . ' will not   you put something on ? ' 

 the wife have be able to bear it no more . 

 ' yes ! thank you for the tea , ' say Ram n , rise . 

 Kate watch he go down the terrace , in his own peculiar silence , his sandal make a faint swish on the tile . 

 ' oh , Señora Caterina ! ' come the voice of Carlota . ' come and drink your tea . come ! ' 

 Kate return to the table , say : 

 ' it seem so wonderfully peaceful here . ' 

 ' peaceful ! ' echo Carlota . ' ah , I do not find it peaceful . there be a horrible stillness , which make I afraid . ' 

 ' do you come out very often ? ' say Kate to Cipriano . 

 ' yes . fairly often . once a week . or twice , ' he reply , look at she with a secret consciousness which she could not understand lurk in his black eye . 

 these man want to take she will away from she , as if they want to deny she the light of day . 

 ' I must be go home now , ' she say . ' the sun will be set . ' 

 ' ya va ? ' say Cipriano , in his soft , velvety indian voice , with a note of distant surprise and reproach . ' will you go already ? ' 

 ' oh , no , Señora ! ' cry Carlota . ' stay until to - morrow . oh , yes , stay until to - morrow , with I . ' 

 ' they will expect we home , ' she say , waver . 

 ' ah , no ! I can send a boy to say you will come to - morrow . yes ? you will stay ? ah , good , good ! ' 

 and she lay her hand caressively on Kate 's arm , then rise to hurry away to the servant . 

 Cipriano have take out his cigarette - case . he offer it to Kate . 

 ' shall I take one ? ' she say . ' it be my vice . ' 

 ' do take one , ' he say . ' it be not   good to be perfect . ' 

 ' it be not , be it ? ' she laugh , puff her cigarette . 

 ' now would you call it peace ? ' he ask with incomprehensible irony . 

 ' why ? ' she cry . 

 ' why do white people always want peace ? ' he ask . 

 ' surely peace be natural ! do not   all people want it ? do not   you ? ' 

 ' peace be only the rest after war , ' he say . ' so it be not more natural than fight : perhaps not so natural . ' 

 ' no , but there be another peace : the peace that pass all understanding . do not   you know that ? ' 

 ' I do not   think I do , ' he say . 

 ' what a pity ! ' she cry . 

 ' ah ! ' he say . ' you want to teach I ! but to I it be different . each man have two spirit in he . the one be like the early morning in the time of rain , very quiet , and sweet , moist , no ? - with the mocking - bird singing , and bird fly about , very fresh . and the other be like the dry season , the steady , strong hot light of the day , which seem as if it will never change . ' 

 ' but you like the first well , ' she cry . 

 ' I do not   know ! ' he reply . ' the other last long . ' 

 ' I be sure you like the fresh morning well , ' she say . 

 " I do not   know ! I do not   know ! ' he smile a crumpled sort of smile , and she could tell he really do not know . ' in the first time , you can feel the flower on their stem , the stem very strong and full of sap , no ? - and the flower opening on top like a face that have the perfume of desire . and a woman might be like that . - but this pass , and the sun begin to shine very strong , very hot , no ? then everything inside a man change , go dark , no ? and the flower crumple up , and the breast of a man become like a steel mirror . and he be all darkness inside , coil and uncoil like a snake . all the flower wither up on shrunk stem , no ? and then woman do not   exist for a man . they disappear like the flower . ' 

 ' and then what do he want ? ' say Kate . 

 ' I do not   know . perhaps he want to be a very big man , and master all the people . ' 

 ' then why do not   he ? ' say Kate . 

 he lift his shoulder . 

 ' and you , ' he say to she . ' you seem to I like that morning I tell you about . ' 

 ' I be just forty year old , ' she laugh shakily . 

 again he lift his shoulder . 

 ' it do not   matter , ' he say . ' it be the same . your body seem to I like the stem of the flower I tell you about , and in your face it will always be morning , of the time of the rain . ' 

 ' why do you say that to I ? ' she say , as an involuntary strange shudder shake she . 

 ' why not say it ! ' he reply . ' you be like the cool morning , very fresh . in Mexico , we be the end of the hot dry day . ' 

 he watch she , with a strange linger desire in his black eye , and what seem to she a curious , lurk sort of insolence . she drop her head to hide from he , and rock in her chair . 

 ' I would like to marry you , ' he say ; ' if ever you will marry . I would like to marry you . ' 

 ' I do not   think I shall ever marry again , ' she flash , her bosom heaving like suffocation , and a dark flush suffusing over her face , against her will . 

 ' who know ! ' say he . 

 Ram n be come down the terrace , his fine white serape fold over his naked shoulder , with its blue - and - dark pattern at the border , and its long scarlet fringe dangle and sway as he walk . he lean against one of the pillar of the terrace , and look down at Kate and Cipriano . Cipriano glance up with that peculiar glance of primitive intimacy . 

 ' I tell the Señora Caterina , ' he say , ' if ever she want to marry a man , she should marry I . ' 

 ' it be plain talk , ' say Ram n , glance at Cipriano with the same intimacy , and smile . 

 then he look at Kate , with a slow smile in his brown eye , and a shadow of curious knowledge on his face . he fold his arm over his breast , as the native do when it be cold and they be protect themselves ; and the cream - brown flesh , like opium , lift the boss of his breast , full and smooth . 

 ' Don Cipriano say that white people always want peace , ' she say , look up at Ram n with haunted eye . ' do not   you consider yourself white people ? ' she ask , with a slight , deliberate impertinence . 

 ' no whiter than we be , ' smile Ram n. ' not lily - white , at least . ' 

 ' and do not   you want peace ? ' she ask . 

 ' I ? I should not   think of it . the meek have inherit the earth , accord to prophecy . but who be I , that I should envy they their peace ! no , Señora . do I look like a gospel of peace ? - or a gospel of war either ? life do not   split down that division , for I . ' 

 ' I do not   know what you want , ' say she , look up at he with haunted eye . 

 ' we only half know ourselves , ' he reply , smile with changeful eye . ' perhaps not so much as half . ' 

 there be a certain vulnerable kindliness about he , which make her wonder , startle , if she have ever realize what real fatherliness mean . the mystery , the nobility , the inaccessibility , and the vulnerable compassion of man in his separate fatherhood . 

 ' you do not   like brown - skin people ? ' he ask she gently . 

 ' I think it be beautiful to look at , ' she say . ' but ' - with a faint shudder - ' I be glad I be white . ' 

 ' you feel there could be no contact ? ' he say , simply . 

 ' yes ! ' she say . ' I mean that . ' 

 ' it be as you feel , ' he say . 

 and as he say it , she know he be more beautiful to she than any blond white man , and that , in a remote , far - off way , the contact with he be more precious than any contact she have know . 

 but then , though he cast over her a certain shadow , he would never encroach on she , he would never seek any close contact . it be the incompleteness in Cipriano that seek she out , and seem to trespass on she . 

 hear Ram n 's voice , Carlota appear uneasily in a doorway . hear he speak English , she disappear again , on a gust of anger . but after a little while , she come once more , with a little vase contain the creamy - colour , thick flower that be colour like freesia , and that smell very sweet . 

 ' oh , how nice ! ' say Kate . ' they be temple flower ! in Ceylon the native tiptoe into the little temple and lie one flower on the table at the foot of the big Buddha statue . and the table of offering be all cover with these flower , all put so neatly . the native have that delicate oriental way of put thing down . ' 

 ' ah ! ' say Carlota , set the vase on the table . ' I do not bring they for any god , especially strange one . I bring they for you , Señora . they smell so sweet . ' 

 ' do not   they ! ' say Kate . 

 the two man go away , Ram n laughing . 

 ' ah , Señora ! ' say Carlota , sit down tense at the table . ' could you follow Ram n ? could you give up the Blessed Virgin ? - I could soon die ! ' 

 ' ha ! ' say Kate , with a little weariness . ' surely we do not   want any more god . ' 

 ' More god , Señora ! ' say Doña Carlota , shock . ' but how be it possible ! - Don Ram n be in mortal sin . ' 

 Kate be silent . 

 ' and he want to lead more and more people into the same , ' continue Carlota . ' it be the sin of pride . man wise in their own conceit ! - the cardinal sin of man . ah , I have tell he . - and I be so glad , Señora , that you feel as I feel . I be so afraid of american woman , woman like that . they wish to have man 's mind , so they accept all the folly and wickedness of man . - you be Catholic , Señora ? ' 

 ' I be educate in a convent , ' say Kate . 

 ' ah , of course ! of course ! - ah , Señora , as if a woman who have ever know the blessed Virgin could ever part from she again . ah , Señora , what woman would have the heart to put Christ back on the Cross , to crucify he twice ! but man , man ! this Quetzalcoatl business ! what buffoonery , Señora ; if it be not horrible sin ! and two clever , well - educate man ! wise in their own conceit ! ' 

 ' man usually be , ' say Kate . 

 it be sunset , with a big level cloud like fur overhead , only the side of the horizon fairly clear . the sun be not visible . it have go down in a thick , rose - red fume behind the wavy ridge of the mountain . now the hill stand up bluish , all the air be a salmon - red flush , the fawn water have pinkish ripple . boy and man , bath a little way along the shore , be the colour of deep flame . 

 Kate and Carlota have climb up to the azotea , the flat roof , from the stone stairway at the end of the terrace . they could see the world : the hacienda with its courtyard like a fortress , the road between deep tree , the black mud hut near the broken highroad , and little naked fire already twinkle outside the door . all the air be pinkish , melt to a lavender blue , and the willow on the shore , in the pink light , be apple - green and glowing . the hill behind rise abruptly , like mound , dry and pinky . away in the distance , down the lake , the two white obelisk tower of Sayula glint among the tree , and villas peep out . boat be creep into the shadow , from the outer brightness of the lake . 

 and in one of these boat be Juana , be row , disconsolate , home . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XIII 

 the First Rain 

 

 Ram n and Cipriano be out by the lake . Cipriano also have change into the white clothe and sandal , and he look well than when in uniform . 

 ' I have a talk with Montes when he come to Guadalajara , ' Cipriano say to Ram n. Montes be the President of the Republic . 

 ' and what do he say ? ' 

 ' he be careful . but he do not   like his colleague . I think he feel lonely . I think he would like to know you well . ' 

 ' why ? ' 

 ' perhaps that you could give he your moral support . perhaps that you might be Secretary , and President when Montes ' term be up . ' 

 ' I like Montes , ' say Ram n. ' he be sincere and passionate . do you like he ? ' 

 ' yes ! ' say Cipriano . ' more or less . he be suspicious , and jealous for fear anyone else might want to share in his power . he have the craving of a dictator . he want to find out if I would stick to he . ' 

 ' you let he know you would ? ' 

 ' I tell he that all I care for be for you and for Mexico . ' 

 ' what do he say ? ' 

 ' well , he be no fool . he say : " Don Ram n see the world with different eye from mine . who know which of we be right ? I want to save my country from poverty and unenlightenment , he want to save its soul . I say , a hungry and ignorant man have no place for a soul . an empty belly grind upon itself , so do an empty mind , and the soul do not   exist . Don Ram n say , if a man have no soul , it do not   matter whether he be hungry or ignorant . well , he can go his way , and I mine . we shall never hinder one another , I believe . I give you my word I will not   have he interfere with . he sweep the patio and I sweep the street . " ' 

 ' sensible ! ' say Ram n. ' and honest in his conviction . ' 

 ' why should you not be Secretary in a few month ' time ? and follow to the Presidency ? ' say Cipriano . 

 ' you know I do not   want that . I must stand in another world , and act in another world . - Politics must go their own way , and society must do as it will . leave I alone , Cipriano . I know you want I to be another Porfirio Diaz , or something like that . but for I that would be failure pure and simple . ' 

 Cipriano be watch Ram n with black , guard eye , in which be an element of love , and of fear , and of trust , but also incomprehension , and the suspicion that go with incomprehension . 

 ' I do not   understand , myself , what you want , ' he mutter . 

 ' yes , yes , you do . politic and all this social religion that Montes have get be like wash the outside of the egg , to make it look clean . but I , myself , I want to get inside the egg , right to the middle , to start it grow into a new bird . ay ! Cipriano ! Mexico be like an old , old egg that the bird of Time lay long ago ; and she have be sit on it for century , till it look foul in the nest of the world . but still , Cipriano , it be a good egg . it be not addle . only the spark of fire have never go into the middle of it , to start it . - Montes want to clean the nest and wash the egg . but meanwhile , the egg will go cold and die . the more you save these people from poverty and ignorance , the quick they will die : like a dirty egg that you take from under the hen - eagle , to wash it . while you wash the egg , it chill and dy . poor old Montes , all his idea be american and european . and the old Dove of Europe will never hatch the egg of dark - skin America . the United States can not   die , because it be not   alive . it be a nestful of china egg , make of pot . so they can be keep clean . - but here , Cipriano , here , let we hatch the chick before we start clean up the nest . ' 

 Cipriano hang his head . he be always test Ram n , to see if he could change he . when he find he could not , then he submit , and new little fire of joy spring up in he . but meanwhile , he have to try , and try again . 

 ' it be no good , try to mix the two thing . at this stage of affair , at least , they will not   mix . we have to shut our eye and sink down , sink away from the surface , away , like shadow , down to the bottom . like the pearl diver . but you keep bob up like a cork . ' 

 Cipriano smile subtly . he know well enough . 

 ' we have   get to open the oyster of the cosmo , and get our manhood out of it . till we have   get the pearl , we be only gnat on the surface of the ocean , ' say Ram n. 

 ' my manhood be like a devil inside I , ' say Cipriano . 

 ' it be very true , ' say Ram n. ' that be because the old oyster have he shut up , like a black pearl . you must let he walk out . ' 

 ' ram n , ' say Cipriano , ' would not   it be good to be a serpent , and be big enough to wrap one 's fold round the globe of the world , and crush it like that egg ? ' 

 Ram n look at he and laugh . 

 ' I believe we could do that , ' say Cipriano , a slow smile curl round his mouth . ' and would not   it be good ? ' 

 Ram n shake his head , laugh . 

 ' there would be one good moment , at least , ' he say . 

 ' who ask for more ! ' say Cipriano . 

 a spark flash out of Ram n 's eye too . then he check himself , and gather himself together . 

 ' what would be the good ! ' he say heavily . ' if the egg be crush , and we remain , what could we do but go howl down the empty passage of darkness ? what be the good , Cipriano ? ' 

 Ram n get up and walk away . the sun have set , the night be fall . and in his soul the great , writhe anger be alive again . Carlota provoke it into life : the two woman seem to breathe life into the black monster of his inward rage , till it begin to lash again . and Cipriano stir it up till it howl with desire . 

 ' my manhood be like a demon howl inside I , ' say Ram n to himself , in Cipriano 's word . 

 and he admit the justice of the howling , his manhood be pen up , humiliate , goad with insult inside he . and rage come over he , against Carlota , against Cipriano , against his own people , against all mankind , till he be fill with rage like the devil . 

 his people would betray he , he know that . Cipriano would betray he . give one little vulnerable chink , they would pierce he . they would leap at the place out of nowhere , like a tarantula , and bite in the poison . 

 while ever there be one little vulnerable chink . and what man can be invulnerable ? 

 he go upstairs by the outer stairway , through the iron door at the side of the house , under the heavy tree , up to his room , and sit on his bed . the night be hot , heavy , and ominously still . 

 ' the water be come , ' he hear a servant say . he shut the door of his room till it be black dark inside . then he throw aside his clothing , say : I put off the world with my clothe . and stand nude and invisible in the centre of his room he thrust his clench fist upwards , with all his might , feel he would break the wall of his chest . and his left hand hang loose , the finger softly curve downward . 

 and tense like the gush of a soundless fountain , he thrust up and reach down in the invisible dark , convulse with passion . till the black wave begin to wash over his consciousness , over his mind , wave of darkness break over his memory over his being , like an incoming tide , till at last it be full tide and he tremble , and fall to rest . invisible in the darkness , he stand soft and relaxed , star with wide eye at the dark , and feel the dark fecundity of the inner tide wash over his heart , over his belly , his mind dissolve away in the great , dark mind , which be undisturbe by thought . 

 he cover his face with his hand , and stand still , in pure unconsciousness , neither hear nor feeling nor know , like a dark sea - weed deep in the sea . with no time and no World , in the deep that be timeless and worldless . 

 then when his heart and his belly be restore , his mind begin to flicker again softly , like a soft flame flow without depart . 

 so he wipe his face with his hand , and put his serape over his head , and , silent inside an aura of pain , he go out and take the drum , carry it downstairs . 

 Martin , the man who love he , be hover in the zaguán . 

 ' ya , Patr n ? ' he say . 

 ' ya ! ' say Ram n. 

 the man run indoor , where a lamp be burn in the big , dark kitchen , and run out again with an armful of the weave straw mat . 

 ' where , Patr n ? ' he say . 

 Ram n hesitate in the centre of the courtyard , and look at the sky . 

 ' Viene el agua ? ' he say . 

 ' creo que sí , Patr n. ' 

 they go to the shed where the banana have be pack and carry away on donkey . there the man throw down the petate . Ram n arrange they . Guisleno run with cane . he be go to make light , the simple possible . three piece of thick cane , tie at the neck with a cord , stand up three - legged , waist high . in the three - pronged fork at the top he lay a piece of flat , slightly hollow lava stone . then he come run from the house with a bit of burn ocote wood . three or four bit of ocote , each bit no big than a long finger , flicker and rise in quick flame from the stone , and the courtyard dance with shadow . 

 Ram n take off his serape , fold it , and sit upon it . Guisleno light another tripod - torch . Ram n sit with his back to the wall , the fire - light dancing on his dark brow , that be sink in a sort of frown . his breast shine like gold in the flame . he take the drum and sound the summon , slow , monotonous , rather sad . in a moment two or three man come run . the drummer come , Ram n stand up and hand he the drum . he run with it to the great outer doorway , and out into the dark lane , and there sound the summon , quick , sharp . 

 Ram n put on his serape , whose scarlet fringe touch his knee , and stand motionless , with ruffle hair . round his shoulder go the woven snake , and his head be through the middle of the blue , weave bird . 

 Cipriano come from the house . he be wear a serape all scarlet and dark brown , a great scarlet sun at the centre , deep scarlet zigzag at the border , and dark brown fringe at his knee . he come and stand at Ram n 's side , glance up into Ram n 's face . but the other man 's brow be low , his eye be fix in the darkness of the shed away across the courtyard . he be look into the heart of the world ; because the face of man , and the heart of man be helpless quicksand . only in the heart of the cosmos man can look for strength . and if he can keep his soul in touch with the heart of the world , then from the heart of the world new blood will beat in strength and stillness into he , fulfil his manhood . 

 Cipriano turn his black eye to the courtyard . his soldier have draw near , in a little group . three or four man be stand in dark serape , round the fire . Cipriano stand brilliant like a cardinal bird , next to Ram n. even his sandal be bright , sealing - wax red , and his loose linen trouser be bind at the ankle with red and black band . his face look very dark and ruddy in the firelight , his little black tuft of a beard hang odd and devilish , his eye be glitter sardonically . but he catch Ram n 's hand in his small hand , and stand hold it . 

 the peon be come through the entrance - way , balance their big hat . woman be hurry barefoot , swish their full skirt , carry baby inside the dark wrap of their rebozo , child run after . they all cluster towards the flame - light , like wild animal gaze in at the circle of man in dark serape , Ram n , magnificent in his white and blue and shadow , poise his beautiful head , Cipriano at his side like a glitter cardinal bird . 

 Carlota and Kate emerge from the inner doorway of the house . but there Carlota remain , wrap in a black silk shawl , seat on a wooden bench where the soldier usually sit , look across at the ruddy flare of light , the circle of dark man , the tall beauty of her husband , the poppy - petal glitter of red , of Cipriano , the group of little , dust - colour soldier , and the solid throng of peon and woman and child , stand gaze like animal . while through the gate man still come hurrying , and from outside , the drum sound , and a high voice sing again and again : 

 

 someone will enter between the gate , 
  now , at this moment , ay ! 
 see the light on the man that wait . 
  shall you ? shall I ? 

 someone will come to the place of fire , 
  now , at this moment , ay ! 
 and hark to the word of their heart 's desire . 
  shall you ? shall I ? 

 someone will knock when the door be shut , 
  ay ! in a moment , ay ! 
 hear a voice say : I know you not ! 
  shall you ? shall I ? 

 

 there be a queer , wild yell each time on the Ay ! and like a bugle refrain : shall you ? shall I ? it make Carlota shiver . 

 Kate , wrap her yellow shawl round she , walk slowly towards the group . 

 the drum outside give a rapid shudder , and be finish . the drummer come in , the great door be shut and bar , the drummer take his place in the ring of stand man . a dead silence supervene . 

 Ram n continue to gaze from under lower brow , into space . then in a quiet , inward voice , he say : 

 ' as I take off this cover , I put away the day that be go from upon I . ' 

 he take off his serape , and stand with it over his arm . all the man in the circle do the same , till they stand with naked breast and shoulder , Cipriano very dark and strong - look , in his smallness , beside Ram n. 

 ' I put away the day that be go , ' Ram n continue , in the same still , inward voice , ' and stand with my heart uncover in the night of the god . ' 

 then he look down at the ground . 

 ' Serpent of the earth , ' he say ; ' snake that lie in the fire at the heart of the world , come ! come ! Snake of the fire of the heart of the world , coil like gold round my ankle , and rise like life around my knee , and lie your head against my thigh . come , put your head in my hand , cradle your head in my finger , snake of the deep . kiss my foot and my ankle with your mouth of gold , kiss my knee and my inner thigh , snake brand with flame and shadow , come ! and rest your head in my finger - basket ! so ! ' 

 the voice be soft and hypnotic . it die upon a stillness . and it seem as if really a mysterious presence have enter unseen from the underworld . it seem to the peon as if really they see a snake of brilliant gold and living blackness softly coil around Ram n 's ankle and knee , and rest its head in his finger , lick his palm with fork tongue . 

 he look out at the big , dilate , glitter eye of his people , and his own eye be wide and uncanny . 

 ' I tell you , ' he say , ' and I tell you truly . at the heart of this earth sleep a great serpent , in the midst of fire . those that go down in mine feel the heat and the sweat of he , they feel he move . it be the live fire of the earth , for the earth be alive . the snake of the world be huge , and the rock be his scale , tree grow between they . I tell you the earth you dig be alive as a snake that sleep . so vast a serpent you walk on , this lake lie between his fold as a drop of rain in the fold of a sleep rattlesnake . yet he none the less life . the earth be alive . 

 ' and if he die , we should all perish . only his living keep the soil sweet , that grow you maize . from the root of his scale we dig silver and gold , and the tree have root in he , as the hair of my face have root in my lip . 

 ' the earth be alive . but he be very big and we be very small , small than dust . but he be very big in his life , and sometimes he be angry . these people , small than dust , he say , they stamp on I and say I be dead . even to their ass they speak , and shout Harreh ! Burro ! but to I they speak no word . therefore I will turn against they , like a woman who lie angry with her man in bed , and eat away his spirit with her anger , turn she back to he . 

 ' that be what the earth say to we . he send sorrow into our foot , and depression into our loin . 

 ' because as an angry woman in the house can make a man heavy , take his life from he , so the earth can make we heavy , make our soul cold , and our life dreary in our foot . 

 ' speak then to the snake of the heart of the world , put oil on your finger and lower your finger for he to taste the oil of the earth , and let he send life into your foot and ankle and knee , like sap in the young maize press against the joint and make the milk of the maize bud among its hair . 

 ' from the heart of the earth man feel his manhood rise up in he , like the maize that be proud , turn its green leaf outward . be proud like the maize , and let your root go deep , deep , for the rain be here , and it be time for we to be grow in Mexico . ' 

 Ram n cease speak , the drum softly pulse . all the man of the ring be look down at the earth and softly let their left hand hang . 

 Carlota , who have not be able to hear , drift up to Kate 's side , spellbound by her husband . Kate unconsciously glance down at the earth , and secretly let her finger hang softly against her dress . but then she be afraid of what might happen to she , and she catch her hand up into her shawl . 

 suddenly the drum begin to give a very strong note , follow by a weak : a strange , exciting thud . 

 everybody look up . Ram n have fling his right arm tense into the air , and be look up at the black dark sky . the man of the ring do the same , and the naked arm be thrust aloft like so many rocket . 

 ' up ! up ! up ! ' say a wild voice . 

 ' up ! up ! ' cry the man of the ring , in a wild chorus . 

 and involuntarily the man in the crowd twitch , then shoot their arm upwards , turn their face to the dark heaven . even some of the woman boldly thrust up their naked arm , and relief enter their heart as they do so . 

 but Kate would not lift her arm . 

 there be dead silence , even the drum be silent . then the voice of Ram n be hear , speak upwards to the black sky : 

 ' your big wing be dark , Bird , you be fly low to - night . you be fly low over Mexico , we shall soon feel the fan of your wing on our face . 

 ' ay , Bird ! you fly about where you will . you fly past the star , and you perch on the sun . you fly out of sight , and be go beyond the white river of the sky . but you come back like the duck of the north , look for water and winter . 

 ' you sit in the middle of the sun , and preen your feather . you crouch in the river of star , and make the star - dust rise around you . you fly away into the deep hollow place of the sky , whence there seem no return . 

 ' you come back to we , and hover overhead , and we feel your wing fan our face - ' 

 even as he speak the wind rise , in sudden gust , and a door could be hear slam in the house , with a shivering of glass , and the tree give off a tear sound . 

 ' come then , Bird of the great sky ! ' Ram n call wildly . ' come ! oh Bird , settle a moment on my wrist , over my head , and give I power of the sky , and wisdom . oh Bird ! bird of all the wide heaven , even if you drum your feather in thunder , and drop the white snake of fire from your beak back to the earth again , where he can run in , deep down the rock again , home : even if you come as the Thunderer , come ! settle on my wrist a moment , with the clutch of the power of thunder , and arch your wing over my head , like a shadow of cloud ; and bend your breast to my brow , and bless I with the sun . bird , roam Bird of the Beyond , with thunder in your pinion and the snake of lightning in your beak , with the blue heaven in the socket of your wing and cloud in the arch of your neck , with sun in the burn feather of your breast and power in your foot , with terrible wisdom in your flight , swoop to I a moment , swoop ! ' 

 sudden gust of wind tear at the little fire of flame , till they could be hear to rustle , and the lake begin to speak in a vast hollow noise , beyond the tearing of tree . distant lightning be beat far off , over the black hill . 

 Ram n drop his arm , which have be bent over his head . the drum begin to beat . then he say : 

 ' sit down a moment , before the Bird shake water out of his wing . it will come soon . sit down . ' 

 there be a stir . man put their serape over their face , woman clutch their rebozos tight , and all sit down on the ground . only Kate and Carlota remain stand , on the outer edge . gust of wind tear at the flame , the man put their hat on the ground in front of they . 

 ' the earth be alive , and the sky be alive , ' say Ram n in his natural voice , ' and between they , we live . earth have kiss my knee , and put strength in my belly . Sky have perch on my wrist , and send power into my breast . 

 ' but as in the morning the Morning - star stand between earth and sky , a star can rise in we , and stand between the heart and the loin . 

 ' that be the manhood of man , and for woman , her womanhood . 

 ' you be not yet man . and woman , you be not yet woman . 

 ' you run about and toss about and die , and still you have not find the star of your manhood rise within you , the star of your womanhood shine out serene between your breast , woman . 

 ' I tell you , for he that wish it , the star of his manhood shall rise within he , and he shall be proud , and perfect even as the Morning - star be perfect . 

 ' and the star of a woman 's womanhood can rise at last , from between the heavy rim of the earth and the lose grey void of the sky . 

 ' but how ? how shall we do it ? how shall it be ? 

 ' how shall we man become man of the Morning Star ? and the woman the Dawn - Star Women ? 

 ' lower your finger to the caress of the Snake of the earth . 

 ' lift your wrist for a perch to the far - lie Bird . 

 ' have the courage of both , the courage of lightning and the earthquake . 

 ' and wisdom of both , the wisdom of the snake and the eagle . 

 ' and the peace of both , the peace of the serpent and the sun . 

 ' and the power of both , the power of the innermost earth and the outermost heaven . 

 ' but on your brow , Men ! the undimmed Morning Star , that neither day nor night , nor earth nor sky can swallow and put out . 

 ' and between your breast , Women ! the Dawn - Star , that can not be dim . 

 ' and your home at last be the Morning Star . neither heaven nor earth shall swallow you up at the last , but you shall pass the place beyond both , into the bright star that be lonely yet feel itself never alone . 

 ' the Morning Star be send you a messenger , a god who die in Mexico . but he sleep his sleep , and the invisible Ones wash his body with water of resurrection . so he have rise , and push the stone from the mouth of the tomb , and have stretch himself . and now he be stride across the horizon even quick than the great stone from the tomb be tumble back to the earth , to crush those that roll it up . 

 ' the Son of the Star be come back to the Sons of Men , with big , bright stride . 

 ' prepare to receive he . and wash yourself , and put oil on your hand and your foot , on your mouth and eye and ear and nostril , on your breast and navel and on the secret place of your body , that nothing of the dead day , no dust of skeleton and evil thing may pass into you and make you unclean . 

 ' do not look with the eye of yesterday , nor like yesterday listen , nor breathe , nor smell , nor taste , nor swallow food and drink . do not kiss with the mouth of yesterday , nor touch with the hand , nor walk with yesterday 's foot . and let your navel know nothing of yesterday , and go into your woman with a new body , enter the new body in she . 

 ' for yesterday 's body be dead , and carrion , the Xopilote be hover above it . 

 ' put yesterday 's body from off you , and have a new body . even as your God who be come . Quetzalcoatl be come with a new body , like a star , from the shadow of death . 

 ' yes , even as you sit upon the earth this moment , with the round of your body touch the round of the earth , say : Earth ! Earth ! you be alive as the globe of my body be alive . breathe the kiss of the inner earth upon I , even as I sit upon you . 

 ' and so , it be say . the earth be stir beneath you , the sky be rush its wing above . go home to your home , in front of the water that will fall and cut you off forever from your yesterday . 

 ' go home , and hope to be man of the Morning Star , Women of the Star of Dawn . 

 ' you be not yet man and woman - ' 

 he rise up and wave to the people to be go . and in a moment they be on their foot , scurry and hasten with the quiet mexican hurry , that seem to run low down upon the surface of the earth . 

 the black wind be all loose in the sky , tear with the thin shriek of torn fabric , in the mango - tree . man hold their big hat on their head and run with bent knee , their serape blow . woman clutch their rebozo tighter and run barefoot to the zaguán . 

 the big door be open , a soldier stand with a gun across his back , hold a hurricane lamp . and the people flee like ghost through the door , and away up the black lane like bit of paper veer away into nothingness , blow out of their line of flight . in a moment , they have all silently go . 

 Martin bar the great door . the soldier put down his lamp on the wooden bench , and he and his comrade sit huddle in their dark shawl , in a little bunch like toadstool in the dark cavern of the zaguán . already one have curl himself up on the wooden bench , wrap like a snail in his blanket , head disappear . 

 ' the water be come ! ' cry the servant excitedly , as Kate go upstairs with Doña Carlota . 

 the lake be quite black , like a great pit . the wind suddenly blow with violence , with a strange rip sound in the mango - trees , as if some membrane in the air be be rip . the white - flower oleander in the garden below lean over quite flat , their white flower ghostly , go right down to the earth , in the pale beam of the lamp - like a street lamp - that shine on the wall at the front entrance . a young palm - tree bent and spread its leaf on the ground . some invisible juggernaut car roll in the dark over the outside world . 

 away across the lake , south - west , lightning blaze and run down the sky like some portentous writing . and soft , velvety thunder break inwardly , strangely . 

 ' it frighten I ! ' cry Doña Carlota , put her hand over her eye and hasten into a far corner of the bare salon . 

 Cipriano and Kate stand on the terrace , watch the coloured flower in the pot shake and fly to bit , disappear up into the void of darkness . Kate clutch her shawl . but the wind suddenly get under Cipriano 's blanket , and lift it straight up into the air , then drop it in a scarlet flare over his head . Kate watch his deep , strong indian chest lift as his arm quickly fight to free his head . how dark he be , and how primitively physical , beautiful , and deep - breast , with soft , full flesh ! but all , as it be , for himself . nothing that come forth from he to meet with one outside . all oblivious of the outside , all for himself . 

 ' ah ! the water ! ' he cry , hold down his serape . 

 the first great drop be fly darkly at the flower , like arrow . Kate stand back into the doorway of the salon . a pure blaze of lightning slip three - fold above the black hill , seem to stand a moment , then slip back into the dark . 

 Down come the rain with a smash , as if some great vessel have break . with it , come a waft of icy air . and all the time , first in one part of the sky , then in another , in quick succession the blue lightning , very blue , break out of heaven and light up the air for a blue , breathless moment , loom tree and ghost of a garden , then be go , while thunder drop and explode continually . 

 Kate watch the dropping mass of water in wonder . already , in the blue moment of lightning , she see the garden below a pond , the walk be rush river . it be cold . she turn indoor . 

 a servant be go round the room with a lantern , to look if scorpion be come out . he find one scuttle across the floor of Kate 's room , and one fall from the ceiling beam on to Carlota 's bed . 

 they sit in the salon in rock - chair , Carlota and Kate , and rock , smell the good wetness , breathe the good , chill air . Kate have already forget what really chill air be like . she wrap she shawl tighter round she . 

 ' ah , yes , you feel cold ! you must take care in the night now . sometimes in the rainy season the night be very cold . you must be ready with an extra blanket . and the servant , poor thing , they just lie and shudder , and they get up in the morning like corps . - but the sun soon warm they again , and they seem to think they must bear what come . so they complain sometimes , but still they do not   provide . ' 

 the wind have go , suddenly . Kate be uneasy , uneasy , with the smell of water , almost of ice , in her nostril , and her blood still hot and dark . she get up and go again to the terrace . Cipriano be still stand there , motionless and inscrutable , like a monument , in his red and dark serape . 

 the rain be abate . down below in the garden two barefoote woman - servant be run through the water , in the faint light of the zaguán lamp , run across the garden and put olla and square gasoline can under the arch spout of water that seethe down from the roof , then dart away while they fill , then struggle in with the frothy vessel . it would save make trip to the lake , for water . 

 ' what do you think of we ? ' Cipriano say to she . 

 ' it be strange to I , ' she reply , wonder and a little awed by the night . 

 ' good , no ? ' he say , in an exultant tone . 

 ' a little scar , ' she reply , with a slight laugh . 

 ' when you be use to it , ' he say , ' it seem natural , no ? it seem natural so - as it be . and when you go to a country like England , where all be so safe and ready - make , then you miss it . you keep say to yourself : " what be I miss ? what be it that be not here ? " ' 

 he seem to be gloat in his native darkness . it be curious , that though he speak such good English , it seem always foreign to she , more foreign than Doña Carlota 's Spanish . 

 ' I can not   understand that people want to have everything , all life , no ? - so safe and ready - make as in England and America . it be good to be awake . on the qui vive , no ? ' 

 ' perhaps , ' she say . 

 ' so I like it , ' he say , ' when Ram n tell the people the earth be alive , and the sky have a big bird in it , that you do not   see . I think it be true . certainly ! and it be good to know it , because then one be on the qui vive , no ? ' 

 ' but it be tiring to be always on the qui vive , ' she say . 

 ' why ? why tiring ? no , I think , on the contrary , it be refreshing . - ah , you should marry , and live in Mexico . at last , I be sure , you would like it . you would keep wake up more and more to it . ' 

 ' or else go more and more deaden , ' she say . ' that be how most foreigner go , it seem to I . ' 

 ' why deaden ? ' he say to she . ' I do not   understand . why deaden ? here you have a country where night be night , and rain come down and you know it . and you have a people with whom you must be on the qui vive all the time , all the time . and that be very good , no ? you do not   go sleepy . like a pear ! do not   you say a pear go sleepy , no ? - cuando se echa a perder ? ' 

 ' yes ! ' she say . 

 ' and here you have also ram n. how do Ram n seem to you ? ' 

 ' I do not   know . I do not   want to say anything . but I do think he be almost too much : too far . - and I do not   think he be mexican . ' 

 ' why not ? why not mexican ? he be mexican . ' 

 ' not as you be . ' 

 ' how not as I be ? he be mexican . ' 

 ' he seem to I to belong to the old , old Europe , ' she say . 

 ' and he seem to I to belong to the old , old Mexico - and also to the new , ' he add quickly . 

 ' but you do not   believe in he . ' 

 ' how ? ' 

 ' you - yourself . you do not   believe in he . you think it be like everything else , a sort of game . everything be a sort of game , a put - up job , to you Mexicans . you do not   really believe , in anything . ' 

 ' how not believe ? I not believe in Ram n ? - well , perhaps not , in that way of kneeling before he and spread out my arm and shed tear on his foot . but I - I believe in he , too . not in your way , but in mine . I tell you why . because he have the power to compel I . if he have not   the power to compel I , how should I believe ? ' 

 ' it be a queer sort of belief that be compel , ' she say . 

 ' how else should one believe , except by be compel ? I like Ram n for that , that he can compel I . when I grow up , and my godfather could not compel I to believe , I be very unhappy . it make I very unhappy . - but Ram n compel I , and that be very good . it make I very happy , when I know I can not   escape . it would make you happy too . ' 

 ' to know I could not escape from Don Ram n ? ' she say ironically . 

 ' yes , that also . and to know you could not escape from Mexico . and even from such a man as I . ' 

 she pause in the dark before she answer , sardonically : 

 ' I do not   think it would make I happy to feel I could not   escape from Mexico . no , I feel , unless I be sure I could get out any day , I could not   bear to be here . ' 

 in her mind she think : and perhaps Ram n be the only one I could not   quite escape from , because he really touch I somewhere inside . but from you , you little Cipriano , I should have no need even to escape , because I could not be catch by you . 

 ' ah ! ' he say quickly . ' you think so . but then you do not   know . you can only think with american thought , it be natural . from your education , you have only american thought , U.S.A. thought , to think with . nearly all woman be like that : even mexican woman of the spanish - mexican class . they be all think nothing but u.s.a. thought , because those be the one that go with the way they dress their hair . and so it be with you . you think like a modern woman , because you belong to the anglo - saxon or teutonic world , and dress your hair in a certain way , and have money , and be altogether free . - but you only think like this because you have have these thought put in your head , just as in Mexico you spend centavos and peso , because that be the mexican money you have put in your pocket . it be what they give you at the bank . - so when you say you be free , you be not free . you be compel all the time to be think U.S.A. thought - compel , I must say . you have not as much choice as a slave . as the peon must eat tortilla , tortillas , tortillas , because there be nothing else , you must think these u.s.a. thought , about be a woman and be free . every day you must eat those tortilla , tortillas . - till you do not   know how you would like something else . ' 

 ' what else should I like ? ' she say , with a grimace at the darkness . 

 ' other thought , other feeling . - you be afraid of such a man as I , because you think I should not treat you    l'américaine . you be quite right . I should not treat you as an american woman must be treat . why should I ? I do not   wish to . it do not   seem good to I . ' 

 ' you would treat a woman like a real old Mexican , would you ? keep her ignorant , and shut she up ? ' say Kate sarcastically . 

 ' I could not keep she ignorant if she do not start ignorant . but what more I have to teach she would not   be in the american style of teaching . ' 

 ' what then ? ' 

 ' Quién sabe ! ça reste    voir . ' 

 ' et continuera    y rester , ' say Kate , laugh . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XIV 

 Home to Sayula 

 

 the morning come perfectly blue , with a freshness in the air and a blue luminousness over the tree and the distant mountain , and bird so bright , absolutely like new - open bud spark in the air . 

 Cipriano be return to Guadalajara in the automobile , and Carlota be go with he . Kate would be row home on the lake . 

 to ram n , Carlota be still , at time , a torture . she seem to have the power still to lacerate he , inside his bowel . not in his mind or spirit , but in his old emotional , passional self : right in the middle of his belly , to tear he and make he feel he bleed inwardly . 

 because he have love she , he have care for she : for the affectionate , passionate , whimsical , sometimes elfish creature she have be . he have make much of she , and spoil she , for many year . 

 but all the while , gradually , his nature be change inside he . not that he cease to care for she , or want other woman . that she could have understand . but inside he be a slow , blind imperative , urge he to cast his emotional and spiritual and mental self into the slow furnace , and smell they into a new , whole being . 

 but he have Carlota to reckon with . she love he , and that , to she , be the outstanding factor . she love he , emotionally . and spiritually , she love mankind . and mentally , she be sure she be quite right . 

 yet , as time go on , he have to change . he have to cast that emotional self , which she love , into the furnace , to be smelt down to another self . 

 and she feel she be rob , cheat . why could not   he go on be gentle , good , and loving , and try to make the whole world more gentle , good , and loving ? 

 he could not , because it be bear in upon he that the world have go as far as it could go in the good , gentle , and love direction , and anything far in that line mean perversity . so the time have come for the slow , great change to something else - what , he do not   know . 

 the emotion of love , and the great emotion of liberty for mankind seem to go hard and congeal upon he , like the shell on a chrysalis . it be the old caterpillar stage of Christianity evolve into something else . 

 but Carlota feel this be all she have , this emotion of love , for her husband , her child , for her people , for the animal and bird and tree of the world . it be she all , her Christ , and her blessed Virgin . how could she let it go ? 

 so she continue to love he , and to love the world , steadily , pathetically , obstinately , and devilishly . she pray for he , and she engage in work of charity . 

 but her love have turn from be the spontaneous flow , subject to the unforeseen coming and going of the Holy Ghost , and have turn into will . she love now with her will : as the white world now tend to do . she become fill with charity : that cruel kindness . ' 

 her winsomeness and her elfishness depart from she , she begin to wither , she grow tense . and she blame he , and pray for he . even as the spontaneous mystery die in she , the will harden , till she be nothing but a will : a lost will . 

 she soon succeed in draw the life of her young boy all to herself , with her pathos and her subtle will . Ram n be too proud and angry to fight for they . they be her child . let she have they . 

 they be the child of his old body . his new body have no child : would probably never have any . 

 ' but remember , ' he say to she , with southern logic , ' you do not love , save with your will . I do not   like the love you have for your god : it be an assertion of your own will . I do not   like the love you have for I : it be the same . I do not   like the love you have for your child . if ever I see in they a spark of desire to be save from it , I shall do my good to save they . meanwhile have your love , have your will . but you know I dislike it . I dislike your insistence . I dislike your monopoly of one feeling , I dislike your charity work . I disapprove of the whole trend of your life . you be weaken and vitiate the boy . you do not love they , you be only put your love will over they . one day they will turn and hate you for it . remember I have say this to you . ' 

 Doña Carlota have tremble in every fibre of her body , under the shock of this . but she go away to the chapel of the Annunciation Convent , and pray . and , pray for his soul , she seem to gain a victory over he , in the odour of sanctity . she come home in frail , pure triumph , like a flower that bloom on a grave : his grave . 

 and Ram n henceforth watch she in her beautiful , rather fluttering , rather irritate gentleness , as he watch his close enemy . 

 Life have do its work on one more human being , quench the spontaneous life and leave only the will . kill the god in the woman , or the goddess , and leave only charity , with a will . 

 ' Carlota , ' he have say to she , ' how happy you would be if you could wear deep , deep mourning for I . - I shall not give you this happiness . ' 

 she give he a strange look from her hazel - brown eye . 

 ' even that be in the hand of God , ' she have reply , as she hurry away from he . 

 and now , on this morning after the first rain , she come to the door of his room as he be sit write . as yesterday , he be naked to the waist , the blue - mark sash tie round his middle confine the white linen , loose trouser - like big , wide pyjama trouser cross in front and tie round his waist . 

 ' may I come in ? ' she say nervously . 

 ' do ! ' he reply , put down his pen and rise . 

 there be only one chair - he be offer it she , but she sit down on the unmade bed , as if assert her natural right . and in the same way she glance at his naked breast - as if assert her natural right . 

 ' I be go with Cipriano after breakfast , ' she say . 

 ' yes , so you say . ' 

 ' the boy will be home in three week . ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' do not   you want to see they ? ' 

 ' if they want to see I . ' 

 ' I be sure they do . ' 

 ' then bring they here . ' 

 ' do you think it be pleasant for I ? ' she say , clasp her hand . 

 ' you do not make it pleasant for I , Carlota . ' 

 ' how can I ? you know I think you be wrong . when I listen to you last night - there be something so beautiful in it all - and yet so monstrous . so monstrous ! - oh ! I think to myself : what be this man do ? this man of all man , who might be such a blessing to his country and mankind - ' 

 ' well , ' say Ram n. ' and what be he instead ? ' 

 ' you know ! you know ! I can not   bear it . - it be not   for you to save Mexico , Ram n. Christ have already save it . ' 

 ' it seem to I not so . ' 

 ' he have ! he have ! and he make you the wonderful being that you be , so that you should work out the salvation , in the name of Christ and of love . instead of which - ' 

 ' instead of which , Carlota , I try something else . - but believe I , if the real Christ have not be able to save Mexico - and he have not   - then I be sure the white Anti - Christ of charity , and socialism , and politic , and reform , will only succeed in finally destroy she . that , and that alone , make I take my stand . - you , Carlota , with your charity work and your pity : and man like Benito Juarez , with their reform and their liberty : and the rest of the benevolent people , politician and socialist and so forth , surcharge with pity for live man , in their mouth , but really with hate - the hate of the materialist have - not for the materialist have : they be the Anti - Christ . the old world , that be just the world . but the new world , that want to save the People , this be the Anti - Christ . this be Christ with real poison in the communion cup . - and for this reason I step out of my ordinary privacy and individuality . I do not   want everybody poison . about the great mass I do not   care . but I do not   want everybody poison . ' 

 ' how can you be so sure that you yourself be not a poisoner of the people ? - I think you be . ' 

 ' think it then . I think of you , Carlota , merely that you have not be able to come to your complete , final womanhood : which be a different thing from the old womanhood . ' 

 ' Womanhood be always the same . ' 

 ' ah , no , it be not ! neither be manhood . ' 

 ' but what do you think you can do ? what do you think this Quetzalcoatl nonsense amount to ? ' 

 ' Quetzalcoatl be just a live word , for these people , no more . all I want they to do be to find the beginning of the way to their own manhood , their own womanhood . man be not yet man in full , and woman be not yet woman . they be all half and half , incoherent , part horrible , part pathetic , part good creature . half arrive . - I mean you as well , Carlota . I mean all the world . - but these people do not   assert any righteousness of their own , these mexican people of ours . that make I think that grace be still with they . and so , have get hold of some kind of clue to my own whole manhood , it be part of I now to try with they . ' 

 ' you will fail . ' 

 ' I shall not . whatever happen to I , there will be a new vibration , a new call in the air , and a new answer inside some man . ' 

 ' they will betray you . - do you know what even your friend Toussaint say of you ? - Ram n Carrasco 's future be just the past of mankind . ' 

 ' a great deal of it be the past . Naturally Toussaint see that part . ' 

 ' but the boy do not   believe in you . instinctively , they disbelieve . Cyprian say to I , when I go to see he : " be father do any more of that silly talk about old god come back , mother ? I wish he would not . it would be pretty nasty for we if he get himself into the newspaper with it . ' " 

 Ram n laugh . 

 ' little boy , ' he say , ' be like little gramophone . they only talk accord to the record that be put into they . ' 

 ' you do not   believe out of the mouth of babe and suckling , ' say Carlota bitterly . 

 ' why , Carlota , the babe and suckling do not   get much chance . their mother and their teacher turn they into little gramophone from the first , so what can they do , but say and feel accord to the record the mother and teacher put into they ? perhaps in the time of Christ babe and suckling be not so perfectly exploit by their elder . ' 

 suddenly , however , the smile go off his face . he rise up , and point to the door . 

 ' go away , ' he say in a low tone . ' go away ! I have smell the smell of your spirit long enough . ' 

 she sit on the bed , spell - bind , gaze at he with frightened , yet obstinate , insolent eye , wince from his outstretched arm as if he have threaten to strike she . 

 then again the fire go out of his eye , and his arm sink . the still , far - away look come on his face . 

 ' what have I to do with it ! ' he murmur softly . 

 and take up his blouse and his hat , he go silently out on to the terrace , depart from she in body and in soul . she hear the soft swish of his sandal . she hear the faint resonance of the iron door to the terrace , to which he alone have access . and she sit like a heap of ash on his bed , ash to ash , burn out , with only the coal of she will still smoulder . 

 her eye be very bright , as she go to join Kate and Cipriano . 

 after breakfast , Kate be row home down the lake . she feel a curious depression at leave the hacienda : as if , for she , life now be there , and not anywhere else . 

 her own house seem empty , banal , vulgar . for the first time in her life , she feel the banality and emptiness even of her own milieu . though the Casa de las Cuentas be not purely her own milieu . 

 ' ah , Niña , how good ! how good that you have come ! ay , in the night , how much water ! much ! much ! but you be safe in the hacienda , Niña . ah , how nice , that hacienda of Jamiltepec . such a good man , Don Ram n - be not   he , Niña ? he care a great deal for his people . and the Señora , ah , how sympathetic she be ! ' 

 Kate smile and be pleasant . but she feel more like go into her room and say : for God 's sake , leave I alone , with your cheap rattle . 

 she suffer again from the servant . again that quiet , subterranean insolence against life , which seem to belong to modern life . the unbearable note of flippant jeering , which be underneath almost all modern utterance . it be underneath Juana 's constant cry . - Niña ! Niña ! 

 at meal - time Juana would seat herself on the ground at a little distance from Kate , and talk , talk in her rapid mouthful of conglomerate word with trail , wistful ending : and all the time watch her mistress with those black , unseee eye on which the spark of light would stir with the peculiar slow , malevolent jeering of the Indian . 

 Kate be not rich - she have only her moderate income . 

 ' ah , the rich people - ! ' Juana would say . 

 ' I be not rich , ' say Kate . 

 ' you be not rich , Niña ? ' come the singing , caressive bird - like voice : ' then , you be poor ? ' - this be indescribable irony . 

 ' no , I be not poor either . I be not rich , and I be not poor , ' say Kate . 

 ' you be not rich , and you be not poor , Niña ! ' repeat Juana , in her bird - like voice , that cover the real bird 's endless , vindictive jeering . 

 for the word mean nothing to she . to she , who have nothing , could never have anything , Kate be one of that weird class , the rich . and , Kate feel , in Mexico it be a crime to be rich , or to be class with the rich . not even a crime , really , so much as a freak . the rich class be a freak class , like dog with two head or calf with five leg . to be look upon , not with envy , but with the slow , undying antagonism and curiosity which ' normal ' have towards ' freak . ' the slow , powerful , corrosive indian mockery , issue from the lava - rock indian nature , against anything which strive to be above the grey , lava - rock level . 

 ' be it true , Niña , that your country be through there ? ' Juana ask , jab her finger downward , towards the bowel of the earth . 

 ' not quite ! ' say Kate . ' my country be more there - ' and she slant her finger at the earth 's surface . 

 ' ah - that way ! ' say Juana . and she look at Kate with a subtle leer , as if to say : what could you expect from people who come out of the earth sideways , like sprout of camote ! 

 ' and be it true that over there , there be people with only one eye - here ! ' Juana punch herself in the middle of her forehead . 

 ' no . that be not   true . that be just a story . ' 

 ' ah ! ' say Juana . ' be not   it true ! do you know ? have you be to the country where they be , these people ? ' 

 ' yes , ' say Kate . ' I have be to all the country , and there be no such people . ' 

 ' Verdad ! Verdad ! ' breathe Juana awestruck . ' you have be to all the country , and there be no such people ! - but in your country , they be all gringo ? nothing but gringo ? ' 

 she mean , no real people and salt of the earth like her own mexican self . 

 ' they be all people like I , ' say Kate coldly . 

 ' like you , Niña ? and they all talk like you ? ' 

 ' yes ! like I . ' 

 ' and there be many ? ' 

 ' many ! many ! ' 

 ' look now ! ' breathe Juana , almost awestruck to think that there could be whole world of these freak , mockable people . 

 and Concha , that young , belch savage , would stare through her window - grating at the strange menagerie of the Niña and the Niña 's white visitor . Concha , slapping tortilla , be real . 

 Kate walk down towards the kitchen . Concha be slap the masa , the maize dough which she buy in the plaza at eight centavos a kilo . 

 ' Niña ! ' she call in her raucous voice . ' do you eat tortilla ? ' 

 ' sometimes , ' say Kate . 

 ' eh ? ' shout the young savage . 

 ' sometimes . ' 

 ' here ! eat one now ! ' and Concha thrust a brown paw with a pinkish palm , and a dingy - look tortilla , at Kate . 

 ' not now , ' say Kate . 

 she dislike the heavy plaster that taste of lime . 

 ' do not   you want it ? do not   you eat it ? ' say Concha , with an impudent , strident laugh . and she fling the reject tortilla on the little pile . 

 she be one of those who will not   eat bread : say they do not   like it , that it be not food . 

 Kate would sit and rock on her terrace , while the sun pour in the green square of the garden , the palm - tree spread its great fan translucent at the light , the hibiscus dangle great double - red flower , rosy red , from its very dark tree , and the dark green orange look as if they be sweat as they grow . 

 Came lunch time , madly hot : and greasy hot soup , greasy rice , splintery little fried fish , bit of boil meat and boil egg - plant vegetable , a big basket pile with mango , papayas , zapote - all the tropical fruit one do not want , in hot weather . 

 and the barefoot little Maria , in a limp , tear , fade red frock , to wait at table . she be the love one . she would stand by Juana as Juana bubble with talk , like dark bubble in her mouth , and she would stealthily touch Kate 's white arm ; stealthily touch she again . not be rebuke , she would stealthily lay her thin little black arm on Kate 's shoulder , with the soft , light touch imaginable , and her strange , wide black eye would gleam with ghostly black beatitude , very curious , and her childish , pock - mark , slightly imbecile face would take on a black , arch , beatitudinous look . then Kate would quickly remove the thin , dark , pock - mark arm , the child would withdraw half a yard , the beatitudinous look foil , but her very black eye still shin expose and absorbedly , in a rapt , reptilian sort of ecstasy . 

 till Concha come to hit she with her elbow , make some brutal , savage remark which Kate could not understand . so the gloze black eye of the child would twitch , and Maria would break into meaningless tear , Concha into a loud , brutal , mock laugh , like some violent bird . and Juana interrupt her black and gluey flow of word to glance at her daughter and throw out some ineffectual remark . 

 the victim , the inevitable victim , and the inevitable victimizer . 

 the terrible , terrible hot emptiness of the mexican morning , the weight of black ennui that hang in the air ! it make Kate feel as if the bottom have fall out of her soul . she go out to the lake , to escape that house , that family . 

 since the rain , the tree in the broken garden of the lake front have flame into scarlet , and pour themselves out into lavender flower . rose red , scarlet and lavend , quick , tropical flower . wonderful splash of colour . but that be all : splash ! they make a splash , like firework . 

 and Kate think of the blackthorn puff white , in the early year , in Ireland , and hawthorn with coral grain , in a damp still morning in the lane , and foxglove by the bare rock , and tuft of ling and heather , and a ravel of harebell . and a terrible , terrible longing for home come over she . to escape from these tropical brilliancy and meaninglessness . 

 in Mexico , the wind be a hard draught , the rain be a sluice of water , to be avoid , and the sun hit down on one with hostility , terrific and stunning . Stiff , dry , unreal land , with sunshine beat on it like metal . or blackness and lightning and crash violence of rain . 

 no lovely fusion , no communion . no beautiful mingling of sun and mist , no softness in the air , never . either hard heat or hard chill . hard , straight lie and zigzag , wound the breast . no soft , sweet smell of earth . the smell of Mexico , however subtle , suggest violence and thing in chemical conflict . 

 and Kate feel herself fill with an anger of resentment . she would sit under a willow - tree by the lake , read a Pío Baroja novel that be angry and full of no ! no ! no ! - ich bin der Geist der stet verneint ! but she herself be so much angry and fuller of repudiation than Pío Baroja . Spain can not stand for No ! as Mexico can . 

 the tree hang fleecy above she . she sit on the warm sand in the shadow , careful not to let even her ankle lie in the biting shine of the sun . there be a faint , old smell of urine . the lake be so still and filmy as to be almost invisible . in the near distance , some dark woman be kneel on the edge of the lake , dress only in their long wet chemise in which they have bath . some be wash garment , some be pour water over themselves , scoop it up in gourd scoop and pour it over their black head and ruddy - dark shoulder , in the intense pressure of the sunshine . on her left be two big tree , and a cane fence , and little straw hut of Indians . there the beach itself end , and the little indian plot of land go down to the lake - front . 

 glance around in the great light , she seem to be sit isolate in a dark core of shadow , while the world move in inconsequential speck through the hollow glare . she notice a dark urchin , nearly naked , march with naked , manly solemnity down to the water 's edge . he would be about four year old , but more manly than an adult man . with sex come a certain vulnerability which these round - face , black - head , stiff - back infant man have not get . Kate know the urchin . she know his tattered rag of a red shirt , and the weird rag that be his little man 's white trouser . she know his black round head , his stiff , sturdy march of a walk , his round eye , and his swift , scuttle run , like a bolting animal . 

 ' what be the brat get ? ' she say to herself , gaze at the move little figure within the great light . 

 dangle from his tiny outstretched arm , hold by the web toe , head down and feebly flap its out - sink wing , be a bird , a water - fowl . it be a black mud - chick with a white bar across the under - wing , one of the many dark fowl that bob in little flock along the edge of the sun - stunned lake . 

 the urchin march stiffly down to the water 's edge , hold the upside - down bird , that seem big as an eagle in the tiny fist . another brat come scuttle after . the two infant man paddle a yard into the warm , lapping water , under the great light , and gravely stoop , like old man , set the fowl on the water . it float , but could hardly paddle . the lift of the ripple move it . the urchin drag it in , like a rag , by a string tie to its leg . 

 so quiet , so still , so dark , like tiny , chubby little infant man , the two solemn figure with the rag of a bird ! 

 Kate turn uneasily to her book , her nerve on edge . she hear the splash of a stone . the bird be on the water , but apparently the string that hold it by the leg be tie to a stone . it lie wavering , a couple of yard out . and the two little he - man , with sober steadfastness and a quiet , dark lust , be pick up stone , and throw they with the fierce indian aim at the feebly flutter bird : right down upon it . like a little warrior stand the mite in the red rag , his arm upraise , to throw the stone with all his might down on the tethered bird . 

 in a whiff , Kate be dart down the beach . 

 ' ugly boy ! ugly child ! go ! go away , ugly child , ugly boy ! ' she say on one breath , with quiet intensity . 

 the round - headed dot give she one black glance from his manly eye , then the two of they scuttle up the beach into invisibility . 

 Kate go into the water , and lift the wet , warm bird . the bit of coarse fibre - string hang from its limp , greenish , waterfowl 's ankle . it feebly try to bite she . 

 she rapidly step out of the water and stand in the sun to unfasten the string . the bird be about as big as a pigeon . it lie in her hand with the absolute motionlessness of a catch wild thing . 

 Kate stoop and pull off her shoe and stocking . she look round . no sign of life from the reed hut dark in the shadow of the tree . she lift her skirt and stagger out barefoot in the hot shallow of the water , almost fall on the cruel stone under the water . the lake - side be very shallow . she stagger on and on , in agony , hold up her skirt in one hand , hold the warm , wet , motionless bird in the other . till at last she be up to her knee . then she launch the greeny - black bird , and give it a little push to the uprearing expanse of filmy water , that be almost dim , invisible with the glare of light . 

 it lie wet and draggle on the pale , move sperm of the water , like a buoyant rag . 

 ' swim then ! swim ! ' she say , try to urge it away into the lake . 

 either it could not   or would not . anyhow it do not . 

 but it be out of reach of those urchin . Kate struggle back from those stone , to her tree , to her shade , to her book , away from the rage of the sun . silent with slow anger , she keep glance up at the float bird , and sideway at the reed hut of the Indians in the black shadow . 

 yes , the bird be dip its beak in the water , and shake its head . it be come to itself . but it do not paddle . it let itself be lift , lift on the ripple , and the ripple would drift it ashore . 

 ' Fool of a thing ! ' say Kate nervously , use all her consciousness to make it paddle away into the lake . 

 two companion , two black dot with white speck of face , be come out of the pale glare of the lake . two mud - chick swam busily forward . the first swam up and poke its beak at the inert bird , as if to say hello ! what be up ? then immediately it turn away and paddle in complete oblivion to the shore , its companion follow . 

 Kate watch the rag of feather misery anxiously . would it not rouse itself ? would not   it follow ? 

 no ! there it lay , slowly , inertly drift on the ripple , only sometimes shake its head . 

 the other two alert bird wad confidently , busily among the stone . 

 Kate read a bit more . 

 when she look again , she could not see her bird . but the other two be walk among the stone , jauntily . 

 she read a bit more . 

 the next thing be a rather loutish youth of eighteen or so , in overall trouser , run with big stride towards the water , and the stiff little man - brat scuttle after with determined bare foot . her heart stand still . 

 the two busy mud - chick rise in flight and go low over the water into the blare of light . go ! 

 but the lout in the big hat and overall trouser and those stiff indian shoulder she sometimes hat so much be peer among the stone . she , however , be sure her bird have go . 

 no ! actually no ! the stiff - shoulder lout stoop and pick up the damp thing . it have let itself drift back . 

 he turn , dangle it like a rag from the end of one wing , and hand it to the man - brat . then he stalk self - satisfied up the shore . 

 Ugh ! and that moment how Kate hat these people : their terrible lowness ,    terre ,    terre . their stiff broad american shoulder , and high chest , and above all , their walk , their prancing , insentient walk . as if some motor - engine drive they at the bottom of their back . 

 stoop rather forward and look at the ground so that he could turn his eye sideways to she , without show she his face , the lout return to the shadow of the hut . and after he , diminutive , the dot of a man march stiffly , hurriedly , dangle the wretched bird , that stir very feebly , downwards from the tip of one wing . and from time to time turn his round , black - eyed face in Kate 's direction , vindictively , apprehensively , lest she should swoop down on he again . black , apprehensive male defiance of the great , white weird female . 

 Kate glare back from under her tree . 

 ' if look would kill you , brat , I would kill you , ' she say . and the urchin turn his face like clockwork at she from time to time , as he strut palpitating towards the gap in the cane hedge , into which the youth have disappear . 

 Kate debate whether to rescue the foolish bird again . but what be the good ! 

 this country would have its victim . America would have its victim . as long as time last , it will be the continent divide between Victims and victimizer . what be the good of try to interfere ! 

 she rise up in detestation of the flabby bird , and of the sulky - faced brat turn his full moon on she in apprehension . 

 lump of woman be by the water 's edge . westward , down the glare , rise the break - look villa and the white twin tower of the church , hold up its two finger in mockery above the scarlet flame - tree and the dark mango . she see the rather lousy shore , and smell the smell of Mexico come out in the hot sun after the rain : excrement , human and animal dry in the sun on a dry , dry earth ; and dry leaf ; and mango leave ; and pure air with a little refuse - smoke in it . 

 ' but the day will come when I shall go away , ' she say to herself . 

 and sit rock once more on her veranda , hear the clap - clap of tortillas from the far end of the patio , the odd , metallic noise of bird , and feel the cloud already assemble in the west , with a weight of unborn thunder upon they , she feel she could bear it no more : the vacuity , and the pressure : the horrible uncreate elementality , so uncouth , even sun and rain uncouth , uncouth . 

 and she wonder over the black vision in the eye of that urchin . the curious void . 

 he could not see that the bird be a real living creature with a life of its own . this , his race have never see . with black eye they star out on an elemental world , where the element be monstrous and cruel , as the sun be monstrous , and the cold , crush black water of the rain be monstrous , and the dry , dry , cruel earth . 

 and among the monstrosity of the element flicker and tower other presence : terrible uncouth thing call gringo , white people , and dress up monster of rich people , with power like god , but uncouth , demonish god . and uncouth thing like bird that could fly and snake that could crawl and fish that could swim and bite . an uncouth , monstrous universe of monster big and little , in which man hold his own by sheer resistance and guardedness , never , never go forth from his own darkness . 

 and sometimes , it be good to have revenge on the monster that flutter and strode . the monster big and the monster little . even the monster of that bird , which have its own monstrous bird - nature . on this the mite could wreck the long human vengeance , and for once be master . 

 blind to the creature as a soft , struggle thing find its own fluttering way through life . see only another monster of the outer void . 

 walk forever through a menace of monster , blind to the sympathy in thing , hold one 's own , and not give in , nor go forth . hence the lift chest and the prance walk . hence the stiff , insentient spine , the rich physique , and the heavy , dreary nature , heavy like the dark - grey mud - brick , with a terrible obstinate ponderosity and a dry sort of gloom . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XV 

 the Written Hymns of Quetzalcoatl 

 

 the electric light in Sayula be as inconstant as everything else . it would come on at half - past six in the evening , and it might bravely burn till ten at night , when the village go dark with a click . but usually it do no such thing . often it refuse to sputter into being till seven , or half - past , or even eight o'clock . but its bad trick be that of pop out just in the middle of supper , or just when you be write a letter . all of a sudden , the black mexican night come down on you with a thud . and then everybody run blindly for match and candle , with a calling of frightened voice . why be they always frightened ? then the electric light , like a wound thing , would try to revive , and a red glow would burn in the bulb , sinister . all hold their breath - be it come or not ? sometimes it expire for good , sometimes it get its breath back and shine , rather dully , but well than nothing . 

 once the rainy season have set in , it be hopeless . night after night it collapse . and Kate would sit with her weary , flutter candle , while blue lightning reveal the dark shape of thing in the patio . and half - see people go swiftly down to Juana 's end of the patio , secretly . 

 on such a night Kate sit on her veranda face the deepness of the black night . a candle shone in her desert salon . now and again she see the oleander and the papaya in the patio garden , by the blue gleam of lightning that fall with a noiseless splash into the pitch darkness . there be a distant noise of thunder , several storm prowl round like hungry jaguar , above the lake . 

 and several time the gate click , and crunch step come along the gravel , someone pass on the gravel walk , salute she , go down to Juana 's quarter , where the dull light of a float oil - wick shone through the grated window - hole . then there be a low , monotonous sound of a voice , recite or read . and as the wind blow and the lightning alight again like a blue bird among the plant , there would come the sharp noise of the round cuenta fall from the cuenta - tree . 

 Kate be uneasy and a bit forlorn . she feel something be happen down in the servant ' corner , something secret in the dark . and she be strand in her isolation on her terrace . 

 but , after all , it be her house , and she have a right to know what her own people be up to . she rise from her rock - chair and walk down the veranda and round the dining - room bay . the dining - room , which have its own two door on the patio , be already lock up . 

 in the far corner beyond the well she see a group sit on the ground , outside the doorway of Juana 's kitchen - hole . out of this little kitchen - shed shine the light of the float - wick lamp , and a voice be slowly intone , all the face be look into the dim light , the woman dark - hooded in rebozos , the man with their hat on , their serape over their shoulder . 

 when they hear Kate 's footstep , the face look her way , and a voice murmur in warning . Juana struggle to her foot . 

 ' it be the Niña ! ' she say . ' come , then , Niña , you poor innocent all alone in the evening . ' 

 the man in the group rise to their foot - she recognize the young Ezequiel , take his hat off to she . and there be Maria del Carmen , the bride . and inside the little shed , with the wick lamp on the floor , be Julio , the bridegroom of a few week ago . Concha and little Maria be there , and a couple of stranger . 

 ' I could hear the voice - ' say Kate . ' I do not   know it be you , Julio . how do you do ? - and I wonder so much what it be . ' 

 there be a moment 's dead silence . then Juana plunge in . 

 ' yes , Niña ! come ! it be very nice that you come . Concha , the chair for the Niña ! ' 

 Concha get up rather unwillingly , and fetch the little low chair which form Juana 's sole article of furniture , save the one bed . 

 ' I do not   disturb you ? ' say Kate . 

 ' no , Niña , you be a friend of Don Ram n , verdad ? ' 

 ' yes , ' say Kate . 

 ' and we - we be read the Hymns . ' 

 ' yes ? ' say Kate . 

 ' the Hymns of Quetzalcoatl , ' say Ezequiel , in his bark young voice , with sudden bravado . 

 ' do go on ! may I listen ! ' 

 ' you hear ! the Niña want to listen . Read , Julio , read ! read then . ' 

 they all sit down once more on the ground , and Julio sit down by the lamp , but he hang his head , hide his face in the shadow of his big hat . 

 ' entonce ! - read then , ' say Juana . 

 ' he be afraid , ' murmur Maria del Carmen , lay her hand on the young man 's knee . ' however , read , Julio ! because the Niña want to hear . ' 

 and after a moment 's struggle , Julio say in a muffled voice : 

 ' do I begin from the beginning . ' 

 ' yes , from the beginning ! read ! ' say Juana . 

 the young man take a sheet of paper , like an advertisement leaflet , from under his blanket . at the top it have the Quetzalcoatl symbol , call the Eye , the ring with the bird - shape standing in the middle . 

 he begin to read in a rather muffle voice : 

 ' I be Quetzalcoatl with the dark face , who live in Mexico in other day . 

 ' till there come a stranger from over the sea , and his face be white , and he speak with strange word . he show his hand and his foot , that in both there be hole . and he say : " my name be Jesus , and they call I Christ . man crucify I on a Cross till I die . but I rise up out of the place where they put I , and I go up to heaven to my Father . now my Father have tell I to come to Mexico . " 

 ' Quetzalcoatl say : you alone ? 

 ' Jesus say : my mother be here . she shed many tear for I , see I crucify . so she will hold the Sons of Mexico on her lap , and soothe they when they suffer , and when the woman of Mexico weep , she will take they on her bosom and comfort they . and when she cry to the Father for her people , he will make everything well . 

 ' Quetzatlcoatl say : that be well . and brother with the name Jesus , what will you do in Mexico ? 

 ' Jesus say : I will bring peace into Mexico . and on the naked I will put clothe , and food between the lip of the hungry , and gift in all man 's hand , and peace and love in their heart . 

 ' Quetzalcoatl say : it be very good . I be old . I could not do so much . I must go now . farewell , people of Mexico . Farewell , strange brother call Jesus . Farewell , woman call Mary . it be time for I to go . 

 ' so Quetzalcoatl look at his people ; and he embrace Jesus , the Son of Heaven ; and he embrace Maria , the Blessed Virgin , the Holy Mother of Jesus , and he turn away . slowly he go . but in his ear be the sound of the tearing down of his temple in Mexico . nevertheless he go on slowly , be old , and weary with much living . he climb the steep of the mountain , and over the white snow of the volcano . as he go , behind he rise a cry of people die , and a flame of place burn . he say to himself : surely those be mexican cry ! yet I must not hear , for Jesus have come to the land , and he will wipe the tear from all eye , and his Mother will make they all glad . 

 ' he also say : surely that be Mexico burn . but I must not look , for all man will be brother , now Jesus have come to the land , and the woman will sit by the blue skirt of Mary , smile with peace and with love . 

 ' so the old god reach the top of the mountain , and look up into the blue of heaven . and through a door in the blue wall he see a great darkness , and star and a moon shin . and beyond the darkness he see one great star , like a bright gateway . 

 ' then fire rise from the volcano around the old Quetzalcoatl , in wing and glitter feather . and with the wing of fire and the glitter of spark Quetzalcoatl fly up , up , like a waft fire , like a glitter bird , up , into the space , and away to the white step of heaven , that lead to the blue wall , where be the door to the dark . so he enter in and be go . 

 ' night fall , and Quetzalcoatl be go , and man in the world see only a star travel back into heaven , depart under the low branch of darkness . 

 ' then man in Mexico say : Quetzalcoatl have go . even his star have depart . we must listen to this Jesus , who speak in a foreign tongue . 

 ' so they learn a new speech from the priest that come from upon the great water to the east . and they become Christians . ' 

 Julio , who have become absorb , end abruptly , as the tale of the leaflet be end . 

 ' it be beautiful , ' say Kate . 

 ' and it be true ! ' cry the sceptical Juana . 

 ' it seem to I true , ' say Kate . 

 ' Señora ! ' yell Concha . ' be it true that heaven be up there , and you come down step like cloud to the edge of the sky , like the step from the mole into the lake ? be it true that El Señor come and stand on the step and look down at we like we look down into the lake to see the charale ? ' 

 Concha shove up her fierce swarthy face , and shake her mass of hair , glare at Kate , wait for an answer . 

 ' I do not   know everything , ' laugh Kate . ' but it seem to I true . ' 

 ' she believe it , ' say Concha , turn her face to her mother . 

 ' and be it true , ' ask Juana , ' that El Señor , El Cristo del Mundo , be a gringo , and that he come from your country , with his Holy Mother ? ' 

 ' not from my country , but from a country near . ' 

 ' listen ! ' exclaim Juana , awestruck . ' El Señor be a gringuito , and his Holy Mother be a gringuita . yes , one really know . look ! look at the foot of the Niña ! pure foot the Santísima ! look ! ' Kate be barefoot , wear sandal with a simple strap across the foot . Juana touch one of the Niña 's white foot , fascinated . ' foot of the Santísima . and she , the Holy Mary , be a gringuita . she come over the sea , like you , Niña ? ' 

 ' yes , she come over the sea ! ' 

 ' ah ! you know it ? ' 

 ' yes . we know that . ' 

 ' think of it ! the Santísima be a gringuita , and she come over the Sea like the Niña , from the country of the Niña ! ' Juana speak in a wicked wonder , horrified , delight , mock . 

 ' and the Lord be a Gringuito - pure Gringuito ? ' bark Concha . 

 ' and Niña - it be the gringo who kill El Señor ? it be not   the Mexicans ? it be those other gringo who put he on the Cross ? ' 

 ' yes ! ' say Kate . ' it be not   the Mexicans . ' 

 ' the gringo ? ' 

 ' yes , the gringo . ' 

 ' and he himself be a Gringo ? ' 

 ' yes ! ' say Kate , not know what else to say . 

 ' look ! ' say Juana , in her hush , awed , malevolent voice . ' he be a Gringo , and the gringo put he on the Cross . ' 

 ' but a long time ago , ' say Kate hastily . 

 ' a long time ago , say the Niña , ' echo Juana , in her awed voice . 

 there be a moment of silence . the dark face of the girl and man seat on the ground be turn up to Kate , watch she fixedly , in the half light , count every word . in the outer air , thunder mutter in different place . 

 ' and now , Niña , ' come the cool , clear voice of Maria del Carmen , ' El Señor be go back again to his Father , and our Quetzalcoatl be come back to we ? ' 

 ' and the Santísima be leave we ? ' put in the hurried voice of Juana . ' think of it ! the Santísima be leave we , and this Quetzalcoatl be come ! he have no mother , he ! ' 

 ' perhaps he have a wife , ' say Kate . 

 ' Quién sabe ! ' murmur Juana . 

 ' they say , ' say the bold Concha , ' that in Paradise he have grow young . ' 

 ' who ? ' ask Juana . 

 ' I do not   know how they call he , ' mutter Concha , ashame to say the word . 

 ' Quetzalcoatl ! ' say Ezequiel , in his bark strong young voice . ' yes , he be young . he be a god in the flower of life , and finely build . ' 

 ' they say so ! they say so ! ' murmur Juana . ' think of it ! ' 

 ' here it say so ! ' cry Ezequiel . ' here it be write . in the second Hymn . ' 

 ' read it then , Julio . ' 

 and Julio , now nothing loth , take out a second paper . 

 ' I , Quetzalcoatl , of Mexico , I travel the long journey . 

 ' beyond the blue outer wall of heaven , beyond the bright place of the Sun , across the plain of darkness where the star spread out like tree , like tree and bush , far away to the heart of all the world , low down like the Morning Star . 

 ' and at the heart of all the world those be wait whose face I could not see . and in voice like bee they murmur among themselves : this be Quetzalcoatl whose hair be white with fan the fire of life . he come alone , and slowly . 

 ' then with hand I could not see , they take my hand , and in their arm that I could not see , at last I die . 

 ' but when I be dead , and bone , they cast not my bone away , they do not give I up to the four wind , nor to the six . no , not even to the wind that blow down to the middle of earth , nor to he that blow upward like a finger pointing , do they give I . 

 ' he be dead , they say , but unrelinquished . 

 ' so they take the oil of the darkness , and lay it on my brow and my eye , they put it in my ear and nostril and my mouth , they put it on the two - fold silence of my breast , and on my sunken navel , and on my secret place , before and behind : and in the palm of my hand , and on the mound of my knee , and under the tread of my foot . 

 ' lastly , they anoint all my head with the oil that come out of the darkness . they they say : he be seal up . lay he away . 

 ' so they lay I in the fountain that bubble darkly at the heart of the world , far , far behind the sun , and there lie I , Quetzalcoatl , in warm oblivion . 

 ' I sleep the great sleep , and dream not . 

 ' till a voice be call : Quetzalcoatl ! 

 ' I say : who be that ? 

 ' no one answer , but the voice say : Quetzalcoatl ! 

 ' I say : where art thou ? 

 ' so ! he say . I be neither here nor there . I be thyself . get up . 

 ' now all be very heavy upon I , like a tomb - stone of darkness . 

 ' I say : be I not old ? how shall I roll this stone away ? 

 ' how art thou old , when I be new man ? I will roll away the stone . sit up ! 

 ' I sit up , and the stone go roll , crash down the gulfs of space . 

 ' I say to myself : I be new man . I be young than the young and old than the old . Lo ! I be unfold on the stem of time like a flower , I be at the midst of the flower of my manhood . neither do I ache with desire , to tear , to burst the bud ; neither do I yearn away like a seed that float into heaven . the cup of my flowering be unfold , in its middle the star float balanced with array . my stem be in the air , my root be in all the dark , the sun be no more than a cupful within I . 

 ' Lo ! I be neither young nor old , I be the flower unfold , I be new . 

 ' so I rise and stretch my limb and look around . the sun be below I in a daze of heat , like a hot humming - bird hover at mid - day over the world . and his beak be long and very sharp , he be like a dragon . 

 ' and a faint star be hesitate wearily , wait to pass . 

 ' I call aloud , say : " who be that ? " 

 

 my name be Jesus , I be Mary 's son . 
 I be come home . 
 my mother the Moon be dark . 

 Brother , Quetzalcoatl , 
 hold back the wild hot sun . 
 bind he with shadow while I pass . 
 let I come home . 

 

 ' I catch the sun and hold he , and in my shade the faint star slip past , go slowly into the dark reach beyond the burning of the sun . then on the slope of silence he sit down and take off his sandal , and I put they on . 

 ' " how do they wear the wing of love , Jesus , the mexican people ? " 

 ' " the soul of the mexican people be heavy for the wing of love , they have swallow the stone of despair . " 

 ' " where be your Lady Mother in the mantle of blue , she with comfort in her lap ? " 

 ' " her mantle fade in the dust of the world , she be weary without sleep , for the voice of people cry night and day , and the knife of the mexican people be sharp than the pinion of love , and their stubbornness be strong than hope . Lo ! the fountain of tear dry up in the eye of the old , and the lap of the aged be comfortless , they look for rest . Quetzalcoatl , Sir , my mother go even before I , to her still white bed in the moon . " 

 ' " she be go , and thou art go , Jesus , the Crucified . then what of Mexico ? " 

 ' " the image stand in their church , Oh Quetzalcoatl , they do not   know that I and my Mother have depart . they be angry soul , Brother , my Lord ! they vent their anger . they break my church , they steal my strength , they wither the lip of the Virgin . they drive we away , and we creep away like a totter old man and a woman , tearless and bend double with age . so we flee while they be not look . and we seek but rest , to forget forever the child of man who have swallow the stone of despair . " 

 ' then say I : it be good , pass on . I , Quetzalcoatl , will go down . sleep thou the sleep without dream . farewell at the cross - road , Brother Jesus . 

 ' he say : oh , Quetzalcoatl ! they have forget thee . the feathered snake ! the serpent - silent bird ! they be ask for none of thee . 

 ' I say : go thy way , for the dust of earth be in thy eye and on thy lip . for I the serpent of middle - earth sleep in my loin and my belly , the bird of the outer air perch on my brow and sweep her bill across my breast . but I , I be lord of two way . I be master of up and down . I be as a man who be a new man , with new limb and life , and the light of the Morning Star in his eye . Lo ! I be I ! the lord of both way . Thou wert lord of the one way . now it lead thee to the sleep . farewell ! 

 ' so Jesus go on towards the sleep . and Mary the Mother of Sorrows lie down on the bed of the white moon , weary beyond any more tear . 

 ' and I , I be on the threshold . I be step across the border . I be Quetzalcoatl , lord of both way , star between day and the dark . ' 

 there be silence as the young man finish read . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XVI 

 Cipriano and Kate 

 

 on Saturday afternoon the big black canoe with their large square sail come slowly approach out of the thin haze across the lake , from the west , from Tlapaltepec , with big straw hat and with blanket and earthenware stuff , from Ixtlahuacan and Jaramay and Las Zemas with mat and timber and charcoal and orange , from Tuliapan and Cuxcueco and San Cristobal with boatload of dark - green , globular water - melon , and pile of red tomato , mango , vegetable , orange : and boat - load of brick and tile , burn red , but rather friable ; then more charcoal , more wood , from the stark dry mountain over the lake . 

 Kate nearly always go out about five o'clock , on Saturdays , to see the boat , flat - bottom , drift up to the shallow shore , and begin to unload in the glow of the evening . it please she to see the man run along the plank with the dark - green melon , and pile they in a mound on the rough sand , melon dark - green like creature with pale belly . to see the tomato all pour out into a shallow place in the lake , bob about while the woman wash they , a bob scarlet upon the water . 

 the long , heavy brick be pile in heap along the scrap of demolish breakwater , and little gang of ass come trot down the rough beach , to be laden , press their little foot in the gravelly sand , and flop their ear . 

 the cargadore be busy at the charcoal boat , carry out the rough sack . 

 ' do you want charcoal , Niña ? ' shout a grimy cargador , who have carry the trunk from the station on his back . 

 ' at how much ? ' 

 ' twenty - five real the two sack . ' 

 ' I pay twenty real . ' 

 ' at twenty real then , Señorita . but you give I two real for the transport ? ' 

 ' the owner pay the transport , ' say Kate . ' but I will give you twenty centavos . ' 

 away go the man , trotting barelegge , barefoot , over the stony ground , with two large sack of charcoal on his shoulder . the man carry huge weight , without seem ever to think they be heavy . almost as if they like to feel a huge weight crush on their iron spine , and to be able to resist it . 

 basket of spring guavas , basket of sweet lemon call lima , basket of tiny green and yellow lemon , big as walnut ; orange - red and greenish mango , orange , carrot , cactus fruit in great abundance , a few knobbly potato , flat , pearl - white onion , little calabazita and speckle green calabazita like frog , camote cook and raw - she love to watch the basket trot up the beach past the church . 

 then , rather late as a rule , big red pot , bulge red olla for water - jar , earthenware casserole and earthenware jug with cream and black scratch pattern in glaze , bowl , big flat earthenware disc for cook tortillas - much earthenware . 

 on the west shore , man be run up the beach wear twelve enormous hat at once , like a trotting pagoda . man trot with finely weave huarache and rough strip sandal . and man with a few dark serape , with gaudy rose - pink pattern , in a pile on their shoulder . 

 it be fascinating . but at the same time , there be a heavy , almost sullen feeling on the air . these people come to market to a sort of battle . they come , not for the joy of selling , but for the sullen contest with those who want what they have get . the strange , black resentment always present . 

 by the time the church bell clang for sunset , the market have already begin . on all the pavement round the plaza squat the Indians with their ware , pyramid of green watermelon , array of rough earthenware , hat in pile , pair of sandal side by side , a great array of fruit , a spread of collar - stud and knick - knack , call novedade , little tray with sweet . and people arrive all the time out of the wild country , with laden ass . 

 yet never a shout , hardly a voice to be hear . none of the animation and the frank wild clamour of a Mediterranean market . always the heavy friction of the will ; always , always , grind upon the spirit , like the grey black grind of lava - rock . 

 when dark fall , the vendor light their tin torch - lamp , and the flame waver and stream as the dark - face man squat on the ground in their white clothe and big hat , wait to sell . they never ask you to buy . they never show their ware . they do not   even look at you . it be as if their static resentment and indifference would hardly let they sell at all . 

 Kate sometimes feel the market cheerful and easy . but more often she feel an unutterable weight slowly , invisibly sink on her spirit . and she want to run . she want , above all , the comfort of Don Ram n and the Hymns of Quetzalcoatl . this seem to she the only escape from a world go ghastly . 

 there be talk of revolution again , so the market be uneasy and grind the black grit into the spirit . foreign - look soldier be about , with loop hat , and knife and pistol , and savage northern face : tall , rather thin figure . they would loiter about in pair , talk in a strange northern speech , and seem more alien even than Kate herself . 

 the food - stall be brilliantly light . row of man sit at the plank board , drink soup and eat hot food with their finger . the milkman ride in on horseback , his two big can of milk sling before he , and he make his way slowly through the people to the food - stall . there , still sit unmove on horseback , he deliver bowl of milk from the can in front of he , and then , on horseback like a monument , take his supper , his bowl of soup , and his plate of tamale , or of mince , fiery meat spread on tortilla . the peon drift slowly round . guitar be sound , half - secretly . a motor - car work its way in from the city , choke with people , girl , young man , city papa , child , in a pile . 

 the rich press of life , above the flare of torch upon the ground ! the throng of white - clad , big - hatted man circulate slowly , the woman with dark rebozos slip silently . dark tree overhead . the doorway of the hotel bright with electricity . girl in organdie frock , white , cherry - red , blue , from the city . group of singer sing inwardly . and all the noise subdue , suppress . 

 the sense of strange , heavy suppression , the dead black power of negation in the soul of the peon . it be almost pitiful to see the pretty , pretty slim girl from Guadalajara go round and round , their naked arm link together , so light in their gauzy , scarlet , white , blue , orange dress , look for someone to look at they , to take note of they . and the peon man only emit from their soul the black vapour of negation , that perhaps be hate . they seem , the native , to have the power of blight the air with their black , rock - bottom resistance . 

 Kate almost weep over the slim , eager girl , pretty as rather papery flower , eager for attention , but thrust away , victimize . 

 suddenly there be a shot . the market - place be on its foot in a moment , scatter , pour away into the street and the shop . another shot ! Kate , from where she stand , see across the rapidly - empty plaza a man sit back on one of the bench , fire a pistol into the air . he be a lout from the city , and he be half drunk . the people know what it be . yet any moment he might lower the pistol and start fire at random . everybody hurry silently , melt away , leave the plaza void . 

 two more shot , pap - pap ! still into the air . and at the same moment a little officer in uniform dart out of the dark street where the military station be , and where now the big hat be pile on the ground ; he rush straight to the drunkard , who be spread his leg and wave the pistol : and before you could breathe , slap ! and again slap ! he have slap the pistol - firer first on one side of the face , then on the other , with slap that resound almost like shot . and in the same breath he seize the arm that hold the pistol and wrest the weapon away . 

 two of the strange soldier instantly rush up and seize the man by the arm . the officer speak two word , they salute and march off their prisoner . 

 instantly the crowd be ebb back into the plaza , unconcerned . Kate sit on a bench with her heart beat . she see the prisoner pass under a lamp , streak of blood on his cheek . and Juana , who have flee , now come scuttle back and take Kate 's hand , say : 

 ' look ! Niña ! it be the General ! ' 

 she rise startled to her foot . the officer be salute she . 

 ' Don Cipriano ! ' she say . 

 ' the same ! ' he reply . ' do that drunken fellow frighten you ? ' 

 ' not much ! only startle I . I do not   feel any evil intention behind it . ' 

 ' no , only drunk . ' 

 ' but I shall go home now . ' 

 ' shall I walk with you ? ' 

 ' would you care to ? ' 

 he take his place at her side , and they turn down by the church , to the lake shore . there be a moon above the mountain and the air be come fresh , not too strong , from the west . from the Pacific . little light be burn ruddy by the boat at the water 's edge , some outside , and some inside , under the roof - tilt of the boat 's little inward shed . woman be prepare a mouthful of food . 

 ' but the night be beautiful , ' say Kate , breathe deep . 

 ' with the moon clip away just a little , ' he say . 

 Juana be follow close on her heel : and behind , two soldier in slouch hat . 

 ' do the soldier escort you ? ' she say . 

 ' I suppose so , ' say he . 

 ' but the moon , ' she say , ' be not   lovely and friendly as it be in England or Italy . ' 

 ' it be the same planet , ' he reply . 

 ' but the moonshine in America be not   the same . it do not   make one feel glad as it do in Europe . one feel it would like to hurt one . ' 

 he be silent for some moment . then he say : 

 ' perhaps there be in you something European , which hurt our Mexican Moon . ' 

 ' but I come in good faith . ' 

 ' european good faith . perhaps it be not the same as Mexican . ' 

 Kate be silent , almost stunned . 

 ' Fancy your mexican moon object to I ! ' she laugh ironically . 

 ' fancy your objecting to our mexican moon ! ' say he . 

 ' I be not , ' say she . 

 they come to the corner of Kate 's road . at the corner be a group of tree , and under the tree , behind the hedge , several reed hut . Kate often laugh at the donkey look over the dry - stone low wall , and at the black sheep with curved horn , tie to a bitten tree , and at the lad , naked but for a bit of a shirt , flee into the corner under the thorn screen . 

 Kate and Cipriano sit on the veranda of the House of the Cuentas . she offer he vermouth , but he refuse . 

 they be still . there come the faint pip!-pip ! from the little electric plant just up the road , which Jesús tend . then a cock from beyond the banana crow powerfully and hoarsely . 

 ' but how absurd ! ' say Kate . ' cock do not   crow at this hour . ' 

 ' only in Mexico , ' laugh Cipriano . 

 ' yes ! only here ! ' 

 ' he think your moon be the sun , no ? ' he say , tease she . 

 the cock crow powerfully , again and again . 

 ' this be very nice , your house , your patio , ' say Cipriano . 

 but Kate be silent . 

 ' or do not   you like it ? ' he say . 

 ' you see , ' she answer , ' I have nothing to do ! the servant will not   let I do anything . if I sweep my room , they stand and say Qué Niña ! Qué Niña ! as if I be stand on my head for their benefit . I sew , though I have   no interest in sewing . - what be it , for a life ? ' 

 ' and you read ! ' he say , glance at the magazine and book . 

 ' ah , it be all such stupid , lifeless stuff , in the book and paper , ' she say . 

 there be a silence . after which he say : 

 ' but what would you like to do ? as you say , you take no interest in sewing . you know the Navajo woman , when they weave a blanket , leave a little place for their soul to come out , at the end : not to weave their soul into it . - I always think England have weave her soul into her fabric , into all the thing she have make . and she never leave a place for it to come out . so now all her soul be in her good , and nowhere else . ' 

 ' but Mexico have no soul , ' say Kate . ' she be swallow the stone of despair , as the hymn say . ' 

 ' ah ! you think so ? I think not . the soul be also a thing you make , like a pattern in a blanket . it be very nice while all the wool be roll their different thread and different colour , and the pattern be be make . but once it be finish - then finish it have no interest any more . Mexico have not   start to weave the pattern of her soul . or she be only just start : with Ram n. do not   you believe in Ram n ? ' 

 Kate hesitate before she answer . 

 ' ram n , yes ! I do ! but whether it be any good try here in Mexico , as he be try - ' she say slowly . 

 ' he be in Mexico . he try here . why should not you ? ' 

 ' I ? ' 

 ' yes ! you ! Ram n do not   believe in womanless god , he say . why should you not be the woman in the Quetzalcoatl pantheon ? if you will , the goddess ! ' 

 ' I , a goddess in the mexican pantheon ? ' cry Kate , with a burst of startled laughter . 

 ' why not ? ' say he . 

 ' but I be not mexican , ' say she . 

 ' you may easily be a goddess , ' say he , ' in the same pantheon with Don Ram n and I . ' 

 a strange , inscrutable flame of desire seem to be burn on Cipriano 's face , as his eye watch her glitter . Kate could not help feel that it be a sort of intense , blind ambition , of which she be partly an object : a passionate object also : which kindle the Indian to the hot pitch of his being . 

 ' but I do not   feel like a goddess in a mexican pantheon , ' she say . ' Mexico be a bit horrible to I . Don Ram n be wonderful : but I be so afraid they will destroy he . ' 

 ' come , and help to prevent it . ' 

 ' how ? ' 

 ' you marry I . you complain you have nothing to do . then marry I . marry I , and help Ram n and I . we need a woman , Ram n say , to be with we . and you be the woman . there be a great deal to do . ' 

 ' but can not   I help without marry anybody ? ' say Kate . 

 ' how can you ? ' he say simply . 

 and she know it be true . 

 ' but you see , ' she say , ' I have no impulse to marry you , so how can I ? ' 

 ' why ? ' he say . 

 ' you see , Mexico be really a bit horrible to I . and the black eye of the people really make my heart contract , and my flesh shrink . there be a bit of horror in it . and I do not   want horror in my soul . ' 

 he be silent and unfathomable . she do not know in the least what he be think , only a black cloud seem over he . 

 ' why not ? ' he say at last . ' horror be real . why not a bit of horror , as you say , among all the rest ? ' 

 he gaze at she with complete , glitter earnestness , something heavy upon she . 

 ' but - ' she stammer in amazement . 

 ' you feel a bit of horror for I too . - but why not ? perhaps I feel a bit of horror for you too , for your light - colour eye and your strong white hand . but that be good . ' 

 Kate look at he in amazement . and all she want be to flee , to flee away beyond the bound of this gruesome continent . 

 ' get used to it , ' he say . ' get used to it that there must be a bit of fear , and a bit of horror in your life . and marry I , and you will find many thing that be not horror . the bit of horror be like the sesame seed in the nougat , it give the sharp wild flavour . it be good to have it there . ' 

 he sit watch she with black , glitter eye , and talk with strange , uncanny reason . his desire seem curiously impersonal , physical , and yet not personal at all . she feel as if , for he , she have some other name , she move within another specie . as if her name be , for example , Itzpapalotl , and she have be bear in unknown place , and be a woman unknown to herself . 

 yet surely , surely he be only put his will over she ? 

 she be breathless with amazement , because he have make she see the physical possibility of marry he : a thing she have never even glimpse before . but surely , surely it would not be herself who could marry he . it would be some curious female within she , whom she do not know and do not own . 

 he be emanate a dark , exultant sort of passion . 

 ' I can not   believe , ' she say , ' that I could do it . ' 

 ' do it , ' he say . ' and then you will know . ' 

 she shudder slightly , and go indoor for a wrap . she come out again in a silk spanish shawl , brown , but deeply embroider in silver - colour silk . she tangle her finger nervously in the long brown fringe . 

 really , he seem sinister to she , almost repellent . yet she hat to think that she merely be afraid : that she have not the courage . she sit with her head bent , the light fall on her soft hair and on the heavy , silvery - colour embroidery of her shawl , which she wrap round her tight , as the indian woman do their rebozo . and his black eye watch she , and watch the rich shawl , with a peculiar intense glitter . the shawl , too , fascinate he . 

 ' well ! ' he say suddenly . ' when shall it be ? ' 

 ' what ? ' she say , glance up into his black eye with real fear . 

 ' the marriage . ' 

 she look at he , almost hypnotize with amazement that he should have go so far . and even now , she have not the power to make he retreat . 

 ' I do not   know , ' she say . 

 ' will you say in August ? on the first of August ? ' 

 ' I will not   say any time , ' she say . 

 suddenly the black gloom and anger of the Indians come over he . then again he shake it off , with a certain callous indifference . 

 ' will you come to Jamiltepec to - morrow to see Ram n ? ' he ask . ' he want to speak with you . ' 

 Kate also want to see Ram n : she always do . 

 ' shall I ? ' she say . 

 ' yes ! come with I in the morning in the automobile . yes ? ' 

 ' I would like to see Don Ram n again , ' she say . 

 ' you be not afraid of he , eh ? not the bit of horror , eh ? ' he say , smile peculiarly . 

 ' no . but Don Ram n be not   really mexican , ' she say . 

 ' not really mexican ? ' 

 ' no ! - he feel european . ' 

 ' really ! to I he be - Mexico . ' 

 she pause and gather herself together . 

 ' I will row in a boat to Jamiltepec to - morrow , or I will take Alonso 's motor - boat . I will come about ten o'clock . ' 

 ' very good ! ' say Cipriano , rise to leave . 

 when he have go , she hear the sound of the drum from the plaza . it would be another meeting of the man of Quetzalcoatl . but she have not the desire nor the courage to set out afresh that day . 

 instead , she go to bed , and lie breathe the inner darkness . through the window - crack she see the whiteness of the moon , and through the wall she hear the small pulse of the drum . and it all oppress she and make she afraid . she lie form plan to escape . she must escape . she would hurriedly pack her trunk and disappear : perhaps take the train to Manzanillo , on the coast , and thence sail up to California , to Los Angeles or to San Francisco . suddenly escape , and flee away to a white man 's country , where she could once more breathe freely . how good it would be ! - yes , this be what she would do . 

 the night grow late , the drum cease , she hear Ezequiel come home and lie down on the mattress outside her door . the only sound be the hoarse crowing of cock in the moonlit night . and in her room , like someone strike a match , come the greenish light of a firefly , intermittent , now here , now there . 

 thoroughly uneasy and cow , she go to sleep . but then she sleep deeply . 

 and curiously enough , she awake in the morning with a new feeling of strength . it be six o'clock , the sun be make yellow pencil through her shutter - crack . she throw open her window to the street , and look through the iron grating at the little lane with deep shadow under the garden wall , and above the wall , banana leave fray translucent green , and shaggy mop of palm - tree perch high , towards the twin white tower - tip of the church , crown by the greek cross with four equal arm . 

 in the lane it be already motion : big cow march slowly to the lake , under the bluish shadow of the wall , and a small calf , big - eyed and adventurous , trot aside to gaze through her gate at the green water grass and the flower . the silent peon , follow , lift his two arm with a sudden swoop upwards , noiselessly , and the calf career on . only the sound of the foot of calf . 

 then two boy vainly try to urge a young bull - calf to the lake . it keep on jerk up its sharp rump , and give dry little kick , from which the boy run away . they push its shoulder , and it butt they with its blunt young head . they be in the state of semi - frenzied bewilderment which the Indians fall into when they be opposed and frustrate . and they take the usual recourse of run to a little distance , pick up heavy stone , and hurl they viciously at the animal . 

 ' no ! ' cry Kate from her window . ' do not   throw stone . drive it sensibly ! ' 

 they start as if the sky have open , drop their stone , and creep very much diminish after the see - saw bull - calf . 

 an ancient crone appear at the window with a plate of chop - up young cactus leave , for three centavos . Kate do not   like cactus vegetable , but she buy it . an old man be thrust a young cockerel through the window - bar . 

 ' go , ' say Kate , ' into the patio . ' 

 and she shut her window on the street , for the invasion have begin . 

 but it have only change door . 

 ' Niña ! Niña ! ' come Juana 's voice . ' say the old man that you buy this chicken ? ' 

 ' at how much ? ' shout Kate , slip on a dressing gown . 

 ' at ten real . ' 

 ' oh , no ! ' say Kate , fling open her patio door , and appear in her fresh wrap of pale pink cotton crepe , embroider with heavy white flower . ' not more than a peso ! ' 

 ' a peso and ten centavos ! ' plead the old man , balance the star - eyed red cock between his hand . ' he be nice and fat , Señorita . see ! ' 

 and he hold out the cock for Kate to take it and balance it between her hand , to try its weight . she motion to he to hand it to Juana . the red cock flutter , and suddenly crow in the transfer . Juana balance he , and make a grimace . 

 ' no , only a peso ! ' say Kate . 

 the man give a sudden gesture of assent , receive the peso , and disappear like a shadow . Concha lurch up and take the cock , and instantly she bawl in derision : 

 ' está muy flaco ! he be very thin . ' 

 ' put he in the pen , ' say Kate . ' we will let he grow . ' 

 the patio be liquid with sunshine and shadow . Ezequiel have roll up his mattress and go . great rose - colour hibiscus dangle from the tip of their bough , there be a faint scent from the half - wild , creamy rose . the great mango - tree be most sumptuous in the morning , like cliff , with their hard green fruit drop like the organ of some animal from the new bronze leaf , so curiously heavy with life . 

 ' está muy flaco ! ' the young Concha be bawl still in derision as she bear off the young cock to the pen under the banana - tree . ' he be very scraggy . ' 

 everybody watch intent while the red cock be put in among the few scraggy fowl . the grey cock , elder , retreat to the far end of the pen , and eye the newcomer with an eye of thunder . the red cock , muy flaco , stand diminish in a dry corner . then suddenly he stretch himself and crow shrilly , his red gill lift like an aggressive beard . and the grey cock stir around , prepare the thunder of his vengeance . the hen take not the slight notice . 

 Kate laugh , and go back to her room to dress , in the powerful newness of the morning . outside her window the woman be pass quietly , the red water - jar on one shoulder , go to the lake for water . they always put one arm over their head , and hold the jar on the other shoulder . it have a contorted look , different from the proud way the woman carry water in Sicily . 

 ' Niña ! Niña ! ' Juana be cry outside . 

 ' wait a minute , ' say Kate . 

 it be another of the hymn - sheet , with a Hymn of Quetzalcoatl . 

 ' see , Niña , the new hymn from last evening . ' 

 Kate take the leaflet and sit upon her bed to read it . 

 

 QUETZALCOATL look down ON MEXICO 

 

 Jesus have go far up the dark slope , when he look back . 
 Quetzalcoatl , my brother ! he call . send I my image , 
 and the image of my mother , and the image of my saint . 
 send I they by the swift way , the way of the spark , 
 that I may hold they like memory in my arm when I go to sleep . 

 and Quetzalcoatl call back : I will do it . 

 then he laugh , see the sun dart fiercely at he . 
 he put up his hand , and hold back the sun with his shadow . 
 so he pass the yellow one , who lash like a dragon in vain . 
 and have pass the yellow one , he see the earth beneath . 
 and he see Mexico lie like a dark woman with white breast - tip . 

 wonder he step nearer , and look at she , 
 at her train , at her railway and her automobile , 
 at her city of stone and her hut of straw , 
 and he say : surely this look very curious ! 

 he sit within the hollow of a cloud , and see the man that work in the field , with foreign overseer . 
 he see the man that be blind , reel with aguardiente . 
 he see the woman that be not clean . 
 he see the heart of they all , that be black , and heavy , with a stone of anger at the bottom . 

 surely , he say , this be a curious people I have find ! 

 so lean forward on his cloud , he say to himself : 
 I will call to they . 
 hold ! hold ! Mexicanos ! glance away a moment towards I . 
 just turn your eye this way , Mexicanos ! 

 they turn not at all , they glance not one his way . 

 Holalá ! Mexicanos ! Holalá ! 

 they have go stone deaf ! he say . 

 so he blow down on they , to blow his breath in their face . 
 but in the weight of their stupefaction , none of they know . 

 Holalá ! what a pretty people ! 
 all go stupefy ! 

 a fall star be run like a white dog over a plain . 
 he whistle to it loudly , twice , till it fall to his hand . 
 in his hand it lie and go dark . 
 it be the Stone of Change . 

 this be the stone of change ! he say . 

 so he toss it awhile in his hand , and play with it . 
 then suddenly he spy the old lake , and he throw it in . 
 it fall in . 
 and two man look up . 

 Holalá ! he say . Mexicanos ! 
 be there two of you awake ? 
 so he laugh , and one hear he laugh . 

 why be you laugh ? ask the first man of Quetzalcoatl . 

 I hear the voice of my First Man ask I why I be laugh ? Holalá , Mexicanos ! it be funny ! 
 to see they so glum and so lumpish ! 

 hey ! First Man of my name ! Hark here ! 
 here be my sign . 
 get a place ready for I . 

 send Jesus his image back , Mary and the saint and all . 
 wash yourself , and rub oil in your skin . 
 on the seventh day , let every man wash himself , and put oil on his skin ; let every woman . 
 let he have no animal walk on his body , nor through the shadow of his hair . say the same to the woman . 
 tell they they all be fool , that I be laugh at they . 
 the first thing I do when I see they , be to laugh at the sight of such fool . 
 such lump , such frog with stone in their belly . 
 tell they they be like frog with stone in their belly , can not   hop ! 
 tell they they must get the stone out of their belly , 
 get rid of their heaviness , 
 their lumpishness , 
 or I will smother they all . 

 I will shake the earth , and swallow they up , with their city . 
 I will send fire and ash upon they , and smother they all . 
 I will turn their blood like sour milk rotten with thunder , 
 they will bleed rotten blood , in pestilence . 
 even their bone shall crumble . 

 tell they so , First Man of my name . 

 for the sun and the moon be alive , and watch with gleam eye . 
 and the earth be alive , and ready to shake off his flea . 
 and the star be ready with stone to throw in the face of man . 
 and the air that blow good breath in the nostril of people and beast 
 be ready to blow bad breath upon they , to perish they all . 

 the star and the earth and the sun and the moon and the wind 
 be about to dance the war dance round you , man ! 
 when I say the word , they will start . 
 for sun and star and earth and the very rain be weary 
 of toss and roll the substance of life to your lip . 
 they be say to one another : let we make an end 
 of those ill - smell tribe of man , these frog that can not   jump , 
 these cock that can not   crow 
 these pig that can not   grunt 
 this flesh that smell 
 these word that be all flat 
 these money vermin . 
 these white man , and red man , and yellow man , and brown man , and black man 
 that be neither white , nor red , nor yellow , nor brown , nor black 
 but everyone of they dirtyish . 
 let we have a spring cleaning in the world . 
 for man upon the body of the earth be like lice , 
 devour the earth into sore . 
 this be what star and sun and earth and moon and wind and rain 
 be discuss with one another ; they be make ready to start . 
 so tell the man I be come to , 
 to make themselves clean , inside and out . 
 to roll the grave - stone off their soul , from the cave of their belly , 
 to prepare to be man . 

 or else prepare for the other thing . 

 

 Kate read this long leaflet again and again , and a swift darkness like a whirlwind seem to envelop the morning . she drink her coffee on the veranda , and the heavy papayas in their grouping seem to be ooze like great drop from the invisible spouting of the fountain of non - human life . she seem to see the great sprouting and urging of the cosmo , move into weird life . and man only like green - fly clustering on the tender tip , an aberration there . so monstrous the rolling and unfolding of the life of the cosmo , as if even iron could grow like lichen deep in the earth , and cease grow , and prepare to perish . iron and stone render up their life , when the hour come . and man be less than the green - fly suck the stem of the bush , so long as they live by business and bread alone . parasite on the face of the earth . 

 she stray to the shore . the lake be blue in the morning light , the opposite mountain pale and dry and rib like mountain in the desert . only at their foot , next the lake , the dark strip of tree and white speck of village . 

 near she against the light five cow stand with their nose to the water , drinking . woman be kneel on the stone , fill red jar . on fork stick stick up on the foreshore , frail fishing - net be hang out , dry , and on the net a small bird sit face the sun ; he be red as a drop of new blood , from the artery of the air . 

 from the straw hut under the tree , her urchin of the mud - chick be scuttle towards she , clutch something in his fist . he open his hand to she , and on the palm lie three of the tiny cooking - pot , the ollita which the native have throw into the water long ago , to the god . 

 ' muy chiquita ! ' he say , in his brisk way , a little , fight tradesman ; ' do you buy they ? ' 

 ' I have no money . to - morrow ! ' say Kate . 

 ' to - morrow ! ' he say , like a pistol shot . 

 ' to - morrow . ' 

 he have forgive she , but she have not forgive he . 

 somebody in the fresh Sunday morning be sing rather beautifully , let the sound , as it be , produce itself . 

 a boy be prowl with a sling , prowl like a cat , to get the little bird . the red bird like a drop of new blood twitter upon the almost invisible fish - net , then in a flash be go . the boy prowl under the delicate green of the willow - tree , stumble over the great root in the sand . 

 along the edge of the water fly four dark bird , their neck push out , skim silent near the silent surface of the lake , in a jagged level rush . 

 Kate know these morning by the lake . they hypnotize she almost like death . scarlet bird like drop of blood , in very green willow - tree . the aguador trot to her house with a pole over his shoulder , and two heavy square gasoline can , one at each end of the pole , fill with hot water . he have be to the hot spring for her daily supply . now barefoot , with one bare leg , the young man trot softly beneath the load , his dark , handsome face sink beneath the shadow of the big hat , as he trot in a silence , mindlessness that be like death . 

 dark head out on the water in little group , like black water - fowl bobbing . be they bird ? be they head ? be this human life , or something intermediate , that lift its orange , wet , glisten shoulder a little out of the lake , beneath the dark head ? 

 she know so well what the day would be . slowly the sun thickening and intensify in the air overhead . and slowly the electricity clotting invisibly as afternoon approach . the beach in the blind heat , strew with refuse , smell of refuse and the urine of creature . 

 everything go vague in the immense sunshine , as the air invisibly thicken , and Kate could feel the electricity press like hot iron on the back of her head . it stupefy she like morphine . meanwhile the cloud rise like white tree from behind the mountain , as the afternoon swoon in silence , rise and spread black branch , quickly , in the sky , from which the lightning stab like bird . 

 and in the midst of the siesta stupor , the sudden round bolt of thunder , and the crash and the chill of rain . 

 tea - time , and evening coming . the last sailing - boat make to depart , wait for the wind . the wind be from the west , the boat go east and south have go , their sail be lapse far away on the lake . but the boat towards the west be wait , wait , while the water rattle under their black flat keel . 

 the big boat from Tlapaltepec , bring many people from the west , wait on into the night . she be anchor a few yard out , and in the early night her passenger come down the dark beach , weary of the day , to go on board . they cluster in a group at the edge of the flap water . 

 the big , wide , flat - bottom canoe , with her wooden awning and her one straight mast , lie black , a few yard out , in the dark night . a lamp be burn under the wooden roof ; one look in , from the shore . and this be home for the passenger . 

 a short man with trouser roll up come to carry the people on board . the man stand with their back to he , leg apart . he suddenly dive at they , duck his head between the fork of their leg and rise , with a man on his shoulder . so he wad out through the water to the black boat , and heave his live load on board . 

 for a woman , he crouch down before she , and she sit on one of his shoulder . he clasp her leg with his right arm , she clasp his dark head . so he carry she to the ship , as if she be nothing . 

 soon the boat be full of people . they sit on the mat on the floor , with their back to the side of the vessel , basket hang from the pent roof , sway as the vessel sway . man spread their serape and curl up to sleep . the light of the lantern light they up , as they sit and lie and sleep , or talk in murmur . 

 a little woman come up out of the darkness ; then suddenly run back again . she have forget something . but the vessel would not sail without she , for the wind would not change yet . 

 the tall mast stand high , the great sail lie in fold along the roof , ready . under the roof , the lantern sway , the people sleep and stretch . probably they would not sail till midnight . then down the lake to Tlapaltepec , with its reed at the end of the lake , and its dead , dead plaza , its dead dry house of black adobe , its ruin street , its strange , bury silence , like Pompeii . 

 Kate know it . so strange and deathlike , it frighten she , and mystify she . 

 but to - day ! to - day she would not loiter by the shore all morning . she must go to Jamiltepec in a motor - boat , to see Ram n. to talk to he even about marry Cipriano . 

 ah , how could she marry Cipriano , and give her body to this death ? take the weight of this darkness on her breast , the heaviness of this strange gloom ? die before die , and pass away whilst still beneath the sun ? 

 ah no ! well to escape to the white man 's land . 

 but she go to arrange with Alonso for the motor - boat . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XVII 

 Fourth Hymn and the Bishop 

 

 the President of the Republic , as a new broom , have be sweep perhaps a little too clean for the common liking , so there be a ' rebellion . ' it be not a very large one . but it mean , of course , banditry , robbery , and cow village . 

 Ram n be determined to keep free from the taint of politic . but already the Church , and with the Church the Knights of Cortés and a certain ' black ' faction , be prepare against he . the priest begin to denounce he from the pulpit - but not very loudly - as an ambitious Anti - Christ . with Cipriano beside he , however , and with Cipriano the army of the west , he have not much to fear . 

 but it be possible Cipriano would have to march away in defence of the Government . 

 ' above all thing , ' say Ram n , ' I do not   want to acquire a political smell . I do not   want to be push in the direction of any party . unless I can stand uncontaminated , I have well abandon everything . but the Church will push I over to the socialists - and the socialist will betray I on the first opportunity . it be not myself . it be the new spirit . the sure way to kill it - and it can be kill , like any other live thing - be to get it connect with any political party . ' 

 ' why do not   you see the Bishop ? ' say Cipriano . ' I will see he too . be I to be chief of the division in the west for nothing ? ' 

 ' yes , ' say Ram n slowly , ' I will see Jimenez . I have think of it . yes , I intend to use every mean in my power . - Montes will stand for we , because he hat the Church and hat any hint of dictation from outside . he see the possibility of a " national " church . though myself , I do not   care about national church . only one have to speak the language of one 's own people . you know the priest be forbid the people to read the Hymns ? ' 

 ' what do that matter ? ' say Cipriano . ' these people be nothing if not perverse , nowadays . they will read they all the more . ' 

 ' maybe ! - I shall take no notice . I will let my new legend , as they call it , grow while the earth be moist . but we have to keep our eye very close on all the little bunch of " interest " . ' 

 ' ram n ! ' say Cipriano . ' if you can turn Mexico entirely into a Quetzalcoatl country , what then ? ' 

 ' I shall be First Man of Quetzalcoatl - I know no more . ' 

 ' you will not   trouble about the rest of the world ? ' 

 Ram n smile . already he see in Cipriano 's eye the gleam of a Holy War . 

 ' I would like , ' he say , smile , ' to be one of the Initiates of the Earth . one of the Initiators . every country its own Saviour , Cipriano : or every people its own saviour . and the First Men of every people , form a Natural Aristocracy of the World . one must have aristocrat , that we know . but natural one , not artificial . and in some way the world must be organically unite : the world of man . but in the concrete , not in the abstract . league and Covenants and International Programmes . ah ! Cipriano ! it be like an international pestilence . the leaf of one great tree can not   hang on the bough of another great tree . the race of the earth be like tree ; in the end they neither mix nor mingle . they stand out of each other 's way , like tree . or else they crowd on one another , and their root grapple , and it be the fight to the death . - only from the flower there be commingle . and the flower of every race be the natural aristocrat of that race . and the spirit of the world can fly from flower to flower , like a humming - bird , and slowly fertilize the great tree in their blossom . only the Natural Aristocrats can rise above their nation ; and even then they do not rise beyond their race . only the Natural Aristocrats of the World can be international , or cosmopolitan , or cosmic . it have always be so . the people be no more capable of it than the leaf of the mango - tree be capable of attach themselves to the pine . - so if I want Mexicans to learn the name of Quetzalcoatl , it be because I want they to speak with the tongue of their own blood . I wish the teutonic world would once more think in term of Thor and Wotan , and the tree Igdrasil . and I wish the druidic world would see , honestly , that in the mistletoe be their mystery , and that they themselves be the Tuatha De Danaan , alive , but submerge . and a new Hermes should come back to the Mediterranean , and a new Ashtaroth to Tunis ; and Mithras again to Persia , and Brahma unbroken to India , and the old of dragon to China . then I , Cipriano , I , First Man of Quetzalcoatl , with you , First Man of Huitzilopochtli , and perhaps your wife , First Woman of Itzpapalotl , could we not meet , with sure soul , the other great aristocrat of the world , the First Man of Wotan and the First Woman of Freya , First Lord of Hermes , and the Lady of Astarte , the Best - bear of Brahma , and the Son of the Greatest Dragon ? I tell you , Cipriano , then the earth might rejoice , when the First Lords of the West meet the First Lords of South and East , in the Valley of the Soul . ah , the earth have Valleys of the Soul , that be not city of commerce and industry . and the mystery be one mystery , but man must see it differently . the hibiscus and the thistle and the gentian all flower on the Tree of Life , but in the world they be far apart ; and must be . and I be hibiscus and you be a yucca flower , and your Caterina be a wild daffodil , and my Carlota be a white pansy . only four of we , yet we make a curious bunch . so it be . the man and woman of the earth be not manufacture good , to be interchangeable . but the Tree of Life be one tree , as we know when our soul open in the last blossoming . we can not   change ourselves , and we do not   want to . but when our soul open out in the final blossoming , then as blossom we share one mystery with all blossom , beyond the knowledge of any leaf and stem and root : something transcendent . 

 ' but it do not   matter . at the present time I have to fight my way in Mexico , and you have to fight your . so let we go and do it . ' 

 he go away to his workshop and his man who be labour under his direction , while Cipriano sit down to his correspondence and his military planning . 

 they be both interrupt by the thudding of a motor - boat enter the little bay . it be Kate , escort by the black - scarve Juana . 

 Ram n , in his white clothe , with the blue - and - black figured sash and the big hat with the turquoise - inlay Eye of Quetzalcoatl , go down to meet she . she be in white , too , with a green hat and the shawl of pale yellow silk . 

 ' I be so glad to come again , ' she say , hold out her hand to he . ' Jamiltepec have become a sort of Mecca to I , my inside yearn for it . ' 

 ' then why do not   you come oftener ? I wish you would come . ' 

 ' I be afraid of intrude . ' 

 ' no ! you could help if you would . ' 

 ' oh ! ' she say . ' I be so frightened , and so sceptical of big undertaking . I think it be because , at the very bottom of I , I dislike the mass of people - anywhere . I be afraid I rather despise people ; I do not   want they to touch I , and I do not   want to touch they . - so how could I pretend to join any - any - any sort of Salvation Army ? - which be a horrid way of put it . ' 

 Don Ram n laugh . 

 ' I do myself , ' he say . ' I det and despise mass of people . but these be my own people . ' 

 ' I , ever since I be a child , since I can remember . - they say of I , when I be a little girl of four , and my parent be have a big dinner - party , they have the nurse bring I in to say good night to all the people they have there dress up and eat and drink . and I suppose they all say nice thing to I , as they do . I only answer : you be all monkey ! it be a great success ! - but I feel it even as a child , and I feel it now . People be all monkey to I , perform in different way . ' 

 ' even the people near you ? ' 

 Kate hesitate . then she confess , rather unwillingly : 

 ' yes ! I be afraid so . both my husband - even Joachim - they seem , somehow , so obstinate in their little stupidity - rather like monkey . I feel a terrible revulsion from Joachim when he be dead . I think : what peak monkey be that , that I have be lose my blood about . - do you think it be rather awful ? ' 

 ' I do ! but then I think we all feel like that , at moment . or we would if we dare . it be only one of our moment . ' 

 ' sometimes , ' say she , ' I think that be my permanent feeling towards people . I like the world , the sky and the earth and the great mystery beyond . but people - yes , they be all monkey to I . ' 

 he could see that , at the bottom of her soul , it be true . 

 ' Puros monos ! ' he say to himself in Spanish . ' Y lo que hacen , pura monerías . ' 

 ' pure monkey ! and the thing they do , sheer monkeydom ! ' then he add : ' yet you have child ! ' 

 ' yes ! yes ! ' she say , struggle with herself . ' my first husband 's child . ' 

 ' and they ? - monos y no más ? ' 

 ' no ! ' she say , frown and look angry with herself . ' only partly . ' 

 ' it be bad , ' he say , shake his head . ' but then ! ' he add . - ' what be my own child to I , but little monkey ? and their mother - and their mother - ah , no ! Señora Caterina ! it be no good . one must be able to disentangle oneself from person , from people . if I go to a rose - bush , to be intimate with it , it be a nasty thing that hurt I . one must disentangle oneself from person and personality , and see people as one see the tree in the landscape . People in some way dominate you . in some way , humanity dominate your consciousness . so you must hate people and humanity , and you want to escape . but there be only one way of escape : to turn beyond they , to the great life . ' 

 ' but I do ! ' cry Kate . ' I do nothing else . when I be with Joachim absolutely alone in a cottage , do all the work myself , and know nobody at all , just live , and feel the great thing all the time ; then I be free , I be happy . ' 

 ' but he ? ' say Ram n. ' was he free and happy ? ' 

 ' he be really . but that be where the monkeyishness come in . he would not   let himself be content . he insist on have people and a cause , just to torture himself with . ' 

 ' then why do not   you live in your cottage quite alone , and without he ? ' he say . ' why do you travel and see people ? ' 

 she be silent , very angry . she know she could not live quite alone . the vacuity crush she . she need a man there , to stop the gap , and to keep she balanced . but even when she have he , in her heart of heart she despise he , as she despise the dog and the cat . between herself and humanity there be the bond of subtle , helpless antagonism . 

 she be naturally quite free - handed and she leave people their liberty . servant would get attach to she , and casual people all like and admire she . she have a strong life - flow of her own , and a certain assertive joie de vivre . 

 but underneath it all be the unconquerable dislike , almost disgust of people . More than hate , it be disgust . whoever it be , wherever it be , however it be , after a little while this disgust overcome she . her mother , her father , her sister , her first husband , even her child whom she love , and Joachim , for whom she have feel such passionate love , even these , be near she , fill she with a certain disgust and repulsion after a little while , and she long to fle they down the great and final oubliette . 

 but there be no great and final oubliette : or at least , it be never final , until one have fling oneself down . 

 so it be with Kate . till she fling herself down the last dark oubliette of death , she would never escape from her deep , her bottomless disgust with human being . brief contact be all right , thrill even . but close contact , or long contact , be short and long revulsion of violent disgust . 

 she and Ram n have sit down on a bench under the white - flower oleander of the garden downstairs . his face be impassive and still . in the stillness , with a certain pain and nausea , he realize the state she be in , and realize that his own state , as regard personal people , be the same . mere personal contact , mere human contact fill he , too , with disgust . Carlota disgust he . Kate herself disgust he . sometimes , Cipriano disgust he . 

 but this be because , or when , he meet they on a merely human , personal plane . to do so be disaster : it fill he with disgust of they and loathing of himself . 

 he have to meet they on another plane , where the contact be different ; intangible , remote , and without intimacy . his soul be concerned elsewhere . so that the quick of he need not be bind to anybody . the quick of a man must turn to God alone : in some way or other . 

 with Cipriano he be most sure . Cipriano and he , even when they embrace each other with passion , when they meet after an absence , embrace in the recognition of each other 's eternal and abide loneliness ; like the Morning Star . 

 but woman would not have this . they want intimacy - and intimacy mean disgust . Carlota want to be eternally and closely identify with Ram n , consequently she hat he and hat everything which she think draw he away from this eternal close identification with herself . it be just a horror and he know it . 

 man and woman should know that they can not , absolutely , meet on earth . in the close kiss , the dear touch , there be the small gulf which be none the less complete because it be so narrow , so nearly non - existent . they must bow and submit in reverence , to the gulf . even though I eat the body and drink the blood of Christ , Christ be Christ and I be I , and the gulf be impassable . though a woman be dearer to a man than his own life , yet he be he and she be she , and the gulf can never close up . any attempt to close it be a violation , and the crime against the Holy Ghost . 

 that which we get from the beyond , we get it alone . the final I I be , come from the farth off , from the Morning Star . the rest be assemble . all that of I which be assemble from the mighty cosmos can meet and touch all that be assemble in the beloved . but this be never the quick . never can be . 

 if we would meet in the quick , we must give up the assemble self , the daily I , and , put off ourselves one after the other , meet unconscious in the Morning Star . Body , soul , and spirit can be transfigure into the Morning Star . but without transfiguration we shall never get there . we shall gnash at the leash . 

 Ram n know what it be to gnash at his leash . he have gnash himself almost to piece , before he have find the way to pass out in himself , in the quick of himself , to the Quick of all be and existence , which he call the Morning Star , since man must give all thing name . to pass in the quick of himself , with transfiguration , to the Morning Star , and there , there alone meet his fellow man . 

 he know what it be to fail even now , and to keep on fail . with Carlota he fail absolutely . she claim he and he restrain himself in resistance . even his very naked breast , when Carlota be there , be self - conscious and assertively naked . but then that be because she claim it as her property . 

 when man meet at the quick of all thing , they be neither naked nor clothe ; in the transfiguration they be just complete , they be not see in part . the final perfect strength have also the power of innocence . 

 sit on the seat beside Kate , Ram n be sad with the sense of heaviness and inadequacy . his third Hymn be angry and bitter . Carlota almost embitter his soul . in Mexico , turbulent fellow have catch at his idea and burlesque it . they have invade one of the church of the city , throw out the sacred image , and hang in their place the grotesque papi - mâché Judas figure , which the Mexicans explode at Easter time . this of course make a scandal . and Cipriano , whenever he be away on his own for some time , slip back into the inevitable Mexican General , fascinate by the opportunity for further his own personal ambition and impose his own personal will . then come Kate , with this centre of sheer repudiation deep in the middle of she , the will to explode the world . 

 he feel his spirit sink again , his limb go like lead . there be only one thing that a man really want to do , all his life ; and that be , to find his way to his God , his Morning Star , and be alone there . then afterwards , in the Morning Star , salute his fellow man , and enjoy the woman who have come the long way with he . 

 but to find the way , far , far along , to the bright Quick of all thing , this be difficult , and require all a man 's strength and courage , for himself . if he break a trail alone , it be terrible . but if every hand pull at he , to stay he in the human place ; if the hand of love drag at his entrail and the hand of hate seize he by the hair , it become almost impossible . 

 this be how Ram n feel at the moment : - I be attempt the impossible . I have well either go and take my pleasure of life while it last , hopeless of the pleasure which be beyond all pleasure . or else I have well go into the desert and take my way all alone , to the Star where at last I have my wholeness , holiness . the way of the anchorite and the man who go into the wilderness to pray . for surely my soul be crave for her consummation , and I be weary of the thing man call life . live , I want to depart to where I be . 

 yet , he say to himself , the woman that be with I in the Morning Star , how glad I should be of she ! and the man that be with I there , what a delight his presence would be ! surely the Morning Star be a meeting - ground for we , for the joy ! 

 sit side by side on the bench , Ram n and Kate forget one another , she think back on the past , with the long disgust of it all , he think on into his future , and try to revive his heavy spirit . 

 in the silence , Cipriano come out on to the balcony above , look around . he almost start as he see the two figure seat on the bench below , under the white oleander tree , mile apart , world apart , in their silence . 

 Ram n hear the step , and glance up . 

 ' we be come up ! ' he call , rise and look round at Kate . ' shall we go upstairs ? will you drink something cool , tepache , or squeeze orange ? there be no ice . ' 

 ' I would like orange juice and water , ' she say . 

 he call to his servant and give the order . 

 Cipriano be in the white pantaloon and blouse , like Ram n. but his sash be scarlet , with black curve , something like the marking on a snake . 

 ' I hear you come . I think perhaps you have go away again , ' he say , look at she with a certain black reproachfulness : an odd , hesitate wistfulness of the barbarian , who feel himself at a loss . then also a certain resentment . 

 ' not yet , ' she say . 

 Ram n laugh , and fling himself into a chair . 

 ' the Señora Caterina think we be all monkey , but perhaps this particular monkey - show be the most amusing after all , ' he say . ' so she will see a little more of it . ' 

 Cipriano , a real Indian , be offend in his pride , and the little black imperial on his chin seem to become portentous . 

 ' that be rather an unfair way of put it ! ' laugh Kate . 

 the black eye of Cipriano glance at she in hostility . he think she be laugh at he . and so , at the depth of her female soul , she be . she be jeer at he inwardly . which no man can stand , least of all a dark - skin man . 

 ' no ! ' she say . ' there be something else beside that . ' 

 ' ah ! ' say Ram n. ' take care ! a little mercy be a dangerous thing . ' 

 ' no ! not mercy ! ' she say , flush . ' why be you be horrid to I ? ' 

 ' monkey always end by be horrid to the spectator , ' say Ram n. 

 she look up at he , and catch the flash of anger in his eye . 

 ' I come , ' she say , ' to hear about the mexican pantheon . I be even give to understand I might be admit . ' 

 ' ah , that be good ! ' laugh Ram n. ' a rare speciman of the female monkey have be add to the Ram n menagerie ! I be sure you would be a good draw . there have be some pretty goddess , I assure you , in the aztec pantheon . ' 

 ' how horrid ! ' she say . 

 ' come ! come ! ' he cry . ' let we keep to the bedrock of thing , Señora mía . we be all monkey . mono somos . - ihr seid alle Affen ! out of the mouth of babe and suckling be it speak , as Carlota say . you see that little male monkey , Cipriano . he have the monkey 's idea of marry you . say the word . marriage be a monkey 's game . say the word . he will let you go when you have   have enough ; and he be have enough . he be a general and a very great jefe . he can make you monkey - queen of monkey - Mexico , if it please you . and what should monkey do , but amuse themselves ! Vamos ! Embobémonos ! shall I be priest ? Vamos ! Vamos ! ' 

 he rise with sudden volcanic violence , and rush away . 

 Cipriano look at Kate in wonder . she have go pale . 

 ' what have you be say to he ? ' he ask . 

 ' nothing ! ' she say , rise . ' I would well go now . ' 

 Juana be collect ; and Alonso and Kate set off back down the lake . she sit with a certain obstinate offendedness under the awning of the boat . the sun be terrifically hot , and the water blind she . she put on black spectacle , in which she look a monster . 

 ' Mucho calor , Niña ! Mucho calor ! ' Juana be repeat behind she . the criada have evidently imbibe tepache . 

 on the pale - brown water little tuft of water - hyacinth be vaguely sailing , hold up the hand of a leaf for a sail . everywhere the lake be dot with these sailing tuft . the heavy rain have wash in flood down the Lerma river into the lake , wash the acre of lirio loose from the marshy end of the water , thirty mile away , and slowly set they travel over all the expanse of the inland sea , till the shore begin to be pile , and the far - off Santiago river , which flow out of the lake , be choke . 

 that day Ram n write his Fourth Hymn . 

 

 what QUETZALCOATL see in MEXICO 

 

 who be these strange face in Mexico ? 
 paleface , yellowface , blackface ? these be no Mexicans ! 
 where do they come from , and why ? 

 Lord of the Two Ways , these be the foreigner . 
 they come out of nowhere . 
 sometimes they come to tell we thing , 
 mostly they be the greedy one . 

 what then do they want ? 

 they want gold , they want silver from the mountain , 
 and oil , much oil from the coast . 
 they take sugar from the tall tube of the cane , 
 wheat from the high land , and maize ; 
 Coffee from the bush in the hot land , even the juicy rubber . 
 they put up tall chimney that smoke , 
 and in the big house they keep their machine , that talk 
 and work iron elbow up and down , 
 and hold myriad thread from their claw ! 
 Wonderful be the machine of the greedy one ! 

 and you , Mexicans and peon , what do you do ? 

 we work with their machine , we work in their field , 
 they give we peso make of mexican silver . 
 they be the clever one . 

 do you love they then ? 

 we love they not , and never . 
 their face be ugly , yet they make wonderful thing . 
 and their will be like their machine of iron . 
 what can we do ? 

 I see dark thing rush across the country . 

 Yea , Lord ! even train and camione and automobile . 

 train and camione , automobile and aeroplane . 
 how nice ! say the peon , to go rush in a train ! 
 how nice , to get in the camion , and for twenty centavos , to be go ! 
 how nice , in the great city , where all thing rush , and huge light flare bright , to wander and do nothing ! 
 how nice to sit in the cine , where the picture of all the world dance before the eye ! 
 how nice if we could take all these thing away from the foreigner , and possess they ! 
 take back our land and silver and oil , take the train and the factory and the automobile 
 and play with they all the time ! 
 how nice ! 

 oh , fool ! mexican and peon ! 
 who be you , to be master of machine which you can not make ? 
 which you can only break ! 
 those that can make be master of these machine . 
 not you , poor boob . 

 how have these paleface , yellowface cross the water of the world ? 
 oh , fool ! mexican and peon , with muddy heart ! 
 do they do it by squat on their ham ? 
 you do nothing but squat on your ham , and stare with vacant eye , and drink fire - water , and quarrel and stab . 
 and then run like surly dog at the bidding of paleface master . 

 oh , dog and fool , Mexicans and peon ! 
 Watery - hearted , with wishy - washy knee . 
 Sulky in spirit , and inert . 
 what be you good for , but to be slave , and rot away ? 

 you be not worth a god ! 
 Lo ! the universe tangle its great dragon , 
 the dragon in the cosmo be stir with anger again . 
 the dragon of the disappointed dead , that sleep in the snow - white north 
 be lash his tail in his sleep ; the wind howl , the cold rock round . 
 the spirit of the cold dead whistle in the ear of the world . 
 prepare for doom . 

 for I tell you , there be no dead dead , not even your dead . 
 there be dead that sleep in the wave of the Morning Star , with freshen limb . 
 there be dead that weep in bitter rain . 
 there be dead that cluster in the frozen north , shudder and chatter among the ice 
 and howl with hate . 
 there be dead that creep through the burn bowel of the earth , 
 stir the fire to acid of bitterness . 
 there be dead that sit under the tree , watch with ash - grey eye for their victim . 
 there be dead that attack the sun like swarm of black fly , to suck his life . 
 there be dead that stand upon you , when you go in to your woman , 
 and they dart to her womb , they fight for the chance to be bear , they struggle at the gate you have open , 
 they gnash when it close , and hate the one that get in to be bear again , 
 child of the live dead , the dead that live and be not refresh . 
 I tell you , sorrow upon you ; you shall all die . 
 and be dead , you shall not be refresh . 
 there be no dead dead . 
 be dead , you shall rove like dog with broken haunch 
 seek the offal and garbage of life , in the invisible lane of the air . 

 the dead that have master fire live on , salamander , in fire . 
 the dead of the water - lord rock and glimmer in the sea . 
 the dead of the steel machine go up in motion , away ! 
 the dead of electric master be electricity itself . 

 but the dead of those who have master nothing , nothing at all , 
 crawl like masterless dog in the back street of the air , 
 creep for the garbage of life , and bite with venomous mouth . 

 those that have master the force of the world , die into the force , they have home in death . 
 but you ! what have you master , among the dragon host of the cosmo ? 
 there be dragon of sun and ice , dragon of the moon and the earth , dragon of salty water , dragon of thunder ; 
 there be the spangled dragon of the star at large . 
 and far at the centre , with one unblinking eye , the dragon of the Morning Star . 

 Conquer ! say the Morning Star . pass the dragon , and pass on to I . 
 for I be sweet , I be the last and the good , the pool of new life . 
 but lo ! you inert one , I will set the dragon upon you . 
 they shall crunch your bone . 
 and even then they shall spit you out , as break - haunche dog , 
 you shall have nowhere to die into . 

 Lo ! in the back street of the air , dead one be crawl like cur ! 
 Lo ! I release the dragon ! the great white one of the north , 
 he of the disappointed dead , he be lash and turn round . 
 he be breathe cold corruption upon you , you shall bleed in your chest . 

 I be go to speak to the dragon of the inner fire , 
 he who housel the dead of the gun , 
 to withdraw his warmth from your foot , so your foot turn cold with death . 

 I be about to tell the dragon of the water to turn round on you 
 and spew out corrosion into your stream , on your rain . 

 and I wait for the final day , when the dragon of thunder , wake under the spider - web net 
 which you have   throw upon he , shall suddenly shake with rage , 
 and dart his electric needle into your bone , and curdle your blood like milk with electric venom . 

 wait ! only wait ! little by little it all shall come upon you . 

 

 Ram n put on his black city clothe , and a black hat , and go himself with this hymn to the printer in the city . the sign of Quetzalcoatl he have print in black and red , and the sign of the dragon , at the end , in green and black and red . and the sheet be fold . 

 six soldier of Cipriano 's command take the bundle of hymn by train ; one to the capital , one to Puebla and Jalapa , one to Tampico and Monterrey , one to Torreon and Chihuahua , one to Sinaloa and Sonora , and one to the mine in Pachucha , Guanajuato , and the central region . each soldier take only a hundred sheet . but in every town there be a recognized reader of the Hymns ; or two , or three , or four , or even ten reader in one city . and reader who go round to the village . 

 because there be a strange , submerge desire in the people for thing beyond the world . they be weary of event , and weary of news and the newspaper , weary even of the thing that be teach in education . Weary be the spirit of man with man 's importunity . of all thing human , and humanly invent , we have have enough , they seem to say . and though they take not much active notice of the Hymns , they crave for they , as man crave for alcohol , as a relief from the weariness and ennui of mankind 's man - make world . 

 everywhere , in all the town and village , at night - time the little flame would be see flickering , a cluster of people be see , sometimes stand , sometimes sit upon the ground , listen to the slow voice of some Reader . 

 more rarely , in some small , out - of - the - way plaza , would sound the sinister thud of the tom - tom , beat out of the hollow of the age . and there would be two man with white serape with the blue edge . then the singing of the Songs of Quetzalcoatl , and perhaps the slow round dance , with the ancient rhythm of the foot on the earth , belong to aboriginal America . 

 for the old dance of the Aztecs and the Zapotees , of all the submerge indian race , be base upon the old , sink bird - step of the Red Indians of the north . it be in the blood of the people ; they can not quite forget it . it come back to they , with a sense of fear , and joy , and relief . 

 of themselves , they dare not revive the old motion , nor stir the blood in the old way . the spell of the past be too terrible . but in the Songs and the Hymns of Quetzalcoatl there speak a new voice , the voice of a master and authority . and though they be slow to trust , the slow and the most untrusting , they seize upon the new - old thrill , with a certain fear , and joy , and relief . 

 the Men of Quetzalcoatl avoid the great market - place and centre of activity . they take their stand in the little side place . on the rim of a fountain a man in a dark blanket with blue border , or with the sign of Quetzalcoatl in his hat , would sit down and begin to read aloud . it be enough . the people linger to listen . he would read to the end , then say : ' I have finish this reading of the Fourth Hymn of Quetzalcoatl . now I will begin again . ' 

 in this way , by a sort of far - away note in the voice , and by the slow monotony of repetition , the thing would drift darkly into the consciousness of the listener . 

 already in the beginning there have be the scandal of the Judases . Holy Week , in Mexico City , be , to all appearance , the great week of Judas . everywhere you see man carry home in triumph the great , gaudily - varnish doll of papi - mâché . they be all man - doll , more or less life - like grotesque . most frequently it be a fat mexican - spanish hacendado , landowner and big farmer , who be represent with his tight trouser , stick - out belly , and huge upturned moustache . the old - fashioned patr n. some of the figure be like Punch , some be like harlequin . but they all have rosy face and the white man 's get - up . you never see the dark - face image of a native - blooded Mexican ; always a stiff , haughty grotesque of a white man . 

 and all these be Judases . Judas be the fun of the fair , the victim , the big man of Holy Week , just as the Skeleton , and the skeleton on horseback , be the idol of the first week in November , the day of the dead and of all the saint . 

 on Easter Saturday the Judases be hang from the balcony , the string be light , and at length , bang ! shriek of joy , Judas have explode into nothingness , from a big cracker in the middle of he ! - all the town be pop with Judases . 

 there be the scandal of the Holy Images throw out of one of the church in Mexico City , and these judas put in their place . the Church begin to move . 

 but then the Church in Mexico have to move gingerly ; it be not popular , and its claw be cut . the priest may not ring the church bell for more than three minute . neither priest nor monk may wear any habit in the street , beyond the hideous black vest and white collar of the protestant clergy . so that the priest show himself as little as possible in the street , and practically never in the chief street and the chief plazas . 

 nevertheless , he still have influence . procession in the street be forbid , but not sermon from the pulpit , nor advice from the confessional . Montes , the President , have no love for the Church , and be meditate the expulsion of all foreign priest . the Archbishop himself be an italian . but he be also a fighter . 

 he give order to all the priest , to forbid the people from listen to anything concern with Quetzalcoatl , to destroy any hymn - sheet that might fall into their hand , and to prevent as far as possible the Hymns from be read , and the Songs from be sing , in the parish . 

 but Montes have give order to the police and the military to afford such protection to the Men of Quetzalcoatl as be accord to any other law - abide citizen . 

 Mexico be not Mexico for nothing , however , and already blood have be shed on both side . this Ram n particularly want to avoid , as he feel that violent death be not so easily wipe out of the air and out of the soul of man , as spilt blood be wash off the pavement . 

 therefore , when he be in the City , he ask the Bishop of the West if he would consent to an interview with himself and Don Cipriano , and would he name the place . the Bishop - who be an old friend and adviser of Carlota , and who know Ram n well enough - reply that he would be pleased to see Don Ram n and the Señor General the next day , if they would be so good as to come to his house . 

 the Bishop no long occupy the great episcopal palace . this be turn into the post - office building . but he have a large house not far from the Cathedral , which have be present by the faithful . 

 Ram n and Cipriano find the thin old man in a dusty , uninteresting library , wait . he wear a simple black cassock , not too clean , with purple button . he receive Ram n , who be in a black town suit , and Cipriano , who be in uniform , with an affable manner and suspicious look . but he play at be the lively , genial old bird . 

 ' ah , Don Ram n , it be long since I see you ! how go it , eh ? well , well ? that be good ! that be very good ! ' and he pat Ram n on the sleeve like a fussy old uncle . ' ah , my General , much honour , much honour ! welcome to this poor house of your . it be the house of your Honour ! to serve you ! gentleman ! will not   you take a seat ? ' 

 they all sit down , in the dusty , dreary room , in the old leather chair . the Bishop nervously look at his thin old hand , at the fine , but rather dull amethyst ring he wear . 

 ' good ! señore ! ' he say , glance up with his little black eye . ' at your service ! entirely at the service of your Honours . ' 

 ' Doña Carlota be in the city , Father . you have see she ? ' say Ram n. 

 ' yes , son of mine , ' say the Bishop . 

 ' then you know the late news about I . she tell you everything . ' 

 ' somewhat ! somewhat ! she speak somewhat of you , the poor little thing . thank to God she have her son with she . they be safely back in their native country , in good health . ' 

 ' do you see they ? ' 

 ' yes ! yes ! two of my dear child ! very sympathetic , very intelligent , like their father ; and , like he , promise to be of very handsome presence . yes ! yes ! smoke if you will , my General . do not   hesitate . ' 

 Cipriano light a cigarette . from old association , he be nervous , albeit amuse . 

 ' you know all about what I want to do , Father ? ' say Ram n. 

 ' I do not   know all , son of mine , but I know enough . I would not   want to hear more . eh ! ' he sigh . ' it be very sad . ' 

 ' not so very sad , Father , if we do not   make it sad . why make a sad thing out of it , Father ? we be in Mexico for the most part Indians . they can not understand the high Christianity , Father , and the Church know it . Christianity be a religion of the spirit , and must need be understand if it be to have any effect . the Indians can not understand it , any more than the rabbit of the hill . ' 

 ' very good ! very good ! Son of mine ! but we can convey it to they . the rabbit of the hill be in the hand of God . ' 

 ' no , Father , it be impossible . and without a religion that will connect they with the universe , they will all perish . only religion will serve ; not socialism , nor education , nor anything . ' 

 ' thou speak well , ' say the Bishop . 

 ' the rabbit of the hill may be in the hand of God , Father . but they be at the mercy of man . the same with Mexico . the people sink heavy and heavy into inertia , and the Church can not help they , because the Church do not possess the key - word to the mexican soul . ' 

 ' do not   the mexican soul know the Voice of God ? ' say the Bishop . 

 ' your own child may know your voice , Father . but if you go out to speak to the bird on the lake , or the deer among the mountain , will they know your voice ? will they wait and listen ? ' 

 ' who know ? it be say they wait to listen to the Holy Francisco of Assisi . ' 

 ' now , Father , we must speak to the Mexicans in their own language , and give they the clue - word to their own soul . I shall say Quetzalcoatl . if I be wrong , let I perish . but I be not wrong . ' 

 the Bishop fidget rather restlessly . he do not   want to hear all this . and he do not want to answer . he be impotent anyhow . 

 ' your Church be the Catholic Church , Father ? ' 

 ' surely ! ' say the Bishop . 

 ' and Catholic Church mean the Church of All , the Universal Church ? ' 

 ' surely , son of mine . ' 

 ' then why not let it be really catholic ? why call it catholic , when it be not only just one among many church , but be even hostile to all the rest of the church ? Father , why not let the Catholic Church become really the Universal Church ? ' 

 ' it be the Universal Church of Christ , my son . ' 

 ' why not let it be the Universal Church of Mohammed as well ; since ultimately , God be one God , but the people speak vary language , and each need its own prophet to speak with its own tongue . the Universal Church of Christ , and Mohammed , and Buddha , and Quetzalcoatl , and all the other - that would be a Catholic Church , Father . ' 

 ' you speak of thing beyond I , ' say the Bishop , turn his ring . 

 ' not beyond any man , ' say Don Ram n. ' a Catholic Church be a church of all the religion , a home on earth for all the prophet and the Christs , a big tree under which every man who acknowledge the great life of the soul can sit and be refresh . be not   that the Catholic Church , Father ? ' 

 ' alas , my son , I know the Apostolic Church of Christ in Rome , of which I be a humble servant . I do not understand these clever thing you be say to I . ' 

 ' I be ask you for peace , Father . I be not one who hat the Church of Christ , the Roman Catholic Church . but in Mexico I think it have no place . when my heart be not bitter , I be grateful forever to Christ , the Son of God . the affair of the Judases grieve I more than it do you , and the affair of bloodshed be far bitter to I . ' 

 ' I be no innovator , my son , to provoke bloodshed . ' 

 ' listen ! I be go to remove the holy image from the church at Sayula , with reverence , and with reverence burn they upon the lake . then I shall put the image of Quetzalcoatl in the church at Sayula . ' 

 the Bishop look up furtively . for some moment he say nothing . but his silence be furtive , cornered . 

 ' would you dare do that , Don Ram n ? ' he say . 

 ' yes ! and I shall not be prevent . General Viedma be with I . ' 

 the Bishop glance sideways at Cipriano . 

 ' certainly , ' say Cipriano . 

 ' nevertheless it be illegal , ' say the Bishop , with acid bitterness . 

 ' what be illegal in Mexico ? ' say Ram n. ' what be weak be illegal . I will not be weak , my Lord . ' 

 ' lucky you ! ' say the Bishop , lift his shoulder . 

 there be a break of silence . 

 ' no ! ' say Ram n. ' I come to ask you for peace . tell the Archbishop what I say . let he tell the Cardinals and the Pope that the time have come for a Catholic Church of the Earth , the Catholic Church of all the Sons of Men . the Saviours be more than one , and let we pray they will still be increase . but God be one God , and the Saviours be the Sons of the one God . let the Tree of the Church spread its branch over all the earth , and shelter the prophet in its shade , as they sit and speak their knowledge of the beyond . ' 

 ' be you one of these prophet , Don Ram n ? ' 

 ' I surely be , Father . and I would speak about Quetzalcoatl in Mexico , and build his Church here . ' 

 ' Nay ! you would invade the church of Christ and the Blessed Virgin , I hear you say . ' 

 ' you know my intention . but I do not want to quarrel with the Church of Rome , nor have bloodshe and enmity , Father . can you not understand I ? should there not be peace between the man who strive down their different way to the God - Mystery ? ' 

 ' once more desecrate the altar ! bring in strange idol . burn the image of our Lord and our Lady , and ask for peace ? ' say the poor Bishop , who helplessly long to be leave alone . 

 ' all that , Father , ' say Ram n. 

 ' Son , what can I answer ? you be a good man smite with the madness of pride . Don Cipriano be one more mexican general . I be the poor old Bishop of this diocese , faithful servant of the Holy Church , humble child of the Holy Father in Rome . what can I do ? what can I answer ? take I out to the cemetery and shoot I at once , general ! ' 

 ' I do not   want to , ' say Cipriano . 

 ' it will end like that , ' say the Bishop . 

 ' but why ? ' cry Don Ram n. ' be there no sense in what I say ? can not you understand ? ' 

 ' my son , my understanding go no far than my faith , my duty , will allow . I be not a clever man , I live by faith and my duty to my sacred office . understand that I do not understand . ' 

 ' good - day , Father ! ' say Ram n , suddenly rise . 

 ' go with God , my son , ' say the Bishop , rise and lift his finger . 

 ' Adi s , Señor ! ' say Cipriano , click his spur , and put his hand on his sword as he turn to the door . 

 ' Adi s , Señor General , ' say the Bishop , dart after they his eye of old malice , which they could feel in their back . 

 ' he will say nothing , ' say Cipriano , as he and Ram n go down the step . ' the old jesuit , he only want to keep his job and his power , and prevent the heart 's beating . I know they . all they treasure , even more than their money , be their centipede power over the frightened people ; especially over the woman . ' 

 ' I do not   know you hat they , ' laugh Ram n. 

 ' waste no more breath on they , my dear one , ' say Cipriano . ' go forward , you can walk over break snake such as those . ' 

 as they go on foot past the post - office square , where the modern scribe at little table under the arch sit tap out letter on their typewriter for the poor and illiterate , who wait with their few centavos to have their message turn into florid Castilian , Ram n and Cipriano meet with an almost startled respect . 

 ' why talk to the Bishop ? - he do not   exist any more . I hear his Knights of Cortés have a big dinner the other evening , and it be say - I do not   believe it - that they drink oath in blood to have my life and your . but I think the oath of the Catholic Dames would frighten I more . why , if a man stop to unfasten his trouser to make water , the Knights of Cortés run for their life , think the pistol be point at they . do not   think about they , man ! do not   try to conciliate they . they will only puff up and become insolent , think you be afraid of they . six soldier will trample down all that dirt , ' say the General . 

 it be the city , and the spirit of the city . 

 Cipriano have a suite in the big Palace on the Plaza de Armas . 

 ' if I marry , ' he say , as they pass into the stone patio , where soldier stand at attention , ' I shall take a house in the colony , to be more private . ' 

 Cipriano in town be amusing . he seem to exude pride and arrogant authority as he walk about . but his black eye , glance above his fine nose and that little goat beard , be not to be laugh at . they seem to get everything , in the stab of a glance . a demoniacal little fellow . 

 

 

 CHAPTER xviii 

 Auto da Fe 

 

 Ram n see Carlota and his boy in the city , but it be a rather fruitless meeting . the eld boy be just uncomfortable in the presence of his father , but the young Cyprian , who be delicate and very intelligent , have a rather lofty air of displeasure with his parent . 

 ' do you know what they sing , papa ? ' he say . 

 ' not all the thing they sing , ' say Ram n. 

 ' they sing - ' the boy hesitate . then , in his clear young voice , he pip up , to the tune of La Cucaracha : 

 

 ' Don Ram n do not   drink , do not   smoke . 
 Doña Carlota wish he would . 
 he be go to wear the sky - blue cloak 
 that he be steal from the Mother of God . ' 

 

 ' no , I be not , ' say Ram n , smile . ' mine be get a snake and a bird in the middle , and black zigzag and a red fringe . you would well come and see it . ' 

 ' no , papa ! I do not   want to . ' 

 ' why not ? ' 

 ' I do not   want to be mix up in this affair . it make we all look ridiculous . ' 

 ' but how do you think you look , anyhow , in your striped little sailor suit and your little saintly look ? we would well dress you as the Infant Jesus . ' 

 ' no , papa ! you be in bad taste . one do not   say those thing . ' 

 ' now you will have to confess to a fib . you say one do not   say those thing , when I , who be your father , say they only a moment ago , and you hear I . ' 

 ' I mean good people do not . decent people . ' 

 ' now you will have to confess again , for call your father indecent . - terrible child ! ' 

 the child flush , and tear rise to his eye . there be silence for a while . 

 ' so you do not   want to come to Jamiltepec ? ' say Ram n , to his boy . 

 ' yes ! ' say the eld boy , slowly . ' I want to come and bathe in the lake , and have a boat . but - they say it be impossible . ' 

 ' why ? ' 

 ' they say you make yourself a peon , in your clothe . ' - the boy be shy . 

 ' they be very nice clothe , you know . Nicer than those little breech of your . ' 

 ' they say , also , that you pretend to be the aztec god Quetzalcoatl . ' 

 ' not at all . I only pretend that the aztec god Quetzalcoatl be come back to the Mexicans . ' 

 ' but , papa , it be not true . ' 

 ' how do you know ? ' 

 ' because it be impossible . ' 

 ' why ? ' 

 ' there never be any Quetzalcoatl , except idol . ' 

 ' be there any Jesus , except image ? ' 

 ' yes , papa . ' 

 ' where ? ' 

 ' in heaven . ' 

 ' then in heaven there be also Quetzalcoatl . and what be in heaven be capable of come back to earth . do not   you believe I ? ' 

 ' I can not . ' 

 ' then go on unbelieve , ' say the father , laugh at they and rise to leave they . 

 ' it be very bad that they sing song about you , and put mama in ; like about Pancho Villa , ' say the young boy . ' it hurt I very much . ' 

 ' rub it with Vapour - rub , my pet , ' say Ram n. ' rub it with Vapour - rub , where it hurt you . ' 

 ' what a real bad man you be , papa ! ' 

 ' what a real good child be you , my son ! be not   that so ? ' 

 ' I do not   know , papa . I only know you be bad . ' 

 ' oh ! oh ! be that all they teach thee at thy american school ? ' 

 ' next term , ' say Ciprianito , ' I want to change my name . I do not   want to be call Carrasco any more . when thou art in the newspaper , they will laugh at we . ' 

 ' oh ! oh ! I be laugh at thee now , little frog ! what name wilt thou choose , then ? Espina , perhaps . Thou know Carrasco be a wild bush , on the moor in Spain , where we come from . wilt thou be the little thorn on the bush ? call thyself Espina , thou art a sprig of the old tree . entonce , adi s ! Señor Espina Espinita ! ' 

 ' Adi s ! ' say the boy abruptly , flush with rage . 

 Ram n take a motor - car to Sayula , for there be a make road . but already the rain be wash it away . the car lurch and bump in the great gap . in one place a cami n lie on its back , where it have overturn . 

 on the flat desert there be already small smear of water , and the pink cosmo flower , and the yellow , be just sprout their tuft of bud . the hill in the distance be go opaque , as leaf come out on the invisible tree and bush . the earth be come to life . 

 Ram n call in Sayula at Kate 's house . she be out , but the wild Concha come scour across the beach , to fetch she . - ' there be Don Ram n ! there be Don Ram n ! ' 

 Kate hurry home , with sand in her shoe . 

 she think Ram n look tired , and , in his black suit , sinister . 

 ' I do not   expect you , ' she say . 

 ' I be on my way back from town . ' 

 he sit very still , with that angry look on his creamy dark face , and he keep push back his black moustache from his closed , angry lip . 

 ' do you see anybody in town ? ' she ask . 

 ' I see Don Cipriano - and Doña Carlota , and my boy ! ' 

 ' oh , how nice for you ! be they quite well ? ' 

 ' in excellent health , I believe . ' 

 she laugh suddenly . 

 ' you be still cross , ' she say . ' be it about the monkey still ? ' 

 ' Señora , ' he say , lean forward , so that his black hair drop a little on his brow , ' in monkeydom I do not   know who be prince . but in the kingdom of fool , I believe it be I. ' 

 ' why ? ' she say . 

 and as he do not answer , she add : 

 ' it must be a comfort to be a prince , even of fool . ' 

 he look dagger at she , then burst into a laugh . 

 ' oh , Señora mía ! what ail we man , when we be always want to be good ? ' 

 ' be you repent of it ? ' she laugh . 

 ' yes ! ' he say . ' I be a prince of fool ! why have I start this Quetzalcoatl business ? why ? pray tell I why . ' 

 ' I suppose you want to . ' 

 he ponder for a time , push up his moustache . 

 ' perhaps it be well to be a monkey than a fool . I object to be call a monkey , nevertheless . Carlota be a monkey , no more ; and my two boy be prize young monkey in sailor suit . and I be a fool . yet what be the difference between a fool and a monkey ? ' 

 ' Quién sabe ? ' say Kate . 

 ' one want to be good , and the other be sure he be good . so I make a fool of myself . they be sure they be always good , so that make monkey of they . oh , if only the world would blow up like a bomb ! ' 

 ' it will not ! ' say Kate . 

 ' true enough . - ah , well ! ' 

 he draw himself erect , pull himself together . 

 ' do you think , Señora Caterina , you might marry our mutual general ? ' Ram n have put himself aside again . 

 ' i - I do not   know ! ' stammer Kate . ' I hardly think so . ' 

 ' he be not sympathetic to you at all ? ' 

 ' yes , he be . he be alive , and there be even a certain fascination about he . - but one should not   try marry a man of another race , do you think , even if he be more sympathetic ? ' 

 ' ah ! ' sigh Ram n. ' it be no good generalizing . it be no good marry anybody , unless there will be a real fusion somewhere . ' 

 ' and I feel there would not , ' say Kate . ' I feel he just want something of I ; and perhaps I just want something of he . but he would never meet I . he would never come forward himself , to meet I . he would come to take something from I and I should have to let he . and I do not   want merely that . I want a man who will come half - way , just half - way , to meet I . ' 

 Don Ram n ponder , and shake his head . 

 ' you be right , ' he say . ' yet , in these matter , one never know what be half - way , nor where it be . a woman who just want to be take , and then to cling on , be a parasite . and a man who want just to take , without give , be a creature of prey . ' 

 ' and I be afraid Don Cipriano might be that , ' say Kate . 

 ' possibly , ' say Ram n. ' he be not so with I . but perhaps he would be , if we do not meet - perhaps it be our half - way - in some physical belief that be at the very middle of we , and which we recognize in one another . do not   you think there might be that between you and he ? ' 

 ' I doubt if he would feel it necessary , with a woman . a woman would not   be important enough . ' 

 Ram n be silent . 

 ' perhaps ! ' he say . ' with a woman , a man always want to let himself go . and it be precisely with a woman that he should never let himself go . it be precisely with a woman that he should never let himself go , but stick to his innermost belief , and meet she just there . because when the innermost belief coincide in they both , if it be physical , there , and then , and nowhere else , they can meet . and it be no good unless there be a meeting . it be no good a man ravish a woman , and it be absolutely no good a woman ravish a man . it be a sin , that be . there be such a thing as sin , and that be the centre of it . man and woman keep on ravish one another . Absurd as it may sound , it be not I who would ravish Carlota . it be she who would ravish I . strange and absurd and a little shameful , it be true . - let oneself go , be either ravish or be ravish . oh , if we could only abide by our own soul , and meet in the abide place . - Señora , I have not a very great respect for myself . woman and I have fail with one another , and it be a bad failure to have in the middle of oneself . ' 

 Kate look at he in wonder , with a little fear . why be he confess to she ? be he go to love she ? she almost suspend her breathing . he look at she with a sort of sorrow on his brow , and in his dark eye , anger , vexation , wisdom , and a dull pain . 

 ' I be sorry , ' he go on , ' that Carlota and I be as we be with one another . who be I , even to talk about Quetzalcoatl , when my heart be hollow with anger against the woman I have marry and the child she bear I ? - we never meet in our soul , she and I. at first I love she , and she want I to ravish she . then after a while a man become uneasy . he can not   keep on want to ravish a woman , the same woman . he have revulsion . then she love I , and she want to ravish I . and I like it for a time . but she have revulsion too . the eld boy be really my boy , when I ravish she . and the young be her boy , when she ravish I . see how miserable it be ! and now we can never meet ; she turn to she crucify Jesus , and I to my uncrucified and uncrucifiable Quetzalcoatl , who at least can not be ravish . ' 

 ' and I be sure you will not   make he a ravisher , ' she say . 

 ' who know ? if I err , it will be on that side . but you know , Señora , Quetzalcoatl be to I only the symbol of the good a man may be , in the next day . the universe be a nest of dragon , with a perfectly unfathomable life - mystery at the centre of it . if I call the mystery the Morning Star , surely it do not   matter ! a man 's blood can not   beat in the abstract . and man be a creature who win his own creation inch by inch from the nest of the cosmic dragon . or else he lose it little by little , and go to piece . now we be all lose it , in the ravishing and ravish disintegration . we must pull ourselves together , hard , both man and woman , or we be all lose . - we must pull ourselves together , hard . ' 

 ' but be you a man who need a woman in his life ? ' she say . 

 ' I be a man who yearn for the sensual fulfilment of my soul , Señora , ' he say . ' I be a man who have no belief in abnegation of the blood desire . I be a man who be always on the verge of take wife and concubine to live with I , so deep be my desire for that fulfilment . except that now I know that be useless - not momentarily useless , but in the long run - my ravish a woman with hot desire . no matter how much she be in love with I and desire I to ravish she . it be no good , and the very inside of I know it be no good . wine , woman , and song - all that - all that game be up . our inside will not   really have it any more . yet it be hard to pull ourselves together . ' 

 ' so that you really want a woman to be with you ? ' say Kate . 

 ' ah , Señora ! if I could trust myself ; and trust she ! I be no long a young man , who can afford to make mistake . I be forty - two year old , and I be make my last - and perhaps in truth , my first great effort as a man . I hope I may perish before I make a big mistake . ' 

 ' why should you make a mistake ? you need not ? ' 

 ' I ? it be very easy for I to make a mistake . very easy , on the one hand , for I to become arrogant and a ravisher . and very easy , on the other hand , for I to deny myself , and make a sort of sacrifice of my life . which be be ravish . easy to let myself , in a certain sense , be ravish . I do it to a small degree even yesterday , with the Bishop of Guadalajara . and it be bad . if I have to end my life in a mistake , Señora , I have rather end it in be a ravisher , than in be ravish . as a hot ravisher , I can still slash and cut at the disease of the other thing , the horrible pandering and the desire man have to be ravish , the hateful , ignoble desire they have . ' 

 ' but why do not   you do as you say , stick by the innermost soul that be in you , and meet a woman there , meet she , as you say , where your two soul coincide in their deep desire ? not always that horrible unbalance that you call ravish . ' 

 ' why do not   I ? but which woman can I meet in the body , without that slow degradation of ravish , or be ravish , set in ? if I marry a spanish woman or a dark Mexican , she will give herself up to I to be ravish . if I marry a woman of the anglo - Saxon or any blonde northern stock , she will want to ravish I , with the will of all the ancient white demon . those that want to be ravish be parasite on the soul , and one have revulsion . those that want to ravish a man be vampire . and between the two , there be nothing . ' 

 ' surely there be some really good woman ? ' 

 ' well , show I they . they be all potential Carlotas or - or - yes , Caterinas . I be sure you ravish your Joachim till he die . no doubt he want it ; even more than you want it . it be not just sex . it lie in the will . victim and victimizer . the upper class , crave to be victim to the low class ; or else craving to make victim of the low class . the politician , crave to make one people victim to another . the Church , with its evil will for turn the people into humble , writhe thing that shall crave to be victimize , to be ravish - I tell you , the earth be a place of shame . ' 

 ' but if you want to be different , ' say Kate , ' surely a few other people do - really . ' 

 ' it may be , ' he say , become calm . ' it may be . I wish I keep myself together well . I must keep myself together , keep myself within the middle place , where I be still . my Morning Star . now I be ashamed of have talk like this to you , Señora Caterina . ' 

 ' why ? ' she cry . and for the first time , the flush of hurt and humiliation come into her face . 

 he see it at once , and put his hand on hers for a moment . 

 ' no , ' he say . ' I be not ashamed . I be relieve . ' 

 she flush deeply at his touch , and be silent . he rise hastily , to leave , crave to be alone again with his own soul . 

 ' on Sunday , ' he say , ' will you come into the plaza , in the morning , when the drum sound ? will you come ? ' 

 ' what for ? ' she say . 

 ' well ! come , and you will see . ' 

 he be go in a flash . 

 there be many soldier in the village . when she go to the post - office , she see the man in their cotton uniform lie about in the entrance to the military station . there must have be fifty or more , little man , not the tall soldier in slouch hat . these be little , quick , compact man , like Cipriano , and they talk in a strange indian language , very subdued . they be very rarely see in the street . they keep out of sight . 

 but at night everyone be request to be indoor by ten o'clock , and through the darkness Kate hear the patrol of horse - soldier rid round . 

 there be an air of excitement and mystery in the place . the parish priest , a rather overbearing , fat man of fifty or so , have preach a famous Saturday evening sermon against Ram n and Quetzalcoatl , forbid the heathen name to be mention , threaten with all the penalty any parishioner who read the Hymns , or even listen . 

 so , of course , he be attack when he leave the church , and have to be rescue by soldier who be in the doorway . they march he safely home . but his criada , the old woman who serve he , be tell by more woman than one that the next time the padre open his mouth against Quetzalcoatl , he would have a few inch of machete in his fat gut . 

 so his reverence stay at home , and a curate officiate . 

 practically all the people who come over the lake in boat on Saturdays go to mass in Sayula church . the great door stand open all the day . man as they pass to and fro to the lake , take off their big hat , with a curious cringing gesture , as they go by the gateway of the church . all day long , scatter people be kneel in the aisle or among the bench , the man kneel erect , their big hat down by their knee , their curious tall - shaped indian head with the thick black hair also erect ; only the kneeling leg , close together , humble . the woman hood themselves in their dark rebozos and spread their elbow as they kneel at a bench , in a slack sort of voluptuousness . 

 on Saturday night , a great ruddy flickering of many candle - point , away down the dark cavern of the church ; and a clustering of dark man 's head , a shuffling of woman , a come and go of man arrive from the lake , of man depart to the market . a hush , not exactly of worship , but of a certain voluptuous admiration of the loftiness and glitter , a sensual , almost victimize self - abandon to the god of death , the Crucified streak with blood , or to the pretty white woman in a blue mantle , with her little doll 's face under her crown , Mary , the doll of doll , Niña of Niñas . 

 it be not worship . it be a sort of numbness and let the soul sink uncontrolle . and it be a luxury , after all the week of unwashed dullness in their squalid village of straw hut . but it irritate Kate . 

 the man get up and tiptoe away in their sandal , cross themselves front and back , on the navel and on the back of the head , with holy water . and their black eye shine with a loose , sensuous look . instead of have gather themselves together and become graver , strong , more collected and deep in their own integrity , they emerge only the more loose and sloppy and uncontrolle . 

 oh , if there be one thing man need to learn , but the Mexican Indians especially , it be to collect each man his own soul together deep inside he , and to abide by it . the Church , instead of help man to this , push they more and more into a soft , emotional helplessness , with the unpleasant sensuous gratification of feel themselves victim , victimize , victimize , but at the same time with the lurk sardonic consciousness that in the end a victim be strong than the victimizer . in the end , the victim pull down their victimizer , like a pack of hyena on an unwary lion . they know it . Cursed be the falsely meek , for they be inherit the earth . 

 on Sunday morning there be early mass at sunrise , another mass at seven o'clock , another at nine , another at eleven . then there be a little band of violin and ' cellos , play old - fashioned dance music ; there be , especially early in the morning , a solid mass of peon and woman , kneel on the floor ; and a flapping of dusky candle , a smell of the exhaust air of candle , a heavy , rolling fume of incense , and the heavy choir of man 's voice , solid , powerful , impressive , from the gallery . 

 and the people go away in sensuous looseness , which soon turn , in the market , to hate , the old , unfathomable hate which lie at the bottom of the indian heart , and which always rise black and turbid when they have sway awhile in sensuous gratification . 

 the church inside be a dead interior , like all mexican church , even the gorgeous Puebla cathedral . the interior of almost any mexican church give the impression of cynical barrenness , cynical meaninglessness , an empty , cynical , mock shell . the italian church be build much in the same style , and yet in they linger a shadow and stillness of old , mysterious holiness . the hush . 

 but not in Mexico . the church outside be impressive . inside , and it be curious to define it , they be blatant ; void of sound and yet with no hush , simple , and yet completely vulgar , barren , sterile . more barren than a bank or a schoolroom or an empty concert - hall , less mysterious than any of these . you get a sense of plaster , of mortar , of whitewash , of smeared blue - wash or grey - wash ; and of gilt lay on and ready to peel off . even in the most gorgeous church , the gilt be hatefully gild , never golden . nothing be soft nor mellow . 

 so the interior of Sayula church ; and Kate have often be in . the white exterior be charming , and so valuable in the landscape , with the twin white pagoda - tower peer out of the green willow - tree . but inside , it seem nothing but whitewash , stencil over with grey scroll - work decoration . the window be high , and many , let in the light as into a schoolroom . Jesus , streak with blood , be in one of the transept , and the Virgin , a doll in faded satin , stand startle inside a glass case . there be rag flower and paper flower , coarse lace and silver that look like tin . 

 nevertheless , it be quite clean , and very much frequent . 

 the Month of Mary have go by , the blue and white paper ribbon be all take down , the palm - tree in pot be all remove from the aisle , the little girl in white dress and little crown of flower no long come with posy in their hand , at evening . curious , the old gentle ceremonial of Europe , how trashy they seem in Mexico , just a cheap sort of charade . 

 the day of Corpus Christi come , with high mass and the church full to the door with kneeling peon , from dawn till noon . then a feeble little procession of child within the church , because the law forbid religious procession outside . but all , somehow , for nothing . just so that the people could call it a fiesta , and so have an excuse to be more slack , more sloshy and uncontrolle than ever . the one mexican desire ; to let themselves go in sloppy inertia . 

 and this be the all - in - all of the religion . instead of do as it should , collect the soul into its own strength and integrity , the religious day leave it all the more decomposed and degenerate . 

 however , the week pass , the crowd in the church seem the same as ever . but the crowd in the church one hour be the crowd of Quetzalcoatl the next hour . just a sensation . 

 till the more socialistic Readers mingle a little anti - clerical bitterness in their reading . and all the peon begin to say : be El Señor a gringo , and the Santísima , be she nothing but a gringuita ? 

 this provoke retaliation on the part of the priest , first mere admonition , then at last the loud denunciation and threat of that sermon . which mean war . 

 everybody wait for Saturday . Saturday come , and the church remain shut . Saturday night , the church be dark and closed . Sunday , the church be silent and the door blank fasten . 

 something like consternation spread through the market host . they have nowhere to go ! - but among the consternation be a pique curiosity . perhaps something exciting be go to happen . 

 thing have happen before . in the revolution , many of the church in Mexico have be use for stable and for barrack . and church be turn into school , and concert hall , and cinematograph theatre . the convent and the monastery be most of they barrack for the rag - tag - and - bobtail soldier . the world change , be bind to change . 

 the second Saturday of the closed church be , as it happen , a big market . much fruit and stuff have come up the lake , from the south from far distance , even from Colima . there be man with lacquer wooden bowl , and woman with glaze pottery . and as usual , man crouch in guard over twenty centavos worth of nauseous tropical plum , or chile , or mango , in tiny pyramid along the roadway . 

 a crowded market , with the much and the little of the Indians . and the church door shut and lock , the church bell silent , even the clock stop . true , the clock be always stop . but not with such a final arrest . 

 no mass , no confession , no little orgy of incense and slack emotion ! the low rumble of murmur tone , the quick , apprehensive glance around . vendor by the causeway squat tight , as if to make themselves dense and small , squat down on their haunch with their knee up to their shoulder , like the aztec idol . and soldier in two and three sprinkle everywhere . and señora and Señoritas , in their black gauze scarf or mantilla , trip to the church for mass and shrill round the gateway of the church , all a bubble and a froth of chatter ; though they have know quite well the church be shut . 

 but it be Sunday morning , and something be due to happen . 

 at about half - past ten , a boat appear , and man in snow - white clothe get out , one carry a drum . they march quickly through the people , under the old tree on the sand , across to the church . they pass through the break iron gate into the stone courtyard in front of the church . 

 at the church door , which be still shut , they take off their blouse , and stand in a ring , with dark naked shoulder and the blue - and - black sash of Quetzalcoatl round their waist . 

 the drum begin to beat , with a powerful , pound note , as the man stand bare - headed and bare - breasted in a circle outside the church door ; a strange ring of lustrous , bluey - black head and dark shoulder , above the snowy - white pantaloon . monotonously the drum beat , on and on . then the little clay flute with the husky sound wheeze a clear melody . 

 the whole market press densely towards the gateway of the church . but there , soldier stand guard . and on the inside of the stone yard in front of the church , soldier quietly guard the low wall , let nobody mount . so that outside , under the old willow- and pepper - tree , in the hot morning sun , the dense crowd stand gaze at the church door . they be mostly man in big hat ; but some townsman be there , and some woman , and Kate with a parasol line with dark blue . a close , silent , tense throng under the spangled shade , press round the trunk of the palm - tree , climb on the root of the pepper - tree . and behind be the camione and the motorcar draw up . 

 the drum shudder and go still , and the earthen flute be silent . the lake could be hear lapping , and a clink of glass and a sound of chauffeur ' voice at the little cantina - booth . for the rest , the silent breathing of the crowd . - soldier be quickly distribute a few leaflet among the crowd . a strong , far - carry male voice begin to sing to the softened thud of the drum . 

 

 JESUS ' FAREWELL 

 Farewell , Farewell , Despedida ! 
 the last of my day be go . 
 to - morrow Jesus and Holy Mary 
 will be bone . 

 it be a long , long way 
 from Mexico to the Pool of Heaven . 
 look back the last time , Mary Mother , 
 let we call the eleven . 

 James , and John , and Mark , 
 Felipe and San Cristobal , 
 all my saint , and Anna , Teresa , 
 Guadalupe whose face be oval . 

 come then , now , it be finish for all of we . 
 let we all be go . 
 follow I now up the ladder of spark . 
 every one . 

 Joaquin , Francis , and Anthony 
 and many - name Maria , 
 Purísima , Refugio , and Soledad 
 Follow here . 

 Ho ! all my saint and my Virgins 
 troop out of your shrine , 
 after your master , the Crucified ; 
 bring all your sign . 

 run up the flame , and with foot on the spark 
 troop into the sky . 
 once more follow the Master , 
 back again now , on high . 

 Farewell , let all be forget 
 in Mexico . 
 to the pool of peace and forget in heaven 
 we go . 

 

 while this be sing , another boat have arrive , and soldier make way through the crowd for Ram n , in his white serape with the blue edge and scarlet fringe , and a young priest of the church in a black cassock , and six man in dark serape with the blue border of Quetzalcoatl . this strange procession march through the crowd and through the gateway of the yard . 

 as they approach , the ring of man round the drum open , and spread into a crescent . Ram n stand tall behind the drum , the six man in dark serape divide and go to the wing of the crescent , the young , slim priest in a black cassock stand alone , in front of the crescent , face the crowd . 

 he lift his hand ; Ram n take off his hat ; all the man in the crowd take off their hat . 

 the priest turn , meet Ram n at the centre of the crescent , and , across the drum , hand he the key of the church . then the priest wait . 

 Ram n unlock the church door and fling they open . the man in front of the crowd kneel down suddenly , see the church dark like a cavern , but a trembling blaze of many candle , away , seemingly far down the mysterious darkness , shudder with dark , ripple flame , like the Presence of the burn bush . 

 the crowd sway and rustle , and subside , kneeling . only here and there a labourer , a chauffeur or a railway man stand erect . 

 the priest raise his hand a little high , re - turn towards the people . 

 ' my child , ' he say ; and as he speak the lake seem to rustle ; ' God the Almighty have call home his Son , and the Holy Mother of the Son . their day be over in Mexico . they go back to the Father . 

 

 Jesus , the Son of God , bid you farewell . 
 Mary , the Mother of God , bid you farewell . 
 for the last time they bless you , as they leave you . 
 Answer Adi s ! 
 say Adi s ! my child . ' 

 

 the man in the circle say a deep Adi s ! and from the soldier , and from the kneeling crowd , a ragged , muttered , strange repeating of Adi s ! again and again , like a sort of storm . 

 suddenly , in a blast , down the darkness of the church into which the kneeling people be star , the burn bush of candle be go , there be only darkness . across the sunshine , light here and there by a frail light of a taper , be a cave of darkness . 

 man in the crowd exclaim and groan . 

 then the drum softly touch , and two man in the crescent begin to sing , in magnificent , terrible voice , the Farewell Hymn again . they be man whom Ram n , or his follower , have find in low drinking - dens in Mexico City , man with train and amazing voice , the powerful mexican tenor that seem to tear the earth open . man whom the ' time ' have reduce to sing in low city dive . and now they sing with all the terrible desperation that be in they , the hopeless , demonish recklessness . 

 when they finish , the priest again lift his hand , and give the benediction ; add in a quiet voice : 

 ' and now , with all the saint , let I go , saith Jesus . for I go back to my Father which be in heaven , and I lead my Mother in my right hand , home to peace . ' 

 he turn and go into the church . Ram n follow . then slowly , all the man of the crescent . Overhead the church bell ring a little while , on the deathly silence . it cease . 

 and in a moment , from the depth of the church sound a drum , with a remote , fearsome thud , and a slow monotony . 

 the priest , in his white vestment with rich lace , appear in the doorway of the church , bear a tall crucifix . he hesitate , then come into the sun . the kneeling people clasp their hand . 

 candle in the dark church be cluster towards the door , lonely flame . Don Ram n come out of the dark , naked to the waist , his serape over one shoulder , bear the front pole of the great bi whereon lie , within a glass case , the lifelike , terrible dead Christ of Holy Week . a tall , dark man , naked to the waist , hold the other end of the pole on his shoulder . the crowd moan and cross themselves . the lifelike Dead Christ seem really dead , as he pass the gate . as he enter the crowd , kneel man and woman lift sightless face and fling their arm wide apart , and so remain , arm rigid and outflung , in an unspeakable ecstasy of fear , supplication , acknowledgement of death . 

 after the bi of the Dead Christ , a slow procession of man naked to the waist , carry litter after litter . first the terrible scourged Christ , with naked body strip like a tiger with blood . then the image of the Saviour of the Sacred Heart , the well - know figure from the side altar , with long hair and outstretche hand . then the image of Jesus of Nazareth , with a crown of thorn . 

 then the Virgin with the blue mantle and lace , and the golden crown . the woman begin to moan as she emerge rather trashily into the blaze sunlight . behind she , in the church , the candle be one by one go out . 

 then come brown Saint Anthony of Padua , with a child in his arm . then Saint Francis , look strangely at a cross in his hand . then Saint Anna . and last , Saint Joaquin . and as he emerge , the last candle in the dark church go out , there be only open door upon a darkness . 

 the image on the shoulder of the brown - skin man ride rather childishly out through the blaze sun , into the shadow of tree . the drum follow last , slowly thud . on the glass case of the big Dead Christ the sun flash with startling flash , as the powerful man carry it turn towards the water . the crowd murmur and sway on its knee . woman cry : Purísima ! Purísima ! do not   leave we ! and some man ejaculate in strangle anguish , over and over again : Señor ! Señor ! Señor ! 

 but the strange procession make its way slowly under the tree , to the coarse sand , and descend again into the great light towards the lake . there be a little breeze under a blaze of sun . fold serape on naked , soft shoulder swing unevenly , the image rock and totter a little . but onwards to the edge of the water go the tall crucifix , then the flash glass box . and after , come Jesus in a red silk robe , flutter , then a wooden Jesus all paint and streak , then Jesus in white with a purple mantle that blow like a kerchief , Mary in lace that flutter upon stiff white and blue satin . but the Saints be only paint ; paint wood . 

 the slim , lace - smock priest stagger down the sand under the heavy crucifix , which have a white Christ Crucified stretch aloft , face the lake . by the little wall be a large black canoa , sailing boat , with a broad plank gangway up to her stern . two bare - legged , white - clothe man walk by the slim priest , whose white sleeve blow like flag as he slowly climb the gangway to the ship . man help he on board , and he walk away to the prow , where at length he stand the big crucifix , with the Christ still face outward . 

 the ship be open , without deck or hatch , but with fix table for the image . slowly Ram n ascend and descend into the boat , the great glass case be lay down on its rest , the two man could wipe their wet brow and their hot , black hair . Ram n put on his blanket and his hat , against the sun . the boat heave very slightly . the wind be from the west . the lake be pale and unreal , sun - blinded . 

 one after another the image rise over the stern of the boat , against the sky , then descend into the vessel , to be set down on their rest , where they rise above the black side of the canoa , in view of the throng on the shore . 

 it be a strange and tawdry collection of image . and yet , each image have a certain pathos of its own , and a certain touch of horror , as they be group together for their last ride , upon the trestle - support , within the vessel . by each image stand the bearer , in hat and serape , keep a steady hand on the pole . 

 there be a little line of soldier on the shore , and three motor - boat with soldier wait by the big canoa . the shore be cover with a mass of people . many row - boat come row inquisitively round , like fish . but none come too near . 

 Bare - legged sailor begin to pole the ship from the shore . they lean heavily on the pole , and walk along the rim of the vessel . slowly she begin to move upon the water , in the shallow . slowly she be leave the shore , and the throng . 

 two other sailor swiftly begin to hoist the huge , square white sail . quickly , yet heavily it rise in the air , and take the wind . it have the great sign of Quetzalcoatl , the circle blue snake and the blue eagle upon a yellow field , at the centre , like a great eye . 

 the wind come from the west , but the boat be steer south - east , for the little Island of the Scorpions , which rise like a small dim hummock from the haze of the lake . so the sail reach out , and the great eye seem to be glance back , at the village with the green willow and the empty white church , the throng on the shore . 

 Motor - boat circle the huge , slow canoe , small boat like insect follow and range round at a distance , never come too close . the run water cluck and speak , the man by the image steady the pole with one hand , their hat with the other , the great eye on the sail ever look back at the land , the sweep of the white canvas sweep low above the glass case of death , the Christ cake with gore , the image in their flutter mantle . 

 on the shore , the people wander away , or sit on the sand wait and watch in a sort of dumb patience that be half indifference . the canoe grow small , more inconspicuous , lapse into the light , the little boat circle around it like mere dot . the lake tire the eye with its light . 

 away under the tree , in a half silence , a half vacancy , a woman buy a dark water - melon , smash it open on a stone , and give the big pinky fragment to her child . in silence , man sprinkle salt on the thick slice of cucumber sell by the woman under the tree . in silence they wander into the church , past the soldier on guard at the door . 

 the church be absolutely dark , save for the light that enter the doorway , and absolutely bare ; wall , floor , altar , transept , all stark bare and empty . the people wander away again , in silence . 

 it be noon , and a hot day . the canoa slowly range to the small hummock of the island amid the water , where live one family of Indians - fisher , with a few goat and one dry little place where they grow a few bean and head of maize . for the rest , the island be all dry rock and thorny bush , and scorpion . 

 the vessel be pole round to the one rocky bay . slowly she draw near the island . the motor - boat and the little boat hurry ahead . already brown , naked man be bath among the rock . 

 the great sail sank , the canoa edge up to the rocky shore , man spring from she into the water , the image be lower and slowly carry on to the rock . there they wait for the bearer . 

 slowly the procession go again up the bank of the dishevel island , past the couple of hut , where a red cock be crow among the litter , and over to rock , beyond the bush , on the far side . 

 the side face Sayula be all rock , naked and painful to tread on . in a rocky hollow at the water 's edge , tall stone have be put up on end , with iron bar across the top , like a grill . underneath , a pile of faggot ready ; and at the side , a pile of faggot . 

 the image , the glass box of the great Dead Christ , be lay on the iron bar of the grill , in a pathetic cluster all together . the crucifix be lean against they . it be noon , the heat and the light be fierce and erect . but already down the lake cloud be push up fantastically . 

 beyond the water , beyond the glare , the village look like a mirage , with its tree and village and white church tower . 

 man who have come in boat crowd on the rock of the little amphitheatre . in silence , Ram n kindle shred of cane and ocote , with a burning - glass . little hasty flame like young snake arise in the solid sunlight , with vapour of smoke . he set fire to the carefully - arrange pyramid of faggot beneath the grill - table of the image . 

 there be a crackling , and a puffing of whitish smoke , the sweet scent of ocote , and orange - red tongue of half - substantial flame be leap up in the hot white air . hot breath blow suddenly , sudden flame gush up , and the ocote , full of sweet resin , begin to roar . the glass of the great box emit strange , painful yelp as it splinter and fall tinkle . between the iron bar , brownish flame push up among the image , which at once go black . the little vestment of silk and satin wither in a moment to blackness , the cake wound of paint bubble black . 

 the young priest take off his linen vestment , his stole , and his chasuble , and with flushed face fling they in the flame . then he strip off his black cassock , and emerge in the white cotton of the man of Quetzalcoatl , his white drawer roll up to the knee . he throw his cassock in the fire . someone hand he a big hat , and a white serape with blue end . 

 there be a smell of burn paint , and wool , and ocote . the fire rush in a dusky mass upon the blacken , flickering image , till nothing be to be see but a confused bush of smoke and brown - red flame , puthering , reeking , roar . the flaming crucifix slip aside , and fall . a man seize it and push it into the fire , under the image . man in a sort of ecstasy throw on more of the heavy , resinous wood , that almost explode into flame . rock crack and explode like gun . everybody draw back from that roaring tree of flame , which rise ever higher and high , its dark smoke and its spark unfold into heaven . 

 one of the support stone burst with a bang , bar of iron and blazing stump of image tumble in a confused roar . the glass case have disappear , but ribbon of iron wave , then curl over red , into the torrent of the sudden fire . strange rod of iron appear out of nowhere , protrude from solid red coal . 

 and soon , all that be leave be a fierce glow of red coal of wood , with a medley of half - fuse iron . 

 Ram n stand aside and watch in silence , his dark brow quite expressionless . 

 then , when only the last bluish flame flicker out of a tumble of red fire , from the eminence above rocket begin to shoot into the air with a swish , explode high in the sightless hot blue , with a glimmer of bluish shower , and of gold . 

 the people from the shore have see the tree of smoke with its trunk of flame . now they hear the heavy firing of the rocket , they look again , exclaim , half in dismay , half in the joyful lust of destruction : 

 ' Señor ! Señor ! La Purísima ! La Santísima ! ' 

 the flame and the smoke and the rocket melt as if by miracle , into nothingness , leave the hot air unblemishe . the coal of fire be shovel and drop down a steep hole . 

 as the canoa sail back , the side of the lake , through filmy air , look brownish and changeless . a cloud be rise in the south - west , from behind the dry , silent mountain , like a vast white tail , like the vast white fleecy tail of some squirrel , that have just dive out of sight behind the mountain . this wild white tail fleece up and up , to the zenith , straight at the sun . and as the canoa spread her sail to tack back , already a delicate film of shadow be over the chalk - white lake . 

 only on the low end of the isle of Scorpions , hot air still quiver . 

 Ram n return in one of the motor - boat . slowly the sky be cloud for the thunder and the rain . the canoa , unable to make her way across , be sail for Tuliapan . the little boat hurry in silence . 

 they land before the wind rise . Ram n go and lock the door of the church . 

 the crowd scatter in the wind , rebozos wave wildly , leaf tear , dust racing . Sayula be empty of God , and , at heart , they be glad . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XIX 

 the Attack on Jamiltepec 

 

 suddenly , nearly all the soldier disappear from the village , there be a ' rebellion ' in Colima . a train have be hold up , people kill . and somebody , Generals Fulano and Tulano , have ' pronounce ' against the government . 

 stir in the air , everybody enjoy those periodical shiver of fear ! but for these shiver , everything much the same as usual . the church remain shut up , and dumb . the clock do not   go . Time suddenly fall off , the day walk naked and timeless , in the old , uncounted manner of the past . the strange , old , uncounted , unregistered , unreckone day of the ancient heathen world . 

 Kate feel a bit like a mermaid try to swim in a wrong element . she be sweep away in some silent tide , to the old , antediluvian silence , where thing move without contact . she move and exist without contact . even the striking of the hour have cease . as a drown person see nothing but the water , so Kate see nothing but the face of the timeless water . 

 so , of course , she clutch at her straw . she could not   bear it . she order an old , rickety Ford car , to take her bumping out to Jamiltepec , over the ruinous road in the afternoon . 

 the country have go strange and void , as it do when these ' rebellion ' start . as if the life - spirit be suck away , and only some empty , anti - life void remain in the wicked hollow countryside . though it be not far to Jamiltepec , once outside the village , the chauffeur and his little attendant lad begin to get frightened , and to go frog - like with fear . 

 there be something truly mysterious about the mexican quality of fear . as if man and woman collapse and lie wriggle on the ground like broken reptile , unable to rise . Kate use all her will , against this cringing nonsense . 

 they arrive without ado at Jamiltepec . the place seem quiet , but normal . an oxen wagon stand empty in the courtyard . there be no soldier on guard . they have all be withdraw , against the rebellion . but several peon be move round , in a desultory fashion . the day be a fiesta , when not much work be do . in the house of the peon , the woman be pat tortilla , and prepare hot chile sauce , grind away on the metate . a fiesta ! only the windmill that pump up water from the lake be spin quickly , with a little noise . 

 Kate drive into the yard in silence , and two mozo with gun and belt of cartridge come to talk in low tone to the chauffeur . 

 ' be Doña Carlota here ? ' ask Kate . 

 ' no , Señora . the patrona be not here . ' 

 ' Don Ram n ? ' 

 ' Sí , Señora ! Está . ' 

 even as she hesitate , rather nervous , Ram n come out of the inner doorway of the courtyard , in his dazzle white clothe . 

 ' I come to see you , ' say Kate . ' I do not   know if you would rather I have not . but I can go back in the motor - car . ' 

 ' no , ' he say . ' I be glad . I be feel deserted , I do not   know why . let we go upstairs . ' 

 ' Patr n ! ' say the chauffeur , in a low voice . ' must I stay ? ' 

 Ram n say a few word to he . the chauffeur be uneasy , and do not   want to stay . he say he have to be back in Sayula at such and such a time . excuse , anyhow . but it be evident he want to get away . 

 ' then well let he go , ' say Ram n to Kate . ' you do not mind go home in the boat ? ' 

 ' I do not   want to give you trouble . ' 

 ' it be least trouble to let this fellow go , and you can leave by boat just whenever you wish to . so we shall all be more free . ' 

 Kate pay the chauffeur , and the Ford start rattle . after rattle a while , it move in a curve round the courtyard , and lurch through the zaguán , disappear as fast as possible . 

 Ram n speak to his two mozo with the gun . they go to the outer doorway , obediently . 

 ' why do you have to have armed man ? ' she say . 

 ' oh , they be afraid of bandit , ' he say . ' whenever there be a rebellion anywhere , everybody be afraid of bandit . so of course that call bandit into life . ' 

 ' but where do they come from ? ' say Kate , as they pass into the inner doorway . 

 ' from the village , ' he say , close the heavy door of that entrance behind he , and put the heavy iron bar across , from wall to wall . 

 the inner archway be now a little prison , for the strong iron gate at the lake end of the passage be shut fast . she look through , at the little round pond . it have some blue water - lily on it . beyond , the pallid lake seem almost like a ghost , in the glare of the sun . 

 a servant be send to the kitchen quarter , Ram n and Kate climb the stone stair to the upper terrace . how lonely , stonily lonesome and forlorn the hacienda could feel ! the very stone wall could give off emptiness , loneliness , negation . 

 ' but which village do the bandit come from ? ' she insist . 

 ' any of they . mostly , they say , from San Pablo or from Ahuajijic . ' 

 ' quite near ! ' she cry . 

 ' or from Sayula , ' he add . ' any of the ordinary man in big hat you see around the plaza may possibly be bandit , when banditry pay , as a profession , and be not   punish with any particular severity . ' 

 ' it be hard to believe ! ' she say . 

 ' it be so obvious ! ' he say , drop into one of the rock - chair opposite she , and smile across the onyx table . 

 ' I suppose it be ! ' she say . 

 he clap his hand , and his mozo Martin come up . Ram n order something , in a low , subdued tone . the man reply in an even low , more subdue tone . then the master and man nod at one another , and the man depart , his huarache swish a little on the terrace . 

 Ram n have fall into the low , crush sort of voice so common in the country , as if everyone be afraid to speak aloud , so they murmur guardedly . this be unusual , and Kate notice it in he with displeasure . she sit look past the thick mango - trees , whose fruit be change colour like something gradually grow hot , to the ruffled , pale - brown lake . the mountain of the opposite shore be very dark . above they lie a heavy , but distant black cloud , out of which lightning flap suddenly and uneasily . 

 ' where be Don Cipriano ? ' she ask . 

 ' Don Cipriano be very much General Viedma at the moment , ' he reply . ' chase rebel in the State of Colima . ' 

 ' will they be very hard to chase ? ' 

 ' probably not . anyhow Cipriano will enjoy chase they . he be Zapotee , and most of his man be Zapotecans , from the hill . they love chase man who be not . ' 

 ' I wonder why he be not   there on Sunday when you carry away the image , ' she say . ' I think it be an awfully brave thing to do . ' 

 ' do you ? ' he laugh . ' it be not . it be never half so brave to carry something off , and destroy it , as to set a new pulse beating . ' 

 ' but you have to destroy those old thing , first . ' 

 ' those frowsty image - why , yes . but it be no good until you have   get something else move , from the inside . ' 

 ' and have you ? ' 

 ' I think I have . do not   you ? ' 

 ' yes , ' she say , a little doubtful . 

 ' I think I have , ' he say . ' I feel there be a new thing move inside I . ' he be laugh at she , for her hesitation . ' why do not   you come and join we ? ' he add . 

 ' how ? ' she say . ' by be marry off to Don Cipriano ? ' 

 ' not necessarily . not necessarily . not necessarily by be marry to anybody . ' 

 ' what be you go to do next ? ' she say . 

 ' I ? I be go to re - open the church , for Quetzalcoatl to come in . but I do not   like lonely god . there should be several of they , I think , for they to be happy together . ' 

 ' do one need god ? ' she say . 

 ' why yes . one need manifestation , it seem to I . ' 

 Kate sit in unwilling silence . 

 ' one need goddesse too . that be also a dilemma , ' he add , with a laugh . 

 ' how I would hate , ' say Kate , ' to have to be a goddess for people . ' 

 ' for the monkey ? ' he say , smile . 

 ' yes ! of course . ' 

 at that moment , he sit erect , listen . there have be a shot , which Kate have hear , but which she have hardly notice ; to her ear , it might have be a motor - car back - firing , or even a motor - boat . 

 suddenly , a sharp little volley of shot . 

 Ram n rise swiftly , swift as a great cat , and slam to the iron door at the top of the stairway , shoot the bar . 

 ' will not   you go into that room ? ' he say to she , point to a dark doorway . ' you will be all right there . just stay a few minute till I come back . ' 

 as he speak , there come a shriek from the courtyard at the back , and a man 's death - voice yell Patr n ! 

 Ram n 's eye dilate with terrible anger , the anger of death . his face go pale and strange , as he look at she without see she , the black flame fill his eye . he have draw a long - barrel steel revolver from his hip . 

 still without see she , he stride rapidly , soft and catlike , along the terrace , and leap up the end staircase on to the roof . the soft , eternal passion of anger in his limb . 

 Kate stand in the doorway of the room , transfix . the light of day seem to have darken before her face . 

 ' Holá ! you there ! ' she hear his voice from the roof , in such anger it be almost a laugh , from far away . 

 for answer , a confused noise from the courtyard , and several shot . the slow , steady answer of shot ! 

 she start as a rush hiss break on the air . in terror she wait . then she see it be a rocket burst with a sound like a gun , high over the lake , and emit a shower of red ball of light . a signal from Ram n ! 

 unable to go into the dark room , Kate wait as if smite to death . then something stir deep in she , she fly along the terrace and up the step to the roof . she realize that she do not   mind die so long as she die with that man . not alone . 

 the roof be glare with sunshine . it be flat , but its different level be uneven . she run straight out into the light , towards the parapet wall , and have nearly come in sight of the gateway of the courtyard below , when something give a slight smack , and bit of plaster fly in her face and her hair . she turn and flee back like a bee to the stairway . 

 the stair come up in a corner , where there be a little sort of stone turret , square , with stone seat . she sink on one of these seat , look down in terror at the turn of the stair . it be a narrow little stone stairway , between the solid stone wall . 

 she be almost paralysed with shock and with fear . yet something within she be calm . lean and look out across calm sunshine of the level roof , she could not believe in death . 

 she see the white figure and the dark head of Ram n within one of the small square turret across the roof . the little tower be open , and hardly high than his head . he be stand in a corner , look sideways down a loop - hole , perfectly motionless . Snap ! go his revolver , deliberately . there be a muffled cry below , and a sudden volley of shot . 

 Ram n stand away from the loop - hole and take off his white blouse , so that it should not betray he . above his sash be a belt of cartridge . in the shadow of the turret , his body look curiously dark , rise from the white of his trouser . again he take his stand quietly at the side of the long , narrow , slant aperture . he lift his revolver carefully , and the shot , one , two , three , slow and deliberate , startle her nerve . and again there be a volley of shot from below , and bit of stone and plaster smoking against the sky . then again , silence , long silence . Kate press her hand against her body , as she sit . 

 the cloud have shift , the sun shone yellowish . in the heavy light , the mountain beyond the parapet show a fleece of young green , smoky and beautiful . 

 all be silent . ram n in the shadow do not move , press himself against the wall , and look down . he command , she know , the big inner door . 

 suddenly , however , he shift . with his revolver in his hand he stoop and run , like some terrible cat , the sun gleam on his naked back as he crouch under the shelter of the thick parapet wall , run along the roof to the correspond front turret . 

 this turret be roofless , and it be near to Kate , as she sit spellbound , in a sort of eternity , on the stone seat at the head of the stair , watch Ram n. he press himself against the wall , and lift his revolver to the slit . and again , one , two , three , four , five , the shot explode deliberately . some voice below yell Ay - ee ! ay - ee ! ay - ee ! in yelps of animal pain . a voice be hear shout command . Ram n kneel on one knee , re - load his revolver . then he strike a match , and again Kate almost start out of her skin , as a rocket rush ferociously up into the sky , explode like a gun , and let fall the ball of red flame that linger as if loth to die away , in the high , remote air . 

 she sigh , wonder what it all be . it be death , she know . but so strange , so vacant . just these noise of shot ! and she could see nothing outside . she want to see what be in the courtyard . 

 Ram n be at his post , press himself close to the wall , look down , with bent head , motionless . there be shot , and a spatter of lead from below . but he do not move . she could not see his face , only part of his back ; the proud , heavy , creamy - brown shoulder , the black head bend a little forward , in concentration , the cartridge - belt drop above his loin , over the white , floppy linen of the trouser . still and soft in watchful concentration , almost like silence itself . then with soft , diabolic swiftness in his movement , he change his position , and take aim . 

 he be utterly unaware of she ; even of her existence . which be as it should be , no doubt . she sit motionless , wait . wait , waiting , wait , in that yellowish sunlight of eternity , with a certain changeless suspense of stillness inside she . someone would come from the village . there would be an end . there would be an end . 

 at the same time , she start every time he fire , and look at he . and she hear his voice say : ' one need manifestation , it seem to I . ' ah , how she hat the noise of shot . 

 suddenly she give a pierce shriek , and in one leap be out of her retreat . she have see a black head turn the stair . 

 before she know it , Ram n jump past she like a great cat , and two man clash in mid - air , as the unseen fellow leap up from the stair . two man in a crash go down on the floor , a revolver go off , terrible limb be writhe . 

 Ram n 's revolver be on the floor . but again there be a shot from the tangled man , and a redness of blood suddenly appear out of nowhere , on the white cotton clothing , as the two man twist and fight on the floor . 

 they be both big man . struggle on the ground , they look huge . Ram n have the bandit 's revolver - hand by the wrist . the bandit , with a ghastly black face with roll eye and sparse moustache , have get Ram n 's naked arm in his white tooth , and be hang on , show his red gum , while with his free hand he be feel for his knife . 

 Kate could not believe that the black , ghastly face with the sightless eye and bite mouth be conscious . Ram n have he clasp round the body . the bandit 's revolver fall , and the fellow 's loose black hand scrabble on the concrete , feel for it . blood be flow over his tooth . yet some blind super - consciousness seem to possess he , as if he be a devil , not a man . 

 his hand nearly touch Ram n 's revolver . in horror Kate run and snatch the weapon from the warm concrete , run away as the bandit give a heave , a great sudden heave of his body , under the body of Ram n. Kate raise the revolver . she hat that horrible devil under Ram n as she have never hat in her life . yet she dare not fire . 

 Ram n shout something , glance at she . she could not understand . but she run round , to be able to shoot the man under Ram n. even as she run , the bandit twist with a great lunge of his body , heave Ram n up , and with his short free hand get Ram n 's own knife from the belt at the groin , and stab . 

 Kate give a cry ! oh , how she want to shoot ! she see the knife strike sideways , slant in a short jab into Ram n 's back . at the same moment there be a stumble on the stair , and another black - headed man be leap on to the roof from the turret . 

 she stiffen her wrist and fire without look , in a sudden second of pure control . the black head come crash at she . she recoil in horror , lift the revolver and fire again , and miss . but even as it pass she , she see red blood among the black hair of that head . it crash down , the buttock of the body heave up , the whole thing twitch and jerk along , the face seem to grin in a mortal grin . 

 glance from horror to horror , she see Ram n , his face still as death , blood run down his arm and his back , hold down the head of the bandit by the hair and stab he with short stab in the throat , one , two , while blood shoot out like a red projectile ; there be a strange sound like a soda - syphon , a ghastly bubble , one final terrible convulsion from the loin of the stricken man , throw Ram n off , and Ram n lie twisted , still clutch the man 's hair in one hand , the bloody knife in the other , and gaze into the livid , distorted face , in which ferocity seem to have go frozen , with a steady , intent , inhuman gaze . 

 then , without let go his victim 's hair , he look up , cautiously . to see Kate 's man , with black hair wet with blood , and blood run down into his glaze , awful eye , slowly rise to his knee . it be the strange face in the world ; the high , dome head with blood - soddene hair , blood run in several stream down the narrow , corrugated brow and along the black eyebrow above the glaze , black , numb eye , in which the last glazing be of ferocity , strange even than wonder , the glazed and absolute ferocity which the man 's last consciousness show . 

 it be a long , thin , handsome face , save for those eye of glaze ferocity , and for the longish white tooth under the sparse moustache . 

 the man be reduce to his last , blank term of be ; a glaze and ghastly ferocity . 

 Ram n drop the hair of his victim , whose head drop sideways with a gap red throat , and rise to a crouch position . the second bandit be on his knee , but his hand already clasp his knife . Ram n crouch . they be both perfectly still . but Ram n have get his balance , crouch between his foot . 

 the bandit 's black , glaze eye of blank ferocity take a glint of cunning . he be stretch . he be go to leap to his foot for his stroke . 

 and even as he leap , Ram n shoot the knife , that be all bright red as a cardinal bird . it fly red like a bird , and the drop of Ram n 's handful of blood fly with it , splash even Kate , who keep she revolver ready , watch near the stairway . 

 the bandit drop on his knee again , and remain for a moment kneeling as if in prayer , the red pommel of the knife stick out of his abdomen , from his white trouser . then he slowly bow over , double up , and go on his face again , once more with his buttock in the air . 

 Ram n still crouch at attention , almost supernatural , his dark eye glitter with watchfulness , in pure , savage attentiveness . then he rise , very smooth and quiet , cross the blood - stain concrete to the fallen man , pick up the clean , fallen knife that belong to the fellow , lift the red - dripping chin , and with one stroke drive the knife into the man 's throat . the man subside with the blow , not even twitch . 

 then again , Ram n turn to look at the first man . he gaze a moment attentively . but that horrible black face be dead . 

 and then Ram n glance at Kate , as she stand near the stair with the revolver . his brow be like a boy 's , very pure and primitive , and the eye underneath have a certain primitive gleam look of virginity . as man must have be , in the first awful day , with that strange beauty that go with pristine rudimentariness . 

 for the most part , he do not recognize she . but there be one remote glint of recognition . 

 ' be they both dead ? ' she ask , awestruck . 

 ' creo que sí ! ' he reply in Spanish . 

 he turn to look once more , and to pick up the pistol that lie on the concrete . as he do so , he notice that his right hand be bright red , with the blood that flow still down his arm . he wipe it on the jacket of the dead man . but his trouser on his loin be also sodden with blood , they stick red to his hip . he do not notice . 

 he be like a pristine being , remote in consciousness , and with far , remote sex . 

 curious rattling , bubble noise still come from the second man , just physical sound . the first man lie sprawl in a ghastly fashion , his evil face fix above a pool of blacken blood . 

 ' watch the stair ! ' say Ram n in Spanish to she , glance at she with farouche eye , from some far remote jungle . yet still the glint of recognition spark furtively out of the darkness . 

 he creep to the turret , and stealthily look out . then he creep back , with the same stealth , and drag the near dead man to the parapet , raise the body till the head look over . there be no sound . then he raise himself , and peep over . no sign , no sound . 

 he look at the dead body as he let it drop . then he go to Kate , to look down the stair . 

 ' you graze that man with your first shot , you only stun he , I believe , ' he say . 

 ' be there any more ? ' she ask , shudder . 

 ' I think they be all go . ' 

 he be pale , almost white , with that same pristine clear brow , like a boy 's , a sort of twilight changelessness . 

 ' be you much hurt ? ' she say . 

 ' I ? no ! ' and he put his finger round to his back , to feel the slowly well wound , with his bloody finger . 

 the afternoon be pass towards yellow , heavy evening . 

 he go again to look at the terrible face of the first dead man . 

 ' do you know he ? ' she say . 

 he shake his head . 

 ' not that I be aware , ' he say . then : ' good that he be dead . good that he be dead . - good that we kill they both . ' 

 he look at she with that glint of savage recognition from afar . 

 ' ugh ! no ! it be terrible ! ' she say , shudder . 

 ' good for I that you be there ! good that we kill they between we ! good they be dead . ' 

 the heavy , luxurious yellow light from below the cloud gild the mountain of evening . there be the sound of a motor - car honk its horn . 

 Ram n go in silence to the parapet , the blood wet his pantaloon lower and low , since they stick to he when he bend down . rich yellow light flood the blood - stain roof . there be a terrible smell of blood . 

 ' there be a car come , ' he say . 

 she follow , frighten , across the roof . 

 she see the hill and low slope inland swim in gold light like lacquer . the black hut of the peon , the lurid leaf of banana show up uncannily , the tree green - gold stand up , with bough of shadow . and away up the road be a puther of dust , then the flash of glass as the automobile turn . 

 ' stay here , ' say Ram n , ' while I go down . ' 

 ' why do not   your peon come and help you ? ' she say . 

 ' they never do ! ' he reply . ' unless they be armed on purpose . ' 

 he go , pick up his blouse and put it on . and immediately the blood come through . 

 he go down . she listen to his step . below , the courtyard be all shadow , and empty , save for two dead white - clothe body of man , one near the zaguán , one against a pillar of the shed . 

 the motor - car come sound its horn wildly all the way between the tree . it lurch into the zaguán . it be full of soldier , soldier stand on the running - board , hang on . 

 ' Don Ram n ! Don Ram n ! ' shout the officer , leap out of the car . ' Don Ram n ! ' he be thunder at the door of the inner zaguán . 

 why do not ram n open ? where be he ? 

 she lean over the parapet and scream like a wild bird . 

 ' Viene ! Viene Don Ram n ! Él viene ! ' 

 the soldier all look up at she . she draw back in terror . then , in a panic , she turn downstairs , to the terrace . there be blood on the stone stair , at the bottom , a great pool . and on the terrace near the rock - chair , two dead man in a great pool of blood . 

 one be Ram n ! for a moment she go unconscious . then slowly she creep forward . Ram n have fall , reek with blood from his wound , his arm round the body of the other man , who be bleed too . the second man open his eye , wildly , and in a rattle voice , blind and dying , say : 

 ' Patr n ! ' 

 it be Martin , Ram n 's own mozo . he be stiffen and die in Ram n 's arm . and Ram n , lift he , have make his own wound gush with blood , and have faint . he lie like dead . but Kate could see the faint pulse in his neck . 

 she run blindly down the stair , and fight to get the great iron bar from across the door , scream all the time : 

 ' come ! somebody ! come to Don Ram n ! he will die . ' 

 a terrified boy and a woman appear from the kitchen quarter . the door be open , just as six horse - soldier gallop into the courtyard . the officer leap from his horse and run like a hare , his revolver drawn , his spur flashing , straight through the door and up the stair , like a madman . when Kate get up the stair again , the officer be stand with draw revolver , gaze down at Ram n. 

 ' he be dead ? ' he say , stupefy , look at Kate . 

 ' no ! ' she say . ' it be only loss of blood . ' 

 the officer lift Ram n and lay he on the terrace . then quickly they get off his blouse . the wound be bleed thickly in the back . 

 ' we have   get to stop this wound , ' say the lieutenant . ' where be Pablo ? ' 

 instantly there be a cry for Pablo . 

 Kate run into a bedroom for water , and she switch an old linen sheet from the bed . pablo be a young doctor among the soldier . Kate give he the bowl of water and the towel , and be tear the sheet into band . Ram n lie naked on the floor , all streak with blood . and the light be go . 

 ' bring light ! ' say the young doctor . 

 with swift hand he wash the wound , peer with his nose almost touch it . 

 ' it be not much ! ' he say . 

 Kate have prepare bandage and a pad . she crouch to hand they to the young man . the woman - servant set a lamp with a white shade on the floor by the doctor . he lift it , peer again at the wound . 

 ' no ! ' he say . ' it be not much . ' 

 then glance up at the soldier who stand motionless , peer down , the light on their dark face . 

 ' Tu ! ' he say , make a gesture . 

 quickly the lieutenant take the lamp , hold it over the inert body , and the doctor , with Kate to help , proceed to staunch and bind the wound . and Kate , as she touch the soft , inert flesh of Ram n , be think to herself : this too be he , this silent body ! and that face that stab the throat of the bandit be he ! and that twilit brow , and those remote eye , like a death - virgin , be he . even a savage out of the twilight ! and the man that know I , where be he ? one among these many man , no more ! oh God ! give the man his soul back , into this bloody body . let the soul come back , or the universe will be cold for I and for many man . 

 the doctor finish his temporary bandage , look at the wound in the arm , swiftly wipe the blood off the loin and buttock and leg , and say : 

 ' we must put he in bed . lift his head . ' 

 quickly Kate lift the heavy , inert head . the eye be half open . the doctor press the closed lip , under the sparse black moustache . but the tooth be firmly shut . 

 the doctor shake his head . 

 ' bring a mattress , ' he say . 

 the wind be suddenly roar , the lamp be leap with a long , smoky needle of flame , inside its chimney . leaf and dust fly rattle on the terrace , there be a splash of lightning . Ram n 's body lie there uncovered and motionless , the bandage be already soak with blood , under the darkening , leap light of the lamp . 

 and again Kate see , vividly , how the body be the flame of the soul , leap and sink upon the invisible wick of the soul . and now the soul , like a wick , seem spend , the body be a sinking , fade flame . 

 ' kindle his soul again , oh God ! ' she cry to herself . 

 all she could see of the naked body be the terrible absence of the live soul of it . all she want be for the soul to come back , the eye to open . 

 they get he upon the bed and cover he , close the door against the wind and the rain . the doctor chafe his brow and hand with cognac . and at length the eye open ; the soul be there , but stand far back . 

 for some moment Ram n lie with open eye , without see or move . then he stir a little . 

 ' what be the matter ? ' he say . 

 ' keep still , Don Ram n , ' say the doctor , who with his slim dark hand be even more delicate than a woman . ' you have lose much blood . keep still . ' 

 ' where be Martin ? ' 

 ' he be outside . ' 

 ' how be he ? ' 

 ' he be dead . ' 

 the dark eye under the black lash be perfectly steady and changeless . then come the voice : 

 ' pity we do not kill they all . pity we do not kill they all . we have get to kill they all . - where be the Señora Inglesa ? ' 

 ' here she be . ' 

 his black eye look up at Kate . then more of his consciousness come back . 

 ' thank you for my life , ' he say , close his eye . then : ' put the lamp aside . ' 

 soldier be tap at the glass pane , for the lieutenant . a black little fellow enter , wipe the rain from his black face and push his thick black hair back . 

 ' there be two more dead on the azotea , ' he announce to his officer . 

 the lieutenant rise , and follow he out . Kate too go on to the terrace . in the early darkness the rain be thresh down . a lantern be come down from the roof : it come along the terrace to the stair , and after it two soldier in the pour rain , carry a dead body , then behind , two more , with the other body . the huarache of the soldier click and shuffle on the wet terrace . the dismal cortège go downstairs . 

 Kate stand on the terrace face the darkness , while the rain thresh down . she feel uneasy here , in this house of man and of soldier . she find her way down to the kitchen , where the boy be fan a charcoal fire , and the woman be crush tomato on the metate , for a sauce . 

 ' ay , Señora ! ' cry the woman . ' five man dead , and the Patr n wound to death ! ay ! ay ! ' 

 ' seven man dead ! ' say the boy . ' two on the azotea ! ' 

 ' seven man ! seven man ! ' 

 Kate sit on her chair , stun , unable to hear anything but the threshing rain , unable to feel anything more . two or three peon come in , and two more woman , the man wrap to their nose in their blanket . the woman bring masa , and begin a great clapping of tortilla . the people converse in low , rapid tone , in the dialect , and Kate could not listen . 

 at length the rain begin to abate . she know it would leave off suddenly . there be a great sound of water run , gush , splash , pour into the cistern . and she think to herself : the rain will wash the blood off the roof and down the spout into the cistern . there will be blood in the water . 

 she look at her own blood - smear white frock . she feel chilly . she rise to go upstairs again , into the dark , empty , masterless house . 

 ' ah , Señora ! you be go upstairs ? go , Daniel , carry the lantern for the Señora ! ' 

 the boy light a candle in a lantern , and Kate return to the upper terrace . the light shine out of the room where Ram n be . she go into the salon and get her hat and her brown shawl . the lieutenant hear she , and come to she quickly , very kindly and respectful . 

 ' will not   you come in , Señora ? ' he say , hold the door to the room where Ram n lay ; the guest - room . 

 Kate go in . Ram n lie on his side , his black , rather thin moustache push against the pillow . he be himself . 

 ' it be very unpleasant for you here , Señora Caterina , ' he say . ' would you like to go to your house ? the lieutenant will send you in the motor - car . ' 

 ' be there nothing I can do here ? ' she say . 

 ' ah no ! do not   stay here ! it be too unpleasant for you . - I shall soon get up , and I shall come to thank you for my life . ' 

 he look at she , into her eye . and she see that his soul have come back to he , and with his soul he see she and acknowledge she ; though always from the peculiar remoteness that be inevitable in he . 

 she go downstairs with the young lieutenant . 

 ' ah , what a horrible affair ! they be not bandit , Señora ! ' say the young man , with passion . ' they do not   come to rob . they come to murder Don Ram n , you know , Señora ! simply to murder Don Ram n. and but for your be here , they would have do it ! - ah , think of it , Señora ! Don Ram n be the most precious man in Mexico . it be possible that in the world there be not a man like he . and personally , he have not   get enemy . as a man among man , he have not   get enemy . no , Señora . not one ! but do you know who it will be ? the priest , and the Knights of Cortés . ' 

 ' be you sure ? ' say Kate . 

 ' sure , Señora ! ' cry the lieutenant indignantly . ' look ! there be seven man dead . two be the mozos with gun , watch in the zaguán . one be Don Ram n 's own mozo Martin ! - ah , what a faithful man , what a brave one ! never will Don Ram n pardon his death . then moreover , the two man kill on the azotea , and two man in the courtyard , shoot by Don Ram n. besides these , a man whom Martin wound , who fall and break his leg , so we have get he . come and see they , Señora . ' 

 they be down in the wet courtyard . little fire have be light under the shed , and the little , black , devil - may - care soldier be crouch round they , with a bunch of peon in blanket stand round . across the courtyard , horse stamp and jingle their harness . a boy come run with tortilla in a cloth . the dark - face little soldier crouch like animal , sprinkle salt on the tortilla , and devour they with small , white , strong tooth . 

 Kate see the great oxen tie in their shed , lie down , the wagon stand inert . and a little crowd of ass be munch alfalfa in a corner . 

 the officer march beside Kate , his spur sparkle in the firelight . he go to the muddy car , that stand in the middle of the yard , then to his horse . from a saddle - pocket he take an electric torch , and lead Kate across to the end shed . 

 there he suddenly flash his light upon seven dead body , lay side by side . the two from the roof be wet . ram n 's dead man lie with his dark , strong breast bare , and his blackish , thick , devilish face sideways ; a big fellow . Kate 's man lie rigid . Martin have be stab in the collar bone ; he look as if he be star at the roof of the shed . the other be two more peon , and two fellow in black boot and grey trouser and blue overall jacket . they be all inert and straight and dead , and somehow , a little ridiculous . perhaps it be clothing that make dead people gruesome and absurd . but also , the grotesque fact that the body be vacant , be always present . 

 ' look ! ' say the lieutenant , touch a body with his toe . ' this be a chauffeur from Sayula ; this be a boatman from Sayula . these two be peon from San Pablo . this man ' - the lieutenant kick the dead body - ' we do not   know . ' it be Ram n 's dead man . ' but this man ' - he kick her dead man , with the tall domed head - ' be from Ahuajijic , and he be married to the woman that now live with a peon here . - you see , Señora ! a chauffeur and a boatman from Sayula - they be Knights - of - cortés man ; and those two peon from San Pablo be priest ' man . - these be not bandit . it be an attempt at assassination . but of course they would have rob everything , everything , if they have kill Don Ram n. ' 

 Kate be star at the dead man . three of they be handsome ; one , the boatman , with a thin line of black beard frame his shapely face , be beautiful . but dead , with the mockery of death in his face . all of they man who have be in the flush of life . yet dead , they do not even matter . they be gruesome , but it do not matter that they be dead man . they be vacant . perhaps even in life there have be a certain vacancy , nothingness , in their handsome physique . 

 for a pure moment , she wish for man who be not handsome as these dark native be . even their beauty be suddenly repulsive to she ; the dark beauty of half - create , half - evolve thing , leave in the old , reptile - like smoothness . it make her shudder . 

 the soul ! if only the soul in man , in woman , would speak to she , not always this strange , perverse materialism , or a distorted animalism . if only people be soul , and their body be gesture from the soul ! if one could but forget both body and fact , and be present with strong , live soul ! 

 she go across the courtyard , that be litter with horse - dropping , to the car . the lieutenant be choose the soldier who should stay behind . the horse - soldier would stay . a peon on a delicate speckled horse , a flea - bite roan , come trot past the soldier in the zaguán . he have be to Sayula for doctor 's stuff , and to give message to the Jefe . 

 at last the car , with little soldier cling on to it all round , move slowly out of the courtyard . the lieutenant sit beside Kate . he stop the car again at the big white barn under the tree , to talk to two soldier picket there . 

 then they move slowly on , under the wet tree , in the mud that crackle beneath the wheel , up the avenue to the highroad , where be the little black hut of the peon . little fire be flap in front of one or two hut , woman be bake tortilla on the flat earthenware plate , upon the small wood fire . a woman be go to her hut with a blaze brand , like a torch , to kindle her fire . a few peon in dirty - white clothe squat silent against the wall of their house , utterly silent . as the motor - car turn its great glare headlight upon the highroad , little sandy pig with short , curly hair start up squealing , and face and figure stand out blindly , as in a searchlight . 

 there be a hut with a wide opening in the black wall , and a grey old man be stand inside . the car stop for the lieutenant to call to the peon under the wall . they come to the car with their black eye glare and glitter apprehensively . they seem very much abash , and humble , answer the lieutenant . 

 meanwhile Kate watch a boy buy a drink for one centavo and a piece of rope for three centavos , from the grey old man at the dark hole , which be a shop . 

 the car go on , the great light glare unnaturally upon the hedge of cactus and mesquite and palo blanco tree , and upon the great pool of water in the road . it be a slow progress . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XX 

 marriage by Quetzalcoatl 

 

 Kate hide in her own house , numb . she could not bear to talk to people . she could not bear even Juana 's bubble discourse . the common thread that bind she to humanity seem to have snap . the little human thing do not   interest she any more . her eye seem to have go dark , and blind to individual . they be all just individual , like leaf in the dark , make a noise . and she be alone under the tree . 

 the egg - woman want six centavos for an egg . 

 ' and I say to she - I say to she - we buy they at five centavos ! ' Juana go on . 

 ' yes ! ' say Kate . she do not   care whether they be buy at five or fifty , or not buy at all . 

 she do not   care , she do not   care , she do not   care . she do not   even care about life any more . there be no escape her own complete indifference . she feel indifferent to everything in the whole world , almost she feel indifferent to death . 

 ' Niña ! Niña ! here be the man with the sandal ! look ! look how nicely he have make they for you , Niña ! look what Mexican huarache the Niña be go to wear ! ' 

 she try they on . the man charge she too much . she look at he with her remote , indifferent eye . but she know , in the world one must live , so she pay he less than he ask , though more than he really would have accept . 

 she sit down again in her rock - chair in the shade of the room . only to be alone ! only that no one should speak to she . only that no one should come near she ! because in reality her soul and spirit be go , depart into the middle of some desert , and the effort of reach across to people to effect an apparent meeting , or contact , be almost more than she could bear . 

 never have she be so alone , and so inert , and so utterly without desire ; plunge in a wan indifference , like death . never have she pass her day so blindly , so unknowingly , in stretch of nothingness . 

 sometimes , to get away from her household , she sit under a tree by the lake . and there , without know it , she let the sun scorch her foot and burn her face inflame . Juana make a great outcry over she . the foot blister and swell , her face be red and painful . but it all seem to happen merely to her shell . and she be wearily , wanly indifferent . 

 only at the very centre of she sometimes a little flame rise , and she know that what she want be for her soul to live . the life of day and fact and happening be dead on she , and she be like a corpse . but away inside she a little light be burn , the light of her innermost soul . sometimes it sink and seem extinct . then it be there again . 

 Ram n have light it . and once it be light the world go hollow and dead , all the world - activity be empty weariness to she . her soul ! her frail , innermost soul ! she want to live its life , not her own life . 

 the time would come again when she would see Ram n and Cipriano , and the soul that be gutter would kindle again in she , and feel strong . meanwhile she only feel weak , weak , weak , weak as the dying . she feel that afternoon of bloodshed have blow all their soul into the twilight of death , for the time . but they would come back . they would come back . nothing to do but to submit , and wait . wait , with a soul almost dead , and hand and heart of uttermost inert heaviness , indifference . 

 Ram n have lose much blood . and she , too , in other way , have be drain of the blood of the body . she feel bloodless and powerless . 

 but wait , wait , wait , the new blood would come . 

 one day Cipriano come . she be rock in her salon , in a cotton housedress , and her face red and rather swollen . she see he , in uniform , pass by the window . he stand in the doorway on the terrace , a dark , grave , small , handsome man . 

 ' do come in , ' she say with effort . 

 her eyelid feel burn . he look at she with his full black eye , that always have in they so many thing she do not understand . she feel she could not look back at he . 

 ' have you chase all your rebel ? ' she say . 

 ' for the present , ' he reply . 

 he seem to be watch , watch for something . 

 ' and you do not   get hurt ? ' 

 ' no , I do not   get hurt . ' 

 she look away out of the door , have nothing to say in the world . 

 ' I go to Jamiltepec yesterday evening , ' he say . 

 ' how be Don Ram n ? ' 

 ' yes , he be well . ' 

 ' quite well ? ' 

 ' no . not quite well . but he walk a little . ' 

 ' wonderful how people heal . ' 

 ' yes . we die very easily . but we also come quickly back to life . ' 

 ' and you ? do you fight the rebel , or do not   they want to fight ? ' 

 ' yes , they want to . we fight once or twice ; not very much . ' 

 ' man kill ? ' 

 ' yes ! some ! not many , no ? perhaps a hundred . we can never tell , no ? maybe two hundred . ' 

 he wave his hand vaguely . 

 ' but you have the bad rebellion at Jamiltepec , no ? ' he say suddenly , with heavy indian gravity , gloom suddenly settle down . 

 ' it do not   last long , but it be rather awful while it do . ' 

 ' rather awful , no ? - if I have know ! I say to Ram n , will not   you keep the soldier ? - the guard , no ? he say they be not necessary . but here - you never know , no ? ' 

 ' Niña ! ' cry Juana , from the terrace . ' Niña ! Don Antonio say he be come to see you . ' 

 ' tell he to come to - morrow . ' 

 ' already he be on the way ! ' cry Juana , in helplessness . Don Antonio be Kate 's fat landlord ; and , of course , Juana 's permanent master , more important in her eye , then , even than Kate . 

 ' here he be ! ' she cry , and flee . 

 Kate lean forward in her chair , to see the stout figure of her landlord on the walk outside the window , take off his cloth cap and bow low to she . a cloth cap ! - she know he be a great Fascista , the reactionary Knights of Cortés hold he in great esteem . 

 Kate bow coldly . 

 he bow low again , with the cloth cap . 

 Kate say not a word . 

 he stand on one foot , then on the other , and then march forward up the gravel walk , towards the kitchen quarter , as if he have not see either Kate or General Viedma . in a few moment he march back , as if he could not see either Kate or the General , through the open door . 

 Cipriano look at the pass stout figure of Don Antonio in a cloth cap as if it be the wind blow . 

 ' it be my landlord ! ' say Kate . ' I expect he want to know if I be take on the house for another three month . ' 

 ' Ram n want I to come and see you - to see how you be , no ? - and to ask you to come to Jamiltepec . will you come with I now ? the car be here . ' 

 ' must I ? ' say Kate , uneasily . 

 ' no . not unless you wish . Ram n say , not unless you wish . he say , perhaps it would be painful to you , no ? - to go to Jamiltepec again - so soon after - ' 

 how curious Cipriano be ! he state thing as if they be mere bare fact with no emotional content at all . as for its be painful to Kate to go to Jamiltepec , that mean nothing to he . 

 ' lucky thing you be there that day , no ? ' he say . ' they might have kill he . very likely they would ! very likely ! Awful , no ? ' 

 ' they might have kill I too , ' she say . 

 ' yes ! yes ! they might ! ' he acquiesce . 

 curious he be ! with a sort of glaze of the ordinary world on top , and underneath a black volcano with hell know what depth of lava . and talk half - abstractedly from his glaze , top self , the word come out small and quick , and he be always hesitate , and say : no ? it be not   himself at all talk . 

 ' what would you have do if they have kill Ram n ? ' she say , tentatively . 

 ' I ? ' - he look up at she in a black flare of apprehension . the volcano be rouse . ' if they have kill he ? - ' his eye take on that fix glare of ferocity , star she down . 

 ' would you have care very much ? ' she say . 

 ' I ? would I ? ' he repeat , and the black suspicious look come into his indian eye . 

 ' would it have mean very much to you ? ' 

 he still watch she with a glare of ferocity and suspicion . 

 ' to I ! ' he say , and he press his hand against the button of his tunic . ' to I Ram n be more than life . More than life . ' his eye seem to glare and go sightless , as he say it , the ferocity melt in a strange blind , confide glare , that seem sightless , either look inward , or out at the whole vast void of the cosmo , where no vision be leave . 

 ' More than anything ? ' she say . 

 ' yes ! ' he reply abstractedly , with a blind nod of the head . 

 then abruptly he look at she and say : 

 ' you save his life . ' 

 by this he mean that therefore - but she could not understand the therefore . 

 she go to change , and they set off to Jamiltepec . Cipriano make she a little uneasy , sit beside he . he make she physically aware of he , of his small but strong and assertive body , with its black current and storm of desire . the range of he be very limited , really . the great part of his nature be just inert and heavy , unresponsive , limit as a snake or a lizard be limited . but within his own heavy , dark range he have a curious power . almost she could see the black fume of power which he emit , the dark , heavy vibration of his blood , which cast a spell over she . 

 as they sit side by side in the motor - car , silent , sway to the broken road , she could feel the curious tingling heat of his blood , and the heavy power of the will that lie unemerged in his blood . she could see again the sky go dark , and the phallic mystery rear itself like a whirling dark cloud , to the zenith , till it pierce the sombre , twilit zenith ; the old , supreme phallic mystery . and herself in the everlasting twilight , a sky above where the sun run smokily , an earth below where the tree and creature rise up in blackness , and man stride along naked , dark , half - visible , and suddenly whirl in supreme power , tower like a dark whirlwind column , whirl to pierce the very zenith . 

 the mystery of the primeval world ! she could feel it now in all its shadowy , furious magnificence . she know now what be the black , glint look in Cipriano 's eye . she could understand marry he , now . in the shadowy world where man be visionless , and wind of fury rise up from the earth , Cipriano be still a power . once you enter his mystery the scale of all thing change , and he become a live male power , undefined , and unconfine . the smallness , the limitation cease to exist . in his black , glint eye the power be limitless , and it be as if , from he , from his body of blood could rise up that pillar of cloud which sway and swung , like a rear serpent or a rise tree , till it sweep the zenith , and all the earth below be dark and prone , and consummate . those small hand , that little natural tuft of black goat ' beard hang light from his chin , the tilt of his brow and the slight slant of his eye , the domed indian head with its thick black hair , they be like symbol to she , of another mystery , the mystery of the twilit , primitive world , where shape that be small suddenly loom up huge , gigantic on the shadow , and a face like Cipriano 's be the face at once of a god and a devil , the undying Pan face . the bygone mystery , that have indeed go by , but have not pass away . never shall pass away . 

 as he sit in silence , cast the old , twilit pan - power over she , she feel herself submit , succumb . he be once more the old dominant male , shadowy , intangible , loom suddenly tall , and cover the sky , make a darkness that be himself and nothing but himself , the Pan male . and she be swoon prone beneath , perfect in her proneness . 

 it be the ancient phallic mystery , the ancient god - devil of the male Pan . Cipriano unyielde forever , in the ancient twilight , keep the ancient twilight around he . she understand now his power with his soldier . he have the old gift of demon - power . 

 he would never woo ; she see this . when the power of his blood rise in he , the dark aura stream from he like a cloud pregnant with power , like thunder , and rise like a whirlwind that rise suddenly in the twilight and raise a great pliant column , sway and lean with power , clear between heaven and earth . 

 ah ! and what a mystery of prone submission , on her part , this huge erection would imply ! submission absolute , like the earth under the sky . beneath an over - arching absolute . 

 ah ! what a marriage ! how terrible ! and how complete ! with the finality of death , and yet more than death . the arm of the twilit Pan . and the awful , half - intelligible voice from the cloud . 

 she could conceive now her marriage with Cipriano ; the supreme passivity , like the earth below the twilight , consummate in live lifelessness , the sheer solid mystery of passivity . ah , what an abandon , what an abandon , what an abandon ! - of so many thing she want to abandon . 

 Cipriano put his hand , with its strange soft warmth and weight , upon her knee , and her soul melt like fuse metal . 

 ' en poco tiempo , verdad ? ' he say to she , look into her eye with the old , black , glint look , of power about to consummate itself . 

 ' in a little while , no ? ' 

 she look back at he , wordless . language have abandon she , and she lean silent and helpless in the vast , unspoken twilight of the Pan world . her self have abandon she , and all her day be go . only she say to herself : 

 ' my demon lover ! ' 

 her world could end in many way , and this be one of they . back to the twilight of the ancient Pan world , where the soul of woman be dumb , to be forever unspoken . 

 the car have stop , they have come to Jamiltepec . he look at she again , as reluctantly he open the door . and as he step out , she realize again his uniform , his small figure in uniform . she have lose it entirely . she have only know his face , the face of the supreme god - demon ; with the arch brow and slightly slanting eye , and the loose , light tuft of a goat - beard . the Master . the everlasting Pan . 

 he be look back at she again , use all his power to prevent her seeing in he the little General in uniform , in the worldly vision . and she avoid his eye , and see nothing . 

 they find Ram n sit in his white clothe in a long chair on the terrace . he be creamy - brown in his pallor . 

 he see at once the change in Kate . she have the face of one wake from the dead , curiously dip in death , with a tenderness far more new and vulnerable than a child 's . he glance at Cipriano . Cipriano 's face seem dark than usual , with that secret hauteur and aloofness of the savage . he know it well . 

 ' be you well ? ' Kate ask . 

 ' very nearly ! ' he say , look up at she gently . ' and you ? ' 

 ' yes , I be all right . ' 

 ' you be ? ' 

 ' yes , I think so . - I have feel myself all lose , since that day . spiritually , I mean . otherwise I be all right . be you heal well ? ' 

 ' oh , yes ! I always heal quickly . ' 

 ' knife and bullet be horrible thing . ' 

 ' yes - in the wrong place . ' 

 Kate feel rather as if she be come to , from a swoon , as Ram n speak to she and look at she . his eye , his voice seem kind . kind ? the word suddenly be strange to she , she have to try to get its meaning . 

 there be no kindness in Cipriano . the god - demon Pan precede kindness . she wonder if she want kindness . she do not know . everything feel numb . 

 ' I be wonder whether to go to England , ' she say . 

 ' again ? ' say Ram n , with a slight smile . ' away from the bullet and the knife , be that it ? ' 

 ' yes ! - to get away . ' and she sigh deeply . 

 ' no ! ' say Ram n. ' do not   go away . you will find nothing in England . ' 

 ' but can I go on here ? ' 

 ' can you help it ? ' 

 ' I wish I know what to do . ' 

 ' how can one know ? something happen inside you , and all your decision be smoke . - let happen what will happen . ' 

 ' I can not   quite drift as if I have no soul of my own , can I ? ' 

 ' sometimes it be good . ' 

 there be a pause . Cipriano stay outside the conversation altogether , in a dusky world of his own , apart and secretly hostile . 

 ' I have be think so much about you , ' she say to Ram n , ' and wonder whether it be worth while . ' 

 ' what ? ' 

 ' what you be do ; try to change the religion of these people . if they have any religion to change . I do not   think they be a religious people . they be only superstitious . I have no use for man and woman who go crawl down a church aisle on their knee , or hold up their arm for hour . there be something stupid and wrong about it . they never worship a God . only some little evil power . I have be wonder so much if it be worth while give yourself to they , and expose yourself to they . it would be horrible if you be really kill . I have see you look dead . ' 

 ' now you see I look alive again , ' he smile . 

 but a heavy silence follow . 

 ' I believe Don Cipriano know they well than you do . I believe he know well , if it be any good , ' she say . 

 ' and what do he say ? ' ask Ram n. 

 ' I say I be Ram n 's man , ' reply Cipriano stubbornly . 

 Kate look at he , and mistrust he . in the long run he be nobody 's man . he be that old , masterless pan - male , that could not even conceive of service ; particularly the service of mankind . he see only glory ; the black mystery of glory consummate . and himself like a wind of glory . 

 ' I feel they will let you down , ' say Kate to ram n. 

 ' maybe ! but I shall not   let myself down . I do what I believe in . possibly I be only the first step round the corner of change . but : ce n'est que le premier pas qui coute - why will you not go round the corner with we ? at least it be well than sit still . ' 

 Kate do not answer his question . she sit look at the mango - tree and the lake , and the thought of that afternoon come over she again . 

 ' how do those two man get in ; those two bandit on the roof ? ' she ask wonderingly . 

 ' it be a woman this time ; a girl whom Carlota bring here from the Cuna in Mexico City , to be a sewing girl and to teach the peon 's wife to sew and do little thing . she have a little room at the end of the terrace there - ' Ram n point to the terrace project towards the lake , opposite the one where his own room be , and the cover balcony . ' she get entangle with one of the peon ; a sort of second overseer , call Guillermo . Guillermo have get a wife and four child , but he come to I to say could he change and take Maruca - the sewing girl . I say no , he could stay with his family . and I send Maruca back to Mexico . but she have have a smattering of education , and think she be equal to anything . she get message through to Guillermo , and he run away and join she in Mexico , leave wife and four child here . the wife then go to live with another peon - the blacksmith - whose wife have die and who be suppose to be a good match ; a decent fellow . 

 ' one day appear Guillermo , and say : could he come back ? I say not with Maruca . he say he do not   want Maruca , he want to come back . his wife be willing to go back to he again with the child . the blacksmith be willing to let she go . I say very well ; but he have forfeit his job as sub - overseer , and must be a peon again . 

 ' and he seem all right - satisfied . but then Maruca come and stay in Sayula , pretend to make she live as a dressmaker . she be in with the priest ; and she get Guillermo again . 

 ' it seem the Knights of Cortés have promise a big reward for the man who would bring in my scalp ; secretly , of course . the girl get Guillermo : Guillermo get those two peon , one from San Pablo and one from Ahuajijic ; somebody else arrange for the rest . 

 ' the bedroom the girl use to have be that one , on the terrace not far from where the stair go up to the roof . the bedroom have a lattice window , high up , look out on the tree . there be a big laurel de India grow outside . it appear the girl climb on a table and knock the iron lattice of the window loose , while she be live here , and that Guillermo , by take a jump from the bough - a very risky thing , but then he be one of that sort - could land on the window - sill and pull himself into the room . 

 ' apparently he and the other two man be go to get the scalp and pillage the house before the other could enter . so the first one , the man I kill , climb the tree , and with a long pole shove in the lattice of the window , and so get into the room , and up the terrace stair . 

 ' Martin , my man , who be wait on the other stair , ready if they try to blow out the iron door , hear the smash of the window and rush round just as the second bandit - the one you shoot - be crouch on the window - sill to jump down into the room . the window be quite small , and high up . 

 ' before Martin could do anything the man have jump down on top of he and stab he twice with his machete . then he take Martin 's knife and come up the stair , when you shoot he in the head . 

 ' Martin be on the floor when he see the hand of a third man grip through the window . then the face of Guillermo . Martin get up and give the hand a slash with the heavy machete , and Guillermo fall smash back down on to the rock under the wall . 

 ' when I come down , I find Martin lie outside the door of that room . he tell I - they come through there , Patr n. Guillermo be one of they . 

 ' Guillermo break his thigh on the rock , and the soldier find he . he confess everything , and say he be sorry , and beg my pardon . he be in the prison hospital now . ' 

 ' and Maruca ? ' say Kate . 

 ' they have   get she too . ' 

 ' there will always be a traitor , ' say Kate gloomily . 

 ' let we hope there will also be a Catarina , ' say Ram n. 

 ' but will you go on with it - your Quetzalcoatl ? ' 

 ' how can I leave off ? it be my métier now . why do not   you join we ? why do not   you help I ? ' 

 ' how ? ' 

 ' you will see . soon you will hear the drum again . soon the first day of Quetzalcoatl will come . you will see . then Cipriano will appear - in the red serape - and Huitzilopochtli will share the Mexican Olympus with Quetzalcoatl . then I want a goddess . ' 

 ' but will Don Cipriano be the god Huitzilopochtli ? ' she ask , take aback . 

 ' First Man of Huitzilopochtli , as I be First Man of Quetzalcoatl . ' 

 ' will you ? ' say Kate to Cipriano . ' that horrible Huitzilopochtli ? ' 

 ' yes , Señora ! ' say Cipriano , with a subtle smile of hauteur , the secret savage come into his own . 

 ' not the old Huitzilopochtli - but the new , ' say Ram n. ' and then there must come a goddess ; wife or virgin , there must come a goddess . why not you , as the First Woman of - say Itzpapalotl , just for the sound of the name ? ' 

 ' I ? ' say Kate . ' never ! I should die of shame . ' 

 ' shame ? ' laugh Ram n. ' ah , Señora Caterina , why shame ? this be a thing that must be do . there must be manifestation . we must change back to the vision of the live cosmo ; we must . the old Pan be in we , and he will not be deny . in cold blood and in hot blood both , we must make the change . that be how man be make . I accept the must from the old Pan in my soul , and from the new I . once a man gather his whole soul together and arrive at a conclusion , the time of alternative have go . I must . no more than that . I be the First Man of Quetzalcoatl . I be Quetzalcoatl himself , if you like . a manifestation , as well as a man . I accept myself entire , and proceed to make destiny . why , what else can I do ? ' 

 Kate be silent . his loss of blood seem to have wash he curiously fresh again , and he be carry again out of the range of human emotion . a strange sort of categorical imperative ! she see now his power over Cipriano . it lie in this imperative which he acknowledge in his own soul , and which really be like a messenger from the beyond . 

 she look on like a child look through a railing ; rather wistful , and rather frightened . 

 ah , the soul ! the soul be always flash and darken into new shape , each one strange to the other . she have think Ram n and she have look into each other 's soul . and now , he be this pale , distant man , with a curious gleam , like a messenger from the beyond , in his soul . and he be remote , remote from any woman . 

 whereas Cipriano have suddenly open a new world to she , a world of twilight , with the dark , half - visible face of the god - demon Pan , who can never perish , but ever return upon mankind from the shadow . the world of shadow and dark prostration , with the phallic wind rush through the dark . 

 Cipriano have to go to the town at the end of the lake , near the State of Colima ; to Jaramay . he be go in a motor - boat with a couple of soldier . would Kate go with he ? he wait , in heavy silence , for her answer . 

 she say she would . she be desperate . she do not want to be send back to her own empty , dead house . 

 it be one of those little period when the rain seem strangle , the air thick with thunder , silent , ponderous thunder latent in the air from day to day , among the thick , heavy sunshine . Kate , in these day in Mexico , feel that between the volcanic violence under the earth , and the electric violence of the air above , man walk dark and incalculable , like demon from another planet . 

 the wind on the lake seem fresh , from the west , but it be a running mass of electricity , that burn her face and her eye and the root of her hair . when she have waken in the night and push the sheet , heavy spark fall from her fingertip . she feel she could not live . 

 the lake be like some frail milk of thunder ; the dark soldier cur - lead under the awning of the boat , motionless . they seem dark as lava and sulphur , and full of a dormant , diabolic electricity . like salamander . the boatman in the stern , steering , be handsome , almost like the man she have kill . but this one have pale greyish eye , phosphorescent with fleck of silver . 

 Cipriano sit in silence in front of she . he have remove his tunic , and his neck rise almost black from his white shirt . she could see how different his blood be from her , dark , blackish , like the blood of lizard among hot black rock . she could feel its changeless surge , hold up his light , bluey - black head as on a fountain . and she would feel her own pride dissolve , go . 

 she feel he want his blood - stream to envelop her . as if it could possibly be . he be so still , so unnoticing , and the darkness of the nape of his neck be so like invisibility . yet he be always wait , wait , wait , invisibly and ponderously wait . 

 she lie under the awning in the heat and light without look out . the wind make the canvas crackle . 

 whether the time be long or short , she know not . but they be come to the silent lake - end , where the beach curve round in front of they . it seem sheer lonely sunlight . 

 but beyond the shingle there be willow - tree , and a low ranch - house . three anchored canoas ride with their black , stiff line . there be flat land , with maize half grow and blow its green flag sideways . but all be as if invisible , in the intense hot light . 

 the warm , thin water run shallower and shallow , to the reach of shingle beyond . black water - fowl bobbed like cork . the motor stop . the boat ebb on . under the thin water be round stone , with thin green hair of weed . they would not reach the shore - not by twenty yard . 

 the soldier take off their huarache , roll their cotton trouser up their black leg , and get into the water . the tall boatman do the same , pull forward the boat . she would go no far . he anchor she with a big stone . then with his uncanny pale eye , under the black lash , he ask Kate in a low tone if he could carry she ashore , offer she his shoulder . 

 ' no , no ! ' she say . ' I will paddle . ' 

 and hastily she take off her shoe and stocking and step into the shallow water , hold up her thin skirt of striped silk . the man laugh ; so do the soldier . 

 the water be almost hot . she go blindly forward , her head drop . Cipriano watch she with the silent , heavy , changeless patience of his race , then when she reach the shingle he come ashore on the boatman 's shoulder . 

 they cross the hot shingle to the willow - tree by the maize - field , and sit upon boulder . the lake stretch pale and unreal , far , far away into the invisible , with dim mountain rise on either side , bare and abstract . the canoas be black and stiff , their mast motionless . the white motor - boat ride near . black bird be bob like cork , at this place of the water 's end and the world 's end . 

 a lonely woman go up the shingle with a water - jar on her shoulder . hear a sound , Kate look , and see a group of fisherman hold a conclave in a dig - out hollow by a tree . they salute , look at she with black , black eye . they salute humbly , and yet in their black eye be that ancient remote hardness and hauteur . 

 Cipriano have send the soldier for horse . it be too hot to walk . 

 they sit silent in the invisibility of this end of the lake , the great light take sight away . 

 ' why be I not the live Huitzilopochtli ? ' say Cipriano quietly , look full at she with his black eye . 

 ' do you feel you be ? ' she say , startle . 

 ' yes , ' he reply , in the same low , secret voice . ' it be what I feel . ' 

 the black eye look at she with a rather awful challenge . and the small , dark voice seem to take all her will away . they sit in silence , and she feel she be faint , lose her consciousness for ever . 

 the soldier come , with a black arab horse for he ; a delicate thing ; and for she a donkey , on which she could sit sideways . he lift she into the saddle , where she sit only half - conscious . a soldier lead the donkey , and they set off , past the long , frail , hang fishing - net , that make long filmy festoon , into the lane . 

 then out into the sun and the grey - black dust , towards the grey - black , low hut of Jaramay , that line the wide , desert road . 

 Jaramay be hot as a lava oven . black low hut - house with tile roof line the break , long , dilapidated street . broken house . blaze sun . a brick pavement all smashed and sun - worn . a dog lead a blind man along the little black wall , on the broken pavement . a few goat . and unspeakable lifelessness , emptiness . 

 they come to the broken plaza , with sun - decay church and ragged palm tree . Emptiness , sun , sun - decay , sun - dilapidation . one man on a dainty arab horse trot lightly over the stone , gun behind , big hat make a dark face . for the rest , the waste space of the centre of life . curious how dainty the horse look , and the horseman sit erect , amid the sun - roast ruin . 

 they come to a big building . a few soldier be draw up at the entrance . they salute Cipriano as if they be transfix , roll their dark eye . 

 Cipriano be down from his horse in a moment . emit the dark ray of dangerous power , he find the Jefe all obsequious ; a fat man in dirty white clothe . they put their will entirely in his power . 

 he ask for a room where his esposa could rest . Kate be pale and all her will have leave she . he be carry she on his will . 

 he accept a large room with a brick - tile floor and a large , new brass bed with a coloured cotton cover throw over it , and with two chair . the strange , dry , stark emptiness , that look almost cold in the heat . 

 ' the sun make you pale . lie down and rest . I will close the window , ' he say . 

 he close the shutter till only a darkness remain . 

 then in the darkness , suddenly , softly he touch she , stroke her hip . 

 ' I say you be my wife , ' he say , in his small , soft indian voice . ' it be true , be not   it ? ' 

 she tremble , and her limb seem to fuse like metal melt down . she fuse into a molten unconsciousness , her will , her very self gone , leave she lying in molten life , like a lake of still fire , unconscious of everything save the eternality of the fire in which she be go . go in the fadeless fire , which have no death . only the fire can leave we , and we can die . 

 and Cipriano the master of fire . the Living Huitzilopochtli , he have call himself . the live firemaster . the god in the flame ; the salamander . 

 one can not have one 's own way , and the way of the god . it have to be one or the other . 

 when she go out into the next room , he be sit alone , wait for she . he rise quickly , look at she with black , flash eye from which dark flash of light seem to play upon she . and he take her hand , to touch she again . 

 ' will you come to eat at the little restaurant ? ' he say . 

 in the uncanny flashing of his eye she see a gladness that frighten she a little . his touch on her hand be uncannily soft and inward . his word say nothing ; would never say anything . but she turn aside her face , a little afraid of that flashing , primitive gladness , which be so impersonal and beyond she . 

 wrap a big yellow - silk shawl around she , spanish fashion , against the heat , and take her white sunshade line with green , she step out with he past the bow Jefe and the lieutenant , and the salute soldier . she shake hand with the Jefe and the lieutenant . they be man of flesh and blood , they understand her presence , and bow low , look up at she with flash eye . and she know what it be to be a goddess in the old style , salute by the real fire in man 's eye , not by their lip . 

 in her big , soft velour hat of jade green , her breast wrap round with the yellow brocade shawl , she step across the sun - eat plaza , a sort of desert make by man , softly , softly beside her Cipriano , soft as a cat , hide her face under her green hat and her sunshade , keep her body secret and elusive . and the soldier and the officer and clerk of the Jefatura , watch she with fix black eye , see , not the physical woman herself , but the inaccessible , voluptuous mystery of man 's physical consummation . 

 they eat in the dusky little cavern of a fonda keep by a queer old woman with spanish blood in her vein . Cipriano be very sharp and imperious in his order , the old woman scuffle and run in a sort of terror . but she be thrill to her soul . 

 Kate be bewilder by the new mystery of her own elusiveness . she be elusive even to herself . Cipriano hardly talk to she at all ; which be quite right . she do not want to be talk to , and word address straight at she , without the curious soft veiling which these people know how to put into their voice , speak only to the unconcerned , third person in she , come at she like blow . ah , the ugly blow of direct , brutal speech ! she have suffer so much from they . now she want this veil elusiveness in herself , she want to be address in the third person . 

 after the lunch they go to look at the serape which be be spin for Ram n. their two soldier escort they a few yard up a break , sun - waste wide street of little , low black house , then knock at big door . 

 Kate enter the grateful shade of the zaguán . in the dark shade of the inner court , or patio , where sun blaze on banana beyond , be a whole weaver 's establishment . a fat , one - eyed man send a little boy to fetch chair . but Kate wander , fascinated . 

 in the zaguán be a great heap of silky white wool , very fine , and in the dark corridor of the patio all the people at work . two boy with flat square board bristle with many little wire bristle be card the white wool into thin film , which they take off the board in fine roll like mist , and lay beside the two girl at the end of the shed . 

 these girl stand by their wheel , spinning , stand beside the run wheel , which they set go with one hand , while with the other hand they keep a long , miraculous thread of white wool - yarn dancing at the very tip of the rapidly - spin spool - needle , the filmy roll of the card wool just touch the point of the spool , and at once run out into a long , pure thread of white , which wound itself on to the spool , and another piece of card wool be attach . one of the girl , a beautiful oval - face one , who smile shyly at Kate , be very clever . it be almost miraculous the way she touch the spool and draw out the thread of wool almost as fine as sew cotton . 

 at the other end of the corridor , under the black shed , be two loom , and two man weave . they treddle at the wooden tread - loom , first with one foot and then the other , absorb and silent , in the shadow of the black mud wall . one man be weave a brilliant scarlet serape , very fine , and of the beautiful cochineal red . it be difficult work . from the pure scarlet centre zigzag of black and white be run in a sort of whorl , away to the edge , that be pure black . wonderful to see the man , with small bobbin of fine red and white yarn , and black , weave a bit of the ground , weave the zigzag of black up to it , and , up to that , the zigzag of white , with deft , dark finger , quickly adjust his set needle , quick as lightning thread his pattern , then bring down the beam heavily to press it tight . the serape be weave on a black warp , long fine thread of black , like a harp . but beautiful beyond word the perfect , delicate scarlet weaving in . 

 ' for whom be that ? ' say Kate to Cipriano . ' for you ? ' 

 ' yes , ' he say . ' for I ! ' 

 the other weaver be weave a plain white serape with blue and natural - black end , throw the spool of yarn from side to side , between the white harp - string , press down each thread of his woof heavily , with the wooden bar , then treddle to change the long , fine thread of the warp . 

 in the shadow of the mud shed , the pure colour of the lustrous wool look mystical , the cardinal scarlet , the pure , silky white , the lovely blue , and the black , gleam in the shadow of the blackish wall . 

 the fat man with the one eye bring serape , and two boy open they one by one . there be a new one , white , with close flower of blue on black stalk , and with green leaf , form the border , and at the boca , the mouth , where the head go through , a whole lot of little , rainbow - colour flower , in a coil blue circle . 

 ' I love that ! ' say Kate . ' what be that for ? ' 

 ' it be one of Ram n 's ; they be Quetzalcoatl 's colour , the blue and white and natural black . but this one be for the day of the opening of the flower , when he bring in the goddess who will come , ' say Cipriano . 

 Kate be silent with fear . 

 there be two scarlet serape with a diamond at the centre , all black , and a border - pattern of black diamond . 

 ' be these your ? ' 

 ' well , they be for the messenger of Huitzilopochtli . those be my colour : scarlet and black . but I myself have white as well , just as Ram n have a fringe of my scarlet . ' 

 ' do not   it make you afraid ? ' she say to he , look at he rather blench . 

 ' how make I afraid ? ' 

 ' to do this . to be the living Huitzilopochtli , ' she say . 

 ' I be the live Huitzilopochtli , ' he say . ' when Ram n dare to be the live Quetzalcoatl , I dare to be the live Huitzilopochtli . I be he . - be I not ? ' 

 Kate look at he , at his dark face with the little hanging tuft of beard , the arched brow , the slightly slanting black eye . in the round , fierce gaze of his eye there be a certain silence , like tenderness , for she . but beyond that , an inhuman assurance , which look far , far beyond she , in the darkness . 

 and she hide her face from he , murmur : 

 ' I know you be . ' 

 ' and on the day of flower , ' he say , ' you , too , shall come , in a green dress they shall weave you , with blue flower at the seam , and on your head the new moon of flower . ' 

 she hide her face , afraid . 

 ' come and look at the wool , ' he say , lead she across the patio to the shade where , on a line , the yarn hang in dripping tress of colour , scarlet and blue and yellow and green and brown . 

 ' see ! ' he say . ' you shall have a dress of green , that leave the arm bare , and a white under - dress with blue flower . ' 

 the green be a strong apple - green colour . 

 two woman under the shed be crouch over big earthenware vessel , which sit over a fire which burn slowly in a hole dig in the ground . they be watch the steaming water . one take dry , yellow - brown flower , and fling they in her water as if she be a witch brewing decoction . she watch as the flower rise , watch as they turn softly in the boiling water . then she throw in a little white powder . 

 ' and on the day of flower you , too , will come . ah ! if Ram n be the centre of a new world , a world of new flower shall spring up round he , and push the old world back . I call you the First Flower . ' 

 they leave the courtyard . the soldier have bring the black arab stallion for Cipriano , and for she the donkey , on which she could perch sideways , like a peasant woman . so they go through the hot , deserted silence of the mud - brick town , down the lane of deep , dark - grey dust , under vivid green tree that be burst into flower , again to the silent shore of the lake - end , where the delicate fishing - net be hang in long line and blow in the wind , loop after loop stride above the shingle and blow delicately in the wind , as away on the low place the green maize be blow , and the fleecy willow shake like soft green feather hang down . 

 the lake stretch pale and unreal into nowhere ; the motor - boat ride near in , the black canoas stand motionless a little far out . two woman , tiny as bird , be kneel on the water 's edge , washing . 

 Kate jump from her donkey on to the shingle . 

 ' why not ride through the water to the boat ? ' say Cipriano . 

 she look at the boat , and thought of the donkey stumble and splash . 

 ' no , ' she say . ' I will wade again . ' 

 he ride his black Arab to the water . it sniff , and enter with delicate foot into the warm shallow . then , a little way in , it stand and suddenly start paw the water , as a horse paw the ground , in the oddest manner possible , very rapidly strike the water with its fore - foot , so that little wave splash up over its black leg and belly . 

 but this splash Cipriano too . he lift the rein and touch the creature with his spur . it jump , and go half - stumble , half - dance through the water , prettily , with a splashing noise . Cipriano quiet it , and it wad gingerly on through the shallow of the vast lake , bend its black head down to look , to look in a sort of fascination at the stony bottom , sway its black tail as it move its glossy , raven haunch gingerly . 

 then again it stand still , and suddenly , with a rapid beating of its fore - paw , send the water hollowly splash up , till its black belly glisten wet like a black serpent , and its leg be shiny wet pillar . and again Cipriano lift its head and touch it with the spur , so the delicate creature dance in a churn of water . 

 ' oh , it look so pretty ! it look so pretty when it paw the water ! ' cry Kate from the shore . ' why do it do it ? ' 

 Cipriano turn in the saddle and look back at she with the sudden , gay indian laugh . 

 ' it like to be wet - who know ? ' he say . 

 a soldier hurry wad through the water and take the horse 's bridle . Cipriano dismount neatly from the stirrup , with a little backward leap into the boat , a real savage horseman . the barefoot soldier leap into the saddle , and turn the horse to shore . but the black horse , male and wilful , insist on stop to paw the water and splash himself , with a naïve , wilful sort of delight . 

 ' look ! look ! ' cry Kate . ' it be so pretty . ' 

 but the soldier be perch in the saddle , draw up his leg like a monkey , and shout at the horse . it would wet its fine harness . 

 he ride the arab slanting through the water , to where an old woman , sit in her own silence and almost invisible before , be squat in the water with brown bare shoulder emerge , ladle water from a half gourd - shell over her matted grey head . the horse splash and dance , the old woman rise with her rag of chemise clinging to she , scold in a quiet voice and bend forward with her calabash cup ; the soldier laugh , the black horse joyfully and excitedly paw the water and make it splash high up , the soldier shout again . - but the soldier know he could make Cipriano responsible for the splashing . 

 Kate wad slowly to the boat , and step in . the water be warm , but the wind be blow with strong , electric heaviness . Kate quickly dry her foot and leg on her handkerchief , and pull on her biscuit - colour silk stocking and brown shoe . 

 she sit look back , at the lake - end , the desert of shingle , the blowing , gauzy net , and , beyond they , the black land with green maize standing , a further fleecy green of tree , and the broken lane lead deep into the row of old tree , where the soldier from Jaramay be now rid away on the black horse and the donkey . on the right there be a ranch , too ; a long , low black building and a cluster of black hut with tile roof , empty garden with reed fence , clump of banana and willow - tree . all in the changeless , heavy light of the afternoon , the long lake reach into invisibility , between its unreal mountain . 

 ' it be beautiful here ! ' say Kate . ' one could almost live here . ' 

 ' Ram n say he will make the lake the centre of a new world , ' say Cipriano . ' we will be the god of the lake . ' 

 ' I be afraid I be just a woman , ' say Kate . 

 his black eye come round at she swiftly . 

 ' what do it mean , just a woman ? ' he say , quickly , sternly . 

 she hang her head . what do it mean ? what indeed do it mean ? just a woman ! she let her soul sink again into the lovely elusiveness where everything be possible , even that oneself be elusive among the god . 

 the motor - boat , with wave slap behind , be run quickly along the brownish pale water . the soldier , who be in the front , for balance , crouch on the floor with the glaze , stupefied mask - face of the people when they be sleepy . and soon they be a heap in the bottom of the boat , two little heap lie in contact . 

 Cipriano sit behind she , his tunic remove , spread his white - sleeve arm on the back of his seat . the cartridge - belt be heavy on his hip . his face be completely expressionless , star ahead . the wind blow his black hair on his forehead , and blow his little beard . he meet her eye with a far - off , remote smile , far , far down his black eye . but it be a wonderful recognition of she . 

 the boatman in the stern sit tall and straight , watch with pale eye of shallow , superficial consciousness . the great hat make his face dark , the chin - ribbon fall black against his cheek . feel her look at he , he glance at she as if she be not there . 

 turn , she push her cushion on to the floor and slide down . Cipriano get up , in the running , heaving boat , and pull she another seat - cushion . she lay , cover her face with her shawl , while the motor chug rapidly , the awning rattle with sudden wind , the hurrying wave rise behind , give the boat a slap and throw she forward , send spray sometimes , in the heat and silence of the lake . 

 Kate lose her consciousness , under her yellow shawl , in the silence of man . 

 she wake to the sudden stopping of the engine , and sit up . they be near shore ; the white tower of San Pablo among near tree . the boatman , wide - eye , be bend over the engine , abandon the tiller . the wave push the boat slowly round . 

 ' what be it ? ' say Cipriano . 

 ' More gasoline , Excellency ! ' say the boatman . 

 the soldier wake and sit up . 

 the breeze have die . 

 ' the water be come , ' say Cipriano . 

 ' the rain ? ' say Kate . 

 ' yes - ' and he point with his fine black finger , which be pale on the inside , to where black cloud be rush up behind the mountain , and in another place far off , great heavy bank be rise with strange suddenness . the air seem to be knit together overhead . lightning flash in various place , muffle thunder speak far away . 

 still the boat drift . there be a smell of gasoline . the man potter with the engine . the motor start again , only to stop again in a moment . 

 the man roll up his trouser , and , to Kate 's amazement , step into the lake , though they be a mile from the shore . the water be not up to his knee . they be on a bank . he slowly push the boat before he , wad in the silence . 

 ' how deep be the lake far in ? ' ask Kate . 

 ' there , Señorita , where the bird with the white breast be swim , it be eight and a half metre , ' he say , point as he wad . 

 ' we must make haste , ' say Cipriano . 

 ' yes , Excellency ! ' 

 the man step in again , with his long , handsome brown leg . the motor splutter . they be under way , run fast . a new chill wind be spring up . 

 but they round a bend , and see ahead the flat promontory with the dark mango - tree , and the pale yellow upper story of the hacienda house of Jamiltepec rise above the tree . palm - tree stand motionless , the bougainvillea hang in heavy sheet of magenta colour . Kate could see hut of peon among the tree , and woman washing , kneel on stone at the lake side where the stream run in , and a big plantation of banana just above . 

 a cool wind be spin round in the heaven . black cloud be fill up . Ram n come walk slowly down to the little harbour as they land . 

 ' the water be come , ' he say in Spanish . 

 ' we be in time , ' say Cipriano . 

 Ram n look they both in the face , and know . Kate , in her new elusiveness , laugh softly . 

 ' there be another flower open in the garden of Quetzalcoatl , ' say Cipriano in Spanish . 

 ' under the red canna of Huitzilopochtli , ' say Ram n. 

 ' yes , there , Señor , ' say Cipriano . ' Pero una florecita tan zarca ! Y abri en mi sombra , amigo . ' 

 ' Seis hombre de la alta fortuna . ' 

 ' Verdad ! ' 

 it be about five in the afternoon . the wind hiss in the leaf , and suddenly the rain be stream down in a white smoke of power . the ground be a solid white smoke of water , the lake be go . 

 ' you will have to stay here to - night , ' say Cipriano to Kate in Spanish , in the soft , lap indian voice . 

 ' but the rain will leave off , ' she say . 

 ' you will have to stay here , ' he repeat , in the same spanish phrase , in a curious voice like a breath of wind . 

 Kate look at Ram n , blushing . he look back at she , she think , very remote , as if look at she from far , far away . 

 ' the bride of Huitzilopochtli , ' he say , with a faint smile . 

 ' Thou , Quetzalcoatl , thou wilt have to marry we , ' say Cipriano . 

 ' do you wish it ? ' say Ram n. 

 ' yes ! ' she say . ' I want you to marry we , only you . ' 

 ' when the sun go down , ' say Ram n. 

 and he go away to his room . Cipriano show Kate to her room , then leave she and go to Ram n. 

 the cool water continue to come down , rush with a smoke of speed down from heaven . 

 as the twilight come through the unceasing rain , a woman - servant bring Kate a sleeveless dress or chemise of white linen , scallop at the bottom and embroider with stiff blue flower upside - down on the black stalk , with two stiff green leaf . in the centre of the flower be the tiny Bird of Quetzalcoatl . 

 ' the patr n ask that you put this on ! ' say the woman , bring also a lamp and a little note . 

 the note be from Ram n , say in Spanish : ' take the dress of the bride of Huitzilopochtli , and put it on , and take off everything but this . leave no thread nor thing that can touch you from the past . the past be finish . it be the new twilight . ' 

 Kate do not quite know how to put on the slip , for it have no sleeve nor arm - hole , but be just a straight slip with a run string . then she remember the old indian way , and tie the string over her left shoulder ; rather , slip the tie string over her left shoulder , leave her arm and part of her right breast bare , the slip gather full over her breast . and she sigh . for it be but a shirt with flower upturned at the bottom . 

 Ram n , barefoot , in his white clothe , come for she and take she in silence downstairs into the garden . the zaguán be dark , the rain fall steadily in the twilight , but be abate . all be dark twilight . 

 Ram n take off his blouse and throw it on the stair . then with naked breast he lead she into the garden , into the massive rain . Cipriano come forward , barefoot , with naked breast , bareheade , in the floppy white pantaloon . 

 they stand barefoot on the earth , that still throw back a white smoke of water . the rain drench they in a moment . 

 ' barefoot on the live earth , with face to the live rain , ' say Ram n in Spanish , quietly ; ' at twilight , between the night and the day ; man , and woman , in presence of the unfading star , meet to be perfect in one another . lift your face , Caterina , and say : this man be my rain from heaven . ' 

 Kate lift her face and shut her eye in the downpour . 

 ' this man be my rain from heaven , ' she say . 

 ' this woman be the earth to I - say that , Cipriano , ' say Ram n , kneel on one knee and lay his hand flat on the earth . 

 Cipriano kneel and lay his hand on the earth . 

 ' this woman be the earth to I , ' he say . 

 ' i , woman , kiss the foot and the heel of this man , for I will be strength to he , throughout the long twilight of the Morning Star . ' 

 Kate kneel and kiss the foot and heel of Cipriano , and say she say . 

 ' i , man , kiss the brow and the breast of this woman , for I will be her peace and her increase , through the long twilight of the Morning Star . ' 

 Cipriano kiss she , and say his say . 

 then Ram n put Cipriano 's hand over the rain - wet eye of Kate , and Kate 's hand over the rain - wet eye of Cipriano . 

 ' I , a woman , beneath the darkness of this cover hand , pray to this man to meet I in the heart of the night , and never deny I , ' say Kate . ' but let it be an abide place between we , for ever . ' 

 ' I , a man , beneath the darkness of this cover hand , pray to this woman to receive I in the heart of the night , in the abide place that be between we for ever . ' 

 ' man shall betray a woman , and woman shall betray a man , ' say Ram n , ' and it shall be forgive they , each of they . but if they have meet as earth and rain , between day and night , in the hour of the Star ; if the man have meet the woman with his body and the star of his hope , and the woman have meet the man with her body and the star of her yearning , so that a meeting have come to pass , and an abide place for the two where they be as one star , then shall neither of they betray the abide place where the meeting live like an unsetting star . for if either betray the abide place of the two , it shall not be forgive , neither by day nor by night nor in the twilight of the star . ' 

 the rain be leave off , the night be dark . 

 ' go and bathe in the warm water , which be peace between we all . and put oil on your body , which be the stillness of the Morning Star . anoint even the sol of your foot , and the root of your hair . ' 

 Kate go up to her room and find a big earthenware bath with steaming water , and big towel . also , in a beautiful little bowl , oil , and a soft bit of white wool . 

 she bath her rain - wet body in the warm water , dry and anoint herself with the clear oil , that be clear as water . it be soft , and have a faint perfume , and be grateful to the skin . she rub all her body , even among her hair and under her foot , till she glow softly . 

 then she put on another of the slip with the invert blue flower that have be lay on the bed for she , and over that a dress of green , hand - weave wool , make of two piece join openly together down the side , show a bit of the white , full under - dress , and fasten on the left shoulder . there be a stiff flower , blue , on a black stem , with two black leaf , embroider at the bottom , at each side . and her white slip show a bit at the breast , and hang below the green skirt , show the blue flower . 

 it be strange and primitive , but beautiful . she push her foot into the plait green huarache . but she want a belt . she tie a piece of ribbon round her waist . 

 a mozo tap to say supper be ready . 

 laugh rather shyly , she go along to the salon . 

 Ram n and Cipriano be both wait , in silence , in their white clothe . Cipriano have his red serape loosely throw over his shoulder . 

 ' so ! ' say Cipriano , come forward . ' the bride of Huitzilopochtli , like a green morning . but Huitzilopochtli will put on your sash , and you will put on his shoe , so that he shall never leave you , and you shall be always in his spell . ' 

 Cipriano tie round her waist a narrow woollen sash of white wool , with white , terrace tower upon a red and black ground . and she stoop and put on his small , dark foot the huarache of weave red strip of leather , with a black cross on the toe . 

 ' one more little gift , ' say Ram n. 

 he make Kate put over Cipriano 's head a blue cord bear a little symbol of Quetzalcoatl , the snake in silver and the bird in blue turquoise . Cipriano put over her head the same symbol , but in gold , with a bird in black dull jet , and hang on a red cord . 

 ' there ! ' say Ram n. ' that be the symbol of Quetzalcoatl , the Morning Star . remember the marriage be the meeting - ground , and the meeting - ground be the star . if there be no star , no meeting - ground , no true come together of man with the woman , into a wholeness , there be no marriage . and if there be no marriage , there be nothing but an agitation . if there be no honourable meeting of man with woman and woman with man , there be no good thing come to pass . but if the meeting come to pass , then whosoever betray the abide place , which be the meeting - ground , which be that which live like a star between day and night , between the dark of woman and the dawn of man , between man 's night and woman 's morning , shall never be forgive , neither here nor in the hereafter . for man be frail and woman be frail , and none can draw the line down which another shall walk . but the star that be between two people and be their meeting - ground shall not be betray . 

 ' and the star that be between three people , and be their meeting - ground , shall not be betray . 

 ' and the star that be between all man and all woman , and between all the child of man , shall not be betray . 

 ' Whosoever betray another man , betray a man like himself , a fragment . for if there be no star between a man and a man , or even a man and a wife , there be nothing . but whosoever betray the star that be between he and another man , betray all , and all be lose to the traitor . 

 ' where there be no star and no abide place , nothing be , so nothing can be lose . ' 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXI 

 the opening of the Church 

 

 Kate go back to her house in Sayula , and Cipriano go back to his command in the city . 

 ' will you not come with I ? ' he say . ' shall we not make a civil marriage , and live in the same house together ? ' 

 ' no , ' she say . ' I be married to you by Quetzalcoatl , no other . I will be your wife in the world of Quetzalcoatl , no other . and if the star have rise between we , we will watch it . ' 

 conflicting feeling play in his dark eye . he could not bear even to be the least bit thwart . then the strong , rather distant look come back . 

 ' it be very good , ' he say . ' it be the good . ' 

 and he go away without look back . 

 Kate return to her house , to her servant and her rock - chair . inside herself she keep very still and almost thoughtless , take no count of time . what be go to unfold must unfold of itself . 

 she no long fear the night , when she be shut alone in her darkness . but she fear the day a little . she shrink so mortally from contact . 

 she open her bedroom window one morning , and look down to the lake . the sun have come , and queer blotty shadow be on the hill beyond the water . way down at the water 's edge a woman be pour water from a calabash bowl over a statuesque pig , dip rapidly and assiduously . the little group be see in silhouette against the pale , dun lake . 

 but impossible to stand at her open window look on the little lane . an old man suddenly appear from nowhere , offer she a leaf full of tiny fish , charale , like splinter of glass , for ten centavos , and a girl be unfold three egg from the ragged corner of her rebozo , thrust they imploringly forward to Kate . an old woman be shamble up with a sad story , Kate know . she flee from her window and the importunity . 

 at the same instant the sound that always make her heart stand still wake on the invisible air . it be the sound of drum , of tom - tom rapidly beat . the same sound she have hear in the distance , in the tropical dusk of Ceylon , from the temple at sunset . the sound she have hear from the edge of the forest in the north , when the Red Indians be dance by the fire . the sound that wake dark , ancient echo in the heart of every man , the thud of the primeval world . 

 two drum be violently throb against one another . then gradually they be slow down , in a peculiar uneven rhythm , till at last there be only leave one slow , continual , monotonous note , like a great drop of darkness fall heavily , continually , drip in the bright morning . 

 the re - evoked past be frightening , and if it be re - evoke to overwhelm the present , it be fiendish . Kate feel a real terror of the sound of a tom - tom . it seem to beat straight on her solar plexus , to make she sick . 

 she go to her window . across the lane rise a tall garden - wall of adobe brick , and above that , the sun on the top of the orange - tree , deep gold . beyond the orange garden rise three tall , handsome , shaggy palm - tree , side by side on slim stem . and from the very top of the two outer palm rise the twin tip of the church tower . she have notice it so often ; the two ironwork greek cross seem to stand on the mop of the palm . 

 now in an instant she see the glitter of the symbol of Quetzalcoatl in the place where the cross have be ; two circular sun , with the dark bird at the centre . the gold of the sun - or the serpent - flash new in the light of the sun , the bird lift its wing dark in outline within the circle . 

 then again the two drum be speed up , beat against one another with the peculiar uneven savage rhythm , which at first seem no rhythm , and then seem to contain a summon almost sinister in its power , act on the helpless blood direct . Kate feel her hand flutter on her wrist , in fear . almost , too , she could hear the heart of Cipriano beating ; her husband in Quetzalcoatl . 

 ' listen , Niña ! listen , Niña ! ' come Juana 's frightened voice from the veranda . 

 Kate go to the veranda . Ezequiel have roll up his mattress and be hitch up his pant . it be Sunday morning , when he sometimes lie on after sunrise . his thick black hair stand up , his dark face be blank with sleep , but in his quiet aloofness and his slightly bow head Kate could see the secret satisfaction he take in the barbarous sound of the drum . 

 ' it come from the Church ! ' say Juana . 

 Kate catch the other woman 's black , reptilian eye unexpectedly . usually , she forget that Juana be dark , and different . for day she would not realize it . till suddenly she meet that black , void look with the glint in it , and she start inwardly , involuntarily ask herself : ' do she hate I ? ' 

 or be it only the unspeakable difference in blood ? 

 now , in the dark glitter which Juana show she for one moment , Kate read fear , and triumph , and a slow , savage nonchalant defiance . something very inhuman . 

 ' what do it mean ? ' Kate say to she . 

 ' it mean , Niña , that they will not   ring the bell any more . they have take the bell away , and they beat the drum in the church . listen ! listen ! ' 

 the drum be shudder rapidly again . 

 Kate and Juana go across to the open window . 

 ' look ! Niña ! the Eye of the other one ! no more cross on the church . it be the Eye of the other one . look ! how it shin ! how nice ! ' 

 ' it mean , ' say Ezequiel 's break young voice , which be just turn deep , ' that it be the church of Quetzalcoatl . now it be the temple of Quetzalcoatl ; our own God . ' 

 he be evidently a staunch Man of Quetzalcoatl . 

 ' think of it ! ' murmur Juana , in an awed voice . she seem like a heap of darkness low at Kate 's side . 

 then again she glance up , and the eye of the two woman meet for a moment . 

 ' see the Niña 's eye of the sun ! ' cry Juana , lay her hand on Kate 's arm . Kate 's eye be a sort of hazel , change , grey - gold , flicker at the moment with wonder , and a touch of fear and dismay . Juana sound triumphant . 

 a man in a white serape , with the blue and black border , suddenly appear at the window , lift his hat , on which be the sign of Quetzalcoatl , and push a little card through the window . 

 the card say : come to the church when you hear the one big drum ; about seven o'clock . - it be sign with the sign of Quetzalcoatl . 

 ' very well ! ' say Kate . ' I will come . ' 

 it be a quarter to seven already . outside the room be the noise of Juana sweep the veranda . Kate put on a white dress and a yellow hat , and a long string of pale - colour topaz that glimmer with yellow and mauve . 

 the earth be all damp with rain , the leaf be all fresh and tropical thick , yet many old leaf be on the ground , beat down . 

 ' Niña ! you be go out already ! wait ! wait ! the coffee . Concha ! quick ! ' 

 there be a running of bare foot , the child bring cup and plate and sweet bun and sugar , the mother hastily limp with the coffee . Ezequiel come stride along the walk , lift his hat . he go down to the servant ' quarter . 

 ' Ezequiel say - ! ' Juana come cry . when suddenly a soft , slack thud seem to make a hole in the air , leave a gap behind it . Thud ! - Thud ! - Thud ! - rather slowly . it be the big drum , irresistible . 

 Kate rise at once from her coffee . 

 ' I be go to the church , ' she say . 

 ' yes , Niña - Ezequiel say - I be come , Niña - ' 

 and Juana scuttle away , to get her black rebozo . 

 the man in the white serape with the blue and black end be wait by the gate . he lift his hat , and walk behind Kate and Juana . 

 ' he be follow we ! ' whisper Juana . 

 Kate draw her yellow shawl around her shoulder . 

 it be Sunday morning , sailing - boat line the water 's edge , with their black hull . but the beach be empty . as the great drum let fall its slow , bellowing note , the last people be run towards the church . 

 in front of the church be a great throng of native , the man with their dark serape , or their red blanket over their shoulder ; the night of rain be cold ; and their hat in their hand . the high , dark indian head ! - Women in blue rebozos be press along . the big drum slowly , slackly explode its note from the church - tower . Kate have her heart in her mouth . 

 in the middle of the crowd , a double row of man in the scarlet serape of Huitzilopochtli with the black diamond on the shoulder , stand with rifle , hold open a lane through the crowd . 

 ' pass ! ' say her guard to she . and Kate enter the lane of scarlet and black serape , go slow and daze between watchful black eye of the man . her guard follow she . but Juana have be turn back . 

 Kate look at her foot , and stumble . then she look up . 

 in the gateway of the yard before the church stand a brilliant figure in a serape whose zig - zag whorl of scarlet , white , and black run curve , dazzle , to the black shoulder ; above which be the face of Cipriano , calm , superb , with the little black beard and the arch brow . he lift his hand to she in salute . 

 behind he , stretch from the gateway to the closed door of the church , be a double row of the guard of Quetzalcoatl , in their blanket with the blue and black border . 

 ' what shall I do ? ' say Kate . 

 ' stand here with I a moment , ' say Cipriano , in the gateway . 

 it be no easy thing to do , to face all those dark face and black , glitter eye . after all , she be a gringuita , and she feel it . a sacrifice ? be she a sacrifice ? she hang her head , under her yellow hat , and watch the string of topaz twinkle and shake its delicate , bog - watery colour against her white dress . Joachim have give it she . he have have it make up for she , the string , in Cornwall . so far away ! in another world , in another life , in another era ! now she be condemn to go through these strange ordeal , like a victim . 

 the big drum overhead cease , and suddenly the little drum break like a shower of hail on the air , and as suddenly cease . 

 in low , deep , inward voice , the guard of Quetzalcoatl begin to speak , in heavy unison : 

 ' oyé ! oyé ! oyé ! oyé ! ' 

 the small , inset door within the heavy door of the church open and Don Ram n step through . in his white clothe , wear the Quetzalcoatl serape , he stand at the head of his two row of guard , until there be a silence . then he raise his naked right arm . 

 ' what be God , we shall never know ! ' he say , in a strong voice , to all the people . 

 the Guard of Quetzalcoatl turn to the people , thrust up their right arm . 

 ' what be God , you shall never know ! ' they repeat . 

 then again , in the crowd , the word be re - echo by the Guard of Huitzilopochtli . 

 after which there fall a dead silence , in which Kate be aware of a forest of black eye glisten with white fire . 

 

 ' but the Sons of God come and go . 
 they come from beyond the Morning Star ; 
 and thither they return , from the land of man . ' 

 

 it be again the solemn , powerful voice of Ram n. Kate look at his face ; it be creamy - brown in its pallor , but changeless in expression , and seem to be send a change over the crowd , remove they from their vulgar complacency . 

 the Guard of Quetzalcoatl turn again to the crowd , and repeat Ram n 's word to the crowd . 

 

 ' Mary and Jesus have leave you , and go to the place of renewal . 
 and Quetzalcoatl have come . he be here . 
 he be your lord . ' 

 

 with his word , Ram n be able to put the power of his heavy , strong will over the people . the crowd begin to fuse under his influence . as he gaze back at all the black eye , his eye seem to have no expression , save that they seem to be see the heart of all darkness in front of he , where his unknowable God - mystery live and move . 

 

 ' those that follow I , must cross the mountain of the sky , 
 and pass the house of the star by night . 
 they shall find I only in the Morning Star . 

 but those that will not follow , must not peep . peep , they will lose their sight , and lingering , they will fall very lame . ' 

 

 he stand a moment in silence , gaze with dark brow at the crowd . then he drop his arm , and turn . the big door of the church open , reveal a dim interior . Ram n enter the church alone . inside the church , the drum begin to beat . the guard of Quetzalcoatl slowly file into the dim interior , the scarlet guard of Huitzilopochtli file into the yard of the church , take the place of the guard of Quetzalcoatl . Cipriano remain in the gateway of the churchyard . his voice ring out clear and military . 

 ' hear I , people . you may enter the house of Quetzalcoatl . man must go to the right and left , and remove their shoe , and stand erect . to the new God no man shall kneel . 

 ' woman must go down the centre , and cover their face . and they may sit upon the floor . 

 ' but man must stand erect . 

 ' pass now , those who dare . ' 

 Kate go with Cipriano into the church . 

 it be all different , the floor be black and polished , the wall be in stripe of colour , the place seem dark . two file of the white - clothe man of Quetzalcoatl stand in a long avenue down the centre of the church . 

 ' this way , ' say one of the man of Quetzalcoatl , in a low voice , draw she into the centre between the motionless file of man . 

 she go alone and afraid over the polished black floor , cover her face with her yellow shawl . the pillar of the nave be dark green , like tree rise to a deep , blue roof . the wall be vertically strip in bar of black and white , vermilion and yellow and green , with the window between rich with deep blue and crimson and black glass , have speck of light . a strange maze , the window . 

 the daylight come only from small window , high up under the deep blue roof , where the stripe of the wall have run into a maze of green , like banana leaf . below , the church be all dark , and rich with hard colour . 

 Kate go forward to the front , near the altar step . high at the back of the chancel , above where the altar have be , burn a small but intense bluey - white light , and just below and in front of the light stand a huge dark figure , a strange loom block , apparently carve in wood . it be a naked man , carve archaic and rather flat , hold his right arm over his head , and on the right arm balance a carve wooden eagle with outspread wing whose upper surface gleam with gold , near the light , whose under surface be black shadow . round the heavy left leg of the man - image be carve a serpent , also glimmer gold , and its golden head rest in the hand of the figure , near the thigh . the face of the figure be dark . 

 this great dark statue loom stiff like a pillar , rather frightening in the white - light blue chancel . 

 at the foot of the statue be a stone altar with a small fire of ocote - wood burning . and on a low throne by the altar sit Ram n. 

 People be begin to file into the church . Kate hear the strange sound of the naked foot of the man on the black , polished floor , the white figure steal forward towards the altar step , the dark face gaze round in wonder , man cross themselves involuntarily . throng of man slowly flood in , and woman come half run , to crouch on the floor and cover their face . Kate crouch down too . 

 a file of the man of Quetzalcoatl come and stand along the foot of the altar step , like a fence with a gap in the middle , face the people . beyond the gap be the flicker altar , and Ram n. 

 Ram n rise to his foot . the man of Quetzalcoatl turn to face he , and shoot up their naked right arm , in the gesture of the statue , Ram n lift his arm , so that his blanket fall in towards his shoulder , reveal the naked side and the blue sash . 

 ' all man salute Quetzalcoatl ! ' say a clear voice in command . 

 the scarlet man of Huitzilopochtli be thread among the man of the congregation , pull the kneeling one to their foot , cause all to thrust up their right arm , palm flat to heaven , face uplifted , body erect and tense . it be the statue receive the eagle . 

 so that around the low dark shrub of the crouch woman stand a forest of erect , upthrusting man , powerful and tense with inexplicable passion . it be a forest of dark wrist and hand up - press , with the striped wall vibrate above , and high , the maze of green go to the little , iron - bar window that stand open , let in the light and air of the roof . 

 ' I be the live Quetzalcoatl , ' come the solemn , impassive voice of Ram n. 

 

 ' I be the Son of the Morning Star , and child of the deep . 
 no man know my Father , and I know he not . 
 my Father be deep within the deep , whence he send I forth . 
 he send the eagle of silence down on wide wing 
 to lean over my head and my neck and my breast 
 and fill they strong with strength of wing . 
 he send the serpent of power up my foot and my loin 
 so that strength well up in I like water in hot spring . 
 but midmost shin as the Morning Star midmost shin 
 between night and day , my Soul - star in one , 
 which be my Father whom I know not . 
 I tell you , the day should not turn into glory , 
 and the night should not turn deep , 
 save for the morning and evening star , upon which they turn . 
 night turn upon I , and Day , who be the star between . 
 between your breast and belly be a star . 
 if it be not there 
 you be empty gourd - shell fill with dust and wind . 
 when you walk , the star walk with you , between your breast and your belly . 
 when you sleep , it softly shin . 
 when you speak true and true , it be bright on your lip and your tooth . 
 when you lift your hand in courage and bravery , its glow be clear in your palm . 
 when you turn to your wife as brave man turn to their woman 
 the Morning Star and the Evening Star shine together . 
 for man be the Morning Star . 
 and woman be the Star of Evening . 
 I tell you , you be not man alone . 
 the star of the beyond be within you . 
 but have you see a dead man , how his star have go out of he ? 
 so the star will go out of you , even as a woman will leave a man if his warmth never warm she . 
 should you say : I have no star ; I be no star . 
 so it will leave you , and you will hang like a gourd on the vine of life 
 with nothing but rind : 
 wait for the rat of the dark to come and gnaw your inside . 
 do you hear the rat of the darkness gnaw at your inside ? 
 till you be as empty as rat - gnaw pomegranate hang hollow on the Tree of Life ? 
 if the star shine , they dare not , they could not . 
 if you be man with the Morning Star . 
 if the star shine within you 
 no rat of the dark dare gnaw you . 
 but I be Quetzalcoatl , of the Morning Star . 
 I be the live Quetzalcoatl . 
 and you be man who should be man of the Morning Star . 
 see you be not rat - gnaw gourd . 
 I be Quetzalcoatl of the eagle and the snake . 
 the earth and air . 
 of the Morning Star . 
 I be Lord of the Two Ways - ' 

 

 the drum begin to beat , the man of Quetzalcoatl suddenly take off their serape , and Ram n do the same . they be now man naked to the waist . the eight man from the altar - step file up to the altar where the fire burn , and one by one kindle tall green candle , which burn with a clear light . they range themselves on either side the chancel , hold the light high , so that the wooden face of the image glow as if alive , and the eye of silver and jet flash most curiously . 

 ' a man shall take the wine of his spirit and the blood of his heart , the oil of his belly and the seed of his loin , and offer they first to the Morning Star , ' say Ram n , in a loud voice , turn to the people . 

 four man come to he . one put a blue crown with the bird on his brow , one put a red belt round his breast , another put a yellow belt around his middle , and the last fasten a white belt round his loin . then the first one press a small glass bowl to Ram n 's brow , and in the bowl be white liquid like bright water . the next touch a bowl to the breast , and the red shake in the bowl . at the navel the man touch a bowl with yellow fluid , and at the loin a bowl with something dark . they hold they all to the light . 

 then one by one they pour they into a silver mixing - bowl that Ram n hold between his hand . 

 ' for save the unknown God pour his Spirit over my head and fire into my heart , and send his power like a fountain of oil into my belly , and his lightning like a hot spring into my loin , I be not . I be nothing . I be a dead gourd . 

 ' and save I take the wine of my spirit and the red of my heart , the strength of my belly and the power of my loin , and mingle they all together , and kindle they to the Morning Star , I betray my body , I betray my soul , I betray my spirit and my God who be unknown . 

 ' Fourfold be man . but the star be one star . and one man be but one star . ' 

 he take the silver mixing - bowl and slowly circle it between his hand , in the act of mix . 

 then he turn his back to the people , and lift the bowl high up , between his hand , as if offer it to the image . 

 then suddenly he throw the content of the bowl into the altar fire . 

 there be a soft puff of explosion , a blue flame leap high into the air , follow by a yellow flame , and then a rose - red smoke . in three successive instant the face of the man inside the chancel be light bluish , then gold , then dusky red . and in the same moment Ram n have turn to the people and shoot up his hand . 

 ' Salute Quetzalcoatl ! ' cry a voice , and man begin to thrust up their arm , when another voice come moan strangely . 

 ' no ! ah no ! ah no ! ' - the voice rise in a hysterical cry . 

 it come from among the crouch woman , who glance round in fear , to see a woman in black , kneel on the floor , her black scarf fall back from her lift face , thrust up her white hand to the Madonna , in the old gesture . 

 ' no ! no ! it be not permit ! ' shriek the voice . ' Lord ! Lord ! Lord Jesus ! Holy Virgin ! prevent he ! prevent he ! ' 

 the voice sink again to a moan , the white hand clutch the breast , and the woman in black begin to work her way forward on her knee , through the throng of woman who press aside to make her way , towards the altar step . she come with her head lower , work her way on her knee , and moan low prayer of supplication . 

 Kate feel her blood run cold . crouch near the altar step , she look round . and she know , by the shape of the head bend in the black scarf , it be Carlota , creep along on her knee to the altar step . 

 the whole church be freeze in horror . ' saviour ! saviour ! Jesus ! oh Holy Virgin ! ' Carlota be moan to herself as she crawl along . 

 it seem hour before she reach the altar step . Ram n still stand below the great Quetzalcoatl image with arm up - flung . 

 Carlota crouch black at the altar step and fling up the white hand and her white face in the frenzy of the old way . 

 ' Lord ! Lord ! ' she cry , in a strange ecstatic voice that freeze Kate 's bowel with horror : ' Jesus ! Jesus ! Jesus ! Jesus ! Jesus ! Jesus ! ' 

 Carlota strangle in her ecstasy . and all the while , Ram n , the live Quetzalcoatl , stand before the flicker altar with naked arm upraise , look with dark , inalterable eye down upon the woman . 

 throe and convulsion torture the body of Carlota . she gaze sightlessly upwards . then come her voice , in the mysterious rhapsody of prayer : 

 ' Lord ! Lord ! Forgive ! 

 ' God of love , forgive ! he know not what he do . 

 ' Lord ! Lord Jesus ! make an end . make an end , Lord of the world , Christ of the cross , make an end . have mercy on he , Father . have pity on he ! 

 ' oh , take his life from he now , now , that his soul may not die . ' 

 her voice have gather strength till it ring out metallic and terrible . 

 ' Almighty God , take his life from he , and save his soul . ' 

 and in the silence after that cry her hand seem to flicker in the air like flame of death . 

 ' the Omnipotent , ' come the voice of Ram n , speak quietly , as if to she , ' be with I , and I serve Omnipotence ! ' 

 she remain with her white clasp hand upraised , her white arm and her white face show mystical , like onyx , from her thin black dress . she be absolutely rigid . and Ram n , with his arm too upraised , look down on she abstractedly , his black brow a little contracted . 

 a strong convulsion seize her body . she become tense again , make inarticulate noise . then another convulsion seize she . once more she recover herself , and thrust up her clench hand in frenzy . a third convulsion seize she as if from below , and she fall with a strangle moan in a heap on the altar step . 

 Kate have rise suddenly and run to she , to lift she up . she find her stiff , with a little froth on her discolour lip , and fix , glaze eye . 

 Kate look up in consternation at Ram n. he have drop his arm , and stand with his hand against his thigh , like a statue . but he remain with his wide , absorb dark eye watch without any change . he meet Kate 's glance of dismay , and his eye quickly glance , like lightning , for Cipriano . then he look back at Carlota , across a changeless distance . not a muscle of his face move . and Kate could see that his heart have die in its connection with Carlota , his heart be quite , quite dead in he ; out of the deathly vacancy he watch his wife . only his brow frown a little , from his smooth , male forehead . his old connection be break . she could hear he say : there be no star between I and Carlota . - and how terribly true it be ! 

 Cipriano come quickly , switch off his brilliant serape , wrap it round the poor , stiff figure , and pick up the burden lightly , walk with it through the lane of woman to the door , and out into the brilliant sun ; Kate follow . and as she follow , she hear the slow , deep voice of Ram n : 

 

 ' I be the Living Quetzalcoatl . 
 Naked I come from out of the deep 
 from the place which I call my Father , 
 Naked have I travel the long way round 
 from heaven , past the sleep son of God . 

 out of the depth of the sky , I come like an eagle . 
 out of the bowel of the earth like a snake . 

 all thing that lift in the lift of live between earth and sky , know I . 

 but I be the inward star invisible . 
 and the star be the lamp in the hand of the Unknown Mover . 
 beyond I be a Lord who be terrible , and wonderful , and dark to I forever . 
 yet I have lie in his loin , ere he beget I in Mother space . 

 now I be alone on earth , and this be mine . 
 the root be mine , down the dark , moist path of the snake . 
 and the branch be mine , in the path of the sky and the bird , 
 but the spark of I that be I be more than mine own . 

 and the foot of man , and the hand of the woman know I . 
 and knee and thigh and loin , and the bowel of strength and seed be light with I . 
 the snake of my left - hand out of the darkness be kiss your foot with his mouth of caressive fire , 
 and put his strength in your heel and ankle , his flame in your knee and your leg and your loin , his circle of rest in your belly . 
 for I be Quetzalcoatl , the feather snake , 
 and I be not with you till my serpent have coil his circle of rest in your belly . 

 and I , Quetzalcoatl , the eagle of the air , be brush your face with vision . 
 I be fan your breast with my breath . 
 and build my nest of peace in your bone . 
 I be Quetzalcoatl , of the Two Ways . ' 

 

 Kate linger to hear the end of this hymn . Cipriano also have linger in the porch , with the strange figure in the brilliant serape in his arm . his eye meet Kate 's . in his black glance be a sort of homage , to the mystery of the Two Ways ; a sort of secret . and Kate be uneasy . 

 they cross quickly under the tree to the hotel , which be very near , and Carlota be lay in bed . a soldier have go already to find a doctor ; they send also for a priest . 

 Kate sit by the bed . Carlota lie on the bed , make small , horrible moaning noise . the drum outside on the church - roof start to roll , in a savage , complicated rhythm . Kate go to the window and look out . People be stream dazzle from the church . 

 and then , from the church roof , come the powerful singing of man 's voice , fan like a dark eagle in the bright air ; a deep , relentless chanting , with an undertone of passionate assurance . she go to the window to look . she could see the man on the church roof , the people swarm down below . and the roll of that relentless chanting , with its undertone of exultance in power and life , roll through the air like an invisible dark presence . 

 Cipriano come in again , glance at Carlota and at Kate . 

 ' they be sing the song of welcome to Quetzalcoatl , ' say he . 

 ' be that it ? ' say Kate . ' what be the word ? ' 

 ' I will find you a song - sheet , ' he say . 

 he stand beside she , put the spell of his presence over she . and she still struggle a little , as if she be drown . when she be not   drown , she want to drown . but when it actually come , she fight for her old footing . 

 there be a cry noise from Carlota . Kate hurry to the bed . 

 ' where be I ? ' say the white - face , awful , deathly - look woman . 

 ' you be rest in bed , ' say Kate . ' do not   trouble . ' 

 ' where be I ? ' come Carlota 's voice . 

 ' perhaps the sun give you a touch of sunstroke , ' say Kate . 

 Carlota close her eye . 

 then suddenly outside the noise of drum roll again , a powerful sound . and outside in the sunshine life seem to be roll in powerful wave . 

 Carlota start , and open her eye . 

 ' what be that noise ? ' 

 ' it be a fiesta , ' say Kate . 

 ' ram n , he be murder I , and lose his own soul , ' say Carlota . ' he have murder I , and lose his own soul . he be a murderer , and one of the damned . the man I marry ! the man I marry ! a murderer among the damned ! ' 

 it be evident she no long hear the sound outside . 

 Cipriano could not bear the sound of her voice . he come quickly to the side of the bed . 

 ' Doña Carlota ! ' he say , look down at she dull hazel eye , that be fix and unseeing : ' do not die with wrong word on your lip . if you be murder , you have murder yourself . you be never married to Ram n. you be married to your own way . ' 

 he speak fiercely , avengingly . 

 ' ah ! ' say the die woman . ' ah ! I never marry Ram n. No ! I never marry he ! how could I ? he be not what I would have he be . how could I marry he ? ah ! I think I marry he . ah ! I be so glad I do not   - so glad . ' 

 ' you be glad ! you be glad ! ' say Cipriano in anger , angry with the very ghost of the woman , talk to the ghost . ' you be glad because you never pour the wine of your body into the mixing - bowl ! yet in your day you have drink the wine of his body and be soothe with his oil . you be glad you keep yours back ? you be glad you keep back the wine of your body and the secret oil of your soul ? that you give only the water of your charity ? I tell you the water of charity , the hiss water of the spirit , be bitter at last in the mouth and in the breast and in the belly ; it put out the fire . you would have put out the fire , Doña Carlota . - but you can not . you shall not . you have be charitable and compassionless to the man you call your own . so you have put out your own fire . ' 

 ' who be talk ? ' say the ghost of Carlota . 

 ' i , Cipriano Viedma , be talk . ' 

 ' the oil and the wine ! the oil and the wine and the bread ! they be the sacrament ! they be the body and the blessing of God ! where be the priest ? I want the sacrament . where be the priest ? I want to confess , and take the sacrament , and have the peace of God , ' say the ghost of Carlota . 

 ' the priest be come . - but you can take no sacrament , unless you give it . the oil and the wine and the bread ! they be not for the priest to give . they be to be pour into the mixing - bowl , which Ram n call the cup of the star . if you pour neither oil nor wine into the mixing - bowl , from the mixing - bowl you can not drink . so you have no sacrament . ' 

 ' the sacrament ! the bread ! ' say the ghost of Carlota . 

 ' there be no bread . there be no body without blood and oil , as Shylock find out . ' 

 ' a murderer , lose among the damned ! ' murmur Carlota . ' the father of my child ! the husband of my body ! ah no ! it be well for I to call to the Holy Virgin , and die . ' 

 ' call then , and die ! ' say Cipriano . 

 ' my child ! ' murmur Carlota . 

 ' it be well you must leave they . with your beggar 's bowl of charity you have steal their oil and their wine as well . it be good for you to steal from they no more , you stale virgin , you spinster , you bear widow , you weep mother , you impeccable wife , you just woman . you steal the very sunshine out of the sky and the sap out of the earth . because back again , what do you pour ? only the water of dead dilution into the mixing - bowl of life , you thief . oh die ! - die ! - die ! die and be a thousand time dead ! do nothing but utterly die ! ' 

 Doña Carlota have relapse into unconsciousness ; even her ghost refuse to hear . Cipriano fling his sinisterly - flame serape over his shoulder and his face , over his nose , till only his black , glitter eye be visible as he blow out of the room . 

 Kate sit by the window , and laugh a little . the primeval woman inside she laugh to herself , for she have know all the time about the two thief on the Cross with Jesus ; the bullying , maraud thief of the male in his own right , and the much more subtle , cold , sly , charitable thief of the woman in her own right , forever chant her beggar 's whine about the love of God and the God of pity . 

 but Kate , too , be a modern woman and a woman in her own right . so she sit on with Carlota . and when the doctor come , she accept the obsequiousness of the man as part of her right . and when the priest come , she accept the obsequiousness from he , just the same , as part of her woman 's right . these two minister of love , what be they for , but to be obsequious to she ? as for herself , she could hardly be call a thief , and a sneak - thief of the world 's virility , when these man come force their obsequiousness upon she , whine to she to take it and relieve they of the responsibility of their own manhood . no , if woman be thief , it be only because man want to be thieve from . if woman thieve the world 's virility it be only because man want to have it thieve , since for man to be responsible for their own manhood seem to be the last thing man want . 

 so Kate sit on in the room of the die Carlota , smile a little cynically . outside she hear the roll of the tom - tom and the deep chanting of the man of Quetzalcoatl . beyond , under the tree , in the smooth , clear space before the church , she see the half - naked man dance in a circle , to the drum ; the round dance . then later , dance a religious dance of the return of Quetzalcoatl . it be the old , barefoote , absorb dancing of the Indians , the dance of downward - sink absorption . it be the dance of these people , too , just the same : the dance of the Aztecs and Zapotees and the huichole , just the same in essence , indigenous to America ; the curious , silent , absorb dance of the softly - beat foot and ankle , the body come down softly , but with deep weight , upon powerful knee and ankle , to the tread of the earth , as when a male bird tread the hen . and woman softly step in unison . 

 and Kate , listen to the drum , and the full - throate singing , and watch the rich , soft body in the dance , think to herself a little sceptically : yes ! for these it be easy . but all the white man , of the dominant race , what be they do at this moment ? 

 in the afternoon there be a great dance of the welcome of Quetzalcoatl . Kate could only see a little of it , in front of the church . 

 the drum beat vigorously all the time , the dance wound strangely to the water 's edge . Kate hear afterwards that the procession of woman with basket on their head , fill with bread and fruit all wrap in leaf , go down to the shore and load the boat . then dancer and all get into the boat and canoas , and row to the island . 

 they make a feast on the island , and learn the dance of the welcome of Quetzalcoatl , which they would dance every year on that day . and they learn the Song of the welcome of Quetzalcoatl ; which later on Cipriano bring to Kate , as she sit in that dim room with the unconscious woman , who make small , terrible , mechanical noise . 

 the doctor come hastening , and the priest come after a while . neither could do anything . they come in the afternoon again , and Kate walk out and wander on the half - desert beach , look at the flock of boat draw near the island , and feel that life be a more terrible issue even than death . one could die and have do . but living be never do , it could never be finish , and the responsibility could never be shift . 

 she go back again to the sick - room , and with the aid of a woman she undress poor Carlota and put a nightdress on she . another doctor come from the city . but the sick woman be die . and Kate be alone with she again . 

 the man , where be they ? 

 the business of living ? be they really go about the great business of living , abandon she here to this business of die ? 

 it be nightfall before she hear the drum return . and again that deep , full , almost martial singing of man , savage and remote , to the sound of the drum . perhaps after all , life would conquer again , and man would be man , so that woman could be woman . till man be man indeed , woman have no hope to be woman . she know that fatally enough . 

 Cipriano come to she , smell of sun and sweat , his face darkly glow , his eye flash . he glance at the bed , at the unconscious woman , at the medicine bottle . 

 ' what do they say ? ' he ask . 

 ' the doctor think she may come round . ' 

 ' she will die , ' he say . 

 then he go with she to the window . 

 ' see ! ' he say . ' this be what they be sing . ' 

 it be the song - sheet of the welcome to Quetzalcoatl . 

 

 welcome to QUETZALCOATL 

 

 we be not waste . we be not leave out . 
 Quetzalcoatl have come ! 
 there be nothing more to ask for . 
 Quetzalcoatl have come ! 

 he throw the fish in the boat . 
 the cock rise , and crew over the water . 
 the naked one climb in . 
 Quetzalcoatl have come ! 

 Quetzalcoatl love the shade of tree . 
 give he tree ! call back the tree ! 
 we be like tree , tall and rustle . 
 Quetzalcoatl be among the tree . 

 do not tell I my face be shin . 
 Quetzalcoatl have come ! 
 over my head his noiseless eagle 
 fan a flame . 

 tie my spotted shoe for dancing , 
 the snake have kiss my heel . 
 like a volcano my hip be move 
 with fire , and my throat be full . 

 blue daylight sink in my hair . 
 the star come out between the two 
 wonder , shin out of everywhere , 
 say without speech : look you ! 

 ah , Quetzalcoatl ! 
 put sleep as black as beauty in the secret of my belly . 
 Put star - oil over I . 
 call I a man . 
 

 even as she read , she could hear the people outside sing it , as the reed - flute unthreade the melody time after time . this strange dumb people of Mexico be open its voice at last . it be as if a stone have be roll off they all , and she hear their voice for the first time , deep , wild , with a certain exultance and menace . 

 

 ' the naked one climb in . 
 Quetzalcoatl have come ! ' 

 

 she could hear the curious defiance and exultance in the man 's voice . then a woman 's voice , clear almost as a star itself , go up the road at the verse : 

 

 ' blue daylight sink in my hair . 
 the star come out between the two 
 Wonders . . . ' 

 

 strange ! the people have open heart at last . they have roll the stone of their heaviness away , a new world have begin . Kate be frightened . it be dusk . she lay her hand on Cipriano 's knee , lose . and he lean and put his dark hand against her cheek , breathe silently . 

 ' to - day , ' he say softly , ' we have do well . ' 

 she feel for his hand . all be so dark . but oh , so deep , so deep and beyond she , the vast , soft , live heat ! so beyond she ! 

 

 ' put sleep as black as beauty in the secret of my belly . 
 Put star - oil over I . ' 

 

 she could almost feel her soul appeal to Cipriano for this sacrament . 

 they sit side by side in darkness , as the night fall , and he hold his hand loosely on her . outside , the people be still sing . some be dance round the drum . on the church - tower , where the bell have be , there be fire flicker , and white form of man , the noise of a heavy drum , then again , the chant . in the yard before the church door a fire be blaze , and man of Huitzilopochtli stand watch two of their man , naked save for a breech - cloth and the scarlet feather on their head , dance the old spear - dance , whooping challenge in the firelight . 

 Ram n come in , in his white clothe . he pull off his big hat , and stand look down at Carlota . she no long make noise , and her eye be turn up horribly , show the white . Ram n close his eye a moment , and turn away , say nothing . he come to the window , where Cipriano still sit in his impenetrable but live silence , that satisfy where all speech have fail , hold Kate 's hand loosely . nor do he let go her hand . 

 Ram n look out , at the fire in the church tower , the fire before the church door , the little fire on the beach by the lake ; and the figure of man in white , the figure of woman in dark rebozos , with full white skirt , the two naked dancer , the standing crowd , the occasional scarlet serape of Huitzilopochtli , the white and blue of Quetzalcoatl , the creep away of a motor - car , the running of boy , the man cluster round the drum , to sing . 

 ' it be life , ' he say , ' which be the mystery . death be hardly mysterious in comparison . ' 

 there be a knocking . the doctor have come again , and a sister to nurse the die woman . softly the sister pace round the room and bent over her charge . 

 Cipriano and Kate go away in a boat over the dark lake , away from all the fire and the noise into the deep darkness of the lake beyond , to Jamiltepec . Kate feel she want to be cover with deep and living darkness , the deep where Cipriano could lay she . 

 

 put sleep as black as beauty in the secret of my belly . 
 Put star - oil over I . 

 

 and Cipriano , as he sit in the boat with she , feel the inward sun rise darkly in he , diffuse through he ; and feel the mysterious flower of her woman 's femaleness slowly open to he , as a sea - anemone open deep under the sea , with infinite soft fleshliness . the hardness of self - will be go , and the soft anemone of her deep blossom for he of itself , far down under the tide . 

 Ram n remain behind in the hotel , in the impenetrable sanctuary of his own stillness . Carlota remain unconscious . there be a consultation of doctor ; to no effect . she die at dawn , before her boy could arrive from Mexico ; as a canoa be put off from the shore with a little breeze , and the passenger be sing the Song of Welcome to Quetzalcoatl , unexpectedly , upon the pale water . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXII 

 the Living Huitzilopochtli 

 

 they bury Doña Carlota in Sayula , and Kate , though a woman , go also to the funeral . Don Ram n follow the coffin , in his white clothe and big hat with the Quetzalcoatl sign . his boy go with he ; and there be many stranger , man , in black . 

 the boy look odd young shoot , in their black suit with short breech and bare knee . they be both round - face and creamy brown in complexion , both have a touch of fairness . the elder , Pedro , be more like Don Ram n ; but his hair be soft , more fluffy than his father 's , with a hint of brown . he be sulky and awkward , and keep his head duck . the young boy , Cyprian , have the fluffy , upstande brown hair and the startled , hazel eye of his mother . 

 they have come in a motor - car with their aunt , from Guadalajara , and be return straight to town . in her will , the mother have name guardian in place of the father , state that the father would consent . and her considerable fortune she have leave in trust for the boy . but the father be one of the trustee . 

 Ram n sit in his room in the hotel , overlook the lake , and his two boy sit on the cane settee opposite he . 

 ' what do you want to do , my son ? ' say Ram n. ' to go back with your Aunt Margarita , and return to school in the United States ? ' 

 the boy remain a while in sulky silence . 

 ' yes ! ' say Cyprian at last , his brown hair seem to fluff up with indignation . ' that be what our mother wish we to do . so , of course , we shall do it . ' 

 ' very well ! ' say Ram n quietly . ' but remember I be your father , and my door , and my arm , and my heart will always be open to you , when you come . ' 

 the eld boy shuffle with his foot , and mutter , without look up : 

 ' we can not come , papa ! ' 

 ' why not , child ? ' 

 the boy look up at he with brown eye as challenging as his own . 

 ' you , papa , you call yourself the Living Quetzalcoatl ? ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' but , papa , our father be call Ram n Carrasco . ' 

 ' it be also true , ' say Ram n , smile . 

 ' we , ' say Pedro , rather heavily , ' be not the child of the Living Quetzalcoatl , papa . we be Carrasco y de Lara . ' 

 ' good name both , ' say Ram n. 

 ' never , ' say the young Cyprian , his eye flash , ' never can we love you , papa . you be our enemy . you kill our mother . ' 

 ' no , no ! ' say Ram n. ' that you must not say . your mother seek her own death . ' 

 ' Mama love you much , much , much ! ' cry Cyprian , the tear rise to his eye . ' always she love you and pray for you - ' he begin to cry . 

 ' and I , my son ? ' say Ram n. 

 ' you hat she and kill she ! oh , mama ! Mama ! oh , mama ! I want my mother ! ' he weep . 

 ' come to I , little one ! ' say Ram n softly , hold out his hand . 

 ' no ! ' cry Cyprian , stamp his foot and flash his eye through his tear . ' no ! no ! ' 

 the eld boy hang his head and be cry too . Ram n have the little , perplex frown of pain on his brow . he look from side to side , as if for some issue . then he gather himself together . 

 ' listen , my son , ' he say . ' you also will be man ; it will not be long . while you be little boy , you be neither man nor woman . but soon , the change will come , and you will have to be man . and then you will know that a man must be a man . when his soul tell he to do a thing , he must do it . when you be man , you must listen carefully to your own soul , and be sure to be true . be true to your own soul ; there be nothing else for a man to do . ' 

 ' Je m'en fiche de ton âme , mon père ! ' say Cyprian , with one of his flash into French . it be a language he often speak with his mother . 

 ' that you may , my boy , ' say Ram n. ' but I may not . ' 

 ' papa ! ' put in the eld boy . ' be your soul different from mama 's soul ? ' 

 ' who know ? ' say Ram n. ' I understand it differently . ' 

 ' because mama always pray for your soul . ' 

 ' and I , in my way , pray for her , child . if her soul come back to I , I will take it into my heart . ' 

 ' Mama 's soul , ' say Cyprian , ' will go straight into Paradise . ' 

 ' who know , child ! perhaps the Paradise for the soul of the dead be the heart of the living . ' 

 ' I do not   understand what you say . ' 

 ' it be possible , ' say Ram n , ' that even now the only Paradise for the soul of your mother be in my heart . ' 

 the two boy star at he with open eye . 

 ' never will I believe that , ' say Cyprian . 

 ' or it may be in thy heart , ' say Ram n. ' Hast thou a place in thy heart for the soul of thy mother ? ' 

 the young Cyprian star with bewildered hazel eye . 

 ' the soul of my mother go direct to Paradise , because she be a saint , ' he assert flatly . 

 ' which Paradise , my son ? ' 

 ' the only one . where God be . ' 

 ' and where be that ? ' 

 there be a pause . 

 ' in the sky , ' say Cyprian , stubbornly . 

 ' it be very far and very empty . but I believe , my son , that the heart of live man be the very middle of the sky . and there God be ; and Paradise ; inside the heart of live man and woman . and there the soul of the dead come to rest , there , at the very centre , where the blood turn and return ; that be where the dead sleep well . ' 

 there be a very blank pause . 

 ' and wilt thou go on say thou art the Living Quetzalcoatl ? ' say Cyprian . 

 ' surely ! and when you be a little old , perhaps you will come to I and say it too . ' 

 ' never ! Thou hast kill our mother , and we shall hate thee . when we be man we ought to kill thee . ' 

 ' Nay , that be bombast , child ! why wilt thou listen only to servant and priest and people of that sort ? be they not thy inferior , since thou art my son , and thy mother 's son ? why dost thou take the talk of servant and inferior into thy mouth ? Hast thou no room for the speech of brave man ? thou wilt not kill I , neither will thy brother . for I would not allow you , even if you wish it . and you do not wish it . talk no more of this empty lackey - talk to I , Cyprian , for I will not hear it . art thou already a little lackey , or a priest ? come , thou art vulgar . thou art a little vulgarian . we have well speak English ; or thy French . Castilian be too good a language to turn into this currish talk . ' 

 Ram n rise and go to the window to look out at the lake . the drum on the church be sound for midday , when every man should glance at the sun , and stand silent with a little prayer . 

 

 ' the sun have climb the hill , the day be on the downward slope . 
 between the morning and the afternoon , stand I here with my soul , and lift it up . 
 my soul be heavy with sunshine , and steep with strength . 
 the sunbeam have fill I like a honeycomb , 
 it be the moment of fulness , 
 and the top of the morning . ' 

 

 Ram n turn and repeat the mid - day verse to his boy . they listen in confused silence . 

 ' come ! ' he say . ' why be you confused ? if I talk to you about your new boot , or ten peso , you would not be confuse . but if I speak of the sun and your own soul fill from the sun like honeycomb , you sulk . you have well go back to your school in America , to learn to be business man . you have well say to everybody : oh , no ! we have no father ! our mother die , but we never have a father . we be child of an immaculate conception , so we should make excellent business man . ' 

 ' I shall be a priest , ' say Cyprian . 

 ' and I a doctor , ' say Pedro . 

 ' very good ! very good ! shall - be be far from am , and tomorrow be another day . come to I when your heart tell you to come . you be my little boy , whatever you say , and I shall stroke your hair and laugh at you . come ! come here ! ' 

 he look at they , and they dare not refuse to obey , his power be so much great than theirs . 

 he take his eld son in his arm and stroke his head . 

 ' there ! ' he say . ' thou art my eld son , and I be thy father , who call himself the Living Quetzalcoatl . when they say : " be it thy father who call himself the Living Quetzalcoatl ? " - say to they : " yes , he be my father . " and when they ask you what you think of such a father , say : " I be young , and I do not understand he yet . but I do not judge my father without understand he . " Wilt thou say that , my boy , Pedro , my son ? ' and Ram n stroke the boy 's hair with the gentleness and tenderness which fill the child with a sort of awe . 

 ' yes , papa ! I will say that , ' say the boy , relieve . 

 ' it be well , ' say Ram n , lay his hand on the child 's head for a moment , like a blessing . 

 then he turn to the young son . 

 ' come then , ' he say , ' and let I stroke thy upstande hair . ' 

 ' if I love thee , I can not love mama ! ' say Cyprian . 

 ' Nay , be thy heart so narrow ? love not at all , if it make thee petty . ' 

 ' but I do not want to come to thee , papa . ' 

 ' then stay away , my son , and come when thou dost want it . ' 

 ' I do not think thou lov I , papa . ' 

 ' Nay , when thou art an obstinate monkey , I love thee not . but when thy real manhood come upon thee , and thou art brave and daring , rather than rash and impudent , then thou wilt be lovable . how can I love thee if thou art not lovable ? ' 

 ' Mama always love I . ' 

 ' she call thee her own . I do not call thee mine own . thou art thyself . when thou art lovable , I can love thee . when thou art rash and impudent , nay , I can not . the mill will not spin when the wind do not blow . ' 

 the boy go away . Ram n watch they as they stand in their black clothe and bare knee upon the jetty , and his heart yearn over they . 

 ' ah , the poor little devil ! ' he say to himself . and then : 

 ' but I can do no more than keep my soul like a castle for they , to be a stronghold to they when they need it - if ever they do . ' 

 these day Kate often sit by the lake shore , in the early light of the morning . between the rain , the day come very clear , she could see every wrinkle in the great hill opposite , and the fold , or pass , through which a river come , away at Tuliapan , be so vivid to she she feel she have walk it . the red bird look as if rain have freshen even their poppy - bud , and in the morning frog be whir . 

 but the world be somehow different ; all different . no jingle of bell from the church , no striking of the clock . the clock be take away . 

 and instead , the drum . at dawn , the heavy drum roll its sound on the air . then the sound of the Dawn - Verse chant from the tower , in a strong man 's voice : 

 

 ' the dark be divide , the sun be come past the wall . 
 Day be at hand . 
 lift your hand , say Farewell ! say welcome ! 
 then be silent . 
 let the darkness leave you , let the light come into you , 
 man in the twilight . ' 

 

 the voice and the great drum cease . and in the dawn the man who have rise stand silent , with arm uplifted , in the moment of change , the woman cover their face and bent their head . all be changeless still for the moment of change . 

 then the light drum rattle swiftly , as the first sparkle of the bright sun flash in sheer light from the crest of the great hill . the day have begin . People of the world move on their way . 

 at about nine o'clock the light drum rattle quickly , and the voice in the tower cry : 

 ' half - way ! half - way up the slope of the morning ! ' 

 there be the heavy drum at noon , the light drum again at about three o'clock , with the cry : 

 ' half - way ! half - way down the slope of afternoon . ' 

 and at sunset again , the great drum rolling , and the voice cry : 

 

 ' leave off ! leave off ! leave off ! 
 lift your hand , say Farewell ! say welcome ! 
 Man in the twilight . 
 the sun be in the outer porch , cry to he : thank ! oh , Thanks ! 
 then be silent . 
 you belong to the night . ' 

 

 and again in the sunset everywhere man stand with lift face and hand , and woman cover their face and stand with bow head ; all be changeless still for the moment of change . 

 then the light drum suddenly beat , and people move on into the night . 

 the world be different , different . the drum seem to leave the air soft and vulnerable , as if it be alive . above all , no clang of metal on metal , during the moment of change . 

 

 ' Metal for resistance . 
 drum for the beat heart . 
 the heart cease not . ' 

 

 this be one of Ram n 's little verse . 

 strange , the change that be take place in the world . always the air have a soft , more velvety silence , it seem alive . and there be no hour . Dawn and noon and sunset , mid - morning , or the up - slope middle , and mid - afternoon , or the down - slope middle , this be the day , with the watch of the night . they begin to call the four watch of the day the watch of the rabbit , the watch of the hawk , the watch of the turkey - buzzard and the watch of the deer . and the four quarter of the night be the watch of the frog , the watch of the fire - fly , the watch of the fish , the watch of the squirrel . 

 ' I shall come for you , ' write Cipriano to she , ' when the deer be thrust his last foot towards the forest . ' 

 that mean , she know , in the last quarter of the hour of the deer ; something after five o'clock . 

 it be as if , from Ram n and Cipriano , from Jamiltepec and the lake region , a new world be unfold , unroll , as softly and subtly as twilight fall and remove the clutter of day . it be a soft , twilit newness slowly spread and penetrate the world , even into the city . now , even in the city the blue serape of Quetzalcoatl be see , and the drum be hear at the hour , cast a strange mesh of twilight over the clash of bell and the clash of traffic . even in the capital the big drum roll again , and man , even man in city clothe , would stand still with uplifted face and arm upstretche , listen for the noon - verse , which they know in their heart , and try not to hear the clash of metal . 

 

 ' Metal for resistance . 
 drum for the beat heart . ' 

 

 but it be a world of metal , and a world of resistance . Cipriano , strangely powerful with the soldier , in spite of the hatred he arouse in other official , be for meet metal with metal . for get Montes to declare : the Religion of Quetzalcoatl be the religion of Mexico , official and declare . - then back up the declaration with the army . 

 but no ! no ! say Ram n. let it spread of itself . and wait awhile , till you can be declare the living Huitzilopochtli , and your man can have the red and black blanket , with the snake - curve . then perhaps we can have the open wedding with Caterina , and she will be a mother among the god . 

 all the time , Ram n try as far as possible to avoid arouse resistance and hate . he write open letter to the clergy , say : 

 ' who be I , that I should be enemy of the one Church ? I be catholic of catholic . I would have one Church of all the world , with Rome for the Central City , if Rome wish . 

 ' but different people must have different saviour , as they have different speech and different colour . the final mystery be one mystery . but the manifestation be many . 

 ' God must come to Mexico in a blanket and in huarache , else he be no God of the Mexicans , they can not know he . naked , all man be but man . but the touch , the look , the word that go from one naked man to another be the mystery of living . we live by manifestation . 

 ' and man be fragile , and fragment , and strangely group in their fragmentariness . the invisible God have do it to we , darken some face and whitened other , and group we in group , even as the zopilote be a bird , and the parrot of the hot land be a bird , and the little oriole be a bird . but the angel of the zopilote must be a zopilote , and the angel of the parrot a parrot . and to one , the dead carcase will ever smell good ; to the other , the fruit . 

 ' priest who will come to I do not forsake either faith or God . they change their manner of speech and vestment , as the peon call with one cry to the oxen , and with another cry to the mule . each respond to its own call in its own way - ' 

 to the socialist and agitator he write : 

 ' what do you want ? would you make all man as you be ? and when every peon in Mexico wear an american suit of clothe and shiny black shoe , and look for life in the newspaper and for his manhood to the government , will you be satisfied ? do the government , then , give you your manhood , that you expect it to give it to these other ? 

 ' it be time to forget . it be time to put away the grudge and the pity . no man be ever the well for be pity , and every man be the bad for a grudge . 

 ' we can do nothing with life , except live it . 

 ' let we seek life where it be to be find . and , have find it , life will solve the problem . but every time we deny the live life , in order to solve a problem , we cause ten problem to spring up where be one before . solve the problem of the people , we lose the people in a poisonous forest of problem . 

 ' life make , and mould , and change the problem . the problem will always be there , and will always be different . so nothing can be solve , even by life and living , for life dissolve and resolve , solve it leave alone . 

 ' therefore we turn to life ; and from the clock to the sun and from metal to membrane . 

 ' this way we hope the problem will dissolve , since it can never be solve . when man seek life first , they will not seek land nor gold . the land will lie on the lap of the god , where man lie . and if the old communal system come back , and the village and the land be one , it will be very good . for truly , no man can possess land . 

 ' but when we be deep in a bog , it be no use attempt to gallop . we can only wade out with toil . and in our haste to have a child , it be no good tear the babe from the womb . 

 ' seek life , and life will bring the change . 

 ' seek life itself , even pause at dawn and at sunset , and life will come back into we and prompt we through the transition . 

 ' Lay forcible hand on nothing , only be ready to resist , if forcible hand should be lay on you . for the new shoot of life be tender , and well ten death than that they should be tear or trample down by the bully of the world . when it come to fight for the tender shoot of life , fight as the jaguar fight for her young , as the she - bear for her cub . 

 ' that which be life be vulnerable , only metal be invulnerable . fight for the vulnerable unfolding of life . but for that , fight never to yield . ' 

 Cipriano , too , be always speak to his soldier , always with the same cry : 

 ' we be man ! we be fighter ! 

 ' but what can we do ? 

 ' shall we march to simple death ? 

 ' no ! no ! we must march to life . 

 ' the gringo be here . we have let they come . we must let they stay , for we can not drive they out . with gun and sword and bayonet we can never drive they out , for they have a thousand where we have one . and if they come in peace , let they stay in peace . 

 ' but we have not lose Mexico yet . we have not lose each other . 

 ' we be the blood of America . we be the blood of Montezuma . 

 ' what be my hand for ? be it to turn the handle of a machine alone ? 

 ' my hand be to salute the God of Mexicans , beyond the sky . 

 ' my hand be to touch the hand of a brave man . 

 ' my hand be to hold a gun . 

 ' my hand be to make the corn grow out of the ground . 

 ' what be my knee for ? 

 ' my knee be to hold I proud and erect . 

 ' my knee be for march on my way . 

 ' my knee be the knee of a man . 

 ' our god be Quetzalcoatl of the blue sky , and Huitzilopochtli red at the gate , watch . 

 ' our god hate a kneeling man . they shout Ho ! erect ! 

 ' then what can we do ? 

 ' wait ! 

 ' I be a man , naked inside my clothe as you be . 

 ' be I a big man ? be I a tall and powerful man , from Tlascala , for example . 

 ' I be not . I be little . I be from the south . I be small - 

 ' yet be I not your general ? 

 ' why ? 

 ' why be I a general , and you only soldier ? 

 ' I will tell you . 

 ' I find the other strength . 

 ' there be two strength ; the strength which be the strength of oxen and mule and iron , of machine and gun , and of man who can not get the second strength . 

 ' then there be the second strength . it be the strength you want . and you can get it , whether you be small or big . it be the strength that come from behind the sun . and you can get it ; you can get it here ! ' - he strike his breast - ' and here ! ' - he strike his belly - ' and here ! ' - he strike his loin . ' the strength that come from back of the sun . ' 

 when Cipriano be rouse , his eye flash , and it be as if dark feather , like pinion , be start out of he , out of his shoulder and back , as if these dark pinion clash and flash like a rouse eagle . his man seem to see he , as by second sight , with the demonish clashing and dashing of wing , like an old god . and they murmur , their eye flash : 

 ' it be Cipriano ! it be he ! we be Ciprianistos , we be his child . ' 

 ' we be man ! we be man ! ' cry Cipriano . 

 ' but listen . there be two kind of man . there be man with the second strength , and man without it . 

 ' when the first gringo come , we lose our second strength . and the padre teach we : submit ! submit ! 

 ' the gringo have get the second strength ! 

 ' how ? 

 ' like cunning one , they steal it on the sly . they keep very still , like a tarantula in his hole . then when neither sun nor moon nor star know he be there , Biff ! - the tarantula spring across , and bit , and leave the poison and suck the secret . 

 ' so they get the secret of the air and the water , and they get the secret out of the earth . so the metal be theirs , and they make gun and machine and ship , and they make train and telegram and radio . 

 ' why ? why do they make all these thing ? how could they do it ? 

 ' because , by cunne , they have get the secret of the second strength , which come from behind the sun . 

 ' and we have to be slave , because we have only get the first strength , we have lose the second strength . 

 ' now we be get it back . we have find our way again to the secret sun behind the sun . there sit Quetzalcoatl , and at last Don Ram n find he . there sit the red Huitzilopochtli , and I have find he . for I have find the second strength . 

 ' when he come , all you who strive shall find the second strength . 

 ' and when you have it , where will you feel it ? 

 ' not here ! ' - and he strike his forehead . ' not where the cunning gringo have it , in the head , and in their book . not we . we be man , we be not spider . 

 ' we shall have it here ! ' - he strike his breast - ' and here ! ' - he strike his belly - ' and here ! ' - he strike his loin . 

 ' be we man ? can we not get the second strength ? can we not ? have we lose it forever ? 

 ' I say no ! Quetzalcoatl be among we . I have find the red Huitzilopochtli . the second strength ! 

 ' when you walk or sit , when you work or lie down , when you eat or sleep , think of the second strength , that you must have it . 

 ' be very quiet . it be shy as a bird in a dark tree . 

 ' be very clean , clean in your body and your clothe . it be like a star , that will not shine in dirt . 

 ' be very brave , and do not drink till you be drunk , nor soil yourself with bad woman , nor steal . because a drunken man have lose his second strength , and a man lose his strength in bad woman , and a thief be a coward , and the red Huitzilopochtli hat a coward . 

 ' try ! try for the second strength . when we have it , the other will lose it . ' 

 Cipriano struggle hard with his army . the curse of any army be the have nothing to do . Cipriano make all his man cook and wash for themselves , clean and paint the barrack , make a great garden to grow vegetable , and plant tree wherever there be water . and he himself take a passionate interest in what they do . a dirty tunic , a sore foot , a badly - make huarache do not escape he . but even when they cook their meal he go among they . 

 ' give I something to eat , ' he would say . ' give I an enchilada ! ' 

 then he praise the cooking , or say it be bad . 

 like all savage , they like do small thing . and , like most Mexicans , once they be a little sure of what they be do , they love do it well . 

 Cipriano be determined to get some discipline into they . Discipline be what Mexico need , and what the whole world need . but it be the discipline from the inside that matter . the machine discipline , from the outside , break down . 

 he have the wild Indians from the north beat their drum in the barrack - yard , and start the old dance again . the dance , the dance which have meaning , be a deep discipline in itself . the old Indians of the north still have the secret of animistic dancing . they dance to gain power ; power over the live force or potency of the earth . and these dance need intense dark concentration , and immense endurance . 

 Cipriano encourage the dance more than anything . he learn they himself , with curious passion . the shield and spear dance , the knife dance , the dance of ambush , and the surprise dance , he learn they in the savage village of the north , and he dance they in the barrack - yard , by the bonfire , at night , when the great door be shut . 

 then , naked save for a black breech - cloth , his body smear with oil and red earth - powder , he would face some heavy naked indian and with shield and spear dance the dance of the two warrior , champion in the midst of the dense ring of soldier . and the silent , rhythmic concentration of this duel in subtlety and rapidity keep the foot softly beat with the drum , the naked body suave and subtle , circle with suave , primitive stealth , then crouch and leap like a panther , with the spear poise , to a clash of shield , part again with the crowing yell of defiance and exultance . 

 in this dance , no one be more suave and sudden than Cipriano . he could swerve along the ground with bent , naked back , as invisible as a lynx , circle round his opponent , his foot beat and his suave body subtly lilt to the drum . then in a flash he be in the air , his spear point down at the collarbone of his enemy and glide over his shoulder , as the opponent swerve under , and the war - yell resound . the soldier in the deep circle watch , fascinated , utter the old low cry . 

 and as the dance go on , Cipriano feel his strength increase and surge inside he . when all his limb be glisten with sweat , and his spirit be at last satisfy , he be at once tired and surcharge with extraordinary power . then he would throw his scarlet and dark serape around he , and motion other man to fight , give his spear and shield to another officer or soldier , go himself to sit down on the ground and watch , by the firelight . and then he feel his limb and his whole body immense with power , he feel the black mystery of power go out of he over all his soldier . and he sit there imperturbable , in silence , hold all those black - eyed man in the splendour of his own , silent self . his own dark consciousness seem to radiate through their flesh and their bone ; they be conscious , not through themselves but through he . and as a man 's instinct be to shield his own head , so that instinct be to shield Cipriano , for he be the most precious part of themselves to they . it be in he they be supreme . they get their splendour from his power and their great consciousness be his consciousness diffuse they . 

 ' I be not of myself , ' he would say to they . ' I be of the red Huitzilopochtli and the power from behind the sun . and you be not of yourself . of yourself you be nothing . you be of I , my man . ' 

 he encourage they to dance naked , with the breech - cloth , to rub themselves with the red earth - powder , over the oil . 

 ' this be the oil of the star . rub it well into your limb and you will be strong as the starry sky . this be the red blood of volcano . rub yourself with it , you will have the power of the fire of the volcano , from the centre of the earth . ' 

 he encourage they to dance the silent , concentrated dance to the drum , to dance for hour , gather power and strength . 

 ' if you know how to tread the dance , you can tread deeply and deeply , till you touch the middle of the earth with your foot . and when you touch the middle of the earth , you will have such power in your belly and your breast , no man will be able to overcome you . get the second strength . get it , get it out of the earth , get it from behind the sun . get the second strength . ' 

 he make long , rapid march across the wild mexican country , and through the mountain , move light and swift . he like to have his man camp in the open , with no tent : but the watch set , and the star overhead . he pursue the bandit with swift movement . he strip his captive , and tie they up . but if it seem a brave man , he would swear he in . if it seem to he a knave , a treacherous cur , he stab he to the heart , say : 

 ' I be the red Huitzilopochtli , of the knife . ' 

 already he have get his own small , pick body of man out of the ignominious drab uniform , dress in white with the scarlet sash and the scarlet ankle cord , and carry the good , red and black serape . and his man must be clean . on the march they would stop by some river , with the order for every man to strip and wash , and wash his clothing . then the man , dark and ruddy , move about naked , while the white clothing of strong white cotton dry on the earth . they move on again , glitter with the peculiar whiteness of cotton clothe in Mexico , gun at their back , serape and small pack on their back , wear the heavy straw hat with the scarlet crown on their head . 

 ' they must move ! ' he say to his officer . ' they must learn again to move swiftly and untiringly , with the old power . they must not lie about . in the sleep hour , let they sleep . in the waking , let they work , or march , or drill , or dance . ' 

 he divide his regiment up into little company of a hundred each , with a centurion and a sergeant in command . each company of a hundred must learn to act in perfect unison , freely and flexibly . ' perfect your hundred , ' Cipriano insist , ' and I will perfect your thousand and your ten of thousand . ' 

 ' listen ! ' he say . ' for we , no trench and cannon warfare . my man be no cannon - fodder , nor trench - dung . where cannon be , we move away . our hundred break up , and we attack where the cannon be not . that we be swift , that we be silent , that we have no burden , and that the second strength be in we : that be all . we intend to put up no battle - front , but to attack at our own moment , and at a thousand point . ' 

 and always he reiterate : 

 ' if you can get the power from the heart of the earth , and the power from behind the sun ; if you can summon the power of the red Huitzilopochtli into you , nobody can conquer you . get the second strength . ' 

 Ram n be press Cipriano now openly to assume the living Huitzilopochtli . 

 ' come ! ' he say . ' it be time you let General Viedma be swallow up in the red Huitzilopochtli . do not   you think ? ' 

 ' if I know what it mean , ' say Cipriano . 

 they be sit on the mat in Ram n 's room , in the heat before the rain come , towards the end of the rainy season . 

 ' stand up ! ' say Ram n. 

 Cipriano stand up at once , with that soft , startling alertness in his movement . 

 Ram n come quickly to he , place one of his hand over Cipriano 's eye , close they . Ram n stand behind Cipriano , who remain motionless in the warm dark , his consciousness reel in strange concentric wave , towards a centre where it suddenly plunge into the bottomless deep , like sleep . 

 ' Cipriano ? ' - the voice sound so far off . 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' be it dark ? ' 

 ' it be dark . ' 

 ' be it alive ? be the darkness alive ? ' 

 ' surely it be alive . ' 

 ' who live ? ' 

 ' i. ' 

 ' where ? ' 

 ' I know not . in the live darkness . ' 

 Ram n then bind Cipriano 's eye and head with a strip of black fur . then again , with a warm , soft pressure , he press one naked hand over Cipriano 's naked breast , and one between his shoulder . Cipriano stand in profound darkness , erect and silent . 

 ' Cipriano ? ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' be it dark in your heart ? ' 

 ' it be come dark . ' 

 Ram n feel the thud of the man 's heart slowly slacken . in Cipriano , another circle of darkness have start slowly to revolve , from his heart . it swing in widen round , like a great sleep . 

 ' be it dark ? ' 

 ' it be dark . ' 

 ' who live ? ' 

 ' I. ' 

 Ram n bind Cipriano 's arm at his side , with a belt of fur round the breast . then he put his one hand over the navel , his other hand in the small of the other man 's back , press with slow , warm , powerful pressure . 

 ' Cipriano ? ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 the voice and the answer go far and far away . 

 ' be it dark ? ' 

 ' no , my Lord . ' 

 Ram n knelt and press his arm close round Cipriano 's waist , press his black head against his side . and Cipriano begin to feel as if his mind , his head be melt away in the darkness ; like a pearl in black wine , the other circle of sleep begin to swing , vast . and he be a man without a head , move like a dark wind over the face of the dark water . 

 ' be it perfect ? ' 

 ' it be perfect . ' 

 ' who live ? ' 

 ' who - ! ' 

 Cipriano no long know . 

 Ram n bind he fast round the middle , then , press his head against the hip , fold the arm round Cipriano 's loin , close with his hand the secret place . 

 ' Cipriano ? ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' be it all dark ? ' 

 but Cipriano could not answer . the last circle be sweeping round , and the breath upon the water be sink into the water , there be no more utterance . Ram n kneel with press head and arm and hand , for some moment still . then he bind the loin , bind the wrist to the hip . 

 Cipriano stand rigid and motionless . Ram n clasp the two knee with his hand , till they be warm , and he feel they dark and asleep like two live stone , or two egg . then swiftly he bind they together , and grasp the ankle , as one might grasp the base of a young tree , as it emerge from the earth . crouch on the earth , he grip they in an intense grip , rest his head on the foot . the moment pass , and both man be unconscious . 

 then Ram n bind the ankle , lift Cipriano suddenly , with a sleep - move softness , lay he on the skin of a big mountain - lion , which be spread upon the blanket , throw over he the red and black serape of Huitzilopochtli , and lie down at his foot , hold Cipriano 's foot to his own abdomen . 

 and both man pass into perfect unconsciousness , Cipriano within the womb of undisturbed creation , Ram n in the death sleep . 

 how long they be both dark , they never know . it be twilight . Ram n be suddenly arouse by the jerking of Cipriano 's foot . he sit up , and take the blanket off Cipriano 's face . 

 ' be it night ? ' say Cipriano . 

 ' almost night , ' say Ram n. 

 Silence follow , while Ram n unfasten the bond , begin at the foot . before he unbound the eye , he close the window , so the room be almost dark . then he unfasten the last binding , and Cipriano sit up , look , then suddenly cover his eye . 

 ' make it quite dark ! ' he say . 

 Ram n close the shutter , and the room be complete night . then he return and sit on the mat by Cipriano . Cipriano be asleep again . after a while , Ram n leave he . 

 he do not see he again till dawn . then Ram n find he go down to the lake , to swim . the two man swam together , while the sun rise . with the rain , the lake be colder . they go to the house to rub oil in their limb . 

 Cipriano look at Ram n with black eye which seem to be look at all space . 

 ' I go far , ' he say . 

 ' to where there be no beyond ? ' say Ram n. 

 ' yes , there . ' 

 and in a moment or two , Cipriano be wrap in his blanket again , and asleep . 

 he do not wake till the afternoon . then he eat , and take a boat , and row down the lake to Kate . he find she at home . she be surprised to see he , in his white clothe and with his serape of Huitzilopochtli . 

 ' I be go to be the living Huitzilopochtli , ' he say . 

 ' be you ? when ? do it feel queer ? ' - Kate be afraid of his eye ; they seem inhuman . 

 ' on Thursday . the day of Huitzilopochtli be to be Thursday . will not   you sit beside I , and be wife of I when I be a god ? ' 

 ' but do you feel you be a god ? ' she ask , querulous . 

 he turn his eye on she strangely . 

 ' I have be , ' he say . ' and I have come back . but I belong there , where I go . ' 

 ' where ? ' 

 ' where there be no beyond , and the darkness sink into the water , and wake and sleeping be one thing . ' 

 ' no , ' say Kate , afraid . ' I never understand mystical thing . they make I uneasy . ' 

 ' be it mystical when I come in to you ? ' 

 ' no , ' say Kate . ' surely , that be physical . ' 

 ' so be the other , only far . will not   you be the bride of Huitzilopochtli ? ' he ask again . 

 ' not so soon , ' say Kate . 

 ' not so soon ! ' he re - echo . 

 there be a pause . 

 ' will you come back with I to Jamiltepec now ? ' he ask . 

 ' not now , ' she say . 

 ' why not now ? ' 

 ' oh , I do not   know . - you treat I as if I have no life of my own , ' she say . ' but I have . ' 

 ' a life of your own ? who give it you ? where do you get it ? ' 

 ' I do not   know . but I have get it . and I must live it . I can not   be just swallow up . ' 

 ' why , Malintzi ? ' he say , give she a name . ' why can not   you ? ' 

 ' be just swallow up ? ' she say . ' well , I just can not . ' 

 ' I be the live Huitzilopochtli , ' he say . ' and I be swallow up . I think , so could you be , malintzi . ' 

 ' no ! not quite ! ' she say . 

 ' not quite ! not quite ! not now ! not just now ! how often you say not , to - day ! - I must go back to Ram n. ' 

 ' yes . go back to he . you only care about he , and your live Quetzalcoatl and your living Huitzilopochtli . - I be only a woman . ' 

 ' no , Malintzi , you be more . you be more than Kate , you be malintzi . ' 

 ' I be not ! I be only Kate , and I be only a woman . I mistrust all that other stuff . ' 

 ' I be more than just a man , Malintzi . - do not   you see that ? ' 

 ' no ! ' say Kate . ' I do not   see it . why should you be more than just a man ? ' 

 ' because I be the live Huitzilopochtli . do not   I tell you ? you have   get dust in your mouth to - day , Malintzi . ' 

 he go away , leave she rock in anger on her terrace , in love again with her old self , and hostile to the new thing . she be think of London and Paris and New York , and all the people there . 

 ' oh ! ' she cry to herself , stifle . ' for heaven 's sake let I get out of this , and back to simple human people . I loathe the very sound of Quetzalcoatl and Huitzilopochtli . I would die rather than be mix up in it any more . horrible , really , both Ram n and Cipriano . and they want to put it over I , with their high - fly bunk , and their Malintzi . Malintzi ! I be Kate Forrester , really . I be neither Kate Leslie nor Kate Tylor . I be sick of these man put name over I . I be bear Kate Forrester , and I shall die Kate Forrester . I want to go home . Loathsome , really , to be call Malintzi . - I have   have it put over I . ' 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXIII 

 Huitzilopochtli 's Night 

 

 they have the Huitzilopochtli ceremony at night , in the wide yard in front of the church . the guard of Huitzilopochtli , in serape of black , red , and yellow stripe , strip like tiger or wasp , stand hold torch of blaze ocote . a tall bonfire be build , but unkindle , in the centre of the yard . 

 in the tower where the bell have be , fire be blaze and the heavy drum of Huitzilopochtli go roll its deep , sinister note . it have be sound all the while since the sun go down . 

 the crowd gather under the tree , outside the gate in front of the church . the church door be close . 

 there be a bang of four firework cannon explode simultaneously , then four rocket shoot up into the sky , lean in the four direction , and explode in shower of red , green , white , and yellow . 

 the church door open , and Cipriano appear , in his brilliant serape of Huitzilopochtli , and with three green parrot feather erect on his brow . he be carry a torch . he stoop and light the big bonfire , then pluck out four blaze brand and toss they to four of his man , who stand wait , naked save for their black breech - cloth . the man catch the brand as they fly , and run in the four direction , to kindle the four bonfire that wait , one in each corner of the yard . 

 the guard have take off their blanket and blouse , and be naked to the red sash . the light drum begin to beat for the dance , and the dance begin , the half - naked man throw their blaze torch whirl in the air , catch they as they come down , dance all the while . Cipriano , in the centre , throw up brand after brand from the fire . 

 now that he be strip of his blanket , his body be see paint in horizontal bar of red and black , while from his mouth go a thin green line , and from his eye a band of yellow . 

 the five fire , build hollow of little tower of ocote faggot , send pure flame in a rush up to the dark sky , illuminate the dancing man , who sing in deep voice as they dance . 

 the fire rush rapidly upwards in flame . the drum beat without cease . and the man of Huitzilopochtli dance on , like demon . meanwhile the crowd sit in the old indian silence , their black eye glitter in the firelight . and gradually the fire begin to die down , the white facade of the church , that have dance also to the yellow flame , begin to go bluish above , merge into the night , rose - colour below , behind the dark shape that dance to the sink fire . 

 suddenly the dance cease , the man throw their serape around they , and sit down . little ocote fire upon the cane tripod flicker here and there , in a silence that last for some minute . then the drum sound , and a man begin to sing , in a clear , defiant voice , the First Song of Huitzilopochtli : 

 

 ' I be Huitzilopochtli , 
 the Red Huitzilopochtli , 
 the blood - red . 

 I be Huitzilopochtli , 
 Yellow of the sun , 
 Sun in the blood . 

 I be Huitzilopochtli , 
 White of the bone , 
 bone in the blood . 

 I be Huitzilopochtli , 
 with a blade of grass between my tooth . 

 I be Huitzilopochtli , sit in the dark . 
 with my redness stain the body of the dark . 

 I watch by the fire . 
 I wait behind man . 

 in the stillness of my night 
 the cactus sharpen his thorn . 
 the grass feel with his root for the other sun . 

 Deeper than the root of the mango tree 
 down in the centre of the earth 
 be the yellow , serpent - yellow shining of my sun . 

 oh , beware of he ! 
 oh , beware of I ! 
 who run athwart my serpent - flame 
 get bite and must die . 

 I be the sleeping and wake 
 of the anger of the manhood of man . 
 I be the leaping and quaking 
 of fire bent back again . ' 

 

 the song come to an end . there be a pause . then all the man of Huitzilopochtli take it up again , change the ' I ' into ' he . ' 

 

 ' he be Huitzilopochtli , 
 the Red Huitzilopochtli , 
 the blood - red . 

 he be Huitzilopochtli , 
 Yellow of the sun , 
 Sun in the blood . 

 he be Huitzilopochtli , 
 White of the bone , 
 bone in the blood . 

 he be Huitzilopochtli , 
 with a blade of green grass between his tooth . 

 he be Huitzilopochtli , sit in the dark , 
 with his redness stain the body of the night . 

 he be watch by the fire . 
 wait behind man . 

 in the stillness of his night 
 cactus sharpen their thorn . 
 Grass feel downwards with his root . 

 Deeper than the root of the mango tree 
 down in the centre of the earth 
 Shines the yellow , serpent - yellow shining of the sun . 

 oh , man , take care , take care ! 
 take care of he and it . 
 nor run aslant his ray . 
 who be bite , die . 

 he be Huitzilopochtli , sleep or wake 
 Serpent in the belly of man . 
 Huitzilopochtli , leaping and quake 
 Fire of the passion of man . ' 

 

 the big fire have all die down . only the little flame on the tripod light up the scene with a ruddy glow . the guard withdraw to the outer wall of the yard , hold bayonet erect . the big drum be go alone , slowly . 

 the yard be now a clear space , with the glow red heap of the bonfire , and the ocote flame flap . and now be see a platform erect against the white wall of the church . 

 in the silence the big door of the church open , and Cipriano come out , in his bright serape , hold in his hand a bunch of black leaf , or feather , and with a tuft of scarlet feather , black - tip , rise from the back of his head . he mount the platform and stand face the crowd , the light of a torch on his face and on the brilliant feather that rise like flame from the back of his head . 

 after he come a strange procession : a peon in floppy white clothe , lead prisoner between two of the guard of Huitzilopochtli : who wear their serape with red and black and yellow and white and green stripe : then another peon prisoner : then another : in all , five , the fifth one tall , limping , and with a red cross paint on the breast of his white jacket . last of all come a woman - prisoner , likewise between two guard , her hair flow loose , over a red tunic . 

 they mount the platform . the peon , prisoner , be place in a row , their guard behind they . the limping peon be apart , with his two guard behind he : the woman again be apart , her two guard behind she . 

 the big drum cease , and a bugle ring out , a long , loud triumphant note , repeat three time . then the kettle - drum , or the small tom - tom like kettle - drum , rattle fierce as hail . 

 Cipriano lift his hand , and there be silence . 

 out of the silence he begin to speak , in his short , martial sentence : 

 

 ' man that be man be more than a man . 
 no man be man till he be more than a man . 
 till the power be in he 
 which be not his own . 

 the power be in I from behind the sun , 
 and from middle earth . 
 I be Huitzilopochtli . 
 I be dark as the sunless under - earth , 
 and yellow as the fire that consume , 
 and white as bone , 
 and red as blood . 

 but I touch the hand of Quetzalcoatl . 
 and between our finger rise a blade of green grass . 
 I touch the hand of Quetzalcoatl . 
 Lo ! I be lord of the watch of the night 
 and the dream of the night rise from I like a red feather . 

 I be the watcher , and master of the dream . 
 in the dream of the night I see the grey dog prowl . 
 prowl to devour the dream . 

 in the night the soul of a coward creep out of he 
 like a grey dog whose mouth be foul with rabie , 
 creep among the sleeping and the dreaming , who be lap in my dark , 
 and in whom the dream sit up like a rabbit , lift long ear tip with night , 
 on the dream - slope browsing like a deer in the dusk . 

 in the night I see the grey dog creep , out of the sleep man 
 who be coward , who be liar , who be traitor , who have no dream 
 that prick their ear like a rabbit , or browse in the dark like deer , 
 but whose dream be dog , grey dog with yellow mouth . 
 from the liar , from the thief , from the false and treacherous and mean 
 I see the grey dog creep out , where my deer be browse in the dark . 
 then I take my knife , and throw it upon the grey dog . 
 and lo ! it stick between the rib of a man ! 
 the house of the grey dog ! 

 beware ! beware ! 
 of the man and the woman who walk among you . 
 you know not how many be house of grey dog . 
 man that seem harmless , woman with fair word , 
 maybe they kennel the grey dog . ' 

 

 the drum begin to beat and the singer begin to sing , clear and pure : 

 

 the song of the GREY DOG 

 

 ' when you sleep and know it not 
 the grey dog creep among you . 
 in your sleep , you twist , your soul hurt you . 
 the grey dog be chew your entrail . 

 then call on Huitzilopochtli : 
 the grey dog catch I at the cross - road 
 as I go down the road of sleep 
 and cross the road of the uneasy . 

 the grey dog leap at my entrail . 
 Huitzilopochtli , call he off . 
 Lo ! the Great one answer . track he down ! 
 kill he in his unclean house . 

 down the road of the uneasy 
 you track the grey dog home 
 to his house in the heart of a traitor , 
 a thief , a murderer of dream . 

 and you kill he there with one stroke , 
 Crying : Huitzilopochtli , be this well do ? 
 that your sleep be not as a cemetery 
 where dog creep unclean . ' 

 

 the song cease , and there be silence . then Cipriano beckon to the man to bring forward the peon with the black cross paint on his front and back . he limp forward . 

 Cipriano : ' what man be that , limp ? ' 

 guard : ' it be Guillermo , overseer of Don Ram n , who betray Don Ram n , his master . ' 

 Cipriano : ' why do he limp ? ' 

 guard : ' he fall from the window on to the rock . ' 

 Cipriano : ' what make he wish to betray his master ? ' 

 guard : ' his heart be a grey dog , and a woman , a grey bitch , entice he forth . ' 

 Cipriano : ' what woman entice the grey dog forth ? ' 

 the guard come forward with the woman . 

 guard : ' this woman , Maraca , my Lord , with the grey bitch heart . ' 

 Cipriano : ' be it she , indeed ? ' 

 guard : ' it be she . ' 

 Cipriano : ' the grey dog , and the grey bitch , we kill , for their mouth be yellow with poison , be it well , man of Huitzilopochtli ? ' 

 guard : ' it be very well , my Lord . ' 

 the guard strip the peon Guillermo of his white clothe , leave he naked , in a grey loin - cloth , with a grey - white cross paint on his naked breast . the woman , too , have a grey - white cross paint on her body . she stand in a short petticoat of grey wool . 

 Cipriano : ' the grey dog and the grey bitch shall run no more about the world . we will bury their body in quick - lime , till their soul be eat , and their body , and nothing be leave . for lime be the thirsty bone that swallow even a soul and be not slake . - bind they with the grey cord , put ash on their head . ' 

 the guard quickly obey . the prisoner , ash - grey , gaze with black , glitter eye , make not a sound . a guard stand behind each of they . Cipriano give a sign , and quick as lightne the guard have get the throat of the two victim in a grey cloth , and with a sharp jerk have break their neck , lift they backwards in one movement . the grey cloth they tie hard and tight round the throat , lay the twitch body on the floor . 

 Cipriano turn to the crowd : 

 

 ' the Lords of Life be the Masters of Death . 
 Blue be the breath of Quetzalcoatl . 
 Red be Huitzilopochtli 's blood . 
 but the grey dog belong to the ash of the world . 
 the Lords of Life be the Masters of Death . 
 Dead be the grey dog . 
 living be the Lords of Life . 
 Blue be the deep sky and the deep water . 
 Red be the blood and the fire . 
 Yellow be the flame . 
 the bone be white and alive . 
 the hair of night be dark over our face . 
 but the grey dog be among the ash . 
 the Lords of Life be the Masters of Death . ' 

 

 then he turn once more , to the other , imprison peon . 

 Cipriano : ' who be these four ? ' 

 guard : ' four who come to kill Don Ram n. ' 

 Cipriano : ' four man , against one man ? ' 

 guard : ' they be more than four , my Lord . ' 

 Cipriano : ' when many man come against one , what be the name of the many ? ' 

 guard : ' coward , my Lord . ' 

 Cipriano : ' coward it be . they be less than man . man that be less than man be not good enough for the light of the sun . if man that be man will live , man that be less than man must be put away , lest they multiply too much . man that be more than man have the judgment of man that be less than man . shall they die ? ' 

 guard : ' they shall surely die , my Lord . ' 

 Cipriano : ' yet my hand have touch the hand of Quetzalcoatl , and among the black leaf one spring green , with the colour of Malintzi . ' 

 an attendant come and lift Cipriano 's serape over his head , leave his body bare to the waist . the guard likewise take off their serape . 

 Cipriano lift up his fist , in which he hold a little tuft of black feather , or leaf . 

 then he say slowly : 

 

 Huitzilopochtli give the black blade of death . 
 take it bravely . 
 take death bravely . 
 go bravely across the border , admit your mistake . 

 determine to go on and on , till you enter the Morning Star . 
 Quetzalcoatl will show you the way . 
 Malintzi of the green dress will open the door . 

 in the fountain you will lie down . 
 if you reach the fountain , and lie down 
 and the fountain cover your face , forever , 
 you will have depart forever from your mistake . 

 and the man that be more than a man in you 
 will wake at last from the clean forgetting 
 and stand up , and look about he , 
 ready again for the business of be a man . 

 but Huitzilopochtli touch the hand of Quetzalcoatl 
 and one green leaf spring among the black . 
 the green leaf of Malintzi 
 who pardon once , and no more . 

 

 Cipriano turn to the four peon . he hold out his fist with the four black twig , to the first . this first one , a little man , peer at the leaf curiously . 

 ' there be no green one , ' he say sceptically . 

 ' good ! ' say Cipriano . ' then receive a black . ' 

 and he hand he a black leaf . 

 ' I know it , ' say the man , and he throw the leaf away with contempt and defiance . 

 the second man draw a black leaf . he stand gaze at it , as if fascinated , turn it round . 

 the third man draw a leaf whose low half be green . 

 ' see ! ' say Cipriano . ' the green leaf of Malintzi ! ' 

 and he hand the last black leaf to the last man . 

 ' have I get to die ? ' say the last man . 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' I do not   want to die , Patr n. ' 

 ' you play with death , and it have spring upon you . ' 

 the eye of the three man be blindfold with black cloth , their blouse and pantaloon be take away . Cipriano take a bright , thin dagger . 

 ' the Lords of Life be Masters of death , ' he say in a loud , clear voice . 

 and swift as lightning he stab the blindfolded man to the heart , with three swift , heavy stab . then he lift the red dagger and throw it down . 

 ' the Lords of Life be Masters of death , ' he repeat . 

 the guard lift the bleed body one by one , and carry they into the church . there remain only the one prisoner , with the green leaf . 

 ' put the green leaf of Malintzi between his brow ; for Malintzi pardon once , and no more , ' say Cipriano . 

 ' yes , my Lord ! ' reply the guard . 

 and they lead the man away into the church . 

 Cipriano follow , the last of his guard after he . 

 in a few minute the drum begin to beat and man come slowly stream into the church . woman be not admit . all the interior be hang with red and black banner . at the side of the chancel be a new idol : a heavy , seat figure of Huitzilopochtli , do in black lava stone . and round he burn twelve red candle . the idol hold the bunch of black strip , or leaf , in his hand . and at his foot lie the five dead body . 

 the fire on the altar be flicker high , to the dark statue of Quetzalcoatl . on his little throne Ram n sit , wear his blue and white colour of Quetzalcoatl . there be another corresponding throne next he , but it be empty . six of the guard of Quetzalcoatl stand by Ram n : but Huitzilopochtli 's side of the chancel be empty save for the dead . 

 the hard drum of Huitzilopochtli be beat incessantly outside , with a noise like madness . inside be the soft roll of the drum of Quetzalcoatl . and the man from the crowd outside throng slowly in , between the guard of Quetzalcoatl . 

 a flute sound the summon to close the door . the drum of Quetzalcoatl cease , and from the tower be hear again the wild bugle of Huitzilopochtli . 

 then down the centre of the church , in silence , barefoot , come the procession of Huitzilopochtli , naked save for the black loin - cloth and the paint , and the scarlet feather of the head - dress . Cipriano have his face paint with a white jaw , a thin band of green stretch from his mouth , a band of black across his nose , yellow from his eye , and scarlet on his brow . one green feather rise from his forehead , and behind his head a beautiful head - dress of scarlet feather . a band of red be paint round his breast , yellow round his middle . the rest be ash - grey . 

 after he come his guard , their face red , black , and white , their body paint as Cipriano 's , and a scarlet feather rise from the back of their head . the hard , dry drum of Huitzilopochtli beat monotonously . 

 as the Living Huitzilopochtli come near the altar step , the Living Quetzalcoatl rise and come to meet he . the two salute , each cover his eye with his left hand for a moment , then touch finger with the right hand . 

 Cipriano stand before the statue of Huitzilopochtli , dip his hand in a stone bowl , and give the loud cry or whoop of Huitzilopochtli , lift up his red hand . his guard utter the loud cry , and quickly file past , each man dip his hand and raise his wet , red fist . the hard drum of Huitzilopochtli rattle like madness in the church , then fall suddenly silent . 

 Ram n : ' why be your hand red , Huitzilopochtli , my brother ? ' 

 Cipriano : ' it be the blood of the treacherous , Oh Quetzalcoatl . ' 

 Ram n : ' what have they betray ? ' 

 Cipriano : ' the yellow sun and the heart of darkness ; the heart of man , and the bud of woman . while they live , the Morning Star could not be see . ' 

 Ram n : ' and be they verily dead ? ' 

 Cipriano : ' verily dead , my Lord . ' 

 Ram n : ' their blood be shed ? ' 

 Cipriano : ' yes , my Lord , save that the grey dog shed no blood . two die the bloodless death of the grey dog , three die in blood . ' 

 Ram n : ' give I the blood of the three , my brother Huitzilopochtli , to sprinkle the fire . ' 

 Cipriano bring the stone bowl , and the little bunch of black leaf from Huitzilopochtli 's idol . ram n slowly , gently , sprinkle a little blood on the fire , with the black leaf . 

 Ram n : ' darkness , drink the blood of expiation . Sun , swallow up the blood of expiation . rise , Morning Star , between the divide sea . ' 

 he give back the bowl and the leaf to Huitzilopochtli , who place they by the black idol . 

 Ram n : ' Thou who didst take the life of the three , Huitzilopochtli , my brother , what wilt thou do with the soul ? ' 

 Cipriano : ' even give they to thee , my Lord , Quetzalcoatl , my Lord of the Morning Star . ' 

 Ram n : ' yea , give they to I and I will wrap they in my breath and send they the long journey , to the sleep and the far awakening . ' 

 Cipriano : ' my Lord be lord of two way . ' 

 the naked , paint guard of Huitzilopochtli come and carry the dead body of the three stab man , carry they on red bier , and lay they at the foot of the Quetzalcoatl statue . 

 Ram n : ' so , there be a long way to go , past the sun to the gate of the Morning Star . and if the sun be angry he strike swifter than a jaguar , and the whirr of the wind be like an angry eagle , and the upper water strike in wrath like silver - colour snake . ah , three soul , make peace now with the sun and wind and water , and go in courage , with the breath of Quetzalcoatl around you like a cloak . fear not and shrink not and fail not ; but come to the end of the long journey , and let the fountain cover your face . so shall all at length be make new . ' 

 when he have speak to the dead , Ram n take incense and throw it on the fire , so cloud of blue smoke arise . then with a censer he swing the blue smoke over the dead . then he unfold three blue cloth and cover the dead . then the guard of Quetzalcoatl lift the bier , and the flute of Quetzalcoatl sound . 

 ' salute the Morning Star ! ' cry Ram n , turn to the light beyond the statue of Quetzalcoatl , and throw up his right arm in the Quetzalcoatl prayer . every man turn to the light and throw up his arm in the passion . and the silence of the Morning Star fill the church . 

 the drum of Quetzalcoatl sound : the guard slowly move away with the three blue - wrap dead . 

 then come the voice of the Living Huitzilopochtli : 

 ' upon the dead grey dog the face of Quetzalcoatl can not look . upon the corps of grey dog rise no Morning Star . but the fire of corps shall consume they . ' 

 there be a sharp rattle of the dry drum of Huitzilopochtli . Ram n remain with his back to the church , his arm upraise to the Morning Star . and the guard of Huitzilopochtli lift the strangled body , lay they on bier , cover they with grey cloth , and bear they away . 

 the bugle of Huitzilopochtli sound . 

 Cipriano : ' the dead be on their way . Quetzalcoatl help they on the long journey . - but the grey dog sleep within the quick - lime , in the slow corpse - fire . - it be finish . ' 

 Ram n drop his arm and turn to the church . all man drop their hand . the soft drum of Quetzalcoatl sound , mingle with the hard drum of Huitzilopochtli . then both guard begin to sing together : 

 

 HUITZILOPOCHTLI 's WATCH 

 

 ' Red Huitzilopochtli 
 Keeps day and night apart . 

 Huitzilopochtli the golden 
 Guards life from death , and death from life . 

 no grey - dog , coward , pass he . 
 no spot traitor crawl by , 
 false fair one can not slip through 
 Past he , from the one to the other . 

 brave man have peace at nightfall , 
 true man look up at the dawn , 
 man in their manhood walk out 
 into blue day , past Huitzilopochtli . 

 Red Huitzilopochtli 
 be the purifier . 

 Black Huitzilopochtli 
 be doom . 

 Huitzilopochtli golden 
 be the liberating fire . 

 White Huitzilopochtli 
 be wash bone . 

 Green Huitzilopochtli 
 be Malintzi 's blade of grass . ' 

 

 at the beginning of each stanza , the Guard of Huitzilopochtli strike their left palm with their scarlet right fist , and the drum give a great crash , a terrific splash of noise . when the song end , the drum gradually die down , like subside thunder , leave the heart of man re - echo . 

 Ram n : ' why be your hand so red , Huitzilopochtli ? ' 

 Cipriano : ' with the blood of slain man , Brother . ' 

 Ram n : ' must it always be red ? ' 

 Cipriano : ' till green - rob Malintzi bring her water - bowl . ' 

 the bugle and the flute both sound . the guard of Huitzilopochtli put out the red candle , one by one , the guard of Quetzalcoatl extinguish the blue candle . the church be dark , save for the small but fierce blue - white light beyond the Quetzalcoatl statue , and the red smouldering on the altar . 

 Ram n begin slowly to speak : 

 

 ' the dead be on their journey , the way be dark . 
 there be only the Morning Star . 
 beyond the white of whiteness , 
 beyond the blackness of black , 
 beyond speak day , 
 beyond the unspoken passion of night , 
 the light which be feed from two vessel 
 from the black oil and the white 
 Shines at the gate . 

 a gate to the innermost place 
 where the Breath and the fountain commingle , 
 where the dead be live , and the living be dead . 
 the deep that life can not fathom , 
 the Source and the end , of which we know 
 only that it be , and its life be our life and our death . 
 all man cover their eye 
 before the unseen . 
 all man be lose in silence , 
 within the noiseless . ' 

 

 the church be utterly still , all man stand with a hand press over their eye . 

 till there be one note of a silver gong , and the green candle of Malintzi be be light in the altar place . - Ram n 's voice be hear again : 

 

 ' like the green candle of Malintzi 
 like a tree in new leaf . 
 the rain of blood be fall , be go into the earth . 

 the dead have go the long journey 
 beyond the star . 
 Huitzilopochtli have throw his black mantle 
 to those who would sleep . 
 when the blue wind of Quetzalcoatl 
 wave softly , 
 when the water of Malintzi fall 
 make a greenness : 

 count the red grain of the Huitzilopochtli 
 Fire in your heart , o man . 
 and blow the ash away . 

 for the live live , 
 and the dead die . 
 but the finger of all touch the finger of all 
 in the Morning Star . ' 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXIV 

 Malintzi 

 

 when the woman be shut out of the church , Kate go home gloomy and uneasy . the execution shock and depress she . she know that Ram n and Cipriano do deliberately what they do : they believe in their deed , they act with all their conscience . and as man , probably they be right . 

 but they seem nothing but man . when Cipriano say : man that be man be more than a man , he seem to be drive the male significance to its utmost , and beyond , with a sort of demonism . it seem to she all terrible will , the exertion of pure , awful will . 

 and deep in her soul come a revulsion against this manifestation of pure will . it be fascinating also . there be something dark and lustrous and fascinating to she in Cipriano , and in Ram n. the black , relentless power , even passion of the will in man ! the strange , sombre , lustrous beauty of it ! she know herself under the spell . 

 at the same time , as be so often the case with any spell , it do not bind she completely . she be spellbound , but not utterly acquiescent . in one corner of her soul be revulsion and a touch of nausea . 

 Ram n and Cipriano no doubt be right for themselves , for their people and country . but for herself , ultimately , ultimately she belong elsewhere . not to this terrible , natural will which seem to beat its wing in the very air of the american continent . always will , will , will , without remorse or relent . this be America to she : all the Americas . sheer will ! 

 the will of God ! she begin to understand that once fearsome phrase . at the centre of all thing , a dark , momentous will send out its terrific ray and vibration , like some vast octopus . and at the other end of the vibration , man , create man , erect in the dark potency , answer Will with will , like god or demon . 

 it be wonderful too . but where be woman , in this terrible interchange of will ? truly only a subservient , instrumental thing : the soft stone on which the man sharpen the knife of his relentless volition : the soft lode - stone to magnetize his blade of steel and keep all its molecule alive in the electric flow . 

 ah , yes , it be wonderful . it be , as Ram n say , a manifestation , a manifestation of the Godhead . but to the Godhead as a sheer and awful will she could not respond . 

 Joachim , let himself be bleed to death for people who would profit nothing by his sacrifice , he be the other extreme . the black and magnificent pride of will which come out of the volcanic earth of Mexico have be unknown to he . he be one of the white , self - sacrifice god . hence her bitterness . and hence , naturally , the spell of beauty and lustrous satisfaction which Cipriano could cast over she . she be in love with he , when he be with she ; in his arm , she be quite go in his spell . she be the deep , slumbrous lodestone which set all his bone glitter with the energy of relentless pride . and she herself derive a great gratification in the embrace , a sense of passive , downward - sink power , profound . 

 yet she could not be purely this , this thing of sheer reciprocity . surely , though her woman 's nature be reciprocal to his male , surely it be more than that ! surely he and she be not two potent and reciprocal current between which the Morning Star flash like a spark out of nowhere . surely this be not it ? surely she have one tiny Morning Star inside she , which be herself , her own very soul and star - self ! 

 but he would never admit this . the tiny star of her very self he would never see . to he she be but the answer to his call , the sheath for his blade , the cloud to his lightning , the earth to his rain , the fuel to his fire . 

 alone , she be nothing . only as the pure female corresponding to his pure male , do she signify . 

 as an isolated individual , she have little or no significance . as a woman on her own , she be repulsive , and even evil , to he . she be not real till she be reciprocal . 

 to a great extent this be true , and she know it . to a great extent , the same be true of he , and without she to give he the power , he too would not achieve his own manhood and meaning . with she or without she , he would be beyond ordinary man , because the power be in he . but fail she , he would never make his ultimate achievement , he would never be whole . he would be chiefly an instrument . 

 he know this too : though perhaps not well enough . he would strive to keep she , to have she , for his own fulfilment . he would not let she go . 

 but that little star of her own single self , would he ever recognize that ? Nay , do he even recognize any single star of his own being ? do he not conceive of himself as a power and a potency on the face of the earth , an embodied will , like a rush dark wind ? and hence , inevitably , she be but the stone of rest to his potency , his bed of sleep , the cave and lair of his male will . 

 what else ? to he there be nothing else . the star ! Don Ram n 's Morning Star be something that spring between he and she and hung shin , the strange third thing that be both of they and neither of they , between his night and her day . 

 be it true ? be she nothing , nothing , by herself ? and he , alone , fail his last manhood , without she be he nothing , or next to nothing ? as a fig tree which grow up , but never come to flower . 

 be this thing true , the same of both of they ? - that alone , they be next to nothing ? each of they , separate , next to nothing . apart in a sort of grey , mechanical twilight , without a star ? 

 and together , in strange reciprocity , flash darkly till the Morning Star rise between they ? 

 he would say to she , as Ram n have say of Carlota : ' soul ! no , you have no soul of your own . you have at good only half a soul . it take a man and a woman together to make a soul . the soul be the Morning Star , emerge from the two . one alone can not have a soul . ' 

 this Ram n say . and she know it convey what Cipriano really feel . Cipriano could not see Kate as a being by herself . and if he live a thousand more year , he would never see she as such . he would see she only as reciprocal to himself . as the balance of he , and the correspondence on the other side of heaven . 

 ' let the Morning Star rise between we , ' he would say . ' alone you be nothing , and I be manqué . but together we be the wing of the morning . ' 

 be it true ? be this the final answer to man 's assertion of individuality ? 

 be it true ? and be it her sacred duty to sit beside he in the green dress of Malintzi , in the church , the goddess admit her halfness ? her halfness ! be there no star of the single soul ? be that all an illusion ? 

 be the individual an illusion ? Man , any man , every man , by himself just a fragment , know no Morning Star ? and every woman the same ; by herself , starless and fragmentary . even in the relation to the innermost God , still fragmentary and unblest . 

 be it true , that the gate be the Morning Star , the only entrance to the innermost ? and the Morning Star rise between the two , and between the many , but never from one alone . 

 and be a man but a dark and arrowy will , and woman the bow from which the arrow be shoot ? the bow without the arrow be as nothing , and the arrow without the bow only a short - range dart , ineffectual ? 

 Poor Kate , it be hard to have to reflect this . it mean a submission she have never make . it mean the death of her individual self . it mean abandon so much , even her own very foundation . for she have believe truly that every man and every woman alike be found on the individual . 

 now , must she admit that the individual be an illusion and a falsification ? there be no such animal . except in the mechanical world . in the world of machine , the individual machine be effectual . the individual , like the perfect being , do not and can not exist , in the vivid world . we be all fragment . and at the good , half . the only whole thing be the Morning Star . which can only rise between two : or between many . 

 and man can meet only in the light of the Morning Star . 

 she think again of Cipriano and the execution , and she cover her hand over her face . be this the knife to which she must be sheath ? be it such a star of power and relentlessness that must rise between she and he ? he naked and paint , with his soldier , dancing and sweating and shout among they . herself unseen and nowhere ! 

 as she sit rock in her terrible loneliness and misgiving , she hear the drum on the tower , and the sound of rocket . she go to the gate . over the church , in the night sky , hang a spangling cloud of red and blue fire , the colour of Huitzilopochtli and Quetzalcoatl . the night of Huitzilopochtli would be over . the sky be dark again , and there be all the star , beyond , far , far beyond where the spangling have be . 

 she go indoor again , to retire . the servant have all run out to see the rocket . Ezequiel would be in with the man in church . 

 she hear footstep on the gravel walk , and suddenly Cipriano stand in the doorway , in his white clothe . he take off his hat , quickly . his black eye be sparkle , almost blaze to she , with a flashing of light such as she have never see . there be still smear of paint on his face . in the blazing of his eye he seem to be smile to she , but in a dazzling , childish way . 

 ' Malintzi , ' he say to she in Spanish . ' oh , come ! come and put on the green dress . I can not be the Living Huitzilopochtli without a bride . I can not be it , Malintzi ! ' 

 he stand before she , flickering and flash and strangely young , vulnerable , as young and boyish as flame . she see that when the fire come free in he , he would be like this always , flickering , flash with a flame of virgin youth . now , not will at all . sensitive as a boy . and call she only with his boyish flame . the living , flickering , fiery Wish . this be first . the Will she have see be subsidiary and instrumental , the Wish in armour . 

 she have be so used to fight for her own soul with individualistic man , that for a moment she feel old , and uncertain . the strange , flash vulnerability in he , the nakedness of the live Wish , disconcert she . she be use to man who have themselves well in hand , and be seek their own end as individual . 

 ' where do you want I to come ? ' she say . 

 ' to the church , ' he say . ' it be mine to - night . I be Huitzilopochtli : but I can not be it alone , ' he add with quick , wistful , watchful smile , as if all his flesh be flicker with delicate fire . 

 Kate wrap herself in a dark tartan shawl and go with he . he step quickly , in the short , indian way . the night be very dark . down on the beach some firework be flame , and the people be all watch . 

 they enter the yard of the church from the back , by the priest 's little gate . soldier be already roll up in their blanket , sleep under the wall . Cipriano open the little vestry door . Kate pass into the darkness . he follow , light a candle . 

 ' my soldier know I be watch to - night in the church , ' he say . ' they will keep guard . ' 

 the body of the church be quite dark , but the bluish white light burn above the statue of Quetzalcoatl , give not much light . 

 Cipriano lift his candle to the black statue of Huitzilopochtli . then he turn to Kate , his black eye flash . 

 ' I be Huitzilopochtli , Malintzi , ' he say in his low , indian Spanish . ' but I can not be it without you . stay with I , Malintzi . say you be the bride of the Living Huitzilopochtli . ' 

 ' yes ! ' she reply , ' I say it . ' 

 convulsive flame of joy and triumph seem to go over his face . he light two candle in front of Huitzilopochtli . 

 ' come ! ' he say . ' put on the green dress . ' 

 he take she to the vestry , where be many folded serape , and the silver bowl and other implement of the church , and leave she while she put on the dress of Malintzi she have wear when Ram n marry they . 

 when she step out she find Cipriano naked and in his paint , before the statue of Huitzilopochtli , on a rug of jaguar skin . 

 ' I be the live Huitzilopochtli , ' he murmur to she in a sort of ecstasy . 

 ' you be malintzi , ' he say . ' the bride of Huitzilopochtli . ' 

 the convulsion of exultance go over his face . he take her hand in his left hand , and they stand face the bluish light . 

 ' cover your face ! ' he say to she . 

 they cover their face in the salute . 

 ' now salute Quetzalcoatl . ' and he fling up his arm . she hold out her left hand , in the woman 's salute . 

 then they turn to the statue of Huitzilopochtli . 

 ' Salute Huitzilopochtli ! ' he say , bring his right fist down with a smash in the palm of his left hand . but this be the male salute . he teach she to press her hand together in front of her breast , then shoot they out towards the idol . 

 then he put a little lamp of earthenware between the foot of Huitzilopochtli . from the right knee of the idol he take a little black vessel of oil , make she take a little white vessel from the god 's left knee . 

 ' now , ' he say , ' together we fill the lamp . ' 

 and together they pour the oil from their little pitcher , into the saucer - shape lamp . 

 ' now together we light it , ' he say . 

 he take one of the two candle burn before the black idol , she take the other , and with the flame dripping and leap together , they kindle the float wick of the lamp . it burn in a round blue bud , then rise higher . 

 ' blow out your candle , ' he say . ' it be our Morning Star . ' 

 they blow out the two candle . it be almost dark now , with the slow light , like a snow - drop , of their united life float between the foot of Huitzilopochtli , and the everlasting - light burn small and bluish beyond the statue of Quetzalcoatl . 

 at the foot of the altar , beside the chair of Huitzilopochtli , a third chair be place . 

 ' sit in your throne of Malintzi , ' he say to she . 

 they sit side by side , his hand hold her hand , in complete silence , look down the dark church . he have place tuft of greenish flower , like thin , greenish lilac , above her chair , and their perfume be like a dream , strong , overpoweringly sweet on the darkness . 

 strange how naïve he be ! he be not like Ram n , rather ponderous and deliberate in his ceremonial . Cipriano in his own little deed to - night with she , be naïve like a child . she could hardly look at that bud of light which he say mean their united life , without a catch at her heart . it burn so soft and round , and he have such an implicit , childish satisfaction in its symbol . it all give he a certain wild , childish joy . the strange convulsion like flame of joy and gratification go over his face ! 

 ' ah , God ! ' she think . ' there be more way than one of become like a little child . ' 

 the flaminess and the magnificence of the beginning : this be what Cipriano want to bring to his marriage . the reel , powerful perfume of those invisible green flower , that the peon call buena de noche : good by night . 

 Strange - that which he bring to marriage be something flamey and unabashed , forever virginal . not , as she have always know in man , yearn and seek his own end . naïvely bring his flame to her flame . 

 as she sit in that darken church in the intense perfume of flower , in the seat of Malintzi , watch the bud of her life unite with his , between the foot of the idol , and feel his dark hand softly hold her own , with the soft , deep indian heat , she feel her own childhood come back on she . the year seem to be reel away in great circle , fall away from she . 

 leave she sit there like a girl in her first adolescence . the Living Huitzilopochtli ! ah , easily he be the live Huitzilopochtli . More than anything . More than Cipriano , more than a male man , he be the living Huitzilopochtli . and she be the goddess bride , Malintzi of the green dress . 

 ah , yes , it be childish . but it be actually so . she be perhaps fourteen year old , and he be fifteen . and he be the young Huitzilopochtli , and she be the bride Malintzi , the bride - girl . she have see it . when the flame come up in he and lick he all over , he be young and vulnerable as a boy of fifteen , and he would always be so , even when he be seventy . 

 and this be her bridegroom . here at last he be not a will . when he come clothe in his own free flame , it be not will that clothe he . let he be a general , an executioner , what he like , in the world . the flame of their united life be a naked bud of flame . their marriage be a young , vulnerable flame . 

 so he sit in silence on his throne , hold her hand in silence till the year reel away from she in flee circle , and she sit , as every real woman can sit , no matter at what age , a girl again , and for he , a virgin . he hold her hand in silence , till she be malintzi , and virgin for he , and when they look at one another , and their eye meet , the two flame ripple in oneness . she close her eye , and be dark . 

 then later , when she open her eye and see the bud of flame just above she , and the black idol invisibly crouch , she hear his strange voice , the voice of a boy hiss in naïve ecstasy , in Spanish : 

 ' Miel ! Miel de Malintzi ! - Honey of Malintzi ! ' 

 and she press he to her breast , convulsively . his innermost flame be always virginal , it be always the first time . and it make she again always a virgin girl . she could feel their two flame flow together . 

 how else , she say to herself , be one to begin again , save by re - find one 's virginity ? and when one find one 's virginity , one realize one be among the god . he be of the god , and so be i. why should I judge he ? 

 so , when she think of he and his soldier , tale of swift cruelty she have hear of he : when she remember his stab the three helpless peon , she think : why should I judge he ? he be of the god . and when he come to I he lay his pure , quick flame to mine , and every time I be a young girl again , and every time he take the flower of my virginity , and I his . it leave I insouciante like a young girl . what do I care if he kill people ? his flame be young and clean . he be Huitzilopochtli , and I be malintzi . what do I care , what Cipriano Viedma do or do not   do ? or even what Kate Leslie do or do not   do ! 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXV 

 Teresa 

 

 Ram n somewhat surprised Kate by marry again , a couple of month or so after the death of Doña Carlota . the new bride be a young woman of about twenty - eight , call Teresa . there be a very quiet civil wedding , and Ram n bring his new wife to Jamiltepec . 

 he have know she since she be a child , for she be the daughter of the famous hacienda of Las Yemas , some twelve mile inland from Jamiltepec . Don Tomás , her father , have be a staunch friend of the Carrascos . 

 but Don Tomás have die a year ago , leave the large , flourish tequila hacienda to his three child , to be administer by Teresa . Teresa be the young . her two brother have revert to the usual wasteful , spendthrift , brutal mexican way . therefore Don Tomás , in order to save the hacienda from their destructive hand , have especially appoint Teresa administrador , and have get the brother ' consent to this . after all , they be shiftless ne'er - do - well , and have never show the slight desire to help in the rather burdensome business of manage a large tequila hacienda , during their father 's lifetime . Teresa have be the one . and during her father 's illness the whole charge have devolve on she , while her brother waste themselves and their substance in the squashy prostitution - living of Mexicans of their class , away in the city . 

 no soon be the father dead , however , and Teresa in charge , than home come the two brother , big with their intention to be hacendado . by simple brute force they oust their sister , give order over her head , jeered at she , and in crush she united for once with each other . they be put she back into her place as a woman - that be to say , back into a secluded sort of prostitution , to which , in their eye , woman belong . 

 but they be bully , and , as bully , coward . and like so many Mexicans of that class , soft and suicidal towards themselves . they make friend with judge and general . they ride about in resplendent charro dress , and have motor - load of rather doubtful visitor . 

 against their soft , sensuous brutality Teresa could do nothing , and she know it . they be all soft and sensual , or sensuous , handsome in their way , open - handed , careless , but bully , with no fear at the middle of they . 

 ' make yourself desirable , and get a husband for yourself , ' they say to she . 

 in their eye , her great crime be that she do not make herself desirable to man of their sort . that she have never have a man , that she be not marry , make she almost repulsive to they . what be woman for , but for loose , soft , prostitutional sex ? 

 ' do you want to wear the trouser ? ' they jeer at she . ' no , Señorita ! not while there be two man on the place , you be not go to wear the trouser . no , Señorita ! the trouser , the man wear they . the woman keep under their petticoat that which they be woman for . ' 

 Teresa be use to these insult . but they make her soul burn . 

 ' you , do you want to be an american woman ? ' they say to she . ' go off to America , then , and bob your hair and wear breech . buy a ranch there , and get a husband to take your order . go ! ' 

 she go to her lawyer , but they hold up their hand . and she go to Ram n , whom she have know since she be a child . 

 it would have mean a hopeless and ruinous law - suit , to get the brother eject from the hacienda . it would have mean the rapid ruin of the estate . Ram n instead ask Teresa to marry he , and he carefully arrange her dowry , so that she should always have her own provision . 

 ' it be a country where man despise sex , and live for it , ' say Ram n. ' which be just suicide . ' 

 Ram n come with his wife , to see Kate . Teresa be rather small , pale , with a lot of loose black hair and big , wide black eye . yet in her quiet bearing and her well - close mouth there be an air of independence and authority . she have suffer great humiliation at the hand of her brother , there be still a certain wanness round her eye , the remain of tear of anger and helpless indignation , and the bitterness of insulted sex . but now she love Ram n with a wild , virgin loyalty . that , too , be evident . he have save her sex from the insult , restore it to she in its pride and its beauty . and in return , she feel an almost fierce reverence for he . 

 but with Kate she be shy and rather distant : a little afraid of the travel , experienced , rather assertive white - skinned woman , the woman of the other race . she sit in Kate 's salon in her simple white dress with a black gauze rebozo , her brown hand motionless in her lap , her dark neck erect , her dark , slender , well - shape cheek avert . she seem , Kate think , rather like a little sempstress . 

 but Kate be reckon without that strange quiescent power of authority which Teresa also possess , in her slight , dark body . and without the black , flash glance which rest on she from time to time , from Teresa 's eye , full of search fierceness and fiery misgiving . a fiery soul , in such a demure , slight , dark body . sometimes a muted word come from her mouth , and a constrain smile move her lip . but her burn eye never change . she do not even look at Ram n. 

 ' how much do you charge per word , Chica ? ' he ask she , with a sort of soft fondness . 

 then her dark eye flash at he , and her mouth give a little smile . it be evident she be hopelessly in love with he , in a sort of trance or muse of love . and she maintain such a cold sort of blankness towards Kate . 

 ' she despise I , ' think Kate , ' because I can not   be in love as she be . ' 

 and for one second Kate envy Teresa . the next second , she despise she . ' the harem type - ' 

 well , it be Ram n 's nature to be a sort of Sultan . he look very handsome in his white clothe , very serene and pasha - like in his assurance , yet at the same time , soft , pleasant , something boyish also in his physical well - being . in his soft yet rather pasha - like way , he be mix a cocktail of gin and vermouth and lime . Teresa watch he from the corner of her eye . and at the same time , she watch Kate , the potential enemy , the woman who talk with man on their own plane . 

 Kate rise to get spoon . at the same moment , he step back from the low table where he be squeeze a lime , so that he come into slight collision with she . and Kate notice again how quick and subtle be his physical evasion of she , the soft , almost liquid , hot quickness of slide out of contact with she . his natural voluptuousness avoid she as a flame lean away from a draught . 

 she flush slightly . and Teresa see the quick flush under the fair , warm - white skin , the leap of yellow light , almost like anger , into Kate 's grey - hazel eye . the moment of evasion of two different blood - stream . 

 and Teresa rise and go to Ram n 's side , bend over and look in the tumbler , ask , with that curious affected childishness of dark woman : 

 ' what do you put in ? ' 

 ' look ! ' say Ram n. and with the same curious male childishness of dark man , he be explain the cocktail to she , give she a little gin in a spoon , to taste . 

 ' it be an impure tequila , ' she say naïvely . 

 ' at eight peso a bottle ? ' he laugh . 

 ' so much ! it be much ! ' 

 she look into his eye for a second , and see all his face go dark , warm , as if his flesh be fuse soft towards she . her small head poise the prouder . she have get he back . 

 ' Harem trick ! ' say Kate to herself . and she be somewhat impatient , see the big , portentous Ram n envelop in the toil of this little dark thing . she resent be make so conscious of his physical presence , his full , male body inside his thin white clothe , the strong , yet soft shoulder , the full , rich male thigh . it be as if she herself , also , be in the presence of this Sultan , should succumb as part of the harem . 

 what a curious will the little dark woman have ! what a subtle female power inside her rather skinny body ! she have the power to make he into a big , golden full glory of a man . whilst she herself become almost inconspicuous , save for her big black eye light with a tigerish power . 

 Kate watch in wonder . she herself have know man who make she feel a queen , who make she feel as if the sky rest on her bosom and her head be among the star . she know what it be to rise grander and grander , till she fill the universe with her womanhood . 

 now she see the opposite taking place . this little bit of a black - eyed woman have an almost uncanny power to make Ram n great and gorgeous in the flesh , whilst she herself become inconspicuous , almost invisible , save for her great black eye . like a sultan , he be , like a full golden fruit in the sun , with a strange and magnificent presence , glamour . and then , by some mysterious power in her dark little body , the skinny Teresa hold he most completely . 

 and this be what Ram n want . and it make Kate angry , angry . the big , fluid male , gleaming , be somewhat repulsive to she . and the tense little female with her pale - dark face , wan under her great , intense , black eye , have all her female being tense in an effort to exalt this big glistening man , this enraged Kate . she could not bear the glistening smile in Ram n 's dark eye , a sort of pasha satisfaction . and she could not bear the erect , tense little figure of the dark woman , use her power in this way . 

 this hide , secretive power of the dark female ! Kate call it harem , and self - prostitution . but be it ? yes , surely it be the slave approach . surely she want nothing but sex from he , like a prostitute ! the ancient mystery of the female power , which consist in glorify the blood - male . 

 be it right ? Kate ask herself . be not   it degrade for a woman ? and do not   it make the man either soft and sensuous , or else hatefully autocratic ? 

 yet Kate herself have convince herself of one thing , finally : that the clue to all live and to all move - on into new living lie in the vivid blood - relation between man and woman . a man and a woman in this togetherness be the clue to all present living and future possibility . out of this clue of togetherness between a man and a woman , the whole of the new life arise . it be the quick of the whole . 

 and the togetherness need a balance . surely it need a balance ! and do not this Teresa throw herself entirely into the male balance , so that all the weight be on the man 's side ? 

 Ram n have not want Kate . Ram n have get what he want - this black little creature , who be so servile to he and so haughty in her own power . Ram n have never want Kate : except as a friend , a clever friend . as a woman , no ! - he want this little viper of a Teresa . 

 Cipriano want Kate . the little general , the strutting little soldier , he want Kate : just for moment . he do not really want to marry she . he want the moment , no more . she be to give he his moment , and then he be off again , to his army , to his man . it be what he want . 

 it be what she want too . her life be her own ! it be not her métier to be fan the blood in a man , to make he almighty and blood - glamorous . her life be her own ! 

 she rise and go to her bedroom to look for a book she have promise Ram n. she could not bear the sight of he in love with Teresa any long . the heavy , mindless smile on his face , the curious glisten of his eye , and the strange , heavy , lordly aplomb of his body affect she like a madness . she want to run . 

 this be what they be , these people ! savage , with the impossible fluid flesh of savage , and that savage way of dissolve into an awful black mass of desire . emerge with the male conceit and haughtiness swell his blood and make he feel endless . while his eye glisten with a haughty blackness . 

 the trouble be , that the power of the world , which she have know until now only in the eye of blue - eyed man , who make queen of their woman - even if they hat they for it in the end - be now fade in the blue eye , and dawn in the black . in Ram n 's eye at this moment be a steady , alien gleam of pride , and daring , and power , which she know be masterly . the same be in Cipriano 's quick look . the power of the world be die in the blond man , their bravery and their supremacy be leave they , go into the eye of the dark man , who be rouse at last . 

 Joachim , the eager , clever , fierce , sensitive genius , who could look into her soul , and laugh into her soul , with his blue eye : he have die under her eye . and her child be not even his child . 

 if she could have fan his blood as Teresa now fan the blood of Ram n , he would never have die . 

 but it be impossible . every dog have his day . - and every race . 

 Teresa come tap timidly . 

 ' may I come ? ' 

 ' do ! ' say Kate , rise from her knee and leave little pile of book all round the book - trunk . 

 it be a fairly large room , with door open on to the patio and the sun - hard garden , smooth mango - tree rise like elephant 's trunk out of the ground , green grass after the rain , chicken beneath the ragged banana leaf . a red bird splash in the basin of water , opening and shut brown wing above his pure scarlet , vivid . 

 but Teresa look at the room , not out of door . she smell the smell of cigarette and see the many cigarette stump in the agate tray by the bed . she see the littered book , the scatter jewellery , the brilliant new - mexican rug on the floor , the persian curtain hang behind the bed , the handsome , coloured bedcover , the dress of dark silk and bright velvet fling over a trunk , the fold shawl with their long fringe , the scatter shoe , white , grey , pale - brown , dark - brown , black , on the floor , the tall chinese candlestick . the room of a woman who live her own life , for her own self . 

 Teresa be repel , uneasy , and fascinated . 

 ' how nice this be ! ' she say , touch the glow bedcover . 

 ' a friend make it for I , in England . ' 

 Teresa look with wonder at everything , especially at the tangle of jewellery on the dressing - table . 

 ' do not   you like those red stone ! ' say Kate , kneel again to put the book back , and look at the brown neck bent absorbedly over the jewel . thin shoulder , with a soft , dark skin , in a bit of a white dress ! and loosely fold mass of black hair hold by tortoise - shell pin . - an insignificant little thing , humble , Kate think to herself . 

 but she know really that Teresa be neither insignificant nor humble . under that soft brown skin , and in that stoop female spine be a strange old power to call up the blood in a man , and glorify it , and , in some way , keep it for herself . 

 on the sewing - table be a length of fine indian muslin which Kate have buy in India , and do not know what to do with . it be a sort of yellow - peach colour , beautiful , but it do not suit Kate . Teresa be finger the gold - thread selvedge . 

 ' it be not organdie ? ' she say . 

 ' no , muslin . hand - make muslin from India . - why do not   you take it ? it do not   suit I . it would be perfect for you . ' 

 she rise and hold the fabric against Teresa 's dark neck , point to the mirror . Teresa see the warm - yellow muslin upon herself , and her eye flash . 

 ' no ! ' she say . ' I could not   take it . ' 

 ' why not ? it do not   suit I . I have   have it lie about for a year now , and be wonder whether to cut it up for curtain . do have it . ' 

 Kate could be imperious , almost cruel in her giving . 

 ' I can not   take it from you ! ' 

 ' of course you can ! ' 

 Ram n appear in the doorway , glance round the room , and at the two woman . 

 ' look ! ' say Teresa , rather confused . ' the Señora want to give I this indian muslin . ' - she turn to he shyly , with the fabric hold to her throat . 

 ' you look very well in it , ' he say , his eye rest on she . 

 ' the Señora ought not to give it to I . ' 

 ' the Señora would not give it you unless she wish to . ' 

 ' then ! ' say Teresa to Kate . ' many thank ! but many thank ! ' 

 ' it be nothing , ' say Kate . 

 ' but Ram n say it suit I . ' 

 ' yes , do not   it suit she ! ' cry Kate to he . ' it be make in India for someone as dark as she be . it do suit she . ' 

 ' very pretty ! ' say Ram n. 

 he have glance round the room , at the different attractive thing from different part of the world , and at the cigarette end in the agate bowl : the rather weary luxury and disorder , and the touch of barrenness , of a woman live her own life . 

 she do not know what he be think . but to herself she think : this be the man I defend on that roof . this be the man who lie with a hole in his back , naked and unconscious under the lamp . he do not   look like a Sultan then . 

 Teresa must have divine something of her thought , for she say , look at Ram n : 

 ' Señora ! but for you Ram n would have be kill . always I think of it . ' 

 ' do not   think of it , ' say Kate . ' something else would have happen . anyhow it be not   I , it be destiny . ' 

 ' ah , but you be the destiny ! ' say Teresa . 

 ' now there be a hostess , will not   you come and stay some time at Jamiltepec ? ' say Ram n. 

 ' oh , do ! do come ! ' cry Teresa . 

 ' but do you really want I ? ' say Kate , incredulous . 

 ' yes ! yes ! ' cry Teresa . 

 ' she need a woman - friend , ' say Ram n gently . 

 ' yes , I do ! ' she cry . ' I have never have a true , true woman - friend : only when I be at school , and we be girl . ' 

 Kate doubt very much her own capacity for be a true , true woman - friend to Teresa . she wonder what the two of they see in she . as what do they see she ? 

 ' yes , I should like to come for a few day , ' she reply . 

 ' oh , yes ! ' cry Teresa . ' when will you come ? ' 

 the day be agree . 

 ' and we will write the Song of Malintzi , ' say Ram n. 

 ' do not   do that ! ' cry Kate quickly . 

 he look at she , in his slow , wonder way . he could make she feel , at moment , as if she be a sort of child and as if he be a ghost . 

 Kate go to Jamiltepec , and before the two woman know it , almost , they be make dress for Teresa , cut up the pineapple - colour muslin . poor Teresa , for a bride she have a scanty wardrobe : nothing but her rather pathetic black dress that somehow make she look poor , and a few old white dress . she have live for her father - who have a good library of Mexicana and be all his life write a history of the State of Jalisco - and for the hacienda . and it be her proud boast that Las Yemas be the only hacienda , within a hundred mile range , which have not be smash at all during the revolution that follow the flight of Porfirio Diaz . 

 Teresa have a good deal of the nun in she . but that be because she be deeply passionate , and deep passion tend to hide within itself , rather than expose itself to vulgar contact . 

 so Kate pin the muslin over the brown shoulder , wonder again at the strange , uncanny softness of the dark skin , the heaviness of the black hair . Teresa 's family , the Romeros , have be in Mexico since the early day of the Conquest . 

 Teresa want long sleeve . 

 ' my arm be so thin ! ' she murmur , hide her slender brown arm with a sort of shame . ' they be not beautiful like your . ' 

 Kate be a strong , full - develop woman of forty , with round , strong white arm . 

 ' no ! ' she say to Teresa . ' your arm be not thin : they be exactly right for your figure , and pretty and young and brown . ' 

 ' but make the sleeve long , to the wrist , ' plead Teresa . 

 and Kate do so , realize it become the other woman 's nature well . 

 ' the man here do not   like little thin woman , ' say Teresa , wistfully . 

 ' one do not   care what the man like , ' say Kate . ' do you think Don Ram n wish you be a plump partridge ? ' 

 Teresa look at she with a smile in her dark , big bright eye , that be so quick , and in many way so unseeing . 

 ' who know ! ' she say . and in her quick , mischievous smile it be evident she would like also , sometimes , to be a plump partridge . 

 Kate now see more of the hacienda life than she have do before . when Ram n be at home , he consult his overseer , or administrator , every morning . but already Teresa be take this work off his hand . she would see to the estate . 

 Ram n be a good deal absent , either in Mexico City or in Guadalajara , or even away in Sonora . he be already famous and notorious throughout the country , his name be a name to conjure with . but underneath the rather ready hero - worship of the Mexicans , Kate somehow feel their latent grudging . perhaps they take more satisfaction in ultimately destroy their hero , than in temporarily raise they high . the real perfect moment be when the hero be down . 

 and to Kate , sceptic as she be , it seem much more likely that they be sharpen the machete to stick in Ram n 's heart , when he get a bit too big for they , than anything else . though , to be sure , there be Cipriano to reckon with . and Cipriano be a little devil whom they quite rightly fear . and Cipriano , for once , be faithful . he be , to himself , Huitzilopochtli , and to this he would maintain a demonish faith . he be Huitzilopochtli , Ram n be Quetzalcoatl . to Cipriano this be a plain and living fact . and he keep his army keen as a knife . even the President would not care to run counter to Cipriano . and the President be a brave man too . 

 ' one day , ' he say , ' we will put Quetzalcoatl in Puebla Cathedral , and Huitzilopochtli in Mexico Cathedral and Malintzi in Guadalupe . the day will come , Ram n. ' 

 ' we will see that it come , ' Ram n reply . 

 but Ram n and Montes suffer alike from the deep , devilish animosity the country send out in silence against they . it be the same , whoever be in power , the Mexicans seem to steam with invisible , grudging hate , the hate of demon foil in their own soul , whose only motive be to foil everything , everybody , in the everlasting hell of cramped frustration . 

 this be the dragon of Mexico , that Ram n have to fight . Montes , the President , have it to fight the same . and it shatter his health . Cipriano also have it up against he . but he succeed well . with his drum , with his dance round the fire , with his soldier keep keen as knife he draw real support from his man . he grow strong and more brilliant . 

 Ram n also , at home in his own district , feel the power flow into he from his people . he be their chief , and by his effort and his power he have almost overcome their ancient , fathomless resistance . almost he have awe they back into the soft mystery of living , awe they until the tension of their resistant , malevolent will relax . at home , he would feel his strength upon he . 

 but away from home , and particularly in the city of Mexico , he feel himself bleed , bleed , bleed by the subtle , hidden malevolence of the Mexicans , and the ugly negation of the greedy , mechanical foreigner , bird of prey forever alight in the cosmopolitan capital . 

 while Ram n be away , Kate stay with Teresa . the two woman have this in common , that they feel it be well to stand faithfully behind a really brave man , than to push forward into the rank of cheap and obtrusive woman . and this unite they . a certain deep , ultimate faithfulness in each woman , to her own man who need her fidelity , keep Kate and Teresa kindre to one another . 

 the rainy season have almost pass , though throughout September and even in October occasional heavy downpour fall . but the wonderful mexican autumn , like a strange , invert spring , be upon the land . the waste place bloom with pink and white cosmos , the strange wild tree flower in a ghostly way , forest of small sunflower shine in the sun , the sky be a pure , pure blue , the flood of sunshine lie temper on the land , that in part be flood with water , from the heavy rain . 

 the lake be very full , strange and uneasy , and it have wash up a bank of the wicked water - hyacinth along all its shore . the wild - fowl be come from the north , cloud of wild duck like dust in the high air , sprinkle the water like weed . many , many wild fowl , grebe , crane , and white gull of the inland sea , so that the northern mystery seem to have blow so far south . there be a smell of water in the land , and a sense of soothe . for Kate firmly believe that part of the horror of the mexican people come from the unsoothed dryness of the land and the untempered crudity of the flat - edged sunshine . if only there could be a softening of water in the air , and a haze above tree , the unspoken and unspeakable malevolence would die out of the human heart . 

 Kate ride out often with Teresa to see the field . the sugarcane in the inner valley be vivid green , and rise tall , tall . the peon be begin to cut it with their sword - like machete , fill the bullock - wagon , to haul the cane to the factory in Sayula . on the dry hill - slope the spikey tequila plant - a sort of maguey - flourish in its iron wickedness . low wild cactus put forth rose - like blossom , wonderful and beautiful for such sinister plant . the bean be gather from the bean - field , some gourd and squash still sprawl their uncanny weight across the land . red chile hang on wither plant , red tomato sink to the earth . some maize still rear its flag , there be still young corn to eat on the cob . the banana crop be small , the child come in with the little wild yellow tejocote apple , for make preserve . Teresa be make preserve , even with the late fig and peach . on the tree , the ponderous mango - tree , some fruit be again orange - yellow and ripe , but the most still hang in string , heavy and greenish and drop like the testis of bull . 

 it be autumn in Mexico , with wild duck on the water , and hunter with gun , and small wild dove in the tree . Autumn in Mexico , and the come of the dry season , with the sky go high and high , pure pale blue , the sunset arrive with a strange flare of crystal yellow light . with the coffee berry turn red on the struggle bush under the tree , and bougainvillea in the strong light glow with a glow of magenta colour so deep you could plunge your arm deep in it . with a few hum - bird in the sunshine , and the fish in the water go wild , and the fly , that steam black in the first rain , now pass away again . 

 Teresa attend to everything , and Kate help . whether it be a sick peon in one of the little house , or the host of bee from the hive under the mango , or the yellow , yellow beeswax to be make into little bowlful , or the preserve , or the garden , or the calf , or the bit of butter and the little fresh cheese make of strand of curd , or the turkey to be overlook : she see to it along with Teresa . and she wonder at the steady , urgent , efficient will which have to be exert all the time . everything be keep go by a heavy exertion of will . if once the will of the master break , everything would break , and ruin would overtake the place almost at once . no real relaxation , ever . always the sombre , insistent will . 

 Ram n arrive home one evening in November , from a long journey to Sonora . he have come overland from Tepic , and twice have be stop by flood . the rain , so late , be very unusual . he be tired and remote - seeming . Kate 's heart stand still a moment as she think : he go so remote , as if he might go away altogether into death . 

 it be cloudy again , with lightning beat about on the horizon . but all be very still . she say good - night early , and wander down her own side of the terrace , to the look - out at the end , which look on to the lake . everything be dark , save for the intermittent pallor of lightning . 

 and she be startled to see , in a gleam of lightning , Teresa sit with she back to the wall of the open terrace , Ram n lie with his head in her lap , while she slowly push her finger through his thick black hair . they be as silent as the night . 

 Kate give a startled murmur and say : 

 ' I be so sorry ! I do not   know you be here . ' 

 ' I want to be under the sky ! ' say Ram n , heave himself to rise . 

 ' oh , do not   move ! ' say Kate . ' it be stupid of I to come here . you be tired . ' 

 ' yes , ' he say , sink again . ' I be tired . these people make I feel I have a hole in the middle of I . so I have come back to Teresa . ' 

 ' yes ! ' say Kate . ' one be not   the Living Quetzalcoatl for nothing . of course they eat hole in you . - really , be it worth it ? - to give yourself to be eat away by they . ' 

 ' it must be so , ' he say . ' the change have to be make . and some man have to make it . I sometimes wish it be not   I. ' 

 ' so do I wish it . so do Teresa . one wonder if it be not   well to be just a man , ' say Kate . 

 but Teresa say nothing . 

 ' one do what one must . and after all , one be always just a man , ' he say . ' and if one have wound -    la guerre comme    la guerre ! ' 

 his voice come out of the darkness like a ghost . 

 ' ah ! ' sigh Kate . ' it make one wonder what a man be , that he must need expose himself to the horror of all the other people . ' 

 there be silence for a moment . 

 ' man be a column of blood , with a voice in it , ' he say . ' and when the voice be still , and he be only a column of blood , he be well . ' 

 she go away to her room sadly , hear the sound of infinite exhaustion in his voice . as if he have a hole , a wound in the middle of he . she could almost feel it , in her own bowel . 

 and if , with his effort , he kill himself ? - then , she say , Cipriano would come apart , and it would be all finish . 

 ah , why should a man have to make these effort on behalf of a beastly , malevolent people who be not   worth it ! well let the world come to an end , if that be what it want . 

 she think of Teresa soothe he , soothe he and say nothing . and he like a great helpless , wound thing ! it be rather horrible , really . herself , she would have to expostulate , she would have to try to prevent he . why should man damage themselves with this useless struggle and fighting , and then come home to their woman to be restore ! 

 to Kate , the fight simply be not   worth one wound . let the beastly world of man come to an end , if that be its destiny , as soon as possible . without lift a finger to prevent it . - live one 's own precious life , that be give but once , and let the rest go its own hellish way . 

 she would have have to try to prevent Ram n from give himself to destruction this way . she be willing for he to be ten Living Quetzalcoatls . but not to expose himself to the devilish malevolence of people . 

 yet he would do it . even as Joachim have do . and Teresa , with her silence and her infinitely soft administering , she would heal he far well than Kate , with her expostulation and her opposition . 

 ' ah ! ' say Kate to herself . ' I be glad Cipriano be a soldier , and do not   get wound in his soul . ' 

 at the same time , she know that without Ram n , Cipriano be just an instrument , and not ultimately interesting to she . 

 in the morning , Teresa appear alone to breakfast . she seem very calm , hide her emotion in her odd , brown , proud little way . 

 ' how be Ram n ? ' say Kate . 

 ' he be sleep , ' say Teresa . 

 ' good ! he seem to I almost do up , last night . ' 

 ' yes . ' - the black eye look at Kate , wide with unshed tear and courage , and a beautiful deep , remote light . 

 ' I do not   believe in a man 's sacrifice himself in this way , ' say Kate . ' and I do not . ' 

 Teresa still look her full in the eye . 

 ' ah ! ' she say . ' he do not   sacrifice himself . he feel he must do as he do . and if he must , I must help he . ' 

 ' but then you be sacrifice yourself to he , and I do not   believe in that either , ' say Kate . 

 ' oh , no ! ' reply Teresa quickly , and a little flush burn in her cheek , and her dark eye flash . ' I be not sacrifice myself to ram n. if I can give he - sleep - when he need it - that be not sacrifice . it be - ' she do not finish , but her eye flash , and the flush burn darker . 

 ' it be love , I know , ' say Kate . ' but it exhaust you too . ' 

 ' it be not simply love , ' flash Teresa proudly . ' I might have love more than one man : many man be lovable . but Ram n ! - my soul be with Ram n. ' - the tear rise to her eye . ' I do not want to talk about it , ' she say , rise . ' but you must not touch I there , and judge I . ' 

 she hurry out of the room , leave Kate somewhat dismayed . Kate sigh , think of go home . 

 but in an hour Teresa appear again , put she cool , soft , snake - like little hand on Kate 's arm . 

 ' I be sorry if I be rude , ' she say . 

 ' no , ' say Kate . ' apparently it be I who be wrong . ' 

 ' yes , I think you be , ' say Teresa . ' you think there be only love . love be only such a little bit . ' 

 ' and what be the rest ? ' 

 ' how can I tell you if you do not know ? - but do you think Ram n be no more to I than a lover ? ' 

 ' a husband ! ' say Kate . 

 ' ah ! ' Teresa put her head aside with an odd impatience . ' those little word ! those little word ! nor either a husband . - he be my life . ' 

 ' surely it be well for one to live one 's own life ! ' 

 ' no ! it be like seed . it be no good till it be give . I know . I keep my own life for a long time . as you keep it long , it die . and I try to give it to God . but I could not , quite . then they tell I , if I marry Ram n and have any part in the Quetzalcoatl heresy , my soul would be damn . - but something make I know it be not true . I even know he need my soul . - ah , Señora - ' a subtle smile come on Teresa 's pale face - ' I have lose my soul to Ram n. - what more can I say ! ' 

 ' and what about his soul ? ' 

 ' it come home to I - here ! ' she put her hand over her womb . 

 Kate be silent for a time . 

 ' and if he betray you ? ' she say . 

 ' ah , Señora ! ' say Teresa . ' ram n be not just a lover . he be a brave man , and he do not   betray his own blood . and it be his soul that come home to I . - and I would struggle to my last breath to give he sleep , when he come home to I with his soul , and need it , ' she flash . then she add , murmur to herself : ' no , thank God ! I have not get a life of my own ! I have be able to give it to a man who be more than a man , as they say in their Quetzalcoatl language . and now it need not   die inside I , like a bird in a cage . - oh , yes , Señora ! if he go to Sinaloa and the west coast , my soul go with he and take part in it all . it do not let he go alone . and he do not forget that he have my soul with he . I know it . - no , Señora ! you must not criticise I or pity I . ' 

 ' still ! ' say Kate . ' it still seem to I it would be well for each one to keep her own soul , and be responsible for it . ' 

 ' if it be possible ! ' say Teresa . ' but you can no more keep your own soul inside you for yourself , without its dying , than you can keep the seed of your womb . until a man give you his seed , the seed of your womb be nothing . and the man 's seed be nothing to he . - and until you give your soul to a man , and he take it , your soul be nothing to you . - and when a man have take your whole soul . - ah , do not talk to I about betray . a man only betray because he have be give a part , and not the whole . and a woman only betray because only the part have be take from she , and not the whole . that be all about betrayal . I know . - but when the whole be give , and take , betrayal can not   exist . what I be to Ram n , I be . and what he be to I , he be . I do not care what he do . if he be away from I , he do as he wish . so long as he will always keep safe what I be to he . ' 

 Kate do not like have to learn lesson from this little waif of a Teresa . Kate be a woman of the world , handsome and experienced . she be accustom to homage . other woman usually have a slight fear of she , for she be powerful and ruthless in her own way . 

 Teresa also fear she a little , as a woman of the world . but as an intrinsic woman , not at all . trenched inside her own fierce and proud little soul , Teresa look on Kate as on one of those woman of the outside world , who make a very splendid show , but who be not so sure of the real secret of womanhood , and the innermost power . all Kate 's handsome , ruthless female power be second - rate to Teresa , compare with her own quiet , deep passion of connection with Ram n. 

 Yes , Kate be accustomed to look on other woman as inferior . but the table be suddenly turn . even as , in her soul , she know Ram n to be a great man than Cipriano , suddenly she have to question herself , whether Teresa be not a great woman than she . 

 Teresa ! a great woman than Kate ? what a blow ! surely it be impossible ! 

 yet there it be . Ram n have want to marry Teresa , not Kate . and the flame of his marriage with Teresa she see both in his eye and in Teresa 's . a flame that be not in Kate 's eye . 

 Kate 's marriage with Cipriano be curious and momentary . when Cipriano be away , Kate be her old individual self . only when Cipriano be present , and then only sometimes , do the connection overwhelm she . 

 when Teresa turn and look at she with this certain flame , touch with indignation , Kate quail . perhaps for the first time in her life she quail and feel abash : repentant . 

 Kate even know that Teresa feel a little repugnance for she : for the foreign white woman who talk as cleverly as a man and who never give her soul : who do not believe in give her soul . all these well - dress , beautiful woman from America or England , Europe , they all keep their soul for themselves , in a sort of purse , as it be . 

 Teresa be determined that Kate should leave off treat she , very , very indefinably , as an inferior . it be how all the foreign woman treat the mexican woman . because the foreign woman be their own mistress ! they even try to be condescend to Ram n. 

 but Ram n ! he could look at they and make they feel small , feel really nothing , in spite of all their money and their experience and their air of belong to the rule race . the rule race ! wait ! ram n be a challenge to all that . let those rule who can . 

 ' you do not sleep ? ' Teresa say to Kate . 

 ' not very well , ' say Kate . 

 ' no , you look as if you have not sleep very well . - under your eye . ' 

 Kate smooth the skin under her eye , querulously . 

 ' one get that look in Mexico , ' she say . ' it be not an easy country to keep your youth in . - you be look well . ' 

 ' yes , I be very well . ' 

 Teresa have a new , soft bloom on her dark skin , something frail and tender , which she do not want to have to defend against another woman . 

 ' I think I will go home now Ram n have come , ' say Kate . 

 ' oh , why ? do you wish to ? ' 

 ' I think I would well . ' 

 ' then I will go with you to Sayula . in the boat , no ? ' 

 Kate put she few thing together . she have sleep badly . the night have be black , black , with something of horror in it . as when the bandit have attack Ram n. she could see the scar in his back , in the night . and the drum crash of fall water , menacing and horrible , seem to keep up for hour . 

 in her soul , Kate feel Teresa 's contempt for her way of wifehood . 

 ' I have be marry too , ' Kate have say . ' to a very exceptional man , whom I love . ' 

 ' ah , yes ! ' say Teresa . ' and he die . ' 

 ' he want to die . ' 

 ' ah , yes ! he want to die . ' 

 ' I do my level well to prevent he from wear himself out . ' 

 ' ah , yes , to prevent he . ' 

 ' what else could I have do ? ' flash Kate in anger . 

 ' if you could have give he your life , he would not even have want to die . ' 

 ' I do give he my life . I love he - oh , you will never know . - but he do not   want my soul . he believe I should keep a soul of my own . ' 

 ' ah , yes , man be like that , when they be merely man . when a man be warm and brave - then he want the woman to give he her soul , and he keep it in his womb , so he be more than a mere man , a single man . I know it . I know where my soul be . it be in Ram n 's womb , the womb of a man , just as his seed be in my womb , the womb of a woman . he be a man , and a column of blood . I be a woman , and a valley of blood . I shall not contradict he . how can I ? my soul be inside he , and I be far from contradict he when he be try with all his might to do something that he know about . he will not   die , and they will not   kill he . no ! the stream flow into he from the heart of the world : and from I . - I tell you , because you save his life , and therefore we belong to the same thing , you and I and he - and Cipriano . but you should not misjudge I . that other way of woman , where a woman keep her own soul - ah , what be it but weariness ! ' 

 ' and the man ? ' 

 ' ah ! if there be man whose soul be warm and brave , how they comfort one 's womb , Caterina ! ' 

 Kate hang her head , stubborn and angry at be put down from her eminence . - the slave morale ! she say to herself . the miserable old trick of a woman live just for the sake of a man . only live to send her soul with he , inside his precious body . and to carry his precious seed in her womb ! herself , apart from this , nothing . 

 Kate want to make her indignation thorough , but she do not quite succeed . somewhere , secretly and angrily , she envy Teresa her dark eye with the flame in they and their savage assurance . she envy she her serpent - delicate finger . and above all , she envy she , with repining , the comfort of a live man permanent in her womb . and the secret , savage indomitable pride in her own womanhood , that rise from this . 

 in the warm morning after the rain , the frog be whir frantically . across the lake , the mountain be blue black , and little piece of white , fluffy vapour wander low across the tree . cloud be along the mountain - top , make a level sky - line of whitish softness the whole length of the range . on the lonely , fawn - colour water , one sail be blow . 

 ' it be like Europe - like the Tyrol to - day , ' say Kate wistfully . 

 ' do you love Europe very much ? ' ask Teresa . 

 ' yes , I think I love it . ' 

 ' and must you go back to it ? ' 

 ' I think so . soon ! to my mother and my child . ' 

 ' do they want you very much ? ' 

 ' yes ! ' say Kate , rather hesitant . then she add : ' not very much , really . but I want they . ' 

 ' what for ? - I mean , ' Teresa add , ' do you long for they ? ' 

 ' sometimes , ' say Kate , the tear come to her eye . 

 the boat row on in silence . 

 ' and Cipriano ? ' Teresa ask timidly . 

 ' ah ! ' say Kate shortly . ' he be such a stranger to I . ' 

 Teresa be silent for some moment . 

 ' I think a man be always a stranger to a woman , ' say Teresa . ' why should it not be so ? ' 

 ' but you , ' say Kate , ' have not   any child . ' 

 ' ram n have . - and he say : " I cast my bread upon the water . it be my child too . and if they return to I after many day , I shall be glad . " - be it not the same for you ? ' 

 ' not quite ! ' say Kate . ' I be a woman , I be not a man . ' 

 ' i , if I have child , ' say Teresa , ' I shall try to cast my bread upon the water , so my child come to I that way . I hope I shall . I hope I shall not try to fish they out of life for myself , with a net . I have a very great fear of love . it be so personal . let each bird fly with its own wing , and each fish swim its own course . - morning bring more than love . and I want to be true to the morning . ' 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXVI 

 Kate be a Wife 

 

 Kate be glad to get back to her own house , and to be more or less alone . she feel a great change be be work in she , and if it work too violently , she would die . it be the end of something , and the beginning of something , far , far inside she : in her soul and womb . the man , Ram n and Cipriano , cause the change , and Mexico . because the time have come . - nevertheless if what be happen happen too rapidly , or violently , she feel she would die . so , from time to time she have to withdraw from contact , to be alone . 

 she would sit alone for hour on the shore , under a green willow - tree that hang its curtain of pale - green frond , on the beach . the lake be much full and high up the shore , soft , more mysterious . there be a smell of the pile of water - hyacinth decaying at the water 's edge . Distance seem far away . the near conical hill be dot with green bush , like a japanese drawing . Bullock - wagon with solid wheel come roll to the village , high with sugar cane , draw by eight oxen with ponderous head and slowly swing horn , while a peon walk in front , with the guiding - stick on the cross - beam of the yoke . so slow , so massive , yet with such slight control ! 

 she have a strange feeling , in Mexico , of the old prehistoric humanity , the dark - eyed humanity of the day , perhaps , before the glacial period . when the world be cold , and the sea emptier , and all the land - formation be different . when the water of the world be pile in stupendous glacier on the high place , and high , high upon the pole . when great plain stretch away to the ocean , like Atlantis , and the lose continent of Polynesia , so that sea be only great lake , and the soft , dark - eyed people of that world could walk around the globe . then there be a mysterious , hot - blooded , soft - footed humanity with a strange civilization of its own . 

 till the glacier melt , and drive the people to the high place , like the lofty plateaux of Mexico , separate they into cut - off nation . 

 sometimes , in America , the shadow of that old pre - flood world be so strong , that the day of historic humanity would melt out of Kate 's consciousness , and she would begin to approximate to the old mode of consciousness , the old , dark will , the unconcern for death , the subtle , dark consciousness , non - cerebral , but vertebrate . when the mind and the power of man be in his blood and his backbone , and there be the strange , dark inter - communication between man and man and man and beast , from the powerful spine . 

 the Mexicans be still this . that which be aboriginal in America still belong to the way of the world before the Flood , before the mental - spiritual world come into being . in America , therefore , the mental - spiritual life of white people suddenly flourish like a great weed let loose in virgin soil . probably it will as quickly wither . a great death come . and after that , the living result will be a new germ , a new conception of human life , that will arise from the fusion of the old blood - and - vertebrate consciousness with the white man 's present mental - spiritual consciousness . the sinking of both being , into a new being . 

 Kate be more irish than anything , and the almost deathly mysticism of the aboriginal Celtic or iberian people lie at the bottom of her soul . it be a residue of memory , something that live on from the pre - flood world , and can not be kill . something old , and more everlastingly potent , than our would - be fair - and - square world . 

 she know more or less what Ram n be try to effect : this fusion ! she know what it be that make Cipriano more significant to she than all her past , her husband and her child . it be the leap of the old , antediluvian blood - male into unison with she . and for this , without her knowing , her innermost blood have be thud all the time . 

 Ireland would not and could not forget that other old , dark , sumptuous living . the Tuatha De Danaan might be under the western sea . but they be under the live blood , too , never quite to be silence . now they have to come forth again , to a new connection . and the scientific , fair - and - square Europe have to mate once more with the old giant . 

 but the change , Kate feel , must not come on she too soon and too suddenly , or it would rupture she and she would die . the old way have its horror . the heavy - footed ,    terre spirit of aboriginal Mexico could be so horrible to she , as to make her wicked . the slow , indomitable kind of exist and persisting , without hope or élan , which be in the aboriginal American , sometimes make her feel she would go mad . the sullen will persist over the slow , dark century , count the individual existence a trifle ! a tenacity of demon , less than human . and a sudden ferocity , a sudden lust of death rouse incalculable and terrible . 

 People who never really change . man who be not faithful to life , to the living actuality . faithful to some dark necessity out of the past . the actual present suddenly collapse in the soul of the man and the woman , and the old , black , volcanic lava burst up in violence , follow by a lava - rock indifference . 

 the hope ! the hope ! would it ever be possible to revive the hope in these black soul , and achieve the marriage which be the only step to the new world of man ? 

 but meanwhile , a strange , almost tear nausea would come over Kate , and she feel she must go away , to spare herself . the strange , reptilian insistence of her very servant . blood be one blood . we be all of one blood - stream . something aboriginal and tribal , and almost bad than death to the white individual . out of the dark eye and the powerful spine of these people , all the time the unknown assertion : the blood be one blood . it be a strange , overbearing insistence , a claim of blood - unison . 

 Kate be of a proud old family . she have be bring up with the English - germanic idea of the intrinsic superiority of the hereditary aristocrat . her blood be different from the common blood , another , fine fluid . 

 but in Mexico , none of this . her criada Juana , the aguador who carry the water , the boatman who row she on the lake , all look at she with one look in their eye . the blood be one blood . in the blood , you and I be undifferentiated . she see it in their eye , she hear it in their word , it ting their deference and their mockery . and sometimes it make she feel physically sick : this overbearing blood - familiarity . 

 and sometimes , when she try to hold herself up , in the proud old assertion : my blood be my own . noli I tangere , she would see the terrible ancient hatred in their eye , the hatred which lead they to atrocity and fearful maiming . 

 they would defer to her spirit , her knowledge , her understanding . they would give her deference , and a sort of grudging reverence for this . she belong to the rule race , the clever one . but back again they demand her acquiescence to the primeval assertion : the blood be one blood . we be one blood . it be the assertion that sweep away all individualism , and leave she immerse , drown in the grand sea of the live blood , in immediate contact with all these man and all these woman . 

 to this she must submit . or they would persist in the slow revenge . 

 and she could not submit , off - hand . it have to be a slow , organic process . anything sudden or violent would destroy she . 

 now she understand Ram n 's assertion : man be a column of blood : woman be a valley of blood . it be the primeval oneness of mankind , the opposite of the oneness of the spirit . 

 but Kate have always look upon her blood as absolutely her own , her individual own . her spirit she share , in the spirit she commune . but her blood stay by she in individuality . 

 now she be confront by the other great assertion : the blood be one blood . - it mean a strange , marginless death of her individual self . 

 now she understand why Ram n and Cipriano wear the white clothe and the sandal , and be naked , or half - naked , as living god . it be the acquiescence in the primitive assertion . it be the renewal of the old , terrible bond of the blood - unison of man , which make blood - sacrifice so potent a factor of life . the blood of the individual be give back to the great blood - being , the god , the nation , the tribe . 

 now she understand the strange unison she could always feel between Ram n and his man , and Cipriano and his man . it be the soft , quaking , deep communion of blood - oneness . sometimes it make she feel sick . sometimes it make her revolt . but it be the power she could not get beyond . 

 because , admit his blood - unison , Ram n at the same time claim a supremacy , even a godliness . he be a man , as the low of his peon be a man . at the same time , rise from the same pool of blood , from the same root of manhood as they , and be , as they be , a man of the pulsing blood , he be still something more . not in the blood nor in the spirit lie his individuality and his supremacy , his godhead . but in a star within he , an inexplicable star which rise out of the dark sea and shine between the flood and the great sky . the mysterious star which unite the vast universal blood with the universal breath of the spirit , and shin between they both . 

 not the rider on the white horse : nor the rider on the red . that which be beyond the rider and the horse , the inexplicable mystery of the star whence no horseman come and to which no horseman can arrive . the star which be a man 's innermost clue , which rule the power of the blood on the one hand , and the power of the spirit on the other . 

 for this , the only thing which be supreme above all power in a man , and at the same time , be power ; which far transcend knowledge ; the strange star between the sky and the water of the first cosmos : this be man 's divinity . 

 and some man be not divine at all . they have only faculty . they be slave , or they should be slave . 

 but many a man have his own spark of divinity , and have it quench , blow out by the wind of force or grind out of he by machine . 

 and when the spirit and the blood in man begin to go asunder , bring the great death , most star die out . 

 only the man of a great star , a great divinity , can bring the opposite together again , in a new unison . 

 and this be Ram n , and this be his great effort : to bring the great opposite into contact and into unison again . and this be the god - power in man . by this power you shall know the god in man . by none other . 

 Ram n be a man as the least of his peon be a man , with the beat heart and the secret loin and the lip close on the same secret of manhood . and he be human as Kate be human , with the same yearning of the spirit , for pure knowledge and communion , the soul in the greatness of its comprehending . 

 but only he have that starry power for bring together the two great human impulse to a point of fusion , for be the bird between the vast wing of the dual - create power to which man have access and in which man have his being . the Morning Star , between the breath of dawn and the deep of the dark . 

 man have try to murder he with knife . Carlota would have murder he with her spirit . each half separately want to commit the murder of he . 

 but he keep himself beyond . he be the live Quetzalcoatl , and the tiny sparkle of a star be rise in his own man , in his own woman . 

 the star between the two wing of power : that alone be divinity in a man , and final manhood . 

 Kate have a message from Cipriano to say he be come out to stay in the Villa Aragon . the Villa Aragon be the chief house on the lake , in small but rather beautiful ground with tuft of palm - tree and heavy hedge of jasmine , a garden keep always green by constant watering . the house be build rather like a little castle , absurd , yet its deep , spacious veranda opening on to the slope and knoll of the tree - cluster garden , above the lake , be pleasant . 

 Cipriano arrive very pleased , his black eye shin with the boyish look . he want Kate to marry he , go through the mexican civil marriage , and install herself in the Villa Aragon . she hesitate . she know she must go back to Europe , to England and Ireland , very soon . the necessity be imperative . the sense of menace that Mexico put over she , and the feeling of inner nausea , be become too much to bear . she feel she could not stand it , unless she go away to relax for a time . 

 this she tell to Cipriano . and his face fall . 

 ' it do not   matter to I very much whether I marry or not , before I go , ' she say . ' but I must go soon - soon . ' 

 ' how soon ? ' 

 ' by January . ' 

 his face lighten again . 

 ' then marry I before you go , ' he say . ' next week . ' 

 she agree , with curious indifference , and he , his eye flash again like a boy 's , move quickly , to make the necessary legal preparation . 

 she do not care whether she marry or not . in one essential sense , she have marry Cipriano already . he be first and foremost a soldier , swift to come to she , and swift to go . she would always be a good deal alone . 

 and he alone , just as a man and a soldier , she could marry easily enough . it be this terrible Mexico that frighten she with a sense of doom . 

 the Quetzalcoatl movement have spread in the country , but sinisterly . the Archbishop have declare against it , Ram n and Cipriano and their adherent be excommunicate . an attempt have be make to assassinate Montes . 

 the adherent of Quetzalcoatl in the capital have make the Church of San Juan Bautisto , which be call the Church of the Black Saviour , their Metropolitan House of Quetzalcoatl . the Archbishop , a choleric man , have summon his fervent follower to march in procession to this Church of San Juan , now call the House of Quetzalcoatl , and seize it , and restore it to the Catholic Church . the government , know it would have to fight soon or later , arrest the archbishop and break up the procession after some bloodshed . 

 then a kind of war begin . the Knights of Cortés bring out their famous hidden store of arm , not very impressive , after all , and a clerical mob , head by a fanatical priest , surge into the z calo . Montes have the gun turn on they . but it look like the beginning of a religious war . in the street the white and blue serape of Quetzalcoatl and the scarlet and black serape of Huitzilopochtli be see in band , march to the sound of tom - tom , and hold up the curious round banner , make of feather - work , of Quetzalcoatl , and the tall scarlet sign of Huitzilopochtli , long pole with the soft club of scarlet feather at the top , tufte with a black point . - in the church , the priest be still inflame the orthodox to a holy war . in the street , priest who have go over to Quetzalcoatl be harangue the crowd . 

 it be a wild moment . in Zacatecas General Narciso Beltran have declare against Montes and for the Church . but Cipriano with his Huitzilopochtli soldier have attack with such swiftness and ferocity , Beltran be take and shoot , his army disappear . 

 then Montes declare the old Church illegal in Mexico , and cause a law to be pass , make the religion of Quetzalcoatl the national religion of the Republic . all church be close . all priest be compel to take an oath of allegiance to the Republic , or condemn to exile . the army of Huitzilopochtli and the white and blue serape of Quetzalcoatl appear in all the town and village of the Republic . Ram n labour ceaselessly . Cipriano appear in unexpected flash , in unexpected place . he manage to rouse the most discontent States , Vera Cruz , Tamaulipas , Yucatan , to a sort of religious frenzy . strange baptism take place in the sea , and a scarlet and black tower of Huitzilopochtli rise along the shore . 

 the whole country be thrill with a new thing , with a release of new energy . but there be a sense of violence and crudity in it all , a touch of horror . 

 the Archbishop be deport , no more priest be see in the street . only the white and blue and earth - colour serape of Quetzalcoatl , and the scarlet and black of Huitzilopochtli , be see among the crowd . there be a great sense of release , almost of exuberance . 

 this be why Cipriano come to Kate with those black , flash , boyish eye . he be in a strange state of triumph . Kate be frightened , and she feel curiously hollow . even the queer , new , flash triumph and the sense of a new thing on the face of the earth could not quite save she . she belong too much to the old world of Europe , she could not , could not make herself over so quickly . but she feel that if she could go back to Ireland , and let her life and her body pause for a time , then she could come back and take her share . 

 for it be not her spirit alone which be change , it be her body , and the constitution of her very blood . she could feel it , the terrible katabolism and metabolism in her blood , change she even as a creature , change she to another creature . 

 and if it go too fast , she would die . 

 so , she be legally married to Cipriano , and she go to live with he in the Villa Aragon , for a month . after a month , she would sail away , alone , to Ireland . he agree too . 

 it be strange , to be married to he . he make she go all vague and quiet , as if she sink away heavy and still , away from the surface of life , and lie deep in the under - life . 

 the strange , heavy , positive passivity . for the first time in her life she feel absolutely at rest . and talk , and think , have become trivial , superficial to she : as the ripple on the surface of the lake be as nothing , to the creature that live away below in the unwavere deep . 

 in her soul , she be still and proud . if only the body have not suffer the unbearable nausea of change . she have sink to a final rest , within a great , open - out cosmo . the universe have open out to her new and vast , and she have sink to the deep bed of pure rest . she have become almost like Teresa in sureness . 

 yet the process of change within her blood be terrible to she . 

 Cipriano be happy , in his curious indian way . his eye keep that flash , black , dilate look of a boy look newly on a strange , almost uncanny wonder of life . he do not look very definitely at Kate , or even take much definite notice of she . he do not like talk to she , in any serious way . when she want to talk seriously , he flash a cautious , dark look at she , and go away . 

 he be aware of thing that she herself be hardly conscious of . Chiefly , of the curious irritant quality of talk . and this he avoid . curious as it may seem , he make she aware of her own desire for frictional , irritant sensation . she realize how all her old love have be frictional , charge with the fire of irritation and the spasm of frictional voluptuousness . 

 Cipriano , curiously , by refuse to share any of this with she , make it become external to she . her strange seething feminine will and desire subside in she and sweep away , leave her soft and powerfully potent , like the hot spring of water that gush up , so noiseless , so soft , yet so powerful , with a sort of secret potency . 

 she realize , almost with wonder , the death in she of the Aphrodite of the foam : the seething , frictional , ecstatic Aphrodite . by a swift dark instinct , Cipriano draw away from this in she . when , in their love , it come back on she , the seethe electric female ecstasy , which know such spasm of delirium , he recoil from she . it be what she use to call she ' satisfaction . ' she have love Joachim for this , that again , and again , and again he could give she this orgiastic ' satisfaction ' , in spasm that make her cry aloud . 

 but Cipriano would not . by a dark and powerful instinct he draw away from she as soon as this desire rise again in she , for the white ecstasy of frictional satisfaction , the throe of Aphrodite of the foam . she could see that to he , it be repulsive . he just remove himself , dark and unchangeable , away from she . 

 and she , as she lay , would realize the worthlessness of this foam - effervescence , its strange externality to she . it seem to come upon she from without , not from within . and succeed the first moment of disappointment , when this sort of ' satisfaction ' be deny she , come the knowledge that she do not really want it , that it be really nauseous to she . 

 and he , in his dark , hot silence would bring she back to the new , soft , heavy , hot flow , when she be like a fountain gush noiseless and with urgent softness from the volcanic deep . then she be open to he soft and hot , yet gush with a noiseless soft power . and there be no such thing as conscious ' satisfaction . ' what happen be dark and untellable . so different from the beak - like friction of Aphrodite of the foam , the friction which flare out in circle of phosphorescent ecstasy , to the last wild spasm which utter the involuntary cry , like a death - cry , the final love - cry . this she have know , and know to the end , with Joachim . and now this too be remove from she . what she have with Cipriano be curiously beyond her know : so deep and hot and flow , as it be subterranean . she have to yield before it . she could not grip it into one final spasm of white ecstasy which be like sheer know . 

 and as it be in the love - act , so it be with he . she could not know he . when she try to know he , something go slack in she , and she have to leave off . she have to let be . she have to leave he , dark and hot and potent , along with the thing that be , but be not know . the presence . and the stranger . this he be always to she . 

 there be hardly anything to say to he . and there be no personal intimacy . he keep his privacy round he like a cloak , and leave her immune within her own privacy . he be a stranger to she , she to he . he accept the fact absolutely , as if nothing else be possible . she , sometimes , feel it strange . she have so crave for intimacy , insist on intimacy . 

 now she find herself accept he finally and forever as the stranger in whose presence she live . it be his impersonal presence which envelop she . she live in his aura , and he , she know , live in her , with nothing say , and no personal or spiritual intimacy whatever . a mindless communion of the blood . 

 therefore , when he have to go away , it do not matter so very much . his presence be something he leave with she , and he take her presence along with he . and somehow , there be no need for emotion . 

 he have to leave early one morning for Mexico City . the dawn come perfect and clear . the sun be not yet on the lake , but it catch the mountain beyond Tuliapan , and they shine magically distinct , as if some magic light be focusse on they . the green furrow of the mountain - side be as if in her own hand . two white gull , fly , suddenly get the light , and glitter . but the full , soft , noiseless dun lake be pallid , unlit . 

 she think of the sea . the Pacific be not very far away . the sea seem to have retreat entirely out of her consciousness . yet she know she need its breath again . 

 Cipriano be go down to bathe . she see he walk out on the masonry of the square basin which be their own tiny harbour . he throw off his wrap and stand dark in silhouette against the pale , unlit water . how dark he be ! dark as a malay . curious that his body be as dark , almost , as his face . and with that strange archaic fulness of physique , with the full chest and the full , yet beautiful buttock of man on old greek coin . 

 he drop off the edge of masonry and wad out in the dim , soft , uncanny water . and at that moment the light tip over the edge of the mountain and spill gold upon the surface of the lake . and instantly he be red as fire . the sunshine be not red , the sun be too high for that . it be golden with morning . but as it flush along the surface of the lake it catch the body of Cipriano and he be red as fire , as a piece of pure fire . 

 the Sons of the morning ! the column of blood ! a Red Indian . she look at he in wonder , as he move pure red and luminous far into the lake , unconscious . as if on fire ! 

 the Sons of the morning ! she let her effort at know slip away from her once more , and remain without effort , within the communion . 

 it be his race , too . she have notice before how the native shine pure red when morning or evening light catch they , rather level . as fire they stand in the water . the Red Indian . 

 he go away , with his man , on horseback . and she watch he ride over the brow of the road , sit dark and still on his silky , roan horse . he love a red horse . and there be a curious motionlessness about he as he ride horseback , an old , male pride , and at the same time the half - ghostly , dark invisibility of the Indian , sit close upon the horse as if he and it belong to one birth . 

 he be go , and for a while she feel the old nostalgia for his presence . not for he , exactly . not even to see he or touch he or speak to he . only to feel he about . 

 then quickly she recover . she adjust herself to the presence he leave behind with she . as soon as he have really go , and the act of go be over , his presence come back to she . 

 she walk a little while by the shore , beyond the breakwater wall . she love to be alone : a great deal alone , with a garden and the lake and the morning . 

 ' I be like Teresa , really , ' she say to herself . 

 suddenly before she she see a long , dark soft rope , lie over a pale boulder . but her soul be softly alert , at once . it be a snake , with a subtle pattern along its soft dark back , lie there over a big stone , with its head sink down to earth . 

 it feel her presence , too , for suddenly , with incredible soft quickness , it contract itself down the boulder , and she see it enter a little gap in the bottom of the wall . 

 the hole be not very big . and as it enter it quickly look back , poise its little , dark , wicked , pointed head , and flicker a dark tongue . then it pass on , slowly ease its dark length into the hole . 

 when it have all go in , Kate could see the last fold still , and the flat little head rest on the fold , like the devil with his chin on his arm , look out of a loop - hole . so the wicked spark of the eye look out at she , from within the recess . watch out of its own invisibility . 

 so she wonder over it , as it lie in its hidden place . at all the unseen thing in the hidden place of the earth . and she wonder if it be disappoint at not be able to rise higher in creation : to be able to run on four foot , and not keep its belly on the ground . 

 perhaps not ! perhaps it have its own peace . she feel a certain reconciliation between herself and it . 

 

 

 CHAPTER XXVII 

 here ! 

 

 she and Teresa visit one another along the lake . there be a kinship and a gentleness between they , especially now Kate be go away for a while . 

 there be a certain autumnal purity and lull on the lake . the moisture still linger , the bush on the wild hill be green in puff . sunlight lie in a rich gleam on the mountain , and shadow be deep and velvety . the green almost cover the rock and the pinkish land . bright green the sugar cane , red the plough earth , dark the tree with white speck of village here and there . and over the wild place , a sprinkle of bush , then stark grey rock still come out . 

 the sky be very high and pure . in the morning come the sound of drum , and on the motionless , crystal air the cry for the pause of the day . and always the day seem to be pause and unfold again to the great mystery . the universe seem to have open vast and soft and delicate with life . 

 there be something curiously soothe even in the full , pale , dove - brown water of the lake . a boat be come over , with its sail hollow out like a shell , pearly white , and its sharp black canoe - beak slip past the water . it look like the boat of Dionysos come with a message , and the vine sprout . 

 Kate could hardly remember now the dry rigid pallor of the heat , when the whole earth seem to crepitate viciously with dry malevolence : like memory go dry and sterile , hellish . 

 Ram n and Teresa come along the lake , and row into the basin . it be a morning when the shadow on the mountain be almost cornflower blue . 

 ' yet you must go away ? ' Ram n say to she . 

 ' for a little while . you do not   think I be Lot 's wife , do you ? ' 

 ' no ! ' laugh Ram n. ' I think you be Cipriano 's . ' 

 ' I be really . but I want to go back for a little while . ' 

 ' ah yes ! well go and then come again . tell they in your Ireland to do as we have do here . ' 

 ' but how ? ' 

 ' let they find themselves again , and their own universe , and their own god . let they substantiate their own mystery . the Irish have be so wordy about their far - off hero and green day of the heroic god . now tell they to substantiate they , as we have try to substantiate Quetzalcoatl and Huitzilopochtli . ' 

 ' I will tell they , ' she say . ' if there be anybody to listen . ' 

 ' yes ! ' he say . 

 he watch the white sail blow nearer . 

 ' but why do you go away ? ' he ask she , after a silence . 

 ' you do not   care , do you ? ' she say . 

 there be a dead pause . 

 ' yes , I care , ' he say . 

 ' but why ? ' 

 again it be some time before he answer . 

 ' you be one of we , we need you , ' he say . 

 ' even when I do not   do anything ? - and when I get a bit bored with live Quetzalcoatls - and the rest , and wish for a simple Don Ram n ? ' she reply . 

 he laugh suddenly . 

 ' what be a simple Don Ram n ? ' he say . ' a simple Don Ram n have a live Quetzalcoatl inside he . but you help all the same . ' 

 ' you go ahead so grandly , one would not think you need help : especially from a mere woman who - who after all be only the wife of your friend . ' 

 they be sit on a bench under a red - flower poinsettia whose huge scarlet petal - leaf spread out like sharp plume . 

 ' the wife of my friend ! ' he say . ' what could you be well ? ' 

 ' of course , ' she say , more than equivocal . 

 he be lean his arm on his knee , and look out to the lake , abstract , and remote . there be a certain worn look on his face , and the vulnerability which always catch at Kate 's heart . she realize again the isolation and the deadly strain his effort towards a new way of life put upon he . yet he have to do it . 

 this again give she a feeling of helplessness , a woman 's utter helplessness with a man who go out to the beyond . she have to stifle her resentment , and her dislike of his ' abstract ' effort . 

 ' do you feel awfully sure of yourself ? ' she say . 

 ' sure of myself ? ' he re - echo . ' no ! any day I may die and disappear from the face of the earth . I not only know it , I feel it . so why should I be sure of myself ? ' 

 ' why should you die ? ' she say . 

 ' why should anybody ever die ? - even Carlota ! ' 

 ' ah ! - her hour have come ! ' 

 ' can you set one 's hour as one set an alarm clock ? ' 

 Kate pause . 

 ' and if you be not sure of yourself , what be you sure of ? ' she challenge . 

 he look at she with dark eye which she could not understand . 

 ' I be sure - sure - ' he voice tail off into vagueness , his face seem to go grey and peak , as a dead man 's , only his eye watch she blackly , like a ghost 's . again she be confront with the suffering ghost of the man . and she be a woman , powerless before this suffering ghost which be still in the flesh . 

 ' you do not   think you be wrong , do you ? ' she ask , in cold distress . 

 ' no ! I be not wrong . only maybe I can not   hold out , ' he say . 

 ' and then what ? ' she say , coldly . 

 ' I shall go my way , alone . ' there seem to be nothing leave of he but the black , ghostly eye that gaze on she . he begin to speak Spanish . 

 ' it hurt I in my soul , as if I be die , ' he say . 

 ' but why ? ' she cry . ' you be not ill ? ' 

 ' I feel as if my soul be come undo . ' 

 ' then do not   let it , ' she cry , in fear and repulsion . 

 but he only gaze with those fix , blank eye . a sudden deep stillness come over she ; a sense of power in herself . 

 ' you should forget for a time , ' she say gently , compassionately lay her hand on his . what be the good of try to understand he or wrestle with he ? she be a woman . he be a man , and - and - and therefore not quite real . not true to life . 

 he rouse himself suddenly from her touch , as if he have come awake , and he look at she with keen , proud eye . her motherly touch have rouse he like a sting . 

 ' yes ! ' he say . ' it be true ! ' 

 ' of course it be ! ' she reply . ' if you want to be so - so abstract and Quetzalcoatlian , then bury your head sometimes , like an ostrich in the sand , and forget . ' 

 ' so ! ' he say , smile . ' you be angry again ! ' 

 ' it be not so simple , ' she say . ' there be a conflict in I . and you will not   let I go away for a time . ' 

 ' we can not   even prevent you , ' he say . 

 ' yes , but you be against my go - you do not   let I go in peace . ' 

 ' why must you go ? ' he say . 

 ' I must , ' she say . ' I must go back to my child , and my mother . ' 

 ' it be a necessity in you ? ' he say . 

 ' yes ! ' 

 the moment she have admit the necessity , she realize it be a certain duplicity in herself . it be as if she have two self : one , a new one , which belong to Cipriano and to Ram n , and which be her sensitive , desirous self : the other hard and finish , accomplish , belong to her mother , her child , England , her whole past . this old accomplished self be curiously invulnerable and insentient , curiously hard and ' free . ' in it , she be an individual and her own mistress . the other self be vulnerable , and organically connect with Cipriano , even with Ram n and Teresa , and so be not ' free ' at all . 

 she be aware of a duality in herself , and she suffer from it . she could not definitely commit herself , either to the old way of life , or to the new . she react from both . the old be a prison , and she loathe it . but in the new way she be not her own mistress at all , and her egoistic will recoil . 

 ' that be just it ! ' she say . ' it be a necessity in I , and you want to prevent I . ' 

 ' no ! no ! ' say Ram n. ' I hope not . ' 

 ' yes ! you put a weight on I , and paralyse I , to prevent I from go , ' she say . 

 ' we must not do that , ' he say . ' we must leave you , and not come near you for a time , if you feel it be so . ' 

 ' why ? why can not   you be friendly ? why can not   you be with I in my going ? why can not   you want I to go , since I must go ? ' 

 he look at she with dispassionate eye . 

 ' I can not   do that , ' he say . ' I do not   believe in your going . it be a turning back : there be something renegade in it . - but we be all complicated . and if you feel you must go back for a time , go ! it be not   terribly important . you have choose , really . I be not afraid for you . ' 

 it be a great relief to she to hear this : because she be terribly afraid for herself . she could never be sure , never be whole in her connection with Cipriano and Ram n. yet she say , mock slightly : 

 ' why should you be afraid for I ? ' 

 ' be not   you sometimes afraid for yourself ? ' he ask . 

 ' never ! ' she say . ' I be absolutely sure about myself . ' 

 they have be sit in the garden of the Villa Aragon , under the poinsettia tree with the huge scarlet petal - leaf , like soft red quill feather . the morning be become hot . the lake have go still , with the fallen wind . everything be still . save the long scarlet of the poinsettia . 

 Christmas be come ! the poinsettia remind Kate of it . 

 Christmas ! Holly - berry ! England ! present ! food ! - if she hurry , she could be in England for Christmas . it feel so safe , so familiar , so normal , the thought of Christmas at home , in England , with her mother . and all the exciting thing she could tell to the people at home ! and all the exciting gossip she could hear ! in the distance , it look very attractive . - she still have a qualm as to what the actual return would be like . 

 ' one can have too much of a good thing , ' she say to Ram n. 

 ' what good thing in particular ? ' he ask she . 

 ' oh - Quetzalcoatl and all that ! ' she say . ' one can have too much of it . ' 

 ' it may be , ' he say , rise and go quietly away ; so quietly , he be go before she know . and when she realize he have go like that , she flush with anger . but she sit on under the poinsettia tree , in the hot , still November sun , look with anger at the hedge of jasmine , with its pure white flower , and its sere , wither flower , and its pinkish bud among the dark leaf . where have she hear something about jasmine ? ' and the jasmine flower between we ! ' 

 oh ! how tired she be of all that ! 

 Teresa come down the garden slope . 

 ' you be still sit here ? ' she exclaim . 

 ' where else should I be ? ' Kate answer . 

 ' I do not   know . - Ram n have go to Sayula , to see the Jefe . he would not   wait for we , to come with we in the boat . ' 

 ' I suppose he be in a hurry , ' say Kate . 

 ' how fine these Noche Buenas be ! ' say Teresa , look at the brilliant spread of the red poinsettias . 

 ' they be your Christmas flower , be not   they ? ' say Kate . 

 ' yes - the flower of the Noche Buena - ' 

 ' how awful , Christmas with hibiscus and poinsettia ! it make I long to see mistletoe among the orange , in a fruiterer 's shop in Hampstead . ' 

 ' why that ? ' laugh Teresa . 

 ' oh ! ' Kate sigh petulantly . ' to get back to simple life . to see the bus roll on the mud in Piccadilly , on Christmas Eve , and the wet pavement crowd with people under the brilliant shop . ' 

 ' be that life , to you ? ' ask Teresa . 

 ' yes ! without all this abstraction , and will . life be good enough for I if I be allow to live and be myself . ' 

 ' it be time Cipriano should come home , ' say Teresa . 

 but this make Kate rise from her seat , with sudden impatience . she would not have this thing put over she ! she would break free , and show they ! 

 she go with Teresa to the village . the air seem mysteriously alive , with a new breath . but Kate feel out of it . the two woman sit under a tree on the beach at Sayula , talk a little , and watch the full expanse of the dove - pale lake . 

 a black boat with a red - paint roof and a tall mast be moor to the low breakwater - wall , which rise about a yard high , from the shallow water . on the wall stand loose little group of white - clothe man , look into the black belly of the ship . and perch immobile in silhouette against the lake , be a black - and - white cow , and a huge monolithic black - and - white bull . the whole silhouette frieze motionless , against the far water that be colour brown like turtle dove . 

 it be near , yet seem strange and remote . two peon fix a plank gangway up to the side of the boat . then they begin to shove the cow towards it . she paw the new broad plank tentatively , then , with that slow mexican indifference , she lumber unwillingly on to the gangway . they edge she slowly to the end , where she look down into the boat . and at last , she drop neatly into the hold . 

 now the group of man break into motion , for the huge and spangled bull . a tall old Mexican , in fawn , skin - tight trouser and little leather jacket , and a huge feel hat heavily embroider with silver , gently take the ring in the bull 's nose , gently lift the wedge of the bull 's head , so the great soft throat be uplifted . a peon behind put his head down , and with all his might begin shove the mighty , living flank of the bull . the slim - legged , high - hat old Mexican pull evenly at the nose - ring . and with a calm and weighty poise , the bull step along the crest of the wall , delicately and impassively , to the plank gangway . there he stop . 

 the peon begin to re - group . the one behind , with his red sash tie so determinedly over his white hip , cease to shove , the slim - legged Mexican let go the ring . 

 then two peon pass a rope loosely round the haunch of the bull . the high - hat farmer step on to the plank , and take the nose - ring again , very gently . he pull softly . the bull lift its head , but hold back . it strike the plank with an unwilling foot . then it stand , spangle with black on its whiteness , like a piece of the sky , immobile . 

 the farmer pull once more at the ring . two man be pull the rope , press in the flank of the immoveable , passive , spangled monster . two peon , at the back , with their head down and their red - sashe , flexible loin thrust out behind , shove with all their strength in the soft flank of the mighty creature . 

 and all be utterly noiseless and changeless ; against the fullness of the pale lake , this silent , monumental group of life . 

 then the bull step slowly , imperturbably , yet against its will , on to the loose plank , and be edge slowly along , to the brink of the boat . there he wait . 

 he stand huge and silvery , dapple like the sky , with black snake marking down his haunch , loom massive above the red roof of the canoa . how would he ever duck to that roof , and drop under , into the darkness of the ship ? 

 he lower his head , and look into the hold . the man behind shove his living flank . he take no heed , but lower his head and look again . the man push with all their might , in the dense mexican silence . 

 slowly , carefully , the bull crouch himself , make himself small , and with a quick , massive little movement drop his forefeet down into the body of the boat , leave his huge hind - quarter heave up behind . there be a shuffle and a little stagger down below , then the soft thud as his hind - foot leap down . he have go . 

 the plank be take away . a peon run to unfasten the mooring rope from the stone of the shore . there be a strange thudding of soft foot within the belly of the boat . man in the water be push the ship 's black stern , to push she off . but she be heavy . slowly , casually they pull the stone from under her flat bottom , and fling they aside . slowly she edge , sway , move a little , and be afloat . 

 the man climb in . the two peon on the ship 's rim be pole she out , press their pole and walk heavily till they reach the stern , then lift their pole and run to the high prow . she slide slowly out , on to the lake . 

 then quickly they hoist the wide white sail . the sail thrust up her horn and curve in a whorl to the wind . the ship be go across the water , with her massive , sky - spangle cargo of life invisible . 

 all so still and soft and remote . 

 ' and will ram n want you to sit beside he in the church as the bride of Quetzalcoatl - with some strange name ? ' Kate ask of Teresa . 

 ' I do not   know , ' say Teresa . ' later , he say , when the time come for they to have a goddess . ' 

 ' and will you mind ? ' 

 ' for myself , I be afraid of it . but I understand that Ram n want it . he say it be accept the great responsibility of one 's existence . and I think that be true . if there be God in I , and God as woman , then I must accept this part of myself also , and put on the green dress , and be for the time the God - woman , since it be true of I also . I think it be true . Ram n say we must make it manifest . when I think of my brother , I know we must . so I shall think of the God that beat invisible , like the heart of all the world . so when I have to wear the green dress , and sit before all the people in the church , I shall look away to the heart of all the world , and try to be my sacred self , because it be necessary , and the right thing to do . it be right . I would not do it if I think it be not right . ' 

 ' but I think the green dress be for the Bride of Huitzilopochtli ! ' say Kate . 

 ' ah yes ! ' Teresa catch herself up . ' mine be the black dress with the white edge , and the red cloud . ' 

 ' would you rather have the green ? ' Kate ask . ' have it if you would . I be go away . ' 

 Teresa glance up at she quickly . 

 ' the green be for the wife of Huitzilopochtli , ' she say , as if numb . 

 ' I can not   see that it matter , ' say Kate . 

 Teresa look at she with quick , dark eye . 

 ' different man must have different wife , ' she say . ' Cipriano would never want a wife like I . ' 

 ' and different woman must have different husband , ' say Kate . ' ram n would always be too abstract and overbearing for I . ' 

 Teresa flush slowly , look down at the ground . 

 ' ram n need far too much submission from a woman , to please I , ' Kate add . ' he take too much upon himself . ' 

 Teresa look up quickly , and raise her head proudly , show her brownish throat like a rear , crested snake . 

 ' how do you know that Ram n need submission from a woman ? ' she say . ' how do you know ? he have not ask any submission from you . - and you be wrong . he do not ask submission from I . he want I to give myself gently to he . and then he give himself back to I far more gently than I give myself to he . because a man like that be more gentle than a woman . he be not like Cipriano . Cipriano be a soldier . but Ram n be gentle . you be mistake in what you say . ' 

 Kate laugh a little . 

 ' and you be a soldier among woman , fight all the time , ' Teresa continue . ' I be not such . but some woman must be soldier in their spirit , and they need soldier husband . that be why you be malintzi , and your dress be green . you would always fight . you would fight with yourself , if you be alone in the world . ' 

 it be very still by the lake . they be wait for Ram n. 

 a man be strip palm - stalk , squat in silence under a tree , in his white clothe , his black head bend forward . then he go to wet his long strip in the lake , return with they dangle . 

 then he sit down again , and deftly , silently , with the dark , childlike absorption of the people , take up his work . he be mend a chair bottom . when Kate watch he , he glance up with a flash of black eye , salute she . and she feel a strange power surge in her limb , from the flash of living recognition and deference in his eye . as if his deference be a sort of flame of life , rich in he when he see she . 

 a roan horse speckle with white be race prance along the shore , neigh frantically . his mane flow in the wind , his foot strike the pebble as he run , and again he open his long nose and neigh anxiously . away up the shore he run . what have he lose ? 

 a peon have drive a high - wheeled wagon , draw by four mule , deep into the lake , till the water be above the high axle of the wheel , almost touch the bed of the cart . it look like a dark square boat draw by four soft , dark seahorse which slowly wave their long dark ear like leaf , while the peon , in white with his big hat proudly balance , stand erect . the mule deep in the water step gently , curve to the shore . 

 it be winter , but like spring by the lake . white and yellow calf , new and silky , be skip , butt up their rear end , lift their tail , trot side by side down to the water , to sniff at it suspiciously . 

 in the shadow of a great tree a mother - ass be tethered , and her foal lie in the shadow , a little thing black as ink , curl up , with fluffy head erect and great black ear spread up , like some jet - black hare full of witchcraft . 

 ' how many day ? ' call Kate to the peon , who have come out of the straw hut . 

 he give she the flash of his dark eye , in a sort of joy of deference . and she feel her breast surge with living pride . 

 ' last night , Patrona ! ' he smile in answer . 

 ' so new ! so new ! he do not   get up , can not   he ? ' 

 the peon go round , put his arm under the foal and lift it to its foot . there it straddle on high , in amaze , upon its black leg like bent hair - pin . 

 ' how nice it be ! ' cry Kate in delight , and the peon laugh at she with a soft , grateful flame , touch with reverence . 

 the ink - black ass - foal do not understand stand up . it rock on its four loose leg , and wonder . then it hobble a few step , to smell at some green , grow maize . it smell and smell and smell , as if all the dark aeon be stir awake in its nostril . 

 then it turn , and look with its bushy - velvet face straight at Kate , and put out a pink tongue at she . she laugh aloud . it stand wonder , daze . then it put out its tongue again . she laugh at it . it give an awkward little skip , which surprise its own self very much . then it venture forward again , and all unexpectedly even to itself , explode into another little skip . 

 ' already it dance ! ' cry Kate . ' and it come into the world only last night . ' 

 ' yes , already it dance ! ' reiterate the peon . 

 after bethink itself for a time , the ass - foal walk uncertainly towards the mother . she be a well - like grey - and - brown she - ass , rather glossy and self - assure . the ass - foal straight find the udder , and be drink . 

 glance up , Kate meet again the peon 's eye , with their black , full flame of life heavy with knowledge and with a curious reassurance . the black foal , the mother , the drinking , the new life , the mystery of the shadowy battlefield of creation ; and the adoration of the full - breast , glorious woman beyond he : all this seem in the primitive black eye of the man . 

 ' Adi s ! ' say Kate to he , lingeringly . 

 ' Adi s , Patrona ! ' he reply , suddenly lift his hand high , in the Quetzalcoatl salute . 

 she walk across the beach to the jetty , feel the life surge vivid and resistant within she . ' it be sex , ' she say to herself . ' how wonderful sex can be , when man keep it powerful and sacred , and it fill the world ! like sunshine through and through one ! - but I be not go to submit , even there . why should one give in , to anything ! ' 

 Ram n be come down towards the boat , the blue symbol of Quetzalcoatl in his hat . and at that moment the drum begin to sound for mid - day , and there come the mid - day call , clear and distinct , from the tower . all the man on the shore stand erect , and shoot up their right hand to the sky . the woman spread both palm to the light . everything be motionless , save the move animal . 

 then Ram n go on to the boat , the man salute he with the Quetzalcoatl salute as he come near . 

 ' it be wonderful , really , ' say Kate , as they row over the water , ' how - how splendid one can feel in this country ! as if one be still genuinely of the nobility . ' 

 ' be not   you ? ' he say . 

 ' yes , I be . but everywhere else it be deny . only here one feel the full force of one 's nobility . the native still worship it . ' 

 ' at moment , ' say Ram n. ' later , they will murder you and violate you , for have worship you . ' 

 ' be it inevitable ? ' she say flippantly . 

 ' I think so , ' he reply . ' if you live here alone in Sayula , and queen it for a time , you would get yourself murder - or bad - by the people who have worship you . ' 

 ' I do not   think so , ' she say . 

 ' I know , ' he reply . 

 ' why ? ' she say , obstinate . 

 ' unless one get one 's nobility from the god and turn to the middle of the sky for one 's power , one will be murder at last . ' 

 ' I do get my nobility that way , ' she say . 

 but she do not quite believe it . and she make up her mind still more definitely , to go away . 

 she write to Mexico City , and engage a berth from Vera Cruz to Southampton : she would sail on the last day of November . Cipriano come home on the seventeenth , and she tell he what she have do . he look at she with his head a little on one side , with a queer boyish judiciousness , but she could not tell at all what he feel . 

 ' you be go already ? ' he say in Spanish . 

 and then she know , at last , that he be offend . when he be offend he never speak English at all , but speak Spanish just as if he be address another Mexican . 

 ' yes , ' she say . ' on the thirtieth . ' 

 ' and when do you come back ? ' he ask . 

 ' Quién sabe ! - who know ! ' she retort . 

 he let his black eye rest on her face for some minute , watch she , unchanging and incomprehensible . he be think , superficially , that if he like , he could use the law and have she prevent from leave the country - or even from leave Sayula - since she be legally married to he . there be the old fixity of indian anger , glint fix and relentless in the depth of his eye . and then the almost invisible change in his face , as the hide emotion sink down and the stoic indifference , the emotionlessness of century , and the stoic kind of tolerance come over he . she could almost feel the wave of successive shadow and coldness go through his blood , his mind hardly aware at all . and again a fear of lose his contact melt her heart . 

 it be somehow , to she , beautiful , to feel shadow , and cold gleam , and a hardness like stone , then the strange heavy inertia of the tropical mid - day , the stupor of the sun , move upon he while he stand motionless , watch she . in the end it be that weird , sultry , tropical stupor of the hot hour , a heat - swoon of sheer indifference . 

 ' Como quiere tu ! ' he say . ' as you wish . ' 

 and she know he have already release she , in the dark , sultry stupor of his blood . he would make no further effort after she . this also be the doom of his race . 

 he take a boat and go down to Jamiltepec , to ram n : as she know he would . 

 she be alone , as usual . it occur to she , that she herself will this aloneness . she could not relax and be with these people . she could not relax and be with anybody . she always have to recoil upon her own individuality , as a cat do . 

 Sex , sexual correspondence , do it matter so very much to she ? it might have matter more , if she have not have it . but she have have it - and very finally and consummately , with Cipriano . so she know all about it . it be as if she have conquer another territory , another field of life . the conqueress ! and now she would retire to the lair of her own individuality , with the prey . 

 suddenly , she see herself as man often see she : the great cat , with its spasm of voluptuousness and its lifelong lustful enjoyment of its own isolate , isolated individuality . voluptuously to enjoy a contact . then with a lustful feline gratification , to break the contact , and roam alone in a sense of power . each time , to seize a sort of power , purr upon her own isolated individuality . 

 she know so many woman like that . they play with love and intimacy as a cat with a mouse . in the end , they quickly eat up the love mouse , then trot off with a full belly and a voluptuous sense of power . 

 only sometimes the love - mouse refuse to be digest , and there be life - long dyspepsia . or , like Cipriano , turn into a sort of serpent , that rear and look at she with glitter eye , then slide away into the void , leave she blank , the sense of power go out of she . 

 another thing , she have observe , with a touch of horror . one after the other , her woman ' friend ' , the powerful love - woman , at the age of forty , forty - five , fifty , they lose all their charm and allure , and turn into real grimalkin , greyish , avid , and horrify , prowl around look for prey that become scarcer and scarcer . as human being they go to piece . and they remain these grey - rib grimalkin , dress in elegant clothe , the grimalkin howl even pass into their smart chatter . 

 Kate be a wise woman , wise enough to take a lesson . 

 it be all very well for a woman to cultivate her ego , her individuality . it be all very well for she to despise love , or to love love as a cat love a mouse , that it play with as long as possible , before devour it to vivify her own individuality and voluptuously fill the belly of her own ego . 

 ' woman have suffer far more from the suppression of her ego than from sex suppression , ' say a woman writer , and it may well be true . but look , only look at the modern woman of fifty and fifty - five , those who have cultivate their ego to the top of their bent ! usually , they be grimalkin to fill one with pity or with repulsion . 

 Kate know all this . and as she sit alone in her villa , she remember it again . she have have her fle , even here in Mexico . and these man would let she go again . she be no prisoner . she could carry off any spoil she have capture . 

 and then what ! to sit in a London drawing - room , and add another to all the grimalkin ? to let the peculiar grimalkin - grimace come on her face , the most weird grimalkin - twang come into her voice ? horror ! of all the horror , perhaps the grimalkin woman , her contemporary , be the most repellent to she . even the horrid old tom - cat man of the civilized roof gutter , do not fill she with such sickly dread . 

 ' no ! ' she say to herself . ' my ego and my individuality be not worth that ghastly price . I would well abandon some of my ego , and sink some of my individuality , rather than go like that . ' 

 after all , when Cipriano touch she caressively , all her body flower . that be the great sex , that could fill all the world with lustre , and which she dare not think about , its power be so much great than her own will . but on the other hand when she spread the wing of her own ego , and send forth her own spirit , the world could look very wonderful to she , when she be alone . but after a while , the wonder fade , and a sort of jealous emptiness set in . 

 ' I must have both , ' she say to herself . ' I must not recoil against Cipriano and Ram n , they make my blood blossom in my body . I say they be limited . but then one must be limit . if one try to be unlimited , one become horrible . without Cipriano to touch I and limit I and submerge my will , I shall become a horrible , elderly female . I ought to want to be limit . I ought to be glad if a man will limit I with a strong will and a warm touch . because what I call my greatness , and the vastness of the Lord behind I , let I fall through a hollow floor of nothingness , once there be no man 's hand there , to hold I warm and limited . ah yes ! rather than become elderly and a bit grisly , I will make my submission ; as far as I need , and no far . ' 

 she call a man - servant , and set off down the lake in a row - boat . it be a very lovely November morning , the world have not yet go dry again . in the sharp fold of the steep mountain slope to the north - east , the shadow be pure corn - flower blue . below be the linger delicacy of green , already dry . the lake be full still , but subside , and the water - hyacinth have drift away . bird fly low in the stillness . it be very full and still , in the strong , hot light . some maize - field show sere stubble , but the palo - blanco flower be out , and the mesquite bush be frail green , and there be waft of perfume from the little yellow flower - ball , like cassia . 

 ' why should I go away ! ' say Kate . ' why should I see the bus on the mud of Piccadilly , on Christmas Eve , and the crowd of people on the wet pavement , under the big shop like great cave of light ? I may as well stay here , where my soul be less dreary . I shall have to tell Ram n I be sorry for the thing I say . I will not   carp at they . after all , there be another kind of vastness here , with the sound of drum , and the cry of Quetzalcoatl . ' 

 already she could see the yellow and reddish , tower - like upper story of Jamiltepec , and the rich , deep fall of magenta bougainvillea , from the high wall , with the pale spraying of plumbago flower , and many loose creamy - colour rose . 

 ' Están tocando ! ' say her boatman quietly , look up at she with dark , pregnant eye . 

 he have hear already the sound of the light drum at Jamiltepec . the boat row softly : and there come a sound of a man 's voice singing in the morning . 

 her boatman lift an oar , as a signal to the house . and as the boat round the curve into the basin , a man - servant in white clothe come run down to the little jetty . in the changeless sunshine be a scent , perhaps of datura and of rose , and an eternal mexican silence , which the noise of the drum , and the voice of singing , do not disturb . 

 ' be Don Cipriano here ? ' ask Kate . 

 ' está ! ' murmur the man , with a slight motion towards Ram n 's balcony , whence the singing come . ' shall I say you have come ? ' 

 he do not lift his voice above the murmur . 

 ' no ! ' say Kate . ' I shall sit here in the garden a while , before I come up . ' 

 ' then I will leave open the door , ' say the man , ' and you can come up when you will . ' 

 Kate sit on a seat under a big tree . a creep plant , with great snake - like cord , and big sulphur - and - brown trumpet flower , hang above . she listen to the singing . it be Ram n teach one of the singer . 

 Ram n have not a very good voice . he sing quietly , as if to the inner air , with very beautiful , simple expression . but Kate could not catch the word . 

 ' ya ? ' say Ram n , when he have finish . 

 ' ya , Patr n ! ' say the man , the singer . 

 and he begin , in his strong , pure voice that catch at the very bowel , to sing another of the Hymns . 

 

 ' my way be not thy way , and thine be not mine . 
 but come , before we part 
 let we separately go to the Morning Star , 
 and meet there . 

 I do not point you to my road , nor yet 
 call : " oh come ! " 
 but the Star be the same for both of we , 
 Winsome . 

 the good ghost of I go down the distance 
 to the Holy Ghost . 
 oh you , in the tent of the cloven flame 
 meet I , you I like most . 

 each man his own way forever , but towards 
 the hoverer between ; 
 who open his flame like a tent - flap , 
 as we slip in unseen . 

 a man can not tread like a woman , 
 nor a woman step out like a man . 
 the ghost of each through the leaf of shadow 
 Moves as it can . 

 but the Morning Star and the Evening Star 
 Pitch tent of flame 
 where we foregather like gypsy , none know 
 how the other come . 

 I ask for nothing except to slip 
 in the tent of the Holy Ghost 
 and be there in the house of the cloven flame , 
 Guest of the Host . 

 be with I there , my woman , 
 be bodily there . 
 then let the flame wrap round we 
 like a snare . 

 be there along with I , o man ! 
 reach across the hearth , 
 and laugh with I while the woman rest 
 for all we be worth . ' 

 

 the man have sing this hymn over several time , halting and forget , his pure , burn voice falter out ; then the low , rather husky voice of Ram n , with a subtler intensity , come in , as if hear from the centre of a shell ; then again the sudden rip sound of the true singer 's tenor , go like a flame through the blood . 

 her mozo , a man - servant , have follow she into the garden , and sit at a distance on his heel , under a tree , with his back to the trunk , like a crouch shadow clothe in white . his toe spread dark and hard , in his open huarache , and the black braid of his hat - string hang against his dark cheek . for the rest he be pure white , the white cotton tight on his thigh . 

 when the singing have finish above , and the drum be silent , and even the voice speak in low tone be silent , her mozo look up at Kate , with his black hat - string dangle at his chin , his black eye shin , and a timid sort of smile on his face . 

 ' Está muy bien , Patrona ? ' he say shyly . ' it be good , be not   it , Mistress ? ' 

 ' it be very good , ' she reply , with the infallible echo . but there be conflict feeling in her breast , and the man know it . 

 he look so young , when he smile that gay , shy , excited little smile . something of the eternal child in he . but a child that could harden in an instant into a savage man , revengeful and brutal . and a man always fully sex - alive , for the moment innocent in the fulness of sex , not in the absence . and Kate think to herself , as she have think before , that there be more way than one of ' become again as a little child . ' 

 but the man have a sharp , watchful look in the corner of his eye : to see if she be feel some covert hostility . he want she to acquiesce in the hymn , in the drum , in the whole mood . like a child he want she to acquiesce . but if she be go to be hostile , he would be quick to be first in the hostility . her hostile judgment would make a pure enemy of he . 

 ah , all man be alike ! 

 at that moment the man stand up , with soft suddenness , and she hear Cipriano 's voice from the balcony above : 

 ' what be it , Lupe ? ' 

 ' Está la Patrona , ' answer the servant . 

 Kate rise to her foot and look up . she see the head and the naked shoulder of Cipriano above the parapet of the balcony . 

 ' I will come up , ' she say . 

 and slowly she go through the great iron gate into the passage - way . Lupe , follow , bolt the door behind she . 

 on the terrace above she find Ram n and Cipriano both with their upper body naked , wait for she in silence . she be embarrassed . 

 ' I wait to hear the new hymn , ' she say . 

 ' and how do it seem to you ? ' say Ram n , in Spanish . 

 ' I like it , ' she say . 

 ' let we sit down , ' say Ram n , still in Spanish . he and she sit in the cane rocking - chair : Cipriano stand by the wall of the terrace . 

 she have come to make a sort of submission : to say she do not   want to go away . but find they both in the thick of their Quetzalcoatl mood , with their manly breast uncover , she be not very eager to begin . they make she feel like an intruder . she do not pause to realize that she be one . 

 ' we do not   meet in your Morning Star , apparently , do we ? ' she say , mocking , but with a slight quaver . 

 a deep silence seem suddenly to hold the two man . 

 ' and I suppose a woman be really de trop , even there , when two man be together . ' 

 but she falter a bit in the saying . Cipriano , she know , be baffle and sting when she taunt he . 

 Ram n answer she , with the gentleness that could come straight out of his heart : but still in Spanish : 

 ' why , Cousin , what be it ? ' 

 her lip quiver , as she suddenly say : 

 ' I do not   really want to go away from you . ' 

 Ram n look swiftly at Cipriano , then say : 

 ' I know you do not . ' 

 but the gentle protective tone of his voice only make Kate rebel again . she brim over with sudden tear , cry : 

 ' you do not   really want I . ' 

 ' yes , I want you ! - Verdad ! Verdad ! ' exclaim Cipriano , in his low , secret , almost mutter voice . 

 and even amid her tear , Kate be think to herself : what a fraud I be ! I know all the time it be I who do not   altogether want they . I want myself to myself . but I can fool they so that they shall not   find out . 

 for she hear the hot , phallic passion in Cipriano 's voice . 

 then come the voice of Ram n , like a chill : 

 ' it be you who do not   want , ' he say , in English this time . ' you need not   commit yourself to we . listen to your own good desire . ' 

 ' and if it tell I to go away ? ' she flash , defiant through the end of her tear . 

 ' then go ! oh certainly go ! ' 

 suddenly her tear come afresh . 

 ' I know you do not   really want I , ' she weep . 

 then Cipriano 's voice say , with a hot , furtive softness of persuasion : 

 ' you be not his ! he would not tell you ! ' 

 ' that be very true , ' say Ram n. ' do not   listen to I ! ' 

 he speak in Spanish . and Kate glance up sharply through her tear , to see he go quietly , but swiftly , away . 

 she wipe her face , suddenly calm . then she look with wet eye at Cipriano . he be stand erect and alert , like a little fighting male , and his eye glow black and uncannily as he meet her wet , limpid glance . 

 yes , she be a bit afraid of he too , with his inhuman black eye . 

 ' you do not   want I to go , do you ? ' she plead . 

 a slow , almost foolish smile come over his face , and his body be slightly convulse . then come his soft - tongue indian speech , as if all his mouth be soft , say in Spanish , but with the ' r ' sound almost lose : 

 ' Yo ! Yo ! ' - his eyebrow lift with queer mock surprise , and a little convulsion go through his body again . ' te quiero mucho ! mucho te quiero ! mucho ! mucho ! I like you very much ! very much ! ' 

 it sound so soft , so soft - tongue , of the soft , wet , hot blood , that she shiver a little . 

 ' you will not   let I go ! ' she say to he . 

 

 

 the END