 the WHITE PEACOCK 


  D. H. LAWRENCE 


  PART I 


  CHAPTER I 

  the PEOPLE of NETHERMERE 


 I stand watch the shadowy fish slide through the gloom of the 
 mill - pond . they be grey , descendant of the silvery thing that have 
 dart away from the monk , in the young day when the valley be lusty . 
 the whole place be gather in the musing of old age . the thick - pile 
 tree on the far shore be too dark and sober to dally with the sun ; 
 the weed stand crowded and motionless . not even a little wind flicker 
 the willow of the islet . the water lie softly , intensely still . only 
 the thin stream fall through the mill - race murmur to itself of the 
 tumult of life which have once quicken the valley . 

 I be almost startled into the water from my perch on the alder root by 
 a voice say : 

 " well , what be there to look at ? " my friend be a young farmer , stoutly 
 build , brown eyed , with a naturally fair skin burn dark and freckle 
 in patch . he laugh , see I start , and look down at I with lazy 
 curiosity . 

 " I be think the place seem old , brood over its past . " 

 he look at I with a lazy indulgent smile , and lie down on his back on 
 the bank , say : " it be all right for a doss here . " 

 " your life be nothing else but a doss . I shall laugh when somebody jerk 
 you awake , " I reply . 

 he smile comfortably and put his hand over his eye because of the 
 light . 

 " why shall you laugh ? " he drawl . 

 " because you will be amusing , " say I. 

 we be silent for a long time , when he roll over and begin to poke 
 with his finger in the bank . 

 " I think , " he say in his leisurely fashion , " there be some cause for 
 all this buzzing . " 

 I look , and see that he have poke out an old , papery nest of those 
 pretty field bee which seem to have dip their tail into bright 
 amber dust . some agitated insect run round the cluster of egg , most of 
 which be empty now , the crown go ; a few young bee stagger about 
 in uncertain flight before they could gather power to wing away in a 
 strong course . he watch the little one that run in and out among the 
 shadow of the grass , hither and thither in consternation . 

 " come here come here ! " he say , imprison one poor little bee under a 
 grass stalk , while with another stalk he loosen the fold blue wing . 

 " do not   tease the little beggar , " I say . 

 " it do not   hurt he I want to see if it be because he could not 
 spread his wing that he could not   fly . there he go no , he do not . 
 let us try another . " 

 " leave they alone , " say i. " let they run in the sun . they be only just 
 out of the shell . do not   torment they into flight . " 

 he persist , however , and break the wing of the next . 

 " oh , dear pity ! " say he , and he crush the little thing between his 
 finger . then he examine the egg , and pull out some silk from round 
 the dead larva , and investigate it all in a desultory manner , ask of 
 I all I know about the insect . when he have finish he fling the 
 cluster egg into the water and rise , pull out his watch from the 
 depth of his breech ' pocket . 

 " I think it be about dinner - time , " say he , smile at I . " I always 
 know when it be about twelve . be you come in ? " 

 " I be come down at any rate , " say I as we pass along the pond bank , 
 and over the plank - bridge that cross the brow of the fall sluice . 
 the bankside where the grey orchard twist its tree , be a steep 
 declivity , long and sharp , drop down to the garden . 

 the stone of the large house be burden with ivy and honey - suckle , 
 and the great lilac - bush that have once guard the porch now almost 
 block the doorway . we pass out of the front garden into the 
 farm - yard , and walk along the brick path to the back door . 

 " shut the gate , will you ? " he say to I over his shoulder , as he pass 
 on first . 

 we go through the large scullery into the kitchen . the servant - girl 
 be just hurriedly snatch the table - cloth out of the table drawer , 
 and his mother , a quaint little woman with big , brown eye , be hover 
 round the wide fireplace with a fork . 

 " dinner not ready ? " say he with a shade of resentment . 

 " no , George , " reply his mother apologetically , " it be not . the fire 
 would not   burn a bit . you shall have it in a few minute , though . " 

 he drop on the sofa and begin to read a novel . I want to go , but 
 his mother insist on my staying . 

 " do not   go , " she plead . " Emily will be so glad if you stay , and father 
 will , I be sure . sit down , now . " 

 I sit down on a rush chair by the long window that look out into the 
 yard . as he be read , and as it take all his mother 's power to watch 
 the potato boil and the meat roast , I be leave to my thought . George , 
 indifferent to all claim , continue to read . it be very annoying to 
 watch he pull his brown moustache , and read indolently while the 
 dog rub against his legging and against the knee of his old 
 riding - breech . he would not even be at the trouble to play with Trip 's 
 ear , he be so content with his novel and his moustache . round and 
 round twirl his thick finger , and the muscle of his bare arm move 
 slightly under the red - brown skin . the little square window above he 
 filter a green light from the foliage of the great horse - chestnut 
 outside and the glimmer fall on his dark hair , and tremble across the 
 plate which Annie be reach down from the rack , and across the face 
 of the tall clock . the kitchen be very big ; the table look lonely , 
 and the chair mourn darkly for the lost companionship of the sofa ; 
 the chimney be a black cavern away at the back , and the inglenook seat 
 shut in another little compartment ruddy with fire - light , where the 
 mother hover . it be rather a desolate kitchen , such a bare expanse of 
 uneven grey flagstone , such far - away dark corner and sober furniture . 
 the only gay thing be the chintz covering of the sofa and the 
 arm - chair cushion , bright red in the bare sombre room ; some might smile 
 at the old clock , adorn as it be with remarkable and vivid poultry ; 
 in I it only provoke wonder and contemplation . 

 in a little while we hear the scraping of heavy boot outside , and the 
 father enter . he be a big burly farmer , with his half - bald head 
 sprinkle with crisp little curl . 

 " Hullo , Cyril , " he say cheerfully . " you have   not forsake we then , " and 
 turn to his son : 

 " have you many more row in the coppice close ? " 

 " finish ! " reply George , continue to read . 

 " that be all right you have   get on with them . the rabbit have bite they 
 turnip down , mother . " 

 " I expect so , " reply his wife , whose soul be in the saucepan . at 
 last she deem the potato cook and go out with the steam pan . 

 the dinner be set on the table and the father begin to carve . George 
 look over his book to survey the fare then read until his plate be 
 hand he . the maid sit at her little table near the window , and we 
 begin the meal . there come the treading of four foot along the brick 
 path , and a little girl enter , follow by her grow - up sister . the 
 child 's long brown hair be toss wildly back beneath her sailor hat . 
 she fling aside this article of her attire and sit down to dinner , 
 talk endlessly to her mother . the eld sister , a girl of about 
 twenty - one , give I a smile and a bright look from her brown eye , and 
 go to wash her hand . then she come and sit down , and look 
 disconsolately at the underdone beef on her plate . 

 " I do hate this raw meat , " she say . 

 " good for you , " reply her brother , who be eat industriously . " give 
 you some muscle to wallop the nipper . " 

 she push it aside , and begin to eat the vegetable . her brother 
 re - charge his plate and continue to eat . 

 " well , our George , I do think you might pass a body that gravy , " say 
 Mollie , the young sister , in injure tone . 

 " certainly , " he reply . " will not   you have the joint as well ? " 

 " no ! " retort the young lady of twelve , " I do not   expect you have   do 
 with it yet . " 

 " Clever ! " he exclaim across a mouthful . 

 " do you think so ? " say the eld sister Emily , sarcastically . 

 " yes , " he reply complacently , " you have   make she as sharp as yourself , I 
 see , since you have   have she in Standard Six . I will try a potato , mother , if 
 you can find one that be do . " 

 " well , George , they seem mixed , I be sure that be do that I try . 
 there they be mixed look at this one , it be soft enough . I be sure they 
 be boil long enough . " 

 " do not   explain and apologise to he , " say Emily irritably . 

 " perhaps the kid be too much for she this morning , " he say calmly , 
 to nobody in particular . 

 " no , " chime in Mollie , ' she knock a lad across his nose and make it 
 bleed . " 

 " little wretch , " say Emily , swallow with difficulty . " I be glad I 
 do ! some of my lad belong to to " 

 " to the devil , " suggest George , but she would not accept it from he . 

 her father sit laugh ; her mother with distress in her eye , look at 
 her daughter , who hang her head and make pattern on the table - cloth 
 with her finger . 

 " be they bad than the last lot ? " ask the mother , softly , fearfully . 

 " no nothing extra , " be the curt answer . 

 " she merely feel like bash them , " say George , call , as he look 
 at the sugar bowl and at his pudding : 

 " fetch some more sugar , Annie . " 

 the maid rise from her little table in the corner , and the mother also 
 hurry to the cupboard . emily trifle with her dinner and say bitterly 
 to he : 

 " I only wish you have a taste of teaching , it would cure your 
 self - satisfaction . " 

 " Pf ! " he reply contemptuously , " I could easily bleed the nose of a 
 handful of kid . " 

 " you would not   sit there bleat like a fat calf , " she continue . 

 this speech so tickle Mollie that she go off into a burst of 
 laughter , much to the terror of her mother , who stand up in tremble 
 apprehension lest she should choke . 

 " you make a joke , Emily , " he say , look at his young sister 's 
 contortion . 

 Emily be too impatient to speak to he far , and leave the table . 
 soon the two man go back to the fallow to the turnip , and I walk 
 along the path with the girl as they be go to school . 

 " he irritate I in everything he do and say , " burst out Emily with 
 much heat . 

 " he be a pig sometimes , " say I. 

 " he be ! " she insist . " he irritate I past bear , with his grand 
 know - all way , and his heavy smartness I can not   beat it . and the way 
 mother humble herself to he ! " 

 " it make you wild , " say I. 

 " Wild ! " she echo , her voice vibrate with nervous passion . we walk 
 on in silence , till she ask . 

 " have you bring I those verse of your ? " 

 " no I be so sorry I have   forget they again . as a matter of fact , I have 
 send they away . " 

 " but you promise I . " 

 " you know what my promise be . I be as irresponsible as a puff of wind . " 

 she frown with impatience and her disappointment be great than 
 necessary . when I leave she at the corner of the lane I feel a sting of 
 her deep reproach in my mind . I always feel the reproach when she have 
 go . 

 I run over the little bright brook that come from the weedy , bottom 
 pond . the stepping - stone be white in the sun , and the water slide 
 sleepily among they . one or two butterfly , indistinguishable against 
 the blue sky , trifle from flower to flower and lead I up the hill , 
 across the field where the hot sunshine stand as in a bowl , and I be 
 enter the cavern of the wood , where the oak bow over and save we 
 a grateful shade . within , everything be so still and cool that my step 
 hang heavily along the path . the bracken hold out arm to I , and the 
 bosom of the wood be full of sweetness , but I journey on , spur by 
 the attack of an army of fly which keep up a guerrilla warfare round 
 my head till I have pass the black rhododendron bush in the garden , 
 where they leave I , scent no doubt Rebecca 's pot of vinegar and 
 sugar . 

 the low red house , with its roof discolour and sink , doze in 
 sunlight , and sleep profoundly in the shade throw by the massive maple 
 encroach from the wood . 

 there be no one in the dining - room , but I could hear the whirr of a 
 sewing - machine come from the little study , a sound as of some great , 
 vindictive insect buzz about , now louder , now soft , now settle . 
 then come a jingling of four or five key at the bottom of the keyboard 
 of the drawing - room piano , continue till the whole range have be 
 cover in little leap , as if some very fat frog have jump from end to 
 end . 

 " that must be mother dust the drawing - room , " I think . the 
 unaccustomed sound of the old piano startle I . the vocal chord behind 
 the green silk bosom , you only discover it be not a bronze silk 
 bosom by poke a fold aside , have become as thin and tuneless as a 
 dry old woman 's . Age have yellow the tooth of my mother 's little 
 piano , and shrink its spindle leg . poor old thing , it could but 
 screech in answer to Lettie 's finger fly across it in scorn , so the 
 prim , brown lip be always closed save to admit the duster . 

 now , however , the little old maidish piano begin to sing a tinkle 
 victorian melody , and I fancy it must be some demure little woman with 
 curl like bunch of hop on either side of her face , who be touch 
 it . the coy little tune tease I with old sensation , but my memory 
 would give I no assistance . as I stand try to fix my vague feeling , 
 Rebecca come in to remove the cloth from the table . 

 " who be play , Beck ? " I ask . 

 " your mother , Cyril . " 

 " but she never play . I think she could not . " 

 " ah , " reply Rebecca , " you forget when you be a little thing sit 
 play against her frock with the prayer - book , and she sing to you . 
  you can not   remember she when her curl be long like a piece of brown 
 silk . you can not   remember she when she use to play and sing , before 
 Lettie come and your father be " 

 Rebecca turn and leave the room . I go and peep in the drawing - room . 
 Mother sit before the little brown piano , with her plump , rather stiff 
 finger move across the key , a faint smile on her lip . at that 
 moment Lettie come fly past I , and fling her arm round mother 's 
 neck , kiss she and say : 

 " oh , my dear , fancy my dear play the piano ! oh , Little Woman , we 
 never know you could ! " 

 " nor can I , " reply mother laugh , disengage herself . " I only 
 wonder if I could just strum out this old tune ; I learn it when I 
 be quite a girl , on this piano . it be a cracked one then ; the only one 
 I have . " 

 " but play again , dearie , do play again . it be like the clinking of 
 lustre glass , and you look so quaint at the piano . do play , my dear ! " 
 plead Lettie . 

 " Nay , " say my mother , " the touch of the old key on my finger be 
 make I sentimental you would not   like to see I reduce to the tear 
 of old age ? " 

 " old age ! " scold Lettie , kiss she again . " you be young enough to 
 play little romance . tell we about it mother . " 

 " about what , child ? " 

 " when you use to play . " 

 " before my finger be stiff with fifty odd year ? where have you be , 
 Cyril , that you be not   in to dinner ? " 

 " only down to Strelley Mill , " say I. 

 " of course , " say mother coldly . 

 " why ' of course ' ? " I ask . 

 " and you come away as soon as Em go to school ? " say Lettie . 

 " I do , " say I. 

 they be cross with I , these two woman . after I have swallow my 
 little resentment I say : 

 " they would have I stay to dinner . " 

 my mother vouchsafe no reply . 

 " and have the great George find a girl yet ? " ask Lettie . 

 " no , " I reply , " he never will at this rate . nobody will ever be good 
 enough for he . " 

 " I be sure I do not   know what you can find in any of they to take you 
 there so much , " say my mother . 

 " do not   be so mean , Mater , " I answer , nettle . " you know I like they . " 

 " I know you like she " say my mother sarcastically . " as for he he be 
 an unlicked cub . what can you expect when his mother have spoil he as 
 she have . but I wonder you be so interested in lick he . " my mother 
 sniff contemptuously . 

 " he be rather good looking , " say Lettie with a smile . 

  " you could make a man of he , I be sure , " I say , bow satirically 
 to she . 

  " I be not interested , " she reply , also satirical . 

 then she toss her head , and all the fine hair that be free from 
 bond make a mist of yellow light in the sun . 

 " what frock shall I wear Mater ? " she ask . 

 " Nay , do not   ask I , " reply her mother . 

 " I think I will wear the heliotrope though this sun will fade it , " she 
 say pensively . she be tall , nearly six foot in height , but slenderly 
 form . her hair be yellow , tend towards a dun brown . she have 
 beautiful eye and brow , but not a nice nose . her hand be very 
 beautiful . 

 " where be you go ? " I ask . 

 she do not answer I . 

 " to Tempest 's ! " I say . she do not reply . 

 " well I do not   know what you can see in he , " I continue . 

 " indeed ! " say she . " he be as good as most folk " then we both begin 
 to laugh . 

 " not , " she continue blush , " that I think anything about he . I be 
 merely go for a game of tennis . be you come ? " 

 " what shall you say if I agree ? " I ask . 

 " oh ! " she toss her head . " we shall all be very pleased I be sure . " 

 " Ooray ! " say I with fine irony . 

 she laugh at I , blush , and run upstairs . 

 half an hour afterwards she pop her head in the study to bid I 
 good - bye , wish to see if I appreciate she . she be so charming in 
 her fresh linen frock and flower hat , that I could not but be proud of 
 she . she expect I to follow she to the window , for from between the 
 great purple rhododendron she wave I a lace mitten , then glint on 
 like a flower move brightly through the green hazel . her path lay 
 through the wood in the opposite direction from Strelley Mill , down the 
 red drive across the tree - scatter space to the highroad . this road run 
 along the end of our lakelet , Nethermere , for about a quarter of a mile . 
 Nethermere be the low in a chain of three pond . the other two be 
 the upper and low mill pond at Strelley : this be the large and most 
 charming piece of water , a mile long and about a quarter of a mile in 
 width . our wood run down to the water 's edge . on the opposite side , on 
 a hill beyond the farth corner of the lake , stand Highclose . it 
 look across the water at we in Woodside with one eye as it be , while 
 our cottage cast a sidelong glance back again at the proud house , and 
 peep coyly through the tree . 

 I could see Lettie like a distant sail steal along the water 's edge , 
 her parasol flow above . she turn through the wicket under the pine 
 clump , climb the steep field , and be enfold again in the tree 
 beside Highclose . 

 Leslie be sprawl on a camp - chair , under a copper beech on the lawn , 
 his cigar glowing . he watch the ash grow strange and grey in the warm 
 daylight , and he feel sorry for poor Nell Wycherley , whom he have drive 
 that morning to the station , for would she not be frightfully cut up as 
 the train whirl she far and far away ? these girl be so daft 
 with a fellow ! but she be a nice little thing he would get Marie to write 
 to she . 

 at this point he catch sight of a parasol flutter along the drive , 
 and immediately he fall into a deep sleep , with just a tiny slit in his 
 slumber to allow he to see Lettie approach . she , find her watchman 
 ungallantly asleep , and his cigar , instead of his lamp untrimmed , break 
 off a twig of syringa whose ivory bud have not yet burst with luscious 
 scent . I know not how the end of his nose tickle in anticipation before 
 she tickle he in reality , but he keep bravely still until the petal 
 sweep he . then , start from his sleep , he exclaim : " Lettie ! I be 
 dream of kiss ! " 

 " on the bridge of your nose ? " laugh she " but whose be the 
 kiss ? " 

 " who produce the sensation ? " he smile . 

 " since I only tap your nose you should dream of " 

 " go on ! " say he , expectantly . 

 " of Doctor Slop , " she reply , smile to herself as she close her 
 parasol . 

 " I do not know the gentleman , " he say , afraid that she be laugh at 
 he . 

 " no your nose be quite classic , " she answer , give he one of 
 those brief intimate glance with which woman flatter man so cleverly . 
 he radiate with pleasure . 




  CHAPTER II 

  dangle the APPLE 


 the long - draw booming of the wind in the wood and the sobbing and 
 moaning in the maple and oak near the house , have make Lettie restless . 
 she do not want to go anywhere , she do not want to do anything , so she 
 insist on my just go out with she as far as the edge of the water . 
 we cross the tangle of fern and bracken , bramble and wild raspberry 
 cane that spread in the open space before the house , and we go down 
 the grassy slope to the edge of Nethermere . the wind whip up noisy 
 little wavelet , and the cluck and clatter of these among the pebble , 
 the swish of the rush and the freshening of the breeze against our 
 face , rouse we . 

 the tall meadow - sweet be in bud along the tiny beach and we walk 
 knee - deep among it , watch the foamy race of the ripple and the 
 whitening of the willow on the far shore . at the place where Nethermere 
 narrow to the upper end , and receive the brook from Strelley , the wood 
 sweep down and stand with its foot wash round with water . we break 
 our way along the shore , crush the sharp - scented wild mint , whose 
 odour check the breath , and examine here and there among the marshy 
 place rag nest of water - fowl , now desert . some slim young 
 lap - wing start at our approach , and speed lightly from we , their neck 
 outstretche in strain fear of that which could not hurt they . one , 
 two , flee cheep into cover of the wood ; almost instantly they course 
 back again to where we stand , to dart off from we at an angle , in an 
 ecstasy of bewilderment and terror . 

 " what have frighten the crazy little thing ? " ask Lettie . 

 " I do not   know . they have   cheek enough sometimes ; then they go whine , 
 skelpe off from a fancy as if they have a snake under their wing . " 

 Lettie however pay small attention to my eloquence . she push aside an 
 eld bush , which graciously shower down upon her myriad crumb from 
 its flower like slice of bread , and bath she in a medicinal scent . I 
 follow she , take my dose , and be startled to hear she sudden , " oh , 
 Cyril ! " 

 on the bank before we lie a black cat , both hindpaw tear and bloody in 
 a trap . it have no doubt be bound forward after its prey when it be 
 catch . it be gaunt and wild ; no wonder it frighten the poor 
 lap - wing into cheep hysteria . it glare at we fiercely , growl 
 low . 

 " how cruel oh , how cruel ! " cry Lettie , shudder . 

 I wrap my cap and Lettie 's scarf over my hand and bend to open the 
 trap . the cat strike with her tooth , tear the cloth convulsively . 
 when it be free , it spring away with one bind , and fall pant , 
 watch we . 

 I wrap the creature in my jacket , and pick she up , murmur : 

 " Poor Mrs. Nickie Ben we always prophesy it of you . " 

 " what will you do with it ? " ask Lettie . 

 " it be one of the Strelley Mill cat , " say I , " and so I will take she 
 home . " 

 the poor animal move and murmur and I carry she , but we bring she 
 home . they star , on see I enter the kitchen coatless , carry a 
 strange bundle , while Lettie follow I . 

 " I have bring poor Mrs. Nickie Ben , " say I , unfold my burden . 

 " oh , what a shame ! " cry Emily , put out her hand to touch the cat , 
 but draw quickly back , like the pee - wit . 

 " this be how they all go , " say the mother . 

 " I wish keeper have to sit two or three day with their bare ankle in a 
 trap , " say Mollie in vindictive tone . 

 we lay the poor brute on the rug , and give it warm milk . it drink very 
 little , be too feeble , Mollie , full of anger , fetch Mr. Nickie Ben , 
 another fine black cat , to survey his crippled mate . Mr. Nickie Ben 
 look , shrug his sleek shoulder , and walk away with high step . 
 there be a general feminine outcry on masculine callousness . 

 George come in for hot water . he exclaim in surprise on see we , and 
 his eye become animate . 

 " look at Mrs. Nickie Ben , " cry Mollie . he drop on his knee on the 
 rug and lift the wound paw . 

 " break , " say he . 

 " how awful ! " say Emily , shudder violently , and leave the room . 

 " Both ? " I ask . 

 " only one look ! " 

 " you be hurt she ! " cry Lettie . 

 " it be no good , " say he . 

 Mollie and the mother hurry out of the kitchen into the parlour . 

 " what be you go to do ? " ask Lettie . 

 " put she out of her misery , " he reply , take up the poor cat . we 
 follow he into the barn . 

 " the quick way , " say he , " be to swing her round and knock her head 
 against the wall . " 

 " you make I sick , " exclaim Lettie . 

 " I will drown she then , " he say with a smile . we watch he morbidly , as 
 he take a length of twine and fasten a noose round the animal 's neck , 
 and near it an iron goose ; he keep a long piece of cord attach to the 
 goose . 

 " you be not come , be you ? " say he . Lettie look at he ; she have 
 grow rather white . 

 " it will make you sick , " he say . she do not answer , but follow he 
 across the yard to the garden . on the bank of the low mill - pond he 
 turn again to we and say : 

 " now for it ! you be chief mourner . " as neither of we reply , he 
 smile , and drop the poor writhe cat into the water , say , 
 " good - bye , Mrs. Nickie Ben . " 

 we wait on the bank some time . he eye we curiously . 

 " Cyril , " say Lettie quietly , " be not   it cruel ? be not   it awful ? " 

 I have nothing to say . 

 " do you mean I ? " ask George . 

 " not you in particular everything ! if we move the blood rise in our 
 heel - print . " 

 he look at she seriously , with dark eye . 

 " I have to drown she out of mercy , " say he , fasten the cord he hold 
 to an ash - pole . then he go to get a spade , and with it , he dig a grave 
 in the old black earth . 

 " if , " say he , " the poor old cat have make a pretty corpse , you would have 
 throw violet on she . " 

 he have strike the spade into the ground , and haul up the cat and the 
 iron goose . 

 " well , " he say , survey the hideous object , " have not   her good look 
 go ! she be a fine cat . " 

 " bury it and have do , " Lettie reply . 

 he do so ask : " shall you have bad dream after it ? " 

 " dream do not trouble I , " she answer , turn away . 

 we go indoor , into the parlour , where Emily sit by a window , bite 
 her finger . the room be long and not very high ; there be a great rough 
 beam across the ceiling . on the mantel - piece , and in the fireplace , and 
 over the piano be wild flower and fresh leaf plentifully scatter ; 
 the room be cool with the scent of the wood . 

 " have he do it ? " ask Emily " and do you watch he ? if I have see it 
 I should have hat the sight of he , and I would rather have touch a 
 maggot than he . " 

 " I should not   be particularly pleased if he touch I , " say Lettie . 

 " there be something so loathsome about callousness and brutality , " say 
 Emily . " he fill I with disgust . " 

 " do he ? " say Lettie , smile coldly . she go across to the old 
 piano . " he be only healthy . he be never be sick , not anyway , yet . " she 
 sit down and play at random , let the numb note fall like dead 
 leaf from the haughty , ancient piano . 

 Emily and I talk on by the window , about book and people . she be 
 intensely serious , and generally succeed in reduce I to the same 
 state . 

 after a while , when the milking and feeding be finish , George come 
 in . Lettie be still play the piano . he ask she why she do not   play 
 something with a tune in it , and this cause she to turn round in her 
 chair to give he a wither answer . his appearance , however , scatter 
 her word like startled bird . he have come straight from washing in the 
 scullery , to the parlour , and he stand behind Lettie 's chair 
 unconcernedly wipe the moisture from his arm . his sleeve be roll 
 up to the shoulder , and his shirt be open wide at the breast . Lettie 
 be somewhat take aback by the sight of he stand with leg apart , 
 dress in dirty legging and boot , and breech tear at the knee , 
 naked at the breast and arm . 

 " why do not   you play something with a tune in it ? " he repeat , rub 
 the towel over his shoulder beneath the shirt . 

 " a tune ! " she echo , watch the swelling of his arm as he move 
 they , and the rise and fall of his breast , wonderfully solid and white . 
 then have curiously examine the sudden meeting of the sunhot skin 
 with the white flesh in his throat , her eye meet his , and she turn 
 again to the piano , while the colour grow in her ear , mercifully 
 shelter by a profusion of bright curl . 

 " what shall I play ? " she ask , finger the key somewhat confusedly . 

 he drag out a book of song from a little heap of music , and set it 
 before she . 

 " which do you want to sing ? " she ask thrill a little as she feel 
 his arm so near she . 

 " anything you like . " 

 " a love song ? " she say . 

 " if you like yes , a love song " he laugh with clumsy insinuation 
 that make the girl writhe . 

 she do not answer , but begin to play Sullivan 's " Tit Willow . " he have a 
 passable bass voice , not of any great depth , and he sing with gusto . 
 then she give he " drink to I only with thine eye . " at the end she 
 turn and ask he if he like the word . he reply that he think 
 they rather daft . but he look at she with glow brown eye , as if in 
 hesitate challenge . 

 " that be because you have no wine in your eye to pledge with , " she 
 reply , answer his challenge with a blue blaze of her eye . then she 
 eyelash droop on to her cheek . he laugh with a faint ring of 
 consciousness , and ask she how could she know . 

 " because , " she say slowly , look up at he with pretend scorn , 
 " because there be no change in your eye when I look at you . I always 
 think people who be worth much talk with their eye . that be why you be 
 force to respect many quite uneducated people . their eye be so 
 eloquent , and full of knowledge . " she have continue to look at he as 
 she speak watch his faint appreciation of her upturned face , and her 
 hair , where the light be always tangle , watch his brief 
 self - examination to see if he could feel any truth in her word , 
 watch till he break into a little laugh which be rather more awkward 
 and less satisfied than usual . then she turn away , smile also . 

 " there be nothing in this book nice to sing , " she say , turn over the 
 leaf discontentedly . I find she a volume , and she sing " should he 
 upbraid . " she have a fine soprano voice , and the song delight he . he 
 move near to she , and when at the finish she look round with a 
 flashing , mischievous air , she find he pledge she with wonderful 
 eye . 

 " you like that , " say she with the air of superior knowledge , as if , 
 dear I , all one have to do be to turn over to the right page of the 
 vast volume of one 's soul to suit these people . 

 " I do , " he answer emphatically , thus acknowledge her triumph . 

 " I would rather ' dance and sing ' round ' wrinkle care ' than carefully shut 
 the door on he , while I sleep in the chimney would not   you ? " she ask . 

 he laugh , and begin to consider what she mean before he reply . 

 " as you do , " she add . 

 " what ? " he ask . 

 " keep half your sens asleep half alive . " 

 " do I ? " he ask . 

 " of course you do ; ' bos - bovis ; an ox . ' you be like a stall ox , food 
 and comfort , no more . do not   you love comfort ? " she smile . 

 " do not   you ? " he reply , smile shameface . 

 " of course . come and turn over for I while I play this piece . well , 
 I will nod when you must turn bring a chair . " 

 she begin to play a romance of Schubert 's . he lean near to she to 
 take hold of the leaf of music ; she feel her loose hair touch his face , 
 and turn to he a quick , laugh glance , while she play . at the end 
 of the page she nod , but he be oblivious ; " yes ! " she say , suddenly 
 impatient , and he try to get the leaf over ; she quickly push his 
 hand aside , turn the page herself and continued playing . 

 " sorry ! " say he , blush actually . 

 " do not   bother , " she say , continue to play without observe he . when 
 she have finish : 

 " there ! " she say , " now tell I how you feel while I be play . " 

 " oh a fool ! " he reply , cover with confusion . 

 " I be glad to hear it , " she say " but I do not   mean that . I mean how 
 do the music make you feel ? " 

 " I do not   know whether it make I feel anything , " he reply 
 deliberately , ponder over his answer , as usual . 

 " I tell you , " she declare , " you be either asleep or stupid . do you 
 really see nothing in the music ? but what do you think about ? " 

 he laugh and think awhile and laugh again . 

 " why ! " he admit , laugh , and try to tell the exact truth , " I 
 think how pretty your hand be and what they be like to touch and 
 I think it be a new experience to feel somebody 's hair tickle my 
 cheek . " when he have finish his deliberate account she give his hand a 
 little knock , and leave he say : 

 " you be bad and bad . " 

 she come across the room to the couch where I be sit talk to 
 Emily , and put her arm around my neck . 

 " be not   it time to go home , Pat ? " she ask . 

 " half past eight quite early , " say I. 

 " but I believe I think I ought to be home now , " she say . 

 " do not   go , " say he . 

 " why ? " I ask . 

 " stay to supper , " urge Emily . 

 " but I believe " she hesitate . 

 " she have another fish to fry , " I say . 

 " I be not sure " she hesitate again . then she flash into sudden 
 wrath , exclaim , " do not   be so mean and nasty , Cyril ! " 

 " be you go somewhere ? " ask George humbly . 

 " why no ! " she say , blush . 

 " then stay to supper will you ? " he beg . she laugh , and yield . we 
 go into the kitchen . Mr. Saxton be sit read . Trip , the big 
 bull terrier , lie at his foot pretend to sleep ; Mr. Nickie Ben 
 repose calmly on the sofa ; Mrs. Saxton and Mollie be just go to 
 bed . we bid they good - night , and sit down . Annie , the servant , have go 
 home , so Emily prepare the supper . 

 " nobody can touch that piano like you , " say Mr. Saxton to Lettie , 
 beam upon she with admiration and deference . he be proud of the 
 stately , mumble old thing , and use to say that it be full of music 
 for those that like to ask for it . Lettie laugh , and say that so few 
 folk ever try it , that her honour be not great . 

 " what do you think of our George 's singing ? " ask the father proudly , 
 but with a deprecating laugh at the end . 

 " I tell he , when he be in love he will sing quite well , " she say . 

 " when he be in love ! " echo the father , laugh aloud , very pleased . 

 " yes , " she say , " when he find out something he want and can not   have . " 

 George think about it , and he laugh also . 

 Emily , who be lay the table say , " there be hardly any water in the 
 pippin , George . " 

 " oh , dash ! " he exclaim , " I have   take my boot off . " 

 " it be not a very big job to put they on again , " say his sister . 

 " why could not   Annie fetch it what be she here for ? " he say angrily . 

 Emily look at we , toss her head , and turn she back on he . 

 " I will go , I will go , after supper , " say the father in a comfort tone . 

 " after supper ! " laugh Emily . 

 George get up and shuffle out . he have to go into the spinney near the 
 house to a well , and be warm disliked turn out . 

 we have just sit down to supper when Trip rush bark to the door . " be 
 quiet , " order the father , think of those in bed , and he follow 
 the dog . 

 it be Leslie . he want Lettie to go home with he at once . this she 
 refuse to do , so he come indoor , and be persuade to sit down at 
 table . he swallow a morsel of bread and cheese , and a cup of coffee , 
 talk to Lettie of a garden party which be go to be arrange at 
 Highclose for the following week . 

 " what be it for then ? " interrupt Mr. Saxton . 

 " for ? " echo Leslie . 

 " be it for the missionary , or the unemployed , or something ? " explain 
 Mr. Saxton . 

 " it be a garden - party , not a bazaar , " say Leslie . 

 " oh a private affair . I think it would be some church matter of your 
 mother 's . she be very big at the church , be not   she ? " 

 " she be interested in the church yes ! " say Leslie , then proceed to 
 explain to Lettie that he be arrange a tennis tournament in which she 
 be to take part . at this point he become aware that he be monopolise 
 the conversation , and turn to George , just as the latter be take a 
 piece of cheese from his knife with his tooth , ask : 

 " do you play tennis , Mr. Saxton ? I know Miss Saxton do not . " 

 " no , " say George , work the piece of cheese into his cheek . " I never 
 learn any lady ' accomplishment . " 

 Leslie turn to Emily , who have nervously be push two plate over a 
 stain in the cloth , and who be very startled when she find herself 
 address . 

 " my mother would be so glad if you would come to the party , Miss 
 Saxton . " 

 " I can not . I shall be at school . thank very much . " 

 " ah it be very good of you , " say the father , beam . but George smile 
 contemptuously . 

 when supper be over Leslie look at Lettie to inform she that he be 
 ready to go . she , however , refuse to see his look , but talk brightly 
 to Mr. Saxton , who be delighted . George , flattered , join in the talk 
 with gusto . then Leslie 's angry silence begin to tell on we all . after a 
 dull lapse , George lift his head and say to his father : 

 " oh , I should not   be surprised if that little red heifer calve 
 to - night . " 

 Lettie 's eye flash with a sparkle of amusement at this thrust . 

 " no , " assent the father , " I think so myself . " 

 after a moment 's silence , George continue deliberately , " I feel she 
 gristle " 

 " George ! " say Emily sharply . 

 " we will go , " say Leslie . 

 George look up sideways at Lettie and his black eye be full of 
 sardonic mischief . 

 " lend I a shawl , will you , Emily ? " say Lettie . " I bring nothing , and 
 I think the wind be cold . " 

 emily , however , regret that she have no shawl , and so Lettie must 
 need wear a black coat over her summer dress . it fit so absurdly 
 that we all laugh , but Leslie be very angry that she should appear 
 ludicrous before they . he show she all the polite attention possible , 
 fasten the neck of her coat with his pearl scarf - pin , refuse the pin 
 Emily discover , after some search . then we sally forth . 

 when we be outside , he offer Lettie his arm with an air of injured 
 dignity . she refuse it and he begin to remonstrate . 

 " I consider you ought to have be home as you promise . " 

 " Pardon I , " she reply , " but I do not promise . " 

 " but you know I be come , " say he . 

 " well you find I , " she retort . 

 " yes , " he assent . " I do find you ; flirt with a common fellow , " he 
 sneer . 

 " well , " she return . " he do it be true call a heifer , a heifer . " 

 " and I should think you like it , " he say . 

 " I do not   mind , " she say , with gall negligence . 

 " I think your taste be more refined , " he reply sarcastically . " but 
 I suppose you think it romantic . " 

 " very ! Ruddy , dark , and really thrill eye , " say she . 

 " I hate to hear a girl talk rot , " say Leslie . he himself have crisp hair 
 of the " ginger " class . 

 " but I mean it , " she insist , aggravate his anger . 

 Leslie be angry . " I be glad he amuse you ! " 

 " of course , I be not hard to please , " she say pointedly . he be sting to 
 the quick . 

 " then there be some comfort in know I do not   please you , " he say 
 coldly . 

 " oh ! but you do ! you amuse I also , " she say . 

 after that he would not speak , prefer , I suppose , not to amuse 
 she . 

 Lettie take my arm , and with her disengage hand hold her skirt above 
 the wet grass . when he have leave we at the end of the riding in the wood , 
 Lettie say : 

 " what an infant he be ! " 

 " a bit of an ass , " I admit . 

 " but really ! " she say , " he be more agreeable on the whole than than my 
 Taurus . " 

 " your bull ! " I repeat laugh . 




  CHAPTER III 

  a vendor of vision 


 the Sunday follow Lettie 's visit to the mill , Leslie come up in the 
 morning , admirably dress , and perfect by a grand air . I show he 
 into the dark drawing - room , and leave he . ordinarily he would have 
 wander to the stair , and sit there call to Lettie ; to - day he be 
 silent . I carry the news of his arrival to my sister , who be pin 
 on her brooch . 

 " and how be the dear boy ? " she ask . " I have not inquire , " say I. she 
 laugh , and loiter about till it be time to set off for church 
 before she come downstairs . then she also assume the grand air and 
 bow to he with a beautiful bow . he be somewhat take aback and have 
 nothing to say . she rustle across the room to the window , where the 
 white geranium grow magnificently . " I must adorn myself , " she say . 

 it be Leslie 's custom to bring her flower . as he have not do so this 
 day , she be pique . he hat the scent and chalky whiteness of the 
 geranium . so she smile at he as she pin they into the bosom of her 
 dress , say : " they be very fine , be they not ? " he mutter that they 
 be . Mother come downstairs , greet he warmly , and ask he if he 
 would take she to church . 

 " if you will allow I , " say he . 

 " you be modest to - day , " laugh mother . 

 " to - day ! " he repeat . 

 " I hate modesty in a young man , " say mother " come , we shall be late . " 
 Lettie wear the geranium all day till evening . she bring Alice Gall 
 home to tea , and bid I bring up " Mon Taureau , " when his farm work be 
 over . 

 the day have be hot and close . the sun be redden in the west as we 
 leap across the less brook . the evening scent begin to awake , and 
 wander unseen through the still air . an occasional yellow sunbeam would 
 slant through the thick roof of leaf and cle passionately to the 
 orange cluster of mountain - ash berry . the tree be silent , draw 
 together to sleep . only a few pink orchid stand palely by the path , 
 look wistfully out at the rank of red - purple bugle , whose last 
 flower , glow from the top of the bronze column , yearn darkly for 
 the sun . 

 we saunter on in silence , not break the first hush of the 
 woodland . as we draw near home we hear a murmur from among the tree , 
 from the lover 's seat , where a great tree have fall and remain mossed 
 and cover with fragile growth . there a crooked bough make a beautiful 
 seat for two . 

 " Fancy be in love and make a row in such a twilight , " say I as we 
 continue our way . but when we come opposite the fallen tree , we see no 
 lover there , but a man sleep , and mutter through his sleep . the 
 cap have fall from his grizzle hair , and his head lean back against 
 a profusion of the little wild geranium that decorate the dead bough 
 so delicately . the man 's clothing be good , but slovenly and neglect . 
 his face be pale and wear with sickness and dissipation . as he sleep , 
 his grey beard wag , and his loose unlovely mouth move in indistinct 
 speech . he be act over again some part of his life , and his feature 
 twitch during the unnatural sleep . he would give a little groan , 
 gruesome to hear and then talk to some woman . his feature twitch as 
 if with pain , and he moan slightly . 

 the lip open in a grimace show the yellow tooth behind the beard . 
 then he begin again talk in his throat , thickly , so that we could 
 only tell part of what he say . it be very unpleasant . I wonder how 
 we should end it . suddenly through the gloom of the twilight - haunt 
 wood come the scream of a rabbit catch by a weasel . the man awake with 
 a sharp " ah ! " he look round in consternation , then sink down again 
 wearily , say , " I be dream again . " 

 " you do not   seem to have nice dream , " say George . 

 the man wince then look at we say , almost sneer : 

 " and who be you ? " 

 we do not answer , but wait for he to move . he sit still , look at 
 we . 

 " so ! " he say at last , wearily , " I do dream . I do , I do . " he sigh 
 heavily . then he add , sarcastically : " be you interested ? " 

 " no , " say I. " but you be out of your way surely . which road do you 
 want ? " 

 " you want I to clear out , " he say . 

 " well , " I say laugh in deprecation . " I do not   mind your dreaming . but 
 this be not the way to anywhere . " 

 " where may you be go then ? " he ask . 

 " I ? home , " I reply with dignity . 

 " you be a Beardsall ? " he query , eye I with bloodshot eye . 

 " I be ! " I reply with more dignity , wonder who the fellow could be . 

 he sit a few moment look at I . it be get dark in the wood . 
 then he take up an ebony stick with a gold head , and rise . the stick 
 seem to catch at my imagination . I watch it curiously as we walk 
 with the old man along the path to the gate . we go with he into the 
 open road . when we reach the clear sky where the light from the west 
 fall full on our face , he turn again and look at we closely . his 
 mouth open sharply , as if he would speak , but he stop himself , and 
 only say " good - bye good - bye . " 

 " shall you be all right ? " I ask , see he totter . 

 " yes all right good - bye , lad . " 

 he walk away feebly into the darkness . we see the light of a vehicle 
 on the high - road : after a while we hear the bang of a door , and a cab 
 rattle away . 

 " well whoever be he ? " say George laughing . 

 " do you know , " say I , " it be make I feel a bit rotten . " 

 " ay ? " he laugh , turn up the end of the exclamation with indulgent 
 surprise . 

 we go back home , decide to say nothing to the woman . they be 
 sit in the window seat watch for we , mother and Alice and Lettie . 

 " you have be a long time ! " say Lettie . " we have   watch the sun go 
 down it set splendidly look the rim of the hill be smoulder yet . 
 what have you be do ? " 

 " wait till your Taurus finish work . " 

 " now be quiet , " she say hastily , and turn to he , " you have come to 
 sing hymn ? " 

 " anything you like , " he reply . 

 " how nice of you , George ! " exclaim Alice , ironically . she be a short , 
 plump girl , pale , with daring , rebellious eye . her mother be a Wyld , a 
 family famous either for shock lawlessness , or for extreme 
 uprightness . Alice , with an admirable father , and a mother who love she 
 husband passionately , be wild and lawless on the surface , but at heart 
 very upright and amenable . my mother and she be fast friend , and 
 Lettie have a good deal of sympathy with she . but Lettie generally 
 deplore Alice 's outrageous behaviour , though she relish it if 
 ' superior " friend be not present . Most man enjoy Alice in company , 
 but they fight shy of be alone with she . 

 " would you say the same to I ? " she ask . 

 " it depend what you would answer , " he say , laughingly . 

 " oh , you be so bloomin ' cautious . I would rather have a tack in my shoe than 
 a cautious man , would not   you Lettie ? " 

 " well it depend how far I have to walk , " be Lettie 's reply " but if I 
 have not   to limp too far " 

 Alice turn away from Lettie , whom she often find rather irritate . 

 " you do look glum , Sybil , " she say to I , " do somebody want to kiss 
 you ? " 

 I laugh on the wrong side , understand her malicious feminine 
 reference and answer : 

 " if they have , I should have look happy . " 

 " dear boy , smile now then , " and she tip I under the chin . I draw 
 away . 

 " oh , Gum we be solemn ! what be the matter with you ? georgy say 
 something else i's'll begin to feel nervous . " 

 " what shall I say ? " he ask , shift his foot and rest his elbow 
 on his knee . " oh , Lor ! " she cry in great impatience . he do not help 
 she , but sit clasp his hand , smile on one side of his face . he be 
 nervous . he look at the picture , the ornament , and everything in the 
 room ; Lettie get up to settle some flower on the mantel - piece , and he 
 scrutinise she closely . she be dress in some blue foulard stuff , 
 with lace at the throat , and lace cuff to the elbow . she be tall and 
 supple ; her hair have a curl fluffiness very charming . he be no 
 tall than she , and look short , be strongly build . he too have a 
 grace of his own , but not as he sit stiffly on a horse - hair chair . she 
 be elegant in her movement . 

 after a little while mother call we in to supper . 

 " come , " say Lettie to he , " take I in to supper . " 

 he rise , feel very awkward . 

 " give I your arm , " say she to tease he . he do so , and flush under 
 his tan , afraid of her round arm half hide by lace , which lie among 
 his sleeve . 

 when we be seat she flourish her spoon and ask he what he would 
 have . he hesitate , look at the strange dish and say he would have 
 some cheese . they insist on his eat new , complicated meat . 

 " I be sure you like tantafflin , do not   you Georgie ? " say Alice , in she 
 mocking fashion . he be not sure . he could not analyse the flavour , 
 he feel confused and bewilder even through his sense of taste ! Alice 
 beg he to have salad . 

 " no , thank , " say he . " I do not   like it . " 

 " oh , George ! " she say , " how can you say so when I be offer it 
 you . " 

 " well I have   only have it once , " say he , " and that be when I be work 
 with Flint , and he give we fat bacon and bit of lettuce soak in 
 vinegar " Ave a bit more salit , ' he keep say , but I would have enough . " 

 " but all our lettuce , " say Alice with a wink , " be as sweet as a nut , no 
 vinegar about our lettuce . " George laugh in much confusion at she pun 
 on my sister 's name . 

 " I believe you , " he say , with pompous gallantry . 

 " think of that ! " cry Alice . " our Georgie believe I . oh , I be so , so 
 please ! " 

 he smile painfully . his hand be rest on the table , the thumb tuck 
 tight under the finger , his knuckle white as he nervously grip his 
 thumb . at last supper be finish , and he pick up his serviette from 
 the floor and begin to fold it . Lettie also seem ill at ease . she have 
 tease he till the sense of his awkwardness have become uncomfortable . 
 now she feel sorry , and a trifle repentant , so she go to the piano , as 
 she always do to dispel her mood . when she be angry she play tender 
 fragment of Tschaikowsky , when she be miserable , Mozart . now she 
 play Handel in a manner that suggest the plain of heaven in the 
 long note , and in the little trill as if she be waltz up the 
 ladder of Jacob 's dream like the damsel in Blake 's picture . I often 
 tell she she flatter herself scandalously through the piano ; but 
 generally she pretend not to understand I , and occasionally she 
 surprise I by a sudden rush of tear to her eye . for George 's sake , 
 she play Gounod 's " Ave Maria , " know that the sentiment of the chant 
 would appeal to he , and make he sad , forgetful of the petty evil of 
 this life . I smile as I watch the cheap spell work . when she have 
 finish , her finger lie motionless for a minute on the key , then she 
 spin round , and look he straight in the eye , give promise of a 
 smile . but she glance down at her knee . 

 " you be tired of music , " she say . 

 " no , " he reply , shake his head . 

 " like it well than salad ? " she ask with a flash of raillery . 

 he look up at she with a sudden smile , but do not reply . he be not 
 handsome ; his feature be too often in a heavy repose ; but when he 
 look up and smile unexpectedly , he flood she with an access of 
 tenderness . 

 " then you will have a little more , " say she , and she turn again to the 
 piano . she play soft , wistful morsel , then suddenly break off in the 
 midst of one sentimental plaint , and leave the piano , drop into a low 
 chair by the fire . there she sit and look at he . he be conscious 
 that her eye be fix on he , but he dare not look back at she , so 
 he pull his moustache . 

 " you be only a boy , after all , " she say to he quietly . then he turn 
 and ask she why . 

 " it be a boy that you be , " she repeat , lean back in her chair , and 
 smile lazily at he . 

 " I never think so , " he reply seriously . 

 " really ? " she say , chuckle . 

 " no , " say he , try to recall his previous impression . 

 she laugh heartily , say : 

 " you be grow up . " 

 " how ? " he ask . 

 " grow up , " she repeat , still laugh . 

 " but I be sure I be never boyish , " say he . 

 " I be teach you , " say she , " and when you be boyish you will be a very 
 decent man . a mere man dare not   be a boy for fear of tumble off his 
 manly dignity , and then he would be a fool , poor thing . " 

 he laugh , and sit still to think about it , as be his way . 

 " do you like picture ? " she ask suddenly , be tired of look at 
 he . 

 " well than anything , " he reply . 

 " except dinner , and a warm hearth and a lazy evening , " she say . 

 he look at she suddenly , harden at her insult , and bite his lip 
 at the taste of this humiliation . she repent , and smile her plaintive 
 regret to he . 

 " I will show you some , " she say , rise and go out of the room . he 
 feel he be near she . she return , carry a pile of great book . 

 " Jove you be pretty strong ! " say he . 

 " you be charming in your compliment , " she say . 

 he glance at she to see if she be mock . 

 " that be the high you could say of I , be not   it ? " she insist . 

 " be it ? " he ask , unwilling to compromise himself . 

 " for sure , " she answer and then , lay the book on the table , " I 
 know how a man will compliment I by the way he look at I " she 
 kneel before the fire . " some look at my hair , some watch the rise and 
 fall of my breathing , some look at my neck , and a few , not you among 
 they , look I in the eye for my thought . to you , I be a fine speciman , 
 strong ! pretty strong ! you primitive man ! " 

 he sit twist his finger ; she be very contrary . 

 " bring your chair up , " she say , sit down at the table and open a 
 book . she talk to he of each picture , insist on hear his 
 opinion . sometimes he disagree with she and would not be persuade . at 
 such time she be pique . 

 " if , " say she , " an ancient Briton in his skin come and contradict I 
 as you do , would not   you tell he not to make an ass of himself ? " 

 " I do not   know , " say he . 

 " then you ought to , " she reply . " you know nothing . " 

 " how be it you ask I then ? " he say . 

 she begin to laugh . 

 " why that be a pertinent question . I think you might be rather nice , you 
 know . " 

 " thank you , " he say , smile ironically . 

 " oh ! " she say . " I know , you think you be perfect , but you be not , 
 you be very annoying . " 

 " yes , " exclaim Alice , who have enter the room again , dress ready to 
 depart . " he be so bloom slow ! great whizz ! who want fellow to carry 
 cold dinner ? should not   you like to shake he Lettie ? " 

 " I do not   feel concerned enough , " reply the other calmly . 

 " do you ever carry a boil pudding georgy ? " ask Alice with innocent 
 interest , punch I slyly . 

 " I ! why ? what make you ask ? " he reply , quite at a loss . 

 " oh , I only wonder if your people need any indigestion mixture pa 
 mix it 1 1 1 a bottle . " 

 " I do not   see " he begin . 

 " Ta ta , old boy , I will give you time to think about it . good - night , 
 Lettie . absence make the heart grow fonder georgy of someone else . 
 farewell . come along , Sybil love , the moon be shin good - night all , 
 good - night ! " 

 I escort her home , while they continue to look at the picture . he 
 be a romanticist . he like Copley , Fielding , Cattermole and Birket 
 Foster ; he could see nothing whatsoever in Girtin or David Cox . they 
 fall out decidedly over George Clausen . 

 " but , " say Lettie , " he be a real realist , he make common thing 
 beautiful , he see the mystery and magnificence that envelop we even 
 when we work menially . I do know and I can speak . if I hoe in the 
 field beside you " this be a very new idea for he , almost a shock 
 to his imagination , and she talk unheeded . the picture under 
 discussion be a water - colour " hoeing " by Clausen . 

 " you would be just that colour in the sunset , " she say , thus bring he 
 back to the subject , " and if you look at the ground you would find there 
 be a sense of warm gold fire in it , and once you have perceive the 
 colour , it would strengthen till you would see nothing else . you be blind ; 
 you be only half - bear ; you be gross with good living and heavy 
 sleep . you be a piano which will only play a dozen common note . 
 sunset be nothing to you it merely happen anywhere . oh , but you make 
 I feel as if I would like to make you suffer . if you have ever be sick ; if 
 you would ever be bear into a home where there be something oppress 
 you , and you could not   understand ; if ever you have believe , or even 
 doubt , you might have be a man by now . you never grow up , like bulb 
 which spend all summer get fat and fleshy , but never waken the 
 germ of a flower . as for I , the flower be bear in I , but it want 
 bring forth . thing do not   flower if they be overfe . you have to 
 suffer before you blossom in this life . when death be just touch a 
 plant , it force it into a passion of flowering . you wonder how I have 
 touch death . you do not   know . there be always a sense of death in this 
 home . I believe my mother hat my father before I be bear . that be 
 death in her vein for I before I be bear . it make a difference " 

 as he sit listen , his eye grow wide and his lip be part , like a 
 child who feel the tale but do not understand the word . she , look 
 away from herself at last , see he , begin to laugh gently , and pat 
 his hand say : 

 " oh ! my dear heart , be you bewilder ? how amiable of you to listen to 
 I there be not   any meaning in it all there be not   really ! " 

 " but , " say he , " why do you say it ? " 

 " oh , the question ! " she laugh . " let we go back to our mutton , we be 
 gaze at each other like two daze image . " 

 they turn on , chat casually , till George suddenly exclaim , 
 " there ! " 

 it be Maurice Griffinhagen 's " Idyll . " 

 " what of it ? " she ask , gradually flush . she remember her own 
 enthusiasm over the picture . 

 " would not   it be fine ? " he exclaim , look at she with glow eye , 
 his tooth show white in a smile that be not amusement . 

 " what ? " she ask , drop her head in confusion . 

 " that a girl like that half afraid and passion ! " he light up curiously . 

 " she may well be half afraid , when the barbarian come out in his glory , 
 skin and all . " 

 " but do not   you like it ? " he ask . 

 she shrug her shoulder , say , " make love to the next girl you 
 meet , and by the time the poppy redden the field , she will hang in your 
 arm . she will have need to be more than half afraid , will not   she ? " 

 she play with the leaf of the book , and do not look at he . 

 " but , " he falter , his eye glow , " it would be rather " 

 " do not , sweet lad , do not ! " she cry laugh . 

 " but I should not   " he insist , " I do not   know whether I should like any 
 girl I know to " 

 " precious Sir Galahad , " she say in a mock caressing voice , and stroke 
 his cheek with her finger , " you ought to have be a monk a martyr , a 
 Carthusian . " 

 he laugh , take no notice . he be breathlessly quiver under the 
 new sensation of heavy , unappeased fire in his breast , and in the 
 muscle of his arm . he glance at her bosom and shiver . 

 " be you study just how to play the part ? " she ask . 

 " no but " he try to look at she , but fail . he shrink , laugh , 
 and drop his head . 

 " what ? " she ask with vibrant curiosity . 

 have become a few degree calm , he look up at she now , his eye 
 wide and vivid with a declaration that make her shrink back as if flame 
 have leap towards her face . she bend down her head and pick at her 
 dress . 

 " do not   you know the picture before ? " she say , in a low , toneless 
 voice . 

 he shut his eye and shrink with shame . 

 " no , I have   never see it before , " he say . 

 " I be surprised , " she say . " it be a very common one . " 

 " be it ? " he answer , and this make - belief conversation fall . she look 
 up , and find his eye . they gaze at each other for a moment before 
 they hide their face again . it be a torture to each of they to look 
 thus nakedly at the other , a dazzle , shrink pain that they force 
 themselves to undergo for a moment , that they might the moment after 
 tremble with a fierce sensation that fill their vein with fluid , 
 fiery electricity . she seek almost in panic , for something to say . 

 " I believe it be in Liverpool , the picture , " she contrive to say . 

 he dare not kill this conversation , he be too self - conscious . he 
 force himself to reply , " I do not   know there be a gallery in 
 Liverpool . " 

 " oh , yes , a very good one , " she say . 

 their eye meet in the brief flash of a glance , then both turn their 
 face aside . thus avert , one from the other , they make talk . at last 
 she rise , gather the book together , and carry they off . at the door 
 she turn . she must steal another keen moment : " be you admire my 
 strength ? " she ask . her pose be fine . with her head throw back , the 
 roundness of her throat run finely down to the bosom which swell above 
 the pile of book hold by her straight arm . he look at she . their 
 lip smile curiously . she put back her throat as if she be drink . 
 they feel the blood beat madly in their neck . then , suddenly 
 break into a slight trembling , she turn round and leave the room . 

 while she be out , he sit twist his moustache . she come back along 
 the hall talk madly to herself in French . have be much impress 
 by Sarah Bernhardt 's " Dame aux Camelias " and " Adrienne Lecouvreur , " 
 Lettie have catch something of the weird tone of this great actress , and 
 her raillery and mockery come out in little wild wave . she laugh at 
 he , and at herself , and at man in general , and at love in particular . 
 whatever he say to she , she answer in the same mad clatter of French , 
 speak high and harshly . the sound be strange and uncomfortable . 
 there be a painful perplexity in his brow , such as I often perceive 
 afterwards , a sense of something hurt , something he could not 
 understand . 

 " well , well , well , well ! " she exclaim at last . " we must be mad 
 sometimes , or we should be get age , Hein ? " 

 " I wish I could understand , " he say plaintively . 

 " poor dear ! " she laugh . " how sober he be ! and will you really go ? they 
 will think we have   give you no supper , you look so sad . " 

 " I have sup full " he begin , his eye dance with a smile as he 
 venture upon a quotation . he be very much excited . 

 " of horror ! " she cry complete it . " now that be bad than anything 
 I have give you . " 

 " be it ? " he reply , and they smile at each other . 

 " far bad , " she answer . they wait in suspense for some moment . he 
 look at she . 

 " good - bye , " she say , hold out her hand . her voice be full of 
 insurgent tenderness . he look at she again , his eye flicker . then 
 he take her hand . she press his finger , hold they a little while . 
 then ashamed of her display of feeling , she look down . he have a deep 
 cut across his thumb . 

 " what a gash ! " she exclaim , shiver , and cling a little tight 
 to his finger before she release they . he give a little laugh . 

 " do it hurt you ? " she ask very gently . 

 he laugh again " no ! " he say softly , as if his thumb be not worthy 
 of consideration . 

 they smile again at each other , and , with a blind movement , he break 
 the spell and be go . 




  CHAPTER IV 

  the FATHER 


 Autumn set in , and the red dahlia which keep the warm light alive in 
 their bosom so late into the evening die in the night , and the morning 
 have nothing but brown ball of rottenness to show . 

 they call I as I pass the post - office door in Eberwich one evening , 
 and they give I a letter for my mother . the distorted , sprawling 
 handwriting perplex I with a dim uneasiness ; I put the letter away , 
 and forget it . I remember it later in the evening , when I wish to 
 recall something to interest my mother . she look at the handwriting , 
 and begin hastily and nervously to tear open the envelope ; she hold it 
 away from she in the light of the lamp , and with eye draw half close , 
 try to scan it . so I find her spectacle , but she do not speak she 
 thank , and her hand tremble . she read the short letter quickly ; then 
 she sit down , and read it again , and continue to look at it . 

 " what be it mother ? " I ask . 

 she do not answer , but continue star at the letter . I go up to 
 she , and put my hand on her shoulder , feel very uncomfortable . she 
 take no notice of I , begin to murmur : " Poor Frank Poor Frank . " 
 that be my father 's name . 

 " but what be it mother ? tell I what be the matter ! " 

 she turn and look at I as if I be a stranger ; she get up , and 
 begin to walk about the room ; then she leave the room , and I hear she go 
 out of the house . 

 the letter have fall on to the floor . I pick it up . the handwriting 
 be very broken . the address give a village some few mile away ; the 
 date be three day before . 

 " my Dear lettice : 

 " you will want to know I be go . I can hardly last a day or two my 
 kidney be nearly go . 

 " I come over one day . I do not   see you , but I see the girl by the 
 window , and I have a few word with the lad . he never know , and he feel 
 nothing . I think the girl might have do . if you know how awfully 
 lonely I be , Lettice how awfully I have be , you might feel sorry . 

 " I have save what I could , to pay you back . I have have the bad of it 
 Lettice , and I be glad the end have come . I have have the bad of it . 

  " good - bye for ever your husband , 

  " FRANK BEARDSALL . " 

 I be numb by this letter of my father 's . with almost agonise effort 
 I strove to recall he , but I know that my image of a tall , handsome , 
 dark man with pale grey eye be make up from my mother 's few word , and 
 from a portrait I have once see . 

 the marriage have be unhappy . my father be of frivolous , rather vulgar 
 character , but plausible , have a good deal of charm . he be a liar , 
 without notion of honesty , and he have deceive my mother thoroughly . one 
 after another she discover his mean dishonesty and deceit , and her 
 soul revolt from he , and because the illusion of he have break into 
 a thousand vulgar fragment , she turn away with the scorn of a woman 
 who find her romance have be a trumpery tale . when he leave she for 
 other pleasure Lettie be a baby of three year , while I be 
 five she rejoice bitterly . she have hear of he indirectly and of he 
 nothing good , although he prosper but he have never come to see she or 
 write to she in all the eighteen year . 

 in a while my mother come in . she sit down , pleat up the hem of her 
 black apron , and smooth it out again . 

 " you know , " she say , " he have a right to the child , and I have   keep 
 they all the time . " 

 " he could have come , " say I. 

 " I set they against he , I have keep they from he , and he want they . 
 I ought to be by he now I ought to have take you to he long ago . " 

 " but how could you , when you know nothing of he ? " 

 " he would have come he want to come I have feel it for year . but I 
 keep he away . I know I have keep he away . I have feel it , and he have . 
 Poor Frank he will see his mistake now . he would not have be as cruel 
 as I have be " 

 " Nay , mother , it be only the shock that make you say so . " 

 " this make I know . I have feel in myself a long time that he be 
 suffer ; I have have the feeling of he in I . I know , yes , I do know 
 he want I , and you , I feel it . I have have the feeling of he upon I 
 this last three month especially . . . I have be cruel to he . " 

 " well we will go to he now , shall we ? " I say . 

 " to - morrow to - morrow , " she reply , notice I really for the first 
 time . " I go in the morning . " 

 " and I will go with you . " 

 " yes in the morning . Lettie have her party to Chatsworth do not   tell 
 she we will not   tell she . " 

 " no , " say I. 

 shortly after , my mother go upstairs . Lettie come in rather late from 
 Highclose ; Leslie do not come in . in the morning they be go with a 
 motor party into Matloch and Chatsworth , and she be excited , and do 
 not observe anything . 

 after all , mother and I could not set out until the warm temper 
 afternoon . the air be full of a soft yellowness when we step down 
 from the train at Cossethay . my mother insist on walk the long two 
 mile to the village . we go slowly along the road , linger over the 
 little red flower in the high hedge - bottom up the hillside . we be 
 reluctant to come to our destination . as we come in sight of the little 
 grey tower of the church , we hear the sound of braying , brassy music . 
 before we , fill a little croft , the Wakes be in full swing . 

 some wooden horse career gaily round , and the swingboat leap into 
 the mild blue sky . we sit upon the stile , my mother and I , and watch . 
 there be booth , and cocoanut shy and round - about scatter in the 
 small field . group of child move quietly from attraction to 
 attraction . a deeply tan man come across the field swing two 
 dripping bucket of water . woman look from the door of their 
 brilliant caravan , and lean dog rise lazily and settle down again 
 under the step . the fair move slowly , for all its noise . a stout lady , 
 with a husky masculine voice invite the excited child into her peep 
 show . a swarthy man stand with his thin leg astride on the platform of 
 the roundabout , and slop backwards , his mouth distend with a row 
 of finger , he whistle astonishingly to the coarse row of the organ , 
 and his whistling sound clear , like the flight of a wild goose high 
 over the chimney top , as he be carry round and round . a little fat 
 man with an ugly swelling on his chest stand scream from a filthy 
 booth to a crowd of urchin , bid they challenge a big , stolid young 
 man who stand with folded arm , his fist push out his bicep . on 
 be ask if he would undertake any of these prospective challenge , 
 this young man nod , not have yet attain a talk stage : yes he 
 would take two at a time , scream the little fat man with the big 
 excrescence on his chest , point at the cower lad and girl . 
 far off , Punch 's quaint voice could be hear when the cocoanut man 
 cease grind out screech from his rattle . the cocoanut man be 
 wroth , for these youngster would not risk a penny shy , and the rattle 
 yell like a fiend . a little girl come along to look at we , daintily 
 lick an ice - cream sandwich . we be uninteresting , however , so she 
 pass on to stare at the caravans . 

 we have almost gather courage to cross the wake , when the crack bell 
 of the church send its note fall over the babble . 

 " one two three " have it really sound three ! then it ring on a low 
 bell " one two three . " a pass bell for a man ! I look at my 
 mother she turn away from I . 

 the organ flare on the husky woman come forward to make another 
 appeal . then there be a lull . the man with the lump on his chest have 
 go inside the rag to spar with the solid fellow . the cocoanut man have 
 go to the " Three Tunns " in fury , and a brazen girl of seventeen or so 
 be in charge of the nut . the horse career round , carry two 
 frightened boy . 

 suddenly the quick , throb note of the low bell strike again through 
 the din . I listen but could not keep count . one , two , three , 
 four for the third time that great lad have determine to go on the 
 horse , and they have start while his foot be on the step , and he have 
 be foil eight , nine , ten no wonder that whistle man have such a 
 big Adam 's apple I wonder if it hurt his neck when he talk , be 
 so point nineteen , twenty the girl be lick more ice - cream , with 
 precious , tiny lick twenty - five , twenty - six I wonder if I do count 
 to twenty - six mechanically . at this point I give it up , and watch for 
 Lord Tennyson 's bald head to come spin round on the paint rim of 
 the round - about , follow by a red - faced Lord Roberts , and a villainous 
 look Disraeli . 

 " fifty - one " say my mother . " come come along . " 

 we hurry through the fair , towards the church ; towards a garden where 
 the last red sentinel look out from the top of the holly - hock spire . 
 the garden be a tousled mass of fade pink chrysanthemum , and 
 weak - eyed Michaelmas daisy , and spectre stalk of holly - hock . it 
 belong to a low , dark house , which crouch behind a screen of yew . 
 we walk along to the front . the blind be down , and in one room we 
 could see the stale light of candle burn . 

 " be this Yew cottage ? " ask my mother of a curious lad . 

 " it be Mrs. May 's , " reply the boy . 

 " do she live alone ? " I ask . 

 " she ' ad French Carlin but he be dead an she be letten th ' candle ter 
 keep th ' owd lad off'n ' i m. " 

 we go to the house and knock . 

 " an ye come about he ? " hoarsely whisper a bent old woman , look up 
 with very blue eye , nod her old head with its velvet net 
 significantly towards the inner room . 

 " yes " say my mother , " we have a letter . " 

 " ay , poor fellow he be go , missis , " and the old lady shake her head . 
 then she look at we curiously , lean forward , and , put she 
 wither old hand on my mother 's arm , her hand with its dark blue vein , 
 she whisper in confidence , " and the candle ' as go out twice . ' e wor 
 a funny feller , very funny ! " 

 " I must come in and settle thing I be his near relative , " say my 
 mother , tremble . 

 " yes I must ' a doze , for when I look up , it wor black darkness . 
 Missis , I dursn't   sit up wi ' ' I m no more , an ' many a one I have   lay out . 
 eh , but his sufferin 's , missis poor feller eh , Missis ! " she lift 
 her ancient hand , and look up at my mother , with her eye so 
 intensely blue . 

 " do you know where he keep his paper ? " ask my mother . 

 " Yis , I ax Father Burns about it ; he say we mun pray for ' I m. I 
 buy he candle out o ' my own pocket . he wor a rum feller , he wor ! " 
 and again she shake her grey head mournfully . my mother take a step 
 forward . 

 " do ye want to see ' I m ? " ask the old woman with half timid 
 questioning . 

 " yes , " reply my mother , with a vigorous nod . she perceive now that 
 the old lady be deaf . 

 we follow the woman into the kitchen , a long , low room , dark , with 
 draw blind . 

 " sit ye down , " say the old lady in the same low tone , as if she be 
 speak to herself : 

 " Ye be his sister , ' appen ? " 

 my mother shake her head . 

 " oh his brother 's wife ! " persist the old lady . 

 we shake our head . 

 " only a cousin ? " she guess , and look at we appealingly . I nod 
 assent . 

 " sit ye there a minute , " she say , and trot off . she bang the door , 
 and jar a chair as she go . when she return , she set down a bottle 
 and two glass with a thump on the table in front of we . her thin , 
 skinny wrist seem hardly capable of carry the bottle . 

 " it be one as he would only just begin of ' ave a drop to keep ye up do now , 
 poor thing , " she say , push the bottle to my mother and hurry off , 
 return with the sugar and the kettle . we refuse . 

 " ' e will not   want it no more , poor feller an it be good , Missis , he aller 
 drink it good . ay an ' ' e ' adn't   a drop the last three day , poor man , 
 poor feller , not a drop . come now , it will stay ye , come now . " we refuse . 

 " ' T be in there , " she whisper , point to a closed door in a dark 
 corner of the gloomy kitchen . I stumble up a little step , and go 
 plunge against a rickety table on which be a candle in a tall brass 
 candlestick . over go the candle , and it roll on the floor , and the 
 brass holder fall with much clanging . 

 " eh ! eh ! Dear Lord , Dear Heart . dear heart ! " wail the old woman . 
 she hasten tremble round to the other side of the bed , and relit the 
 extinguish candle at the taper which be still burn . as she 
 return , the light glow on her old , wrinkle face , and on the 
 burnish knob of the dark mahogany bedstead , while a stream of wax 
 drip down on to the floor . by the glimmering light of the two taper 
 we could see the outlined form under the counterpane . she turn back 
 the hem and begin to make painful wail sound . my heart be beat 
 heavily , and I feel choked . I do not want to look but I must . it be 
 the man I have see in the wood with the puffiness go from his face . 
 I feel the great wild pity , and a sense of terror , and a sense of 
 horror , and a sense of awful littleness and loneliness among a great 
 empty space . I feel beyond myself as if I be a mere fleck drift 
 unconsciously through the dark . then I feel my mother 's arm round my 
 shoulder , and she cry pitifully , " oh , my son , my son ! " 

 I shiver , and come back to myself . there be no tear in my mother 's 
 face , only a great pleading . " never mind , mother never mind , " I say 
 incoherently . 

 she rise and cover the face again , and go round to the old lady , and 
 hold she still , and stay her little wailing . the woman wipe from her 
 cheek the few tear of old age , and push her grey hair smooth under 
 the velvet network . 

 " where be all his thing ? " ask mother . 

 " Eh ? " say the old lady , lift up her ear . 

 " be all his thing here ? " repeat mother in a loud tone . 

 " here ? " the woman wave her hand round the room . it contain the great 
 mahogany bedstead naked of hanging , a desk , and an oak chest , and two 
 or three mahogany chair . " I could not   get he upstairs ; he be only be 
 here about a three week . " 

 " where be the key to the desk ? " say my mother loudly in the woman 's ear . 

 " yes , " she reply " it be his desk . " she look at we , perplex and 
 doubtful , fear she have misunderstood we . this be dreadful . 

 " key ! " I shout . " where be the key ? " 

 her old face be full of trouble as she shake her head . I take it that 
 she do not know . 

 " where be his clothe ? clothe " I repeat point to my coat . she 
 understand , and mutter , " I will fetch them ye . " 

 we should have follow she as she hurry upstairs through a door near 
 the head of the bed , have we not hear a heavy footstep in the kitchen , 
 and a voice say : " be the old lady go to drink with the Devil ? 
 Hullo , Mrs. May , come and drink with I ! " we hear the tinkle of the 
 liquor pour into a glass , and almost immediately the light tap of the 
 empty tumbler on the table . 

 " I will see what the old girl be up to , " he say , and the heavy tread come 
 towards we . like I , he stumble at the little step , but escape 
 collision with the table . 

 " damn that fool 's step , " he say heartily . it be the doctor for he 
 keep his hat on his head , and do not hesitate to stroll about the 
 house . he be a big , burly , red - faced man . 

 " I beg your pardon , " he say , observe my mother . my mother bow . 

 " Mrs. Beardsall ? " he ask , take off his hat . 

 my mother bow . 

 " I post a letter to you . you be a relative of his of poor old 
 Carlin 's ? " he nod sideways towards the bed . 

 " the near , " say my mother . 

 " poor fellow he be a bit strand . come of be a bachelor , Ma'am . " 

 " I be very much surprised to hear from he , " say my mother . 

 " yes , I guess he be not be much of a one for write to his friend . 
 he be have a bad time lately . you have to pay some time or other . we bring 
 they on ourselves silly devil as we be . I beg your pardon . " 

 there be a moment of silence , during which the doctor sigh , and then 
 begin to whistle softly . 

 " well we might be more comfortable if we have the blind up , " he say , 
 let daylight in among the glimmer of the taper as he speak . 

 " at any rate , " he say , " you will not   have any trouble settle up no 
 debt or anything of that . I believe there be a bit to leave so it be not 
 so bad . poor devil he be very down at the last ; but we have to pay at 
 one end or the other . what on earth be the old girl after ? " he ask , 
 look up at the raftered ceiling , which be rumble and thunder 
 with the old lady 's violent rummaging . 

 " we want the key of his desk , " say my mother . 

 " oh I can find you that and the will . he tell I where they be , and 
 to give they you when you come . he seem to think a lot of you . perhaps 
 he might ha ' do well for himself " 

 here we hear the heavy tread of the old lady come downstairs . the 
 doctor go to the foot of the stair . 

 " hello , now be careful ! " he bawl . the poor old woman do as he 
 expect , and trod on the brace of the trouser she be trail , and 
 come crash into his arm . he set she tenderly down , say , " not 
 hurt , be you ? no ! " and he smile at she and shake his head . 

 " eh , doctor Eh , doctor bless ye , I be thankful ye've   come . Ye'll see to 
 them now , will ye ? " 

 " yes " he nod in his bluff , win way , and hurry into the 
 kitchen , he mix she a glass of whisky , and bring one for himself , 
 say to she , " there you be ' twa a nasty shake for you . " 

 the poor old woman sit in a chair by the open door of the staircase , the 
 pile of clothing tumble about her foot . she look round pitifully at 
 we and at the daylight struggle among the candle light , make a 
 ghostly gleam on the bed where the rigid figure lie unmove ; her hand 
 tremble so that she could scarcely hold her glass . 

 the doctor give we the key , and we rifle the desk and the drawer , 
 sort out all the paper . the doctor sit sip and talk to we all 
 the time . 

 " yes , " he say , " he be only be here about two year . felt himself 
 begin to break up then , I think . he have be a long time abroad ; they 
 always call he Frenchy . " the doctor sip and reflect , and sip 
 again , " ay he would run the rig in his day use to dream dreadfully . good 
 thing the old woman be so deaf . Awful , when a man give himself away in 
 his sleep ; play the deuce with he , know it . " sip , sip , sip and 
 more reflection and another glass to be mix . 

 " but he be a jolly decent fellow generous , open - handed . the folk 
 do not   like he , because they could not   get to the bottom of he ; they 
 always hate a thing they can not   fathom . he be close , there be no 
 mistake save when he be asleep sometimes . " the doctor look at his 
 glass and sigh . 

 " however we shall miss he shall not   we , Mrs. May ? " he bawl suddenly , 
 startle we , make we glance at the bed . 

 he light his pipe and puff voluminously in order to obscure the 
 attraction of his glass . meanwhile we examine the paper . there be 
 very few letter one or two address to Paris . there be many bill , 
 and receipt , and note business , all business . 

 there be hardly a trace of sentiment among all the litter . my mother 
 sort out such paper as she consider valuable ; the other , letter 
 and missive which she glance at cursorily and put aside , she take into 
 the kitchen and burn . she seem afraid to find out too much . 

 the doctor continue to colour his tobacco smoke with a few pensive 
 word . 

 " ay , " he say , " there be two way . you can burn your lamp with a big 
 draught , and it will flare away , till the oil 's gone , then it will stink and 
 smoke itself out . or you can keep it trim on the kitchen table , dirty 
 your finger occasionally trim it up , and it will last a long time , 
 and sink out mildly . " here he turn to his glass , and find it empty , 
 be awaken to reality . 

 " anything I can do , Madam ? " he ask . 

 " no , thank you . " 

 " ay , I do not   suppose there be much to settle . nor many tear to 
 shed when a fellow spend his year an ' his prime on the Lord know 
 who , you can not   expect those that remember he young to feel his loss too 
 keenly . he have have his fling in his day , though , ma'am . ay must ha ' have 
 some rich time . no lasting satisfaction in it though always want , 
 craving . there be nothing like marry you have   get your dish before you 
 then , and you have   get to eat it . " he lapse again into reflection , from 
 which he do not rouse till we have lock up the desk , burn the 
 useless paper , put the other into my pocket and the black bag , and 
 be stand ready to depart . then the doctor look up suddenly and 
 say : 

 " but what about the funeral ? " 

 then he notice the weariness of my mother 's look , and he jump up , and 
 quickly seize his hat , say : 

 " come across to my wife and have a cup of tea . bury in these dam hole 
 a fellow get such a boor . do come my little wife be lonely come just 
 to see she . " 

 my mother smile and thank he . we turn to go . my mother hesitate 
 in her walk ; on the threshold of the room she glance round at the bed , 
 but she go on . 

 outside , in the fresh air of the fading afternoon , I could not believe 
 it be true . it be not true , that sad , colourless face with grey beard , 
 waver in the yellow candle - light . it be a lie , that wooden 
 bedstead , that deaf woman , they be fade phrase of the untruth . that 
 yellow blaze of little sunflower be true , and the shadow from the 
 sun - dial on the warm old almshouse that be real . the heavy afternoon 
 sunlight come round we warm and reviving ; we shiver , and the untruth 
 go out of our vein , and we be no long chill . 

 the doctor 's house stand sweetly among the beech tree , and at the iron 
 fence in front of the little lawn a woman be talk to a beautiful 
 Jersey cow that push its dark nose through the fence from the field 
 beyond . she be a little , dark woman with vivid colouring ; she rub 
 the nose of the delicate animal , peep right into the dark eye , and 
 talk in a lovable scottish speech ; talk as a mother talk softly to 
 her child . 

 when she turn round in surprise to greet we there be still the 
 softness of a rich affection in her eye . she give we tea , and scone , 
 and apply jelly , and all the time we listen with delight to her voice , 
 which be musical as bee hum in the lime tree . though she say 
 nothing significant we listen to she attentively . 

 her husband be merry and kind . she glance at he with quick glance of 
 apprehension , and her eye avoid he . he , in his merry , frank way , 
 chaff she , and praise she extravagantly , and tease she again . then 
 he become a trifle uneasy . I think she be afraid he have be drink ; 
 I think she be shake with horror when she find he tipsy , and 
 bewilder and terrify when she see he drunk . they have no child . I 
 notice he cease to joke when she become a little constrained . he 
 glance at she often , and look somewhat pitiful when she avoid his 
 look , and he grow uneasy , and I could see he want to go away . 

 " I have well go with you to see the vicar , then , " he say to I , and we 
 leave the room , whose window look south , over the meadow , the room 
 where dainty little water - colour , and beautiful bit of embroidery , and 
 empty flower vas , and two dirty novel from the town library , and the 
 closed piano , and the odd cup , and the chip spout of the teapot 
 cause stain on the cloth all tell one story . 

 we go to the joiner 's and order the coffin , and the doctor have a 
 glass of whisky on it ; the graveyard fee be pay , and the doctor 
 seal the engagement with a drop of brandy ; the vicar 's port complete 
 the doctor 's joviality , and we go home . 

 this time the disquiet in the little woman 's dark eye could not dispel 
 the doctor 's merriment . he rattle away , and she nervously twist her 
 wedding ring . he insist on drive we to the station , in spite of our 
 alarm . 

 " but you will be quite safe with he , " say his wife , in her caressing 
 Highland speech . when she shake hand at part I notice the hardness 
 of the little palm ; and I have always hat an old , black alpaca dress . 

 it be such a long way home from the station at Eberwich . we ride part 
 way in the bus ; then we walk . it be a very long way for my mother , 
 when her step be heavy with trouble . 

 Rebecca be out by the rhododendron look for we . she hurry to we 
 all solicitous , and ask mother if she have have tea . 

 " but you will do with another cup , " she say , and run back into the house . 

 she come into the dining - room to take my mother 's bonnet and coat . she 
 want we to talk ; she be distressed on my mother 's behalf ; she notice 
 the blackness that lie under her eye , and she fidget about , unwilling 
 to ask anything , yet uneasy and anxious to know . 

 " Lettie have be home , " she say . 

 " and go back again ? " ask mother . 

 " she only come to change her dress . she put the green poplin on . she 
 wonder where you have go . " 

 " what do you tell she ? " 

 " I say you would just go out a bit . she say she be glad . she be as 
 lively as a squirrel . " 

 Rebecca look wistfully at my mother . at length the latter say : 

 " he be dead , Rebecca . I have see he . " 

 " now thank God for that no more need to worry over he . " 

 " well ! he die all alone , rebecca all alone . " 

 " he die as you have   live , " say Becky with some asperity . 

 " but I have   have the child , I have   have the child we will not   tell Lettie , 
 rebecca . " 

 " no ' m. " Rebecca leave the room . 

 " you and Lettie will have the money , " say mother to I . there be a sum 
 of four thousand pound or so . it be leave to my mother ; or , in default 
 to Lettie and I . 

 " well , mother if it be ours , it be your . " 

 there be silence for some minute , then she say , " you might have have a 
 father " 

 " we be thankful we have not , mother . you spar we that . " 

 " but how can you tell ? " say my mother . 

 " I can , " I reply . " and I be thankful to you . " 

 " if ever you feel scorn for one who be near you rise in your throat , 
 try and be generous , my lad . " 

 " well " say I. 

 " yes , " she reply , " we will say no more . sometime you must tell 
 Lettie you tell she . " 

 I do tell she , a week or so afterwards . 

 " who know ? " she ask , her face harden . 

 " Mother , Becky , and ourselves . " 

 " nobody else ? " 

 " no . " 

 " then it be a good thing he be out of the way if he be such a nuisance 
 to mother . where be she ? " 

 " Upstairs . " 

 Lettie run to she . 




  CHAPTER V 

  the scent of blood 


 the death of the man who be our father change our life . it be not 
 that we suffer a great grief ; the chief trouble be the unanswered 
 crying of failure . but we be change in our feeling and in our 
 relation ; there be a new consciousness , a new carefulness . 

 we have live between the wood and the water all our life , Lettie and 
 I , and she have seek the bright note in everything . she seem to hear 
 the water laughing , and the leaf titter and giggle like young 
 girl ; the aspen flutter like the drapery of a flirt , and the sound 
 of the wood - pigeon be almost foolish in its sentimentality . 

 lately , however , she have notice again the cruel pitiful crying of a 
 hedgehog catch in a gin , and she have notice the trap for the fierce 
 little murderer , trap wall in with a small fence of fir , and bait 
 with the gut of a kill rabbit . 

 on an afternoon a short time after our visit to Cossethay , Lettie sit in 
 the window seat . the sun clung to her hair , and kiss she with 
 passionate splash of colour bring from the vermilion , die creeper 
 outside . the sun love Lettie , and be loath to leave she . she look 
 out over Nethermere to Highclose , vague in the September mist . have it 
 not be for the scarlet light on her face , I should have think she 
 look be sad and serious . she nestle up to the window , and lean she 
 head against the wooden shaft . gradually she droop into sleep . then 
 she become wonderfully childish again it be the girl of seventeen 
 sleep there , with her full pouting lip slightly apart , and the 
 breath come lightly . I feel the old feeling of responsibility ; I must 
 protect she , and take care of she . 

 there be a crunch of the gravel . it be Leslie come . he lift his 
 hat to she , think she be look . he have that fine , lithe physique , 
 suggestive of much animal vigour ; his person be exceedingly attractive ; 
 one watch he move about , and feel pleasure . his face be less 
 pleasing than his person . he be not handsome ; his eyebrow be too 
 light , his nose be large and ugly , and his forehead , though high and 
 fair , be without dignity . but he have a frank , good - natured expression , 
 and a fine , wholesome laugh . 

 he wonder why she do not move . as he come near he see . then he 
 wink at I and come in . he tiptoe across the room to look at she . the 
 sweet carelessness of her attitude , the appealing , half - pitiful 
 girlishness of her face touch his responsive heart , and he lean 
 forward and kiss her cheek where already be a crimson stain of 
 sunshine . 

 she rouse half out of her sleep with a little , petulant " oh ! " as an 
 awaken child . he sit down behind she , and gently draw her head against 
 he , look down at she with a tender , soothe smile . I think she 
 be go to fall asleep thus . but her eyelid quiver , and her eye 
 beneath they flicker into consciousness . 

 " Leslie ! oh ! let I go ! " she exclaim , push he away . he loose 
 she , and rise , look at she reproachfully . she shake her dress , and 
 go quickly to the mirror to arrange her hair . 

 " you be mean ! " she exclaim , look very flushed , vex , and 
 dishevel . 

 he laugh indulgently , say , " you should not   go to sleep then and look 
 so pretty . who could help ? " 

 " it be not nice ! " she say , frown with irritation . 

 " we be not ' nice ' be we ? I think we be proud of our 
 unconventionality . why should not   I kiss you ? " 

 " because it be a question of I , not of you alone . " 

 " dear I , you be in a way ! " 

 " Mother be come . " 

 " be she ? you have well tell she . " 

 Mother be very fond of Leslie . 

 " well , sir , " she say , " why be you frown ? " 

 he break into a laugh . 

 " Lettie be scold I for kiss she when she be play ' sleeping 
 Beauty . ' " 

 " the conceit of the boy , to play Prince ! " say my mother . 

 " oh , but it appear I be sadly out of character , " he say ruefully . 

 Lettie laugh and forgave he . 

 " well , " he say , look at she and smile , " I come to ask you to go 
 out . " 

 " it be a lovely afternoon , " say mother . 

 she glance at he , and say : 

 " I feel dreadfully lazy . " 

 " never mind ! " he reply , " you will wake up . go and put your hat on . " 

 he sound impatient . she look at he . 

 he seem to be smile peculiarly . 

 she lower her eye and go out of the room . 

 " she will come all right , " he say to himself , and to I . " she like to 
 play you on a string . " 

 she must have hear he . when she come in again , draw on her glove , 
 she say quietly : 

 " you come as well , Pat . " 

 he swing round and star at she in angry amazement . 

 " I have rather stay and finish this sketch , " I say , feel 
 uncomfortable . 

 " no , but do come , there be a dear . " she take the brush from my hand , and 
 draw I from my chair . the blood flush into his cheek . he go 
 quietly into the hall and bring my cap . 

 " all right ! " he say angrily . " woman like to fancy themselves 
 Napoleons . " 

 " they do , dear Iron Duke , they do , " she mock . 

 " yet , there be a Waterloo in all their history , " he say , since she have 
 supply he with the idea . 

 " Say Peterloo , my general , say Peterloo . " 

 " ay , Peterloo , " he reply , with a splendid curl of the lip " Easy 
 conquest ! " 

 " ' he come , he see , he conquer , ' " Lettie recite . 

 " be you come ? " he say , get more angry . 

 " when you bid I , " she reply , take my arm . 

 we go through the wood , and through the dishevel border - land to the 
 high road , through the border - land that should have be park - like , but 
 which be shaggy with loose grass and yellow mole - hill , rag with 
 gorse and bramble and briar , with wander old thorn - tree , and a queer 
 clump of Scotch fir . 

 on the highway the leaf be fall , and they chatter under our 
 step . the water be mild and blue , and the corn stand drowsily in 
 ' stook . " 

 we climb the hill behind Highclose , and walk on along the upland , 
 look across towards the hill of arid Derbyshire , and see they 
 not , because it be autumn . we come in sight of the head - stock of the 
 pit at Selsby , and of the ugly village stand blank and naked on the 
 brow of the hill . 

 Lettie be in very high spirit . she laugh and joke continually . she 
 pick bunch of hip and stick they in her dress . have get a thorn 
 in her finger from a spray of blackberry , she go to Leslie to have 
 it squeeze out . we be all quite gay as we turn off the high road 
 and go along the bridle path , with the wood on our right , the high 
 Strelley hill shut in our small valley in front , and the field and 
 the common to the left . about half way down the lane we hear the slurr 
 of the scythestone on the scythe . Lettie go to the hedge to see . it 
 be George mow the oats on the steep hillside where the machine could 
 not go . his father be tie up the corn into sheaf . 

 straighten his back , Mr. Saxton see we , and call to we to come and 
 help . we push through a gap in the hedge and go up to he . 

 " now then , " say the father to I , " take that coat off , " and to Lettie : 
 " have you bring we a drink ? no ; come , that sound bad ! go a walk I 
 guess . you see what it be to get fat , " and he pull a wry face as he 
 bent over to tie the corn . he be a man beautifully ruddy and burly , in 
 the prime of life . 

 " show I , I will do some , " say Lettie . 

 " Nay , " he answer gently , " it would scratch your wrist and break your 
 stay . Hark at my hand " he rub they together " like sandpaper ! " 

 George have his back to we , and have not notice we . he continue to mow . 
 Leslie watch he . 

 " that be a fine movement ! " he exclaim . 

 " yes , " reply the father , rise very red in the face from the tying , 
 " and our George enjoy a bit o ' mowing . it put you in fine condition 
 when you get over the first stiffness . " 

 we move across to the stand corn . the sun be mild , George have 
 throw off his hat , and his black hair be moist and twist into 
 confused half - curl . firmly plant , he swing with a beautiful rhythm 
 from the waist . on the hip of his belted breech hang the scythestone ; 
 his shirt , fade almost white , be tear just above the belt , and show 
 the muscle of his back playing like light upon the white sand of a 
 brook . there be something exceedingly attractive in the rhythmic body . 

 I speak to he , and he turn round . he look straight at Lettie with a 
 flashing , betray smile . he be remarkably handsome . he try to say 
 some word of greeting , then he bend down and gather an armful of 
 corn , and deliberately bind it up . 

 like he , Lettie have find nothing to say . Leslie , however , remark : 

 " I should think mow be a nice exercise . " 

 " it be , " he reply , and continue , as Leslie pick up the scythe , " but 
 it will make you sweat , and your hand will be sore . " 

 Leslie toss his head a little , throw off his coat , and say briefly : 

 " how do you do it ? " without wait for a reply he proceed . George 
 say nothing , but turn to Lettie . 

 " you be picturesque , " she say , a trifle awkwardly , " quite fit for an 
 Idyll . " 

 " and you ? " he say . 

 she shrug her shoulder , laugh , and turn to pick up a scarlet 
 pimpernel . 

 " how do you bind the corn ? " she ask . 

 he take some long straw , clean they , and show she the way to hold 
 they . instead of attend , she look at his hand , big , hard , inflame 
 by the snaith of the scythe . 

 " I do not   think I could do it , " she say . 

 " no , " he reply quietly , and watch Leslie mowing . the latter who be 
 wonderfully ready at everything , be do fairly well , but he have not 
 the invincible sweep of the other , nor do he make the same crisp 
 crunch music . 

 " I bet he will sweat , " say George . 

 " do not   you ? " she reply . 

 " a bit but I be not dress up . " 

 " do you know , " she say suddenly , " your arm tempt I to touch they . 
 they be such a fine brown colour , and they look so hard . " 

 he hold out one arm to she . she hesitate , then she swiftly put she 
 finger tip on the smooth brown muscle , and draw they along . quickly she 
 hide her hand into the fold of her skirt , blushing . 

 he laugh a low , quiet laugh , at once pleasant and startling to hear . 

 " I wish I could work here , " she say , look away at the stand corn , 
 and the dim blue wood . he follow her look , and laugh quietly , with 
 indulgent resignation . 

 " I do ! " she say emphatically . 

 " you feel so fine , " he say , push his hand through his open shirt 
 front , and gently rub the muscle of his side . " it be a pleasure to 
 work or to stand still . it be a pleasure to yourself your own physique . " 

 she look at he , full at his physical beauty , as if he be some great 
 firm bud of life . 

 Leslie come up , wipe his brow . 

 " Jove , " say he , " I do perspire . " 

 George pick up his coat and help he into it ; say : 

 " you may take a chill . " 

 " it be a jolly nice form of exercise , " say he . 

 George , who have be feel one finger tip , now take out his pen - knife 
 and proceed to dig a thorn from his hand . 

 " what a hide you must have , " say Leslie . 

 Lettie say nothing , but she recoil slightly . 

 the father , glad of an excuse to straighten his back and to chat , come 
 to we . 

 " you would soon have enough , " he say , laugh to Leslie . 

 George startle we with a sudden , " Holloa . " we turn , and see a rabbit , 
 which have burst from the corn , go course through the hedge , dodge 
 and bound the sheaf . the stand corn be a patch along the 
 hill - side some fifty pace in length , and ten or so in width . 

 " I do not   think there would have be any in , " say the father , pick up a 
 short rake , and go to the low wall of the corn . we all follow . 

 " Watch ! " say the father , " if you see the head of the corn shake ! " 

 we prowl round the patch of corn . 

 " hold ! look out ! " shout the father excitedly , and immediately after a 
 rabbit break from the cover . 

 " ay Ay Ay , " be the shout , " turn he turn he ! " we set off full pelt . 
 the bewildered little brute , scar by Leslie 's wild running and cry , 
 turn from its course , and dodge across the hill , thread its 
 terrified course through the maze of lie sheaf , spurt on in a 
 painful zigzag , now bound over an untied bundle of corn , now swerve 
 from the sound of a shout . the little wretch be hard press ; George 
 rush upon it . it dart into some fall corn , but he have see it , and 
 have fall on it . in an instant he be up again , and the little creature 
 be dangle from his hand . 

 we return , panting , sweating , our eye flash , to the edge of the 
 stand corn . I hear Lettie call , and turn round see Emily and 
 the two child enter the field as they pass from school . 

 " there be another ! " shout Leslie . 

 I see the oat - top quiver . " here ! here ! " I yell . the animal leap 
 out , and make for the hedge . George and Leslie , who be on that side , 
 dash off , turn he , and he course back our way . I head he off to 
 the father who sweep in pursuit for a short distance , but who be too 
 heavy for the work . the little beast make towards the gate , but this 
 time Mollie , with her hat in her hand and her hair fly , whirl upon 
 he , and she and the little fragile lad send he back again . the rabbit 
 be get tired . it dodge the sheaf badly , run towards the top 
 hedge . I go after it . if I could have let myself fall on it I could 
 have catch it , but this be impossible to I , and I merely prevent 
 its dashing through the hole into safety . it race along the hedge 
 bottom . George tear after it . as he be upon it , it dart into the 
 hedge . he fall flat , and shoot his hand into the gap . but it have escape . 
 he lie there , pant in great sob , and look at I with eye in 
 which excitement and exhaustion struggle like flicker light and 
 darkness . when he could speak , he say , " why do not   you fall on top of 
 it ? " 

 " I could not , " say I. 

 we return again . the two child be peer into the thick corn 
 also . we think there be nothing more . George begin to mow . as I 
 walk round I catch sight of a rabbit skulking near the bottom corner 
 of the patch . its ear lie pressed against its back ; I could see the 
 palpitation of the heart under the brown fur , and I could see the 
 shin dark eye look at I . I feel no pity for it , but still I 
 could not actually hurt it . I beckon to the father . he run up , and 
 aim a blow with the rake . there be a sharp little cry which send a 
 hot pain through I as if I have be cut . but the rabbit run out , and 
 instantly I forget the cry , and give pursuit , fairly feel my finger 
 stiffen to choke it . it be all lame . Leslie be upon it in a moment , 
 and he almost pull its head off in his excitement to kill it . 

 I look up . the girl be at the gate , just turn away . 

 " there be no more , " say the father . 

 at that instant Mary shout . 

 " there be one down this hole . " 

 the hole be too small for George to get his hand in , so we dig it out 
 with the rake handle . the stick go savagely down the hole , and there 
 come a squeak . 

 " mouse ! " say George , and as he say it the mother slide out . somebody 
 knock she on the back , and the hole be open out . little mouse seem 
 to swarm everywhere . it be like kill insect . we count nine little 
 one lie dead . 

 " poor brute , " say George , look at the mother , " what a job she must 
 have have rear that lot ! " he pick she up , handle she curiously and 
 with pity . then he say , " well , I may as well finish this to - night ! " 

 his father take another scythe from off the hedge , and together they 
 soon lay the proud , quiver head low . Leslie and I tie up as they 
 mow , and soon all be finish . 

 the beautiful day be flush to die . over in the west the mist be 
 gather bluer . the intense stillness be break by the rhythmic hum of 
 the engine at the distant coal - mine , as they draw up the last bantle 
 of man . as we walk across the field the tube of stubble tinkle like 
 dulcimer . the scent of the corn begin to rise gently . the last cry of 
 the pheasant come from the wood , and the little cloud of bird be 
 go . 

 I carry a scythe , and we walk , pleasantly weary , down the hill 
 towards the farm . the child have go home with the rabbit . 

 when we reach the mill , we find the girl just rise from the table . 
 Emily begin to carry away the used pot , and to set clean one for we . 
 she merely glance at we and say her formal greeting . Lettie pick up 
 a book that lie in the ingle seat , and go to the window . George 
 drop into a chair . he have fling off his coat , and have push back his 
 hair . he rest his great brown arm on the table and be silent for a 
 moment . 

 " run like that , " he say to I , pass his hand over his eye , 
 " make you more tired than a whole day 's work . I do not   think I shall do 
 it again . " 

 " the sport 's exciting while it last , " say Leslie . 

 " it do you more harm than the rabbit do we good , " say Mrs. Saxton . 

 " oh , I do not   know , mother , " drawl her son , " it be a couple of 
 shilling . " 

 " and a couple of day off your life . " 

 " what be that ! " he reply , take a piece of bread and butter , and 
 bite a large piece from it . 

 " pour we a drop of tea , " he say to Emily . 

 " I do not   know that I shall wait on such brute , " she reply , relent , 
 and flourish the teapot . 

 " oh , " say he , take another piece of bread and butter , " I be not all 
 alone in my savageness this time . " 

 " man be all brute , " say Lettie , hotly , without look up from her 
 book . 

 " you can tame we , " say Leslie , in mighty good humour . 

 she do not reply . George begin , in that deliberate voice that so 
 annoyed Emily : 

 " it do make you mad , though , to touch the fur , and not be able to grab 
 he " he laugh quietly . 

 Emily move off in disgust . Lettie open her mouth sharply to speak , 
 but remain silent . 

 " I do not   know , " say Leslie . " when it come to kill it go against 
 the stomach . " 

 " if you can run , " say George , " you should be able to run to death . when 
 your blood 's up , you do not   hang half way . " 

 " I think a man be horrible , " say Lettie , " who can tear the head off a 
 little mite of a thing like a rabbit , after run it in torture over a 
 field . " 

 " when he be nothing but a barbarian to begin with " say Emily . 

 " if you begin to run yourself you would be the same , " say George . 

 " why , woman be cruel enough , " say Leslie , with a glance at Lettie . 
 " yes , " he continue , " they be cruel enough in their way " another look , 
 and a comical little smile . 

 " well , " say George , " what be the good finicking ! if you feel like do 
 a thing you would well do it . " 

 " unless you have not   courage , " say Emily , bitingly . 

 he look up at she with dark eye , suddenly full of anger . 

 " but , " say Lettie she could not hold herself from ask , " do not   you 
 think it be brutal , now that you do think be not   it degrade and mean 
 to run the poor little thing down ? " 

 " perhaps it be , " he reply , " but it be not   an hour ago . " 

 " you have no feeling , " she say bitterly . 

 he laugh deprecatingly , but say nothing . 

 we finish tea in silence , Lettie reading , Emily move about the 
 house . George get up and go out at the end . a moment or two after we 
 hear he across the yard with the milk - bucket , sing " the Ash 
 Grove . " 

 " he do not   care a scrap for anything , " say Emily with accumulated 
 bitterness . Lettie look out of the window across the yard , think . 
 she look very glum . 

 after a while we go out also , before the light fade altogether from 
 the pond . Emily take we into the low garden to get some ripe plum . 
 the old garden be very low . the soil be black . the cornbind and 
 goosegrass be clutch at the ancient gooseberry bush , which 
 sprawl by the path . the garden be not very productive , save of 
 weed , and perhaps , tremendous lank artichoke or swollen marrow . but 
 at the bottom , where the end of the farm building rise high and grey , 
 there be a plum - tree which have be crucify to the wall , and which 
 have break away and lean forward from bondage . now under the bough 
 be hide great mist - bloom , crimson treasure , splendid globe . I 
 shake the old , ragged trunk , green , with even the fresh gum dull over , 
 and the treasure fall heavily , thud down among the immense rhubarb 
 leave below . the girl laugh , and we divide the spoil , and turn 
 back to the yard . we go down to the edge of the garden , which skirt 
 the bottom pond , a pool chain in a heavy growth of weed . it be 
 move with rat , the father have say . the rush be thick below we ; 
 opposite , the great bank front we , with orchard tree climb it like 
 a hillside . the low pond receive the overflow from the upper by a 
 tunnel from the deep black sluice . 

 two rat run into the black culvert at our approach . we sit on some 
 pile , mossy stone to watch . the rat come out again , run a little way , 
 stop , run again , listen , be reassure , and slide about freely , 
 drag their long naked tail . soon six or seven grey beast be 
 play round the mouth of the culvert , in the gloom . they sit and wipe 
 their sharp face , stroke their whisker . then one would give a little 
 rush and a little squirm of excitement and would jump vertically into 
 the air , alight on four foot , run , slide into the black shadow . 
 one drop with an ugly plop into the water , and swam toward we , the 
 hoary imp , his sharp snout and his wicked little eye move at we . 
 Lettie shudder . I throw a stone into the dead pool , and frighten 
 they all . but we have frighten ourselves more , so we hurry away , and 
 stamp our foot in relief on the free pavement of the yard . 

 Leslie be look for we . he have be inspect the yard and the stock 
 under Mr. Saxton 's supervision . 

 " be you run away from I ? " he ask . 

 " no , " she reply . " I have be to fetch you a plum . look ! " and she 
 show he two in a leaf . 

 " they be too pretty to eat ! " say he . 

 " you have not taste yet , " she laugh . 

 " come , " he say , offer she his arm . " let we go up to the water . " she 
 take his arm . 

 it be a splendid evening , with the light all thick and yellow lying on 
 the smooth pond . Lettie make he lift she on to a lean bough of 
 willow . he sit with his head rest against her skirt . Emily and I 
 move on . we hear he murmur something , and her voice reply , gently , 
 caressingly : 

 " no let we be still it be all so still I love it well of all now . " 

 Emily and I talk , sit at the base of the alder , a little way on . 
 after an excitement , and in the evening , especially in autumn , one be 
 inclined to be sad and sentimental . we have forget that the darkness 
 be weave . I hear in the little distance Leslie 's voice begin to 
 murmur like a fly beetle that come not too near . then , away down in 
 the yard George begin sing the old song , " I sow the seed of love . " 

 this interrupt the flight of Leslie 's voice , and as the singing come 
 nearer , the hum of low word cease . we go forward to meet George . 
 Leslie sit up , clasp his knee , and do not speak . George come near , 
 say : 

 " the moon be go to rise . " 

 " let I get down , " say Lettie , lift her hand to he to help she . 
 he , mistake her wish , put his hand under her arm , and set she gently 
 down , as one would a child . Leslie get up quickly , and seem to hold 
 himself separate , resent the intrusion . 

 " I think you be all four together , " say George quietly . Lettie 
 turn quickly at the apology : 

 " so we be . so we be five now . be it there the moon will rise ? " 

 " yes I like to see it come over the wood . it lift slowly up to stare 
 at you . I always think it want to know something , and I always think I 
 have something to answer , only I do not   know what it be , " say Emily . 

 where the sky be pale in the east over the rim of wood come the 
 forehead of the yellow moon . we stand and watch in silence . then , as 
 the great disc , nearly full , lift and look straight upon we , we be 
 wash off our foot in a vague sea of moonlight . we stand with the light 
 like water on our face . Lettie be glad , a little bit exalt ; Emily 
 be passionately troubled ; her lip be part , almost beseech ; 
 Leslie be frown , oblivious , and George be think , and the 
 terrible , immense moonbeam braid through his feeling . at length 
 Leslie say softly , mistakenly : 

 " come along , dear " and he take her arm . 

 she let he lead she along the bank of the pond , and across the plank 
 over the sluice . 

 " do you know , " she say , as we be carefully descend the steep bank 
 of the orchard , " I feel as if I want to laugh , or dance something 
 rather outrageous . " 

 " surely not like that now , " Leslie reply in a low voice , feel 
 really hurt . 

 " I do though ! I will race you to the bottom . " 

 " no , no , dear ! " he hold she back . when he come to the wicket lead on 
 to the front lawn , he say something to she softly , as he hold the 
 gate . 

 I think he want to utter his half finished proposal , and so bind she . 

 she break free , and , observe the long lawn which lie in grey shadow 
 between the eastern and western glow , she cry : 

 " Polka ! a polka one can dance a polka when the grass be smooth and 
 short even if there be some fallen leaf . yes , yes how jolly ! " 

 she hold out her hand to Leslie , but it be too great a shock to his 
 mood . so she call to I , and there be a shade of anxiety in her 
 voice , lest after all she should be catch in the toil of the night 's 
 sentiment . 

 " Pat you will dance with I Leslie hat a polka . " I dance with she . I 
 do not know the time when I could not polka it seem innate in one 's 
 foot , to dance that dance . we go fly round , hiss through the 
 dead leaf . the night , the low hung yellow moon , the pallor of the 
 west , the blue cloud of evening overhead go round and through the 
 fantastic branch of the old laburnum , spin a little madness . you 
 can not tire Lettie ; her foot be wing that beat the air . when at last I 
 stay she she laugh as fresh as ever , as she bind her hair . 

 " there ! " she say to Leslie , in tone of extreme satisfaction , " that be 
 lovely . do you come and dance now . " 

 " not a polka , " say he , sadly , feel the poetry in his heart insult 
 by the jigging measure . 

 " but one can not dance anything else on wet grass , and through shuffle 
 dead leaf . you , George ? " 

 " Emily say I jump , " he reply . 

 " come on come on " and in a moment they be bound across the grass . 
 after a few step she fall in with he , and they spin round the grass . 
 it be true , he leap , spring with large stride , carry she with 
 he . it be a tremendous , irresistible dancing . Emily and I must join , 
 make an inner ring . now and again there be a sense of something white 
 fly near , and wild rustle of drapery , and a swish of disturb 
 leaf as they whirl past we . long after we be tired they dance on . 

 at the end , he look big , erect , nerve with triumph , and she be 
 exhilarate like a Bacchante . 

 " have you finish ? " Leslie ask . 

 she know she be safe from his question that day . 

 " yes , " she pant . " you should have dance . give I my hat , please . do I 
 look very disgraceful ? " 

 he take her hat and give it to she . 

 " disgraceful ? " he repeat . 

 " oh , you be solemn to - night ! what be it ? " 

 " yes , what be it ? " he repeat ironically . 

 " it must be the moon . now , be my hat straight ? tell I now you be not 
 look . then put it level . now then ! why , your hand be quite cold , 
 and mine so hot ! I feel so impish , " and she laugh . 

 " there now I be ready . do you notice those little chrysanthemum try 
 to smell sadly ; when the old moon be laugh and wink through those 
 bough . what business have they with their sadness ! " she take a handful 
 of petal and fling they into the air : " there if they sigh they ask for 
 sorrow I like thing to wink and look wild . " 




  CHAPTER VI 

  the EDUCATION of GEORGE 


 as I have say , Strelley Mill lie at the north end of the long 
 Nethermere valley . on the northern slope lay its pasture and arable 
 land . the shaggy common , now closed and part of the estate , cover the 
 western slope , and the cultivate land be bound on the east by the 
 sharp dip of the brook course , a thread of woodland broaden into a 
 spinney and end at the upper pond ; beyond this , on the east , rise the 
 sharp , wild , grassy hillside , scatter with old tree , ruinous with the 
 gaunt , ragged bone of old hedge - row , grow into thorn tree . along the 
 rim of the hill , begin in the northwest , be dark woodland , which 
 sweep round east and south till they race down in riot to the very edge 
 of southern Nethermere , surround our house . from the eastern hill 
 crest , look straight across , you could see the spire of Selsby 
 Church , and a few roof , and the head - stock of the pit . 

 so on three side the farm be skirt by wood , the den of rabbit , 
 and the common hold another warren . 

 now the squire of the estate , head of an ancient , once even famous , but 
 now decay house , love his rabbit . unlike the family fortune , the 
 family tree flourish amazingly ; Sherwood could show nothing 
 comparable . its ramification be stupendous ; it be more like a banyan 
 than a british oak . how be the good squire to nourish himself and his 
 lady , his name , his tradition , and his thirteen lusty branch on his 
 meagre estate ? an evil fortune discover to he that he could sell 
 each of his rabbit , those bit of furry vermin , for a shilling or 
 thereabout in Nottingham ; since which time the noble family subsist 
 by rabbit . 

 Farms be gnaw away ; corn and sweet grass depart from the face of 
 the hill ; cattle grow lean , unable to eat the defile herbage . then the 
 farm become the home of a keeper , and the country be silent , with no 
 sound of cattle , no clink of horse , no barking of lusty dog . 

 but the squire love his rabbit . he defend they against the snare of 
 the despair farmer , protect they with gun and notice to quit . how 
 he glow with thankfulness as he see the dishevel hillside heave 
 when the gnawing host move on ! 

 " be they not quail and manna ? " say he to his sporting guest , early 
 one Monday morning , as the high meadow break into life at the sound of 
 his gun . " Quails and manna in this wilderness ? " 

 " they be , by Jove ! " assent the sporting guest as he take another gun , 
 while the saturnine keeper smile grimly . 

 meanwhile , Strelley Mill begin to suffer under this gangrene . it be the 
 outpost in the wilderness . it be an understand thing that none of the 
 squire 's tenant have a gun . 

 " well , " say the squire to Mr. Saxton , " you have the land for next to 
 nothing next to nothing at a rent really absurd . surely the little 
 that the rabbit eat " 

 " it be not a little come and look for yourself , " reply the farmer . the 
 squire make a gesture of impatience . 

 " what do you want ? " he inquire . 

 " will you wire I off ? " be the repeat request . 

 " Wire be what do Halkett say so much per yard and it would come 
 to what do Halkett tell I now ? but a large sum . no , I can not   do it . " 

 " well , I can not   live like this . " 

 " have another glass of whisky ? yes , yes , I want another glass myself , 
 and I can not   drink alone so if I be to enjoy my glass . that be it ! now 
 surely you exaggerate a little . it be not so bad . " 

 " I can not   go on like it , I be sure . " 

 " well , we will see about compensation we will see . I will have a talk with 
 Halkett , and I will come down and have a look at you . we all find a pinch 
 somewhere it be nothing but humanity 's heritage . " 


 


 I be bear in September , and love it well of all the month . there be no 
 heat , no hurry , no thirst and weariness in corn harvest as there be in 
 the hay . if the season be late , as be usual with we , then mid - September 
 see the corn still stand in stook . the morning come slowly . the 
 earth be like a woman married and fading ; she do not leap up with a 
 laugh for the first fresh kiss of dawn , but slowly , quietly , 
 unexpectantly lie watch the waking of each new day . the blue mist , 
 like memory in the eye of a neglect wife , never go from the woode 
 hill , and only at noon creep from the near hedge . there be no bird to 
 put a song in the throat of morning ; only the crow 's voice speak during 
 the day . perhaps there be the regular breathing hush of the scythe even 
 the fretful jar of the mow machine . but next day , in the morning , all 
 be still again . the lie corn be wet , and when you have bind it , and 
 lift the heavy sheaf to make the stook , the tress of oats wreathe 
 round each other and droop mournfully . 

 as I work with my friend through the still morning we talk 
 endlessly . I would give he the gist of what I know of chemistry , and 
 botany , and psychology . day after day I tell he what the professor have 
 tell I ; of life , of sex and its origin ; of Schopenhauer and William 
 James . we have be friend for year , and he be accustom to my talk . 
 but this autumn fruit the first crop of intimacy between we . I talk 
 a great deal of poetry to he , and of rudimentary metaphysics . he be 
 very good stuff . he have hardly a single dogma , save that of please 
 himself . religion be nothing to he . so he hear all I have to say with 
 an open mind , and understand the drift of thing very rapidly , and 
 quickly make these idea part of himself . 

 we tramp down to dinner with only the cling warmth of the sunshine 
 for a coat . in this still , enfold weather a quiet companionship be 
 very grateful . Autumn creep through everything . the little damson in 
 the pudding taste of September , and be fragrant with memory . the voice 
 of those at table be soft and more reminiscent than at haytime . 

 Afternoon be all warm and golden . Oat sheaf be light ; they whisper 
 to each other as they freely embrace . the long , stout stubble tinkle as 
 the foot brush over it ; the scent of the straw be sweet . when the 
 poor , bleached sheaf be lift out of the hedge , a spray of nodding 
 wild raspberry be disclose , with belate berry ready to drop ; among 
 the damp grass lush blackberry may be discover . then one notice 
 that the last bell hang from the ragged spire of fox - glove . the talk be 
 of people , an odd book ; of one 's hope and the future ; of Canada , where 
 work be strenuous , but not life ; where the plain be wide , and one be 
 not lap in a soft valley , like an apple that fall in a seclude 
 orchard . the mist steal over the face of the warm afternoon . the 
 tying - up be all finish , and it only remain to rear up the fall 
 bundle into shock . the sun sink into a golden glow in the west . the 
 gold turn to red , the red darken , like a fire burn low , the sun 
 disappear behind the bank of milky mist , purple like the pale bloom on 
 blue plum , and we put on our coat and go home . 


 


 in the evening , when the milking be finish , and all the thing feed , 
 then we go out to look at the snare . we wander on across the stream 
 and up the wild hillside . our foot rattle through black patch of 
 devil's - bit scabius ; we skirt a swim of thistle - down , which glisten 
 when the moon touch it . we stumble on through wet , coarse grass , over 
 soft mole - hill and black rabbit - hole . the hill and wood cast 
 shadow ; the pool of mist in the valley gather the moonbeam in 
 cold , shivery light . 

 we come to an old farm that stand on the level brow of the hill . the 
 wood sweep away from it , leave a great clearing of what be once 
 cultivate land . the handsome chimney of the house , silhouette against 
 a light sky , draw my admiration . I notice that there be no light or 
 glow in any window , though the house have only the width of one room , and 
 though the night be only at eight o'clock . we look at the long , 
 impressive front . several of the window have be bricke in , give a 
 pitiful impression of blindness ; the place where the plaster have fall 
 off the wall show blacker in the shadow . we push open the gate , and 
 as we walk down the path , weed and dead plant brush our ankle . we 
 look in at a window . the room be light also by a window from the 
 other side , through which the moonlight stream on to the flagged 
 floor , dirty , litter with paper , and wisps of straw . the hearth lie in 
 the light , with all its distress of grey ash , and pile cinder of 
 burn paper , and a child 's headless doll , charred and pitiful . on the 
 border - line of shadow lie a round fur cap a game - keeper 's cap . I blame 
 the moonlight for enter the desolate room ; the darkness alone be 
 decent and reticent . I hat the little rose on the illuminated piece 
 of wallpaper , I hat that fireside . 

 with farmer 's instinct George turn to the outhouse . the cow - yard 
 startle I . it be a forest of the tall nettle I have ever 
 see nettle far tall than my six foot . the air be soddene with the 
 dank scent of nettle . as I follow George along the obscure brick 
 path , I feel my flesh creep . but the building , when we enter they , 
 be in splendid condition ; they have be restore within a small number 
 of year ; they be well - timbere , neat , and cosy . here and there we see 
 feather , bit of animal wreckage , even the remnant of a cat , which we 
 hastily examine by the light of a match . as we enter the stable there 
 be an ugly noise , and three great rat half rush at we and threaten 
 we with their vicious tooth . I shudder , and hurry back , stumble 
 over a bucket , rotten with rust , and so fill with weed that I think 
 it part of the jungle . there be a silence make horrible by the faint 
 noise that rat and fly bat give out . the place be bare of any 
 vestige of corn or straw or hay , only choke with a growth of abnormal 
 weed . when I find myself free in the orchard I could not stop 
 shivering . there be no apple to be see overhead between we and the 
 clear sky . either the bird have cause they to fall , when the rabbit 
 have devour they , or someone have gather the crop . 

 " this , " say George bitterly , " be what the mill will come to . " 

 " after your time , " I say . 

 " my time my time . I shall never have a time . and I should not   be 
 surprised if father 's time be not   short with rabbit and one thing and 
 another . as it be , we depend on the milk - round , and on the carting which 
 I do for the council . you can not   call it farming . we be a miserable 
 mixture of farmer , milkman , greengrocer , and cart contractor . it be a 
 shabby business . " 

 " you have to live , " I retort . 

 " yes but it be rotten . and father will not   move and he will not   change his 
 method . " 

 " well what about you ? " 

 " I ! what should I change for ? I be comfortable at home . as for my 
 future , it can look after itself , so long as nobody depend on I . " 

 " Laissez faire , " say I , smile . 

 " this be no laissez faire , " he reply , glance round , " this be pull 
 the nipple out of your lip , and let the milk run away sour . look 
 there ! " 

 through the thin veil of moonlit mist that slide over the hillside we 
 could see an army of rabbit bunch up , or hop a few pace forward , 
 feed . 

 we set off at a swing pace down the hill , scatter the host . as we 
 approach the fence that bound the Mill field , he exclaim , 
 " Hullo ! " and hurry forward . I follow he , and observe the dark 
 figure of a man rise from the hedge . it be a game - keeper . he pretend 
 to be examine his gun . as we come up he greet we with a calm 
 " good - evenin ' ! " 

 George reply by investigate the little gap in the hedge . 

 " I will trouble you for that snare , " he say . 

 " will yer ? " answer Annable , a broad , burly , black - face fellow . " an ' 
  I should like ter know what you be do on th ' wrong side th ' ' edge ? " 

 " you can see what we be do hand over my snare and the rabbit , " 
 say George angrily . 

 " what rabbit ? " say Annable , turn sarcastically to I . 

 " you know well enough an ' you can hand it over or " George reply . 

 " or what ? spit it out ! the sound will not   kill I " the man grin with 
 contempt . 

 " hand over here ! " say George , step up to the man in a rage . 

 " now do not ! " say the keeper , stand stock still , and look 
 unmovedly at the proximity of George : 

 " you would well get off home both you an ' ' I m. you will get neither snare 
 nor rabbit see ! " 

 " we will see ! " say George , and he make a sudden move to get hold of 
 the man 's coat . instantly he go staggering back with a heavy blow 
 under the left ear . 

 " damn brute ! " I ejaculate , bruise my knuckle against the fellow 's 
 jaw . then I too find myself sit dazedly on the grass , watch the 
 great skirt of his velveteen fling round he as if he have be a 
 demon , as he stride away . I get up , press my chest where I have be 
 strike . George be lie in the hedge - bottom . I turn he over , and 
 rub his temple , and shake the drench grass on his face . he open 
 his eye and look at I , daze . then he draw his breath quickly , and 
 put his hand to his head . 

 " he he nearly stun I , " he say . 

 " the devil ! " I answer . 

 " I be not   ready . " 

 " no . " 

 " do he knock I down ? " 

 " ay I too . " 

 he be silent for some time , sit limply . then he press his hand 
 against the back of his head , say , " my head do sing ! " he try to 
 get up , but fail . " Good God ! be knock into this state by a 
 damned keeper ! " 

 " come on , " I say , " let us see if we can not   get indoor . " 

 " no ! " he say quickly , " we need not   tell they do not   let they know . " 

 I sit think of the pain in my own chest , and wish I could remember 
 hear Annable 's jaw smash , and wish that my knuckle be more 
 bruised than they be though that be bad enough . I get up , and help 
 George to rise . he sway , almost pull I over . but in a while he 
 could walk unevenly . 

 " be I , " he say , " cover with clay and stuff ? " 

 " not much , " I reply , trouble by the shame and confusion with which he 
 speak . 

 " get it off , " he say , stand still to be clean . 

 I do my good . then we walk about the field for a time , gloomy , 
 silent , and sore . 

 suddenly , as we go by the pond - side , we be startle by great , 
 swish black shadow that sweep just above our head . the swan be 
 fly up for shelter , now that a cold wind have begin to fret 
 Nethermere . they swing down on to the glassy mill - pond , shake the 
 moonlight in fleck across the deep shadow ; the night ring with the 
 clacking of their wing on the water ; the stillness and calm be 
 break ; the moonlight be furrow and scatter , and break . the swan , 
 as they sail into shadow , be dim , haunt spectre ; the wind find 
 we shiver . 

 " do not   you will not   say anything ? " he ask as I be leave he . 

 " no . " 

 " nothing at all not to anybody ? " 

 " no . " 

 " good - night . " 


 


 about the end of September , our countryside be alarm by the harrying 
 of sheep by strange dog . one morning , the squire , go the round of 
 his field as be his custom , to his grief and horror find two of his 
 sheep tear and dead in the hedge - bottom , and the rest huddle in a 
 corner sway about in terror , smear with blood . the squire do not 
 recover his spirit for day . 

 there be a report of two grey wolvish dog . the squire 's keeper have 
 hear yelp in the field of Dr. Collins of the Abbey , about dawn . 
 three sheep lie soak in blood when the labourer go to tend the 
 flock . 

 then the farmer take alarm . Lord , of the White House farm , intend to 
 put his sheep in pen , with his dog in charge . it be Saturday , however , 
 and the lad run off to the little travel theatre that have halt at 
 Westwold . while they sit open - mouthed in the theatre , gloriously 
 nickname the " Blood - Tub , " watch hero die with much writhing and 
 heaving , and struggle up to say a word , and collapse without have 
 say it , six of their silly sheep be slaughter in the field . at 
 every house it be enquire of the dog ; nowhere have one be loose . 

 Mr. Saxton have some thirty sheep on the Common . George determine that 
 the easy thing be for he to sleep out with they . he build a shelter 
 of hurdle interlace with brushwood , and in the sunny afternoon we 
 collect pile of bracken , brown to the ruddy winter - brown now . he 
 sleep there for a week , but that week age his mother like a year . she 
 be out in the cold morning twilight watching , with her apron over her 
 head , for his approach . she do not rest with the thought of he out on 
 the Common . 

 therefore , on Saturday night he bring down his rug , and take up Gyp 
 to watch in his stead . for some time we sit look at the star over 
 the dark hill . now and then a sheep cough , or a rabbit rustle 
 beneath the bramble , and Gyp whine . the mist creep over the 
 gorse - bush , and the webs on the bramble be white ; the devil throw 
 his net over the blackberry as soon as September 's back be turn , 
 they say . 

 " I see two fellow go by with bag and net , " say George , as we sit 
 look out of his little shelter . 

 " poacher , " say I. " do you speak to they ? " 

 " no they do not   see I . I be drop asleep when a rabbit rush 
 under the blanket , all of a shiver , and a whippet dog after it . I give 
 the whippet a punch in the neck , and he yelp off . the rabbit stop 
 with I quite a long time then it go . " 

 " how do you feel ? " 

 " I do not   care . I do not   care much what happen just now . Father could 
 get along without I , and mother have the child . I think I shall 
 emigrate . " 

 " why do not   you before ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know . there be a lot of little comfort and interest at 
 home that one would miss . besides , you feel somebody in your own 
 countryside , and you be nothing in a foreign part , I expect . " 

 " but you be go ? " 

 " what be there to stop here for ? the valley be all run wild and 
 unprofitable . you have   no freedom for thinking of what the other folk 
 think of you , and everything round you keep the same , and so you can not 
 change yourself because everything you look at bring up the same old 
 feeling , and stop you from feel fresh thing . and what be there 
 that be worth anything ? what be worth have in my life ? " 

 " I think , " say I , " your comfort be worth have . " 

 he sit still and do not answer . 

 " what be shake you out of your nest ? " I ask . 

 " I do not   know . I have   not feel the same since that row with Annable . and 
 Lettie say to I : ' here , you can not   live as you like in any way or 
 circumstance . you be like a bit out of those colour marble mosaic in 
 the hall , you have to fit in your own set , fit into your own pattern , 
 because you be put there from the first . but you do not   want to be like a 
 fix bit of a mosaic you want to fuse into life , and melt and mix with 
 the rest of folk , to have some thing burn out of you ' she be 
 downright serious . " 

 " well , you need not believe she . when do you see she ? " 

 " she come down on Wednesday , when I be get the apple in the 
 morning . she climb a tree with I , and there be a wind , that be why 
 I be get all the apple , and it rock we , I right up at the top , 
 she sit half way down hold the basket . I ask she do not   she 
 think that free kind of life be the good , and that be how she answer 
 I . " 

 " you should have contradict she . " 

 " it seem true . I never think of it be wrong , in fact . " 

 " come that sound bad . " 

 " no I think she look down on we on our way of life . I think she 
 mean I be like a toad in a hole . " 

 " you should have show she different . " 

 " how could I when I could see no different ? " 

 " it strike I you be in love . " 

 he laugh at the idea , say , " no , but it be rotten to find that there 
 be not   a single thing you have to be proud of . " 

 " this be a new tune for you . " 

 he pull the grass moodily . 

 " and when do you think of go ? " 

 " oh I do not   know I have   say nothing to mother . not yet , at any rate 
 not till spring . " 

 " not till something have happen , " say I. 

 " what ? " he ask . 

 " something decisive . " 

 " I do not   know what can happen unless the Squire turn we out . " 

 " no ? " I say . 

 he do not speak . 

 " you should make thing happen , " say I. 

 " do not   make I feel a bad fool , Cyril , " he reply despairingly . 

 Gyp whine and jump , tug her chain to follow we . the grey blur 
 among the blackness of the bush be rest sheep . a chill , dim mist 
 creep along the ground . 

 " but , for all that , Cyril , " he say , " to have her laugh at you across 
 the table ; to hear her sing as she move about , before you be wash at 
 night , when the fire 's warm , and you be tired ; to have she sit by you on 
 the hearth seat , close and soft . . . . " 

 " in Spain , " I say . " in Spain . " 

 he take no notice , but turn suddenly , laugh . 

 " do you know , when I be stooke up , lift the sheaf , it feel like 
 have your arm round a girl . it be quite a sudden sensation . " 

 " you would well take care , " say I , " you will mesh yourself in the silk of 
 dream , and then " 

 he laugh , not have hear my word . 

 " the time seem to go like lightning think " he confess " I seem to 
 sweep the morning up in a handful . " 

 " oh , Lord ! " say I. " why do not   you scheme forget what you want , 
 instead of dream fulfilment ? " 

 " well , " he reply . " if it be a fine dream , would not   you want to go on 
 dream ? " and with that he finish , and I go home . 

 I sit at my window look out , try to get thing straight . mist 
 rise , and wreathe round Nethermere , like ghost meet and embrace 
 sadly . I think of the time when my friend should not follow the harrow 
 on our own snug valley side , and when Lettie 's room next mine should be 
 close to hide its emptiness , not its joy . my heart clung passionately 
 to the hollow which hold we all ; how could I bear that it should be 
 desolate ! I wonder what Lettie would do . 

 in the morning I be up early , when daybreak come with a shiver through 
 the wood . I go out , while the moon still shine sickly in the west . 
 the world shrink from the morning . it be then that the last of the 
 summer thing die . the wood be dark , and smell damp and heavy with 
 autumn . on the path the leaf lie clogged . 

 as I come near the farm I hear the yelling of dog . run , I reach 
 the Common , and see the sheep huddle and scatter in group , something 
 leap round they . George burst into sight pursuing . directly , there be 
 the bang , bang of a gun . I pick up a heavy piece of sandstone and run 
 forward . three sheep scatter wildly before I . in the dim light I see 
 their grey shadow move among the gorse bush . then a dog leap , and I 
 fling my stone with all my might . I hit . there come a high - pitch 
 howl yelp of pain ; I see the brute make off , and go after he , 
 dodge the prickly bush , leap the trail bramble . the gunshot 
 ring out again , and I hear the man shout with excitement . my dog be 
 out of sight , but I follow still , slant down the hill . in a field 
 ahead I see someone run . leap the low hedge , I pursue , and 
 overtook Emily , who be hurry as fast as she could through the wet 
 grass . there be another gunshot and great shouting . Emily glance 
 round , see I , and start . 

 " it be go to the quarry , " she pant . we walk on , without say a 
 word . skirt the spinney , we follow the brook course , and come at 
 last to the quarry fence . the old excavation be fill now with 
 tree . the steep wall , twenty foot deep in place , be pack with 
 loose stone , and trail with hang bramble . we climb down the 
 steep bank of the brook , and enter the quarry by the bed of the 
 stream . under the grove of ash and oak a pale primrose still linger , 
 glimmer wanly beside the hidden water . Emily find a smear of blood 
 on a beautiful trail of yellow convolvulus . we follow the track on to 
 the open , where the brook flow on the hard rock bed , and the stony 
 floor of the quarry be only a tangle of gorse and bramble and 
 honeysuckle . 

 " take a good stone , " say I , and we press on , where the grove in the 
 great excavation darken again , and the brook slide secretly under the 
 arm of the bush and the hair of the long grass . we beat the cover 
 almost to the road . I think the brute have escape , and I pull a 
 bunch of mountain - ash berry , and stand tap they against my knee . I 
 be startle by a snarl and a little scream . run forward , I come 
 upon one of the old , horse - shoe lime kiln that stand at the head of the 
 quarry . there , in the mouth of one of the kiln , Emily be kneel on 
 the dog , her hand bury in the hair of its throat , push back its 
 head . the little jerk of the brute 's body be the spasm of death ; 
 already the eye be turn inward , and the upper lip be draw from 
 the tooth by pain . 

 " Good Lord , Emily ! but he be dead ! " exclaim . 

 " have he hurt you ? " I draw she away . she shudder violently , and seem 
 to feel a horror of herself . 

 " no no , " she say , look at herself , with blood all on her skirt , 
 where she have kneel on the wound which I have give the dog , and press 
 the broken rib into the chest . there be a trickle of blood on her arm . 

 " do he bite you ? " I ask , anxious . 

 " no oh , no I just peep in , and he jump . but he have no strength , 
 and I hit he back with my stone , and I lose my balance , and fall on 
 he . " 

 " let I wash your arm . " 

 " oh ! " she exclaim , " be not   it horrible ! oh , I think it be so awful . " 

 " what ? " say I , busy bath her arm in the cold water of the brook . 

 " this this whole brutal affair . " 

 " it ought to be cauterise , " say I , look at a score on her arm from 
 the dog 's tooth . 

 " that scratch that be nothing ! can you get that off my skirt I feel 
 hateful to myself . " 

 I wash her skirt with my handkerchief as well as I could , say : 

 " let I just sear it for you ; we can go to the Kennels . do you ought I 
 do not   feel safe otherwise . " 

 " really , " she say , glance up at I , a smile come into her fine dark 
 eye . 

 " yes come along . " 

 " ha , ha ! " she laugh . " you look so serious . " 

 I take her arm and draw she away . she link her arm in mine and lean 
 on I . 

 " it be just like Lorna Doone , " she say as if she enjoy it . 

 " but you will let I do it , " say I , refer to the cauterising . 

 " you make I ; but I shall feel ugh , I dare not   think of it . get I some 
 of those berry . " 

 I pluck a few bunch of guelder - rose fruit , transparent , ruby 
 berry . she stroke they softly against her lip and cheek , caress 
 they . then she murmur to herself : 

 " I have always want to put red berry in my hair . " 

 the shawl she have be wear be throw across her shoulder , and her 
 head be bare , and her black hair , soft and short and ecstatic , tumble 
 wildly into loose light curl . she thrust the stalk of the berry 
 under her comb . her hair be not heavy or long enough to have hold 
 they . then , with the ruby bunch glow through the black mist of 
 curl , she look up at I , brightly , with wide eye . I look at she , 
 and feel the smile win into her eye . then I turn and drag a 
 trail of golden - leave convolvulus from the hedge , and I twist it into 
 a coronet for she . 

 " there ! " say I , " you be crown . " 

 she put back her head , and the low laughter shake in her throat . 

 " what ! " she ask , put all the courage and recklessness she have into 
 the question , and in her soul tremble . 

 " not ChloŽ , not Bacchante . you have always get your soul in your eye , 
 such an earnest , troublesome soul . " 

 the laughter fade at once , and her great seriousness look out again 
 at I , plead . 

 " you be like Burne - Jones ' damsel . troublesome shadow be always 
 crowd across your eye , and you cherish they . you think the flesh of 
 the apple be nothing , nothing . you only care for the eternal pip . why 
 do not   you snatch your apple and eat it , and throw the core away ? " 

 she look at I sadly , not understand , but believe that I in my 
 wisdom speak truth , as she always believe when I lose she in a maze of 
 word . she stoop down , and the chaplet fall from her hair , and only 
 one bunch of berry remain . the ground around we be strew with the 
 four - lipped burrs of beechnut , and the quaint little nut - pyramid be 
 scatter among the ruddy fall leaf . Emily gather a few nut . 

 " I love beechnut , " she say , " but they make I long for my childhood 
 again till I could almost cry out . to go out for beechnut before 
 breakfast ; to thread they for necklace before supper ; to be the envy 
 of the other at school next day ! there be as much pleasure in a beech 
 necklace then as there be in the whole autumn now and no sadness . there 
 be no more unmixed joy after you have grow up . " she keep she face to 
 the ground as she speak , and she continue to gather the fruit . 

 " do you find any with nut in ? " I ask . 

 " not many here here be two , three . you have they . no I do not   care 
 about they . " 

 I strip one of its horny brown coat and give it to she . she open 
 her mouth slightly to take it , look up into my eye . some people , 
 instead of bring with they cloud of glory , trail cloud of sorrow ; 
 they be bear with " the gift of sorrow " ; ' sorrow " they proclaim " alone 
 be real . the veiled grey angel of sorrow work out slowly the beautiful 
 shape . sorrow be beauty , and the supreme blessedness . " you read it in 
 their eye , and in the tone of their voice . Emily have the gift of 
 sorrow . it fascinate I , but it drive I to rebellion . 

 we follow the soft , smooth - bite turf road under the old beech . the 
 hillside fall away , dishevel with thistle and coarse grass . soon we 
 be in sight of the Kennels , the red old Kennels which have be the 
 scene of so much animation in the time of Lord Byron . they be empty 
 now , overgrow with weed . the bar window of the cottage be grey 
 with dust ; there be no need now to protect the window from cattle , dog 
 or man . one of the three house be inhabit . clear water trickle 
 through a wooden runnel into a great stone trough outside near the door . 

 " come here , " say I to Emily . " let I fasten the back of your dress . " 

 " be it undo ? " she ask , look quickly over her shoulder , and 
 blushing . 

 as I be engage in my task , a girl come out of the cottage with a black 
 kettle and a tea - cup . she be so surprised to see I thus occupy that 
 she forget her own duty , and stand open - mouthed . 

 " S'r Ann ! S'r Ann , " call a voice from inside . " be ter go ter come 
 in an ' shut that door ? " 

 Sarah Ann hastily pour a few cupful of water into the kettle , then 
 she put down both utensil and stand hold her bare arm to warm they . 
 her chief garment consist of a skirt with grey bodice and red flannel 
 skirt , very much tear . her black hair hang in wild tail on to her 
 shoulder . 

 " we must go in here , " say I , approach the girl . she , however , 
 hastily seize the kettle and run indoor with an " oh , mother ! " 

 a woman come to the door . one breast be bare , and hang over her blouse , 
 which , like a dressing - jacket , fall loose over her skirt . her fading , 
 red - brown hair be all frowsy from the bed . in the fold of her skirt 
 clung a swarthy urchin with a shockingly short shirt . he star at we 
 with big black eye , the only portion of his face undecorated with egg 
 and jam . the woman 's blue eye question we languidly . I tell she our 
 errand . 

 " come in come in , " she say , " but dunna look at th ' ' ouse . Th ' childer 
 not be long up . go in , Billy , wi ' nowt on ! " 

 we enter , take the forget kettle lid . the kitchen be large , but 
 scantily furnish save , indeed , for child . the eld , a girl of 
 twelve or so , be stand toast a piece of bacon with one hand , and 
 hold back her nightdress in the other . as the toast hand get 
 scorch , she transfer the bacon to the other , give the hot finger a 
 lick to cool they , and then hold back her nightdress again . her auburn 
 hair hang in heavy coil down her gown . a boy sit on the steel fender , 
 catch the drop fat on a piece of bread . " one , two , three , four , 
 five , six drop , " and he quickly bite off the tasty corner , and resume 
 the task with the other hand . when we enter he try to draw his shirt 
 over his knee , which cause the fat to fall waste . a fat baby , 
 evidently lay down from the breast , lie kicking on the squab , purple in 
 the face , while another lad be push bread and butter into its mouth . 
 the mother sweep to the sofa , poke out the bread and butter , push she 
 finger into the baby 's throat , lift the child up , punch its back , 
 and be highly relieved when it begin to yell . then she administer a 
 few sound spank to the naked buttock of the crammer . he begin to howl , 
 but stop suddenly on see we laugh . on the sack - cloth which 
 serve as hearth rug sit a beautiful child wash the face of a wooden 
 doll with tea , and wipe it on her nightgown . at the table , an infant 
 in a high chair sit suck a piece of bacon , till the grease run down 
 his swarthy arm , ooze through his finger . an old lad stand in the 
 big arm - chair , whose back be hang with a calf - skin , and be 
 industriously pour the dreg of the teacup into a basin of milk . the 
 mother whisk away the milk , and make a rush for the urchin , the baby 
 hang over her arm the while . 

 " I could half kill thee , " she say , but he have slide under the 
 table , and sit serenely unconcerned . 

 " could you " I ask when the mother have put her bonny baby again to her 
 breast " could you lend I a knitting needle ? " 

 " our s'r Ann , wheer 's thy knittin ' needle ? " ask the woman , wince at 
 the same time , and put her hand to the mouth of the suck child . 
 catch my eye , she say : 

 " you would not   credit how he bite . ' E 's nobbut two tooth , but they like 
 six needle . " she draw her brow together and purse her lip , say to 
 the child , " naughty lad , naughty lad ! tha ' shanna hae it , no , not if ter 
 bite thy mother like that . " 

 the family interest be now divide between we and the private concern 
 in process when we enter ; save , however , that the bacon sucker have 
 suck on stolidly , immovable , all the time . 

 " our Sam , wheer 's my knittin ' , tha 's ' ad it ? " cry S'r Ann after a 
 little search . 

 " ' a ' e na , " reply Sam from under the table . 

 " yes , tha ' ' as , " say the mother , give a blind prod under the table 
 with her foot . 

 " ' a ' e na then ! " persist Sam . 

 the mother suggest various possible place of discovery , and at last 
 the knitting be find at the back of the table drawer , among fork and 
 old wooden skewer . 

 " I ' an ter tell yer wheer ivrythink be , " say the mother in mild 
 reproach . S'r Ann , however , give no heed to her parent . her heart be 
 tear for her knitting , the fruit of her labour ; it be a red woollen 
 cuff for the winter ; a corkscrew be bore through the web , and the ball 
 of red wool be bristle with skewer . 

 " it be a ' thee , our Sam , " she wail . " I know it be a ' thee an ' thy A. B. 
 C. " 

 Samuel , under the table , croak out in a voice of fierce monotony : 

  " P. be for Porkypine , whose bristle so strong 
  Kill the bold lion 
 by prick ' be tongue . " 

 the mother begin to shake with quiet laughter . 

 " his father learn he that make it all up , " she whisper proudly to 
 we and to he . 

 " tell we what ' b ' be Sam . " 

 " Shonna , " grunt Sam . 

 " go on , there be a duckie ; an ' I will ma ' ' e a treacle puddin ' . " 

 " today ? " ask S'r Ann eagerly . 

 " go on , Sam , my duck , " persist the mother . 

 " Tha ' ' as na get no treacle , " say Sam conclusively . 

 the needle be in the fire ; the child stand about watch . 

 " will you do it yourself ? " I ask Emily . 

 " I ! " she exclaim , with wide eye of astonishment , and she shake she 
 head emphatically . 

 " then I must . " I take out the needle , hold it in my handkerchief . I 
 take her hand and examine the wound . but when she see the hot glow of 
 the needle , she snatch away her hand , and look into my eye , 
 laugh in a half - hysterical fear and shame . I be very serious , very 
 insistent . she yield I her hand again , bite her lip in imagination 
 of the pain , and look at I . while my eye be look into hers she 
 have courage ; when I be force to pay attention to my cauterising , she 
 glance down , and with a sharp " ah ! " end in a little laugh , she put 
 her hand behind she , and look again up at I with wide brown eye , 
 all quiver with apprehension , and a little shame , and a laughter that 
 hold much pleading . 

 one of the child begin to cry . 

 " it be no good , " say I , throw the fast cool needle on to the 
 hearth . 

 I give the girl all the penny I have then I offer Sam , who have 
 creep out of the shelter of the table , a sixpence . 

 " Shonna a'e that , " he say , turn from the small coin . 

 " well I have no more penny , so nothing will be your share . " 

 I give the other boy a rickety knife I have in my pocket . Sam look 
 fiercely at I . Eager for revenge , he pick up the " porkypine quill " by 
 the hot end . he drop it with a shout of rage , and , seize a cup off 
 the table , fling it at the fortunate Jack . it smash against the 
 fire - place . the mother grab at Sam , but he be go . a girl , a little 
 girl , wail , " oh , that be my rosey mug my rosey mug . " we flee from the 
 scene of confusion . Emily have hardly notice it . her thought be of 
 herself , and of I . 

 " I be an awful coward , " say she humbly . 

 " but I can not   help it " she look beseechingly . 

 " never mind , " say I. 

 " all my flesh seem to jump from it . you do not   know how I feel . " 

 " well never mind . " 

 " I could not   help it , not for my life . " 

 " I wonder , " say I , " if anything could possibly disturb that young 
 bacon - sucker ? he do not   even look round at the smash . " 

 " no , " say she , bite the tip of her finger moodily . 

 further conversation be interrupt by howl from the rear . look 
 round we see Sam career after we over the close - bite turf , howl 
 scorn and derision at we . " rabbit - tail , rabbit - tail , " he cry , his bare 
 little leg twinkle , and his little shirt flutter in the cold 
 morning air . fortunately , at last he trod on a thistle or a thorn , for 
 when we look round again to see why he be silent , he be caper on 
 one leg , hold his wound foot in his hand . 




  CHAPTER VII 

  LETTIE pull down the SMALL GOLD grape 


 during the fall of the leaf Lettie be very wilful . she utter 
 many banality concern man , and love , and marriage ; she taunt 
 Leslie and thwart his wish . at last he stay away from she . she have 
 be several time down to the mill , but because she fancy they be 
 very familiar , receive she on to their rough plane like one of 
 themselves , she stay away . since the death of our father she have be 
 restless ; since inherit her little fortune she have become proud , 
 scornful , difficult to please . difficult to please in every 
 circumstance ; she , who have always be so ripple in thoughtless life , 
 sit down in the window sill to think , and her strong tooth bit at her 
 handkerchief till it be tear in hole . she would say nothing to I ; she 
 read all thing that deal with modern woman . 

 one afternoon Lettie walk over to Eberwich . Leslie have not be to see 
 we for a fortnight . it be a grey , dree afternoon . the wind drift a 
 clammy fog across the hill , and the road be black and deep with mud . 
 the tree in the wood slouch sulkily . it be a day to be shut out and 
 ignore if possible . I heap up the fire , and go to draw the curtain 
 and make perfect the room . then I see Lettie come along the path 
 quickly , very erect . when she come in her colour be high . 

 " Tea not lay ? " she say briefly . 

 " rebecca have just bring in the lamp , " say I. 

 Lettie take off her coat and fur , and fling they on the couch . she go 
 to the mirror , lift her hair , all curl by the fog , and star 
 haughtily at herself . then she swing round , look at the bare table , 
 and ring the bell . 

 it be so rare a thing for we to ring the bell from the dining - room , 
 that Rebecca go first to the outer door . then she come in the room 
 say : 

 " do you ring ? " 

 " I think tea would have be ready , " say Lettie coldly . rebecca 
 look at I , and at she , and reply : 

 " it be but half - past four . I can bring it in . " 

 Mother come down hear the clink of the tea - cup . 

 " well , " she say to Lettie , who be unlace her boot , " and do you 
 find it a pleasant walk ? " 

 " except for the mud , " be the reply . 

 " ah , I guess you wish you have stay at home . what a state for your 
 boot ! and your skirt too , I know . here , let I take they into the 
 kitchen . " 

 " let rebecca take they , " say Lettie but mother be out of the room . 

 when mother have pour out the tea , we sit silently at table . it be on 
 the tip of our tongue to ask Lettie what ail she , but we be 
 experienced and we refrain . after a while she say : 

 " do you know , I meet Leslie Tempest . " 

 " oh , " say mother tentatively , " do he come along with you ? " 

 " he do not look at I . " 

 " oh ! " exclaim mother , and it be speak volume ; then , after a 
 moment , she resume : 

 " perhaps he do not see you . " 

 " or be it a stony Britisher ? " I ask . 

 " he see I , " declare Lettie , " or he would not   have make such a babyish 
 show of be delighted with Margaret Raymond . " 

 " it may have be no show he still may not have see you . " 

 " I feel at once that he have ; I could see his animation be extravagant . 
 he need not have trouble himself , I be not go to run after he . " 

 " you seem very cross , " say I. 

 " indeed I be not . but he know I have to walk all this way home , and he 
 could take up Margaret , who have only half the distance . " 

 " be he drive ? " 

 " in the dog - cart . " she cut her toast into strip viciously . we wait 
 patiently . 

 " it be mean of he , be not   it mother ? " 

 " well , my girl , you have treat he badly . " 

 " what a baby ! what a mean , manly baby ! man be great infant . " 

 " and girl , " say mother , " do not know what they want . " 

 " a grow - up quality , " I add . 

 " nevertheless , " say Lettie , " he be a mean fop , and I detest he . " 

 she rise and sort out some stitchery . Lettie never stitch unless she 
 be in a bad humour . mother smile at I , sigh , and proceed to 
 Mr. Gladstone for comfort ; her breviary and missal be Morley 's Life of 
 Gladstone . 

 I have to take a letter to highclose to Mrs. Tempest from my mother , 
 concern a bazaar in process at the church . " I will bring Leslie back 
 with I , " say I to myself . 

 the night be black and hateful . the lamp by the road from Eberwich 
 end at Nethermere ; their yellow blur on the water make the cold , wet 
 inferno of the night more ugly . 

 Leslie and Marie be both in the library half a library , half a 
 business office ; use also as a lounge room , be cosy . Leslie lie in a 
 great armchair by the fire , immune among cloud of blue smoke . Marie be 
 perch on the step , a great volume on her knee . Leslie get up in his 
 cloud , shake hand , greet I curtly , and vanish again . Marie smile 
 I a quaint , vex smile , say : 

 " oh , Cyril , I be so glad you have   come . I be so worried , and Leslie say 
 he be not a pastry cook , though I be sure I do not   want he to be one , only 
 he need not be a bear . " 

 " what be the matter ? " 

 she frown , give the big volume a little smack and say : 

 " why , I do so much want to make some of those spanish tartlet of your 
 mother 's that be so delicious , and of course Mabel know nothing of 
 they , and they be not in my cookery book , and I have   look through page 
 upon page of the encyclopedia , right through ' Spain , ' and there be 
 nothing yet , and there be fifty page more , and Leslie will not   help I , 
 though I have   get a headache , because he be frabous about something . " she 
 look at I in comical despair . 

 " do you want they for the bazaar ? " 

 " yes for to - morrow . Cook have do the rest , but I have fairly set my 
 heart on these . do not   you think they be lovely ? " 

 " exquisitely lovely . suppose I go and ask mother . " 

 " if you would . but no , oh no , you can not   make all that journey this 
 terrible night . we be simply besiege by mud . the man be both 
 out William have go to meet father and mother have send George to 
 carry some thing to the vicarage . I can not   ask one of the girl on a 
 night like this . I shall have to let it go and the cranberry tart 
 too it can not be help . I be so miserable . " 

 " ask Leslie , " say I. 

 " he be too cross , " she reply , look at he . 

 he do not deign a remark . 

 " will you Leslie ? " 

 " what ? " 

 " go across to Woodside for I ? " 

 " what for ? " 

 " a recipe . do , there be a dear boy . " 

 " where be the man ? " 

 " they be both engage they be out . " 

 " send a girl , then . " 

 " at night like this ? who would go ? " 

 " Cissy . " 

 " I shall not ask she . be not   he mean , Cyril ? man be mean . " 

 " I will come back , " say I. " there be nothing at home to do . mother be 
 read , and Lettie be stitch . the weather disagree with she , as it 
 do with Leslie . " 

 " but it be not fair " she say , look at I softly . then she put 
 away the great book and climb down . 

 " will not   you go , Leslie ? " she say , lay her hand on his shoulder . 

 " woman ! " he say , rise as if reluctantly . " there be no end to their 
 want and their caprice . " 

 " I think he would go , " say she warmly . she run to fetch his overcoat . 
 he put one arm slowly in the sleeve , and then the other , but he would 
 not lift the coat on to his shoulder . 

 " well ! " she say , struggle on tiptoe , " you be a great creature ! can not 
 you get it on , naughty child ? " 

 " give she a chair to stand on , " he say . 

 she shake the collar of the coat sharply , but he stand like a sheep , 
 impassive . 

 " Leslie , you be too bad . I can not   get it on , you stupid boy . " 

 I take the coat and jerk it on . 

 " there , " she say , give he his cap . " now do not   be long . " 

 " what a damned dirty night ! " say he , when we be out . 

 " it be , " say I. 

 " the town , anywhere be well than this hell of a country . " 

 " ha ! how do you enjoy yourself ? " 

 he begin a long history of three day in the metropolis . I listen , and 
 hear little . I hear more plainly the cry of some night bird over 
 Nethermere , and the peevish , wail , yarle cry of some beast in the 
 wood . I be thankful to slam the door behind I , to stand in the light 
 of the hall . 

 " Leslie ! " exclaim mother , " I be glad to see you . " 

 " thank you , " he say , turn to Lettie , who sit with her lap full of 
 work , her head busily bent . 

 " you see I can not   get up , " she say , give he her hand , adorn as it 
 be by the thimble . " how nice of you to come ! we do not know you be 
 back . " 

 " but ! " he exclaim , then he stop . 

 " I suppose you enjoy yourself , " she go on calmly . 

 " immensely , thank . " 

 snap , snap , snap go her needle through the new stuff . then , without 
 look up , she say : 

 " yes , no doubt . you have the air of a man who have be enjoy 
 himself . " 

 " how do you mean ? " 

 " a kind of guilty or shall I say embarrassed look . do not   you notice it 
 mother ? " 

 " I do ! " say my mother . 

 " I suppose it mean we may not ask he question , " Lettie conclude , 
 always very busily sewing . 

 he laugh . she have break her cotton , and be try to thread the 
 needle again . 

 " what have you be do this miserable weather ? " he enquire 
 awkwardly . 

 " oh , we have sit at home desolate . ' ever of thee I be fo - o - ondly 
 dreeaming ' and so on . have not   we mother ? " 

 " well , " say mother , " I do not   know . we imagine he all sort of lion 
 up there . " 

 " what a shame we may not ask he to roar his old roar over for we , " 
 say Lettie . 

 " what be they like ? " he ask . 

 " how should I know ? like a suck dove , to judge from your present 
 voice . ' a monstrous little voice . ' " 

 he laugh uncomfortably . 

 she go on sewing , suddenly begin to sing to herself : 

  " Pussy cat , Pussy cat , where have you be ? 
  I have   be up to London to see the fine queen : 
  Pussy cat , Pussy cat , what do you there 
  I frighten a little mouse under a stair . " 

 " I suppose , " she add , " that may be so . poor mouse ! but I guess she be 
 none the bad . you do not see the queen , though ? " 

 " she be not in London , " he reply sarcastically . 

 " you do not   " she say , take two pin from between her tooth . " I 
 suppose you do not   mean by that , she be in Eberwich your queen ? " 

 " I do not   know where she be , " he answer angrily . 

 " oh ! " she say , very sweetly , " I think perhaps you have meet she in 
 Eberwich . when do you come back ? " 

 " last night , " he reply . 

 " oh why do not   you come and see we before ? " 

 " I have   be at the office all day . " 

 " I have   be up to Eberwich , " she say innocently . 

 " have you ? " 

 " yes . and I feel so cross because of it . I think I might see you . I 
 feel as if you be at home . " 

 she stitch a little , and glance up secretly to watch his face redden , 
 then she continue innocently , 

 " yes I feel you have come back . it be funny how one have a feeling 
 occasionally that someone be near ; when it be someone one have a sympathy 
 with . " she continue to stitch , then she take a pin from her bosom , and 
 fix her work , all without the least suspicion of guile . 

 " I think I might meet you when I be out " another pause , another 
 fixing , a pin to be take from her lip " but I do not . " 

 " I be at the office till rather late , " he say quickly . 

 she stitch away calmly , provokingly . 

 she take the pin from her mouth again , fix down a fold of stuff , and 
 say softly : 

 " you little liar . " 

 Mother have go out of the room for her recipe book . 

 he sit on his chair dumb with mortification . she stitch swiftly and 
 unerringly . there be silence for some moment . then he speak : 

 " I do not know you want I for the pleasure of pluck this crow , " 
 he say . 

 " I want you ! " she exclaim , look up for the first time , " who say 
 I want you ? " 

 " no one . if you do not   want I I may as well go . " 

 the sound of stitch alone break the silence for some moment , then 
 she say deliberately : 

 " what make you think I want you ? " 

 " I do not   care a damn whether you want I or whether you do not . " 

 " it seem to upset you ! and do not   use bad language . it be the privilege 
 of those near and dear to one . " 

 " that be why you begin it , I suppose . " 

 " I can not remember " she say loftily . 

 he laugh sarcastically . 

 " well if you be so beastly cut up about it " 

 he put this tentatively , expect the soft answer . but she refuse to 
 speak , and go on stitch . he fidget about , twist his cap 
 uncomfortably , and sigh . at last he say : 

 " well you have we do then ? " 

 she have the vast superiority , in that she be engage in ostentatious 
 work . she could fix the cloth , regard it quizzically , rearrange it , 
 settle down and begin to sew before she reply . this humble he . at 
 last she say : 

 " I think so this afternoon . " 

 " but , good God , Lettie , can not   you drop it ? " 

 " and then ? " the question startle he . 

 " why ! forget it , " he reply . 

 " well ? " she speak softly , gently . he answer to the call like an eager 
 hound . he cross quickly to her side as she sit sewing , and say , in a 
 low voice : 

 " you do care something for I , do not   you , Lettie ? " 

 " well , " it be modulate kindly , a sort of promise of assent . 

 " you have treat I rottenly , you know , have not   you ? you know I well , 
 I care a good bit . " 

 " it be a queer way of show it . " her voice be now a gentle reproof , 
 the sweetest of surrender and forgiveness . he lean forward , take she 
 face in his hand , and kiss she , murmur : 

 " you be a little tease . " 

 she lay her sewing in her lap , and look up . 



 the next day , Sunday , break wet and dreary . Breakfast be late , and 
 about ten o'clock we stand at the window look upon the impossibility 
 of our go to church . 

 there be a drive drizzle of rain , like a dirty curtain before the 
 landscape . the nasturtium leave by the garden walk have go rotten in a 
 frost , and the gay green disc have give place to the first black flag 
 of winter , hang on flaccid stalk , pinch at the neck . the grass plot 
 be strew with fallen leaf , wet and brilliant : scarlet splash of 
 Virginia creeper , golden drift from the lime , ruddy brown shawl under 
 the beech , and away back in the corner , the black mat of maple leaf , 
 heavy soddene ; they ought to have be a vivid lemon colour . 
 occasionally one of these great black leaf would loose its hold , and 
 zigzag down , stagger in the dance of death . 

 " there now ! " say Lettie suddenly . 

 I look up in time to see a crow close his wing and clutch the topmost 
 bough of an old grey holly tree on the edge of the clearing . he flap 
 again , recover his balance , and fold himself up in black resignation 
 to the detestable weather . 

 " why have the old wretch settle just over our nose , " say Lettie 
 petulantly . " just to blot the promise of a sorrow . " 

 " your 's or mine ? " I ask . 

 " he be look at I , I declare . " 

 " you can see the wicked pupil of his eye at this distance , " I 
 insinuate . 

 " well , " she reply , determined to take this omen unto herself . " I see 
 he first . " 

  " ' one for sorrow , two for joy , 
  three for a letter , four for a boy , 
  five for silver , six for gold , 
  and seven for a secret never tell . ' 

 " you may bet he be only a messenger in advance . there will be three more 
 shortly , and you will have your four , " say I , comfort . 

 " do you know , " she say , " it be very funny , but whenever I have 
 particularly notice one crow , I have   have some sorrow or other . " 

 " and when you notice four ? " I ask . 

 " you should have hear old Mrs. Wagstaffe , " be her reply . " she declare 
 an old crow croak in their apple tree every day for a week before 
 Jerry get drown . " 

 " great sorrow for she , " I remark . 

 " oh , but she weep abundantly . I feel like weep too , but somehow I 
 laugh . she hop he have go to heaven but I be sick of that word 
 ' but ' it be always tangle one 's thought . " 

 " but , Jerry ! " I insist . 

 " oh , she lift up her forehead , and the tear drip off her nose . he 
 must have be an old nuisance , Syb . I can not   understand why woman marry 
 such man . I feel downright glad to think of the drunken old wretch 
 topple into the canal out of the way . " 

 she pull the thick curtain across the window , and nestle down in it , 
 rest her cheek against the edge , protect herself from the cold 
 window pane . the wet , grey wind shake the half naked tree , whose leaf 
 drip and shine sullenly . even the trunk be blacken , trickle 
 with the rain which drive persistently . 

 whirl down the sky like black maple leaf catch up aloft , come two 
 more crow . they sweep down and clung hold of the tree in front of the 
 house , stay near the old forerunner . Lettie watch they , half 
 amuse , half melancholy . one bird be carry past . he swerve round and 
 begin to battle up the wind , rise higher , and row laboriously 
 against the drive wet current . 

 " here come your fourth , " say I. 

 she do not answer , but continue to watch . the bird wrestle 
 heroically , but the wind push he aside , tilt he , catch under his 
 broad wing and bear he down . he sweep in level flight down the stream , 
 outspread and still , as if fix in despair . I grieve for he . sadly 
 two of his fellow rise and be carry away after he , like soul 
 hunting for a body to inhabit , and despairing . only the first ghoul be 
 leave on the withered , silver - grey skeleton of the holly . 

 " he will not   even say ' nevermore ' , " I remark . 

 " he have more sense , " reply Lettie . she look a trifle lugubrious . 
 then she continue : " well say ' nevermore ' than ' evermore . ' " 

 " why ? " I ask . 

 " oh , I do not   know . Fancy this ' evermore . ' " 

 she have be sure in her own soul that Leslie would come now she begin 
 to doubt : thing be very perplexing . 

 the bell in the kitchen jangle ; she jump up . I go and open the 
 door . he come in . she give he one bright look of satisfaction . he see 
 it , and understand . 

 " Helen have get some people over I have be awfully rude to leave they 
 now , " he say quietly . 

 " what a dreadful day ! " say mother . 

 " oh , fearful ! your face be red , Lettie ! what have you be do ? " 

 " look into the fire . " 

 " what do you see ? " 

 " the picture would not   come plain nothing . " 

 he laugh . we be silent for some time . 

 " you be expect I ? " he murmur . 

 " yes I know you would come . " 

 they be leave alone . he come up to she and put his arm around she , as 
 she stand with her elbow on the mantelpiece . 

 " you do want I , " he plead softly . 

 " yes , " she murmur . 

 he hold she in his arm and kiss she repeatedly , again and again , till 
 she be out of breath , and put up her hand , and gently push her face 
 away . 

 " you be a cold little lover you be a shy bird , " he say , laugh 
 into her eye . he see her tear rise , swim on her lid , but not 
 fall . 

 " why , my love , my darling why ! " he put his face to she be and take the 
 tear on his cheek : 

 " I know you love I , " he say , gently , all tenderness . 

 " do you know , " he murmur . " I can positively feel the tear rise up 
 from my heart and throat . they be quite painful gathering , my love . 
 there you can do anything with I . " 

 they be silent for some time . after a while , a rather long while , she 
 come upstairs and find mother and at the end of some minute I hear 
 my mother go to he . 

 I sit by my window and watch the low cloud reel and stagger past . it 
 seem as if everything be be sweep along I myself seem to have 
 lose my substance , to have become detach from concrete thing and the 
 firm trodden pavement of everyday life . onward , always onward , not 
 know where , nor why , the wind , the cloud , the rain and the bird and 
 the leaf , everything whirl along why ? 

 all this time the old crow sit motionless , though the cloud tumble , 
 and be rent and pile , though the tree bent , and the window - pane 
 shiver with run water . then I find it have cease to rain ; that 
 there be a sickly yellow gleam of sunlight , brighten on some great 
 elm - leaf near at hand till they look like ripe lemon hang . the 
 crow look at I I be certain he look at I . 

 " what do you think of it all ? " I ask he . 

 he eye I with contempt : great featherless , half wing bird as I be , 
 incomprehensible , contemptible , but awful . I believe he hat I . 

 " but , " say I , " if a raven could answer , why will not   you ? " 

 he look wearily away . nevertheless my gaze disquiet he . he turn 
 uneasily ; he rise , wave his wing as if for flight , poised , then 
 settle defiantly down again . 

 " you be no good , " say I , " you will not   help even with a word . " 

 he sit stolidly unconcerned . then I hear the lapwing in the meadow 
 crying , cry . they seem to seek the storm , yet to rail at it . they 
 wheel in the wind , yet never cease to complain of it . they enjoy 
 the struggle , and lament it in wild lament , through which come a sound 
 of exultation . all the lapwing cry , cry the same tale , " bitter , 
 bitter , the struggle for nothing , nothing , nothing , " and all the time 
 they swing about on their broad wing , revel . 

 " there , " say I to the crow , " they try it , and find it bitter , but they 
 would not   like to miss it , to sit still like you , you old corpse . " 

 he could not endure this . he rise in defiance , flap his wing , and 
 launch off , utter one " caw " of sinister foreboding . he be soon 
 whirl away . 

 I discover that I be very cold , so I go downstairs . 

 twist a curl round his finger , one of those loose curl that always 
 dance free from the capture hair , Leslie say : 

 " look how fond your hair be of I ; look how it twin round my finger . 
 do you know , your hair the light in it be like oh buttercup in the 
 sun . " 

 " it be like I it will not   be keep in bound , " she reply . 

 " shame if it be like this , it brush my face so and set I 
 tingle like music . " 

 " Behave ! now be still , and I will tell you what sort of music you make . " 

 " oh well tell I . " 

 " like the calling of throstle and blackie , in the evening , frightening 
 the pale little wood - anemone , till they run pant and sway right 
 up to our wall . like the ringing of bluebell when the bee be at they ; 
 like hippomene , out - of - breath , laugh because he have win . " 

 he kiss she with rapturous admiration . 

 " marriage music , sir , " she add . 

 " what golden apple do I throw ? " he ask lightly . 

 " what ! " she exclaim , half mock . 

 " this Atalanta , " he reply , look lovingly upon she , " this 
 Atalanta I believe she just lag at last on purpose . " 

 " you have it , " she cry , laugh , submit to his caress . " it be 
 you the apple of your firm heel the apple of your eye the apple 
 Eve bit that win I hein ! " 

 " that be it you be clever , you be rare . and I have   win , win the ripe 
 apple of your cheek , and your breast , and your very fist they can not 
 stop I and and all your roundness and warmness and softness I have 
 win you , Lettie . " 

 she nod wickedly , say : 

 " all those those yes . " 

 " all she admit it everything ! " 

 " oh ! but let I breathe . do you claim everything ? " 

 " yes , and you give it I . " 

 " not yet . everything though ? " 

 " every atom . " 

 " but now you look " 

 " do I look aside ? " 

 " with the inward eye . suppose now we be two angel " 

 " oh , dear a sloppy angel ! " 

 " well do not   interrupt now suppose I be one like the ' Blessed 
 Damosel . ' " 

 " with a warm bosom ! " 

 " do not   be foolish , now I a ' Blessed Damosel ' and you kick the brown 
 beech leave below think " 

 " what be you drive at ? " 

 " would you be think thought like prayer ? " 

 " what on earth do you ask that for ? oh I think I would be curse eh ? " 

 " no say fragrant prayer that your thin soul might mount up " 

 " hang thin soul , Lettie ! I be not one of your souly sort . I can not   stand 
 pre - raphaelitie . you you be not a Burne - Jonesess you be an Albert 
 Moore . I think there be more in the warm touch of a soft body than in a 
 prayer . I will pray with kiss . " 

 " and when you can not ? " 

 " I will wait till prayer - time again . by Jove , I would rather feel my arm full 
 of you ; I would rather touch that red mouth you grudg ! than sing hymn 
 with you in any heaven . " 

 " I be afraid you will never sing hymn with I in heaven . " 

 " well I have you here yes , I have you now . " 

 " our life be but a fade dawn ? " 

 " liar ! well , you call I ! besides , I do not   care ; ' carpe diem ' , my 
 rosebud , my fawn . there be a nice Carmen about a fawn . ' time to leave its 
 mother , and venture into a warm embrace . ' poor old Horace I have 
 forget he . " 

 " then poor old Horace . " 

 " ha ! ha ! well , I shall not   forget you . what be that queer look in your 
 eye ? " 

 " what be it ? " 

 " nay you tell I . you be such a tease , there be no getting to the 
 bottom of you . " 

 " you can fathom the depth of a kiss " 

 " I will I will " 

 after a while he ask : 

 " when shall we be properly engage , Lettie ? " 

 " oh , wait till Christmas till I be twenty - one . " 

 " nearly three month ! why on earth " 

 " it will make no difference . I shall be able to choose thee of my own 
 free choice then . " 

 " but three month ! " 

 " I shall consider thee engage it do not   matter about other people . " 

 " I think we should be marry in three month . " 

 " ah married in haste . but what will your mother say ? " 

 " say ! oh , she will say it be the first wise thing I have   do . you will make a 
 fine wife , Lettie , able to entertain , and all that . " 

 " you will flutter brilliantly . " 

 " we will . " 

 " no you will be the moth I will paint your wing gaudy feather - dust . then 
 when you lose your coloured dust , when you fly too near the light , or 
 when you play dodge with a butterfly net away go my part you can not 
 fly I alas , poor I ! what become of the feather - dust when the moth 
 brush his wing against a butterfly net ? " 

 " what be you make so many word about ? you do not   know now , do you ? " 

 " no that I do not . " 

 " then just be comfortable . let I look at myself in your eye . " 

 " Narcissus , Narcissus ! do you see yourself well ? do the image flatter 
 you ? or be it a troubled stream , distort your fair lineament . " 

 " I can not   see anything only feel you look you be laugh at 
 I . what have you behind there what joke ? " 

 " I I be think you be just like Narcissus a sweet , beautiful youth . " 

 " be serious do . " 

 " it would be dangerous . you would die of it , and I I should " 

 " what ! " 

 " be just like I be now serious . " 

 he look proudly , think she refer to the earnestness of her love . 


 


 in the wood the wind rumble and roar hoarsely overhead , but not a 
 breath stir among the sadden bracken . an occasional raindrop be 
 shake out of the tree ; I slip on the wet path . black bar strip 
 the grey tree - trunk , where water have trickle down ; the bracken be 
 overthrow , its yellow rank break . I slide down the steep path to the 
 gate , out of the wood . 

 army of cloud march in rank across the sky , heavily laden , almost 
 brush the gorse on the common . the wind be cold and disheartening . 
 the ground sob at every step . the brook be full , swirl along , 
 hurrying , talk to itself , in absorb intent tone . the cloud 
 darken ; I feel the rain . careless of the mud , I run , and burst into 
 the farm kitchen . 

 the child be paint , and they immediately claim my help . 

 " Emily and George be in the front room , " say the mother quietly , for 
 it be Sunday afternoon . I satisfy the little one ; I say a few word 
 to the mother , and sit down to take off my clog . 

 in the parlour , the father , big and comfortable , be sleep in an 
 arm - chair . Emily be write at the table she hurriedly hide her paper 
 when I enter . George be sit by the fire , reading . he look up as 
 I enter , and I love he when he look up at I , and as he linger 
 on his quiet " Hullo ! " his eye be beautifully eloquent as eloquent as 
 a kiss . 

 we talk in subdued murmur , because the father be asleep , opulently 
 asleep , his tanned face as still as a brown pear against the wall . the 
 clock itself go slowly , with languid throb . we gather round the 
 fire , and talk quietly , about nothing blissful merely in the sound of 
 our voice , a murmur , soothe sound a grateful , dispassionate love 
 trio . 

 at last George rise , put down his book look at his father and go 
 out . 

 in the barn there be a sound of the pulper crunch the turnip . the 
 crisp strip of turnip sprinkle quietly down onto a heap of gold which 
 grow beneath the pulper . the smell of pulp turnip , keen and sweet , 
 bring back to I the feeling of many winter night , when frozen 
 hoof - print crunch in the yard , and Orion be in the south ; when a 
 friendship be at its mystical good . 

 " pulp on Sunday ! " I exclaim . 

 " Father do not   do it yesterday ; it be his work ; and I do not   notice it . 
 you know Father often forget he do not   like to have to work in the 
 afternoon , now . " 

 the cattle stir in their stall ; the chain rattle round the post ; 
 a cow cough noisily . when George have finish pulp , and it be 
 quiet enough for talk , just as he be spread the first layer of chop 
 and turnip and meal in run Emily , with her hair in silken , twining 
 confusion , her eye glow to bid we go in to tea before the milking 
 be begin . it be the custom to milk before tea on Sunday but George 
 abandon it without demur his father will it so , and his father be 
 master , not to be question on farm matter , however one disagree . 

 the last day in October have be dreary enough ; the night could not come 
 too early . we have tea by lamplight , merrily , with the father radiating 
 comfort as the lamp shine yellow light . Sunday tea be imperfect without 
 a visitor ; with I , they always declare , it be perfect . I love to 
 hear they say so . I smile , rejoice quietly into my teacup when the 
 Father say : 

 " it seem proper to have Cyril here at Sunday tea , it seem natural . " 

 he be most loath to break the delightful bond of the lamp - light 
 tea - table ; he look up with a half - appeal glance when George at last 
 push back his chair and say he suppose he would well make a start . 

 " ay , " say the father in a mild , conciliatory tone , " I will be out in a 
 minute . " 

 the lamp hang against the barn - wall , softly illuminate the low part 
 of the building , where bit of hay and white dust lie in the hollow 
 between the brick , where the curl chip of turnip scatter orange 
 gleam over the earthen floor ; the lofty roof , with its swallow ' nest 
 under the tile , be deep in shadow , and the corner be full of 
 darkness , hiding , half hiding , the hay , the chopper , the bin . the light 
 shine along the passage before the stall , glisten on the moist 
 nose of the cattle , and on the whitewash of the wall . 

 George be very cheerful ; but I want to tell he my message . when he 
 have finish the feeding , and have at last sit down to milk , I say : 

 " I tell you Leslie Tempest be at our house when I come away . " 

 he sit with the bucket between his knee , his hand at the cow 's udder , 
 about to begin to milk . he look up a question at I . 

 " they be practically engaged now , " I say . 

 he do not turn his eye away , but he cease to look at I . as one who 
 be listen for a far - off noise , he sit with his eye fix . then he 
 bent his head , and lean it against the side of the cow , as if he would 
 begin to milk . but he do not . the cow look round and stir 
 uneasily . he begin to draw the milk , and then to milk mechanically . I 
 watch the movement of his hand , listen to the rhythmic clang of 
 the jet of milk on the bucket , as a relief . after a while the movement 
 of his hand become slow , thoughtful then stop . 

 " she have really say yes ? " 

 I nod . 

 " and what do your mother say ? " 

 " she be pleased . " 

 he begin to milk again . the cow stir uneasily , shift her leg . he 
 look at she angrily , and go on milk . then , quite upset , she 
 shift again , and swing her tail in his face . 

 " stand still ! " he shout , strike she on the haunch . she seem to 
 cower like a beat woman . he swear at she , and continue to milk . she 
 do not yield much that night ; she be very restive ; he take the stool 
 from beneath he and give she a good blow ; I hear the stool knock on 
 her prominent hip bone . after that she stand still , but her milk soon 
 cease to flow . 

 when he stand up , he pause before he go to the next beast , and I 
 think he be go to talk . but just then the father come along with 
 his bucket . he look in the shed , and , laugh in his mature , pleasant 
 way , say : 

 " so you be an onlooker to - day , Cyril I think you would have milk a cow 
 or two for I by now . " 

 " Nay , " say I , " Sunday be a day of rest and milking make your hand 
 ache . " 

 " you only want a bit more practice , " he say , joke in his ripe 
 fashion . " why George , be that all you have   get from Julia ? " 

 " it be . " 

 " h'm she be soon go dry . Julia , old lady , do not   go and turn skinny . " 

 when he have go , and the shed be still , the air seem colder . I hear 
 his good - humour " stand over , old lass , " from the other shed , and the 
 drum - beat of the first jet of milk on the pail . 

 " he have a comfortable time , " say George , look savage . I laugh . he 
 still wait . 

 " you really expect Lettie to have he , " I say . 

 " I suppose so , " he reply , " then she would make up her mind to it . it 
 do not   matter what she want at the bottom . " 

 " you ? " say I. 

 " if it have not   be that he be a prize with a ticket she would have 
 have " 

 " you ! " say I. 

 " she be afraid look how she turn and keep away " 

 " from you ? " say I. 

 " I should like to squeeze she till she scream . " 

 " you should have grip she before , and keep she , " say I. 

 " she she be like a woman , like a cat run to comfort she strike a 
 bargain . woman be all tradesman . " 

 " do not   generalise , it be no good . " 

 " she be like a prostitute " 

 " it be banal ! I believe she love he . " 

 he start , and look at I queerly . he look quite childish in his 
 doubt and perplexity . 

 " she , what ? " 

 " love he honestly . " 

 " she would ' a love I well , " he mutter , and turn to his milking . I 
 leave he and go to talk to his father . when the latter 's four beast 
 be finish , George 's light still shine in the other shed . 

 I go and find he at the fifth , the last cow . when at length he have 
 finish he put down his pail , and go over to poor Julia , stand 
 scratch she back , and her poll , and her nose , look into her big , 
 startled eye and murmuring . she be afraid ; she jerk her head , give 
 he a good blow on the cheek with her horn . 

 " you can not   understand they , " he say sadly , rub his face , and 
 look at I with his dark , serious eye . 

 " I never know I could not   understand they . I never think about 
 it till . but you know , Cyril , she lead I on . " 

 I laugh at his rueful appearance . 

  CHAPTER VIII 

  the RIOT of christmas 

 for some week , during the latter part of November and the beginning of 
 December , I be keep indoor by a cold . at last come a frost which 
 clear the air and dry the mud . on the second Saturday before 
 Christmas the world be transform ; tall , silver and pearl - grey tree 
 rise pale against a dim - blue sky , like tree in some rare , pale 
 Paradise ; the whole woodland be as if petrify in marble and silver 
 and snow ; the holly - leaf and long leaf of the rhododendron be 
 rim and spangle with delicate tracery . 

 when the night come clear and bright , with a moon among the hoar - frost , 
 I rebel against confinement , and the house . no long the mist and 
 dank weather make the home dear ; tonight even the glare of the distant 
 little iron work be not visible , for the low cloud be go , and 
 pale star blink from beyond the moon . 

 Lettie be stay with I ; Leslie be in London again . she try to 
 remonstrate in a sisterly fashion when I say I would go out . 

 " only down to the Mill , " say I. then she hesitate a while say she 
 would come too . I suppose I look at her curiously , for she say : 

 " oh if you would rather go alone ! " 

 " come come yes , come ! " say I , smile to myself . 

 Lettie be in her old animate mood . she run , leap over rough place , 
 laugh , talk to herself in French . we come to the Mill . Gyp do not 
 bark . I open the outer door and we creep softly into the great dark 
 scullery , peep into the kitchen through the crack of the door . 

 the mother sit by the hearth , where be a big bath half full of soapy 
 water , and at her foot , warm his bare leg at the fire , be David , 
 who have just be bath . the mother be gently rub his fine fair 
 hair into a cloud . Mollie be comb out her brown curl , sit by 
 her father , who , in the fire - seat , be read aloud in a hearty voice , 
 with quaint precision . at the table sit Emily and George : she be 
 quickly pick over a pile of little yellow raisin , and he , slowly , 
 with his head sunk , be stone the large raisin . David keep reach 
 forward to play with the sleepy cat interrupt his mother 's rubbing . 
 there be no sound but the voice of the father , full of z ; I be 
 afraid they be not all listen carefully . I click the latch and 
 enter . 

 " Lettie ! " exclaim George . 

 " Cyril ! " cry Emily . 

 " Cyril , ' ooray ! " shout David . 

 " Hullo , Cyril ! " say Mollie . 

 six large brown eye , round with surprise , welcome I . they overwhelm 
 I with question , and make much of we . at length they be settle and 
 quiet again . 

 " yes , I be a stranger , " say Lettie , who have take off her hat and fur 
 and coat . " but you do not expect I often , do you ? I may come at time , 
 eh ? " 

 " we be only too glad , " reply the mother . " nothing all day long but 
 the sound of the sluice and mist , and rotten leaf . I be thankful to 
 hear a fresh voice . " 

 " be Cyril really well , Lettie ? " ask Emily softly . 

 " he be a spoiled boy I believe he keep a little bit ill so that we can 
 cade he . let I help you let I peel the apple yes , yes I will . " 

 she go to the table , and occupy one side with her apple - peel . 
 George have not speak to she . so she say : 

 " I will not   help you George , because I do not   like to feel my finger so 
 sticky , and because I love to see you so domesticated . " 

 " you will enjoy the sight a long time , then , for these thing be 
 numberless . " 

 " you should eat one now and then I always do . " 

 " if I eat one I should eat the lot . " 

 " then you may give I your one . " 

 he pass she a handful without speak . 

 " that be too many , your mother be look . let I just finish this 
 apple . there , I have   not break the peel ! " 

 she stand up , hold up a long curl strip of peel . 

 " how many time must I swing it , Mrs. Saxton ? " 

 " three time but it be not all Hallows ' Eve . " 

 " never mind ! look ! " she carefully swing the long band of green peel 
 over her head three time , let it fall the third . the cat pounce on 
 it , but Mollie sweep he off again . 

 " what be it ? " cry Lettie , blushing . 

 " G , " say the father , wink and laugh the mother look dagger at 
 he . 

 " it be not   nothink , " say David naively , forget his confusion at 
 be in the presence of a lady in his shirt . Mollie remark in her 
 cool way : 

 " it might be a ' hess ' if you could not   write . " 

 " or an ' l ' , " I add . Lettie look over at I imperiously , and I be 
 angry . 

 " what do you say , Emily ? " she ask . 

 " Nay , " say Emily , " it be only you can see the right letter . " 

 " tell we what be the right letter , " say George to she . 

 " I ! " exclaim Lettie , " who can look into the seed of Time ? " 

 " those who have set them and watch them sprout , " say I. 

 she fling the peel into the fire , laugh a short laugh , and go on 
 with her work . 

 Mrs. Saxton lean over to her daughter and say softly , so that he 
 should not hear , that George be pull the flesh out of the raisin . 

 " George ! " say Emily sharply , " you be leave nothing but the husk . " 

 he too be angry : 

 " ' and he would fain fill his belly with the husk that the swine do 
 eat . ' " he say quietly , take a handful of the fruit he have pick and 
 put some in his mouth . Emily snatch away the basin : 

 " it be too bad ! " she say . 

 " here , " say Lettie , hand he an apple she have peel . " you may have 
 an apple , greedy boy . " 

 he take it and look at it . then a malicious smile twinkle round his 
 eye , as he say : 

 " if you give I the apple , to whom will you give the peel ? " 

 " the swine , " she say , as if she only understand his first reference to 
 the Prodigal Son . he put the apple on the table . 

 " do not   you want it ? " she say . 

 " Mother , " he say comically , as if jest . " she be offer I the 
 apple like Eve . " 

 like a flash , she snatch the apple from he , hide it in her skirt a 
 moment , look at he with dilated eye , and then she fling it at the 
 fire . she miss , and the father lean forward and pick it off the 
 hob , say : 

 " the pig may as well have it . you be slow , George when a lady offer 
 you a thing you do not   have to make mouth . " 

 " a ce qu'il parait , " she cry , laugh now at her ease , boisterously : 

 " be she make love , emily ? " ask the father , laugh suggestively . 

 " she say it too fast for I , " say Emily . 

 George be lean back in his chair , his hand in his breech pocket . 

 " we shall have to finish his raisin after all , Emily , " say Lettie 
 brightly . " look what a lazy animal he be . " 

 " he like his comfort , " say Emily , with irony . 

 " the picture of content solid , healthy , easy - move content " 
 continue Lettie . as he sit thus , with his head throw back against the 
 end of the ingle - seat , coatless , his red neck see in repose , he do 
 indeed look remarkably comfortable . 

 " I shall never fret my fat away , " he say stolidly . 

 " no you and I we be not like Cyril . we do not burn our body in our 
 head or our heart , do we ? " 

 " we have it in common , " say he , look at she indifferently beneath 
 his lash , as his head be tilt back . 

 Lettie go on with the paring and coring of her apple then she take 
 the raisin . meanwhile , Emily be make the house ring as she chop 
 the suet in a wooden bowl . the child be ready for bed . they kiss 
 we all " good - night " save George . at last they be go , accompany by 
 their mother . Emily put down her chopper , and sigh that her arm be 
 ache , so I relieve she . the chopping go on for a long time , while 
 the father read , Lettie work , and George sit tilt back look on . 
 when at length the mincemeat be finish we be all out of work . 
 Lettie help to clear away sit down talk a little with 
 effort jump up and say : 

 " oh , I be too excited to sit still it be so near Christmas let we play 
 at something . " 

 " a dance ? " say Emily . 

 " a dance a dance ! " 

 he suddenly sit straight and get up : 

 " come on ! " he say . 

 he kick off his slipper , regardless of the hole in his stocking 
 foot , and put away the chair . he hold out his arm to she she come with 
 a laugh , and away they go , dance over the great flagged kitchen at 
 an incredible speed . her light fly step follow his leap ; you 
 could hear the quick light tap of her toe more plainly than the thud of 
 his stockinged foot . Emily and I join in . Emily 's movement be 
 naturally slow , but we dance at great speed . I be hot and perspiring , 
 and she be pant , when I put she in a chair . but they whirl on in 
 the dance , on and on till I be giddy , till the father laugh , cry 
 that they should stop . but George continue the dance ; her hair be 
 shake loose , and fall in a great coil down her back ; her foot begin to 
 drag ; you could hear a light slur on the floor ; she be pant I could 
 see her lip murmur to he , beg he to stop ; he be laugh with 
 open mouth , hold she tight ; at last her foot trail ; he lift she , 
 clasp she tightly , and dance twice round the room with she thus . 
 then he fall with a crash on the sofa , pull she beside he . his eye 
 glow like coal ; he be pant in sob , and his hair be wet and 
 glistening . she lie back on the sofa , with his arm still around she , not 
 move ; she be quite overcome . her hair be wild about her face . emily 
 be anxious ; the father say , with a shade of inquietude : 

 " you have   overdone it it be very foolish . " 

 when at last she recover her breath and her life , she get up , and 
 laugh in a queer way , begin to put up her hair . she go into the 
 scullery where be the brush and comb , and Emily follow with a 
 candle . when she return , order once more , with a little pallor 
 succeed the flush , and with a great black stain of sweat on her 
 leathern belt where his hand have hold she , he look up at she from his 
 position on the sofa , with a peculiar glance of triumph , smile . 

 " you great brute , " she say , but her voice be not as harsh as her 
 word . he give a deep sigh , sit up , and laugh quietly . 

 " Another ? " he say . 

 " will you dance with I ? " 

 " at your pleasure . " 

 " come then a minuet . " 

 " do not   know it . " 

 " nevertheless , you must dance it . come along . " 

 he rear up , and walk to her side . she put he through the step , 
 even drag he round the waltz . it be very ridiculous . when it be 
 finish she bow he to his seat , and , wipe her hand on her 
 handkerchief , because his shirt where her hand have rest on his 
 shoulder be moist , she thank he . 

 " I hope you enjoy it , " he say . 

 " ever so much , " she reply . 

 " you make I look a fool so no doubt you do . " 

 " do you think you could look a fool ? why you be ironical ! can marche ! in 
 other word , you have come on . but it be a sweet dance . " 

 he look at she , lower his eyelid , and say nothing . 

 " ah , well , " she laugh , ' some be breed for the minuet , and some 
 for " 

 " Less tomfoolery , " he answer . 

 " ah you call it tomfoolery because you can not do it . myself , I like 
 it so " 

 " and I can not   do it ? " 

 " could you ? do you ? you be not build that way . " 

 " Sort of Clarence MacFadden , " he say , light a pipe as if the 
 conversation do not interest he . 

 " yes what age since we sing that ! 

  ' Clarence MacFadden he want to dance 
  but his foot be not gaite that way . . . ' 

 " I remember we sing it after one corn harvest we have a fine time . I 
 never think of you before as Clarence . it be very funny . by the 
 way will you come to our party at Christmas ? " 

 " when ? who be come ? " 

 " the twenty - sixth . oh ! only the old people Alice Tom 
 Smith Fanny those from Highclose . " 

 " and what will you do ? " 

 " sing charade dance a little anything you like . " 

 " Polka ? " 

 " and minuet and valeta . come and dance a valeta , Cyril . " 

 she make I take she through a valeta , a minuet , a mazurka , and she 
 dance elegantly , but with a little of Carmen 's ostentation her dash 
 and devilry . when we have finish , the father say : 

 " very pretty very pretty , indeed ! they do look nice , do not   they , 
 George ? I wish I be young . " 

 " as I be " say George , laugh bitterly . 

 " show I how to do they some time , Cyril , " say Emily , in her pleading 
 way , which displease Lettie so much . 

 " why do not   you ask I ? " say the latter quickly . 

 " well but you be not often here . " 

 " I be here now . come " and she wave Emily imperiously to the 
 attempt . 

 Lettie , as I have say , be tall , approach six foot ; she be lissome , 
 but firmly mould , by nature graceful ; in her poise and harmonious 
 movement be reveal the subtle sympathy of her artist 's soul . the 
 other be short , much heavy . in she every motion you can see the 
 extravagance of her emotional nature . she quiver with feeling ; emotion 
 conquer and carry havoc through she , for she have not a strong 
 intellect , nor a heart of light humour ; her nature be brood and 
 defenceless ; she know herself powerless in the tumult of her feeling , 
 and add to she misfortune a profound mistrust of herself . 

 as they dance together , Lettie and Emily , they show in strike 
 contrast . my sister 's ease and beautiful poetic movement be exquisite ; 
 the other could not control her movement , but repeat the same error 
 again and again . she grip Lettie 's hand fiercely , and glance up with 
 eye full of humiliation and terror of her continued failure , and 
 passionate , trembling , hopeless desire to succeed . to show she , to 
 explain , make matter bad . as soon as she tremble on the brink of an 
 action , the terror of not be able to perform it properly blind she , 
 and she be conscious of nothing but that she must do something in a 
 turmoil . at last Lettie cease to talk , and merely swing she through the 
 dance haphazard . this way succeed well . so long as Emily need not 
 think about her action , she have a large , free grace ; and the swing and 
 rhythm and time be impart through her sens rather than through her 
 intelligence . 

 it be time for supper . the mother come down for a while , and we talk 
 quietly , at random . Lettie do not utter a word about her engagement , 
 not a suggestion . she make it seem as if thing be just as before , 
 although I be sure she have discover that I have tell George . she 
 intend that we should play as if ignorant of her bond . 

 after supper , when we be ready to go home , Lettie say to he : 

 " by the way you must send we some mistletoe for the party with plenty 
 of berry , you know . be there many berry on your mistletoe this 
 year ? " 

 " I do not know I have never look . we will go and see if you like , " 
 George answer . " but will you come out into the cold ? " he pull on his 
 boot , and his coat , and twist a scarf round his neck . the young moon 
 have go . it be very dark the liquid star waver . the great night 
 fill we with awe . Lettie catch hold of my arm , and hold it tightly . 
 he pass on in front to open the gate . we go down into the front 
 garden , over the turf bridge where the sluice rush coldly under , on to 
 the broad slope of the bank . we could just distinguish the gnarl old 
 appletree lean about we . we bent our head to avoid the bough , and 
 follow George . he hesitate a moment , say : 

 " let I see I think they be there the two tree with mistletoe on . " 

 we again follow silently . 

 " yes , " he say , " here they be ! " 

 we go close and peer into the old tree . we could just see the dark 
 bush of the mistletoe between the bough of the tree . Lettie begin to 
 laugh . 

 " have we come to count the berry ? " she say . " I can not   even see the 
 mistletoe . " 

 she lean forwards and upwards to pierce the darkness ; he , also 
 strain to look , feel her breath on his cheek , and turning , see the 
 pallor of her face close to his , and feel the dark glow of her eye . he 
 catch she in his arm , and hold her mouth in a kiss . then , when he 
 release she , he turn away , say something incoherent about go to 
 fetch the lantern to look . she remain with she back towards I , and 
 pretend to be feel among the mistletoe for the berry . soon I see 
 the swing of the hurricane lamp below . 

 " he be bring the lantern , " say I. 

 when he come up , he say , and his voice be strange and subdue : 

 " now we can see what it be like . " 

 he go near , and hold up the lamp , so that it illuminate both their 
 face , and the fantastic bough of the tree , and the weird bush of 
 mistletoe sparsely pearl with berry . instead of look at the 
 berry they look into each other 's eye ; his lid flicker , and he 
 flush , in the yellow light of the lamp look warm and handsome ; he 
 look upwards in confusion and say : " there be plenty of berry . " 

 as a matter of fact there be very few . 

 she too look up , and murmur her assent . the light seem to hold 
 they as in a globe , in another world , apart from the night in which I 
 stand . he put up his hand and break off a sprig of mistletoe , with 
 berry , and offer it to she . they look into each other 's eye 
 again . she put the mistletoe among her fur , look down at her bosom . 
 they remain still , in the centre of light , with the lamp uplifted ; the 
 red and black scarf wrap loosely round his neck give he a luxurious , 
 generous look . he lower the lamp and say , affect to speak 
 naturally : 

 " yes there be plenty this year . " 

 " you will give I some , " she reply , turn away and finally break 
 the spell . 

 " when shall I cut it ? " he stride beside she , swing the lamp , as we 
 go down the bank to go home . he come as far as the brook without 
 say another word . then he bid we good - night . when he have light she 
 over the step - stone , she do not take my arm as we walk home . 

 during the next two week we be busy prepare for Christmas , range 
 the wood for the reddest holly , and pull the gleam ivy - bunch 
 from the tree . from the farm around come the cruel yelling of pig , 
 and in the evening later , be a scent of pork - pie . far - off on the 
 high - way could be hear the sharp trot of pony hasten with 
 Christmas good . 

 there the cart of the huckster dash by to the expectant villager , 
 triumphant with great bunch of light foreign mistletoe , gay with 
 orange peep through the box , and scarlet intrusion of apple , and 
 wild confusion of cold , dead poultry . the huckster wave their whip 
 triumphantly , the little pony rattle bravely under the sycamore , 
 towards Christmas . 

 in the late afternoon of the 24th , when dust be rise under the hazel 
 brake , I be walk with Lettie . all among the mesh of twig overhead 
 be tangle a dark red sky . the bole of the tree grow denser almost 
 blue . 

 tramp down the riding we meet two boy , fifteen or sixteen year old . 
 their clothe be largely patch with tough cotton moleskin ; scarf 
 be knot round their throat , and in their pocket roll tin 
 bottle full of tea , and the white knob of their knot snap - bag . 

 " why ! " say Lettie . " be you go to work on Christmas eve ? " 

 " it look like it , do not   it ? " say the elder . 

 " and what time will you be come back ? " 

 " about ' alf past tųw . " 

 " Christmas morning ! " 

 " you will be able to look out for the herald Angels and the Star , " say I. 

 " they would think we be two dirty little un , " say the young lad , 
 laugh . 

 " they will ' appen ' a do before we get up ter th ' top , " add the elder 
 boy " an ' they will none venture down th ' shaft . " 

 " if they do , " put in the other , " you have ha'e ter bath them after . I would 
 gi'e them a bit o ' my pasty . " 

 " come on , " say the elder sulkily . 

 they tramp off , slur their heavy boot . 

 " Merry Christmas ! " I call after they . 

 " in th ' mornin ' , " reply the elder . 

 " same to you , " say the young , and he begin to sing with a tinge of 
 bravado . 

  " in the field with their flock abide . 
  they lie on the dewy 
 ground " 

 " Fancy , " say Lettie , " those boy be work for I ! " 

 we be all go to the party at Highclose . I happen to go into the 
 kitchen about half past seven . the lamp be turn low , and Rebecca sit 
 in the shadow . on the table , in the light of the lamp , I see a glass 
 vase with five or six very beautiful Christmas rose . 

 " Hullo , Becka , who be send you these ? " say I. 

 " they be not send , " reply Rebecca from the depth of the shadow , with 
 suspicion of tear in her voice . 

 " why ! I never see they in the garden . " 

 " perhaps not . but I have   watch they these three week , and keep they 
 under glass . " 

 " for Christmas ? they be beauty . I think some one must have send 
 they to you . " 

 " it be little as ' as ever be send I , " reply Rebecca , " an ' less as 
 will be . " 

 " why what be the matter ? " 

 " nothing . Who'm I , to have anything the matter ! nobody nor ever be , 
 nor ever will be . and I be get old as well . " 

 " something 's upset you , Becky . " 

 " what do it matter if it have ? what be my feeling ? a bunch o ' 
 fal - de - rol flower as a gardener clip off wi ' never a thought be 
 prefer before mine as I have   fettle after this three - week . I can sit 
 at home to keep my flower company nobody want them . " 

 I remember that Lettie be wear hot - house flower ; she be excited 
 and full of the idea of the party at Highclose ; I could imagine she 
 quick " oh no thank you , Rebecca . I have have a spray send to I " 

 " never mind , Becky , " say I , ' she be excited to - night . " 

 " an ' I be easy forget . " 

 " so be we all , Becky tant mieux . " 

 at Highclose Lettie make a stir . among the little belle of the 
 countryside , she be decidedly the most distinguished . she be 
 brilliant , move as if in a drama . Leslie be enrapture , ostentatious 
 in his admiration , proud of be so well infatuate . they look into 
 each other 's eye when they meet , both triumphant , excited , blaze arch 
 look at one another . Lettie be enjoy her public demonstration 
 immensely ; it exhilarate she into quite a vivid love for he . he be 
 magnificent in response . meanwhile , the honour lady of the house , 
 pompous and ample , sit aside with my mother confer her patronage on 
 the latter amiable little woman , who smile sardonically and watch 
 Lettie . it be a splendid party ; it be brilliant , it be dazzle . 

 I dance with several lady , and honourably kiss each under the 
 mistletoe except that two of they kiss I first , it be all do in a 
 most correct manner . 

 " you wolf , " say Miss Wookey archly . " I believe you be a wolf a 
 veritable rŰdeur des femme and you look such a lamb too such a dear . " 

 " even my bleat remind you of Mary 's pet . " 

 " but you be not my pet at least it be well that my Golaud do not 
 hear you " 

 " if he be so very big " say I. 

 " he be really ; he be beefy . I have   engage myself to he , somehow or other . 
 one never know how one do those thing , do they ? " 

 " I could not   speak from experience , " say I. 

 " cruel man ! I suppose I feel Christmasy , and I would just be read 
 Maeterlinck and he really be big . " 

 " who ? " I ask . 

 " oh he , of course . my Golaud . I can not   help admire man who be a bit 
 avoirdupoisy . it be unfortunate they can not   dance . " 

 " perhaps fortunate , " say I. 

 " I can see you hate he . pity I do not   think to ask he if he 
 dance before " 

 " would it have influence you very much ? " 

 " well of course one can be free to dance all the more with the really 
 nice man whom one never marry . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " oh you can only marry one " 

 " of course . " 

 " there he be he be come for I ! oh , Frank , you leave I to the tender 
 mercy of the world at large . I think you would forget I , Dear . " 

 " I think the same , " reply her Golaud , a great fat fellow with a 
 childish bare face . he smile awesomely , and one never know what he 
 mean to say . 

 we drive home in the early Christmas morning . Lettie , warmly wrap in 
 her cloak , have have a little stroll with her lover in the shrubbery . she 
 be still brilliant , flash in her movement . he , as he bid she 
 good - bye , be almost beautiful in his grace and his low musical tone . I 
 nearly love he myself . she be very fond towards he . as we come to 
 the gate where the private road branch from the highway , we hear John 
 say " thank you " and look out , see our two boy return from the 
 pit . they be very grotesque in the dark night as the lamplight fall on 
 they , show they grimy , fleck with bit of snow . they shout 
 merrily , their good wish . Lettie lean out and wave to they , and 
 they cry " ' ooray ! " Christmas come in with their acclamation . 




  CHAPTER IX 

  LETTIE come of AGE 


 Lettie be twenty - one on the day after Christmas . she wake I in the 
 morning with cry of dismay . there be a great fall of snow , 
 multiply the cold morning light , startle the slow - footed twilight . 
 the lake be black like the open eye of a corpse ; the wood be black 
 like the beard on the face of a corpse . a rabbit bob out , and 
 flounder in much consternation ; little bird settle into the depth , 
 and rise in a dusty whirr , much terrify at the universal treachery of 
 the earth . the snow be eighteen inch deep , and drift in place . 

 " they will never come ! " lament Lettie , for it be the day of her 
 party . 

 " at any rate Leslie will , " say I. 

 " one ! " she exclaim . 

 " that one be all , be not   it ? " say I. " and for sure George will come , 
 though I have   not see he this fortnight . he be not be in one night , 
 they say , for a fortnight . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " I can not say . " 

 Lettie go away to ask Rebecca for the fiftieth time if she think 
 they would come . at any rate the extra woman - help come . 

 it be not more than ten o'clock when Leslie arrive , ruddy , with 
 shin eye , laugh like a boy . there be much stamp in the porch , 
 and knock of legging with his stick , and cry of Lettie from the 
 kitchen to know who have come , and loud , cheery answer from the porch 
 bid she come and see . she come , and greet he with effusion . 

 " ha , my little woman ! " he say kiss she . " I declare you be a woman . 
 look at yourself in the glass now " she do so " what do you see ? " he 
 ask laughing . 

 " you mighty gay , look at I . " 

 " ah , but look at yourself . there ! I declare you be more afraid of your 
 own eye than of mine , be not   you ? " 

 " I be , " she say , and he kiss she with rapture . 

 " it be your birthday , " he say . 

 " I know , " she reply . 

 " so do I. you promise I something . " 

 " what ? " she ask . 

 " here see if you like it , " he give she a little case . she open it , 
 and instinctively slip the ring on her finger . he make a movement of 
 pleasure . she look up , laugh breathlessly at he . 

 " now ! " say he , in tone of finality . 

 " ah ! " she exclaim in a strange , thrilled voice . 

 he catch she in his arm . 

 after a while , when they could talk rationally again , she say : 

 " do you think they will come to my party ? " 

 " I hope not by Heaven ! " 

 " but oh , yes ! we have make all preparation . " 

 " what do that matter ! ten thousand folk here to - day ! " 

 " not ten thousand only five or six . I shall be wild if they can not 
 come . " 

 " you want they ? " 

 " we have ask they and everything be ready and I do want we to have a 
 party one day . " 

 " but to - day damn it all , Lettie ! " 

 " but I do want my party to - day . do not   you think they will come ? " 

 " they will not   if they have   any sense ! " 

 " you might help I " she pout . 

 " well I will be ! and you have   set your mind on have a houseful of people 
 to - day ? " 

 " you know how we look forward to it my party . at any rate I know Tom 
 Smith will come and I be almost sure Emily Saxton will . " 

 he bite his moustache angrily , and say at last : 

 " then I suppose I would well send John round for the lot . " 

 " it would not   be much trouble , would it ? " 

 " no trouble at all . " 

 " do you know , " she say , twist the ring on her finger . " it make I 
 feel as if I tie something round my finger to remember by . it somehow 
 remain in my consciousness all the time . " 

 " at any rate , " say he , " I have get you . " 

 after dinner , when we be alone , Lettie sit at the table , nervously 
 finger her ring . 

 " it be pretty , mother , be not   it ? " she say a trifle pathetically . 

 " yes , very pretty . I have always like Leslie , " reply my mother . 

 " but it feel so heavy it fidget I . I should like to take it off . " 

 " you be like I , I never could wear ring . I hat my wedding ring for 
 month . " 

 " do you , mother ? " 

 " I long to take it off and put it away . but after a while I get use 
 to it . " 

 " I be glad this be not   a wedding ring . " 

 " Leslie say it be as good , " say I. 

 " ah well , yes ! but still it be different " she put the jewel round 
 under her finger , and look at the plain gold band then she twist it 
 back quickly , say : 

 " I be glad it be not not yet . I begin to feel a woman , little mother I 
 feel grow up to - day . " 

 my mother get up suddenly and go and kiss Lettie fervently . 

 " let I kiss my girl good - bye , " she say , and her voice be muffle with 
 tear . Lettie clung to my mother , and sob a few quiet sob , hide in 
 her bosom . then she lift her face , which be wet with tear , and 
 kiss my mother , murmur : 

 " no , mother no o ! " 

 about three o'clock the carriage come with Leslie and Marie . both Lettie 
 and I be upstairs , and I hear Marie come trip up to my sister . 

 " oh , Lettie , he be in such a state of excitement , you never know . he 
 take I with he to buy it let I see it on . I think it be awfully 
 lovely . here , let I help you to do your hair all in those little 
 roll it will look charming . you have   really get beautiful hair there be 
 so much life in it it be a pity to twist it into a coil as you do . I 
 wish my hair be a bit long though really , it be all the well for 
 this fashion do not   you like it ? it be ' so chic ' I think these little 
 puff be just fascinating it be rather long for they but it will look 
 ravish . really , my eye , and eyebrow , and eyelash be my good 
 feature , do not   you think ? " 

 Marie , the delightful , charming little creature , twitter on . I go 
 downstairs . 

 Leslie start when I enter the room , but see only I , he lean 
 forward again , rest his arm on his knee , look in the fire . 

 " what the Dickens be she do ? " he ask . 

 " dress . " 

 " then we may keep on wait . be not   it a deuced nuisance , these people 
 come ? " 

 " well , we generally have a good time . " 

 " oh it be all very well we be not in the same boat , you and I . " 

 " fact , " say I laugh . 

 " by Jove , Cyril , you do not   know what it be to be in love . I never 
 think I could not   ha ' believe I should be like it . all the time when 
 it be not   at the top of your blood , it be at the bottom : ' the Girl , the 
 Girl . ' " 

 he star into the fire . 

 " it seem press you , press you on . never leave you alone a 
 moment . " 

 again he lapse into reflection . 

 " then , all at once , you remember how she kiss you , and all your blood 
 jump afire . " 

 he muse again for awhile or rather , he seem fiercely to con over his 
 sensation . 

 " you know , " he say , " I do not   think she feel for I as I do for she . " 

 " would you want she to ? " say I. 

 " I do not   know . perhaps not but still I do not   think she feel " 

 at this he light a cigarette to soothe his excited feeling , and there 
 be silence for some time . then the girl come down . we could hear their 
 light chatter . Lettie enter the room . he jump up and survey she . 
 she be dress in soft , creamy , silken stuff ; her neck be quite bare ; 
 her hair be , as Marie promise , fascinating ; she be laugh 
 nervously . she grow warm , like a blossom in the sunshine , in the glow of 
 his admiration . he go forward and kiss she . 

 " you be splendid ! " he say . 

 she only laugh for answer . he draw she away to the great arm - chair , 
 and make she sit in it beside he . she be indulgent and he radiant . he 
 take her hand and look at it , and at his ring which she wear . 

 " it look all right ! " he murmur . 

 " anything would , " she reply . 

 " what do they mean sapphire and diamond for I do not   know ? " 

 " nor do I. Blue for hope , because Speranza in ' Fairy Queen ' have a blue 
 gown and diamond for the crystalline clearness of my nature . " 

 " its glitter and hardness , you mean you be a hard little mistress . but 
 why Hope ? " 

 " why ? no reason whatever , like most thing . no , that be not right . Hope ! 
 oh blindfold hug a silly harp with no string . I wonder why she 
 do not   drop her harp framework over the edge of the globe , and take the 
 handkerchief off her eye , and have a look round ! but of course she be 
 a woman and a man 's woman . do you know I believe most woman can sneak a 
 look down their nose from underneath the handkerchief of hope they have 
 tie over their eye . they could take the whole muffler off but they 
 do not   do it , the dear . " 

 " I do not   believe you know what you be talk about , and I be sure I 
 do not . sapphire remind I of your eye and be not   it ' blue that keep 
 the faith ? ' I remember something about it . " 

 " here , " say she , pull off the ring , " you ought to wear it yourself , 
 faithful one , to keep I in constant mind . " 

 " keep it on , keep it on . it hold you fast than that fair damsel tie 
 to a tree in Millais ' picture I believe it be Millais . " 

 she sit shake with laughter . 

 " what a comparison ! who will be the brave knight to rescue 
 I discreetly from behind ? " 

 " ah , " he answer , " it do not   matter . you do not   want rescue , do you ? " 

 " not yet , " she reply , tease he . 

 they continue to talk half nonsense , make themselves eloquent by 
 quick look and gesture , and communion of warm closeness . the ironical 
 tone go out of Lettie 's voice , and they make love . 

 Marie draw I away into the dining room , to leave they alone . 



 Marie be a charming little maid , whose appearance be neatness , whose 
 face be confident little goodness . her hair be dark , and lie low upon 
 her neck in wavy coil . she do not affect the fashion in coiffure , and 
 generally be a little behind the fashion in dress . indeed she be a 
 half - open bud of a matron , conservative , full of propriety , and of 
 gentle indulgence . she now smile at I with a warm delight in the 
 romance upon which she have just shed her grace , but her demureness 
 allow nothing to be say . she glance round the room , and out of the 
 window , and observe : 

 " I always love woodside , it be restful there be something about 
 it oh assure really it comfort one I have   be read Maxim 
 Gorky . " 

 " you should not , " say I. 

 " Dadda read they but I do not   like they I shall read no more . I like 
 Woodside it make you feel really at home it soothe one like the old 
 wood do . it seem right life be proper here not ulcery " 

 " just healthy live flesh , " say I. 

 " no , I do not   mean that , because one feel oh , as if the world be old 
 and good , not old and bad . " 

 " young , and undisciplined , and mad , " say I. 

 " no but here , you , and Lettie , and Leslie , and I it be so nice for 
 we , and it seem so natural and good . woodside be so old , and so sweet 
 and serene it do reassure one . " 

 " yes , " say I , " we just live , nothing abnormal , nothing cruel and 
 extravagant just natural like dove in a dovecote . " 

 " oh ! dove ! they be so so mushy . " 

 " they be dear little bird , dove . you look like one yourself , with the 
 black band round your neck . you a turtle - dove , and Lettie a 
 wood - pigeon . " 

 " Lettie be splendid , be not   she ? what a swing she have what a mastery ! I 
 wish I have her strength she just march straight through in the right 
 way I think she be fine . " 

 I laugh to see she so enthusiastic in her admiration of my sister . 
 Marie be such a gentle , serious little soul . she go to the window . I 
 kiss she , and pull two berry off the mistletoe . I make she a nest 
 in the heavy curtain , and she sit there look out on the snow . 

 " it be lovely , " she say reflectively . " People must be ill when they 
 write like Maxim Gorky . " 

 " they live in town , " say I. 

 " yes but then look at hardy life seem so terrible it be not , be it ? " 

 " if you do not   feel it , it be not   if you do not   see it . I do not   see it for 
 myself . " 

 " it be lovely enough for heaven . " 

 " Eskimo 's heaven perhaps . and we be the angel eh ? and I be an 
 archangel . " 

 " no , you be a vain , frivolous man . be that ? what be that move 
 through the tree ? " 

 " somebody come , " say I. 

 it be a big , burly fellow move curiously through the bush . 

 " do not   he walk funnily ? " exclaim Marie . he do . when he come near 
 enough we see he be straddle upon indian snow - shoe . Marie peep , and 
 laugh , and peep , and hide again in the curtain laugh . he be very 
 red , and look very hot , as he haul the great mesh , shuffle over 
 the snow ; his body roll most comically . I go to the door and 
 admit he , while Marie stand stroke her face with her hand to 
 smooth away the trace of her laughter . 

 he grasp my hand in a very large and heavy glove , with which he then 
 wipe his perspiring brow . 

 " well , Beardsall , old man , " he say , " and how be thing ? God , I be not 
 ' alf hot ! fine idea though " he show I his snow - shoe . 

 " rip ! be not   they ? I have   come like an indian brave " he roll his 
 " r 's " , and lengthen out his " ah 's " tremendously " brra - ave " . 

 " could not   resist it though , " he continue . " remember your party last 
 year girl turn up ? on the war - path , eh ? " he purse up his childish 
 lip and rub his fat chin . 

 have remove his coat , and the white wrap which protect his collar , 
 not to mention the snowflake , which Rebecca take almost as an insult to 
 herself he seat his fat , hot body on a chair , and proceed to take 
 off his gaiter and his boot . then he don his dancing pump , and I 
 lead he upstairs . 

 " Lord , I skim here like a swallow ! " he continue and I look at his 
 corpulence . 

 " never meet a soul , though they have   have a snow - plough down the road . I see 
 the mark of a cart up the drive , so I guess the Tempests be here . 
 so Lettie 's put her nose in Tempest 's nosebag leave nobody a chance , 
 that some woman have rum taste only they be like raven , they go for 
 the gilding do not   blame them only it leave nobody a chance . Madie 
 Howitt 's come , I suppose ? " 

 I venture something about the snow . 

 " she will come , " he say , " if it be up to the neck . her mother see I go 
 past . " 

 he proceed with his toilet . I tell he that Leslie have send the 
 carriage for Alice and Madie . he slap his fat leg , and exclaim : 

 " Miss Gall I smell sulphur ! beardsall , old boy , there be fun in the 
 wind . Madie , and the coy little Tempest , and " he hiss a line of a 
 music - hall song through his tooth . 

 during all this he have straighten his cream and lavender waistcoat : 

 " little pink of a girl work it for I a real juicy little 
 peach chip somehow or other " he have arrange his white bow he have 
 draw forth two ring , one a great signet , the other gorgeous with 
 diamond , and have adjust they on his fat white finger ; he have run his 
 finger delicately , through his hair , which ripple backwards a trifle 
 tawdrily be fine and somewhat sapless ; he have produce a box , 
 contain a cream carnation with suitable greenery ; he have flick 
 himself with a silk handkerchief , and have dust his patent - leather 
 shoe ; lastly , he have purse up his lip and survey himself with great 
 satisfaction in the mirror . then he be ready to be present . 

 " could not   forget to - day , Lettie . would not   have let old Pluto and all the 
 bunch of them keep I away . I skim here like a ' brra - ave ' on my 
 snow - shoe , like Hiawatha come to Minnehaha . " 

 " ah that be famine , " say Marie softly . " and this be a feast , a 
 gorgeous feast , Miss Tempest , " he say , bow to Marie , who laugh . 

 " you have bring some music ? " ask mother . 

 " Wish I be Orpheus , " he say , utter his word with exaggerated 
 enunciation , a trick he have catch from his singing I suppose . 

 " I see you be in full feather , Tempest . be she kind as she be fair ? ' " 

 " who ? " 

 will purse up his smooth sensuous face that look as if it have never 
 need shaving . Lettie go out with Marie , hear the bell ring . 

 " she be an houri ! " exclaim William . " Gad , I be almost do for ! she be a 
 lotus - blossom ! but be that your ring she be wear , Tempest ? " 

 " keep off , " say Leslie . 

 " and do not   be a fool , " say I. 

 " oh , O - o - oh ! " drawled will , ' so we must look the other way ! ' Le bel 
 homme san merci ! ' " 

 he sigh profoundly , and run his finger through his hair , keep one 
 eye on himself in the mirror as he do so . then he adjust his ring 
 and go to the piano . at first he only splash about brilliantly . then 
 he sort the music , and take a volume of Tchaikowsky 's song . he begin 
 the long opening of one song , be unsatisfie , and find another , a 
 serenade of Don Juan . then at last he begin to sing . 

 his voice be a beautiful tenor , soft , more mellow , less strong and 
 brassy than Leslie 's . now it be raise that it might be hear upstairs . 
 as the melting gush pour forth , the door open . William soften his 
 tone , and sing ' dolce , ' but he do not glance round . 

 " rapture ! Choir of Angels , " exclaim Alice , clasp her hand and 
 gaze up at the lintel of the door like a sainted virgin . 

 " Persephone Europa " murmur Madie , at her side , get tangle in 
 her mythology . 

 Alice press her clasp hand against her bosom in ecstasy as the 
 note rise higher . 

 " hold I , Madie , or I shall rush to extinction in the arm of this 
 siren . " she cling to Madie . the song finish , and will turn round . 

 " take it calmly , Miss Gall , " he say . " I hope you be not hit too badly . " 

 " oh how can you say ' take it calmly ' how can the savage beast be 
 calm ! " 

 " I be sorry for you , " say will . 

 " you be the cause of my trouble , dear boy , " reply Alice . 

 " I never think you would come , " say Madie . 

 " skim here like an indian ' brra - ave , ' " say will . " like Hiawatha 
 towards Minnehaha . I know you be come . " 

 " you know , " simper Madie , " it give I quite a flutter when I hear the 
 piano . it be a year since I see you . how do you get here ? " 

 " I come on snow - shoe , " say he . " Real Indian , come from 
 Canada they be just rip . " 

 " oh Aw - w do go and put they on and show we do ! do perform for we , 
 Billy dear ! " cry Alice . 

 " out in the cold and drive sleet no fear , " say he , and he turn to 
 talk to Madie . Alice sit chat with mother . soon Tom Smith come , and 
 take a seat next to Marie ; and sit quietly look over his spectacle 
 with his sharp brown eye , full of scorn for William , full of misgive 
 for Leslie and Lettie . 

 shortly after , George and Emily come in . they be rather nervous . when 
 they have change their clog , and Emily have take off her brown - paper 
 legging , and he his leather one , they be not anxious to go into the 
 drawing room . I be surprised and so be Emily to see that he have put 
 on dancing shoe . 

 emily , ruddy from the cold air , be wear a wine colour dress , which 
 suit her luxurious beauty . George 's clothe be well make it be a 
 point on which he be particular , be somewhat self - conscious . he wear 
 a jacket and a dark bow . the other man be in evening dress . 

 we take they into the drawing - room , where the lamp be not light , and 
 the glow of the fire be become evident in the dusk . we have take up 
 the carpet the floor be all polished and some of the furniture be 
 take away so that the room look large and ample . 

 there be general hand shake , and the newcomer be seat near the 
 fire . first mother talk to they then the candle be light at the 
 piano , and will play to we . he be an exquisite pianist , full of 
 refinement and poetry . it be astonishing , and it be a fact . Mother go 
 out to attend to the tea , and after a while , Lettie cross over to 
 Emily and George , and , draw up a low chair , sit down to talk to they . 
 Leslie stand in the window bay , look out on the lawn where the snow 
 grow bluer and bluer and the sky almost purple . 

 Lettie put her hand on Emily 's lap , and say softly , " look do you like 
 it ? " 

 " what ! engage ? exclaim Emily . 

 " I be of age , you see , " say Lettie . 

 " it be a beauty , be not   it . let I try it on , will you ? yes , I have   never 
 have a ring . there , it will not   go over my knuckle no I think not . 
 be not   my hand red ? it be the cold yes , it be too small for I . I do 
 like it . " 

 George sit watch the play of the four hand in his sister 's lap , two 
 hand move so white and fascinating in the twilight , the other two 
 rather red , with rather large bone , look so nervous , almost 
 hysterical . the ring play between the four hand , give an occasional 
 flash from the twilight or candlelight . 

 " you must congratulate I , " she say , in a very low voice , and two of we 
 know she speak to he . 

 " as , yes , " say Emily , " I do . " 

 " and you ? " she say , turn to he who be silent . 

 " what do you want I to say ? " he ask . 

 " say what you like . " 

 " sometime , when I have   think about it . " 

 " cold dinner ! " laugh Lettie , awake Alice 's old sarcasm at his 
 slowness . 

 " what ? " he exclaim , look up suddenly at her taunt . she know she be 
 play false ; she put the ring on her finger and go across the room 
 to Leslie , lay her arm over his shoulder , and lean her head 
 against he , murmur softly to he . he , poor fellow , be delighted 
 with she , for she do not display her fondness often . 

 we go in to tea . the yellow shaded lamp shine softly over the table , 
 where Christmas rose spread wide open among some dark - colour leaf ; 
 where the china and silver and the coloured dish shine delightfully . 
 we be all very gay and bright ; who could be otherwise , seat round a 
 well - lay table , with young company , and the snow outside . George feel 
 awkward when he notice his hand over the table , but for the rest , we 
 enjoy ourselves exceedingly . 

 the conversation veer inevitably to marriage . 

 " but what have you to say about it , Mr. Smith ? " ask little Marie . 

 " nothing yet , " reply he in his peculiar grating voice . " my marriage be 
 in the unanalysed solution of the future when I have   do the analysis 
 I will tell you . " 

 " but what do you think about it ? " 

 " do you remember Lettie , " say will Bancroft , " that little red - haired 
 girl who be in our year at college ? she have just marry old Craven out 
 of Physic 's department . " 

 " I wish her joy of it ! " say Lettie ; " be not   she an old flame of your ? " 

 " among the rest , " he reply smile . " do not   you remember you be one 
 of they ; you have your day . " 

 " what a joke that be ! " exclaim Lettie , " we use to go in the 
 arboretum at dinner - time . you last half one autumn . do you remember 
 when we give a concert , you and I , and Frank Wishaw , in the small 
 lecture theatre ? " 

 " when the Prinny be such an old buck , flatter you , " continue Will . 
 " and that night Wishaw take you to the station send old Gettim for a 
 cab and see you in , large as life never be such a thing before . Old 
 Wishaw win you with that cab , do not   he ? " 

 " oh , how I swell ! " cry Lettie . " there be you all at the top of the 
 step gaze with admiration ! but Frank Wishaw be not a nice fellow , 
 though he play the violin beautifully . I never like his eye " 

 " no , " add will . " he do not   last long , do he ? though long enough to 
 oust I . we have a giddy rip time in Coll . , do not   we ? " 

 " it be not bad , " say Lettie . " rather foolish . I be afraid I waste my 
 three year . " 

 " I think , " say Leslie , smile , " you improve the shin hour to 
 great purpose . " 

 it please he to think what a flirt she have be , since the flirting 
 have be harmless , and only add to the glory of his final conquest . 
 George feel very much leave out during these reminiscence . 



 when we have finish tea , we adjourn to the drawing - room . it be in 
 darkness , save for the fire light . the mistletoe have be discover , 
 and be be appreciate . 

 " Georgie , Sybil , Sybil , Georgie , come and kiss I , " cry Alice . 

 will go forward to do she the honour . she run to I , say , " get 
 away , you fat fool keep on your own preserve . now Georgie dear , come 
 and kiss I , 'cause you have not   get nobody else but I , no y ' ave not . 
 do you want to run away , like georgy - Porgy apple - pie ? shall not   cry , sure I 
 shall not , if you be ugly . " 

 she take he and kiss he on either cheek , say softly , " you shall not 
 be so serious , old boy buck up , there be a good fellow . " 

 we light the lamp , and charade be propose , Leslie and Lettie , will 
 and Madie and Alice go out to play . the first scene be an elopement 
 to Gretna Green with Alice a maid servant , a part that she play 
 wonderfully well as a caricature . it be very noisy , and extremely 
 funny . Leslie be in high spirit . it be remarkable to observe that , as 
 he become more animate , more abundantly energetic , Lettie become 
 quieter . the second scene , which they be play as excited melodrama , 
 she turn into small tragedy with her bitterness . they go out , and 
 Lettie blow we kiss from the doorway . 

 " do not   she act well ? " exclaim Marie , speak to Tom . 

 " quite realistic , " say he . 

 " she could always play a part well , " say mother . 

 " I should think , " say Emily , ' she could take a role in life and play up 
 to it . " 

 " I believe she could , " mother answer , " there would only be interval 
 when she would see herself in a mirror acting . " 

 " and what then ? " say Marie . 

 " she would feel desperate , and wait till the fit pass off , " reply my 
 mother , smile significantly . 

 the player come in again . Lettie keep her part subordinate . Leslie 
 play with brilliance ; it be rather startling how he excel . the 
 applause be loud but we could not guess the word . then they laugh , 
 and tell we . we clamour for more . 

 " do go , dear , " say Lettie to Leslie , " and I will be help to arrange 
 the room for the dance . I want to watch you I be rather tired it be 
 so exciting Emily will take my place . " 

 they go . Marie and Tom , and Mother and I play bridge in one corner . 
 Lettie say she want to show George some new picture , and they bent 
 over a portfolio for some time . then she bid he help she to clear the 
 room for the dance . 

 " well , you have have time to think , " she say to he . 

 " a short time , " he reply . " what shall I say ? " 

 " tell I what you have   be think . " 

 " well about you " he answer , smile foolishly . 

 " what about I ? " she ask , venturesome . 

 " about you , how you be at college , " he reply . 

 " oh ! I have a good time . I have plenty of boy . I like they all , till I 
 find there be nothing in they ; then they tire I . " 

 " poor boy ! " he say laugh . " be they all alike ? " 

 " all alike , " she reply , " and they be still . " 

 " pity , " he say , smile . " it be hard line on you . " 

 " why ? " she ask . 

 " it leave you nobody to care for " he reply . 

 " how very sarcastic you be . you make one reservation . " 

 " do I ? " he answer , smile . " but you fire sharp into the air , and then 
 say we be all blank cartridge except one , of course . " 

 " you ? " she query , ironically " oh , you would forever hang fire . " 

 " ' cold dinner ! ' " he quote in bitterness . " but you know I love you . 
 you know well enough . " 

 " past tense , " she reply , " thank make it perfect next time . " 

 " it be you who hang fire it be you who make I , " he say . 

 " and so from the retort circumstantial to the retort direct , ' " she 
 reply , smile . 

 " you see you put I off , " he insist , grow excited . for reply , she 
 hold out her hand and show he the ring . she smile very quietly . he 
 star at she with darken anger . 

 " will you gather the rug and stool together , and put they in that 
 corner ? " she say . 

 he turn away to do so , but he look back again , and say , in low , 
 passionate tone : 

 " you never count I . I be a figure naught in the counting all along . " 

 " see there be a chair that will be in the way , " she reply calmly ; but 
 she flush , and bow her head . she turn away , and he drag an 
 armful of rug into a corner . 

 when the actor come in , Lettie be move a vase of flower . while they 
 play , she sit look on , smile , clap her hand . when it be 
 finish Leslie come and whisper to she , whereon she kiss he 
 unobserved , delight and exhilarate he more than ever . then they 
 go out to prepare the next act . 

 George do not return to she till she call he to help she . her colour 
 be high in her cheek . 

 " how do you know you do not count ? " she say nervously , unable to 
 resist the temptation to play this forbidden game . 

 he laugh , and for a moment could not find any reply . 

 " I do ! " he say . " you know you could have I any day , so you do not 
 care . " 

 " then we be behave in quite the traditional fashion , " she answer 
 with irony . 

 " but you know , " he say , " you begin it . you play with I , and show 
 I heap of thing and those morning when I be bind corn , and 
 when I be gather the apple , and when I be finish the 
 straw - stack you come then I can never forget those morning thing 
 will never be the same you have awaken my life I imagine thing that 
 I could not   have do . " 

 " ah ! I be very sorry , I be so sorry . " 

 " do not   be ! do not   say so . but what of I ? " 

 " what ? " she ask rather startled . he smile again ; he feel the 
 situation , and be a trifle dramatic , though deadly in earnest . 

 " well , " say he , " you start I off then leave I at a loose end . what 
 be I go to do ? " 

 " you be a man , " she reply . 

 he laugh . " what do that mean ? " he say contemptuously . 

 " you can go on which way you like , " she answer . 

 " oh , well , " he say , " we will see . " 

 " do not   you think so ? " she ask , rather anxious . 

 " I do not   know we will see , " he reply . 

 they go out with some thing . in the hall , she turn to he , with a 
 break in her voice , say : " oh , I be so sorry I be so sorry . " 

 he say , very low and soft , " never mind never mind . " 

 she hear the laughter of those prepare the charade . she draw away and 
 go in the drawing room , say aloud : 

 " now I think everything be ready we can sit down now . " 

 after the actor have play the last charade , Leslie come and claim 
 she . 

 " now , Madam be you glad to have I back ? " 

 " that I be , " she say . " do not   leave I again , will you ? " 

 " I will not , " he reply , draw she beside he . " I have leave my 
 handkerchief in the dining - room , " he continue ; and they go out 
 together . 

 Mother give I permission for the man to smoke . 

 " you know , " say Marie to Tom , " I be surprised that a scientist should 
 smoke . be not   it a waste of time ? " 

 " come and light I , " he say . 

 " Nay , " she reply , " let science light you . " 

 " science do ah , but science be nothing without a girl to set it 
 go yes come on now , do not   burn my precious nose . " 

 " Poor George ! " cry Alice . " do he want a minister angel ? " 

 he be half lie in a big arm chair . 

 " I do , " he reply . " come on , be my box of soothe ointment . my match 
 be all loose . " 

 " I will strike it on my heel , eh ? now , rouse up , or I shall have to sit on 
 your knee to reach you . " 

 " poor dear he shall beluxurious , " and the dauntless girl perch on his 
 knee . 

 " what if I singe your whisker would you send an Armada ? 
 aw aw pretty ! you do look sweet do not   he suck prettily ? " 

 " do you envy I ? " he ask , smile whimsically . 

 " Ra ther ! " 

 " shame to debar you , " he say , almost with tenderness . 

 " smoke with I . " 

 he offer she the cigarette from his lip . she be surprised , and 
 exceedingly excited by his tender tone . she take the cigarette . 

 " I will make a heifer like Mrs. Daws , " she say . 

 " do not   call yourself a cow , " he say . 

 " nasty thing let I go , " she exclaim . 

 " no you fit I do not   go , " he reply , hold she . 

 " then you must have grow . oh what great hand let go . Lettie , come 
 and pinch he . " 

 " what be the matter ? " ask my sister . 

 " he will not   let I go . " 

 " he will be tired first , " Lettie answer . 

 Alice be release , but she do not move . she sit with wrinkle forehead 
 try his cigarette . she blow out little tiny whiff of smoke , and 
 think about it ; she send a small puff down her nostril , and rub 
 her nose . 

 " it be not as nice as it look , " she say . 

 he laugh at she with masculine indulgence . 

 " pretty boy , " she say , stroke his chin . 

 " be I ? " he murmur languidly . 

 " Cheek ! " she cry , and she box his ear . then " oh , pore fing ! " she 
 say , and kiss he . 

 she turn round to wink at my mother and at Lettie . she find the 
 latter sit in the old position with Leslie , two in a chair . he be 
 toy with her arm ; hold it and stroke it . 

 " be not   it lovely ? " he say , kiss the forearm , ' so warm and yet so 
 white . io it remind one of Io . " 

 " somebody else talk about heifer , " murmur Alice to George . 

 " can you remember , " say Leslie , speak low , " that man in Merimťe who 
 want to bite his wife and taste her blood ? " 

 " I do , " say Lettie . " have you a strain of wild beast too ? " 

 " perhaps , " he laugh , " I wish these folk have go . your hair be all 
 loose in your neck it look lovely like that though " 

 Alice , the mocker , have unbutton the cuff of the thick wrist that lay 
 idly on her knee , and have push his sleeve a little way . 

 " ah ! " she say . " what a pretty arm , brown as an overbaked loaf ! " 

 he watch her smile . 

 " hard as a brick , " she add . 

 " do you like it ? " he drawl . 

 " no , " she say emphatically , in a tone that mean " yes . " " it make I 
 feel shivery . " he smile again . 

 she superpose her tiny pale , flower - like hand on his . 

 he lie back look at they curiously . 

 " do you feel as if your hand be full of silver ? " she ask almost 
 wistfully , mock . 

 " well than that , " he reply gently . 

 " and your heart full of gold ? " she mock . 

 " of hell ! " he reply briefly . 

 Alice look at he searchingly . 

 " and be I like a blue - bottle buzzing in your window to keep your 
 company ? " she ask . 

 he laugh . 

 " good - bye , " she say , slip down and leave he . 

 " do not   go , " he say but too late . 

 the irruption of Alice into the quiet , sentimental party be like take 
 a bright light into a sleep hen - roost . everybody jump up and want 
 to do something . they cry out for a dance . 

 " emily play a waltz you will not   mind , will you , George ? what ! you do not 
 dance , Tom ? oh , Marie ! " 

 " I do not   mind , Lettie , " protest Marie . 

 " dance with I , Alice , " say George , smile " and Cyril will take Miss 
 Tempest . " 

 " glory ! come on do or die ! " say Alice . 

 we begin to dance . I see Lettie watch , and I look round . George be 
 waltz with Alice , dance passably , laugh at her remark . Lettie 
 be not listen to what her lover be say to she ; she be watch 
 the laugh pair . at the end she go to George . 

 " why ! " she say , " you can " 

 " do you think I could not ? " he say . " you be pledge for a minuet and a 
 valeta with I you remember ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " you promise ? " 

 " yes . but " 

 " I go to Nottingham and learn . " 

 " why because ? very well , Leslie , a mazurka . will you play it , 
 emily yes , it be quite easy . Tom , you look quite happy talk to the 
 Mater . " 

 we dance the mazurka with the same partner . he do it well than I 
 expect without much awkwardness but stiffly . however , he move 
 quietly through the dance , laugh and talk abstractedly all the 
 time with Alice . 

 then Lettie cry a change of partner , and they take their valeta . 
 there be a little triumph in his smile . 

 " do you congratulate I ? " he say . 

 " I be surprised , " she answer . 

 " so be I. but I congratulate myself . " 

 " do you ? well , so do I. " 

 " thank ! you be begin at last . " 

 " what ? " she ask . 

 " to believe in I . " 

 " do not   begin to talk again , " she plead sadly , " nothing vital . " 

 " do you like dance with I ? " he ask 

 " now , be quiet that be real , " she reply . 

 " by Heaven , Lettie , you make I laugh ! " 

 " do I ? " she say " what if you marry Alice soon . " 

 " I Alice ! Lettie ! ! besides , I have   only a hundred pound in the world , 
 and no prospect whatever . that be why well I shall not   marry 
 anybody unless its somebody with money . " 

 " I have   a couple of thousand or so of my own " 

 " have you ? it would have do nicely , " he say smile . 

 " you be different to - night , " she say , lean on he . 

 " be I ? " he reply " it be because thing be alter too . they be 
 settle one way now for the present at least . " 

 " do not   forget the two step this time , " say she smile , and add 
 seriously , " you see , I could not   help it . " 

 " no , why not ? " 

 " thing ! I have be bring up to expect it everybody expect it and 
 you be bind to do what people expect you to do you can not   help it . we 
 can not   help ourselves , we be all chess - man , " she say . 

 " ay , " he agree , but doubtfully . 

 " I wonder where it will end , " she say . 

 " Lettie ! " he cry , and his hand close in a grip on she 's . 

 " do not   do not   say anything it be no good now , it be too late . it be do ; 
 and what be do , be do . if you talk any more , I shall say I be tired 
 and stop the dance . do not   say another word . " 

 he do not at least to she . their dance come to an end . then he take 
 Marie who talk winsomely to he . as he waltz with Marie he regain 
 his animate spirit . he be very lively the rest of the evening , quite 
 astonishing and reckless . at supper he eat everything , and drink much 
 wine . 

 " have some more turkey , Mr. Saxton . " 

 " thank but give I some of that stuff in brown jelly , will you ? it be 
 new to I . " 

 " have some of this trifle , Georgie ? " 

 " I will you be a jewel . " 

 " so will you be a yellow topaz tomorrow ! " 

 " ah ! tomorrow 's tomorrow ! " 

 after supper be over , Alice cry : 

 " Georgie , dear have you finish ? do not   die the death of a king King 
 John I can not   spare you , pet . " 

 " be you so fond of I ? " 

 " I be aw ! I would throw my good Sunday hat under a milk - cart for you , I 
 would ! " 

 " no ; throw yourself into the milk - cart some Sunday , when I be drive . " 

 " yes come and see we , " say Emily . 

 " how nice ! tomorrow you will not   want I , Georgie dear , so I will come . do not 
 you wish Pa would make Tono - Bungay ? would not   you marry I then ? " 

 " I would , " say he . 

 when the cart come , and Alice , Madie , Tom and will depart , Alice bade 
 Lettie a long farewell blow Georgie many kiss promise to love he 
 faithful and true and be go . 

 George and Emily linger a short time . 

 now the room seem empty and quiet , and all the laughter seem to have 
 go . the conversation dribble away ; there be an awkwardness . 

 " well , " say George heavily , at last . " to - day be nearly go it will 
 soon be tomorrow . I feel a bit drunk ! we have a good time to - night . " 

 " I be glad , " say Lettie . 

 they put on their clog and legging , and wrap themselves up , and 
 stand in the hall . 

 " we must go , " say George , " before the clock strike , like 
 Cinderella look at my glass slipper " he point to his clog . 
 " Midnight , and rag , and flee . very appropriate . I shall call myself 
 Cinderella who would not   fit . I believe I be a bit drunk the world look 
 funny . " 

 we look out at the haunting wanness of the hill beyond Nethermere . 
 " good - bye , Lettie ; good - bye . " 

 they be out in the snow , which peer pale and eerily from the depth 
 of the black wood . 

 " good - bye , " he call out of the darkness . Leslie slam the door , and 
 draw Lettie away into the drawing - room . the sound of his low , vibrate 
 satisfaction reach we , as he murmur to she , and laugh low . then he 
 kick the door of the room shut . Lettie begin to laugh and mock and 
 talk in a high strained voice . the sound of their laughter mingled be 
 strange and incongruous . then her voice die down . 

 Marie sit at the little piano which be put in the 
 dining - room strumming and tinkle the false , quaver old note . it 
 be a depressing jingling in the deserted remain of the feast , but she 
 feel sentimental , and enjoy it . 

 this be a gap between to - day and tomorrow , a dreary gap , where one sit 
 and look at the dreary comedy of yesterday , and the grey tragedy of 
 dawn tomorrow , vacantly , miss the poignancy of an actual to - day . 

 the cart return . 

 " Leslie , Leslie , John be here , come along ! " call Marie . 

 there be no answer . 

 " Leslie John be wait in the snow . " 

 " all right . " 

 " but you must come at once . " she go to the door and speak to he . then 
 he come out look rather sheepish , and rather angry at the 
 interruption . Lettie follow , tidy her hair . she do not laugh and 
 look confused , as most girl do on similar occasion ; she seem very 
 tired . 

 at last Leslie tear himself away , and after more return for a farewell 
 kiss , mount the carriage , which stand in a pool of yellow light , 
 blur and splotch with shadow , and drive away , call something 
 about tomorrow . 




  PART II 


  CHAPTER I 

  STRANGE BLOSSOMS and strange new BUDDING 


 Winter lie a long time prostrate on the earth . the man in the mine of 
 Tempest , Warrall and Co. come out on strike on a question of the 
 rearranging of the work system down below . the distress be not 
 awful , for the man be on the whole wise and well - condition , but 
 there be a dejection over the face of the country - side , and some 
 suffer keenly . everywhere , along the lane and in the street , 
 loitered gang of man , unoccupied and spiritless . week after week go 
 on , and the agent of the Miner 's Union hold great meeting , and the 
 minister hold prayer - meeting , but the strike continue . there be no 
 rest . always the crier 's bell be ring in the street ; always the 
 servant of the company be deliver handbill , state the case 
 clearly , and always the people talk and fill the month with bitter , 
 and then hopeless , resent . school give breakfast , chapel give 
 soup , well - to - do people give tea the child enjoy it . but we , who 
 know the face of the old man and the privation of the woman , breathe 
 a cold , dishearten atmosphere of sorrow and trouble . 

 determine poaching be carry on in the squire 's wood and warren . 
 Annable defend his game heroically . one man be at home with a leg 
 suppose to be wound by a fall on the slippery road but really , by a 
 man - trap in the wood . then Annable catch two man , and they be 
 sentence to two month ' imprisonment . 

 on both the lodge gate of Highclose on our side and on the far 
 Eberwich side be post notice that trespasser on the drive or in 
 the ground would be liable to punishment . these poster be soon 
 mud over , and fresh one fix . 

 the man loiter on the road by Nethermere , look angrily at Lettie as 
 she pass , in her black fur which Leslie have give she , and their 
 remark be pungent . she hear they , and they burn in her heart . from 
 my mother she inherit democratic view , which she now proceed to 
 debate warmly with her lover . 

 then she try to talk to Leslie about the strike . he hear she with 
 mild superiority , smile , and say she do not know . woman jump to 
 conclusion at the first touch of feeling ; man must look at a thing all 
 round , then make a decision nothing hasty and impetuous careful , 
 long - think - out , correct decision . woman could not be expect to 
 understand these thing , business be not for they ; in fact , their 
 mission be above business etc . , etc . , Unfortunately Lettie be the 
 wrong woman to treat thus . 

 " so ! " say she , with a quiet , hopeless tone of finality . 

 " there now , you understand , do not   you , Minnehaha , my Laughing Water so 
 laugh again , darling , and do not   worry about these thing . we will not 
 talk about they any more , eh ? " 

 " no more . " 

 " no more that be right you be as wise as an angel . come here pooh , 
 the wood be thick and lonely ! look , there be nobody in the world but we , 
 and you be my heaven and earth ! " 

 " and hell ? " 

 " ah if you be so cold how cold you be ! it give I little shiver 
 when you look so and I be always hot Lettie ! " 

 " well ? " 

 " you be cruel ! kiss I now no , I do not   want your cheek kiss I 
 yourself . why do not   you say something ? " 

 " what for ? what be the use of say anything when there be nothing 
 immediate to say ? " 

 " you be offend ! " 

 " it feel like snow to - day , " she answer . 

 at last , however , winter begin to gather her limb , to rise , and drift 
 with sadden garment northward . 

 the strike be over . the man have compromise . it be a gentle way of 
 tell they they be beat . but the strike be over . 

 the bird flutter and dash ; the catkin on the hazel loosen their 
 winter rigidity , and swing soft tassel . all through the day sound 
 long , sweet whistling from the brush ; then later , loud , laugh 
 shout of bird triumph on every hand . 

 I remember a day when the breast of the hill be heave in a last 
 quick wake sigh , and the blue eye of the water open bright . across 
 the infinite sky of March great rounded mass of cloud have sail 
 stately all day , dome with a white radiance , soften with faint , 
 fleeting shadow as if company of angel be gently sweeping past ; 
 adorn with resting , silken shadow like those of a full white breast . 
 all day the cloud have move on to their vast destination , and I have 
 clung to the earth yearning and impatient . I take a brush and try to 
 paint they , then I rag at myself . I wish that in all the wild valley 
 where cloud shadow be travel like pilgrim , something would call 
 I forth from my rooted loneliness . through all the grandeur of the 
 white and blue day , the poise cloud mass swing their slow flight , and 
 leave I unnoticed . 

 at evening they be all go , and the empty sky , like a blue bubble 
 over we , swam on its pale bright rim . 

 Leslie come , and ask his betrothed to go out with he , under the 
 darken wonderful bubble . she bid I accompany she , and , to escape 
 from myself , I go . 

 it be warm in the shelter of the wood and in the crouch hollow of 
 the hill . but over the slanting shoulder of the hill the wind sweep , 
 whip the redness into our face . 

 " get I some of those alder catkin , Leslie , " say Lettie , as we come 
 down to the stream . 

 " yes , those , where they hang over the brook . they be ruddy like new 
 blood freshen under the skin . look , tassel of crimson and gold ! " she 
 point to the dusty hazel catkin mingle with the alder on her bosom . 
 then she begin to quote Christina Rossetti 's " a birthday . " 

 " I be glad you come to take I a walk , " she continue " do not   Strelley 
 Mill look pretty ? like a group of orange and scarlet fungus in a fairy 
 picture . do you know , I have not   be , no , not for quite a long time . 
 shall we call now ? " 

 " the daylight will be go if we do . it be half past five more ! I see 
 he the son the other morning . " 

 " where ? " 

 " he be cart manure I make haste by . " 

 " do he speak to you do you look at he ? " 

 " no , he say nothing . I glance at he he be just the same , brick 
 colour stolid . mind that stone it rock . I be glad you have   get strong 
 boot on . " 

 " see that I usually wear they " 

 she stand poise a moment on a large stone , the fresh spring brook 
 hastening towards she , deepening , sidle round she . 

 " you will not   call and see they , then ? " she ask . 

 " no . I like to hear the brook tinkling , do not   you ? " he reply . 

 " ah , yes it be full of music . " 

 " shall we go on ? " he say , impatient but submissive . 

 " I will catch up in a minute , " say I. 

 I go in and find Emily put some bread into the oven . 

 " come out for a walk , " say I. 

 " now ? let I tell mother I be long " 

 she run and put on her long grey coat and her red tam - o - shanter . as we 
 go down the yard , George call to I . 

 " I will come back , " I shout . 

 he come to the crew - yard gate to see we off . when we come out onto the 
 path , we see Lettie stand on the top bar of the stile , balance with 
 her hand on Leslie 's head . she see we , she see George , and she wave to 
 we . Leslie be look up at her anxiously . she wave again , then we 
 could hear she laughing , and tell he excitedly to stand still , and 
 steady she while she turn . she turn round , and leap with a great 
 flutter , like a big bird launching , down from the top of the stile to 
 the ground and into his arm . then we climb the steep hill - side Sunny 
 Bank , that have once shine yellow with wheat , and now wave black 
 tattered rank of thistle where the rabbit run . we pass the little 
 cottage in the hollow scoop out of the hill , and gain the highland 
 that look out over Leicestershire to Charnwood on the left , and away 
 into the mountain knob of derbyshire straight in front and towards the 
 right . 

 the upper road be all grassy , fall into long disuse . it use to lead 
 from the Abbey to the Hall ; but now it end blindly on the hill - brow . 
 half way along be the old White House farm , with its green mount 
 step moulder outside . lady have mount here and ride towards 
 the Vale of Belvoir but now a labourer hold the farm . 

 we come to the quarry , and look in at the lime - kiln . 

 " let we go right into the wood out of the quarry , " say Leslie . " I have 
 not be since I be a little lad . " 

 " it be trespassing , " say Emily . 

 " we do not   trespass , " he reply grandiloquently . 

 so we go along by the hurrying brook , which fall over little cascade 
 in its haste , never look once at the primrose that be glimmer 
 all along its bank . we turn aside , and climb the hill through the 
 wood . velvety green sprig of dog - mercury be scatter on the red 
 soil . we come to the top of a slope , where the wood thin . as I talk 
 to Emily I become dimly aware of a whiteness over the ground . she 
 exclaim with surprise , and I find that I be walk , in the first 
 shade of twilight , over clump of snowdrop . the hazel be thin , and 
 only here and there an oak tree uprose . all the ground be white with 
 snowdrop , like drop of manna scatter over the red earth , on the 
 grey - green cluster of leaf . there be a deep little dell , sharp 
 sloping like a cup , and white sprinkling of flower all the way down , 
 with white flower show pale among the first inpouring of shadow at 
 the bottom . the earth be red and warm , prick with the dark , succulent 
 green of bluebell sheath , and embroider with grey - green cluster of 
 spear , and many white floweret . high above , above the light tracery of 
 hazel , the weird oak tangle in the sunset . below , in the first 
 shadow , droop host of little white flower , so silent and sad ; it 
 seem like a holy communion of pure wild thing , numberless , frail , and 
 fold meekly in the evening light . other flower company be glad ; 
 stately barbaric horde of bluebell , merry - head cowslip group , even 
 light , toss wood - anemone ; but snowdrop be sad and mysterious . we 
 have lose their meaning . they do not belong to we , who ravish they . the 
 girl bend among they , touch they with their finger , and symbolise 
 the yearning which I feel . fold in the twilight , these conquer 
 floweret be sad like forlorn little friend of dryad . 

 " what do they mean , do you think ? " say Lettie in a low voice , as her 
 white finger touch the flower , and her black fur fall on they . 

 " there be not so many this year , " say Leslie . 

 " they remind I of mistletoe , which be never ours , though we wear it , " 
 say Emily to I . 

 " what do you think they say what do they make you think , Cyril ? " Lettie 
 repeat . 

 " I do not   know . Emily say they belong to some old wild lose religion . 
 they be the symbol of tear , perhaps , to some strange hearted Druid 
 folk before we . " 

 " More than tear , " say Lettie . " More than tear , they be so still . 
 something out of an old religion , that we have lose . they make I feel 
 afraid . " 

 " what should you have to fear ? " ask Leslie . 

 " if I know I should not   fear , " she answer . " look at all the 
 snowdrop " they hang in dim , strange fleck among the dusky 
 leaf " look at they close up , retreating , powerless . they belong to 
 some knowledge we have lose , that I have lose and that I need . I feel 
 afraid . they seem like something in fate . do you think , Cyril , we can 
 lose thing off the earth like mastodon , and those old 
 monstrosity but thing that matter wisdom ? " 

 " it be against my creed , " say I. 

 " I believe I have lose something , " say she . 

 " come , " say Leslie , " do not   trouble with fancy . come with I to the 
 bottom of this cup , and see how strange it will be , with the sky mark 
 with branch like a filigree lid . " 

 she rise and follow he down the steep side of the pit , cry , " ah , 
 you be treading on the flower . " 

 " no , " say he , " I be be very careful . " 

 they sit down together on a fallen tree at the bottom . she lean 
 forward , her finger wander white among the shadow grey space of 
 leaf , pluck , as if it be a rite , flower here and there . he could 
 not see her face . 

 " do not   you care for I ? " he ask softly . 

 " you ? " she sit up and look at he , and laugh strangely . " you do not 
 seem real to I , " she reply , in a strange voice . 

 for some time they sit thus , both bow and silent . bird ' skirre " off 
 from the bush , and Emily look up with a great start as a quiet , 
 sardonic voice say above we : 

 " a dove - cot , my eye if it be not ! it strike I I ' eere a cooin ' , an ' 
 ' ere 's th ' bird . come on , sweetheart , it be th ' wrong place for billin ' 
 an ' cooin ' , in th ' middle o ' these ' ere snowdrop . let us ' ave yer name , 
 come on . " 

 " clear off , you fool ! " answer Leslie from below , jump up in anger . 

 we all four turn and look at the keeper . he stand in the rim of 
 light , darkly ; fine , powerful form , menace we . he do not move , but 
 like some malicious Pan look down on we and say : 

 " very pretty pretty ! two and two make four . ' tis true , two and two 
 make four . come on , come on out o ' this ' ere bridal bed , an ' let us ' ave 
 a look at yer . " 

 " can not   you use your eye , you fool , " reply Leslie , stand up and 
 help Lettie with her fur . " at any rate you can see there be lady 
 here . " 

 " very sorry , Sir ! you can not   tell a lady from a woman at this distance at 
 dusk . who may you be , Sir ? " 

 " clear out ! come along , Lettie , you can not   stay here now . " 

 they climb into the light . 

 " oh , very sorry , Mr. Tempest when yer look down on a man he never look 
 the same . I think it be some young fool come here dallyin ' " 

 " damn you shut up ! " exclaim Leslie " I beg your pardon , Lettie . will 
 you have my arm ? " 

 they look very elegant , the pair of they . Lettie be wear a long 
 coat which fit close ; she have a small hat whose feather flush 
 straight back with her hair . 

 the keeper look at they . then , smile , he go down the dell with 
 great stride , and return , say , " well , the lady might as well take 
 her glove . " 

 she take they from he , shrink to Leslie . then she start , and say : 

 " let I fetch my flower . " 

 she run for the handful of snowdrop that lie among the root of the 
 tree . we all watch she . 

 " sorry I make such a mistake a lady ! " say Annable . " but I have   nearly 
 forget the sight o ' one save the squire 's daughter , who be never out 
 o ' night . " 

 " I should think you never have see many unless ! have you ever be a 
 groom ? " 

 " no groom but a bridegroom , Sir , and then I think I would rather groom a 
 horse than a lady , for I get well bit if you will excuse I , Sir . " 

 " and you deserve it no doubt . " 

 " I get it an ' I wish you well luck , Sir . one 's more a man here in th ' 
 wood , though , than in my lady 's parlour , it strike I . " 

 " a lady 's parlour ! " laugh Leslie , indulgent in his amusement at the 
 facetious keeper . 

 " oh , yes ! ' will you walk into my parlour ' " 

 " you be very smart for a keeper . " 

 " oh , yes Sir I be once a lady 's man . but I would rather watch th ' rabbit 
 an ' th ' bird ; an ' it be easy breeding brat in th ' Kennels than in th ' 
 town . " 

 " they be your , be they ? " say I. 

 " you know them , do you , Sir ? be not   they a lovely little litter ? be not 
 they a pretty bag o ' ferret ? natural as weasel that be what I say 
 they should be breed up like a bunch o ' young fox , to run as they 
 would . " 

 Emily have join Lettie , and they keep aloof from the man they 
 instinctively hat . 

 " they will get nicely trap , one of these day , " say I. 

 " they be natural they can fend for themselves like wild beast do , " he 
 reply , grin . 

 " you be not do your duty , it strike I , " put in Leslie 
 sententiously . 

 the man laugh . 

 " duty of parent ! tell I , I have   need of it . I have   nine that be eight , 
 and one not far off . she breed well , the ow'd lass one every two 
 year nine in fourteen year do well , have not   she ? " 

 " you have   do pretty badly , I think . " 

 " I why ? it be natural ! when a man 's more than nature he be a devil . be a 
 good animal , say I , whether it be man or woman . you , Sir , a good natural 
 male animal ; the lady there a female un that be proper as long as yer 
 enjoy it . " 

 " and what then ? " 

 " do as th ' animal do . I watch my brat I let them grow . they be 
 beauty , they be sound as a young ash pole , every one . they shall not 
 learn to dirty themselves wi ' smirk deviltry not if I can help it . 
 they can be like bird , or weasel , or viper , or squirrel , so long as 
 they be not   human rot , that be what I say . " 

 " it be one way of look at thing , " say Leslie . 

 " ay . look at the woman look at we . I be something between a bull and a 
 couple of worm stick together , I be . see that spink ! " he raise his 
 voice for the girl to hear . " pretty , be not   he ? what for ? and what for 
 do you wear a fancy vest and twist your moustache , Sir ! what for , at the 
 bottom ! ha tell a woman not to come in a wood till she can look at 
 natural thing she might see something good night , Sir . " 

 he march off into the darkness . 

 " coarse fellow , that , " say Leslie when he have rejoin Lettie , " but 
 he be a character . " 

 " he make you shudder , " she reply . " but yet you be interested in he . 
 I believe he have a history . " 

 " he seem to lack something , " say Emily . 

 " I think he rather a fine fellow , " say I. 

 " splendidly build fellow , but callous no soul , " remark Leslie , 
 dismiss the question . 

 " no , " assent Emily . " no soul and among the snowdrop . " 

 Lettie be thoughtful , and I smile . 

 it be a beautiful evening , still , with red , shake cloud in the west . 
 the moon in heaven be turn wistfully back to the east . dark purple 
 wood lie around we , paint out the distance . the near , wild , ruin 
 land look sad and strange under the pale afterglow . the turf path be 
 fine and springy . 

 " let we run ! " say Lettie , and join hand we race wildly along , with 
 a flutter and a breathless laughter , till we be happy and forgetful . 
 when we stop we exclaim at once , " Hark ! " 

 " a child ! " say Lettie . 

 " at the kennel , " say I. 

 we hurry forward . from the house come the mad yelling and yelping of 
 child , and the wild hysterical shouting of a woman . 

 " Tha ' little devil tha ' little devil tha ' shanna that tha ' shanna ! " 
 and this be accompany by the hollow sound of blow , and a pandemonium 
 of howling . we rush in , and find the woman in a tousled frenzy 
 belabour a youngster with an enamel pan . the lad be roll up 
 like a young hedgehog the woman hold he by the foot , and like a flail 
 come the hollow utensil thudding on his shoulder and back . he lie in 
 the firelight and howl , while scatter in various group , with the 
 leaping firelight twinkle over their tear and their open mouth , be 
 the other child , cry too . the mother be in a state of hysteria ; 
 her hair stream over her face , and her eye be fix in a stare of 
 overwrought irritation . up and down go her long arm like a windmill 
 sail . I run and hold it . when she could hit no more , the woman drop 
 the pan from her nerveless hand , and stagger , trembling , to the squab . 
 she look desperately weary and fordone she clasp and unclasp she 
 hand continually . Emily hush the child , while Lettie hush the 
 mother , hold she hard , crack hand as she sway to and fro . 
 gradually the mother become still , and sit star in front of she ; then 
 aimlessly she begin to finger the jewel on Lettie 's finger . 

 Emily be bath the cheek of a little girl , who lift up her voice 
 and weep loudly when she see the speck of blood on the cloth . but 
 presently she become quiet too , and Emily could empty the water from the 
 late instrument of castigation , and at last light the lamp . 

 I find Sam under the table in a little heap . I put out my hand for he , 
 and he wriggle away , like a lizard , into the passage . after a while I 
 see he in a corner , lie whimpering with little savage cry of pain . 
 I cut off his retreat and capture he , bear he struggle into the 
 kitchen . then , weary with pain , he become passive . 

 we undress he , and find his beautiful white body all discolour 
 with bruise . the mother begin to sob again , with a chorus of baby . 
 the girl try to soothe the weeping , while I rub butter into the 
 silent , wince boy . then his mother catch he in her arm , and kiss 
 he passionately , and cry with abandon . the boy let himself be 
 kiss then he too begin to sob , till his little body be all shake . 
 they fold themselves together , the poor dishevel mother and the 
 half - naked boy , and weep themselves still . then she take he to bed , and 
 the girl help the other little one into their nightgown , and soon 
 the house be still . 

 " I canna manage them , I canna , " say the mother mournfully . " they growin ' 
 beyont I I dunna know what to do wi ' them . an ' niver a ' and do ' e 
 lift ter ' elp I no ' e care not a thing for I not a thing nowt but 
 make a mock an ' a sludge o ' I . " 

 " ah , baby ! " say Lettie , set the bonny boy on his foot , and hold 
 up his trail nightgown behind he , " do you want to walk to your 
 mother go then ah ! " 

 the child , a handsome little fellow of some sixteen month , toddle 
 across to his mother , wave his hand as he go , and laugh , while 
 his large hazel eye glow with pleasure . his mother catch he , push 
 the silken brown hair back from his forehead , and lay his cheek against 
 her . 

 " ah ! " she say , " Tha 's get a funny Dad , tha ' have , not like another man , 
 no , my duckie . ' E be get no ' art ter care for nobody , ' e ' asna , ma 
 pigeon no , live like a stranger to his own flesh an ' blood . " 

 the girl with the wounded cheek have find comfort in Leslie . she be 
 seat on his knee , look at he with solemn blue eye , her solemnity 
 increase by the quaint round head , whose black hair be cut short . 

 " be my chalk , yes it be , ' n our Sam say as it be ' issen , an ' ' e ta'es it 
 and mark it all gone , so I wouldna gie ' t ' I m , " she clutch in her 
 fat little hand a piece of red chalk . " my dad gen it I , ter mark my 
 dolly 's face red , what be on'y wood I will show yer . " 

 she wriggle down , and hold up her trailing gown with one hand , 
 trot to a corner pile with a child 's rubbish , and haul out a 
 hideous carven caricature of a woman , and bring it to Leslie . the face 
 of the object be streak with red . 

 " ' Ere sh ' be , my dolly , what my Dad make I ' er name 's Lady Mima . " 

 " be it ? " say Lettie , " and be these her cheek ? she be not pretty , be 
 she ? " 

 " um sh ' be . my Dad say sh ' be like a lady . " 

 " and he give you her rouge , do he ? " 

 " Rouge ! " she nod . 

 " and you would not   let Sam have it ? " 

 " no an ' mi mower say , Dun gie ' t ' I m ' ' n ' e bite I . " 

 " what will your father say ? " 

 " Me Dad ? " 

 " ' e'd nobbut laugh , " put in the mother , " an ' say as a bite 's bett'r'n a 
 kiss . " 

 " Brute ! " say Leslie feelingly . 

 " no , but ' e never lay a finger on them nor I neither . but ' e be not 
 like another man niver tell yer nowt . he be more a stranger to I this 
 day than ' e wor th ' day I first set eye on ' i m. " 

 " where be that ? " ask Lettie . 

 " when I wor a lass at th ' ' all an ' ' I m a new man come fair a 
 gentleman , an ' a , an ' a ! an even now can read an ' talk like a 
 gentleman but ' e tell I nothing oh no what be I in ' be eye but a 
 sludge bump ? ' e be above I , ' e be , an ' above ' be own childer . God 
 a - mercy , ' e will be in in a minute . come on ' ere ! " 

 she hustle the child to bed , sweep the litter into a corner , and 
 begin to lay the table . the cloth be spotless , and she put he a silver 
 spoon in the saucer . 

 we have only just get out of the house when he draw near . I see his 
 massive figure in the doorway , and the big , prolific woman move 
 subserviently about the room . 

 " Hullo , Proserpine have visitor ? " 

 " I never ax them they come in ' earin ' th ' childer cryin ' . I never 
 encourage them " 

 we hurry away into the night . " ah , it be always the woman bear the 
 burden , " say Lettie bitterly . 

 " if he have help she would not   she have be a fine woman now splendid ? 
 but she be drag to bit . man be brute and marriage just give scope 
 to they , " say Emily . 

 " oh , you would not   take that as a fair sample of marriage , " reply 
 Leslie . " think of you and I , Minnehaha . " 

 " ay . " 

 " oh I mean to tell you what do you think of Greymede old vicarage for 
 we ? " 

 " it be a lovely old place ! " exclaim Lettie , and we pass out of 
 hearing . 

 we stumble over the rough path . the moon be bright , and we step 
 apprehensively on the shadow throw from the tree , for they lay so 
 black and substantial . occasionally a moonbeam would trace out a suave 
 white branch that the rabbit have gnaw quite bare in the hard winter . 
 we come out of the wood into the full heaven . the northern sky be 
 full of a gush of green light ; in front , eclipse Orion lean over his 
 bed , and the moon follow . 

 " when the northern light be up , " say Emily , " I feel so strange half 
 eerie they do fill you with awe , do not   they ? " 

 " yes , " say I , " they make you wonder , and look , and expect something . " 

 " what do you expect ? " she say softly , and look up , and see I 
 smile , and she look down again , bite her lip . 

 when we come to the parting of the road , Emily beg they just to step 
 into the mill just for a moment and Lettie consent . 

 the kitchen window be uncurtained , and the blind , as usual , be not 
 draw . we peep in through the cord of bud honeysuckle . George and 
 Alice be sit at the table play chess ; the mother be mend a 
 coat , and the father , as usual , be read . Alice be talk quietly , 
 and George be bent on the game . his arm lie on the table . 

 we make a noise at the door , and enter . George rise heavily , shake 
 hand , and sit down again . 

 " Hullo , Lettie Beardsall , you be a stranger , " say Alice . " be you so 
 much engaged ? " 

 " ay we do not   see much of she nowadays , " add the father in his jovial 
 way . 

 " and be not   she a toff , in her fine hat and fur and snowdrop . look at 
 she , George , you have   never look to see what a toff she be . " 

 he raise his eye , and look at her apparel and at her flower , but 
 not at her face : 

 " ay , she be fine , " he say , and return to the chess . 

 " we have be gather snowdrop , " say Lettie , finger the flower 
 in her bosom . 

 " they be pretty give I some , will you ? " say Alice , hold out her 
 hand . Lettie give she the flower . 

 " check ! " say George deliberately . 

 " get out ! " reply his opponent , " I have   get some snowdrop do not   they 
 suit I , an innocent little soul like I ? Lettie will not   wear they she be 
 not meek and mild and innocent like I . do you want some ? " 

 " if you like what for ? " 

 " to make you pretty , of course , and to show you an innocent little 
 meekling . " 

 " you be in check , " he say . 

 " where can you wear they ? there be only your shirt . aw ! there ! " she 
 stick a few flower in his ruffled black hair " Look , Lettie , be not   he 
 sweet ? " 

 Lettie laugh with a strained little laugh : 

 " he be like Bottom and the ass 's head , " she say . 

 " then I be Titania do not   I make a lovely fairy queen , Bully Bottom ? and 
 who be jealous Oberon ? " 

 " he remind I of that man in Hedda Gabler crown with vine 
 leaf oh , yes , vine leave , " say Emily . 

 " how be your mare 's sprain , Mr. Tempest ? " George ask , take no notice 
 of the flower in his hair . 

 " oh she will soon be all right , thank . " 

 " ah George tell I about it , " put in the father , and he hold Leslie in 
 conversation . 

 " be I in check , George ? " say Alice , return to the game . she knit 
 her brow and cogitate : 

 " Pooh ! " she say , " that be soon remedie ! " she move her piece , and say 
 triumphantly , " now , Sir ! " 

 he survey the game , and , with deliberation move . Alice pounce on 
 he ; with a leap of her knight she call " check ! " 

 " I do not   see it you may have the game now , " he say . 

 " Beaten , my boy ! do not   crow over a woman any more . stale - mate with 
 flower in your hair ! " 

 he put his hand to his head , and feel among his hair , and throw the 
 flower on the table . 

 " would you believe it ! " say the mother , come into the room from 
 the dairy . 

 " what ? " we all ask . 

 " Nickie Ben 's be and eat the sile cloth . yes ! when I go to wash 
 it , there sit Nickie Ben gulp , and wipe the froth off his 
 whisker . " 

 George laugh loudly and heartily . he laugh till he be tired . Lettie 
 look and wonder when he would be do . 

 " I imagine , " he gasp , " how he would feel with half a yard of muslin 
 creep down his throttle . " 

 this laughter be most incongruous . he go off into another burst . 
 Alice laugh too it be easy to infect she with laughter . then the 
 father begin and in walk Nickie Ben , step disconsolately we all 
 roar again , till the rafter shake . only Lettie look impatiently for 
 the end . George sweep his bare arm across the table , and the scatter 
 little flower fall break to the ground . 

 " oh what a shame ! " exclaim Lettie . 

 " what ? " say he , look round . " your flower ? do you feel sorry for 
 they ? you be too tender hearted ; be not   she , Cyril ? " 

 " always be for dumb animal , and thing , " say I. 

 " do not   you wish you be a little dumb animal , Georgie ? " say Alice . 

 he smile , put away the chess - man . 

 " shall we go , dear ? " say Lettie to Leslie . 

 " if you be ready , " he reply , rise with alacrity . 

 " I be tired , " she say plaintively . 

 he attend to she with little tender solicitation . 

 " have we walk too far ? " he ask . 

 " no , it be not that . no it be the snowdrop , and the man , and the 
 child and everything . I feel just a bit exhausted . " 

 she kiss Alice , and Emily , and the mother . 

 " good - night , Alice , " she say . " it be not altogether my fault we be 
 stranger . you know really I be just the same really . only you 
 imagine , and then what can I do ? " 

 she say farewell to George , and look at he through a quiver of 
 suppress tear . 

 George be somewhat flushed with triumph over Lettie : she have go home 
 with tear shake from her eye unknown to her lover ; at the farm George 
 laugh with Alice . 

 we escort Alice home to Eberwich " like a bloom little monkey 
 dangle from two bough , " as she put it , when we swing she along on our 
 arm . we laugh and say many preposterous thing . George want to 
 kiss she at parting , but she tip he under the chin and say , 
 " sweet ! " as one do to a canary . then she laugh with her tongue 
 between her tooth , and run indoor . 

 " she be a little devil , " say he . 

 we take the long way home by Greymede , and pass the dark school . 

 " come on , " say he , " let us go in the ' Ram Inn , ' and have a look at my 
 cousin Meg . " 

 it be half past ten when he march I across the road and into the 
 sand passage of the little inn . the place have be an important farm 
 in the day of George 's grand - uncle , but since his decease it have 
 decline , under the governance of the widow and a man - of - all - work . the 
 old grand - aunt be prop and support by a splendid grand - daughter . 
 the near kin of Meg be all in California , so she , a bonny delightful 
 girl of twenty - four , stay near her grand - ma . 

 as we tramp grittily down the passage , the red head of Bill poke out 
 of the bar , and he say as he recognise George : 

 " Good - ev'nin ' go forward ' er 's non abe yit . " 

 we go forward , and unlatche the kitchen door . the great - aunt be 
 seat in her little , round - back armchair , sip she " night - cap . " 

 " well , George , my lad ! " she cry , in her querulous voice . " Tha ' niver 
 say it be thai , do ter ? that be com'n for summat , for sure , else what 
 bring thee ter see I ? " 

 " no , " he say . " Ah'n com ter see thee , nowt else . Wheer 's Meg ? " 

 " ah ! ha ha ah ! I , do ter say ? come ter see I ? ha wheer 's 
 Meg ! an ' who be this young gentleman ? " 

 I be formally introduce , and shake the clammy cord hand of the old 
 lady . 

 " Tha ' look delikit , " she observe , shake her cap and its scarlet 
 geranium sadly : " cum now , sit thee down , an ' dunna look so long o ' th ' 
 leg . " 

 I sit down on the sofa , on the cushion cover with blue and red 
 check . the room be very hot , and I star about uncomfortably . the old 
 lady sit peer at nothing , in reverie . she be a hard - visage , 
 bosomless dame , clothe in thick black cloth - like armour , and wear an 
 immense twisted gold brooch in the lace at her neck . 

 we hear heavy , quick footstep above . 

 " Er 's commin ' , " remark the old lady , rouse from her apathy . the 
 footstep come downstairs quickly , then cautiously round the bend . Meg 
 appear in the doorway . she start with surprise , say : 

 " well , I ' eere sumbody , but I never think it be you . " More colour 
 still flame into her glossy cheek , and she smile in her fresh , frank 
 way . I think I have never see a woman who have more physical charm ; 
 there be a voluptuous fascination in she every outline and movement ; 
 one never listen to the word that come from her lip , one watch the 
 ripe motion of those red fruit . 

 " get them a drop o ' whiskey , Meg you will ' a'e a drop ? " 

 I decline firmly , but do not escape . 

 " Nay , " declare the old dame . " I s'll ha'e none o ' thy no 's . should ter 
 like it ' ot ? say th ' word , an ' tha ' ' as it . " 

 I do not say the word . 

 " then gi'e ' I m claret , " pronounce my hostess , " though it be thin - belly 
 stuff ter go to ter bed on " and claret it be . 

 Meg go out again to see about closing . the grand - aunt sigh , and 
 sigh again , for no perceptible reason but the whiskey . 

 " it be well you have   come ter see I now , " she moan , " for you will none 
 ' a'e a chance next time you come'n ; no I be all go but my cap " 
 she shake that geraniume erection , and I wonder what sardonic fate 
 leave it behind . 

 " an ' I be force ter say it , I s'll be thankful to be go , " she add , 
 after a few sigh . 

 this weariness of the flesh be touching . the cruel truth be , however , 
 that the old lady clung to life like a louse to a pig 's back . die , she 
 faintly , but emphatically declare herself , " a bit well a bit well . 
 I s'll be up to - morrow . " 

 " I should a go before now , " she continue , " but for that blessed 
 wench I canna abear to think o ' leavin ' er come drink up , my lad , 
 drink up nay , tha ' ' rt nobbut young yet , tha ' ' rt none top up wi ' a 
 thimbleful . " 

 I take whiskey in preference to the acrid stuff . 

 " ay , " resume the grand - aunt . " I canna go in peace till ' er be 
 settle an ' ' er be that tickle o ' choosin ' . Th ' right sort ' asn't   th ' 
 gumption ter ax ' er . " 

 she sniff , and turn scornfully to her glass . George grin and 
 look conscious ; as he swallow a gulp of whiskey it crackle in his 
 throat . the sound annoy the old lady . 

 " Tha ' might be scar'd at summat , " she say . " Tha ' niver ' ad six drop o ' 
 spunk in thee . " 

 she turn again with a sniff to her glass . he frown with irritation , 
 half fill his glass with liquor , and drink again . 

 " I dare bet as tha ' niver kiss a wench in thy life not proper " and 
 she toss the last drop of her toddy down her skinny throat . 

 here Meg come along the passage . 

 " come , gran'ma , " she say . " I be sure it be time as you be in bed come 
 on . " 

 " sit thee down an ' drink a drop wi 's it be not ivry night as we ' a'e 
 cumpny . " 

 " no , let I take you to bed I be sure you must be ready . " 

 " sit thee down ' ere , I say , an ' get thee a drop o ' port . come no 
 argy - bargyin ' . " 

 Meg fetch more glass and a decanter . I make a place for she between 
 I and George . we all have port wine . Meg , naive and unconscious , wait 
 on we deliciously . her cheek gleam like satin when she laugh , save 
 when the dimple hold the shadow . her suave , tawny neck be bare and 
 bewitching . she turn suddenly to George as he ask she a question , 
 and they find their face close together . he kiss she , and when she 
 start back , jump and kiss her neck with warmth . 

 " La la dy da la dy da dy da , " cry the old woman in delight , 
 and she clutch her wineglass . 

 " come on chink ! " she cry , " all together chink to he ! " 

 we four chinked and drank . George pour wine in a tumbler , and drink it 
 off . he be get excite , and all the energy and passion that 
 normally be bind down by his caution and self - instinct begin to flame 
 out . 

 " here , aunt ! " say he , lift his tumbler , " here be to what you want you 
 know ! " 

 " I know tha ' wor as spunky as ony on'em , " she cry . " Tha ' nobbut 
 want warmin ' up . I will see as you be all right . it be a bargain . chink 
 again , ivrybody . " 

 " a bargain , " say he before he put his lip to the glass . 

 " what bargain be that ? " say Meg . 

 the old lady laugh loudly and wink at George , who , with his lip wet 
 with wine , get up and kiss Meg soundly , say : 

 " there it be that seal it . " 

 Meg wipe her face with her big pinafore , and seem uncomfortable . 

 " be not   you comin ' , gran'ma ? " she plead . 

 " eh , tha ' want ter ' orry I off what be thai say , George a deep un , 
 isna ' er ? " 

 " Dunna go , Aunt , dunna be hustle off . " 

 " Tush Pish , " snort the old lady . " yah , tha ' ' rt a slow un , an ' no 
 mistake ! get a candle , Meg , I be ready . " 

 Meg bring a brass bedroom candlestick . Bill bring in the money in a 
 tin box , and deliver it into the hand of the old lady . 

 " go thy way to bed now , lad , " say she to the ugly , wizene 
 serve - man . he sit in a corner and pull off his boot . 

 " come an ' kiss I good - night , George , " say the old woman and as he do 
 so she whisper in his ear , whereat he laugh loudly . she pour 
 whiskey into her glass and call to the serve - man to drink it . then , 
 pull herself up heavily , she lean on Meg and go upstairs . she have 
 be a big woman , one could see , but now her shapeless , broken figure 
 look pitiful beside Meg 's luxuriant form . we hear they slowly , 
 laboriously climb the stair . George sit pull his moustache and 
 half - smile ; his eye be alight with that peculiar childish look they 
 have when he be experience new and doubtful sensation . then he pour 
 himself more whiskey . 

 " I say , steady ! " I admonish . 

 " what for ! " he reply , indulge himself like a spoiled child and 
 laugh . 

 Bill , who have sit for some time look at the hole in his stocking , 
 drain his glass , and with a sad " good - night , " creak off upstairs . 

 presently Meg come down , and I rise and say we must be go . 

 " I will just come an ' lock the door after you , " say she , stand 
 uneasily wait . 

 George get up . he grip the edge of the table to steady himself ; then 
 he get his balance , and , with his eye on Meg , say : 

 " ' Ere ! " he nod his head to she . " come here , I want ter ax thee 
 sumwhat . " 

 she look at he , half - smile , half doubtful . he put his arm round she 
 and look down into her eye , with his face very close to her , say : 

 " let us ha'e a kiss . " 

 quite unresisting she yield he her mouth , look at he intently 
 with her bright brown eye . he kiss she , and press she closely to 
 he . 

 " I be go to marry thee , " he say . 

 " go on ! " she reply , softly , half glad , half doubtful . 

 " I be an ' all , " he repeat , press she more tightly to he . 

 I go down the passage , and stand in the open doorway look out into 
 the night . it seem a long time . then I hear the thin voice of the old 
 woman at the top of the stair : 

 " Meg ! Meg ! send ' I m off now . come on ! " 

 in the silence that follow there be a murmur of voice , and then they 
 come into the passage . 

 " good - night , my lad , good luck to thee ! " cry the voice like a ghoul 
 from upper region . 

 he kiss his betroth a rather hurry good - night at the door . 

 " good - night , " she reply softly , watch he retreat . then we hear 
 her shoot the heavy bolt . 

 " you know , " he begin , and he try to clear his throat . his voice be 
 husky and strangulate with excitement . he try again : 

 " you know she she be a clinker . " 

 I do not reply , but he take no notice . 

 " damn ! " he ejaculate . " what do I let she go for ! " 

 we walk along in silence his excitement abate somewhat . 

 " it be the way she swing her body an ' the curve as she stand . it be 
 when you look at she you feel you know . " 

 I suppose I know , but it be unnecessary to say so . 

 " you know if ever I dream in the night of woman you know it be always 
 Meg ; she seem to look so soft , and to curve her body " 

 gradually his foot begin to drag . when we come to the place where the 
 colliery railway cross the road , he stumble , and pitch forward , 
 only just recover himself . I take hold of his arm . 

 " Good Lord , Cyril , be I drunk ? " he say . 

 " not quite , " say I. 

 " no , " he mutter , " could not   be . " 

 but his foot drag again , and he begin to stagger from side to side . I 
 take hold of his arm . he murmur angrily then , subside again , 
 mutter , with slovenly articulation : 

 " I I feel fit to drop with sleep . " 

 along the dead , silent roadway , and through the uneven blackness of the 
 wood , we lurch and stumble . he be very heavy and difficult to 
 direct . when at last we come to the brook we splash straight through 
 the water . I urge he to walk steadily and quietly across the yard . he 
 do his good , and we make a fairly still entry into the farm . he drop 
 with all his weight on the sofa , and lean down , begin to unfasten his 
 legging . in the midst of his fumbling he fall asleep , and I be afraid 
 he would pitch forward on to his head . I take off his legging and his 
 wet boot and his collar . then , as I be push and shake he awake 
 to get off his coat , I hear a creaking on the stair , and my heart 
 sink , for I think it be his mother . but it be Emily , in her long 
 white nightgown . she look at we with great dark eye of terror , and 
 whisper : " what be the matter ? " 

 I shake my head and look at he . his head have drop down on his 
 chest again . 

 " be he hurt ? " she ask , her voice become audible , and dangerous . he 
 lift his head , and look at she with heavy , angry eye . 

 " George ! " she say sharply , in bewilderment and fear . his eye seem to 
 contract evilly . 

 " be he drunk ? " she whisper , shrink away , and look at I . " have 
 you make he drunk you ? " 

 I nod . I too be angry . 

 " oh , if mother get up ! I must get he to bed ! oh , how could you ! " 

 this sibilant whisper irritated he , and I . I tug at his coat . he 
 snarl incoherently , and swear . she catch her breath . he look at she 
 sharply , and I be afraid he would wake himself into a rage . 

 " go upstairs ! " I whisper to she . she shake her head . I could see he 
 take heavy breath , and the vein of his neck be swell . I be 
 furious at her disobedience . 

 " go at once , " I say fiercely , and she go , still hesitate and 
 look back . 

 I have haul off his coat and waistcoat , so I let he sink again into 
 stupidity while I take off my boot . then I get he to his foot , and , 
 walk behind he , impel he slowly upstairs . I light a candle in his 
 bedroom . there be no sound from the other room . so I undress he , 
 and get he in bed at last , somehow . I cover he up and put over he 
 the calf - skin rug , because the night be cold . almost immediately he 
 begin to breathe heavily . I drag he over to his side , and pillow 
 his head comfortably . he look like a tired boy , asleep . 

 I stand still , now I feel myself alone , and look round . up to the low 
 roof rise the carven pillar of dark mahogany ; there be a chair by the 
 bed , and a little yellow chest of drawer by the window , that be all 
 the furniture , save the calf - skin rug on the floor . in the drawer I 
 notice a book . it be a copy of Omar Khayyam , that Lettie have give he 
 in her Khayyam day , a little shill book with coloured illustration . 

 I blow out the candle , when I have look at he again . as I creep on to 
 the landing , Emily peep from her room , whispering , " be he in bed ? " 

 I nod , and whisper good - night . then I go home , heavily . 

 after the evening at the farm , Lettie and Leslie draw close together . 
 they eddy unevenly down the little stream of courtship , jostle and 
 drift together and apart . he be unsatisfied and strove with every 
 effort to bring she close to he , submissive . gradually she yield , and 
 submit to he . she fold round she and he the snug curtain of the 
 present , and they sit like child play a game behind the hanging 
 of an old bed . she shut out all distant outlook , as an Arab unfold his 
 tent and conquer the mystery and space of the desert . so she live 
 gleefully in a little tent of present pleasure and fancy . 

 occasionally , only occasionally , she would peep from her tent into the 
 out space . then she sit pore over book , and nothing would be able to 
 draw she away ; or she sit in her room look out of the window for 
 hour together . she plead headache ; mother say liver ; he , angry like 
 a spoilt child deny his wish , declare it moodiness and perversity . 




  CHAPTER II 

  a SHADOW in spring 

 with spring come trouble . the Saxtons declare they be be bite 
 off the estate by rabbit . suddenly , in a fit of despair , the father 
 buy a gun . although he know that the squire would not for one moment 
 tolerate the shooting of that manna , the rabbit , yet he be out in the 
 first cold morning twilight bang away . at first he but scar the 
 brute , and bring Annable on the scene ; then , blood by the use of 
 the weapon , he play havoc among the furry beast , bring home some 
 eight or nine couple . 

 George entirely approve of this measure ; it rejoice he even ; yet he 
 have never have the initiative to begin the like himself , or even to urge 
 his father to it . he prophesy trouble , and possible loss of the farm . 
 it disturb he somewhat , to think they must look out for another 
 place , but he postpone the thought of the evil day till the time should 
 be upon he . 

 a vendetta be establish between the Mill and the keeper , Annable . the 
 latter cherish his rabbit : 

 " call them vermin ! " he say . " I only know one sort of vermin and that be 
 the talkin sort . " so he set himself to thwart and harass the rabbit 
 slayer . 

 it be about this time I cultivate the acquaintance of the keeper . all 
 the world hat he to the people in the village he be like a devil 
 of the wood . some miner have swear vengeance on he for have cause 
 their committal to gaol . but he have a great attraction for I ; his 
 magnificent physique , his great vigour and vitality , and his swarthy , 
 gloomy face draw I . 

 he be a man of one idea : that all civilisation be the paint fungus 
 of rottenness . he hat any sign of culture . I win his respect one 
 afternoon when he find I trespass in the wood because I be 
 watch some maggot at work in a dead rabbit . that lead we to a 
 discussion of life . he be a thorough materialist he scorn religion 
 and all mysticism . he spend his day sleep , make intricate trap 
 for weasel and man , put together a gun , or do some amateur 
 forestry , cut down timber , split it in log for use in the hall , 
 and plant young tree . when he think , he reflect on the decay of 
 mankind the decline of the human race into folly and weakness and 
 rottenness . " be a good animal , true to your animal instinct , " be his 
 motto . with all this , he be fundamentally very unhappy and he make I 
 also wretche . it be this power to communicate his unhappiness that 
 make I somewhat dear to he , I think . he treat I as an affectionate 
 father treat a delicate son ; I notice he like to put his hand on my 
 shoulder or my knee as we talk ; yet withal , he ask I question , and 
 save his thought to tell I , and believe in my knowledge like any 
 acolyte . 

 I go up to the quarry wood one evening in early April , take a look 
 for Annable . I could not find he , however , in the wood . so I leave the 
 wildland , and go along by the old red wall of the kitchen garden , 
 along the main road as far as the mouldering church which stand high on 
 a bank by the road - side , just where the tree tunnel the darkness , and 
 the gloom of the highway startle the traveller at noon . great tree 
 grow on the bank suddenly fold over everything at this point in the 
 swing road , and in the obscurity rot the Hall church , black and 
 melancholy above the shrink head of the traveller . 

 the grassy path to the churchyard be still clog with decayed leaf . 
 the church be abandon . as I draw near an owl float softly out of the 
 black tower . grass overgrow the threshold . I push open the door , 
 grind back a heap of fall plaster and rubbish and enter the 
 place . in the twilight the pew be lean in ghostly disorder , the 
 prayer - book drag from their ledge , scatter on the floor in the 
 dust and rubble , tear by mouse and bird . bird scuffle in the darkness 
 of the roof . I look up . in the upward well of the tower I could see a 
 bell hang . I stoop and pick up a piece of plaster from the ragged 
 confusion of feather , and broken nest , and remnant of dead bird . up 
 into the vault overhead I toss piece of plaster until one hit the 
 bell , and it " tonge " out its faint remonstrance . there be a rustle of 
 many bird like spirit . I sound the bell again , and dark form move 
 with cry of alarm overhead , and something fall heavily . I shiver in 
 the dark , evil - smell place , and hurry to get out of door . I 
 clutch my hand with relief and pleasure when I see the sky above I 
 quiver with the last crystal light , and the low red of sunset 
 behind the yew - bole . I drink the fresh air , that sparkle with the 
 sound of the blackbird and thrush whistle their strong bright 
 note . 

 I stray round to where the headstone , from their eminence lean to 
 look on the Hall below , where great window shine yellow light on to the 
 flagged court - yard , and the little fish pool . a stone staircase 
 descend from the graveyard to the court , between stone balustrade 
 whose pock - mark grey column still swell gracefully and with 
 dignity , encrust with lichen . the staircase be fill with ivy and 
 ramble rose impassable . fern be unroll round the big square 
 halting place , half way down where the stair turn . 

 a peacock , startle from the back premise of the Hall , come flap up 
 the terrace to the churchyard . then a heavy footstep cross the flag . 
 it be the keeper . I whistle the whistle he know , and he break his way 
 through the vicious rose - bough up the stair . the peacock flap 
 beyond I , on to the neck of an old bow angel , rough and dark , an 
 angel which have long cease sorrow for the lose Lucy , and have die 
 also . the bird bend its voluptuous neck and peer about . then it lift 
 up its head and yell . the sound tear the dark sanctuary of twilight . 
 the old grey grass seem to stir , and I could fancy the smothered 
 primrose and violet beneath it wake and gasp for fear . 

 the keeper look at I and smile . he nod his head towards the 
 peacock , say : 

 " Hark at that damned thing ! " 

 again the bird lift its crested head and give a cry , at the same time 
 turn awkwardly on its ugly leg , so that it show we the full wealth 
 of its tail glimmering like a stream of coloured star over the sunken 
 face of the angel . 

 " the proud fool ! look at it ! perch on an angel , too , as if it be a 
 pedestal for vanity . that be the soul of a woman or it be the devil . " 

 he be silent for a time , and we watch the great bird move uneasily 
 before we in the twilight . 

 " that be the very soul of a lady , " he say , " the very , very soul . damn 
 the thing , to perch on that old angel . I should like to wring its neck . " 

 again the bird scream , and shift awkwardly on its leg ; it seem to 
 stretch its beak at we in derision . Annable pick up a piece of sod and 
 fling it at the bird , say : 

 " get out , you screech devil ! God ! " he laugh . " there must be plenty 
 of heart twist under here , " and he stamp on a grave , " when they 
 hear that row . " 

 he kick another sod from a grave and throw at the big bird . the 
 peacock flap away , over the tomb , down the terrace . 

 " just look ! " he say , " the miserable brute have dirty that angel . a 
 woman to the end , I tell you , all vanity and screech and defilement . " 

 he sit down on a vault and light his pipe . but before he have smoke two 
 minute , it be out again . I have not see he in a state of perturbation 
 before . 

 " the church , " say I , " be rotten . I suppose they will stand all over the 
 country like this , soon with peacock trail the graveyard . " 

 " ay , " he mutter , take no notice of I . 

 " this stone be cold , " I say , rise . 

 he get up too , and stretch his arm as if he be tired . it be quite 
 dark , save for the wax moon which lean over the east . 

 " it be a very fine night , " I say . " do not   you notice a smell of 
 violet ? " 

 " ay ! the moon look like a woman with child . I wonder what Time 's get in 
 her belly . " 

 " you ? " I say . " you do not   expect anything exciting do you ? " 

 " exciting ! no about as exciting as this rotten old place just rot 
 off oh , my God ! I be like a good house , build and finish , and leave to 
 tumble down again with nobody to live in it . " 

 " why what be up really ? " 

 he laugh bitterly , say , " come and sit down . " 

 he lead I off to a seat by the north door , between two pew , very black 
 and silent . there we sit , he put his gun carefully beside he . he 
 remain perfectly still , think . 

 " Whot be up ? " he say at last , " why I will tell you . I go to 
 Cambridge my father be a big cattle dealer he die bankrupt while I 
 be in college , and I never take my degree . they persuade I to be a 
 parson , and a parson I be . 

 I go a curate to a little place in Leicestershire a bonnie place with 
 not many people , and a fine old church , and a great rich parsonage . I 
 have not   overmuch to do , and the rector he be the son of an Earl be 
 generous . he lend I a horse and would have I hunt like the rest . I 
 always think of that place with a smell of honeysuckle while the grass 
 be wet in the morning . it be fine , and I enjoy myself , and do the 
 parish work all right . I believe I be pretty good . 

 a cousin of the rector 's use to come in the hunting season a Lady 
 Crystabel , lady in her own right . the second year I be there she come 
 in June . there be not   much company , so she use to talk to I I use to 
 read then and she use to pretend to be so childish and unknowing , and 
 would get I tell her thing , and talk to she , and I be hot on 
 thing . we must play tennis together , and ride together , and I must row 
 she down the river . she say we be in the wilderness and could do as 
 we like . she make I wear flannel and soft clothe . she be very fine 
 and frank and unconventional ripping , I think she . all the summer she 
 stop on . I should meet she in the garden early in the morning when I 
 come from a swim in the river it be clear and deepen on 
 purpose and she would blush and make I walk with she . I can remember I 
 use to stand and dry myself on the bank full where she might see I I 
 be mad on she and she be madder on I . 

 we go to some cave in Derbyshire once , and she would wander from the 
 rest , and loiter , and , for a game , we play a sort of hide and seek 
 with the party . they think we would go , and they go and lock the 
 door . then she pretend to be frightened and clung to I , and say what 
 would they think , and hide her face in my coat . I take she and kiss 
 she , and we make it up properly . I find out afterwards she actually 
 tell I she would get the idea from a sloppy french novel the Romance of A 
 Poor Young Man . I be the Poor Young Man . 

 we get marry . she give I a living she have in her parsonage , and we 
 go to live at her Hall . she would not   let I out of her sight . 
 Lord ! we be an infatuated couple and she would choose to view I in 
 an aesthetic light . I be greek statue for she , bless you : Croton , 
 Hercules , I do not   know what ! she have her own way too much I let she do 
 as she like with I . 

 then gradually she get tired it take she three year to be really 
 glut with I . I have a physique then for that matter I have now . " 

 he hold out his arm to I , and bade I try his muscle . I be startle . 
 the hard flesh almost fill his sleeve . 

 " ah , " he continue , " you do not   know what it be to have the pride of a 
 body like mine . but she would not   have child no , she would not   say 
 she dare not . that be the root of the difference at first . but she 
 cool down , and if you do not   know the pride of my body you would never know 
 my humiliation . I try to remonstrate and she look simply astounded 
 at my cheek . I never get over that amazement . 

 she begin to get souly . a poet get hold of she , and she begin to affect 
 Burne - Jones or Waterhouse it be Waterhouse she be a lot like one of 
 his woman Lady of Shalott , I believe . at any rate , she get souly , and I 
 be her animal son animal son boeuf . I put up with that for above a 
 year . then I get some servant ' clothe and go . 

 I be see in France then in Australia though I never leave England . I 
 be suppose to have die in the bush . she marry a young fellow . then 
 I be prove to have die , and I read a little obituary notice on myself 
 in a woman 's paper she subscribe to . she write it herself as a warning 
 to other young lady of position not to be seduce by plausible " poor 
 Young Men . " 

 now she be dead . they have   get the paper her paper in the kitchen down 
 there , and it be full of photograph , even an old photo of I " an 
 unfortunate misalliance . " I feel , somehow , as if I be at an end too . I 
 think I would grow a solid , middle - age - man , and here I feel sore as I 
 do at twenty - six , and I talk as I use to . 

 one thing I have get some child , and they be of a breed as you would not 
 meet anywhere . I be a good animal before everything , and I have   get some 
 child . " 

 he sit look up where the big moon swam through the black branch of 
 the yew . 

 " so she be dead your poor peacock ! " I murmur . 

 he get up , look always at the sky , and stretch himself again . he 
 be an impressive figure mass in blackness against the moonlight , with 
 his arm outspread . 

 " I suppose , " he say , " it be not   all her fault . " 

 " a white peacock , we will say , " I suggest . 

 he laugh . 

 " go home by the top road , will you ! " he say . " I believe there be 
 something on in the bottom wood . " 

 " all right , " I answer , with a quiver of apprehension . 

 " yes , she be fair enough , " he mutter . 

 " ay , " say I , rise . I hold out my hand from the shadow . I be startle 
 myself by the white sympathy it seem to express , extend towards he 
 in the moonlight . he grip it , and cleave to I for a moment , then he 
 be go . 

 I go out of the churchyard feel a sullen resentment against the 
 tousled graf that lie inanimate across my way . the air be heavy to 
 breathe , and fearful in the shadow of the great tree . I be glad when I 
 come out on the bare white road , and could see the copper light from 
 the reflector of a pony - cart 's lamp , and could hear the amiable 
 chat - chat of the hoof trot towards I . I be lonely when they have 
 pass . 

 over the hill , the big flushed face of the moon poise just above the 
 treetops , very majestic , and far off yet imminent . I turn with swift 
 sudden friendliness to the net of elm - bough spread over my head , dot 
 with soft cluster winsomely . I jump up and pull the cool soft tuft 
 against my face for company ; and as I pass , still I reach upward for 
 the touch of this bud gentleness of the tree . the wood breathe 
 fragrantly , with a subtle sympathy . the fir soften their touch to I , 
 and the larch wake from the barren winter - sleep , and put out velvet 
 finger to caress I as I pass . only the clean , bare branch of the 
 ash stand emblem of the discipline of life . I look down on the 
 blackness where tree fill the quarry and the valley bottom , and it 
 seem that the world , my own home - world , be strange again . 

 some four or five day after Annable have talk to I in the churchyard , 
 I go out to find he again . it be Sunday morning . the larch - wood be 
 afloat with clear , lyric green , and some primrose scatter whitely on 
 the edge under the fringing bough . it be a clear morning , as when the 
 latent life of the world begin to vibrate afresh in the air . the smoke 
 from the cottage rise blue against the tree , and thick yellow against 
 the sky . the fire , it seem , be only just light , and the wood - smoke 
 pour out . 

 Sam appear outside the house , and look round . then he climb the 
 water - trough for a well survey . evidently unsatisfie , pay slight 
 attention to I , he jump down and go run across the hillside to 
 the wood . " he be go for his father , " I say to myself , and I leave the 
 path to follow he down hill across the waste meadow , crackle the 
 blanched stem of last year 's thistle as I go , and stumble in 
 rabbit hole . he reach the wall that run along the quarry 's edge , and 
 be over it in a twinkling . 

 when I come to the place , I be somewhat nonplussed , for sheer from the 
 stone fence , the quarry - side drop for some twenty or thirty foot , 
 pile up with unmortared stone . I look round there be a plain dark 
 thread down the hillside , which mark a path to this spot , and the wall 
 be score with the mark of heavy boot . then I look again down the 
 quarry - side , and I see how could I have fail to see ? stone 
 project to make an uneven staircase , such as be often see in the 
 Derbyshire fence . I see this ladder be well use , so I trust myself 
 to it , and scramble down , cling to the face of the quarry wall . once 
 down , I feel pleased with myself for have discover and use the 
 unknown access , and I admire the care and ingenuity of the keeper , who 
 have fit and wedge the long stone into the uncertain pile . 

 it be warm in the quarry : there the sunshine seem to thicken and 
 sweeten ; there the little mound of overgrown waste be aglow with very 
 early dog - violet ; there the spark be come out on the bit of 
 gorse , and among the stone the colt - foot plume be already silvery . 
 here be spring sit just awake , unloosen her glitter hair , and 
 open her purple eye . 

 I go across the quarry , down to where the brook run murmur a tale 
 to the primrose and the bud tree . I be startle from my wandering 
 among the fresh thing by a faint clatter of stone . 

 " what be that young rascal do ? " I say to myself , set forth to 
 see . I come towards the other side of the quarry : on this , the moister 
 side , the bush grow up against the wall , which be high than on the 
 other side , though pile the same with old dry stone . as I draw near I 
 could hear the scrape and rattle of stone , and the vigorous grunting of 
 Sam as he labour among they . he be hide by a great bush of sallow 
 catkin , all yellow , and murmur with bee , warm with spice . when he 
 come in view I laugh to see he lug and grunt among the great 
 pile of stone that have fall in a mass from the quarry - side ; a pile of 
 stone and earth and crush vegetation . there be a great bare gap in 
 the quarry wall . somehow , the lad 's labour earnestness make I 
 anxious , and I hurry up . 

 he hear I , and glance round , his face red with exertion , eye big 
 with terror , he call , command I : 

 " pull them off ' I m pull them off ! " suddenly my heart beat in my throat 
 nearly suffocate I . I see the hand of the keeper lie among the 
 stone . I set to tear away the stone , and we work for some time 
 without a word . then I seize the arm of the keeper and try to drag 
 he out . but I could not . 

 " pull it off ' I m ! " whine the lad , work in a frenzy . 

 when we get he out I see at once he be dead , and I sit down tremble 
 with exertion . there be a great smashed wound on the side of the head . 
 Sam put his face against his father 's and snuffed round he like a dog , 
 to feel the life in he . the child look at I : 

 " he will not   get up , " he say , and his little voice be hoarse with fear 
 and anxiety . 

 I shake my head . then the boy begin to whimper . he try to close the 
 lip which be draw with pain and death , leave the tooth bare ; then 
 his finger hover round the eye , which be wide open , glaze , and I 
 could see he be tremble to touch they into life . 

 " he be not asleep , " he say , " because his eye be open look ! " 

 I could not bear the child 's question terror . I take he up to carry 
 he away , but he struggle and fight to be free . 

 " Ma'e ' I m get up ma'e ' I m get up , " he cry in a frenzy , and I have to 
 let the boy go . 

 he run to the dead man , call " Feyther ! Feyther ! " and pull his 
 shoulder ; then he sit down , fascinate by the sight of the wound ; he put 
 out his finger to touch it , and shiver . 

 " come away , " say I. 

 " be it that ? " he ask , point to the wound . I cover the face with a 
 big silk handkerchief . 

 " now , " say I , " he will go to sleep if you do not   touch he so sit still 
 while I go and fetch somebody . will you run to the Hall ? " 

 he shake his head . I know he would not . so I tell he again not to touch 
 his father , but to let he lie still till I come back . he watch I go , 
 but do not move from his seat on the stone beside the dead man , though 
 I know he be full of terror at be leave alone . 

 I run to the Hall I dare not go to the Kennels . in a short time I be 
 back with the squire and three man . as I lead the way , I see the child 
 lift a corner of the handkerchief to peep and see if the eye be 
 close in sleep . then he hear we , and start violently . when we 
 remove the covering , and he see the face unchanged in its horror , he 
 look at I with a look I have never forget . 

 " a bad business an awful business ! " repeat the squire . " a bad 
 business . I say to he from the first that the stone might come down 
 when he be go up , and he say he have take care to fix they . but you 
 can not   be sure , you can not   be certain . and he would be about half way 
 up ay and the whole wall would come down on he . an awful business , it 
 be really ; a terrible piece of work ! " 

 they decide at the inquest that the death come by misadventure . but 
 there be vague rumour in the village that this be revenge which have 
 overtake the keeper . 



 they decide to bury he in our churchyard at Greymede under the 
 beech ; the widow would have it so , and nothing might be deny she in 
 her state . 

 it be a magnificent morning in early spring when I watch among the 
 tree to see the procession come down the hillside . the upper air be 
 weave with the music of the lark , and my whole world thrill with the 
 conception of summer . the young pale wind - flower have arise by the 
 wood - gale , and under the hazel , when perchance the hot sun push his 
 way , new little sun dawn , and blaze with real light . there be a 
 certain thrill and quicken everywhere , as a woman must feel when she 
 have conceive . a sallow tree in a favour spot look like a pale gold 
 cloud of summer dawn ; nearer it have poise a golden , fairy busby on 
 every twig , and be voice with a hum of bee , like any sacred golden 
 bush , utter its gladness in the thrilling murmur of bee , and in warm 
 scent . bird call and flash on every hand ; they make off exultant 
 with streaming strand of grass , or wisps of fleece , plunge into the 
 dark space of the wood , and out again into the blue . 

 a lad move across the field from the farm below with a dog trotting 
 behind he , a dog , no , a fussy , black - legged lamb trot along on its 
 toe , with its tail swing behind . they be go to the mother on 
 the common , who move like little grey cloud among the dark grose . 

 I can not help forget , and share the spink 's triumph , when he 
 flash past with a fleece from a bramble bush . it will cover the bedded 
 moss , it will weave among the soft red cow - hair beautifully . it be a 
 prize , it be an ecstasy to have capture it at the right moment , and the 
 nest be nearly ready . 

 ah , but the thrush be scornful , ring out his voice from the hedge ! he 
 set his breast against the mud , and model it warm for the turquoise 
 egg blue , blue , bluest of egg , which cluster so close and round 
 against the breast , which round up beneath the breast , nestling content . 
 you should see the bright ecstasy in the eye of a nesting thrush , 
 because of the rounded caress of the egg against her breast ! 

 what a hurry the jenny wren make hop I shall not see her dart into 
 the low bush . I have a delight in watch they against their shy little 
 will . but they have all rise with a rush of wing , and be go , the 
 bird . the air be brush with agitation . there be no lark in the sky , 
 not one ; the heaven be clear of wing or twinkle dot . 

 till the herald come till the herald wave like shadow in the bright 
 air , crying , lament , fret forever . rise and fall and 
 circle round and round , the slow - wave peewit cry and complain , and 
 lift their broad wing in sorrow . they stoop suddenly to the ground , the 
 lapwing , then in another throb of anguish and protest , they swing up 
 again , offer a glistening white breast to the sunlight , to deny it in 
 black shadow , then a glisten of green , and all the time cry and 
 cry in despair . 

 the pheasant be frighten into cover , they run and dart through the 
 hedge . the cold cock must fly in his haste , spread himself on his 
 streaming plume , and sail into the wood 's security . 

 there be a cry in answer to the peewit , echo louder and strong the 
 lamentation of the lapwing , a wail which hush the bird . the man come 
 over the brow of the hill , slowly , with the old squire walk tall and 
 straight in front ; six bow man bear the coffin on their shoulder , 
 treading heavily and cautiously , under the great weight of the 
 glisten white coffin ; six man follow behind , ill at ease , wait 
 their turn for the burden . you can see the red handkerchief knot 
 round their throat , and their shirt - front blue and white between the 
 open waistcoat . the coffin be of new unpolished wood , gleam and 
 glistening in the sunlight ; the man who carry it remember all their 
 life after the smell of new , warm elm - wood . 

 again a loud cry from the hill - top . the woman have follow thus far , the 
 big , shapeless woman , and she cry with loud cry after the white 
 coffin as it descend the hill , and the child that cling to her 
 skirt weep aloud , and be not to be hush by the other woman , who 
 bend over they , but do not form one of the group . how the crying 
 frighten the bird , and the rabbit ; and the lamb away there run to 
 their mother . but the peewit be not frightened , they add their note 
 to the sorrow ; they circle after the white , retreat coffin , they 
 circle round the woman ; it be they who forever " keen " the sorrow of 
 this world . they be like priest in their robe , more black than white , 
 more grief than hope , drive endlessly round and round , turning , 
 lifting , fall and cry always in mournful desolation , repeat 
 their last syllable like the broken accent of despair . 

 the bearer have at last sink between the high bank , and turn out of 
 sight . the big woman can not see they , and yet she stand to look . she 
 must go home , there be nothing left . 

 they have rest the coffin on the gate post , and the bearer be 
 wipe the sweat from their face . they put their hand to their 
 shoulder on the place where the weight have press . 

 the other six be place the pad on their shoulder , when a girl come 
 up with a jug and a blue pot . the squire drink first , and fill for the 
 rest . meanwhile the girl stand back under the hedge , away from the 
 coffin which smell of new elm - wood . in imagination she picture the man 
 shut up there in close darkness , while the sunlight flow all outside , 
 and she catch her breast with terror . she must turn and rustle among 
 the leaf of the violet for the flower she do not see . then , 
 trembling , she come to herself , and pluck a few flower and breathe 
 they hungrily into her soul , for comfort . the man put down the pot 
 beside she , with thank , and the squire give the word . the bearer lift 
 up the burden again , and the elm - boughs rattle along the hollow white 
 wood , and the pitiful red cluster of elm - flower sweep along it as if 
 they whisper in sympathy " we be so sorry , so sorry " ; always the 
 compassionate bud in their fulness of life bend down to comfort the 
 dark man shut up there . " perhaps , " the girl think , " he hear they , and 
 go softly to sleep . " she shake the tear out of her eye on to the 
 ground , and , take up her pot , go slowly down , over the brook . 

 in a while , I too get up and go down to the mill , which lie red and 
 peaceful , with the blue smoke rise as winsomely and carelessly as 
 ever . on the other side of the valley I could see a pair of horse nod 
 slowly across the fallow . a man 's voice call to they now and again 
 with a resonance that fill I with longing to follow my horse over 
 the fallow , in the still , lonely valley , full of sunshine and eternal 
 forgetfulness . the day have already forget . the water be blue and 
 white and dark - burnish with shadow ; two swan sail across the 
 reflect tree with perfect blithe grace . the gloom that have pass 
 across be go . I watch the swan with his ruffle wing swell 
 onwards ; I watch his slim consort go peep into corner and under 
 bush ; I see he steer clear of the bush , to keep full in view , 
 turn his head to I imperiously , till I long to pelt he with the 
 empty husk of last year 's flower , knap - weed and scabius . I be too 
 indolent , and I turn instead to the orchard . 

 there the daffodil be lift their head and throw back their 
 yellow curl . at the foot of each slop , grey old tree stand a family 
 of flower , some bursten with golden fulness , some lift their head 
 slightly , to show a modest , sweet countenance , other still hide their 
 face , lean forward pensively from the jaunty grey - green spear ; I 
 wish I have their language , to talk to they distinctly . 

 Overhead , the tree , with lift finger shake out their hair to the 
 sun , deck themselves with bud as white and cool as a water - nymph 
 breast . 

 I begin to be very glad . the colt - foot disc glow and laugh in a 
 merry company down the path ; I stroke the velvet face , and laugh 
 also , and I smell the scent of black - currant leaf , which be full of 
 childish memory . 

 the house be quiet and complacent ; it be people with ghost again ; 
 but the ghost have only come to enjoy the warm place once more , carry 
 sunshine in their arm and scatter it through the dusk of gloomy 
 room . 




  CHAPTER III 

  the irony of inspire moment 


 it happen , the next day after the funeral , I come upon reproduction 
 of Aubrey Beardsley 's " Atalanta , " and of the tail - piece " Salome , " and 
 other . I sit and look and my soul leap out upon the new thing . I 
 be bewilder , wonder , grudging , fascinated . I look a long time , 
 but my mind , or my soul , would come to no state of coherence . I be 
 fascinated and overcome , but yet full of stubbornness and resistance . 

 Lettie be out , so , although it be dinner - time , even because it be 
 dinner - time , I take the book and go down to the mill . 

 the dinner be over ; there be the fragrance of cooked rhubarb in the 
 room . I go straight to Emily , who be lean back in her chair , and 
 put the Salome before she . 

 " look , " say I , " look here ! " 

 she look ; she be short - sighted , and peer close . I be impatient for 
 she to speak . she turn slowly at last and look at I , shrink , 
 with questioning . 

 " well ? " I say . 

 " be not   it fearful ! " she reply softly . 

 " no ! why be it ? " 

 " it make you feel why have you bring it ? " 

 " I want you to see it . " 

 already I feel relieve , see that she too be catch in the spell . 

 George come and bend over my shoulder . I could feel the heavy warmth of 
 he . 

 " Good Lord ! " he drawl , half amuse . the child come crowd to see , 
 and Emily close the book . 

 " I shall be late hurry up , Dave ! " and she go to wash her hand before 
 go to school . 

 " give it I , will you ! " George ask , put out his hand for the book . 
 I give it he , and he sit down to look at the drawing . when Mollie 
 creep near to look , he angrily shout to she to get away . she pull a 
 mouth , and get her hat over her wild brown curl . Emily come in ready 
 for school . 

 " I be go good - bye , " she say , and she wait hesitatingly . I move to 
 get my cap . he look up with a new expression in his eye , and say : 

 " be you go ? wait a bit I be come . " 

 I wait . 

 " oh , very well good - bye , " say Emily bitterly , and she depart . 

 when he have look long enough he get up and we go out . he keep his 
 finger between the page of the book as he carry it . we go towards 
 the fallow land without speak . there he sit down on a bank , lean 
 his back against a holly - tree , and say , very calmly : 

 " there be no need to be in any hurry now " whereupon he proceed to 
 study the illustration . 

 " you know , " he say at last , " I do want she . " 

 I start at the irrelevance of this remark , and say , " who ? " 

 " Lettie . we have   get notice , do you know ? " 

 I start to my foot this time with amazement . 

 " notice to leave ? what for ? " 

 " rabbit I expect . I wish she would have I , Cyril . " 

 " to leave Strelley Mill ! " I repeat . 

 " that be it and I be rather glad . but do you think she might have I , 
 Cyril ? " 

 " what a shame ! where will you go ? and you lie there joke ! " 

 " I do not . never mind about the damned notice . I want she more than 
 anything . and the more I look at these naked line , the more I want 
 she . it be a sort of fine sharp feeling , like these curved line . I do not 
 know what I be say but do you think she would have I ? have she see these 
 picture ? " 

 " no . " 

 " if she do perhaps she would want I I mean she would feel it clear and sharp 
 come through she . " 

 " I will show she and see . " 

 " I would be sort of think about it since father have that notice . it 
 seem as if the ground be pull from under our foot . I never feel so 
 lose . then I begin to think of she , if she would have I but not clear , 
 till you show I those picture . I must have she if I can and I must 
 have something . it be rather ghostish to have the road suddenly smudge 
 out , and all the world anywhere , nowhere for you to go . I must get 
 something sure soon , or else I feel as if I should fall from somewhere 
 and hurt myself . I will ask she . " 

 I look at he as he lie there under the holly - tree , his face all 
 dreamy and boyish , very unusual . 

 " you will ask Lettie ? " say I , " when how ? " 

 " I must ask she quick , while I feel as if everything have go , and I be 
 ghostish . I think I must sound rather a lunatic . " 

 he look at I , and his eyelid hang heavy over his eye as if he have 
 be drink , or as if he be tired . 

 " be she at home ? " he say . 

 " no , she be go to Nottingham . she will be home before dark . " 

 " I will see she then . can you smell violet ? " 

 I reply that I could not . he be sure that he could , and he seem 
 uneasy till he have justify the sensation . so he arise , very leisurely , 
 and go along the bank , look closely for the flower . 

 " I know I could . white one ! " 

 he sit down and pick three flower , and hold they to his nostril , and 
 inhale their fragrance . then he put they to his mouth , and I see his 
 strong white tooth crush they . he chew they for a while without 
 speak ; then he spit they out and gather more . 

 " they remind I of she too , " he say , and he twist a piece of 
 honeysuckle stem round the bunch and hand it to I . 

 " a white violet , be she ? " I smile . 

 " give they to she , and tell she to come and meet I just when it be 
 get dark in the wood . " 

 " but if she will not ? " 

 " she will . " 

 " if she be not at home ? " 

 " come and tell I . " 

 he lie down again with his head among the green violet leave , say : 

 " I ought to work , because it all count in the valuation . but I do not 
 care . " 

 he lie look at I for some time . then he say : 

 " I do not   suppose I shall have above twenty pound leave when we have   sell 
 up but she be get plenty of money to start with if she have I in 
 Canada . I could get well off and she could have what she want I be 
 sure she would have what she want . " 

 he take it all calmly as if it be realise . I be somewhat amused . 

 " what frock will she have on when she come to meet I ? " he ask . 

 " I do not   know . the same as she be go to Nottingham in , I suppose a 
 sort of gold - brown costume with a rather tight fitting coat . why ? " 

 " I be think how she would look . " 

 " what chicken be you count now ? " I ask . 

 " but what do you think I look well in ? " he reply . 

 " you ? just as you be no , put that old smooth cloth coat on that be 
 all . " I smile as I tell he , but he be very serious . 

 " shall not   I put my new clothe on ? " 

 " no you want to leave your neck showing . " 

 he put his hand to his throat , and say naively : 

 " do I ? " and it amuse he . 

 then he lie look dreamily up into the tree . I leave he , and go 
 wander round the field find flower and bird 's nest . 

 when I come back , it be nearly four o'clock . he stand up and stretch 
 himself . he pull out his watch . 

 " Good Lord , " he drawl , " I have   lain there think all afternoon . I 
 do not   know I could do such a thing . where have you be ? it be with 
 be all upset you see . you leave the violet here , take they , will 
 you ; and tell she : I will come when it be get dark . I feel like 
 somebody else or else really like myself . I hope I shall not   wake up to 
 the other thing you know , like I be always before they . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know only I feel as if I could talk straight off without 
 arrange like bird , without know what note be come next . " 

 when I be go he say : 

 " here , leave I that book it will keep I like this I mean I be not the 
 same as I be yesterday , and that book'll keep I like it . perhaps it be 
 a bilious bout I do sometimes have one , if something very extraordinary 
 happen . when it be get dark then ! " 

 Lettie have not arrive when I go home . I put the violet in a little 
 vase on the table . I remember he have want she to see the 
 drawing it be perhaps as well he have keep they . 

 she come about six o'clock in the motor - car with Marie . but the latter 
 do not descend . I go out to assist with the parcel . Lettie have 
 already begin to buy thing ; the wedding be fix for July . 

 the room be soon over - cover with stuff : table linen , underclothing , 
 piece of silken stuff and lace stuff , pattern for carpet and 
 curtain , a whole gleam glowing array . Lettie be very delighted . she 
 could hardly wait to take off her hat , but go round cut the string 
 of her parcel , open they , talk all the time to my mother . 

 " look , Little Woman . I have   get a ready - make underskirt be not   it lovely . 
 listen ! " and she ruffle it through her hand . " shall not   I sound splendid ! 
 Frou - Frou ! but it be a charming shade , be not   it , and not a bit bulky or 
 clumsy anywhere ? " she put the band of the skirt against her waist , and 
 put forward her foot , and look down , say , " it be just the right 
 length , be not   it , Little Woman ? and they say I be tall it be a 
 wonder . do not   you wish it be your , little ? oh , you will not   confess it . 
 yes you like to be as fine as anybody that be why I buy you this 
 piece of silk be not   it sweet , though ? you need not   say there be too much 
 lavender in it , there be not . now ! " she pleat it up and hold it 
 against my mother 's chin . " it suit you beautifully do not   it . do not 
 you like it , Sweet ? you do not   seem to like it a bit , and I be sure it 
 suit you make you look ever so young . I wish you would not   be so old 
 fashioned in your notion . you do like it , do not   you ? " 

 " of course I do I be only think what an extravagant mortal you be 
 when you begin to buy . you know you must not   keep on always " 

 " now now , Sweet , do not   be naughty and preachey . it be such a treat to go 
 buying : you will come with I next time , will not   you ? oh , I have enjoy 
 it but I wish you be there Marie take anything , she be so easy to 
 suit I like to have a good buy oh , it be splendid ! and there be lot 
 more yet . oh , do you see this cushion cover these be the colour I 
 want for that room gold and amber " 

 this be a bad opening . I watch the shadow darken far and far 
 along the brightness , hush the glitter of the water . I watch the 
 golden ripeness come upon the west , and think the rencontre be never 
 to take place . at last , however , Lettie fling herself down with a sigh , 
 say she be tired . 

 " come into the dining - room and have a cup of tea , " say mother . " I tell 
 Rebecca to mash when you come in . " 

 " all right . Leslie 's come up later on , I believe about half past 
 eight , he say . should I show he what I have   buy ? " 

 " there be nothing there for a man to see . " 

 " I shall have to change my dress , and I be sure I do not   want the fag . 
 Rebecca , just go and look at the thing I have   buy in the other 
 room and , Becky , fold they up for I , will you , and put they on my 
 bed ? " 

 as soon as she have go out , Lettie say : " she will enjoy do it , will not 
 she , mother , they be so nice ! do you think I need dress , mother ? " 

 " please yourself do as you wish . " 

 " I suppose I shall have to ; he do not   like blouse and skirt of an 
 evening he say ; he hat the belt . I will wear that old cream cashmere ; 
 it look nice now I have   put that new lace on it . do not   those violet 
 smell nice ? who get they ? " 

 " Cyril bring they in . " 

 " George send they you , " say I. 

 " well , I will just run up and take my dress off . why be we troubled with 
 man ! " 

 " it be a trouble you like well enough , " say mother . 

 " oh , do I ? such a bother ! " and she run upstairs . 

 the sun be red behind Highclose . I kneel in the window seat and 
 smile at Fate and at people who imagine that strange state be near to 
 the inner reality . the sun go straight down behind the cedar tree , 
 deliberately and , it seem as I watch , swiftly lower itself behind 
 the tree , behind the rim of the hill . 

 " I must go , " I say to myself , " and tell he she will not come . " 

 yet I fidget about the room , loth to depart . Lettie come down , dress 
 in white or cream cut low round the neck . she look very delightful 
 and fresh again , with a sparkle of the afternoon 's excitement still . 

 " I will put some of these violet on I , " she say , glance at herself in 
 the mirror , and then take the flower from their water , she dry 
 they , and fasten they among her lace . 

 " do not   Lettie and I look nice to - night ? " she say smile , glance from 
 I to her reflection which be like a light in the dusky room . 

 " that remind I , " I say , " George Saxton want to see you this 
 evening . " 

 " what ever for ? " 

 " I do not   know . they have   get notice to leave their farm , and I think he 
 feel a bit sentimental . " 

 " oh , well be he come here ? " 

 " he say would you go just a little way in the wood to meet he . " 

 " do he ! oh , indeed ! well , of course I can not . " 

 " of course not if you will not . they be his violet you be wear by the 
 way . " 

 " be they let they stay , it make no difference . but whatever do he 
 want to see I for ? " 

 " I could not   say , I assure you . " 

 she glance at herself in the mirror , and then at the clock . 

 " let us see , " she remark , " it be only a quarter to eight . three quarter 
 of an hour ! but what can he want I for ? I never know anything like 
 it . " 

 " startling , be not   it ! " I observe satirically . 

 " yes , " she glance at herself in the mirror : 

 " I can not   go out like this . " 

 " all right , you can not   then . " 

 " besides it be nearly dark , it will be too dark to see in the wood , 
 will not   it ? " 

 " it will directly . " 

 " well , I will just go to the end of the garden , for one moment run and 
 fetch that silk shawl out of my wardrobe be quick , while it be light . " 

 I run and bring the wrap . she arrange it carefully over her head . 

 we go out , down the garden path . Lettie hold her skirt carefully 
 gather from the ground . a nightingale begin to sing in the twilight ; 
 we step along in silence as far as the rhododendron bush , now in 
 rosy bud . 

 " I can not go into the wood , " she say . 

 " come to the top of the riding " and we go round the dark bush . 

 George be wait . I see at once he be half distrustful of himself 
 now . Lettie drop her skirt and trail towards he . he stand 
 awkwardly await she , conscious of the clownishness of his appearance . 
 she hold out her hand with something of a grand air : 

 " see , " she say , " I have come . " 

 " yes I think you would not   perhaps " he look at she , and suddenly 
 gain courage : " you have be put white on you , you do look 
 nice though not like " 

 " what ? who else ? " 

 " nobody else only I well I have I would think about it different like 
 some picture . " 

 she smile with a gentle radiance , and ask indulgently , " and how be I 
 different ? " 

 " not all that soft stuff plainer . " 

 " but do not   I look very nice with all this soft stuff , as you call 
 it ? " and she shake the silk away from her smile . 

 " oh , yes well than those naked line . " 

 " you be quaint to - night what do you want I for to say good - bye ? " 

 " good - bye ? " 

 " yes you be go away , Cyril tell I . I be very sorry fancy horrid 
 stranger at the Mill ! but then I shall be go away soon , too . we be 
 all go you see , now we have   grow up , " she keep hold of my arm . " yes . " 

 " and where will you go Canada ? you will settle there and be quite a 
 patriarch , will not   you ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " you be not really sorry to go , be you ? " 

 " no , I be glad . " 

 " glad to go away from we all . " 

 " I suppose so since I must . " 

 " ah , Fate Fate ! it separate you whether you want it or not . " 

 " what ? " 

 " why , you see , you have to leave . I must not   stay out here it be grow 
 chilly . how soon be you go ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " not soon then ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " then I may see you again ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " oh , yes , I shall . well , I must go . shall I say good - bye now ? that be 
 what you want , be it not ? " 

 " to say good - bye ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " no it be not   I want , I want to ask you " 

 " what ? " she cry . 

 " you do not   know , Lettie , now the old life 's go , everything how I want 
 you to set out with it be like begin life , and I want you . " 

 " but what could I do I could only hinder what help should I be ? " 

 " I should feel as if my mind be make up as if I could do something 
 clearly . now it be all hazy not know what to do next . " 

 " and if if you have what then ? " 

 " if I have you I could go straight on . " 

 " where ? " 

 " oh I should take a farm in Canada " 

 " well , would not   it be well to get it first and make sure ? " 

 " I have no money . " 

 " oh ! so you want I ? " 

 " I only want you , I only want you . I would have give you " 

 " what ? " 

 " you would have I you would have all I , and everything you want . " 

 " that I pay for a good bargain ! no , oh no , George , I beg your pardon . 
 this be one of my flippant night . I do not   mean it like that . but you 
 know it be impossible look how I be fix it be impossible , be not   it 
 now . " 

 " I suppose it be . " 

 " you know it be look at I now , and say if it be not impossible a 
 farmer 's wife with you in Canada . " 

 " yes I do not   expect you like that . yes , I see it be impossible . but 
 I would think about it , and feel as if I must have you . should have you . 
 . . yes , it do not   do to go on dream . I think it be the first time , 
 and it will be the last . yes , it be impossible . now I have make up my 
 mind . " 

 " and what will you do ? " 

 " I shall not go to Canada . " 

 " oh , you must not you must not do anything rash . " 

 " no I shall get marry . " 

 " you will ? oh , I be glad . I think you you be too fond . but 
 you be not of yourself I mean . I be so glad . yes do marry ! " 

 " well , I shall since you be " 

 " yes , " say Lettie . " it be good . but I think that you " she smile 
 at he in sad reproach . 

 " do you think so ? " he reply , smile gravely . 

 " yes , " she whisper . they stand look at one another . 

 he make an impulsive movement towards she . she , however , draw back 
 slightly , check he . 

 " well I shall see you again sometime so good - bye , " he say , put 
 out his hand . 

 we hear a foot crunch on the gravel . Leslie halt at the top of the 
 riding . Lettie , hear he , relax into a kind of feline graciousness , 
 and say to George : 

 " I be so sorry you be go to leave it break the old life up . you 
 say I would see you again " she leave her hand in his a moment or 
 two . 

 " yes , " George reply . " good - night " and he turn away . she stand for a 
 moment in the same drooping , graceful attitude watch he , then she 
 turn round slowly . she seem hardly to notice Leslie . 

 " who be that you be talk to ? " he ask . 

 " he have go now , " she reply irrelevantly , as if even then she seem 
 hardly to realise it . 

 " it appear to upset you his go who be it ? " 

 " he ! oh , why , it be George Saxton . " 

 " oh , he ! " 

 " yes . " 

 " what do he want ? " 

 " eh ? what do he want ? oh , nothing . " 

 " a mere trysting in the interim , eh ! " he say this laughing , 
 generously pass off his annoyance in a jest . 

 " I feel so sorry , " she say . 

 " what for ? " 

 " oh do not   let we talk about he talk about something else . I can not 
 bear to talk about he . " 

 " all right , " he reply and after an awkward little pause . " what sort 
 of a time have you in Nottingham ? " 

 " oh , a fine time . " 

 " you will enjoy yourself in the shop between now and July . some time 
 I will go with you and see they . " 

 " very well . " 

 " that sound as if you do not   want I to go . be I already in the way on a 
 shopping expedition , like an old husband ? " 

 " I should think you would be . " 

 " that be nice of you ! why ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know . " 

 " yes you do . " 

 " oh , I suppose you would hang about . " 

 " I be much too well bring up . " 

 " rebecca have light the hall lamp . " 

 " yes , it be grow quite dark . I be here early . you never give I a good 
 word for it . " 

 " I do not   notice . there be a light in the dining - room , we will go there . " 

 they go into the dining - room . she stand by the piano and carefully 
 take off the wrap . then she wander listlessly about the room for a 
 minute . 

 " be not   you come to sit down ? " he say , point to the seat on the 
 couch beside he . 

 " not just now , " she say , trail aimlessly to the piano . she sit down 
 and begin to play at random , from memory . then she do that most 
 irritate thing play accompaniment to song , with snatch of the 
 air where the voice should have predominate . 

 " I say Lettie , . . . " he interrupt after a time . 

 " yes , " she reply , continue to play . 

 " it be not very interesting . . . . " 

 " no ? " she continue to play . 

 " nor very amusing . . . . " 

 she do not answer . he bear it for a little time long , then he say : 

 " how much long be it go to last , Lettie ? " 

 " what ? " 

 " that sort of business . . . . " 

 " the piano ? I will stop play if you do not   like it . " 

 she do not , however , cease . 

 " yes and all this dry business . " 

 " I do not   understand . " 

 " do not   you ? you make I . ' " 

 there she go on , tinkle away at " if I build a world for you , dear . " 

 " I say , stop it , do ! " he cry . 

 she tinkle to the end of the verse , and very slowly close the piano . 

 " come on come and sit down , " he say . 

 " no , I do not   want to . I would rather have go on playing . " 

 " go on with your damned play then , and I will go where there be more 
 interest . " 

 " you ought to like it . " 

 he do not answer , so she turn slowly round on the stool , open the 
 piano , and lay her finger on the key . at the sound of the chord he 
 start up , say : " then I be go . " 

 " it be very early why ? " she say , through the calm jingle of " Meine Ruh 
 be hin " 

 he stand bite his lip . then he make one more appeal . 

 " Lettie ! " 

 " yes ? " 

 " be not   you go to leave off and be amiable ? " 

 " amiable ? " 

 " you be a jolly torment . what be upset you now ? " 

 " Nay , it be not I who be upset . " 

 " I be glad to hear it what do you call yourself ? " 

 " I ? nothing . " 

 " oh , well , I be go then . " 

 " must you ? so early to - night ? " 

 he do not go , and she play more and more softly , languidly , 
 aimlessly . once she lift her head to speak , but do not say anything . 

 " look here ! " he ejaculate all at once , so that she start , and jar 
 the piano , " what do you mean by it ? " 

 she jingle leisurely a few second before answer , then she reply : 

 " what a worry you be ! " 

 " I suppose you want I out of the way while you sentimentalise over that 
 milkman . you need not   bother . you can do it while I be here . or I will go 
 and leave you in peace . I will go and call he back for you , if you 
 like if that be what you want " 

 she turn on the piano stool slowly and look at he , smile faintly . 

 " it be very good of you ! " she say . 

 he clench his fist and grin with rage . 

 " you tantalise little " he begin , lift his fist expressively . 
 she smile . then he swing round , knock several hat fly off the 
 stand in the hall , slam the door , and be go . 

 Lettie continue to play for some time , after which she go up to her 
 own room . 

 Leslie do not return to we the next day , nor the day after . the first 
 day Marie come and tell we he have go away to Yorkshire to see about 
 the new mine that be be sink there , and be likely to be absent 
 for a week or so . these business visit to the north be rather 
 frequent . the firm , of which Mr. Tempest be director and chief 
 shareholder , be open important new mine in the other county , as 
 the seam at home be become exhausted or unprofitable . it be 
 propose that Leslie should live in Yorkshire when he be marry , to 
 superintend the new working . he at first reject the idea , but he 
 seem later to approve of it more . 

 during the time he be away Lettie be moody and cross - tempered . she do 
 not mention George nor the mill ; indeed , she preserve she well , most 
 haughty and ladylike manner . 

 on the evening of the fourth day of Leslie 's absence we be out in the 
 garden . the tree be " uttering joyous leaf . " my mother be in the 
 midst of her garden , lift the dusky face of the auriculas to look at 
 the velvet lip , or tenderly take a young weed from the black soil . 
 the thrush be call and clamour all round . the japonica flame 
 on the wall as the light grow thick ; the tassel of white 
 cherry - blossom swing gently in the breeze . 

 " what shall I do , mother ? " say Lettie , as she wander across the grass 
 to pick at the japonica flower . " what shall I do ? there be nothing to 
 do . " 

 " well , my girl what do you want to do ? you have be mop about all 
 day go and see somebody . " 

 " it be such a long way to Eberwich . " 

 " be it ? then go somewhere nearer . " 

 Lettie fret about with restless , petulant indecision . 

 " I do not   know what to do , " she say , " and I feel as if I might just as 
 well never have live at all as waste day like this . I wish we be not 
 bury in this dead little hole I wish we be near the town it be 
 hateful have to depend on about two or three folk for your your your 
 pleasure in life . " 

 " I can not   help it , my dear you must do something for yourself . " 

 " and what can I do ? I can do nothing . " 

 " then I would go to bed . " 

 " that I will not   with the dead weight of a waste day on I . I feel as if 
 I would do something desperate . " 

 " very well , then , " say mother , " do it , and have do . " 

 " oh , it be no good talk to you I do not   want " she turn away , 
 go to the laurestinus , and begin pull off it the long red berry . 
 I expect she would fret the evening wastefully away . I notice all at 
 once that she stand still . it be the noise of a motor - car run 
 rapidly down the hill towards Nethermere a light , quick - click sound . 
 I listen also . I could feel the swing drop of the car as it come 
 down the leap of the hill . we could see the dust trail up among the 
 tree . Lettie raise her head and listen expectantly . the car rush 
 along the edge of Nethermere then there be the jar of brake , as the 
 machine slow down and stop . in a moment with a quick flutter of 
 sound , it be pass the lodge - gate and whirl up the drive , through 
 the wood , to we . Lettie stand with flushed cheek and brighten eye . 
 she go towards the bush that shut off the lawn from the gravel 
 space in front of the house , watch . a car come race through the 
 tree . it be the small car Leslie use on the firm 's business now it 
 be white with dust . Leslie suddenly put on the brake , and tear to a 
 standstill in front of the house . he step to the ground . there he 
 stagger a little , be giddy and cramp with the long drive . his 
 motor - jacket and cap be thick with dust . 

 Lettie call to he , " Leslie ! " and fly down to he . he take she into 
 his arm , and cloud of dust rise round she . he kiss she , and they 
 stand perfectly still for a moment . she look up into his face then 
 she disengage her arm to take off his disfigure motor - spectacle . 
 after she have look at he a moment , tenderly , she kiss he again . he 
 loosen his hold of she , and she say , in a voice full of tenderness : 

 " you be tremble , dear . " 

 " it be the ride . I have   never stop . " 

 without further word she take he into the house . 

 " how pale you be see , lie on the couch never mind the dust . all 
 right , I will find you a coat of Cyril 's . o , mother , he be come all those 
 mile in the car without stop make he lie down . " 

 she run and bring he a jacket , and put the cushion round , and make 
 he lie on the couch . then she take off his boot and put slipper on 
 his foot . he lie watch she all the time ; he be white with fatigue 
 and excitement . 

 " I wonder if I shall be have up for scorch I can feel the road come 
 at I yet , " he say . 

 " why be you so headlong ? " 

 " I feel as if I should go wild if I do not   come if I do not   rush . I 
 do not   know how you might have take I , Lettie when I say what I 
 do . " 

 she smile gently at he , and he lie resting , recover , look at 
 she . 

 " it be a wonder I have not   do something desperate I have   be half mad 
 since I say oh , Lettie , I be a damned fool and a wretch I could have 
 tear myself in two . I have   do nothing but curse and rage at myself ever 
 since . I feel as if I would just come up out of hell . you do not   know how 
 thankful I be , Lettie , that you have   not oh turn against I for what I 
 say . " 

 she go to he and sit down by he , smooth his hair from his 
 forehead , kiss he , her attitude tender , suggest tear , her 
 movement impulsive , as if with a self - reproach she would not 
 acknowledge , but which she must silence with lavish tenderness . he draw 
 she to he , and they remain quiet for some time , till it grow dark . 

 the noise of my mother stir in the next room disturb they . Lettie 
 rise , and he also get up from the couch . 

 " I suppose , " he say , " I shall have to go home and get bath and 
 dress though , " he add in tone which make it clear he do not want 
 to go , " I shall have to get back in the morning I do not   know what 
 they will say . " 

 " at any rate , " she say , " you could wash here " 

 " but I must get out of these clothe and I want a bath . " 

 " you could you might have some of Cyril 's clothe and the water 's hot . 
 I know . at all event , you can stay to supper " 

 " if I be go I shall have to go soon or they would not like it , if I go in 
 late ; they have no idea I have   come ; they do not   expect I till next 
 Monday or Tuesday " 

 " perhaps you could stay here and they need not   know . " 

 they look at each other with wide , smile eye like child on the 
 brink of a steal pleasure . 

 " oh , but what would your mother think ! no , I will go . " 

 " she will not   mind a bit . " 

 " oh , but " 

 " I will ask she . " 

 he want to stay far more than she wish it , so it be she who put 
 down his opposition and triumph . 

 my mother lift her eyebrow , and say very quietly : 

 " he would well go home and be straight . " 

 " but look how he would feel he would have to tell they . . . and how would he 
 feel ! it be really my fault , in the end . do not   be piggle and mean and 
 Grundyish , Matouchka . " 

 " it be neither meanness nor grundyishness " 

 " oh , Ydgrun , Ydgrun ! " exclaim Lettie , ironically . 

 " he may certainly stay if he like , " say mother , slightly nettle at 
 Lettie 's gibe . 

 " all right , Mutterchen and be a sweetling , do ! " 

 Lettie go out a little impatient at my mother 's unwillingness , but 
 Leslie stay , nevertheless . 

 in a few moment Lettie be up in the spare bedroom , arrange and 
 adorning , and Rebecca be run with hot - water bottle , and hurrying 
 down with clean bed - clothe . Lettie hastily appropriate my good 
 brush which she have give I and take the suit of pajama of the 
 thin , fine flannel and discover a new tooth - brush and make 
 selection from my shirt and handkerchief and underclothing and 
 direct I which suit to lend he . altogether I be astonish , and 
 perhaps a trifle annoyed , at her extraordinary thoughtfulness and 
 solicitude . 

 he come down to supper , bath , brush , and radiant . he eat heartily 
 and seem to emanate a warmth of physical comfort and pleasure . the 
 colour be flush again into his face , and he carry his body with the 
 old independent , assertive air . I have never know the time when he 
 look handsomer , when he be more attractive . there be a certain 
 warmth about he , a certain glow that enhance his word , his laughter , 
 his movement ; he be the predominant person , and we feel a pleasure in 
 his mere proximity . my mother , however , could not quite get rid of she 
 stiffness , and soon after supper she rise , say she would finish her 
 letter in the next room , bid he good - night , as she would probably 
 not see he again . the cloud of this little coolness be the thin 
 and most transitory . he talk and laugh more gaily than ever , and be 
 ostentatious in his movement , throw back his head , take little 
 attitude which display the broad firmness of his breast , the grace of 
 his well - train physique . I leave they at the piano ; he be sit 
 pretend to play , and look up all the while at she , who stand with 
 her hand on his shoulder . 

 in the morning he be up early , by six o'clock downstairs and attend 
 to the car . when I get down I find he very busy , and very quiet . 

 " I know I be a beastly nuisance , " he say , " but I must get off early . " 

 Rebecca come and prepared breakfast , which we two eat alone . he be 
 remarkably dull and wordless . 

 " it be a wonder Lettie have not   get up to have breakfast with you she be 
 such a one for rave about the perfection of the early morning it be 
 purity and promise and so forth , " I say . 

 he break his bread nervously , and drink some coffee as if he be 
 agitated , make noise in his throat as he swallow . 

 " it be too early for she , I should think , " he reply , wipe his 
 moustache hurriedly . yet he seem to listen for she . Lettie 's bedroom 
 be over the study , where Rebecca have lay breakfast , and he listen 
 now and again , hold his knife and fork suspend in their action . 
 then he go on with his meal again . 

 when he be lay down his serviette , the door open . he pull 
 himself together , and turn round sharply . it be mother . when she 
 speak to he , his face twitch with a little frown , half of relief , 
 half of disappointment . 

 " I must be go now , " he say " thank you very much Mother . " 

 " you be a harum - scarum boy . I wonder why Lettie do not   come down . I 
 know she be up . " 

 " yes , " he reply . " yes , I have   hear she . perhaps she be dress . I must 
 get off . " 

 " I will call she . " 

 " no do not   bother she she would come if she want " 

 but mother have call from the foot of the stair . 

 " Lettie , Lettie he be go . " 

 " all right , " say Lettie , and in another minute she come downstairs . she 
 be dress in dark , severe stuff , and she be somewhat pale . she do 
 not look at any of we , but turn her eye aside . 

 " good - bye , " she say to he , offer he her cheek . he kiss she , 
 murmuring : " good - bye my love . " 

 he stand in the doorway a moment , look at she with beseech eye . 
 she keep her face half avert , and would not look at he , but stand 
 pale and cold , bite her underlip . he turn sharply away with a motion 
 of keen disappointment , set the engine of the car into action , mount , 
 and drive quickly away . 

 Lettie stand pale and inscrutable for some moment . 

 then she go in to breakfast and sit toy with her food , keep she 
 head bent down , her face hide . 

 in less than an hour he be back again , say he have leave something 
 behind . he run upstairs , and then , hesitating , go into the room where 
 Lettie be still sit at table . 

 " I have to come back , " he say . 

 she lift her face towards he , but keep her eye avert , look out 
 of the window . she be flushed . 

 " what have you forget ? " she ask . 

 " I would leave my cigarette case , " he reply . 

 there be an awkward silence . 

 " but I shall have to be get off , " he add . 

 " yes , I suppose you will , " she reply . 

 after another pause , he ask : 

 " will not   you just walk down the path with I ? " 

 she rise without answer . he take a shawl and put it round she 
 carefully . she merely allow he . they walk in silence down the 
 garden . 

 " you be you be you angry with I ? " he falter . 

 tear suddenly come to her eye . 

 " what do you come back for ? " she say , avert her face from he . he 
 look at she . 

 " I know you be angry and , " he hesitate . 

 " why do not   you go away ? " she say impulsively . he hang his head and be 
 silent . 

 " I do not   see why why it should make trouble between we , Lettie , " he 
 falter . she make a swift gesture of repulsion , whereupon , catch 
 sight of her hand , she hide it swiftly against her skirt again . 

 " you make my hand my very hand disclaim I , " she struggle to say . 

 he look at she clench fist press against the fold of her dress . 

 " but , " he begin , much troubled . 

 " I tell you , I can not   bear the sight of my own hand , " she say in low , 
 passionate tone . 

 " but surely , Lettie , there be no need if you love I " 

 she seem to wince . he wait , puzzled and miserable . 

 " and we be go to be marry , be not   we ? " he resume , look 
 pleadingly at she . 

 she stir , and exclaim : 

 " oh , why do not   you go away ? what do you come back for ? " 

 " you will kiss I before I go ? " he ask . 

 she stand with avert face , and do not reply . his forehead be 
 twitch in a puzzled frown . 

 " Lettie ! " he say . 

 she do not move or answer , but remain with her face turn full away , 
 so that he could see only the contour of her cheek . after wait 
 awhile , he flush , turn swiftly and set his machine rattle . in a 
 moment he be race between the tree . 




  CHAPTER IV 

  KISS when she be RIPE for TEARS 


 it be the Sunday after Leslie 's visit . we have have a wretched week , with 
 everybody mute and unhappy . 

 Though Spring have come , none of we see it . afterwards it occur to I 
 that I have see all the rank of poplar suddenly bursten into a dark 
 crimson glow , with a flutter of blood - red where the sun come through the 
 leaf ; that I have find high cradle where the swan 's egg lie by the 
 waterside ; that I have see the daffodil lean from the moss - grow 
 wooden wall of the boat - house , and all , moss , daffodil , water , 
 scatter with the pink scarf from the elm bud ; that I have break the 
 half - spread fan of the sycamore , and have watch the white cloud of 
 sloe - blossom go silver grey against the evening sky : but I have not 
 perceive it , and I have not any vivid spring - picture leave from the 
 neglect week . 

 it be Sunday evening , just after tea , when Lettie suddenly say to I : 

 " come with I down to Strelley Mill . " 

 I be astonish , but I obey unquestioningly . on the threshold we 
 hear a chattering of girl , and immediately Alice 's voice greet we : 

 " hello , Sybil , love ! hello , Lettie ! come on , here be a gathering of the 
 goddess . come on , you just make we right . you be Juno , and here be Meg , 
 she be Venus , and I be here , somebody , who be I , tell we quick do you 
 say Minerva , Sybil dear ? well you ought , then ! now Paris , hurry up . he be 
 put his Sunday clothe on to take we a walk Laws , what a time it 
 take he ! get your blush ready , Meg now , Lettie , look haughty , and 
 I will look wise . I wonder if he want I to go and tie his tie . oh , 
 glory where on earth do you get that antimacassar ? " 

 " in Nottingham do not   you like it ? " say George refer to his tie . 
 " hello , Lettie have you come ? " 

 " yes , it be a gathering of the goddess . have you that apple ? if so , 
 hand it over , " say Alice . 

 " what apple ? " 

 " oh , Lum , his education ! Paris 's apple can not   you see we have   come to be 
 choose ? " 

 " oh , well I have not   get any apple I have   eat mine . " 

 " be not   he flat he be like boil magnesia that be do boil for a 
 week . be you go to take we all to church then ? " 

 " if you like . " 

 " come on , then . where be the Abode of Love ? look at Lettie look 
 shock . awfully sorry , old girl think love agree with you . " 

 " do you say love ? " inquire George . 

 " yes , I do ; do not   I , Meg ? and you say ' love ' as well , do not   you ? " 

 " I do not   know what it be , " laugh Meg , who be very red and rather 
 bewilder . 

 " ' amor est titillatio ' ' love be a tickling , ' there that be it , be not 
 it , Sybil ? " 

 " how should I know . " 

 " of course not , old fellow . leave it to the girl . see how know 
 Lettie look and , law , Lettie , you be solemn . " 

 " it be love , " suggest George , over his new neck - tie . 

 " I will bet it be ' degustasse sit est ' be not   it , Lettie ? ' one lick 's 
 enough ' ' and damned be he that first cry : hold , enough ! ' which one 
 do you like ? but be you go to take we to church , Georgie , 
 darle one by one , or all at once ? " 

 " what do you want I to do , Meg ? " he ask . 

 " oh , I do not   mind . " 

 " and do you mind , Lettie ? " 

 " I be not go to church . " 

 " let us go a walk somewhere and let we start now , " say Emily somewhat 
 testily . she do not like this nonsense . 

 " there you be Syb you have   get your order do not   leave I behind , " 
 wail Alice . 

 Emily frown and bit her finger . 

 " come on , Georgie . you look like the finger of a pair scale between 
 two weight . Which'll draw ? " 

 " the heavy , " he reply , smile , and look neither at Meg or 
 Lettie . 

 " then it be Meg , " cry Alice . " oh , I wish I be fleshy I have   no chance 
 with Syb against Pem . " 

 Emily flash look of rage ; Meg blush and feel ashamed ; Lettie begin 
 to recover from her first outraged indignation , and smile . 

 thus we go a walk , in two trio . 

 unfortunately , as the evening be so fine , the road be full of 
 stroller : group of three or four man dress in pale trouser and 
 shiny black cloth coat , follow their suspicious little dog : gang 
 of youth slouch along , occupy with nothing , often silent , talk 
 now and then in raucous tone on some subject of brief interest : then 
 the gallant husband , in their tail coat very husbandly , push a 
 jingling perambulator , admonish by a much dress spouse round whom 
 the small member of the family gyrate : occasionally , two lover 
 walk with a space between they , disown each other ; occasionally , a 
 smartly dress mother with two little girl in white silk frock and 
 much expanse of yellow hair , step mincingly , and , near by , a father 
 awkwardly control his Sunday suit . 

 to endure all this it be necessary to chatter unconcernedly . George have 
 to keep up the conversation behind , and he seem to do it with ease , 
 discourse on the lamb , discuss the breed when Meg exclaim : 

 " oh , be not   they black ! they might ha ' creep down th ' chimney . I never 
 see any like they before . " he describe how he have rear two on the 
 bottle , exciting Meg 's keen admiration by his mothering of the lamb . 
 then he go on to the peewit , harp on the same string : how they 
 would cry and pretend to be wound " just fancy , though ! " and how he 
 have move the egg of one pair while he be plough , and the mother 
 have follow they , and have even sit watch as he draw near again with 
 the plough , watch he come and go " well , she know you but they do 
 know those who be kind to they " 

 " yes , " he agree , " her little bright eye seem to speak as you go by . " 

 " oh , I do think they be nice little thing do not   you , Lettie ? " cry 
 Meg in access of tenderness . 

 Lettie do with brevity . 

 we walk over the hill and down into Greymede . Meg think she ought 
 to go home to her grandmother , and George bade her go , say he would 
 call and see she in an hour or so . 

 the dear girl be disappoint , but she go unmurmuring . we leave Alice 
 with a friend , and hurry home through Selsby to escape the 
 after - church parade . 

 as you walk home past Selsby , the pit stand up against the west , with 
 beautiful taper chimney mark in black against the swim of sunset , 
 and the head - stock etch with tall significance on the brightness . 
 then the house be squat in row of shadow at the foot of these high 
 monument . 

 " do you know , Cyril , " say Emily , " I have mean to go and see 
 Mrs Annable the keeper 's wife she be move into Bonsart 's row , and the 
 child come to school oh , it be awful ! they have   never be to school , 
 and they be unspeakable . " 

 " what be she go there for ? " I ask . 

 " I suppose the squire want the Kennels and she choose it herself . but 
 the way they live it be fearful to think of ! " 

 " and why have not   you be ? " 

 " I do not   know I have   mean to but " Emily stumble . 

 " you do not   want , and you dare not ? " 

 " perhaps not would you ? " 

 " Pah let us go now ! there , you hang back . " 

 " no I do not , " she reply sharply . 

 " come on then , we will go through the twitchel . let I tell Lettie . " 

 Lettie at once declare , " no ! " with some asperity . 

 " all right , " say George . " I will take you home . " 

 but this suit Lettie still less . 

 " I do not   know what you want to go for , Cyril , " she say , " and Sunday 
 night , and , everybody everywhere . I want to go home . " 

 " well you go then Emily will come with you . " 

 " ha , " cry the latter , " you think I will not   go to see she . " 

 I shrug my shoulder , and George pull his moustache . 

 " well , I do not   care , " declare Lettie , and we march down the twitchel , 
 indian file . 

 we come near to the ugly row of house that back up against the 
 pit - hill . everywhere be black and sooty : the house be back to back , 
 have only one entrance , which be from a square garden where 
 black - speckle weed grow sulkily , and which look on to a row of evil 
 little ash - pit hut . the road everywhere be tread over with a crust of 
 soot and coal - dust and cinder . 

 between the row , however , be a crowd of woman and child , bare 
 head , bare arm , white apron , and black Sunday frock bristle with 
 gimp . one or two man squat on their heel with their back against a 
 wall , laugh . the woman be wave their arm and scream up at the 
 roof of the end house . 

 Emily and Lettie draw back . 

 " look there it be that little beggar , Sam ! " say George . 

 there , sure enough , perch on the ridge of the roof against the end 
 chimney , be the young imp , coatless , his shirt - sleeve tear away from 
 the cuff . I know his bright , reddish young head in a moment . he get up , 
 his bare toe cling to the tile , and spread out his finger fanwise 
 from his nose , shout something , which immediately cause the crowd to 
 toss with indignation , and the woman to shriek again . Sam sit down 
 suddenly , have almost lose his balance . 

 the village constable hurry up , his thin neck stretch out of his 
 tunic , and demand the cause of the hubbub . 

 immediately a woman with bright brown squint eye and a birthmark on 
 her cheek , rush forward and seize the policeman by the sleeve . 

 " Ta'e ' I m up , ta'e ' I m up , an ' birch ' I m till ' be bloody back 's raw , " 
 she scream . 

 the thin policeman shake she off , and want to know what be the 
 matter . 

 " I will smosh ' I m like a rotten tater , " cry the woman , " if I can lay 
 ' and on ' I m. ' E be not fit ter live nowhere where there be decent 
 folk the thievin ' , brazen little devil " thus she go on . 

 " but what be up ! " interrupt the thin constable , " what be up wi ' ' I m ? " 

 " up it be ' I m as ' be up , an ' let ' I m wait till I get ' I m down . a crafty 
 little " 

 Sam , see her look at he , distort his honest feature , and 
 overheat her wrath , till Lettie and Emily tremble with dismay . 

 the mother 's head appear at the bedroom window . she slide the sash 
 back , and crane out , vainly try to look over the gutter below the 
 slate . she be even more dishevelled than usual , and the tear have 
 dry on her pale face . she stretch far out , cling to the 
 window frame and to the gutter overhead , till I be afraid she would 
 come down with a crash . 

 the man , squat on their heel against the wall of the ashpit , 
 laugh , say : 

 " Nab ' I m , Poll can ter see ' m clawk ' I m ! " and then the pitiful voice 
 of the woman be hear cry : " come thy way down , my duckie , come 
 on on'y come ter thy mother they shanna touch thee . Du thy mother 's 
 biddin ' , now Sam Sam Sam ! " her voice rise higher and high . 

 " Sammy , Sammy , go to thy mammy , " jeer the wit below . 

 " Shonna ter come , Shonna ter come to thy mother , my duckie come on , 
 come thy way down . " 

 Sam look at the crowd , and at the eave from under which rise his 
 mother 's voice . he be go to cry . a big gaunt woman , with the family 
 steel comb stick in her back hair , shout , " Tha ' mun well bend thy 
 face , tha ' need ter scraight , " and aid by the woman with the 
 birthmark and the squint , she revile he . the little scoundrel , in a 
 burst of defiance , pick a piece of mortar from between the slate , and 
 in a second it fly into fragment against the family steel comb . the 
 wearer thereof declare her head be lay open and there be general 
 confusion . the policeman I do not   know how thin he must have be when 
 he be take out of his uniform lose his head , and he too begin 
 brandish his fist , spit from under his sweep's - brush moustache 
 as he command in tone of authority : 

 " now then , no more on it let us ' a'e thee down here , an ' no more messin ' 
 about ! " 

 the boy try to creep over the ridge of the roof and escape down the 
 other side . immediately the brat rush round yell to the other side 
 of the row , and piece of red - burn gravel begin to fly over the roof . 
 Sam crouch against the chimney . 

 " got ' I m ! " yell one little devil " got ' I m ! hi go again ! " 

 a shower of stone come down , scatter the woman and the policeman . 
 the mother rush from the house and make a wild onslaught on the 
 thrower . she catch one and fling he down . immediately the rest turn 
 and aim their missile at she . then George and the policeman and I 
 dash after the young wretch , and the woman run to see what happen 
 to their offspring . we catch two lad of fourteen or so , and make the 
 policeman haul they after we . the rest flee . 

 when we return to the field of battle , Sam have go too . 

 " if ' e ' asna slive off ! " cry the woman with a squint . " but I will see 
 he lock up for this . " 

 at this moment a band of missioner from one of the chapel or church 
 arrive at the end of the row , and the little harmonium begin to bray , 
 and the place vibrate with the sound of a woman 's powerful voice , 
 prop round by several other , sing : 

 " at even ' ere the sun be set " 

 everybody hurry towards the new noise , save the policeman with his 
 captive , the woman with the squint , and the woman with the family comb . 
 I tell the limb of the law he would well get rid of the two boy and find 
 out what mischief the other be after . 

 then I enquire of the woman with the squint what be the matter . 

 " thirty - seven young un ' an we ' ad from that doe , an ' there be no knowin ' 
 ' ow many more , if they ' adn't   a - go an ' ate - n ' er , " she reply , 
 lapsing , now her fury be spend , into sullen resentment . 

 " An ' niver a word should we a ' know , " add the family - comb - bearer , 
 " but for that blessed cat of ourn , as scrat it up . " 

 " indeed , " say I , " the rabbit ? " 

 " no , there be nowt leave but th ' skin they would see ter that , a 
 thieving , dirt - eatin ' lot . " 

 " when be that ? " say I. 

 " this mortal night an ' there be th ' head an ' th ' back in th ' dirty 
 stewpot I can show you this instant I have   get them in our pantry for a 
 proof , ' aven't   I , Martha ? " 

 " a fat lot o ' good it be but I will rip th ' neck out of ' I m , if ever I 
 lay ' and on ' i m. " 

 at last I make out that Samuel have steal a large , lop - eared doe out of 
 a bunch in the coal - house of the squint - eyed lady , have skin it , 
 bury the skin , and offer his booty to his mother as a wild rabbit , 
 trap . the doe have be the chief item of the Annables ' Sunday 
 dinner albeit a portion be unluckily save till Monday , provide 
 undeniable proof of the theft . the owner of the rabbit have suppose the 
 creature to have escape . this peaceful supposition have be destroy 
 by the comb - bearer 's see her cat , scratch in the Annables garden , 
 unearth the white and brown doe - skin , after which the trouble have begin . 

 the squint - eyed woman be not so hard to manage . I talk to she as if 
 she be some male friend of mine , only appeal to her womanliness 
 with all the soft sadness I could press into the tone of my voice . in 
 the end she be mollify , and even tender and motherly in her feeling 
 toward the unfortunate family . I leave on her dresser the half - crown I 
 shrink from offer she , and , have reduce the comb - wearer also , I 
 march off , carry the stewpot and the fragment of the ill - fat doe 
 to the cottage of the widow , where George and the girl await I . 

 the house be in a woeful state . in the rock chair , beside the high 
 guard that surround the hearth , sit the mother , rock , look sadly 
 shake now her excitement be over . Lettie be nurse the little baby , 
 and Emily the next child . George be smoke his pipe and try to look 
 natural . the little kitchen be crowded there be no room there be 
 not even a place on the table for the stew - jar , so I gather together 
 cup and mug contain tea sop , and set down the vessel of ignominy 
 on the much slopped tea - cloth . the four little child be strip and 
 patch with tear at my entrance one under the table recommence to 
 weep , so I give he my pencil which push in and out , but which push 
 in and out no more . the sight of the stewpot affect the mother afresh . 
 she weep again , cry : 

 " an ' I niver think as ' ow it be aught but a snare un ; as if I 
 should set ' I m on ter thieve their old doe ; an ' tough it be an ' all ; 
 an ' ' I m a thief , an me call all the name they could lay their tongue 
 to : an ' then in my bit of a pantry , takin ' the very pot out : that 
 stewpot as I bring all the way from Nottingham , an ' I have   ' ad it afore 
 our Minnie wor bear " 

 the baby , the little baby , then begin to cry . the mother get up 
 suddenly , and take it . 

 " oh , come then , come then my pet . why , why cos they shanna , no they 
 shanna . yes , he be his mother 's least little lad , he be , a little un . 
 Hush then , there , there what be a matter , my little ? " she hush the 
 baby , and herself . at length she ask : 

 " ' as th ' p'liceman go as well ? " 

 " yes it be all right , " I say . 

 she sigh deeply , and her look of weariness be painful to see . 

 " how old be your eld ? " I ask . 

 " Fanny she be fourteen . she be out service at Websters . then Jim , as be 
 thirteen next month let us see , yes , it be next month he be go to 
 Flints farming . they can not   do much an ' I shall not   let them go into th ' 
 pit , if I can help it . my husband always use to say they should never 
 go in th ' pit . " 

 " they can not   do much for you . " 

 " they dun what they can . but it be a hard job , it be , ter keep them all 
 go . Wi ' weshin , an ' th ' parish pay , an ' five shillin ' from th ' 
 squire it be ' ard . it be different when my husband be alive . it ought 
 ter ' a be I as should ' a die I do not   seem as if I can manage 
 them they get beyond I . I wish I be dead this minnit , an ' ' I m ' ere . I 
 can not   understand it : ' I m as wor so capable , to be take , an ' I leave . ' E 
 wor a man in a thousand , ' e wor full o ' management like a gentleman . I 
 wisht it be I as ' ad a be take . ' an ' e 's restless , 'cos ' e know I 
 find it ' ard . I stand at th ' door last night , when they be all asleep , 
 look out over th ' pit pond an ' I see a light , an ' I know it be 
 ' I m cos it wor our weddin ' day yesterday by the day an ' th ' date . an ' 
 I say to ' I m ' Frank , be it thee , Frank ? I be all right , I be gettin ' on 
 all right , ' an ' then ' e go ; seem to go ower the whimsey an ' back 
 towards th ' wood . I know it wor ' I m , an ' ' e couldna rest , thinkin ' I 
 couldna manage " 

 after a while we leave , promise to go again , and to see after the 
 safety of Sam . 

 it be quite dark , and the lamp be light in the house . we could 
 hear the throb of the fan - house engine , and the soft whirr of the fan . 

 " be not   it cruel ? " say Emily plaintively . 

 " be not   the man a wretch to marry the woman like that , " add Lettie 
 with decision . 

 " Speak of Lady Chrystabel , " say I , and then there be silence . " I 
 suppose he do not know what he be do , any more than the rest of 
 we . " 

 " I think you be go to your aunt 's to the Ram Inn , " say Lettie 
 to George when they come to the cross - road . 

 " not now it be too late , " he answer quietly . " you will come round our 
 way , will not   you ? " 

 " yes , " she say . 

 we be eat bread and milk at the farm , and the father be talk 
 with vague sadness and reminiscence , linger over the thought of their 
 departure from the old house . he be a pure romanticist , forever seek 
 the colour of the past in the present 's monotony . he seem settle 
 down to an easy contented middle - age , when the unrest on the farm and 
 development of his child quicken he with fresh activity . he read 
 book on the land question , and modern novel . in the end he become an 
 advanced radical , almost a socialist . occasionally his letter appear 
 in the newspaper . he have take a new hold on life . 

 over supper he become enthusiastic about Canada , and to watch he , his 
 ruddy face light up , his burly form straight and nerve with 
 excitement , be to admire he ; to hear he , his word of thoughtful 
 common - sense all warm with a young man 's hope , be to love he . at 
 forty - six he be more spontaneous and enthusiastic than George , and far 
 more happy and hopeful . 

 Emily would not agree to go away with they what should she do in 
 Canada , she say and she do not want the little one " to be drudge on 
 a farm in the end to be nothing but cattle . " 

 " Nay , " say her father gently , " Mollie shall learn the dairying , and 
 David will just be right to take to the place when I give up . it will 
 perhaps be a bit rough and hard at first , but when we have   get over it we 
 shall think it be one of the good time like you do . " 

 " and you , George ? " ask Lettie . 

 " I be not go . what should I go for ? there be nothing at the end of it 
 only a long life . it be like a day here in June a long work day , 
 pleasant enough , and when it be do you sleep well but it be work and 
 sleep and comfort , half a life . it be not enough . what be the odd ? I 
 might as well be Flower , the mare . " 

 his father look at he gravely and thoughtfully . 

 " now it seem to I so different , " he say sadly , " it seem to I you 
 can live your own life , and be independent , and think as you like 
 without be choke with harassment . I feel as if I could keep 
 on like that " 

 " I be go to get more out of my life , I hope , " laugh George . " no . do 
 you know ? " and here he turn straight to Lettie . " do you know , I be 
 go to get pretty rich , so that I can do what I want for a bit . I want 
 to see what it be like , to taste all side to taste the town . I want to 
 know what I have   get in I . I will get rich or at least I will have a good 
 try . " 

 " and pray how will you manage it ? " ask Emily . 

 " I will begin by marry and then you will see . " 

 Emily laugh with scorn " let we see you begin . " 

 " ah , you be not wise ! " say the father sadly then , laugh , he say to 
 Lettie in coax , confidential tone , " but he will come out there to I 
 in a year or two you see if he do not . " 

 " I wish I could come now , " say I. 

 " if you would , " say George , " I would go with you . but not by myself , to 
 become a fat stupid fool , like my own cattle . " 

 while he be speak Gyp burst into a rage of barking . the father get 
 up to see what it be , and George follow . Trip , the great 
 bull - terrier , rush out of the house shake the building with his 
 roar . we see the white dog flash down the yard , we hear a rattle from 
 the hen - house ladder , and in a moment a scream from the orchard side . 

 we rush forward , and there on the sharp bank - side lie a little figure , 
 face down , and trip stand over it , look rather puzzle . 

 I pick up the child it be Sam . he struggle as soon as he feel my 
 hand , but I bear he off to the house . he wriggle like a wild hare , 
 and kick , but at last he be still . I set he on the hearthrug to 
 examine he . he be a quaint little figure , dress in a man 's trouser 
 that have be botch small for he , and a coat hang in rag . 

 " do he get hold of you ? " ask the father . " where be it he get hold of 
 you ? " 

 but the child stand unanswere , his little pale lip pinch together , 
 his eye star out at nothing . Emily go on her knee before he , and 
 put her face close to his , say , with a voice that make one shrink 
 from its unbridled emotion of caress : 

 " do he hurt you , eh ? tell we where he hurt you . " she would have put 
 her arm around he , but he shrink away . 

 " look here , " say Lettie , " it be here and it be bleed . go and get some 
 water , Emily , and some rag . come on , Sam , let I look and I will put some 
 rag round it . come along . " 

 she take the child and strip he of his grotesque garment . trip have 
 give he a sharp grab on the thigh before he have realise that he be 
 deal with a little boy . it be not much , however , and Lettie soon have 
 it bath , and anoint with eld - flower ointment . on the boy 's body 
 be several scar and bruise evidently he have rough time . Lettie 
 tend to he and dress he again . he endure these attention like a 
 trap wild rabbit never look at we , never open his lip only 
 shrink slightly . when Lettie have put on he his torn little shirt , 
 and have gather the great breech about he , Emily go to he to coax 
 he and make he at home . she kiss he , and talk to he with her 
 full vibration of emotional caress . it seem almost to suffocate he . 
 then she try to feed he with bread and milk from a spoon , but he 
 would not open his mouth , and he turn his head away . 

 " leave he alone take no notice of he , " say Lettie , lift he into 
 the chimney seat , with the basin of bread and milk beside he . emily 
 fetch the two kitten out of their basket and put they too beside he . 

 " I wonder how many egg he would get , " say the father , laugh softly . 

 " hush ! " say Lettie . " when do you think you will go to Canada , 
 Mr. Saxton ? " 

 " next spring it be no good go before . " 

 " and then you will marry ? " ask Lettie of George . 

 " before then oh , before then , " he say . 

 " why how be it you be suddenly in such a hurry ? when will it be ? " 

 " when be you marry ? " he ask in reply . 

 " I do not   know , " she say , come to a full stop . 

 " then I do not   know , " he say , take a large wedge of cheese and bite 
 a piece from it . 

 " it be fix for June , " she say , recover herself at his suggestion 
 of hope . 

 " July ! " say Emily . 

 " Father ! " say he , hold the piece of cheese up before he as he 
 speak he be evidently nervous : " would you advise I to marry Meg ? " 

 his father start , and say : 

 " why , be you think of do ? " 

 " yes all thing consider . " 

 " well if she suit you " 

 " we be cousin " 

 " if you want she , I suppose you will not   let that hinder you . she will have a 
 nice bit of money , and if you like she " 

 " I like she all right I shall not   go out to Canada with she though . I 
 shall stay at the Ram for the sake of the life . " 

 " it be a poor life , that ! " say the father , ruminate . 

 George laugh . " a bit mucky ! " he say " but it will do . it would need 
 Cyril or Lettie to keep I alive in Canada . " 

 it be a bold stroke everybody be embarrassed . 

 " well , " say the father , " I suppose we can not   have everything we want we 
 generally have to put up with the next good thing do not   we , 
 Lettie ? " he laugh . Lettie flush furiously . 

 " I do not   know , " she say . " you can generally get what you want if you 
 want it badly enough . of course if you do not   mind " 

 she rise and go across to Sam . 

 he be play with the kitten . one be pat and cuff his bare 
 toe , which have poke through his stocking . he push and tease the 
 little scamp with his toe till it rush at he , clinging , tickling , 
 bite till he give little bubble of laughter , quite forgetful of we . 
 then the kitten be tired , and run off . Lettie shake her skirt , and 
 directly the two playful mite rush upon it , dart round she , 
 roll head over heel , and swing from the soft cloth . suddenly 
 become aware that they feel tired , the young thing trot away and 
 cuddle together by the fender , where in an instant they be asleep . 
 almost as suddenly , Sam sink into drowsiness . 

 " he would well go to bed , " say the father . 

 " put he in my bed , " say George . " David would wonder what have 
 happen . " 

 " will you go to bed , Sam ? " ask Emily , hold out her arm to he , and 
 immediately startle he by the terrible gentleness of her persuasion . 
 he retreat behind Lettie . 

 " come along , " say the latter , and she quickly take he and undress 
 he . then she pick he up , and his bare leg hang down in front of 
 she . his head droop drowsily on to her shoulder , against her neck . 

 she put down her face to touch the loose riot of his ruddy hair . she 
 stand so , quiet , still and wistful , for a few moment ; perhaps she be 
 vaguely aware that the attitude be beautiful for she , and irresistibly 
 appeal to George , who love , above all in she , her delicate dignity 
 of tenderness . Emily wait with the light candle for her some 
 moment . 

 when she come down there be a softness about she . 

 " now , " say I to myself , " if George ask she again he be wise . " 

 " he be asleep , " she say quietly . 

 " I be think we might as well let he stop while we be here , should we , 
 George ? " say the father . " eh ? " 

 " we will keep he here while we be here " 

 " oh the lad ! I should . yes he would be well here than up yonder . " 

 " ah , yes ever so much . it be good of you , " say Lettie . 

 " oh , he will make no difference , " say the father . 

 " not a bit , " add George . 

 " what about his mother ! " ask Lettie . 

 " I will call and tell she in the morning , " say George . 

 " yes , " she say , " call and tell she . " 

 then she put on her thing to go . he also put on his cap . 

 " be you come a little way , emily ? " I ask . 

 she run , laugh , with bright eye as we go out into the darkness . 

 we wait for they at the wood gate . we all linger , not know what 
 to say . Lettie say finally : 

 " well it be no good the grass be wet good - night good - night , Emily . " 

 " good - night , " he say , with regret and hesitation , and a trifle of 
 impatience in his voice and his manner . he linger still a moment ; she 
 hesitate then she strike off sharply . 

 " he have not ask she , the idiot ! " I say to myself . 

 " really , " she say bitterly , when we be go up the garden path , " you 
 think rather quiet folk have a lot in they , but it be only 
 stupidity they be mostly fool . " 




  CHAPTER V 

  AN arrow from the impatient GOD 


 on an afternoon three or four day after the recovery of Sam , matter 
 become complicated . George , as usual , discover that he have be 
 dawdling in the portal of his desire , when the door come to with a 
 bang . then he hasten to knock . 

 " tell she , " he say , " I will come up tomorrow after milk tell she 
 I be come to see she . " 

 on the evening of that morrow , the first person to put in an appearance 
 be a garrulous spinster who have call ostensibly to inquire into the 
 absence of the family from church : " I say to Elizabeth , ' now what a 
  thing if anything happen to they just now , and the wedding be put 
 off . ' I feel I must come and make myself sure that nothing have 
 happen . we all feel so interested in Lettie just now . I be sure 
 everybody be talk of she , she seem in the air . I really think we 
 shall have thunder : I hope we shall not . yes , we be all so glad that 
 Mr. Tempest be content with a wife from at home the other , his father 
 and Mr. Robert and the rest they be none of they to be suit at 
 home , though to be sure the wife they bring be nothing indeed they 
 be not as many a one say Mrs. Robert be a paltry choice neither 
 in look or manner have she anything to boast of if her family be old 
 than mine . family be not   much to make up for what she lack in other 
 thing , that I could easily have supply she with ; and , oh , dear , what 
 an object she be now , with her wisp of hair and her spectacle ! she for 
 one have not   keep much of her youth . but when be the exact date , 
 dear ? some say this and some that , but as I always say , I never trust a 
 ' they say . ' it be so nice that you have that cousin a canon to come down 
 for the service , Mrs. Beardsall , and Sir Walter Houghton for the groom 's 
 man ! what ? you do not   think so oh , but I know , dear , I know ; you do 
 like to treasure up these secret , do not   you ; you be greedy for all the 
 good thing just now . " 

 she shake her head at Lettie , and the jet ornament on her bonnet 
 twitter like a thousand wag little tongue . then she sigh , and 
 be about to recommence her song , when she happen to turn her head and 
 to espy a telegraph boy come up the path . 

 " oh , I hope nothing be wrong , dear I hope nothing be wrong ! I always 
 feel so terrified of a telegram . you would well not open it yourself , 
 dear do not   now let your brother go . " 

 Lettie , who have turn pale , hurry to the door . the sky be very 
 dark there be a mutter of thunder . 

 " it be all right , " say Lettie , tremble , " it be only to say he be come 
 to - night . " 

 " I be very thankful , very thankful , " cry the spinster . " it might have 
 be so much bad . I be sure I never open a telegram without feel as 
 if I be open a death - blow . I be so glad , dear ; it must have upset 
 you . what news to take back to the village , suppose something have 
 happen ! " she sigh again , and the jet drop twinkle ominously in the 
 thunder light , as if declare they would make something of it yet . 

 it be six o'clock . the air relax a little , and the thunder be 
 silent . George would be come about seven ; and the spinster show no 
 sign of departure ; and Leslie might arrive at any moment . Lettie 
 fret and fidget , and the old woman gabble on . I look out of the 
 window at the water and the sky . 

 the day have be uncertain . in the morning it be warm , and the sunshine 
 have play and race among the cloud - shadow on the hill . later , great 
 cloud mass have stalk up from the northwest and crowded thick across 
 the sky ; in this little night , sleet and wind , and rain whirl 
 furiously . then the sky have laugh at we again . in the sunshine come 
 the spinster . but as she talk , over the hilltop rise the wide forehead 
 of the cloud , rear slowly , ominously high . a first messenger of 
 storm pass darkly over the sky , leave the way clear again . 

 " I will go round to Highclose , " say Lettie . " I be sure it will be 
 stormy again . be you come down the road , Miss Slaighter , or do you 
 mind if I leave you ? " 

 " I will go , dear , if you think there be go to be another storm I 
 dread it so . perhaps I have well wait " 

 " oh , it will not come over for an hour , I be sure . we read the weather 
 well out here , do not   we , Cyril ? you will come with I , will not   you ? " 

 we three set off , the gossip lean on her toe , trip between we . 
 she be much gratify by Lettie 's information concern the proposal 
 for the new home . we leave she in a glow of congratulatory smile on the 
 highway . but the cloud have upreare , and stretch in two great arm , 
 reach overhead . the little spinster hurry along , but the black 
 hand of the cloud keep pace and clutch she . a sudden gust of wind 
 shudder in the tree , and rush upon her cloak , blow its bugle . 

 an icy raindrop smote into her cheek . she hurry on , pray fervently 
 for her bonnet 's sake that she might reach Widow Harriman 's cottage 
 before the burst come . but the thunder crash in her ear , and a host of 
 hailstone fly at she . in despair and anguish she flee from under the 
 ash tree ; she reach the widow 's garden gate , when out leapt the 
 lightning full at she . " put I in the stair - hole ! " she cry . " where be 
 the stair - hole ? " 

 Glancing wildly round , she see a ghost . it be the reflection of the 
 sainted spinster , Hilda Slaighter , in the widow 's mirror ; a reflection 
 with a bonnet fall backwards , and to it attach a thick rope of 
 grey - brown hair . the author of the ghost instinctively twist to look 
 at the back of her head . she see some end of grey hair , and flee into 
 the open stair - hole as into a grave . 

 we have go back home till the storm be over , and then , restless , 
 afraid of the arrival of George , we set out again into the wet evening . 
 it be fine and chilly , and already a mist be rise from Nethermere , 
 veil the far shore , where the tree rise loftily , suggest 
 grove beyond the Nile . the bird be sing riotously . the fresh 
 green hedge glisten vividly and glow again with intense green . 
 look at the water , I perceive a delicate flush from the west hiding 
 along it . the mist lick and wreathe up the shore ; from the hidden 
 white distance come the mournful cry of water fowl . we go slowly along 
 behind a heavy cart , which clank and rattle under the dripping tree , 
 with the hoof of the horse move with broad thud in front . we pass 
 over black patch where the ash flower be beat down , and under 
 great mass cloud of green sycamore . at the sudden curve of the road , 
 near the foot of the hill , I stop to break off a spray of larch , 
 where the soft cone be heavy as raspberry , and gay like flower 
 with petal . the shake bough spatter a heavy shower on my face , of 
 drop so cold that they seem to sink into my blood and chill it . 

 " Hark ! " say Lettie , as I be dry my face . there be the quick patter 
 of a motor - car come downhill . the heavy cart be draw across the road 
 to rest , and the driver hurry to turn the horse back . it move with 
 painful slowness , and we stand in the road in suspense . suddenly , before 
 we know it , the car be drop down on we , come at we in a curve , 
 have round the horse and cart . Lettie stand face with terror . 
 Leslie see she , and swing round the wheel on the sharp , curve 
 hill - side ; look only to see that he should miss she . the car slide 
 sideways ; the mud crackle under the wheel , and the machine go 
 crash into Nethermere . it catch the edge of the old stone wall with 
 a smash . then for a few moment I think I be blind . when I see again , 
 Leslie be lie across the broken hedge , his head hang down the 
 bank , his face cover with blood ; the car rest strangely on the brink 
 of the water , crumple as if it have sink down to rest . 

 Lettie , with hand shudder , be wipe the blood from his eye with a 
 piece of her underskirt . in a moment she say : 

 " he be not dead let we take he home let we take he quickly . " 

 I run and take the wicket gate off its hinge and lay he on that . his 
 leg trail down , but we carry he thus , she at the foot , I at the 
 head . she make I stop and put he down . I think the weight be too 
 much for she , but it be not that . 

 " I can not   bear to see his hand hang , knock against the bush and 
 thing . " 

 it be not many yard to the house . a maidservant see we , come run 
 out , and go run back , like the frightened lapwing from the wound 
 cat . 

 we wait until the doctor come . there be a deep graze down the side of 
 the head serious , but not dangerous ; there be a cut across the 
 cheek - bone that would leave a scar ; and the collar - bone be break . I 
 stay until he have recover consciousness . " Lettie , " he want Lettie , 
 so she have to remain at Highclose all night . I go home to tell my 
 mother . 

 when I go to bed I look across at the light window of Highclose , 
 and the light trail mistily towards I across the water . the cedar 
 stand dark guard against the house ; bright the window be , like the 
 star , and , like the star , cover their torment in brightness . the 
 sky be glitter with sharp light they be too far off to take 
 trouble for we , so little , little almost to nothingness . all the great 
 hollow vastness roar overhead , and the star be only spark that whirl 
 and spin in the restless space . the earth must listen to we ; she cover 
 her face with a thin veil of mist , and be sad ; she soak up our blood 
 tenderly , in the darkness , grieve , and in the light she soothe and 
 reassure we . here on our earth be sympathy and hope , the heavens have 
 nothing but distance . 

 a corn - crake talk to I across the valley , talk and talk 
 endlessly , ask and answer in hoarse tone from the sleep , 
 mist - hide meadow . the monotonous voice , that on past summer evening 
 have have pleasant note of romance , now be intolerable to I . its 
 inflexible harshness and cacophany seem like the voice of fate 
 speak out its tuneless perseverance in the night . 

 in the morning Lettie come home wan , sad - eye , and self - reproachful . 
 after a short time they come for she , as he want she again . 

 when in the evening I go to see George , he too be very despondent . 

 " it be no good now , " say I. " you should have insist and make your own 
 destiny . " 

 " yes perhaps so , " he drawl in his good reflective manner . 

 " I would have have she she would have be glad if you have do as you want 
 with she . she will not   leave he till he be strong , and he will marry she 
 before then . you should have have the courage to risk yourself you be 
 always too careful of yourself and your own poor feeling you never 
 could brace yourself up to a shower - bath of contempt and hard usage , so 
 you have   save your feeling and lose not much , I suppose you could not . " 

 " but " he begin , not look up ; and I laugh at he . 

 " go on , " I say . 

 " well she be engage to he " 

 " Pah you think you be too good to be reject . " 

 he be very pale , and when he be pale , the tan on his skin look 
 sickly . he regard I with his dark eye , which be now full of misery 
 and a child 's big despair . 

 " and nothing else , " I complete , with which the little , exhaust 
 gunboat of my anger wreck and sink utterly . yet no thought would 
 spread sail on the sea of my pity : I be like water that heave with 
 yearning , and be still . 

 Leslie be very ill for some time . he have a slight brain fever , and be 
 delirious , insist that Lettie be leave he . she stay most of she 
 day at Highclose . 

 one day in June he lie rest on a deck chair in the shade of the 
 cedar , and she be sit by he . it be a yellow , sultry day , when all 
 the atmosphere seem inert , and all thing be languid . 

 " do not   you think , dear , " she say , " it would be well for we not to 
 marry ? " 

 he lift his head nervously from the cushion ; his face be emblazon 
 with a livid red bar on a field of white , and he look worn , wistful . 

 " do you mean not yet ? " he ask . 

 " yes and , perhaps , perhaps never . " 

 " ha , " he laugh , sink down again . " I must be get like myself 
 again , if you begin to tease I . " 

 " but , " she say , struggle valiantly , " I be not sure I ought to marry 
 you . " 

 he laugh again , though a little apprehensively . 

 " be you afraid I shall always be weak in my noddle ? " he ask . " but you 
 wait a month . " 

 " no , that do not   bother I " 

 " oh , do not   it ! " 

 " silly boy no , it be myself . " 

 " I be sure I have   make no complaint about you . " 

 " not likely but I wish you would let I go . " 

 " I be a strong man to hold you , be not   I ? look at my muscular paw ! " he 
 hold out his hand , frail and white with sickness . 

 " you know you hold I and I want you to let I go . I do not   want to " 

 " to what ? " 

 " to get marry at all let I be , let I go . " 

 " what for ? " 

 " oh for my sake . " 

 " you mean you do not   love I ? " 

 " love love I do not   know anything about it . but I can not   we can not 
 be do not   you see oh , what do they say , flesh of one flesh . " 

 " why ? " he whisper , like a child that be tell some tale of mystery . 

 she look at he , as he lie prop upon his elbow , turn towards 
 her his white face of fear and perplexity , like a child that can not 
 understand , and be afraid , and want to cry . then slowly tear gather 
 full in her eye , and she weep from pity and despair . 

 this excite he terribly . he get up from his chair , and the cushion 
 fall on to the grass : 

 " what be the matter , what be the matter ! oh , Lettie , be it I ? do not 
 you want I now ? be that it ? tell I , tell I now , tell I , " he 
 grasp her wrist , and try to pull her hand from her face . the tear 
 be run down his cheek . she feel he tremble , and the sound of 
 his voice alarm she from herself . she hastily smear the tear from 
 her eye , get up , and put her arm round he . he hide his head on her 
 shoulder and sob , while she bent over he , and so they cry out 
 their cry , till they be ashamed , look round to see if anyone be 
 near . then she hurry about , pick up the cushion , make he lie 
 down , and arrange he comfortably , so that she might be busy . he be 
 querulous , like a sick , indulged child . he would have her arm under his 
 shoulder , and her face near his . 

 " well , " he say , smile faintly again after a time . " you be naughty to 
 give we such rough time be it for the pleasure of make up , bad 
 little Schnucke be not   you ? " 

 she keep close to he , and he do not see the wince and quiver of her 
 lip . 

 " I wish I be strong again could not   we go boat or ride on 
 horseback and you would have to behave then . do you think I shall be strong 
 in a month ? strong than you ? " 

 " I hope so , " she say . 

 " why , I do not   believe you do , I believe you like I like this so that 
 you can lay I down and smooth I do not   you , quiet girl ? " 

 " when you be good . " 

 " ah , well , in a month I shall be strong , and we will be marry and go to 
 Switzerland do you hear , Schnucke you will not   be able to be naughty any 
 more then . oh do you want to go away from I again ? " 

 " no only my arm be dead , " she draw it from beneath he , stand up , 
 swing it , smile because it hurt she . 

 " oh , my darling what a shame ! oh , I be a brute , a kiddish brute . I wish 
 I be strong again , Lettie , and do not   do these thing . " 

 " you boy it be nothing . " she smile at he again . 




  CHAPTER VI 

  the courting 


 during Leslie 's illness I stroll down to the mill one Saturday 
 evening . I meet George tramping across the yard with a couple of bucket 
 of swill , and eleven young pig rush squeal about his leg , 
 shriek in an agony of suspense . he pour the stuff into a trough 
 with luscious gurgle , and instantly ten nose be dip in , and ten 
 little mouth begin to slobber . though there be plenty of room for ten , 
 yet they shoulder and shove and struggle to capture a large space , 
 and many little trotter dabble and spill the stuff , and the ten 
 sucking , clapping snout twitch fiercely , and twenty little eye 
 glare askance , like so many point of wrath . they give uneasy , gasp 
 grunt in their haste . the unhappy eleventh rush from point to point 
 try to push in his snout , but for his pain he get rough squeezing , 
 and sharp grab on his ear . then he lift up his face and scream 
 scream of grief and wrath unto the evening sky . 

 but the ten little glutton only twitch their ear to make sure there 
 be no danger in the noise , and they suck hard , with much spilling 
 and slobbe . George laugh like a sardonic jove , but at last he give 
 ear , and kick the ten glutton from the trough , and allow the 
 residue to the eleventh . this one , poor wretch , almost weep with relief 
 as he suck and swallow in sob , cast his little eye 
 apprehensively upwards , though he do not lift his nose from the trough , 
 as he hear the vindictive shriek of ten little fiend keep at bay by 
 George . the solitary feeder , shiver with apprehension , rub the 
 wood bare with his snout , then , turn up to heaven his eye of 
 gratitude , he reluctantly leave the trough . I expect to see the ten 
 fall upon he and devour he , but they do not ; they rush upon the 
 empty trough , and rub the wood still drier , shriek with misery . 

 " how like life , " I laugh . 

 " fine litter , " say George ; " there be fourteen , only that damn 
 she - devil , Circe , go and eat three of them before we get at she . " 

 the great ugly sow come leer up as he speak . 

 " why do not   you fatten she up , and devour she , the old gargoyle ? she be an 
 offence to the universe . " 

 " nay she be a fine sow . " 

 I snort , and he laugh , and the old sow grunt with contempt , and 
 her little eye twist towards we with a demoniac leer as she roll 
 past . 

 " what be you go to do to - night ! " I ask . " go out ? " 

 " I be go court , " he reply , grin . 

 " oh ! wish I be ! " 

 " you can come if you like and tell I where I make mistake , since 
 you be an expert on such matter . " 

 " do not   you get on very well then ? " I ask . 

 " oh , all right it be easy enough when you do not   care a damn . besides , 
 you can always have a Johnny Walker . that be the good of court at the 
 Ram Inn . I will go and get ready . " 

 in the kitchen Emily sit grind out some stitch from a big old 
 hand - machine that stand on the table before she : she be make shirt 
 for Sam , I presume . that little fellow , who be instal at the farm , 
 be seat by her side fire off word from a reading book . the machine 
 rumble and rattle on , like a whole factory at work , for an inch or 
 two , during which time Sam shout in shrill explosion like irregular 
 pistol shot : " do not pot " " Put ! " cry Emily from the machine ; 
 " put " shrill the child , " the soot on my boot , " there the 
 machine break down , and , frighten by the sound of his own voice , the 
 boy stop in bewilderment and look round . 

 " go on ! " say Emily , as she poke in the tooth of the old machine with 
 the scissor , then pull and prod again . he begin 
 " boot but you " here he die off again , make nervous by the sound 
 of his voice in the stillness . Emily suck a piece of cotton and push 
 it through the needle . 

 " now go on , " she say , " ' but you may ' . " 

 " but you may shoot " : he shout away , reassure by the rumble of the 
 machine : " shoot the fox . I I it be at the rot " 

 " Root , " shriek Emily , as she guide the stuff through the doddering 
 jaw of the machine . 

 " Root , " echo the boy , and he go off with these cracker : 
 " root of the tree . " 

 " next one ! " cry Emily . 

 " put the ol " begin the boy . 

 " what ? " cry Emily . 

 " ole on " 

 " wait a bit ! " cry Emily , and then the machine break down . 

 " Hang ! " she ejaculate . 

 " Hang ! " shout the child . 

 she laugh , and lean over to he : 

 " ' put the oil in the pan to boil , while I toil in the soil oh , Cyril , I 
 never know you be there ! go along now , Sam : David will be at the back 
 somewhere . " 

 " he be in the bottom garden , " say I , and the child run out . 

 directly George come in from the scullery , dry himself . he stand on 
 the hearthrug as he rub himself , and survey his reflection in the 
 mirror above the high mantelpiece ; he look at himself and smile . I 
 wonder that he find such satisfaction in his image , see that there 
 be a gap in his chin , and an uncertain moth - eat appearance in one 
 cheek . Mrs. Saxton still hold this mirror an object of dignity ; it be 
 fairly large , and have a well - carven frame ; but it leave gap and spot 
 and scratch in one 's countenance , and even where it be bright , it 
 give one 's reflection a far - away dim aspect . notwithstanding , George 
 smile at himself as he comb his hair , and twist his moustache . 

 " you seem to make a good impression on yourself , " say I. 

 " I be think I look all right sort of face to go court with , " 
 he reply , laugh : " you just arrange a patch of black to come and 
 hide your fault and you be all right . " 

 " I always use to think , " say Emily , " that the black spot have 
 swallow so many face they be full up , and could not   take any 
 more and the rest be misty because there be so many face lap one 
 over the other reflect . " 

 " you do see yourself a bit ghostish " say he , " on a background of 
 your ancestor . I always think when you stop in an old place like this 
 you sort of keep company with your ancestor too much ; I sometimes feel 
 like a bit of the old building walk about ; the old feeling of the 
 old folk stick to you like the lichen on the wall ; you sort of get 
 hoary . " 

 " that be it it be true , " assert the father , " people whose family have 
 shift about much do not   know how it feel . that be why I be go to 
 Canada . " 

 " and I be go in a pub , " say George , " where it be quite 
 different plenty of life . " 

 " life ! " echo Emily with contempt . 

 " that be the word , my wench , " reply her brother , lapse into the 
 dialect . " that be what I be after . we know such a lot , an ' we know 
 nŲwt . " 

 " you do " say the father , turn to I , " you stay in one place , 
 generation after generation , and you seem to get proud , an ' look on 
 thing outside as foolishness . there be many a thing as any common man 
 know , as we have not   a glimpse of . we keep on think and feel the 
 same , year after year , till we have   only get one side ; an ' I suppose 
 they have   do it before we . " 

 " it be ' good - night an ' God bless you , ' to th ' owd place , granfeyther an ' 
 grammother , " laugh George as he run upstairs " an ' off we go on the 
 gallivant , " he shout from the landing . 

 his father shake his head , say : 

 " I can not   make out how it be , he be so different . I suppose it be be in 
 love " 

 we go into the barn to get the bicycle to cycle over to Greymede . 
 George strike a match to look for his pump , and he notice a great 
 spider scuttle off into the corner of the wall , and sit peep out at 
 he like a hoary little ghoul . 

 " how be you , old chap ? " say George , nod to he " thought he look 
 like an old grandfather of mine , " he say to I , laugh , as he pump 
 up the tyre of the old bicycle for I . 

 it be Saturday night , so the bar parlour of the Ram Inn be fairly 
 full . 

 " hello , George come co'tin ' ? " be the cry , follow by a nod and a 
 " Good evenin ' , " to I , who be a stranger in the parlour . 

 " it be raight for thaigh , " say a fat young fellow with an unwilling 
 white mustache , " tha can co'te as much as ter like ter ' ae , as well 
 as th ' lass , an ' it cost thee nŲwt " at which the room laugh , 
 take pipe from mouth to do so . George sit down , look round . 

 " ' owd on a bit , " say a black - whisker man , " tha mun ' a ' e patience 
 when to ' t co'tin ' a lass . Ow 's puttin ' th ' owd lady ter bed ' ark 
 thee can t ' ear that wor th ' bed latts go bang . Ow'll be dern in a 
 minnit now , gie ' er time ter tuck th ' owd lady up . can ' ter ' ear ' er say 
 ' er prayer . " 

 " Strike ! " cry the fat young man , explode : 

 " Fancy th ' owd lady sayin ' ' er prayer ! it ' ud be enough ter ma'e ' er 
 false tooth drop out . " 

 the room laugh . 

 they begin to tell tale about the old landlady . she have practise 
 bone - setting , in which she be very skilful . People come to she from 
 long distance that she might divine their trouble and make right their 
 limb . she would accept no fee . 

 once she have go up to Dr. Fullwood to give he a piece of her mind , 
 inasmuch as he have let a child go for three week with a break 
 collar - bone , whilst treat he for dislocation . the doctor have try 
 the high hand with she , since when , wherever he go the miner place 
 their hand on their shoulder , and groan : ' oh my collar - bone ! ' 

 here Meg come in . she give a bright , quick , bird like look at George , 
 and flush a bright red . 

 " I think you be not   cummin , " she say . 

 " Dunna thee bother ' e'd none stop away , " say the black - whisker man . 

 she bring we glass of whisky , and move about supply the man , who 
 chaff with she honestly and good - naturedly . then she go out , but we 
 remain in our corner . the man talk on the most peculiar subject : 
 there be a bitter discussion as to whether London be or be not a 
 seaport the matter be thrash out with heat ; then an embryo artist 
 set the room ablaze by declare there be only three colour , red , 
 yellow , and blue , and the rest be not colour , they be mixture : 
 this amount almost to atheism and one man ask the artist to dare to 
 declare that his brown breech be not a colour , which the artist do , 
 and almost have to fight for it ; next they come to strength , and George 
 win a bet of five shilling , by lift a piano ; then they settle down , 
 and talk sex , sotto voce , one man give startling account of 
 japanese and chinese prostitute in Liverpool . after this the talk split 
 up : a farmer begin to counsel George how to manage the farm attach to 
 the Inn , another bargain with he about horse , and argue about 
 cattle , a tailor advise he thickly to speculate , and unfold a fine 
 secret by which a man might make money , if he have the go to do it so 
 on , till eleven o'clock . then Bill come and call " time ! " and the place 
 be empty , and the room shiver as a little fresh air come in between 
 the foul tobacco smoke , and the smell of drink , and foul breath . 

 we be both affect by the whisky we have drunk . I be ashamed to find 
 that when I put out my hand to take my glass , or to strike a match , I 
 miss my mark , and fumble ; my hand seem hardly to belong to I , and 
 my foot be not much more sure . yet I be acutely conscious of every 
 change in myself and in he ; it seem as if I could make my body drunk , 
 but could never intoxicate my mind , which rouse itself and keep the 
 sharp guard . George be frankly half drunk : his eyelid slop over 
 his eye and his speech be thick ; when he put out his hand he knock 
 over his glass , and the stuff be spill all over the table ; he only 
 laugh . I , too , feel a great prompting to giggle on every occasion , and 
 I marvel at myself . 

 Meg come into the room when all the man have go . 

 " come on , my duck , " he say , wave his arm with the generous flourish 
 of a tipsy man . " come an ' sit ' ere . " 

 " shall not   you come in th ' kitchen ? " she ask , look round on the table 
 where pot and glass stand in little pool of liquor , and where spend 
 match and tobacco - ash litter the white wood . 

 " no what for ? come an ' sit ' ere ! " he be reluctant to get on his 
 foot ; I know it and laugh inwardly ; I also laugh to hear his thick 
 speech , and his word which seem to slur against his cheek . 

 she go and sit by he , have move the little table with its spilled 
 liquor . 

 " they have   be tellin ' I how to get rich , " he say , nod his head and 
 laughing , show his tooth , " An ' I be go ter show them . you see , Meg , 
 you see I be go ter show them I can be as good as they , you see . " 

 " why , " say she , indulgent , " what be you go to do ? " 

 " you wait a bit an ' see they do not   know yet what I can do they do not 
 know you do not   know none of you know . " 

 " An ' what shall you do when we be rich , George ? " 

 " do ? I shall do what I like . I can make as good a show as anybody else , 
 can not   I ? " he put his face very near to hers , and nod at she , but she 
 do not turn away . " yes I will see what it be like to have my fling . 
 we have   be too cautious , our family have an ' I have ; we be frightened of 
 ourselves , to do anything . I be go to do what I like , my duck , now I 
 do not   care I do not   care that ! " he bring his hand down heavily on 
 the table nearest he , and break a glass . Bill look in to see what be 
 happen . 

 " but you will not   do anything that be not right , George ! " 

 " no I do not   want to hurt nobody but I do not   care that ! " 

 " you be too good - hearted to do anybody any harm . " 

 " I believe I be . you know I a bit , you do , Meg you do not   think I be a 
 fool now , do you ? " 

 " I be sure I do not   who do ? " 

 " no you do not   I know you do not . Gi'e I a kiss thou'rt a little 
 beauty , thou art like a ripe plum ! I could set my tooth in thee , 
 thou'rt that nice full o ' red juice " he playfully pretend to bite 
 she . she laugh , and gently push he away . 

 " tha like I , doesna ta ? " he ask softly . 

 " what do you want to know for ? " she reply , with a tender archness . 

 " but tha do say now , tha do . " 

 " I should a ' thought you would a ' know , without tell . " 

 " Nay , but I want to hear thee . " 

 " go on , " she say , and she kiss he . 

 " but what should you do if I go to Canada and leave you ? " 

 " ah you would not   do that . " 

 " but I might and what then ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know what I should do . but you would not   do it , I know you 
 would not   you could not . " he quickly put his arm round she and kiss 
 she , move by the trembling surety of her tone : 

 " no , I wouldna I would niver leave thee tha'd be as miserable as sin , 
 shouldna ta , my duck ? " 

 " yes , " she murmur . 

 " ah , " he say , " tha'rt a warm little thing tha love I , eh ? " 

 " yes , " she murmur , and he press she to he , and kiss she , and hold 
 her close . 

 " we will be marry soon , my bird be ter glad ? in a bit tha'rt glad , 
 be not   ta ? " 

 she look up at he as if he be noble . her love for he be so 
 generous that it beautify he . 

 he have to walk his bicycle home , be unable to ride ; his shin , I 
 know , be a good deal bark by the pedal . 




  CHAPTER VII 

  the fascination of the forbidden apple 


 on the first Sunday in June , when Lettie know she would keep she 
 engagement with Leslie , and when she be have a day at home from 
 Highclose , she get ready to go down to the mill . we be in mourn for 
 an aunt , so she wear a dress of fine black voile , and a black hat with 
 long feather . then , when I look at her fair hand , and her arm 
 closely cover in the long black cuff of her sleeve , I feel keenly my 
 old brother - love shielding , indulgent . 

 it be a windy , sunny day . in shelter the heat be passionate , but in 
 the open the wind scatter its fire . every now and then a white cloud 
 broad base , blue shadowed , travel slowly along the sky - road after 
 the forerunner small in the distance , and trail over we a chill 
 shade , a gloom which we watch creep on over the water , over the wood 
 and the hill . these royal , rounded cloud have sail all day along the 
 same route , from the harbour of the South to the waste in the northern 
 sky , follow the swift wild goose . the brook hurry along singing , 
 only here and there linger to whisper to the secret bush , then 
 set off afresh with a new snatch of song . 

 the fowl peck staidly in the farmyard , with Sabbath decorum . 
 occasionally a lost , sportive wind - puff would wander across the yard and 
 ruffle they , and they resent it . the pig be asleep in the sun , 
 give faint grunt now and then from sheer luxury . I see a squirrel go 
 dart down the mossy garden wall , up into the laburnum tree , where he 
 lie flat along the bough , and listen . suddenly away he go , chuckle 
 to himself . gyp all at once set off barking , but I soothe she down ; it 
 be the unusual sight of Lettie 's dark dress that startle she , I 
 suppose . 

 we go quietly into the kitchen . Mrs. Saxton be just put a 
 chicken , wrap in a piece of flannel , on the warm hob to coax it into 
 life ; it look very feeble . George be asleep , with his head in his 
 arm on the table ; the father be asleep on the sofa , very comfortable 
 and admirable ; I hear Emily flee up stair , presumably to dress . 

 " he stay out so late up at the Ram Inn , " whisper the mother in a 
 high whisper , look at George , " and then he be up at five he do not 
 get his proper rest . " she turn to the chick , and continue in her 
 whisper " the mother leave they just before they hatch out , so we have 
 be bring they on here . this one be a bit weak I think I would hot he 
 up a bit " she laugh with a quaint little frown of deprecation . eight 
 or nine yellow , fluffy little mite be cheep and scuffle in the 
 fender . Lettie bend over they to touch they ; they be tame , and run 
 among her finger . 

 suddenly George 's mother give a loud cry , and rush to the fire . there 
 be a smell of sing down . the chicken have toddle into the fire , and 
 gasp its faint gasp among the red - hot coke . the father jump from 
 the sofa ; George sit up with wide eye ; Lettie give a little cry and a 
 shudder ; Trip rush round and begin to bark . there be a smell of 
 cook meat . 

 " there go number one ! " say the mother , with her queer little laugh . 
 it make I laugh too . 

 " what be a matter what be a matter ? " ask the father excitedly . 

 " it be a chicken be and walk into the fire I put it on the hob to 
 warm , " explain his wife . 

 " goodness I could not   think what be up ! " he say , and drop his head 
 to trace gradually the border between sleeping and wake . 

 George sit and smile at we faintly , he be too daze to speak . his 
 chest still lean against the table , and his arm be spread out 
 thereon , but he lift his face , and look at Lettie with his daze , 
 dark eye , and smile faintly at she . his hair be all ruffle , and his 
 shirt collar unbuttoned . then he get up slowly , push his chair back 
 with a loud noise , and stretch himself , press his arm upwards with 
 a long , heavy stretch . 

 " oh h h ! " he say , bend his arm and then let they drop to his 
 side . " I never think you would come to - day . " 

 " I want to come and see you I shall not   have many more chance , " say 
 Lettie , turn from he and yet look at he again . 

 " no , I suppose not , " he say , subside into quiet . then there be 
 silence for some time . the mother begin to enquire after Leslie , and 
 keep the conversation up till Emily come down , blush and smile and 
 glad . 

 " be you come out ? " say she , " there be two or three robin ' nest , 
 and a spinkie 's " 

 " I think I will leave my hat , " say Lettie , unpin it as she speak , and 
 shake her hair when she be free . Mrs. Saxton insist on she take a 
 long white silk scarf ; Emily also wrap her hair in a gauze scarf , and 
 look beautiful . 

 George come out with we , coatless , hatless , his waistcoat all 
 unbuttoned , as he be . we cross the orchard , over the old bridge , and 
 go to where the slope run down to the low pond , a bank all cover 
 with nettle , and scatter with a hazel bush or two . among the nettle 
 old pan be rusting , and old coarse pottery crop up . 

 we come upon a kettle heavily coat with lime . emily bend down and 
 look , and then we peep in . there be the robin bird with their 
 yellow beak stretch so wide apart I fear they would never close 
 they again . among the naked little mite , that beg from we so blindly 
 and confidently , be huddle three egg . 

 " they be like irish child peep out of a cottage , " say Emily , 
 with the family fondness for romantic simile . 

 we go on to where a tin lie with the lid press back , and inside it , 
 snug and neat , be another nest , with six egg , cheek to cheek . 

 " how warm they be , " say Lettie , touch they , " you can fairly feel 
 the mother 's breast . " 

 he try to put his hand into the tin , but the space be too small , and 
 they look into each other 's eye and smile . " you would think the father 's 
 breast have mark they with red , " say Emily . 

 as we go up the orchard side we see three wide display of colour 
 piece of pot arrange at the foot of three tree . 

 " look , " say Emily , " those be the child 's house . you do not   know how 
 our Mollie get all Sam 's pretty bit she be a cajole hussy ! " 

 the two look at each other again , smile . up on the pond - side , in the 
 full glitter of light , we look round where the blade of cluster 
 corn be softly heal the red bosom of the hill . the lark be 
 overhead among the sunbeam . we straggle away across the grass . the 
 field be all afroth with cowslip , a yellow , glitter , shake froth 
 on the still green of the grass . we trail our shadow across the 
 field , extinguish the sunshine on the flower as we go . the air 
 be tingle with the scent of blossom . 

 " look at the cowslip , all shake with laughter , " say Emily , and she 
 toss back her head , and her dark eye sparkle among the flow of 
 gauze . Lettie be on in front , flit darkly across the field , bend 
 over the flower , stoop to the earth like a sable Persephone come 
 into freedom . George have leave she at a little distance , hunt for 
 something in the grass . he stop , and remain stand in one place . 

 gradually , as if unconsciously , she draw near to he , and when she 
 lift her head , after stoop to pick some chimney - sweep , little 
 grass flower , she laugh with a slight surprise to see he so near . 

 " ah ! " she say . " I think I be all alone in the world such a splendid 
 world it be so nice . " 

 " like Eve in a meadow in Eden and Adam 's shadow somewhere on the 
 grass , " say I. 

 " no no Adam , " she assert , frown slightly , and laugh . 

 " who ever would want street of gold , " Emily be say to I , " when you 
 can have a field of cowslip ! look at that hedgebottom that get the 
 South sun one stream and glitter of buttercup . " 

 " those Jews always have an eye to the filthy lucre they even make Heaven 
 out of it , " laugh Lettie , and , turn to he , she say , " do not   you 
 wish we be wild hark , like wood - pigeon or lark or , look , like 
 peewit ? should not   you love fly and wheel and sparkle 
 and court in the wind ? " she lift her eyelid , and vibrate the 
 question . he flush , bend over the ground . 

 " look , " he say , " here be a larkie 's . " 

 once a horse have leave a hoofprint in the soft meadow ; now the lark have 
 round , soften the cup , and have lay there three dark - brown egg . 
 Lettie sit down and lean over the nest ; he lean above she . the wind 
 run over the flower head , peep in at the little brown bud , and 
 bound off again gladly . the big cloud send message to they down the 
 shadow , and run in raindrop to touch they . 

 " I wish , " she say , " I wish we be free like that . if we could put 
 everything safely in a little place in the earth could not   we have a 
 good time as well as the lark ? " 

 " I do not   see , " say he , " why we can not . " 

 " oh but I can not   you know we can not " and she look at he fiercely . 

 " why can not   you ? " he ask . 

 " you know we can not   you know as well as I do , " she reply , and her 
 whole soul challenge he . " we have to consider thing " she add . he 
 drop his head . he be afraid to make the struggle , to rouse himself 
 to decide the question for she . she turn away , and go kick 
 through the flower . he pick up the blossom she have leave by the 
 nest they be still warm from her hand and follow she . she walk 
 on towards the end of the field , the long strand of her white scarf 
 run before she . then she lean back to the wind , while he catch 
 she up . 

 " do not   you want your flower ? " he ask humbly . 

 " no , thank they would be dead before I get home throw they away , you look 
 absurd with a posy . " 

 he do as he be bid . they come near the hedge . a crab - apple tree 
 blossom up among the blue . 

 " you may get I a bit of that blossom , " say she , and suddenly 
 add " no , I can reach it myself , " whereupon she stretch upward and 
 pull several sprig of the pink and white , and put it in her dress . 

 " be not   it pretty ? " she say , and she begin to laugh ironically , point 
 to the flower " pretty , pink - cheeked petal , and stamen like yellow 
 hair , and bud like lip promise something nice " she stop and 
 look at he , flicker with a smile . then she point to the ovary 
 beneath the flower , and say : " result : Crab - apple ! " 

 she continue to look at he , and to smile . he say nothing . so they 
 go on to where they could climb the fence into the spinney . she 
 climb to the top rail , hold by an oak bough . then she let he lift 
 she down bodily . 

 " ah ! " she say , " you like to show I how strong you be a veritable 
 Samson ! " she mock , although she have invite he with her eye to take 
 she in his arm . 

 we be enter the spinney of black poplar . in the hedge be an elm 
 tree , with myriad of dark dot point against the bright sky , myriad 
 of cluster of flaky green fruit . 

 " look at that elm , " she say , " you would think it be in full leaf , would not 
 you ? do you know why it be so prolific ? " 

 " no , " he say , with a curious questioning drawl of the monosyllable . 

 " it be cast its bread upon the wind no , it be die , so it put out 
 all its strength and load its bough with the last fruit . it will be dead 
 next year . if you be here then , come and see . look at the ivy , the suave 
 smooth ivy , with its finger in the tree ' throat . tree know how to 
 die , you see we do not . " 

 with her whimsical mood she torment he . she be at the bottom a 
 seething confusion of emotion , and she want to make he likewise . 

 " if we be tree with ivy instead of be fine human with free 
 active life we should hug our thinning life , should not   we ? " 

 " I suppose we should . " 

 " you , for instance fancy your sacrifice yourself for the next 
 generation that remind you of Schopenhauer , do not   it ? for the next 
 generation , or love , or anything ! " 

 he do not answer she ; she be too swift for he . they pass on under 
 the poplar , which be hang string of green bead above they . there 
 be a little open space , with tuft of bluebell . Lettie stoop over a 
 wood - pigeon that lie on the ground on its breast , its wing half spread . 
 she take it up its eye be bursten and bloody ; she feel its breast , 
 ruffle the dim iris on its throat . 

 " it be be fight , " he say . 

 " what for a mate ? " she ask , look at he . 

 " I do not   know , " he answer . 

 " cold he be quite cold , under the feather ! I think a wood - pigeon must 
 enjoy be fight for and be win especially if the right one win . 
 it would be a fine pleasure to see they fight do not   you think ? " she 
 say , torture he . 

 " the claw be spread it fall dead off the perch , " he reply . 

 " ah , poor thing it be wound and sit and wait for death when the 
 other have win . do not   you think life be very cruel , George and love the 
 cruell of all ? " 

 he laugh bitterly under the pain of her soft , sad tone . 

 " let I bury he and have do with the beat lover . but we will make 
 he a pretty grave . " 

 she scoop a hole in the dark soil , and snatch a handful of 
 bluebell , throw they in on top of the dead bird . then she smooth the 
 soil over all , and press her white hand on the black loam . 

 " there , " she say , knock her hand one against the other to shake off 
 the soil , " he be do with . come on . " 

 he follow she , speechless with his emotion . 

 the spinney open out ; the fern be serenely uncoil , the bluebell 
 stand group with blue curl mingle . in the free space 
 forget - I - not flower in nebula , and dog - violet give an undertone of 
 dark purple , with primrose for planet in the night . there be a slight 
 drift of woodruff , sweet new - mow hay , scent the air under the 
 bough . on a wet bank be the design of golden saxifrage , glisten 
 unholily as if varnish by its minister , the snail . George and Lettie 
 crush the veined belle of wood - sorrel and break the silken moss . 
 what do it matter to they what they break or crush . 

 over the fence of the spinney be the hillside , scatter with old thorn 
 tree . there the little grey lichen hold up ruby ball to we unnoticed . 
 what do it matter , when all the great red apple be be shake from 
 the Tree to be leave to rot . 

 " if I be a man , " say Lettie , " I would go out west and be free . I 
 should love it . " 

 she take the scarf from her head and let it wave out on the wind ; the 
 colour be warm in her face with climbing , and her curl be free by 
 the wind , sparkling and rippling . 

 " well you be not a man , " he say , look at she , and speak with 
 timid bitterness . 

 " no , " she laugh , " if I be , I would shape thing oh , would not   I have 
 my own way ! " 

 " and do not   you now ? " 

 " oh I do not   want it particularly when I have   get it . when I have   have my 
 way , I do want somebody to take it back from I . " 

 she put her head back and look at he sideways , laugh through the 
 glitter of her hair . 

 they come to the kennel . she sit down on the edge of the great stone 
 water trough , and put her hand in the water , move they gently like 
 submerge flower through the clear pool . 

 " I love to see myself in the water , " she say , " I do not   mean on the 
 water , Narcissus but that be how I should like to be out west , to have a 
 little lake of my own , and swim with my limb quite free in the water . " 

 " do you swim well ? " he ask . 

 " fairly . " 

 " I would race you in your little lake . " 

 she laugh , take her hand out of the water , and watch the clear 
 drop trickle off . then she lift her head suddenly , at some thought or 
 other . she look across the valley , and see the red roof of the Mill . 

  " Ilion , Ilion 
  Fatalis incestusque judex 
  Et mulier peregrina vertit . 
  in pulverem " 

 " what be that ? " he say . 

 " nothing . " 

 " that be a private trough , " exclaim a thin voice , high like a peewit 's 
 cry . we start in surprise to see a tall , black - bearded man look at 
 we and away from we nervously , fidget uneasily some ten yard off . 

 " be it ? " say Lettie , look at her wet hand , which she proceed to 
 dry on a fragment of a handkerchief . 

 " you must not   meddle with it , " say the man in the same reedy , oboe 
 voice . then he turn his head away , and his pale grey eye rove the 
 countryside when he have courage , he turn his back to we , shade 
 his eye to continue his scrutiny . he walk hurriedly , a few step , 
 then crane his neck , peer into the valley , and hasten a dozen 
 yard in another direction , again stretch and peer about . then he 
 go indoor . 

 " he be pretend to look for somebody , " say Lettie , " but it be only 
 because he be afraid we shall think he come out just to look at we " and 
 they laugh . 

 suddenly a woman appear at the gate ; she have pale eye like the 
 mouse - voice man . 

 " you will get Bright 's disease sit on that there damp stone , " she say 
 to Lettie , who at once rise apologetically . 

 " I ought to know , " continue the mouse - voice woman , " my own mother die 
 of it . " 

 " indeed , " murmur Lettie , " I be sorry . " 

 " yes , " continue the woman , " it behoove you to be careful . do you come 
 from Strelley Mill Farm ? " she ask suddenly of George , survey his 
 shameful dťshabille with bitter reproof . 

 he admit the imputation . 

 " and you be go to leave , be not   you ? " 

 which also he admit . 

 " Humph ! we s'll ' appen get some neighbour . it be a dog 's life for 
 loneliness . I suppose you know the last lot that be here . " 

 another brief admission . 

 " a dirty lot a dirty beagle she must have be . you should just ha ' 
 see these grate . " 

 " yes , " say Lettie , " I have see they . " 

 " Faugh the state ! but come in come in , you will see a difference . " 

 they enter , out of curiosity . the kitchen be indeed different . it be 
 clean and sparkling , warm with bright red chintz on the sofa and on 
 every chair cushion . unfortunately the effect be spoil by green and 
 yellow antimaccassar , and by a profusion of paper and woollen flower . 
 there be three case of woollen flower , and on the wall , four fan 
 stitch over with ruffle green and yellow paper , adorn with yellow 
 paper rose , carnation , arum lily , and poppy ; there be also wall 
 pocket full of paper flower ; while the wood outside be load with 
 blossom . " yes , " say Lettie , " there be a difference . " the woman swell , 
 and look round . the black - bearded man peep from behind the Christian 
 Herald those long blare trumpet ! and shrink again . the woman dart 
 at his pipe , which he have put on a piece of newspaper on the hob , and 
 blow some imaginary ash from it . then she catch sight of 
 something perhaps some dust on the fireplace . 

 " there ! " she cry , " I know it ; I could not   leave he one second ! I 
 have not   work enough burn wood , but he must be poke poke " 

 " I only push a piece in between the bar , " complain the mouse - voice 
 from behind the paper . 

 " pushed a piece in ! " she re - echo , with awful scorn , seize the poker 
 and thrust it over his paper . " what do you call that , sit there 
 tell your story before folk " 

 they creep out and hurry away . glance round , Lettie see the woman 
 mop the doorstep after they , and she laugh . he pull his watch 
 out of his breech ' pocket ; it be half - past three . 

 " what be you look at the time for ? " she ask . 

 " Meg be come to tea , " he reply . 

 she say no more , and they walk slowly on . 

 when they come on to the shoulder of the hill , and look down on to the 
 mill , and the mill - pond , she say : 

 " I will not come down with you I will go home . " 

 " not come down to tea ! " he exclaim , full of reproach and amazement . 
 " why , what will they say ? " 

 " no , I will not   come down let I say farewell ' jamque Vale ! do you 
 remember how Eurydice sink back into Hell ? " 

 " but " he stammer , " you must come down to tea how can I tell they ? 
 why will not   you come ? " 

 she answer he in Latin , with two line from Virgil . as she watch 
 he , she pity his helplessness , and give he a last cut as she say , 
 very softly and tenderly : 

 " it would not   be fair to Meg . " 

 he stand look at she ; his face be colour only by the grey - brown 
 tan ; his eye , the dark , self - mistrustful eye of the family , be 
 dark than ever , dilate with misery of helplessness ; and she be 
 infinitely pitiful . she want to cry in her yearning . 

 " shall we go into the wood for a few minute ? " she say in a low , 
 tremulous voice , as they turn aside . 

 the wood be high and warm . along the riding the forget - I - not be 
 knee deep , stretching , glimmer into the distance like the Milky Way 
 through the night . they leave the tall , flower - tangle path to go in 
 among the bluebell , break through the close - press flower and 
 fern till they come to an oak which have fall across the hazel , where 
 they sit half screen . the hyacinth droop magnificently with an 
 overweight of purple , or they stand pale and erect , like unripe ear of 
 purple corn . heavy bee swing down in a blunder of extravagance among 
 the purple flower . they be intoxicate even with the sight of so much 
 blue . the sound of their hearty , wanton humming come clear upon the 
 solemn boom of the wind overhead . the sight of their clinging , 
 clamber riot give satisfaction to the soul . a rosy campion flower 
 catch the sun and shine out . an elm send down a shower of flesh - tint 
 sheath upon they . 

 " if there be faun and hamadryad ! " she say softly , turn to he to 
 soothe his misery . she take his cap from his head , ruffle his hair , 
 say : 

 " if you be a faun , I would put guelder rose round your hair , and make 
 you look Bacchanalian . " she leave her hand lie on his knee , and look 
 up at the sky . its blue look pale and green in comparison with the 
 purple tide ebb about the wood . the cloud rise up like tower , and 
 something have touch they into beauty , and poise they up among the 
 wind . the cloud pass on , and the pool of sky be clear . 

 " look , " she say , " how we be net down bough with knot of green 
 bud . if we be free on the wind ! but I be glad we be not . " she turn 
 suddenly to he , and with the same movement , she give he her hand , and 
 he clasp it in both his . " I be glad we be net down here ; if we be 
 free in the wind ah ! " 

 she laugh a peculiar little laugh , catch her breath . 

 " look ! " she say , " it be a palace , with the ash - trunk smooth like a 
 girl 's arm , and the elm - column , rib and bossed and fret , with the 
 great steel shaft of beech , all rise up to hold an embroider 
 care - cloth over we ; and every thread of the care - cloth vibrate with 
 music for we , and the little broidered bird sing ; and the hazel - bush 
 fle green spray round we , and the honeysuckle lean down to pour out 
 scent over we . look at the harvest of bluebell ripen for we ! listen 
 to the bee , sound among all the organ - play if he sound exultant 
 for we ! " she look at he , with tear come up into her eye , and a 
 little , winsome , wistful smile hover round her mouth . he be very 
 pale , and dare not look at she . she put her hand in his , lean softly 
 against he . he watch , as if fascinate , a young thrush with full pale 
 breast who hop near to look at they glance with quick , shin 
 eye . 

 " the cloud be go on again , " say Lettie . 

 " look at that cloud face see gaze right up into the sky . the lip 
 be open he be tell we something . now the form be slip 
 away it be go come , we must go too . " 

 " no , " he cry , " do not   go do not   go away . " 

 her tenderness make her calm . she reply in a voice perfect in 
 restrained sadness and resignation . 

 " no , my dear , no . the thread of my life be untwine ; they drift 
 about like float thread of gossamer ; and you do not   put out your 
 hand to take they and twist they up into the chord with your . now 
 another have catch they up , and the chord of my life be be twist , 
 and I can not wrench it free and untwine it again I can not . I be not 
 strong enough . besides , you have twist another thread far and tight 
 into your chord ; could you get free ? " 

 " tell I what to do yes , if you tell I . " 

 " I can not   tell you so let I go . " 

 " no , Lettie , " he plead , with terror and humility . " no , Lettie ; do not 
 go . what should I do with my life ? nobody would love you like I do and 
 what should I do with my love for you ? hate it and fear it , because 
 it be too much for I ? " 

 she turn and kiss he gratefully . he then take she in a long , 
 passionate embrace , mouth to mouth . in the end it have so weary she 
 that she could only wait in his arm till he be too tired to hold she . 
 he be tremble already . 

 " Poor Meg ! " she murmur to herself dully , her sensation have become 
 vague . 

 he wince , and the pressure of his arm slacken . she loosen his 
 hand and rise half daze from her seat by he . she leave he , while he 
 sit deject , raise no protest . 

 when I go out to look for they , when tea have already be wait on 
 the table half an hour or more , I find he lean against the gatepost 
 at the bottom of the hill . there be no blood in his face , and his tan 
 show livid ; he be haggard as if he have be ill for some week . 

 " Whatever be the matter ? " I say . " where 's Lettie ? " 

 " she be go home , " he answer , and the sound of his own voice , and the 
 meaning of his own word make he heave . 

 " why ? " I ask in alarm . 

 he look at I as if to say " what be you talk about ? I can not 
 listen ! " 

 " why ? " I insist . 

 " I do not   know , " he reply . 

 " they be wait tea for you , " I say . 

 he hear I , but take no notice . 

 " come on , " I repeat , " there be Meg and everybody wait tea for you . " 

 " I do not   want any , " he say . 

 I wait a minute or two . he be violently sick . 

  " Vae meum 
  Fervens difficile bile tumet jecur " 

 I think to myself . 

 when the sickness pass over , he stand up away from the post , trembling 
 and lugubrious . his eyelid droop heavily over his eye , and he look 
 at I , and smile a faint , sick smile . 

 " come and lie down in the loft , " I say , " and I will tell they you have   get 
 a bilious bout . " 

 he obey I , not have energy to question ; his strength have go , and 
 his splendid physique seem shrink ; he walk weakly . I look away 
 from he , for in his feebleness he be already begin to feel 
 ludicrous . 

 we get into the barn unperceive , and I watch he climb the ladder to 
 the loft . then I go indoor to tell they . 

 I tell they Lettie have promise to be at Highclose for tea , that George 
 have a bilious attack , and be moon about the barn till it be over ; 
 he have be badly sick . we eat tea without zest or enjoyment . Meg be 
 wistful and ill at ease ; the father talk to she and make much of she ; 
 the mother do not care for her much . 

 " I can not   understand it , " say the mother , " he so rarely have anything the 
 matter with he why , I have   hardly know the day ! be you sure it be 
 nothing serious , Cyril ? it seem such a thing and just when Meg 
 happen to be down just when Meg be come " 

 about half - past six I have again to go and look for he , to satisfy the 
 anxiety of his mother and his sweetheart . I go whistle to let he 
 know I be come . he lie on a pile of hay in a corner , asleep . he have 
 put his cap under his head to stop the tickling of the hay , and he lay 
 half curl up , sleep soundly . he be still very pale , and there be 
 on his face the repose and pathos that a sorrow always leave . as he 
 wear no coat I be afraid he might be chilly , so I cover he up with a 
 couple of sack , and I leave he . I would not have he disturb I 
 help the father about the cowshed , and with the pig . 

 Meg have to go at half - past seven . she be so disappointed that I say : 

 " come and have a look at he I will tell he you do . " 

 he have throw off the sack and spread out his limb . as he lie on his 
 back , fling out on the hay , he look big again , and manly . his mouth 
 have relax , and take its old , easy line . one feel for he now the 
 warmth one feel for anyone who sleep in an attitude of abandon . she 
 lean over he , and look at he with a little rapture of love and 
 tenderness ; she long to caress he . then he stretch himself , and his 
 eye open . their sudden unclosing give she a thrill . he smile 
 sleepily , and murmur , " Allo , Meg ! " then I see he awake . as he 
 remember , he turn with a great sighing yawn , hide his face again , and 
 lay still . 

 " come along , Meg , " I whisper , " he will be well asleep . " 

 " I would well cover he up , " she say , take the sack and lay it very 
 gently over his shoulder . he keep perfectly still while I draw she 
 away . 




  CHAPTER VIII 

  a POEM of FRIENDSHIP 


 the magnificent promise of spring be break before the May - blossom be 
 fully out . all through the beloved month the wind rush in upon we from 
 the north and north - east , bring the rain fierce and heavy . the 
 tender - bud tree shudder and moan ; when the wind be dry , the 
 young leaf flap limp . the grass and corn grow lush , but the light 
 of the dandelion be quite extinguish , and it seem that only a long 
 time back have we make merry before the broad glare of these flower . the 
 bluebell linger and linger ; they fringe the field for week like 
 purple fringe of mourning . the pink campion come out only to hang heavy 
 with rain ; hawthorn bud remain tight and hard as pearl , shrink 
 into the brilliant green foliage ; the forget - I - not , the poor pleiade 
 of the wood , be ragged weed . often at the end of the day the sky 
 open , and stately cloud hang over the horizon infinitely far away , 
 glowing , through the yellow distance , with an amber lustre . they never 
 come any nearer , always they remain far off , look calmly and 
 majestically over the shiver earth , then sadden , fear their 
 radiance might be dim , they draw away , and sink out of sight . 
 sometimes , towards sunset , a great shield stretch dark from the west 
 to the zenith , tangle the light along its edge . as the canopy rise 
 higher , it break , disperse , and the sky be primrose colour , high and 
 pale above the crystal moon . then the cattle crouch among the gorse , 
 distress by the cold , while the long - bill snipe flicker round high 
 overhead , round and round in great circle , seem to carry a serpent 
 from its throat , and cry a tragedy , more painful than the poignant 
 lamentation and protest of the peewit . follow these evening come 
 morning cold and grey . 

 such a morning I go up to George , on the top fallow . his father be 
 out with the milk he be alone ; as I come up the hill I could see he 
 stand in the cart , scatter manure over the bare red field ; I 
 could hear his voice call now and then to the mare , and the creak and 
 clank of the cart as it move on . starling and smart wagtail be 
 run briskly over the clod , and many little bird flash , 
 flutter , hop here and there . the lapwing wheel and cry as ever 
 between the low cloud and the earth , and some run beautifully among the 
 furrow , too graceful and glisten for the rough field . 

 I take a fork and scatter the manure along the hollow , and thus we 
 work , with a wide field between we , yet very near in the sense of 
 intimacy . I watch he through the wheel peewit , as the low cloud 
 go stealthily overhead . beneath we , the spire of the poplar in the 
 spinney be warm gold , as if the blood shine through . far gleam 
 the grey water , and below it the red roof . Nethermere be half hide 
 and far away . there be nothing in this grey , lonely world but the 
 peewit swing and cry , and George swing silently at his work . 
 the movement of active life hold all my attention , and when I look up , 
 it be to see the motion of his limb and his head , the rise and fall of 
 his rhythmic body , and the rise and fall of the slow wave peewit . 
 after a while , when the cart be empty , he take a fork and come towards 
 I , work at my task . 

 it begin to rain , so he bring a sack from the cart , and we crush 
 ourselves under the thick hedge . we sit close together and watch the 
 rain fall like a grey strip curtain before we , hide the valley ; we 
 watch it trickle in dark stream off the mare 's back , as she stand 
 dejectedly ; we listen to the swish of the drop fall all about ; we 
 feel the chill of the rain , and draw ourselves together in silence . he 
 smoke his pipe , and I light a cigarette . the rain continue ; all the 
 little pebble and the red earth glisten in the grey gloom . we sit 
 together , speak occasionally . it be at these time we form the 
 almost passionate attachment which later year slowly wear away . 

 when the rain be over , we fill our bucket with potato , and go 
 along the wet furrow , stick the spritte tuber in the cold ground . 
 be sandy , the field dry quickly . about twelve o'clock , when nearly 
 all the potato be set , he leave I , and fetch up Bob from the far 
 hedge - side , harness the mare and he to the ridger , to cover the 
 potato . the sharp light plough turn the soil in a fine furrow over 
 the potato ; host of little bird flutter , settle , bound off 
 again after the plough . he call to the horse , and they come downhill , 
 the white star on the two brown nose nod up and down , George 
 stride firm and heavy behind . they come down upon I ; at a call the 
 horse turn , shift awkwardly sideways ; he fling himself against the 
 plough , and lean well in , bring it round with a sweep : a click , and 
 they be off uphill again . there be a great rustle as the bird sweep 
 round after he and follow up the new turn furrow . untackle the 
 horse when the row be all cover , we tramp behind they down the 
 wet hillside to dinner . 

 I kick through the drench grass , crush the wither cowslip 
 under my clog , avoid the purple orchid that be stunt with harsh 
 upbringing , but magnificent in their powerful colouring , crush the 
 pallid lady smock , the wash - out wild gilliver . I become conscious of 
 something near my foot , something little and dark , move indefinitely . 
 I have find again the larkie 's nest . I perceive the yellow beak , the 
 bulging eyelid of two tiny lark , and the blue line of their wing 
 quill . the indefinite movement be the swift rise and fall of the brown 
 fledge back , over which wave long strand of fine down . the two 
 little speck of bird lie side by side , beak to beak , their tiny body 
 rise and fall in quick unison . I gently put down my finger to 
 touch they ; they be warm ; gratify to find they warm , in the midst 
 of so much cold and wet . I become curiously absorb in they , as an eddy 
 of wind stir the strand of down . when one fledgling move uneasily , 
 shift his soft ball , I be quite excited ; but he nestle down again , 
 with his head close to his brother 's . in my heart of heart , I long 
 for someone to nestle against , someone who would come between I and the 
 coldness and wetness of the surrounding . I envy the two little 
 miracle expose to any tread , yet so serene . it seem as if I be 
 always wander , look for something which they have find even before 
 the light break into their shell . I be cold ; the lilac in the Mill 
 garden look blue and perish . I run with my heavy clog and my heart 
 heavy with vague longing , down to the Mill , while the wind blanch the 
 sycamore , and push the sullen pine rudely , for the pine be 
 sulk because their million creamy sprite could not fly wet - wing . 
 the horse - chestnut bravely keep their white candle erect in the socket 
 of every bough , though no sun come to light they . drearily a cold swan 
 sweep up the water , trail its black foot , clack its great hollow 
 wing , rock the frightened water hen , and insult the staid 
 black - neck geese . what do I want that I turn thus from one thing to 
 another ? 

 at the end of June the weather become fine again . hay harvest be to 
 begin as soon as it settle . there be only two field to be mow this 
 year , to provide just enough stuff to last until the spring . as my 
 vacation have begin I decide I would help , and that we three , the 
 father , George and I , would get in the hay without hire assistance . 

 I rise the first morning very early , before the sun be well up . the 
 clear sound of challenging cock could be hear along the valley . in the 
 bottom , over the water and over the lush wet grass , the night mist 
 still stand white and substantial . as I pass along the edge of the 
 meadow the cow - parsnip be as tall as I , froth up to the top of the 
 hedge , put the faded hawthorn to a wan blush . little , early bird I 
 have not hear the lark flutter in and out of the foamy meadow - sea , 
 plunge under the surf of flower wash high in one corner , swing 
 out again , dash past the crimson sorrel cresset . under the froth of 
 flower be the purple vetch - clump , yellow milk vetche , and the 
 scatter pink of the wood - betony , and the float star of 
 marguerite . there be a weight of honeysuckle on the hedge , where pink 
 rose be wake up for their broad - spread flight through the day . 

 Morning silver the swath of the far meadow , and sweep in smooth , 
 brilliant curve round the stone of the brook ; morning run in my vein ; 
 morning chase the silver , dart fish out of the depth , and I , who see 
 they , snap my finger at they , drive they back . 

 I hear trip barking , so I run towards the pond . the punt be at the 
 island , where from behind the bush I could hear George whistle . I 
 call to he , and he come to the water 's edge half dress . 

 " fetch a towel , " he call , " and come on . " 

 I be back in a few moment , and there stand my Charon flutter in the 
 cool air . one good push send we to the islet I make haste to undress , 
 for he be ready for the water , trip dancing round , bark with 
 excitement at his new appearance . 

 " he wonder what be happen to I , " he say , laugh , push the dog 
 playfully away with his bare foot . trip bound back , and come leap 
 up , lick he with little caressing lick . he begin to play with the 
 dog , and directly they be roll on the fine turf , the laughing , 
 expostulating , naked man , and the excited dog , who thrust his great head 
 on to the man 's face , lick , and , when fling away , rush forward 
 again , snap playfully at the naked arm and breast . at last George 
 lie back , laugh and pant , hold trip by the two fore foot which 
 be plant on his breast , while the dog , also pant , reach forward 
 his head for a flicker lick at the throat press back on the grass , 
 and the mouth throw back out of reach . when the man have thus lain still 
 for a few moment , and the dog be just lay his head against his 
 master 's neck to rest too , I call , and George jump up , and plunge 
 into the pond with I , trip after we . 

 the water be icily cold , and for a moment deprive I of my sens . 
 when I begin to swim , soon the water be buoyant , and I be sensible of 
 nothing but the vigorous poetry of action . I see George swimming on his 
 back laugh at I , and in an instant I have fling myself like an 
 impulse after he . the laugh face vanish as he swing over and flee , 
 and I pursue the dark head and the ruddy neck . Trip , the wretch , come 
 paddle towards I , interrupt I ; then all bewilder with 
 excitement , he scud to the bank . I chuckle to myself as I see he 
 run along , then plunge in and go plod to George . I be gain . he 
 try to drive off the dog , and I gain rapidly . as I come up to he 
 and catch he , with my hand on his shoulder , there come a laughter from 
 the bank . it be Emily . 

 I trod the water , and throw handfuls of spray at she . she laugh and 
 blush . then Trip wad out to she and she flee swiftly from his 
 shower - bath . George be float just beside I , look up and 
 laugh . 

 we stand and look at each other as we rub ourselves dry . he be 
 well proportion , and naturally of handsome physique , heavily limbe . 
 he laugh at I , tell I I be like one of Aubrey Beardsley 's long , 
 lean ugly fellow . I refer he to many classic example of 
 slenderness , declare myself more exquisite than his grossness , which 
 amuse he . 

 but I have to give in , and bow to he , and he take on an indulgent , 
 gentle manner . I laugh and submit . for he know how I admire the 
 noble , white fruitfulness of his form . as I watch he , he stand in 
 white relief against the mass of green . he polish his arm , hold it 
 out straight and solid ; he rub his hair into curl , while I watch 
 the deep muscle of his shoulder , and the band stand out in his neck 
 as he hold it firm ; I remember the story of Annable . 

 he see I have forget to continue my rubbing , and laugh he take hold 
 of I and begin to rub I briskly , as if I be a child , or rather , a 
 woman he love and do not fear . I leave myself quite limply in his 
 hand , and , to get a well grip of I , he put his arm round I and 
 press I against he , and the sweetness of the touch of our naked 
 body one against the other be superb . it satisfy in some measure 
 the vague , indecipherable yearning of my soul ; and it be the same with 
 he . when he have rub I all warm , he let I go , and we look at each 
 other with eye of still laughter , and our love be perfect for a 
 moment , more perfect than any love I have know since , either for man or 
 woman . 

 we go together down to the field , he to mow the island of grass he 
 have leave stand the previous evening , I to sharpen the machine knife , 
 to mow out the hedge - bottom with the scythe , and to rake the swath 
 from the way of the machine when the unmown grass be reduce to a 
 triangle . the cool , moist fragrance of the morning , the intentional 
 stillness of everything , of the tall bluish tree , of the wet , frank 
 flower , of the trustful moth fold and unfold in the fall swath , 
 be a perfect medium of sympathy . the horse move with a still dignity , 
 obey his command . when they be harness , and the machine oil , 
 still he be loth to mar the perfect morning , but stand look down the 
 valley . 

 " I shall not   mow these field any more , " he say , and the fall , silver 
 swath flicker back his regret , and the faint scent of the lime be 
 wistful . so much of the field be cut , so much remain to cut ; then it 
 be end . this year the eld flower be widespread over the corner 
 bush , and the pink rose flutter high above the hedge . there be 
 the same flower in the grass as we have know many year ; we should not 
 know they any more . 

 " but merely to have mow they be worth have live for , " he say , 
 look at I . 

 we feel the warmth of the sun trickle through the morning 's mist of 
 coolness . 

 " you see that sycamore , " he say , " that bushy one beyond the big willow ? 
 I remember when father break off the lead shoot because he want a 
 fine straight stick , I can remember I feel sorry . it be run up so 
 straight , with such a fine balance of leaf you know how a young 
 strong sycamore look about nine foot high it seem a cruelty . when 
 you be go , and we be leave from here , I shall feel like that , as if 
 my lead shoot be break off . you see , the tree be spoil . yet how 
 it go on grow . I believe I shall grow fast . I can remember the 
 bright red stalk of the leaf as he break they off from the bough . " 

 he smile at I , half proud of his speech . then he swing into the seat 
 of the machine , have attend to the horse ' head . he lift the 
 knife . 

 " good - bye , " he say , smile whimsically back at I . the machine 
 start . the bed of the knife fall , and the grass shiver and drop 
 over . I watch the head of the daisy and the splendid line of the 
 cocksfool grass quiver , shake against the crimson burnet , and drop - over . 
 the machine go sing down the field , leave a track of smooth , 
 velvet green in the way of the swath - board . the flower in the wall of 
 uncut grass wait unmoved , as the day wait for we . the sun catch in 
 the uplicke scarlet sorrel flame , the butterfly wake , and I could 
 hear the fine ring of his " Whoa ! " from the far corner . then he turn , 
 and I could see only the tossing ear of the horse , and the white of 
 his shoulder as they move along the wall of high grass on the hill 
 slope . I sit down under the elm to file the section of the knife . 
 always as he ride he watch the fall swath , only occasionally 
 call the horse into line . it be his voice which ring the morning 
 awake . when we be at work we hardly notice one another . yet his 
 mother have say : 

 " George be so glad when you be in the field he do not   care how long 
 the day be . " 

 later , when the morning be hot , and the honeysuckle have cease to 
 breathe , and all the other scent be move in the air about we , when 
 all the field be down , when I have see the last trembling ecstasy of 
 the harebell , tremble to fall ; when the thick clump of purple vetch 
 have sink ; when the green swath be settle , and the silver swath 
 be glisten and glitter as the sun come along they , in the hot 
 ripe morning we work together turn the hay , tip over the 
 yesterday 's swath with our fork , and bring yesterday 's fresh , 
 hide flower into the death of sunlight . 

 it be then that we talk of the past , and speculate on the future . as 
 the day grow old and less wistful , we forget everything , and work 
 on , singing , and sometimes I would recite he verse as we go , and 
 sometimes I would tell he about book . life be full of glamour for we 
 both . 




  CHAPTER IX 

  PASTORALS and peony 


 at dinner time the father announce to we the exciting fact that Leslie 
 have ask if a few of his guest might picnic that afternoon in the 
 Strelley hayfield . the close be so beautiful , with the brook under 
 all its shelter tree , run into the pond that be set with two 
 green islet . moreover , the squire 's lady have write a book fill 
 these meadow and the mill precinct with pot - pourri romance . the 
 wedding guest at Highclose be anxious to picnic in so choice a spot . 

 the father , who delight in a gay throng , beam at we from over the 
 table . George ask who be come . 

 " oh , not many about half a dozen mostly lady down for the wedding . " 

 George at first swore warmly ; then he begin to appreciate the affair as 
 a joke . 

 Mrs. Saxton hop they would not   want she to provide they pot , for she 
 have not   two cup that match , nor have any of her spoon the least 
 pretence to silver . the child be hugely excited , and want a 
 holiday from school , which Emily at once veto firmly , thereby cause 
 family dissension . 

 as we go round the field in the afternoon turn the hay , we be 
 think apart , and do not talk . every now and then and at every 
 corner we stop to look down towards the wood , to see if they be 
 come . 

 " here they be ! " George exclaim suddenly , have spy the movement of 
 white in the dark wood . we stand still and watch . two girl , 
 heliotrope and white , a man with two girl , pale green and white , and a 
 man with a girl last . 

 " can you tell who they be ? " I ask . 

 " that be Marie Tempest , that first girl in white , and that be he and 
 Lettie at the back , I do not   know any more . " 

 he stand perfectly still until they have go out of sight behind the 
 bank down by the brook , then he stick his fork in the ground , say : 

 " you can easily finish if you like . I will go and mow out that bottom 
 corner . " 

 he glance at I to see what I be think of he . I be think that 
 he be afraid to meet she , and I be smile to myself . perhaps he feel 
 ashamed , for he go silently away to the machine , where he belt his 
 rid breech tightly round his waist , and sling the scythe strap on 
 his hip . I hear the clang slur of the scythe stone as he whet the 
 blade . then he stride off to mow the far bottom corner , where the ground 
 be marshy , and the machine might not go , to bring down the lush green 
 grass and the tall meadow sweet . 

 I go to the pond to meet the newcomer . I bow to Louie Denys , a 
 tall , graceful girl of the droop type , elaborately gown in 
 heliotrope linen ; I bow to Agnes D'Arcy , an erect , intelligent girl 
 with magnificent auburn hair she wear no hat and carry a sunshade ; I 
 bow to Hilda Seconde , a svelte , petite girl , exquisitely and 
 delicately pretty ; I bow to Maria and to Lettie , and I shake hand 
 with Leslie and with his friend , Freddy Cresswell . the latter be to be 
 good man , a broad shoulder , pale - face fellow , with beautiful soft 
 hair like red wheat , and laugh eye , and a whimsical , drawl manner 
 of speech , like a man who have suffer enough to bring he to manhood 
 and maturity , but who in spite of all remain a boy , irresponsible , 
 lovable a trifle pathetic . as the day be very hot , both man be in 
 flannel , and wear flannel collar , yet it be evident that they have 
 dress with scrupulous care . instinctively I try to pull my trouser 
 into shape within my belt , and I feel the inferiority cast upon the 
 father , big and fine as he be in his way , for his shoulder be 
 round with work , and his trouser be much distort . 

 " what can we do ? " say Marie ; " you know we do not   want to hinder , we want 
 to help you . it be so good of you to let we come . " 

 the father laugh his fine indulgence , say to they they love he 
 for the mellow , laugh modulation of his voice : 

 " come on , then I see there be a bit of turning - over to do , as Cyril 's 
 left . come and pick your fork . " 

 from among a sheaf of hayfork he choose the light for they , and they 
 begin anywhere , just tip at the swath . he show they 
 carefully Marie and the charming little Hilda just how to do it , but 
 they find the right way the hard way , so they work in their own 
 fashion , and laugh heartily with he when he make playful joke at 
 they . he be a great lover of girl , and they blossom from timidity 
 under his hearty influence . 

 " Ain ' it flippin ' ' ot ? " drawl Cresswell , who have just take his M. a. 
 degree in classic : " this bloomin ' stuff 's dry enough come an ' flop on 
 it . " 

 he gather a cushion of hay , which Louie Denys carefully appropriate , 
 arrange first her beautiful dress , that fit close to her shape , 
 without any belt or interruption , and then lay her arm , that be 
 net to the shoulder in open lace , gracefully at rest . Lettie , who be 
 also in a closefitte white dress which show her shape down to the 
 hip , sit where Leslie have prepare for she , and Miss D'Arcy reluctantly 
 accept my pile . 

 Cresswell twist his clean - cut mouth in a little smile , say : 

 " Lord , a giddy little pastoral fit for old Theocritus , be not   it , Miss 
 Denys ? " 

 " why do you talk to I about those classic people I dare not   even say 
 their name . what would he say about we ? " 

 he laugh , wink his blue eye : 

 " he would make old Daphnis there , " point to Leslie ' sing a match with 
 I , damoeta contest the merit of our various sheperdesse begin 
 Daphnis , sing up for Amaryllis , I mean Nais , damn them , they be for 
 ever get mix up with their nymph . " 

 " I say , Mr. Cresswell , your language ! consider whom you be damn , " 
 say Miss Denys , lean over and tap his head with her silk glove . 

 " you say any giddy thing in a pastoral , " he reply , take the edge of 
 her skirt , and lie back on it , look up at she as she lean over 
 he . " strike up , Daphnis , something about honey or white cheese or else 
 the early apple that will be ripe in a week 's time . " 

 " I be sure the apple you show I be ever so little and green , " 
 interrupt Miss Denys ; " they will never be ripe in a week ugh , sour ! " 

 he smile up at she in his whimsical way : 

 " hear that , Tempest ' Ugh , sour ! ' not much ! oh , love we , have not   you 
 get a start yet ? be not   there aught to sing about , you blunt - faced kid ? " 

 " I will hear you first I be no judge of honey and cheese . " 

 " An ' darn little apple take a woman to judge they ; do not   it , Miss 
 Denys ? " 

 " I do not   know , " she say , stroke his soft hair from his forehead with 
 her hand whereon ring be sparkling . 

 " ' my love be not white , my hair be not yellow , like honey dropping 
 through the sunlight my love be brown , and sweet , and ready for the 
 lip of love . ' go on , Tempest strike up , old cowherd . who be that tune 
 his pipe ? oh , that fellow sharpen his scythe ! it be enough to make 
 your backache to look at he work go an ' stop he , somebody . " 

 " yes , let we go and fetch he , " say Miss D'Arcy . " I be sure he do not 
 know what a happy pastoral state he be in let we go and fetch he . " 

 " they do not   like hinder at their work , Agnes besides , where 
 ignorance be bliss " say Lettie , afraid lest she might bring he . 
 the other hesitate , then with her eye she invite I to go with she . 

 " oh , dear , " she laugh , with a little mowe , " Freddy be such an ass , and 
 Louie Denys be like a wasp at treacle . I want to laugh , yet I feel 
 just a tiny bit cross . do not   you feel great when you go mow like 
 that ? Father Timey sort of feel ? shall we go and look ! we will say we 
 want those foxglove he will be cut down directly and those bell 
 flower . I suppose you need not   go on with your labour " 

 he do not know we be approach till I call he , then he start 
 slightly as he see the tall , proud girl . 

 " Mr. Saxton Miss D'Arcy , " I say , and he shake hand with she . 
 immediately his manner become ironic , for he have see his hand big and 
 coarse and inflame with the snaith clasp the lady 's hand . 

 " we think you look so fine , " she say to he , " and man be so 
 embarrassing when they make love to somebody else be not   they ? save we 
 those foxglove , will you they be splendid like savage soldier draw 
 up against the hedge do not   cut they down and those 
 campanulas bell - flower , ah , yes ! they be spin idyll up there . I 
 do not   care for idyll , do you ? oh , you do not   know what a classical 
 pastoral person you be but there , I do not   suppose you suffer from 
 idyllic love " she laugh , " one do not   see the silly little god 
 flutter about in our hayfield , do one ? do you find much time to 
 sport with Amaryllis in the shade ? I be sure it be a shame they banish 
 Phyllis from the field " 

 he laugh and go on with his work . she smile a little , too , think 
 she have make a great impression . she put out her hand with a dramatic 
 gesture , and look at I , when the scythe crunch through the 
 meadow - sweet . 

 " Crunch ! be not   it fine ! " she exclaim , " a kind of inevitable fate I 
 think it be fine ! " 

 we wander about pick flower and talk until teatime . a 
 manservant come with the tea - basket , and the girl spread the cloth 
 under a great willow tree . Lettie take the little silver kettle , and 
 go to fill it at the small spring which trickle into a stone trough 
 all pretty with cranesbill and stellaria hang over , while long blade 
 of grass wave in the water . George , who have finish his work , and 
 want to go home to tea , walk across to the spring where Lettie sit 
 play with the water , get little cupful to put into the kettle , 
 watch the quick skating of the water beetle , and the large faint 
 spot of their shadow dart on the silted mud at the bottom of the 
 trough . 

 she glance round on hear he come , and smile nervously : they be 
 mutually afraid of meet each other again . 

 " it be about teatime , " he say . 

 " yes it will be ready in a moment this be not to make the tea 
 with it be only to keep a little supply of hot water . " 

 " oh , " he say , " I will go on home I would rather . " 

 " no , " she reply , " you can not   because we be all have tea together : I 
 have some fruit put up , because I know you do not   trifle with tea and 
 your father 's come . " 

 " but , " he reply pettishly , " I can not   have my tea with all those 
 folk I do not   want to look at I ! " 

 he hold out his inflame , barbaric hand . 

 she wince and say : 

 " it will not   matter you will give the realistic touch . " 

 he laugh ironically . 

 " no you must come , " she insist . 

 " I will have a drink then , if you will let I , " he say , yield . 

 she get up quickly , blush , offer he the tiny , pretty cup . 

 " I be awfully sorry , " she say . 

 " never mind , " he mutter , and turn from the proffered cup he lie 
 down flat , put his mouth to the water , and drink deeply . she stand and 
 watch the motion of his drinking , and of his heavy breathing 
 afterwards . he get up , wipe his mouth , not look at she . then he 
 wash his hand in the water , and stir up the mud . he put his hand 
 to the bottom of the trough , bring out a handful of silt , with the 
 grey shrimp twist in it . he fling the mud on the floor where the 
 poor grey creature writhe . 

 " it want clean out , " he say . 

 " yes , " she reply , shudder . " you will not   be long , " she add , take 
 up the silver kettle . 

 in a few moment he get up and follow she reluctantly down . he be 
 nervous and irritable . 

 the girl be seat on tuft of hay , with the man lean in 
 attendance on they , and the manservant wait on all . George be place 
 between Lettie and Hilda . the former hand he his little egg - shell of 
 tea , which , as he be not very thirsty , he put down on the ground beside 
 he . then she pass he the bread and butter , cut for five - o'clock tea , 
 and fruit , grape and peach , and strawberry , in a beautifully 
 carve oak tray . she watch for a moment his thick , half - wash finger 
 fumble over the fruit , then she turn her head away . all the gay 
 teatime , when the talk bubble and froth over all the cup , she 
 avoid he with her eye . yet again and again , as someone say : " I be 
 sorry , Mr. Saxton will you have some cake ? " or " see , Mr. Saxton try 
 this peach , I be sure it will be mellow right to the stone , " speak 
 very naturally , but make the distinction between he and the other man 
 by their indulgence towards he , Lettie be force to glance at he as 
 he sit eat , answer in monosyllable , laugh with constraint and 
 awkwardness , and her irritation flicker between her brow . although 
 she keep up the gay frivolity of the conversation , still the discord be 
 feel by everybody , and we do not linger as we should have do over the 
 cup . " George , " they say afterwards , " be a wet blanket on the party . " 
 Lettie be intensely annoyed with he . his presence be unbearable to 
 she . she wish he a thousand mile away . he sit listen to 
 Cresswell 's whimsical affectation of vulgarity which flicker with 
 fantasy , and he laugh in a strained fashion . 

 he be the first to rise , say he must get the cow up for milk . 

 " oh , let we go let we go . may we come and see the cow milk ? " say 
 Hilda , her delicate , exquisite feature flush , for she be very shy . 

 " no , " drawled Freddy , " the stink o ' live beef be not   salubrious . you be 
 warn , and stop here . " 

 " I never could bear cow , except those lovely little highland cattle , 
 all woolly , in picture , " say Louie Denys , smile archly , with a 
 little irony . 

 " no , " laugh Agnes D'Arcy , " they they be smelly , " and she purse up 
 her mouth , and end in a little trill of deprecatory laughter , as she 
 often do . Hilda look from one to the other , blush . 

 " Come , Lettie , " say Leslie good - naturedly , " I know you have a farmyard 
 fondness come on , " and they follow George down . 

 as they pass along the pond bank a swan and her tawny , fluffy brood 
 sail with they the length of the water , " tip on their little toe , 
 the darling pitter - patter through the water , tiny little thing , " as 
 Marie say . 

 we hear George below call " Bully Bully Bully Bully ! " and then , a 
 moment or two after , in the bottom garden : " come out , you little 
 fool be you come out of it ? " in manifestly angry tone . 

 " have it run away ? " laugh Hilda , delight and we hasten out of the 
 low garden to see . 

 there in the green shade , between the tall gooseberry bush , the heavy 
 crimson peony stand gorgeously along the path . the full red globe , 
 poise and lean voluptuously , sink their crimson weight on to the 
 seeding grass of the path , bear down by secret rain , and by their own 
 splendour . the path be pour over with red rich silk of strew petal . 
 the great flower swing their crimson grandly about the walk , like 
 crowd of cardinal in pomp among the green bush . we burst into the 
 new world of delight . as Lettie stoop , take between both hand the 
 gorgeous silken fulness of one blossom that be sink to the earth . 
 George come down the path , with the brown bull - calf straddle behind 
 he , its neck stick out , suck zealously at his middle finger . 

 the unconscious attitude of the girl , all bent enrapture over the 
 peony , touch he with sudden pain . as he come up , with the calf 
 stalking grudgingly behind , he say : 

 " there be a fine show of pyeenock this year , be not   there ? " 

 " what do you call they ? " cry Hilda , turn to he her sweet , charming 
 face full of interest . 

 " pyeenock , " he reply . 

 Lettie remain crouch with a red flower between her hand , glancing 
 sideways unseen to look at the calf , which with its shiny nose uplifted 
 be mumble in its sticky gum the seductive finger . it suck eagerly , 
 but unprofitably , and it appear to cast a troubled eye inward to see 
 if it be really receive any satisfaction , doubt , but not 
 despairing . Marie , and Hilda , and Leslie laugh , while he , after 
 look at Lettie as she crouch , wistfully , as he think , over the 
 flower , lead the little brute out of the garden , and send it run into 
 the yard with a smack on the haunch . 

 then he return , rub his sticky finger dry against his breech . he 
 stand near to Lettie , and she feel rather than see the extraordinary 
 pale cleanness of the one finger among the other . she rub her finger 
 against her dress in painful sympathy . 

 " but be not   the flower lovely ! " exclaim Marie again . " I want to hug 
 they . " 

 " oh , yes ! " assent Hilda . 

 " they be like a romance D'Annunzio a romance in passionate sadness , " 
 say Lettie , in an ironical voice , speak half out of conventional 
 necessity of say something , half out of desire to shield herself , and 
 yet in a measure express herself . 

 " there be a tale about they , " I say . 

 the girl clamour for the legend . 

 " pray , do tell we , " plead Hilda , the irresistible . 

 " it be Emily tell I she say it be a legend , but I believe it be only a 
 tale . she say the peony be bring from the Hall long since by a 
 fellow of this place when it be a mill . he be brown and strong , and 
 the daughter of the Hall , who be pale and fragile and young , love he . 
 when he go up to the Hall garden to cut the yew hedge , she would 
 hover round he in her white frock , and tell he tale of old day , in 
 little snatch like a wren singing , till he think she be a fairy who 
 have bewitch he . he would stand and watch she , and one day , when she 
 come near to he tell he a tale that set the tear swim in her 
 eye , he take hold of she and kiss she and keep she . they use to 
 tryst in the poplar spinney . she would come with her arm full of 
 flower , for she always keep to her fairy part . one morning she come 
 early through the mist . he be out shooting . she want to take he 
 unaware , like a fairy . her arm be full of peony . when she be 
 move beyond the tree he shoot she , not know . she stumble on , and 
 sink down in their tryst place . he find she lie there among the red 
 pyeenock , white and fallen . he think she be just lie talk to 
 the red flower , so he stand wait . then he go up , and bent over 
 she , and find the flower full of blood . it be he set the garden here 
 with these pyeenock . " 

 the eye of the girl be round with the pity of the tale and Hilda 
 turn away to hide her tear . 

 " it be a beautiful ending , " say Lettie , in a low tone , look at the 
 floor . 

 " it be all a tale , " say Leslie , soothe the girl . 

 George wait till Lettie look at he . she lift her eye to he at 
 last . then each turn aside , tremble . 

 Marie ask for some of the peony . 

 " give I just a few and I can tell the other the story it be so 
 sad I feel so sorry for he , it be so cruel for he ! and Lettie 
 say it end beautifully ! " 

 George cut the flower with his great clasp knife , and Marie take they , 
 carefully , treat their romance with great tenderness . then all go 
 out of the garden and he turn to the cowshed . 

 " good - bye for the present , " say Lettie , afraid to stay near he . 

 " good - bye , " he laugh . 

 " thank you so much for the flower and the story it be splendid , " 
 say Marie , " but so sad ! " 

 then they go , and we do not see they again . 

 later , when all have go to bed at the mill , George and I sit together 
 on opposite side of the fire , smoking , say little . he be cast up 
 the total of discrepancy , and now and again he ejaculate one of his 
 thought . 

 " and all day , " he say , " Blench have be plough his wheat in , because 
 it be that bite off by the rabbit it be no manner of use , so he be 
 plough it in : an ' they say with idyll , eat peach in our close . " 

 then there be silence , while the clock throb heavily , and outside a 
 wild bird call , and be still ; softly the ash rustle lower in the 
 grate . 

 " she say it end well but what be the good of death what be the good 
 of that ? " he turn his face to the ash in the grate , and sit 
 brooding . 

 outside , among the tree , some wild animal set up a thin , wail cry . 

 " damn that row ! " say I , stirring , look also into the grey fire . 

 " it be some stoat or weasel , or something . it be be go on like that 
 for nearly a week . I have   shoot in the tree ever so many time . there be 
 two one 's go . " 

 continuously , through the heavy , chilling silence , come the miserable 
 cry from the darkness among the tree . 

 " you know , " he say , ' she hat I this afternoon , and I hat she " 

 it be midnight , full of sick thought . 

 " it be no good , " say I. " go to bed it will be morning in a few hour . " 




  PART III 


  CHAPTER I 

  a new start in life 


 Lettie be wed , as I have say , before Leslie lose all the wistful 
 trace of his illness . they have be go away to France five day 
 before we recover anything like the normal tone in the house . then , 
 though the routine be the same , everywhere be a sense of loss , and of 
 change . the long voyage in the quiet home be over ; we have cross the 
 bright sea of our youth , and already Lettie have land and be 
 travel to a strange destination in a foreign land . it be time for 
 we all to go , to leave the valley of Nethermere whose water and whose 
 wood be distil in the essence of our vein . we be the child 
 of the valley of Nethermere , a small nation with language and blood of 
 our own , and to cast ourselves each one into separate exile be painful 
 to we . 

 " I shall have to go now , " say George . " it be my nature to linger an 
 unconscionable time , yet I dread above all thing this slow crumble 
 away from my foundation by which I free myself at last . I must wrench 
 myself away now " 

 it be the slack time between the hay and the corn harvest , and we sit 
 together in the grey , still morning of August pull the stack . my 
 hand be sore with tug the loose wisps from the low part of the 
 stack , so I wait for the touch of rain to send we indoor . it come at 
 last , and we hurry into the barn . we climb the ladder into the loft 
 that be strew with farming implement and with carpenter ' tool . we 
 sit together on the shaving that litter the bench before the high 
 gable window , and look out over the brook and the wood and the 
 pond . the tree - top be very near to we , and we feel ourselves the 
 centre of the water and the wood that spread down the rainy valley . 

 " in a few year , " I say , " we shall be almost stranger . " 

 he look at I with fond , dark eye and smile incredulously . 

 " it be as far , " say I , " to the ' Ram ' as it be for I to 
 London far . " 

 " do not   you want I to go there ? " he ask , smile quietly . 

 " it be all as one where you go , you will travel north , and I east , and 
 Lettie south . Lettie have depart . in seven week I go . and you ? " 

 " I must be go before you , " he say decisively . 

 " do you know " and he smile timidly in confession , " I feel alarmed 
 at the idea of be leave alone on a loose end . I must not be the last 
 to leave " he add almost appealingly . 

 " and you will go to Meg ? " I ask . 

 he sit tear the silken shaving into shred , and tell I in clumsy 
 fragment all he could of his feeling : 

 " you see it be not so much what you call love . I do not   know . you see I 
 build on Lettie , " he look up at I shamefacedly , then continue 
 tear the shaving " you must find your castle on something , and I 
 found mine on Lettie . you see , I be like plenty of folk , I have 
 nothing definite to shape my life to . I put brick upon brick , as they 
 come , and if the whole topple down in the end , it do . but you see , 
 you and Lettie have make I conscious , and now I be at a dead loss . I 
 have look to marriage to set I busy on my house of life , something 
 whole and complete , of which it will supply the design . I must marry or 
 be in a lost lane . there be two people I could marry and Lettie 's 
 go . I love Meg just as well , as far as love go . I be not sure I do not 
 feel well pleased at the idea of marry she . you know I should 
 always have be second to Lettie , and the good part of love be be 
 make much of , be first and foremost in the whole world for somebody . 
 and Meg 's easy and lovely . I can have she without tremble , she be full 
 of soothe and comfort . I can stroke her hair and pet she , and she 
 look up at I , full of trust and lovingness , and there be no flaw , all 
 restfulness in one another " 

 three week later , as I lay in the August sunshine in a deck - chair on 
 the lawn , I hear the sound of wheel along the gravel path . it be 
 George call for I to accompany he to his marriage . he pull up the 
 dog - cart near the door and come up the step to I on the lawn . he be 
 dress as if for the cattle market , in jacket and breech and gaiter . 

 " well , be you ready ? " he say standing smile down on I . his eye 
 be dark with excitement , and have that vulnerable look which be so 
 peculiar to the Saxtons in their emotional moment . 

 " you be in good time , " say I , " it be but half past nine . " 

 " it would not   do to be late on a day like this , " he say gaily , ' see how 
 the sun shin . come , you do not   look as brisk as a good man should . I 
 think you would have be on tenterhook of excitement . get up , get 
 up ! look here , a bird have give I luck " he show I a white smear on 
 his shoulder . 

 I draw myself up lazily . 

 " all right , " I say , " but we must drink a whisky to establish it . " 

 he follow I out of the fragrant sunshine into the dark house . the 
 room be very still and empty , but the cool silence respond at once 
 to the gaiety of our sunwarm entrance . the sweetness of the summer 
 morning hang invisible like glad ghost of romance through the shadowy 
 room . we seem to feel the sunlight dance golden in our vein as we 
 fill again the pale liqueur . 

 " Joy to you I envy you to - day . " 

 his tooth be white , and his eye stir like dark liquor as he 
 smile . 

 " here be my wedding present ! " 

 I stand the four large water - colour along the wall before he . they 
 be drawing among the water and the field of the mill , grey rain and 
 twilight , morning with the sun pour gold into the mist , and the 
 suspense of a midsummer noon upon the pond . all the glamour of our 
 yesterday come over he like an intoxicant , and he quiver with the 
 wonderful beauty of life that be weave he into the large magic of 
 the year . he realise the splendour of the pageant of day which have 
 he in train . 

 " it be be wonderful , Cyril , all the time , " he say , with surprised joy . 

 we drive away through the freshness of the wood , and among the flowing 
 of the sunshine along the road . the cottage of Greymede fill the 
 shadow with colour of rose , and the sunlight with odour of pink and 
 the blue of corn flower and larkspur . we drive briskly up the long , 
 sleep hill , and bowl down the hollow past the farm where the hen 
 be walk with the red gold cock in the orchard , and the duck like 
 white cloudlet under the aspen tree revel on the pond . 

 " I tell she to be ready any time , " say George " but she do not   know 
 it be to - day . I do not   want the public - house full of the business . " 

 the mare walk up the sharp little rise on top of which stand the " Ram 
 Inn . " in the quiet , as the horse slow to a standstill , we hear the 
 crooning of a song in the garden . we sit still in the cart , and look 
 across the flagged yard to where the tall madonna lily rise in 
 cluster out of the alyssome . beyond the border of flower be Meg , 
 bend over the gooseberry bush . she see we and come swing down 
 the path , with a bowl of gooseberry poise on her hip . she be dress 
 in a plain , fresh holland frock , with a white apron . her black , heavy 
 hair reflect the sunlight , and her ripe face be luxuriant with 
 laughter . 

 " well , I never ! " she exclaim , try not to show that she guess his 
 errand . " fancy you here at this time o ' morning ! " 

 her eye , delightful black eye like polished jet , untroubled and frank , 
 look at we as a robin might , with bright questioning . her eye be so 
 different from the Saxton 's : darker , but never still and full , never 
 hesitate , dread a wound , never dilate with hurt or with timid 
 ecstasy . 

 " be you ready then ? " he ask , smile down on she . 

 " what ? " she ask in confusion . 

 " to come to the registrar with I I have   get the licence . " 

 " but I be just go to make the pudding , " she cry , in full 
 expostulation . 

 " let they make it themselves put your hat on . " 

 " but look at I ! I have   just be get the gooseberry . look ! " she 
 show we the berry , and the scratch on her arm and hand . 

 " what a shame ! " he say , bend down to stroke her hand and her arm . 
 she draw back smile , flush with joy . I could smell the white lily 
 where I sit . 

 " but you do not   mean it , do you ? " she say , lift to he her face that 
 be round and glossy like a blackheart cherry . for answer , he unfold 
 the marriage licence . she read it , and turn aside her face in 
 confusion , say : 

 " well , I have   get to get ready . shall you come an ' tell Gran'ma ? " 

 " be there any need ? " he answer reluctantly . 

 " yes , you come an tell ' er , " persuade Meg . 

 he get down from the trap . I prefer to stay out of door . presently 
 Meg run out with a glass of beer for I . 

 " we shall not   be many minute , " she apologise . " I have   on'y to slip another 
 frock on . " 

 I hear George go heavily up the stair and enter the room over the 
 bar - parlour , where the grandmother lie bed - ridden . 

 " what , be it thaigh , ma lad ? what be thaigh do ' ere this mornin ' ? " 
 she ask . 

 " well a'nt , how do ta feel by now ? " he say . 

 " eh , sadly , lad , sadly ! it will not be long afore they carry I downstairs 
 head first " 

 " Nay , dunna thee say so ! I be just off to Nottingham I want Meg ter 
 come . " 

 " what for ? " cry the old woman sharply . 

 " I want ' er to get marry , " he reply . 

 " what ! what does't say ? an ' what about th ' licence , an ' th ' ring , an 
 ivrything ? " 

 " I have   see to that all right , " he answer . 

 " well , tha ' rt a nice'st un , I must say ! what be want go in this 
 pig - in - a - poke fashion for ? this be a nice shabby trick to serve a body ! 
 what do ta mean by it ? " 

 " you know as I wor go ter marry ' er directly , so I can not   see as it 
 matter o ' th ' day . I non want a ' th ' pub talkin ' " 

 " Tha ' rt mighty particklar , an ' all , an ' all ! an ' why should not   the pub 
 talk ? tha ' rt non marryin ' a nigger , as ta should be so frightened I 
 niver think it on thee ! an ' what be thy ' orry , all of a sudden ? " 

 " no hurry as I know of . " 

 " no ' orry ! " reply the old lady , with wither sarcasm . " tha wor 
 niver in a ' orry a ' thy life ! she be non commin ' wi ' thee this day , 
 though . " 

 he laugh , also sarcastic . the old lady be angry . she pour on he 
 her abuse , declare she would not have Meg in the house again , nor 
 leave she a penny , if she marry he that day . 

 " Tha can please thysen , " answer George , also angry . 

 Meg come hurriedly into the room . 

 " ta'e that ' at off ta'e it off ! tha non goos wi ' ' I m this day , not if I 
 know it ! do ' e think tha ' rt a cow , or a pig , to be fetched wheniver 
 ' e think fit . ta'e that ' at off , I say ! " 

 the old woman be fierce and peremptory . 

 " but gran'ma ! " begin Meg . 

 the bed creak as the old lady try to rise . 

 " ta'e that ' at off , afore I pull it off ! " she cry . 

 " oh , be still Gran'ma you will be hurtin ' yourself , you know you 
 will " 

 " be you come Meg ? " say George suddenly . 

 " she be not ! " cry the old woman . 

 " be you come Meg ? " repeat George , in a passion . 

 Meg begin to cry . I suppose she look at he through her tear . the 
 next thing I hear be a cry from the old woman , and the sound of 
 staggering foot . 

 " would ta drag ' er from I ! if tha goos , ma wench , tha enter this 
 ' ouse no more , tha ' eer that ! tha do thysen my lady ! Dunna venture 
 anigh I after this , my gel ! " the old woman call louder and louder . 
 George appear in the doorway , hold Meg by the arm . she be cry 
 in a little distress . her hat with its large silk rose , be slant 
 over her eye . she be dress in white linen . they mount the trap . I 
 give he the rein and scramble up behind . the old woman hear we 
 through the open window , and we listen to she call as we drive 
 away : 

 " Dunna let I clap eye on thee again , tha ungrateful ' ussy , tha 
 ungrateful ' ussy ! Tha'll rue it , my wench , tha'll rue it , an ' then dunna 
 come ter I " 

 we drive out of hearing . George sit with a shut mouth , scowl . Meg 
 weep awhile to herself woefully . we be swing at a good pace under 
 the beech of the churchyard which stand above the level of the road . 
 Meg , have settle her hat , bent her head to the wind , too much 
 occupy with her attire to weep . we swing round the hollow by the bog 
 end , and rattle a short distance up the steep hill to Watnall . then the 
 mare walk slowly . Meg , at leisure to collect herself , exclaim 
 plaintively : 

 " oh , I have   only get one glove ! " 

 she look at the odd silk glove that lie in her lap , then peer about 
 among her skirt . 

 " I must ' a leave it in th ' bedroom , " she say piteously . 

 he laugh , and his anger suddenly vanish . 

 " what do it matter ? you will do without all right . " 

 at the sound of his voice , she recollect , and her tear and her 
 weeping return . 

 " Nay , " he say , " do not   fret about the old woman . she will come round 
 to - morrow an ' if she do not , it be her lookout . she be get polly to 
 attend to she . " 

 " but she will be that miserable ! " weep Meg . 

 " it be her own fault . at any rate , do not   let it make you miserable " he 
 glance to see if anyone be in sight , then he put his arm round her 
 waist and kiss she , say softly , coaxingly : " she will be all right 
 to - morrow . we will go an ' see she then , an ' she will be glad enough to have 
 we . we will give in to she then , poor old Gran'ma . she can boss you about , 
 an ' I as well , tomorrow as much as she like . she feel it hard , be 
 tie to her bed . but to - day be ours , surely be not   it ? to - day be ours , 
 an ' you be not sorry , be you ? " 

 " but I have   get no glove , an ' I be sure my hair be a sight . I never think 
 she could ' a reach up like that . " 

 George laugh , tickle . 

 " no , " he say , ' she be in a temper . but we can get you some glove 
 directly we get to Nottingham . " 

 " I have not   a farthing of money , " she say . 

 " I have   plenty ! " he laugh . " oh , an ' let us try this on . " 

 they be merry together as he try on her wedding ring , and they 
 talk softly , he gentle and coax , she rather plaintive . the mare 
 take her own way , and Meg 's hat be disarrange once more by the 
 sweeping elm - bough . the yellow corn be dip and flow in the 
 field , like a cloth of gold peg down at the corner under which the 
 wind be heave . sometimes we pass cottage where the scarlet lily 
 rise like bonfire , and the tall larkspur like bright blue leaping 
 smoke . sometimes we smell the sunshine on the brown corn , sometimes 
 the fragrance of the shadow of leaf . occasionally it be the dizzy 
 scent of new haystack . then we rock and jolt over the rough 
 cobblestone of Cinderhill , and bound forward again at the foot of the 
 enormous pit hill , smell of sulphur , inflame with slow red fire in 
 the daylight , and crust with ash . we reach the top of the rise and 
 see the city before we , heap high and dim upon the broad range of the 
 hill . I look for the square tower of my old school , and the sharp 
 proud spire of St. Andrews . over the city hang a dullness , a thin dirty 
 canopy against the blue sky . 

 we turn and swing down the slope between the last sully cornfield 
 towards Basford , where the swollen gasometer stand like toadstool . as 
 we near the mouth of the street , Meg rise excitedly , pull George 's 
 arm , cry : 

 " oh , look , the poor little thing ! " 

 on the causeway stand two small boy lift their face and weep to 
 the heedless heaven , while before they , upside down , lie a baby 
 strap to a shut - up baby - chair . the gim - crack carpet - seat thing have 
 collapse as the boy be dismount the curb - stone with it . it have 
 fall backwards , and they be unable to right it . there lie the infant 
 strapped head downwards to its silly cart , in imminent danger of 
 suffocation . Meg leap out , and drag the child from the wretched 
 chair . the two boy , drench with tear , howl on . Meg crouch on the 
 road , the baby on her knee , its tiny foot dangle against her skirt . 
 she soothe the pitiful tear - wet mite . she hug it to she , and kiss 
 it , and hug it , and rock it in an abandonment of pity . when at last 
 the childish trio be silent , the boy shake only by the last ebbing 
 sob , Meg calm also from her frenzy of pity for the little thing . she 
 murmur to it tenderly , and wipe its wet little cheek with her 
 handkerchief , soothe , kissing , fondle the bewildered mite , smooth 
 the wet strand of brown hair under the scrap of cotton bonnet , 
 twitch the inevitable baby cape into order . it be a pretty baby , 
 with wisps of brown - gold silken hair and large blue eye . 

 " be it a girl ? " I ask one of the boy " how old be she ? " 

 " I do not   know , " he answer awkwardly , " we ' ve   ' ad ' er about a three 
 week . " 

 " why , be not   she your sister ? " 

 " no my mother keep ' er , " they be very reluctant to tell we 
 anything . 

 " poor little lamb ! " cry Meg , in another access of pity , clasp the 
 baby to her bosom with one hand , hold its winsome slippere foot in 
 the other . she remain thus , sting through with acute pity , crouch , 
 fold herself over the mite . at last she raise her head , and say , in 
 a voice difficult with emotion : 

 " but you love she do not   you ? " 

 " yes she be she be all right . but we ' ave to mind ' er , " reply the boy 
 in great confusion . 

 " surely , " say Meg , " surely you do not   begrudge that . poor little 
 thing so little , she be surely you do not   grumble at mind she a 
 bit ? " 

 the boy would not answer . 

 " oh , poor little lamb , poor little lamb ! " murmur Meg over the child , 
 condemn with bitterness the boy and the whole world of man . 

 I teach one of the lad how to fold and unfold the wretched chair . Meg 
 very reluctantly seat the unfortunate baby therein , gently fasten 
 she with the strap . 

 " Wheer 's ' er dummy ? " ask one of the boy in muffle , self - conscious 
 tone . the infant begin to cry thinly . Meg crouch over it . the ' dummy ' 
 be find in the gutter and wipe on the boy 's coat , then plug into 
 the baby 's mouth . Meg release the tiny clasping hand from over her 
 finger , and mount the dog cart , say sternly to the boy : 

 " mind you look after her well , poor little baby with no mother . God 's 
 watch to see what you do to she so you be careful , mind . " 

 they stand very shamefaced . George click to the mare , and as we 
 start throw copper to the boy . while we drive away I watch the 
 little group diminish down the road . 

 " it be such a shame , " she say , and the tear be in her voice , " a 
 sweet little thing like that " 

 " ay , " say George softly , " there be all sort of thing in town . " 

 Meg pay no attention to he , but sit woman - like thinking of the forlorn 
 baby , and condemn the hard world . he , full of tenderness and 
 protectiveness towards she , have watch she with soften eye , feel 
 a little bit rebuffed that she ignore he , and sit alone in her fierce 
 womanhood . so he busy himself with the rein , and the two sit each 
 alone until Meg be rouse by the bustle of the town . the mare sidle 
 past the electric car nervously , and jump when a traction engine come 
 upon we . Meg , rather frightened , clung to George again . she be very 
 glad when we have pass the cemetery with its white population of 
 tombstone , and draw up in a quiet street . 

 but when we have dismount , and give the horse 's head to a loafer , she 
 become confused and bashful and timid to the last degree . he take she on 
 his arm ; he take the whole charge of she , and laugh , bear she away 
 towards the step of the office . she leave herself entirely in his hand ; 
 she be all confusion , so he take the charge of she . 

 when , after a short time , they come out , she begin to chatter with 
 blushful animation . he be very quiet , and seem to be take his 
 breath . 

 " be not   he a funny little man ? do I do it all proper ? I do not   know 
 what I be do . I be sure they be laugh at I do you think they 
 be ? oh , just look at my frock what a sight ! what would they 
 think ! " the baby have slightly soil the front of her dress . 

 George drive up the long hill into the town . as we come down between the 
 shop on Mansfield Road he recover his spirit . 

 " where be we go where be you take we ? " ask Meg . 

 " we may as well make a day of it while we be here , " he answer , 
 smile and flick the mare . they both feel that they be launch 
 forth on an adventure . he put up at the " Spread Eagle , " and we walk 
 towards the market - place for Meg 's glove . when he have buy she these 
 and a large lace scarf to give she a more clothed appearance , he want 
 dinner . 

 " we will go , " he say , " to an hŰtel . " 

 his eye dilate as he say it , and she shrink away with delighted fear . 
 neither of they have ever be to an hŰtel . she be really afraid . she 
 beg he to go to an eat house , to a cafť . he be obdurate . his one 
 idea be to do the thing that he be half - afraid to do . his passion and 
 it be almost intoxication be to dare to play with life . he be afraid 
 of the town . he be afraid to venture into the foreign place of life , 
 and all be foreign save the valley of Nethermere . so he cross the 
 border flauntingly , and march towards the heart of the unknown . we 
 go to the Victoria HŰtel the most impose he could think of and we 
 have luncheon accord to the menu . they be like two child , very 
 much afraid , yet delight in the adventure . he dare not , however , 
 give the order . he dare not address anybody , waiter or otherwise . I 
 do that for he , and he watch I , absorbing , learn , wonder that 
 thing be so easy and so delightful . I murmur they injunction 
 across the table and they blush and laugh with each other nervously . 
 it would be hard to say whether they enjoy that luncheon . I think Meg 
 do not even though she be with he . but of George I be doubtful . he 
 suffer exquisitely from self consciousness and nervous embarrassment , 
 but he feel also the intoxication of the adventure , he feel as a man who 
 have live in a small island when he first set foot on a vast continent . 
 this be the first step into a new life , and he muse delightedly upon 
 it over his brandy . yet he be nervous . he could not get over the 
 feeling that he be trespass . 

 " where shall we go this afternoon ? " he ask . 

 several thing be propose , but Meg plead warmly for Colwick . 

 " let us go on a steamer to Colwick Park . there will be entertainment there 
 this afternoon . it will be lovely . " 

 in a few moment we be on the top of the car swing down to the 
 Trent Bridges . it be dinner time , and crowd of people from shop and 
 warehouse be hurry in the sunshine along the pavement . sunblind 
 cast their shadow on the shop - front , and in the shade stream the 
 people dress brightly for summer . as our car stand in the great space 
 of the market place we could smell the mingled scent of fruit , orange , 
 and small apricot , and pear pile in their vividly coloured section 
 on the stall . then away we sail through the shadow of the dark 
 street , and the open pool of sunshine . the castle on its high rock 
 stand in the dazzle dry sunlight ; the fountain stand shadowy in the 
 green glimmer of the lime tree that surround the alm - house . 

 there be many people at the Trent . we stand awhile on the bridge to 
 watch the bright river swirl in a silent dance to the sea , while the 
 light pleasure - boat lie asleep along the bank . we go on board the 
 little paddle steamer and pay our ' sixpence return . " after much waiting 
 we set off , with great excitement , for our mile - long voyage . two banjo 
 be tumme somewhere below , and the passenger hum and sing to 
 their tune . a few boat dabble on the water . soon the river meadow 
 with their high thorn hedge lie green on our right , while the scarp of 
 red rock rise on our left , cover with the dark tree of summer . 

 we land at Colwick Park . it be early , and few people be there . dead 
 glass fairy - lamp be sling about the tree . the grass in place be 
 wear threadbare . we walk through the avenue and small glade of the 
 park till we come to the boundary where the race - course stretch its 
 level green , its winding white barrier run low into the distance . 
 they sit in the shade for some time while I wander about . then many 
 people begin to arrive . it become noisy , even rowdy . we listen for 
 some time to an open - air concert , give by the pierrot . it be rather 
 vulgar , and very tiresome . it take I back to Cowes , to Yarmouth . there 
 be the same foolish over - eyebrowe face , the same perpetual jingle 
 from an out - of - tune piano , the restless jigging to the song , the same 
 chorus , the same escapading . Meg be well pleased . the vulgarity 
 pass by she . she laugh , and sing the chorus half audibly , daring , 
 but not bold . she be immensely pleased . " oh , it be Ben 's turn now . I 
 like he , he be get such a wicked twinkle in his eye . look at Joey try 
 to be funny ! he can not   to save his life . do not   he look soft ! " she 
 begin to giggle in George 's shoulder . he see the funny side of thing 
 for the time and laugh with she . 

 during tea , which we take on the green verandah of the degraded hall , 
 she be constantly break forth into some chorus , and he would light 
 up as she look at he and sing with she , sotto voce . he be not 
 embarrassed at Colwick . there he have on his good careless , superior air . 
 he move about with a certain scornfulness , and order lobster for tea 
 off - handedly . this also be a new walk of life . here he be not 
 hesitate or tremulously string ; he be patronise . both Meg and he 
 thoroughly enjoy themselves . 

 when we get back into Nottingham she entreat he not to go to the 
 hotel as he have propose , and he readily yield . instead they go to 
 the Castle . we stand on the high rock in the cool of the day , and 
 watch the sun slop over the great river - flat where the menial town 
 spread out , and end , while the river and the meadow continue into 
 the distance . in the picture gallery , there be a fine collection of 
 Arthur Melville 's painting . Meg think they very ridiculous . I begin 
 to expound they , but she be manifestly bored , and he be half - hearted . 
 outside in the ground be a military band playing . Meg long to be 
 there . the townspeople be dance on the grass . she long to join 
 they , but she could not dance . so they sit awhile look on . 

 we be to go to the theatre in the evening . the Carl Rosa Company be 
 give " Carmen " at the Royal . we go into the dress circle " like giddy 
 duke , " as I say to he , so that I could see his eye dilate with 
 adventure again as he laugh . in the theatre , among the people in 
 evening dress , he become once more childish and timorous . he have always 
 the air of one who do something forbidden , and be charm , yet 
 fearful , like a trespassing child . he have begin to trespass that day 
 outside his own estate of Nethermere . 

 " Carmen " fascinate they both . the gaudy , careless southern life amaze 
 they . the bold free way in which Carmen play with life startle they 
 with hint of freedom . they star on the stage fascinate . between the 
 act they hold each other 's hand , and look full into each other 's 
 wide bright eye , and , laugh with excitement , talk about the opera . 
 the theatre surge and roar dimly like a hoarse shell . then the music 
 rise like a storm , and sweep and rattle at their foot . on the stage the 
 strange storm of life clash in music towards tragedy and futile death . 
 the two be shake with a tumult of wild feeling . when it be all over 
 they rise bewildered , stun , she with tear in her eye , he with a 
 strange wild beating of his heart . 

 they be both in a tumult of confused emotion . their ear be full of 
 the roar passion of life , and their eye be blind by a spray of 
 tear and that strange quivering laughter which burn with real pain . 
 they hurry along the pavement to the " Spread Eagle , " Meg cling to 
 he , run , clasp her lace scarf over her white frock , like a 
 scared white butterfly shake through the night . we hardly speak as the 
 horse be be harness and the lamp light . in the little smoke 
 room he drink several whisky , she sip out of his glass , stand 
 all the time ready to go . he push into his pocket great piece of 
 bread and cheese , to eat on the way home . he seem now to be think 
 with much acuteness . his few order be give sharp and terse . he hire 
 an extra light rug in which to wrap Meg , and then we be ready . 

 " who drive ? " say I. 

 he look at I and smile faintly . 

 " you , " he answer . 

 Meg , like an impatient white flame stand wait in the light of the 
 lamp . he cover she , extinguish she in the dark rug . 




  CHAPTER II 

  PUFFS of WIND in the SAIL 


 the year burst into glory to usher we forth out of the valley of 
 Nethermere . the cherry tree have be gorgeous with heavy out - reach 
 bough of red and gold . immense vegetable marrow lie prostrate in the 
 bottom garden , their great tentacle clutch the pond bank . against 
 the wall the globe crimson plum hang close together , and drop 
 occasionally with a satisfied plunge into the rhubarb leave . the crop 
 of oats be very heavy . the stalk of corn be like strong reed of 
 bamboo ; the head of grain sweep heavily over like tress weight with 
 drop of gold . 

 George spend his time between the Mill and the Ram . the grandmother have 
 receive they with much grumbling but with real gladness . Meg be 
 re - instal , and George sleep at the Ram . he be extraordinarily 
 bright , almost gay . the fact be that his new life interested and 
 please he keenly . he often talk to I about Meg , how quaint and 
 naive she be , how she amuse he and delight he . he rejoice in 
 have a place of his own , a home , and a beautiful wife who adore he . 
 then the public - house be full of strangeness and interest . no hour be 
 ever dull . if he want company he could go into the smoke - room , if he 
 want quiet he could sit with Meg , and she be such a treat , so soft 
 and warm , and so amusing . he be always laugh at her quaint crude 
 notion , and at her queer little turn of speech . she talk to he with 
 a little language , she sit on his knee and twist his mustache , find 
 small unreal fault with his feature for the delight of dwell upon 
 they . he be , he say , incredibly happy . really he could not believe it . 
 Meg be , ah ! she be a treat . then he would laugh , think how 
 indifferent he have be about take she . a little shadow might cross 
 his eye , but he would laugh again , and tell I one of his wife 's funny 
 little notion . she be quite uneducated , and such fun , he say . I 
 look at he as he sound this note . I remember his crude 
 superiority of early day , which have anger Emily so deeply . there be 
 in he something of the prig . I do not like his amused indulgence of 
 his wife . 

 at threshing day , when I work for the last time at the Mill , I notice 
 the new tendency in he . the Saxtons have always keep up a certain proud 
 reserve . in former year , the family have move into the parlour on 
 threshing day , and an extra woman have be hire to wait on the man who 
 come with the machine . this time George suggest : " let we have dinner 
 with the man in the kitchen , Cyril . they be a rum gang . it be rather 
 good sport mix with they . they have   see a bit of life , and I like to 
 hear they , they be so blunt . they be good study though . " 

 the farmer sit at the head of the table . the seven man troop in , very 
 sheepish , and take their place . they have not much to say at first . they 
 be a mixed set , some rather small , young , and furtive looking , some 
 unshapely and coarse , with unpleasant eye , the eyelid slack . there be 
 one man whom we call the Parrot , because he have a hooked nose , and put 
 forward his head as he talk . he have be a very large man , but he be 
 grey , and bend at the shoulder . his face be pale and fleshy , and 
 his eye seem dull sighted . 

 George patronise the man , and they do not object . he chaff they , 
 make a good deal of demonstration in give they more beer . he invite 
 they to pass up their plate , call the woman to bring more bread and 
 altogether play mine host of a feast of beggar . the Parrot eat very 
 slowly . 

 " Come Dad , " say George " you be not get on . not get many 
 grinder ? " 

 " what I have   get 's in th ' road . Is'll ' ae ter get em out . I can manage wi ' 
 bare gum , like a baby again . " 

 " second childhood , eh ? ah well , we must all come to it , " George laugh . 

 the old man lift his head and look at he , and say slowly : 

 " You'n get ter ower th ' first afore that . " 

 George laugh , unperturbe . evidently he be well use to the thrust 
 of the public - house . 

 " I suppose you soon get over your , " he say . 

 the old man raise himself and his eye flicker into life . he chew 
 slowly , then say : 

 " I would marry , an ' pay for it ; I would broke a constable 's jaw an ' pay for 
 it ; I would desert from the army , an ' pay for that : I would have a bullet 
 through my cheek in India atop of it all , by I be your age . " 

 " oh ! " say George , with condescend interest , " you have   see a bit of 
 life then ? " 

 they draw the old man out , and he tell they in his slow , laconic 
 fashion , a few brutal story . they laugh and chaff he . George 
 seem to have a thirst for tale of brutal experience , the raw gin of 
 life . he drink it all in with relish , enjoy the sensation . the dinner 
 be over . it be time to go out again to work . 

 " and how old be you , Dad ? " George ask . the Parrot look at he again 
 with his heavy , tired , ironic eye , and answer : 

 " if you will be any well for know sixty - four . " 

 " it be a bit rough on you , be not   it , " continue the young man , " go 
 round with the threshing machine and sleep outdoors at that time of 
 life ? I should ' a thought you would ' a want a bit o ' comfort " 

 " how do you mean , ' rough on I ' ? " the Parrot reply slowly . 

 " oh , I think you know what I mean , " answer George easily . 

 " do not   know as I do , " say the slow old Parrot . " well , you have not   make 
 exactly a good thing out of life , have you ? " 

 " what d'you mean by a good thing ? I have   have my life , an ' I be satisfied 
 wi ' it . Is'll die with a full belly . " 

 " oh , so you have save a bit ? " 

 " no , " say the old man deliberately , " I have   spend as I have   go on . an ' 
 I have   have all I wish for . but I pity the angel , when the Lord set I 
 before they like a book to read . Heaven will not   be heaven just then . " 

 " you be a philosopher in your way , " laugh George . 

 " and you , " reply the old man , " toddle about your back - yard , think 
 yourself mighty wise . but your wisdom will go with your tooth . you will 
 learn in time to say nothing . " 

 the old man go out and begin his work , carry the sack of corn from 
 the machine to the chamber . 

 " there be a lot in the old Parrot , " say George , " as he will never tell . " 

 I laugh . 

 " he make you feel , as well , as if you have a lot to discover in life , " he 
 continue , look thoughtfully over the dusty straw - stack at the 
 chuffing machine . 


 


 after the harvest be end the father begin to deplete his farm . Most 
 of the stock be transfer to the " Ram . " George be go to take over 
 his father 's milk business , and be go to farm enough of the land 
 attach to the Inn to support nine or ten cow . until the spring , 
 however , Mr. Saxton retain his own milk round , and work at improve 
 the condition of the land ready for the valuation . George , with three 
 cow , start a little milk supply in the neighbourhood of the Inn , 
 prepare his land for the summer , and help in the public - house . 

 Emily be the first to depart finally from the Mill . she go to a 
 school in Nottingham , and shortly afterwards Mollie , her young sister , 
 go to she . in October I move to London . Lettie and Leslie be 
 settle in their home in Brentwood , Yorkshire . we all feel very keenly 
 our exile from Nethermere . but as yet the bond be not break ; only 
 use could sever they . Christmas bring we all home again , hasten to 
 greet each other . there be a slight change in everybody . Lettie be 
 bright , more imperious , and very gay ; Emily be quiet , 
 self - restrain , and look happy ; Leslie be jolly and at the same 
 time more subdued and earnest ; George look very healthy and happy , and 
 sound well pleased with himself ; my mother with her gaiety at our 
 return bring tear to our eye . 

 we din one evening at Highclose with the Tempests . it be dull as 
 usual , and we leave before ten o'clock . Lettie have change her shoe and 
 put on a fine cloak of greenish blue . we walk over the frost - bind 
 road . the ice on Nethermere gleam mysteriously in the moonlight , and 
 utter strange half - audible whoop and yelp . the moon be very high in 
 the sky , small and brilliant like a vial full of the pure white liquid 
 of light . there be no sound in the night save the haunt movement of 
 the ice , and the clear tinkle of Lettie 's laughter . 

 on the drive lead to the wood we see someone approach . the wild 
 grass be grey on either side , the thorn tree stand with shaggy black 
 beard sweep down , the pine tree be erect like dark soldier . the 
 black shape of the man draw near , with a shadow run at its foot . I 
 recognise George , obscure as he be in his cap and his upturned 
 collar . Lettie be in front with her husband . as George be pass , she 
 say , in bright clear tone : 

 " a Happy New Year to you . " 

 he stop , swing round , and laugh . 

 " I think you would not   have know I , " he say . 

 " what , be it you George ? " cry Lettie in great surprise " now , what a 
 joke ! how be you ? " she put out her white hand from her drapery . he 
 take it , and answer , " I be very well and you ? " however meaningless 
 the word be , the tone be curiously friendly , intimate , informal . 

 " as you see , " she reply laugh , interested in his attitude " but 
 where be you go ? " 

 " I be go home , " he answer , in a voice that mean " have you 
 forget that I too be marry ? " 

 " oh , of course ! " cry Lettie . " you be now mine host of the Ram . you 
 must tell I about it . may I ask he to come home with we for an hour , 
 mother ? it be New Year 's Eve , you know . " 

 " you have ask he already , " laugh mother . 

 " will Mrs. Saxton spare you for so long ? " ask Lettie of George . 

 " Meg ? oh , she do not order my coming and going . " 

 " do she not ? " laugh Lettie . " she be very unwise . train up a husband 
 in the way he should go , and in after life . I never could quote a 
 text from end to end . I be full of beginning , but as for a finish ! 
 Leslie , my shoe - lace be untied shall I wait till I can put my foot on 
 the fence ? " 

 Leslie kneel down at her foot . she shake the hood back from her head , 
 and her ornament sparkle in the moonlight . her face with its whiteness 
 and its shadow be full of fascination , and in their dark recess her 
 eye thrill George with hidden magic . she smile at he along her 
 cheek while her husband crouch before she . then , as the three walk 
 along towards the wood she fling her drapery into loose eloquence and 
 there be a glimpse of her bosom white with the moon . she laugh and 
 chatter , and shake her silken stuff , send out a perfume exquisite 
 on the frosted air . when we reach the house Lettie drop she 
 drapery and rustle into the drawing - room . there the lamp be low - lit , 
 shed a yellow twilight from the window space . Lettie stand between 
 the firelight and the dusky lamp glow , tall and warm between the light . 
 as she turn laugh to the two man , she let she cloak slide over her 
 white shoulder and fall with silk splendour of a peacock 's gorgeous blue 
 over the arm of the large settee . there she stand , with her white hand 
 upon the peacock of her cloak , where it tumble against her dull orange 
 dress . she know her own splendour , and she draw up her throat laugh 
 and brilliant with triumph . then she raise both her arm to her head 
 and remain for a moment delicately touch her hair into order , still 
 front the two man . then with a final little laugh she move slowly 
 and turn up the lamp , dispel some of the witchcraft from the room . 
 she have develop strangely in six month . she seem to have discover 
 the wonderful charm of her womanhood . as she lean forward with her arm 
 outstretche to the lamp , as she delicately adjust the wick with 
 mysterious finger , she seem to be move in some alluring figure of a 
 dance , her hair like a nimbus cloud the light , her bosom light with 
 wonder . the soft outstretching of her hand be like the whispering of 
 strange word into the blood , and as she finger a book the heart 
 watch silently for the meaning . 

 " will not   you take off my shoe , darling ? " she say , sink among the 
 cushion of the settee . Leslie kneel again before she , and she bend 
 her head and watch he . 

 " my foot be a tiny bit cold , " she say plaintively , give he her 
 foot , that seem like gold in the yellow silk stocking . he take it 
 between his hand , stroke it : 

 " it be quite cold , " he say , and he hold both her foot in his hand . 

 " ah , you dear boy ! " she cry with sudden gentleness , bend forward 
 and touch his cheek . 

 " be it great fun be mine host of ' Ye Ramme Inne ? ' " she say playfully 
 to George . there seem a long distance between they now as she sit , 
 with the man in evening dress crouch before her put golden shoe 
 on her foot . 

 " it be rather , " he reply , " the man in the smoke room say such rum 
 thing . my word , you hear some tale there . " 

 " tell we , do ! " she plead . 

 " oh ! I could not . I never could tell a tale , and even if I 
 could well " 

 " but I do long to hear , " she say , " what the man say in the smoke room 
 of ' Ye Ramme Inne . ' be it quite untellable ? " 

 " quite ! " he laugh . 

 " what a pity ! see what a cruel thing it be to be a woman , Leslie : we 
 never know what man say in smoke room , while you read in your novel 
 everything a woman ever utter . it be a shame ! George , you be a 
 wretch , you should tell I . I do envy you . " 

 " what do you envy I , exactly ? " he ask laugh always at her 
 whimsical way . 

 " your smoke room . the way you see life or the way you hear it , rather . " 

 " but I should have think you see life ten time more than I , " he 
 reply . 

 " I ! I only see manner good manner and bad manner . you know ' manner 
 maketh a man . ' that be when a woman 's there . but you wait awhile , you will 
 see . " 

 " when shall I see ? " ask George , flattered and interested . 

 " when you have make the fortune you talk about , " she reply . 

 he be uplifted by she remember the thing he have say . 

 " but when I have make it when ! " he say sceptically , " even 
 then well , I shall only be , or have be , landlord of ' Ye Ramme Inne . ' " 
 he look at she , wait for she to lift up his hope with her gay 
 balloon . 

 " oh , that do not   matter ! Leslie might be landlord of some Ram Inn when 
 he be at home , for all anybody would know might not   you , hubby , dear ? " 

 " thank ! " reply Leslie , with good humour sarcasm . 

 " you can not   tell a publican from a peer , if he be a rich publican , " she 
 continue . " money maketh the man , you know . " 

 " plus manner , " add George , laugh . 

 " oh they be always there where I be . I give you ten year . at the end 
 of that time you must invite we to your swell place say the Hall at 
 Eberwich and we will come ' with all our numerous array . ' " 

 she sit among her cushion smile upon he . she be half ironical , half 
 sincere . he smile back at she , his dark eye full of trembling hope , 
 and pleasure , and pride . 

 " how be Meg ? " she ask . " be she as charming as ever or have you 
 spoil she ? " 

 " oh , she be as charming as ever , " he reply . " and we be tremendously 
 fond of one another . " 

 " that be right ! I do think man be delightful , " she add , smile . 

 " I be glad you think so , " he laugh . 

 they talk on brightly about a thousand thing . she touch on Paris , 
 and picture , and new music , with her quick chatter , sound to George 
 wonderful in her culture and facility . and at last he say he must go . 

 " not until you have eat a biscuit and drunk good luck with I , " she 
 cry , catch her dress about she like a dim flame and run out of 
 the room . we all drink to the New Year in the cold champagne . 

 " to the Vita Nuova ! " say Lettie , and we drink smile : 

 " Hark ! " say George , " the hooter . " 

 we stand still and listen . there be a faint booing noise far away 
 outside . it be midnight . Lettie catch up a wrap and we go to the 
 door . the wood , the ice , the grey dim hill lie frozen in the light of 
 the moon . but outside the valley , far away in Derbyshire , away towards 
 Nottingham , on every hand the distant hooter and buzzer of mine and 
 ironwork crow small on the border of the night , like so many 
 strange , low voice of cockerel burst forth at different pitch , with 
 different tone , warn we of the dawn of the New Year . 




  CHAPTER III 

  the first page of several ROMANCES 


 I find a good deal of difference in Leslie since his marriage . he have 
 lose his assertive self - confidence . he no long pronounce emphatically 
 and ultimately on every subject , nor do he seek to dominate , as he have 
 always do , the company in which he find himself . I be surprised to 
 see he so courteous and attentive to George . he move unobtrusively 
 about the room while Lettie be chatter , and in his demeanour there 
 be a new reserve , a gentleness and grace . it be charming to see he 
 offer the cigarette to George , or , with beautiful tact , ask with 
 his eye only whether he should refill the glass of his guest , and 
 afterward replace it softly close to the other 's hand . 

 to Lettie he be unfailingly attentive , courteous , and undemonstrative . 

 towards the end of my holiday he have to go to London on business , and we 
 agree to take the journey together . we must leave Woodside soon after 
 eight o'clock in the morning . Lettie and he have separate room . I 
 think she would not have rise to take breakfast with we , but at a 
 quarter - past seven , just as Rebecca be bring in the coffee , she come 
 downstairs . she wear a blue morning gown , and her hair be as 
 beautifully dress as usual . 

 " why , my darling , you should not   have trouble to come down so early , " 
 say Leslie , as he kiss she . 

 " of course , I should come down , " she reply , lift back the heavy 
 curtain and look out on the snow where the darkness be wilt into 
 daylight . " I should not let you go away into the cold without have 
 see you take a good breakfast . I think it be thaw . the snow on the 
 rhododendron look sodden and droop . ah , well , we can keep out the 
 dismal of the morning for another hour . " she glance at the clock " just 
 an hour ! " she add . he turn to she with a swift tenderness . she 
 smile to he , and sit down at the coffee - maker . we take our place at 
 table . 

 " I think I shall come back to - night , " he say quietly , almost 
 appealingly . 

 she watch the flow of the coffee before she answer . then the brass 
 urn swing back , and she lift her face to hand he the cup . 

 " you will not do anything so foolish , Leslie , " she say calmly . 

 he take his cup , thank she , and bent his face over the fragrant 
 steam . 

 " I can easily catch the 7:15 from St. Pancras , " he reply , without 
 look up . 

 " have I sweeten to your like Cyril ? " she ask , and then , as she 
 stir her coffee she add , " it be ridiculous Leslie ! you catch the 
 7.15 and very probably miss the connection at Nottingham . you can not   have 
 the motor - car there , because of the road . besides , it be absurd to come 
 toil home in the cold slushy night when you may just as well stay in 
 London and be comfortable . " 

 " at any rate I should get the 10.30 down to Lawton Hill , " he urge . 

 " but there be no need , " she reply , " there be not the faint need for 
 you to come home to - night . it be really absurd of you . think of all the 
 discomfort ! indeed I should not want to come trail dismally home at 
 midnight , I should not indeed . you would be simply wretched . stay and 
 have a jolly evening with Cyril . " 

 he keep his head bent over his plate and do not reply . his persistence 
 irritate she slightly . 

 " that be what you can do ! " she say . " go to the pantomime . or wait go 
 to Maeterlinck 's ' Blue Bird . ' I be sure that be on somewhere . I wonder 
 if Rebecca have destroy yesterday 's paper . do you mind touch the 
 bell , Cyril ? " rebecca come , and the paper be discover . Lettie 
 carefully read the notice , and plan for we with z a delightful 
 programme for the evening . Leslie listen to it all in silence . 

 when the time have come for our departure Lettie come with we into the 
 hall to see that we be well wrap up . Leslie have speak very few 
 word . she be conscious that he be deeply offend , but her manner be 
 quite calm , and she pet we both brightly . 

 " good - bye dear ! " she say to he , when he come mutely to kiss she . " you 
 know it would have be miserable for you to sit all those hour in the 
 train at night . you will have ever such a jolly time . I know you will . I 
 shall look for you to - morrow . good - bye , then , Good - bye ! " 

 he go down the step and into the car without look at she . she 
 wait in the doorway as we move round . in the black - grey morning she 
 seem to harbour the glitter blue sky and the sunshine of March in 
 her dress and her luxuriant hair . he do not look at she till we be 
 curve to the great , snow - cumber rhododendron , when , at the last 
 moment he stand up in a sudden panic to wave to she . almost as he see 
 she the bush come between they and he drop dejectedly into his 
 seat . 

 " good - bye ! " we hear her call cheerfully and tenderly like a blackbird . 

 " good - bye ! " I answer , and : " good - bye Darling , Good - bye ! " he cry , 
 suddenly start up in a passion of forgiveness and tenderness . 

 the car go cautiously down the soddene white path , under the tree . 

 I suffer acutely the sickness of exile in Norwood . for week I 
 wander the street of the suburb , haunt by the spirit of some part 
 of Nethermere . as I go along the quiet road where the lamp in yellow 
 loneliness stand among the leafless tree of the night I would feel the 
 feeling of the dark , wet bit of path between the wood meadow and the 
 brook . the spirit of that wild little slope to the Mill would come upon 
 I , and there in the suburb of London I would walk wrapt in the sense of 
 a small wet place in the valley of Nethermere . a strange voice within I 
 rise and call for the hill path ; again I could feel the wood wait 
 for I , call and call , and I cry for the wood , yet the space of 
 many mile be between we . since I leave the valley of home I have not 
 much fear any other loss . the hill of Nethermere have be my wall , 
 and the sky of Nethermere my roof overhead . it seem almost as if , at 
 home , I might lift my hand to the ceiling of the valley , and touch my 
 own beloved sky , whose familiar cloud come again and again to visit I , 
 whose star be constant to I , bear when I be bear , whose sun have 
 be all my father to I . but now the sky be strange over my head , 
 and Orion walk past I unnoticing , he who night after night have stand 
 over the wood to spend with I a wonderful hour . when do day now lift 
 up the confine of my dwelling place , when do the night throw open her 
 vastness for I , and send I the star for company ? there be no night in 
 a city . how can I lose myself in the magnificent forest of darkness when 
 night be only a thin scattering of the tree of shadow with barrenness 
 of light between ! 

 I could never lift my eye save to the Crystal Palace , crouch , 
 cower wretchedly among the yellow - grey cloud , prick up its two 
 round tower like pillar of anxious misery . no landmark could have be 
 more foreign to I , more depressing , than the great dilapidated palace 
 which lie forever prostrate above we , fret because of its own 
 degradation and ruin . 

 I watch the bud come on the brown almond tree ; I hear the 
 blackbird , and I see the restless starling ; in the street be many 
 heap of violet , and man hold forward to I snowdrop whose white mute 
 lip be push upwards in a bunch : but these thing have no meaning for 
 I , and little interest . 

 most eagerly I wait for my letter . Emily write to I very constantly : 

 " do not   you find it quite exhilarate , almost intoxicating , to be so 
 free ? I think it be quite wonderful . at home you can not live your own 
 life . you have to struggle to keep even a little apart for yourself . it 
 be so hard to stand aloof from our mother , and yet they be only hurt 
 and insult if you tell they what be in your heart . it be such a relief 
 not to have to be anything to anybody , but just to please yourself . I be 
 sure mother and I have suffer a great deal from try to keep up our 
 old relation . yet she would not let I go . when I come home in the 
 evening and think that I need not   say anything to anybody , nor do 
 anything for anybody , but just have the evening for myself , I be 
 overjoyed . 

 " I have begin to write a story " 

 again , a little later , she write : 

 " as I go to school by Old Brayford village in the morning the bird be 
 thrill wonderfully and everything seem stir . very likely there 
 will be a set - back , and after that spring will come in truth . 

 " when shall you come and see I ? I can not think of a spring without you . 
 the railway be the only fine exciting thing here one be only a few 
 yard away from school . all day long I be watch the great Midland 
 train go south . they be very lucky to be able to rush southward 
 through the sunshine . 

 " the crow be very interesting . they flap past all the time we be out 
 in the yard . the railway and the crow make the charm of my life in 
 Brayford . the other day I see no end of pair of crow . do you remember 
 what they say at home ? ' one for sorrow . ' very often one solitary 
 creature sit on the telegraph wire . I almost hate he when I look at 
 he . I think my badge for life ought to be one crow . " 

 again , a little later : 

 " I have be home for the week - end . be not   it nice to be make much of , to 
 be an important cherish person for a little time ? it be quite a new 
 experience for I . 

 " the snowdrop be full out among the grass in the front garden and 
 such a lot . I imagine you must come in the sunshine of the Sunday 
 afternoon to see they . it do not seem possible you should not . the 
 winter aconite be out along the hedge . I kneel and kiss they . I have 
 be so glad to go away , to breathe the free air of life , but I feel as 
 if I could not come away from the aconite . I have send you some be 
 they much wither ? 

 " now I be in my lodging , I have the quite unusual feeling of be 
 content to stay here a little while not long not above a year , I be 
 sure . but even to be content for a little while be enough for I . " 

 in the beginning of March I have a letter from the father : 

 " you will not see we again in the old place . we shall be go in a 
 fortnight . the thing be most of they go already . George have get Bob 
 and Flower . I have sell three of the cow , Stafford , and Julia and 
 Hannah . the place look very empty . I do not   like go past the 
 cowshed , and we miss hear the horse stamp at night . but I shall not 
 be sorry when we have really go . I begin to feel as if we have stagnate 
 here . I begin to feel as if I be settle and get narrow and dull . 
 it will be a new lease of life to get away . 

 " but I be wonder how we shall be over there . Mrs. Saxton feel very 
 nervous about go . but at the bad we can but come back . I feel as if 
 I must go somewhere , it be stagnation and starvation for we here . I wish 
 George would come with I . I never think he would have take to 
 public - house keeping , but he seem to like it all right . he be down 
 with Meg on Sunday . Mrs. Saxton say he be get a public - house tone . 
 he be certainly much lively , more full of talk than he be . Meg and he 
 seem very comfortable , I be glad to say . he be get a good milk - round , and 
 I have   no doubt but what he will do well . he be very cautious at the bottom ; 
 he will never lose much if he never make much . 

 " Sam and David be very great friend . I be glad I have   get the boy . we 
 often talk of you . it would be very lonely if it be not   for the 
 excitement of sell thing and so on . Mrs. Saxton hop you will stick 
 by George . she worry a bit about he , think he may go wrong . I 
 do not   think he will ever go far . but I should be glad to know you be 
 keep friend . Mrs. Saxton say she will write to you about it . " 

 George be a very poor correspondent . I soon cease to expect a letter 
 from he . I receive one directly after the father 's . 

 " my Dear Cyril , 

 " forgive I for not have write you before , but you see , I can not sit 
 down and write to you any time . if I can not do it just when I be in the 
 mood , I can not do it at all . and it so often happen that the mood come 
 upon I when I be in the field at work , when it be impossible to write . 
 last night I sit by myself in the kitchen on purpose to write to you , 
 and then I could not . all day , at Greymede , when I be drill in the 
 fallow at the back of the church , I have be think of you , and I 
 could have write there if I have have material , but I have not , and at 
 night I could not . 

 " I be sorry to say that in my last letter I do not thank you for the 
 book . I have not read they both , but I have nearly finish Evelyn 
 inne . I get a bit tired of it towards the end . I do not do much reading 
 now . there seem to be hardly any chance for I , either somebody be 
 cry for I in the smoke room , or there be some business , or else Meg 
 will not   let I . she do not   like I to read at night , she say I ought to 
 talk to she , so I have to . 

 " it be half - past seven , and I be sit ready dress to go and talk to 
 Harry Jackson about a young horse he want to sell to I . he be in 
 pretty low water , and it will make a pretty good horse . but I do not   care 
 much whether I have it or not . the mood seize I to write to you . 
 somehow at the bottom I feel miserable and heavy , yet there be no need . 
 I be make pretty good money , and I have   get all I want . but when I have 
 be plough and get the oats in those field on the hillside at 
 the back of Greymede church , I have   feel as if I do not   care whether I get 
 on or not . it be very funny . last week I make over five pound clear , one 
 way and another , and yet now I be as restless , and discontent as I can 
 be , and I seem eager for something , but I do not   know what it be . 
 sometimes I wonder where I be go . yesterday I watch break white 
 mass of cloud sail across the sky in a fresh strong wind . they all 
 seem to be go somewhere . I wonder where the wind be blow 
 they . I do not   seem to have hold on anything , do I ? can you tell I what 
 I want at the bottom of my heart ? I wish you be here , then I think I 
 should not feel like this . but generally I do not , generally I be quite 
 jolly , and busy . 

 " by jove , here be Harry Jackson come for I . I will finish this letter 
 when I get back . 

 " I have get back , we have turn out , but I can not finish . I can not 
 tell you all about it . I have   have a little row with Meg . oh , I have   have a 
 rotten time . but I can not tell you about it to - night , it be late , and I 
 be tired , and have a headache . some other time perhaps 

  GEORGE SAXTON . " 

 the spring come bravely , even in south London , and the town be fill 
 with magic . I never know the sumptuous purple of evening till I see the 
 round arc - lamp fill with light , and roll like golden bubble along the 
 purple dusk of the high road . everywhere at night the city be fill 
 with the magic of lamp : over the river they pour in golden patch 
 their float luminous oil on the restless darkness ; the bright lamp 
 float in and out of the cavern of London Bridge Station like round 
 shin bee in and out of a black hive ; in the suburb the street lamp 
 glimmer with the brightness of lemon among the tree . I begin to love 
 the town . 

 in the morning I love to move in the aimless street 's procession , 
 watch the face come near to I , with the sudden glance of dark eye , 
 watch the mouth of the woman blossom with talk as they pass , 
 watch the subtle movement of the shoulder of man beneath their 
 coat , and the naked warmth of their neck that go glow along the 
 street . I love the city intensely for its movement of man and woman , 
 the soft , fascinating flow of the limb of man and woman , and the sudden 
 flash of eye and lip as they pass . among all the face of the street 
 my attention rove like a bee which clamber drunkenly among blue 
 flower . I become intoxicate with the strange nectar which I sip out 
 of the eye of the passer - by . 

 I do not know how time be hasten by on still bright wing , till I 
 see the scarlet hawthorn flaunt over the road , and the lime - bud light 
 up like wine drop in the sun , and the pink scarf of the lime - bud 
 pretty as louse - wort a - blossom in the gutter , and a silver - pink tangle 
 of almond bough against the blue sky . the lilac come out , and in the 
 pensive stillness of the suburb , at night , come the delicious tarry 
 scent of lilac flower , waken a silent laughter of romance . 

 across all this , strangely , come the bleak sound of home . Alice write 
 to I at the end of May : 

 " cyril dear , prepare yourself . Meg have get twin yesterday . I go up 
 to see how she be this afternoon , not know anything , and there I 
 find a pair of bub in the nest , and old ma Stainwright boss the 
 show . I nearly faint . Sybil dear , I hardly know whether to laugh or to 
 cry when I see those two rummy little round head , like two larch cone 
 cheek by cheek on a twig . one be a darkie , with lot of black hair , and 
 the other be red , would you believe it , just light up with thin red hair 
 like a flicker of firelight . I gasp . I believe I do shed a few tear , 
 though what for , I do not   know . 

 " the old grandma be a perfect old wretch over it . she lie chuckle and 
 pass audible remark in the next room , as pleased as punch really , 
 but so mad because ma Stainwright would not   have they take in to she . 
 you should have hear she when we take they in at last . they be both 
 boy . she do make a fuss , poor old woman . I think she be go a bit 
 funny in the head . she seem sometimes to think they be her , and you 
 should have hear she , the way she talk to they , it make I feel quite 
 funny . she want they lie against she on the pillow , so that she 
 could feel they with her face . I shed a few more tear , Sybil . I think I 
 must be go dotty also . but she come round when we take they away , and 
 begin to chuckle to herself , and talk about the thing she would say to 
 George when he come awful shocking thing , Sybil , make I blush 
 dreadfully . 

 " Georgie do not   know about it then . he be down at Bingham , buy some 
 horse , I believe . he seem to have get a craze for buy horse . he 
 get in with Harry Jackson and Mayhew 's son you know , they be horse 
 dealer at least their father be . you remember he die bankrupt about 
 three year ago . there be Fred and Duncan leave , and they pretend to 
 keep on the old business . they be always up at the ram , and Georgie be 
 always drive about with they . I do not   like it they be a loose lot , 
 rather common , and poor enough now . 

 " well , I think I would wait and see Georgie . he come about half - past five . 
 Meg have be fidget about he , wonder where he be , and how he 
 be , and so on . bless I if I would worry and whittle about a man . the old 
 grandma hear the cart , and before he could get down she shout you 
 know her room be in the front ' hi , George , ma lad , sharpen thy shin 
 an ' com ' an ' a'e a look at them thee'r 's two on them , two on them ! ' and 
 she laugh something awful . 

 " " Ello Granma , what art ter shoutin ' about ? ' he say , and at the sound 
 of his voice Meg turn to I so pitiful , and say : 

 " ' he be be wi ' them Mayhews . " 

 " ' Tha 's get twin , a couple at a go ma lad ! ' shout the old woman , 
 and you know how she give squeal before she laugh ! she make the horse 
 shy , and he swear at it something awful . then Bill take it , and Georgie 
 come upstairs . I see Meg seem to shrink when she hear he kick at the 
 stair as he come up , and she go white . when he get to the top he come 
 in . he fairly reek of whisky and horse . Bah , a man be hateful when he 
 reek of drink ! he stand by the side of the bed grin like a fool , 
 and say , quite thick : 

 " ' you have   bin in a bit of a ' urry , ' aven't   you Meg . an ' how be ter 
 feelin ' then ? ' 

 " ' oh , I be a ' right , ' say Meg . 

 " ' be it twin , straight ? ' he say , ' wheer be them ? ' 

 " Meg look over at the cradle , and he go round the bed to it , hold 
 to the bed - rail . he have never kiss she , nor anything . when he see the 
 twin , asleep with their fist shut tight as wax , he give a laugh as if 
 he be amuse , and say : 

 " ' two right enough an ' one on them red ! which be the girl , Meg , the 
 black un ? ' 

 " ' they be both boy , ' say Meg , quite timidly . 

 " he turn round , and his eye go little . 

 " ' blast them then ! ' he say . he stand there look like a devil . sybil 
 dear , I do not know our George could look like that . I think he could 
 only look like a faithful dog or a wound stag . but he look fiendish . 
 he stand watch the poor little twin , scowl at they , till at last 
 the little red one begin to whine a bit . Ma Stainwright come push she 
 fat carcass in front of he and bend over the baby , say : 

 " ' why , my pretty , what be they do to thee , what be they ? what be 
 they do to thee ? ' 

 " Georgie scowl blacker than ever , and go out , lurch against the 
 wash - stand and make the pot rattle till my heart jump in my throat . 

 " ' well , if you do not   call that scandylo ! ' say old Ma Stainwright , 
 and Meg begin to cry . you do not   know , Cyril ! she sob fit to break she 
 heart . I feel as if I could have kill he . 

 " that old gran'ma begin talk to he , and he laugh at she . I do hate 
 to hear a man laugh when he be half drunk . it make my blood boil all of 
 a sudden . that old grandmother back he up in everything , she be a 
 regular nuisance . Meg have cry to I before over the pair of they . the 
 wicked , vulgar old thing that she be " 

 I go home to Woodside early in September . Emily be stay at the 
 Ram . it be strange that everything be so different . Nethermere even 
 have change . Nethermere be no long a complete , wonderful little world 
 that hold we charm inhabitant . it be a small , insignificant valley 
 lose in the space of the earth . the tree that have droop over the 
 brook with such delightful , romantic grace be a ridiculous thing when I 
 come home after a year of absence in the south . the old symbol be 
 trite and foolish . 

 Emily and I go down one morning to Strelley Mill . the house be 
 occupy by a labourer and his wife , stranger from the north . he be 
 tall , very thin , and silent , strangely suggest kinship with the rat 
 of the place . she be small and very active , like some ragged domestic 
 fowl run wild . already Emily have visit she , so she invite we into the 
 kitchen of the mill , and set forward the chair for we . the large room 
 have the barren air of a cell . there be a small table strand towards 
 the fireplace , and a few chair by the wall ; for the rest , desert 
 space of flagged floor retreat into shadow . on the wall by the 
 window be five cage of canary , and the small sharp movement of 
 the bird make the room more strange in its desolation . when we begin to 
 talk the bird begin to sing , till we be quite bewilder , for the 
 little woman speak Glasgow Scotch , and she have a hare lip . she rise and 
 run toward the cage , cry herself like some wild fowl , and flap a 
 duster at the warble canary . 

 " stop it , stop it ! " she cry , shake her thin weird body at they . 
 " silly little devil , fool , fool , fool ! ! " and she flap the duster 
 till the bird be subdue . then she bring we delicious scone and 
 apple jelly , urge we , almost nudge we with her thin elbow to make 
 we eat . 

 " do not   you like them , do not   you ? well eat them , eat them then . go on Emily , 
 go on , eat some more . only do not   tell Tom do not   tell Tom when ' e come 
 in , " she shake her head and laugh her shrilling , weird laughter . 

 as we be go she come out with we , and go run on in front . we 
 could not help note how ragged and unkempt be her short black skirt . 
 but she hasten around we , hither and thither like an excited fowl , 
 talk in her high - pitch , unintelligible manner . I could not believe 
 the brood mill be in her charge . I could not think this be the 
 Strelley Mill of a year ago . she flutter up the steep orchard bank in 
 front of we . happen to turn round and see Emily and I smile at 
 each other she begin to laugh her strident , weird laughter say , with 
 a leer : 

 " emily , he be your sweetheart , your sweetheart emily ! you never tell I ! " 
 and she laugh aloud . 

 we blush furiously . she come away from the edge of the sluice gully , 
 near to we , cry : 

 " you have   be here o ' night , have not   you Emily have not   you ? " and she 
 laugh again . then she sit down suddenly , and point above our head , 
 shriek : 

 " ah , look there " we look and see the mistletoe . " look at she , look 
 at she ! how many kiss a night , Emily ? ha ! ha ! kiss all the year ! 
 Kisses o ' night in a lonely place . " 

 she go on wildly for a short time , then she drop her voice and 
 talk in low , pathetic tone . she press on us scone and jelly and 
 oat - cake , and we leave she . 

 when we be out on the road by the brook Emily look at I with 
 shameface , laugh eye . I notice a small movement of her lip , and 
 in an instant I find myself kiss she , laugh with some of the 
 little woman 's wildness . 




  CHAPTER III 

  DOMESTIC life at the RAM 


 George be very anxious to receive I at his home . the Ram have as yet 
 only a six day licence , so on Sunday afternoon I walk over to tea . it 
 be very warm and still and sunny as I come through Greymede . a few 
 sweetheart be saunter under the horse - chestnut tree , or cross 
 the road to go into the field that lie smoothly carpet after the 
 hay - harvest . 

 as I come round the flagged track to the kitchen door of the Inn I hear 
 the slur of a bake tin and the bang of the oven door , and Meg say 
 crossly : 

 " no , do not   you take he emily naughty little thing ! let his father hold 
 he ! " 

 one of the baby be cry . 

 I enter , and find Meg all flushed and untidy , wear a large white 
 apron , just rise from the oven . emily , in a cream dress , be take a 
 red - haired , cry baby from out of the cradle . George sit in the small 
 arm - chair , smoking and look cross . 

 " I can not   shake hand , " say Meg , rather flurry . " I be all floury . sit 
 down , will you " and she hurry out of the room . Emily look up 
 from the complain baby to I and smile a woman 's rare , intimate 
 smile , which say : " see , I be engage thus for a moment , but I keep my 
 heart for you all the time . " 

 George rise and offer I the round arm - chair . it be the high 
 honour he could do I . he ask I what I would drink . when I refuse 
 everything , he sit down heavily on the sofa , frown , and angrily 
 cudgel his wit for something to say in vain . 

 the room be large and comfortably furnish with rush - chair , a 
 glass - knob dresser , a cupboard with glass door , perch on a shelf 
 in the corner , and the usual large sofa whose cosy loose - bed and pillow 
 be cover with red cotton stuff . there be a peculiar reminiscence of 
 victual and drink in the room ; beer , and a touch of spirit , and bacon . 
 Teenie , the sullen , black - browed servant girl come in carry the other 
 baby , and Meg call from the scullery to ask she if the child be 
 asleep . Meg be evidently in a bustle and a flurry , a most uncomfortable 
 state . 

 " no , " reply Teenie , " he be not for sleep this day . " 

 " mend the fire and see to the oven , and then put he his frock on , " 
 reply Meg testily . Teenie set the black - haired baby in the second 
 cradle . immediately he begin to cry , or rather to shout his 
 remonstrance . George go across to he and pick up a white furry 
 rabbit , which he hold before the child : 

 " here , look at bun - bun ! have your nice rabbit ! Hark at it squeak ! " 

 the baby listen for a moment , then , decide that this be only a 
 put - off , begin to cry again . George throw down the rabbit and take the 
 baby , swear inwardly . he dandle the child on his knee . 

 " what be up then ? what be up wi ' thee ? have a ride 
 then dee - de - dee - de - dee ! " 

 but the baby know quite well what be the father 's feeling towards he , 
 and he continue to cry . 

 " hurry up , Teenie ! " say George as the maid rattle the coal on the 
 fire . Emily be walk about hush her charge , and smile at I , so 
 that I have a peculiar pleasure in gathering for myself the honey of 
 endearment which she shed on the lip of the baby . George hand over 
 his child to the maid , and say to I with patient sarcasm : 

 " will you come in the garden ? " 

 I rise and follow he across the sunny flagged yard , along the path 
 between the bush . he light his pipe and saunter along as a man on his 
 own estate do , feel as if he be untrammele by law or 
 convention . 

 " you know , " he say , ' she be a dam rotten manager . " 

 I laugh , and remark how full of plum the tree be . 

 " yes ! " he reply heedlessly " you know she ought to have send the girl 
 out with the kid this afternoon , and have get dress directly . but no , 
 she must sit gossip with Emily all the time they be asleep , and 
 then as soon as they wake up she begin to make cake " 

 " I suppose she feel she would enjoy a pleasant chat , all quiet , " I answer . 

 " but she know quite well you be come , and what it would be . but a 
 woman 's no dam foresight . " 

 " Nay , what do it matter ! " say I. 

 " Sunday 's the only day we can have a bit of peace , so she might keep them 
 quiet then . " 

 " I suppose it be the only time , too , that she could have a quiet 
 gossip , " I reply . 

 " but you do not   know , " he say , " there seem to be never a minute of 
 freedom . Teenie sleep in now , and live with we in the kitchen Oswald 
 as well so I never know what it be to have a moment private . there 
 do not   seem a single spot anywhere where I can sit quiet . it be the kid 
 all day , and the kid all night , and the servant , and then all the man 
 in the house I sometimes feel as if I should like to get away . I shall 
 leave the pub as soon as I can only Meg do not   want to . " 

 " but if you leave the public - house what then ? " 

 " I should like to get back on a farm . this be no sort of a place , 
 really , for farming . I have   always get some business on hand , there be a 
 traveller to see , or I have   get to go to the brewer , or I have   somebody to 
 look at a horse , or something . your life 's all mess up . if I have a 
 place of my own , and farm it in peace " 

 " you would be as miserable as you could be , " I say . 

 " perhaps so , " he assent , in his old reflective manner . " perhaps so ! 
 anyhow , I need not   bother , for I feel as if I never shall go back to the 
 land . " 

 " which mean at the bottom of your heart you do not   intend to , " I say 
 laugh . 

 " perhaps so ! " he again yield . " you see I be do pretty well 
 here apart from the public - house : I always think that be Meg 's . come and 
 look in the stable . I have   get a shire mare and two nag : pretty good . I 
 go down to Melton Mowbray with Tom Mayhew , to a chap they have   have 
 dealing with . Tom 's all right , and he know how to buy , but he be such 
 a lazy careless devil , too lazy to be bother to sell " 

 George be evidently interested . as we go round to the stable , Emily 
 come out with the baby , which be dress in a new silk frock . she 
 advance , smile to I with dark eye : 

 " see , now he be good ! do not   he look pretty ? " 

 she hold the baby for I to look at . I glance at it , but I be only 
 conscious of the near warmth of her cheek , and of the scent of her hair . 

 " who be he like ? " I ask , look up and find myself full in her 
 eye . the question be quite irrelevant : her eye speak a whole clear 
 message that make my heart throb ; yet she answer . 

 " who be he ? why , nobody , of course ! but he will be like father , do not 
 you think ? " 

 the question draw my eye to hers again , and again we look each other 
 the strange intelligence that make her flush and I breathe in as I 
 smile . 

 " ay ! blue eye like your father 's not like yours " 

 again the wild message in her look . 

 " no ! " she answer very softly . " and I think he will be jolly , like 
 father they have neither of they our eye , have they ? " 

 " no , " I answer , overcome by a sudden hot flush of tenderness . " no not 
 vulnerable . to have such soft , vulnerable eye as you use make one 
 feel nervous and irascible . but you have clothe over the sensitiveness 
 of your , have not   you ? like naked life , naked defenceless protoplasm 
 they be , be it not so ? " 

 she laugh , and at the old painful memory she dilate in the old way , 
 and I feel the old tremor at see her soul fling quiver on my pity . 

 " and be mine like that ? " ask George , who have come up . 

 he must have perceive the bewilderment of my look as I try to adjust 
 myself to he . a slight shadow , a slight chagrin appear on his face . 

 " yes , " I answer , " yes but not so bad . you never give yourself away so 
 much you be most cautious : but just as defenceless . " 

 " and be I alter ? " he ask , with quiet irony , as if he know I be not 
 interested in he . 

 " yes , more cautious . you keep in the shadow . but Emily have clothe 
 herself , and can now walk among the crowd at her own gait . " 

 it be with an effort I refrain from put my lip to kiss she at 
 that moment as she look at I with womanly dignity and tenderness . 
 then I remember , and say : 

 " but you be take I to the stable George ! come and see the horse 
 too , Emily . " 

 " I will . I admire they so much , " she reply , and thus we both indulge 
 he . 

 he talk to his horse and of they , lay his hand upon they , run 
 over their limb . the glossy , restless animal interest he more than 
 anything . he break into a little flush of enthusiasm over they . they 
 be his new interest . they be quiet and yet responsive ; he be their 
 master and owner . this give he real pleasure . 

 but the baby become displeased again . Emily look at I for sympathy 
 with he . 

 " he be a little wanderer , " she say , " he like to be always move . 
 perhaps he object to the ammonia of stable too , " she add , frown 
 and laugh slightly , " it be not very agreeable , be it ? " 

 " not particularly , " I agree , and as she move off I go with she , 
 leave he in the stable . when Emily and I be alone we saunter 
 aimlessly back to the garden . she persist in talk to the baby , and 
 in talk to I about the baby , till I wish the child in Jericho . 
 this make her laugh , and she continue to tantalise I . the holly - hock 
 flower of the second whorl be flush to the top of the spire . the 
 bee , cover with pale crumb of pollen , be sway a moment outside 
 the wide gate of the floret , then they swing in with excited hum , and 
 clung madly to the fury white capitol , and work riotously round the 
 waxy basis . Emily hold out the baby to watch , talk all the time in 
 low , fond tone . the child stretch towards the bright flower . the sun 
 glisten on his smooth hair as on bronze dust , and the wonder blue 
 eye of the baby follow the bee . then he make small sound , and 
 suddenly wave his hand , like rumple pink holly - hock bud . 

 " look ! " say Emily , " look at the little bee ! ah , but you must not   touch 
 they , they bite . they be come ! " she cry , with sudden laugh 
 apprehension , draw the child away . he make noise of remonstrance . 
 she put he near to the flower again till he knock the spire with his 
 hand and two indignant bee come sail out . Emily draw back quickly 
 cry in alarm , then laugh with excited eye at I , as if she have 
 just escape a peril in my presence . thus she tease I by fling I 
 all kind of bright gage of love while she keep I aloof because of the 
 child . she laugh with pure pleasure at this state of affair , and 
 delight the more when I frown , till at last I swallow my 
 resentment and laugh too , play with the hand of the baby , and 
 watch his blue eye change slowly like a softly sail sky . 

 presently Meg call we in to tea . she wear a dress of fine blue stuff 
 with cream silk embroidery , and she look handsome , for her hair be 
 very hastily dress . 

 " what , have you have that child all this time ? " she exclaim , on see 
 Emily . " where be his father ? " 

 " I do not   know we leave he in the stable , do not   we Cyril ? but I like 
 nurse he , Meg . I like it ever so much , " reply Emily . 

 " oh , yes , you may be sure George would get off it if he could . he be 
 always in the stable . as I tell he , he fair stink of horse . he be not 
 that fond of the child , I can tell you . come on , my pet why , come to 
 its mammy . " 

 she take the baby and kiss it passionately , and make extravagant love 
 to it . a clean shaven young man with thick bare arm go across the 
 yard . 

 " here , just look and tell George as tea be ready , " say Meg . 

 " where be he ? " ask Oswald , the sturdy youth who attend to the farm 
 business . 

 " you know where to find he , " reply Meg , with that careless freedom 
 which be so subtly derogatory to her husband . 

 George come hurry from the out - building . " what , be it tea already ? " 
 he say . 

 " it be a wonder you have not   be cry out for it this last hour , " say 
 Meg . 

 " it be a marvel you have   get dress so quick , " he reply . 

 " oh , be it ? " she answer " well , it be not with any of your help that 
 I have   do it , that be a fact . where 's Teenie ? " 

 the maid , short , stiffly build , very dark and sullen looking , come 
 forward from the gate . 

 " can you take Alfy as well , just while we have tea ? " she ask . Teenie 
 reply that she should think she could , whereupon she be give the 
 ruddy - haired baby , as well as the dark one . she sit with they on a seat 
 at the end of the yard . we proceed to tea . 

 it be a very great spread . there be hot cake , three or four kind of 
 cold cake , tin apricot , jelly , tin lobster , and trifle in the 
 way of jam , cream , and rum . 

 " I do not   know what those cake be like , " say Meg . " I make they in such 
 a fluster . really , you have to do thing as well you can when you have   get 
 child especially when there be two . I never seem to have time to do 
 my hair up even look at it now . " 

 she put up her hand to her head , and I could not help notice how 
 grimy and rough be her nail . 

 the tea be go on pleasantly when one of the baby begin to cry . 
 Teenie bent over it croon gruffly . I lean back and look out of 
 the door to watch she . I think of the girl in Tchekoff 's story , who 
 smother her charge , and I hop the grim Teenie would not be drive to 
 such desperation . the other child join in this chorus . Teenie rise 
 from her seat and walk about the yard , gruffly try to soothe the 
 twin . 

 " it be a funny thing , but whenever anybody come they be sure to be 
 cross , " say Meg , begin to simmer . 

 " they be no different from ordinary , " say George , " it be only that 
 you be force to notice it then . " 

 " no , it be not ! " cry Meg in a sudden passion : " be it now , Emily ? of 
 course , he have to say something ! be not   they as good as gold this 
 morning , Emily ? and yesterday ! why they never murmur , as good as 
 gold they be . but he want they to be as dumb as fish : he would like 
 they shut up in a box as soon as they make a bit of noise . " 

 " I be not say anything about it , " he reply . 

 " yes , you be , " she retort . " I do not   know what you call it then " 

 the baby outside continue to cry . 

 " bring Alfy to I , " call Meg , yield to the mother feel . 

 " oh , no , damn it ! " say George , " let Oswald take he . " 

 " yes , " reply Meg bitterly , " let anybody take he so long as he be out 
 of your sight . you never ought to have child , you do not   " 

 George murmur something about " to - day . " 

 " come then ! " say Meg with a whole passion of tenderness , as she take 
 the red - haired baby and hold it to her bosom , " why , what be it then , 
 what be it , my precious ? hush then pet , hush then ! " 

 the baby do not hush . Meg rise from her chair and stand rock the 
 baby in her arm , sway from one foot to the other . 

 " he be get a bit of wind , " she say . 

 we try to continue the meal , but everything be awkward and difficult . 

 " I wonder if he be hungry , " say Meg , " let us try he . " 

 she turn away and give he her breast . then he be still , so she 
 cover herself as much as she could , and sit down again to tea . we have 
 finish , so we sit and wait while she eat . this disjoint of the 
 meal , by reflex action , make Emily and I more accurate . we be 
 exquisitely attentive , and polite to a nicety . our very speech be 
 clip with precision , as we drift to a discussion of Strauss and 
 Debussy . this of course put a breach between we two and our host , but 
 we could not help it ; it be our only way of cover over the 
 awkwardness of the occasion . George sit look glum and listen to 
 we . Meg be quite indifferent . she listen occasionally , but her 
 position as mother make she impregnable . she sit eat calmly , look 
 down now and again at her baby , hold we in slight scorn , babbler 
 that we be . she be secure in her high maternity ; she be mistress and 
 sole authority . George , as father , be first servant ; as an indifferent 
 father , she humiliate he and be hostile to his wish . Emily and I 
 be mere intruder , feel ourselves such . after tea we go upstairs 
 to wash our hand . the grandmother have have a second stroke of paralysis , 
 and lie inert , almost stupifie . her large bulk upon the bed be 
 horrible to I , and her face , with the muscle all slack and awry , 
 seem like some cruel cartoon . she speak a few thick word to I . 
 George ask she if she feel all right , or should he rub she . she turn 
 her old eye slowly to he . 

 " my leg my leg a bit , " she say in her strange guttural . 

 he take off his coat , and push his hand under the bed - clothe , sit 
 rub the poor old woman 's limb patiently , slowly , for some time . she 
 watch he for a moment , then without she turn her eye from he , he 
 pass out of her vision and she lie star at nothing , in his 
 direction . 

 " there , " he say at last , " be that any well then , mother ? " 

 " ay , that be a bit well , " she say slowly . 

 " should I gi'e thee a drink ? " he ask , linger , wish to minister 
 all he could to she before he go . 

 she look at he , and he bring the cup . she swallow a few drop 
 with difficulty . 

 " do not   it make you miserable to have she always there ? " I ask he , 
 when we be in the next room . he sit down on the large white bed and 
 laugh shortly . 

 " we be used to it we never notice she , poor old gran'ma . " 

 " but she must have make a difference to you she must make a big 
 difference at the bottom , even if you do not   know it , " I say . 

 " she would get such a strong character , " he say musing , " she seem to 
 understand I . she be a real friend to I before she be so bad . 
 sometimes I happen to look at she generally I never see she , you know 
 how I mean but sometimes I do and then it seem a bit rotten " 

 he smile at I peculiarly , " it seem to take the shine off thing , " 
 he add , and then , smile again with ugly irony " she be our skeleton 
 in the closet . " he indicate her large bulk . 

 the church bell begin to ring . the grey church stand on a rise among 
 the field not far away , like a handsome old stag look over towards 
 the inn . the five bell begin to play , and the sound come beat upon 
 the window . 

 " I hate Sunday night , " he say restlessly . 

 " because you have   nothing to do ? " I ask . 

 " I do not   know , " he say . " it seem like a gag , and you feel helpless . I 
 do not   want to go to church , and hark at the bell , they make you feel 
 uncomfortable . " 

 " what do you generally do ? " I ask . 

 " feel miserable I have   be down to Mayhew 's these last two Sundays , and 
 Meg 's be pretty mad . she say it be the only night I could stop with 
 she , or go out with she . but if I stop with she , what can I do ? and if 
 we go out , it be only for half an hour . I hate Sunday night it be a dead 
 end . " 

 when we go downstairs , the table be clear , and Meg be bath the 
 dark baby . thus she be perfect . she handle the bonny , naked child with 
 beauty of gentleness . she kneel over he nobly . her arm and her bosom 
 and her throat have a nobility of roundness and softness . she droop she 
 head with the grace of a Madonna , and her movement be lovely , 
 accurate and exquisite , like an old song perfectly sing . her voice , 
 play and soothe round the curved limb of the baby , be like water , 
 soft as wine in the sun , run with delight . 

 we watch humbly , share the wonder from afar . 

 Emily be very envious of Meg 's felicity . she beg to be allow to 
 bathe the second baby . Meg grant her bounteous permission : 

 " yes , you can wash he if you like , but what about your frock ? " 

 Emily , delighted , begin to undress the baby whose hair be like crocus 
 petal . her finger tremble with pleasure as she loose the little 
 tape . I always remember the inarticulate delight with which she take 
 the child in her hand , when at last his little shirt be remove , and 
 feel his soft white limb and body . a distinct , glow atmosphere 
 seem suddenly to burst out around she and the child , leave I 
 outside . the moment before she have be very near to I , her eye 
 search mine , her spirit cling timidly about I . now I be put 
 away , quite alone , neglect , forgotten , outside the glow which 
 surround the woman and the baby . 

 " ha ! ha - a - a ! " she say with a deep throate vowel , as she put her face 
 against the child 's small breast , so round , almost like a girl 's , 
 silken and warm and wonderful . she kiss he , and touch he , and 
 hover over he , drink in his baby sweetness , the sweetness of the 
 laugh little mouth 's wide , wet kiss , of the round , wave limb , of 
 the little shoulder so winsomely curve to the arm and the breast , 
 of the tiny soft neck hide very warm beneath the chin , taste 
 deliciously with her lip and her cheek all the exquisite softness , 
 silkiness , warmth , and tender life of the baby 's body . 

 a woman be so ready to disclaim the body of a man 's love ; she yield he 
 her own soft beauty with so much gentle patience and regret ; she cling 
 to his neck , to his head and his cheek , fondle they for the soul 's 
 meaning that be there , and shrink from his passionate limb and his 
 body . it be with some perplexity , some anger and bitterness that I 
 watch Emily move almost to ecstasy by the baby 's small , innocuous 
 person . 

 " Meg never find any pleasure in I as she do in the kid , " say 
 George bitterly , for himself . 

 the child , laughing and crowing , catch his hand in Emily 's hair and 
 pull dark tress down , while she cry out in remonstrance , and try 
 to loosen the small fist that be shut so fast . she take he from the 
 water and rub he dry , with marvellous gentle little rub , he kick 
 and expostulating . she bring his fine hair into one silken 
 up - springing of ruddy gold like an aureole . she play with his tiny 
 ball of toe , like wee pink mushroom , till at last she dare detain he 
 no long , when she put on his flannel and his night - gown and give he 
 to Meg . 

 before carry he to bed Meg take he to feed he . his mouth be 
 stretch round the nipple as he suck , his face be press close and 
 close to the breast , his finger wander over the fine white globe , 
 blue veined and heavy , try to hold it . Meg look down upon he with 
 a consume passion of tenderness , and Emily clasp her hand and 
 lean forward to he . even thus they think he exquisite . 

 when the twin be both asleep , I must tiptoe upstairs to see they . 
 they lie cheek by cheek in the crib next the large white bed , breathe 
 little , ruffle breath , out of unison , so small and pathetic with 
 their tiny shut finger . I remember the two lark . 

 from the next room come a heavy sound of the old woman 's breathing . Meg 
 go in to she . as in pass I catch sight of the large , prone figure 
 in the bed , I think of Guy de Maupassant 's " Toine , " who act as an 
 incubator . 




  CHAPTER IV 

  the DOMINANT MOTIF of suffer 


 the old woman lie still another year , then she suddenly sink out of 
 life . George cease to write to I , but I learn his news elsewhere . he 
 become more and more intimate with the Mayhews . after old Mayhew 's 
 bankruptcy , the two son have remain on in the large dark house that 
 stand off the Nottingham Road in Eberwich . this house have be 
 bequeath to the old daughter by the mother . Maud Mayhew , who be 
 married and separate from her husband , keep house for her brother . she 
 be a tall , large woman with high cheek - bone and oily black hair loop 
 over her ear . Tom Mayhew be also a handsome man , very dark and ruddy , 
 with insolent bright eye . 

 the Mayhews ' house be call the " Hollies . " it be a solid building , of 
 old red brick , stand fifty yard back from the Eberwich highroad . 
 between it and the road be an unkempt lawn , surround by very high 
 black holly tree . the house seem to be imprison among the bristling 
 holly . pass through the large gate , one come immediately upon the 
 bare side of the house and upon the great range of stable . Old Mayhew 
 have in his day stable thirty or more horse there . now grass be 
 between the red brick , and all the bleach door be shut , save 
 perhaps two or three which be open for George 's horse . 

 the " Hollies " become a kind of club for the disconsolate , " well - off " 
 man of the district . the large dining - room be gloomily and sparsely 
 furnish , the drawing - room be a desert , but the small morning - room 
 be comfortable enough , with wicker arm - chair , heavy curtain , and a 
 large sideboard . in this room George and the Mayhews meet with several 
 man two or three time a week . there they discuss horse and make mock 
 of the authority of woman . George provide the whisky , and they all 
 gamble timidly at card . these bachelor party be the source of 
 great annoyance to the wife of the married man who attend they . 

 " he be quite unbearable when he be be at those Mayhews ' , " say Meg . " I be 
 sure they do nothing but cry we down . " 

 Maud Mayhew keep apart from these meeting , watch over her two 
 child . she have be very unhappily married , and now be reserve , 
 silent . the woman of Eberwich watch she as she go swiftly along the 
 street in the morning with her basket , and they glory a little in her 
 overthrow , because she be too proud to accept consolation , yet they 
 be sorry in their heart for she , and she be never touch with 
 calumny . George see she frequently , but she treat he coldly as she 
 treat the other man , so he be afraid of she . 

 he have more facility now for his horse - dealing . when the grandmother 
 die , in the October two year after the marriage of George she leave he 
 seven hundred pound . to Meg she leave the Inn , and the two house she 
 have build in Newerton , together with brewery share to the value of 
 nearly a thousand pound . George and Meg feel themselves to be people of 
 property . the result , however , be only a little further coldness 
 between they . he be very careful that she have all that be her . she 
 say to he once when they be quarrel , that he need not   go feed 
 the Mayhews on the money that come out of her business . thenceforward he 
 keep strict account of all his affair , and she must audit they , 
 receive her exact due . this be a mortification to her woman 's 
 capricious soul of generosity and cruelty . 

 the Christmas after the grandmother 's death another son be bear to 
 they . for the time George and Meg become very good friend again . 

 when in the following March I hear he be come down to London with 
 Tom Mayhew on business , I write and ask he to stay with I . Meg 
 reply , say she be so glad I have ask he : she do not want he 
 go off with that fellow again ; he have be such a lot well lately , 
 and she be sure it be only those man at Mayhew 's make he what he be . 

 he consent to stay with I . I write and tell he Lettie and Leslie 
 be in London , and that we should dine with they one evening . I meet he 
 at King 's Cross and we all three drive west . Mayhew be a remarkably 
 handsome , well - build man ; he and George make a notable couple . they be 
 both in breech and gaiter , but George still look like a yeoman , 
 while Mayhew have all the braggadocio of the stable . we make an 
 impossible trio . Mayhew laugh and jest broadly for a short time , 
 then he grow restless and fidgety . he feel restrained and awkward in my 
 presence . later , he tell George I be a damned parson . on the other 
 hand , I be content to look at his rather vulgar beauty his tooth be 
 blacken with smoking and to listen to his ineffectual talk , but I 
 could find absolutely no response . George be go - between . to I he be 
 cautious and rather deferential , to Mayhew he be careless , and his 
 attitude be ting with contempt . 

 when the son of the horse - dealer at last leave we to go to some of his 
 father 's old crony , we be glad . very uncertain , very sensitive and 
 wavering , our old intimacy burn again like the fragile burning of 
 alcohol . close together in the same blue flame , we discover and 
 watch the pageant of life in the town reveal wonderfully to we . we 
 laugh at the tyranny of old romance . we scorn the fade procession 
 of old year , and make mock of the vast pilgrimage of by - go romance 
 travel far into the dim distance . be we not in the midst of 
 the bewilder pageant of modern life , with all its confusion of 
 banneret and colour , with its infinite interweaving of sound , the 
 screech of the modern toy of haste strike like keen spray , the heavy 
 boom of busy mankind gather its bread , earnestly , form the bed of 
 all other sound ; and between these two the swiftness of song , the 
 triumphant tilt of the joy of life , the hoarse oboe of privation , the 
 shuddering drum of tragedy , and the eternal scraping of the two 
 deep - toned string of despair ? 

 we watch the taxicab course with their nose down to the street , we 
 watch the rock hansom , and the lumber stateliness of bus . in 
 the silent green cavern of the park we stand and listen to the surging 
 of the ocean of life . we watch a girl with streaming hair go gallop 
 down the row , a dark man , laugh and show his white tooth , 
 gallop more heavily at her elbow . we see a squad of life - guard enter 
 the gate of the park , erect and glitter with silver and white and 
 red . they come near to we , and we thrill a little as we watch the 
 muscle of their white smooth thigh answer the movement of the 
 horse , and their cheek and their chin bend with proud manliness to 
 the rhythm of the march . we watch the exquisite rhythm of the body of 
 man move in scarlet and silver far down the leafless avenue , like 
 a slightly waver spark of red life blow along . at the Marble Arch 
 Corner we listen to a little socialist who be flare fiercely under 
 a plane tree . the hot stream of his word flow over the old wound 
 that the knowledge of the unending misery of the poor have give I , 
 and I wince . for he the world be all East - end , and all the East - End 
 be as a pool from which the water be drain off , leave the 
 water - thing to wrestle in the wet mud under the sun , till the whole of 
 the city seem a heaving , shudder struggle of black - mud object 
 deprive of the element of life . I feel a great terror of the little 
 man , lest he should make I see all mud , as I have see before . then I 
 feel a breathless pity for he , that his eye should be always fill 
 with mud , and never brighten . George listen intently to the speaker , 
 very much move by he . 

 at night , after the theatre , we see the outcast sleep in a rank under 
 the Waterloo bridge , their head to the wall , their foot lie out on 
 the pavement : a long , black , ruffle heap at the foot of the wall . all 
 the face be cover but two , that of a peaked , pale little man , and 
 that of a brutal woman . over these two face , float like uneasy pale 
 dream on their obscurity , sweep now and again the trail light of the 
 tram car . we pick our way past the line of abandon foot , shrink 
 from the sight of the thin bare ankle of a young man , from the draggle 
 edge of the skirt of a bunch - up woman , from the pitiable sight of the 
 man who have wrap their leg in newspaper for a little warmth , and lay 
 like worthless parcel . it be rain . some man stand at the edge of 
 the causeway fix in dreary misery , find no room to sleep . outside , 
 on a seat in the blackness and the rain , a woman sit sleep , while the 
 water trickle and hang heavily at the end of her loosened strand of 
 hair . her hand be push in the bosom of her jacket . she lurch 
 forward in her sleep , start , and one of her hand fall out of her 
 bosom . she sink again to sleep . George grip my arm . 

 " give she something , " he whisper in panic . I be afraid . then suddenly 
 get a florin from my pocket , I stiffen my nerve and slide it into 
 her palm . her hand be soft , and warm , and curl in sleep . she start 
 violently , look up at I , then down at her hand . I turn my face 
 aside , terrify lest she should look in my eye , and full of shame and 
 grief I run down the embankment to he . we hurry along under the plane 
 tree in silence . the shin car be draw tall in the distance 
 over Westminster Bridge , a fainter , yellow light run with they on 
 the water below . the wet street be spill with golden liquor of 
 light , and on the deep blackness of the river be the restless yellow 
 slash of the lamp . 

 Lettie and Leslie be stay up at Hampstead with a friend of the 
 Tempests , one of the large shareholder in the firm of Tempest , 
 Wharton    Co. the raphael have a substantial house , and Lettie prefer 
 to go to they rather than to an hotel , especially as she have bring 
 with she her infant son , now ten month old , with his nurse . they 
 invite George and I to dinner on the Friday evening . the party 
 include Lettie 's host and hostess , and also a scottish poetess , and an 
 irish musician , composer of song and pianoforte rhapsody . 

 Lettie wear a black lace dress in mourning for one of Leslie 's maternal 
 aunt . this make she look old , otherwise there seem to be no change 
 in she . a subtle observer might have notice a little hardness about her 
 mouth , and disillusion hang slightly on her eye . she be , however , 
 excite by the company in which she find herself , therefore she 
 overflow with clever speech and rapid , brilliant observation . 
 certainly on such occasion she be admirable . the rest of the company 
 form , as it be , the orchestra which accompany she . 

 George be exceedingly quiet . he speak a few word now and then to 
 Mrs Raphael , but on the whole he be altogether silent , listen . 

 " really ! " Lettie be say , " I do not   see that one thing be worth do 
 any more than another . it be like dessert : you be equally indifferent 
 whether you have grape , or pear , or pineapple . " 

 " have you already din so far ? " sing the scottish poetess in her 
 musical , plaintive manner . 

 " the only thing worth do be produce , " say Lettie . 

 " alas , that be what all the young folk be say nowadays ! " sigh the 
 irish musician . 

 " that be the only thing one find any pleasure in that be to say , any 
 satisfaction , " continue Lettie , smile , and turn to the two 
 artist . 

 " do you not think so ? " she add . 

 " you do come to a point at last , " say the scottish poetess , " when your 
 work be a real source of satisfaction . " 

 " do you write poetry then ? " ask George of Lettie . 

 " I ! oh , dear no ! I have try strenuously to make up a Limerick for a 
 competition , but in vain . so you see , I be a failure there . do you know 
 I have a son , though ? a marvellous little fellow , be he not , 
 Leslie ? he be my work . I be a wonderful mother , be I not , Leslie ? " 

 " too devoted , " he reply . 

 " there ! " she exclaim in triumph " when I have to sign my name and 
 occupation in a visitor 's book , it will be ' mother ' . I hope my 
 business will flourish , " she conclude , smile . 

 there be a touch of ironical brutality in she now . she be , at the 
 bottom , quite sincere . have reach that point in a woman 's career 
 when most , perhaps all of the thing in life seem worthless and insipid , 
 she have determine to put up with it , to ignore her own self , to empty 
 her own potentiality into the vessel of another or other , and to live 
 her life at second hand . this peculiar abnegation of self be the 
 resource of a woman for the escaping of the responsibility of her own 
 development . like a nun , she put over her living face a veil , as a sign 
 that the woman no long exist for herself : she be the servant of God , 
 of some man , of her child , or may be of some cause . as a servant , she 
 be no long responsible for her self , which would make she terrify 
 and lonely . service be light and easy . to be responsible for the good 
 progress of one 's life be terrifying . it be the most insufferable form 
 of loneliness , and the heavy of responsibility . so Lettie indulge 
 her husband , but do not yield her independence to he ; rather it be 
 she who take much of the responsibility of he into her hand , and 
 therefore he be so devoted to she . she have , however , now determined to 
 abandon the charge of herself to serve her child . when the child 
 grow up , either they would unconsciously fle she away , back upon 
 herself again in bitterness and loneliness , or they would tenderly 
 cherish she , chafe at her love - bond occasionally . 

 George look and listen to all the flutter of conversation , and say 
 nothing . it seem to he like so much unreasonable rustling of piece 
 of paper , of leaf of book , and so on . later in the evening Lettie 
 sing , no long italian folk song , but the fragmentary utterance of 
 Debussy and Strauss . these also to George be quite meaningless , and 
 rather wearisome . it make he impatient to see she waste herself upon 
 they . 

 " do you like those song ? " she ask in the frank , careless manner she 
 affect . 

 " not much , " he reply , ungraciously . 

 " do not   you ? " she exclaim , add with a smile , " those be the most 
 wonderful thing in the world , those little thing " she begin to hum a 
 Debussy idiom . he could not answer she on the point , so he sit with the 
 arrow stick in he , and do not speak . 

 she enquire of he concern Meg and his child and the affair of 
 Eberwich , but the interest be flimsy , as she preserve a wide distance 
 between they , although apparently she be so unaffected and friendly . we 
 leave before eleven . 

 when we be seat in the cab and rush down hill , he say : 

 " you know , she make I mad . " 

 he be frown , look out of the window away from I . 

 " who , Lettie ? why , what rile you ? " I ask . 

 he be some time in reply . 

 " why , she be so affected . " 

 I sit still in the small , close space and wait . 

 " do you know ? " he laugh , keep his face avert from I . " she 
 make my blood boil . I could hate she . " 

 " why ? " I say gently . 

 " I do not   know . I feel as if she have insult I . she do lie , do not 
 she ? " 

 " I do not   notice it , " I say , but I know he mean she shirk , she 
 shuffling of her life . 

 " and you think of those poor devil under the bridge and then of she 
 and they fritter away themselves and money in that idiocy " 

 he speak with passion . 

 " you be quote Longfellow , " I say . 

 " what ? " he ask , look at I suddenly . 

 " ' life be real , life be earnest ' " 

 he flush slightly at my good - natured gibe . 

 " I do not   know what it be , " he reply . " but it be a pretty rotten 
 business , when you think of she fool about waste herself , and all 
 the waste that go on up there , and the poor devil rot on the 
 embankment and " 

 " and you and Mayhew and I " I continue . 

 he look at I very intently to see if I be mock . he laugh . I 
 could see he be very much move . 

 " be the time quite out of joint ? " I ask . 

 " why ! " he laugh . " no . but she make I feel so angry as if I should 
 burst I do not   know when I feel in such a rage . I wonder why . I be sorry 
 for he , poor devil . ' Lettie and Leslie ' they seem christen for one 
 another , do not   they ? " 

 " what if you have have she ? " I ask . 

 " we should have be like a cat and dog ; I would rather be with Meg a 
 thousand time now ! " he add significantly . he sit watch the lamp 
 and the people and the dark building slip past we . 

 " shall we go and have a drink ? " I ask he , think we would call in 
 Frascati 's to see the come - and - go . 

 " I could do with a brandy , " he reply , look at I slowly . 

 we sit in the restaurant listen to the jigging of the music , watch 
 the change flow of the people . I like to sit a long time by the 
 hollyhock watch the throng of varied bee which poise and hesitate 
 outside the wild flower , then swing in with a hum which set everything 
 aquiver . but still more fascinating it be to watch the come and go of 
 people weave and intermingle in the complex mesh of their 
 intention , with all the subtle grace and mystery of their moving , 
 shapely body . 

 I sit still , look out across the amphitheatre . George look also , 
 but he drink glass after glass of brandy . 

 " I like to watch the people , " say I. 

 " ay and do not   it seem an aimless , idiotic business look at they ! " he 
 reply in tone of contempt . I look instead at he , in some surprise 
 and resentment his face be gloomy , stupid and unrelieved . the amount of 
 brandy he have drunk have increase his ill humour . 

 " shall we be go ? " I say . I do not want he to get drunk in his 
 present state of mind . 

 " ay in half a minute , " he finish the brandy , and rise . although he 
 have drink a good deal , he be quite steady , only there be a 
 disagreeable look always on his face , and his eye seem small and 
 more glittering than I have see they . we take a bus to Victoria . he sit 
 sway on his seat in the dim , clumsy vehicle , say not a word . in 
 the vast cavern of the station the theatre - goer be hasten , 
 cross the pale grey strand , small creature scurry hither and 
 thither in the space beneath the lonely lamp . as the train crawl over 
 the river we watch the far - flung hoop of diamond light curve slowly 
 round and strip with bright thread the black water . he sit look 
 with heavy eye , seem to shrink from the enormous unintelligible 
 lettering of the poem of London . 

 the town be too large for he , he could not take in its immense , its 
 stupendous poetry . what do come home to he be its flagrant discord . 
 the unintelligibility of the vast city make he apprehensive , and the 
 crudity of its big , coarse contrast wound he unutterably . 

 " what be the matter ? " I ask he as we go along the silent pavement 
 at Norwood . 

 " nothing , " he reply . " nothing ! " and I do not trouble he far . 

 we occupy a large , two - bedded room that look down the hill and over 
 to the far wood of Kent . he be morose and untalkative . I bring up a 
 soda - syphon and whisky , and we proceed to undress . when he stand in 
 his pajama he wait as if uncertain . 

 " do you want a drink ? " he ask . 

 I do not . he cross to the table , and as I get into my bed I hear the 
 brief fizzing of the syphon . he drink his glass at one draught , then 
 switch off the light . in the sudden darkness I see his pale shadow go 
 across to the sofa in the window - space . the blind be undrawn , and the 
 star look in . he gaze out on the great bay of darkness wherein , far 
 away and below , float a few spark of lamp like herre boat at sea . 

 " be not   you come to bed ? " I ask . 

 " I be not sleepy you go to sleep , " he answer , resent have to 
 speak at all . 

 " then put on a dressing gown there be one in that corner turn the light 
 on . " 

 he do not answer , but fumble for the garment in the darkness . when he 
 have find it , he say : 

 " do you mind if I smoke ? " 

 I do not . he fumble again in his pocket for cigarette , always 
 refuse to switch on the light . I watch his face bow to the match 
 as he light his cigarette . he be still handsome in the ruddy light , 
 but his feature be coarser . I feel very sorry for he , but I see that 
 I could get no nearer to he , to relieve he . for some time I lay in the 
 darkness watch the end of his cigarette like a ruddy , malignant 
 insect hover near his lip , put the timid star immensely far 
 away . he sit quite still , lean on the sofa arm . occasionally there 
 be a little glow on his cheek as the cigarette burn brighter , then 
 again I could see nothing but the dull red bee . 

 I suppose I must have drop asleep . suddenly I start as something 
 fall to the floor . I hear he curse under his breath . 

 " what be the matter ? " I ask . 

 " I have   only knock something down cigarette case or something , " he 
 reply , apologetically . 

 " be not   you come to bed ? " I ask . 

 " yes , I be come , " he answer quite docile . 

 he seem to wander about and knock against thing as he come . he 
 drop heavily into bed . 

 " be you sleepy now ? " I ask . 

 " I dunno I shall be directly , " he reply . 

 " what be up with you ? " I ask . 

 " I dunno , " he answer . " I be like this sometimes , when there be nothing 
 I want to do , and nowhere I want to go , and nobody I want to be near . 
 then you feel so rottenly lonely , Cyril . you feel awful , like a vacuum , 
 with a pressure on you , a sort of pressure of darkness , and you 
 yourself just nothing , a vacuum that be what it be like a little vacuum 
 that be not dark , all loose in the middle of a space of darkness , that be 
 press on you . " 

 " good gracious ! " I exclaim , rouse myself in bed . " that sound bad ! " 

 he laugh slightly . 

 " it be all right , " he say , " it be only the excitement of London , and that 
 little man in the park , and that woman on the seat I wonder where she 
 be to - night , poor devil and then Lettie . I seem throw off my 
 balance . I think really , I ought to have make something of myself " 

 " what ? " I ask , as he hesitate . 

 " I do not   know , " he reply slowly , " a poet or something , like Burns I 
 do not   know . I shall laugh at myself for think so , to - morrow . but I be 
 bear a generation too soon I be not   ripe enough when I come . I want 
 something I have not   get . I be something short . I be like corn in a wet 
 harvest full , but pappy , no good . Is'll rot . I come too soon ; or I 
 want something that would ha ' make I grow fierce . that be why I want 
 Lettie I think . but be I talk damn rot ? what be I say ? what be 
 you make I talk for ? what be you listen for ? " 

 I rise and go across to he , say : " I do not   want you to talk ! if you 
 sleep till morning thing will look different . " 

 I sit on his bed and take his hand . he lie quite still . 

 " I be only a kid after all , Cyril , " he say , a few moment later . 

 " we all be , " I answer , still hold his hand . presently he fall 
 asleep . 

 when I awake the sunlight be laugh with the young morning in the 
 room . the large blue sky shine against the window , and the bird be 
 call in the garden below , shout to one another and make fun of 
 life . I feel glad to have open my eye . I lay for a moment look out 
 on the morning as on a blue bright sea in which I be go to plunge . 

 then my eye wander to the little table near the couch . I notice the 
 glitter of George 's cigarette case , and then , with a start , the whisky 
 decanter . it be nearly empty . he must have drink three - quarter of a 
 pint of liquor while I be doze . I could not believe it . I think I 
 must have be mistake as to the quantity the bottle contain . I 
 lean out to see what it be that have startle I by its fall the night 
 before . it be the large , heavy drinking glass which he have knock down 
 but not break . I could see no stain on the carpet . 

 George be still asleep . he lie half uncover , and be breathe 
 quietly . his face look inert like a mask . the pallid , uninspired clay 
 of his feature seem to have sink a little out of shape , so that he 
 appear rather haggard , rather ugly , with groove of ineffectual misery 
 along his cheek . I want he to wake , so that his inert , flaccid 
 feature might be inspire with life again . I could not believe his 
 charm and his beauty could have forsake he so , and leave his feature 
 dreary , sunken clay . 

 as I look he wake . his eye open slowly . he look at I and turn 
 away , unable to meet my eye . he pull the bedclothe up over his 
 shoulder , as though to cover himself from I , and he lie with his back 
 to I , quite still , as if he be asleep , although I know he be quite 
 awake ; he be suffer the humiliation of lie wait for his life to 
 crawl back and inhabit his body . as it be , his vitality be not yet 
 sufficient to inform the muscle of his face and give he an expression , 
 much less to answer by challenge . 

  CHAPTER V 

  PISGAH 

 when her eld boy be three year old Lettie return to live at 
 Eberwich . old Mr. Tempest die suddenly , so Leslie come down to inhabit 
 " Highclose . " he be a very much occupied man . very often he be in 
 Germany or in the South of England engage on business . at home he be 
 unfailingly attentive to his wife and his two child . he have 
 cultivate a taste for public life . in spite of his pressure of business 
 he have become a County Councillor , and one of the prominent member of 
 the Conservative Association . he be very fond of answer or proposing 
 toast at some public dinner , of entertain political man at 
 " Highclose , " of take the chair at political meeting , and finally , of 
 speak on this or that platform . his name be fairly often see in the 
 newspaper . as a mine owner , he speak as an authority on the employment 
 of labour , on royalty , land - owning and so on . 

 at home he be quite tame . he treat his wife with respect , romp in 
 the nursery , and domineer the servant royally . they like he for 
 it she they do not like . he be noisy , but unobservant , she be quiet 
 and exact . he would swear and bluster furiously , but when he be 
 round the corner they smile . she give her order and pass very 
 moderate censure , but they go away curse to themselves . as Lettie 
 be always a very good wife , Leslie adore she when he have the time , and 
 when he have not , forget she comfortably . 

 she be very contradictory . at time she would write to I in term of 
 passionate dissatisfaction : she have nothing at all in her life , it be a 
 barren futility . 

 " I hope I shall have another child next spring , " she would write , " there 
 be only that to take away the misery of this torpor . I seem full of 
 passion and energy , and it all fizzle out in day to day domestic " 

 when I reply to she urge she to take some work that she could throw 
 her soul into , she would reply indifferently . then later : 

 " you charge I with contradiction . well , naturally . you see I write that 
 screech letter in a mood which will not   come again for some time . 
 generally I be quite content to take the rain and the calm day just as 
 they come , then something fling I out of myself and I be a trifle 
 demented : very , very blue , as I tell Leslie . " 

 like so many woman , she seem to live , for the most part contentedly , a 
 small indoor existence with artificial light and pad upholstery . only 
 occasionally , hear the wind of life outside , she clamour to be out 
 in the black , keen storm . she be drive to the door , she look out and 
 call into the tumult wildly , but feminine caution keep she from 
 step over the threshold . 

 George be flourish in his horse - dealing . 

 in the morning , procession of splendid shire horse , tie tail and 
 head , would tramp grandly along the quiet lane of Eberwich , lead by 
 George 's man , or by Tom Mayhew , while in the fresh clean sunlight George 
 would go rid by , two restless nag dance beside he . 

 when I come home from France five year after our meeting in London I 
 find he instal in the " Hollies . " he have rent the house from the 
 Mayhews , and have move there with his family , leave Oswald in charge 
 of the " Ram . " I call at the large house one afternoon , but George be 
 out . his family surprise I . the twin be tall lad of six . there 
 be two more boy , and Meg be nurse a beautiful baby - girl about a 
 year old . this child be evidently mistress of the household . Meg , who 
 be grow stouter , indulge the little creature in every way . 

 " how be George ? " I ask she . 

 " oh , he be very well , " she reply . " he be always get something on hand . 
 he hardly seem to have a spare moment ; what with his socialism , and one 
 thing and another . " 

 it be true , the outcome of his visit to London have be a wild devotion 
 to the cause of the down - trodden . I see a picture of Watt 's " Mammon , " on 
 the wall of the morning - room , and the work of Blatchford , Masterman , 
 and Chiozza Money on the side table . the socialist of the district use 
 to meet every other Thursday evening at the " Hollies " to discuss reform . 
 Meg do not care for these earnest soul . 

 " they be not my sort , " she say , " too jerky and bumptious . they think 
 everybody 's slow - witted but they . there be one thing about they , though , 
 they do not   drink , so that be a blessing . " 

 " why ! " I say , " have you have much trouble that way ? " 

 she lower her voice to a pitch which be sufficiently mysterious to 
 attract the attention of the boy . 

 " I should not   say anything if it be not   that you be like brother , " she 
 say . " but he do begin to have dreadful drinking bout . you know it be 
 always spirit , and generally brandy : and that make such work with 
 they . you have   no idea what he be like when he be evil - drunk . sometimes he be 
 all for talk , sometimes he be laugh at everything , and sometimes he be 
 just snappy . and then " here her tone grow ominous , " he will come 
 home evil - drunk . " 

 at the memory she grow serious . 

 " you could not   imagine what it be like , Cyril , " she say . " it be like 
 have Satan in the house with you , or a black tiger glower at you . 
 I be sure nobody know what I have   suffer with he " 

 the child stand with large awful eye and pal lip , listen . 

 " but he be well now ? " I say . 

 " oh , yes since Gertie come , " she look fondly at the baby in her 
 arm " he be a lot well now . you see he always want a girl , and he be 
 very fond of she be not   he , pet ? be you your Dadda 's girlie ? and 
 Mamma 's too , be not   you ? " 

 the baby turn with sudden coy shyness , and clung to her mother 's neck . 
 Meg kiss she fondly , then the child lay her cheek against her 
 mother 's . the mother 's dark eye , and the baby 's large , hazel eye 
 look at I serenely . the two be very calm , very complete and 
 triumphant together . in their completeness be a security which make I 
 feel alone and ineffectual . a woman who have her child in her arm be a 
 tower of strength , a beautiful , unassailable tower of strength that may 
 in its turn stand quietly deal death . 

 I tell Meg I would call again to see George . two evening later I ask 
 Lettie to lend I a dog - cart to drive over to the " Hollies . " Leslie be 
 away on one of his political jaunt , and she be restless . she propose 
 to go with I . she have call on Meg twice before in the new large home . 

 we start about six o'clock . the night be dark and muddy . Lettie 
 want to call in Eberwich village , so she drive the long way round 
 Selsby . the horse be walk through the gate of the " Hollies " at about 
 seven o'clock . Meg be upstairs in the nursery , the maid tell I , and 
 George be in the dining - room get baby to sleep . 

 " all right ! " I say , " we will go in to he . do not   bother to tell he . " 

 as we stand in the gloomy , square hall we hear the rumble of a 
 rocking - chair , the stroke come slow and heavy to the tune of " Henry 
 Martin , " one of our Strelley Mill folk song . then , through the man 's 
 heavily - accent singing float the long light crooning of the baby as 
 she sing , in her quaint little fashion , a mischievous second to her 
 father 's lullaby . he wax a little louder ; and without know why , we 
 find ourselves smile with piquant amusement . the baby grow louder 
 too , till there be a shrill ring of laughter and mockery in her music . 
 he sing louder and louder , the baby shrill higher and high , the 
 chair swing in long , heavy beat . then suddenly he begin to laugh . the 
 rocking stop , and he say , still with laughter and enjoyment in his 
 tone : 

 " now that be very wicked ! ah , naughty Girlie go to boh , go to 
 bohey ! at once . " 

 the baby chuckle her small , insolent mockery . 

 " Come , Mamma ! " he say , " come and take Girlie to bohey ! " 

 the baby laugh again , but with an uncertain touch of appeal in her 
 tone . we open the door and enter . he look up very much startled to 
 see we . he be sit in a tall rock - chair by the fire , coatless , 
 with white shirtsleeve . the baby , in her high - waiste , tight little 
 night - gown , stand on his knee , her wide eye fix on we , wild wisps of 
 her brown hair brush across her forehead and glint like puff of 
 bronze dust over her ear . quickly she put her arm round his neck and 
 tuck her face under his chin , her small foot poise on his thigh , the 
 night - gown dropping upon they . he shake his head as the puff of soft 
 brown hair tickle he . he smile at we , say : 

 " you see I be busy ! " 

 then he turn again to the little brown head tuck under his chin , 
 blow away the luminous cloud of hair , and rub his lip and his 
 moustache on the small white neck , so warm and secret . the baby put up 
 her shoulder , and shrink a little , bubble in his neck with hidden 
 laughter . she do not lift her face or loosen her arm . 

 " she think she be shy , " he say . " look up , young hussy , and see the 
 lady and gentleman . she be a positive owl , she will not   go to bed will 
 you , young brown - owl ? " 

 he tickle her neck again with his moustache , and the child bubble over 
 with naughty , merry laughter . 

 the room be very warm , with a red bank of fire up the chimney mouth . it 
 be half light from a heavy bronze chandelier , black and gloomy , in 
 the middle of the room . there be the same sombre , sparse furniture that 
 the Mayhews have have . George look large and handsome , the glossy black 
 silk of his waistcoat fitting close to his side , the roundness of the 
 shoulder muscle fill the white linen of his sleeve . 

 suddenly the baby lift her head and star at we , thrust into her 
 mouth the dummy that be pin to the breast of her night - gown . the 
 fade pink sleeve of the night - gown be tight on her fat little 
 wrist . she stand thus suck her dummy , one arm round her father 's 
 neck , watch we with hazel solemn eye . then she push her fat little 
 fist up among the bush of small curl , and begin to twist her finger 
 about her ear that be white like a camelia flower . 

 " she be really sleepy , " say Lettie . 

 " come then ! " say he , fold she for sleep against his breast . " come 
 and go to boh . " 

 but the young rascal immediately begin to cry her remonstrance . she 
 stiffen herself , free herself , and stand again on his knee , watch 
 we solemnly , vibrate the dummy in her mouth as she suddenly suck at 
 it , twist her father 's ear in her small finger till he wince . 

 " her nail be sharp , " he say , smile . 

 he begin ask and give the small information that pass between 
 friend who have not meet for a long time . the baby lay her head on his 
 shoulder , keep her tired , owl - like eye fix darkly on we . then 
 gradually the lid flutter and sink , and she drop on to his arm . 

 " she be asleep , " whisper Lettie . 

 immediately the dark eye open again . we look significantly at one 
 another , continue our subdue talk . after a while the baby sleep 
 soundly . 

 presently Meg come downstairs . she greet we in breathless whisper of 
 surprise , and then turn to her husband . 

 " have she go ? " she whisper , bend over the sleep child in 
 astonishment . " my , this be wonderful , be not   it ! " 

 she take the sleep droop baby from his arm , put her mouth 
 close to its forehead , murmur with soothing , inarticulate sound . 

 we stay talk for some time when Meg have put the baby to bed . George 
 have a new tone of assurance and authority . in the first place he be an 
 establish man , live in a large house , have altogether three man 
 work for he . in the second place he have cease to value the 
 conventional treasure of social position and ostentatious refinement . 
 very , very many thing he condemn as flummery and sickly waste of 
 time . the life of an ordinary well - to - do person he set down as adorn 
 futility , almost idiocy . he speak passionately of the monstrous denial 
 of life to the many by the fortunate few . he talk at Lettie most 
 flagrantly . 

 " of course , " she say , " I have read Mr. Wells and Mr. Shaw , and even 
 Niel Lyons and a Dutchman what be his name , Querido ? but what can I do ? 
 I think the rich have as much misery as the poor , and of quite as deadly 
 a sort . what can I do ? it be a question of life and the development of 
 the human race . society and its regulation be not a sort of drill that 
 endless Napoleons have force on we : it be the only way we have yet 
 find of live together . " 

 " pah ! " say he , " that be rank cowardice . it be feeble and futile to the 
 last degree . " 

 " we can not   grow consumption - proof in a generation , nor can we grow 
 poverty - proof . " 

 " we can begin to take active measure , " he reply contemptuously . 

 " we can all go into a sanatorium and live miserably and dejectedly 
 ward off death , " she say , " but life be full of goodliness for all 
 that . " 

 " it be full of misery , " he say . 

 nevertheless , she have shake he . she still keep she astonishing power 
 of influence his opinion . all his passion , and heat , and rude speech , 
 analyse out , be only his terror at her threatening of his 
 life - interest . 

 she be rather pique by his rough treatment of she , and by his 
 contemptuous tone . moreover , she could never quite let he be . she feel 
 a drive force which impel she almost against her will to interfere 
 in his life . she invite he to dine with they at Highclose . he be now 
 quite possible . he have , in the course of his business , be sufficiently 
 in the company of gentleman to be altogether " comme it faut " at a 
 private dinner , and after dinner . 

 she write I concern he occasionally : 

 " George Saxton be here to dinner yesterday . he and Leslie have frightful 
 battle over the nationalisation of industry . George be rather more 
 than a match for Leslie , which , in his secret heart , make our friend 
 gloriously proud . it be very amusing . I , of course , have to preserve the 
 balance of power , and , of course , to bolster my husband 's dignity . at a 
 crucial dangerous moment , when George be just go to wave his bloody 
 sword and Leslie lie bleed with rage , I step in and prick the victor 
 under the heart with some little satire or some esoteric question , I 
 raise Leslie and say his blood be luminous for the truth , and vous 
 voila ! then I abate for the thousandth time Leslie 's conservative crow , 
 and I appeal once more to George it be no use my arguing with he , he 
 get so angry I make an abtruse appeal for all the wonderful , sad , and 
 beautiful expression on the countenance of life , expression which he 
 do not see or which he distort by his oblique vision of socialism 
 into grimace and there I be ! I think I be something of a Machiavelli , 
 but it be quite true , what I say " 

 again she write : 

 " we happen to be motor from Derby on Sunday morning , and as we come 
 to the top of the hill , we have to thread our way through quite a large 
 crowd . I look up , and whom should I see but our friend George , hold 
 forth about the state endowment of mother . I make Leslie stop while we 
 listen . the market - place be quite full of people . George see we , and 
 become fiery . Leslie then grow excited , and although I cling to the 
 skirt of his coat with all my strength , he jump up and begin to 
 question . I must say it with shame and humility he make an ass of 
 himself . the man all round be jeer and mutter under their 
 breath . I think Leslie be not very popular among they , he be such an 
 advocate of machinery which will do the work of man . so they cheer our 
 friend George when he thunder forth his reply and his 
 demonstration . he point his finger at we , and fling his hand at we , 
 and shout till I quail in my seat . I can not understand why he should 
 become so frenzied as soon as I be within range . George have a triumph 
 that morning , but when I see he a few day later he seem very uneasy , 
 rather self - mistrustful " 

 almost a year later I hear from she again on the same subject . 

 " I have have such a lark . two or three time I have be to the 
 ' holly ' ; to socialist meeting . Leslie do not know . they be great 
 fun . of course , I be in sympathy with the socialist , but I can not 
 narrow my eye till I see one thing only . life be like a large , rather 
 beautiful man who be young and full of vigour , but hairy , barbaric , with 
 hand hard and dirty , the dirt ingrain . I know his hand be very 
 ugly , I know his mouth be not firmly shapen , I know his limb be hairy 
 and brutal : but his eye be deep and very beautiful . that be what I 
 tell George . 

 the people be so earnest , they make I sad . but then , they be so 
 didactic , they hold forth so much , they be so cock - sure and so 
 narrow - eye , they make I laugh . George laugh too . I be sure we make 
 such fun of a straight - haired goggle of a girl who have suffer in 
 prison for the cause of woman , that I be ashamed when I see my " Woman 's 
 League " badge . at the bottom , you know , Cyril , I do not   care for anything 
 very much , except myself . thing seem so frivolous . I be the only real 
 thing , I and the child " 

 Gradually George fall out of the socialist movement . it weary he . it 
 do not feed he altogether . he begin by mock his friend of the 
 confraternity . then he speak in bitter dislike of Hudson , the wordy , 
 humorous , shallow leader of the movement in Eberwich ; it be Hudson with 
 his wriggling and his clap - trap who disgust George with the cause . 
 finally the meeting at the ' Hollies ' cease , and my friend drop all 
 connection with his former associate . 

 he begin to speculate in land . a hosiery factory move to Eberwich , 
 give the place a new stimulus to growth . George happen to buy a 
 piece of land at the end of the street of the village . when he get it , 
 it be lay out in allotment garden . these be become valueless 
 owe to the encroachment of house . he take it , divide it up , and 
 offer it as site for a new row of shop . he sell at a good profit . 

 altogether he be become very well off . I hear from Meg that he be 
 flourish , that he do not drink " anything to speak of , " but that he 
 be always out , she hardly see anything of he . if get - on be to 
 keep he so much away from home , she would be content with a little less 
 fortune . he complain that she be narrow , and that she would not 
 entertain any sympathy with any of his idea . 

 " nobody come here to see I twice , " he say . " because Meg receive they 
 in such an off - hand fashion . I ask Jim Curtiss and his wife from 
 Everley Hall one evening . we be uncomfortable all the time . Meg have 
 hardly a word for anybody ' yes ' and ' no ' and ' Hm Hm ! ' they will never 
 come again . " 

 Meg herself say : 

 " oh , I can not   stand stuck - up folk . they make I feel uncomfortable . as 
 soon as they begin mince their word I be do for I can no more talk 
 than a lobster " 

 thus their nature contradict each other . he try hard to gain a 
 footing in Eberwich . as it be he belong to no class of society 
 whatsoever . Meg visit and entertain the wife of small shop - keeper 
 and publican : this be her set . 

 George vote the woman loud - mouthed , vulgar , and narrow not without 
 some cause . Meg , however , persist . she visit when she think fit , 
 and entertain when he be out . he make acquaintance after 
 acquaintance : Dr. Francis ; Mr. Cartridge , the veterinary surgeon ; Toby 
 Heswall , the brewer 's son ; the Curtisses , farmer of good standing from 
 Everley Hall . but it be no good . George be by nature a family man . he 
 want to be private and secure in his own room , then he be at ease . 
 as Meg never go out with he , and as every attempt to entertain at the 
 " holly " fill he with shame and mortification , he begin to give up 
 try to place himself , and remain suspend in social isolation at 
 the " Hollies . " 



 the friendship between Lettie and himself have be keep up , in spite of 
 all thing . Leslie be sometimes jealous , but he dare not show it 
 openly , for fear of his wife 's scathing contempt . George go to 
 " Highclose " perhaps once in a fortnight , perhaps not so often . Lettie 
 never go to the " Hollies , " as Meg 's attitude be too antagonistic . 

 Meg complain very bitterly of her husband . he often make a beast of 
 himself drink , he think more of himself than he ought , home be not 
 good enough for he , he be selfish to the back - bone , he care neither 
 for she nor the child , only for himself . 



 I happen to be at home for Lettie 's thirty - first birthday . George be 
 then thirty - five . Lettie have allow her husband to forget her birthday . 
 he be now very much immerse in politic , foresee a general election 
 in the following year , and intend to contest the seat in parliament . 
 the division be an impregnable liberal stronghold , but Leslie have hope 
 that he might capture the situation . therefore he spend a great deal of 
 time at the conservative club , and among the man of influence in the 
 southern division . Lettie encourage he in these affair . it relieve 
 she of he . it be thus that she let he forget her birthday , while , for 
 some unknown reason , she let the intelligence slip to George . he be 
 invite to dinner , as I be at home . 

 George come at seven o'clock . there be a strange feeling of festivity 
 in the house , although there be no evident sign . Lettie have dress 
 with some magnificence in a blackish purple gauze over soft satin of 
 light tone , nearly the colour of double violet . she wear vivid green 
 azurite ornament on the fairness of her bosom , and her bright hair be 
 bind by a band of the same colour . it be rather startling . she be 
 conscious of her effect , and be very excited . immediately George see 
 she his eye waken with a dark glow . she stand up as he enter , she 
 hand stretch straight out to he , her body very erect , her eye bright 
 and rousing , like two blue pennant . 

 " thank you so much , " she say softly , give his hand a last pressure 
 before she let it go . he could not answer , so he sit down , bow his 
 head , then look up at she in suspense . she smile at she . 

 presently the child come in . they look very quaint , like acolyte , 
 in their long straight dressing - gown of quilt blue silk . the boy , 
 particularly , look as if he be go to light the candle in some 
 childish church in paradise . he be very tall and slender and fair , with 
 a round fine head , and serene feature . both child look remarkably , 
 almost transparently clean : it be impossible to consider anything more 
 fresh and fair . the girl be a merry , curly head puss of six . she 
 play with her mother 's green jewel and prattle prettily , while the 
 boy stand at his mother 's side , a slender and silent acolyte in his pale 
 blue gown . I be impress by his patience and his purity . when the girl 
 have bound away into George 's arm , the lad lay his hand timidly on 
 Lettie 's knee and look with a little wonder at her dress . 

 " how pretty those green stone be , mother ! " he say . 

 " yes , " reply Lettie brightly , lift they and let their strange 
 pattern fall again on her bosom . " I like they . " 

 " be you go to sing , mother ? " he ask . 

 " perhaps . but why ? " say Lettie , smile . 

 " because you generally sing when Mr. Saxton come . " 

 he bend his head and stroke Lettie 's dress shyly . 

 " do I , " she say , laugh , " can you hear ? " 

 " just a little , " he reply . " quite small , as if it be nearly lose in 
 the dark . " 

 he be hesitate , shy as boy be . Lettie lay her hand on his head and 
 stroke his smooth fair hair . 

 " sing a song for we before we go , mother " he ask , almost shamefully . 
 she kiss he . 

 " you shall sing with I , " she say . " what shall it be ? " 

 she play without a copy of the music . he stand at her side , while 
 Lucy , the little mouse , sit on her mother 's skirt , press Lettie 's 
 silk slipper in turn upon the pedal . the mother and the boy sing their 
 song . 

  " gaily the troubadour touch his guitar 
  as he be hasten from 
 the war . " 

 the boy have a pure treble , clear as the flight of swallow in the 
 morning . the light shine on his lip . under the piano the girl child sit 
 laugh , press her mother 's foot with all her strength , and laugh 
 again . Lettie smile as she sing . 

 at last they kiss we a gentle " good - night , " and flit out of the 
 room . the girl pop her curly head round the door again . we see the 
 white cuff on the nurse 's wrist as she hold the youngster 's arm . 

 " you will come and kiss we when we be in bed , Mum ? " ask the rogue . her 
 mother laugh and agree . 

 Lucy be withdraw for a moment ; then we hear she , " just a tick , nurse , 
 just half - a - tick ! " 

 the curly head appear round the door again . 

 " and one teenie sweetie , " she suggest , " only one ! " 

 " go , you ! " Lettie clap her hand in mock wrath . the child 
 vanish , but immediately there appear again round the door two blue 
 laugh eye and the snub tip of a nose . 

 " a nice one , Mum not a jelly - one ! " 

 Lettie rise with a rustle to sweep upon she . the child vanish with a 
 glitter of laughter . we hear she call breathlessly on the 
 stair " wait a bit , Freddie , wait for I ! " 

 George and Lettie smile at each other when the child have go . as 
 the smile die from their face they look down sadly , and until dinner 
 be announce they be very still and heavy with melancholy . after 
 dinner Lettie debate pleasantly which bon - bon she should take for the 
 child . when she come down again she smoke a cigarette with we over 
 coffee . George do not like to see her smoking , yet he brighten a 
 little when he sit down after give she a light , pleased with the mark 
 of recklessness in she . 

 " it be ten year to - day since my party at Woodside , " she say , reach 
 for the small roman salt - cellar of green jade that she use as an 
 ash - tray . 

 " my Lord ten year ! " he exclaim bitterly . " it seem a hundred . " 

 " it do and it do not , " she answer , smile . 

 " if I look straight back , and think of my excitement , it seem only 
 yesterday . if I look between then and now , at all the day that lie 
 between , it be an age . " 

 " if I look at myself , " he say , " I think I be another person 
 altogether . " 

 " you have change , " she agree , look at he sadly . " there be a great 
 change but you be not another person . I often think there be one of 
 his old look , he be just the same at the bottom ! " 

 they embark on a barge of gloomy recollection and drift along the 
 soil canal of their past . 

 " the bad of it be , " he say . " I have get a miserable carelessness , a 
 contempt for thing . you know I have such a faculty for reverence . I 
 always believe in thing . " 

 " I know you do , " she smile . " you be so humbly - minded too 
 humbly - minded , I always consider . you always think thing have a deep 
 religious meaning , somewhere hide , and you reverence they . be it 
 different now ? " 

 " you know I very well , " he laugh . " what be there leave for I to 
 believe in , if not in myself ? " 

 " you have to live for your wife and child , " she say with firmness . 

 " Meg have plenty to secure she and the child as long as they live , " he 
 say , smile . " so I do not   know that I be essential . " 

 " but you be , " she reply . " you be necessary as a father and a 
 husband , if not as a provider . " 

 " I think , " say he , " marriage be more of a duel than a duet . one party 
 win and take the other captive , slave , servant what you like . it be 
 so , more or less . " 

 " well ? " say Lettie . 

 " well ! " he answer . " Meg be not like you . she want I , part of I , so 
 she would kill I rather than let I go loose . " 

 " oh , no ! " say Lettie , emphatically . 

 " you know nothing about it , " he say quietly . 

 " in the marital duel Meg be win . the woman generally do ; she have 
 the child on her side . I can not   give she any of the real part of I , 
 the vital part that she want I can not , any more than you could give 
 kiss to a stranger . and I feel that I be lose and do not   care . " 

 " no , " she say , " you be get morbid . " 

 he put the cigarette between his lip , draw a deep breath , then slowly 
 send the smoke down his nostril . 

 " no , " he say . 

 " look here ! " she say . " let I sing to you , shall I , and make you 
 cheerful again ? " 

 she sing from Wagner . it be the music of resignation and despair . she 
 have not think of it . all the time he listen he be think . the 
 music stimulate his thought and illuminate the trend of his brooding . 
 all the time he sit look at she his eye be dark with his thought . 
 she finish the " Star of Eve " from Tannhšuser and come over to he . 

 " why be you so sad to - night , when it be my birthday ? " she ask 
 plaintively . 

 " be I slow ? " he reply . " I be sorry . " 

 " what be the matter ? " she say , sink onto the small sofa near to he . 

 " nothing ! " he reply " you be look very beautiful . " 

 " there , I want you to say that ! you ought to be quite gay , you know , 
 when I be so smart to - night . " 

 " Nay , " he say , " I know I ought . but the to - morrow seem to have fall 
 in love with I . I can not   get out of its lean arm . " 

 " why ! " she say . " to - morrow 's arm be not lean . they be white , like 
 mine . " she lift her arm and look at they , smile . 

 " how do you know ? " he ask , pertinently . 

 " oh , of course they be , " be her light answer . 

 he laugh , brief and sceptical . 

 " no ! " he say . " it come when the child kiss we . " 

 " what ? " she ask . 

 " these lean arm of tomorrow 's round I , and the white arm round you , " 
 he reply , smile whimsically . she reach out and clasp his hand . 

 " you foolish boy , " she say . 

 he laugh painfully , not able to look at she . 

 " you know , " he say , and his voice be low and difficult " I have need 
 you for a light . you will soon be the only light again . " 

 " who be the other ? " she ask . 

 " my little girl ! " he answer . then he continue , " and you know , I 
 could not   endure complete darkness , I could not . it be the solitariness . " 

 " you must not   talk like this , " she say . " you know you must not . " she put 
 her hand on his head and run her finger through the hair he have so 
 ruffle . 

 " it be as thick as ever , your hair , " she say . 

 he do not answer , but keep his face bend out of sight . she rise from 
 her seat and stand at the back of his low arm - chair . take an amber 
 comb from her hair , she bent over he , and with the translucent comb and 
 her white finger she busy herself with his hair . 

 " I believe you would have a parting , " she say softly . 

 he laugh shortly at her playfulness . she continue comb , just 
 touching , press the strand in place with the tip of her finger . 

 " I be only a warmth to you , " he say , pursue the same train of 
 thought . " so you could do without I . but you be like the light to I , 
 and otherwise it be dark and aimless . Aimlessness be horrible . " 

 she have finally smooth his hair , so she lift her hand and put back 
 her head . 

 " there ! " she say . " it look fair fine , as Alice would say . Raven 's 
 wing be raggy in comparison . " 

 he do not pay any attention to she . 

 " be not   you go to look at yourself ? " she say , playfully reproachful . 
 she put her finger - tip under his chin . he lift his head and they 
 look at each other , she smile , try to make he play , he smile 
 with his lip , but not with eye , dark with pain . 

 " we can not   go on like this , Lettie , can we ? " he say softly . 

 " yes , " she answer he , " yes ; why not ? " 

 " it can not ! " he say , " it can not , I could not   keep it up , Lettie . " 

 " but do not   think about it , " she answer . " do not   think of it . " 

 " Lettie , " he say . " I have to set my tooth with loneliness . " 

 " hush ! " she say . " no ! there be the child . do not   say anything do 
 not be serious , will you ? " 

 " no , there be the child , " he reply , smile dimly . 

 " yes ! hush now ! stand up and look what a fine parting I have make in 
 your hair . stand up , and see if my style become you . " 

 " it be no good , Lettie , " he say , " we can not   go on . " 

 " oh , but come , come , come ! " she exclaim . " we be not talk about 
 go on ; we be consider what a fine parting I have make you down 
 the middle , like two wing of a spread bird " she look down , 
 smile playfully on he , just close her eye slightly in petition . 

 he rise and take a deep breath , and set his shoulder . 

 " no , " he say , and at the sound of his voice , Lettie go pale and also 
 stiffen herself . 

 " no ! " he repeat . " it be impossible . I feel as soon as Fred come into 
 the room it must be one way or another . " 

 " very well then , " say Lettie , coldly . her voice be " mute " like a 
 violin . 

 " yes , " he reply , submissive . " the child . " he look at she , 
 contract his lip in a smile of misery . 

 " be you sure it must be so final ? " she ask , rebellious , even 
 resentful . she be twist the azurite jewel on her bosom , and 
 press the blunt point into her flesh . he look up from the 
 fascination of her action when he hear the tone of her last question . 
 he be angry . 

 " quite sure ! " he say at last , simply , ironically . 

 she bow her head in assent . his face twitch sharply as he restrain 
 himself from speak again . then he turn and quietly leave the room . 
 she do not watch he go , but stand as he have leave she . when , after some 
 time , she hear the grating of his dog - cart on the gravel , and then the 
 sharp trot of hoof down the frozen road , she drop herself on the 
 settee , and lie with her bosom against the cushion , look fixedly at 
 the wall . 




  CHAPTER VI 

  the SCARP SLOPE 


 Leslie win the conservative victory in the general election which take 
 place a year or so after my last visit to " Highclose . " 

 in the interim the Tempests have entertain a continuous stream of 
 people . I hear occasionally from Lettie how she be busy , amused , or 
 bore . she tell I that George have throw himself into the struggle on 
 behalf of the candidate of the Labour Party ; that she have not see he , 
 except in the street , for a very long time . 

 when I go down to Eberwich in the March succeed the election , I 
 find several people stay with my sister . she have under her wing a 
 young literary fellow who affect the " Doady " style Dora Copperfield 's 
 " Doady . " he have bunch of half - curly hair , and a romantic black cravat ; 
 he play the impulsive part , but be really as calculate as any man 
 on the stock - exchange . it delight Lettie to " mother " he . he be so 
 shrewd as to be less than harmless . his fellow guest , a woman much 
 experience in music and an elderly man who be in the artistic world 
 without be of it , be interesting for a time . bubble after bubble of 
 float fancy and wit we blow with our breath in the evening . I rise 
 in the morning loathe the idea of more bubble - blowing . 

 I wander around Nethermere , which have now forget I . the daffodil 
 under the boat - house continue their golden laughter , and nod to one 
 another in gossip , as I watch they , never for a moment pause to 
 notice I . the yellow reflection of daffodil among the shadow of grey 
 willow in the water tremble faintly as they tell haunted tale in the 
 gloom . I feel like a child leave out of the group of my playmate . there 
 be a wind run across Nethermere , and on the eager water blue and 
 glisten grey shadow change place swiftly . along the shore the wild 
 bird rise , flap in expostulation as I pass , peewit mewing 
 fiercely round my head , while two white swan lift their glistening 
 feather till they look like grand double water - lily , lay back 
 their orange beak among the petal , and front I with haughty 
 resentment , charge towards I insolently . 

 I want to be recognise by something . I say to myself that the dryad 
 be look out for I from the wood 's edge . but as I advance they 
 shrink , and glance wistfully , turn back like pale flower fall in 
 the shadow of the forest . I be a stranger , an intruder . among the 
 bush a twitter of lively bird exclaim upon I . finch go leap 
 past in bright flash , and a robin sit and ask rudely : " hello ! who 
 be you ? " 

 the bracken lie sere under the tree , break and chavelle by the 
 restless wild wind of the long winter . 

 the tree catch the wind in their tall netted twig , and the young 
 morning wind moan at its captivity . as I trod the discard oak - leaf 
 and the bracken they utter their last sharp gasp , press into 
 oblivion . the wood be roof with a wide young sobbing sound , and 
 floor with a faint hiss like the intaking of the last breath . between , 
 be all the glad out - peeping of bud and anemone flower and the rush of 
 bird . I , wander alone , feel they all , the anguish of the bracken 
 fall face - down in defeat , the careless dash of the bird , the sobbing 
 of the young wind arrest in its haste , the trembling , expand 
 delight of the bud . I alone among they could hear the whole succession 
 of chord . 

 the brook talk on just the same , just as gladly , just as boisterously 
 as they have do when I have net small , glitter fish in the 
 rest - pool . at Strelley Mill a servant girl in a white cap , and white 
 apron - band , come run out of the house with purple prayer - book , 
 which she give to the elder of two finicke girl who sit 
 disconsolately with their black - silke mother in the governess cart at 
 the gate , ready to go to church . near Woodside there be barb - wire 
 along the path , and at the end of every riding it be tar on the 
 tree - trunk , " private . " 

 I have do with the valley of Nethermere . the valley of Nethermere have 
 cast I out many year before , while I have fondly believe it cherish 
 I in memory . 

 I go along the road to Eberwich . the church bell be ring 
 boisterously , with the careless boisterousness of the brook and the 
 bird and the rollick coltsfoot and celandine . 

 a few people be hasten blithely to service . miner and other 
 labour man be pass in aimless gang , walk nowhere in 
 particular , so long as they reach a sufficiently distant public house . 

 I reach the ' Hollies . ' it be much more spruce than it have be . the 
 yard , however , and the stable have again a somewhat abandon air . I 
 ask the maid for George . 

 " oh , master 's not up yet , " she say , give a little significant toss of 
 her head , and smile . I wait a moment . 

 " but he ring for a bottle of beer about ten minute since , so I should 
 think " she emphasise the word with some ironical contempt , " he 
 will not   be very long , " she add , in tone which convey that she be not 
 by any mean sure . I ask for Meg . 

 " oh , Missis be go to church and the child but Miss Saxton be in , 
 she might " 

 " Emily ! " I exclaim . 

 the maid smile . 

 " she be in the drawing - room . she be engage , but perhaps if I tell 
 she " 

 " yes , do , " say I , sure that Emily would receive I . 

 I find my old sweetheart sit in a low chair by the fire , a man 
 stand on the hearthrug pull his moustache . Emily and I both feel a 
 thrill of old delight at meeting . 

 " I can hardly believe it be really you , " she say , laugh I one of 
 the old intimate look . she have change a great deal . she be very 
 handsome , but she have now a new self - confidence , a fine , free 
 indifference . 

 " let I introduce you . Mr. Renshaw , Cyril . Tom , you know who it be you 
 have hear I speak often enough of Cyril . I be go to marry Tom in 
 three week ' time , " she say , laugh . 

 " the devil you be ! " I exclaim involuntarily . 

 " if he will have I , " she add , quite as a playful afterthought . 

 Tom be a well - build fair man , smoothly , almost delicately tan . there 
 be something soldierly in his bearing , something self - conscious in the 
 way he bend his head and pull his moustache , something charming and 
 fresh in the way he laugh at Emily 's last preposterous speech . 

 " why do not   you tell I ? " I ask . 

 " why do not   you ask I ? " she retort , arch her brow . 

 " Mr. Renshaw , " I say . " you have out - manoeuvre I all unawares , quite 
 indecently . " 

 " I be very sorry , " he say , give one more twist to his moustache , then 
 break into a loud , short laugh at his joke . 

 " do you really feel cross ? " say Emily to I , knit her brow and 
 smile quaintly . 

 " I do ! " I reply , with truthful emphasis . 

 she laugh , and laugh again , very much amuse . 

 " it be such a joke , " she say . " to think you should feel cross now , when 
 it be how long be it ago ? 

 " I will not count up , " say I. 

 " be you not sorry for I ? " I ask of Tom Renshaw . 

 he look at I with his young blue eye , eye so bright , so naively 
 inquisitive , so winsomely meditative . he do not know quite what to say , 
 or how to take it . 

 " very ! " he reply in another short burst of laughter , quickly twist 
 his moustache again and look down at his foot . 

 he be twenty - nine year old ; have be a soldier in China for five 
 year , be now farm his father 's farm at Papplewick , where Emily be 
 schoolmistress . he have be at home eighteen month . his father be an 
 old man of seventy who have have his right hand chop to bit in the 
 chop machine . so they tell I . I like Tom for his handsome bearing 
 and his fresh , winsome way . he be exceedingly manly : that be to say he 
 do not dream of question or analyse anything . all that come his 
 way be ready label nice or nasty , good or bad . he do not imagine 
 that anything could be other than just what it appear to be : and with 
 this appearance , he be quite content . he look up to Emily as one 
 wiser , nobler , near to God than himself . 

 " I be a thousand year old than he , " she say to I , laugh . " just 
 as you be century old than i. " 

 " and you love he for his youth ? " I ask . 

 " yes , " she reply . " for that and he be wonderfully sagacious and so 
 gentle . " 

 " and I be never gentle , be I ? " I say . 

 " no ! as restless and as urgent as the wind , " she say , and I see a last 
 flicker of the old terror . 

 " where be George ? " I ask . 

 " in bed , " she reply briefly . " he be recover from one of his orgy . 
 if I be Meg I would not live with he . " 

 " be he so bad ? " I ask . 

 " Bad ! " she reply . " he be disgusting , and I be sure he be dangerous . I would 
 have he remove to an inebriate 's home . " 

 " you would have to persuade he to go , " say Tom , who have come into the room 
 again . " he do have dreadful bout , though ! he be kill himself , sure 
 enough . I feel awfully sorry for the fellow . " 

 " it seem so contemptible to I , " say Emily , " to become enslave to one 
 of your liking till it make a beast of you . look what a spectacle he 
 be for his child , and what a disgusting disgrace for his wife . " 

 " well , if he can not   help it , he can not , poor chap , " say Tom . " though I do 
 think a man should have more backbone . " 

 we hear heavy noise from the room above . 

 " he be get up , " say Emily . " I suppose I would well see if he will have 
 any breakfast . " she wait , however . presently the door open , and 
 there stand George with his hand on the knob , lean , look in . 

 " I think I hear three voice , " he say , as if it free he from a 
 certain apprehension . he smile . his waistcoat hang open over his 
 woollen shirt , he wear no coat and be slipperless . his hair and his 
 moustache be dishevel , his face pale and stupid with sleep , his 
 eye small . he turn aside from our look as from a bright light . his 
 hand as I shake it be flaccid and chill . 

 " how do you come to be here , Cyril ? " he say subduedly , faintly smile . 

 " will you have any breakfast ? " Emily ask he coldly . 

 " I will have a bit if there be any for I , " he reply . 

 " it have be wait for you long enough , " she answer . he turn and 
 go with a dull thud of his stockinge foot across to the dining - room . 
 Emily ring for the maid , I follow George , leave the betrothed 
 together . I find my host move about the dining - room , look behind 
 the chair and in the corner . 

 " I wonder where the devil my slipper be ! " he mutter explanatorily . 
 meanwhile he continue his search . I notice he do not ring the bell to 
 have they find for he . presently he come to the fire , spread his 
 hand over it . as he be smash the slowly burn coal the maid come 
 in with the tray . he desist , and put the poker carefully down . while 
 the maid spread his meal on one corner of the table , he look in the 
 fire , pay she no heed . when she have finish : 

 " it be fry white - bait , " she say . " shall you have that ? " 

 he lift his head and look at the plate . 

 " ay , " he say . " have you bring the vinegar ? " 

 without answer , she take the cruet from the sideboard and set it on 
 the table . as she be close the door , she look back to say : 

 " you would well eat it now , while it be hot . " 

 he take no notice , but sit look in the fire . 

 " and how be you go on ? " he ask I . 

 " I ? oh , very well ! and you ? " 

 " as you see , " he reply , turn his head on one side with a little 
 gesture of irony . 

 " as I be very sorry to see , " I rejoin . 

 he sit forward with his elbow on his knee , tap the back of his 
 hand with one finger , in monotonous two - pulse like heart - beat . 

 " be not   you go to have breakfast ? " I urge . the clock at that moment 
 begin to ring a sonorous twelve . he look up at it with subdued 
 irritation . 

 " ay , I suppose so , " he answer I , when the clock have finish 
 striking . he rise heavily and go to the table . as he pour out a cup 
 of tea he spill it on the cloth , and stand look at the stain . it 
 be still some time before he begin to eat . he pour vinegar freely 
 over the hot fish , and eat with an indifference that make eat ugly , 
 pause now and again to wipe the tea off his moustache , or to pick a 
 bit of fish from off his knee . 

 " you be not married , I suppose ? " he say in one of his pause . 

 " no , " I reply . " I expect I shall have to be look round . " 

 " you be wise not , " he reply , quiet and bitter . 

 a moment or two later the maid come in with a letter . 

 " this come this morning , " she say , as she lay it on the table beside 
 he . he look at it , then he say : 

 " you do not   give I a knife for the marmalade . " 

 " do not   I ? " she reply . " I think you would not   want it . you do not   as a 
 rule . " 

 " and do you know where my slipper be ? " he ask . 

 " they ought to be in their usual place . " she go and look in the 
 corner . " I suppose Miss Gertie 's put they somewhere . I will get you 
 another pair . " 

 as he wait for she he read the letter . he read it twice , then he put 
 it back in the envelope , quietly , without any change of expression . but 
 he eat no more breakfast , even after the maid have bring the knife and 
 his slipper , and though he have have but a few mouthful . 

 at half - past twelve there be an imperious woman 's voice in the house . 
 Meg come to the door . as she enter the room , and see I , she stand 
 still . she sniff , glance at the table , and exclaim , come forward 
 effusively : 

 " well I never , Cyril ! who have a thought of see you here this morning ! 
 how be you ? " 

 she wait for the last of my word , then immediately she turn to 
 George , and say : 

 " I must say you be in a nice state for Cyril to see you ! have you 
 finish ? if you have , Kate can take that tray out . it smell quite 
 sickly . have you finish ? " 

 he do not answer , but drain his cup of tea and push it away with 
 the back of his hand . Meg ring the bell , and have take off her 
 glove , begin to put the thing on the tray , tip the fragment of 
 fish and bone from the edge of his plate to the middle with short , 
 disgusted jerk of the fork . her attitude and expression be of 
 resentment and disgust . the maid come in . 

 " clear the table kate , and open the window . have you open the bedroom 
 window ? " 

 " No'm not yet , " she glance at George as if to say he have only be 
 down a few minute . 

 " then do it when you have take the tray , " say Meg . 

 " you do not   open this window , " say George churlishly . " it be cold enough 
 as it be . " 

 " you should put a coat on then if you be starve , " reply Meg 
 contemptuously . " it be warm enough for those that have get any life in 
 their blood . you do not find it cold , do you Cyril ? " 

 " it be fresh this morning , " I reply . 

 " of course it be , not cold at all . and I be sure this room need air . " 

 the maid , however , fold the cloth and go out without approach the 
 window . 

 Meg have grow stouter , and there be a certain immovable confidence in 
 she . she be authoritative , amiable , calm . she wear a handsome dress of 
 dark green , and a toque with opulent ostrich feather . as she move 
 about the room she seem to dominate everything , particularly her 
 husband , who sit ruffle and deject , his waistcoat hang loose over 
 his shirt . 

 a girl enter . she be proud and mince in her deportment . her face 
 be handsome , but too haughty for a child . she wear a white coat , with 
 ermine tippet , muff , and hat . her long brown hair hang twin down her 
 back . 

 " have dad only just have his breakfast ? " she exclaim in high censorious 
 tone as she come in . 

 " he have ! " reply Meg . 

 the girl look at her father in calm , childish censure . 

 " and we have be to church , and come home to dinner , " she say , as she 
 draw off her little white glove . George watch she with ironical 
 amusement . 

 " hello ! " say Meg , glance at the open letter which lie near his 
 elbow . " who be that from ? " 

 he glance round , have forget it . he take the envelope , double it 
 and push it in his waistcoat pocket . 

 " it be from William Housley , " he reply . 

 " oh ! and what have he to say ? " she ask . 

 George turn his dark eye at she . 

 " nothing ! " he say . 

 " Hm - Hm ! " sneered Meg . " funny letter , about nothing ! " 

 " I suppose , " say the child , with her insolent , high - pitch 
 superiority , " it be some money that he do not   want we to know about . " 

 " that be about it ! " say Meg , give a small laugh at the child 's 
 perspicuity . 

 " so be he can keep it for himself , that be what it be , " continue the 
 child , nod her head in rebuke at he . 

 " I have   no right to any money , have I ? " ask the father sarcastically . 

 " no , you have not , " the child nod her head at he dictatorially , " you 
 have not , because you only put it in the fire . " 

 " you have   get it wrong , " he sneer . " you mean it be like give a child 
 fire to play with . " 

 " um ! and it be , be not   it Mam ? " the small woman turn to her mother 
 for corroboration . Meg have flush at his sneer , when he quote for the 
 child its mother 's dictum . 

 " and you be very naughty ! " preach Gertie , turn she back 
 disdainfully on her father . 

 " be that what the parson be be tell you ? " he ask , a grain of 
 amusement still in his bitterness . 

 " no it be not ! " retort the youngster . " if you want to know you should 
 go and listen for yourself . everybody that go to church look 
 nice " she glance at her mother and at herself , prune herself 
 proudly , " and God love they , " she add . she assume a sanctify 
 expression , and continue after a little thought : " because they look 
 nice and be meek . " 

 " what ! " exclaim Meg , laughing , glance with secret pride at I . 

 " because they be meek ! " repeat Gertie , with a superior little smile of 
 knowledge . 

 " you be off the mark this time , " say George . 

 " no , I be not , be I mam ? be not   it right Mam ? ' the meek shall inevit the 
 erf ' ? " 

 Meg be too much amuse to answer . 

 " the meek shall have herring on earth , " mock the father , also amuse . 
 his daughter look dubiously at he . she smell impropriety . 

 " it be not , Mam , be it ? " she ask , turn to her mother . Meg laugh . 

 " the meek shall have herring on earth , " repeat George with soft 
 banter . 

 " no it be not Mam , be it ? " cry the child in real distress . 

 " tell your father he be always teach you something wrong , " answer 
 Meg . 

 then I say I must go . they press I to stay . 

 " oh , yes do stop to dinner , " suddenly plead the child , smooth she 
 wild ravel of curl after have draw off her hat . she ask I again 
 and again , with much earnestness . 

 " but why ? " I ask . 

 " so be you can talk to we this afternoon an ' so 's Dad will not   be so 
 dis'greeable , " she reply plaintively , poke the black spot on her 
 muff . 

 Meg move near to her daughter with a little gesture of compassion . 

 " but , " say I , " I promise a lady I would be back for lunch , so I must . 
 you have some more visitor , you know . " 

 " oh , well ! " she complain , " they go in another room , and Dad do not 
 care about they . " 

 " but come ! " say I. 

 " well , he be just as dis'greeable when Auntie Emily 's here he be with 
 she an ' all . " 

 " you be have your character give away , " say Meg brutally , turn 
 to he . 

 I bade they good - bye . he do I the honour of come with I to the 
 door . we could neither of we find a word to say , though we be both 
 move . when at last I hold his hand and be look at he as I say 
 " good - bye " , he look back at I for the first time during our meeting . 
 his eye be heavy and as he lift they to I , seem to recoil in an 
 agony of shame . 




  CHAPTER VII 

  a prospect among the MARSHES of LETHE 


 George steadily decline from this time . I go to see he two year 
 later . he be not at home . Meg weep to I as she tell I of he , how he 
 let the business slip , how he drink , what a brute he be in drink , and 
 how unbearable afterwards . he be ruin his constitution , he be 
 ruin her life and the child 's . I feel very sorry for she as she 
 sit , large and ruddy , brim over with bitter tear . she ask I if I 
 do not think I might influence he . he be , she say , at the " Ram . " 
 when he have an extra bad bout on he go up there , and stay sometimes 
 for a week at a time , with Oswald , come back to the " Hollies " when he 
 have recover " though , " say Meg , " he be sick every morning and almost 
 after every meal . " 

 all the time Meg be tell I this , sit curl up in a large chair 
 their young boy , a pale , sensitive , rather spoil lad of seven or 
 eight year , with a petulant mouth and nervous dark eye . he sit 
 watch his mother as she tell her tale , heave his shoulder and 
 settle himself in a new position when his feeling be nearly too 
 much for he . he be full of wild , childish pity for his mother , and 
 furious , childish hate of his father , the author of all their trouble . I 
 call at the " ram " and see George . he be half drunk . 

 I go up to highclose with a heavy heart . Lettie 's last child have be 
 bear , much to the surprise of everybody , some few month before I come 
 down . there be a space of seven year between her young girl and 
 this baby . Lettie be much absorb in motherhood . 

 when I go up to talk to she about George I find she in the bedroom 
 nurse the baby , who be very good and quiet on her knee . she listen 
 to I sadly , but her attention be catch away by each movement make by 
 the child . as I be tell she of the attitude of George 's child 
 towards their father and mother , she glance from the baby to I , and 
 exclaim : 

 " see how he watch the light flash across your spectacle when you turn 
 suddenly look ! " 

 but I be weary of baby . my friend have all grow up and married and 
 inflict they on I . there be storm of baby . I long for a place 
 where they would be obsolete , and young , arrogant , impervious mother 
 might be a forget tradition . Lettie 's heart would quicken in answer 
 to only one pulse , the easy , light tick of the baby 's blood . 

 I remember , one day as I sit in the train hastening to Charing Cross 
 on my way from France , that that be George 's birthday . I have the 
 feeling of he upon I , heavily , and I could not rid myself of the 
 depression . I put it down to travel fatigue , and try to dismiss it . as 
 I watch the evening sun glitter along the new corn - stubble in the 
 field we pass , try to describe the effect to myself , I find 
 myself ask : " but what be the matter ? I have   not have bad news , have I , 
 to make my chest feel so weight ? " 

 I be surprised when I reach my lodging in New Maiden to find no 
 letter for I , save one fat budget from Alice . I know her squat , 
 saturnine handwriting on the envelope , and I think I know what 
 content to expect from the letter . 

 she have marry an old acquaintance who have be her particular 
 aversion . this young man have get himself into trouble , so that the 
 condemnation of the righteous pursue he like cloud of gnat on a 
 summer evening . Alice immediately rise to ste back his vulgar enemy , 
 and have render he a service , feel she could only wipe out the 
 score by marry he . they be fairly comfortable . occasionally , as 
 she say , there be display of small firework in the back yard . he 
 work in the office of some iron foundry just over the Erewash in 
 derbyshire . Alice live in a dirty little place in the valley a mile and 
 a half from Eberwich , not far from his work . she have no child , and 
 practically no friend ; a few young matron for acquaintance . as wife 
 of a superior clerk , she have to preserve her dignity among the 
 work - people . so all her little crackling fire be sod down with the 
 sod of british respectability . occasionally she smoulder a fierce 
 smoke that make one 's eye water . occasionally , perhaps once a year , she 
 write I a whole venomous budget , much to my amusement . 

 I be not in any haste to open this fat letter until , after supper , I 
 turn to it as a resource from my depression . 

 " oh dear Cyril , I be in a bubble state , I want to yell , not write . oh , 
 Cyril , why do not   you marry I , or why do not   our Georgie Saxton , or 
 somebody . I be deadly sick . Percival Charles be enough to stop a clock . 
 oh , Cyril , he live in an eternal Sunday suit , holy broadcloth and 
 righteous three inch of cuff ! he go to bed in it . Nay , he wallow 
 in bible when he go to bed . I can feel the brass cover of all his 
 family bible stick in my rib as I lie by his side . I could weep 
 with wrath , yet I put on my black hat and trot to chapel with he like a 
 lamb . 

 " oh , Cyril , nothing be happen . nothing have happen to I all these 
 year . I shall die of it . when I see Percival Charles at dinner , after 
 have ask a blessing , I feel as if I should never touch a bit at his 
 table again . in about an hour I shall hear he hurry up the 
 entry prayer always make he hungry and his first look will be on the 
 table . but I be not fair to he he be really a good fellow I only wish 
 he be not . 

 " it be George Saxton who be put this seidlitz powder in my marital cup of 
 cocoa . Cyril , I must a tale unfold . it be fifteen year since our George 
 married Meg . when I count up , and think of the future , it nearly make 
 I scream . but my tale , my tale ! 

 " can you remember his faithful - dog , wound - stag , gentle - gazelle eye ? 
 Cyril , you can see the whisky or the brandy combust in they . he be get 
 d t 's , blue - devil and I have   see he , and I be swarm myself with 
 little red devil after it . I go up to Eberwich on Wednesday afternoon 
 for a pound of fry for Percival Charles ' Thursday dinner . I walk by 
 that little path which you know go round the back of the 
 ' Hollies ' it be as near as any way for I . I think I hear a row in 
 the paddock at the back of the stable , so I say I might as well see 
 the fun . I go to the gate , basket in one hand , ninepence in copper in 
 the other , a demure deacon 's wife . I do not   take in the scene at first . 

 " there be our Georgie , in legging and breech as of yore , and a whip . 
 he be flourish , and stride , and yell . ' go it old boy , ' I say , 
 ' you will want your stocking round your throat to - night . ' but Cyril , I have 
 speak too soon . oh , lum ! there come rake up the croft that long , 
 wire - springy racehorse of his , ear flat , and , cling to its neck , the 
 pale - face lad , Wilfred . the kid be white as death , and squeal ' Mam ! 
 mam ! ' I think it be a bit rotten of Georgie try to teach the kid 
 to jockey . the race - horse , Bonny - Boy Boney boy I call he come 
 bounce round like a spiral egg - whish . then I see our Georgie rush up 
 screaming , nearly spit the moustache off his face , and fetch the 
 horse a cut with the whip . it go off like a flame along hot paraffin . 
 the kid shriek and clung . Georgie go rush after he , run 
 staggery , and swearing , fairly scream , awful ' a lily - livere little 
 swine ! ' the high lanky race - horse go larrope round as if it be 
 go mad . I be daze . then Meg come rush , and the other two lad , 
 all scream . she go for George , but he lift his whip like the 
 devil . she dare not   go near he she rush at he , and stop , rush 
 at he , and stop , strike at he with her two fist . he wave his 
 whip and keep she off , and the race - horse keep tear along . Meg fly 
 to stop it , he run with his drunken totter - step , brandish his whip . I 
 fly as well . I hit he with my basket . the kid fall off , and Meg rush 
 to he . some man come run . George stand fairly shudder . you would 
 never have know his face , Cyril . he be mad , demoniacal . I feel 
 sometimes as if I should burst and shatter to bit like a sky - rocket 
 when I think of it . I have   get such a weal on my arm . 

 " I lose Percival Charles ' ninepence and my nice white cloth out of the 
 basket , and everything , besides have black look on Thursday because 
 it be mutton chop , which he hat . oh , Cyril , ' I wish I be a 
 cassowary , on the bank of the Timbuctoo . ' when I see Meg sob over 
 that lad thank goodness he be not   hurt ! I wish our Georgie be 
 dead ; I do now , also ; I wish we only have to remember he . I have not   be 
 to see they lately can not   stand Meg 's ikeyness . I wonder how it all will 
 end . 

 " there be P. C. bidding ' good night and God Bless you ' to Brother Jakes , 
 and no supper ready " 

 as soon as I could , after read Alice 's letter , I go down to 
 Eberwich to see how thing be . memory of the old day come over I 
 again till my heart hunger for its old people . 

 they tell I at the " Hollies " that , after a bad attack of delirium 
 tremen , George have be send to Papplewick in the lonely country to 
 stay with Emily . I borrow a bicycle to ride the nine mile . the summer 
 have be wet , and everything be late . at the end of September the 
 foliage be heavy green , and the wheat stand dejectedly in stook . I ride 
 through the still sweetness of an autumn morning . the mist be fold 
 blue along the hedge ; the elm tree loom up along the dim wall of 
 the morning , the horse - chestnut tree at hand flicker with a few 
 yellow leaf like bright blossom . as I ride through the tree tunnel by 
 the church where , on his last night , the keeper have tell I his story , I 
 smell the cold rotting of the leaf of the cloudy summer . 

 I pass silently through the lane , where the chill grass be weigh 
 down with grey - blue seed - pearl of dew in the shadow , where the wet 
 woollen spider - cloth of autumn be spread as on a loom . brown bird 
 rustle in flock like drive leaf before I . I hear the far - off 
 hooting of the " loose - all " at the pit , tell I it be half - past 
 eleven , that the man and boy would be sit in the narrow darkness of 
 the mine eat their ' snap , " while shadowy mouse dart for the crumb , 
 and the boy laugh with red mouth rim with grime , as the bold 
 little creature peep at they in the dim light of the lamp . the 
 dogwood berry stand jauntily scarlet on the hedge - top , the bunch 
 scarlet and green berry of the convolvulus and bryony hang amid golden 
 trail , the blackberry drop ungathered . I ride slowly on , the 
 plant die around I , the berry lean their heavy ruddy mouth , 
 and languish for the bird , the man imprison underground below I , 
 the brown bird dash in haste along the hedge . 

 Swineshed Farm , where the Renshaws live , stand quite alone among its 
 field , hide from the highway and from everything . the lane lead up 
 to it be deep and unsunned . on my right , I catch glimpse through the 
 hedge of the corn - field , where the shock of wheat stand like small 
 yellow - sail ship in a widespread flotilla . the upper part of the 
 field be clear . I hear the clank of a wagon and the voice of man , 
 and I see the high load of sheaf go lurch , rock up the incline 
 to the stackyard . 

 the lane debouch into a close - bite field , and out of this empty land 
 the farm rise up with its building like a huddle of old , paint 
 vessel float in still water . white fowl go step discreetly 
 through the mild sunshine and the shadow . I lean my bicycle against 
 the grey , silken door of the old coach - house . the place be breathe 
 with silence . I hesitate to knock at the open door . Emily come . she be 
 rich as always with her large beauty , and stately now with the 
 stateliness of a strong woman six month go with child . 

 she exclaim with surprise , and I follow she into the kitchen , 
 catch a glimpse of the glistening pan and the white wood bath as I 
 pass through the scullery . the kitchen be a good - sized , low room that 
 through long course of year have become absolutely a home . the great 
 beam of the ceiling bow easily , the chimney - seat have a bit of 
 dark - green curtain , and under the high mantel - piece be another low 
 shelf that the man could reach with their hand as they sit in the 
 ingle - nook . there the pipe lay . many generation of peaceful man and 
 fruitful woman have pass through the room , and not one but have add a 
 new small comfort ; a chair in the right place , a hook , a stool , a 
 cushion , a certain pleasing cloth for the sofa cover , a shelf of book . 
 the room , that look so quiet and crude , be a home evolve through 
 generation to fit the large body of the man who dwell in it , and 
 the placid fancy of the woman . at last , it have an individuality . it be 
 the home of the Renshaws , warm , lovable , serene . Emily be in perfect 
 accord with its brownness , its shadow , its ease . I , as I sit on the 
 sofa under the window , feel reject by the kind room . I be distressed 
 with a sense of ephemerality , of pale , erratic fragility . 

 emily , in her full - blooded beauty , be at home . it be rare now to feel a 
 kinship between a room and the one who inhabit it , a close bond of 
 blood relation . Emily have at last find her place , and have escape from 
 the torture of strange , complex modern life . she be make a pie , and 
 the flour be white on her brown arm . she push the tickling hair from 
 her face with her arm , and look at I with tranquil pleasure , as she 
 work the paste in the yellow bowl . I be quiet , subdue before she . 

 " you be very happy ? " I say . 

 " ah very ! " she reply . " and you ? you be not , you look worn . " 

 " yes , " I reply . " I be happy enough . I be live my life . " 

 " do not   you find it wearisome ? " she ask pityingly . 

 she make I tell she all my doing , and she marvel , but all the time 
 her eye be dubious and pitiful . 

 " you have George here , " I say . 

 " yes . he be in a poor state , but he be not as sick as he be . " 

 " what about the delirium tremen ? " 

 " oh , he be well of that very nearly before he come here . he 
 sometimes fancy they be come on again , and he be terrified . be not   it 
 awful ! and he be bring it all on himself . Tom 's very good to he . " 

 " there be nothing the matter with he physically , be there ? " I ask . 

 " I do not   know , " she reply , as she go to the oven to turn a pie that 
 be bake . she put her arm to her forehead and brush aside her hair , 
 leave a mark of flour on her nose . for a moment or two she remain 
 kneeling on the fender , look into the fire and thinking . " he be in a 
 poor way when he come here , could eat nothing , sick every morning . I 
 suppose it be his liver . they all end like that . " she continue to wipe 
 the large black plum and put they in the dish . 

 " harden of the liver ? " I ask . she nod . 

 " and be he in bed ? " I ask again . 

 " yes , " she reply . " it be as I say , if he would get up and potter about a 
 bit , he would get over it . but he lie there skulk . " 

 " and what time will he get up ? " I insist . 

 " I do not   know . he may crawl down somewhere towards tea - time . do you want 
 to see he ? that be what you come for , be not   it ? " 

 she smile at I with a little sarcasm , and add : " you always think 
 more of he than anybody , do not   you ? ah , well , come up and see he . " 

 I follow she up the back stair , which lead out of the kitchen , and 
 which emerge straight in a bedroom . we cross the hollow - sound 
 plaster - floor of this naked room and open a door at the opposite side . 
 George lie in bed watch we with apprehensive eye . 

 " here be Cyril come to see you , " say Emily , ' so I have   bring he up , 
 for I do not   know when you would be downstairs . " 

 a small smile of relief come on his face , and he put out his hand from 
 the bed . he lie with the disorderly clothe pull up to his chin . his 
 face be discolour and rather bloated , his nose swell . 

 " do not   you feel so well this morning ? " ask Emily , soften with pity 
 when she come into contact with his sickness . 

 " oh , all right , " he reply , wish only to get rid of we . 

 " you should try to get up a bit , it be a beautiful morning , warm and 
 soft " she say gently . he do not reply , and she go downstairs . 

 I look round to the cold , whitewashed room , with its ceiling curve 
 and slop down the wall . it be sparsely furnish , and bare of even 
 the slight ornament . the only thing of warm colour be the cow and 
 horse skin on the floor . all the rest be white or grey or drab . on one 
 side , the roof slop down so that the window be below my knee , and 
 nearly touch the floor , on the other side be a large window , breast 
 high . through it one could see the jumbled , ruddy roof of the shed and 
 the sky . the tile be shin with patch of vivid orange lichen . 
 Beyond be the corn - field , and the man , small in the distance , lift 
 the sheaf on the cart . 

 " you will come back to farming again , will not   you ? " I ask he , turn 
 to the bed . he smile . 

 " I do not   know , " he answer dully . 

 " would you rather I go downstairs ? " I ask . 

 " no , I be glad to see you , " he reply , in the same uneasy fashion . 

 " I have   only just come back from France , " I say . 

 " ah ! " he reply , indifferent . 

 " I be sorry you be ill , " I say . 

 he star unmovedly at the opposite wall . I go to the window and 
 look out . after some time , I compel myself to say , in a casual 
 manner : 

 " will not   you get up and come out a bit ? " 

 " I suppose Is'll have to , " he say , gather himself slowly together 
 for the effort . he push himself up in bed . 

 when he take off the jacket of his pajama to wash himself I turn 
 away . his arm seem thin , and he have belly , and be bow and 
 unsightly . I remember the morning we swam in the mill - pond . I 
 remember that he be now in the prime of his life . I look at his 
 bluish feeble hand as he laboriously wash himself . the soap once 
 slip from his finger as he be pick it up , and fall , rattle the 
 pot loudly . it startle we , and he seem to grip the side of the 
 washstand to steady himself . then he go on with his slow , painful 
 toilet . as he comb his hair he look at himself with dull eye of 
 shame . 

 the man be come in from the scullery when we get downstairs . Dinner 
 be smoke on the table . I shake hand with Tom Renshaw , and with the 
 old man 's hard , fierce left hand . then I be introduce to Arthur 
 Renshaw , a clean - face , large , bashful lad of twenty . I nod to the 
 man , Jim , and to Jim 's wife , Annie . we all sit down to table . 

 " well , an ' ' ow be ter feelin ' by now , like ? " ask the old man heartily 
 of George . receive no answer , he continue , " Tha should ' a gor up an ' 
 com ' an ' gen we a ' and wi ' th ' wheat , it ' ud ' a do thee good . " 

 " you will have a bit of this mutton , will not   you ? " Tom ask he , tap 
 the joint with the carving knife . George shake his head . 

 " it be quite lean and tender , " he say gently . 

 " no , thank , " say George . 

 " Gi'e ' I m a bit , gi'e ' I m a bit ! " cry the old man . " it will do ' I m 
 good it be what ' e want , a bit o ' strengthenin ' nourishment . " 

 " it be no good if his stomach will not   have it , " say Tom , in mild reproof , 
 as if he be speak of a child . Arthur fill George 's glass with 
 beer without speak . the two young man be full of kind , gentle 
 attention . 

 " let ' I m ' a'e a spoonful o ' tonnup then , " persist the old man . " I 
 canna eat while ' be plate stand there emp'y . " 

 so they put turnip and onion sauce on George 's plate , and he take up his 
 fork and taste a few mouthful . the man eat largely , and with z . the 
 sight of their grand satisfaction , amount almost to gusto , sicken 
 he . 

 when at last the old man lay down the dessert spoon which he use in 
 place of a knife and fork , he look again at George 's plate , and say : 

 " why tha ' asna aten a smite , not a smite ! Tha non goos th ' raight road 
 to be well . " 

 George maintain a stupid silence . 

 " do not   bother he , father , " say Emily . 

 " tha art an ųwd whittle , feyther , " add Tom , smile good - naturedly . he 
 speak to his father in dialect , but to Emily in good English . whatever 
 she say have Tom 's immediate support . before serve we with pie , emily 
 give her brother junket and damson , set the plate and the spoon 
 before he as if he be a child . for this act of grace Tom look at 
 she lovingly , and stroke her hand as she pass . 

 after dinner , George say , with a miserable struggle for an indifferent 
 tone : 

 " be not   you go to give Cyril a glass of whisky ? " 

 he look up furtively , in a conflict of shame and hope . a silence fall 
 on the room . 

 " ay ! " say the old man softly . " let ' I m ' ave a drop . " 

 " yes ! " add Tom , in submissive pleading . 

 all the man in the room shrink a little , await the verdict of the 
 woman . 

 " I do not   know , " she say clearly , " that Cyril want a glass . " 

 " I do not   mind . " I answer , feel myself blush . I have not the courage 
 to counteract she will directly . not even the old man have that courage . 
 we wait in suspense . after keep we so for a few minute , while we 
 smoulder with mortification , she go into another room , and we hear 
 her unlock a door . she return with a decanter contain rather 
 less than half a pint of liquor . she put out five tumbler . 

 " Tha nedna gi'e I none , " say the old man . " Ah'm non a proud chap . Ah'm 
 not . " 

 " nor I neither , " say Arthur . 

 " you will Tom ? " she ask . 

 " do you want I to ? " he reply , smile . 

 " I do not , " she answer sharply . " I want nobody to have it , when you 
 look at the result of it . but if Cyril be have a glass , you may as 
 well have one with he . " 

 Tom be pleased with she . she give her husband and I fairly stiff 
 glass . 

 " steady , steady ! " he say . " give that George , and give I not so much . 
 two finger , two of your finger , you know . " 

 but she pass he the glass . when George have have his share , there 
 remain but a drop in the decanter . 

 Emily watch the drunkard coldly as he take this remainder . 

 George and I talk for a time while the man smoke . he , from his glum 
 stupidity , break into a harsh , almost imbecile loquacity . 

 " have you see my family lately ? " he ask , continue . " yes ! not badly 
 set up , be they , the child ? but the little devil be soft , 
 mard - soft , every one of them . it be their mother 's bringin ' up she marde 
 them till they be soft , an ' would never let I have a say in it . I 
 should ' a bring them up different , you know I should . " 

 Tom look at Emily , and , remark her angry contempt , suggest that 
 she should go out with he to look at the stack . I watch the tall , 
 square - shoulder man lean with deference and tenderness towards his 
 wife as she walk calmly at his side . she be the mistress , quiet and 
 self - assure , he she rejoice husband and servant . 

 George be talk about himself . if I have not see he , I should hardly 
 have recognise the word as his . he be lamentably decay . he talk 
 stupidly , with vulgar contumely of other , and in weak praise of 
 himself . 

 the old man rise , with a : 

 " well , I suppose we mun ma'e another dag at it , " and the man leave the 
 house . 

 George continue his foolish , harsh monologue , make gesture of 
 emphasis with his head and his hand . he continue when we be walk 
 round the building into the field , the same babble of brag and 
 abuse . I be weary and disgust . he look , and he sound , so 
 worthless . 

 across the empty cornfield the partridge be run . we walk 
 through the September haze slowly , because he be feeble on his leg . as 
 he become tired he cease to talk . we lean for some time on a gate , in 
 the brief glow of the transient afternoon , and he be stupid again . he 
 do not notice the brown haste of the partridge , he do not care to 
 share with I the handful of ripe blackberry , and when I pull the 
 bryony rope off the hedge , and hold the great knot of red and green 
 berry in my hand , he glance at they without interest or appreciation . 

 " poison - berry , be not   they ? " he say dully . 

 like a tree that be fall , go soft and pale and rotten , clammy with 
 small fungus , he stand lean against the gate , while the dim afternoon 
 drift with a flow of thick sweet sunshine past he , not touch he . 

 in the stackyard , the summer 's splendid monument of wheat and grass 
 be rear in gold and grey . the wheat be litter brightly round the 
 rise stack . the loaded wagon clank slowly up the incline , draw near , 
 and ride like a ship at anchor against the scotch , brush the stack 
 with a crisp , sharp sound . Tom climb the ladder and stand a moment 
 there against the sky , amid the brightness and fragrance of the gold 
 corn , and wave his arm to his wife who be pass in the shadow of the 
 building . then Arthur begin to lift the sheaf to the stack , and the 
 two man work in an exquisite , subtle rhythm , their white sleeve and 
 their dark head gleam , move against the mild sky and the corn . the 
 silence be break only by the occasional lurch of the body of the 
 wagon , as the teamer step to the front , or again to the rear of the 
 load . occasionally I could catch the blue glitter of the prong of the 
 fork . Tom , now lift high above the small wagon load , call to his 
 brother some question about the stack . the sound of his voice be strong 
 and mellow . 

 I turn to George , who also be watch , and say : 

 " you ought to be like that . " 

 we hear Tom calling , " all right ! " and see he stand high up on the 
 tall corner of the stack , as on the prow of a ship . 

 George watch , and his face slowly gather expression . he turn to 
 I , his dark eye alive with horror and despair . 

 " I shall soon be out of everybody 's way ! " he say . his moment of fear 
 and despair be cruel . I curse myself for have rouse he from his 
 stupor . 

 " you will be well , " I say . 

 he watch again the handsome movement of the man at the stack . 

 " I could not   team ten sheaf , " he say . 

 " you will in a month or two , " I urge . 

 he continue to watch , while Tom get on the ladder and come down the 
 front of the stack . 

 " Nay , the soon I clear out , the well , " he repeat to himself . 

 when we go in to tea , he be , as Tom say , " downcast . " the man talk 
 uneasily with abate voice . Emily attend to he with a little , 
 palpitating solicitude . we be all uncomfortably impressed with the 
 sense of our alienation from he . he sit apart and obscure among we , 
 like a condemn man . 




  the END 

