Miss Brown 
 by 
 Vernon Lee 
 1884 
 AUTHOR of euphorion , BELCARO , ETC . 

 in three VOLUMES 
 VOL . I. 
 to HENRY JAMES , I dedicate , for good LUCK , my FIRST attempt at a novel . 





 BOOK I. 

 MISS BROWN . 

 CHAPTER I. 

 IT 
 be melancholy to admit that Italy also have cease to interest he , think Hamlin , as he smoke his cigarette on the hillside above the Villa Arnolfini ; melancholy , although , in truth , he have suspect as much throughout the journey , and , indeed , before start . Pale , milky morning sky , deepen into luminous blue opposite the fast?rise sun ; misty blue?green valley bound by unsubstantial Apennine peak and Carrara crag ; yellow shimmer of vine and of maize , green sparkle of pine and fir branch , glitter of vermilion sand crumble under his foot among the sear grass 

 and the brown cistus tuft , all these thing seem to have lose for he their emotional colour , their imaginative luminousness . he try to realise the time when all these thing have give he a thrill , have go to his head , nay , when the mere sense of be in Italy have do so ; but now the very word " thrill " and " intoxication " seem false , disgusting , and vulgar . formerly , at least , such thing have soak into he , dye his mind with colour , saturate it with light ; instead of remain , as now , so separate from he , so terribly external , that to perceive they require almost an effort . he and the world have be become paler in the last three year ; it be melancholy , but that seem quite natural and in keeping ; and besides , a washed?out world , a man with worn?out feeling , have quite as much psychologic interest for a poet as the reverse . 


 Walter Hamlin have never be your splash?of?scarlet and dash?of?orange?and?skyblue , lust?and?terror kind of lyrist ; but he have begin his poetical career with a quiet concentra ? 

 tion of colour , physical and moral , which have make his early verse affect one like so many old church window , deep fleck of jewel lustre set in quaint stiff little frame , with a great deal of lead between , and supreme indifference to anatomy and perspective . and as a painter   perhaps just because , despite his own contrary opinion   he certainly have less original genius as painter than as poet he have continue in this habit of gemlike harmony of colour ; but in his poetry , and in his reality as a man , it strike he that he have little by little get paler and paler , colour turn gradually to tint , and tint to shadow ; pleasure , pain , hope , despair , all reduce gradually to a delicate penumbra , a diaphanous intellectual pallor , of which this utter listlessness , this indifference even to have grow indifferent , be , as it be , the faint key?note . the world be a pale and prismatic mist , full of vague , formless ghost , in which it be possible to see only as far as to?day ; and , indeed , why wish to see that pale to?day call 

 to?morrow ? perhaps there be a little depression add to Hamlin s usual listlessness . it have give he a kind of little shock to see Melton Perry again , after those twelve or thirteen year ; bring back to he the time when he have be the most brilliant and eccentric of that little knot of ? sthetic undergraduate , at whose strange doing as greek god , and Provenτal poet , and Norse hero , Oxford have murmur in those philistine day , and which have welcome young Hamlin , with his girlish beauty and pre?Raphaelite verse , as a sort of mixture of Apollo and Eros , sit at the head of the supper?table dress in green silk , with rose garland on his head , while Perry lead a chorus of praise , dress in indigo velveteen , with peacock feather in his button?hole , and silver?gilt grasshopper in his hair . poor old Perry ! absurd day those be , think Hamlin , as he walk slowly towards the house , through the grass and hemlock bend with dew , push aside the fig branch and vine trail along the narrow path between the 

 terrace olive ; absurd day those , and at which he could now , have grow grave and listless , only faintly smile . still the sight of Perry have bring back to he that recur sense that all those absurd lad of long?gone day , turn humdrum don , and parson , and squire for the most part , have have a something , a spontaneity , an aristocratic fibre , a sort of free?bornness , which he miss among the clique?and?shop shoddy ? stheticism with which he now associate , and which sing his praise as those boy have sing they so many year before . professional poetry ! professional art ! faugh ! think Hamlin ; it be that feeling which have be make London odious to he of late , and send he abroad , he know not whither . he be a poet himself , and a painter also , to be sure ; but somehow he like to feel   and yet it oppress he   that he be not of the same stock as his fellow?workers that he have his coat make by less romantic tailor , and cut his hair and beard in less pictorial style . the sense of his difference from all those pen ? 

 and?pencil?drive man of genius , those reviewer?poet and clerk?poet , those once?a?week?studio?receiving painter ; the sense of the dust and smoke , as it be , of the ? sthetic factory , have be choke he of late : he would rather go and associate only with well?dresse numskull , go and flirt with empty?heade Faubourg St Germain lady , or emptier?heade Monte Carlo lady he would not touch pen or brush for year . it have be silly to accept Perry s invitation to spend September at the Villa Arnolfini ; he have accept , think of Perry as he have be , a wild , roistering , half?french creature , bring up at Louis?le?Grand , and tell wicked french story . good heaven ! what a change ! when the wretched , thin , waste , depressed?looking creature , fit for a medieval picture of mansuetude , have greet he by night at the near station , and have drive he in the gig , he have be quite unable to realise that this be indeed Melton Perry . but he have understand all , all , when , in the bleak drawing?room , in the glare of an ill ? 

 trim lamp , that lank , limp , lantern?jawe leer creature with a Sapphic profile have come forward and seize he by both hand , and kiss they , cry 

 " Dear Mr Hamlin , I must kiss the hand that have open the paradise of body and soul to so many of we . " 
 she , and her speech , and the damp dab on his hand , have pass before he like a nightmare ; he feel that he would never be able to disassociate Mrs Melton Perry from that horrible smell of ill?trimmed , flicker oil?lamp . it seem to he dreadful a sort of hideous , harpy?like proceed that his old friend should have thus be metamorphose . 
 " you see , " Perry have say , " I must paint thing well not the sort of thing I exactly admire , because , you see , there s Mrs Perry and the child five girl , and last year s baby . " 

 Perry s depressed voice have remain in Hamlin s ear . this be the end of a bright , original fellow marry for love , too ! and 

 six child ! Hamlin have already make up his mind that he could not possibly hold out long at the Villa Arnolfini . that Mrs Perry , with she leer Sapphic profile , her almost amorous admiration , the limp gown , the five girl , and last year s baby , the all?pervading smell of oil?lamp , be too much for he . in three day , he calculate , he might decently , on some pretext , slip off to Florence . and then why , from Florence he might go to America . he think all those big hotel , with the fifteen hundred inmate and thirteen brass band , all that tremendous strain , telegraph?telephone vulgarity , might be refresh . 


 Hamlin have get to the bottom of the hill , and in front of he , nestle among the olive and the vine , rise the Villa Arnolfini , a time ? and weather?staine tuscan country?house , with its rose?hedge go wild among the bean and artichoke , its grotesque ivy?draped terra?cotta statue , its belvedere tower , from whose crannied side and yellow lichene tile 

 the pigeon sweep down on to the lawn of overgrown grass , thick with dew in the blue morning shadow . it have a sort of half?romantic , half?idyllic charm , which Hamlin could not help recognise : it certainly be well than an american hotel , with ten lift , thirteen brass band , and fifteen hundred inmate . but , like everything else , it be a snare ; for behind those sleepy?looke green shutter be the pink and blue chromo?lithograph pot?boilers of Melton Perry , be the five girl and the last year s baby , nay , be the sapphic leer and limp dress of Mrs Melton Perry herself . 


 make these reflection , Hamlin push open the green and blister house?door and enter the wide hall , with rickety eighteenth?century chair and table marshal round the wall . there be one good thing about his host , he think , and that be , that they have no common breakfast , but invite their guest to do whatsoever they please in the early morning . the hall be very silent , and Ham ? 

 lin wonder how he should get any breakfast . it strike he that he have well go and ring the bell in his bedroom . but on go upstairs he find there be no sign of a bell either in it or in the vast scantily furnish drawing?room , where a thick layer of dust repose on table and mirror , and the smell of last night s oil?lamp still linger . he see the open door of Perry s studio ; it be empty , and so be the adjoining dressing?room , where boot and canvas litter the floor . but on the mirror be a paper , on which be write in the large character : " I be go to sketch at the Lake of Massaciuccoli ; shan t be back till lunch ; please look after Hamlin . " 


 " confound it ! " think Hamlin , " be I to be leave in 
 t?te???t?te 
 with Mrs Perry all the morning ? " but since Melton Perry think nothing of leave his guest alone all the morning , he too the guest might surely be permit to slip away after breakfast from the effusive ? stheticism of his hostess . 


 hav ? 

 ing 

 have 

 find no sign of life on the first floor , Hamlin go down?stairs once more , and proceed to ramble about in search of breakfast , or , at least , of some servant . the ground?floor seem to consist entirely of servant room , office , and strange garner , where sack of potato , garden?tool , silkworm?mat , and various kind of pod be gather together . they be all empty ; and empty likewise be the kitchen , its brass saucepan and huge spit leave invitingly for any one who might care to step through the open garden?door . but next to the kitchen be a sort of nursery , at least so he judge from the child s chair and battered doll lie about and here a table be spread with cup and saucer and jug , and a cut loaf and a plate of fig . " this look more like it , " think Hamlin , wonder what have become of the inmate of this mysterious abode of sleep . suddenly he hear child talk in a room at the end of the passage , and a sort of subdued , deep , melancholy chant , like some church song . he go 

 to the door whence come the sound , and knock gently . the childish chattering do not stop , nor the fitful gust of chant deep , nasal , but harmonious and weird , with curious , sudden , metallic falsetto note , less like the voice of a woman than of a youth . Hamlin knock again , and receive no notice , boldly open the door and stand on the threshold . he be strike by the sight which meet he . the room be low and vault , with wall entirely fresco with dark?blue sky sprinkle with bird , mountain like cheese , river , box?like house , people fish , and plentiful duck and parrot on perch ; a faint green shimmer of leaf come through the open window ; three or four little yellow?heade child be scramble on the floor , struggle violently over the funeral of a doll in a biscuit?tin . in the middle of the room be a large deal table , cover with singed flannel , on the corner of which stand a brasier with some flat?iron , and a heap of crumple pink pinafore ; and behind this table , her tall and 

 powerful figure , in a close?fitting white vest and white skirt , stand out against the dark?blue paint wall and the green shimmer from outside , be a young woman bend over a frock which she be ironing , her bare brown arm go up and down along the board ; her massive and yet girlish body bend with the movement , and sing that strange chant which Hamlin have hear from outside . 

 " I beg your pardon , " say Hamlin , in Italian , as he stand in the doorway . the child look round , tittered , and make remark in shrill whisper ; the girl stop her work , stand erect , put her iron on the brasier , and star full at Hamlin with large wide?opene eye of strange dark?greyish blue , beneath heavy mass of dark lustreless hair , crimp naturally like so much delicate black iron wire , on her narrow white brow . 
 " I beg your pardon , " say Hamlin again ; " but can you tell I how I may get some breakfast ? " 

 he could not help smile in proffer this innocent request , so serious and almost tragic be the face of the girl . 
 " it s Mr Hamlin , " titter the child , roll under the table , and hang to the table?cloth . 
 the young woman eye Hamlin for a second in no very gracious manner ; then answer , with a certain contemptuous listlessness in her slightly hollow pale cheek and beautifully curl but somewhat prominent lip 
 " I don t know anything about your breakfast , sir . " she speak , to his surprise , in perfect English , with only the faint guttural italian accent . " Mr Perry go to sketch at Massaciuccoli early this morning , and take the boy with he ; Mrs Perry may never be disturb till nine ; and the cook be go to Lucca for provision . " 
 " that s very sad , " remark Hamlin , laughing , and look at this curious and picturesque being . 

 the girl seem annoyed at be discover 

 in that guise , for she pull down her white sleeve quickly . 

 " I suppose the cook have order about your breakfast , " she say , in a tone which seem to put an end to the conversation ; and she take up her iron once more . " Mrs Perry do not think you would want anything so early ; the cook will be back about nine . " 
 but Hamlin would not be shake off ; the fact be , he enjoy watch this beautiful sullen creature much as he might have enjoy watch a cat whom he have disturb in its sleep . 
 " nine o clock ! " he say ; " that s a long time to wait . Couldn t you give I something to eat ? I see a table spread in the next room . " 
 the girl put down her iron with a sort of subdue irritation of manner . 
 " it s the child s breakfast , sir , " she answer ; " we have neither tea nor coffee . " 
 " we have milk , " say the eld of the little girl pertly , " and fig . " 

 " milk and fig ! " exclaim Hamlin ; " why , that s a breakfast for the god ! and win t you , " he go on rather appealingly " win t you share a little of it with I ? " 
 " you be Mrs Perry s guest , " say the girl more sullenly than ever , " and of course you be welcome to anything you choose . " 
 Hamlin feel rather take aback . 
 " indeed ! " he say . " I don t wish to do anything against the habit of the house , or disagreeable to you . " 
 " it be not against any rule , " she answer . " if you will excuse I , I will see whether the milk be heat . the child will show you the way . " 



 CHAPTER II . 

 HAMLIN 
 feel rather contrite and humiliate as he sit down at the square table , with the two eld child , pert little rosy and flaxen thing , on either side of he , and the three little one star at he , and then suddenly make convulsive dive under the table?cloth and behind each other s shoulder opposite . he be the furthest possible remove from the kind of young man who persecute pretty housemaid . whatever vagary he might have have in his life , they be not of that sort ; and now , although he have merely intend to ask for some breakfast , he find himself somehow in the position of push his presence upon a servant girl . he be vex with himself , and become very grave , 


 scarce ? 

 ly 

 scarcely 

 answer the chatter of the child by his side . 

 " and you know , " say the eld child , a pretty little minx of eleven , fully conscious of her charm , " mamma tell we you be the great poet , and she read we a poem of yours about Sir Troilus . Mamma always read poetry to we and we like it so much , and I like all about where he kiss the lady so much , and her purple dress with the golden rose , and then about Love , where he come and take she by the throat , and choke she , and make she feel like a furnace . Mamma say it s just like love . Mr Thaddeus Smith be in love with the gardener s girl when he come here last year , mamma say . " 
 " good heaven ! " think Hamlin , " what a mamma and what child ! " 
 " and mamma tell we to get some myrtle and put they in your room , " blurt out a small one . 
 " Hush , Winnie ! you know you shouldn t tell , " say the eld . 

 " and you know , " insist the young , in her little , impertinent lisp , " mamma say we should put the myrtle , because you make poem about myrtle ; and we be to have have on our good frock , and meet you in the hall , and " 
 " Hush , Winnie ! " 
 " and throw rose on the floor before you ; only then papa get a telegram say you be come by the late train , and we have to go to bed " 
 Miss Winnie s revelation and her sister s expostulation be interrupt by the entry of the nurse , or governess , or whatever else she might be , carry a large jug of milk . she have slip on a skirt and loose jacket of striped peasant cotton , which at a distance look like a dull , rich purple . she sit down at the head of the table , and begin silently help the hot milk . 
 " may I cut the bread for you ? " ask Hamlin , feel quite shy from her silence . 

 " I don t think you will know how to do 

 it , " she answer . " we have only yesterday s bread at this hour , until the cook return from market . " when the milk be help and the bread cut , she say , rather sharply 

 " now , child , say your prayer . " 
 the child immediately set up a shrill chorus ; the elder , who wish to show off , slowly the little one , who be hungry , quick ; an absurdly pseudo?poetical thanksgiving , which remind Hamlin of the sort of poetry present to rich foreigner by needy Italians on creamy , emboss , and illuminate paper . he be strike by the fact that the girl do not join , but wait passively through this religio?poetical ceremony ; doubtless , he think , because she be a Catholic . 
 " that s mamma s Tuesday hymn , " say Winnie ; " she make a different one for each day of the week . " 

 Whereupon the child fall vigorously to their breakfast of bread and milk . Heaven know when Hamlin have eat bread and milk last probably , he think , not since he 

 have be out of frock ; but it seem to he pleasant and pastoral . he would have enjoy this improvise breakfast have the child chatter less incessantly   Hamlin do not care for child , and have he not continue to feel rather as if he have be court a nursemaid . the young woman have as much as she could do in pour out more milk , give out more fig , and cut more slice of bread and butter for the child ; and her conversation be entirely engross in admonition to they not to spill their milk , not to jump on their chair , not to talk with their mouth full , and so forth . she seem determine , in her sullen indifferent way , to make Hamlin understand that he might intrude his person at that breakfast?table , but that he have no chance of intrude his personality upon her notice . but her very indifference afford Hamlin an opportunity , and , as it be , a right , to examine her appearance : one may surely look at a person who obstinately refuse to notice one . she be very beautiful , and even more than 

 beautiful strange . she seem very young , certainly , think Hamlin not more than nineteen at most ; but her face , though of perfectly smooth complexion , without furrow or faint wrinkle , be wholly unyouthful ; the look be not of age , for you could not imagine she ever grow old , but of a perfect negation of youth . Hamlin try to think what she might have be as a child , look round on the childish face about he , but in vain . the complexion be of a uniform opaque pallor , more like certain old marble than ivory ; indeed you might almost imagine , as she sit motionless at the head of the table , that this be no live creature , but some sort of strange statue cheek and chin and forehead of parian marble , scarcely stain a dull red in the lip , and hair of dull wrought?iron , and eye of some mysterious greyish?blue , slate?tinte onyx : a beautiful and sombre idol of the heathen . and the feature be strange and more monumental even than the substance in which they seem carve by 

 some sharp chisel , delight in gradual hollowing of cheek and eye , in sudden cutting of bold groove and cavity of nostril and lip . the forehead be high and narrow , the nose massive , heavy , with a slight droop that remind Hamlin of the head of Antinous ; the lip thick , and of curiously bold projection and curl ; the faintly hollow cheek subside gradually into a neck round and erect like a tower , but set into the massive chest as some strong supple branch into a tree?trunk . he wonder as he look at she ; and wonder whether this strange type , neither Latin nor Greek , but with something of jewish and something of Ethiopian subdue into a statuesque but most un?hellenic beauty , have meet he before . the near approach seem to be certain mournful and sullen head of Michaelangelo , the type be so monumental , and at the same time so picturesque ; and as he look at the girl , it seem , despite its strangeness , as if , at some dim distant time , he have see and know it well before . 


 he look at she with the curiosity of an artist examine a model , or a poet try to solve a riddle ; there be , he feel conscious , nothing insolent or offensive in his stare . yet he feel he must break the silence ; so , with real indifference , he suddenly ask 
 " how be it that you speak English so marvellously well ? no one would ever guess that you be not english . " 
 " I be english , " answer the girl . 
 english nationality have explain many otherwise unaccountable mixed type to Hamlin ; but this take he by surprise , and leave he utterly incredulous . this girl certainly be no Englishwoman a Jewess , perhaps . no , never ; no Jewess be ever so pure and statuesque of outline : some Eastern , dash with Hindoo or Negro ; they be much coarser , more common , of far more obvious , less subtle beauty . 
 " you mean English by adoption , " he suggest , " surely not by blood ? " 

 " my mother be an italian . I think she 

 family come from Sicily or Sardinia , or somewhere , where there be Spaniards and moor , " she answer ; " but my father be Scotch . he come from Aberdeen . " 

 " have you ever be in Scotland ? " he ask , just by way of say something to mitigate the personalness of his previous question . 
 " no , " she answer , and her lip close as with a spring ; then she add , as if to close all further conversation , " I be bear in Italy ; my father be employ at Spezia in the dock . " 
 the eld Miss Perry raise her pretty little sentimental head pertly . 
 " Annina s father be one of those who make the big men?of?war at Spezia . " 
 " oh , you know , we once go with papa , and see a man?of?war , and all the boiler and big , big cannon , " interrupt a small one . 

 " and he be a bad , bad man , " go on the eld , composedly . " he use to drink quantity of 
 acquavite 
 ; and one day when he have 

 drunk so much 
 acquavite 
 , do you know what he do ? he try to throw Annina s mother out of the window , and then shoot himself with a revolver . " 

 Hamlin listen as the cruel word dribble out , and star at the childish face . he have never take any interest in child ; but he have never think that a child could be so deliberately   as it seem to he   malignant . the word make his ear burn , and he feel indignant , confused , and humiliate , as if he be a party to they . he do not look at the girl ; but he somehow see , or feel , the sullen , suppress bitterness of shame in her tragic face . 

 " and be it true , " interrupt Winnie , " that you be go to do our picture ? Mamma say you would want to paint we angel or fairy . all the painter paint we , because , mamma say , we be the most beautiful child in Florence . they always give we chocolate and 
 marron glacés 
 to keep we quiet . " 




 CHAPTER III . 

 when 
 breakfast be over , and she have make the child fold up their napkin , the nurse take what remain of fig , bread , and milk to lock up in the kitchen . Mildred , the eld of the little Perrys , sidle up to Hamlin , as he stand on the doorstep lead into the vineyard , light a cigarette , and ask whether he would not like to see her garden . 

 Hamlin look down upon the innocent?looking little fiend with a sort of disgust and contempt . " thank you , " he say ; " garden aren t much in my line . " 
 the little thing scowl at this rebuff of her fascination . but a sudden thought strike Hamlin . " yes , by the way , " he say , " I do take an interest in garden sometimes . come and show I yours . " 

 Mildred slip her arm through his a long?legge , fair?haire , pre?Raphaelite child , in much?darned stocking and patch pinafore Winnie , the second , a rounder , more comfortable , cherubic beauty , seize his hand . he let himself be lead along , among the prattle of the little one and the assumed shyness of the elder , through the vineyard , where the tall , red?tippe sorghum broom stand among the trail pumpkin and the tuft of fennel , to a small grove behind the house , in whose shade be four little raked?up space , with droop marigold and zinnia stick into the earth , and small box sprig . 
 " this be my garden ! " cry Winnie , drag he along , and point to the melancholy little patch . " I have marigold , and sunflower , and red bean and potato . " 
 " and this be mine , " say Mildred , raise her big blue eye . " I call it the garden of Acrasia ; because mamma tell we once about Sir Guyon " 

 " Won t you give we anything to buy seed 

 with ; we want tomato seed , " clamour Winnie . 

 " Hush , Winnie ! I wonder you re not ashamed ! " cry Mildred . 
 " they be very good sort of garden , " say Hamlin , fish in his waistcoat for loose silver , while the child look at he with beam eye ; " here I hope your tomato may prosper and prove eatable . " 
 then he suddenly turn to Mildred . " come here , " he order , " I want to speak to you ; " and he sit down on a stone bench under a plane?tree , in which the cicala be saw away with all his might . 
 Mildred stand in front of he , wonder , half hop for the usual request that she should sit for an angel or a fairy . 

 " look here , " say Hamlin , quietly ; " I want to know how you would feel if your papa have be in the habit of drink too much 
 acquavite 
 , and have shoot himself after try to murder your mamma , and some nasty little girl blurt it all out at breakfast to a perfect stranger ? " 



 the child flush with surprise and anger ; she look as if she would have scratch Hamlin s eye out . but he look steadily in her face , and he be a stranger , a gentleman , a man , and not her papa ; circumstance which entirely overawe she . she recover her composure marvellously , and answer after a moment s reflection , " my papa be a gentleman , and Annina s papa be a common man   a 
 mascalzone 
 , " with considerable triumph at her dignified argument . 


 " your papa 
 be 
 a gentleman , " reply Hamlin , sternly ; " I have know he long before you be bear . but remember , if you say cruel thing which hurt people s feeling , whether they be gentle people or servant , however much your papa may be a gentleman , 
 you 
 win t be a lady . " 


 and Hamlin leave the little Perrys to muse upon this moral truth . he feel quite excited ; and when the excitement have subside , he feel quite astonished at himself . he could scarcely realise that he himself have actually be 

 meddle in other people s affair , have be read a lesson to other people s child , all about a little girl say offensive thing to her nurse . it be so strange that it quite humiliate he : he have first push his company on to a nursemaid , and then , unasked , fight the nursemaid s battle . this confound Perry household ! be it go to turn he also into a ridiculous caricature ? he go up?stairs and write some business letter , and correct a lot of proof of his new book . then he think it would be pleasanter to correct the remainder in the garden ; so he bring down his writing?case , and establish himself on the grass behind the house . the first?floor balcony and the roof project a deep shade ; and on the high grass flicker shadow of plane?trees and laurel , as through their branch there flicker the pale?blue sky . the swift fly round the eave with sharp noise , the cicala saw in the tree ; all be profoundly peaceable . but suddenly , from the first?floor window come a vague sound of 

 childish sobbing , a confused murmur as if of consolation . then a pause , after which a well?known voice arise shrill in glib Italian . 

 " Annina , how dare you distress the signorina Mildred ? how dare you say cruel thing to my poor , poor sensitive child ? " 
 " I have say nothing cruel to the signorina Mildred , " answer a deep , quiet voice ; " the signorina Mildred go to show her garden to Mr Hamlin , and then come back cry . I ask she what have happen , but she refuse to tell I . I have nothing to do with her tear . " 
 " how dare you tell such an untruth ? " shriek Mrs Perry . " the signorina Mildred say something about your father at breakfast , and you , like a little viper , turn round upon the poor little darling . she be nearly in hysteric ! you little serpent ! " 
 " it be one of Miss Mildred s usual lie , " answer the other voice calmly " una delle solite bugφe . " 

 Hamlin have be admit too much into 

 confidence . he take up his write thing hastily , and remove to the furth end of the garden , out of reach of the dispute . 

 this be the pretty result of his interference ! he have merely get this poor devil of a nursemaid into a scrape . it be the fit punishment for his folly in go out of his way to meddle with other folk . he be very much annoyed ; he have be drag into a sordid woman s squabble ; Mrs Perry s scolding have seem address to he . at the same time , he do feel indignant that the girl should be treat in this fashion : such a splendid , queenly creature slang by a sentimental , ? sthetic fishwife , as he define his hostess to himself . 
 the return of Melton Perry interrupt his reflection . Perry be quite astonished to find he up , and extremely distressed at his have have no regular breakfast . 
 " you see , " he say , " Mrs Perry be very delicate in short , scarcely fit for any kind of household bother , so that " 

 " oh , " answer Hamlin , " I have a capital breakfast with your child . " 
 then they fall to talk of old time ; and little by little there emerge from out of the overworked , henpecke Melton Perry of the present , the resemblance of the proud and brilliant Melton Perry of the past . 

 " of course , " say Perry , as they sit smoke in the sheltered studio " of course I m very happy , and that sort of thing . my wife well , she s a little impetuous , and I don t always agree about her way of bring up the child but there s no saying that she isn t an immensely superior kind of woman . I don t always agree with she , mind you ; but she have the true poetic temperament , and " here he make an evident effort " she keep I up to the mark with my work . I be always a lazy hound , you know , and all that . in short , I know I m quite a singularly fortunate man . nevertheless , well , I tell you my frank opinion about matrimony : never do it ; the odd 

 be too great . my own belief be , that , especially for an artist , it s a fellow s ruin . mine , you see , be an exceptional position . but if you take my advice , old man , never marry . " 

 " I don t think there be the faint chance , " answer Hamlin . " woman have get to bore I long ago : all that in my poem be mere recollection of the past description of a myself which have long come to an end . " 
 " I m glad of it , " reply Perry . " it be a foolish thing to get tie to a woman . " 
 " foolish indeed ! " think Hamlin , look from his shabby , depressed old comrade , to the blaze sunset and green moonlight on the easel about they . 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 during 
 luncheon , no mention be make of the nursemaid into whose concern Hamlin have that morning intrude ; but at dinner , Hamlin s sense of the question be a sore one , and of be himself mix up in it , give way before his curiosity to solve the riddle of the strange?type which have take he so by surprise . 

 " that be a very strange?looke girl you have in your service , " he remark to his hostess , over their grape and thin wine . 
 " the cook ? " cry Mrs Perry . " isn t she a divine creature ? I call she Monna Lisa s young sister . " 
 " I don t know your cook by sight , " he answer . " I mean the other young woman they call Annina " 

 Mrs Perry s brow darken . 
 " the nurse or governess , I don t know exactly how to describe she , of your little girl . " 
 " my child s maid , " answer Mrs Perry , with considerable emphasis . " thank heaven , my child have never have and shall never have any other nurse or any other governess than their own mother . " 
 " well , now , Julia , " remonstrate her husband , " I think , you know , that s push it a little too far . " 
 " my child shall never learn anything from a menial , " insist Mrs Perry , " neither to walk bodily , nor morally , nor intellectually , as long as I be alive . " 
 " good heaven ! " think Hamlin , " what a bandy?legge family they be likely to turn out ! " 
 " I suppose you mean Annie , " say Perry . " yes , she s a good girl , and a good?looke girl . " 
 " you be mad , Melton , " cry Mrs Perry , " with your idea of goodness and good look ! " 

 " I think she extraordinarily good?looking , " put in Hamlin , enjoy the authority of his own verdict . 
 " I always tell you so , " reply Perry . 
 " when I say good?looking , " correct Hamlin , " I don t mean it at all in the ordinary sense . there be dozen of italian girl five time as pretty as that girl , and I daresay most people don t think she at all attractive . " 
 " yes , " burst out Mrs Perry , " vulgar mind and eye never appreciate the high beauty . they see only the body . " 
 " this be exactly a question of the body , " go on Hamlin . " that girl be one of the most singular type I have ever come across . she be like some of Michaelangelo s woman , but even stranger a superb creature . " 
 the revelation of she maid s beauty by so great an authority as Hamlin quite dazzle and delight Mrs Perry . 

 " all our servant be handsome , " she say ; " the cook s the fine Leonardo da Vinci type when you see she you will want to do she 

 picture , Mr Hamlin , as Venus Mystica , " and Mrs Melton Perry set her meagre feature and wide?opene mouth into a mystic smile , intimate that she know a great deal about Venus Mystica , and her guest doubtless likewise . 

 " and the footman " . . . she go on . 
 " Errand?boy , " correct Mr Perry , suddenly , embolden by his friend s presence . 
 " the footman be quite a type of manly beauty a young Hercules , such a neck and shoulder and arm and a head like a cameo . I always make it a rule to engage only handsome servant , because it spiritualise the mind of our child to be bring up constantly surround by beautiful human form . " 
 " I see , " answer Hamlin drily , entirely neglect his opportunity of make the usual reply to this remark namely , that the young Perrys be so abundantly provide with beautiful human form in the person of their mother that any other be superfluous . 
 " that girl you notice have rather a curious history , " say Perry . 

 " indeed ! " answer Hamlin;"she look as if she ought to have some sort of tragic past a kind of Brynhilt or Amazon . " 
 " it s tragic enough if you like , but it s unfortunately not at all poetical , " reply Perry . 
 " there be poetry in all suffering , Melton , " correct his wife gravely . 

 " well , this girl be the daughter of a Scotch mechanic , a very clever fellow , I believe , who fall in love with the italian maid of some old friend of our , and follow she to Italy . he get a very good position in the dock at Spezia , but then the other chap cabal against he , and make he lose his place . they have to live from hand to mouth for a long while , do odd job for the railway company ; he squander his money also on invention , so , little by little , he and his wife and child get into great distress . then he take to drinking , poor devil !   I m sure I should have do so long before ;   and one day that he have again be do out of a place by some italian 


 scoun ? 

 drel 

 scoundrel 

 , he try to throw his wife out of the window , and then shoot himself . it be a dreadful business . " 

 " he be a great republican , poor dear , " add Mrs Perry . " I m a republican too , a socialist quite a dreadful creature , Mr Hamlin . " 
 " what become of the wife and child ? " ask Hamlin . 
 " the child have all die by this time , except Annie ; and the poor wife be quite break in health . there be a nephew of the husband s , a Scotch lad , quite a boy , who be awfully plucky and work for they for some time . then the widow die ; and an old friend of ours , old Miss Curzon , the famous singer that have be perhaps you may have hear of she take Annie into her house . " 
 " Darling Miss Curzon ! " exclaim Mrs Perry . " she be the noble woman that ever live . how she love I ! I always say that I lose my voice I have a lovely voice before my marriage when dear darling Miss Curzon die . " 


 " Miss Curzon 
 be 
 an excellent old woman , " go on Perry : " she take Annie when she be eleven , and keep she in her house and educate she till her own death two year ago ; " and Perry sigh , as he peel a hard white peach . 

 " then I say to my husband , Perry , this child be a legacy to we from our dear friend , " go on Mrs Perry , solemnly ; " we be not rich , but Heaven will send we enough for our child and this child ; and if it don t , why , we must do without . " 
 " so she have be with you ever since ? " 
 " yes , " answer Perry , sharply ; " and I should like she to remain for the child s sake , only that I feel the girl ought to look out for some well place . " and he turn rather gloomily to his wife . 

 Mrs Perry answer his look with one of sweet and ineffable astonishment . she naturally view all her property , servant , child , husband ,   c. , as emanation from herself that be to say , from perfection , and consequently as 

 more perfect than other folk s property , servant , child , husband , although occasionally fall short of this ineffable origin ; and she accept , with alacrity and pleasure , the belief in the transcendent beauty of the nursemaid whom she have shriek at only a few hour before . she be quite reconcile to she , evidently . 

 " and what be this girl s name ? " ask Hamlin . 
 " Anne , " answer Perry " Anne Brown . " 



 CHAPTER V. 

 thus 
 it come about that Walter Hamlin , of Wotton Hall , pre?Raphaelite poet and painter , make acquaintance with Anne Brown , nurse , or as Mrs Perry define it , child s maid at the Villa Arnolfini . 


 the whole of the two following day , Hamlin neither see nor particularly remember the strange girl whose champion he have constitute himself against the little Perrys . an old chaise , with an old pony , be produce from the neighbouring farmhouse , and Mr and Mrs Melton Perry take it by turn to drive their guest along the dusty road to the old town of Lucca , to various villa , and other sight of the neighbourhood . in the evening Perry lead his friend out for a stroll among the vineyard and 

 the olive , and across the low hill cover with bright green pine and dark cypress . at the end of the third day , Hamlin , while smoke after dinner with his host , insinuate to Perry that he really think he must be push on to Florence . a look of blank terror overspread poor Perry s face . 

 " nonsense ! " he cry " don t say that ; don t leave I in the lurch yet . " 
 " you see , " say Hamlin , hypocritically , " I intend go to America ; and I really think I ought to do a little work before leave Italy . " 
 " what sort of work ? " 
 " why , I suppose I think I ought to take this opportunity of work a little at one of my picture for the next Grosvenor . " 
 " which picture ? " ask Perry , eagerly . 
 " I really scarcely know . I suppose I ought to be make some study for Circe and the child Comus . " 

 " Child Comus ! " exclaim Perry . " why , I ve the very thing you want here at hand . 

 such a Comus for you ! there s not a model in all Florence will suit you so well ; it s the farmer s son . such leg , and such a chest ! " 

 " I don t intend do he naked , " answer Hamlin , whose strong point be not anatomy . 
 " naked or not , he s what you want . the head , since you don t care for leg and chest . you shall have he to?morrow ; and you can work much well here than in that swelter at Florence " 
 " in short , " burst out poor Perry , " don t leave I yet , old fellow . you don t know what it be for I to have you here I feel quite another man . it seem to I as if I be ten year young . the fact be , don t you know , a man s never the same when once marry ; it s a weight round his neck . Don t go away yet , dear old Watty , for the sake of auld lang syne . " 

 Hamlin could not help be touch by the way in which his old friend throw himself on his compassion . poor old Perry ! how 

 dreadfully dreary and broken?spirite he must be when all alone with that awful wife of his ! 

 " well , I m willing enough to stay , if you ll keep I , " answer Hamlin . 
 " that s right ! " cry Perry , squeeze his hand . " keep I from grow into a turnip for a little long , for goodness sake . " 
 so the next morning the farmer s boy be send for , and Hamlin begin , in a desultory way , to make some study for his picture . the fact be , he be so utterly indifferent as to all his own movement , that it be an absolute relief to be pin down to one place by his old friend . accordingly he unpack his thing , and prepare to stay at the Villa Arnolfini until the Perrys should themselves return to Florence in October . 

 little by little he get to arrange his day so as to avoid as far as possible the dread 
 t?te???t?te 
 with Mrs Perry ; spend the morning lie on the sear grass or the fall fir?needles under Melton Perry s sketch umbrella ; and 

 lock himself up during the afternoon with the pretext of his picture . lock himself up , and sometimes unlock the door and let the lank and limp lady come and sit in his improvise studio , entertain he with her view on life , poetry , art , love ; and invariably represent herself as the devoted slave of a kind of fierce and gloomy lover?husband of the Othello description . during this first week of his stay at the Villa Arnolfini , Hamlin do not lose sight of the Perrys strange nursemaid . the girl s exotic , and , so to speak , tragic style of beauty , have make a great impression upon he , but a sort of impression such as only a temper entirely artistic could receive . he be interested in Anne Brown , but not in the whole of Anne Brown . he wish to see more of she , but to see more only of her superb physical appearance , and of that sullen , silent , almost haughty manner which accompany it . as to anything there might be , intellectual or moral , behind this beautiful and dramatic creature , he do not 

 care in the least , and would much rather have see nothing of it . so far , she be strike , admirable , picturesque , consistent ; further detail might merely spoil the effect . hence it be that , although he make several sketch of her head from memory , and although he rhyme the first half of a sonnet upon the strange fate which have , to put it in plain prose , give the beauty of an Amazon to a nursemaid , he instinctively abstain from seek in any way to renew the acquaintance which he have make that first morning . the picturesque and imaginative figure be just in the right light and at the right distance , a single movement , and all the picturesqueness and strangeness might vanish . Walter Hamlin have have but too many instance of the melancholy result of try to approach and become familiar with creature who have catch his ? sthetic and poetic fancy . he often see her hurrying   if she might ever be say to hurry , for there be something wonderfully measure about she   to and fro , fill up , 

 it would seem , the gap in Mrs Perry s rather theoretical housekeeping ; and sometimes , pass through the ground?floor passage , he would also see her ironing , like that first time , or laboriously preside over the little Perrys lesson ; for it appear that Mrs Perry s intellectual guidance of her child consist in tell they the plot of novel and repeat choice poetry , leave such mechanical matter as read and write to what she call a menial . and even more frequently Hamlin would meet she take the child for a walk , or sit in the vineyard sewing or reading , while they build house of leaf and stick , and cook dinner of maize?grain and unripe fig . Hamlin scarcely ever speak to she ; and if the child force he to remain and examine their house or their dinner , he would watch the girl , but without the slight desire of enter into conversation . he wish to know only as much as he could see of she . but this much which he see inspire he with a kind of respect , a respect not for Anne 

 Brown , nursemaid or nursery?governess of Mrs Melton Perry , but respect for a beautiful and solemn kind of Valkyr or Amazon ; for there be no doubt that to certain temperament not give to respect for social distinction or religious institution , or even the kind of moral characteristic hold to be worthy of respect by ordinary folk , there be something actually venerable in some kind of beauty : the man respect the unknown woman as a goddess , and respect himself for have discover her divinity . so that , habitually and instinctively , Hamlin display towards the young woman a degree of courtesy which astonish the little Perrys , who have see young man flirt with various of their mother s carefully select beautiful servant , but never treat they , as Miss Mildred express it , as if they be funeral pass . all of which distant respect Anne Brown receive coldly , as if it be a matter of course ; show astonishment only on one occasion , when Hamlin answer , be request to lift little Winnie into the branch 

 of an olive?tree " you must first ask permission of Miss Brown . " 

 the girl look up from her work , and fix she great greyish?blue eye upon he in wonder . no one have ever call her Miss Brown before . 

 thus thing might have continue , and Hamlin have leave the Villa Arnolfini with only a few line of a sonnet on the fly?leaf of his Vita Nuova   a few scratched?out sketch of a face with strange , curl full lip , and mass of wiry hair , in his sketchbook and a daily fainter remembrance of Mrs Perry s nurse ; when one day he take it into his head to construct a kind of medieval costume for his peasant?boy model , and accordingly go to Mrs Perry for assistance in sew together the various shred of old brocade and satin which he have buy at Lucca , the various bit of weather?staine cotton which he have obtain by barter from the peasant . Mrs Perry , lie languidly on a sofa in her dusty boudoir , litter over with 

 book and review , afford he a variety of valuable piece of information upon harmony of colour and the magic of fold ; but when it come to practical tailoring , she smile with reproachful gentleness , and , clap her hand , call out for Annie . Annie that be to say , Anne Brown emerge from an adjacent room , silent and sullen as usual ; but when she understand that the job be for Hamlin , she seem suddenly to develop a certain interest in it . the piece of stuff be spread out on the drawing?room table , and Hamlin proceed to explain what manner of garment he want , Mrs Perry join in from the next room with various bewildering instruction . the girl immediately understand ; but the piece of work be complicated and tiresome . the stuff have several time to be sew together , try on to the live model , and then take down?stairs to be alter . 

 " Won t you sit down and do it here , Miss Brown ? " Hamlin at length suggest . 

 the girl hesitate for a moment , and then 

 settle herself to sew at the table of the empty drawing?room . Hamlin go into the studio next door , and try to draw a little ; but he feel himself attract to go and watch the girl as she lean over the table , or sit with her beautiful head bend over her sewing . every now and then she look up to ask he some question : a regal , tragic , out?of?our?world , almost weird face , the contrast of which with her prosiac question about seam and tuck be almost comic . 


 Hamlin look at she as he might have look at a beautiful cathedral front ; and he begin to feel that kind of anticipated regret at the thought of lose sight of something beautiful and rare , that almost painful desire to keep at least some durable likeness of it , which , in former year , have often torment he in the midst of the enjoyment of lovely thing . he do not see his way to introduce Anne Brown into any picture ; nay , he perhaps do not even think of his work ; but he determine that he must have a likeness of 

 she to take away with he . accordingly , that same evening , as he be seat with the Perrys in front of the villa , watch the star gradually light themselves in the bright metallic blue sky , Hamlin suddenly turn to his hostess , and ask she whether she think it would be possible for he to make a sketch of Anne Brown . 

 " I may want she for a picture some day , " he add , half hypocritically . 
 Mrs Perry s enthusiasm be immediately kindle . 

 " oh ! " she exclaim , " paint a picture of she as the Witch of Atlas , with a red cloak and red rose all about she , and a background of cactus and aloe all twist and writhing , and look as if they gibber . do paint she like that , dear Mr Hamlin and Mildred and Winnie will do for attendant spirit . begin to?morrow you shall have she to sit to you all day ; and she have such lovely arm and shoulder , you 
 must 
 paint she in some kind of dress that will show they . " 


 " I think it s rather cool of you to promise Annie as a sitter in that way , " put in Melton Perry " especially with so few clothe on , Julia . " 
 " why not ? " ask Mrs Perry , in astonishment . " if she be beautiful she must be paint . she shall begin sit to?morrow morning . " 
 " she shan t do anything of the kind ! " exclaim Perry , suddenly . " I don t see at all what right we have to dispose of she . we pay her wage as a servant for our child , not as a model for our visitor . " 
 " I never dream of Miss Brown be in any way compel to sit , " remonstrate Hamlin , rather indignantly . " I only want your assistance in ask whether she would . " 
 " of course she will , " insist Mrs Perry . " why , I wonder what great hardship there be in sit for one s likeness ? haven t I do it hundred of time ? when a woman be beautiful , it s her duty ; that s what I be always tell . " 

 " it may be the duty of a lady , Julia , " 


 an ? 

 swere 

 answer 

 Mr Perry , gloomily , " and it may be yours ; but it isn t the duty of a servant girl the difference lie in that . " 

 " well , " retort Mrs Perry , angrily , " I think you don t show much appreciation of the honour of have one of the great of live painter in our house , Perry . I do , and I shall see to his have the proper model . " 
 " please , I entreat you , dear Mrs Perry , " cry Hamlin , " do let the matter go it really be of no consequence ; and , indeed , it would be in the last degree distasteful to I to have an unwilling sitter . " 
 " you shall have a willing one , Mr Hamlin ; " and Mrs Perry walk off with dignity . 
 Melton Perry suddenly shake off his languor , and start after his wife . 

 " Julia , " he cry , " do leave it to I I ll speak to Annie only 
 do 
 leave it to I . " 

 " I see no reason for this , " she answer . 
 " then I shall speak to Annie at once , " reply Perry . 

 " there s be far too much of this turning of servant into model in this house , " he say , turn to Hamlin . " Mrs Perry can t be get to see that it isn t at all the right sort of thing . I don t mind so much with the other , for I suppose they re a parcel of slut ; but Annie be another matter . I don t mind it s be you , you know , old fellow ; but I object to the principle . Annie ! Annie ! I want to speak to you a moment , " and Mr Perry go into the house . 
 after a moment he return . 

 " I ve speak to she , Hamlin , " he say . " I tell she that she be just what you want for the Lady Guenevere or the Lady of the Lake , or some lady or other all a lie ; but you see I didn t wish she to know it be merely because she s handsome . I tell she she be like a portrait of one of these person . please don t tell she she s not . I really expect she d refuse ; and I say to she , Annie , mind you don t let the mistress force you into sit ; don t do it to please anybody . I m 

 really quite surprised , for she s such a very reserved girl always ; but then she be an oblige creature too , and I think she ll do more to please I than perhaps my wife , because I always let she understand that this isn t a good place at all , and that she ought to try for another . well , she say she ll sit ; but not till after the ironing be do in the morning . I propose half?past nine will that do ? " 

 " thank you , " answer Hamlin , put his hand on Perry s shoulder ; " you re a good old creature , Perry . " 



 CHAPTER VI . 

 HAMLIN 
 do not succeed in do much that first sit . he have think that Anne Brown s head would be an easy one to sketch ; but it prove just the reverse . those salient and outlandish feature , which he have think he could catch in half an hour , be turn into caricature by the slight exaggeration , and exaggeration be almost inevitable . he make several beginning , and scratch they all out ; and at the end of a couple of hour he feel that he positively could not go on ; he have become quite fidgety over his work . 


 " I have bungle everything , " he say at last , rise , " and keep you here for nothing , 

 Miss Brown . the fact be , that you be far more difficult to draw than I expect . " 

 he feel very humiliate at have , as it be , to confess himself a bad artist before such a model . 
 " try again , " suggest Perry . " I daresay Annie will sit for you again win t you , Annie ? " 
 " if Mr Hamlin wish I to sit , certainly , " answer the girl simply . 

 " she 
 be 
 confoundedly difficult to draw , " say Hamlin , when she have turn she back . 


 " she s difficult because she s a kind of mystery , " explain Perry . " I ve feel it ever since we have have she . one think there must be something behind that face , and yet it seem to be a mere blank . my belief be , that people of this condition of life often have very little character at least none in particular develop . because , after all , it s talk and jaw about thing which don t matter a pin that develop our character . the people who have no opportunity for that remain quite 

 without character , until some day they be force to choose whether they ll be self?sacrifice creature or mean pig . " 


 " there s something in that , " answer Hamlin , tear up his abortive sketch in a huff ; " but it 
 be 
 hard that a man should be unable to copy the shape of a handsome face as he would copy the shape of a handsome vase , without wonder what there may be inside . " 


 the fact be , that the utter silence of his model , and his own utter silence , except when beg she to turn a little more in this direction or that , make Hamlin nervous . he have , of course , sketch and paint score of people who have sit as utterly silent as Anne Brown , but then Anne Brown be not a model of that kind . indifferent as he feel towards the hidden reality of this girl , he be , nevertheless , fully conscious that she be a personality , something much more than a mere form ; or rather , the form itself be suggestive of something more . it would be an easy thing to have to sketch Michaelangelo s Dawn , or 

 his Delphic Sibyl become live flesh , in utter silence with those eye fix upon one . if only he could speak to she , or make she speak , he be persuade it would be much easy ; but for some unaccountable reason it seem impossible to set up a conversation . one morning accident come to Hamlin s assistance . stroll about after breakfast , he find in a corner of the vineyard , where the trample grass reveal the recent presence of the little Perrys , a couple of book carefully bury under a heap of dead leaf just where he chance to walk . the child have evidently hide they out of mischief . one be a cheap copy of Dante , with note the other an italian grammar . turn to the fly?leaf he find , write in a curious hand , a stiff imitation of english tradesman s writing , the name " Anne Brown . " he wipe the book , for they be wet with dew , and deposit they upon the window?sill of the nursery . at half?past nine the girl come to the studio . she have be sit a little while , when Hamlin , 

 bend over his work , suddenly break the silence 

 " I find we have a common friend , Miss Brown , " he say . 
 the girl , without stir , open her large eye . 
 " a common friend ? " she ask , with a scarcely perceptible agitation in her quiet manner ; then add , " I suppose you mean Mr Perry ; I haven t many friend now anywhere . " 
 " oh ! this be the friend of a great many people thousand besides ourselves , so you need not feel jealous ; his name be Dante . " 
 " indeed ! " answer Anne Brown , and relapse into silence . 
 but silence do not suit Hamlin . " I find two book belong to you in the vineyard early this morning , " he continue ; " and I put they on the nursery window?sill . " 
 " thank you , " reply Miss Brown , in her taciturn manner ; " I miss they last night . " 

 " I be indiscreet enough to wonder whether 

 you and I care for the same thing in Dante , " pursue Hamlin ; " so I venture to open the book . I find you have mark the passage about Provenzano . " 

 " yes , " say Miss Brown . 
 " how be it that you mark Provenzano , and do not mark Ugolino , I wonder ? " 
 " I don t care about Ugolino . he be a traitor . " 
 " do you consider that traitor ought to be starve to death ? " ask Hamlin , with a smile . 
 " I don t think any one ought to be starve to death , " she answer very seriously ; " it be too dreadful . but I don t care about Ugolino , because he be a traitor ; and the Archbishop be a traitor too . there be no one to be glad or sorry about . " 
 " and Francesca da Rimini ? do you find there be nothing to care for or be sorry about in she ? " 
 a faint redness well up under the uniform brown pallor of Anne Brown s face . 

 " the husband be quite right , " she say , after a pause . 
 " you be very severe , " remark Hamlin " much more severe than Dante . he be sorry for they . " 
 " they be quite happy , " she answer . " they do not mind be kill ; they do not mind be drive about in the wind , of course " then she stop short suddenly . 
 " why of course ? " and Hamlin go on scrap at his pencil . 
 " because I don t think one would mind , if people care for one , be drive about in the wind like that . lot of people have be drive about in revolution , and put into dungeon together , and so on . if they have put papa in prison , I should have want to go in with he , " for once she speak with a certain amount of vehemence . 

 Hamlin look up from his pencil?cutting . the expression which he suddenly meet in her face make he feel that at last he have what he want . it be a curious mixture , possible 

 only in those strange feature , of a kind of passionate effort with dog determination : the head a little lift , cheek and lip firmly set ; but in the eye , and even in the curl of the close?set lip , a sort of strain , as of a person try to inhale a large amount of air , or to take in a large sight . in a second it be go . 

 " that be what I want ! " think Hamlin ; " the Amazon or Valkyr as I think . " 
 " tell I why you care for Provenzano , " he go on , now much more interested in his work again . 
 " because he be so proud , and do not like to do humble thing , " she answer ; " and yet he beg in the street for a ransom for his friend . " 

 she show no desire to say more , and Hamlin be now engross in his work . they exchange but a few trivial remark during the rest of the sitting . the girl seem to have contract a habit of silence , to break through which require a positive effort . when the 

 sitting have come to an end , Hamlin ask whether she could possibly give he another . 

 she hesitate . " if Mrs Perry wish it , of course , " she answer . 
 " excuse I , " correct Hamlin . " Mrs Perry s consent may be necessary for you ; but for I , the sitting depend upon your wish , Miss Brown . " 
 " I don t care one way or another , " she answer hurriedly . 
 Mrs Perry of course give her consent . 
 she have carefully collect and piece the scatter remnant of yesterday s abortive sketch , and Hamlin find she paste they on to cardboard . 
 " do let I keep they , dear Mr Hamlin , " cry Mrs Perry ; " they be the most precious thing I possess . " 
 " they be horrible rubbish ; " and Hamlin rudely tear they to shreds . " if you want something of mine , I will make you a sketch of little Winnie only please don t keep these fearful thing . " 


 " thank you , thank you 
 so 
 much ! " she exclaim " but oh , mayn t I keep this ? it be such a lovely head ! " 

 " it s the head of Miss Brown , " he answer angrily . " you don t care for it much on her shoulder , why should you care for it on my paper an abominable caricature ? really , I must be permit to tear it up " and he tear it into a heap of little piece . 
 the next day but one he have another sitting from Anne Brown ; and he be so pleased with his drawing , that he beg for permission to finish it in colour . during these additional sitting there be not much conversation . the Dante topic be perfectly worn to shred , till at last it seem as if it could be make to go no far . in despair , Hamlin remember the italian grammar which he have pick up together with the Dante . 
 " what do you want with an italian grammer ? " he ask . " you surely don t require to study it yourself , Miss Brown ? " 
 " I want to teach some day , " she answer . 

 " do you mean to teach the Perry child ? " 

 " oh no to teach , to be a daily governess , what we call a 
 parlatrice 
 here . it be not difficult . the lesson be all conversation . many english lady want those sort of lesson . I know a girl , the daughter of Mrs Perry s dressmaker , who give ten lesson every day , and and get two franc a lesson . " 

 " ten lesson a?day ! but that s fearful . what awful slavery ! surely you don t want to do that ? " 
 " I wish I could . I should be so happy . " 
 " then you want to leave the Perrys ? " 
 " I want to give up be a servant . " 
 Hamlin pause , and look at this superb and regal creature . he do not know what to say . 
 " you don t care for child ? " he ask at random . 
 " I don t know . I don t care for these child , " she answer bluntly . 
 " I think woman always like child . " 
 she smile bitterly . 

 " oh , " she say , " child be bad sometimes than grow people ; and then one can t resent it , or answer bad word , or strike they , just because they be child . " 
 " then you think you would prefer be a teacher of italian ? " 
 " oh yes , I must become that some day ; I study when I have a little time . a teacher talk with lady , and talk about all sort of thing . " 
 " how do you mean about all sort of thing ? " 
 " about thing which be not thing to eat , or mend , or clean , about book , and place , and people . " 
 Hamlin could not help smile . " be that such a rare pleasure ? " he ask , think not of the girl with whom he be talk , but of those weary ? sthetic discussion which he have leave behind he in London . 
 " Miss Curzon use to talk about book to I and about music , sometimes , " say the girl . " she make I read Shakespeare with she . that be long , long ago . " 

 " and since then . do you never talk about such thing ? " 
 " never . " 
 " never ? " 
 Anne Brown raise her eye quietly . " never , except with you , sir . " 
 Hamlin do not answer . 
 towards the end of the sitting , he suddenly look up . 
 " have you ever read the Vita Nuova , Miss Brown ? " he ask . 
 " what s the Vita Nuova ? " 
 " it be a little book by Dante , in prose and verse , tell how he meet Beatrice , and then how she die . it be much more beautiful than the Divina Commedia . " 
 she look incredulous . 
 " be it more beautiful than Bertran del Bornio , where he carry his head like a lantern ? or Bocca degli Abati , where they all change into snake ? or Cacciaguida when he prophesy about Dante s exile ? " 
 " it be quite different all about beautiful thing , and love . " 

 " I don t care for that . " 
 " you must read it some day , though . " 
 Miss Brown be silent , and relapse into her usual sullen appearance . 
 " I say , Hamlin , old fellow , " say Perry , as they walk up and down in the garden that evening , " do you care to see the festival at Lucca to?morrow ? I m go to take the child in for a treat , and I shall take Annie too for she never get any amusement , poor girl . I ve hire a waggonette will you be of the party ? " 
 " will you let I think about it , Perry ? I don t much go in for festival . " 
 " this be a picturesque affair really worth see . " 
 " by the way , " ask Hamlin , " I have nearly finish my sketch of Miss Brown , and I should like I suppose I ought to make she some little present . " 

 " I wouldn t , " answer Melton Perry sharply ; " she s an odd girl , and you might just hurt her feeling . you see her father be a republican , and that sort of thing , so she s get 

 all sort of notion about equality and so forth . awful bosh , of course , but still I think it s as well she should have they as not . " 

 " I didn t mean any money , " say Hamlin , feel himself grow red at the mere thought . 
 " then , if you will run the risk , give she some school?book . you know she want to set up as a teacher . grammar that sort of thing . " 
 Hamlin make a gesture of disgust . 
 " horrible ! to give her grammar ! " 
 " it s what she want . " 
 " why , it would seem well it would be like encourage she to become a daily governess . " 
 " that s just what I wish to do . " 
 Hamlin do not answer . the idea of Anne Brown give lesson at two franc the hour jar upon he . 



 CHAPTER VII . 

 early 
 the following morning Hamlin be awaken by the wheel of the waggonette and the bell of the horse . then come the excited voice of child ; the sound of slammed door and precipitate step on the stair ; and finally the rattle and jingle of departure . he have decline be one of the boisterous expedition to Lucca , for he detest child in general , and the little Perrys in particular ; and a day in the empty house   for Mrs Perry be go to see some friend at a neighbouring villa   have seem to he delightful . he open his shutter and see , in the crisp pale?blue morning , the carriage sweep round the corner of a narrow lane , the child s hat , Anne Brown s red shawl , the coachman s grey coat , brush rapidly along a tall box hedge . 

 if there be a thing Hamlin hat more than another , it be a holiday , a crowd , a lot of people on a jaunt . 


 after breakfast he go to the studio and sit down before his sketch of Miss Brown . they be unsatisfactory , but they be as good as he could hope to make they . he have fancy that a coloured sketch of her head would be all that he could possibly want ; but he now recognise that , after all , the head , beautiful and singular as it be , be yet the least part of the matter . it be the girl s gait , her way of carry her head and neck , her movement when at work , her posture when in repose a number of thing of which that head give no indication , and which , indeed , it be difficult to render in painting , since it be all movement . he have scribble a few line just fragmentary metaphor and scrap of description suggest to he by Anne Brown , and wonder what use he would make of they ; indeed , what use he could make of Anne Brown altogether . here be a 

 splendid model , a splendid heroine , but he be in the mood neither for painting nor for poetry writing . he put a background of dark bay tree to one of his sketch , and then regret have put it in at all . he no long feel inclined to work ; and , all of a sudden , an unaccountable fancy strike he to follow the holiday?maker to go quietly into town to see they , without , perhaps , let himself be see . 


 the sun be already high as he walk , or rather wad , along the dusty road , with its garland of dust?engraine vine hang from tree to tree on either side ; its dust?stifle marsh?flower in the ditch ; its white farmhouse , and white stone heap , white upon white , brilliant , relentlessly white , under the deep blue autumn sky . before he the bullock?cart , with sleepy driver prostrate on their back , move in a white cloud ; a whirlwind of dust be raise by every cariole , heavily laden with singing and yell peasant , which dash past . within sight of the rampart tree , like a pleasant oasis of leafage in 

 the treeless green desert of the town , the crowd of vehicle of all sort begin . under the red brick gate , with its statue of Justice and motto " Libertas , " there be a perfect block of cart , gig , bullock , horse , and scream country folk . Hamlin wriggle through , and slip along in the scant shade of the narrow street empty and desolate on that holiday ribbon of brilliant light cut into , border by the black shadow of overhang roof and balcony . a great buzz of voice come from the square of the cathedral ; peasant and townsfolk elbow about , people at booth yell their ware , boy screech on whistle and trumpet , cathedral bell tolling , and all the neighbouring church bell clatter and jangle . from the window of the blacken palace flutter strip of crimson and yellow brocade ; across the street , from balcony to balcony , and from twisted iron torchholder to twisted iron bridle?ring , be slung garland of coloured lamp for the evening s illumination ; and in the 

 midst of all rise the cathedral front , its tier and tier of twisted and sculptured pillaret , with the massive grey belfry soar by its side into the high blue sky . Hamlin push his way in at one of the side gate ; a rolling of organ , and quavering of choir voice , and clash of brass instrument ; a hot mouthful of heavy , incense?laden atmosphere ; a compact move human mass beneath the Gothic arch ; beam of light flickering among cloud of dust , and incense and taper smoke high in the arched nave ; constellation of light on altar , and organ?loft , and chandelier , yellow speck in the mid?day twilight of the cathedral ; something tawdry , hushed , unbreathable , and yet impressive and beautiful . 


 Hamlin gradually make his way to the side of the altar?steps . this part of the cathedral be full of woman provincial great lady , and shopkeeper wife and daughter in their Sunday clothe , brilliant caricature of last year s Paris fashion close pack together on reserved seat , enjoy the incense , the 

 light , the music , the holiness of the ceremony , the clothe of their neighbour , the appealing glance of the young man in elaborate silk and alpaca summer coat , with artistically combed?up head of hair , suck their cane all about the altar . Hamlin s entry , however quiet , be soon perceive , and the eye of all this womankind be fix upon the sight , rare in that country town , of an Englishman ; and white silk bonnet , and black lace veil , and big red fan , and fuzzy yellow and smooth black head , leant towards each other , while question go round in a whisper , who be the 
 forestiere 
  the handsome 
 forestiere 
  small , slight , meagre , white , with the light hair and moustache , and that melancholy face like a woman s ? Hamlin be quickly bore by all this magnificence ; jostle to piece , stifle by the heat , and incense , and heavy smell of the crowd . he be go out , when , as his eye wander from the silver and light of the altar , and the shin mitre and stole of the priest , to that sea of head and bonnet and 

 hat in the nave , they be suddenly and unexpectedly arrest on the side step of the high altar just opposite to he . there , among a lot of head , but high above they , be a head half cover with coarse black lace and crisp dark hair half turn away from he ; a majestic sweep of cheek and jaw , a solemn bend of neck . a moment later the bell tinkle for the elevation of the Host , the organ burst forth into a rapid jig , and the church be a sea of bent head , of kneel and stoop man and woman . as the people suddenly sink like a wave about the step , there remain , strand as it be , and rise conspicuous , the tall and massive figure of Miss Brown . she be stand on the altar?steps , whose orange?re baize cloth throw up faint yellowish tint on to her long dress of some kind of soft white wool , while the crimson brocade on wall and column form a sort of dull red background . in the mixed light of the yellow taper and the grey incense?laden sunbeam , her face acquire a diaphanous pallor , as if of a halo surround 

 it , as she stand , her hand hang loosely clasp , look calmly upon the bowed?down crowd below . one minute , and the bell tinkle again , the people rise with a muffle , shuffle noise , and hide she from Hamlin . the organ and bell be peal , the voice and violin rise shrill , the incense curl up in grey spiral into the sunbeam among the crimson hanging . the sonnet of Guido Cavalcanti , about the Madonna picture , enshrine at Or San Michele behind the blaze taper , and in which he recognise his lady , come into Hamlin s mind , with the sound of the music and the fume of the incense ; and together with it , a remembrance , a sort of picture , hopelessly jumbled , of Laura in the church at Avignon that good Friday , and Beatrice among the blaze light of the Heavenly Rose . the Mass be over , and people begin to stir and leave the cathedral . why have she remain stand while all the other have kneel ? perhaps from some Scotch puritanism ; it be incongruous , think Hamlin . but at the same time 

 he feel that , while incongruous in one way for she ought certainly to have kneel like the other it have in another respect complete an effect ; this disbelieve girl have herself become , as it be , the Madonna of the place . he stand aside and let the crowd slowly pass out . suddenly he see , among the move sea of head , the flaxen curl of the little Perrys the reddish beard of Melton Perry the head , half cover with black lace and tower above the other , of Miss Brown . she be lead the two small child , and look anxious in that great crowd . up go one of the little yellow head ; she have take the child in her arm . all of a sudden her eye catch those of Hamlin stand close by , and yet separate from he by an impassable gulf of people . her own light up , and with they her whole face , in a smile , which he have never see before . at last , near the church door , the crowd bear his friend straight towards he . 

 " what ! here after all ! " cry Perry . " up to some mischief , you cunne dog ! " 

 " up to the mischief of watch these good people s devotion , " answer Hamlin . 
 " why do you come ? " ask the child eagerly . 
 " I suppose because I think I should like to amuse myself after all , " answer Hamlin . 
 they be out on the cathedral step , in the full glare of the blue sky . outside a fountain be play , penny whistle and trumpet shrill on all side , and the people at the stall shriek and bellow out their ware to the motley crowd pour out of the church . the child cast eye of longing upon the booth , decorate with tricolour flag and sprig of green , full of gaudy doll , and squeak wooden dog , and tin trumpet , and drum ; upon the table , cover with bottle shape like pyramid , and china man , and Garibaldi bust , full of red and yellow and green stuff , and with pile of cake with little picture of saint stick in the middle of they . 

 " buy we something , " cry the little one to their father and Hamlin ; and they squeeze 

 through the crowd , and begin to hesitate before the varied splendour of the fair . 

 " you look very happy , Miss Brown , " say Hamlin , as they be wait while the child make their choice . for really the girl look quite radiant , an expression of unwonted happiness , of freedom and amusement , shine through her quiet , almost solemn , face , like sunshine through a thin film of mist , all the rich for be half suppress . 
 " it be all so beautiful , " she answer , look round at the square surround by high black palace drape with crimson brocade , and terrace cover with green , and at the cathedral , carve like a precious casket , beneath the blue sky . 
 " not more beautiful than at the Villa Arnolfini , surely ? " 
 she pause . 
 " no , not more beautiful ; but more I don t know what . " 
 " more cheerful ? " 

 she shake her head . " yes ; but not so 

 much that ; more free more I don t know how to call it . " 

 the child be laden with lollipop and sixpenny toy . 
 " come , " say Perry suddenly , very cheerful , in his unaccustomed freedom from his well half , " you must choose a fairing , Annie . what will you have ? a doll ? a beautiful yellow kerchief with purple flower , warrant the very bad colour in creation ? some gingerbread ? a penny whistle ? no , I m sure you re die for some literature " and he turn to a stone bench under a palace , where twopenny book be pile up , and quantity of leaflet of ballad , and life of saint , and romantic history , be string to the wall . 

 " oh ! " he say , " there s nothing for Annie here she hat saint and knight and poetry ; we must get she a book on the Rights of Man , or a history of the French Revolution , at the bookseller s in Via Fillungo . but this be just what suit Hamlin " and throw 

 down a heap of copper , he fill his hand with print leaflet . " the tremendous adventure of the Giant Ferracci ? , " he read ; " the lamentable history of Lucia of Lamermoor ; the love of Irminda and Astolfo ; the complaint of the beautiful fair?haired one , these be the thing for a poet , " and he stuff they into Hamlin s pocket . 

 " Don t be ridiculous , Melton , " cry Hamlin . 
 " ridiculous ! " exclaim Perry . " who talk of thing be ridiculous ? I m in good earnest " and as they go along he begin declaim , with appropriate gesture , a ballad compose by some printer s prentice from the libretto of an old opera . 
 the child shriek with laughter at papa s voice and face ; and Anne Brown burst into a curious subdue laugh , which , although scarcely audible , be extremely childish . 

 as they walk along the narrow crowded street towards the inn where they be to 

 have dinner , Perry keep on ahead with the two elder child , and Hamlin hang back with Miss Brown and the two young . 

 " do you like the ceremony in the cathedral , Miss Brown ? " he ask , irresistibly draw on to understand why she have not kneel like the other . 
 " it be very beautiful , " she say ; " and such beautiful vestment ! do you see the white and gold embroidery of the bishop ? and the purple dress of the canon ? oh , it be lovely ! but it make I angry to see such thing . " 
 " why so ? " 
 " because it be dreadful don t you think ? to see all those people kneel down and believe in all that nonsense . " 
 " how do you know it be nonsense ? it seem to I very beautiful and console . " 

 she turn she big grey?blue eye upon he . " you don t mean that you believe in all that mummery ? " she ask , searchingly and reproachfully " you who have study so much ; 

 you don t believe that they can make God come down with their muttering and kneeling ? " 

 " I don t believe it , " answer Hamlin , with some embarrassment ; " but I think it be very beautiful , and those who do believe in it be very happy . " 
 " but you don t think it be right that people should believe in falsehood , and be the slave of wicked priest ? " 
 " how rabid you be ! " laugh Hamlin . " no , I don t believe ; but I like to see other believe . " 
 " I don t ; " and after a minute she add , " Don t you believe in anything at all ? " 
 " perhaps I do , " he say , fix his eye upon she . " I believe in beauty I believe that be the one true thing in life . " 
 " I don t know what you mean , " she answer ; " but it seem to I dreadful that people should believe in priest and king , and all sort of lie . " 

 they relapse into silence . as they walk along , Hamlin steal glance at his companion , 

 walk stately and serious like a saint or a sibyl by his side . he wonder what this girl would have be have she live three or four century back . all this common modern radicalism distress he in she it have no colour and no perfume . yet , after all , it be but the modern accessory instead of the medieval . this be the way in which beauty and romance be waste nowadays waste , he think , half consciously , yet not perhaps entirely , since it go to make up a characteristic whole . 


 Melton Perry take they to the chief inn of the place for dinner . he let each of the child choose whatever she prefer , order several bottle of 
 Asti spumante 
 , and give it they to drink in champagne?glasse . the one or two furtive english spinster who be sip their tea and read their " Murray " at the other table of the huge dining?room , profusely ornament with cast from the antique , and with cut?paper fiy?floppers , look up with surprise at the festive party head by Perry . 

 after dinner the two little one begin to hang their head in the hot room , and give sign of go to sleep . 

 " good gracious ! " say Perry , in a consternation , " what be we to do with these wretched infant ? they ll just prevent our take a stroll in the town before return home . " 
 " I think the good thing will be for they to sleep a little , sir , " suggest Anne Brown . " I will tuck they up on the sofa , and stay with they here while you and Mr Hamlin take Miss Mildred and Miss Winnie for a walk . " 
 " but I can t think of leave you behind , Annie , " cry Perry . , " I know how much you would like to see the town . " 

 " I see part of it this morning , " she swere ; " and I really would just as soon stay with the child here . " there be no gainsay she ; so the two man sally forth with the two elder child on a walk through the crowded and bannere street ; while Anne Brown remain sit in the stuffy inn dining?room by the side of the torpid little 

 one . when they be out an idea suddenly strike Hamlin : this be the opportunity of get a present for Anne Brown . he leave Perry regale the child on ice at a 
 café 
 opposite the Church of St Michael , which rise like a great marble bride?cake into the bright blue sky , and make his way to a bookstall which he have notice in the morning . he ask for the Vita Nuova . the old bookseller look over a number of little schedule in his desk , and produce several copy , new and second?hand . they do not please Hamlin . at last he display a tiny Giunti volume , just delicately yellow by age , and bind in vellum . Hamlin buy it , and secrete it in his pocket , and then join Perry . 


 they go to the stable , where all the cariole from the country put up , and order the waggonette to be at the inn door in an hour . but as they be slowly mount the wide stone staircase , with the eternal plaster dance nymph trip it on each landing , Perry s eye fall upon a large bill paste upon the 

 opposite wall , the playbill of the Teatro del Giglio , on which , among the name of singer , fiddler , chorus?directors , scene?painter , theatre tailor , and hairdresser , stream , in scarlet letter , the title " semiramide . " 


 " 
 t ? 
 ! " cry Milton Perry , with the tuscan expression for a sudden bright thought ; " what do you two young minx say to go to hear an opera for the first time in your life ? " 

 " oh , papa ! " shrill Mildred . 
 " oh , papa ! " echo Winnie , catch hold of his knee 
 " not so quick ! " exclaim Perry ; " I m by no mean so sure of it . what s to become of the two sleepy little worm ? " 
 " send they home with Annie , " suggest Mildred , promptly ; " and you ll take we home later . " 
 " nothing of the kind , my young woman , " he answer sternly . " if any one go to the opera it shall be Annie . make up your mind for that . " 

 the dining?room be desert . on a sofa 

 near the open window lie the two tiny girl , prop up with cushion ; Anne Brown , surly , flop away the fly which buzz about they , and read a newspaper . she be rest the paper on her knee , and support her head with one hand , while the other move slowly with the cut?paper flopper ; and in this position the young nursemaid strike Hamlin as a resuscitation , but more beautiful and even strange , of one of Michaelangelo s prophetic woman . 

 " I say , Annie , " cry Perry , " what do you say to take these two brat to the opera this evening ? " 
 Anne Brown start up . 
 " to the opera , sir ? " she cry , flush with pleasure . 

 " yes ; these creature have never be . they re give Semiramide to?night . I think it s a good opera for child to begin with ; because it will teach they betime the unhappy complication which be apt to result from murder one s husband , and try 

 to marry one s son unawares . I ll take the little one back to the villa in half an hour , and quiet Mrs Perry s feeling . Mr Hamlin will be delighted to accompany you and mesdemoiselle my daughter , to the theatre , and then bring you home . it win t last late . " 

 " but , " exclaim Anne Brown , " oh , how good of you , sir ! but be you sure you would not like to stay for the opera yourself ? I could take the little one home . " 

 " no , thank you , Annie . the fact be , I 
 never 
 have approve of Rossini s music . ever since my early infancy I have be shock by its want of earnestness ; what I like be a symphony in p minor , with plenty of chord of the diminished seventeenth . that s the right sort of thing , isn t it , Hamlin ? " 

 a few minute later Perry go away with the two little girl , leave Mildred and Winhie with Anne Brown . Hamlin accompany they down?stairs to the waggonette . 
 " I will go to the theatre and secure a box , " he say , " and order a trap to take we back . " 

 " all right ! " cry Perry , as the waggonette roll off . " mind you don t let those child bore you or worry poor Annie too much ; and don t leave they alone the whole afternoon . " 
 but , for some unaccountable reason , Hamlin do leave they alone the whole afternoon . after he have secure the box and order the carriage , he feel a sort of unwillingness to go back to the inn , perhaps unconsciously , to sit opposite the Perrys nursemaid ; so he walk about the town till tea?time , not trouble himself to inquire whether Anne Brown and the child might not prefer a stroll on the rampart to the monotony of sit for two mortal hour in the inn dining?room . 



 CHAPTER VIII . 

 AT 
 dusk they hurriedly drink some of the thin yellow hotel?tea ; and then hasten to the theatre across the twilit street and square , where the garland of venetian lantern be begin to shine like jewel against the pale?blue evening sky . Hamlin offer Anne Brown his arm , but she ask he to give it to Winnie Perry . 

 " Mildred shall take mine , " she say " that s the good way in case of a crowd . " 

 a crowd , alas ! there be not ; the liveried theatre servant   doubtless the same , in yellow striped waistcoat and drab gaiter , who carry out Semiramis s throne , when the drop?scene fall   make profuse bow to the little party , and hand they at least half?a?dozen 


 play ? 

 bill 

 playbill 

 , each as large as an ordinary flag . the child have never be in a theatre before , and be in a high state of delight at the light , the gilding , the red plush , the scraping of fiddle ; especially at be in a box , although the box on this occasion cost only about half as much as would a single seat in an English playhouse . gradually the theatre fill ; the box with people of quality from surround villa , gentleman display an ampleness of shirt?front , and ladie an ampleness of bosom conceivable only by the provincial mind ; the pit with townsfolk and officer : the whole company star with eye and opera?glasse , talk , sing , rap with stick and sabre till the overture begin to roll out , when the audience immediately set up a kind of confused hum , suppose to be the melody of the piece , and which half drown the meagre orchestra . 


 then the opera begin an opera such as only the misery and genius of Italy could produce . there be a triumphal procession of six 

 ragamuffin in cotton trouser and with brass kettle?cover on their head , march round and round the stage , bear trophy of paper altar?flower and coffee?biggin ; there be a row of loathsome female , bloated or fleshless , in draggled robe too short or too long , shriek out of tune in the queen s chamber and four rapscallion in nightgowns and Tam?o Shanters , and beard which would not stick on , stand round the little spirit?lamp burn in front of Baal s statue ; there be the little black leathern portmanteau contain the babylonian regalia , which a nigger with a black?crape face carry after the Prince Arsaces ; and there be the " magnificent apartment in the palace of Nineveh , disclose a delicious view of the famous hang garden , " as describe by the libretto , and furnish solely with a rush?bottome chair and a deal table , the table?cloth of which be so short that Semiramis be oblige to lean her arm on it to prevent its slip off , which , however , it finally do . moreover , an 


 incal ? 

 culable 

 incalculable 

 amount of singing out of tune and pummel one s chest in moment of passion . no training , no dress , no scenery , no orchestra . still in this miserable performance there be an element of beauty and dignity , a something in harmony with the grand situation and glorious music : a splendidly make Semiramis , quite regal in her tawdry robe , who shower out volley of 
 roulade 
 as a bird might shower out its trill ; another young woman , plain , tall , and slight , play the prince in corselet and helmet , with quite magnificent attitude of defiance and command , with bare extend arm and supple wrist . the two girl who play the principal part be sister , and although they have certainly never sing much with a teacher , they must have sing a great deal together ; and their voice and style melt into each other quite as if it be all a spontaneous effusion on their part . all the reality which money can get , dress , voice , training , accessory , scenery , utterly want ; but instead , in the midst of pauperism , something which money 

 can not always get , a certain ideal beauty and charm . Anne Brown be intensely interested in the performance ; indeed , quite as much so , though in another way , as the child . during the interval between the act , she could speak of nothing but the story of Semiramis , and wonder what would happen next . Hamlin could scarcely help laugh at the concern which she manifest each time that the hero Arsace be bully by the wicked Assur ; but he could not laugh at the tragic way in which she conceive the whole situation . to he all that florid music of Rossini would already have destroy any seriousness there might have be in the matter ; but to Anne Brown it seem as if all these splendid vocalisation take the place of the visible pomp and magnificence of assyrian royalty : for she the hero and heroine , the magi and satrap , be clothe , not in the calico and tinsel of the theatre tailor , but in the musical splendour of Rossini . Hamlin , to say the truth , find the performance very wearisome ; he have be 

 bore by Semiramide too often with Tietiens and Trebelli , to find it particularly interesting at the Teatro del Giglio of Lucca . he sit look on listlessly , not so much at the stage as at the girl who be lean out of the box before he , watch each movement of her hand and neck , as she devour the performance with eye and ear . but when at last there come the grand scene between Semiramis and her son , whatsoever be good in the performance suddenly burst forth ; the two young woman sing with a sort of spontaneous passion , a delight in the music and their own voice and themselves ; and when , Semiramis have let down her back hair   as distressed heroine always do   from utter despair , Prince Arsaces , not to be outdo , pull off his helmet , let down his or her back hair also , and the two sink into each other s arm and begin the great duet , even Hamlin feel in a kind of way that this be passionate , and tragic , and grand . Anne Brown be seat sidewise in the front of the box , rest her mass 

 of iron?black hair on her hand , her other hand lie loosely on her knee . her chest heave under her lace mantilla , and her part lip quiver . it seem to Hamlin as if this be the real Semiramis , the real mysterious king?woman of antiquity as if the music belong in some sort of ideal way to she . when the curtain have fall amid the yell of applause , she remain silent , let Hamlin help she on with her shawl without turn her eye from the stage . the light be rapidly put out . 

 " we must go , Miss Brown , " cry Hamlin , " otherwise we shall be leave in the dark . " 
 she turn , take little Winnie by the hand , and follow he , who lead the eld Perry child , prattle loudly , to the stair . there be a great crowd go down , whistle and hum tune from the opera . from the force of habit Hamlin again offer Anne Brown his arm . but instead of accept it , she , so to speak , rapidly pluck little Winnie from the ground , and raise she in her arm as if she be a feather . 

 " please let I carry that child , " cry Hamlin . 
 " oh no , " she answer quietly . " I don t mind carry she at all ; but she s too heavy for you , sir . " 

 out in the square the carriage be await they in the bright starlight , where the red and green lamp be already die out among the plane?trees . in a minute they be rattle through the narrow street , and out of the town by the dark tree?masse of the bastion . the bell of the horse jingle as they go ; the melancholy shrilling of insect rise from the field all round ; the vine?garland creak in the wind . the two child be speedily asleep one with her head on Hamlin s shoulder , the other wrap in her nurse s shawl . Anne Brown bend over the side of the waggonette , a dark outline , the damp night breeze catch her hair . neither speak . Hamlin feel a sense of guilt steal over he ; of guilt for nothing very definite ; of guilt towards no one else , but towards himself . 

 the drive pass like a dream . suddenly the wheel grate on the gravel of the villa garden ; dog bark ; light appear ; the child be lift out of the carriage asleep ; and the voice of Perry whisper to Hamlin 

 " I catch it nicely when I come home I don t know why , upon my soul ! I m sure I wish I have remain and amuse myself with you . " 
 " I wish you have , " say Hamlin quite seriously , always with the sense of vague guilt towards himself ; then add , 
 " by the way , old man , I fear I really must go on to Florence to?morrow afternoon . " 



 CHAPTER IX . 

 PERRY 
 could not at first understand his friend s sudden decision , and violently combat it . but after a little while he say to himself that it must have be fearfully dull for Hamlin at the Villa Arnolfini , and that to have stay so long be already much more than a miserable be like himself could expect . so that when his wife nearly go into hysteric at the notion of Hamlin their poet?painter , as she call he suddenly depart , he represent to she , with more emphasis than be his will not , that Hamlin have bore himself to death , and must be bore no long . 

 " and where be you go ? " ask the limp and Sapphic lady , as they sit at lunch . 

 " I have no notion , " answer Hamlin . " I know nothing beyond Florence for three day . I may go on to Rome , Naples , Egypt , America , Japan , or return to Hammersmith . I have no notion . " 
 " ah , these poet ! " cry Mrs Perry ; " they never can tell whither their soul may waft their body . " 
 when they have finish , Hamlin ask whether he might say good?bye to Anne Brown . " I have a little farewell gift to make she , " he explain . 
 Anne Brown be summon into the studio ; she evidently have only just hear the news . 
 " be you go away , sir , really ? " she ask . 
 " yes , " answer Hamlin , drily ; " I expect the gig must be wait for I already . " 
 " and be you not go to return , Mr Hamlin ? " 
 " oh no ; I think I shall go to America this winter . " 

 she be silent , and stand by the table in the attitude of a servant wait for further order . 
 " before I go away , " say Hamlin , " I want to thank you , Miss Brown , for your kindness and patience , which have enable I to make a sketch which will be very valuable for one of my next picture , and , " he add , as she merely nod her head , " I want to beg you to accept a little gift in remembrance of all the trouble I have give you . " 
 Anne Brown flush , and her face suddenly change , as if a whip?cord have pass across it . 
 Hamlin take the little vellum?bound volume from his pocket . 
 " you tell I you have never read the Vita Nuova , Miss Brown , " he say , " so I venture to ask you to accept this copy of it . I don t know whether you like old book ; I think they much pretty to look at . Good?bye . " 
 the girl s face clear into a kind of radiance . 

 " thank you so much , " she say ; " I will read it often . " 
 " and think of I sometimes and the trouble I give you ? " 
 " it be my duty , since Mrs Perry wish it , sir . Good?bye a good journey to you . " 
 " Good?bye , Miss Brown . " 




 BOOK II . 


 CHAPTER I. 

 WALTER HAMLIN 
 do not go to America . on leave the Villa Arnolfini , he meet at Florence some artist friend , who , in his condition of utter absence of plan , easily draw he on with they to Siena and Perugia , thence into the small umbrian city , and finally into a wholly unexplored region between the Abruzzo and the Adriatic . by the time that their sketching and article?write expedition be at an end , the winter have come round , and more than three month have elapse since Hamlin have part with the Perrys . would Hamlin return with his friend to England ? he have often say that he have have enough of Italy that he would go home and shut 


 he ? 

 self 

 himself 

 up in his studio at Hammersmith , among smoke and river?fog , see not a live creature , learn Persian and study sufi poet until next spring , when he would set off for the East , never more to return to Europe , except for the grosvenor private view . but when the moment for return north approach , Hamlin begin to hesitate ; and the very day before his friend departure , he inform they that he have come to the conclusion that there be still some work for he to do in Italy . 

 " I shall be in England at the end of two month at late , " he say . 
 and on their remonstrating at his fickleness , he merely answer 
 " I have a notion for a new picture , and I think I have find my model for it . " 
 " the queen of Night in your portfolio , " suggest one of his friend . 

 they have notice and generally admire that strange head , the like of which none of they have ever see before , and they have give the drawing , which Hamlin describe 

 merely as " a girl near Lucca , " the nickname of " the queen of Night . " 

 " yes , " answer Hamlin , " that s the one I m think about . " 
 so the rest of the party set sail from Civita Vecchia ; and one drizzly , foggy morning , Hamlin get into the train to carry he northward to Florence . 

 during those three month , he could scarcely himself have explain when or how , strange notion have come into Hamlin s head , and a still strange plan have finally mature in it . he have be haunt by the remembrance of the Perrys nursemaid at the Villa Arnolfini , and gradually take to brood and day?dreaming about she . he have make up his mind that Anne Brown be the most beautiful girl , in the strange style , whom he have ever meet . what be to be her future ? of two possibility one must be realise . either this magnificent blossom be to be untimely nip , this beautiful and strange girl be to fritter away her life , unnoticed , waste , to 

 little by little lose her beauty , her dignity , her grandeur , her whole imaginative aroma ; or the rare plant of beauty be to be cherish , nurse into perfection , till it burst out in maturity of splendour , a thing of delight for the present and of wonder for the future . either Anne Brown must turn into a sordid nursery?governess , or into the avowedly most beautiful woman in England that be to say , in the particular pre?Raphaelite society which constitute England to he . 


 yet not necessarily ; there be still a middle course she might marry some small shopkeeper or teacher of language at Florence ; or , perhaps , some artist might notice she , make she his mistress , perhaps his wife . this last thought of Anne Brown as the possible wife of some other Melton Perry   for they be all Melton Perrys at Florence   fill Hamlin with a vague disgust and irritation . much well that she should end her life as a nursery?maid , or a daily governess at a franc the hour . still , it be dreadful to think that something so 

 unique should be lose , waste for ever . " such thing must be , " say Hamlin to himself ; " it be sad , but it can t be help . " and he write two sonnet , " Lost Loveliness , " and " Stillborn Joy , " which be extremely beautiful , and quite among the fine he ever write . but this do not despatch the subject . the sense of have make the most of the fact that this loveliness be to be waste , this joy of beauty to be stillborn , do not make up for the consciousness that the waste , the abortion , have not actually take place , might yet be prevent , and be dreadful in themselves . be he , Hamlin , to marry Anne Brown ? he shrink in terror from so quixotic , and at the same time so commonplace , so school?girlish a thought . but if he do not marry she no other man could ; at least , no other man who be to prevent the act of wastefulness to be consummate . she might marry a clerk , a shopkeeper , even a servant , or even some miserable little anglo?florentine artist ; but if she marry a man above that , a man to appreciate and 

 make the most of she , that man must evidently be himself . it be difficult to follow the logic of this notion ; but certain it be that Hamlin never doubt for a second that either Anne Brown must bloom for he and by he , must be his most precious possession and his most precious loan to the world or that Anne Brown must be simply and deliberately bury under a bushel . such argument be matter of character , I suppose ; be it as it may , the argument be absolutely cogent . 


 when Hamlin have get thus far he stop for a long time , revolve the matter in his mind in a purely abstract way , without attempt to realise how thing might be settle . he be not a man of action or of resolve , and would usually let thing slip on and look at they slip ; and during this ruminating condition , he do not once seriously ask himself whether he intend marry the Perrys nursemaid . but suddenly , the very day before his friend be to carry he back to England , a new notion come into his head . his life seem 

 suddenly fill with romance . the matter be settle in a minute . Anne Brown be to be filch triumphantly from oblivion : he telegraph Perry to hire he room in Florence . as the meeting of certain chemical substance will sometimes produce a new and undreamt?of something of wholly unprecedented property , so idea have come in collision in Hamlin s mind , and out of a mere perplexity have arise a stranger scheme out of the question what should be the fate of Anne Brown , have originate the decision what be to be the future of Walter Hamlin . the situation seem change : instead of his be a mere possible , but by no means probable , instrument of a change in her life , she be the predestine instrument for the consummation of his life . Anne Brown should live for the world and for fame ; and Walter Hamlin s life should be crown by gradually endow with vitality , and then woo , awaken the love of this beautiful galatea whose soul he have mould , even as Pygmalion have mould the limb of 

 the image which he have make to live and to love . the idea , once present to Hamlin s mind , have be accept at once ; and in another hour he have work out all the detail of the real romance in which he be embark ; he have determine exactly where he would send Anne Brown to school , where he would go during her stay there , what settlement he would make to ensure her complete freedom of choice when she should choose he , in what part of London he would buy a house for she , which of his female relation should have charge of she , by whom she should be introduce into artistic society ; he begin to imagine all the detail of his long courtship . beyond the courtship , into their actual married life , his fancy do not carry he ; it be that year , or two or three year of gradually grow devotion , upon which he care to dwell . whether such a scheme be wise or right it never occur to he to question . he have determine on educating , wooing , and marry a woman like what Anne Brown seem to be , 

 as a man might determine to buy a house in a particular fishing or hunt district the only thing be to make sure whether the particular house be the suitable house . the only further concern of Hamlin be to make sure that Anne Brown be really all that she seem to he to be ; and Hamlin look forward as to a kind of preliminary romance to the strange inspection , this minute examination of a creature who should never guess the extraordinary metamorphosis which might , or might not , be in store for she . 




 CHAPTER II . 

 a week 
 later Hamlin be paint Anne Brown in a studio which he have hire for three month . she have manifest some pleasure when , unexpectedly , Mrs Perry have tell she of his return , and of his desire to have she once more for a model ; but the manifestation thereof be so calm , or rather so mingled with her usual haughty indifference , that her romantic and passionate mistress have forthwith make up her mind that Anne Brown be a mere soulless body , and communicate that fact to her husband . 


 " I don t see why Annie should be particularly delighted at the prospect of sit for two hour , twice a?week , with her head raise and her throat outstretche , in a beastly cold 

 studio , " answer Perry , affect , as he frequently do , from a curious kind of coyness , not to understand his wife s underlie meaning . 

 " she be a mere soulless body , " repeat Mrs Perry " as indifferent to Hamlin as a handsome cow would be . " 
 " do you expect she to throw herself into Hamlin s arm ? " cry Perry , angrily . 
 " I expect she , " answer Mrs Perry , with a kind of haughty mystery and sadness , " to be a woman . " 
 " and I expect you to attend to her remain what she be an honest girl , " retort Perry . 
 " Melton ! " say his wife solemnly ; and immediately poor Perry s principle droop like a furled sail . 

 Melton Perry have always an uncomfortable feeling of responsibility regard Anne Brown ; a sort of sense that , as poor old Miss Curzon have be grievously mistake in intrust a girl like Anne Brown to a lady so mystical 

 and romantic as his wife , he , on his part , harden sinner , social wreck as he doubtless be , be in duty bind to make up for the good old woman s want of discernment . if it have be any one except Hamlin , he repeat to himself , he would never have permit a single sitting ; but Hamlin be a Sir Galahad at least with regard to servant girl and suchlike who have always strike Perry dumb with wonder ; and in this instance in particular , Hamlin seem really to consider Anne Brown much in the light of a picture by an old master . yet even thus , it have take he by surprise , and relieve his mind of a heavy weight , when , the day before the first sit in the studio , Ham in have ask Mrs Perry to tell he of some elderly woman some former housekeeper or nurse in an english family who could come to his studio and keep it in order two or three time a?week . 

 " I can recommend you a most delightful young laundress , " exclaim Mrs Perry with fervour " quite a Palma Vecchio . " 

 " thank you , " answer Hamlin , drily ; " I particularly want an elderly woman who can take charge of my thing , and who can be there when I mean , who can take Miss Brown s bonnet and shawl when she come to sit to I . " 
 Mrs Perry confess to no knowledge of such a person , but sit down to write to the german deaconess , " such real saint , " in quest of the desire piece of elderly respectability . but when she have go to her writing?table , Melton Perry kick Hamlin s foot under the table , and say in an undertone 
 " you be a damned moral dog , certainly , Wat . thank you so much , old fellow . " 

 so the old housekeeper be hire to go three time a?week to Hamlin s studio , and twice a?week she open the studio door to Anne Brown , and take the girl s poke?bonnet and grey shawl in the little anteroom , cram full of dwarf orange?tree , which open into the pillare balcony circling round the topmost floor of the old palace , and from which 

 you look into the lichene court , and see the steel?like sheen of the water in the well . Hamlin have determine to embody one of his usual mystical fancy in his new picture . his picture come to he first as poem , and he have write a sonnet descriptive of his intend work before he have paint a stroke of it . it be call Venus Victrix ; and the strangeness , the mysteriousness which give a charm to his beautiful church?window?like picture , and make one forget for a minute the uncertainty of drawing and the weakness of flesh?painting this essential quality of the pictorial riddle depend very much upon the fact that his Venus Victrix be entirely unlike any other Venus Victrix which the mind of man could conceive . instead of the naked goddess triumphing over the apple of Paris , whom such a name would lead you to expect , Hamlin make a sketch of a lady in a dress of sad?coloured green and gold brocade , seat in a melancholy landscape of distant barren peak , suffuse with the grey and yellow tint 

 of a late sunset ; behind she be a bower of sear?coloure palm , knot their bough into a kind of canopy for her head , and in her hand she hold , drag despondingly on the ground , a broken palm?branch . the expression of the goddess of Love , since such she be , be one of intense melancholy . it be one of those picture which go to the head with a perfectly unintelligible mystery , and which absolutely preclude all possibility of inquire into their exact meaning . a picture which might have be one of Hamlin s good , only that it be never finish . 


 for , it must be remember , the picture , or rather the painting of it , be merely an excuse invent by Hamlin for an opportunity of see , of examine , the creature whose future be in his hand . he wish to assure himself that Anne Brown be really the Anne Brown of his fancy ; and as he star at that strange and beautiful face , it be not in reality with the object of transfer it on to his canvas , but to make sure whether it be 

 really as strange as it seem to he . it be also to gauge whatever mystery there might be hide in that singular nature . whether he ever do gauge it , it be impossible to tell . there be , he feel , something strange there something which correspond with the magnificent and mysterious outside , a possibility of thought and emotion enclose like the bud in its case of young leave a potential passion , good or bad , of some sort . at Anne Brown s actual character it be difficult to get ; or rather , perhaps , there be as yet but little actual character to get at . he become more and more persuade , as he sit opposite to she , paint and talking or , interrupt the sitting , play to her strange song which he have pick up in his travel , and fragment of forget opera which it be his mania to collect that Anne Brown be in reality much young than her year ; that beneath those solemn feature there be a still immature soul wrap up in mere conventional idea of right and wrong , 

 a few inherit republican formul ? , and a natural pride which have grow , as do any protect skin , physical or moral , where surrounding be for ever chafing and wear . a soul , above all , which have never yet seek for an ideal have never love ; and this knowledge be to Hamlin a source of infinite satisfaction . 


 it be a satisfaction , also , to notice how , little by little , whatever ideal seem to bud in Anne Brown s mind , be connect with he , or at least with the thing which he present to her imagination . Nay , with himself , as a person not at all , but yet with the book , the music , the picture about which he talk to she . this studio , so unlike the bleak and tobacco?reeking workshop of Melton Perry , with its curious carve furniture , its japanese screen , its bit of brocade and tapestry   rubbish which Hamlin would have blush at in London , its shelf of book and chip majolica and glass , its quantity of flower , be evidently a sort of earthly paradise to the 

 girl . and the handsome , pale , serious young man , with womanishly regular feature and world?worn look , who treat she with a sort of protect deference , who instruct she in what she ought to like and dislike , and at the same time ask with real earnestness for her opinion , be evidently its affable archangel . this Hamlin perceive to his pleasure ; but , nevertheless , he perceive also that all feel , all idea , be in Anne Brown vague , immature , or merely potential unless , indeed , this tragic?looke creature repress and drown in the darkness of her consciousness anything more definite and develop . 


 they do not talk very much , for they be both of they rather taciturn ; but what they say acquire therefrom more than double importance . and of this talk Hamlin do by far the great share . Anne Brown have indeed little to say a nursery?maid of nineteen have not much to tell a fashionable poet?painter of thirty?one : slight description of place she have be to , villas , or bathing?place , and one or two 

 excursion from they ; vague reminiscence of old Miss Curzon , of the book which she have make the girl read , the music she have hear , the anecdote of Landor and Rossini and Malibran which the old lady have narrate ; a few allusion , short and passionate , to her father ; a few more , sullen and dreary , to her own future life ; that be all that poor Anne Brown could say . 

 for when he tell she the plot of novel , and repeat scrap of poem to she , she scarcely venture to give he her opinion . she be so earnest that she feel that only something worth say should be say ; and what thing worth say could she say to he ? 

 " by the way , " say Hamlin one day , as she stand , tie her bonnet , and look out over the sea of shingly roof , the sudden gap show shady garden far below , open 
 loggia 
 , between whose column flutter linen , and irregular row of window with herb in broken ewer on their sill " by the way , you have never 

 tell I how you like the Vita Nuova , Miss Brown . " he have talk of so many book , make her wonder and sometimes laugh at his account of they , but never about that , nor about his own . 

 " it be very beautiful , " she say , still look out of the window " but do you think it be true ? " 
 " why not ? " he say . 

 " I don t know I don t think there be man like that ; " then she suddenly add , with a sort of melancholy humorous laugh , which be frequent with she , " I will make my pupil read it when I be a 
 parlatrice 
 . those lady will tell I their opinion . " 

 Hamlin be look at she , as she still turn her massive head , with its wave of iron?black hair , away from he , towards the light . 
 " Good?bye , " she say , with her hand on the door?latch . 

 " stop a minute , " say Hamlin ; and go 

 to a book?shelf , he get down a little green?bound volume . 

 " I don t know why , " he say , " but I should like you to read these . it be idiotic trash after the Vita Nuova   but it be mine . " 
 " thank you , " she say . " I will bring it you back next sit . I will cover the binding . " 
 " I want you to keep it . Won t you do I that favour ? " 
 she redden all over her pale face . 
 " thank you , " she say . " it be very good of you . " 



 CHAPTER III . 

 it 
 so happen that as Anne Brown be walk quickly home she be overtake by Melton Perry . 

 " what s that book , Annie ? " he inquire , as they walk side by side . 
 " Mr Hamlin give it I it s his poem . " 
 " let I see . " Perry be more peremptory than usual . 
 he turn over the leaf as they go along , and then return it to she . 
 " you may read that , " he say " it s sad trash , but you may read it . all poetry isn t fit for woman to read , " he add , by way of explanation . 
 the gift of this book somehow disturb Perry s equanimity . 

 " what make he give you that book ? " he ask . 
 " I don t know , sir . we be talk about the Vita Nuova . " 
 " a lot of confound medieval twaddle , " cry Perry . " why don t you read Lady Audley s Secret or the Heir of Redclyffe ? that s the right sort of thing . " 
 she seem hurt , and they be silent . suddenly Perry say , with some roughness 
 " I m sorry to inconvenience Hamlin , but this will be the last of the sitting . I be go to send you to the sea?side with the child in a day or two . little May need change of air . when you return , Mr Hamlin will be leave Florence . " 
 " yes , sir , " answer Anne Brown ; and a kind of suppress spasm pass across her face . 
 Perry see it . 
 " it s high time , " he say to himself . 

 Melton Perry could not screw up his courage 

 till he and his wife and Hamlin have already finish dinner that evening . 

 " I say , Hamlin , " he begin , light his pipe , while Mrs Perry artistically twist a cigarette in her long brown finger " d you think you could finish off that picture with only one more sitting ? I m sure Mrs Perry think it be time for the child to go down to the sea?side only , of course , she doesn t like disturb you in your work . " 
 " go down to the sea?side ! " exclaim Mrs Perry , not at all mollify by her husband s deference ; " who talk of go to the seaside ? and what have that to do with his work ? " 
 " you forget , my dear , that you say this morning that May require change of air and , of course , Annie will be require to take the child down to Viareggio . I be extremely sorry for you , old fellow , but I fear you must finish that picture at least so far as Annie be concern by the beginning of next week . " 

 " I see , " answer Hamlin , briefly . for the first time in his life almost , he feel angry with 

 his old friend ; an unspeakable resentment at this interference with what he consider already as his . 


 " 
 I 
 see nothing of the sort , " burst out Mrs Perry ; " I will never , never permit dear Hamlin s masterpiece to be spoil . I would rather take the child to the sea?side myself oh yes . I would rather they do not go at all . my child be the dear thing I possess , but I have no right selfishly to prefer their welfare to the completion of such a picture . I should never forgive myself . that unfinished picture , that strange , terrible Venus , would haunt I in my dream , and I should hear the whole world ask I , what have you do with a thing mean for our joy ? " 

 " Bosh ! " cry Perry , stretch out his leg and puff at his pipe " rubbish ! a fine thing if May get low fever again : much you ll think of Hamlin s masterpiece then . " 
 " may shall not have fever , " answer Mrs Perry , haughtily ; " and Hamlin s masterpiece , which you choose to sneer at " 

 " oh , please , don t bother about my masterpiece ! " interpose Hamlin . 
 " shall not be sacrifice . you shall take the child to the sea?side , Melton ; and Annie shall continue to give he as many sitting as he may wish . " and then , pass over her husband s nauseous existence , she begin a mellifluous and irrelevant conversation with Hamlin across he . 
 but after two or three minute Perry could stand it no long . 
 " Damn your sea?side ! " he suddenly burst out . 
 " Melton ! " shriek Mrs Perry , fall back on her chair . 
 " Damn your sea?side ! " repeat Perry . " haven t you eye in your head to understand that the sea?side have nothing to do with the matter ? the child no more require to go to Viareggio than I require to be make Khan of Tartary . what be require be that an honest girl , who be intrust to we by an old friend , should not get to be talk of as a " 

 " this loathsome coarseness be too much for I . Adieu , Mr Hamlin ! " and Mrs Perry flounce out of the room . 
 " Lord deliver we from womankind ! " exclaim Perry , as the door shut upon his wife , and he fall back in his chair . " what a nice breakfast I shall have to?morrow ! " 
 Hamlin do not answer , but merely light another cigarette , and look into the smoulder fire . 
 " Hamlin , old boy , " resume Perry , " don t be down upon I . I really be confoundedly sorry to bother you indeed I be ; but you see about this girl " 
 " I understand , " answer Hamlin , shortly ; " don t let s talk about it . " 
 " but please don t be in a rage with I , Watty , " cry Perry , appealingly ; " really I don t know what to do . you see , it s not as if she be an ordinary girl or an ordinary servant ; then I should say hang it , please yourself ! " 
 " sweet moral ! " sneer Hamlin . 

 " but with she it s different ; I m sure you must recognise that yourself . now I don t mean to say you be in the least to blame , or that the girl care the least scrap about you ; but still , this sort of thing win t do . I know you re the last man to do a dirty thing indeed you re the only man whom I would have permit to go on so long . but then , quite without mean anything , all that sit , and talk , and discuss poetry and Vita Nuova together without know it , it put idea into a girl s head , make she dissatisfy , that sort of thing , and the result be that she go to the bad . and then , here in Florence especially , a girl s none the well look at for have sit , if even only to one man . People begin to talk   at the villa it be another matter , story go round , and it become difficult for she to get a respectable situation . " 
 " you needn t say any more , " cry Hamlin , with almost feminine impatience . all this give he a sense of moral nausea . 

 " you understand , old fellow , I don t mean 

 it about you in particular , " persist Perry ; " indeed you ve behave like Sir Bors , Sir Percival , and Sir Galahad all roll into one . but it s the fatality of the circumstance , the beastly world about we . you re not angry , be you , with I ? " 

 " not a bit , " answer Hamlin , quietly , minutely examine one of the picture on the wall , which be not worth look at , and have be thoroughly look at by he already ; " not a bit , my dear Perry . I suppose you have no objection to Miss Brown give I one more morning ? " 
 " not the least two , or even three , for the matter of that . I be only anxious not to spin out thing indefinitely . " 
 " one more sitting will be more than enough , " answer Hamlin . " by the way , before I go , I want to do a drawing of little Mildred . " 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 it 
 be a cold and drizzle February morning that last sit which Anne Brown be to give to Walter Hamlin . as the girl slowly mount the well?like stair of the old tower palace , and see the distant snow?covere hill through the dim window on the landing , she think with sadness that this be the last time she should toil up to Hamlin s studio . a lethargy weigh upon she , make she feel that everything be dreary and unreal , such as she have experience only once or twice before , when one of the few holiday of her childhood have draw to a close . the cheerless , colourless , eventless , joyless routine of ordinary life be about to close over , to engulf , her little island of brightness . she be long 

 than usual take off her bonnet and cloak in the anteroom fill with orange?trees , for she feel as if she must look at everything well one last time at the bit of brocade and the photograph on the wall , the plaster?cast on the shelf , the scarlet and purple anemone in the crack china bow , the brass synagogue lamp hang in the window . 

 " it be bad weather , " say Hamlin s old housekeeper . 
 " horrible , " answer Anne , look vacantly through the window at the grey sky and wet roof . 
 the old woman open the studio door and draw the curtain . Hamlin , who be at a table writing , rise and come to meet his model . 
 " it be very good of you to come in such horrible weather , Miss Brown , " he say . 
 " it be the last sitting I think I ought not to miss it , " and she sit down at once in the arm?chair of fade green velvet opposite Hamlin s easel . 

 " Won t you warm yourself a little ? " he ask . 
 " no , thank you ; I be not cold . " 
 Hamlin begin to prepare his paint . 
 " you be go to Viareggio , Miss Brown , " he remark . 
 " yes ; I believe I be . " 
 " you will enjoy the change of air . the sea you tell I you like the sea one day , " and he go on squeeze the paint on to his palette . 
 " I suppose so . " she say no more . 

 Hamlin be seat before his easel , look now at his work and now at she , and make minute alteration with a small brush . they do not talk much . he seem bent upon his work . he have tell she that she need not keep her head in position , as he be merely finish some unimportant detail . her eye wander round the room at the book , the sketch on the wall , the rug under foot . on the chimney?piece be stick a photograph of Melton Perry . if only she might have a 


 photo ? 

 graph 

 photograph 

 of Hamlin ! . . . for less than a second she think she might beg for one ; then it seem to her impossible , and the wish beat itself painfully against that cold , dead impossibility , like a bird against its cage?bar . 

 Hamlin call the old woman 
 " take that letter to the post?office at the Uffizi , " he say , point to his writing?table , " and mind you get it register . " 
 it be the first time that Hamlin have send the old woman on an errand during one of Anne Brown s sitting , when she be will not to go in and out of the studio noiselessly , like a watchful duenna . 
 the heavy stair door bang behind she . Anne listen to it dully , vacantly , as one listen to thing when deeply preoccupy . for a few minute Hamlin work on in silence , then suddenly , without look up , he say 
 " do you remember my find your Dante in the vineyard at the Villa Arnolfini , Miss Brown ? " 
 " yes , " she answer . 

 " and you tell I that you wish to fit yourself to be a teacher ? " 
 " yes , I remember . " 
 " well , " go on Hamlin , " I have be think about that ; and I think it would be a pity I mean I hope you win t think it horribly rude of I to say so I think it would be well if you go to school for a little while yourself . " 
 Anne star at this speech , and at the close of it her surprise turn to resentment . 
 " of course it would be well , " she say , bitterly ; " of course I shall always be very ignorant ; but I have no wish to set up for what I be not . I be not go to teach people anything only to correct their pronunciation and a few mistake . one do not require to study much for that , and I shall be competent to do it . " 
 in her quiet , subdued way she look very angry . 
 Hamlin rise from his easel . 

 " you misunderstand I , " he say ; " and 

 indeed what I have to say be so strange and perhaps so unjustifiable , that you have every right to do so . listen , " and he draw a chair near her . 

 " please do not think I very bold , and forgive the horrid way in which I be force to put thing , when I tell you , dear Miss Brown , that I be very much interested in you , and , indeed will you forgive a comparative stranger saying so ? that I have never feel so much attract by any one as I do by you . " 
 Anne Brown do not answer ; she seem literally petrify by sheer astonishment . 

 " the time have come when our acquaintance must come to an end , " go on Hamlin , rapidly ; " but I can not let this happen without make an effort to prolong it . I have no brother or sister no one , at least , live with I , except distant relation . I have never take much interest in anybody . but now I want to know would you , instead of our parting company altogether would you let I 


 be ? 

 come 

 become 

 your guardian for the next few year , and as such , would you let I take charge of your education and send you to school ? it seem a very ridiculous thing to suggest . but still you must not be angry with I for do so . " 

 Anne s big onyx eye have open wider and wide . she flush purple in the middle of his speech , then turn ashy?white , while she pick convulsively at the fringe of the armchair . then suddenly a sort of convulsion come across her face , and , as if from sheer unbearable tension of feeling , she burst into tear . 
 she give way only one second , immediately try to stop herself , but in vain . Hamlin feel that he be make a horrible mess of it . he come close up to the chair where the poor girl be throw back , shake with sob . 

 " Miss Brown , " he cry , take her hand " Anne oh , don t be unhappy ! I do not mean to offend you . Don t you understand my meaning ? I wish you to be what you have a right to be . I wish you to be in 

 such a position that of all the man in the world you may choose the one who deserve you most . Anne , I love you and I hope that perhaps some day you may love I ; but I want you to be able to love whoever may well deserve you , and merely to do my good that you should care for I . I want you to have a future independent of I to possess the education and the fortune which shall enable you to marry whomsoever you will , or not to marry at all . will you let I , for the time be , be your guardian , your father , your brother ; let I provide for you , take care of your money , see to your education ? I do not ask you to love I , but merely to give I a chance of try to make you prefer I . " 

 Anne do not cease sobbing ; and every convulsive heaving of her body make Hamlin feel a sort of sicken terror . he slide down on his knee and kiss her hand . 
 this action seem suddenly to awaken she . she start up , and make a tremendous effort , stop her crying . 

 he stand aside while she go to the mirror and look at her swollen eye and convulse face . 
 " may I have a glass of water ? " she ask ; then , stop Hamlin , " never mind , " she say " never mind I must go ; " and she pull her blue veil hurriedly over her eye and huddle on her cloak . 
 " Miss Brown , " cry Hamlin , " why don t you answer I ? " and he lay hold of her arm as she be about to open the door . 
 " because you do not deserve it , " she answer , try to loosen his grasp . " let I go , please . " 

 " I can not let you go , " answer Hamlin calmly , stand before the door , " until you have listen to I . will you let I provide for your future , send you to school , and then place you in the care of my aunt ? will you let I act as if I be your guardian for the next three year , and at the end of they you shall have enough to live and marry as befit a lady , and be as free as air , or become my 

 wife whichever you shall choose ? answer I , for I be serious . " 

 Anne Brown pause . 
 " Don t ask I for an answer now , " she say ; " I be not sure that you be in earnest . " 
 " I be indeed I be ! " cry Hamlin ; " I have intend ask you this ever since my return to Florence . I return merely in order to ask you . I be in earnest ; can not you give I a serious answer ? " 
 " not now I can t think about anything ; I must ask ; I don t know what be right to do . " 
 he open the door , and Anne Brown walk out rapidly , through the anteroom and downstair . 



 CHAPTER V. 

 for 
 a long time Anne Brown remain as it be daze , as if she have receive a blow on the head . when she get back to the Perrys house , she feel broken in all her limb , and slip up?stairs and throw herself on her bed . but it be no use : all that day , while attend on the child and do her usual work , she feel as if some one else be do it all ; while she remain conscious only of something very sudden and strange , of a confused buzzing in her brain , through which she hear the voice of Hamlin repeat his word in the studio ; word which somehow make her indignant , angry , and at the same time fill she with a sense of have do something which she should not . this feeling increase 

 at night , and she lie awake while the clock strike hour after hour , hot , red , half deafen by her own blood , fevere and vaguely indignant . it be as if Hamlin have strike she ; she feel insulted , outraged , by this strange interference with her fate , this wonderful intrusion of excitement into her dull and sombre life . it be dawn when she awake : a chill greyness in the sky , redden by the pale winter sun . she know that something have happen , that something be change . she be almost surprised to find herself in her usual room , with the child s tea?sets on the chest of drawer , the coloured picture from the Illustrated and the Graphic pin on the wall , the doll house in the corner , and little May asleep by her side in her crib . then she remember it all , and sit up in her bed think about it . thing appear to she in quite a new light . she have be an ungrateful beast to feel as she have towards Hamlin ; and a great wave of gratitude and awe , and love and joy , well up in her heart . it be as if she be sit 

 in the sunshine : an indefinable kind of happiness . how noble and generous and good he have be ; and how doubly so , be so great , and she be a mere nothing in the world ! whether he love she or she he , she do not ask herself ; it seem a thing to die of for sheer happiness , that any one should care for she and her future . and just in proportion to her usual pride , and sullenness , and joylessness , she feel happy in the idea of deserve nothing and receive everything , from his kindness : and Hamlin , with whom she have speak not twenty?four hour early , whom she would see again that day , appear to she as a distant , dim , ineffable creature , lighting and warm she like the sun , but equally unapproachable . but on think it over , thing come round to commonplace actuality . what be she to do ? would he ask she again ? or even , have he ask she at all ? it all seem a dream , and she do not venture to examine into its reality . she determine to tell it all to Perry , and ask his advice ; but she feel as 

 if she never could . she meet Perry several time in the course of the morning , but she could not succeed in screw up her courage . what if it should all prove to be an illusion ? she take the child out for their accustomed walk , during which she be even more silent than usual . on return home she see Hamlin in the street , close to the door . the blood all rush up to her head . Hamlin salute she as if nothing have happen , and accompany she up?stairs . when they be at the landing he suddenly turn to she 

 " have you think over our conversation in the studio yesterday , Miss Brown ? " he ask . 
 " yes , " answer Anne , inaudibly , as he stand with his hand on the bell ; " I have . " 
 " well , then , " go on Hamlin , " with regard to the plan which I submit to you , what be your answer ? do you consent or not ? " 
 Anne Brown raise her head . 

 " I consent , " she answer quietly , look 

 full at he , as if to make sure that she be not talk in a dream . he have never see she so beautiful and majestic before ; and she have a look with dilated eye , and rapid , oppress breath like the one which he have notice once when she talk of her father , and of which he have feel at once , " this be what I want . " 

 " thank you , " he answer gravely , and ring the bell . for a moment they stand in silence , till the door be open . 



 CHAPTER VI . 

 HAMLIN 
 sit for some time in the dusty attic call a studio , while Perry cut acrobat and devil out of black paper , and stick they on the dirty window?pane . 

 " that s my vocation , " say Perry , " and not paint damned landscape spinach and soapsud sea . look ! aren t they jolly old fiend ? " and he hold up a group of black clown , stand on each other s hand and shoulder . 
 " Capital ! " answer Hamlin . " but look here ; I come to tell you something . I want the address of Miss Brown s guardian , you tell I there be one , because I be go to have Miss Brown educate , with a view , if she do not change her mind , to she become my wife . " 
 Perry let his scissor fall on the floor . 

 " damnation ! " he cry . 
 Hamlin pick up the scissor and put they quietly on the table . 
 " so that s it ! " burst out Perry . " while I be bother my brain with try to take care of Anne , you be be inveigle by that cursed hypocritical slut . " 

 " I shall be oblige to you to speak in rather different language , Perry , " say Hamlin , in a tone of voice and with a manner which his friend be not accustom to . 


 " 


 " oh , beast ! brute ! seven?times?distille and most?kickable jackass that I have be , " moan Perry , " that I should have let this happen to you ! that I should have let you be entrap under my very nose ! but it mustn t be , old fellow ; I win t stand it . " 
 " you will have to , " answer Hamlin , contemptuously ; " and so , let s say no more about it . only one word : Miss Brown have not inveigle I . " 
 Perry give a sort of moan of disgust . " no woman ever do inveigle a man ! " 

 " Miss Brown have not inveigle I . I conceive the desire of educate she , and give myself a chance of marry she if she would have I , long ago , before I return to Florence . and , as a favour , I beg you will respect Miss Brown so long as she remain in your house , as you would respect the woman who be at present my ward , and may possibly become my wife . " 
 " Ward ! wife ! fiddlestick ! " cry Perry . " for God s sake , my dear old Watty , don t go and do such a damnable thing ! don t be such an idiot as to suppose you must do it . that be my confounded folly : let myself be lead on , and then think it be my own choice , my resolution , all sort of fine thing . no man ever really want to tie himself up ; it s the woman who do it , and make he believe it s himself . all this be bosh , mere bosh ; you ll think well of it . " 

 " I tell you again , Perry , that there be no inveigling about the matter . I make up my mind to this step while I be away from 

 Florence . besides , I be not go to marry Miss Brown straight off ; I be go to give she the education which such a woman deserve , to enable she to marry I should she care to do so . " 

 " Education , forsooth ! " groan Perry ; " you will get yourself married before you have time to say Jack Robinson : and to think that I have bring it all upon you ! to think that I have drive you to do it ! " 
 Hamlin could not help smile at his friend s distress . 
 " really , you need not feel under any responsibility . I alone be responsible in the business I and good fortune , which have bring I into the presence of the most marvelious woman that ever be " 
 " but what do you do it for ? you re not in love with Annie , I do believe , " cry poor Perry . 

 " I do it because she be the most beautiful woman I have ever see , " answer Hamlin , deliberately ; " and the woman who , properly 

 educate , be of all other the one whom I should most wish to love because , in short , I can not see she waste . " 

 Perry fling his arm over his head with a gesture of grotesque despair . at that moment the door open , and Mrs Perry enter the studio . 
 " what be the matter ? what have happen ? " she ask with a dramatic gesture , and a not less dramatic accent ; and she remain stand on the threshold , raise the door?curtain with much dignity . 
 " Hamlin want to bring up and marry Anne Brown , " yell Perry . 
 Mrs Perry totter , let the curtain go , hold her hand to her head for a moment . 
 " Anne Brown do you hear that ? he want to marry she ! to educate she ! he have already propose ! " repeat Perry . 
 Mrs Perry come forward solemnly , and stretch out her hand to Hamlin . 
 " dear friend , " she say softly , " my heart tell I that this would be . " 

 " Fudge ! " exclaim Perry ; " if it do , why the deuce didn t you interfere ? " 
 " my heart tell I this would be . I congratulate you , dear friend , that you have at last find the embodiment of your mysterious dream of beauty . and I thank you , on my part , for give I the happiness of see that glorious dethrone goddess reinstate in her right , and also , " and Mrs Perry s long mouth smile formidable like an alligator s , " for give I the happiness of witness a union of mystic perfection ; " whereupon , to Hamlin s horror , the tall and bony lady deposit a damp kiss on his forehead . 
 " oh but thank you so much ! " exclaim Hamlin " I have not ask Miss Brown to marry I ; I have only ask she to let I educate she . I wish she to choose whatever husband may deserve she . " 
 " and that will be yourself your noble , darling self , " beam Mrs Perry . 

 " I be happy that you approve of my decision , " say Hamlin , quickly ; " and since you 

 do , will you kindly tell I the address of Miss Brown s Miss Brown s guardian ? " 

 " Julia , I forbid you , " moan Perry feebly . 
 " his address " answer Mrs Perry blandly , and take no notice of her husband " be Richard Brown , care of Gillespie Brothers , New Cross . he be foreman at a cannon?foundry , or a place where they make torpedo . I know it s something murderous and dreadful . " 
 " Richard Brown , Gillespie Brothers , New Cross , " write Hamlin in his note?book . " thank you so much ; I shall write to he at once . " 
 " oh , idiotic beast that I be ! " groan Perry , " to think that it should all be my fault . " 
 " come into my boudoir , " say Mrs Perry ; " you shall write to he without a moment s delay . Denrest Mr Hamlin , it be so noble , so lovely on your part ; and dear Anne how beautiful she will become ! " 

 Perry pace up and down the room in violent despair , kick at all the chair and easel on his way , and hurl a tin of black 

 paint against the ceiling , whence , have deposit its oozy content , it slowly descend . after this , feel that his despair be not yet vent , he stalk off to the german beer?cellar , in the Via Lambertesca , and gloomily consume a 
 bock 
  a proceeding to which he invariably resort whenever his wife have inspire he with a more than usually strong wish to drown himself . 


 suddenly an idea strike he , and he rush to the near telegraph?office . there he spend upwards of an hour , and consume many piece of paper in concoct a missive which should , within the compass of twenty word , convey to Mr Richard Brown , care of Gillespie Brothers , New Cross , that the proposal be make to Anne Brown by a certain person must be immediately reject , as its acceptance would bring ruin , dishonour , and misery on all party . " proposal disastrous snare , " wound up Perry at last in triumph ; and then discover that , in his zeal for Hamlin s good , 

 he have express disapprobation to the extent of exactly twenty franc of italian money . 

 " nothing but pipe loathsome , smelly , filthy pipe ; never a cigar for the next two month , " meditate Perry , as he pay his money and receive the clerk s receipt ; " but a fellow must save his friend after all . " 



 CHAPTER VII . 

 no 
 arrangement could be come to until Hamlin should hear from Anne Brown s guardian , and this , even by return of post , be impossible under a week . and during that week , Hamlin determine to keep away from the Perrys house : the objurgation of Melton Perry , the congratulation of his wife , the very tittering of the child , all this vulgar prose have well be keep aloof from his romance ; besides , he be in the ridiculous position that Anne be , and be not his ; that she could no long be consider the Perrys servant , and could not yet be consider as his ward . accordingly , he betake himself for three day to Siena , deem it impossible that any answer could come so soon . 


 but when Hamlin return to his lodging in Florence , on the fourth day after his proposal to Anne Brown it seem to he as if he have propose to her month ago , nay , as if he have never exist at all before that proposal he be tell that a gentleman have call that morning , and have leave word that he would return again later on in the day . 
 " some confound painter or poetaster of my acquaintance , " think Hamlin , annoy that any one should call upon he at this point of his adventure . 
 a little later a card be bring in to he . the name upon it make he start a large shopman s card , on which be print , " Richard Brown , New Cross . " 
 " ask he to come in , " cry Hamlin . 
 the visitor stalk in : a tall , burly man , with bushy black hair and beard . 
 " an insolent cad , " say Hamlin to himself . 
 " Mr Walter Hamlin ? " ask the newcomer , bow very slightly , and look down upon Hamlin from his big , bent shoulder . 

 " precisely and you , I believe , be Miss Anne Brown s cousin ? " answer Hamlin , stiffen at the other s free?and?easy manner . the very look of this man rub he the wrong way . " pray , sit down , " he add , do his good to be courteous . but the other have already sit down . 
 " I have come here , " say Richard Brown , in a deep , Scotch voice , which make a certain abruptness of manner even more offensive to his host , " in consequence of a telegram which I receive from your friend Mr Melton Perry . " 
 Hamlin turn pale with anger . 
 " Perry telegraph behind my back , " he exclaim " however , I have write to you the same day . I presume you know the content of my letter ? " 

 " I have receive no letter from you I suppose I start before it arrive , " answer Richard Brown . " Mr Perry mention no letter from you in his telegram , and as I understand from it that there be plan afoot which concern my cousin and ward , I 

 think I have well come at once and inquire into they . " 

 he stop a moment , and look Hamlin in the face , as if to find out what sort of man he might be . he himself might be any age between thirty and forty , of the dark possible Scotch type , sun?burnt like a bargee , snub of feature , with a huge , overhang forehead ; he be a man such as Hamlin have never deal with a type which he recognise as have see among workman and dissenting preacher : ugly , intellectual , contemptuous the incarnation of what , to the descendant of Cavaliers and Jamaica planter , seem the aggressive low class . 
 " I see , " say Hamlin , coldly . " I be greatly oblige to you for the trouble you have take . your presence here will make it much easy for we to settle all necessary matter . " 

 " Mr Perry , " go on the visitor , " have give I rather a confused account of the proposal which I understand you to have make to my cousin ; and I think it wise to see 

 you before speak to she . I must therefore beg you to tell I whether Mr Perry s account of your proposal be correct , and also whether you be in earnest in make it . " 

 " have you wait for my letter , I think you could have have no further doubt , " answer Hamlin , with some irritation . " to recapitulate , then . I propose to Miss Brown that she should permit I to take charge of her education for the next two year , and , on she become of age and deem her study complete , to place at her disposal the capital of an income which should enable she to live in a manner correspond with the education she have receive , and to make a suitable marriage . " 
 while Hamlin be speak a sneer come over his listener s face . 
 " I be to understand , therefore , " he say , " that I be misinformed as to this be a proposal of marriage . " 

 " Pardon I , " correct Hamlin , gently . " I tell your cousin that I hop that perhaps , at the end of those two year , or more , she might 

 feel inclined to accept I as her husband ; but that my particular object be that Miss Brown should , on come of age , find herself in possession of a fortune correspond to her education , and which should leave she free to contract whatever marriage she please , or to continue single . " 

 Richard Brown flush . 
 " in short , " he say , with a strange irony in his voice , " you offer to provide my cousin with a competence whereon to live , or get marry , after she shall have remain for two year in your charge . I fully appreciate the intention of your proposal ; and I therefore beg to refuse it . " 
 the blood rush to Hamlin s head . that such an interpretation should be put upon his word have never enter his mind . it be as if a whip have whiz about his ear and cut into his face . his first impulse be to knock the other down . but the sense of his misunderstood superiority , superiority unintelligible to his visitor , restrain he . 

 " I quite understand your refusal , Mr Brown , " he answer , " as a result of your interpretation of the case ; and I suppose I have no right to ask you to see my proposal , except as you would mean it be you to make it yourself . " 
 Richard Brown turn pale ; but he too master his feeling . 
 " if your intention be to marry my cousin , why not marry she at once ? " he ask , with something in his look which express that he feel himself not to be outwit by a vicious fool . 
 Hamlin hesitate . he feel that he could never make this man understand his dream , his plan of turn Anne Brown into a realise ideal , of wooing and win the creature of his own making . 
 " because because , " he hesitate . 

 " because , " interrupt Richard Brown , " a man in your position of life can not marry a girl like my cousin before she have be turn into a lady ; and because , even if this be grant , he can not bind himself to marry she 

 until he see whether schooling have succeed in make a lady of she . I perfectly follow your reason ; but you also can follow mine when I say that my cousin can not be subject to the up and down of your appreciation . " 

 in this man there be a hatred of Hamlin , not merely as a fine gentleman , an idler , but as an ? sthete ; a hatred not merely of class , but of temperament . 

 " you misunderstand my motif , " answer Hamlin , lose patience . " my reason for not marry your cousin at once be , that I would not marry a woman who can not possibly love I as yet ; and my reason against a formal engagement between we be , that I can not consent to bind Miss Brown to marry I when she have no opportunity as yet of choose a man more to her taste . it seem to I , " add Hamlin , feel the advantage on his side , " that to take your cousin in marriage now , or to bind she to marry I in the future , would be buy she in exchange for the education and the money which she will 


 re ? 

 ceive 

 receive 

 from I . that education and that money be intend to secure her freedom , to secure her choice of a man whom she may love , not to make she into the chattel of a man whom she could only despise . " 

 Hamlin s tone and these sentiment , which seem to belong to a world west of the sun and east of the moon , evidently impress Anne s guardian . he remain silent for a moment , unable to realise Hamlin s state of mind , while no long able to disbelieve in it . but the temptation to disbelieve in the sincerity of this handsome , effeminate , ? sthetic aristocrat be too strong . 
 " all this be very noble and chivalric , " he say , " and I doubt not quite natural in a poet like you , Mr Hamlin ; but for we practical people , I fear it win t do . I be fully persuade of the desirability of give my cousin some further schooling , and fully persuade also of the undesirability of leave she any long in the care of Mr Perry . so I shall take she back to England with I . " 

 Hamlin turn pale with anger . it sicken he to see his plan drag in the mire of this fellow s suspicion , and at the same time he feel unable ever to make he understand , utterly helpless in defend himself . suddenly an idea strike he . 
 " I see , " say Hamlin , rise and lean against the fireplace , while his guest remain coolly seat " I see that , in plain word , you suppose that I project settle some money upon your cousin , with a view of make she my mistress for two year that be it , be it not , Mr Brown ? " 
 the brutal frankness stagger Brown ; it be impossible to make any more insinuation now . and he begin to feel ashamed of those which he have already make . his own imagination , then , be less clean than the intention of this womanish fine gentleman ? 
 perhaps for this very reason he answer calmly , but turn very red 
 " yes , sir ; that be exactly the state of the case . " 

 Hamlin feel a sort of triumph at this humiliation of his visitor . 
 " in that case , " he say , " I think I can devise a plan which shall satisfy you which will relieve your apprehensiveness . I offer not merely to settle upon Miss Brown the capital of five hundred a?year , to be administer by you until her majority ; but also to give you my word of honour to marry Miss Brown at any time that she may summon I to do so . " 
 Richard Brown be take aback ; all this romance , which he have believe to be but a vicious snare , be then real . 
 " I don t understand you , " he say . " I don t understand what you want to do with my cousin . " 

 " it seem difficult to explain it to you , Mr Brown , " say Hamlin ; " still , I may repeat it . I wish Miss Brown to receive all the advantage of education and money which a woman gift like she have a right to , and which will enable she to freely marry a man worthy of her 

 myself , or any other in the world . I will not hear of bind Miss Brown to I at present , either by marriage or by promise of marriage ; she be to remain absolutely independent . but I offer once more to pledge myself to marry she whenever she may wish it . " 

 Brown do not answer for a moment . 
 " be you ready to sign a document to that effect ? " he ask . 
 " I will give Miss Brown my word , " answer Hamlin , contemptuously ; " and I will give you , Mr Brown , as many sign document as may be equivalent thereto in your eye . " 
 Brown feel the insult , but he know he have draw it upon himself . for a moment he hesitate ; his aversion to Hamlin and Hamlin s plan fight painfully with his sense of the worldly interest of his ward . at last he say 

 " on these condition I can no long make any opposition ; and it rest with my cousin to accept or refuse your offer . I can only warn she and you and to do so be my 

 duty , I think that , in my opinion , such an arrangement be utterly undesirable for both party , and that my strong advice be not to enter upon it . " 

 " I take your warning to heart , " answer Hamlin , contemptuously ; " but I can not agree with it . may I beg you to meet I at the English Consulate to?morrow morning , to witness the document which you propose I should draw out ; the matter of her money settlement I shall leave in the hand of my lawyer . what hour will suit you ? and may I have the pleasure of receive you to breakfast with I and Mr Perry , who will doubtless be my witness ? " 
 Richard Brown bow . 

 " thank you , " he say briefly ; " I think I should prefer breakfasting at my inn . with regard to the document , I shall be happy to meet you at the Consulate any time convenient to yourself . but , " and his face become as threaten as his voice be studiously courteous , " we must first hear whether , on 

 second thought , my cousin accept your proposal . good afternoon , Mr Hamlin . " 

 " good afternoon , " answer Hamlin . 
 Richard Brown s visit have leave a nauseous taste in his soul . 



 CHAPTER VIII . 

 later 
 in the afternoon Richard Brown call at the Perrys and ask to see his cousin . he be receive with effusiveness by Mrs Perry . 

 " so you have see our noble , darle Hamlin , " she cry ; " and you have feel your heart go out to meet he as we have feel ours . " 
 " I have see Mr Hamlin , " answer Brown roughly , not at all appreciate the lady s win manner ; " and I should like to speak to my cousin , please . " 
 " Anne my beautiful Anne " cry Mrs Perry , open the door of the next room . 
 " poor child ! " she add , " how she have be tremble in her heart all day ! " 

 Anne enter . she be pale even than 

 usual , and be more than usually self?possesse . she have see her guardian for a minute early that morning , and she know that this visit would seal her fate . 

 " good afternoon , Richard , " she say briefly . 
 Brown look round at Mrs Perry , wait for she to withdraw . but such be by no mean her intention . 

 " Don t be unhappy , darling , " she say to Anne ; " I know how one woman always long for another woman in these moment . I will stay with you while your cousin tell you the result of his visit . 

 " 



 " it be very kind of you , madam , " say Brown gruffly , " but I think this matter have well be settle solely between my cousin and myself . would you permit she to take I into some other room ? " 
 " oh , I don t wish to intrude , " sigh Mrs Perry , " I only wish to support this poor child with my presence . but after all , a woman who love require support from no one . " say which she sweep out of the room . 

 there be a moment s silence . 
 " I have be to Mr Hamlin s , Anne , " say Brown briefly , seat himself by the fire . 
 " well ? " 
 the tone of voice be so resolute and even triumphant that he raise his head and look up at she where she be stand by the table , a piece of needlework still in her hand . 
 " well , " answer Brown quietly , and watch the effect of each of his word on the pale , melancholy , but dispassionate face of the girl , " I have speak to Mr Hamlin ; and I find that you be correct in your judgment , and that I be mistaken in mine . he be in earnest in his proposal , and honest in it . " 

 " I know that ; " and Anne Brown wonder whether this could be the same cousin Dick who be a big boy , almost a man , when she be a tiny mite at Spezia ; who take care of she when her mother be ill and her father be drunk ; who use to shoulder his uncle and drag he off to bed when , in a fit of 

 intoxication , he would come in and threaten to throw the baby out of the window . she recognise the small feature , the dark skin and hair , the heavy intellectual brow ; but he seem to have change in expression , to have grow hard , and arrogant , and coarse . 

 " I know that , " she repeat , " though you would not believe it . so , " she add , with a certain hardness in her manner , " I suppose I be leave free to decide , and that you be ready to let Mr Hamlin do what he choose . " 
 " you be free to decide , " he answer . " Mr Hamlin , as I have say , be serious and honest , and willing to make every provision which can bind he and leave you free , legally . I can not , as your guardian , say no . but , " and his voice assume a threatening tone , " as your kinsman , and as the representative of your father , I most earnestly dissuade you from accept this proposal . " 
 Anne redden . " but you can no long oppose it , " she say quickly . 

 " I have tell you before that you be free , 

 Anne . and because you be free , " continue Brown , a sort of despair come over he at the sight of the girl s indifference " because you be free , I want you to listen to I . this proposal be one which , in the eye of the world , will change your life for the well : you will be educate , get the manner of a lady , be rich yourself , and marry a rich man . but will you stand high in your own opinion ? would you stand as high as you should in that of your father , if he be alive ? you , have barter your freedom , have accept all from this one man ? " 

 Anne do not answer . 

 " of course , " go on Richard Brown eagerly , " you will have every worldly advantage . but will you be happy take out of your own sphere of life , know yourself to be bind in gratitude to this man , who will always continue to feel your superior , to look down upon you as a beggar whom he have feed , or a chattel which he have buy ? this man be , for his class and idea , honourable : he wish to leave you free 

 to marry he only if you please ; he wish to marry you really and truly . but in reality he be make you his slave ; for how can you refuse he the only thing which you , my poor Nan , can give he in return for his money ? and in reality he be make you his mistress ; for what sort of marriage be it which be a marriage merely before the world where the one buy and the other be buy ? " 

 Anne flush still deep , and tremble from head to foot as she lean against the table . a dull pain claw she at the heart , a lump rise up to her throat . but she do not speak . 
 Richard Brown misunderstood her silence . he rise and approach the table , and try to put his arm paternally on her shoulder . she shrink back , but let his heavy hand rest on her shoulder . what do his touch matter when there be his word ? 

 " Annie , dear , " say Brown more gently , " you know I be a rough man , and don t know how to mince matter and say thing to woman ; but you know that I be fond of 

 you . Don t you recollect when you be a wee lassie , and I use to carry you about on my back , and go into the water to get you the sea?weeds and the little nautilus . I suppose you don t any long . but still , you know I would not for the world hurt my poor little Nan . " 

 Anne hold on to the table , and as she recognise that familiar intonation , hot tear roll down her cheek . her whole childhood seem to return to she . 

 " Don t cry don t cry ! " exclaim Brown , take her hand . " poor child ! I know it must be very hard for you who be so young ; I know what it must be to be tempt with a lady s education , and money , and a fine gentleman , who s in love with one , for a husband . but remember what your poor dad use to tell we , that we common folk must make our own way make the other feel that we re as good as they , and not accept anything from they . d you remember how he use to say to I , work and be proud ? well , and I 

 have work and have be proud , and it s that that have enable I to rest a little . and you , too , must be proud , and work , my little Annie . " 

 " look here , " he go on , " you must not think you be never to be anything but a servant . I feel I ve be to blame , and neglect you too long . you see , I ve have to work hard for my life , out in England ; but now I be quite safely off indeed much well off than I ever anticipate : my employer be go to take I into partnership next year . well , since you wish to go to school , I will send you there . you shall come back with I to England , and I will send you to the very good school to be find : you shall be as good as any lady , and you shall owe nothing to any one . Annie , do say yes . " 

 he speak , this rough man , almost as one might to a sick child ; and as he speak , he try to pass his arm round the girl s waist . but Anne shudder , and free herself from his grasp . there be something in this big dark 

 man , with his bushy hair and beard , which make she shrink physically , although she feel no suspicion of he morally . the thought of Hamlin pass across her mind Hamlin , who be everything which Richard Brown be not . 

 " you be very good , Dick , " she say , feel ashamed of her ingratitude ; " but but oh no , no , I can t , I can t ! " and she hide her tear with her hand . 
 " can t what ? " exclaim Brown , and his voice and face change ; " can t what ? can t accept my offer ; can t owe anything to I , to your cousin , to the man to whom your father confide you ? no ! you win t be under such an obligation , eh ? Nay , don t humbug I . you can t give up the money , the land , the house , the fine name all the thing which he can give you and I can t ; for I can only give you an education , and I be such a fool as to think that you want that ! " and Brown laugh a loud , bitter laugh . 

 " you want to marry that man , " he go 

 on brutally ; " well , do so . but remember what marriage mean . you be a girl of the people , who have have to take care of herself not a fine young lady , as yet , thank God , with all the fine name which fine folk have for nasty thing . you know what marriage mean . it mean be a man s chattel , more than his beast of burden , his plaything , the toy of his caprice and sensuality . it mean , also , that you must smother all love for a worthy man , or degrade yourself in your own eye . will you be this , sell yourself thus ? " 

 " Mr Hamlin do not wish I to degrade myself , " cry the girl . " he respect I , yes , he do ; and you you don t ! " 
 " he respect you ! " sneer Brown . " and he do not want to degrade you . of course , he s a respectable , highly moral man . but , upon my soul , I would rather you have be seduce by a man you love , than that you should have sell yourself coldly in this way . " 

 Anne feel herself choke . for a moment she could not utter a word . then suddenly , 

 with a strange look in her eye , she cry , in a tone which smite her cousin on the mouth 

 " I love he ! " 
 Brown turn and look she in the face . she be very flushed , and her slate?grey eye gleam feverishly . but her face be calm , and she return his taunt gaze , which seek for the proof that she lie , with a look of irrepressible contempt . 
 " I love he ! " she repeat . 
 Brown take his hat . 
 " Good?bye , " he say , stretch out his hand ; " I leave the choice in your hand , and you have choose . to?morrow morning I shall settle everything with Mr Hamlin the paper , I mean which shall make he henceforth your sole protector . then I shall go . goodbye . I wish you joy of your choice " he pause " you mercenary thing ! " 
 Anne do not move . 

 Richard Brown have already turn the handle of the door when he stop . " one thing more , " he say , " which I desire you 

 to know . you have take care of yourself hitherto , and you be prudent enough in all conscience , and world?wise enough , and heartless enough , to do so in future ; so this piece of information may be of use to you . to?morrow he will sign a paper , which I shall keep till you come of age , declare that , although he leave you complete freedom in the choice of a husband , he bind himself to marry you whenever you may call upon he to do so . you will doubtless know how to turn this to profit . Good?bye . " 

 Anne sink into a chair , excited , exhausted , all her blood in movement , she scarcely know why insult , malign , and yet with a great sense of joyfulness in her heart . 




 BOOK III . 


 CHAPTER I. 

 a month 
 later , the little Perrys be be take for their walk in the Boboli Gardens by a Swiss 
 bonne 
 in a quilt cap ; and Anne Brown be unpack her thing in a room overlook the yellowish?green Rhine , with its oscillate bridge of boat , and face the rock and bastion of Ehrenbreitstein . 


 when Richard Brown have return to England with the sign document in his pocket , Hamlin have immediately write two letter , one to his lawyer , instruct they to settle the capital of five hundred a?year , that be to say , one quarter of his property , on Anne Brown ; the other , narrate the history of his engagement   if engagement it might be call , to the widow of his former tutor , and ask 

 she to admit the young lady in whom he be interested into her school at Coblenz . it be the Easter holiday , and Mrs Simson have take advantage of the fact to come to Florence in order to take back her pupil herself . 

 there be still a fortnight before the school would reopen , so Hamlin suggest that they should slowly travel north , and it be settle that he should accompany the schoolmistress and his ward . the great part of that fortnight be spend at Venice , where Anne Brown have never be , and Hamlin part company from they to return to England , only at Munich . 

 Mrs Simson be of that particular type of Englishwoman which , however much it may marry , always seem to remain an old maid ; but an old maid whose old?maidishness be an incapacity of feel any difference of age between herself and her younger , of maintain any stateliness of superior age and experience : a hopeful , believe , shrewd , happy?go?lucky , enthusiastic creature , invariably make 

 one think of a remarkably good?nature old grey mare . Youth be the great attraction in the world to she , and she identify herself completely with the young woman that come under her influence . Hamlin have know she in his boyish day , and lately , pass along the Rhine , have stay with she for a day or two in her old?fashioned house by the confluence of the Rhine and the Mosel . the impression that this school be so utterly unlike any of the girl school he have read of in novel ; the impression that a young woman might develop there into whatever pleasant thing nature intend , have be so strong , that from the moment of his first contemplate a possible marriage with the Perrys servant , Mrs Simson and her school at Coblenz have form an essential part of his plan . the lady , on the other hand , be exactly the kind of woman to whom a situation like this would appeal : Hamlin , whom she have entertain on bun and ginger?beer , and then , in later year , rave over after the first sonnet which he send to 

 the Athen?um , have always be her especial object of adoration ; and his adoption of a beautiful and strange young woman , his preparation of a bride for himself , be for she the finishing touch to his perfection . she would indeed have prefer have Anne Brown be small and fair , and garrulous and impish , and show a love for mathematic and flirtation ; but , nevertheless , Anne Brown , inasmuch as she be the elect of Walter Hamlin , and inasmuch as she be a beautiful young creature , immediately win the facile but not fickle heart of Mrs Simson . the whole business seem to she as natural as possible ; and it be she who propose that Hamlin should accompany she and his ward part of their way northward . 


 what be Anne s own condition ? during those hour in the train , when Hamlin be for ever jump out and overwhelm they with coffee and stale cake and newspaper at every station ; during those day at Venice , when they stay at the same hotel   the headwaiter quite spontaneously write " Mrs 


 Sim ? 

 son 

 Simson 

 and niece " in the stranger book , and spend their day in picture?gallerie and church and gondola , and their evening at theatre , during all that journey Anne be as cold , and silent , and melancholy as she have be when first they have meet at the Villa Arnolfini ; indeed any man but Hamlin , and any woman except Mrs Simson , would probably have be dishearten and disgust by this apparent stolidity of behaviour . but Mrs Simson have already make up her character of Anne Brown , and fall in love with it quite independent of reality ; and Hamlin be rather pleased that the creature whom he be go to teach how to think and how to feel , do not manifest any particular mode of thinking and feeling of her own . so they be both extremely assiduous to Anne Brown , and in reality think much more about what she be go to be than about what she actually be . 


 the fact be that the poor girl be in a daze condition that all this journey seem 

 to her unreal , and all the thing around her unsubstantial . her head feel hollow , she seem to be inform about her feeling rather than to experience they , her own word sound as if through a whispering?gallery . a couple of week ago she have have so strong a consciousness of identity and existence , of her own desire and hope ; now she could not well understand how she come to be where she be . sometimes , while mechanically talk with her companion or walk in their company , she use to ask herself how it have all come about , and then she could see no reason for it all ; it seem accidental , inexplicable , causeless , and almost incredible . whenever , on the other hand , she awaken to the reality of thing , she be depress by a sense of transition ; she be afraid of speak , and almost of feeling . as long as she have be the Perrys servant , she have experience no shyness with Hamlin ; as far as her taciturn nature would allow , she have speak out whatever she have think or 

 feel , without consider whether or not it might surprise , annoy , or amuse he . now , on the contrary , she gradually become conscious of a fear lest Hamlin should have cheat himself in choose she . unable to tell any one of this feeling , she let it overshadow she . one evening at Munich , two or three day before they part company with Hamlin , Mrs Simson , come into Anne s room , find the girl seat with her head in the pillow of her bed , sob . 

 the excellent and somewhat romantic heart of the schoolmistress immediately melt at this sight . 
 " my dear child , " she cry , look more than ever like a friendly grey old mare , " what be the matter with you ? " 
 but Anne merely bury her head deeply in the pillow , and sob hard than before . 
 " what be the matter ? " repeat Mrs Sireson , lay her hand on Anne s shoulder . 
 " oh , leave I , leave I ! " moan the girl . 

 Mrs Simpson gently pass her arm under 

 the prostrate girl s breast , and lift she up from the bed . 

 " what be the matter with you , my dear ? " she ask . 
 " nothing nothing , " sob Anne , try to hide her cried?out eye with her hand . 
 " nonsense ; nothing ! " say Mrs Simson , briskly . " you be unhappy about something , you poor little thing . " 
 girl , and especially girl in distress , invariably appear little to Mrs Simson , even when , like Anne Brown , they overtop she by a good head . 
 " something be the matter with you , " she insist . " now just let we see together what it may be ; " and she make the reluctant girl sit down by her side on the sofa . " be you homesick ? do you feel very strange , poor dearie , with strange people ?   be you frighten a little by the sudden change in your life ? it s very natural , my dear little girl , but you ll get over it soon . " 

 Anne shake her head . but the 


 impossibil ? 

 ity 

 impossibility 

 of make Mrs Simson understand what depress she , send the sob once more into her voice . 

 " no , no , " she say ; " oh no , no you can t understand . I don t feel lonely I don t feel unhappy but it s only because Mr Hamlin " 
 " because Mr Hamlin be go away , my dear ? " Mrs Simson smile as she kiss Anne on the crisp iron?black hair , for the girl would not loosen her hand from her face " because he be go away ? that s very natural too ; but it win t be for long , dearest . " 
 Anne break loose from her embrace . " it s not that ! it s not that ! " she sob ; " please go away you can t understand it s not that ! oh no , I shall be glad when he be go away ! " 
 Mrs Simson rise . at first she feel pained , disgusted ; but her frigidness melt with the speedy reflection that girl don t know what the matter be with they in such case . 

 " Good?bye , dear , " she say ; " I shall send you up some tea in a few minute ; that will set you all right . but don t fret because 

 Mr Hamlin be go . you will see he soon again . " 

 " I shall be glad when he be go ! " repeat Anne , in a paroxysm of grief . 
 it be not a mere foolish , hysterical falsehood . it be a real relief when , one morning at Frankfurt , Hamlin be stand on the platform of the station , speak to they at the door of their carriage . the guard come to slam the door . 
 " Good?bye , Mrs Simson , " say Hamlin . " Good?bye , Miss Brown . " 
 " Good?bye , sir , " she answer , extend her hand . 
 he kiss it hurriedly . the door be slam . the train move on slowly , and Hamlin walk along its side . gradually it go quick and quick , and Anne Brown see Hamlin for a minute on the platform ; he be pale , but radiant . he wave his hand . 

 " 
 a rivederci 
 ! " he cry , wave his hat . 


 a pillar of the station hide he . Anne turn away from the window and open a 

 book which he have give she . she read so assiduously all that day , that poor Mrs Simson , who be a sociable woman , resort , in sheer despair , to talk with the other traveller , who star in puzzled surprise at the tall girl with the melancholy pale face and mass of crimp black hair who sit opposite she . 


 when they have get out of the train , rattle over the round stone of Coblenz , and be finally follow the obstreperously welcome cook and housemaid up the stair of Mrs Simson s house , Anne feel relieve . and when she have be leave alone in her room , she feel a weight off she . when she have take some thing out of her box , she go to the window . the last flare of sunset be on the marblelike brownish?green swirl of the Rhine ; and filament of reddish gold streak the sky above Ehrenbreitstein , whose window gleam crimson . a steamer be puff and whistle by the wharf ; the trumpet of the 
 rappel 
 shriek through the street and be reecho from the opposite shore . from inside 

 the house rise the sound of a piano ; some one be play Bach s " Mein glσubige Herz . " 

 it be the beginning of a new life . Anne Brown leave the window , hang her clothe in the wardrobe , fold her linen in the drawer . then she take from her trunk a frame photograph of Hamlin , and stick it on her dressing?table ; he be very handsome , with his straight , keen?featured , almost beardless Norman face and wave of light hair : she look at it long . then she dive to the bottom of her trunk and bring out two little book ; the " Petrarch " he have give she at Lucca , and the volume of his own poem . she sit down by the open window and begin read they , and glance at the redness die away from river and sky . she feel very solemn and happy . 
 " I must become worthy of he , " she think . 



 CHAPTER II . 

 LIFE 
 be monotonous enough at Mrs Simson s at Coblenz ; but it be a kind of monotony which to Anne Brown be positively exciting . it be for she a process of absorption into another class of life ; and as such , represent a daily influx of new idea and habit , a daily surprise , effort , and adjustment . by virtue of her half?italian nature , Anne require but little to make she , in education and manner , a lady . with her wide?open but rather empty mind , her seriousness and dignity of person , extreme simpleness , as the reverse of complexity of character , it be wholly unnecessary that she should unlearn anything , or even that she should absorb anything absolutely new ; the only thing be to fill up the magnificent design 

 which already exist in she . no one ever require to say to Anne , " you must not do , or think , or say such or such a thing . " she surprise people only by her timidity , her silence , her passiveness , and by a sort of haughtiness which accompany they strangely enough ; a certain solemn , and , at the same time , abrupt way of judging of thing and treat people , and which be the mental counterpart of her look , gait , nay , even of the fold which her dress take on she . ignorant though she be , she seem at her ease with the new culture with which she be present , just as , for all her habit of wait on instead of be serve , she seem at ease in her behaviour . but it be difficult for Anne to tune herself or get herself tune to the pitch of the everyday feeling and life of her companion ; she could not understand these young lady . the girl at Mrs Simson s do not exceed half?a?dozen , and they be none of they schoolgirl in the ordinary sense . they be , like Anne , eccentrically place young woman ; orphan , or girl 

 whose parent be in the colony , or girl who could not get on at home , girl , all of they , with a certain pretension to superiority , and a great habit of independence , which be foster by the schoolmistress , whose theory be that woman could not possibly be leave too much to their own device . 


 Mrs Simson be very fond of preach this gospel of high education , to the great scandal of the respectable german matron whom she visit . " narrow?minde , vicious creature , " she use to say , who shake their head at the young lady attend public lecture , walk about by themselves , and flirt in the most stalwart and open manner   quite unsentimental and unwomanly , say the Germans   with the prussian officer . of these girl two be orphan , and have be send to Coblenz as a convenient riddance by their guardian ; one have be deposit in Europe by her parent , to be call for when educate , and ship off to New Zealand ; one , a huge damsel approach thirty , be study eye ? 

 surgery with a famous Rhenish oculist ; the fifth be go to Girton and be study German ; the sixth have find her home too much for she , and be perpetually complain of the hardness of her fate and the viciousness of her own character , aspire to impossible ideal of knowledge and usefulness and self?sacrifice , and spend her leisure make up frock in which to disport herself at the garrison ball . 


 each of they study whatsoever she think fit : greek and latin professor , piano and singing master , german governess , be perpetually go in and out of the house ; the girl be continually run to lecture on botany or physiology or comparative philology , where the youth of the town eye the 
 Sch ne EnglΣnderinnen 
 with rapture , send they anonymous bouquet and verse , and bring they serenade , and even , to poor Mrs Simson s horror , slip love?letter of the most burn description into the door?hinge . among these girl poor Anne would have feel utterly lose , have she not be accustom for year to be 

 her own sole company , let her life brush by that of other folk , without ever mix . it seem to she quite natural to exchange one kind of isolation for another : to drudge on at improve her own mind as she have formerly drudge on at mend the clothe and make the bed of the little Perrys , interesting herself as little in , and awakening as little interest among , her companion as she have do among her fellow?servant in Italy . Mrs Simson have receive full instruction from Hamlin as to all the thing which she be and be not to teach or have teach to his ward ; and Anne would have be perfectly satisfied with work for her french and german master , prepare her lesson of geography and history , and read such book as Hamlin would send she , but the other girl be not at all so minded . 


 Anne Brown s arrival create a tremendous sensation in Mrs Simson s establishment . her strange kind of beauty , which do not strike the conventional spectator as be beauty 

 at all , exclude , as it do , fairness , rosiness , youthfulness , daintiness , liveliness , voluptuousness , sentimentalness , or any of the orthodox ingredient of female charm , her wholly unlike?everyone?else appearance , her silence , sullenness , haughtiness , all take the girl by surprise . her shyness , ignorance , newness in her position , be obvious from the very first day . the knowledge of what she have be and what she be go to be , all this romance be quickly wheedle out of Mrs Simson by the misunderstood little girl who wish to turn sister of mercy , and carry on a simultaneous flirtation with a lieutenant , a Bonn student , a painter , and a piano?master ; and bully out of she by the bounce amazon who talk about nothing but retinal impression and optic nerve . from that moment Anne become a subject of intense interest at the school : most of the girl have hear of Hamlin in England , and all of they have hear of he from the enthusiastic schoolmistress . to possess in their midst his choose one be a great privilege , 

 although they sometimes make fun of Anne and he behind her back , draw picture of the solemn and tragic girl dress in the most draggle ? sthetic manner , surround by a circle of young ? sthete copy out of Punch   Bunthome do not exist at that time   hold lily and swing censer as she go . they all think Anne a strange , awe?inspiring , and , at the same time , somewhat ridiculous person ; but they all get to like she , although the misunderstood High Church flirt could never be get to see why Anne should despise officer and garrison ball ; and the scientific girl of twenty?eight think ? stheticism and ? sthetic poet idiotic and immoral ; and each of the other find some reservation to make about the italian , as they call she . yet , as I say , they do grow to like she ; and Anne , who be unaccustomed to friendliness , be so touch by the familiarity and good?nature of her companion , that she gradually begin to take a great and serious interest in their concern . she become quite enthusiastic about ocular 

 surgery , listen with scarcely any shudder to the narration of the most complicated operation ; she let herself be overwhelm with discourse about middle high German and Gothic , and the connection with Sanskrit ; she firmly believe in the mystical fervour , the desire of self?sacrifice , the waste passion of the little fair?haire flirt , reason seriously about they , and try to check what she believe to be a suicidal tendency ; she be greatly touch by the home?sickness and family squabble of the other girl . not that Anne be a fool , or make to be a dupe ; on the contrary , she see well enough the funniness of the contrast between her friend word and their life ; but Anne be so earnest , so simple , so homogeneous of nature , she be so fervent in all her feeling , that she always imagine that the serious thing which people say or affected must be the reality ; and , as in her own case , the levity , the frivolousness , the fickleness , must be the mere exterior clothing of social fiction . thus she give her sympathy wherever it be ask 

 for , while ask for no sympathy herself . the girl use often to remark upon this , and complain that for all they do , Anne Brown remain surround by a sort of moral moat , alone , isolate , impregnable in a kind of moral fortress . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 as 
 Hamlin have fancy , while paint Anne s portrait , so the girl at Mrs Simson s use to fancy that there could not be much go on inside this taciturn and undemonstrative creature . but it be not so . while Anne look so quiet , say so little   and least of all about herself   during those two year of school , a drama nay , a whole life?poem be incessantly go on within she . she work indefatigably at her lesson , read every book she could lay hold of , be take to concert , lecture , burgher tea?parties and garrison ball , and on excursion up and down the Rhine and into the neighbouring hill ; but all this be but as an exterior life surround an interior one , as the movement of the ship to the movement of the passenger on its deck . 



 the real life be not with these girl and these teacher , but with Hamlin ; not in this Rhineland town , but in the distant place where he travel . he write to she very often , from London , from Italy , from Greece and Egypt , and wherever he roam about . at first she be surprise by the frequency of his letter ; then she become accustomed to it as to a necessity of her existence , but a necessity to which she have no right . it seem to she wonderful that he should write so often , and yet that the time which elapse between his letter should be intolerable . in her great desire for they she use to have recourse to all manner of unconscious sophistication . she try to train herself to disappointment , to chastise her own impatience and greediness , say to herself , on the day when she think that a letter might come , " it be impossible that there should be one to?day , " although her heart fall when the prophecy sometimes come true ; and she stay up?stairs , her eye pin to her book , 

 when she hear the postman s ring at the door , although that ring put she all into a tremble , and make she feel faint when she hear it . thus with the letter from he . it be almost bad about her own answer . often she could stand it no long , and would begin a letter to Hamlin only a few line , which might be finish when his next letter should be receive . the few line turn to page ; yet the next day no letter would come , and she be unable to resist the temptation of write even more ; then , when the long?wished letter at last came , there come with it such a number of new thing to say , that her previous epistle must need be tear up . also , on re?reade what she have write in answer to Hamlin , she be often fill with shame and fear . she have entertain he with such trifle , or be so pedantic , or put thing in such a horrid way , she must need tear it up and write once more . then the length , the frequency of her letter frighten she : he would grow weary and impatient ; she try 

 to write briefly , but fail ; she try to write rarely , make solemn resolution to let two , three , or four day pass without answer he ; but it be not of much use . she be dreadfully afraid lest Hamlin should think she a drag upon he , lest he should write one single letter more than he would naturally have do , from goodness to she . she never tell he with what tremulous expectancy she wait for the post ; with what heartburn she see it come empty?hande ; with what avidity she read his letter , re?read they furtively by snatch , carry they about in her pocket , make they last over day , till she know they by heart , and , even then , how she be for ever do up and undo again the packet in which she keep they : if he know that , he might feel oblige , be so kind , to write oftener ; and that must not be . 


 any one who have see these letter which be her soul s food , would have be surprised how they could awaken such a longing , how they could produce such emotion and 

 keep alive such passion . in accordance with his whole plan of proceeding , Hamlin never once write to Anne as if there be any question of she ever become his wife . " my dear Miss Brown , " they all ceremoniously begin , and end off " your sincerely , " or " your sincere friend , Walter Hamlin . " affectionate they be , and even adore , in the sense of look up , or affect to look up , at she as a sort of superhuman and wonderful creature , not quite conscious of its wonderfulness , perhaps , and certainly not responsible for it ; the mental attitude of an artist before a beautiful model , of some italian medieval poet before a platonic mistress . there be not much perception of the reality of Anne Brown s personality , nor indeed of she have any personality at all , be a thing with feeling , thought , hope , interest of her own . sometimes even poor Anne feel , on read his letter , as if a lump of ice have be lay on her heart , when she come upon certain sentence ; she could scarcely tell you why , but 

 those sentence make she feel numb and alone , like a wreck sailor at the north pole , for day . then a reaction come ; a burn indignation with herself , a burn adoration of Hamlin . she feel as if she have do he some injury ; and once or twice , amid tear of shame , she write that she have become unworthy of his friendship why , she could not well explain . but she tear it all up , or leave only dim hint which Hamlin misunderstood , and become more respectful and adore than ever , imagine that he must have say something to slight she . he really be adore ; it be such a lovely Madonna this , that it seem to he that all the most beautiful and precious thing of his mind , and other man s mind , must be heap up before she , like offering of flower , and rich ointment , and jewel , and music . he copy out page of poetry and prose in his letter , and write to she the most lovely description of thing he see or thing he feel . whenever he recollect a fine poem , or see a beautiful scene , 

 or be strike by a beautiful thought or a happy expression , he hasten to offer it to Anne , as the king of the East offer gold and frankincense and embroidered raiment to the little Christ . that this be the result of his love , she never think ; for she never venture to think that he condescend , or even would ever condescend , to love she ; but it be in her eye the result of his greatness , his generosity , the 
 largesse 
 , as it be , of his sublimity . about himself Hamlin would also write a great , great deal . of singularly delicate mental fibre , and somewhat weak will , he be for ever torment   or pretend to himself to be torment , for to be so be pretty well a matter of choice   by unattainable ideal , by conflict in his own nature : mysterious temptation of unspeakable thing , beckon his nobler nature into the mud , which he never at all specify , but which move Anne to agony of grief and admiration . the poor girl , not understand how such thing will shoot up in the poetic mind as a result of mere 

 reading , and be nurture there for a day for the sake of their strange colour , would screw up all her might to help he , write to he to be patient , to be strong and bold , to remember the nobility of his nature , strange passionately earnest entreaty write in tear , or in mood like those which send people to the stake ; and which , in their ludicrous disproportionateness to their cause , would bring the tear to almost any one s eye who should read they . 


 a strange correspondence ; and of which Hamlin s half , although beautiful with all manner of artistic prettiness , would have strike one as the less beautiful and interesting part : the suppress passionateness , unconscious of itself , of the girl s letter , her mixture of prim literary daintiness , absorb from her reading , and of homely , tragically?hurled?about imagery   Hamlin use , without reveal the author , to read out some of these metaphor of Anne s to his friend , point out their Elizabethan , webster?like character , be much 

 more really strike . but Anne think that what she write be unworthy to be see by Hamlin ; his condescension be mere goodness . 


 Hamlin , indeed , be very good to her very gentle , courteous , generous , and assiduous . there be scarcely a book read by Anne Brown which be not of his select ; and even in the midst of his journey he use to elaborately select thing for her reading , cut out all but a very few piece out of book of poetry , and copying and paste into they all manner of extract . " I should be grieve to think that anything save the very good should ever be read by you , " he often write . thus , in the most singular way , Anne , only a nursemaid a few month before , become more deeply verse in poetry and poetical and picturesque history than most girl ; greek lyrism , oriental mysticism , French ? stheticism , but above all , thing medieval and pseudo?medieval ; imbue with the imagery and sentiment of that strange eclectic school of our day which we still call pre?raphaelite . and 

 such an education , while put she in complete harmony with Hamlin s aspiration and habit , also bring home to she the merit of Hamlin s own work . of his picture , she have , indeed , only vague recollection , besides the little sketch , wonderful jewel?coloure thing , full of poetic suggestion , which he would send she at Christmas and on her birthday , to the amazement of the whole school . but he send she a good deal of his poetry , and that only of the good . she do not always understand exactly the thing to which he allude , see only the beauty , the vague passionate wistfulness , the delicate sadness of what he write . his greatness perfectly confound she . she find allusion to it in everything : in reading of dead poet , of Shelley , Keats , Goethe , a kind of passionate interest thrill through she , for she seem to be read about Hamlin . and the same hold good as to artist ; they be all his kinsman , of his blood nay , they all , in a mystic manner , foreshadow he . 


 of these matter she never speak to any of the girl . but often , while walk with they , her pride would swell with the thought that she belong to he that he have choose she . and when the New Zealander , who be musical and have a fine voice , use sometimes to sing Schumann s song , " er der herrlichste von allen , " the word and the music send a flood of love and pride to her heart ; it be he , " he the most glorious of all , " who be thus gracious and good to she . 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 thus 
 one year go by ; and then , slowly , another , while Anne Brown be be transform from a nursemaid into a lady . Hamlin see she twice during that time . once , while Mrs Simson and Anne be stay in Paris for he have beg that her holiday might be spend either in Switzerland , or in some place where she might see picture and statue when he suddenly turn up for a day on his way from England to Greece ; and once at Coblenz . Mrs Simson be give a party : suddenly into the parlour , fill with german matron and damsel , with a sprinkling of professor and soldier , be introduce a slight , fair man , who look very young till you see he closely , and at whose sight that 

 sombre , quiet , strange , half?italian girl have suddenly turn crimson , and clutch a chair , as if afraid to fall , while the company star and whisper . Hamlin leave that same evening ; and as the day in Paris have be spend in see and talk about picture , so this afternoon pass in trifle conversation at Mrs Simson s table . alone , Anne scarcely see he for an instant . only , when he leave Coblenz , he seize her hand as he stand at the door , and kiss it fervently . it seem to she , during the long month of absence , that she would give all her life to see he again , to be able to tell he how grateful she be to he . yet , in reality , his presence pass like the picture of a magic?lantern on a wall ; and she feel as if her lip be glue together : it be a vision , and no more . but on that second visit Hamlin have be dazzle . he have recognise from the first the exotic beauty and strangeness of the Perrys servant ; he have see in Paris that his judgment have be correct ; but when , after eighteen month of schooling , he 

 suddenly see Anne again , it be as if he have never see she before , a fresh revelation . a year and a half of a lady s life , without bodily fatigue or mental weariness , have develop to the full the girl s marvellous beauty : strange , mysterious , amazonian it be as ever ; but it be as the regalness of a triumphant queen by the side of the queenliness of a depose Amazon chief . the haughtiness which have strike he in the nursemaid of the little Perrys , be not diminish , but soften , by a kind of quiet graciousness and goodness . Hamlin remark that she seem , now that she be no long humble and cramp , to have a much kindly spirit and a sense of humour which have at first seem scarcely to exist , or to exist only in bitterness . but what strike he most of all be an indefinable change in Anne s expression : the soul , which have lie as a tiny germ at the bottom of her nature , have expand and come to the surface . she be as beautiful and singular as ever , but more manifold and subtle : her mind have increase threefold . Hamlin 

 go away , intend that Anne should remain at Coblenz another year . but he find that his patience , hitherto inexhaustible , have suddenly depart . he find the time intolerably heavy on his hand . he travel about in out?of?the?way country , have fragmentary love?affair , in a dreamy , irresponsible way , with other woman ; and send Anne more letter than usual , and present of all manner of outlandish stuff silver ornament and so forth which use to create great excitement at the school ; but he fret with impatience . impatience , be it well understand , not to marry Anne , for he always think of marriage as the return from , the end of , a sort of spiritual honeymoon ; but impatience to commence that long courtship which have , from the beginning , be the object of his desire . he grow tired of their correspondence , find that he have exhaust all the delight of unconsciously reveal love , love bud and develop with the girl s mind . it begin to be mere repetition ; and he scarcely know 

 what to write about now : the prologue have last long enough ; the piece must begin . 


 one day , some two year or so after her arrival at Coblenz , Anne Brown receive a letter in which Hamlin remind she that she be twenty?one , and that his guardianship have consequently come to an end already some month before ; and suggest that , as he hear that her education be now complete , at least in so far as Coblenz go , he think that it might be wise if she come to England , where she would have well opportunity of continue any special study . moreover , that his aunt , Mrs Macgregor , a widow without any child , be come to settle in London , and that he think it might be a good arrangement that she and Anne should live together , as Anne could scarcely take a house by herself . what do Miss Brown think of this arrangement ? and would she authorise he to settle everything for Mrs Macgregor and she ? faintly and vaguely Anne thank he for his forethought , and acquiesce in 

 everything which he might be kind enough to decide upon . she have never realise her situation , she be not the sort of mind which have clear conception of the future , and she have be far too much absorb , these two year , in the unreal present . besides , Anne feel a confused pain , a disappointment , which prevent she attend to anything else . Hamlin have say nothing about himself , not a word as to whether he also would settle in London , or whether he intend continue his wandering life . and she have not the courage to ask he . she be conscious of a coldness and emptiness in her heart , of the disappointment of some vague , unspoken hope . but why feel disappointed ? or do she really feel disappointed at all ? she believe that she care for Hamlin only as for a benefactor , a divinity , a creature who might bestow affection but could not be ask for it ; and this be the case , and know herself to have be perfectly satisfied and happy hitherto , 

 she persuade herself that she really do not feel disappointed about anything , when Hamlin thus write about her education and her plan and nothing else . 


 but as the winter draw to a close , there come another letter from Hamlin   all the intermediate one have be only the usual talk about himself , and about book and scenery   tell she that , with a view to she live with his aunt , he have , as her ex?guardian   he always speak of himself as her guardian , completely ignore Richard Brown   deem it wise to employ part of her capital , which have be accumulate in his hand , in the purchase of the lease of a house at Hammersmith , which he be have prepare and furnish against she come in May . " it be in a pretty neighbourhood , with the river in front and old house and garden all round , " he write . " what determine my choice , as I be sure it would have determine yours also , be that the house be itself more than a century and a 

 half old , and have some fine tree in the garden . flower seem to grow well , as it be pretty well beyond reach of smoke . there be also some fine elm and poplar in front , all along the river?side , which be old?fashioned , and .not yet make into a modern embankment . it be rather far from the world ; but the world be hideous , and the far away from it the well , don t you think ? my aunt be busy about the practical household property ; I be get in some of the more useless furniture . if you should dislike the arrangement , it can all be easily undo . I hope you will not disapprove of this step ; the house be pretty well unique , and I have to decide on take it , unless some one else be to snap it up ; otherwise I should certainly have consult you first . I trust you will forgive I . " 


 Anne put the letter down , and wonder whether she be dream . what be all this about buy and consult she , employ her capital ? what capital have she 

 get ? what right to be consult ? for a moment she feel quite bewilder ; and then the full consciousness of Hamlin s goodness rush out and overwhelm she , and she let her head fall on her desk and cry for sheer happiness . then she think it must all be a dream , and snatch the letter where it lie all crumple , and smooth it out tremble . yes , there it all be . and then , as postscript , come this sentence , which make her heart leap : 

 " there be two room additional on the garden , have a separate entrance from the embankment , and which I think you will not at present require for yourself . would you perhaps let I rent they for a studio ? my own lodging be a long way from St John s House   that be its name , for it be a priory once ; but if I have my workshop there , I might hope to see you almost every day , if you would let I . " 

 the first dinner?bell ring , and Anne , have hastily wash her eye and smooth she 

 hair , run down?stair , not know very well why the bell ring , or what it be all about . in the sitting?room she find the girl from New Zealand , a little nervous creature , whom she have nurse through a bad fever , in her cold , absent way , and who have conceive a shy , intense passion for this beautiful strange creature , who seem to she an unapproachable being from another world . 

 " I be go away , " cry Anne she feel she must say it " go away from school to London , next month . " 
 the thin , nervous , an?mic little girl turn ashy?white . 
 " oh , be you really go ? " she exclaim faintly , for with Anne disappear all the poor child s sunshine and ideal from this dreary , bad than orphan life , among girl who have too many occupation and interest to care for she . 
 " be you really go , Annie ? . . . oh , I be so sorry ! " 

 " sorry ? " cry Anne ; " it be very nasty 

 of you to be sorry I be glad ; oh , so glad ! so glad ! " 

 the little New Zealander have go to the window , and be look through its pane at the rainy street ; she give a little suppress sob . 
 Anne feel as if she have commit a murder . she run to the window , and seize the struggle small creature in her powerful arm , and kneel down before she , clasp her round the waist . 
 " oh , forgive I ! forgive I ! " cry Anne , as the consciousness of the girl s love , which she have never before perceive , come upon she , together with the shame and remorse at her heartlessness ; " forgive I , forgive I be a brute a beast   oh dear , oh dear , that happiness should make I so wicked ! " 
 the New Zealander smile and bury her thin yellow face in the mass of Anne s dark crisp hair . 
 " will you remember I sometimes ? " she ask ; " I love you so much . " 

 Anne kiss the poor , pale , tear?staine cheek . 
 " oh yes , I will always remember you , " she say . 
 but she be already think of Hamlin . 



 CHAPTER V. 

 during 
 that last month at school Anne be indefatigable : in the face of the vague future which be so rapidly approach , she feel bind to clutch hold of the present , think that time which be employ in some way go less quickly . the fact be that she be in a state of great excitement half impatience and half terror ; she wish the day to go by quick , and she wish they to go by slow ; she be at once drag wearisomely , and hurry along . at length it become a question no long of week but of day . and then come another letter from Hamlin . he remember the desire she have once express to go down the Rhine , to be on the sea : he propose that she should come through Belgium and cross from Antwerp to 

 London . " I be sure you will enjoy it much more than the vile , vulgar , usual route , " he write . but he do not tell she that he be unwilling she should get any impression of England before meet he , however slight they might be ; that he prefer to meet she , in the evening , on the Thames wharf , to receive his Amazon Queen , his mysterious and tragic Madonna , rather than in the shed at Victoria or Charing Cross . Anne do not care how she be to go : she be to go , to embark on a new life , to see he , to be see by he . this thought , which have never strike she before , begin to haunt she now : if he should be disgust with she ? if he should recognise that he have be mistake in his choice ? 

 the morning before her departure , Mrs Sireson hand Anne a letter at breakfast . 
 " Mr Hamlin have send a girl to fetch you , dear , " she say . 
 " to fetch I ? " cry Anne , in astonishment . 

 Mrs Simson open the door " pray , come in , " she say . 
 a young woman enter , whose immaculate smartness and cheerful alertness never would have let one guess that she have just be travel twenty?four hour . 
 " this be Miss Brown , " say Mrs Simson . the girl curtsy , and wait for Miss Brown to speak . but Anne could not utter a word . 
 " Mrs Macgregor , Mr Hamlin s aunt , engage I as your travelling?maid , miss , " say the young woman , hand a note to Anne . 
 it be from Hamlin , and run briefly 

 " MY dear MISS BROWN , my aunt be unfortunately too delicate to admit of my ask she to fetch you from Coblenz ; but she have engage the bearer to be your maid , unless you have some previous . choice at Coblenz , in which case , please forgive our interference . she be highly recommend , and seem a good girl , and accustom to travel . she will telegraph I how you be from Cologne and 


 Ant ? 

 werp 

 Antwerp 

 . I shall await you Thursday evening on the wharf . till then , farewell . your sincere and impatient friend , 

 " WALTER HAMLIN . " 

 for some unaccountable reason Anne feel quite angry . she do not require any one to travel with she ; she do not want a maid . the very word 
 maid 
 seem to bring up her whole past . 

 " you have well go and rest yourself , " she say to the girl coldly . 
 " how sweet and considerate ! " say Mrs Simson , read Hamlin s note . 
 " I don t want a maid ! " cry Anne , angrily . 
 " a young lady of your age can not travel alone , my dear , " answer Mrs Simson , blandly . but Anne feel miserable , she know not why , and hat the maid . 

 presently she go up to her room to pack her trunk . on open the door she discover the maid she maid on her knee , 


 emp ? 

 tie 

 empty 

 the chest of drawer , and fold thing after thing . 

 " please don t do that ! " cry Anne , turn purple . " I will do it myself , please . " 
 the girl star politely , and answer in a subdue , respectfully chide tone 
 " I be only pack your trunk , miss . " 
 " I will do it myself ! " cry Anne , excitedly . 
 " as you wish , madam , " be the maid s icy answer ; and she rise . 
 " can I do nothing for you ? " she say , stand by the door , with a reproachful , prim little face . 
 Anne be ashamed . 

 " you can help I if you like , " she answer , rather humble ; and she begin fold her thing . but the girl be much quick than she , and Anne soon remain with nothing to do , look on vacantly . she feel as if she would give world to get the girl away ; she feel as if she ought to say to she , " Don t do that for I ; I be not a real lady ; I be no well than you ; I be a servant , a maid , 


 my ? 

 self 

 myself 

 , " and as if every moment of silence be a kind of deceit . at last she could bear it no long 

 " please , " she cry , " let I pack my thing myself ; I have always pack they myself ; I should be so glad if you would let I . " 
 the girl rise and retire . 
 " as you like , miss , " she reply , fix her eye on Anne s strange excited face . 
 " she know I be only a servant like herself , and she think I proud and ungrateful , " think Anne . 

 the next evening , among the lamentation of Mrs Simson s establishment , Anne Brown set off for Cologne . this first short scrap of journey move she very much : when the train puff out of the station , and the familiar face be hide by outhouse and locomotive , the sense of embark on unknown water rush upon Anne ; and when , that evening , she maid bid her good night at the hotel at Cologne , offer to brush her hair and help she to undress , she be seize with intolerable 


 home ? 

 sickness 

 homesickness 

 for the school , the little room she have just leave , and she would have implore any one to take she back . but the next day she feel quite different : the excitement of novelty keep she up , and almost make it seem as if all these new thing be quite habitual ; for there be nothing strange than the way in which excitement settle one in novel position , and familiarise one with the unfamiliar . see a lot of sight on the way , and know that a lot more remain to be see , it be as if there be nothing beyond these three or four day as if the journey would have no end ; that an end there must be , and what that end mean seem a thing impossible to realise . she scarcely begin to realise it when the ship begin slowly to move from the wharf at Antwerp ; when she walk up and down the deserted and darken deck watch the widen river under the clear blue spring night , light only by a ripple of moonlight , widen mysteriously out of sight , bound only by the shore?light , with here or there the 

 white or blue or red light of some ship , and its long curl of smoke , make you suddenly conscious that close by be another huge moving thing , more human creature in this solitude , till at last all be mere moonlight?permeate mist of sky and sea . and only as the next day as the boat cut slowly through the hazy , calm sea be draw to its close , do Anne begin to feel at all excited . at first , as she sit on deck , the water , the smoke , the thrill of the boat , the people walk np and down , the child wander about among the pile of rope , and lean over the ship s side all these thing seem the only reality . but later , as they get high up in the Thames , and the unwonted English sunshine become dimmer , a strange excitement arise in Anne an excitement more physical than mental , which , with every movement of the boat , make her heart beat fast and fast , till it seem as if it must burst , and a lot of small heart to start up and throb all over her body , tight and tight , till she have to press she 

 hand to her chest , and sit down gasp on a bench . 


 the afternoon be draw to a close , and the river have narrow ; all around be row of wharf and group of ship ; the man begin to tug at the rope . they be in the great city . the light grow fainter , and the starlight mingle with the dull smoke?grey of London ; all about be the sad grey outline of the old house on the wharf , the water grey and the sky also , with only a faint storm?re where the sun have set . the rigging , interweave against the sky , be grey also ; the brownish sail of some nearer boat , the dull red side of some steam hard by , the only colour . the ship begin to slacken speed and to turn , great puff and pant of the engine run through its fibre ; the sailor begin to halloo , the people around to collect their luggage : they be get alongside of the wharf . Anne feel the maid throw a shawl round she ; hear her voice , as if from a great distance , say , " there s Mr Hamlin , miss ; " feel herself 


 walk ? 

 ing 

 walk 

 along as if in a dream ; and as if in a dream a figure come up and take her hand , and slip her arm through his , and she know herself to be stand on the wharf , in the twilight , the breeze blow in her face , all the people jostle and shout around she . then a voice say " I fear you must be very tired , Miss Brown . " it be at once so familiar and so strange that it make she start ; the dream seem dispel . she be in reality , and Hamlin be really by her side . 





 BOOK IV . 


 CHAPTER I. 

 it 
 be sad to think how little even the most fervently love among we be able to reproduce , to keep within recollection , the reality of the absent belove ; certain as we seem to be , live as appear the phantom which we have cherish , we yet always find , on the day of meeting , that the loved person be different from the simulacrum which we have carry in our heart . as Anne Brown sit in the carriage which be carry she to her new home , the feeling which be strong in she be , not joy to see Hamlin again , nor fear at enter on this new phase of existence , but a recur shock of surprise at the voice which be speak to she , the voice which she now recognise as that of the real Hamlin , but 

 which be so undefinably different from the voice which have haunt she throughout those month of absence . Hamlin be seat by her side , the maid opposite . the carriage drive quickly through a network of dark street , and then , on , on , along mile of embankment . it be a beautiful spring night , and the mist and fog which hang over river and town be soak with moonlight , turn into a pale?blue luminous haze , star with the yellow speck of gas , break into , here and there , by the yellow sheen from some open hall?door or light window of a party?give house : out of the faint blueness emerge the unsubstantial outline of thing bush , and overhang tree?branche , and distant spectral tower and belfry . 

 " you must be very tired , " say Hamlin . 
 " oh no , " answer Anne , that repeat revelation of the real voice still startle she " not at all . " 

 he ask she how she have leave those at Coblenz , and about her journey ; she have to 

 tell he about every picture and church she have see at Cologne , Brussels , bruge , and Antwerp . it be strange how people whose heart have seem full to burst with thing they have so long be wait to say , will talk , when they meet again , like person introduce for the first time at a dinner?party . on they roll , and on , through the pale moonlight mist by the river . 

 " I hope , " say Hamlin , when they have do discuss Van Eyck , and Rubens , and Memling " I hope you will like the house and the way I have have it arrange ; and , " he add , " I hope you will like my aunt . she be rather misanthropic , but it be only on the surface . " 

 his aunt ! Anne have forget all about she ; and her heart sink within she as the carriage at last draw up in front of some garden railing . the house door be throw open , and a stream of yellow light flood the strip of garden and the railing . Hamlin give Anne his arm ; the maid follow . a 

 woman?servant be hold the door open , and raise a lamp above she . Anne bend her head , feel that she be be scrutinise . she walk speechless , lean on Hamlin s arm , and those step seem to her endless . it be all very strange and wonderful . her step be muffle in thick , dark carpet ; all about , the wall of the narrow passage be cover with tapestry , and here and there come a gleam of brass or a sheen of dim mirror under the subdue light of some sort of eastern lamp , which hung , with yellow sheen of metal disc and tassel , from the ceiling . thus up the narrow carpet and tapestrie stair , and into a large dim room , with strange?looking thing all about . some red ember send a crimson flicker over the carpet ; by the tall fireplace be a table with a shaded lamp , and at it be seat a tall , slender woman , with the figure of a young girl , but whose face , when Anne see it , be parch and hollow out , and surround by grey hair . 


 " this be Miss Brown , Aunt Claudia , " say Hamlin . 
 the old lady rise , advance , and kiss Anne frigidly on both cheek . 
 " I be glad to see you , my dear , " she say , in a tone which be neither cold nor insincere , but simply and utterly indifferent . 
 Anne sit down . there be a moment s silence , and she feel the old lady s eye upon she , and feel that Hamlin be look at his aunt , as much as to say , " well , what do you think of she ? " and she shrink into herself . 
 " you have have a bad passage , doubtless , " say Mrs Macgregor after a moment , vaguely and dreamily . 
 " oh no , " answer Anne , faintly , " not at all bad , thank you . " 
 " so much the well , " go on the old lady , absently . " ring for some tea , Walter . " 
 Hamlin rang . in a moment tea?thing be bring . Hamlin hand a cup to Anne , and offer she some cake . 

 " it be a long drive , " say Mrs Macgregor 

 " a long drive all the way from Charing Cross . " 

 " Miss Brown come by the Antwerp boat St Catherine s Wharf in the City , aunt , " correct Hamlin . 
 " ah , yes , to be sure perhaps she would like some more milk in her tea . there be always such a delay at Charing Cross , isn t there , Walter ? " 
 but while Mrs Macgregor s mind and word seem to ramble vaguely about , her eye be fix upon Anne large , melancholy dark eye . 
 " you be glad to be back in London , aren t you ? " she ask . 
 " this be the first time I be in England , " answer Anne , shyly ; all this dim room , with its vague sense of beautiful thing all round , this absent?minde lady , all seem to harmonise with her own dreamlike sensation . 
 " Miss Brown be bear in Italy , " explain Hamlin , probably for the hundredth time . 

 " oh yes , of course ; how stupid I be ! and , 

 Walter , there be some letter for you on the hall table , and Mr Chough come while you be out , and a man from what s his name the upholsterer who write poetry . " 

 " all right , " interrupt Hamlin . 
 " Won t you have another cup , Margaret ? " ask Mrs Macgregor . 
 " her name be Anne , auntie " 
 " of course I don t know whether you take sugar in your tea or not , Rachel . " 
 thus they go on for another half?hour ; Mrs Macgregor call Anne by one wrong name after another , allude to thing which she could not possibly know anything about , and Hamlin try to set matter right and induce Anne to talk . 
 " it be get late , " he say , " and I fear Miss Brown must be tired after her long journey . I think you have well not keep she up any long , aunt . " 
 " I be not tired , " protest Anne . 
 " you will be tired to?morrow , " say the old lady . 


 " yes , " add Hamlin , " and I must go . Good?bye , aunt . good night , Miss Brown ; I hope you will have good dream to welcome you home to England . I shall come in for lunch to?morrow , Aunt Claudia . good night . good night , Miss Brown , " and he kiss her hand . " good night , 
 buon riposo e sogni felici . 
 " 

 the few word of Italian almost bring the tear to Anne s eye ; she feel so strange here , so far from everything and yet what have she leave behind ? nothing , and no one who love she , except that little girl from New Zealand . she feel terribly alone in the world . 
 Hamlin have evidently not trust to his aunt to send Anne to bed , for the maid come in uncalled , and ask whether Miss Brown would not like to go up to her room . 

 " of course , " say Mrs Macgregor ; and take a heavy old?fashioned silver candlestick , she lead Anne to her room . the poor girl be too weary and daze to see what it be like . she sink on to a chair , and 

 passively let the maid take off her hat and cloak . 

 " shall I undress you , ma am ? " she ask . 
 Anne shake her head . " no , thank . " 
 the girl retire , but Mrs Macgregor remain stand by Anne s side , look at the reflection in the glass of her pale , sad , tired face . " Undo your hair , Eliza dear , " say Mrs Macgregor . 
 Anne mechanically pull out the hair?pin , and the mass of iron?black crisp hair fall over her shoulder . 
 the old lady look at she for a moment . 
 " you be a beautiful girl , Anne , " she say , at last hit the right name , " and , " she add , with a curious compassionate look , as she kiss the girl s forehead , " be you really in love with Watty ? " 
 Anne do not answer ; but she feel herself redden . 

 " marriage without love be a terrible thing , " say the old lady , " and in so far love be a mitigation of evil ; but at the good it be only 

 delusion . People must marry , but it be the misfortune of their life . good night , my dear . " 

 the word go on in Anne s head , but she be too worn out to understand they . she soon fall asleep , and dream that Melton Perry have paint a picture , and that in a storm the ship s crew say it must be use as a raft ; and somehow it all take place at Florence , in the large pond in the Boboli Gardens . 



 CHAPTER II . 

 ANNE BROWN 
 awake with a vague sense of gladness , but no very clear notion of where she be . then it come upon she that this be Hamlin s house , that she would actually see he again in a few hour ; for it be as if she have not see he at all the previous evening . the sun be stream through the blind , fill the room with a yellowish light ; from without come a sound of leaf , of twitter bird , and the plash of the steamer?paddle in the river . Anne look round she and wonder . she have never see such a room as this in her life : the wail be all panel white , except where the panelling be interrupt by expanse of pale?yellow chintz ; the furniture also be of old?fashioned chintz ; the 

 mirror be like what she have see in the illustration to an old copy of Sir Charles Grandison which have belong to Miss Curzon ; the taper chair and table to match . there be blue?and?white jar and pot all about , and old?fashioned china thing on the dressing?table : except for the fac?simile of drawing by Mantegna and Botticelli , and the coloured copy of famous italian picture which dot the wall , the room might have be untouched since the day of the first george . she remember that Hamlin have tell she that the house be an old one ; but she could not understand how everything come to look so very spick and span and new . she get up and go to the window . below , in the little garden , be a lilac?tree burst into flower , and a yellow laburnum . a milkman s cart be draw up before the door . in front be the tree , in tender leaf , and the wooden parapet of the river?walk ; then the Thames , still wide , but so different from what she have see it the previous evening : a clear grey stream 

 reflect green bank and cloudy blue sky , with here and there a barge or boat moor by the shore . the sky be blue , but cover with moist cloud , and it seem to Anne that she could almost see where it arise on the horizon , so low do it seem . there be a scent of recent rain in the air , a shimmer of moisture on the leaf and grass . be this London , which she have always fancy so noisy , and grimy , and vulgarly new ? 


 Anne be already half dress ; but she spend some time wonder which of her frock she should put on : they have be make expressly for London , and greatly admire by the girl at Coblenz , but now one look more absurd and frumpish than the other . at last she put on a sort of greyish?blue tweed , such as be then wear on the continent , and have look at herself rather anxiously in the glass , she open her door and hesitatingly go out into the passage . all be perfectly quiet as she go down the carpet stair , wonder at the tapestry and brazen wrought shield and 

 plaster cast and curious weapon which cover its wall ; she could hear only the ticking of the old clock , which stand in its tall inlaid case in the hall . after the bustle of girl and servant at the Coblenz school , and the hundred and one noise of screech well?pulley , whir bucket , whistle starling , singing and chattering servant , clatter crockery , which greet the early riser in an italian house , this silence seem to she almost eerie , and she wander about over the noiseless floor like the knight in the palace of the sleep beauty . she find her way into the drawing?room , where she have be receive the previous evening ; there be another next to it , and a kind of little library beyond . it be , indeed , an enchant palace ; the wall be all hang with picture and drawing , and piece of precious embroidery , and burnish oriental plate , and the floor spread with oriental carpet and matting , which give out a faint , drowsy , sweet scent . the curious furniture be cover with old brocade and embroidery , 

 and in all corner , on bracket and table and in cabinet , be all manner of wonderful glass and china , and strange ivory and inlay japanese toy . there be flower , also , about everywhere , and palm in the window . in the library be more book than Anne have almost ever see ; and in the chief drawing?room a beautiful grand piano , not make like those of our day , but with slight straight leg and a yellow case paint with faded?looke flower . Anne look at everything with astonishment and awe : it be like the room in Walter Crane s fairy book , with their inlay chest and brocade couch , and majolica vase full of peacock feather . 


 it take she a long time to take it all in . she steal to the piano , open it gently , and play the accompaniment of a song of Carissimi s , which Hamlin be fond of , but inaudibly , without let her finger press down the key . then she look at everything once more . she be begin to get familiarise with the picture on the wall ; the pale , delicate 

 bit of landscape ; the deep?coloure picture of lady in wonderful jewel?like robe , with mysterious landscape behind they ; the drawing of strange , beautiful , emaciated , cruel?looke creature , man or woman , with wicked lip and combed?out lock , all these thing , which be like so many point of interrogation when the door open and the maid appear . 

 " I have be look for you everywhere , miss , " she say . " I think , as you didn t answer when I knock , that you must still be asleep , so I carry your tea down again . Mrs Macgregor be go to have breakfast now , and say , would you mind have it in her room with she , miss , as she never go down till lunch ? " 
 Anne follow the servant to Mrs Macgregor s room , where she find the old lady in she dressing?gown , before a table spread with eighteenth?century china , or what to Anne seem such . 

 " what an hour you do get up at , Charlotte ! " 


  ! 

 say Mrs Macgregor , kiss Anne on both cheek . " we never think of get up 

 here before half?past nine . Walter never come in till luncheon?time , because he have so far to come , and be up so late every night . turn round ; let I see what you look like this morning . " 

 and Mrs Macgregor make Anne turn round slowly . she look at her approvingly . 

 " you re a handsome girl , certainly , " she say ; " not the style that use to be admire in my time , " and she smile with the faint smile of an old belle , " girl have to be slight , and fair , and with little feature then . but you re just what they like now . I m thankful at least that Walter have not bring home a bag of bone like the other beauty of his set . 
 Loveliness in decay 
 , that s what I call their style ; but you look a good flesh?and?blood girl . " 


 Anne do not know what to answer ; she pour herself out a cup of tea in silence , and vaguely eat some bread and butter . the old lady be good?nature , garrulous , flighty ; but yet , beneath the shiftiness of her exterior , there seem to be something real , something 

 sad and bitter , when you look at her thin draw mouth and melancholy eye . 


 " that s a pretty frock you have on , my dear , " she pursue , " and 
 I 
 think it very become . but you ll see that Watty win t like it . he s quite the what do you call it ? medieval sort of thing , no stay , and no petticoat , and slashing , and tag and boot?lace in the sleeve , and a yard of draggle train that sort of thing . oh , you ll find it a queer world , the world of Watty s friend . do you ever see Punch ? that s the sort of thing . they re 
 all 
 great beauty and great painter and great poet , every man and woman of they . wait till you see little Chough and young Posthlethwaite   I forget his real name . ah , well , it s perhaps well , after all , this kind of fooling , and masquerade , and write verse about thing people would horsewhip a man for say in prose ; it s perhaps well , after all , for Watty , than the sort of life which we lead when he be young " and Mrs Macgregor become suddenly very silent . 



 after breakfast Anne be free until luncheon?time , as Mrs Macgregor proceed to lie down on her sofa and read Leigh Hunt s Religion of the Heart , or Fox s Religious Ideas , which Anne see lie on her table . Hamlin s aunt have evidently be an 
 esprit fort 
 in her youth , and possess in her bedroom a whole library of what be once deem literary firebrand , but might nowadays be describe as mild , old?fashione free?thinke literature . Anne roam about the drawing?room once more , look again and again at the picture , and open the book , as people do in a strange house , before they can settle down . she timidly also open the piano , but shut it again after a minute . then she take a volume of Jean Paul out of a shelf , and carry it up into her room . find it too dull to read , and with an irritate sense that she ought to be do something definite , she write a letter to Mrs Simson , and one to the little New Zealander . she feel so much like a fish out of water that Coblenz seem more than her 

 birthplace , and the people there more than mother and sister . at last she hear one o clock strike , and soon after there come a knock at the house?door , and run to the window she see Hamlin stand on the doorstep . she withdraw her head quickly , and go down to meet he . 

 he be more respectful than ever , ask she how she have sleep , and what she think of the house . 
 " it s lovely , " say Anne , " and it be so nice have everything old about one . " 
 " everything old ? " ask Hamlin . 
 " yes ; all the hanging , and chair , and table , and mirror , be of the time of the building of the house , aren t they ? " 
 " oh goodness , no , " answer Hamlin , sadly ; " I only wish they be . they re bran?new , every stick of they . everybody have they now ; nobody make anything except imitation old?world thing . " 

 " why don t they try and make something good and new something out of their own 

 head , as the old workman do ? " ask Anne , look with wonder upon these new thing which seem so old . 

 " there be nothing to nourish art nowadays , " say Hamlin , seat himself opposite she and look she full in the face as he use to do long ago at the studio in Florence . " art can t live where life be trivial and aimless and hideous . we can only pick up the broken fragment of the past and blunderingly set they together . " 
 " but why should the life of to?day be trivial and aimless and hideous ? " ask Anne , a vague remembrance of thing which she have hear her father say year ago about progress and modern achievement return to her mind as it have never do when , in the letter which he use to write to she at Coblenz , Hamlin have say before what he be say now . 
 " I don t know why it should be , " reply Hamlin , " but so it be . " 

 " can t we prevent it ? " ask Anne , scarcely think of what she be say ; conscious 

 only that she be really once more in his presence . 

 Hamlin shake his head sadly . 
 " why can not we revive those ? " he say , point to a bunch of delicate pale?pink rose , which droop wither in a venetian glass . " what be dead be dead . the only thing that remain for we late comer to do be to pick up the fade petal and keep they , discolour as they be , to scent our life . the world be get uglier and uglier outside we ; we must , out of the material bequeath to we by former generation , and with the help of our own fancy , build for ourselves a little world within the world , a world of beauty , where we may live with our friend and keep alive whatever small sense of beauty and nobility still remain to we , that it may not get utterly lose , and those who come after we may not be in a wilderness of sordid sight and sordid feeling . Ours be not the mission of the poet and artist of former day ; it be humbler , sad , but equally necessary . " 

 " oh , but you must not say that ! " cry 

 Anne . " what you do will last , don t you know , like the thing which people be able to do formerly . " 

 Hamlin shake his head , and remain for some time with his beautiful greenish?blue eye fix on Anne , as she sit twist and untwist the fringe on the arm of her chair . 
 " there be one consolation , Miss Brown , " say Hamlin , rise from his chair and lean against the chimney?piece , all cover with japanese cup and curious nick?nack , and not take his eye off she , " and that be , that even now , Nature , which be so barren of painter and poet , can produce creature as wonderful as those who inspire the painter and poet of former time a consolation , and at the same time a source of despair . " 
 Hamlin speak these lover?like word in a tone so cold , so sad , that Anne do not at first understand to whom he be allude , and look up rather in interrogation than in embarrassment . 
 a bell rang . " there s lunch , " say Hamlin . " we must finish our discussion afterwards . " 



 CHAPTER III . 

 " 
 WON T 
 you take she out for a drive , Walter ? " ask Mrs Macgregor , after lunch . " she must be curious to see something of London . " 

 Hamlin look at Anne , as much as to say , " do you really wish to go ? " 
 " I be sure Miss Brown be too tired from her journey , aunt , " he say ; " and what be there to take she to see in this beastly city ? " 
 " I think we might have a brougham and take she to see a few of your friend , Walter , " suggest Mrs Macgregor . 
 Poor Anne feel a sort of horror go all down she . 
 " oh , please don t ! " she cry " not to?day ; don t take I to see any one , please . " 
 " it s much wise to let she rest , " say Hamlin , in a tone of annoyance . 

 " Won t you just take the poor girl to Mrs Argiropoulo s , Watty ? " insist his aunt . " it s a sin to keep she mew up at Hammersmith all day ; and you know Mrs Argiropoulo be so anxious to see she at once . " 
 " Confound Mrs Argiropoulo ! " exclaim Hamlin . " I beg your pardon , Miss Brown , but do you feel inclined , after your long journey , to go and see a fat , fashionable lion?huntress , with a snob of a husband who sell currant ? " 
 " not at all , " answer Anne , laugh . " I would much rather stay at home , really . " 
 " very well ; then I will show you the garden and my studio , if you don t mind ; and a great friend of mine , Cosmo Chough , I think I send you some of his poem about music . . . . " 
 " oh yes , " cry Anne ; " they be lovely " 
 " I think little Chough s poem perfectly indecent , " interrupt Mrs Macgregor . " I would much soon let a girl read Don Juan , or even Candide , any day . " 

 Hamlin redden , but laugh . 
 " opinion differ ; at any rate , Miss Brown know only Chough s good thing ; and when he be at his good , Chough be really very good and pure and elevated . " 
 " ah , well , " merely remark Mrs Macgregor . 
 " Cosmo Chough say he would look in about four , " go on Hamlin . " he be a strange creature , and sometimes say odd thing . " 
 " very odd thing , " put in his aunt . 
 " but he be as pure?minded a man as I know , and a real poet , " go on Hamlin " indeed quite one of the good ; and he be a great musician , and a most entertaining fellow his only weakness be that he be a great republican and democrat , but would like to be think the son of a duke . " 
 " the son of a duke ? " ask Anne , in surprise . 

 " oh , the natural son , of course forgive I , my dear , " say Mrs Macgregor . " People nowadays like anything illegitimate it s a 

 distinction . it wasn t in my day , but thing have change ; and Mr Cosmo Chough would dearly like to be think a bastard , especially a duke s. " 

 Hamlin smile . 
 " Poor Chough ! some one tell he he be like Richard Savage one day , and that s his pose . would you like to come into the garden , Miss Brown ? " 

 they go together into the strip of garden which lie behind the house . there be not many flower out as yet , only a few peony and lilac , and a belate tulip or hyacinth , but there be green , daisied grass , and big grey?mosse apple?tree still in blossom ; and across the low wall , cover with creeper , you see big wave tree?branche , and old brick house cover with ivy : the bird be sing , and some hen cluck next door . it be very quiet and old?world . Hamlin show she all the rose?buds which might soon come out , and the place where the lily would be , and the espalier for the sweet?peas . then 

 they go into the two ground?floor room which he be arrange for his studio : there be quantity of beautiful rare book and volume of print , and Persian and japanese and old italian metal?work , and pottery all about , and easel with unfinished picture evcrywhere a great and beautiful confusion . 


 when he have show she his property , and she have reverently handle the thing which have once belong to Shelley and Keats , and the bundle of unpublished manuscript , entrust to Hamlin by live poet , they sit down in the studio and begin to discuss various matter : Anne s school life , her reading and lesson , Hamlin s work , art , poetry , life , all sort of thing , a long and drowsy afternoon s talk , such as be possible only after a long correspondence between people become familiar without much personal intercourse , who , know each other s mind , be now begin to know each other s face and way and heart ; and which have a charm quite peculiar to itself , like that of hear 

 for the first time , with full symphony of voice and instrument , some piece of music which we have learn to know and love merely from the dry score . 

 Anne have never feel so happy in all her life , and Hamlin not often happy in his , as they sit in the studio , talk over abstract question , which seem to acquire such a quite personal interest from those who be discuss they . 
 they be thus engage when the servant announce Mr Cosmo Chough . 
 Anne s heart sink at the thought of confront one of Hamlin s most intimate friend , and one of the poet who constitute the star of his solar system . to Anne s surprise Mr Chough do not at all resemble either Shelley or Keats , as she imagine ; he be a little wiry man , with fiercely brush coal?black hair and whisker , dress within an inch of his life , but in a style of fashionableness , booted and cravate , which be quite peculiar to himself . 

 " Miss Brown , " say Hamlin , " let I introduce my old friend , Cosmo Chough . " 

 Mr Chough make a most fascinating bow , and swoop gracefully to the other end of the studio to fetch himself a chair near Anne s. he be quite touchingly concerned in Anne s journey and her sensation after it ; and ask she whether she like London , with a sort of expansive chivalry of manner , as of Sir Walter Raleigh spread embroider cloak across puddle for Queen Elizabeth , which strike she as rather ridiculous , but very agreeable , as she have rather anticipate be scorn by Hamlin s poetical friend . Anne think Mr. Chough decidedly nice , with his oriental style of politeness , and magnificent volubility , constantly quote poetry in various language in a shrill and chirpy voice ; moreover , he seem to adore Hamlin , and this be enough to put he in her good grace . Mr Chough rapidly inform she what the principal poet in London and Paris   for he speak of french thing with an affectation 

 of throaty accent and allusion to his " real country " which greatly puzzle Anne   be write ; and Anne feel so completely take into confidence that she venture to ask he whether he be himself write anything at present , as she have greatly admire some short piece of his which Hamlin have send she . 

 Mr Chough be as modest as he be polite . his eye shine , and he clasp his small hand in ecstasy at the idea of anything of his have please Miss Brown . he then proceed to tell she that he have an idea for a long poem a sort of masque or mystery?play to be call the Triumph of Womanhood . 

 " we be try over some of Jomelli s music a night or two ago , at Isaac the great composer s , " he explain ; " magnificent music , which no one can sing nowadays , and we feebly crow , when in the midst of the great burst of the " Gloria " I seem to have reveal to I a vision of a mystic procession of woman go in triumph ; I understand , 

 in a sort of flash , the mysterious and real regalness of Womanhood . " 

 " it must have be very beautiful , " say Anne , naively . 
 Mr Chough have open the piano , and begin play , in a masterly way , a fragment of very intricate fugue . 
 " do you notice that ? " he ask : " that sudden modulation there ta ta ti , la la la from a minor to E major , that somehow mysteriously bring home to I one of the figure of that triumphal procession , and she I have try to describe . if you like , I can repeat you the first few line ; it be call Imperia of Rome . " 
 " how good of you , " cry Anne . 
 " I think we have well put off hear it till you have compose rather more of the poem , " interrupt Hamlin . 
 Cosmo Chough look mortified , and Anne wonder why Hamlin should silence his old friend . 

 " tell I all about Imperia of Rome , " she 

 ask . " who be she ? have she anything to do with the Scipios , or Cato , or Tarquin ? " 

 " Imperia be not an ancient roman , " explain Chough ; " she live at the beginning of the sixteenth century , and it be say that all the cardinal and poet and artist of Rome , nay , the Pope himself , accompany her coffin when she die . " 
 " why , what have she do ? be she a saint ? " 
 " the inscription on her tomb be , I think , the most truly noble and Roman ever compose on any woman , " proceed Chough ; " Imperia . . . " 

 " Miss Brown doesn t understand Latin , Cosmo , " interrupt Hamlin , roughly , " and I be sure she would take no interest in Imperia or her epitaph . suppose you let Miss Brown hear some of that beautiful Jomelli Mass you be speak about . Chough be one of the fine musician I know , " he explain to Anne , " and he be quite famous 

 for sing all sort of forget old italian master . " 

 Chough sit down and begin to sing , in a warbling falsetto , but with the most marvellous old?world grace and finish . 
 Anne do not attend . she be wonder about Imperia of Rome . why have Hamlin cut short Chough ? what have Imperia do ? the remark of Mrs Macgregor come to her mind ; and she feel indignant , and her indignation be all the great , perhaps , because Chough s offence be vague and unknown how nobly and simply Hamlin have silence he ! she wonder whether he be very angry with Chough , and whether Chough s feeling have be much hurt . she feel rather sorry for the sharp way in which he have be treat , and terrify lest she should be a source of misunderstanding between Hamlin and his friend . she greatly praise Chough s singing . 

 " will you sing ? " cry the little poet , supplicatingly ; " you must have a 


 beauti ? 

 ful 

 beautiful 

 voice . I know it from your way of speak . " 

 Anne refuse in terror . 
 " do sing , Miss Brown , " urge Hamlin . so she take her courage with both hand , as she express it , and sing an air by Scarlatti , Chough accompanying . she make several false start , and sing the wrong word almost throughout , for she feel a lump in her chest . Anne have a deep , powerful , rather guttural voice , not improve by sing modern german song at Coblenz ; but the voice be fine , and she have catch something of the manner of her former protectress , Miss Curzon , who have be a great singer in her day . 
 Chough burst out into applause . 

 " a splendid voice ! " he cry ; " you 
 must 
 sing , Miss Brown you 
 must 
 study I will come and practise your accompaniment for you , if you will permit I . " 

 Anne look at Hamlin ; such an offer , on so slight an acquaintance , surprise she . 

 " you will let Chough teach you , win t you , 

 Miss Brown ? " ask Hamlin , approvingly . he afterwards tell she that Chough spend whatever leisure remain from an inferior Government offce , in which , together with a whole band of other poet , he be employ , in play accompaniment for various young lady whom he consider , each singly , the most divine type of womanhood whom he have ever meet . 

 Chough be in high spirit , and proceed to display to Anne two or three relic which he carry on his person . a fervent though not very orthodox Catholic , he be prone to religious mysticism : on his watch?chain hang a gold cross , contain a bit of wood from St Theresa s house , which a friend have bring he from Spain ; by its side dangle a large locket , enclose a wisp of yellow hair . 
 " it be a lock of Lucretia Borgia s , " he say , display it with as much unction as he have manifest for St Theresa " a bit of the one which Byron possess , the most precious thing I have in all the world . " 

 " she be rather an insignificant character though , on the whole , wasn t she ? " remark Anne , not know what to say , " a sort of characterless villain , the Germans say . " 
 Cosmo Chough be indignant . 
 " Insignificant ! " he cry " a Borgia insignificant ! why , her blood run with evil as the Pactolus do with gold . all woman that have ever be , except Sappho and Vittoria Accoramboni , and perhaps Faustina , be lifeless shadow by her side . . . " 
 " I don t believe in those sort of woman have be very remarkable , " say Anne , in her frank , stolid way , " except for disreputableness . " 
 " but that be just it , that which you call disreputableness , my dear Miss Brown , " cry Chough , " therein be their greatness , in that fiery . . . " 
 Anne shake her head contemptuously . 

 " I daresay great woman have often commit great crime , " she say ; " but then they have have great plan and ambition ; they 

 have not be mere wretched slave of passion ; " and she relapse into silence . 

 she have have what Hamlin use to call her Amazon or Valkyr expression as she speak ; and he feel , as he have feel in Florence , the persuasion that this proud and sombre woman must have in her future some great decision , some great sacrifice of other or of herself . 
 while they be talk , the servant enter to tell Miss Brown that Mrs Argiropoulo be in the drawing?room with Mrs Macgregor . 
 " Confound Mrs Argiropoulo ! " exclaim Hamlin between his tooth , " to come intrude so soon . " 
 " be that the lion?hunting lady ? " ask Anne . 
 " yes ; I suppose you must receive she , as she have call on you . " 
 " call on I ? " repeat Anne in amazement ; " you mean on Mrs Macgregor . why , how should she have hear of I ? " 

 " all London have hear of you , Miss Brown , " exclaim Chough enthusiastically , as he open the door for she ; " at least all that deserve 

 to be call London . and Mrs Argiropoulo say last night at Wendell the R.A. s , that she be determined to see you before any other creature in town . you see I have gain a march upon she . " 


 Anne do not answer , but she grow purple . so every one be curious to see this nursery?maid whom the great Hamlin have cast his eye on , and whom he have generously educate ; for the first time her heart burst with indignation and ruffle pride . but after a moment , as she sit in the drawing?room , after frigidly return the fat and fashionable lion?huntress s affectionate greeting , her conscience smite she : who be she , that she should feel thus ? if she do depend entirely on Hamlin s generosity , ought she not to be grateful merely , and proud ? and if his friend feel curious to see she , be it not natural , he be what he be ; and have she a right to feel annoyed at their curiosity , at their know all about she ? it have be mean and unworthy . yet she could not help feel a sort of vague anger 

 at she know not what , as the lady chatter away , in glib Greek?English , about poet , and studio , and dinner?partie ; and she answer Mrs Argiropoulo only in monosyllable . 

 " you must let I take your ward into society a little , dear Mrs Macgregor , " lisp the greek lady , " for I know you hate go out of an evening . Miss Brown must meet some of the principal person of our set . " 
 she be very fat , very good?nature , and extremely vulgar?looking , her huge body encase in a medieval dress of flame gold brocade . " what in the world can she have to do among artist and poet ? " think Anne . 
 " her husband be in the currant?trade , " whisper Chough " an awful old noodle , but he buy more picture of our school than any one else . their house be a perfect wonder . " 
 " my aunt be go to ask a few friend to meet Miss Brown first here , " answer Hamlin ; " perhaps you will join they , Mrs Argiropoulo . there s plenty of time to think of party?going . " 

 " very good , very good , " answer Mrs Argiropoulo ; " meanwhile perhaps I may have the pleasure of take Miss Brown out for a drive once or twice . " 
 " I be sure she will be delighted , " say Hamlin . 
 " I hate that woman ! " exclaim Hamlin , as he return from escort the wife of the currant?dealer to the door ; " an odious , inquisitive , vulgar brute . " 
 " she look good?nature , I think , " insinuate Anne . 
 " oh , every one s good?nature ! " 
 " in your set , Watty ? " ask Mrs Macgregor , bitterly . 

 " every one s good?nature ! " continue Hamlin , throw himself back in his chair ; " and so s Mrs Argiropoulo . but a kind of grain that set my nerve off . that s the misfortune of London , that a lot of vulgar creature , merely because they buy our picture and give dinner , have come and invade our set , show we , like so many wild beast , to 

 the fashionable world . positively , I shall have to give up London . but you will find , " he add , turn to Anne , " one or two house still remain where one meet only superior people the house where artistic life really go on . " 


 " upon whip cream and swiss champagne , " say Mrs Macgregor " what one might call the real , genuine , four hundred a?year intellectual world . ah , well , Walter ! you needn t look reproachful ; but it 
 be 
 droll what sort of people you have come to associate with clerk and penny?a?liner , each of they a great poet . " 

 Hamlin merely smile . " one must make a world for one s self , " he say , and look at Anne . 
 when Mr Cosmo Chough have take his seat next to Mrs Argiropoulo , the portly lady deluge he with question and reply as her landau roll away . 

 " on the whole , I m quite as well pleased not to take she out at once , " she say . " I m 

 not at all so sure about she . she seem to I too big and lumpish and healthy?looking . I should like to have one or two opinion first one or two artist , and young Posthlethwaite s , and little o reilly s of course , they ll see she at old Smith s , or Mrs Saunders s , or some such house and all depend on 
 their 
 verdict . " 


 " I know what 
 mine 
 be , " cry little Chough , enthusiastically " that she be the divinest woman , in the cold , imperial style , with a latent and strange smoulder passion , that I ever set eye on . and as to that flabby elephant Posthlethwaite , and that little hop , skip , and jump of an impudent jackanape o reilly , I wonder how you can think 
 their 
 opinion worth have , or , indeed , their presence supportable . " 

 at this grand winding up Mrs Argiropoulo laugh loudly . 

 " I know you don t like those young man , " she say . " Posthlethwaite s your rival , they say ; he write even more improper thing 

 than you do ; and you can t forgive Thaddy O reilly call your poem the love of the cannibal . oh , I know you poet ! now , shall I drive you home ? what s your address ? " 

 this be an old joke , for Mr Cosmo Chough always surround his dwelling?place with mystery , and have his letter address to his office . 
 " pray don t inconvenience yourself , " he say in a stately way ; " set I down at the corner of Park Lane . I shall walk home in less than a minute from there . " 
 " to the corner of Park Lane , " order Mrs Argiropoulo of her footman , who know , as well as his mistress and every other creature in what they call London , that Mr Cosmo Chough live in a secluded terrace in Canonbury . 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 ANNE BROWN 
 find that Hamlin , or , as he studiously put it , Mrs Macgregor , have make several engagement for she before her arrival ; and before she could thoroughly realise that the school , the journey from Coblenz , be thing of the past , she find herself be lead about , passively , half unconsciously , through the maze of ? sthetic London . it be all very hazy : Anne be inform that this and that person be come to dinner or lunch at Hammersmith ; that this or that person hop she would come and dine or take tea somewhere or other ; that such or such a lady be go to take she to see some one or other s studio , or to introduce she at some other person s house . she know that they be all 

 either distinguished poet , or critic , or painter , or musician , or distinguished relation and friend of the above ; that they all receive she as if they have hear of she from their early infancy ; that they press she to have tea , and strawberry , and claret?cup , and cake , and ask she what she think of this picture or that poem ; that they live in grim , smut?engraine house in Bloomsbury , or rose?grown cottage at Hampstead , with just the same sort of weird furniture , partly japanese , partly Queen Anne , partly medieval ; with blue?and?white china and embroider chasuble stick upon the wall if they be rich , and twopenny screen and ninepenny pot if they be poor , but with no further difference ; and , finally , that they be all intimately acquaint , and speak of each other as be , or just have miss being , the most brilliant or promising specimen of whatever they happen to be . 


 at first Anne feel very shy and puzzle ; but after a few day the very vagueness which 

 she feel about all these man and woman , these artist , critic , poet , and relative , who be perpetually reappear as on a merry?go?round , nay , the very cloudiness as to the identity of these familiar face the very confusion as to whether they be one , two , or three different individual , produce in Miss Brown an indifference , an ease , almost a familiarity , like that which we may experience towards the vague , unindividual company meet on a steamer or at a hotel . 


 and little by little , out of this crowd of people who seem to look , and to dress , and to talk very much alike , venerable bearded man , who be the head of great school of painting , or poetry , or criticism , or be the papa of great offspring ; elderly , quaintly dress lady , who be somebody s wife , or mother , or sister ; youngish man , with manner at once exotically courteous , and curiously free and easy , in velveteen coat and mustard?coloured shooting?jacket or elegiac?looking dress?coat , all rise in poetry , or art , or 

 criticism ; young lady , vary from sixteen to six?and?thirty , with hair cut like medieval page , or tousle like m?nad , or tuck away under cap like eighteenth?century housekeeper , habit in limp and stayless garment , picturesque and economical , with japanese chintz for brocade , and flannel instead of stamp velvet most of which young lady appear at one period , past , present , or future , to own a connection with the Slade school , and all of whom , when not poet or painter themselves , be the belonging of some such , or madly in love with the great sonneteer such a one , or the great colourist such another ; out of all this confusion there begin gradually to detach themselves and assume consistency in Anne s mind one or two personality , some of whom attract , and some of whom repel she , as we shall see far on ; but to all these people , vague or distinct , attractive or repulsive , Miss Brown feel a kind of gratitude something , in an infinitesimal degree , of the thankfulness for undeserved kindness and courtesy which 

 constitute a large part of her love for Hamlin . 

 it be a curious state of thing , thus to be introduce by a man whom she know at once so much and so little , to this exclusive and esoteric sort of people ; and whenever the thought would come upon she how completely and utterly she , the daughter of the dockyard workman of Spezia , the former servant of the little Perrys , be foreign to all this , it make she feel alone and giddy , like one stand on a rock and watch the water below . 
 such be the condition of thing when one morning , about three week after Anne s arrival , Hamlin put upon the luncheon?table a note address to Miss Brown . 
 " it s an invitation to Mrs Argiropoulo s big party on the twenty?seventh , " he say ; " you must go , Miss Brown . she s an awful be herself ; but you ll see all the most interesting people in London at her house . Edith Spencer or Miss Pringle can take you , if Aunt Claudia feel too tired . " 

 " Aunt Claudia always feel too tired , " answer Mrs Macgregor , in a bitter little tone . Anne could not quite understand this amiable and cynical old lady , who be at once devotedly attach to her nephew , and perpetually rail at his friend . a fear seize her lest , in her vague , almost somnambulic introduction into ? sthetic society , she might have unconsciously neglect the woman who , proud of her birth as she be , request this workman s daughter to address and consider she as her aunt . 
 " oh , win t you go ? " cry Anne ; " win t you go , Mrs Macgregor ? " 
 " the fact be , " hesitate Hamlin , " that you see Mrs Argiropoulo invite comparatively few people , and " 
 " that she want only celebrity , or great folk , or pretty girl , " interrupt Aunt Claudia , with her friendly cynicism , " or , as she express it , that she want no padding . so you must go with Mrs Spencer or Miss Pringle , my dear . " 

 " but it be abominable ; it be most rude of Mrs Argiropoulo ; and I certainly win t go anywhere where Aunt Claudia have not be invite . " 
 " Nonsense , Nan , " silence the old lady ; " you re not up to this lion?hunte world yet . where there be so many genius on the loose , and so many professed beauty , there be no chair for old woman , except countess or school board manager . " 
 " but since you think Mrs Argiropoulo hateful , " persist Anne , address Hamlin , " why should you wish I to go ? you know I would much rather not ; and I think , consider her rudeness to your aunt , you ought not to wish I to go . " 
 " as you choose , Miss Brown , " cry Hamlin , peevishly . 
 " Don t be absurd , Anne you must go , " insist Mrs Macgregor . " listen : Watty have actually be addle his brain do dressmaking ; he have invent a dress for you to go to the party , so you will break his heart if you refuse . " 

 Anne look in amazement ; and Hamlin redden . 
 " I hope you will not deem it a liberty on my part , Miss Brown , " he say ; " but as I know that this invitation be come , I venture to make a sketch of the sort of dress which I think would become you , and to give it to a woman who have make dress from artist direction ; of course , if you don t think it pretty , you win t dream of put it on . but I could not resist the temptation . " 
 Miss Brown scarcely know what to say or feel : there be in she a moment s humiliation at be so completely Hamlin s property as to warrant this ; then she feel grateful and ashamed of her ingratitude . 
 " if you have show I the sketch , I daresay I could have make up the dress myself , " she say . 
 " I fear my sketch might not have be very intelligible to any one who have not experience of make such thing . " 

 " perhaps not , " answer Anne , think of 

 all the dress for Miss Curzon and the little Perrys which she have make in her day . " it be very good of you , Mr Hamlin . " 

 " what an idiot I be to let the cat out of the bag ! " exclaim Mrs Macgregor when her nephew be out of hearing . " I ve spoil your pleasure in the frock ; and there s Walter sulking because he think you win t like it . " 
 " I be very ungrateful , " say Anne , sigh as she stoop over her book , and feel all the same that she wish Hamlin would let she make up her dress herself . 

 a few day later the dressmaker come to try on the dress , or rather   perhaps because Hamlin do not wish Anne to see it before it be finish   its lining and a small amount of the greek stuff of which it be make ; but it be not till the very afternoon of Mrs Argiropoulo s party that the costume be bring home finished . Miss Brown be by this time tolerably accustomed to the eccentric garb of ? sthetic circle , and she firmly believe that it be the only one which a self?respecting 

 woman might wear ; but when she see the dress which Hamlin have design for she , she could not help shrink back in dismay . it be of that Cretan silk , not much thick than muslin , which be weave in minute wrinkle of pale yellowy white ; it be make , it seem to she , more like a night?gown than anything else , shapeless and yet cling with large and small fold , and crease like those of damp sculptor s drapery , or the garment of Mantegna s woman . 

 " I must get out a long petticoat , " say Anne , appal . 
 " oh please , ma am , no , " cry the dressmaker . " on no account an additional petticoat it would ruin the whole effect . on the contrary , you ought to remove one of those you have on , because like this the dress can t cling properly . " 
 " I win t have it cling , " cry Miss Brown , resolutely . " I will let alone the extra petticoat , but that s as much as I will do . " 

 " as you please , ma am , " answer the 

 woman , and continue adjust the limp garment with the maid s assistance . 

 Anne walk to the mirror . she be almost terrified at the figure which meet she . that colossal woman , with wrinkle drapery cling to she in half?antique , half?medieval guise , that great solemn , theatrical creature , could that be herself ? 
 " I think , " she say in despair , " that there s something very odd about it , Mrs Perkins . it look somehow all wrong . be you sure that something hasn t get unstitched ? " 
 " no indeed , madam , " answer the dressmaker , ruffle in her dignity . " I have exactly follow the design ; and , " she add , with crush effect , " as it s I who execute the most difficult design for the Lyceum , I think I may say that it could not be make differently . " 
 the lyceum ! Anne feel half petrify . what ! Hamlin be have she rig out by a stage dressmaker ! 

 " Mr Hamlin be down?stairs , Miss Brown , " 

 hesitate the maid , as Anne bade her help she out of this mass of limp stuff . " he say he would wait to see you after the dressmaker have leave , if you have no objection . " 

 " Watty want to see you in your new frock , my dear , " say Mrs Macgregor , put her head in at the door . " come along . " 
 Anne follow down?stair , gather all that uncanny white crape about she . for the first time she feel a dull anger against Hamlin . 
 he meet she in the dim drawing?room . 
 " my hair isn t do yet , " be all Miss Brown could say , tousle it with her hand . 
 " leave it like that oh , do leave it like that ! " exclaim Hamlin ; " you can t think how " and he pause and look at she , where she stand before he , stoop her massive head sullenly " you can t think how beautiful you look , Anne ! " 
 it be the first time he have call she by her christian name since that scene , long ago , in the studio at Florence . 

 " forgive I , dear Miss Brown , " he 


 apolo ? 

 gise 

 apologised 

 . " I know how such a dress must suit you , and yet it have give I quite a shock to see you in it . " 

 " it be very kind of you to have it make for I , " say Anne , " and the stuff be very pretty also ; and and I be so glad you like I in it . " 
 Hamlin kiss her hand . he be more than usually handsome , and look very happy . 
 " thank you , " he say ; " I must now go home and dress for that stupid dinner?party . I will meet you at Mrs Argiropoulo s at half?past ten or eleven . I suppose Edith Spencer will call for you soon after dinner . Good?bye . " 
 he look at she with a kind of fervour , and leave the room . 

 Anne sit down . why do that dress make such a difference to he ? why do he care so much more for she because she have it on ? do he care for she only as a sort of live picture ? she think bitterly . but , after all , it be quite natural on his part to be please , since he have invent the dress . and it be 

 very good of he to have think of she at all . and thus , in a state of enjoyable repentance , she await the hour to go to Mrs Argiropoulo . 

 Mrs Spencer , a very lovable and laughable little woman , whose soul be divide between her baby and fierce rancour against all enemy of pre?raphaelitism , hereditary , in virtue of her father , Andrew Saunders , in her family , come punctually , marvellously attire in grey cashmere medieval garment , a garland of parsley and gild oak?leaves in her handsome red hair . on see Anne , who stand await she by the fireplace , she could not repress an exclamation of admiration . 
 " yes , " answer Anne , unaccustomed to have her look admire at Florence and at Coblenz ; " it be a very wonderful costume , isn t it ? Mr Hamlin design it for I . I think it be so kind of he ; don t you ? " 

 " kind ? I see nothing kind about it . Walter "   she always speak of he thus familiarly , because he have work as a youth in 

 her father s studio   " be simply head over ear in love with you , my dear . " 

 Anne shake her head . 
 " oh no , " she answer , with a sort of reason conviction , " he be merely very good to I , that s all and perhaps he like I also , of course . but that s all . " 
 " you know nothing of the world , Annie ; and still less of Walter . he have never in his life be fond of any one except when in love . I ve not know he these fifteen year for nothing . " 
 " I think you be mistaken , " say Anne , quietly . 
 " I think you be not aware , my dear girl , that you be the most beautiful woman Walter have ever see . " 
