THE COUNTESS 
 of ALBANY 


 BY 
 VERNON LEE 

 to the memory of MY FRIEND 


 MADAME JOHN MEYER , 


 I dedicate this volume , 
 so OFTEN and so LATELY TALKED over together , 
 in GRATEFUL and AFFECTIONATE REGRET . 




 PREFACE 


 in prepare this volume on the Countess of Albany   which I consider as 
 a kind of completion of my previous study of eighteenth - century 
 Italy , I have avail myself largely of Baron Alfred von Reumont 's 
 large work die Gräfin von Albany   publish in 1862 ; and of the 
 monograph , itself partially found on the foregoing , of M. St. René 
 Taillandier , entitle La Comtesse d'Albany , publish in Paris in 
 1862 . Baron von Reumont 's two volume , write twenty year ago and when 
 the generation which have come into personal contact with the Countess of 
 Albany have not yet entirely die out ; and M. St. René Taillandier 's 
 volume , which embody the result of his research into the archive of 
 the Musée Fabre at Montpellier ; might naturally be expect to have 
 exhaust all the information obtainable about the subject of their and 
 my study . this have prove to be the case very much less than might 
 have be anticipate . the publication , by Jacopo Bernardi and Carlo 
 Milanesi , of a number of letter of Alfieri to sienese friend , have 
 afford I an insight into Alfieri 's character and his relation with 
 the Countess of Albany such as be unattainable to Baron von Reumont and 
 to M. St. René Taillandier . the examination , by myself and my friend 
 Signor Mario Pratesi , of several hundred of MS . letter of the Countess 
 of Albany exist in public and private archive at Siena and at 
 Milan , have add an important amount of what I may call psychological 
 detail , overlook by Baron von Reumont and unguesse by M. St. René 
 Taillandier . I have , therefore , I trust , be able to reconstruct the 
 Countess of Albany 's spiritual likeness during the period - that of she 
 early connection with Alfieri - which my predecessor have be satisfy 
 to despatch in comparatively few page , counterbalance the thinness of 
 this portion of their biography by a degree of detail concern the 
 Countess 's latter year , and the friend with whom she then correspond , 
 which , however interesting , can not be consider as vital to the real 
 subject of their work . 

 besides the volume of Baron von Reumont and M. St. René Taillandier , I 
 have depend mainly upon Alfieri 's autobiography , edit by Professor 
 Teza , and supplement by Bernardi 's and Milanesi 's Lettere di Vittorio 
 Alfieri , publish by Le Monnier in 1862 . among english book that I 
 have put under contribution , I may mention Klose 's Memoirs of Prince 
 Charles Edward Stuart   Colburn , 1845 , Ewald 's Life and Times of 
 Prince Charles Stuart   Chapman and Hall , 1875 , and Sir Horace Mann 's 
  letter to Walpole , edit by Dr. Doran . a review , variously 
 attribute to Lockhart and to Dennistoun , in the Quarterly for 1847 , 
 have be all the more useful to I as I have be unable to procure , 
 write in Italy , the Tales of the Century , of which that paper give 
 a masterly account . 

 for various detail I must refer to Charles Dutens ' Mémoires d'un 
 Voyageur qui se repose   Paris , 1806 ; to Silvagni 's La Corte e la 
 Societ   Romana nel secolo XVIII . ; to Foscolo 's Correspondence , Gino 
 Capponi 's Ricordi and those of d'Azeglio ; to Giordani 's work and 
 Benass   Montanari 's life of Ippolito Pindemonti , besides the book 
 quote by Baron Reumont ; and for what I may call the general pervading 
 historical colouring   if indeed I have succeed in give any   of the 
 background against which I have try to sketch the Countess of Albany , 
 Charles Edward and Alfieri , I can only refer generally to what be 
 now a vague mass of detail accumulate by myself during the year of 
 preparation for my Studies of the Eighteenth Century in Italy . 

 my debt to the kindness of person who have put unpublished matter at my 
 disposal , or help I to collect various information , be a large one . 
 in the first category , I wish to express my good thank to the Director 
 of the Public Library at Siena ; to cavaliere Guiseppe Porri , a great 
 collector of autograph , in the same city ; to the Countess Baldelli and 
 Cavaliere Emilio Santarelli of Florence , who possess some most curious 
 portrait and other relic of the Countess of Albany , Prince Charles 
 Edward , and Alfieri ; and also to my friend Count Pierre Boutourline , 
 whose grandfather and great - aunt be among Madame d'Albany 's friend . 
 among those who have kindly give I the benefit of their advice and 
 assistance , I must mention foremost my friend Signor Mario Pratesi , the 
 eminent novelist ; and next to he the learn Director of the State 
 Archives of Florence , Cavaliere Gaetano Milanese , and Doctor Guido 
 Biagi , of the Biblioteca Vittorio Emanuel of Rome , without whose 
 kindness my work would have be quite impossible . 

 Florence , 
  March 15 , 1884 . 

 CHAPTER I. 

 THE BRIDE . 


 on the Wednesday or Thursday of Holy Week of the year 1772 the inhabitant 
 of the squalid and dilapidate little mountain town between Ancona and 
 Loreto be throw into great excitement by the passage of a travel 
 equipage , doubtless follow by two or three dependent chaise , of more 
 than usual magnificence . 

 the people of those part have little to do now - a - day , and must have 
 have still less during the Pontificate of his Holiness Pope Clement XIV . ; 
 and we can imagine how all the window of the unplastered house , all 
 the black and oozy doorway , must have be line with head of woman 
 and child ; how the principal square of each town , where the horse 
 be change , must have be crowd with inquisitive townsfolk and 
 peasant , whispering , as they hang about the carriage , that the great 
 traveller be the young queen of England go to meet her bridegroom ; 
 a thing to be remember in such world - forget place as these , and 
 which must have furnish the subject of conversation for month and 
 year , till that Queen of England and her bridegroom have become part 
 and parcel of the tale of the " Three Golden Oranges , " of the " King of 
 Portugal 's cowherd , " of the " wonderful little Blue Bird , " and such - like 
 story in the mind of the child of those apennine city . the Queen 
 of England go to meet her bridegroom at the Holy House of Loreto . the 
 notion , even to we , do savour strangely of the fairy tale . 

 what be , meanwhile , the thought of the beautiful little fairy 
 princess , with laugh dark eye and shin golden hair , and brilliant 
 fair skin , more brilliant for the mysterious patch of rouge upon 
 the cheek , and vermilion upon the lip , whom the more audacious or 
 fortunate of the townsfolk catch a glimpse of seat in her gorgeous 
 travel dress   for the eighteenth century be still in its stage of 
 pre - revolutionary brocade and gold lace and powder and spangle   behind 
 the curtain of the coach ? Louise , Princess of Stolberg - Gedern , and 
 ex - canoness of Mons , be , if we may judge by the crayon portrait and the 
 miniature do about that time , much more of a child than most woman of 
 nineteen . a clever and accomplished young lady , but , one would say , 
 with , as yet , more intelligence and acquire pretty little habit and 
 idea than character ; a childish woman of the world , a bright , light 
 handful of thistle - bloom . and thus , besides the confusion , the unreality 
 due to precipitation of event and change of scene , the sense that she 
 have   how long ago - day , week , or year ? in such a state time become a 
 great muddle and mystery   be actually marry by proxy , that she have 
 come the whole way from Paris , through Venice and across the sea , 
 besides be in this dream - like , phantasmagoric condition , which must 
 have make all thing seem light - it be probable that the young lady have 
 scarcely sufficient consciousness of herself as a grown - up , independent , 
 independently feel and think creature , to feel or think very 
 strongly over her situation . it be the regular thing for girl of 
 Louise of Stolberg 's rank to be put through a certain amount of rather 
 vague convent education , as she have be at mon ; to be put through a 
 certain amount of ball and party ; to be put through the formality of 
 betrothal and marriage ; all this be the half - conscious dream - then 
 would come the great wake up . and Louise of Stolberg be , most likely , 
 in a state of feeling like that which come to we with the early 
 light through the blind : pleasant , or unpleasant ? we know not which ; 
 still drowse , dream , but yet strongly conscious that in a moment we 
 shall be awake to reality . 

 there be , nevertheless , in the position of this girl something which , 
 even in these circumstance , must have compel she to think , or , at 
 all event , to meditate , however confusedly , upon the present and the 
 future . if she have in she the small spark of imagination she must 
 have feel , to an acute degree , the sort of continuous surprise , recur 
 like the tick of a clock , which haunt we sometimes with the fact that 
 it really do just happen to be ourselves to whom some curious lot , 
 some rare combination of the number in life 's lottery , have come . for 
 the man whom she be go to marry - nay , to whom , in a sense , she be 
 married already - the unknown whom she would see for the first time that 
 evening , be not the mere typical bridegroom , the mere man of rank and 
 fortune , to whom , whatever his particular individual shape and name , the 
 daughter of a high - bear but impoverished house have know herself , since 
 her childhood , to be devote . 

 Louise Maximilienne Caroline Emanuele , daughter of the late Prince 
 Gustavus Adolphus of Stolberg - Gedern , Prince of the Empire , who have 
 die , a Colonel of Maria Theresa , in the battle of Leuthen ; and of 
 Elisabeth Philippine , Countess of Horn , bear at mon in Hainaut , the 
 20th September 1752 , educate there in a convent , and subsequently 
 admit to the half - ecclesiastic , half - worldly dignity of Canoness of 
 Ste . Wandru in that town : Louise , Princess of Stolberg , now in her 
 twentieth year , have be betroth , and , a few week ago , marry by 
 proxy in Paris to Charles Edward Stuart , know to history as the Younger 
 Pretender , to popular imagination as Bonnie Prince Charlie , and to 
 society in the second half of the eighteenth century as the Count of 
 Albany . the match have be make up hurriedly - most probably without 
 consulting , or dream of consulting , the girl - by her mother , the 
 dowager Princess Stolberg , and the Duke of Fitz - James , Charles Edward 's 
 cousin . the french Minister , Duc d'Aiguillon , in one of those fit of 
 prepare Charles Edward as a weapon against England , which have more 
 than once cost the Pretender so much bitterness , and the Court of 
 Versailles so much brazenly endure shame , have intimate to the Count of 
 Albany that he have well take unto himself a wife . Charles Edward have 
 more than once refuse ; this time he accept , and his cousin Fitz - James 
 look around for a possible future Queen of England . now it happen 
 that the eld son of Fitz - James , the Marquis of Jamaica and Duke of 
 Berwick , have just marry Caroline , the second daughter of the widow of 
 Prince Gustavus Adolphus of Stolberg - Gedern ; so that the choice 
 naturally fall upon this lady 's eld sister , Louise of Stolberg , the 
 young canoness of Ste . Wandru of Mons . 

 the alliance , short of royal birth , be , in the matter of dignity , all 
 that could be wish ; the Stolbergs be one of the most illustrious 
 family of the Holy Roman Empire , in whose service they have discharge 
 many high office ; the Horns , on the other hand , be among the most 
 brilliant of the flemish aristocracy , ally to the Gonzagas of Mantua , 
 the Colonna , Orsinis , the Medina Celis , Croys , Lignes , Hohenzollerns , 
 and the house of Lorraine , reign or quasi - reigning family ; and 
 Louise of Stolberg 's mother be , moreover , on the maternal side , the 
 grand - daughter of the Earl of Elgin and Ailesbury , a Bruce , and a 
 staunch follower of King James II . such have be the inducement in the 
 eye of the Duke of Fitz - James ; and therefore in the eye of Charles 
 Edward , for whom he be commission to select a wife . the inducement 
 to the Princess of Stolberg have be even great . foremost among they 
 be probably the mere desire of rid herself , poor and live as she 
 be on the charity of the Empress - Queen , of another of the four girl 
 with whom she have be leave a widow at twenty - five . it have be a great 
 blessing to get the two eld girl , Louise and Caroline , educate , 
 house for a time , and momentarily settle in the world by their 
 admission to the rich and noble chapter of Ste . Wandru : it must have 
 be a great blessing to see the second girl marry to the son of 
 Fitz - James ; it would be a still great one to get Louise safely off her 
 hand , now that the third and fourth daughter require to be think 
 of . so far for the desirability of any marriage . this particular 
 marriage with Prince Charles Edward be , moreover , such as to tempt the 
 vanity and ambition of a lady like the widow Princess of Stolberg , 
 conscious of her high rank , and conscious , perhaps painfully conscious 
 of the difficulty of live up to its requirement . the Count of 
 Albany 's grandfather have be King of England ; his father , the Pretender 
 James , have live with royal state in his exile at Rome , recognise as 
 reign Sovereign by the Pope , and even , every now and then , by France 
 and Spain . no Government have recognise Charles Edward as King of 
 England ; but , on the other hand , Charles Edward have virtually be king 
 of Scotland during the ' 45 ; he have be promise the help of France to 
 restore he to his right ; and although that help have never be 
 satisfactorily give in the past , who could tell whether it might 
 not be give at any moment in the future ? the up and down of politic 
 bring all sort of unexpected necessity ; and why should the french 
 Government , which have ignominiously kidnap and bundle off Charles 
 Edward in 1748 , have send for he again only a year ago , have urge he 
 to marry , unless it have some scheme for reinstate he in England ? the 
 Duke of Fitz - James have doubtless urge these consideration ; he have not 
 lay much weight on the fact that Charles Edward be thirty - two year 
 old than his propose wife ; still less be it probable that he have bid 
 the Princess of Stolberg consider that his royal kinsman be say to be 
 neither of very good health , nor of very agreeable disposition , nor of 
 very temperate habit ; or , if such idea be present to the Princess 
 Stolberg , she put they behind she . be it as it may , these be matter 
 for the judicious consideration of a mother ; not , certainly , for the 
 thought of a daughter . the judicious mother decide that such a match 
 be a good one ; perhaps , in her heart , she be even overwhelm by the 
 glory which this daughter of her be permit by Heaven to add to all 
 the glory of the illustrious Stolbergs and Horns . anyhow , she accept 
 eagerly ; so eagerly as to forget both gratitude and prudence : for so far 
 from consult her benefactress , Maria Theresa , about the advisability 
 of this marriage , or ask her sovereign permission for a step 
 which might draw upon the Empress - Queen some disagreeable diplomatic 
 correspondence with England , the Princess of Stolberg keep the matter 
 close , and do not even announce the marriage to the Court of Vienna ; 
 yet she must have foresee what occur , namely , that Maria Theresa , 
 mortify not merely in her dignity as a sovereign , but also , and 
 perhaps more , in her rule passion of benevolent meddlesomeness , would 
 suspend the pension which form a large portion of the Princess 's 
 income , and compel she to the abject apology before restore it . the 
 marriage with Charles Edward Stuart be worth all that ! 

 Louise of Stolberg be probably well aware of the extreme glory of the 
 marriage for which she have be reserve . the Fitz - Jameses , in virtue of 
 their illegitimate descent from James II . , consider themselves and 
 be consider as a sort of prince of the blood ; and as such they 
 doubtless impress Louise with a great notion of the glory of the 
 Stuarts , and the absolute legitimacy of their claim . on his marriage 
 Charles Edward assume the title , and attempt to assume the position , 
 of King of England ; so his bride must have consider herself as the 
 wife not merely of the Count of Albany , but of Charles III . , King of 
 Great Britain , France , and Ireland . she be go to be a queen ! we 
 must try , we democratic creature of a time when king and queen may 
 perfectly be adventurer and adventuress , to put ourselves in the 
 place of this young lady of a century ago , bring up as a dignitary 
 of a chapter into which admission depend entirely upon the number 
 and quality of quartering of the candidate 's escutcheon , under a 
 superior - the Abbess of Ste . Wandru - who be the sister of the late 
 Emperor Francis , the sister - in - law of Maria Theresa ; we must try and 
 conceive an institution something between a school , a sisterhood , and a 
 club , in which the rule idea , the source of all dignity , jealousy , 
 envy , and triumph , be greatness of birth and connection ; we must try 
 and do this in order to understand what , to Louise of Stolberg , be the 
 full value of the fact of become the wife of Charles Edward Stuart . 
 one hundred and twelve year ago , and seventeen year before the great 
 revolution which yawn , an almost impassable gulf , between we and the 
 man and woman of the past , a woman , a girl of nineteen , and a canoness 
 of Ste . Wandru of Mons , need have be of no base temper if , on the 
 eve of such a wedding as this one , her mind have be full of only one 
 idea : the idea , monotonous and drowningly loud like some big cathedral 
 bell , " I shall be a queen . " but if Louise of Stolberg be , as be most 
 probable , in some such a state of vague exultation , we must remember 
 also that there may well have enter into such exultation an element 
 with which even we , and even the most austerely or snobbishly democratic 
 among we , might fully have sympathise . her mother , her sister , her 
 brother - in - law , and the old Duke of Fitz - James , who have make up her 
 marriage and marry she by proxy , and every other person who have 
 approach she during the last month , must have be fill the mind of 
 Louise of Stolberg with tale of the ' 45 and of the heroism of Prince 
 Charlie . and her mind , which , as afterwards appear , be romantic , 
 fascinate by eccentricity and genius , may easily have become enamour 
 of the bridegroom who await she , the last of so brilliant and ill - fat 
 a race , the hero of Gladsmuir and Falkirk , at whose approach the 
 Londoners have shut their shop in terror , and the hanoverian usurper 
 order his yacht to lie ready moor at the Tower step ; the more than 
 royal young man whom   as the Jacobites doubtless tell she   only the 
 foolish and traitorous obstinacy of his follower have prevent from 
 reinstate his father on the throne of England . historical figure , 
 especially those of a heroic sort , remain picture in man 's mind at 
 their moment of glory ; and this be the case particularly with the Young 
 Pretender , who have disappear into well - nigh complete mystery after his 
 wonderful exploit and hairbreadth escape of the ' 45 ; so that in the 
 eye of Louise of Stolberg the man she be about to marry appear most 
 probably but little change from the brilliant youth who have march on 
 foot at the head of his army towards London , who have hold court at 
 Holyrood and roam in disguise about the Hebrides . 

 still , it be difficult to imagine that as the hour of meeting draw 
 nearer , the little Princess , as her travel carriage toil up the 
 Apennine valley , do not feel some terror of the future and the 
 unknown . the spring come late to those region ; in the middle of April 
 the blackthorn be scarcely bud on the rock , the violet be still 
 plentiful underneath the leafless roadside hedge ; scarcely a faint 
 yellow , more like autumn that spring , be begin to tinge the scraggy 
 outline of the poplar , which rise in spectral regiment out of the 
 river bed . wherever the valley widen , or the road gain some hill - crest , 
 a huge peak white with newly - fall snow confront you , close in the 
 view , bring bleakness and bitterness curiously home to the feeling . 
 these valley , torrent - track between the steep rock of livid basalt or 
 bright red sandstone , bare as a bone or thinly clothe with ilex and 
 juniper scrub , be inexpressibly lonely and sad , especially at this time 
 of year . you feel imprison among the rock in a sort of catacomb open 
 to the sky , where the shadow gather in the early afternoon , and only 
 the light on the snow - peak and on the high - sailing cloud tell you 
 that the sun be still in the heaven . village there seem none ; and you 
 may drive for an hour without meet more than a stray peasant cutting 
 scrub or quarry gravel on the hill - side , a train of mule carry 
 charcoal or faggot ; the town be far between , bleak , black , filthy , 
 and such as only to make you feel all the more poignantly the utter 
 desolateness of these mountain . no sad way of enter Italy can 
 well be imagine than land at Ancona and cross through the 
 Apennines to Rome in the early spring . to a girl accustom to the fat 
 flatness of Flanders , to the market - bustle of a Flemish provincial town , 
 this journey must have be overwhelmingly dreary and dismal . during 
 those long hour drag up these Apennine valley , do a shadow fall 
 across the mind of the pretty , fair - haired , brilliant - complexion 
 little canoness of Mons , a shadow like the cold melancholy blue which 
 fill the valley between the sun - smite peak ? and do it ever occur 
 to she , as the horse be change in the little post - town , that it be 
 in honour of Holy Week that the savage - looking bearded man , the big , 
 brawny , madonna - like woman have get on their good clothe ? do it strike 
 she that the unplastered church - front be drape with black , the 
 street strew with laurel and box , as for a funeral , that the bell 
 be silent in their tower ? perhaps not ; and yet when , a few year 
 later , the Countess of Albany be already will not to say that her married 
 life have be just such as befit a woman who have go to the altar on 
 Good Friday , she must have remember , and the remembrance must have 
 seem fraught with ill oman , that last day of her girlhood , travel 
 through the black deserted valley of the March , through the 
 world - forget mountain - town with their hush bell and black - drape 
 church and funereally strew street . 

 at Loreto - where , as a good Catholic , the Princess Louise of Stolberg 
 doubtless pray for a blessing on her marriage , in the great sanctuary 
 which enclose with silver and carve marble the little house of the 
 Virgin - at Loreto the bride be meet by a Jacobite dignitary , Lord 
 Carlyle , and five servant in the crimson livery of England . at 
 Macerata , one of the large town of the March of Ancona , she be 
 await by her bridegroom . a noble family of the province , the 
 Compagnoni - Marefoschis , one of whom , a cardinal , be an old friend of 
 the Stuarts , have place their palace at the disposal of the royal pair . 
 we most of we know what such palace , in small italian provincial town 
 south of the Apennines , be apt to be ; huge , gloomy , shapeless mass of 
 brickwork and mouldering plaster , something between a mediæval fortress 
 and a convent ; great black archway , where the refuse of the house , the 
 filth of the town , have peaceably accumulate   and how much more in those 
 day ; magnificent statue staircase give over to the few servant 
 who have replace the armed bravos of two century ago ; long suite 
 of room , vast , resound like so many church , glaze in the last 
 century with tiny square of bad glass , through which the light 
 come green and thick as through sea - water ; carpet still despise 
 as a new - fangled luxury from France ; the wall , not cheerful with 
 eighteenth - century french panel and hanging , but cover with big naked 
 frescoed man and woman , or fade arra ; few fire - place , but those few 
 enormous , look like a huge red cavern in the room . the Marefoschis 
 have get together all their good furniture and plate , and the palace be 
 fill with torch and wax light ; a funereal illumination in a 
 funereal place , it must have seem to the little Princess of Stolberg , 
 fresh from the brilliant nattiness of the parisian house of the time of 
 Louis XV . 

 the bride alight ; a small , plump , well - proportion , rather childish 
 creature , with still half - form childish feature , a trifle snub , a 
 trifle soulless , very pretty , tender , light - hearted ; a charming little 
 creature , very well make to steal folk 's heart unconscious to 
 themselves and to herself . 

 the bridegroom meet she . a fade , but extremely characteristic crayon 
 portrait , the companion of the one of which I have already speak , now 
 in the possession of Cavaliere Emilio Santarelli   the only man still 
 live who can remember that same Louise d'Albany , a portrait evidently 
 take at this time , have show I what that bridegroom must have be . 
 the man who meet Louise of Stolberg at Macerata as her husband and 
 master , the man who have once be Bonnie Prince Charlie , be tall , 
 big - boned , gaunt , and prematurely bow for his age of fifty - two ; 
 dress usually , and doubtless on this occasion , with the blue ribbon 
 and star , in a suit of crimson water silk , which throw up a red 
 reflection into his red and bloated face . a red face , but of a livid , 
 purplish red suffuse all over the heavy furrow forehead to where it 
 meet the white wig , all over the flabby cheek , hang in big loose 
 fold upon the short , loose - fold red neck ; massive feature , but 
 coarsen and draw ; and dull , thick , silent - look lip , of purplish 
 red scarce redder than the red skin ; pale blue eye tend to a watery 
 greyness , leaden , vague , sad , but with angry streaking of red ; 
 something inexpressibly sad , gloomy , helpless , vacant and debase in the 
 whole face : such be the man who await Louise of Stolberg in the 
 Compagnoni - Marefoschi palace at Macerata , and who , on Good Friday the 
 17th of April 1772 , wed she in the palace chapel and sign his name 
 in the register as Charles III . , King of Great Britain , France , and 
 Ireland . 




 CHAPTER II . 

 the BRIDEGROOM . 


 on the Wednesday after Easter the bride and bridegroom make their solemn 
 entry into Rome ; the two travel carriage of the Prince and of the 
 Princess be draw by six horse ; four gala coach , carry the 
 attendant of Charles Edward and of his brother the Cardinal Duke of 
 York , follow behind , and the street be clear by four outrider 
 dress in scarlet with the white Stuart cockade . the house to which 
 Louise of Stolberg , now Louise d'Albany , or rather , as she sign 
 herself at this time , Louise R. , be conduct after her five day ' 
 wedding journey , have pass through several hand since belong to the 
 Sacchettis , the Muti Papazzurris , and now - a - day to the family of 
 About 's charming and unhappy Tolla Ferraldi . clement XI . have give or 
 lend it to the Elder Pretender : James III . , as he be style in Italy , 
 have settle in it about 1719 with his beautiful bride Maria Clementina 
 Sobieska , romantically filch by her Jacobites from the convent at 
 Innsbruck , where the Emperor Charles VI . have hop to restrain she from 
 so compromise a match ; here , in the year 1720 , Charles Edward have be 
 bear and have his baby finger kiss by the whole sacred college ; and 
 here the so - call King of England have die at last , a melancholy 
 hypochondriac , in 1766 . the palace close in the narrow end of the 
 square of the Santissimi Apostoli , stately and quiet with its various 
 palace , Colonna , Odescalchi , and whatever else their name , and its 
 pillare church front . there be a certain aristocratic serenity about 
 that square , separate , like a big palace yard , from the bustling Corso 
 in front ; yet to I there remain , a tradition of my childhood , a sort 
 of grotesque and horrid suggestiveness connect with this peaceful and 
 princely corner of Rome . for , many year ago , when the square of the 
 Santissimi Apostoli be still periodically strew with sand that the 
 Pope might not be jolt when his golden coach drive up to the church , 
 and when the name of Charles Edward and his Countess be curiously 
 mix up in my brain with those of Charles the First and Mary Queen of 
 Scots , there use to be in a little street lead out of the square 
 towards the Colonna Gardens , a dark recess in the blank church - wall , an 
 embrasure , shelter by a pen - house roof and raise like a stage a few 
 steep step above the pavement ; and in it loom , strap to a chair , 
 dark in the shadow , a creature in a long black robe and a skull cap 
 draw close over his head ; a vague , contort , writhe and gibber 
 horror , of whose St. Vitus twisting and mouthing we child scarcely 
 venture to catch a glimpse as we hurry up the narrow street , follow 
 by the bestial cry and moan of the solitary maniac . this weird and 
 grotesque sight , more weird and more grotesque see through a muddled 
 childish fancy and through the haze of year , have remain associate in 
 my mind with that particular corner of Rome , where , with window look 
 down upon that street , upon that blank church - wall with its little 
 black recess , the palace of the Stuarts close in the narrow end of the 
 square of the Santissimi Apostoli . and now , I can not help see a 
 certain strange appropriateness in the fact that the image of that 
 mouth and gesticulate half - witte creature should be connect in 
 my mind with the house to which , with pomp of six - horse coach and 
 scarlet outrider , Charles Edward Stuart conduct his bride . 

 illustration : CHARLES EDWARD STUART 
  from a pastel , painter unknown , once in the possession of the 
  heir of the Countess of Albany 's heir fabre . now in the possession 
  of Mrs. Horace Walpole , of Heckfield Place , Winchfield , Hants . 

 for the beautiful and brilliant youth who have secretly leave that palace 
 twenty - four year before to re - conquer his father 's kingdom , the gentle 
 and gallant and chivalric young prince of whose irresistible manner and 
 voice the canny chieftain have vainly bid each other beware when he 
 land with his handful of friend and call the Highlanders to arm ; 
 the patient and heroic exile , sing to his friend when the sea wash 
 over their boat and the hanoverian soldier surround their cavern or 
 hovel , who have silently give Miss Macdonald that solemn kiss which she 
 treasure for more than fifty year in her strong heart - that Charles 
 Edward Stuart be now a creature not much worthy and not much less 
 repulsive than the poor idiot whom I still see , fling about his 
 palsy hand and gobble with his speechless mouth , beneath the 
 window of the Stuart palace . the taste for drinking , so strange in a 
 man bring up to the age of twenty - three among the proverbially sober 
 Italians , have arise in Charles Edward , a most excusable ill habit in 
 one continually expose to wet and cold , frequently sleep on the damp 
 ground , ill - feed , anxious , wear out by over - exertion in fly before his 
 enemy , during those frightful month after the defeat at Culloden , 
 when , with a price of thirty thousand pound upon his head , he have 
 lurk in the fastness of the Hebrides . we hear that on the eve of his 
 final escape from Scotland , his host , Macdonald of Kingsburgh , prevent 
 the possible miscarriage of all their perilous plan only by smash 
 the punch - bowl over which the Pretender , already more than half drunk , 
 have insist upon spend the night . still more significant be the 
 fact , record by Hugh Macdonald of Balshair , that when Charles Edward 
 be conceal in a hovel in the isle of South Uist , the prince and his 
 faithful follower continue drink   the word be Balshair 's own 
 " for three day and three night . " hard drinking be , we all know , a 
 necessary accomplishment in the Scotland of those day ; and hard 
 drinking , we must all of we admit , may well have be the one comfort 
 and resource of a man undergo the frightful mental and bodily 
 misery of those month of lie at bay . but Charles Edward do not 
 relinquish the habit when he be back again in safety and luxury . 
 strangely compound of an Englishman and a Pole , the polish element , 
 the brilliant and light - hearted chivalry , the cheerful and youthfully 
 wayward heroism which he have inherit from the Sobieskis , seem to 
 constitute the whole of Charles Edward 's nature when he be young and , 
 for all his revers , still hopeful ; as he grow old , as defer 
 and disappointed hope , and endure ignominy , make he a middle - aged 
 man before his time , then also do the other hereditary strain , the 
 morose obstinacy , the gloomy brutality of James II . and of his father 
 begin to appear , and gradually obliterate every trace of what have be 
 the splendour and charm of the Prince Charlie of the ' 45 . disappoint 
 of the assistance of France , which have egg he to this great enterprise 
 only to leave he shamefully in the lurch , Charles Edward have , immediately 
 upon the peace of Aix la Chapelle , become an embarrassing guest of 
 Louis XV . , and a guest of whom the victorious English be continually 
 require the ignominious dismissal ; until , weary by the indifference 
 to all hint and order to free France from his compromise presence , 
 the Court of Versailles have descend to the incredible baseness of 
 have the Prince kidnap as he be go to the opera , bind hand and 
 foot , carry like a thief to the fortress of Vincennes , and then 
 conduct to the frontier like a suspect though unconvicted swindler , 
 or other public nuisance . 

 this indignity , come close upon the irreparable blow deal to the 
 Jacobite cause by the stupid selfishness which impel Charles Edward 's 
 young brother to become a romish priest and a cardinal , appear to 
 have definitively decide the extraordinary change in the character of 
 the Young Pretender . during the many year of skulking , often completely 
 lose to the sight both of Jacobite adherent and of hanoverian spy , 
 which follow upon that outrage of the year 1748 , the few glimpse 
 which we obtain of Charles Edward show we only a precociously aged , 
 brutish and brutal sot , obstinate in disregard all effort to restore 
 he to a worthy life , yet not obstinate enough to refuse unnecessary 
 pecuniary aid from the very government and person by whom he have be 
 so cruelly outraged . we hear that Charles Edward 's confessor , with whom , 
 despite his secret abjuration of Catholicism , he continue to associate , 
 be a notorious drunkard ; and that the mistress with whom he live for 
 many year , and whom he even pass off as his wife , be also addict 
 to drinking ; nay , Lord Elcho be say to have witness a tipsy squabble 
 between the Young Pretender and Miss Walkenshaw , the lady in question , 
 across the table of a low Paris tavern . the report of the many spy 
 whom the English Government set everywhere on his trace be constant 
 and unanimous in one item of information : the Prince begin to drink 
 early in the morning , and be invariably dead drunk by the evening ; nay , 
 some letter of Cardinal York , address to an unknown Jacobite , speak 
 of the " nasty bottle , that go on but too much , and certainly must at 
 last kill he . " but , although drunkenness undoubtedly do much to 
 obliterate whatever still remain of the hero of the ' 45 , it be 
 itself only one of the proof of the strange metamorphosis which have 
 take place in his character . we can not admit the plea of some of his 
 biographer , who would save his honour at the price of his reason . 
 Charles Edward be the victim neither of an hereditary vice nor of a 
 mental disease ; drink be in his case not a form of madness , but merely 
 the rule passion of a break - spirited and degraded nature . he have the 
 power when he marry , and even much later in life , when he send for his 
 illegitimate daughter , of refrain from his usual excess ; his will , 
 impair though it be , still exist , and what be want in the sad 
 second half of his career be not resolution , but conscience , pride , an 
 ideal , anything which might beget the desire of reform . the curious 
 mixture of brow - beat moroseness with a brazen readiness to accept and 
 even extort favour , he would appear , as he cease to be young , to have 
 gradually inherit from his father ; he be ready to live on the alm of 
 the French Court , while never lose an opportunity of declaiming 
 against the ignoble treatment which that same Court have inflict on 
 he . he become sordid and grasp in money matter , basely beg 
 for money , which he do not require , from those who , like Gustavus III . 
 of Sweden , discover only too late that he be demean himself from 
 avarice and not from necessity . while keep a certain maudlin sentiment 
 about his exploit and those of his follower , which manifest itself 
 in cruelly pathetic scene when , as in his old age , people talk to he 
 of the Highlands and the Rebellion ; he be wholly without any sense of 
 his obligation towards man who have expose their life and happiness for 
 he , of the duty which bind he to repay their devotion by docility to 
 their advice , by sacrifice of his inclination , or even by such mere 
 decency of behaviour as would spare they the bitterness of allegiance to 
 a disreputable and foul - mouthed sot . but , until the moment when old and 
 dying , he place himself in the strong hand of his natural daughter , 
 Charles Edward seem to have be , however obstinate in his favouritism , 
 incapable of any real affection . when his brother Henry become a priest 
 Charles hold aloof for long year both from he and from his father ; and 
 this resentment of what be after all a mere piece of bigote folly , may 
 be partially excuse by the fact that the identification of his family 
 with Popery have seriously damage the prospect of Jacobitism . but the 
 lack of all lovingness in his nature be prove beyond possibility of 
 doubt by the brutal manner in which , while obstinately refuse to part 
 with his mistress at the earnest entreaty of his adherent , he explain 
 to their envoy Macnamara that his refusal be due merely to resentment 
 at any attempt interference in his concern ; but that , for the rest , 
 he have not the small affection or consideration remain for 
 the woman they wish to make he relinquish . as if all the stupid 
 selfishness breed of century of royalty have accumulate in this man 
 who might be king only through his own and his adherent ' magnanimity , 
 Charles Edward seem , in the second period of his life , to feel as 
 if he have a right over everything , and nobody else have a right over 
 anything ; all sense of reciprocity be go ; he would accept devotion , 
 self - sacrifice , generosity , charity - nay , he would even insist upon 
 they ; but he would give not one tittle in return ; so that , forgetful of 
 the heroism and clemency and high spirit of his early day , one might 
 almost think that his indignant answer to Cardinal de Tenein , who 
 offer he England and Scotland if he would cede Ireland to France , 
 " everything or nothing , Monsieur le Cardinal ! " be dictate less by the 
 indignation of an Englishman than by the stubborn graspingness of a 
 Stuart . his further behaviour towards Miss Walkenshaw show the same 
 indifference to everything except what he consider his own right . he 
 have crudely admit that he care nothing for she , that it be only 
 because his adherent wish her dismissal that he do not pack she off ; 
 and subsequently he seem to have give himself so little thought either 
 for his mistress or for his child by she , that , without the benevolence 
 of his brother the Cardinal , they might have starve . but when , after 
 long endurance of his jealousy and brutality , after be watch like 
 a prisoner and beat like a slave , the wretched woman at length take 
 refuge in a convent , Charles Edward 's rage know no bound ; and he 
 summon the French Government , despite his old quarrel with it , to 
 kidnap and send back the woman over whom he have no legal right , and 
 certainly no moral one , with the obstinacy and violence of a drunken 
 navvy clamour for the wife whom he have well - nigh do to death . 
 beyond the mere intemperance and the violence bear of intemperance which 
 make Charles Edward 's name a byword and serve the hanoverian dynasty 
 well than all the Duke of Cumberland 's gibbet , there be at the 
 bottom of the Pretender 's character - his second character at least , his 
 character after the year 1750 - heartlessness and selfishness , an absence 
 of all ideal and all gratitude , much more morally repulsive than any 
 mere vice , and of which the vice which publicly degrade he be the 
 result much more than the cause . the curse of kingship in an age 
 when royalty have lose all utility , the habit of irresponsibility , of 
 indifference , the habit of always claim and never give justice , 
 love , self - sacrifice , all the good thing of this world , this curse have 
 lurk , an evil strain , in the nature of this king without a kingdom , 
 and have gradually blight and make hideous what have seem an almost 
 heroic character . Royal - soule Charles Edward Stuart have certainly 
 be in his youth ; brilliant with all those virtue of endurance , 
 clemency , and affability which the early eighteenth century still 
 fondly associate with the divine right of king ; and royal - soule , hard 
 and weak with all the hardness and weakness , the self - indulgence , 
 obstinacy , and thoughtlessness for other of effete race of king , he 
 have become no less certainly , in the second part of his life ; brand 
 with God 's own brand of unworthiness , which signify that a people , or 
 a class , or a family , be doom to extinction . 

 such be the man to whom the easy - go habit of the world , the 
 perfectly self - righteous indifference to a woman 's happiness or honour 
 of the well - breed people of that day , give over as a partner for life a 
 half - educate , worldly - ignorant and absolutely will - less young girl of 
 nineteen and a half , who doubtless consider herself extremely 
 fortunate in be choose for so brilliant a match . 

 there be a glamour , even for we , connect with the name of Charles 
 Edward Stuart ; in his youth he form a brilliant speck of romantic light 
 in that dull eighteenth century , a spot of light surround by the halo 
 of glory of the devotion which he inspire and the enthusiasm which he 
 leave behind he . we feel , in a way , grateful to he almost as we might 
 feel grateful to a clever talker , a beautiful woman , a bright day , as to 
 something pleasing and enliven to our fancy . but the brilliant effect 
 which have please we be like some gorgeous pageant connect with the 
 worship of a stupid and ferocious divinity ; nay , rather , if we let our 
 thought dwell upon the matter , if we remember how , while the prison 
 and ship - hold be pestilent with the Jacobite man and woman pen up 
 like cattle in obscene promiscuity , while the mutilate corps be 
 lie still green , pile up under the bog turf of Culloden , while so 
 many of the brave man of Scotland , who have supplicate the Young 
 Pretender not to tempt they to a hopeless enterprise , be cheerfully 
 mount the scaffold " for so sweet a prince , " Charles Edward be 
 dance at Versailles in his crimson silk dress and diamond , with 
 his black - eyed boast the eldest - bear Princess of France . Nay , bad , 
 if we remember how the man , for whose love and whose right so much 
 needless agony have be expend , let himself become a disgrace to the 
 very memory of the man who have die for he : if we bear all this in 
 mind , Charles Edward seem to become a mere irresponsible and fated 
 representative of some evil creed ; the idol , at first fair - shapen and 
 smile , then hideous and loathsome , to which human sacrifice be 
 bring in solemnity ; a glitter idol of silver , or a foul idol of 
 rotten wood , but without nerve and mind to perceive the weeping all 
 around , the sop of blood at its foot . and now , after the sacrifice of so 
 many hundred of brave man to this one man , come the less tragic , less 
 heroic , perfectly legitimate and correct sacrifice to he of a pretty 
 young woman , not brave and not magnanimous , but very fit for innocent 
 enjoyment and very fit for honourable love . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 REGINA APOSTOLORUM . 


 Charles Edward have refrain from drink , or at least refrain from any 
 excess , in honour of his marriage . perhaps the notion that France be 
 again take he up , a notion well - found since France have bid he 
 marry and have an heir , and the recollection of the near miscarriage of 
 all his project , thank to have present himself , a year before , to 
 the french Minister so drunk that he could neither speak nor be speak 
 to , perhaps the old hope of become after all a real king , have turn 
 the Pretender into a temporarily - reform character . or , perhaps , weary 
 of the life of melancholy solitude , of debauched squalor , of the moral 
 pig - stye in which he have be rot so many year , the idea of 
 decency , of dignity , of society , of a wife and child and friend , 
 may have make he capable of a strong resolution . perhaps , also , the 
 unfamiliar , wonderful presence of a beautiful and refined young woman , 
 of something to adore , or at least to be jealous and vain of , may have 
 waken whatever still remain of the gallant and high - spirited Polish 
 nature in this morose and besotten old Stuart . be this as it may , 
 Charles Edward , however degrade , be able to command himself when he 
 choose , and , for one reason or another , he do choose to command himself 
 and behave like a tolerably decent man and husband during the first few 
 month follow on his marriage . besides the redness of his face , the 
 leaden suffuse look of his eye , the vague air of degradation all about 
 he , there be perhaps nothing , at first , that reveal to Louise , Queen 
 of Great Britain , France , and Ireland , that her husband be a drunkard 
 and well - nigh a maniac . engage he certainly could not have be , 
 however much he try   and we know he try hard   to show his full 
 delight at have get so charming a little wife ; indeed , it be easy to 
 imagine that if anything might inspire even a properly educate and 
 high - bear young flemish or german lady of the eighteenth century with 
 somewhat of a sense of loathing , it must have be the assiduity and 
 endearment of a man such as Charles Edward . but Louise of Stolberg have 
 doubtless absorb , from her mother , from her old fellow - canonesse , 
 nay , from the very school - girl in the convent where she have be 
 educate , all proper view , negative and positive , on the subject of 
 marriage ; nor must we give to a girl who be probably still too much of 
 a child , too much of an unromantic little woman of the world , undeserved 
 pity on account of degradation which she have most probably , as yet , not 
 sufficient moral nerve to appreciate . her husband be old , he be ugly , 
 he be not attractive ; he may have be tiresome and rather loathsome in 
 his constant attendance ; he may even have smell of brandy every now and 
 then ; but as marriage have be invent in order to give young woman a 
 position in the world , husband be not expect to be much more than 
 drawback to the situation ; and as to the sense of life - long dependence 
 upon an individual , as to the desire for love and sympathy , it be still 
 too early in the eighteenth century , and perhaps , also , too early in the 
 life of a half - flemish , half - german girl , very childish still in aspect , 
 and bring up in the worldly wisdom of a noble chapter of canonesse , 
 to expect anything of that kind . 

 there must , however , from the very beginning , have be something unreal 
 and uncanny in the girl 's situation . the huge old palace , cram with 
 property of dead Stuarts and Sobieskis , with its royal throne and daïs 
 in the ante - room , its servant in the royal livery of England , must 
 have be full of rather lugubrious memory . here James III . of England 
 and VIII . of Scotland have mop away his bitter old age ; here , year 
 and year ago , Charles Edward 's mother , the beautiful and brilliant 
 grand - daughter of John Sobieski , have pin away , bully and cajole back 
 from the convent in which she have take refuge , perpetually outraged by 
 the violence of her husband and the insolence of his mistress ; it be an 
 ill - omen sort of place for a bride . around extend the sombre and 
 squalid Rome of the second half of the eighteenth century , with its 
 huge ostentatious rococo palace and church , its straggle , black 
 and filthy street , its ruin still embed in nettle and filth , its 
 population seemingly compose only of monk and priest   for all man of 
 the middle - class wear the black dress and short hair of the clergy , 
 or of half - savage peasant and workman , bearded creature , in wonderful 
 embroider vest and scarf , look exceedingly like brigand , as 
 Bartolomeo Pinelli etch they even some thirty year later . a town 
 where every doorway be a sewer by day and a possible hiding - place for 
 thief by night ; where no woman durst cross the street alone after 
 dusk , and no man dare to walk home unattended after nine or ten ; where , 
 drive about in her gild state - coach of an afternoon , the Pretender 's 
 bride must often have meet a knot of people convey a stabbed man   the 
 average give more than one assassination per day   to the near barber 
 or apothecary , the blood of the murder man mingling , in the black ooze 
 about the rough cobble - stone over which the coach jolt , with the 
 blood trickle from the disembowel sheep hang , ghastly in their 
 fleece , from the hook outside the butcher ' and cheesemonger ' shop ; 
 or return home at night from the opera , amid the flare of the 
 footman 's torch , must have hear the distant cry of some imprudent 
 person struggle in the hand of marauder ; or , again , on Sundays and 
 holiday have be stop by the crowd gather round the pillory where 
 some too easy - go husband sit crown with a paper - cap in a hail - storm 
 of mud and egg - shell and fruit - peeling , round the scaffold where some 
 petty offender be be flog by the hangman , until the fortunate 
 appearance of a clement cardinal or the rage of the sympathise mob put 
 a stop to the proceeding . barbarous as we remember the Rome of the 
 pope , we must imagine it just a hundred time more barbarous , more 
 squalid , picturesque , filthy , and unsafe if we would know what it be a 
 hundred year ago . 

 but in this barbarous Rome there be thing more beautiful and 
 wonderful to a young Flemish lady of the eighteenth century than they 
 could possibly be to we , indifferent and much - cultured creature of the 
 nineteenth century , who know that most art be corrupt and most music 
 trashy . the private gallery of Rome be then in process of formation ; 
 picture which have hang in dwelling - room be be assemble in those 
 beautiful gild and stuccoed saloon , with their out - look on to the 
 cloister of a court , or the ilex top or orange espalier of a garden , 
 fill with the faint splash of the fountain outside , the spectral 
 silvery chiming of musical clock , where , unconscious of the thousand of 
 being who would crowd in there arm with guide - book and opera - glass 
 in the day to come , only stray foreigner be to be meet , foreigner 
 who most likely be daintily embroider and powdered aristocrat from 
 England or Germany , if they be not man like Winckelmann , or Goethe , or 
 Beckford . it be the great day , also , for excavation ; the vast majority 
 of antique which we now see in Rome have be dig up at that period ; 
 and among the ilex of the Ludovisi and Albani garden , among the laurel 
 and rough grass of the Vatican hill , portico be be build , and 
 long gallery and temple - like place , where a whole people of marble 
 might live among the newly - find mosaic and carve altar and vas . 
 moreover , there be at that time in Rome a thing of which there be now 
 less in Rome than anywhere , perhaps , in the world - a thing for which 
 English and Germans come expressly to Italy : there be music . a large 
 proportion of the good new opera be always bring out in Rome - always 
 four or five new one in each season ; and the young singer from the 
 conservatorio of Naples come to the ecclesiastical city , where no 
 actress be suffer , to begin their career in the hoop skirt and 
 stomacher , and powder toupé with which the eighteenth century be 
 will not to conceive the heroine of ancient Greece and Rome . the bride of 
 Charles Edward be herself a tolerable musician , and she have a taste for 
 painting and sculpture which develop into a perfect passion in 
 after life ; so , with respect to art , there be plenty to amuse she . 

 it be different with regard to society . by insist upon royal honour 
 such as have be enjoy by his father , but which the Papal Court , 
 anxious to keep on good term with England , absolutely refuse to give 
 he , the Pretender have virtually cut himself and his wife out of all 
 roman society ; for he would not know the noble on a footing of equality , 
 and they , on the other hand , dare know he on no other . the great 
 entertainment in the palace where Charles Edward have so often dance , 
 the admire of all beholder , in his boyhood , be not for the Count and 
 Countess of Albany . there remain the theatre and public ball , to 
 which the Pretender conduct his wife with the assiduity of a man 
 immensely vain of have on his arm a woman far too young and too pretty 
 for his desert . and , besides this , there be a certain amount of vague , 
 shift foreign society , noble on the loose , and young man on their 
 grand tour , who mostly consider that a visit to the Palazzo Muti , or 
 at least a seemingly accidental meeting and introduction in the lobby of 
 a theatre or the garden of a villa , be an indispensable part of their 
 sight - seeing . such people as these be the guest of the Palazzo Muti ; 
 and , together with a few Jacobite hanger - on , constitute the fluctuating 
 little Court of Louise , queen of Great Britain , France , and Ireland , 
 whom the people of Rome , hearing of the throne and daïs in the ante - room 
 and of the royal ceremonial in the palace near the Santissimi Apostoli , 
 usually speak of as the Regina Apostolorum ; while only a very few , who 
 have approach that charming little blonde lady , correct the title to 
 that of Queen of Hearts , Regina dei Cuori . among the few who bow 
 before Charles Edward 's wife , in consideration of this last - name 
 kingdom , be a brilliant , wayward young man , destine to remain a sort 
 of brilliant , wayward , impracticable child until he be eighty ; and 
 destine , also , to cherish throughout the long life of both , the sort 
 of half genuine , half affect , boy 's , or rather page 's , passion with 
 which Queen Louise have inspire he . Karl Victor von Bonstetten , of a 
 patrician family of Bern , a frenchified German , more french , more 
 butterfly - like than any real Frenchman , even of the old régime , come 
 to Rome , already well - know by his romantic friendship with the swiss 
 historian Müller , and by the idea which he have desultorily and gaily 
 air on most subject , in the year 1773 . in his memoir he write as 
 follow of the " Queen of Hearts " : " she be of middle height , fair , with 
 dark - blue eye , a slightly turn - up nose , and a dazzle white English 
 complexion . her expression be gay and espiègle , and not without a 
 spice of irony , on the whole more french than German . she be enough to 
 turn all head . the Pretender be tall , lean , good - natured , talkative . 
 he like to have opportunity of speak English , and be give to 
 talk a great deal about his adventure - interesting enough for a 
 visitor , but not equally so for his intimate , who have probably hear 
 those story a hundred time over . after every sentence almost he would 
 ask , in Italian , ' do you understand ? ' his young wife laugh heartily at 
 the story of his dress up in woman 's clothe . " a dull , garrulous 
 husband , bore people with story of which they be sick ; a childish 
 little wife , try to make the good of thing , and laugh over the 
 stale old joke ; this be what may be call the idyllic moment in the 
 wed life of Charles Edward and Louise . what would she have feel , that 
 strong , calm lady , grow old far off in the Isle of Skye , have she be 
 able to see what Bonstetten see ; have she hear the Count and Countess of 
 Albany laughing , the one with the laughter of an old sot , the other with 
 the laughter of a giddy child , over the adventure of that heroic Prince 
 Charlie whose memory be safe in her heart as the sheet he have sleep in 
 be safe in her closet , wait to be her grave - clothe ? 

 forty - four year later , when the Queen of Hearts be a stout , dowdy old 
 lady , with no trace of beauty , and himself a flighty , amiable old 
 gossip of seventy , Karl Victor von Bonstetten write to the Countess of 
 Albany from Rome : " I never pass through the apostle ' square without 
 look up at that balcony , at that house where I see you for the first 
 time . " 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 the HEIR . 


 in 1765 Horace Walpole , mention the now - ascertain fact of the 
 Pretender 's abjuration of Catholicism , inform his friend Mann that 
 a rumour be about that Charles Edward have declare his intention of 
 never marry , in order that no more stuart should remain to embroil 
 England . this magnanimous resolution , which be a mere repetition of an 
 answer make year ago by the Pretender 's father , do not hold good 
 against the temptation of the Cabinet of Versailles . there be something 
 particularly disgusting in the thought that , merely because the French 
 Government think it convenient to keep a Stuart in reserve with whom , 
 if necessary , to trip up England , the once magnanimous Charles Edward 
 consent to marry in consideration of a certain pension from Versailles ; 
 to make money out of any possible or probable son he might have . this , 
 however , be the plain state of the case ; and Louise of Stolberg have 
 be select , and marry to a drunkard old enough to be her father , 
 merely that this honourable bargain between the man outrage in 1748 , 
 and the government which have outrage he , might be satisfactorily 
 fulfil . 

 the Court of Versailles waste its money : the officially - negotiate baby 
 be never bear . Nay , Sir Horace Mann , the English Minister at Florence , 
 whose spy watch every movement of the Count and Countess of Albany , 
 be able to report to his government , in answer to a vague rumour of the 
 coming of an heir , that the wife of Charles Edward Stuart have never , at 
 any moment , have any reason for expect to become a mother . and when , 
 in the first year of this century , Henry Benedict , Cardinal York , the 
 young brother of Charles Edward , be bury where the two melancholy 
 genii of Canova keep watch in St. Peter 's , opposite to the portrait of 
 Maria Clementina Sobieska in powder and paint and patch , a certain 
 solemn feeling come over most englishman with the thought that the race 
 of James II . be now extinct . 

 but the world have forget that the child of Edward IV . be 
 resuscitate ; that the son of Louis XVI . , whose poor little dead body 
 have be handle by the Commissary of the Republic , have return to 
 earth in the shape of five or six perfectly distinct individual , 
 Bruneau , Hervagault , Naundorff , whatever else their name ; that King 
 Arthur be still live in the kingdom of Morgan le Fay ; and Barbarossa 
 still asleep on the stone table , wait till the rook which circle 
 round the Kiefhäuser hill shall tell he to arise ; and the world have , 
 therefore , to learn that a Stuart still exist . the legend run as 
 follow . 

 in 1773 , a certain Dr. Beaton , a staunch Jacobite , who have fight at 
 Culloden , be attract , while travel in Italy , by the knowledge 
 that his legitimate sovereign be spend part of the summer at a 
 villa in the neighbourhood , to a vague place somewhere in the Apennines 
 between Parma and Lucca , distinguish by the extremely un - tuscan name 
 of St. Rosalie . here , while walk about " in the deep quiet shade , " 
 the doctor be one day startle by a " calash and four , with scarlet 
 livery , " which dash past he and up an avenue . during the one moment 
 of its rapid passage , the Scotch physician recognise in the rather 
 apocalyptic gentleman wear the garter and the cross of St. Andrew , 
 who sit by the side of a beautiful young woman , " the Bonnie Prince Charlie 
 of our faithful beau ideal , still the same eagle - feature , royal bird , 
 which I have see on his own mountain , when he spread his wing towards 
 the south . " towards dusk of that same day , as Dr. Beaton be pace up 
 and down the convent church of St. Rosalie , doubtless thinking over that 
 " eagle - feature royal bird , " whom he have see drive in the calash and 
 four , he be startle in his meditation by the jingle of spur on the 
 pavement , and by the approach of a man " of superior appearance . " 

 this person be dress in a manner which be " a little equivocal , " 
 wear a broad hat and a thick moustache , which , join with the sternness 
 of his pale cheek and the piercingness of his eye , must indeed have 
 suggest something extremely eerie to a well - shave , three - corner hat , 
 respectable man of the eighteenth century ; so that we be not at all 
 surprised to hear that the doctor 's imagination be cross by " a sudden 
 idea of the celebrate Torrifino , " who , although his name sound like a 
 sweetmeat , be probably one of the many mysterious Italians , brother of 
 the Count of Udolpho and Spalatro and Zeluco , who haunt the reader of 
 the romance of the latter eighteenth century . this personage enquire 
 whether he be address " il Dottor Betoni Scozzere . " 

 the physician have answer this question , ask , for no conceivable 
 reason , in bad italian of a Scotchman by a Scotchman   for we learn that 
 the unknown be a Chevalier Graham , the mysterious moustache man 
 request he to attend at once upon " one who stand in immediate need . " 
 Dr. Beaton 's enquiry as to the nature of the assistance and the person 
 who require it , have be answer with the solemn remark that " the 
 relief of the malady , and not the circumstance of the patient , be the 
 province of a physician , " and the proposal be make that he should go 
 to the sick person blindfold and in a shuttered carriage , the doctor 's 
 prudence and the thought of the famous Torrifino dictate a flat refusal ; 
 but the mysterious stranger would not let he off . " Signor , " he exclaim 
  persistently talk bad italian , " I respect your doubt ; by one word 
 I could dispel they ; but it be a secret which would be embarrassing to 
 the possessor . it concern the interest and safety of one - the most 
 illustrious and unfortunate of the Scottish Jacobites . " " what ! whom ? " 
 exclaim Dr. Beaton . " I can say no more , " reply the stranger ; " but if 
 you would venture any service for one who be once the dearest to your 
 country and your cause , follow I . " " let we go , " cry Dr. Beaton , the 
 enthusiasm for Prince Charlie entirely get the well of the thought 
 of the famous Torrifino ; and so , blindfold , he be convey , partly by 
 land and partly by water   what water , in those Apennine valley where 
 there be no stream save torrent in which even a punt would be 
 impossible , it be difficult to understand , to a house stand in a 
 garden . that it do stand in a garden appear to have be a piece of 
 information volunteer by the mysterious Chevalier Graham , for Dr. 
 Beaton expressly state that it be not till the two have pass through 
 a " long range of apartment " that the bandage be remove from his eye . 

 the doctor find himself in a ' splendid saloon , hang with crimson 
 velvet , and blaze with mirror which reach from the ceiling to the 
 floor . at the farth end a pair of fold door stand open , and show 
 the dim perspective of a long conservatory . " the mysterious Chevalier 
 Graham ring a silver bell , which summon a little page dress in 
 scarlet , with whom he exchange a few rapid word in German . the 
 communication appear to agitate the Chevalier ; and after dismiss 
 the page , he turn to the doctor . " Signor Dottore , " he say , " the most 
 important part of your occasion be past . the lady whom you have be 
 unhappily call to attend , meet with an alarming accident in her 
 carriage , not half an hour before I find you in the church , and the 
 unlucky absence of her physician leave she entirely under your charge . 
 her accouchement be over , apparently without any result more than 
 exhaustion ; but of that you will be the judge . " 

 it be only at the mention of the carriage and the accident that Dr. 
 Beaton , whose wit appear to have be wool - gathering , suddenly guess 
 at a possible connection between these " most illustrious and unfortunate 
 of Scottish Jacobites , " to whose house he have be thus mysteriously 
 introduce , and the lady and gentleman in whom he have that same afternoon 
 recognise Charles Edward and his wife . the page reappear , and 
 conduct Dr. Beaton through another suite of splendid apartment , till 
 they come to an ante - room decorate with the portrait of no less 
 remarkable person than the rebel Duke of Perth and King James VIII . , a 
 fact which show that the Stuarts must have carry their furniture with 
 they , from Rome to a lucchese villa hire for a few month , with more 
 recklessness than one might have imagine likely in those day of 
 post - chaise . out of this ante - room the physician be usher into a 
 large and magnificent bed - room , light with a single taper . from the side 
 of a crimson - drape bed step a lady , who salute Dr. Beaton in 
 English , and lead he up to the patient , while a female attendant nurse 
 an infant envelop in a mantle . the lady draw aside the curtain , and by 
 the faint light the doctor be able to distinguish a pale , delicate 
 face , and a slender white arm and hand lie upon the blue velvet 
 counterpane . the lady in waiting say some word in German , in answer 
 to which the sick woman feebly attempt to stretch out her hand to 
 the physician . have ascertain that the patient be in a dangerous 
 condition , Dr. Beaton ask for pen and paper to write out a prescription , 
 which , in that Apennine wilderness , would doubtless be make up with the 
 great exactness and rapidity . by the side of the writing - desk be a 
 dressing - table ; and on what should the doctor 's casual glance not rest 
 but a miniature , throw carelessly among the scent bottle and jewel , 
 and in which he instantly recognise a portrait of Charles Edward such 
 as he have see he rid on the field of Culloden ! but in a moment , 
 when he glance again from his writing to the toilet - table , the 
 miniature be no long visible . 

 the lady have apparently recover , Dr. Beaton be dismiss , 
 blindfold as he have come , but only after have take an oath upon the 
 crucifix " never to speak of what he have hear , or see , or think , 
 that night , except it should be in the service of King Charles , " and 
 also to quit Tuscany immediately . he repair , therefore , to the near 
 seaport , but be detain there three day before the departure of his 
 ship . one moonlight evening , as he be walk on the sand , he be 
 surprise by see an english man - of - war at anchor . in answer to his 
 enquiry , she prove to be the Albina , Commodore O'Haloran . while he 
 be lie in a sequester corner , watch the frigate , he be startle 
 by the sudden appearance of a small closed carriage and of a horseman , 
 in whom , by the moonlight , he immediately recognise the moustached 
 stranger of St. Rosalie . the cavalcade stop at the water 's brink , 
 and the horseman blow a shrill whistle . immediately a man - of - war 's boat 
 shoot from behind some rock and pull straight towards they . a man with 
 glimmering epaulette spring from the boat on to the beach , and help 
 into it a lady , who have alight from the carriage , and carry something 
 wrap in a shawl . Dr. Beaton hear the cry of an infant , the soothe 
 voice of the lady ; and , a moment later , after a word and shake of the 
 hand with the moustache man , the boat pull off from shore . " for 
 more than a quarter of an hour the tall black figure of the cavalier 
 continue fix upon the same spot , and in the same attitude ; but 
 suddenly the broad gigantic shadow of the frigate swung round in the 
 moonshine , her sail fill to the breeze , and dimly brighten in the 
 light , she bear off slow and still and stately towards the west . " 

 such be the adventure of Dr. Beaton , and thus he be say to have relate 
 it , in the year 1831 , eighty - five year after the battle of Culloden , 
 where he have himself see Charles Edward ; whence it be presumable that 
 the doctor be considerably over a hundred when he make the disclosure . 
 this story of Doctor Beaton be publish , not in a historical work , but 
 in a volume entitle tale of the Century ; or sketch of the Romance 
 of history between the year 1746 and 1846 , publish at Edinburgh in 
 1847 . but although this book might pass as a work of imagination , and 
 could , therefore , scarcely be impugn as a historical document , there 
 be every reason for suppose that , while not officially claim to 
 reveal the existence of an heir of the Stuarts , it be deliberately 
 intend to convey information to that effect ; and as such , an anonymous 
 writer   either Lockhart or Dennistoun   make short work of it in the 
  Quarterly Review for June 1847 , from which I have derive the great 
 part of my knowledge of this curious " romance of history . " 

 Nay , the Tales of the Century be undoubtedly intend to insinuate a 
 far remarkable fact : not merely that there still exist heir of 
 Stuarts in the direct male line , but that these heir of the Stuarts be 
 no other but the joint author of the book . the two brother style 
 themselves on the title - page John Sobieski Stuart and Charles Edward 
 Stuart , but whose legal name be respectively John Hay Allan and 
 Charles Stuart Allan , have be know for some year in the Highlands as 
 person envelop in a degree of romantic mystery , and claim to be 
 something much more illustrious than what they be officially suppose 
 to be , the grandson of an admiral in the service of George III . 
 accord to the information collect by Baron von Reumont , the joint 
 author of the Tales of the Century have make themselves conspicuous by 
 their affectation of the Stuart tartan , to which , as Hay Allans , they 
 could have no right ; by a certain Stuart make - up   by the help of a 
 Charles I. wig which be once find and mistake for a bird's - nest by an 
 irreverent Highlander   on the part of the elder , and by a habit of 
 bow to his brother whenever the King 's health be drunk on the part 
 of the young . moreover the family circumstance of these gentleman 's 
 father coincide exactly with those of the hero of this book , of the 
 suppose son of Charles Edward Stuart and Louise of Stolberg . their 
 father , Thomas Hay Allan , once a lieutenant in the navy , be know 
 before the law as the young son of a certain Admiral Carter Allan , who 
 lay claim to the earldom of Errol ; and the Jolair Dhearg   for such be 
 the keltic appellation of the hero of the Tales of the Century    be 
 the reputed son of a certain Admiral O'Haloran , who lay claim to the 
 Earldom of Strathgowrie , to which curious parallel the writer in the 
  Quarterly add the additional point that Errol , be in the district 
 of Gowrie , the Earldom of Strathgowrie claim by the imaginary Admiral 
 O'Haloran be evidently another name for the Earldom of Errol claim by 
 the real Admiral Carter Allan , two name , by the way , O'Haloran and 
 Carter Allan , of which the first seem intend to reproduce in some 
 measure the sound of the other . the father of Messrs. John Hay and 
 Charles Stuart Allan , be marry in 1792 , and the hero of the Tales of 
 the Century be marry somewhere about 1791 , both to lady more 
 suit to the son of an admiral than to the son of the Pretender . 
 take all these circumstance into consideration it become obvious 
 that when the two brother Hay Allan assume respectively the name 
 of John Sobieski and Charles Edward Stuart , they distinctly , though 
 unofficially , identify themselves with the son of the Jolair Dhearg 
 of their book , with the son of that mysterious infant at whose birth 
 Dr. Beaton have be present , who have be convey by night on board the 
  Albina and educate as the son of Admiral O'Haloran ; in other word , 
 with the son of the child , unknown to history , of the Count and 
 Countess of Albany . 

 now , not only be we assure by Sir Horace Mann , whose spy surround 
 the Pretender and his wife , and include even their physician , that 
 there never be the small or brief expectation of an heir to the 
 Stuarts ; but , add to this positive evidence , we have an enormous bulk 
 of even more convincing negative evidence by which it be completely 
 corroborate . this negative evidence consist of a heap of improbability 
 and impossibility , of which even a few will serve to convince the 
 reader . the Pretender marry , and be pension for marrying , merely 
 that the French Court might have another possible pretender to use as a 
 weapon against England ; be it likely , therefore , that such an heir would 
 be hide away so as to lose his identity , and be completely and utterly 
 forget ? the Pretender , separate from his wife in consequence of 
 circumstance which will be relate far on , call to he , as sole 
 companion of his old age , his illegitimate daughter by Miss Walkenshaw , 
 after neglecting and apparently forget both she and her mother for 
 twenty year ; be it likely he would have do this have he possess a 
 legitimate son ? Cardinal York assume the title of Henry IX . immediately 
 on the decease of his brother ; be it likely that he , always indifferent 
 to royal honour , always faithful to his brother , and now almost die , 
 would have do so have he know that his brother have leave a son ? the 
 Countess of Albany , who never relinquish her Stuart position , and who 
 be extremely devoted to child , leave her fortune to the painter 
 Fabre ; be it likely she would have do so have she be aware that she 
 possess a child of her own ? but there be yet further evidence - I 
 scarcely know whether I should say positive or negative , but in point of 
 fact perhaps both at once , since it be evidence that the word of one , at 
 least , of the joint author of the Tales of the Century can not 
 outweigh the silence of all other authority . five year before the 
 brother Allan , or Stuart , whichever they should be call , mysteriously 
 inform the world of the adventure of the Jolair Dhearg , the elder of 
 the two , once John Hay Allan , now John Sobieski Stuart , have bring out 
 a magnificent volume , price five guineas , entitle Vestiarium 
 Scoticum , and purport to be a treatise on family tartan write 
 somewhere in the 16th century , and now edit for the first time . the 
 history of this work , as state in the preface , be well - nigh as 
 complicated and as romantic as the history of the Jolair Dhearg . the 
 only reliable copy of three know by Mr. Sobieski Stuart , of which one 
 be say to exist in the library of the Monastery of St. Augustine at 
 Cadiz , and another have be obtain from an Edinburgh sword - player and 
 porter name John Ross , be in the possession of the learn editor , 
 and have be give by the father of the Scots College at Douay to 
 Prince Edward Stuart , from whom it have , in some unspecified but 
 doubtless extremely romantic manner   probably sew in the swaddling 
 clothe in which the Jolair Dhearg be consign to Admiral O'Haloran 
 descend to Mr. John Sobieski Stuart . this venerable heraldic document 
 appear , if one may judge by the review in the Quarterly , to have 
 be well - deserving of publication , owe to the extremely new and 
 unexpected information which it contain upon scottish archæology . 
 among such information may be mention that it derive several clan 
 from other clan with which they be well known to have no possible 
 connection ; that it extend the use of tartan to border - family who 
 have never hear of such a thing ; that it contain many word and 
 expression hitherto entirely unknown in the particular dialect in which 
 it be write ; and , moreover , that it multiply complicated and 
 recondite pattern of tartan in a manner so remarkable that Sir Walter 
 Scott , to whom part of Mr. Sobieski Stuart 's transcript of the ancient 
 MS . be submit , be lead to suspect " that information as to its origin 
 might be obtain even in a less romantic site than the cabin of a 
 Cowgate porter   or the Scots College at Douay , even behind the counter 
 of one of the great clan - tartan warehouse which use to illuminate the 
 principal thoroughfare of Edinburgh . " 

 this important and well - nigh unique document be apparently never 
 submit in its original MS . to anyone ; the copy from the Scots College 
 at Douay , and the copy from the old sword - player of Cowgate , remain 
 equally unknown to everyone save their fortunate possessor . but 
 transcript of some portion of the work be submit , at the request 
 of the Antiquarian Society , to Sir Walter Scott , and as he dismiss the 
 deputation which have meet to hear his opinion upon the Vestiarium 
 Scoticum , the author of Waverley be pleased to remark by way of 
 sum up : " well , I think the March of the next rise "   allude to 
 the part of the Highlanders in the ' 45   " must be not ' hey tuttie tattie , ' 
 but ' the Devil among the Tailors . ' " 

 however , perhaps the Vestiarium Scoticum may have come out of the 
 Scots College at Douay , and perhaps also the son of Charles Edward 
 Stuart and of Louise of Stolberg may have be bear in the room hung 
 with red brocade , and have be hand over to a British Admiral one 
 moonlight night , in the presence of the venerable Dr. Beaton , whom 
 Providence permit to attain the unusual age of a hundred year or 
 more , in order that , with unimpaired faculty and unclouded memory , he 
 might transmit to posterity this strange romance of history . 




 CHAPTER V. 

 FLORENCE . 


 it be quite impossible to tell the precise moment at which begin what 
 Horace Mann , most light - hearted and chirpy of diplomatist , call the 
 Countess of Albany 's martyrdom . as we have see , Charles Edward have 
 momentarily give up all excessive drinking at the time of his marriage . 
 Bonstetten think he a good - natured garrulous bore , and his wife a 
 merry , childish young woman , who laugh at her husband 's oft - tell 
 story . this be the very decent exterior of the pretender 's domestic 
 life in the first year of his marriage . but who can tell what there may 
 have be before beneath the surface ? who can say when Louise d'Albany , 
 hitherto apparently so childish , become suddenly a woman with the first 
 terrible suspicion of the nature of the bondage into which she have be 
 sell ? such thing be unromantic , unpoetical , coarse , common - place ; yet 
 if the fear and the despair of a guiltless and charming girl have any 
 interest for we , the first whiff of brandy - taint breath which meet the 
 young wife in her husband 's embrace , the first qualm and reeking 
 after dinner which come before her eye , the first bestial and unquiet 
 drunkard 's sleep which keep she awake in disgust and terror , these 
 thing , vile though they be , be as tragic as any more ideal horror . at 
 the beginning , most probably , Charles Edward drink only in the evening , 
 and sleep off his drunkenness over - night ; nor do Bonstetten appear to 
 have guess that there be any skeleton in the palace at the Santissimi 
 Apostoli . but the spy of the english minister soon report that 
 Charles Edward be return to his old way ; that the " nasty bottle , " 
 as Cardinal York call it , have get the well of the young wife ; and 
 when , two year after their marriage , the Count and Countess of Albany 
 have leave Rome and settle in Florence , Charles Edward seem very soon to 
 have acquire in the latter place the dreadful notoriety which he have 
 long enjoy in the former . 

 circumstance also have conduce to replunge the pretender into the 
 habit to which the renew hope of political support , the novelty of 
 married life , and perhaps whatever of good may still have be conjure 
 up in his nature by the presence of a beautiful young wife , have 
 momentarily break through . the french Government , after its sudden 
 pre - occupation about the future of the Stuarts , seem to have 
 completely forget the existence of Charles Edward , except as regard 
 the payment of the pension grant on his marriage . the child that have 
 be prepay by that wedding pension , who be to rally the jacobite 
 round a man whose claim must otherwise devolve legitimately in a few 
 year to the hanoverian usurper , the heir be not bear , and , as month 
 go by after month , its final coming become less and less likely . nor 
 be this all . Charles Edward seem to have expect that the sudden 
 interest take by the Court of Versailles in his affair , and his new 
 position as a married man and the possible father of a line of stuart , 
 would bring the obdurate sovereign of Italy , and especially the Pope , 
 to grant he those royal honour enjoy by his father , but hitherto 
 obstinately deny to the moody drunkard whose presence in the paternal 
 palace have be occasionally reveal only by the rumour of some more 
 than ordinarily gross debauch , or the noise of some more than ordinarily 
 violent scene of blackguardly altercation . 

 Charles Edward , as I have already have occasion to remark , while 
 absolutely callous to the right which self - sacrifice and heroism might 
 give other over he , be extremely alive to the right which , as a 
 Stuart and as an obstinate and wilful man , he imagine himself to 
 possess over other folk ; and , while it never occur to he that there 
 might be something slightly ungentlemanly in a prince who have secretly 
 abjure the catholic faith for political reason continue to live in a 
 house and on a pension grant he by the unsuspecting sovereign Pontiff 
 in consideration of his be a martyr for the glory of the Church , he 
 be fully persuade of the cowardly meanness which prevent Clement 
 XIV . , whose interest it be to jog on amicably with England , from 
 acknowledge the grandson of James II . as a legitimate king of Great 
 Britain and Ireland . it be therefore easy to conceive the accumulation 
 of disappointment and anger with which Charles Edward see his hope 
 delude . he have , immediately on his return to Rome , officially announce 
 to Clement XIV . the arrival in the Eternal City of King Charles III . and 
 his queen , and the Pope have condescend no answer save that he have 
 hitherto be unaware of the existence of such person , and that he 
 would suffer none such to live under his jurisdiction . he have , for more 
 than a year , impose upon his wife   despite Cardinal York 's and her own 
 entreaty , if we may credit Sir Horace Mann   the title and etiquette of 
 a queen , and have flaunt his scarlet livery along the Corso day after 
 day , with no result save that of make the roman noble keep carefully 
 out of the way wherever he and his wife might go ; nay , more , he have 
 replace over the doorway of his residence the royal escutcheon of Great 
 Britain , only to return from the country one day and find that the 
 pontifical police have take it down during his absence . after this we 
 can understand , as I say , the disappointment and rage which must have 
 accumulate in his heart , and which , fifteen month after his wedding , 
 make he abandon the base town of the pope and seek sympathy and 
 dignity in the capital of Tuscany . but he be destine only to 
 further disappointment . the Grand Duke , Peter Leopold , the practical , 
 economical , priest - hat , paternally - meddlesome , bustlingly and 
 tyrannically - reform son of Maria Theresa , be not the man to console 
 so mediæval and antiquated and unphilosophical a thing as a Stuart . the 
 arrival , the presence of Charles Edward in Florence , be absolutely 
 ignore by the Court , and no invitation of any sort be send out 
 either to King Charles III . or to the Count of Albany . except the 
 Corsinis , old friend of the Stuarts , who have know Charles Edward in 
 his brilliant boyhood , and who politely place at his disposal their 
 half - suburban palace or casino , open on to the famous Oricellari 
 Gardens , no one seem inclined to pay any particular respect to the 
 new - comer . there be , indeed , no pressure from the Government   as have 
 be the case in Rome , and the florentine noble , whose exclusiveness 
 and pride have be considerably diminish by the inroad of swagger 
 lorenese favourite under the Grand Duke Francis , and of cut and dry 
 austrian official under his son Peter Leopold , show a sort of 
 lukewarm willingness to receive the Count and Countess of Albany on 
 equal term into their society . but Charles Edward want royal honour ; 
 he forbid his wife demean she queenly position by return the 
 visit of florentine lady , and the noble of the Tuscan Court 
 gradually leave the would - be King and queen of England to their own 
 resource . 

 these resource , with the exception of receive such few visitor as 
 might care to know they on unequal term , and a dogged pushing into 
 notice in every place , promenade , theatre , or noble ' club , where no 
 invitation be require , these resource consist on the part of 
 Charles Edward in the old , old consoler , the flask of Cyprus or bottle 
 of brandy , in the even gross pleasure of excessive eating , the 
 indefatigable , assiduous courtship of his young wife , and the occasional 
 row with his servant and acquaintance . the Count and Countess of 
 Albany appear to have inhabit the Casino Corsini until 1777 , when they 
 send for the great part of the furniture of their roman house , and 
 establish themselves in a palace , buy of the Guadagnis and later 
 sell to the Duke of San Clemente , between the now suppress Porta San 
 Sebastiano and the Garden of St. Mark 's . in both these place Sir Horace 
 Mann , the vigilant Minister to the Tuscan Court and head spy over the 
 Stuarts in Italy , keep the Pretender well in sight ; but , in fact , thing 
 have now become so public that spying have grow unnecessary . already , 
 the year follow the removal from Rome to Florence , Sir Horace Mann 
 write to Walpole that the Pretender 's health be give way beneath his 
 excess of eat and drinking ; dyspepsia and dropsy be begin , 
 and a sofa have be order for his opera - box , that he might conveniently 
 snooze through the performance . for neither drunkenness nor ailment 
 would induce Charles Edward to let his wife out of his sight for a 
 minute . his systematic jealousy may possibly have originate , as the 
 English Minister report Charles Edward to have himself declare , from 
 fear lest there might attach to the birth of any possible heir of his 
 those doubt of legitimacy which be almost invariably the lot of a 
 pretender ; but there can be no doubt that jealousy be an essential 
 feature of his character , in which it amount almost to monomania . he 
 have cage his mistress long after he have cease , by his own avowal , to 
 care for she ; he now cage his wife , and with probably about as much or 
 as little affection . he have fence up Miss Walkenshaw 's bed with table 
 and chair fit with bell which the slight touch set ringing ; 
 he now   and so early as 1775   barricade all avenue to his wife 's 
 room except the one through his own . very soon , also , the gross 
 and violent language , the blow which have fall to the lot of the 
 half - tipsy mistress , be to be share by the virtuous and patient wife . 

  illustration : LOUISE , COUNTESS of ALBANY 
  from a pastel once in the possession of the heir of Fabre , now 
  in the possession of Mrs. Horace Walpole , of Heckfield Place , 
  Winchfield , hant .  

 for virtuous and patient all account unite in show the young 
 Countess of Albany to have be . in that corrupt Florence of the corrupt 
 eighteenth century , where every married woman be furnish , within two 
 year of her marriage , with an officially appoint lover who sit in her 
 dressing - room while she be finish her toilet , who accompany she 
 on all her visit , who attend she to ball and theatre , and , in fact , 
 entirely replace , by the strict social necessity of the system of 
 cicisbeism , the husband , who be similarly employ about the wife 
 of another ; in this society , where conjugal infidelity be a social 
 organisation supplement by every kind of individual caprice of 
 gallantry ; where woman be none the bad thought of if they add 
 to the official cavaliere servente a whole string of other lover , 
 vary from the Cardinals of the Holy Church to the singer who 
 play woman 's part , in powder and hoop , at the opera ; in this world 
 of jog - trot immorality , where jealousy be tolerate in lover , but 
 ridiculous in husband , such a couple as the Count and Countess of 
 Albany be indeed a source of pity , wonder , and amazement . but if a 
 husband who barricade his wife 's room , never go out without she , nor 
 permit she to go out without he , who be never far off than the 
 next room during the presence of any visitor , be a marvellous sight ; 
 still more marvellous be a beautiful and charming woman of twenty - three 
 or twenty - four , who cast no glance of longing at the brilliant 
 cavalier all round she , who console her dreary prison - hour with 
 read hard enough for a professor at the university , and who show 
 towards the peevish , violent , disgustingly - ail old toper who 
 overshadow her life with his presence nothing , as Horace Mann tell 
 we , but attention and tenderness . the fact be that Louise of Stolberg , 
 much as her subsequent life and way of thought prove she to be a woman 
 of the eighteenth century , and not at all above the eighteenth century 's 
 easy - go habit and conventional idea , be a kind of woman rare at 
 all time and rare of all in a time like her own , with a kindly and 
 affectionate temper , the immense bulk of her nature , the overbalance , the 
 top - heaviness of it , be intellectual ; and intellectual not in the sense 
 of the ready society intelligence , so common among eighteenth - century 
 woman , but in the sense of actual engrossing interest and in abstract 
 question and ideal . the portrait do of she immediately after her 
 marriage show , as I have say , a remarkably childish person ; and 
 childish , without much ballast of passion or even liking , the likeness 
 sketch by Bonstetten seem certainly to show she . but there be woman 
 who , while immature as woman and human being , be precocious as 
 intellect , and in whom the character , instead of rapidly develop 
 itself by the force of its own emotion and passion , seem in a manner 
 to be call into existence by the intelligence : retarded nature , in 
 whom the thought seem to determine the feeling . of this sort , I think , 
 we must imagine the Countess of Albany , if we would understand the 
 anomaly of her life : a person rather deficient in sensitiveness ; 
 indifferent , light - hearted , in her girlhood ; not rebel against the 
 frightful negativeness of existence , the want of love , of youth , of 
 brightness , of all that a young girl can want in the early part of she 
 married life ; not rebel against the positive misery , the constant 
 presence of everything that be mentally and physically loathsome in the 
 second period of this wed slavery ; a woman of cold temperament , and 
 even , you might say , of cold heart , and safe , safe in the routine of 
 duty and suffering , until a merely intellectual flame burst out , white 
 and cold , in her hitherto callous nature . a creature , so to speak , only 
 half awake , or awake , perhaps , only when she devour her book and 
 try to puzzle out her mathematical problem ; and go through life by 
 the side of her jealous , brutal , sickly , drunken husband , in a kind of 
 somnambulistic indifferentism , perhaps not feel her misery very 
 acutely , and probably not envy other woman their meaningless liberty , 
 their inane lover , their empty wholeness of life . 

 thus the routine continue . the Count and Countess of Albany , cure 
 by this time of any affectation of royalty , have gradually get 
 domesticate in florentine society . People begin to go to their house , 
 the newly - buy palace in Via San Sebastiano . People come to the 
 opera - box where Charles Edward lie stretch , doze or snoring , his 
 bottle of Cyprus wine by his side , on his sofa . it be easy to read 
 through the line of Sir Horace Mann 's page of social tittle - tattle , 
 that Florence , frivolous and unintellectual and corrupt though it be , 
 and , perhaps , almost in proportion to its frivolity , emptiness , and 
 corruption , feel a strange sort of interest , experience a vague , mixed 
 feeling , pity , fear , and general surprise and want of comprehension 
 towards this beautiful young woman , with her dazzle white complexion , 
 dark hazel eye and blonde hair , her childish feature grow , perhaps 
 not less young , but more serious and solemn for her five year of waste 
 youth and endure misery , with her reputation for coldness , her almost 
 legendary eccentricity of intellectual interest . woman like this one 
 be apt to be regard not so much with dislike and envy , as with the 
 mixed awe and pity which peasant feel towards an idiot , by frivolous 
 and immoral people like those powdered Florentines of a hundred year 
 ago , whose brocade train and embroider coat have long since find 
 their way into the cupboard of curiosity shop , and be cut up into 
 quaint room decoration by æsthetically - minded foreigner ; pity and awe 
 the more natural when , as in the case of Louise d'Albany , it be evident 
 to every man and woman , however heartless and stupid , that the creature 
 in question be a victim , and an innocent one . People be lead , perhaps 
 to some extent by impertinent curiosity , by the lazy desire to have 
 some opinion to give upon that now legendary household of the besotten , 
 sleepy , nauseous old King of England and his terribly virtuous and 
 intellectual young Queen , to the palace in Via San Sebastiano ; and man 
 and woman of fashion lead thither , as to one of the curious sight of 
 Florence , their country cousin and their distinguished visitor from 
 other part . and thus , one day in the autumn of 1777 , there be bring , 
 we know not by whom , half - curious and half - indifferent , to the salon 
 of the Countess of Albany a certain very tall , thin , pale young man of 
 twenty - eight , with handsome , mobile , rather hard aquiline feature , 
 choleric , flash blue eye , and a head of crisp , bright red hair ; a 
 man of fashion , nattily dress in the sardinian uniform , but with 
 something strange , untamed , morose about his whole aspect which 
 contrast singularly with the effete gracefulness and amiability of 
 young florentine dandy . he have hear of the Countess of Albany 's 
 eccentricity long before ; she have doubtless hear of his . 

 one can imagine the curiosity with which the wild , moody young officer 
 fix those bright , hard , steel , flash blue eye upon the beautiful 
 young woman of whom he have hear that she be , what no woman of 
 his acquaintance   and his acquaintance be but too large   have 
 be - intellectual and virtuous . one can imagine the curiosity , much 
 vaguer and more indifferent , with which the woefully cold and woefully 
 weary young woman meet the scrutiny of those hard , flash blue eye , 
 and take the moral measure of this eccentric creature , come from Turin 
 to Florence with some ten or twelve half - tame horse , in order to learn 
 tuscan grammar for the sake of write tragedy . the common friend , 
 whose name have be engulf into the unknowable , introduce to the 
 Countess of Albany Count Vittorio Alfieri . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 ALFIERI . 


 the childhood and early youth of Vittorio Alfieri have be strangely 
 vacant , dreary , one might almost say intellectually and morally sordid ; 
 and the strange , the dreary circumstance about they be exactly 
 that this vacuity , this dreariness , this total want of all that can make 
 the life of a boy and of a young man pleasant to our fancy or attractive 
 to our sympathy , do not in the least depend upon any harshness or 
 stinginess of fate . indeed , perhaps , no man have ever prepare for he 
 an easy existence ; no man have ever less misfortune send to he by 
 Providence , or less unkindness show towards he by mankind , than this 
 constantly struggle , this pessimistic and misanthropic man . the only 
 son of Count Alfieri of Cortemiglia , of one of the rich and noblest 
 family of Asti in Piedmont , his early childhood be spend under the 
 care of his mother , a woman of almost saintly simplicity and kindness , 
 unworldly , charitable , devote to her child , and to the poor of 
 the place ; and of her third husband , also an Alfieri , who appear to 
 have be , in his affection and generosity towards his wife 's child , 
 everything that a step - father be usually suppose not to be . be 
 delicate in health , the boy be treat with every degree of consideration , 
 never worry with lesson , never exasperate with punishment , as long 
 as he remain at home . he be send , under the care of an uncle , the 
 eminent architect , Benedetto Alfieri , who appear to have be the 
 ideally amiable uncle as Giacinto Alfieri have be the ideally amiable 
 step - father , to the academy or noble ' college at Turin , where again , 
 provide with plenty of money , and a most accommodating half - tutor , 
 half - valet , he enjoy , or might have enjoy , every advantage possible 
 to a young piedmontese noble , either in the way of study or of idleness . 
 and , finally , when still in his teen , he have be supply with ample 
 money , horse and fine clothe ad libitum , and almost unlimited 
 liberty to wander all over the world , from Naples to Holland , from 
 St. Petersburg to Cadiz , in search of experience or amusement . nor 
 during those year of youthful wandering , do he ever seem , except 
 upon one memorable occasion , to have be make to suffer from the 
 unconscientiousness , the harshness , the infidelity , the indifference of 
 the man and woman whom he meet , any more than in his boyhood he have 
 suffer from the severity of his master , the brutality of his 
 tutor - servant , or the ill - nature of his fellow pupil . Fate and the 
 world be extremely kind to Vittorio Alfieri : give he every 
 advantage and comfort , and teach he no cruel lesson . but Vittorio 
 Alfieri be nevertheless one of the least happy of little boy , and one 
 of the least happy of young man . he be bear with an uncomfortable 
 and awkward and unwieldy character , as some man be bear lame , or 
 scrofulous , or dyspeptic . the child of a father over sixty , and of a 
 very young mother ; there be in he some indefinable imperfection of 
 nature , some jar of character , or some great want , some original sin of 
 mental constitution , which make he different from other man , disable 
 he from get pleasure or profit out of the circumstance which give 
 pleasure or profit to they ; and turn his youth into a long period of 
 mental weakness and suffering , from which he recover , indeed , by a 
 system of moral and intellectual cold water , meagre diet , and excessive 
 exercise , but only to remain for the rest of his day in a condition 
 of character absolutely analogous to the bodily condition of those 
 self - martyr invalid , who keep the gout down by take exhausting 
 walk , eat next to no dinner , and fill the life of other with 
 their excitable cantankerousness and gloomy foreboding . there be a 
 numbness and yet a sort of over - sensitiveness about his youth ; a 
 strangeness which , without give the least promise of superior genius , 
 merely make he less happy than other lad . 

 the word numbness return to my mind in connexion with this young 
 Alfieri ; it certainly do not express the exact impression leave in I 
 by his own narrative of his boyhood and youth , and yet I can find no 
 well word : there be in he something like those irregularity of the 
 circulation due to dyspepsia , which , while make some part of the body , 
 say the head , throb and ache at the least sound , yet leave the whole man 
 dull , heavy , only half - awake . 

 as a child he have vague and wistful craving , untempered , unbeautified 
 by such imaginative vision as usually accompany the eccentric feeling 
 of such child as be subject to they . obstinate and taciturn , he 
 tell we of the curious passion which he experience for the little 
 chorister , boy of twelve or thirteen , whom he see serve mass , or 
 hear sing the response , in the Carmine Church at Asti . silently , 
 painfully , he seem to have yearn for they in solitude ; the daily 
 visit to the church where they shine out in their white surplice , 
 be the only pleasure in this black , blind little life of seven or 
 eight . some physical ailment , some want of change and movement may have 
 underlain this morbid and sombre passionateness ; and we learn that when 
 he be still a tiny boy , have hear that the poisonous hemlock be a 
 sort of grass which bring death , and with no clear notion what death 
 be , but with a vague longing for it , he gorge himself with grass out 
 of the garden , in the belief that there would be some hemlock in it . 

 at school he learn nothing . the education give at the Academy of 
 Turin may , indeed , have be poor in quantity and quality ; still it be 
 the good which a young piedmontese nobleman could obtain , and Alfieri 
 himself confess that of his school - fellow most come away with more 
 profit , and some afterwards become cultured and even learn man . he 
 learn nothing because he feel interest , emulation , curiosity about 
 nothing . his nature be still dull , dumb , dormant ; and what he call a 
 period of vegetation might more fitly be term a moral and intellectual 
 hibernation . his school life be a weary , colourless , featureless part of 
 his autobiography . he would seem to have make neither friend nor 
 enemy . the trick practise by or upon other school - boy be never 
 mention by he ; never a practical joke , a lark , a scrape . of his 
 intellectual tendency , which be but little develop , we learn 
 only that he exchange a copy of Ariosto , finally confiscate by the 
 authority , for a certain number of helping of chicken , relinquish 
 by he to its possessor ; and that he bribe , with eatable also , a 
 certain other boy to tell he story . 

 the one incident which shed light upon the lad 's morbid constitution 
 or condition , which reveal that strange , apathetic obstinacy , that 
  vis inertiæ which be the spring even of his most decide action in 
 after life , and which at the same time raise grave doubt in my mind 
 whether there may not have be an actual taint of insanity in this 
 extraordinary being , be the incident of his have submit , rather 
 than give in after some misdemeanour , to be confine to his room in 
 the Academy for nearly three month at a stretch . Alfieri be fifteen ; 
 he might have be let loose for the asking , since there be no real 
 severity in the school . he sleep nearly all day long , rise in the 
 evening , but refuse to let himself be comb or dress , and lie for 
 hour on a mattress before the fire , cook a squalid meal of polenta 
 instead of his dinner , which he regularly send down ; receive the 
 visit of his school - fellow without speak or even move ; deaf and 
 dumb , as he describe himself , by the hour together , his eye fix on 
 the ground , brimful with tear , but never permit himself to cry or 
 complain - a strange sort of savage animal rather than a human being . 

 after leave school at eighteen , he begin his long series of journey , 
 his series of passion for woman and for horse , passion dull and 
 dumb , but violent , yet never such as to break through the spell of 
 inarticulateness which seem to freeze his nature . nothing more curious 
 can be fancy than his journey . he go from place to place without 
 be attract to any , without feel the small interest in 
 anything which he see , without contract the faint attachment for 
 any person or thing , drive along by a sort of fury of restlessness 
 and sombre vacuity . many youth have doubtless be to the full as 
 indifferent as Vittorio Alfieri to all the object of interest on their 
 road ; but they have be so from frivolity and giddiness , and no one be 
 ever less frivolous or giddy than the young Alfieri . with no particular 
 purity of nature or principle of conduct to restrain he from vice , his 
 dissipation could yet scarcely be call dissipation , so little do it 
 wake up this lethargic , ailing , restless nature . despite the furious 
 passion which he have for horse , and the hysterical , one might almost 
 say epileptic passion which he experience for woman , he remain 
 characterless , chaotic , only half alive . his many journey give he only 
 the negative pleasure of get away from already know place , the 
 negative wisdom of see through a variety of thing , military and 
 diplomatic distinction and national prejudice . he remain joyless and 
 ignorant , and , what be bad , without long for pleasure or desire 
 for knowledge . More than once kindly man of the world and scholar be 
 smite with pity for this strange lad , in whom they could not but 
 recognise certain negative quality rare in the eighteenth century - an 
 intense and cruel truthfulness , an absolute disinterestedness , a 
 constitutional contempt for all the vanity and baseness of the world . 
 they try to talk to he , to lend he book , to awaken he out of this 
 dormouse sleep of the intellect , to break the spell which weigh he 
 down . all in vain . he continue his life of dull dissipation and dull 
 wandering , through Italy , Germany , France , England , far into Spain , 
 Portugal , Russia , and even Finland . periodic fit of depression and of 
 almost sordid avarice show that he be still the same person as the 
 boy of fifteen who have spend those three month unwashed , unkempt , in 
 savage squalor , by his fireside ; and fit of brutal and almost maniac 
 violence , as when , because a hair be sharply pull out by the root 
 during the elaborate process of frizzling , he cut open with a blow of a 
 heavy silver candlestick the temple of his faithful valet Elia , who have 
 nurse he like a mother , and whose only revenge , after this fearful 
 scene , be to keep the two handkerchief steep with his blood as a 
 memorial and a warning to his master . 

 still , see nothing , learn nothing , take interest in nothing , by 
 turn morosely apathetic and brutally violent , continually intriguing 
 with woman , mercenary or deprave , Vittorio Alfieri have , at twenty - five , 
 less thing to be proud of , but perhaps less also to regret as absolutely 
 dishonourable , than most young man of his time . he have never lie , never 
 seduce , never stoop to anything which seem to he demean . he be 
 splash with vice from head to foot , but he be neither unnerved nor 
 warp by it . a subject of constant gossip , of frequent scandal , with 
 his team of half - tame horse , his flashy clothe , his furious passion 
 for worthless woman , his moroseness and violence , he be still , so far , 
 a very negative character , a mere mass of rough material , out of which a 
 man might be make . but who should mould that matter ? it be extremely 
 difficult to understand how it come about , as difficult almost as to 
 understand how a certain amount of inorganic molecule will sometimes 
 suddenly seem to obey an impulse from within , and become an organism , 
 a yeast plant , or a microscopic animal ; but whether or not we succeed 
 in understand the how and why of the phenomenon , the phenomenon 
 nevertheless take place ; and this unorganised mass of passion call 
 Vittorio Alfieri , this chaotic thing without a high life or a purpose 
 in the world , only partially sensitive , and seemingly quite impervious 
 to external influence , suddenly obey some inner impulse   perhaps some 
 accumulation of unnoticed effect from without , and organise itself 
 into a man , a thinker , and a writer . 

 Alfieri have always be capable of contempt for other , and largely also 
 of contempt for himself : blind and dull , impulsive and indifferent by 
 turn , he have yet feel acutely the ignominy of certain excess , whether 
 of avarice , or brutality , or love   if love it may be call , which 
 have ever and anon break the monotony of his aimless life . of these 
 ignominy the one he have feel most , perhaps because it deprive he of 
 the independence which even in his stupid time he put his pride in , 
 be the ignominy of love ; that be to say , of what love be to he , 
 unworthy incapacity of do without a woman whom he despise and even 
 occasionally hat . the very fit of moral hysteric , nay , of moral St. 
 Vitus 's dance , of which such love malady largely consist , sicken 
 he , degrade he in his own eye like some disgusting physical infirmity . 
 in his twenty - second year he have such a love malady , he have be the 
 scandal of all London in an intrigue with a certain very lovely Lady 
 Ligonier , who , divorce by her husband for her guilt with the young 
 Italian , be on the point of be joyfully take to wife by Alfieri when 
 it come out that before be his mistress she have be the mistress 
 of her own groom ; a termination of the adventure which , much as it 
 distress the writer of Alfieri 's autobiography , be extremely 
 satisfactory to the reader . a few year later , after a variety of minor 
 love affair , he become entangle at Turin in the net of a Marchesa di 
 Prié , a rather fade Armida of very tarnished reputation , and whom 
 he thoroughly despise and even dislike at the very height of his 
 attachment . the struggle between his sense of weariness and degradation 
 and his unworthy love for this woman half wear he out , and bring on a 
 severe malady , from which he recover only to swear he would never 
 enter her house again , and to return to it as soon as he could stand on 
 his foot . the beautiful social custom of eighteenth - century Italy 
 authorise and even impose upon a man who have accept the position of 
  cavaliere servente   a sort of pseudo - platonic vice - husbandship which 
 cover illicit connection with a worldly propriety   to attend upon his 
 lady from the moment of she get up in the morning to the moment when 
 she return home or dismiss her guest at night , with only a few 
 interval during which the lover might have his meal or pay his visit ; 
 so , when the Marchesa di Prié fall ill of a malady which require 
 absolute repose and silence , Alfieri be bind to spend the whole 
 morning seat at the foot of her bed . during one of these weary 
 watch , it come into his head to kill time by scribble some dramatic 
 scene on loose sheet of paper , which he hide during the interval of 
 his visit under the cushion of an arm - chair . a piedmontese and a 
 thorough ignoramus , he have scarcely ever attempt to write even so 
 much as a letter in Italian ; and as to a literary composition in any 
 language , such a thing have never occur to he . the Cleopatra thus 
 write in his lady 's bed - room and secrete under the chair cushion , be 
 a most worthless performance , but it make Alfieri an author . always 
 devour by a desire to shine , hitherto by the excellence of his 
 get - up , the beauty of his person , and the number of his horse , it 
 suddenly flash across he that he might shine in future as a 
 poet . this be the turning - point of his life , or what he call his 
 liberation . but , like a man bind in all his limb , and who at length 
 have slip the cord from off one hand , there still remain to Alfieri 
 an infinite amount of struggle , of bitter effort , of hopeless inaction , 
 before he could completely liberate himself from the bond of sloth , of 
 worldly vanity , dissipation , and unworthy love , before he could step 
 forth and walk steadily along the new road which have appear to he . 
 his ignorance be appalling . he could no long construe a line of 
 Latin , he have not for month open a book ; and as to Italian , he know 
 it no well than any piedmontese street porter . his idleness , his habit 
 of absolute vacuity , be even bad ; his desire to shine before the 
 frivolous woman , the inane young man of Turin , nay , merely to have 
 himself , his well - cut coat , his well - frizzle hair , the horse he ride or 
 drive , notice by any chance loafer in the street , be another almost 
 incredible obstacle ; and , bad of all , there be his degrade serfdom 
 to a woman whom he know he neither love nor respect , and who have 
 never love , still less respected , he . but Alfieri , once awaken out 
 of that strange long torpor of his youth , be able to put forth as 
 active and invincible force all that extraordinary obstinacy , that 
 morose doggedness , that indifference to comfort and pleasure , that 
 brutal violence which have more than once , in their negative condition , 
 make he seem more like some wild animal or half - savage monomaniac 
 than an ordinary young man under five - and - twenty . he have , moreover , at 
 this moment , when all the energy of his nature suddenly burst out , a 
 power of deliberate , complacent , and pitiless moral self - vivisection , a 
 power of perform upon his character such cut and rip - open 
 operation as he think beneficial to himself , which make one think of 
 the abnormal faculty of endure pain , the abnormal and almost cruel 
 satisfaction in examine the mechanism of one 's own suffering , 
 occasionally display by hysterical woman ; and which bring back the 
 impression already convey by the morbid sensitiveness , the frenzied 
 violence , the moody torpor of his youth , that there be something 
 abnormal in Alfieri 's whole nature . he be now employ that very 
 hysterical satisfaction in pain and impatience of half measure , to 
 reduce himself , by heroic mean , to at least such moral and mental 
 health as would permit the full exercise of his faculty . there exist 
 a diary of his , write in 1777 , which be an almost unique example 
 of the seemingly cold , but really excited and hysterical kind of 
 self - vivisection of which I have speak . Alfieri have always be 
 extraordinarily truthful , not merely for his time and country , but 
 truthful quite beyond the limit of a mere negative virtue . but he be 
 also , what seem almost incompatible with this ferocious truthfulness , 
 excessively self - conscious and morally attitudinising , a thin - skin 
  poseur . to reconcile these seemingly contradictory characteristic , to 
 become what he wish to appear , to pose as what he be , to make himself 
 up   if I may say so   as himself , to intensify what he recognise as his 
 main characteristic and efface all his other one , now become to 
 Alfieri a sort of unconscious aim of life , closely connect with his 
 avow desire to become a great poet ; " the reason of which desire , " he 
 himself write in his diary , " be my immoderate ambition , which , find 
 no other field , have devote itself entirely to literature . " nothing 
 can be more serious , as I have already remark , than this diary of 
 Alfieri 's struggle , where he note , day by day , the laziness , the 
 meanness , the want of frankness to himself and other , the despicable 
 vanity , the attempt to appear what he be not , the indulged unfounded 
 suspiciousness towards his friend , all the little base defect which 
 must have pain a nature like his more than any real sinfulness , as the 
 prodding of a surgeon 's instrument would have agonise such a man more 
 than an actual amputation . he narrate in extenso all his vacillation 
 about nothing at all , all his giving way to laziness , all his insincere 
 confidence make to other . one morning be consume in debate whether 
 or not he will buy a certain indian walking - stick : " tear by avarice and 
 the ambition of have it , I go away without decide whether I will buy 
 it or not , yet I know full well that before two day be out I shall 
 have buy it . seek to understand this contradiction , I discover 
 a thousand ridiculous dirtiness in my character    mille ridicole 
 porcherie   . " another day he note down , after describe the mean envy 
 with which he have listen to the praise of another member of his 
 little club of dilettante author : " I do believe that as much praise as 
 be be give and will ever be give to all mankind for every sort of 
 praiseworthy thing , I should like to snap up for myself alone . " again , 
 another day he write : " more lazy than ever . walk with a friend , and 
 talk about our income ,   c. I think I be give he a perfectly 
 open account of my money matter ; but , with the good intention of 
 tell he the truth , I find that , in order to deceive myself as well 
 as he , I increase my fortune by one - fifth . " again , " I have some doubt 
 whether , as it be blow hard on the promenade , I would go on as far 
 as where the lady be walk ; because , know that I be look 
 pale and ill , and that the wind have take the powder out of my hair , I 
 be unwilling to show myself in a condition so unsuitable to my 
 pretension to beauty . " 

 but while thus analyze himself , while work at Latin and grammar 
 like a school - boy , this fashionable young man , ashamed of be see when 
 he be not in good look , ashamed of have one horse less than usual , 
 be continually ruminate over the glory for which he intend living , 
 and which he appear never for a moment to have doubt of attain . 
 " in my mind , which be completely give up to the idea of glory , I 
 frequently go over the plan of my life . I determine that at forty - five 
 I will write no more , but merely enjoy the fame which I shall have 
 obtain , or imagine that I have obtain , and prepare myself for death . 
 one thing only make I uneasy : I fear that as I approach the prescribed 
 limit , I may push it continually back , and that at forty - five I may 
 still be think only of continue to live and , perhaps , of continue 
 to scribble . hard as I try to think , or to make other think , that I be 
 different from the rest of mankind , I fear , I tremble lest I be 
 extremely like they . " 

 but in order to devote himself to the pursuit of literary glory , one 
 thing remain to be achieve by this strange , self - conscious , frank , 
 contemptuous , and vain creature , by this young man who , even in his 
 weakness , have a certain heroic air about he . it be necessary to 
 break through the bond of unworthy love . unable to trust any long to 
 his often baffle resolution and self - command , Alfieri devise a 
 primitive and theatrical remedy too much in harmony with his whole 
 nature to be otherwise than efficacious . the lady occupy a house in 
 the great rococo square of San Carlo , opposite to the one which he 
 rent ; she could not go in or out of her door without be see by 
 Alfieri , and the sight of she be too much for he : he invariably break 
 all his resolve and go across the square to his Armida . know this , 
 Alfieri oblige a friend of his to receive from he a solemn write 
 promise to the effect that he would not merely never go to the lady , nor 
 take any notice of her message , but that , until he feel himself 
 absolutely indifferent and beyond her reach , he would go out only in 
 solitary place and at unlikely hour , and spend the great part of the 
 day seat at his window look at her house , see she pass , hear 
 her speak of , receive her letter , without ever approach she 
 or send she the small message . as a pledge of this engagement , 
 Alfieri cut off his long red hair , and send the plait to his friend , 
 leave himself in a state of crop - headedness , which make it utterly 
 impossible , in that day when wig have be give up but short hair have 
 not yet be adopt , for he to appear anywhere . and then he have 
 himself tie to his chair with rope hide under his cloak , and spend 
 day after day look at his mistress ' window , quite unable to read a 
 word or attend to conversation , rag and sob and howl like a 
 demoniac , but never ask to be untie ; until , at the end of a 
 fortnight or three week , he be reward , most characteristically , by 
 be at once deliver of all love for his lady , and inspire with the 
 idea for a sonnet . 

 Alfieri work hard and hard at his latin and italian lesson , 
 sketch out the plan of several play : and , then , in the early summer 
 of 1776 , get together his horse , procure a permission to travel from 
 the King of Sardinia , and set out for Tuscany in order to learn the 
 language in which he be to achieve that great literary glory to which 
 he have dedicate his life . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 the CAVALIERE servente . 


 Alfieri 's great terror in life be to fall in love once more . all his 
 love affair have be degrade to his good sense , his will and his 
 manhood ; they have be odious , even at the moment , to his extraordinary 
 innate passion , or , one might almost say , monomania for independence ; 
 he who even in his dull and most inane year have hat the thought 
 of any sort of military or diplomatic position which should imply 
 subjection to a despotic government , whose only strong feeling about the 
 world in general have long be a fierce hatred and contempt both for 
 those who tyrannise and those who be tyrannise over , this Alfieri 
 have always , as he tell we , flee , though unsuccessfully , from the 
 presence of woman whose social position   though the word sound like a 
 sarcasm   be sufficiently good to make any regular love intrigue 
 possible or probable . how much more must he not defend his liberty now 
 that he see before he the direct road to glory , and feel within himself 
 the power to journey along it . 

 thus it be , as he explain in his autobiography , that on his first 
 arrival in Florence , hear everyone praise the character and talent 
 of the wife of Charles Edward Stuart , and see the beautiful young 
 woman at theatre and in the public promenade , he resolutely decline to 
 be introduce to she . the very charm of the impression which she have 
 thus accidentally make upon he , the vivid image of those very dark eye 
  I be translate his word , and must explain that her eye , which 
 seem blue to bonstetten and dark to Alfieri 's , be in reality of that 
 hazel colour which give great prominence to the pupil , and therefore 
 leave the idea of black eye   contrast with the brilliant fair skin 
 and pale blonde hair , of the graciousness and sweetness and perhaps even 
 a certain sad austerity in her whole appearance and manner , - all this 
 make Alfieri determine to avoid all personal acquaintance . 

 but after some month at Siena , where his thought have be entirely 
 absorb in the literary project which he discuss with his new 
 friend , the grave and good and serious - minded Gori , and one or two 
 sienese professor , after that first feeling of attraction have die 
 away , and he feel himself cover , as it be , with an impenetrable 
 armour of poetic interest , Alfieri decide , on his return to Florence , 
 that he be quite sufficiently of a new man to expose himself without 
 any danger to such a lady as the Countess of Albany . he be , after all , 
 a different individual from that inane , dull , violent young man who in 
 the vacuity of life have rag and roar in the chain of unworthy love . 
 and she , she also , be quite a different woman from the Lady Ligonier 
 and from the Marchesa di Prié , the shameless , unfaithful wife , and 
 heartless , vain , worldly coquette who have make such havoc of his heart . 
 she be a cold , virtuous , extremely intellectual woman , try to 
 find consolation for she quietly and bravely support misery in 
 study , in abstract interest which should take away her thought from 
 the sicken reality of thing ; a woman who would be valuable as a 
 friend to a poet , and who would know how to value his friendship . and 
 he , continually seek for people who could understand his literary 
 ambition , with whom he could discuss all his poetical project , and 
 from whom he might receive assistance in this new intellectual life , 
 be he not in need of such a friendship ? would he not appreciate its 
 usefulness and uniqueness sufficiently to see that it do not turn to a 
 mere useless and demoralise love affair ? there may also have be 
 something very reassuring to Alfieri 's apprehension in the knowledge 
 that he would be deal , not with an italian woman , accustom and 
 almost socially oblige to hold a man in the degrading bond of 
 cicisbeism , but with a foreigner , the jealously - guard wife of a sort 
 of legendary ogre , with whom , however much the old fury of love might 
 awaken in he , there could by no possibility be anything beyond the most 
 strictly watch friendship . so Alfieri go to the palace of the Count 
 of Albany ; and , have once be , return there . 

 the palace buy by Charles Edward about 1776 stand in the most remote 
 and peaceful quarter of Florence . a few quiet street , unbroken by 
 shop - front and unfrequented by vehicle , lead up to that quarter ; 
 street of low white - wash convent wall overtop by tree , of silent 
 palace , of unpretende little house of the seventeenth or eighteenth 
 century , from behind whose iron window - grating and blister green 
 shutter one expect even now , as one pass in the silence of the 
 summer afternoon , to hear the faint jangle of some harpsichord - strum 
 minuet , the turn and sudden high note of some long - forget song by 
 Cimarosa or Paisiello . it be a region of dead wall , over which bend 
 the acacia and elm , over which shoot up the cypress and cedar 
 of innumerable convent and palace - garden , on whose flower - bed and 
 fountain and quincunxe the first - floor window look down . in the midst 
 of all this , at the corner of two very quiet street , stand the palace , 
 now of the Duke of San Clemente , an ungainly , yellow structure of 
 various epoch , with a pretty late sixteenth - century belvedere tower on 
 one side ; a lot of shuttered and heavily - grate seventeenth - century 
 window , ornament with stone stay - lace and tag , upon the dark 
 street ; and to the back a desolate old garden , where the vine have 
 crawl over the stonework , and the grotesque seventeenth - century 
 statue , green and yellow with lichen , stand in niche among the 
 ill - trim hedge of ilex and laurel : the most old - world house and 
 garden in the old - world part of the town . the eighteenth century still 
 seem very near as we walk in those street and look in , through the 
 railing , at the ilex and laurel quincunxe , the lichene statue of 
 that garden ; and from the roof of the house still float , creak in 
 the wind , regardless of the triumph of the Hanoverians , unconscious of 
 the many banner which have be throw , mere heap of obsolete colour 
 tatter , on the dust - heap , a rusty metal weather - vane , bear the 
 initial of Carolus Rex , the last successor of the standard that be 
 raise in Glenfinnan . 

 in this house be now develop one of the most singular love that 
 ever be . shortly after his introduction to the Countess of Albany , 
 Alfieri , terrify lest he might be forfeit his spiritual liberty 
 once more , take to flight and try to forget the lady in a mad journey 
 to Rome . but he have not forget she ; and on his passage through Siena , 
 return to Florence , he have explain his feeling , his fear , to 
 his friend Francesco Gori . this Gori , a young Sienese of the middle 
 class , extremely cultured , of " antique uprightness , " to use the 
 eighteenth - century phrase , seem to have take to his heart , as one 
 might some wild young brother , or some eccentric , moody child , the 
 strange , self - engross , passionate Piedmontese . a gentle , grave , and 
 quiet man , he have love the magnanimity and independence so curiously 
 mingle with mere vanity and egotism in Alfieri 's nature ; he have never 
 tired of hear his friend 's plan for the future , have never smile at 
 his almost comic certainty of supreme greatness , he have never lose 
 patience with the self - meritorious egotism which make all Alfieri 's 
 action seem the one interest of the world in Alfieri 's own eye . to 
 Francesco Gori , therefore , Alfieri go for advice : ought he , or ought 
 he not , to fly from this new love while it be still possible to do so ? 

 the grave and virtuous Gori answer that he should not : this new love 
 have be send to he as a cure for all base love ; instead of crush 
 it as an obstacle to his high life and his glory , he should thankfully 
 cultivate it as an incentive and assistance in work out his 
 intellectual redemption . 

 let we pause , and consider for a moment the meaning of Alfieri 's 
 question , and the meaning of Gori 's answer ; let we try and realise the 
 idea and feeling of two honourable man , seek a high life , in a 
 country so near our own as Italy , and so short a while ago as the year 
 1777 . here be Alfieri , passionately desirous to redeem his own 
 existence by intellectual effort , and confident of a vague mission to 
 awaken his countryman to his own nobler feeling : to the contempt of 
 sensual pleasure and worldly vanity , the hatred of political and 
 religious servitude , the love of truth and justice , the love of Italy . 
 here be this Alfieri , at the very outset of his new career , solemnly 
 confide to his kind and wise friend the scruple , the fear , 
 which restrain he from seek the company of a woman whom he be 
 begin to love , and who be begin to love he , a young woman 
 marry by mere worldly convention to a sickly , brutal , and brutish 
 drunkard , old enough to be her father . and what be these scruple ? 
 merely that a new love might distract Alfieri from his plan of study 
 and work , that a woman might cheat he of glory , and Italy of the tragic 
 drama which would school she to virtue . that there could be any other 
 scruple appear never to have cross Alfieri 's brain : that there could 
 be any reason to pause and ask himself whether he be do wrong or ill 
 before expose to temptation the woman whom he love , and the honour 
 which he love more than she ; whether he have a right to return to the 
 palace of Charles Edward and , while receive his hospitality , while 
 enjoy his confidence , to teach the wife of his host how to love 
 another man than her husband ; whether he have a right to return to the 
 presence of that beautiful and intellectual lady , who have hitherto 
 suffer only from the brutishness of her husband , and add to these 
 suffering the suffering of hopeless love , the suffering of a guilty 
 conscience ? 

 but to the Italian of the eighteenth century , even to the man who most 
 thoroughly despise and loathe his country 's and century 's corruption , 
 no such scruple ever come . what consideration need any man or any woman 
 waste upon a husband ? what possible disgrace could come to a woman 
 in have a lover ? and do not the frantic jealousy of the besotte 
 old husband , his continual attendance , his perpetual spying , most 
 effectually remove any further consideration there might be for he ? 

 I scarcely know whether it be a thing about which to be cheerful or sad , 
 proud or ashamed ; but the more one study the idea and feeling of 
 even one 's near neighbour , in place or in time , the more be one 
 impress with the sense that , say what people choose , man and woman do 
 not think and feel , even upon the most important subject , in anything 
 like a uniform manner . social misarrangement , which be crime towards 
 the individual , be invariably partially right , make endurable , by 
 individual rearrangement , which be crime towards society . the woman 
 be not consult by her parent before her marriage , she be not 
 restrain by her conscience afterwards ; she be give for ambition to a 
 man whose tenure of she receive legal and religious sanction ; she give 
 herself for love to a man whose possession of she be against society 
 and against religion ; but society receive she to its party , and the 
 Church give she its communion . and thus , in Italy , and in the eighteenth 
 century , where no one have find any fault at a girl of nineteen be 
 marry by proxy to a man who turn out to be a disgusting and brutal 
 sot ; no one also could find any fault at a young man of twenty - eight 
 seeking , and obtain , the love of a married woman of twenty - five . the 
 immoral law have produce the immoral lawlessness . so , to the scruple 
 of Alfieri , Francesco Gori have answer : " return to Florence . " 

 we shall now see how , out of this vile piece of prose , the high nature 
 of Alfieri and of the Countess of Albany , and   what a satire upon poetic 
 and platonic affection !   most of all , the monomaniac jealousy of Charles 
 Edward , contrive to make a sort of poetry . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 the ESCAPE . 


 Alfieri 's fear have be groundless . his love for the wife of Charles 
 Edward Stuart - a love , he tell we , quite different from any he have 
 previously experience , quiet , pure , and solemn - be destine not to 
 interfere with that austere process of detach his soul from the base 
 passion of the world , and devote it to the creation of a new style 
 of poetry , to the achievement of a new kind of glory ; nay , rather , 
 by bring to the surface whatever capacity for tenderness and 
 self - restraint and respect for other have hitherto lurk within this 
 fantastic nature , this new love help to complete that strange 
 monumental personality of Alfieri - a personality more striking , more 
 ideal , than any of those play by which he hop to regenerate Italy , 
 and which have be far more potent than his work in the moral 
 regeneration of his country . Alfieri 's youth have be illiterate and 
 stupid ; and he require , in order to make up for so much waste of time 
 and waste of spirit , that he should now be surround by an atmosphere 
 as intensely intellectual as the atmosphere in which he have previously 
 live have be the reverse . after the long spiritual numbness of his 
 early year , this soul , if it be to be keep alive , must be keep in an 
 almost artificially high spiritual temperature , and continually ply 
 with spiritual cordial . these advantage he obtain in the love , or , 
 we ought rather to say , the friendship of the Countess of Albany , and it 
 be extremely improbable whether he would have obtain they otherwise . 
 irritable and vain and moody , at once excessively persuade of his own 
 dramatic mission and morbidly diffident of his actual power of carry 
 it out , contemptuous of other and of himself , Alfieri , who require 
 such constant sympathy and encouragement in his work , be not the 
 man who could hope to obtain much of either from other man , whom 
 his excessive pretension , his up and down of humour , his very 
 dissatisfaction with himself , must have quickly exhaust of the small 
 amount of brotherly tenderness which seem to exist in the literary 
 brotherhood . he do , indeed , meet a degree of sincere helpfulness and 
 friendliness from the member of the Turinese Literary Club ; from 
 Cesarotti , the translator of Ossian ; from Parini , the great Milanese 
 satirist , and from one or two other man of letter ; which show that 
 there be more kindness in the world than he ever would admit , and 
 confirm I in my remark that he be singularly well treat by fate 
 and mankind . but all this be very lukewarm sympathy ; and except from 
 his two great friend , Francesco Gori and Tommaso di Caluso , a 
 difficult - temper man like Alfieri could receive only lukewarmness . 
 now what he require be sympathy , admiration , adoration , of the most 
 burn description . this be possible , towards such a man , only 
 from a woman . but where find the woman who could give it , among the 
 convent - educate , early corrupted , frivolous lady of Italy , to whom 
 love - making be the high interest in life , but an interest only a 
 trifle high than card - playing , dancing , or dress ? where , even among 
 the very small number of woman like Silvia Verza at Verona , Isabella 
 Albrizzi at Venice , or Paolina Castiglione at Milan , who actually have 
 some amount of culture , and actually pride themselves on it ? the rank 
 and file of italian lady could give he only another Marchesa di Prié , 
 a little well or a little bad , another woman who would degrade 
 he in the sensual and inane routine of a cicisbéo . the exceptional 
 lady be even bad . Fancy this morbid , conceited , self - doubtful , 
 violent , moody Alfieri accept literary sympathy in a room full of 
 small provincial lion - sympathy which have to be divide with half a 
 dozen other ; learn person who edit latin inscription , dapper 
 poet priestlet , their pocket cram with sonnet on lady ' hat , 
 opera - singer , canary bird , birth , death , and marriage , and 
 ponderous pedant of all sort and description . why , a lady who set 
 up as the muse of a hot - temper and brow - beat creature like 
 Alfieri , a man whom consciousness of imperfect education make horribly 
 sensitive - such a lady would have lose all the accustomed guest of her 
  salon in ten day ' time . Herein , therefore , consist the uniqueness 
 of the Countess of Albany , in the fact that she be everything to 
 Alfieri , which no other woman could be . originally well educate than 
 her italian contemporary , the ex - canoness of Mons , half - flemish , 
 half - german by family , french by training , and connect with England 
 through her marriage with the Pretender , have the advantage of open 
 door upon several field of culture . she could read the book of four 
 different nation - a very rare accomplishment in her day ; and she be , 
 moreover , one of those woman , rarer even in the eighteenth century than 
 now - a - day , whose nature , while unproductive in any particular line , be 
 intensely and almost exclusively intellectual , and in the intellectual 
 domain even more intensely and almost exclusively literary - woman who 
 be bear reader , to whom a new poem be as great an excitement as a new 
 toilette , a treatise of philosophy   we shall see the Countess devouring 
 Kant long before he have be hear of out of Germany   more exquisitely 
 delightful than a symphony . and this woman , thus educate , with this 
 immense fund of intellectual energy , be live , not a normal life with 
 the normal distracting influence of an endurable husband , of child 
 and society , but a life of frightful mental and moral isolation , by the 
 side , or rather in the loathsome shadow , of a degrade , sordid , violent , 
 and jealous brute , from the reality of whose beastly excess and 
 bestial fury , of whose vomiting and oath and outrage and blow , she 
 could take refuge only in the unreal world of book . 

 with such a woman , Alfieri , accept as an intimate by the husband , who 
 doubtless think one hare - brain poet more easy to manage than two or 
 three fashionable gallant - with such a woman as this , Alfieri might 
 talk over plan of self - culture and work , his play , his essay on 
 liberty and literature , and all the thing by which he intend to 
 redeem Italy and make himself immortal , without any fear of his listener 
 ever grow weary ; from she he could receive that passionate sympathy 
 and encouragement without which life and work be impossible to he . 
 for we must bear in mind what a man like Alfieri , in the heyday of his 
 youth , his beauty , and that genius which be the indomitable energy and 
 independence of his nature , must have be in the eye of the Countess 
 of Albany . she have be marry at nineteen - she be now twenty - six : in 
 those seven year of suffering there have be ample time to obliterate 
 all trace of the frivolous , worldly girl whom Bonstetten have see 
 light - heartedly laugh at her old husband 's joke ; there have be 
 plenty of time to produce in this excessively intellectual nature that 
 vague dissatisfaction , that desire for the ideal , which be the price too 
 often pay for the consolation of mere abstract and literary interest . 
 the pressure of constant disgust and terror at her husband 's doing , the 
 terrible mental and moral solitude of live by such a husband 's side , 
 have probably work up Louise d'Albany to the very high and almost 
 morbid refinement of nature - a refinement far surpass the normal 
 condition of her character , even as the extra fining off of already 
 delicate feature by illness will make they surpass by far their healthy 
 degree of beauty . in such a mental condition the sense of what her 
 husband be must have exasperate her imagination quite as much as his 
 actual loathsomeness must have repel her feeling ; the knowledge of 
 the frightful moral and intellectual fall of Charles Edward must have 
 be as bad as the filthy place to which he have fall . and opposite to 
 the image of the Pretender must constantly have arise the image of 
 Alfieri - opposite to the image of the man , once heroic and charming and 
 brilliant , who have sell his heroism and his charm , his mind and his 
 manhood , for the bestial pleasure of drink - who have reward the 
 devotion and self - sacrifice and noble enthusiasm of his follower 
 by the sight , bad than the scaffold on Tower Hill , of their idol 
 turn into a half - maniac , besotte brute ; opposite to this image of 
 degradation must have arise the image of the man who have wrestle with 
 the base passion of his nature , who have break through the base habit 
 of his youth , who have fashion himself into a noble moral shape as the 
 marble be fashion by the hand of the sculptor ; who be struggle 
 still , not merely with the difficulty of his art , but with whatever he 
 think mean and slothful in himself . 

 some eighteen month after their first acquaintance , Alfieri announce 
 to the wife of Charles Edward that he have just happily settle a most 
 important piece of business , the success of which be one of the most 
 fortunate thing of his life . he have make a gift of all his estate to 
 his sister , reserve for himself only a very moderate yearly income ; he 
 have reduce himself from comparative wealth to comparative poverty ; he 
 have cut himself off from ever make a suitable marriage ; he have make 
 himself a pensioner of his sister 's husband : but at this price he have 
 buy independence - he be no long the subject of the King of 
 Sardinia , nor of any sovereign or state in the world . 

 the passion for political liberty , the abhorrence of any kind of 
 despotism , however glorious or however paternal , have grow in Alfieri 
 with every journey he have make through France , Spain , Germany , 
 Russia - with every sojourn in England ; it have grow with every page of 
 Livy and Tacitus , with every line of Dante and Petrarch which he have 
 read ; it have grow with every word that he himself have write . he have 
 determine to be the poet who should make man ashamed of be slave 
 and ashamed of be tyrant . but he be himself the subject of the 
 little military despotism of Piedmont , whose noble require , every 
 time they wish to travel or live abroad , to beg civilly for leave of 
 absence , which be usually most uncivilly grant ; and one of whose law 
 threaten any person who should print book in foreign country , and 
 without the permission of the sardinian censor , with a heavy fine , and , 
 if necessary , with corporal chastisement . 

 in order to become a poet , Alfieri require to become a free agent ; and 
 the only way to become a free agent , to break through the bar of what 
 he call his " abominable native cage , " the only way to obtain the power 
 of write what he wish to write , be to give up all his fortune , and 
 live upon the charity of the relative whom he have enrich . so , during 
 the past month , he have be in constant correspondence with his sister , 
 his brother - in - law , and his lawyer ; and now he have succeed in rid 
 himself of all his estate and all his capital . the Countess of Albany 
 know Alfieri sufficiently well by this time to understand that this 
 alienation of all his property be a real sacrifice . Alfieri be the 
 vain and most ostentatious of man ; young , handsome , showy and 
 eccentric , accustom to cut a grand figure wherever he go , it must 
 have cost he a twinge to be oblige to reduce his hitherto brilliant 
 establishment , to dismiss nearly all his servant , to sell most of his 
 horse , to exchange his embroider velvet and satin for a plain black 
 coat for the evening , and a plain blue coat for the afternoon . the bad 
 sacrifice of all he doubtless confide , with savage bitterness , to the 
 Countess , as he confide it to the reader of his autobiography , it be 
 to resign the nominal service of Piedmont - to put aside , for good and 
 all , that brilliant sardinian uniform in which he look to such 
 advantage . we can imagine how this subject be talk over - how Alfieri , 
 with that savage pleasure of his in the self - infliction of pain and 
 humiliation , expose to the Countess all the little , mean motif which 
 have deter he or which have encourage he in his liberation from 
 political servitude ; we can imagine how she chide he for his rash step , 
 and how , at the same time , she feel a delicious pride in the meanness 
 which he so frankly reveal , in the rashness which she so severely 
 reprove ; we can imagine how the thought of Alfieri , who have thus 
 sacrifice fortune , luxury , vanity , to the desire to be free , meet in the 
 Countess of Albany 's mind the thought of Charles Edward , live the 
 pensioner of a sovereign who have insult he and of a sovereign whom he 
 have cheat , spend in liquor the money which France have pay he to 
 get himself an heir and the stuart another king . 

 a strange and dangerous situation , but one whose danger be completely 
 neutralise . of all the various person who speak of the extraordinary 
 friendship between Vittorio Alfieri and Louise d'Albany which exist at 
 this time , not one even venture to hint that the relation between 
 they exceed in the slight degree the limit of mere passionate 
 friendship ; and the solemn word of Alfieri , in whom truthfulness be 
 not merely an essential part of his natural character , but an even more 
 essential part of his self - idealise personality , merely confirm the 
 word of all contemporary writer . now , if there be a country where an 
 intrigue between a woman note for her virtue and a poet note for his 
 eccentricity would , have it exist , have be joyfully lay hold of by 
 gossip , it be certainly this utterly - demoralise Italy of cavalieri 
 serventi : every fashionable woman and every fast man would have feel a 
 personal satisfaction in tear to piece the reputation of a lady 
 whose whole character and life have be a censure upon theirs . but , as 
 there be woman the intensity of whose pure - mindedness , feel in every 
 feature and gesture and word , paralyse even the most ribald wish to 
 shock or outrage , and momentarily drag up towards themselves the very 
 people who would dearly love to drag they down even for a second ; so 
 also it would appear that there be situation so strange , meeting of 
 individual so exceptional , that calumny itself be unable to attack 
 they . no one say a word against Alfieri and the Countess ; and Charles 
 Edward himself , jealous as he be of any kind of interference in his 
 concern , appear never to have attempt to rid himself of his wife 's 
 new friend . 

 much , of course , must be set down to the very madness of the Pretender 's 
 jealousy , to his more than oriental systematic guarding and watching of 
 his wife . Mann , we must remember , have write , long before Alfieri 
 appear upon the scene , that Charles Edward never go out without his 
 wife and never let she go out without he ; he barricade her apartment , 
 and be never far off than the next room . Charles Edward undoubtedly 
 confer upon two people , live in a day of excessive looseness of 
 manner , the inestimable advantage of confine their love within the 
 bound of friendship , of crush all that might have be base , of 
 liberate all that could be noble , of turn what might have be 
 merely a passion after the pattern of Rousseau into a passion after the 
 pattern of Dante . but what Charles Edward could not do , what no human 
 being or accidental circumstance could bring about , be due to the 
 special nature of Alfieri and of the Countess ; namely , that this strange 
 platonic passion , instead of die out after a very brief time , merely 
 intensify , become long - live , inextinguishable , nay continue , in its 
 absolute austerity and purity , long after every obstacle and restraint 
 have be remove , except the obstacle and restraint which , from the 
 very ideality of its own nature , increase for itself . and , if we look 
 fact calmly in the face , and , let alone all poetical jargon , ask 
 ourselves the plain psychological explanation , we see that such thing 
 not only could , but , consider the character of the Countess of Albany 
 and of Alfieri , must have be . the Countess have find in Alfieri the 
 satisfaction of those intellectual and ideal craving which in a nature 
 like her , and in a situation like her , must have be the strong 
 and most durable necessity . Alfieri , on the other hand , sick of his 
 past life , mortally afraid of fall once more under the tyranny of his 
 base nature , seek on all side assistance in that terrible struggle 
 of the wing intellect out of the caterpillar cocoon in which it have 
 lain torpid so long , be work up , if ever a man be , to the pitch of 
 enjoying , of desire a mere intellectual passion just in proportion as 
 it be absolutely and completely intellectual . 

 a poet especially in his conception of his own personality , an artist 
 who manipulate his own nature , a poseur whose pose be his 
 concentrated self clear of all thing which recall the vulgar herd ; 
 moreover , a furiously literary temper with a mad devotion to Dante and 
 Petrarch : Alfieri must have find in this love , which fate in the 
 Pretender 's person ordain to be platonic , the crown characteristic 
 of his present personality , the almost miraculous confirmation of his 
 mystic relationship to the lover of Beatrice and the lover of Laura . 
 and , in the knowledge of what he be to this poor , torment young 
 wife ; in the consciousness of be the only ray of light in this 
 close - shutter prison - nay , rather bedlam - like existence ; in the sense 
 of how completely the happiness of Louise d'Albany depend upon 
 he , whatever there be of generous and dutiful in the selfish and 
 self - willed nature of Alfieri must have become paramount , and enjoin 
 upon he never to vacillate or grow weary in this strange mixture of 
 love and of friendship . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 ROME . 


 this strange intellectual passion , the meeting , as it be , of two 
 long - repressed , long solitary intellectual life , austerely satisfy 
 with itself and contemptuous of all base love , might have suffice for 
 the happiness of two such over - wrought nature as be at that moment 
 Vittorio Alfieri and Louise d'Albany . 

 but there could be no happiness for the wife of the Pretender , and no 
 happiness , therefore , for the man who see she the daily victim of the 
 cantankerousness , the grossness and the violence of her drunken husband . 
 to an imaginative mind , love in thing rather the ideal than the 
 reality , strive for ever after some poetical or heroic model of love 
 and of life , try to be at once a patriot out of Plutarch and a 
 lover after the fashion of the Vita Nuova , there be few trial more 
 exasperating than to have to see the real creature who for the moment 
 embody one 's ideal , the creature whom one carefully garland with 
 flower and hang round with lamp , raise above all vulgar thing in 
 the niche in one 's imagination , elbow by brutish reality , bespatter 
 with ignoble misery . and this Alfieri have constantly to bear . 
 perhaps the very knowledge of the actual suffering , of the unjust 
 recrimination , the cruel violence , the absolute fear of death , among 
 which Louise d'Albany spend her life , be not so difficult for her lover 
 to bear as to see she , the beautiful and high - minded lady of his heart , 
 seat in her opera box near the sofa where the red and tumid - faced 
 Pretender lie snore , wake up , as Mann describe he , only to summon 
 his lacquey to assist he in a fit of drunken sickness , or to be 
 carry , like a dead swine , with hang bloated head and powerless 
 arm , down - stair to his carriage ; not so difficult to bear as to hear 
 she , his Beatrice , his Laura , make the continual victim of her bullying 
 husband 's childish bad - temper , of his foul - mouthed abuse , to hear it and 
 have to sit by in silence , dependent upon the good grace of a besotte 
 ruffian against whom Alfieri 's hand must have continually itch . 

 a little poem , poor , like all Alfieri 's lyric , write about this time , 
 and complain of have to see a beautiful pure rose drag through 
 ignoble filth , show that Alfieri , like most poetical mind , resent 
 the vulgar and the disgusting much more than he would have resent what 
 one may call clean tragedy . but thing get bad and bad , and the real 
 tragedy threaten . Charles Edward have outrage and beat his mistress ; 
 old and much more profoundly degrade , he now outrage and beat his 
 wife . in 1780 Sir Horace Mann report upon the " cruel and indecent 
 behaviour " of which Mme . d'Albany be the victim . ill - treatment and 
 terror be begin to undermine her health , and there can be no 
 doubt , I think , that the symptom of a nervous disorder , of which she 
 complain a couple of year later to Alfieri 's bosom friend Gori , must 
 originally have be produce in this unusually robust young woman by 
 the horrible treatment to which she be at this time subject . Mme . 
 d'Albany , who have astonish the world by her resignation , appear to 
 have fairly take fright ; she write to her brother - in - law Cardinal 
 York , entreat he to protect she from her husband . the weak - minded , 
 conscientious cardinal be not the man to take any bold step ; he promise 
 his sister - in - law all possible assistance if she be drive to 
 extremity , but beg she to endure a little long and save he the 
 pain of a scandal . so the Countess of Albany , long since abandon by 
 her own kith and kin , abandon also by her brother - in - law , alone in the 
 world between a husband who be daily become more and more of a wild 
 beast , and a lover who be fearful of give any advice which might 
 compromise her reputation or separate they for ever , go on suffering . 

 but the moment come when she could suffer no more . at the beginning of 
 the winter of 1780 , the celebration of St. Andrew 's day by Charles 
 Edward and his drinking companion , be follow by a scene over which 
 Alfieri drop a modest veil , call it vaguely a violent bacchanal 
 which endanger the life of his lady . from the biographer of Charles 
 Edward we learn that the Pretender rouse his wife in the middle of 
 the night with a torrent of insult language which provoke she to 
 vehement recrimination ; that he beat she , commit foul act upon she , 
 and finish off with attempt to choke she in her bed , in which he 
 would probably have succeed have the servant not be wake by the 
 Countess 's scream and drag Charles Edward away . 1 

 Alfieri , partly from an honourable reluctance to see his lady make the 
 heroine of a public scandal , and partly , no doubt , from the more selfish 
 fear lest a separation from her husband might imply a separation also 
 from her lover , have long persist in advise the Countess against any 
 extreme measure . Alfieri tell we that with the desire for freedom of 
 speech and writing at the bottom of his act of self - spoliation in his 
 sister 's favour , there have mingle a sense also that by break all 
 connection with Piedmont , and liberate himself from all temptation of 
 marry for the sake of his family , he be , in a manner , secure the 
 continuation of his relation with Mme . d'Albany . the Countess 's flight 
 from her husband , they both well know , would in all probability put an 
 end to these relation ; the Catholic Church could grant no divorce , and 
 Charles Edward would probably refuse a separation ; so that the honour , 
 nay , the life of the fugitive wife would be safe only in a convent , 
 whence Alfieri would be exclude together with Charles Edward . the 
 choice be a hard one to make ; the choice between a life of peace and 
 safety , but separate from all that make life dear to she , and a life 
 console by the presence of Alfieri , but make wretched and absolutely 
 endanger by the violence of a drunken maniac . but after that frightful 
 night of St. Andrew no choice remain ; to remain under the Pretender 's 
 roof be equivalent for his wife either to a violent death in another 
 such fit of madness , or to a linger death from sheer misery and daily 
 terror . the Countess of Albany must leave her husband . 

 to effectuate this be the work of Alfieri - of Alfieri , who , of all 
 man , be most interested to keep Mme . d'Albany in her husband 's house ; 
 of Alfieri , who , of all man , be the least fit for any kind of 
 underhand practice . the actual plot for escape be the least part of 
 the business ; the conspiracy would have utterly miscarry , and Mme . 
 d'Albany have be condemn to a life of much bad agony , have not 
 provision be make against the Pretender 's certain effort to get his 
 wife back . Mme . d'Albany may have remember how her mother - in - law 
 Clementina Sobieska , although protect by the Pope , have be eventually 
 get out of the convent whither she have escape , and have be restore 
 to her husband the Pretender James ; she be probably aware , also , 
 how Charles Edward have storm at the french Government to have Miss 
 Walkenshaw send back to he from the convent at Meaux . no government 
 could give a man back his mistress , but it be different with a wife ; 
 and both Alfieri and the Countess must have know full well that 
 however lax the Grand Ducal Court might be on the subject of conjugal 
 infidelity , when quietly carry on under the domestic roof and 
 dignify by the name of serventismo , no court , no society , could do 
 otherwise than virtuously resent so great a turpitude as a wife publicly 
 run away by herself from her husband 's house . it become necessary to 
 win over the sympathy of those in power , to secure their connivance , 
 or at all event their neutrality ; and this task of talk , flattering , 
 wheedling , imploring , fall to Alfieri , whose sense of self - debasement 
 appear to have be mitigate only by the knowledge that he be work 
 for the good of a guiltless and miserable woman , of the woman whom he 
 love more than the whole world ; by the bitter knowledge that the 
 success of his effort , the liberation of his beloved , mean also the 
 sacrifice of that intercourse which make the happiness of his life . 

 Alfieri succeed ; the Grand Duke and the Grand Duchess be win over . 
 the actual flight alone remain to be accomplish . 

  2 in the first day of December 1780 a certain Mme . Orlandini , a 
 half irish lady connect with the Jacobite Ormonds , be invite to 
 breakfast at the palace in the Via San Sebastiano . she skilfully lead 
 the conversation into a discussion on needle - work , and suggest that 
 the Countess of Albany should go and see the last embroidery produce 
 at the convent of Bianchette , a now long - suppress establishment in 
 the adjoining Via del Mandorlo . the Countess of Albany order she 
 carriage for immediately after breakfast , and the two lady drive off , 
 accompany , of course , by Charles Edward , who never permit his wife 
 to go out without he . near the convent - gate they meet a Mr. Gahagan , an 
 Irish Jacobite and the official cavaliere servente of Mme . Orlandini , 
 who , hear that they be go to pay a visit to the nun , offer to 
 accompany they . Gahagan help out the Countess and Mme . Orlandini , who 
 rapidly run up the flight of step lead to the convent door ; he then 
 offer his arm to Charles Edward , whose leg be disable by dropsy . 
 lean on Gahagan 's arm , the Pretender be slowly make his way up the 
 step when his companion , look up , suddenly exclaim that the two 
 lady have already enter the convent and that the nun have stupidly 
 and rudely shut the door in his and the Count of Albany 's face . " they 
 will soon have to open , " answer Charles Edward , and begin to knock 
 violently . Mr. Gahagan doubtless knock also . but no answer come . at 
 length the door open , and there appear behind a grating no less a 
 person than the Lady Abbess , who ceremoniously inform the Count that 
 she be unable to let he in , as his wife have seek an asylum in her 
 convent under the protection of her Highness the Grand Duchess of 
 Tuscany . 

 Sir Horace Mann say that Alfieri , who be not mention in the very 
 circumstantial narrative of Dutens , be hang about the convent , 
 in order to prevent the Pretender , who always carry pistol in his 
 pocket , from commit any violence . this seem extremely unlikely , 
 as the first use to which Charles Edward would naturally have put 
 his pistol would have be shoot Alfieri , for whose murder he 
 immediately offer a thousand sequin . at any rate , rag like a 
 maniac , the discomfited husband go back to his empty house . 

 it would be pretty and pathetic to insert in this part of my narrative a 
 page of half - condemnatory condolence with Charles Edward . but this I 
 find it perfectly impossible to do . of course , if we call to mind 
 Falkirk and Skye , if we conjure up in our fancy the Prince Charlie who 
 still live in the thought of Flora MacDonald , there be something very 
 frightful in this tragi - comic flight of the Countess of Albany : the 
 slamming of that convent door in his face be the bad injury , the bad 
 injustice , the bad ignominy reserve by fate for the last of the 
 unhappy stuart . 

 but of the Charles Edward of the Forty - five there remain so little in 
 this Count of Albany that we have no right to consider they any long 
 as one individual , to condone the brutishness of the Count of Albany for 
 the sake of the chivalry of Prince Charles , to degrade our conception of 
 the young man by tack on to it the just ignominy inflict upon the 
 old man , the man who have inherit his name and position , but scarcely 
 his personality . above all , we have no right to add to whatever reproach 
 we may think fit to shower upon the Countess of Albany and on Alfieri , 
 the imaginary reproach that the husband whose right they be violate 
 be the victor of Gladsmuir and Falkirk . 

 there must always be something which shock we in the behaviour , 
 however otherwise innocent and decorous , of a woman who run away 
 from her husband with the assistance of her lover ; but this quality of 
 offensiveness be not , in such a case as the present one , a fault of 
 the woman : it be one of her undeserved misfortune , as much as be the 
 bad treatment , the solitude , the temptation , to which she have be 
 subject . the evil practice of the world , its folly and wickedness in 
 permit that a girl like Louise of Stolberg should be married to a 
 man like Charles Edward , its injustice and cruelty in forbid the 
 legal breaking of such an unrighteous contract ; the evil practice of the 
 world which condemn the Countess of Albany to be for so much of her 
 life an unhappy woman , also condemn she to be in some of her action a 
 woman deserve of blame . we shall see far on how , in the attempt to 
 work out their happiness in despite of the evil world in which they 
 live , the Countess and Alfieri , infinitely intellectually and morally 
 superior to many of we whom circumstance permit to live blameless and 
 comfortable , be splash with the mud of unrighteousness , which be 
 foreign to their nature , and remain spot in the eye of posterity . 

 Charles Edward do what he have do once before in his life : he apply 
 to the Government to put he again in possession of the woman whom he 
 have victimise ; but as the French Government have refuse to recognise 
 his claim over his fugitive mistress , so the Government of the Grand 
 Duke of Tuscany now refuse to give he back his fugitive wife . the 
 Countess of Albany have naturally take no clothe with she in her 
 flight ; and she presently send a maid to the palace in Via San Sebastiano 
 to fetch such thing as she might require . but Charles Edward would not 
 permit a single one of her effect to be touch ; if she want she 
 clothe and trinket , she might come and fetch they herself . however , 
 after a few day , a message come from the Pope , order the pretender 
 to supply his wife with whatever she might require ; a threat to suspend 
 the pension be probably express or imply , for Charles Edward 
 immediately obey . 

 meanwhile , the Countess of Albany be anxiously await at the convent 
 of the Bianchette a decision from her brother - in - law , to whom she have 
 write immediately after her flight . those first day must have be 
 painfully unquiet . what if the Tuscan Court should listen to the Count 
 of Albany 's entreaty ? what if Cardinal York should take part with his 
 brother ? return to the house of her husband would be death or bad 
 than death . Cardinal York answer immediately : a long , kind , rather 
 weak - minded letter , the ideal letter of a well - intentione , rather 
 silly priest , in curious anglo - roman French . he inform she that for 
 some time past he have expect to hear of her flight from her husband ; 
 he protest that he have have no hand in her unhappy marriage , and beg 
 she to believe that it have be out of his power to protect she . he have 
 inform the Pope of the whole affair , and with his Holiness ' approval 
 have prepare for his sister - in - law a temporary asylum in the Ursuline 
 convent in Rome , whither he invite she to remove as soon as possible . 
 in January 1781 the Countess of Albany , accompany by a Mme . de Marzan , 
 who appear to have form part of her household , and two maid , start 
 for Rome ; but such have be the threat of Charles Edward , and his 
 raving to get his wife back , that Alfieri and Gahagan , armed and 
 dress as servant , accompany the carriage a considerable part of its 
 way . the Pretender , we must remember , have offer a thousand sequin to 
 anyone who would kill Alfieri ; and even in that humdrum late eighteenth 
 century a man of position might easily hire a couple of ruffian to 
 waylay a carriage and kidnap a woman . 

 the Countess of Albany be instal in the Ursuline convent in Via 
 Vittoria , a street near the Piazza di Spagna . a gloomy family memory 
 hang about the place : it have be the asylum of Clementina Sobieska when 
 she have flee from the eld Pretender as Louise d'Albany have flee from 
 the young . but the wife of Charles Edward be in a very different mood 
 from the wife of James III . ; and it be probable that , despite the many 
 charm of the convent , and the excellent manner of its aristocratic 
 inmate , upon which Cardinal York have lay great store , the Countess , 
 with her heart full of the thought of Alfieri , be not at all incline 
 to give her pious brother - in - law the satisfaction , which he apparently 
 expect , of develop a sudden vocation for Heaven . 

 she have leave Florence at the end of the year ; in the spring she see 
 Alfieri again . the quiet work which have seem so natural and easy while 
 he be sure of see his lady every day , have become quite impossible to 
 he . he feel that he ought to remain in Florence , that he ought not to 
 follow she to Rome . but Florence have become insufferable to he ; and 
 he determine to remove to Naples , because to get to Naples it be 
 necessary to pass through Rome . the melancholy barren approach to the 
 Eternal City , which , three year before , have inspire Alfieri with 
 nothing but melancholy and disgust , now seem to he a sort of earthly 
 paradise ; and Rome , which he hat , as the most delightful of place . 
 he hurry to the Ursuline convent , and be admit to speak to the 
 Countess of Albany . " I see she , " he write many year later , " but   o God ! 
 my heart seem to break at the mere recollection   I see she a prisoner 
 behind a grating ; less tormented than in Florence , but yet not less 
 unhappy . we be separate , and who could tell how long our separation 
 might not last ? but , while cry , I try to console myself with the 
 thought that she might at least recover her health , that she would 
 breathe freely , and sleep peacefully , no long tremble at every 
 moment before the indivisible shadow of her drunken husband ; that she 
 might , in short , live . " 




 CHAPTER X. 

 antigone . 


 about three month after the Countess of Albany 's flight from her 
 husband , the Pope grant her permission to leave the Ursuline convent ; 
 and her brother - in - law , Cardinal York , offer her hospitality in his 
 magnificent palace of the Cancelleria . Alfieri be at Naples when he 
 receive this news , rid gloomily along the sea - shore , weeping 
 profusely   for we must remember that to an italian , especially of the 
 eighteenth century , there be no incongruity in a would - be ancient roman 
 shed love - sick tear , unable to give his attention to work , live , 
 as he express it , on the come in and go out of the post . " I 
 wish to return to Rome , " he write , " and at the same time I feel very 
 keenly that I ought not to do it yet . the struggle between love and 
 duty which take place in an honourable and tender heart , be the most 
 terrible and mortal pain that a man can suffer . I delay throughout 
 April , and I determine to drag on through May ; but on the 12th May I 
 find myself , I scarcely know how , back in Rome . " 

 Alfieri find the Countess of Albany establish in the palace of the 
 Cancelleria , the mistress of the establishment , for her brother - in - law 
 be live in his episcopal town of Frascati . they be free to see each 
 other as much as they choose , to love each other as much as they would ; 
 for the Cardinal and the priestly circle seem to have go completely 
 to sleep in the presence of this critical situation ; and the habit of 
 roman society , which be even a shade bad than those of Florence , 
 be not such as to give umbrage to the lover . but those year during 
 which they have love under the vigilant jealousy of Charles Edward , have 
 apparently foster a love which be accustom and satisfied with be 
 only a more passionate kind of friendship ; the indomitable power of 
 resistance to himself , the passion for realise in himself some heroic 
 attitude which he admire , and the almost furious desire to reverse 
 completely his former habit of life , keep Alfieri up to the point of a 
 platonic connexion ; and the Countess of Albany , intellectual , cold , 
 passive , easily mould by a more vehement nature , love Alfieri much 
 more with the head than with the heart , and love in he just that which 
 make he prefer that they should meet and love as austerely as Petrarch 
 and Laura . the fact be , I believe , that the Countess of Albany have much 
 more mind than personality , and that she be therefore mere wax in the 
 hand of a man who have become so exclusively and violently intellectual 
 as Alfieri : she have see too much of the coarse reality of life , of 
 the brutal give way to sensual impulse : the heroic , the ideal , nay the 
 deliberately make up , the artificial , have a charm for she . be this 
 as it may , the Countess and Alfieri continue , in the opinion of all 
 contemporary , and accord to the assurance of Alfieri himself , whose 
 cynicism and truthfulness be equal , on the same footing as in 
 Florence . 

 and these month in Rome seem to have be the happy month of 
 Alfieri 's life , the happy , probably , of the life of the Countess 
 of Albany . Alfieri hire the villa Strozzi , on the Esquiline , a small 
 palace build by one of Michel Angelo 's pupil , and for which , include 
 the use of furniture , stable , and garden , he pay the now incredibly 
 small sum of ten scudo a month , about two pound of our money . permit 
 himself only two coat , the black one for the evening , and the famous 
 blue one for ordinary occasion , and limit his dinner to one dish of 
 meat and vegetable , without wine or coffee , Alfieri contrive to make 
 the comparatively small pension pay to he by his sister , go almost 
 as far as have the fine fortune of which he have despoil himself . he 
 spend lavishly on book , and more lavishly on horse , on horse which , 
 accord to his own account , be his third passion , come only after 
 his love for Mme . d'Albany , and sometimes usurp the place of his love 
 of literary glory . 

 the mania for systematic division of his time , the invincible tendency 
 to routine , which follow in most Italians after the disorder and 
 wastefulness of youth , have already get the well of Alfieri . he have , 
 almost at the moment when the passion for literature first disclose 
 itself , make up his mind to write a definite number of tragedy , first 
 twelve , then fourteen , and no more ; and to devote a certain number of 
 year to the elaborate process of first construct they mentally , then 
 of write they full length in prose , and finally of turn this prose 
 into verse ; and he be later to devise a corresponding plan of write 
 an equally fix number of comedy and satire in an equally fix 
 number of year , after which , as we have see , he be to give up his 
 thought , have attain the age of forty - five , to prepare for death . 

 this routine be a national characteristic , and absorb many an italian , 
 turn all the poetry of his nature to prose , with a kind of dreadful 
 inevitableness ; but Alfieri do not merely submit to routine , he enjoy 
 it , he devise and carry it out with all the ferocity of his nature . 
 to this man , who care so much for the figure he cut , and so little for 
 all the thing which surround he , a life reduce to absolute monotony 
 of grind work be almost an object of æsthetic pleasure , almost 
 an object of sensual delight : he enjoy a dead level , an endless 
 white - wash wall , as much as other man , and especially other poet , 
 enjoy the up and down , the irregularity and mottled colour of 
 existence . so Alfieri arrange for himself , in his house near Santa 
 Maria Maggiore , what to he be a life of exquisite delightfulness . 

 he spend the whole early morning read the latin and italian classic , 
 and grind away at his tragedy , which , after repeat sketch out , 
 repeat write out in prose , be now go through the most elaborate 
 process of writing , re - writing , revising , and re - revise in verse . 
 then , before resume his solitary study in the afternoon , he would 
 have one of his many horse saddle , and ride about in the desolate 
 tract of the town , which in papal time extend from Santa Maria 
 Maggiore to the Porta Pia , the Porta San Lorenzo , and St. John Lateran : 
 mile of former villa gardens , with quincunxe and flower - bed , cut up 
 for cabbage - grow , wide open space where the wall of a temple , the 
 arch of an aqueduct , rise crown with wall - flower and weed out of the 
 rank grass , the briar and nettle , the heap of broken masonry and 
 plaster , among which shine beneath the dart lizard , scrap of 
 vermilion wall - fresco , the chip of purple porphyry or dark - green 
 serpentine ; long avenue of tree early sere , close in by arum - fringe 
 wall , or by ditch where the wither reed creak beneath the 
 festoon of clematis and wild vine ; solemn and solitary wilderness 
 within the city wall , where the silence be break only by the lowing 
 of the herd drive along by the shaggy herdsman on his shaggy horse , by 
 the long - draw , guttural chant of the carter stretch on the top of his 
 cart , and the jingle of his horse 's bell ; place inaccessible to the 
 present , a border - land of the past , and which , as Alfieri say , think 
 of those many time when he must have rein in his horse , and vaguely 
 and wistfully look out on to the green desolation islande with ruin 
 and traverse by the vast procession of the aqueduct , invite one to 
 meditate , and cry , and be a poet . and sometimes - we know it from the 
 sonnet to his horse Fido , who have , Alfieri tell we , carry the 
 beloved burden of his lady - Alfieri do not ride out alone . one of the 
 horse of the villa Strozzi be saddle for the Countess of Albany ; and 
 this strange pair of platonic lover ride forth together among the 
 ruin , the wife of Charles Edward listening , with something more than 
 mere abstract interest , to Alfieri 's fierce contemptuous tirade 
 against the tyranny of soldier and priest , the tyranny of sloth and 
 lust which have turn these spot into a wilderness , and which have leave 
 the world , as Alfieri always feel , and a man not unlike Alfieri in 
 savage and destructive austerity , St. Just , be later to say , empty 
 since the day of the Romans . 

 towards dusk Alfieri put by his book , and descend through the twilit 
 street of the upper city - where the troop of red and yellow and blue 
 seminarist , and black and brown monk , pass by like ant , homeward 
 bind after their evening walk - into the busy part of Rome , and 
 cross the Corso fill with paint and gild coach , and make 
 his way through the many square where the people gather round the 
 lemonade - booth near the fountain or the obelisk , through the tortuous 
 black street fill with the noise of the anvil and hammer of 
 the locksmith and nailor behind the Pantheon , make his way towards 
 the palace , grand and prim in its architecture of bramant , of the 
 Cancelleria , perhaps not without think that in the big square before 
 its window , where the vegetable cart be unload every morning , and 
 the quack and dentist and pedlar bawl all day , a man as strange , as 
 wayward and impatient of tyranny as himself , Giordano Bruno , have be 
 burn two century before by Cardinal York 's predecessor in that big 
 palace of the Cancelleria . fortunately there be no Cardinal York in the 
 Cancelleria , or at least only rarely ; but instead only the beautiful 
 blonde woman with the dark hazel eye , whom Alfieri speak of as his 
 " lady , " and , somewhat later , " as the sweet half of himself , " and in 
 whose speech Alfieri be never Alfieri , or Vittorio , or the Count , but 
 merely " the poet , " so completely have these strange , self - model , 
 unconsciously - attitudinise lover , array themselves and their love 
 accord to the pattern of Dante and Petrarch . 

 to the Countess , we may be sure , Alfieri never fail to give a most 
 elaborate account of his day 's work , nor to read to she whatever scene 
 of his play he have block out , in prose , or work up in verse . by 11 
 o'clock , he tell we , he be always back in his solitary little villa on 
 the Esquiline . 

 but this , although it be probably correct with regard to his visit to 
 Mme . d'Albany , with whom consideration for gossip prevent his staying 
 much after ten at night , must not be take as the invariable rule ; for 
 Alfieri , devote as he be to his lady , by no mean neglect other 
 society . he be finish his allotted number of tragedy , and , as the 
 solemn moment of publication approach , he begin to be torment with 
 that same desire to display his work to other , to hear their praise 
 even if false , to understand their opinion even if unfavourable , which 
 come , by gust , as one of the passion of his life . Rome be at that 
 time , like every italian town , full of literary academy , conventicle 
 of very small intellectual fry meeting in private drawing - room or at 
 coffee - house , and sway by the overlordship of the famous Arcadia , 
 which have now sink into be a huge club to which every creature who 
 scribble , or daub , or strum , or have a coach - and - pair , or a bad 
 tongue , or a pretty face , or a title , belong without further claim . 
 there be also several house of woman who affect intelligence or 
 culture , have no claim to beauty or fashion ; and foremost among these , 
 but differ from they by the real originality and culture of the lady 
 of the house , the charm of her young daughter , and the superior quality 
 of the conversation and music to be enjoy there , be the house of a 
 Signora Maria Pizzelli , of all woman in Rome the one to whom , after the 
 Countess of Albany , Alfieri show himself most assiduous . in her house 
 and in many other Alfieri begin to give almost public reading of his 
 play ; try to persuade himself that his object in so do be to 
 judge , from the expression of face and even more from the restlessness 
 or quiescence of his listener on their chair , how his work might 
 affect the mixed audience of a theatre ; but admit in his heart of 
 heart that the old desire to be remark have as much to do with these 
 exhibition as with the six - horse gallop which use to astonish the 
 people of Turin and Florence . 

 but something well soon offer itself . the Duke Grimaldi have have a 
 small theatre construct in the spanish palace , his residence as 
 Ambassador from the Catholic King , and a small company of high - bear 
 amateur have be play in it translation of french comedy and 
 tragedy . to these lady and gentleman Alfieri offer his Antigone , 
 which be accept with fervour . the beautiful and majestic Duchess 
 of Zagarolo be to act the part of the heroine ; her brother and 
 sister - in - law , the Duke and Duchess of Ceri , respectively the part of 
 Hæmon and of Argia , while the character of Creon , the villain of the 
 piece , be reserve for Alfieri himself . the performance of Antigone 
 be a great solemnity . the magnificent room of the Spanish Embassy be 
 crowd with the fashionable world of Rome , which , in the year 1782 , 
 include priest and prince of the Church quite as much as paint 
 lady and powdered cavalier . a contemporary diary , keep by the page of 
 the Princess Colonna , a certain Abate Benedetti , enable we to form some 
 notion of the assembly . foremost among the lady be the two rival 
 beauty , equally famous for their conquest in the ecclesiastical as 
 well as the secular nobility , the Princess Santacroce and the Princess 
 Altieri , vie with each other in the magnificence of their diamond and 
 of their lace , and each upon the arm of a prince of the Church who have 
 the honour of be her orthodox cavaliere servente ; the Princess 
 Altieri lead in by Cardinal Giovan Francesco Albani , the very gallant and 
 art - love nephew of Winckelmann 's Cardinal Alessandro ; the Princess 
 Santacroce escort by the french Ambassador Cardinal de Bernis , the 
 amiable society rhymester of Mme . de Pompadour , whom Frederick the Great 
 have surname Babet la bouquetière . in the front row sit the wife of 
 the Senator Rezzonico , who , in virtue of be the niece of the late 
 Pope Clement XIII . , affect an almost royal pomp , and by her side sit 
 the witty and most literary of the Sacred College , the still very 
 flirtatious old Cardinal Gerdil . the hall be nearly full when the stir 
 in the crowd , and the general look in one direction , announce the 
 arrival of a guest who excite unwonted attention . a young woman , who 
 scarcely look her full age of thirty , small , slender , very simply and 
 elegantly dress , with something still girlish in her small irregular 
 feature and complexion of northern brilliancy , be conduct along the 
 gangway between the row of chair , and , as if she be the queen of the 
 entertainment , solemnly instal by the side of the Princess Rezzonico 
 in the first row . be it because her husband have call himself King of 
 England , or because her lover be the author of the play about to be 
 perform ? be it as it may , the Countess of Albany be the object of 
 universal curiosity , and the emotion which she display during the play 
 be a second and perhaps more interesting performance for the 
 scandal - love Romans . 


 while the ghost of these long dead man and woman , lady in voluminous 
 brocade skirt and diamond - cover bosom , burst out of the lace 
 and jewel of their stiff bodice , cardinal in trail scarlet robe 
 and bishop with well - powder hair contrast curiously with their 
 dominican or franciscan dress , roman noble all in the strange old - world 
 costume , with ruff and trunk hose and emblazon mantle , of the 
 Pope 's household and of the military order of Malta and Calatrava , 
 secular dandy in elaborately - embroider silk coat and waistcoat , 
 ecclesiastical dandy to the full as dapper with their heavy lace , 
 and abundant fob jewel and inevitable two watch on the sober black 
 of their clothe ; - while these ghost whom we have evoke in all 
 their finery   long since go to the bric- -brac shop   to fill the 
 theatre - hall of the spanish palace , sit and listen to the symphony 
 which Cimarosa himself have write for Antigone , sit and watch the 
 magnificent Duchess of Zagarolo , dress as Antigone in hoop and 
 stomacher and pile - up feather hair , and the red - haired eccentric 
 Piedmontese Count , the d'Albany 's lover , bellow the anger of Creon ; 
 let we try and sum up what the tragedy of Alfieri be for we people of 
 to - day , and what they must have be for those people of a hundred year 
 ago . 

 while scribble for mere pastime at his early play , Alfieri have feel 
 his mind illumine by a sort of double revelation : he would make his 
 name immortal , and he would create a new kind of tragedy . these two 
 half of a proposition , of which he appear never to have entertain a 
 single moment 's doubt , have originate at the same time and develop in 
 close connection : that he could be otherwise than an innovator be as 
 inconceivable to Alfieri as that he could be otherwise than a genius , 
 although , in reality , he be as far from be the one as from be 
 the other . the fact be that Alfieri feel in himself the power of 
 invent a style and of produce work which should answer to the 
 requirement of his own nature : consider himself as the sole audience , 
 he consider himself as the unique playwright . excessively limit in 
 his mental vision , and excessively strong in his mental muscle , it be 
 with his work as with his life : the ideal be so comparatively within 
 reach , and the will be so powerful , that one feel certain that he 
 nearly always succeed in behave in the way of which he approve , and 
 in write in the style which he admire . and the most extraordinary 
 part of the coincidence be , that as he happen to live in a time and 
 country which have entirely neglect the tragic stage , and consequently 
 have no habit or aspiration connect with it , his own desire with 
 reference to italian tragedy precede those of his fellow - countryman , 
 his own ideal be thrust upon they before they well know where they 
 be ; and his own nature and liking become the sole standard by which 
 he measure his work , his own satisfaction the only criterion by which 
 they could be judge . in order , therefore , to understand the nature of 
 Alfieri 's play , it be necessary , first of all , to understand what be 
 Alfieri 's innate liking and disliking in the domain of the drama . 
 before all other thing , Alfieri be not a poet : he lack all , or very 
 nearly all , the faculty which be really poetical . to begin with the 
 more gross and external one , he have no instinct for , no pleasure in , 
 metrical arrangement for their own sake ; he do not think nor invent in 
 verse , idea do not come to he on the wave of metre ; he think out , 
 he elaborately finish , every sentence in prose , and then translate 
 that prose into verse , as he might have translate   and in some 
 instance actually do translate   from a french version into an italian 
 one . moreover he be , to a degree which would have be surprising even 
 in a prose writer , deficient in that which constitute the intellectual 
 essence of poetry as metre constitute its material externality ; in 
 that tendency to see thing surround by , disguise in , a swarm , a 
 masquerade , of associated idea ; deficient in the power of suggest 
 image , of conceiving figure of speech ; in fancy , imagination , in the 
 metaphorical faculty , or whatever else we may choose to call it . nor do 
 he perceive or describe visible thing , visible effect , in their own 
 unmetaphorical shape and colour : not a line of description , not an 
 adjective can be find in his work except such as may be absolutely 
 indispensable for topographical or similar intelligibility ; Alfieri 
 obviously care as little for beautiful sight as for beautiful sound . 
 this be the case , everything that we might call distinctly poetical , 
 all those thing which be precious to we in Shakespeare , or Marlowe , 
 or Webster , in Goethe or Schiller , nay , even , occur at interval , 
 in Racine himself , at least as much as mere psychology or oratory or 
 pathos , appear to Alfieri in the light of mere meretricious gewgaw , 
 which take away from the interest of dramatic action without afford 
 he any satisfaction in return . as it be with metre and metaphor and 
 description , so it be also with the indefinable something which we call 
 lyric quality : the something which sing to our soul , and which send a 
 thrill of delight through our nerve or a gust of emotion across our 
 nature in the same direct way as do the note of certain voice , the 
 phrase of certain piece of music : instantaneously , unreasoningly and 
 unerringly . of this Alfieri have little , so little that we may also say 
 that he have nothing ; the presence of this quality be evidently 
 unnoticed by he and unappreciated . so much for the absolutely poetical 
 quality . of what I may call the prose quality of a playwright , only 
 a certain number appeal to Alfieri , and only a certain number be 
 possess by he . in a time when the novel be begin to become a 
 psychological study more minute than any stage play could ever be , 
 Alfieri be only very moderately interested in the subtle analysis or 
 representation of character and state of mind ; the fine touch which 
 bring home a person or a situation do not attract his attention ; nor 
 be he trouble by consideration concern the probability of a 
 give word or word be speak at a particular moment and by a 
 particular man or woman : realism have no meaning for he . as it be 
 with intellectual conception , so be it also with instructive sympathy : 
 Alfieri never subtly analyse the anatomy of individual nature , nor 
 do he unconsciously mimic its action and tone ; what most of we mean 
 by pathos do not appeal to he . neither metrical nor imaginative 
 pleasurableness , nor descriptive charm , nor lyric poignancy , nor 
 psychological analysis or intention enter , therefore , into Alfieri 's 
 conception of a desirable tragedy , any more than any of these thing 
 fall within the range of his special talent ; for , we must always bear 
 in mind that with this man , whose feeling and desire be in such 
 constant action and reaction , with this man whose will impose his 
 intellectual notion on his feeling , and his emotional tendency on 
 his thought , the thing which he enjoy be always as the concave to the 
 convex of the thing which he produce . but although Alfieri be not a 
 poet , and be not even a potential novel writer , he be , in a sense , 
 essentially a dramatist ; though even here we must distinguish and 
 diminish . Alfieri be not a man who care for rapid action or for 
 intricate plot : he never feel the small inclination to violate the 
 old tradition of the pseudo - classic stage by those thrilling scene 
 or sight which have to be describe and not show , nor by those 
 complication of interest which require year for an action instead of 
 the orthodox twenty - four hour . 

 he be perfectly satisfied with the no - place , no - where - with the vague 
 temple , or palace hall , or public square where , as in the country of the 
 abstract , the action of pseudo - classic tragedy always take place , or , 
 more properly speak , the talking of pseudo - classic tragedy always 
 go on ; he be perfectly satisfied with send in a servant or a 
 messenger to inform the public of a murder or suicide commit behind 
 the scene ; he be perfectly satisfied with take up a story , so to 
 speak , at the eleventh hour , without trace it to its original cause 
 or develop it through its various phase . in such matter Alfieri be 
 as undramatic as Corneille or Racine . nevertheless Alfieri have a 
 distinct dramatic sense : an intense poseur himself , enjoy nothing 
 so much as work himself up to produce a give effect upon his own 
 mind or upon other , he have an extraordinary instinct for the theatrical , 
 for the moral attitude which may be strike so as to be effective , and 
 for the arrangement of subordinate part so that this attitude surprise 
 and move the audience . the moral attitude , the psychological gesture , 
 which thus become the main interest of Alfieri 's play , be , as might be 
 expect from such a man , nearly always his own moral attitude , his own 
 psychological gesture ; he himself , his uncompromising , unhesitate , 
 unflinche , curt and emphatic nature , be always the hero or heroine 
 of the play , however much the situation , the incident , the other 
 characteristic may vary . Antigone be generous and tender , Creon be 
 inhuman in all save paternal feeling , Saul be a suspicious madman , 
 Agamemnon a just and confide hero , Clytæmnestra be sinful and 
 self - sophisticate , Virginia pure and open - minded ; yet all these 
 different people , despite all their difference , speak and act as 
 Alfieri would speak and act , could he , without lose his peculiar 
 characteristic , adopt for the moment vice or virtue which would 
 become quite secondary matter by the side of his essential quality of 
 pride , narrowness , decision , violence , and self - importance . whether he 
 paint his face into a smile or a scowl , whether he put on the blond wig 
 of innocence , or the black wig of villainy , the man 's movement and 
 gesture , the tone of his voice , the accent of his word , the length of 
 his sentence , be always the same : so much so that in one play there 
 may be two or three Alfieris , good and bad , Alfieris turn perfectly 
 virtuous or perfectly vicious ; but anything that be not an Alfieri in 
 some tolerably transparent disguise , be sure to be a puppet , a lay 
 figure with as few joint as possible , just able to stretch out its arm 
 and clap they to its side , but dangle suspend between heaven and 
 earth . 

 the attitude and the gesture , which be the thing for whose sake the 
 play exist , be , as I have say , the attitude and gesture of Alfieri . 
 but the moral attitude and gesture of Alfieri happen to be just those 
 which be rarest in the eighteenth century in all country , and more 
 especially rare in Italy ; and they be the moral attitude and gesture 
 which the eighteenth century absolutely require to become the nineteenth , 
 and which the Italy of Peter Leopold and Pius VI . and metastasio 
 and Goldoni absolutely require to become the Italy of Mazzini and 
 Garibaldi , the Italy of Foscolo and Leopardi : they be the attitude and 
 the gesture of single - mindedness , haughtiness , indifference to one 's 
 own comfort and one 's neighbour ' opinion , the attitude and gesture 
 of manliness , of strength , if you will , of heroism . to have write 
 tragedy whose whole value depend upon the striking exhibition of 
 these quality ; and to have make this exhibition interesting , nay , 
 fascinating to the very people , to the amiable , humane , indifferent , 
 lie , feeble - spirited Italians of the latter eighteenth century , till 
 these very man be ashamed of what they have hitherto be ; to stamp the 
 new generation with the clear - cut die of his own strong character ; this 
 be the reality of the mission which Alfieri have feel within himself : a 
 reality which will be remember when his play shall have long cease 
 to be act , and shall long have cease to be read . Alfieri imagine 
 himself to be a great poetic genius , and a great dramatic innovator : 
 he scorn with loathe the work of Corneille , of Racine , and of 
 Voltaire , all immeasurably more valuable as poetry and drama than his 
 own ; he hat the work of Metastasio , a poet and a playwright by the 
 divine right of genius ; he refuse to read Shakespeare , lest Shakespeare 
 should spoil the perfection of his own conception . he slave for month 
 and year perfect each of his play , recast the action and 
 curtail the dialogue and polish the verse ; yet the action be 
 always heavy , the dialogue unnatural to the last degree , the verse 
 unpoetical . but all this extraordinary self - sufficiency be not a 
 delusion , all this extraordinary labour be not a waste : Alfieri , who 
 never have a single poetical thought , nor a single art - revolutionise 
 notion , be yet a great genius and a great innovator , inasmuch as he 
 first mould in his own image the italian patriot of the nineteenth 
 century . his use consist in his mere existence among man so different 
 from himself ; and his drama , his elaborately construct and curtail 
 and correct drama , be , so to speak , a system of mirror by which 
 the image of this strange new - fangled personality might be flash 
 everywhere into the soul of his contemporary . to perceive the 
 moral attitude and gesture specially characteristic of himself , to 
 artificially correct and improve and isolate they in his own reality , 
 and then to multiply their likeness for all the world ; to know himself 
 to be Alfieri , to make himself up as Alfieri , and to write play whereof 
 the hero and heroine be mere repetition of Alfieri ; such be the 
 mission of this powerful and spontaneous nature , of this self - conscious 
 and self - manipulate poseur . 

 the success of that performance of Antigone on the amateur stage 
 in the spanish palace be very great . a young man , half lay , half 
 ecclesiastic , a dubious sort of poet , secretary , factotum , accustom to 
 write not the most sincere poetry , and to execute , perhaps , not the most 
 creditable errand , of the Pope 's dubious nephew , Duke Braschi - a young 
 man name Vincenzo Monti , be present at this performance , or one 
 of the succeed one ; and from that moment become the author of the 
 revolutionary tragedy of Aristodemo , the potential author of that 
 famous ode on the battle of Marengo , one of the forerunner of new 
 Italy . Nay , even when , some few month later , there die at Vienna the 
 old Abate Metastasio , and his death bring home to a rather forgetful 
 world what a poet and what a dramatist that old Metastasio have be ; 
 even then , an intimate friend of the dead man , a worldly priest , a quasi 
 prelate , the Abate Taruffi , could find no well wind up for the 
 funeral oration , deliver before all the pedant and prig and fop and 
 spy of pontifical Rome assemble in the room of the arcadian academy , 
 than to point to Count Vittorio Alfieri , and prophesy that Metastasio 
 have find a successor great than himself . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 separation . 


 Alfieri and the Countess be happy , happy , perhaps , than at any 
 other time of their life ; but this happiness have to be pay for . the 
 false position in which , however faultlessly , they be place ; the 
 illegitimate affection in which , however blamelessly , they be 
 indulge ; these thing , offensive to social institution , although in 
 no manner wrong in themselves , have produce their fruit of humiliation , 
 nay , of degradation . Fate be more of a conservative than we be apt to 
 think ; it resent the effort of any individual , be he as blameless 
 as possible , to resist for his own comfort and satisfaction the 
 uncomfortable and unsatisfactory arrangement of the world ; it punish 
 the man who seek to elude an unjust law by condemn he to the same 
 moral police dep"t , to the same moral prison - food , as the villain who 
 have elude the holy law that be ever frame ; and Fate , therefore , 
 soil the poetic passion of Alfieri and his lady by force it to the 
 base practice of any illicit love . the manner in which fate execute 
 these summary lynching of people 's honour could not usually be more 
 ingenious ; there seem to be a special arrangement by which offender 
 be punish in their most sensitive part . the punishment of Alfieri 
 and of Mme . d'Albany for refuse to sacrifice their happiness to the 
 propriety of a society which marry girl of nineteen to drunkard 
 whom they have never see , but which would not hear of divorce ; this 
 punishment , fall directly only upon the man , but probably just as 
 heavy upon the woman who witness the humiliation of the person whom 
 she most love and respect , consist in turn Alfieri , the man who 
 be train Italy to be self - respect , truthful , unflinche , into a 
 toady , a liar , and an intriguer . 

 the Countess of Albany , live in the palace of her brother - in - law , 
 Cardinal York , and under the special protection of the Pope , be 
 entirely dependent on the good pleasure of the priestly bureaucracy of 
 the Rome of Pius VI . , that be to say , of about the most contemptible 
 and vilest set of fool and hypocrite and sinner that can well be 
 conceive ; the Papacy , just before the Revolution , have become one of the 
 most corrupt of the many corrupt government of the day . Cardinal York 
 himself be a weak and silly , but honest and kind - hearted man ; but 
 Cardinal York be entirely sway by the prelate and priest and 
 priestlet and semi - priestly semi - lay nondescript among whom he live . 
 he be responsible for the honour of the Countess of Albany , that be to 
 say , of her husband and his brother ; and the honour of the Countess of 
 Albany depend exactly upon the remark which the most depraved and 
 hypocritical clergy in Europe , the people who do or abet all the 
 dirty work of Pius VI . and his Sacred College , choose to make or not to 
 make about her conduct . 

 such be the person upon whom depend the liberty and happiness of 
 Alfieri 's lady , the possibility of that high - fly platonic intercourse 
 which constitute Louis d'Albany 's whole happiness , and Alfieri 's 
 strong incentive to glory ; a word from they could exile Alfieri and 
 lock the Countess up in a convent . the consequence of this state of 
 thing be humiliating to relate , since it show to what baseness the 
 most high - minded among we may be force to degrade themselves . already , 
 during those few day ' sojourn in Rome , before his stay in Naples and 
 Mme . d'Albany 's release from the Ursuline convent , Alfieri have spend his 
 time run about flattering and wheedle the power in command   that 
 be to say , the corrupt minister of the Papacy and their retinue of 
 minion and spy , in order to obtain leave to inhabit the same city as 
 his beloved and to see she from time to time ; do everything , and 
 stoop to everything , he tell we , in order to be tolerate by those 
 priest and priestlet whom he abhor and despise from the bottom 
 of his heart . " after so many frenzy , and effort to make myself a 
 free man , " he write , in his autobiography , " I find myself suddenly 
 transform into a man pay call , and make bow and fine speech 
 in Rome , exactly like a candidate on promotion in prelatedom . " at this 
 price of bitter humiliation , nay , of something more real than mere 
 humiliation , Alfieri buy the privilege of frequent the palace of 
 Cardinal York . but it be a privilege for which you could not pay once 
 and for all ; its price be a black - mail of humbugging , and wheedle , 
 and dirt - eating . 

 Alfieri hat and despise all sovereign and all priest ; and if 
 there be a sovereign and a priest whom he despise and hat more 
 than the rest , it be the then reign Pius VI . , a vain , avaricious , 
 weak - minded man , stickle not in the least at humiliating Catholicism 
 before anyone who ask he to do it , by no means clean - handed in his 
 effort to enrich his family , without courage , or fidelity to his 
 promise ; a man whose miserable end as the brutally - treat captive of 
 the French Republic have not be sufficient to raise to the dignity of a 
 martyr . of this Pope Pius VI . do Alfieri crave an audience , and to he 
 do he offer the dedication of one of his play ; nay , the man who have 
 sacrifice his fortune in order to free himself from the comparatively 
 clean - handed despotism of Sardinia , who have stubbornly refuse to be 
 present to Frederick the Great and Catherine II . , who have decline 
 make Metastasio 's acquaintance on account of a too deferential bow 
 which he have see the old poet make to Maria Theresa ; the man who have in 
 his portfolio play and sonnet and essay intend to teach the world 
 contempt for king and priest , this man , this Alfieri , submit to 
 have his cheek pat by Pope Braschi . this stain of baseness and 
 hypocrisy with which , as he say , he contaminate himself , eat like a 
 hidden and shameful sore into Alfieri 's soul ; yet , until the moment of 
 write his autobiography , he have not the courage to display this 
 gall thing of the past even to his most intimate friend . to Louise 
 d'Albany , to the woman between whom and himself he boast that there 
 be never the slight reticence or deceit , he screw up the force to 
 tell the tale of that interview only some time later . Alfieri , honest 
 enough to lay bare his own self - degradation , be not generous enough to 
 hide the fact that this self - degradation be incur out of love for 
 she . that her hero should have stoop so low , so low that he scarcely 
 dare to tell even she , surely this must have be as gall to the 
 Countess of Albany as be the caress of Pius VI . to Alfieri himself ; 
 this high poetic love of theirs , this exotic dantesque passion , have be 
 drag down , by the impartial legality of fate , to the humiliating 
 punishment which await all the base love intrigue in this base Rome 
 of the base eighteenth century . 

 and , after some time , the stock of toleration buy at the price of 
 this baseness be exhaust . the clerical friend and adviser of 
 Cardinal York , who have hitherto assure the foolish prince of the Church 
 that he be act for the honour of his brother and his brother 's wife 
 in leave a young woman of thirty - one to the sole care of a young poet 
 of thirty - four , each be well know to be over head and ear in love 
 with the other ; these prudent ecclesiastic , little by little , begin to 
 change their mind , and the success of Alfieri 's play , the general 
 interest in he and his lady which that success produce , suggest to 
 they that there really might be some impropriety in the familiarity 
 between the wife of Charles Edward and the author of Antigone . the 
 train be lay , and the match be soon apply . in April 1783 the 
 Pretender fall ill in Florence , so ill that his brother be summon at 
 once to what seem his death - bed . Charles Edward recover . but during 
 that illness the offended husband , who , we must remember , have offer a 
 reward for Alfieri 's murder , pour out to his brother , move and 
 reconcile to he by the recent fear of his death , all his grievance 
 against the Tuscan Court , against his wife , and against her lover . a 
 letter of Sir Horace Mann make it clear that Charles Edward persuade 
 his brother that his ill - usage of his wife   which , however , Mann , with 
 his spy everywhere , have vouch for at the time   be a mere invention , 
 and part of an odious plot by which Alfieri have impose upon the Grand 
 Duke , the Pope , the society of Florence and Rome , nay , upon Cardinal 
 York himself , in order to obtain their connivance in a shameful intrigue 
 development . the Cardinal return to Rome in a state of indignation 
 proportionate to his previous saintly indifference to the doing of 
 Alfieri and Mme . d'Albany ; he discover that he have be shut his 
 eye to what all the world   by Alfieri 's own confession   see as a very 
 hazardous state of thing ; and , with the tendency to run into extreme 
 of a foolish and weak - minded creature , he immediately publish from all 
 the housetop the dishonour whose existence have never occur to he 
 before . to the Countess of Albany he intimate that he would not permit 
 she to receive Alfieri under his roof ; and of the Pope   the Pope who have 
 so recently pat Alfieri 's cheek   he immediately implore an order 
 that Alfieri should quit the Papal States within a fortnight . the order 
 be give ; but Alfieri , in whose truthfulness I have complete faith , 
 say that , know that the order have be ask for , he forestall the 
 ignominy of be banish by spontaneously bid farewell to the 
 Countess of Albany and to Rome . 

 " this event , " say Alfieri , " upset my brain for nearly two year ; and 
 upset and retard also my work in every way . " in speak of Alfieri 's 
 youth I have already have occasion to remark that there be in this man 's 
 character something abnormal ; he be , as I have say , a moral invalid 
 from birth ; his very energy and resolution have somewhat of the frenzy 
 and rigidity of a nervous disease , and though he would seem morally 
 strong than other man when strictly follow his self - prescribe 
 rule of excessive intellectual exercise , and when surround by a 
 soothe atmosphere of affection and encouragement , his old malady of 
 melancholy and rage   melancholy and rage whom he represent in one of his 
 sonnet as two horrible - faced woman seat on either side of he , his 
 old incapacity for work , for interest in anything , his old feverish 
 restlessness of place , return , as a fever return with its heat and 
 cold and impotence and delirium , whenever he be shut out of this 
 atmosphere of happiness , whenever he be expose to any sort of moral 
 hardship . on leave Rome Alfieri go to Siena , where , year before , 
 when he have come light - hearted and bent only upon literary fame , to 
 learn tuscan , he have be introduce into a little circle of man and 
 woman whom he faithfully love , and to that Francesco Gori who share 
 with Tommaso di Caluso the rather try honour of be his bosom 
 friend . this Gori , " an incomparable man , " write Alfieri , " good , 
 compassionate , and with all his austerity and ruggedness of virtue    con 
 tanta altezza e ferocia di sensi    most gentle , " appear literally to 
 have nurse Alfieri in this period of moral sickness as one might nurse 
 a sick or badly - bruise child . " without he , " write Alfieri , " I think 
 I should most likely have go mad . but he , although he see in I a 
 would - be hero so disgracefully break in spirit and inferior to himself " 
  this passage be characteristic , as show that Alfieri consider 
 himself , when in a normal condition , far superior to his much - praise 
 Gori , " although he know well than any the meaning of courage and 
 endurance , do not , therefore , cruelly and inopportunely , oppose 
 his severe and frozen reason to my frenzy , but , on the contrary , 
 diminish my pain by divide it with I . o rare , o truly heavenly 
 gift , this of be able both to reason and to feel . " 

 weep and raving , Alfieri be live once more upon letter receive 
 and send as during his previous separation from Mme . d'Albany ; and of 
 all these love - letter , none appear to have come down to we . carefully 
 preserve by Mme . d'Albany and by her heir Fabre , they fall into the 
 hand of a Mr. Gache of Montpellier , who assume the grave responsibility 
 of destroy they and of thus suppress for ever the most important 
 evidence in the law - suit which posterity will for ever be bring 
 against Alfieri and Mme . d'Albany in favour of Charles Edward , or 
 against Charles Edward in favour of Alfieri and Mme . d'Albany . but some 
 week ago , among the pile of the Countess 's letter to sienese friend 
 preserve by Cavaliere Guiseppe Porri at Siena , I have the good fortune 
 to discover what be virtually five love - letter of her , obviously 
 intend for Alfieri although address to his friend Francesco Gori . 
 I confess that an eerie feeling come over I as I unfold these five 
 closely - write , unsigned and undated little square of yellow paper , 
 thing intend so exclusively for the mere moment of writing and 
 reading , all that long - dead momentary passion of a long - dead man and 
 woman quiver back into reality , fill , as an assembly of ghost 
 might fill a house , and drive out its living occupant , this present 
 hour which so soon will itself have become , with all its passion and 
 worry , a part of the past , of the indifferent , the passionless . one be 
 frightened on suddenly be admit to witness , unperceive , as by 
 the opening of a long - locked door , or by some spell say over a crystal 
 globe or a beryl - stone , such passion as this ; one feel as if one would 
 almost rather not . these five letter , as I have say , be address to 
 a " Dear Signor Francesco , friend of my friend , " and who , of course , 
 be Francesco Gori ; and be write , which no other letter of Mme . 
 d'Albany 's be , not in French , but in tolerably idiomatic though far 
 from correct Italian . only one of they have any indication of place or 
 date , " Genzano , Mardi " ; but this , and the reference to Alfieri 's 
 approach journey northward and to Gori 's intention of escort he 
 as far as Genoa , be sufficient to show that they must have be write 
 in the summer of 1783 , when Cardinal York , terrify at the liberty 
 which he have allow to his sister - in - law , have convey she safely to 
 some villa in the Alban Hills . the woman who write these letter be a 
 strangely different being from the quiet jog - trot , rather cynically 
 philosophical Countess of Albany whom we know from all her other 
 innumerable manuscript letter , from the publish answer of Sismondi , 
 of Foscolo and of Mme . de Souza to letter of hers which have disappear . 
 the hysterical frenzy of Alfieri seem to have enter into this woman ; 
 he have work up this naturally placid but malleable soul , this woman in 
 bad health , deprive of all friend , jealously guard by enemy , weak 
 and depressed , until she have become another himself , " weeping , rave , " 
 like himself , but unable to relieve , perhaps to enjoy , all this frantic 
 grief by run about like the mad Orlando , or talk and weep by 
 the hour to a compassionate Gori . 

 " Dear Signor Francesco , " she write ; " how grateful I be to you for your 
 compassion . you can not   have a notion of our unhappiness . my misery be not 
 in the least less than that of our friend . there be moment when I 
 feel my heart tear to piece think of all that he must suffer . I have 
 no consolation except your be with he , and that be something . never 
 let he remain alone . he be bad , and I know that he greatly enjoy 
 your society , for you be the only person who do not bore he and whom 
 he always meet with pleasure . oh ! dear Signor Francesco , in what a sea 
 of misery be we not ! you also , because our misery be certainly 
 also your . I no long live ; and if it be not for my friend , for whom 
 I be keep myself , I would not drag out this miserable life . what do I 
 do in this world ? I be a useless creature in it ; and why should I suffer 
 when it be of no use to anyone ? but my friend - I can not make up my mind 
 to leave he , and he must live for his own glory ; and , as long as he 
 live , even if I have to walk on my hand , I would suffer and live . who 
 know what will happen , it be so long since the man in Florence   Charles 
 Edward   be ill , and still he live , and it seem to I that he be make 
 of iron in order that we may all die . you will say , in order to console 
 I , that he can not   last ; but I see thing clearly . this illness have not 
 make he young , but he may live another couple of year . he may at any 
 moment be suffocate by the humour which have rise to his chest . what 
 a cruel thing to expect one 's happiness from the death of another ! o 
 God ! how it degrade one 's soul ! and yet I can not refrain from wish 
 it . what a thing , what a horrible thing be life ; and for I it have be 
 a continual suffering , all except the two year that I spend with my 
 friend , and even then I live in the midst of tear . and you also be 
 probably not happy ; with a heart like yours it be not possible that 
 you should be . whoever be bear with any feeling can scarcely enjoy 
 happiness . I recommend our friend to your care , particularly his health . 
 mine be not so bad ; I take care of myself and stay much in bed to kill 
 the time and to rest my nerve , which be very weak . good - bye , dear 
 Signor Francesco , preserve your friendship for I ; I deserve it , since I 
 appreciate you . " 

 later on she write again : - 

 " Dear Signor Francesco , friend of ours . I do all I can to take courage . 
 I study as much as I can . music alone distract my thought , or rather 
 deaden they , and I play the harp many hour a day , and I do so also 
 because I know that my friend wish I to get to play it well . I work 
 at it as hard as I can . I live only for he ; without he life would be 
 odious to I , and I could not endure it . I do nothing in this world ; I 
 be useless in it ; and where be the use of suffering for nothing ? but 
 there be my friend , and I must remain on this earth . I do not doubt of 
 he ; I know how much he love I . but in moment of suffer I have 
 fear lest he should find someone who would give he less pain than 
 myself , with whom he might live cheerful and happy . I ought to wish it , 
 but I have not get the strength to do so . but I believe so fully in he 
 that I be satisfied as soon as he tell I that such a thing can not 
 happen . I love he more than myself ; it be a union of feeling which 
 we only can understand . I find in he all that I can desire ; he be 
 everything for I ; and yet I must suffer separation from he . certainly 
 if I could come to a violent decision I should be the happy woman 
 in the world ; I should never think of the past ; I should live in he 
 and for he ; for I care for nothing in this world . comfort , luxury , 
 position , all be vanity for I ; peace by his side would suffice for I . 
 and yet I be condemn to languish far from he . what a horrible life ! " 

 again she write to Gori : - 

 " dear friend , I be so very , very grateful for the interest you take in 
 my unhappy situation , which be really terrible . time serve only to 
 aggravate it , and certainly it will bring no alleviation to my misery 
 until I shall meet our friend . there be no peace , no tranquillity for 
 I . I would give whatever of life may remain to I in order to live for 
 one day with he , and I should be satisfied . my feeling for he be 
 unchangeable , and I be sure that his for I be the same . when shall I 
 see the end of my woe ? who know whether I shall ever see it ? that man 
  Charles Edward   do not seem inclined to depart ... I suffer a little 
 from my nerve ... but those be the least of my suffering . it be the 
 heart which suffer . I have moment of despair when I could throw myself 
 out of the window be it not for the thought that I must live for my 
 friend 's sake ; that my life be his . I feel a disgust for life which be 
 so reason out that I say to myself sometimes , ' why do I live ? what 
 good do I do ? ' and then I continue to suffer patiently , remember 
 my friend . forgive I for unbosom myself with you , who alone can 
 understand I ; you alone , except my friend , understand what I suffer . 
 do you know , you ought to come and see I this winter , you would give 
 I such a pleasure . good - bye , dear Signor Francesco ; preserve your 
 friendship for I . " 

 thus she run on , repeat and re - repeat the same idea , the same 
 word , her love for Alfieri , her desperate situation , her hatred of 
 life , her uselessness , her desire to play the harp well for Alfieri 's 
 sake , her hop that Charles Edward may die ; disconnected phrase , run 
 into each other without so much as a comma or a full stop   since I 
 have have to punctuate my translation , at least partially , to make it 
 intelligible ; the excited , unconsecutive , unceasing , discursive , 
 reiterate gabble of hysteria , eager , vague , impotent , thought 
 suddenly vanish and as suddenly come to a dead stop ; everything 
 rattle off as if between two sob or two convulsion . do Alfieri enjoy 
 receive letter such as these ? doubtless : they be echo of his own 
 raving ; fuel for his own passion and vanity . it do not strike he , for 
 all the greek and roman hero and heroine whom he have make to speak 
 with stoical , unflinche curtness , that there could be anything to move 
 shame , and compassion sicken by shame , in the fact that this should be 
 the expression of that high and pure love imitate from Dante and 
 Petrarch . what could he do ? give up Louise d'Albany , forget she ; and bid 
 she , who live only in he , whom a few year must free , forget he at 
 the price of break her heart ? certainly not . but he , the man , the man 
 free to move about , to work , with friend and occupation , should surely 
 have try to teach resignation and patience to this poor lonely , sick , 
 hysterical woman , point out to she that if only they would wait , and 
 wait courageously , the moment of liberation and happiness must come . 
 surely more difficult and humiliating for this lover to bear than the 
 sight of his lady degrade by the foul word and deed of the drunken 
 Pretender , ought to have be the reading of such letter as these ; the 
 sight of this once calm and dignified woman , of this Beatrice or Laura , 
 in her disconnected hysterical raving . and for myself , the thought of 
 all that the Countess of Albany endure at the hand of Charles Edward 
 awaken less pity , though pity mix with indignation at the fate which 
 humiliate she so deeply , and with shame for that deep humiliation , than 
 that sudden cry with which she stop in the midst of the light - head 
 gabble about her misery , and seem to start back ashamed as at the 
 sight of her passion and tear - defile face in a mirror : " what a cruel 
 thing to expect one 's happiness from the death of another ! o God ! how it 
 degrade one 's soul ! " 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 COLMAR . 


 " on the 17th August 1784 , at eight in the morning , at the inn of the 
  two Keys , Colmar , I meet she , and remain speechless from excess of 
 joy . " so run an annotation of Alfieri on the margin of one of his 
 lyric . 

 the hour of liberty and happiness have come for Alfieri and Mme . 
 d'Albany ; soon by far than they expect , and soon , we may think , 
 than they deserve . liberty and happiness , however , not in the face 
 of the law . Charles Edward be still alive ; but , press by King 
 Gustavus III . of Sweden , whom he contrive to wheedle out of some most 
 unnecessary money , he have consent to a legal separation from his 
 fugitive wife ; as a result of which the Countess of Albany , renounce 
 all money supply from the stuart , and subsist entirely upon a 
 share of the two pension , French and Papal , grant to her husband , 
 be permit to spend a portion of the year wheresoever she please , 
 provide she return for awhile to show herself in the Papal States . 
 on hear the unexpected news , Alfieri , who be cross the Apennines 
 of Modena with fourteen horse that he have be to buy in England , be 
 seize with a violent temptation to send his caravan along the main 
 road , and gallop by cross - path to meet the Countess , who be cross 
 the Apennines of Bologna on her way from Rome to the bath of Baden in 
 Switzerland . the thought of her honour and safety restrain he , and he 
 push on moodily to Siena . but , as on a previous occasion , his stern 
 resolution not to seek his lady soon give way ; and two month later 
 follow that meeting at the two Keys at Colmar on the Rhine . 

 for the first time in those seven long year of platonic passion , 
 Alfieri and Mme . d'Albany find themselves settle beneath the same 
 roof . to the mind of this italian man , and this half - french , half - german 
 woman of the eighteenth century , for whom marriage be one of the 
 sacrament of a religion in which they wholly disbelieve , and one 
 of the institution of a society which alleviate it with universal 
 adultery ; to Alfieri and Mme . d'Albany the legal separation from Charles 
 Edward Stuart be equivalent to a divorce . the Pretender could no long 
 prescribe any line of conduct to his wife ; she be free to live where 
 and with whom she choose ; and if she be not free to marry , the idea , 
 the wish for marriage , probably never cross the brain of these two 
 platonic lover of seven year ' standing . marriage be a social contract 
 between people who wish to obtain each other 's money and title and 
 land - who wish to have heir . Alfieri , who have make over all his 
 property to his sister , and the Countess , who live on a pension , have no 
 money or title or land to throw together ; and they certainly neither 
 of they , the man live entirely for his work , the woman live entirely 
 for the man , have the small desire to have child , heir to nothing 
 at all . what injury could their live together now do to Charles Edward , 
 who have relinquish all his husband 's right ? none , evidently . on the 
 other hand , what harm could their live together do to their own honour 
 or happiness , now that they have have seven year ' experience that only 
 death could extinguish their affection ? none , again evidently . and as to 
 harm to the institution of society , what be those institution , and 
 what be their value , that they should be respect ? such , could we 
 have question they , would have be the answer of Alfieri and the 
 Countess . that they be set an example to other less pure in mind , 
 less exceptional in position ; that they be make it more difficult 
 for marriage to be reorganise on a more rational plan , by show man 
 and woman a something that might do instead of rationally organise 
 marriage ; that they be , in short , prevent the law from be 
 rectify , by take the law into their own hand : such thought could 
 not enter into the mind of continental of the eighteenth century , 
 people for whom the great Revolution , Romanticism , and the new view 
 of society which grow out of both , be still in the future . that a 
 punishment should await they , that as time go on and youthful passion 
 diminish , their life should be barren and silent and cold for want of 
 all those thing : child , legal bond , social recognition , by which 
 their union should fall short of a real marriage ; this they could never 
 anticipate . 

 for the moment , unite in the " excessively clean and comfortable " little 
 château , rent by Madame d'Albany at a short distance from Colmar ; 
 rid and drive about in the lovely Rhine country ; the Countess deep 
 in her reading again , Alfieri deep once more in his writing ; together , 
 above all , after so many month of separation : they seem perfectly 
 happy . so happy that it seem as if a misfortune must come to restore 
 the natural balance of thing ; and the misfortune come , in the sudden 
 news of the death of poor Francesco Gori . a sense as of guiltiness at 
 have half forget that thoughtful and gentle friend in the first 
 flush of their happiness , seem to have come over they . 

 " o God , " write Alfieri to Gori 's friend Bianchi at Siena , " I do not   know 
 what I shall do . I always see he and speak to he , and every small 
 word and thought and gesture of his return to my mind , and stab my 
 heart . I do not feel very sorry for he : he care little for life for 
 its own sake , and the life which he be force to lead be too far below 
 his great soul , and the goodness and tenderness of his heart , and the 
 nobility of his noble scornfulness . the person dear to I of any , 
 and immediately next to whom I love Checco   Gori   most , know and 
 appreciate he and be not to be console for such a loss . I tell he 
 already last July , so many , many time , that he be not well , that he 
 be grow visibly thin day by day . oh ! I ought never to have leave 
 he in this state . " 

 a letter , this one on Gori 's death , which may induce we to forgive the 
 letter of Alfieri of which we have see a reflection in those of Mme . 
 d'Albany : the passionate grief for the lost friend make we feel that 
 there be something noble in the possibility of even the morbid grief at 
 the lost mistress . more touching still , bring home what each of we , 
 alas ! must have feel in those long , dull grief for one who be not 
 our kith and kin , whom the thought of our nearest and dearest , of our 
 work , of all those thing which the world recognise as ours in a sense 
 in which the poor belove dead be not , do not permit we to mourn in 
 such a way as to satisfy our heart , and the longing for whom , half 
 suppress , come but the more pertinaciously to haunt we , to make the 
 present and future , all where he or she be not , a blank ; more touching 
 than any letter in which Alfieri give free vent to his grief for poor 
 Gori , be that note which he write upon the manuscript of his poem on 
 Duke Alexander 's murder , after the annotation say that this work be 
 resume at Siena , the 17th July 1784 - " o God ! and the friend of my heart 
 be still live then " ; the word which a man speak , or write only for 
 himself , feel that no one , not those even who be the very flesh and 
 blood of his heart , can , since they be not himself , feel that terrible 
 pang at suddenly see the past so close within his reach , so 
 hopelessly beyond his grasp . 

 the death of Gori seem the only circumstance which diminish the 
 happiness of Alfieri and Mme . d'Albany ; nay , it be not heartless , 
 surely , to say that , cruel as be that wound , there be doubtless a 
 quite special sad sweetness in each try to heal it in the other , in 
 the redoubled love due to this fellow - feeling in affliction , the new 
 energy of affection which come to the survivor whenever death call 
 out the warning , " love each other while I still let you . " but they have 
 still to pay , and pay in many instalment , the price of happiness 
 snatch before its legitimate time . 

 suppose to be live apart from Alfieri , the Countess could not , 
 therefore , take he back with she to Italy , where , accord to the 
 stipulation of the act of separation , she be bind to spend the 
 great part of every year . hence the stay at Colmar in 1784 , and those 
 in the succeed year , be merely so many interlude of happiness in 
 the dreary life of separation ; happiness which , as Alfieri say in one 
 of his sonnet , be constantly embitter by the thought that every day 
 and every hour be bring they near to a cruel parting . the day 
 come : Alfieri have to take leave of Mme . d'Albany ; and , as he express 
 it , have to return to much bad gloom than before , be separate from 
 his lady without have the consolation of see Gori once more . 
 mechanically he return to Siena , to Siena which it be impossible 
 to conceive without his friend Checco ; but when he realise the empty 
 house , the empty town , he find the place he have so love insupportable , 
 and go to spend his long solitary winter writing , reading , translate , 
 break in horse , lead a slave 's life to pass the weary time , at 
 Pisa . in April 1785 Mme . d'Albany obtain permission to quit Bologna , 
 where she have spend the winter , and to go to her sister in France . in 
 September she and her lover meet once more in the beloved country - house 
 on the Rhine . but again , in December , come another separation ; Mme . 
 d'Albany go to Paris , and Alfieri remain behind at Colmar . 

 " shall we then be again separate , " he write in a sonnet , " by cruel and 
 lie opinion , which blame we for error which the whole world commit 
 every day ? unhappy that I be ! the more I love thee with true and loyal 
 love , the more must I ever refuse myself that for which I be always 
 longing : thy sweet sight , beyond which I ask for nothing . but the vulgar 
 can not understand this , and know we but little , and do not see that 
 thy pure heart be the seat of virtue . " 

 strange word , and which , come from a man cynical and truthful as 
 Alfieri , may make we pause and refuse to affirm that this strange love , 
 platonic for seven long year , cease to be a mere passionate friendship 
 even when it resort to the secrecy and deception of a mere common 
 intrigue ; even when it openly brave , in the semblance of marriage , the 
 opinion of the world at large . during those many month of solitude in 
 the villa at Colmar , with no other company than that of his sienese 
 servant or secretary and of the horse , whose news he carefully send , in 
 letter and sonnet , to the Countess , Alfieri appear for the first time 
 to have get into a habit of excessive overwork , and to have have the 
 first serious attack of the gout ; overwork and gout , the two thing 
 which be to kill he . a six month ' stay in Paris , where society , the 
 business of print his work , and the great distance of his lodging 
 from the house of Mme . d'Albany , diminish his intellectual work , keep 
 he up for the moment . but in the following summer of the year 1787 , 
 shortly after he have return to Colmar with the Countess , and have 
 welcome as a guest Tommaso di Caluso , his great friend since Gori 's 
 death , he suddenly break down under a terrific attack of dysentery . 
 for many day , reduce to a skeleton , ice cold even under burning 
 application , and just sufficiently alive to feel in his intensely proud 
 and masculine nature the cruel degradation of an illness which make he 
 an object of loathing to himself , Alfieri remain at death 's door , 
 devotedly tend by his beloved and by his friend . 

 " it grieve I dreadfully to think that I should die , leave my lady , 
 and my friend , and that fame scarcely rough hewn for which I have work 
 and frenzy myself so terribly for more than ten year , " write 
 Alfieri ; " for I feel very keenly that of all the writing which I should 
 leave behind I , not one be complete and finish as it should have 
 be have time be give I to complete and to perfect accord to my 
 idea . on the other hand , it be a great consolation to know that , if I 
 must die , I should die a free man , and between the two well beloved 
 person that I have , and whose love and esteem I believe myself to 
 possess and to deserve . " 

 Alfieri recover . but with that illness end , I think , the period of 
 his youth , and of his genius , that be to say , of that high - wrought and 
 passionate austerity and independence of character which be to he 
 what artistic endowment be to other writer ; and with that illness 
 begin a premature old age , mental and moral , decrepitude gradually 
 show itself in a kind of ossification of the whole personality ; the 
 decrepitude which correspond , on the other side of a brief manhood of 
 comparative strength and health , to the morally inert and sickly year 
 of Alfieri 's strange youth . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

 RUE DE BOURGOYNE . 


 Alfieri 's mother , an old lady of extreme simplicity of mind and 
 gentleness of spirit , be still live at Asti , cheerfully deprive 
 herself of every luxury in order to devote her fortune , as she devote 
 her thought and her strength , to the service of the poor and of the 
 sick . Alfieri , who have leave she as a boy , and scarcely see she except 
 for a few hour at rare interval , look up to she less with the 
 affection of a son than with the satisfaction of an artist who see 
 in the woman of whom he be bear the peculiar type of feature or 
 character which he prize most in womankind ; if he , for all his 
 conscious weakness , be more like his own hero than any man of his 
 acquaintance , if Mme . d'Albany might be judiciously get up as the Laura 
 of his affection , the old Countess Alfieri be even more unmistakably 
 the mother who suit his idea , the live model of his mother of 
 Virginia , or his mother of Myrrha . to the Countess Alfieri he have , 
 already in 1784 , introduce the Countess of Albany , whom she invite to 
 stay with she on her passage through Asti as she return from Colmar 
 into Italy . Mme . d'Albany find an excuse for not accept in the bad 
 state of the road , which render another route than that of Asti 
 preferable . Frank and indifferent to the world 's opinion as be Mme . 
 d'Albany , her originally cut and dry intellectual temper harden by 
 many year ' misery , one can conceive that she should shrink from 
 accept the hospitality of Alfieri 's mother . Alfieri have doubtless 
 show she his mother 's letter , and from these letter , as reflect in 
 his answer , it be clear that the Countess of Albany , return from 
 that first stay with her lover at Colmar , would have feel that she be 
 tacitly deceive the noble old lady under whose roof she be stay . 
 for the Countess Alfieri , noble , and italian , and woman of the 
 eighteenth century though she be , seem to have be one of those 
 person into whose mind , high remove above all worldly concern , no 
 experience of vice , of weakness , nay , of mere equivocal situation , can 
 enter . whatever she may have see or hear in her youth of the habit of 
 woman of her century and station , of the virtual divorce which , after a 
 few year , reign in aristocratic house , of authorised lover and 
 socially accept infidelity , seem to have pass out of her memory 
 and leave her mind as innocent as it may have be during her convent 
 school - day . she have take great interest in this poor young woman , 
 maltreat by a drunken husband , and finally save from his clutch by 
 the benevolence of the Grand Duke of Tuscany and of a prince of the 
 church , about whom her son have write to she . that her son experience 
 more than her own pity for so worthy an object , that he be at all 
 compromise in the fate of this virtuous , unhappy lady , never enter 
 her mind . so little could she understand the muddy thing of this 
 world , that in 1789 , when Alfieri be publicly live with Mme . d'Albany 
 at Colmar , the Countess Alfieri send he , through his friend Caluso , the 
 suggestion of a match which she have greatly at heart , between he and a 
 young lady of Asti , " fifteen or sixteen year old , without any fault , 
 such as he would certainly like , cultivate , docile , and clever . " it be 
 one of the thing which grate upon one most in Alfieri 's character , 
 and which show that however much he might be cast and have chisel 
 himself in antique heroic form he be yet make of the same stuff as his 
 contemporary , to find that he and his friend Caluso merely amuse 
 themselves immensely at this proposal of marriage , and concoct a 
 dutiful letter to the old Countess explain that matrimony be not at 
 present in his plan . what would Madame Alfieri have think have she 
 know the truth ! it be very sad to think how , in some case , the very 
 noble and purest , just because they be so completely noble and pure 
 and above all the base necessity of the world of passion , must be 
 unable to see , in the doing of other less fortunate than themselves , 
 those very element of nobility and purity which redeem the baser 
 circumstance of their life . that Mme . d'Albany have love a man not her 
 husband , have flee from her husband and unite her life to that of she 
 lover , would be a horror visible to the old Countess ' eye ; the platonic 
 purity , the fidelity , the loyalty of this long and illegitimate love , 
 would have escape she . no art be so cruelly contemptuous of whatever of 
 beauty and sweetness imperfect reality may contain , as the art which be 
 able to attain an ideal perfection ; and thus it be also in matter of 
 appreciation of man by man and woman by woman . the Countess of Albany 
 be apparently more frank than Alfieri , because frank rather from 
 temperament than from pre - occupation about a give ideal of conduct . 
 that the mother of Alfieri should understand so little seem to have 
 worry she ; and when the unsuspecting old lady ask she sympathisingly 
 for news of Charles Edward , she write back as follow : " as to my husband , 
 he be well ; but I must confess to you , Madame , that I can not take so 
 lively an interest in he as you suppose , for he make I , during nine 
 year , the most wretched woman that ever live . if I do not hate he it 
 be a result of christian charity , and because we be desire to pardon . 
 he drag out a miserable life , abandon by all the world , without 
 relative or friend , give over to his servant ; but he have will 
 it thus , since he have never be able to live with anyone . forgive 
 I , Madame , for have enter into such detail with you ; but the 
 friendship which you have show towards I oblige I to speak 
 sincerely . " Mme . d'Albany , write some time before to condole about the 
 death of Alfieri 's half - brother , have try to insinuate to the old 
 Countess what her son be for she , and what position she herself might 
 one day assume in the Alfieri family : " I hope that if circumstance 
 change , you will not see a family die out to which you be so attached , 
 and that you will receive the great consolation from M. le Comte 
 Alfieri . " word which could only mean that when the pretender die Mme . 
 Alfieri might hope for a daughter - in - law in the writer , and for 
 grand - child through she . but Madame Alfieri do not understand ; 
 imagining , perhaps , that Mme . d'Albany be allude to some project of 
 marriage of her friend M. le Comte Alfieri ; and the letter in which the 
 ill - treat wife 's aversion to her husband be first openly reveal 
 appear to have act as a thunder - clap , and to have , at least 
 momentarily , put an end to all correspondence . 

 the Countess of Albany be mistake in suppose that Charles Edward 
 would die in the arm of mere servant . the very year after her own 
 separation from Alfieri , the Pretender have call to Florence the 
 natural daughter bear to he by Miss Walkenshaw , and whom he have leave , 
 apparently forget for twenty - five year , in the convent at Meaux , 
 where her mother have take refuge from his brutality , even as Louise 
 d'Albany have take refuge from they in the convent of the Bianchette . 
 partly from a paternal feeling bear of the unexpected solitude in which 
 his wife 's flight have leave he ; partly , doubtless , from a desire to 
 spite the Countess ; he have solemnly , as King of England , legitimate 
 this daughter , and create her Duchess of Albany : he have make incredible 
 effort , abandon drink , go into the world and keep open house , 
 to attach this young woman to he , and to treat she as well as he have 
 treat his wife ill . 

 Charlotte of Albany , a strong , lively , good - humour , big creature , 
 devoted to gaiety , effectually reform her father in his last year , 
 and turn he , from the brute he have be , to a tolerably well - behave 
 old man . but we must not therefore conclude that Charlotte be a well 
 woman , or a woman more desirous of do her duty , than Louise d'Albany . 
 between the two there be an abyss : Charlotte have be send for by a man 
 weary of solitude , smart under the frightful punishment bring upon 
 his pride by the flight of his wife ; ready to do anything in order not 
 to be alone and despise by the world ; a man break by illness and age , 
 weak , hysterical , incapable almost of his former excess ; and Charlotte 
 be a woman of thirty , she be a daughter , she be free to go where she 
 would to marry , and her father could buy her presence only at the price 
 of submission to her taste and to her desire . how different have it not 
 be with Louise of Stolberg : unite to this man twelve year before , a 
 mere child of nineteen , give over to he as his wife , his chattel , his 
 property , to torment and lock up as he might torment and lock up his dog 
 or his horse ; lose all influence over he with every day which make 
 she less of a novelty and diminish the chance of an heir ; and sicken 
 and alarm more and more by the obstinate jealousy and drunkenness and 
 brutality of a man still in the vigour of his odious passion . still , 
 the fact remain that while Louise d'Albany be secretly or openly 
 make light of all social institution , and live as the mistress , 
 almost the wife , of Alfieri ; this insignificant Charlotte , this 
 bastard of a Miss Walkenshaw , this woman who have probably never have an 
 enthusiasm , or an ideal , or a thought , have succeed in reclaim 
 whatever there remain of human in the degraded Charles Edward ; have 
 succeed in do the world the service of lay out at least with 
 decency and decorum this living corpse which have once contain the soul 
 of a hero , so that posterity might look upon it without too much 
 contempt and loathing , nay , almost , see it so quiet and seemingly 
 peaceful , with compassion and reverence . 

 and when , at the beginning of February 1788 , the Countess of Albany , in 
 the full enjoyment of her love for Alfieri , and of the pleasure of the 
 most brilliant parisian society , receive the news that on the last day 
 of January Charles Edward have pass away peacefully in the arm of the 
 Duchess Charlotte ; and that the drink - soil broken body , from which she 
 must so often have recoil in disgust and terror , have be lay out , 
 with the sad mock royalty of a gilt wooden sceptre and pinchbeck crown , 
 in state in the cathedral of Frascati ; when , I say , the news reach 
 Paris , this woman , so confident of have be in the right , and who have 
 write so frankly that if she do not hate her husband it be from mere 
 christian charity and the duty of forgiveness , feel herself smite by 
 an unexpected grief . 

 Alfieri , who witness it with astonishment , and to whose cut - and - dry 
 nature it must have seem highly mysterious , be , nevertheless , in a 
 way overawe by this sudden emotion at the death of the man who have 
 make both lover so miserable . his appreciation , difficult to so 
 narrow a temper , of all that may move our sympathy in that , to he , 
 unintelligible grief , be , I think , one of the fact in his life which 
 bring this strange , artificial , heroic , admirable , yet repulsive 
 character , most within reach of our affection ; as that same grief , so 
 unexpected by herself , at what be after all her final deliverance , be , 
 together with the letter to Alfieri 's mother , tell of her hatred to 
 Charles Edward , and that exclamation in the hysterical love - letter at 
 Siena - " o God ! how this degrade the soul ! " - one of the thing which 
 persuade we that this woman , whom we shall see inconsistent , worldly , 
 and cynical , do really possess at bottom what her lover call " a most 
 upright and sincere and incomparable soul . " 

 " for the present , " write Alfieri to his sienese friend on the occasion 
 of Charles Edward 's death , " nothing will be alter in our mode of 
 life . " in other word , the Countess of Albany and her lover , establish 
 publicly beneath the same roof in Paris , do not intend get marry . 
 whatever hop may have fill Mme . d'Albany 's heart when , year before , 
 she have hint to Alfieri 's mother that when certain circumstance 
 change , the Alfieri family should be save from extinction ; whatever 
 idea Alfieri have have in his mind when he pray in a sonnet for the 
 happy day when he might call his love holy ; whatever intention of 
 repair the injury do to social institution , may at one time have 
 mingle with the lover ' remorse and the lover ' temptation , - have now 
 be completely forget . we have see how , more than once , love , 
 however self - restrain , have induce Alfieri to put aside all his 
 republican sternness and truthfulness , and to cringe before people 
 whom he thoroughly despise ; we can not easily forget that ignominious 
 stroking of the Brutus poet 's cheek by Pope Pius VI . we shall now see 
 how this peculiar sort of roman and stoical virtue , cultivate by 
 Alfieri in himself and in his beloved as the one admirable thing in 
 the world , a strange exotic in this eighteenth - century baseness , have 
 nevertheless wither in several of its branch , beat by the wind 
 of illegitimate passion , and dry up by the callousness of an immoral 
 state of society : an exotic , or rather a precocious moral variety , come 
 before its season , and bleach and warp like a winter flower . 

 Alfieri and the Countess do not get marry , simply , I think , because 
 they do not care to get marry ; because marriage would entail 
 reorganisation of a mode of life which have somehow organise itself ; 
 because it would give a common - place prose solution to what appear a 
 romantic and exceptional story ; and finally because it might necessitate 
 certain loss in the way of money , of comfort , and of rank . 

 one see throughout all his autobiography and letter that Alfieri draw 
 a sharp distinction between love and marriage ; that he conceive 
 marriage as the act of a man who set up shop , so to say , in his native 
 place , go in for have child , for be master in his own house , 
 administer and increase his estate , and generally devote himself 
 to the advancement of his family . as such Alfieri , who be essentially a 
 routinist , respect and approve of marriage ; and anything different 
 would have strike his martinet , rule and compass , mind , as ridiculous 
 and contemptible . in give up his fortune to his sister , Alfieri have 
 deliberately cut himself off from the possibility of such a marriage ; 
 moreover , put aside the financial question , his notion of the 
 liberty of a writer , who must be able to speak freely against any 
 government , be incompatible with his notion of a father of a family , 
 settle in dignity in his ancestral palace ; and finally , I feel 
 perfectly persuade that in the mind of Alfieri , which see thing only 
 in sharp black and white contrast , there exist a still more 
 complete incompatibility between a woman like the Countess of Albany , 
 and a wife such as he conceive a wife : to marry Mme . d'Albany would be 
 to degrade a poetical ideal into vulgar domesticity , and at the same 
 time to frightfully depart from the normal type of matrimony , which 
 require that the man be absolute master , and not afflict with any 
 sort of sentimental respect for his well half . 

 accord to Alfieri , there be two possibility for the ideal man : a 
 handsome and highly respectable marriage with a girl twenty year his 
 junior , fresh from the convent , provide with the right number of 
 heraldic quartering , acre , diamond , and domestic virtue , and who 
 would bear he , in deep awe for his unapproachable superiority , five or 
 six robust child ; and a romantic connexion with a married woman or a 
 widow , a woman all passion and intellect and aspiration , with whom he 
 should go through a course of mutual soul improvement , who should be the 
 sharer of all his high life , and whom he would diligently deck out as 
 a Beatrice or a Laura in the eye of society . 

 the Countess of Albany do not fit into the first ideal ; nor , for the 
 matter of that , do Alfieri , poor , expatriate , mad for independence , 
 engross in literature , fit into it himself ; and both , as it happen , 
 fit in perfectly to the second ideal possibility . to get marry with 
 a view to turn into domestic being , would be a failure , a trouble , 
 an interruption , a desecration , and a bore ; to get marry merely to go 
 on as they be at present , would , in the eye of Alfieri , have be a 
 profanation of the poetry of their situation , a perfectly unnecessary 
 piece of humbug . 

 such be , doubtless , Alfieri 's view of the case . Mme . d'Albany , on 
 the other hand , have evidently no vocation as a housewife or a mother ; 
 marriage be full of disagreeable association to she : a husband 
 might beat one , and a lover might not . she , probably , also , guess 
 instinctively that to Alfieri a Laura must always be a mere mistress , 
 and a wife must always be a mere Griselda ; she know his cut - and - dry 
 view , his frightful power of carry theory into practice ; she may 
 have guess that the most respectful of lover would in his case make 
 the most tyrannical of husband . but while Alfieri doubtless bring 
 Mme . d'Albany to share his abstract reason , Mme . d'Albany probably 
 bring home to he her own more practical one . Alfieri , we must 
 remember , have be a man of excessive social vanity ; and much as he 
 despise mankind , he certainly still like to enjoy its admire 
 consideration . Mme . d'Albany , on the other hand , have be bring up in 
 the full worldliness of a canoness of Ste . Wandru , and have grow 
 accustomed to a certain amount of state and of luxury ; and these worldly 
 tendency , throw into the background by the passion , the poetry which 
 spring up with the irresistible force of a press down spring during 
 her married misery , have return to she as year go on , and as passion 
 cool and poetry diminish . now marriage would probably involve a 
 great risk of a diminution of income , since the Pope and the Court of 
 France might easily refuse to support Charles Edward 's widow once she 
 have cease to be a Stuart ; and it must inevitably mean an end to a 
 quasi - regal mode of life to which the widow of the Pretender could lay 
 claim , but the wife of a piedmontese noble could not . it be one of the 
 various meanness , commit quite unconsciously by Mme . d'Albany , and 
 apparently not censure by the people of the eighteenth century , that , 
 so far from be anxious to shake off all vestige of her hateful 
 married life , the Countess of Albany , on the contrary , seem determine 
 to enjoy , so to speak , her money 's worth ; to get whatever advantage have 
 be buy at the price of her marriage with Charles Edward . Mme . 
 d'Albany enjoy be the widow of a kind of sovereign . rather 
 easy - go and familiar by nature , she nevertheless assume towards 
 stranger a certain queenly haughtiness which frequently give offence ; 
 and Sir Nathaniel Wraxall , who be introduce at her house in 1788 , 
 find , to his surprise , that all the plate belong to Mme . d'Albany 
 be engrave with the royal arm of England ; that guest be conduct 
 through an ante - room in which stand a royal throne also emblazon with 
 the arm of England ; nay , that the servant have order to address the 
 lady of the house by the title of a queen : a state of thing whose 
 institution by a woman who affect nobility of sentiment and who make 
 no secret of her hatred of Charles Edward , whose toleration by a man 
 who scorn the world and abhor royalty , be one of those strange 
 anomaly which teach we the enormous advance in self - respect and 
 self - consistency due to social and democratic progress , an improvement 
 which separate in feel even the most mediocre and worldly man and 
 woman of to - day from the most high - minded and eccentric man and woman of 
 a century ago . to marry Alfieri would mean , for the Countess of Albany , 
 to risk part of her fortune and to relinquish her royal state , as well 
 as to sink into a mere humdrum housewife . hence , in both party 
 concern , a variety of reason , contemptible in our eye , excellent in 
 their own , against legitimate their connection . and , on the other hand , 
 no corresponding inducement . why should they get marry ? the Countess , 
 go in state every Sunday to a convent where she be receive with 
 royal honour , Alfieri write to his mother that although he be not 
 regular at confession , he be yet provide with a most austere and 
 worthy spiritual director in case of need , neither of they have the 
 small belief in Christianity nor in its sacrament . to please whom 
 should they marry , pray ? to please religion ? why , they have none . to 
 please society ? why , society , in this Paris of the year 1788 , at least 
 such aristocratic society as they care to see , consist entirely 
 either of devoted couple of high - minded lover each with a husband or 
 wife somewhere in the background , or of even more interesting triangular 
 arrangement of high - minded and devoted wife , husband , and lover , 
 all live together on charming term , and provide , in case of 
 disagreement , each with a lettre de cachet which should lock the other 
 up in the Bastille . a queen of England by right divine , keep open 
 house in company with a ferociously republican piedmontese poet , be 
 indeed a new and perhaps a questionable case ; but the pre - revolutionary 
 society of Paris be too philosophical to be surprised at anything ; and , 
 after very little hesitation , resort to the charming Albany - Alfieri 
 hotel in the Rue de Bourgoyne . now , if the well - bear and amusing people 
 in Paris do not insist upon Alfieri and the Countess get marry , 
 why should they go out of their way to do so ? we good people of the 
 nineteenth century should have like they the well ; but then , you see , 
 it be the peculiarity of the man and woman of the eighteenth century to 
 be quite unable to conceive that the man and woman of the nineteenth 
 century would be in the least different from themselves . 




 CHAPTER XIV 

 before the storm . 


 the well - bear and amusing people of the end of the eighteenth and 
 beginning of the nineteenth century do not stickle at the question 
 of the marriage . they flock to the hotel of the Rue de Bourgoyne , 
 attract by the peculiar cosmopolitan charm , the very undeniable 
 talent for society , the extraordinary intellectual superiority of Mme . 
 d'Albany ; attract , also , by a certain easy - go and half - motherly 
 kindliness which seem , to all those who want sympathy , to have be 
 quite irresistible . it be the moment of the great fermentation , when 
 even trifle thing and trifle people seem to boil and seethe with 
 importance ; when cold - hearted people be suddenly full of tenderness 
 and chivalry , selfish people full of generosity , prosaic people full of 
 poetry , and mediocre people full of genius : the brief carnival - week 
 of the old world , when man and woman masquerade in all manner of 
 outlandish and antiquated thought and feeling , and enjoy the 
 excitement of dressing - up so much that they actually believe themselves 
 for the moment to be what they pretend : it be the brief moment , 
 grotesque and pathetic , when the doom class of society , who be 
 fatally go to be exterminate for their long selfishness and 
 indifference , enthusiastically catch up pick - axe and shovel and tore 
 down the brick of the edifice which be destine to fall and to crush 
 they all beneath its ruin . 

 all these man and woman , their deep in - bear corruption momentarily 
 transfigure by this enthusiasm for liberty , for equality , for sentiment , 
 for austerity , which mingle oddly with their childish pleasure in all 
 new thing , in mesmerism , in America , in electricity , in Montgolfier 
 balloon , with their habitual pleasure in all their big and small futile 
 and wicked pleasure of worldliness ; - all these man and woman , these 
  morituri delight at the preparation , the scaffolding , red clothe , 
 black crape , torch and drum and bugle , for their own execution , all 
 assemble at that hotel of the Rue de Bourgoyne . 

 a brilliant crowd of minister and diplomatist , and artist and 
 pamphleteer , and wit and beautiful woman ; perishable and perish 
 thing , out of which we must select one or two , either as type of that 
 which have perish , or as type of the imperishable ; and the perish , 
 the amiable and beautiful woman , the amusing and brilliantly - improvise 
 orator and philosopher of the half - hour , be often that which , could 
 we have choose , we should have preserve . most notable among the woman , 
 the young daughter of Necker , the wife of the swedish ambassador , Mme . 
 la Baronne de Staël Holstein : a rather mannish superb sort of creature , 
 with shoulder and arm compensate for thick swarthy feature ; eye 
 like volcano ; the laugh of the most kind - hearted of child ; the 
 stride , the attitude , with her hand for ever behind the back , of an 
 unceremonious man ; a young woman already account a genius , and feel to 
 be a moral force . next to she a snub , drab - colour Livonian , with 
 northern eye tell of future mysticism , that Mme . de Krüdener , as yet 
 note only for the droll contrast of her enthusiasm for St. Pierre and 
 the simplicity of nature with her quarterly bill of twenty thousand 
 franc from Mdlle . Bertin , the Queen 's milliner ; but later to be famous 
 for her literary and religious vagary , her influence on Mme . de Staël , 
 her strange influence on Alexander of Russia . near she , doubtless , that 
 fascinating Suard , in the convent of whose sister Mme . de Krüdener be 
 will not to spend a month in religious exercise , thank God , at the foot 
 of the altar , for give she a sister like Mdlle . Suard , and a lover 
 like Suard himself . as yet but little notice , except as the pet friend , 
 the " young sister " of Mme . d'Albany , a Mme . de Flahault , later marry 
 to the Portuguese Souza ; a simple - natured little woman , adore her 
 child and the rose in her garden , and who , if I may judge by the 
 letter which , many , many year later , she address to Mme . d'Albany , 
 would be the woman of all those one would rather resuscitate for a 
 friend , leave Mmes . de Staël and de Krüdener quiet in their coffin . 
 far on , the delicate and charming Pauline de Beaumont , who be to be 
 the Egeria of Joubert and the tenderly - beloved friend of Châteaubriand ; 
 and a host of woman notable in those day for wit or heart or look , 
 wherewith to make a new Ballade of Dead Ladies , much sad than the one 
 of Villon : " but where be the snow of yester - year ? " 

 round about these lady an even great number of man of what be , or 
 pass for , eminent quality ; political for the most part , or busy 
 with the new science of economy , like the Trudaines ; and most notable 
 among they , as the typical victim of genius of the Reign of Terror , poor 
 André Chénier , his exquisite imitation of Theocritus still wait to 
 be sort and annotate in prison ; and the typical blood - maniac of 
 genius , the painter David , who be to startle Mme . d'Albany 's guest , 
 soon after the 10th August , by wish that the Fishwives have stick 
 Marie Antoinette 's head without more ado upon a pike . imagine all these 
 people assemble in order to hear M. de Beaumarchais , in the full glory 
 of his million and his wonderful garden , give a first reading of his 
  Mère Coupable , after invite they to prepare themselves to weep 
  which be easy in those day of soft heart   "    plein canal . " or else 
 listen to the cold and solemn M. de Condorcet , prophesy the time 
 when science shall have abolish suffering and shall abolish death ; 
 little dreaming of those day of wander without food , of those night 
 in the quarry of Montrouge , of that little bottle of poison , the only 
 thing that science could give to abolish his suffering . 

 to all these great and illustrious people the Countess of Albany - I have 
 almost say the Queen of England - introduce her " incomparable friend " 
  style then in vogue   Count Vittorio Alfieri ; and all of they doubtless 
 take a great interest in he as her lover , and a little interest in he 
 as the great poet of Italy ; not certainly without wonder - amiable 
 people as they be , and persuade that France and Paris alone 
 exist - that Mme . d'Albany should find anything to love in this 
 particularly rude and disagreeable man , and that a country like Italy 
 should have the impudence to set up a poet of its own . the Countess of 
 Albany , make to be a leader of intellectual society , be happy ; but 
 Alfieri be not . ever since his childhood , when a french dancing - master 
 have vainly try to unstiffen his rigid person , he have mortally hat 
 the french nation ; ever since his first boyish travel he have loathe 
 Paris as the sewer , the cloaca maxima   the expression be his own   of 
 the world ; his whole life have be a struggle with the french manner , 
 the french language , which have permeate Piedmont ; one of the chief 
 merit of the new drama he have conceive be   in his own eye   to sweep 
 Corneille , Racine , and particularly Voltaire , his arch - aversion 
 Voltaire , off the stage . 

 Alfieri , with his fault and his virtue , be specially construct , if 
 I may use the expression , to ignore all the good point , and to feel 
 with hysterical sensitiveness all the bad one , of the french nation ; 
 and more especially of the french nation of the pre - revolutionary and 
 revolutionary era . Alfieri 's reality and Alfieri 's ideal be austerity , 
 inflexibility , pride and contemptuousness of character , coldness , 
 roughness , decision of manner , curtness , reticence , and absolute 
 truthfulness of speech ; above all , no consideration for other folk ' 
 liking and disliking , no mercy for their foible . his ideal , even more 
 so than the ideal of other idealising mind , be the mere outcome of 
 himself ; it contain his fault as well as his virtue . now all that 
 fall short of , or go beyond , his ideal - that be to say , himself - be 
 abomination in Alfieri 's eye . consequently France and the French , 
 all the nobility , the wit , the sentiment , the warm - heartedness , the 
 enthusiasm , the wide - mindedness , the childishness , the frivolity , the 
 instability , the disrespectfulness , the sentimentality , the high 
 falutinism , the superficiality , the looseness of principle , everything 
 that make up the greatness and littleness of the France of the end of 
 last century , everything which will make up the greatness and littleness 
 of France , the glory and weakness which the world must love , to the 
 end of time ; all these thing be abhorrent to Alfieri ; and Alfieri , 
 when once he dislike a person or a thing , justly or unjustly , could 
 only increase but never diminish his dislike . let we look at this 
 matter , which be instructive to all person whose nobility of character 
 run to injustice , a little close ; it will help we to understand the 
  Misogallo , the extraordinary apostasy which , quite unconsciously , 
 Alfieri be later to commit towards the principle of freedom . Alfieri , 
 intensely italian , if mediæval and peasant Italy may give we the 
 italian type , in a certain silent or rather inarticulate violence of 
 temper - violence which roar and yell and stab and strangle , but 
 which never talk , and much less argue - could not endure the particular 
 sort of excitement which surround he in France ; excitement mainly 
 cerebral , heroism or villainy result , but only as the outcome of 
 argument and definition of principle and of that mixture of logic and 
 rhetoric call by the french des mot . Alfieri be not a reasoning 
 mind , he be not an eloquent man ; above all , he be not a witty man ; his 
 satirical effort be so many blow upon an opponent 's head ; they be 
 almost physical brutality ; there be nothing clever or funny about 
 they . in such a society as this parisian society of the year ' 87 , ' 88 , 
 ' 89 , ' 90 , he must have be at a continual disadvantage ; and at a 
 disadvantage which he feel keenly , but which he feel , also , that 
 any remarkable piece of Alfierism which would have move Italy to 
 admiration , such as glaring , or stalk off in silence , or punch a 
 man 's head , could only increase . to feel himself at a disadvantage on 
 account of his very virtue , and with people whom those virtue do 
 not impress , must have be most intolerable to a man as vain and 
 self - conscious as Alfieri , and to this be add the sense that , 
 from mere ignorance of the language   the language whose nobility , as 
 contrast with the " low , plebeian , nasal disgustingness " of French , he 
 so often descanted on   in which he write , it be quite impossible for 
 these people to be reduce to their right place and right mind by the 
 crush superiority of his dramatic genius . he , who hunger and 
 thirst for glory , what glory could he hope for among all these monkey 
 of Frenchmen , jabber and gesticulate about their States - General , 
 their Montgolfier , their St. Pierre , their Condorcet , their Parny , their 
 Necker , who have not even the decent feeling to know italian , and who 
 bow and smile and doubtless mix he up with Metastasio and Goldoni 
 when introduce by the Countess to so odd a piece of provincialism as an 
 italian poet . " do Monsieur write comedy or tragedy ? " one fancy 
 one can hear the politely indifferent question put with a charming 
 smile by some powdered and embroider french wit to Mme . d'Albany in 
 Alfieri 's hearing ; nay , to Alfieri himself . 

 mix with such meaner , though unconscious motif for dissatisfaction , 
 must have be the sense , intolerable to a man like Alfieri , of the 
 horrid and grotesque jumble of good and bad , of real and false , not 
 merely in the revolutionary movement itself , but in all these man of the 
  ancien régime who initiate it . Alfieri conceive liberty from the 
 purely antique , or , if you prefer , pseudo - antique , point of view ; it 
 be to he the final cause of the world ; the aim of all struggle ; to 
 be free be the one and only desideratum , to be master of one 's own 
 thought , action , and word , merely for the sake of such mastery . the 
 practical advantage of liberty entirely escape he , as do the 
 practical disadvantage of tyranny ; nay , one can almost imagine that 
 have liberty involve absolute misery for all man , and tyranny absolute 
 happiness , Alfieri would have choose liberty . to this pseudo - roman 
 and intensely patrician stoic , who have never know privation or 
 injustice towards himself , and scarcely notice it towards other , 
 the humanitarian , the philanthropic movement , characteristic of the 
 eighteenth century , and which be the strong impulse of the revolution , 
 be absolutely incomprehensible . Alfieri be , in the sense of certain 
 ancient , a hard - hearted man , indifferent , blind and deaf to suffering . 
 that a man of education and mind , a gentleman , should have to sweep the 
 ground with his hat on the passage of another man , because that other 
 happen to wear a ribbon and a star ; that he should be liable to exile , 
 to imprisonment , for a truthful statement of his opinion : these be to 
 Alfieri the insupportable thing of tyranny . but that a man in wooden 
 shoe and a torn smock frock , sleep between the pig and the cow on 
 the damp clay floor , eat bread mainly compose of straw , should have 
 all the profit of his hard labour take from he in taxis , while 
 another man , a splendid gentleman cover over with gold , rid over 
 acre of his land with his hound , or a fat priest dress in silk , 
 snooze over his Lucullus dinner , should be exempt from taxation and 
 empower to starve , rob , beat , or hang the peasant : such a thing as 
 this do not fall within the range of Alfieri 's feeling . to his mind , 
 for ever wrap in an intellectual toga , there be no tragedy in mere 
 misery ; there be no injustice in mere cruelty , or rather misery , 
 cruelty , nay , all their ally evil , ignorance , brutality , sickness , 
 superstition , vice , be unknown to he . hence , as I have say , all the 
 philanthropic side of the revolutionary movement be lose to he ; just 
 as the defence of Labarre , the vindication of Calas , never disturb 
 the current of his contempt for Voltaire . so also the abolition of 
 privilege , the secularisation of church property , the equalisation of 
 legal punishment , the abrogation of barbarous law , the liberation of 
 slave ; all these thing , which stir even the most corrupt and 
 apathetic mind of the late eighteenth century , seem merely so much 
 declamation to Alfieri . to he , who could conceive no virtue beyond 
 independent truthfulness , such thing be mere sentimental trash , mere 
 hypocritical nonsense beneath which base man hide their baseness . and 
 the baseness , unhappily , be there : baseness of absolute corruption , 
 or of scandalous levity , even in the noblest . to Alfieri , a man like 
 Beaumarchais , for all his quick philanthropy , his audacious outspokenness , 
 must have seem base , with his background of money - jobbing , of dirty 
 diplomatic work , of legal squabble . how much more such a man as 
 Mirabeau , with his heroic resolution , his heroic kindliness , his whole 
 Titan nature , carous , eat into by a hundred mean vice . that Mirabeau 
 should have gain his bread write libel and obscene novel , mean to 
 Alfieri not that a man bear in corruption and taint thereby have , by 
 the force of his genius , by the force of the great humanitarian 
 movement , raise himself as morally high as he have hitherto grovel 
 morally low ; it merely mean that the immaculate name of hero be 
 degrade by a foul writer . 

 from such figure as these Alfieri turn away in indignant disgust . the 
 great movement of the eighteenth century seem to he a mere stirring 
 and splash in a noisome pool , in that cloaca maxima , as he have 
 call it . 

 already before settle in Paris in 1787 , he have write to his sienese 
 friend that , be it not for the necessity of attend to the printing 
 of his work   to print which permission would not be obtainable in 
 Italy , he would rather have establish himself at Prats , at Colle , 
 at Buonconvento , at any little town of two thousand inhabitant near 
 Florence or Siena . surround by , in daily contact with , some of the 
 noble mind of the century , nay , of any century , by people like Mme . 
 de Staël , André Chénier , Condorcet , Mirabeau , Alfieri could write , with 
 a sort of bitter pleasure at his own narrow - mindedness : " now I be among 
 a million of man , and not one of they that be worth Gori 's little 
 finger . " 

 I be almost prepared to say that Alfieri really feel as if live in 
 Paris , among such people and at such a moment , be a sort of saintly 
 sacrifice , the crown heroism of his life , which he make in order to 
 print his book ; that he endure the contact of this plague - stricken 
 city , merely because he know that unless he correct a certain number 
 of manuscript page , and revise a certain number of proof - sheet , the 
 world would be defraud of the great and sovereign antidote to all such 
 baseness as this in the shape of his own complete work . 

 write to his mother towards the end of the year 1788 , he mention 
 contemptuously the excitement and enthusiasm create by the approach 
 election of the States - General , and add calmly : " but all these sort of 
 thing interest I very little ; and I give my attention only to the 
 correction of my proof , a piece of work with which I be pretty well 
 half through . " 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 ENGLAND . 


 the contradiction in complex and self - contradictory character like 
 those of the frenchman of the early revolution can be easily explain , 
 and , say what we will , must be easily pardon : rich nature , creature 
 of impulse , intensely sensitive to external influence , we feel that 
 it be to the very richness of nature , the warmth of impulse , the 
 susceptibility to influence , that we owe not merely these man 's virtue 
 but their vice . but the contradiction of the self - righteous be an 
 afflict spectacle , over which we would fain draw the veil : there be 
 no room in a narrow nature for any flagrant violation of its own ideal 
 to be stuff away unnoticed in a corner . and now we come to one of the 
 strange self - contradiction in the history of Mme . d'Albany , that be 
 to say , of her lord and master Alfieri . 

 the revision and printing of Alfieri 's work have be bring to an end ; 
 but neither he nor the Countess seem to have contemplate a return to 
 Italy . the fact be that they be both of they retain by money 
 matter . a proportion of Mme . d'Albany 's income consist in the pension 
 which she receive from the french Court ; and the great part of 
 Alfieri 's income consist in certain money make over to he by his 
 sister as the capital of his life pension , and which he have invest in 
 french fund . 

 by the year 1791 , the French Court and the french fund have get to be 
 very shaky ; and those who depend upon they do not dare go to any 
 distance , lest on their return they should find nothing to claim , or no 
 one to claim from . hence the necessity for Alfieri and the Countess to 
 remain in France , or , at least , hover about near it . 

 now , whether the unsettled state of french affair suggest to Mme . 
 d'Albany , and through she to Alfieri , that it would be wise to see what 
 sort of home , nay , perhaps , what sort of pecuniary assistance , might be 
 find elsewhere , I can not tell ; but this much be certain , that on the 
 19th May , 1791 , Horace Walpole write as follow to Miss Barry : - 

 " the Countess of Albany be not only in England , in London , but at this 
 very moment , I believe , in the palace of St. James ; not restore by as 
 rapid a revolution as the French , but , as be observe at supper at 
 Lady Mount Edgecumbe 's , by that topsy - turvihood that characterise the 
 present age . within these two day the Pope have be burn at Paris ; 
 Mme . du Barry , mistress of Louis Quinze , have din with the Lord Mayor 
 of London ; and the Pretender 's widow be present to the Queen of Great 
 Britain . " 

 that we should have to learn so strike an episode of the journey to 
 England from the letter of a total stranger , who notice it as a mere 
 piece of gossip , while the memoir of Alfieri , who accompany Mme . 
 d'Albany to England , be perfectly silent on the subject , be , to say the 
 least of it , a suspicious circumstance . 

 as he grow old , Alfieri seem to have lose that power , nay that 
 irresistible desire , of speak the truth and the whole truth which 
 make he record with burn shame the caress of Pius VI . perhaps , on 
 the other hand , Alfieri , who , after all , be but a sorry mixture of 
 an ancient roman and a man of the eighteenth century , think that a 
 certain amount of baseness and dirt - eating , quite degrade in a man , 
 might be permit to a woman , even to the lady of his thought . and 
 still I can not help think that Alfieri , who could certainly , with his 
 strong will , have prevent the Countess from demean herself , and in 
 so far demeaning also his love for she , quietly abet this step , and 
 then as quietly consign it to oblivion . 

 but oblivion do not depend upon registration , or non - registration , 
 in Alfieri 's memoir . the letter of Walpole , the memoir of Hannah 
 More , the political correspondence collect by Lord Stanhope , furnish 
 abundant detail of this affair . the Countess of Albany be introduce 
 by her relation , or connexion , the young Countess of Aylesbury , and 
 announce by her maiden name of Princess of Stolberg . Horace Walpole 's 
 informant , who stand close by , tell he that she be " well - dress , and 
 not at all embarrass . " George III . and his son talk a good deal to 
 she , about her passage , her stay in England , and similar matter ; but 
 the princess none of they say a word ; and we hear that Queen Charlotte 
 " look at she earnestly . " the strait - laced wife of George III . have 
 probably consent to receive the Pretender 's widow , only because this 
 ceremony be a sort of second burial of Charles Edward , a burial of all 
 the claim , the pride of the Stuarts ; but she feel presumably no great 
 cordiality towards a woman who have run away from her husband , who be 
 travel in England with her lover ; and who , while affect royal 
 state in her own house , could crave the honour of be receive by the 
 family of the usurper . 

 Mme . d'Albany be not abash : she seem to have make up her mind to get 
 all she could out of royal friendliness . she accept a seat in the 
 King 's box at the opera ; nay , she accept a seat at the foot of the 
 throne   " the throne she might once have expect to mount , " remark 
 Hannah more , on the occasion of the King 's speech in the House of 
 Lords . it be the 10th of June , the birthday of Prince Charlie ; and the 
 woman who sit there so unconcernedly , keep a throne with the british 
 arm in her ante - room , and make her servant address she as a Queen ! 

 what be Alfieri 's feeling when Mme . d'Albany come home in her Court 
 toilette , and tell he of all these fine doing ? the more we try to 
 conceive certain thing , the more inconceivable they become : it be like 
 strain to see what may be hide at the bottom of a very deep well . 
 in the case of Alfieri , I think we may add that the well be empty . 
 since his illness at Colmar , he have age in the most extraordinary way : 
 the process of dessication and ossification of his moral nerve and 
 muscle , which , as I have say , be the form that premature decrepitude 
 take in this abnormal man , have begin . the creative power be extinct in 
 he , both as regard his work and himself : there be no possibility of 
 anything new , of any response of this wooden nature to new circumstance . 
 he have attain to the age of forty - two without any particular feeling 
 such as could fit into this present case , and the result be that he 
 probably have no feeling . the Countess of Albany be the ideal woman he 
 have enshrine she as such age ago , and an ideal woman could not change , 
 could not commit an impropriety , least of all in his eye . if she have 
 condescend to ridiculous meanness in order to secure for herself an 
 opening in english society , a subsidy from the English Government 
  apparently already suggest at that time , but grant only many year 
 later   in case of a general break - up of french thing ; if she have do 
 this , it be no concern of Alfieri : Mme . d'Albany have be patent as 
 the ideal woman . as to he , why should he condescend to think about 
 state reception , gala , pension , king and queen , and similar low 
 thing ? he have put such vanity behind he long ago . 

 Alfieri and the Countess make a tour through England , and project 
 a tour through Scotland . whether the climate , the manner , the aspect 
 of England and its inhabitant really disappoint the perhaps ideal 
 notion she have form ; or whether , perhaps , she be a little bit put 
 out of sort by no pension be grant , and by a possible coldness of 
 british matron towards a widow travel about with an italian poet , 
 it be not for I to decide . but her impression of England , as record 
 in a note - book now at the Musée Fabre at Montpellier , be certainly not 
 those of a person who have receive a good welcome : 

 " although I know , " she say , repeat the stale platitude   or perhaps 
 the true impression ?   of all foreigner , " that the English be 
 melancholy , I have not imagine that life in their capital would be so to 
 the point which I experience it . no sort of society , and a quantity of 
 crowd ... as they spend nine month in the country - the family alone , 
 or with only a very few friend - they like , when they come to town , to 
 throw themselves into the vortex . woman be never at home . the whole 
 early part of the day , which begin at two   for , go to bed at four 
 in the morning , they rise only at mid - day , be spend in visit and 
 exercise , for the english require , and their climate absolutely 
 necessitate , a great deal of exercise . the coal smoke , the constant 
 absence of sunshine , the heavy food and drink , make movement a necessity 
 to they .... if England have an oppressive Government , this country and 
 its inhabitant would be the low in the universe : a bad climate , bad 
 soil , hence no sort of taste ; it be only the excellence of the political 
 constitution which render it inhabitable . the nation be melancholy , 
 without any imagination , even without wit ; the dominant characteristic 
 be a desire for money . " 

 the same note as that even of such a man as Taine . the almost morbid 
 love of beauty which a civilisation , whose outward expression be the 
 line and line of black box , with slit for door and window of 
 Bloomsbury , produce in man like Coleridge , Blake , and Turner , naturally 
 escape Mme . d'Albany ; but the second great rebellion of imagination 
 and love of beauty , the rebellion lead by Madox Brown and Morris , and 
 Rossetti and Burne Jones , escape Taine . but of all the thing which 
 most offend this quasi - queen of England in our civilisation , the 
 social arrangement do so most of all . with the instinct of a woman who 
 have live a by no mean regular life in the midst of a society far bad 
 than herself , with the instinct of one of those strange pseudo - french 
 Continental mongrel with whom age always bring cynicism , she try to 
 account for the virtue of Englishwomen by accidental , and often rather 
 nasty , necessity . Mme . d'Albany write with the freedom and precision 
 of a continental woman of the world of eighty year ago ; and her remark 
 lose too much or gain too much by translation into our chaster language . 
 " the charm of intimate society , " she wind up , conscious of the charm 
 of her own little salon full of clever man and pretty woman all 
 well - acquainted with each other - " the charm of intimate society be 
 unknown in England . " 

 in short , the soon England be quit , the well . political , 
 or rather financial circumstance - that be to say , the frightful 
 worthlessness of french money   and Alfieri 's and her money come mainly 
 from France , make a return to Paris urgent . 

 an incident , as curious perhaps as that of Mme . d'Albany 's presentation 
 at Court , but which , unlike that , Alfieri have not think fit to 
 suppress , mark their departure from England . as Alfieri , who have 
 precede the Countess by a few minute to see whether the luggage have 
 be properly store on the ship at Dover , turn to go and meet she , 
 his eye suddenly fall with a start of recognition upon a woman stand 
 on the landing - place . she be not young , but still very handsome , as 
 some of we may know she from Gainsborough 's portrait ; and she be no 
 other than Penelope Lady Ligonier , for whom Alfieri have be so mad 
 twenty year before , for whom he have fight his famous duel in St. 
 James ' Park , and get himself disgracefully mix up in a peculiarly 
 disgraceful divorce suit . he have several time inquire after she , and 
 always in vain ; and now he would scarcely have believe his eye have his 
 former mistress not give he a smile of recognition . Alfieri be 
 terribly upset . the sight of this ghost from out of a disgraceful past , 
 come to haunt what he consider a dignified present , seem fairly to 
 have terrify he ; he run back into the ship and dare not go to meet 
 Mme . d'Albany , lest in so do he should meet Lady Ligonier . presently , 
 Mme . d'Albany come on board . with the indifference of a woman of the 
 world , of that easy - goingness which be rapidly efface in her the 
 romantic victim of Charles Edward , she tell Alfieri that the friend 
 who have escort she to the ship   and who appear to have perfectly 
 understand the temper of the Countess   have point out his former flame 
 and entertain she with a brief biography of her predecessor in 
 Alfieri 's heart . Mme . d'Albany take it all as a matter of course : she 
 be probably no long at all in love with Alfieri , but she admire his 
 genius and character as much and more than ever ; and be probably 
 begin to develop a certain good - nature , half - motherly acquiescence 
 in his eccentricity , such as woman who have suffer much , and grow 
 stout and strong , and cynically optimistic now that suffering be over , 
 be apt to develop towards people accustomed to resort to they , like 
 sick child , in all their up and down of temper . 

 " between we , " say Alfieri , " there be never any falsehood , or reticence , 
 or coolness , or quarrel " ; - and , indeed , when a woman , such as Mme . 
 d'Albany must have be at the age of forty , have once determine to 
 adore and humour a particular individual in every single possible thing , 
 all such painful result of more sensitive passion naturally become 
 unnecessary . if Mme . d'Albany merely smile over bygone folly , Alfieri 
 have be put into great agitation by the sight of Lady Ligonier . from 
 Calais he send she a letter , of which no copy have be preserve , but 
 which , accord to his account , " be full , not indeed of love , but of 
 a deep and sincere emotion at see she still lead a wandering life 
 very unsuited to her birth and position ; and of pain in think that I , 
 although innocently   that " although innocently " , on the part of a man 
 who have be the cause of her scandalous downfall , be perfectly charming 
 in its simple revelation of continental moral , might have be the 
 cause or the pretext thereof . " 

 Lady Ligonier 's answer come to hand in Brussels . write in bad French , 
 it answer Alfieri 's tragic grandiloquence with a cold civility , which 
 show how deeply his magnanimous compassion have wound a woman who feel 
 herself to be no more really corrupt than he . 

 " Monsieur , " so run the letter , " you could not doubt that the expression 
 of your remembrance of I , and of the interest which you kindly take in 
 my lot , would be duly appreciate and receive gratefully by I ; the 
 more especially as I can not consider you as the cause of my unhappiness , 
 since I be not unhappy , although the uprightness of your soul make you 
 fear that I be . you be , on the contrary , the agent of my liberation 
 from a world for which I be in no way suit , and which I have not 
 for a moment regret .... I be in the enjoyment of perfect health , 
 increase by liberty and peace of mind . I seek the society only of 
 simple and virtuous person without pretension either to particular 
 genius or to particular learning ; and besides such society I entertain 
 myself with book , drawing , music ,   c. but what constitute the basis of 
 real happiness and satisfaction be the friendship and unalterable love 
 of a brother whom I have always love more than the whole world , and who 
 possess the good of heart . " " I hear , " go on Lady Ligonier , after a 
 few compliment on Alfieri 's literary fame , " that you be attach to 
 the Princess with whom you be travel , whose amiable and clever 
 physiognomy seem indeed form for the happiness of a soul as sensitive 
 and delicate as your . I be also tell that she be afraid of you : I 
 recognise you there . without wish , or perhaps even know it , you 
 have an irresistible ascendancy over all who be attach to you . " 

 be it this disrespectful hint concern what he wish the world to 
 consider as his ideal love for Mme . d'Albany , or be it Lady Ligonier 's 
 determination to let he know that desertion by he have make she neither 
 more disreputable nor more unhappy than before , I can not tell ; but 
 certain it be that something in this letter appear to have put Alfieri , 
 who have not object to Mme . d'Albany 's mean behaviour towards George 
 III . , into a condition of ruffle virtue and dignity . 

 " I copy this letter , " he write in his memoir , " in order to give an 
 idea of this woman 's eccentric and obstinately evilly - incline 
 character . " 

 do it never occur to Alfieri that his own character , whose fault 
 during youth he so keenly appreciate , be not improve with year ? 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

 the MISOGALLO . 


 Alfieri and Madame d'Albany be scarcely back in Paris , and settle in 
 a new house , when the disorder in Paris and the movement of the 
 imperial troop on the frontier begin to make the situation of 
 foreigner difficult and dangerous . the storming of the Tuileries , the 
 great slaughter of the 10th August 1792 , admonish they to sacrifice 
 everything to their safety . with considerable difficulty a passport for 
 the Countess have be obtain from the Swedish Minister , one for 
 Alfieri from the Venetian Resident   almost the only diplomatic 
 representative , say Alfieri , who still remain to that ghost of a 
 king , and a passport for each of they and for each of their servant 
 from their communal section . departure be fix for the 20th August , 
 but Alfieri 's black presentiment hasten it to the 18th . arrive at 
 the Barrière Blanche , on the road to Calais , passport be examine by 
 two or three soldier of the National Guard , and the gate be on the 
 point of be open to let the two heavily - load carriage pass , when 
 suddenly , from out of a neighbouring pot - house , rush some twenty - five 
 or thirty ruffian , ragged , drunken , and furious . they surround the 
 carriage , yell that all the rich be run away and leave they 
 to starve without work ; and a crowd rapidly form round they and the 
 National Guards , who want the traveller to be permit to pass on . 
 Alfieri jump out of the carriage , brandish his seven passport , and 
 throw himself , a long , lean , red - haired man , fiercely gesticulate and 
 yelling at the top of his voice , among the crowd , force this man and 
 that to read the passport , cry frantically , " look ! listen ! Name 
 Alfieri . italian and not french ! tall , thin , pale , red - haired ; that be 
 I ; look at I . I have my passport ! we have our passport all in order 
 from the proper authority ! we want to pass ; and , by God ! we will 
 pass ! " 

 after half an hour of this altercation , with voice issue from the 
 crowd , " burn the carriage ! " " throw stone at they ! " " they be run 
 away , they be noble and rich ; take they to the Hotel de Ville to be 
 judge ! " at last Alfieri 's vociferation and gesticulation weary even 
 the Paris mob , the crowd become quieter , the National Guards give the 
 sign for departure , and Alfieri , jump into the carriage where Mme . 
 d'Albany be sit more dead than alive , shout to the postillion to 
 gallop off . 

 at a country house near Mons , belong to the Countess of Albany 's 
 sister , the fugitive receive the frightful news of the September 
 massacre ; of those man and woman drive , like beast into an arena , 
 down the prison - stair into the prison yard , to fall , hack to piece 
 by the bayonet and sabre and pike of Maillard 's amateur executioner , 
 on to the blood - soak mattress , while the people of Paris , morally 
 divide on separate bench , the gentleman here , the lady there , sit 
 and look on ; of those man and woman many have frequent the salon of 
 the Rue de Bourgoyne , have chat and laugh , only a few week back , 
 with Alfieri and the Countess ; amongst those man and woman Alfieri and 
 the Countess might themselves easily have be , have the ruffian of the 
 Barrière Blanche drag they back to their house , where an order to 
 arrest Mme . d'Albany arrive two day later , that very 20th August which 
 have originally be fix for their departure . the thought of this 
 narrow escape turn the recollection of that scene at the Barrière 
 Blanche into a perfect nightmare , which focusse , so to speak , all the 
 frenzied horror conceive by Alfieri for the French Revolution , for the 
 " Tiger - Apes " of France . 

 by November Alfieri and Mme . d'Albany be in Florence , safe ; but 
 establish in a miserable inn , without their furniture , their horse , 
 their book ; all leave in Paris ; nay , almost without the necessary 
 clothe , and with very little money . from the dirty inn they migrate 
 into rather unseemly furnished lodging , and finally , after some 
 debating about Siena and inquire whether a house might not be have 
 there on the promenade of the Lizza , they settle down in the house , one 
 of a number formerly belong to the Gianfigliazzi family , on the Lung 
 Arno , close to the Ponte Santa Trinita , in Florence . the situation be 
 one of the most delightful in Florence : across the narrow quay the 
 window look almost sheer down into the river , sparkle with a hundred 
 facet in the spring and summer sunlight , cut by the deep shadow of the 
 old bridge , to where it be lose to sight between the tall poplar by 
 the Greve mouth and the ilex and elm of the Cascine , close in by 
 the pale blue peak of the Carrara Alps ; or else , in autumn and winter , 
 scarcely move , a mass of dark - green and brown , wonderfully veined , 
 like some strange oriental jasper , with transparent violet streaking , 
 and above which arise , veil , half wash out by mist , the old 
 corbelle house , the church - steeple and roof , the tier and tier of 
 pine and ilex plume on the hill opposite . 

 for a moment , with the full luminousness of the tuscan sky once more 
 in his eye , and the guttural strength of the tuscan language once more 
 in his ear , Alfieri seem to have be delighted . but his cheerfulness 
 be not of long duration . ever since his great illness at Colmar , 
 Alfieri have , I feel persuade , become virtually an old man ; his strength 
 and spirit be impaired , and the strange morose depression of his 
 half - fructify youth seem to return . come at that moment , the 
 disappointment , the terror , the horror of the French Revolution become , 
 so to speak , part of a moral illness which last to his death . Alfieri 
 be not a tender - hearted nor a humane man ; have he be , he would have 
 feel more sympathy than he do with the beginning of the great movement , 
 with the striving after reform which precede it ; he have , on the 
 contrary , the sort of cold continuous rage , the ruthless self - righteousness 
 and cut - and - dryness which would have make he , have he be a Frenchman , 
 a terrorist of the most dreadful type ; a regular routinist in extermination 
 of corrupt people . hence I can not believe that , much as he may have be 
 shock by the news of the September massacre , of the grandes 
 fournées which precede Thermidor , and much as he may have be 
 distress by Mme . d'Albany 's anxiety and grief for so many friend who 
 lose their property or life , Alfieri be the man to be drive mad by 
 the mere thought of bloodshed . but Alfieri have , ever since his early 
 youth , make liberty his goddess , and the worship of liberty his special 
 religion and mission . that such a religion and mission , to which he have 
 devote himself in a time and country when and where no one else dream 
 of anything of the sort , should suddenly become , and without the 
 small agency of his , the religion and mission of the very nation 
 and people whom he instinctively abhor from the depth of his soul ; 
 that liberty , which he alone be to teach man to desire , should be the 
 fashionable craze , mix up with science , philanthropy , sentiment , and 
 everything he hat most in the French , this be already a pain that 
 gnaw silently into Alfieri 's soul . but when liberty be , as it be , 
 drag out of his own little private temple , where he adore and hymn 
 it , deck out in patrician dignity of Plutarch and Livy , and carry 
 about , dress in the garb of a Paris fish - wife , a red cotton night - cap 
 on her head , by a tattered , filthy , drunken , blood - stain crew of 
  sansculotte , nay , bad , roll along on a triumphal car by an 
 assembly of lawyer and doctor and ex - priest and journalist - when 
 liberty , which have be to he antique and aristocratic , become modern 
 and democratic ; when the whole of France have turn into a blood - reeking 
 and stream temple of this Moloch goddess , then a sort of moral 
 abscess , long grow unnoticed , seem to burst within Alfieri 's soul , 
 and a process of slow moral blood - poisoning to begin . 

 the Reign of Terror come to an end , the reaction of Thermidor set 
 in ; but this be nothing to Alfieri , for , whereas the unspeakable 
 profanation of what be his own personal and quasi - private property , 
 liberty , have hitherto be limit to France , it now spread , a 
 frightful invading abomination , with the army of the Directory all 
 over the world ; nay , to Italy itself . 

 it be as an expression , an eternal , immortal expression , the severest 
 conceivable retribution , Alfieri sincerely think , of this rage , all 
 the strong as there enter into it the petty personal vanity as well 
 as the noble abstract feeling of the man - it be as an expression of 
 this gallophobia that Alfieri compose his famous but little - read 
  Misogallo . this collection of prose argument and vituperation and 
 versify epigram , all lard and load with quotation from all the 
 latin and greek author whom Alfieri be busy spell out , do 
 certainly contain many thing which , old as they be , strike even we 
 with the force of live contempt and indignation . Nay , even include 
 its most stupid and dull violent part , we can sympathise with its 
 bitterness and violence , when we think of the frightful deed of blood 
 which , talk heroically of justice and liberty , France have be 
 commit ; of the miserable series of petty rapine and extortion 
 which , talk patronisingly of the Greeks and Romans , the french nation 
 be practise upon the Italians whom it have come to liberate . that such 
 feeling should be elicit be natural enough . but we feel , as we turn 
 over the page of the Misogallo , and collate with its epigram a 
 certain passage in Alfieri 's memoir and letter , that when we meet 
 it in this particular man , in this hard , savage , narrow , pedantic 
 doctrinaire , whose very magnanimity be vanity and egotism , we can no 
 long sympathise with the hatred of the French , which in juster and 
 more modest man , as for instance Carlo Botta , invariably elicit our 
 sympathy . much as we dislike the republican French who descend into 
 Italy , the Misogallo make we like Alfieri even less . whether this 
 revolution , despite the ocean of blood which it shed , might not be 
 bring a great and lasting benefit to mankind by sweep away the 
 hundred and one obstacle which impede social progress ; whether this 
 french invasion , despite the money which it extort , the statue and 
 picture which it stole , the miserable high - fly lie which it tell , 
 might not be do Italy a great service in accustom it to modern 
 institution , in train it to warfare , in rid it of a brood of 
 inept little tyrant : such question do not occur to Alfieri , for whom 
 liberty mean everything , progress and improvement nothing . as the 
 century draw to a close , and the futility of so many vaunted reform , 
 the hollowness of so many promise , become apparent to the Italians with 
 the shameful treaty which give Venice , liberate of her oligarchy , to 
 Austria , all the nobler man of the day , Pindemonti , Botta , Foscolo , and 
 the crowd of nameless patriotic youth who fill the university , 
 be seize by a terrible soul - sickness ; everything seem to have give 
 way , each course be as bad as the other , and Italy seem destine to 
 servitude and indignity , whether under her new master the French , or 
 under her old master the Austrians and Bourbons and priest . but the 
 feeling of Alfieri be not of this kind ; he be not tear by 
 patriotism ; he be simply push into sympathy with the tyranny which 
 he have so hat by the intolerable pain of find that the liberty 
 which he have preach be be propagandise by the nation and the 
 class of society which he detest most . 

 such Alfieri appear to I , and such I think he must appear to everyone 
 who conscientiously study the extraordinary manner in which this 
 apostle of liberty come to preach in favour of despotism . but in his own 
 eye , and in the eye of the Countess of Albany , Alfieri doubtless find 
 abundant argument to prove himself perfectly logical and magnanimous . 
 this French Revolution be merely a revolt of slave ; and what tyranny 
 could be more odious than the tyranny of those whom nature have fit 
 only for slavery ? what be the French ? " the French , " answer one of the 
 epigram of the Misogallo , " have always be puppet ; formerly puppet 
 in powder , now stink and blood - stain puppet . " " we indeed be 
 slave , " say another epigram , " but at least indignant slave "   a 
 statement which the whole history of Italy in the ninety go to 
 disprove ; " not , as you Gauls always have be and always will be , 
 slave applaud power whatever it be . " the nasal and guttural 
 pronunciation of the french language , the bare existence of such a word 
 as quatrain , be enough to prove to Alfieri that the French can never 
 know true liberty . Alfieri , who have look the ancien régime more than 
 once in the face , actually persuade himself that , as he write , " the 
 frightful french mob rob and slaughter the upper class because 
 those upper class have always treat it too kindly . " Alfieri actually 
 get to believe these thing . he would , have power be put in his hand , 
 have head a counter revolution and exterminate as many people again 
 as the republicans have exterminate . power not be in his hand , he 
 hasten to do what seem to he a vital matter to all Europe , a sort 
 of fatal thrust to France ; he solemnly recant all his former writing 
 in favour of revolution and republic . he , who have witness the taking 
 of the Bastille and sing it in an ode , deliberately write as follow : 
 " the famous day of the 14th July 1789 crown the victorious iniquity 
  of the people . not understand at that time the nature of these 
 slave , I dishonour my pen by write an ode on the taking of the 
 Bastille . " surely , if we admit that to see liberty degrade by its 
 association with revolutionary horror must have be unbearably bitter 
 to the nobler portion of Alfieri 's nature , we must admit that to see 
 Alfieri himself , Alfieri so proud of his former ferocious love of 
 liberty , turn into a mere ranting renegade , be an unendurable 
 spectacle also ; we should like to wash our hand of he as he try to 
 wash his hand of the Revolution . 

 all this political atrabiliousness do not improve Alfieri 's temper ; 
 and could not have make it easy or more agreeable to live with he . 
 the Countess of Albany naturally dislike the Revolution and the 
 French , after all the grief and inconvenience which she owe they ; she 
 naturally , also , dislike everything that Alfieri dislike . still , I 
 can not help fancy that this woman , far more intellectual than 
 passionate , and grow more indifferent , more easy - go , more 
 half - optimistically , half - cynically charitable towards the world with 
 every year that see she grow fat , and plain , and dowdy , - I can not help 
 fancy that the Countess of Albany must have get to listen to 
 Alfieri 's misogallic fury much as she might have listen to his 
 groan have he be afflict with gout or the toothache , sympathise 
 with the pain , but just a little weary of its expression . she must 
 also , at time , have compare the little company of select provincial 
 notability , illustrious people never know beyond their town and their 
 lifetime , which she collect about herself and Alfieri in the house by 
 the Arno , with the brilliant society which have assemble in her hotel 
 in Paris . to she , who be , after all , not italian , but french by 
 education and temper , and who have be steep anew in french idea and 
 habit , this small fry of italian literature , professional and pedantic , 
 able to discuss and   alas ! but too able   to hold forth , but absolutely 
 unable to talk , to causer in the french sense , must have become rather 
 oppressive . she and Alfieri be both grow elderly , and the hearth by 
 which they be seat , alone , childless , with nothing but the ghost of 
 their former passion , the ghost of their former ideal , to keep they 
 company , be on the whole very bleak and cheerless . Alfieri , work off 
 his over - excitement in a system of tremendous self - education , sit 
 for the great part of the day pore over Latin and greek and hebrew 
 grammar , and exercise and annotated edition , till he be so exhausted 
 that he could scarcely digest his dinner ; the Countess kill the 
 endless day read new book of philosophy , of poetry , of fiction , 
 anything and everything that come to hand , write pile and pile of 
 letter to every person of her acquaintance ; this double existence of 
 bored and overwork dreariness , be this the equivalent of marriage ? 
 be this the realisation of ideal love ? 

 but there be thing to confirm Mme . d'Albany in that easy - go 
 indifferentism which replace passion and suffering in this fat , kindly , 
 intellectual woman of forty ; thing which , as they might have make other 
 woman weep , probably make this woman do what in its way be just as 
 sad - smile . 

 Alfieri have always have what , to we , may seem very strange notion on the 
 subject of love , but which be not strange when we consider the time 
 and nation in general , and the man in particular . after the various 
 love mania which precede his meeting with Mme . d'Albany , he have 
 determine , as he tell we , to save his peace of mind and dignity by 
 refuse to fall in love with woman of respectable position . the 
 Countess of Albany , by enchain he in the bond of what he call 
 " worthy love , " have save he from any chance of fresh folly with these 
 alarming " virtuous woman . " but folly with woman of less respectable 
 position and less obvious virtue appear to have present no fear of 
 degradation to Alfieri 's mind . and now , late on in the ninety , when 
 Mme . d'Albany be rapidly grow plain and stout and elderly , and he 
 be get into the systematic habit of regard she less in her 
 reality than in the ideal image which he have arrange in his mind ; now , 
 when he be write the autobiography where the Countess figure as 
 his Beatrice , and when he be compose the latin epitaph which be 
 to unite his tomb with that of the woman " a Victorio Alferio , ultra 
 resomnia dilecta , " just at this time Alfieri appear to have return to 
 those flirtation with woman neither respectable nor virtuous which 
 seem to he so morally safe to indulge in . a very strange note , 
 preserve at Siena , to a " Nina padrona mia dilettissima , " show that the 
 memory of Gori and the friendship of Gori 's friend be not the only 
 thing which attract he ever and anon from Florence to Siena . a 
 collection of wretched bout - rimés and burlesque doggrel , write at 
 Florence in a house which Mme . d'Albany could not enter , and in the 
 company of woman whom Mme . d'Albany could not receive , and among which 
 be a sonnet in which Alfieri explain his condescension in join in 
 these poetical exercise of the demi - monde by an allusion to Hercules 
 and Omphale , show that Alfieri frequent in Florence other society 
 besides that which crowd round his lady in Casa Gianfigliazzi . 

 Mme . d'Albany be far too shrewd and far too worldly not to see all 
 this ; and Alfieri be far too open and cynical to attempt to hide 
 it . Mme . d'Albany , have her praise and his love read to she in 
 innumerable sonnet , in the autobiography and in the epitaph , probably 
 merely smile ; she be a woman of the eighteenth century , a foreigner , 
 an easy - go woman , and have learn to consider such escapade as these 
 as an inevitable part of matrimony or quasi - matrimony . but , for all her 
 worldly philosophy , do she never feel a vague craving , a void , as she 
 sit in that big empty house read her book while Alfieri be study 
 his Greek , a vague desire to have what console other woman for coldness 
 or infidelity , a son or a daughter , a normal object of devotion , something 
 besides Alfieri , and which she could love whether deserving or not ; 
 something besides Alfieri 's glory , in which she could take an interest 
 whether other people do or do not agree ? such a connection as her 
 with Alfieri may have have an attraction of romance , of poetry , connect 
 with its very illegitimacy , its very negation of normal domestic life , 
 as long as both she and Alfieri be young and passionately in love ; but 
 where be the romance , the poetry now , and where be the humdrum marry 
 woman 's happiness , at whose expense that romance , that poetry , have be 
 buy ? 

 Mme . d'Albany , if I may judge by the enormous pile of her letter which 
 I have myself see , and by the report of my friend Signor Mario Pratesi , 
 who have examine another huge collection for my benefit , be get to 
 make herself a sort of half - vegetate intellectual life , read so 
 many hour a day , write letter so many more hour ; take the quite 
 unenthusiastic , business - like interest in literature and politic of a 
 woman whose life be very empty , and , it seem to I , from the tone of 
 her letter , grow daily more indifferent to life , more desultory , 
 more cynical , more misanthropic and tittle - tattling . and Alfieri , 
 meanwhile , be grow more unsociable , more misanthropic , more violent 
 in temper , hang a print card state that he wish no visit   one 
 such be preserve in the library at Florence   in the hall , pursue and 
 flog street - boy because they splash his stocking by play in 
 the puddle ; insult Ginguené and General Miollis when they attempt 
 to be civil ; groan over the victory of the French , rejoice over 
 the brutal massacre by the priest - hound tuscan populace ; go to 
 Florence   when they be spend the summer in a villa   for the 
 pleasure of see the austrian troop enter , and of witness   as Gino 
 Capponi record   the french prisoner or Frenchly - incline Florentines 
 be pillory and torture by the anti - revolutionary mob . besides such 
 demonstration of an unamiable disposition as these , work with the 
 fury of an alchemist , and , perhaps , take a holiday at that house where 
 the doggrel verse be write . the Countess of Albany , who have be so 
 horribly unhappy with her legitimate husband , must have be rather 
 dreary of soul with her world - authorise lover . 

 it be at this moment , as she sit , an idle , desultory , neither happy nor 
 unhappy woman , rapidly grow old , watch the century draw to a close 
 amid chaos and misery , - it be at this moment that an eccentric english 
 prelate , Lord Bristol , Bishop of Derry , introduce at the house on the 
 Lung Arno a friend of his , a french painter , a former pupil of David , 
 and who have win the Prix de Rome , by name François Xavier Fabre . M. 
 Fabre be french , but he be a royalist ; he hat the revolution ; he have 
 settle in Italy ; and , in consideration of this , he be tolerate by 
 Alfieri . to Mme . d'Albany , on the other hand , the fact of Fabre be 
 French must secretly have be a great recommendation . french in 
 language , habit , mode of thought , french in heart , cut off , as it 
 seem , for ever from Paris and parisian society , coope up among this 
 pedantic small fry of Florentines , listen all day to Alfieri 's 
 tirade against the french nation , the french reform , the french 
 philosophy , the french language , the french everything , the poor woman 
 must have heartily enjoy an hour 's chat in good French with a real 
 Frenchman , a Frenchman who , for all Alfieri might say , be really 
 french ; she must have enjoy talk about his work , his picture , 
 about everything and anything that be not Alfieri 's Greek , or Alfieri 's 
 Hebrew , or Alfieri 's tragedy , or comedy or satire . Alfieri be a 
 great genius and a great man ; and she love , or imagine she love , 
 Alfieri like her very soul . but still - still , it be somehow a relief 
 when young Fabre , with his regular south - of - France face , his rather 
 mocking and cynical french expression , his easy french talk , come to 
 give she a painting lesson while Alfieri be pace up and down 
 translate Homer and Pindar with the help of a lexicon . 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

 CASA gianfigliazzi . 


 thus thing jog on . occasionally a grand performance of one of 
 Alfieri 's play enliven the house on the Lung Arno . a room be fill 
 with chair , arrange with curtain , and a select company invite to see 
 the poet   for by this respectful title he appear always to have be 
 mention   play Saul or Creon , to his own admiration , but apparently 
 less so to that of his guest . occasionally , also , Alfieri and Mme . 
 d'Albany would go for a few day to Siena to enjoy the conversation of a 
 little knot of friend of their dead friend Gori ; a certain Cavaliere 
 Bianchi , a certain Canon Ansano Luti , a certain Alessandro Cerretani , 
 and one or two other , who meet in the house of a charming and 
 intellectual woman , Teresa Regoli , daughter of a sienese shopkeeper , 
 married to another shopkeeper , call Mocenni , and who be one of Mme . 
 d'Albany 's most intimate friend . occasionally , also , some of these 
 would come for a jaunt to Florence , when Alfieri and the Countess move 
 heaven and earth   recollect their own aversion to husband   that the 
  Grumbler , as Signor Mocenni be familiarly call , should be leave 
 behind , and la chère Thérèse come accompany   in characteristic 
 italian eighteenth - century fashion   only by her child and by her 
  cavaliere servente , Mario Bianchi . these be the small excitement in 
 this curious double life of more than married routine . Alfieri , who , as 
 he be get old and weak in health , be grow only the more 
 furiously active and rigidly disciplinarian , have determine to learn 
 Greek , to read all the great greek author ; and work away with 
 terrific ardour at this school - boy work , crown his effort with a 
 self - constitute Order of Homer , of which he himself be the sole 
 founder and sole member . he be , also , have finally despatch the 
 sacramental number of tragedy , work at an equally sacramental 
 number of satire and comedy , absolutely unconscious of his complete 
 deficiency in both these style , and persuade that he owe it to his 
 nation to set they on the right road in comedy and satire , as he have set 
 they on the right road in tragedy . 

 a ridiculous man ! not so . I have speak many hard word against Alfieri ; 
 and I repeat that he seem to I to have often fall short , betray by 
 his century , his vanity , his narrowness and hardness of temper , even of 
 the ideal which he have set up for himself . but I would not have it 
 suppose that I do not see the greatness of that ideal , and the nobleness 
 of the reality out of which it arise . that Alfieri , a strange mixture of 
 the passionate man of spontaneous action , and of the self - manipulating , 
 idealise poseur , should have fall short of his own ideal , be 
 perhaps the one pathetic circumstance of his life ; the one dash of 
 suffering and failure which make this heroic man a hero . Alfieri do 
 not probably suspect wherein he fall short of his own ideal ; he do 
 not , could not see that his fault be narrowness of nature , and 
 incompleteness , meanness of conception , for , if he have , he would have 
 cease to be narrow and cease to be mean . but Alfieri know that there 
 be something very wrong about himself , he feel a deficiency , a jar in 
 his own soul ; he feel , as he describe in the famous sonnet at the back 
 of Fabre 's portrait of he , that he do not know whether he be noble or 
 base , whether he be Achilles or Thersites . 

 " uom , sei tu grande o vile ? Mori , il saprai . "   " Man , art thou noble 
 or base ? die , and thou shalt know it . "   thus write Alfieri , make , as 
 usual , fame the arbiter of his worth ; and show , even in the moment of 
 seek for truth about himself , how utterly and hopelessly impossible 
 it be for he to feel it . mean and great ; both , I think , at once . but 
 of the meanness , the narrowness of nature , the want of resonance of 
 fibre , the insufficiency of moral vitality in so many thing ; of 
 Alfieri 's vanity , intolerance , injustice , indifference , hardness ; of all 
 these peculiarity which make the real man repulsive , the ideal man 
 unattractive , to we , I have say more than enough , and when we have 
 say all this , Alfieri still remain , for all his vanity , selfishness , 
 meanness , narrow - mindedness , a man of grander proportion , of finer 
 material , nay , even of nobler moral shape , than the vast majority of 
 man superior to he in all these point . let we look at he in those 
 last decaying year , at those study which have seem to we absurd : 
 self - important , pedantic , almost monomaniac ; or brood over those 
 feeling which be , doubtless , selfish , morbid ; let we look at he , 
 for , despite all his fault , he be fine . fine in indomitable energy , in 
 irrepressible passion . Alfieri be fifty ; he be torment by gout ; his 
 health be rapidly sink ; but the sense of weakness only make he more 
 resolute to finish the work which   however mistakenly   he think it his 
 duty to leave complete ; more determined that , have live for so many 
 year a dunce , he would go down to the grave cleanse of the stain of 
 ignorance , have read and appreciate as much of the great writer of 
 antiquity as any man who have have a well - train youth , a studious 
 manhood . soon after his great illness   which , I believe , change he so 
 much for the bad by hasten premature old age   at Colmar , he have 
 write to his friend at Siena that he have very nearly be make a fool 
 of by death ; but that , have escape , he intend , by hurry his 
 work , to make a fool of Death instead . and in 1801 he write in his 
 memorandum - book : " health give way year by year ; whence , hurry to 
 finish my six comedy , I make it decidedly bad . " 

 soon after , as Mme . d'Albany later inform his friend Caluso , Alfieri , 
 find that his digestion have become so bad as to produce inability to 
 work after meal , begin systematically to diminish his already extremely 
 sober allowance of food ; while , at the same time , he do not diminish 
 the exercise , walk , riding , and driving , which he find necessary to 
 keep himself in spirit . know that death could not be far ahead , and 
 accustom since his youth to think that his life ought not to extend 
 over sixty year , Alfieri be calmly and deliberately walk to meet 
 death . 

 calmly and deliberately ; but not heartlessly . engross in his study , 
 devote to his own glory as he be , he be still full of a kind of 
 mental passion for Mme . d'Albany . he be unfaithful to she for the 
 sake of low woman , he be neglectful of she for the sake of his work ; he 
 do not , perhaps , receive much pleasure from this stout , plain , prosaic 
 lady   like one of Rubens 's woman grow old , as Lamartine later describe 
 she   whom he leave to her letter - writing , her reading of Kant , of La 
 Harpe , of Shakespeare , of Lessing ; to her paint lesson , and long 
 discussion on art with Monsieur Fabre . the woman whose presence , no 
 long exciting , be doubtless a matter of indifference to he . but , 
 nevertheless , it seem to I probable that Alfieri never write more 
 completely from his heart than when , compose the epitaph of the 
 Countess , he say of Mme . d'Albany that she have be love by he more 
 than anything on earth , and hold almost as a mortal divinity . " a 
 Victorio Alferio ... ultra re omne dilecta , et quasi mortale numen 
 ab ipso constanter habita et observata . " for a thought begin about 
 the year 1796 to recur throughout Alfieri 's letter and sonnet , and 
 whenever he mention the Countess in his autobiography ; a think too 
 terrible not to be genuine : he or his beloved must die first ; one or the 
 other must have the horror of remain alone , widow of all interest 
 on earth . how constantly this idea haunt he , and with what painful 
 vividness , be apparent from a letter which I shall translate almost in 
 extenso ; as , together with those few word which I have quote about 
 Gori 's death , it show the passionate tenderness that be hide , like 
 some aromatic herb beneath the Alpine snow , under the harsh exterior of 
 Alfieri . 

 the letter be to Mme . Teresa Mocenni at Siena , and relate to the death 
 of Mario Bianchi , who have long be her devoted cavaliere servente . 
 " your letter , " write Alfieri , " break my heart . I feel the complete 
 horror of a situation which it give I the shiver merely to think may 
 be my situation one day or other ; and oh ! how much bad would it not be 
 for I , live alone , isolate from everyone , close up in myself . o 
 God ! I hope I may not be the survivor , and yet how can I wish that my 
 well self    la parte migliore di I stesso    should endure a situation 
 which I myself could never have the courage to endure ? these be frightful 
 thing . I think about they very often , and sometimes I write some bad 
 rhyme about they to ease my mind ; but I never can get accustomed either 
 to the thought of remain alone , nor to that of leave my lady . " 
 " some opinion , " he go on - and this hankering after Christianity on 
 the part of a man who have live in eighteenth - century disbelief seem 
 to bear out what Mme . d'Albany tell the late Gino Capponi , that have 
 Alfieri live much long he would have die tell his rosary , - ' some 
 opinion be more useful and give more satisfaction than other to a 
 well - constitute heart . thus , it do our affection much more good to 
 believe that our Mario   Bianchi   be unite to Candido   another dead 
 friend   and to Gori , that they be talk and think about we , and 
 that we shall meet they all some day , than to believe that they be all 
 of they reduce to a handful of ash . if such a belief as the first be 
 repugnant to physics and to mathematical evidence , it be not , therefore , 
 to be despise . the principal advantage and honour of mankind be that it 
 can feel , and science teach we how not to feel . long live , therefore , 
 ignorance and poetry , and let we accept the imaginary as the true . man 
 subsist upon love ; love make he a god : for I call God an intensely 
 feel love , and I call dog , or French , which come to the same , the 
 frozen philosophiser who be move only by the fact that two and two 
 make four . " 

 Alfieri 's secret desire that he might not survive his beloved be 
 fulfil soon , perhaps , than he expect . the eccentric figure , the 
 tall , gaunt man , thin and pale as a ghost , with fly red hair and 
 fly scarlet cloak , drive the well - know phaeton , or saunter 
 moodily along the Lung Arno and through the Boboli gardens , be soon to 
 be see no more . as the year 1803 wear on he feel himself hard press 
 by the gout ; he eat less and less , he take an enormous amount of 
 foot exercise ; he work madly at his memoir , his comedy , his 
 translation , he feel almost constantly fatigued and depressed . on the 
 3rd October 1803 , after his usual morning 's work , he go out for a 
 drive in his phaeton ; but a strange and excessive cold , despite the 
 still summer weather , force he to alight and to try and warm himself 
 by walk . walk bring on violent internal pain , and he return 
 home with the fever on he . the next day he rise and dress , but he be 
 unable to eat or work , and fall into a long drowse ; the next day after 
 that he again try to take a walk , but return with frightful pain . 
 he refuse to go to bed except at night , and tear off the mustard 
 plaister which the doctor have place on his foot , lest the blister 
 should prevent his walking ; die , he would still not be a sick man . the 
 night of the 8th he be unable to sleep , and talk a great deal to the 
 Countess , seat by his bedside , about his work , and repeat part of 
 Hesiod in Greek to she . accustomed for month to the idea of death , he 
 do not seem to have guess that it be near at hand . but the news 
 that he be die spread through Florence . a piedmontese lady - strangely 
 enough a niece of that Marchesa de Prié opposite to whose window 
 Alfieri have renew the device of Ulysses and the siren by be tie 
 to a chair - hasten to a learn and eccentric priest , a Padre Canovai , 
 entreat he to run and offer the die poet the consolation of 
 religion . Canovai , know that both Alfieri and Mme . d'Albany be 
 unbeliever , stoutly refuse ; but later on , seize with remorse , he 
 hurry to the house on the Lung Arno . admit into the sick room , he 
 come just in time to see Alfieri , who have get up during a momentary 
 absence of Mme . d'Albany , rise from his arm - chair , lean against his 
 bed , and , without agony or effort , unconscious " like a bird , " say the 
 Countess , give up the ghost . it be between nine and ten of the morning 
 of the 9th October 1803 . Vittorio Alfieri be in his fifty - fifth year . 

 the Abate di Caluso , the great friend he have , after Gori , be 
 summon from Turin to console the Countess and put all paper in order . 
 Alfieri 's will , make out in 1799 , leave all his book and MSS . , and 
 whatever small property he possess , to the Countess Louise d'Albany , 
 leave she to dispose of they entirely accord to her good pleasure . 
 among these paper be find a short letter , undated , address " to the 
 friend I have leave behind , Tommaso di Caluso , at Turin , " and which run 
 as follow : - 

 " as I may any day give way beneath the very serious malady which be 
 consume I , I have think it wise to prepare these few line in order 
 that they may be give to you as a proof that you have always , to my 
 last moment , be present to my mind and very dear to my heart . the 
 person whom above everything in the world I have most respect and 
 love , may some day tell you all the circumstance of my illness . I 
 supplicate and conjure you to do your good to see and console she , and 
 to concert with she the various measure which I have beg she to 
 carry out with regard to my writing . 

 " I will not give you more pain , at present , by say any more . I have 
 know in you one of the most rare man in every respect . I die love and 
 esteem you , and value myself for your friendship if I have deserve 
 it . farewell , farewell . " 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 FABRE . 


 " happiness have disappear out of the world for I , " write Mme . d'Albany , 
 in January 1804 , to her old friend Canon Luti , at Siena . " I take 
 interest in nothing ; the world might be completely upset without my 
 notice it . I read a little , and reading be the only thing which give 
 I any courage , a merely artificial courage ; for when I return to my 
 own thought and think of all that I have lose , I burst into tear and 
 call death to my assistance , but death will not come . o God ! what a 
 misfortune to lose a person whom one adore and venerate at the same 
 time . I think that if I still have Thérèse   Mme . Mocenni   it would 
 be some consolation ; but there be no consolation for I . I have the 
 strength to hide my feeling before the world , for no one could conceive 
 my misfortune who have not feel it . a twenty - six year ' friendship with 
 so perfect a being , and then to see he take away from I at the very 
 age when I require he most . " 

 Alfieri a perfect being - a being adore and venerate by Mme . d'Albany ! 
 one can not help , in read these word , smile sadly at the strange 
 magic by which death metamorphose those whom he have take in the eye 
 of the survivor ; at the strange potion by mean of which he make love 
 spring up in the heart where it have cease to exist , save we from 
 hypocrisy by make we really feel what be false to our nature , 
 enable we to lie to ourselves instead of lie to other . the Countess 
 of Albany 's grief be certainly most sincere ; long after all direct 
 reference to Alfieri have cease in her correspondence   I be speak 
 principally of that with her intimate at Siena , there reign 
 throughout her letter a depression , an indifference to everything , 
 which show that the world have indeed become empty in her eye . but 
 though the grief be sincere , I greatly question whether the love be 
 so . Alfieri have become , in his later year , the incarnation of dreary 
 violence ; he could not have be much to anyone 's feeling ; and Mme . 
 d'Albany 's engrossment in her reading , in political news and town 
 gossip , even with her most intimate correspondent , show that Alfieri 
 play but a very small part in her colourless life . so small a part , 
 that one may say , without fear of injustice , that Mme . d'Albany have 
 pretty well cease to love he at all ; for have she love he , would she 
 have be as indifferent , as serene as she appear in all her letter , 
 while the man she love be kill himself as certainly as if he be 
 take daily dos of a slow poison ? love be vigilant , love be full of 
 fear , and Mme . d'Albany be so little vigilant , so little trouble by 
 fear , that when this visibly die man , this man who have prepare his 
 epitaph , who have settle all his literary affair , who have write the 
 farewell letter to his friend , actually die , she would seem to have 
 be thunder - stricken not merely by grief , but by amazement . 

 the Countess of Albany be not a selfish woman ; she have , apparently 
 without complain , sacrifice her social taste , make herself an old 
 woman before her time , in acquiescence to Alfieri 's misanthropic and 
 routinist self - engrossment ; she have be satisfy , or think herself 
 satisfy , with the cold , ceremonious adoration of a man who divide his 
 time between his study , his horse , and his intrigue with other 
 woman ; but unselfish nature be often unselfish from their very 
 thinness and coldness . Alfieri , heaven know , have be selfish and 
 self - engross ; but , perhaps because he be selfish and self - engross , 
 because he be always listen to his own idea , and nurse his own 
 feeling , Alfieri have be passionate and loving ; and , as we have see , 
 while he seem grow daily more fossilised , while he be at once 
 engross with his own scheme of literary glory , and indifferently 
 amuse himself by infidelity to his lady , he be then , even then , 
 constantly haunt by the thought that , unless he himself be leave 
 behind in the terror of widowhood , the Countess of Albany would have to 
 suffer those pang which he feel that he himself could never endure . 

 Alfieri see the Countess through the medium of his own character , and he 
 prove mistaken . perhaps the most terrible ironical retribution which 
 could have fall upon his strange egomania , would have be , have such a 
 thing be possible , the revelation of how gratuitous have be that 
 terrible vision of Mme . d'Albany 's life after his death ; the revelation 
 of how little difference , after the first great grief , his loss have make 
 in her life ; the revelation that , unnoticed , unconsciously , a successor 
 have be prepare for he . 

 in a very melancholy letter , date May 31 , 1804 , in which Mme . d'Albany 
 expatiate to her friend Canon Luti upon the uselessness of her life , 
 and her desire to end it , I find this unobtrusive little sentence : 
 " fabre desire his compliment to you . he have be a great resource to 
 I in everything . " 

 this sentence , I think , explain what to the enemy of Mme . d'Albany 
 have be a delightful scandal , and to her admirer a melancholy mystery ; 
 explain , reduce to mere very simple , conceivable , neither commendable 
 nor shameful every - day prose , the fact that little by little the place 
 leave vacant by Alfieri be fill by another man . italian writer , 
 inheriting from Giordani , even from Foscolo , a certain animosity against 
 a woman who , as soon as Alfieri be dead , become once more what nature 
 have make she , half French , with a great preference for french and french 
 thing - italian writer , I say , have try to turn the Fabre episode 
 into something extremely disgraceful to Mme . d'Albany . Massimo d'Azeglio , 
 partly out of hatred to the Countess , who be rather severe and 
 acrimonious upon his youthful free - and - easiness , partly out of a desire 
 to amuse his reader , have introduce into his autobiography an anecdote 
 tell he by Mme . de Prié   the niece of Alfieri 's famous Turin mistress , 
 and the lady who take it upon herself to send he a priest without 
 consult the Countess , to the effect that she have watch Fabre 
 make eye , kiss his finger , and generally exchange signal with 
 Mme . d'Albany at a party where Alfieri be present . let those who be 
 amuse by this piece of gossip believe it implicitly ; it do not appear 
 to I either amusing , or credible , or creditable to the man who retail 
 it . the florentine society of the early year of this century be , if we 
 may trust the keen observation of Stendhal , almost as naïvely and 
 openly profligate as that of a South Sea Island village ; and such a 
 society , which could talk of the thing and in the way which it do , 
 which could permit certain poetical composition   find highly 
 characteristic by Stendhal   to be publicly perform before the lady 
 and gentleman celebrate therein , such a society naturally enjoy and 
 believe a story like that retail by d'Azeglio . but surely we may put 
 it behind we , we who be not florentine of the year 1800 , and who can 
 actually conceive that a woman who have exchange irreproachable 
 submission to a drunken husband , for legally unsanctioned , but open and 
 faithful attachment for a man like Alfieri , might at the age of fifty 
 take a liking to a man of thirty - five without that liking require a 
 disgusting explanation . the clean explanation seem so much simple and 
 more consonant . Fabre have become an intimate of the house during 
 Alfieri 's last year . he be french , he be a painter ; two high 
 recommendation to Mme . d'Albany . he be , if we may trust Paul Louis 
 Courier , who make he the hero of a famous imaginary dialogue , clever 
 with a peculiarly french sort of cleverness ; he give the Countess 
 lesson in painting while Alfieri be pore over his work . the sudden 
 death of Alfieri would bring Fabre into still close relation with Mme . 
 d'Albany , as a friend of the deceased , the brother of his physician , and 
 the virtual fellow - countryman of the Countess ; he would naturally be 
 call upon to help in a hundred and one melancholy arrangement : he 
 receive visitor , answered letter , give order ; he probably lay 
 Alfieri in his coffin . when all the bustle incident upon death have 
 subside , Fabre would remain Mme . d'Albany 's most constant visitor . he , 
 who have see Alfieri at the very last , might be admit when the door 
 be close to all other ; he could help to sort the dead man 's paper ; 
 he could , in his artistic capacity , discuss the plan for Alfieri 's 
 monument , write to Canova , correspond with the dignitary of Santa 
 Croce , and so forth ; come in contact with the Countess in those manifold 
 piece of business , in those long conversation , which seem , for a time , 
 to keep the dead one still in the company of the living . there be 
 nothing difficult to understand or shameful to relate in all this ; and 
 the friend of the Countess , delicate - minded woman like Mme . de Souza , 
 puritanic - minded man like Sismondi , misanthropic or scoffing people like 
 Foscolo or Paul Louis Courier , find nothing at which to take umbrage , 
 nothing to rage or laugh at , in this long intimacy between a woman over 
 fifty and a man many year her junior ; a man who live at the other end 
 of Florence , who   if I may trust tradition yet alive   be suppose to 
 be attach to a woman well know to Mme . d'Albany ; nor have we , I 
 think , any right to be less charitable than they . 

 Louise d'Albany , careless , like most woman of her day , of social 
 institution , and particularly hostile to marriage , be certainly not an 
 impure woman ; her whole life go to prove this . but Louise d'Albany be 
 an indifferent woman , and the extinction of all youthful passion and 
 enthusiasm , the friction of a cynical world , make she daily more 
 indifferent . she have be faithful to Alfieri , devotedly endure one of 
 the most unendurable of companion , love and admire he while he be 
 still alive . but once the pressure of that strong personality remove , 
 the image of Alfieri appear to have be obliterate little by little 
 from the soft wax of her character . she continue , nay institute , 
 a sort of cultus of Alfieri ; became , as his beloved , the priestess 
 presiding over what have once be his house , and be now his temple . the 
 house on the Lung Arno remain the Casa Alfieri ; the room which he 
 have inhabit be keep carefully untouched ; his book and paper be 
 elaborate and preserve as he have leave they ; his portrait be 
 everywhere , and visitor , like Foscolo , Courier , Sismondi , and the young 
 Lamartine , be expect to inquire respectfully into the legend of the 
 divinity , to ask to see his relic , as the visitor of a shrine might be 
 expect to enquire into the legend , to ask to see the relic , of some 
 great saint . Mme . d'Albany conscientiously devote a portion of her time 
 to see that Alfieri 's work be properly publish , and that 
 Alfieri 's tomb in Santa Croce be properly execute . she be , as I have 
 say , the priestess , the divinely select priestess , of the divinity . but 
 at the same time Mme . d'Albany gradually settle down quite comfortably 
 and happily without Alfieri . after the first great grief be over a 
 sense of relief may have arise , a sense that after all " ' tis an ill 
 wind that blow no good " ; that if she have lose Alfieri she have gain a 
 degree of liberty , of independence , that she have acquire a possibility 
 of be herself with all her taste , the very existence of which she 
 have forget while live under the shadow of that strange and 
 disagreeable great man . a negative sense of compensation , of pleasure 
 in the foreign society to which she could now devote herself ; of 
 satisfaction in the miniature copy of her former parisian salon which 
 she could arrange in her Florentine house ; of comfort in a gently 
 bustling , unconcerned , cheerful old age ; negative feeling which , 
 perhaps as a result of their very repression , seem little by little to 
 have turn to a positive feeling , a positive aversion for the past 
 which she refuse to regret , a positive dislike to the memory of the 
 man whom she could no long love . horrible thing to say ; yet , I 
 fear , true . a man such as Alfieri have permit himself to become , 
 admirable in many respect , but intolerant , hard , arrogant , selfish , 
 self - engross , can not really be love ; he may be endure as a result of 
 long habit , he may inflict his personality without effort upon another ; 
 but in order that this be the case that other must be singularly 
 apathetic , indifferent , malleable ; and apathetic , indifferent , and 
 malleable people , those who never resist the live individual , rarely 
 remember the dead one . " she be , " write one of the most conscientious 
 and respectful of man , the late Gino Capponi , " heavy in feature and 
 form , and , if I may say so , her mind , like her body , be thick - set .... 
 since several year she have cease to love Alfieri . " 

 we can not be indignant with she ; she have never pretend to be what she 
 be not . a highly intellectual , literary mind , a pure temperament , a 
 passive , rather characterless character , take the impress of its 
 surrounding ; passionate when Alfieri be passionate , depressed when 
 Alfieri be depressed ; cheerful when Alfieri 's successor , Fabre and 
 mankind and womankind in general , be cheerful . to be angry with such a 
 woman would be ridiculous ; but , little as we may feel attach to the 
 memory of Alfieri , we can not help say to ourselves , " thank Heaven he 
 never understand what she be ; thank Heaven he never foresaw what she 
 would be ! " 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

 SALON of the COUNTESS . 


 a shadowy being , nay , a shadow cast in the unmistakable shape of 
 another , so long as Alfieri be alive , the Countess of Albany seem to 
 gain consistency and form , to become a substantive person , only after 
 Alfieri 's death . this woman , whom , in the last ten year , we have see 
 consort almost exclusively with Italians , and spend the great 
 proportion of her day in solitary reading of Condillac , Lock , Kant , 
 Mme . de Genlis , Lessing , Milton , everything and anything ; whose letter , 
 exclusively   as far as I know they   to Italians of the middle class , 
 be full of fury against everything that be french ; this woman , who have 
 hitherto be a feeble replica of Alfieri , suddenly turn into an 
 extremely sociable , chatty woman of the world , and a woman of the world 
 who be , to all intent and purpose , French . 

 to be the rallying point of a very cosmopolitan , literary , but by no 
 mean unworldly society , seem suddenly to have become Mme . d'Albany 's 
 mission ; and read the letter copy from the Montpellier Archives , 
 and publish by M. Saint René Taillandier , one wonder how this friend 
 of Mme . de Staël , of Sismondi , of Mme . de Souza , this hostess of Moore , 
 of Lamartine , of Lady Morgan , of every sort of french , English , german , 
 Russian , or polyglot creature of distinction that travel through 
 Italy in the early part of this century , could ever have be the 
 beloved of Alfieri , the misanthropic correspondent of a lot of sienese 
 professor , priest , and shop - keeper . 

 the fact be that Mme . d'Albany could now become , so to speak , what she 
 really be ; or , at least , show herself to be such . worldly wise and a 
 trifle cynical she have always be ; in the midst of the page of literary 
 review and political newspaper constitute her letter to Mme . Mocenni , 
 Canon Luti and Alessandro Cerretani of Siena , there be a good deal of 
 mere personal gossip , story of married woman 's lover , married man 's 
 mistress , domestic bickering ,   c. , intersperse with very plain - speak 
 and   accord to our idea   slightly demoralise moralising . it be 
 evident that this be not a woman to shrink from the reality of thing , 
 to take the world in disgust , to expect too much of her acquaintance . 
 on the other hand these letter of the Alfieri period show Mme . d'Albany 
 to have be decidedly a good - natured and friendly woman . she have the 
 gift of get people to trust she with their little annoyance and 
 grievance ; she be constantly administer sympathy to Mme . Mocenni 
 for the tiresomeness and stupidity and harshness of her husband ; she 
 keep up a long correspondence , recommend book , correct french 
 exercise , exhort to study and to virtue   particularly to abstinence 
 from gambling , encouraging , help Mme . Mocenni 's boy Vittorio . she be 
 clearly a woman who enjoy hear about other folk 's concern , enjoy 
 take an interest in they , sympathise and , if possible , assist 
 they . 

 these two quality , a dose of cynical worldliness , sufficient to 
 prevent all squeamishness and that coldness and harshness which spring 
 from expect people to be well than they be , and a dose of 
 kindliness , helpfulness , pleasure in know the affair and feeling 
 and trouble of other ; these two quality be , I should think , the 
 essential for a woman who would keep a salon in the old sense of the 
 word , who would be the centre of a large but decidedly select society , 
 the friend and correspondent of many and various people possess of 
 more genius or more character than herself . such a woman , thank to she 
 easy - go knowledge of the world , and to her cordial curiosity and 
 helpfulness , be the friend of the most hostile people ; and she be so 
 completely satisfied with , and interested in , the particular person with 
 whom she be talk or to whom she be write , that that particular 
 person really believe himself or herself to be her chief friend , and 
 overlook the score of other chief friend , view with exactly the 
 same degree of interest , and treat with the same degree of cordiality 
 all round . the world be apt to like such woman , as such woman like it , 
 and to say of they that there must be an immense richness of character , 
 an extraordinary power of bring out the good quality of every 
 individual , in a woman who can drive such complicated team of friend . 
 but be it not more probable that the secret of such success be poverty 
 of personality rather than richness ; and that so many people receive a 
 share of friendship , of sympathy , of comprehension , because each 
 receive only very little ; because the universal friend be too obtuse to 
 mind anybody 's fault , and too obtuse , also , to mind anybody 's great 
 virtue ? in short , do not such woman pay people merely in the paper 
 money of attention , which can be multiply at pleasure , rather than in 
 the gold coin of sympathy , of which the supply be extremely small ? 

 be this as it may , Mme . d'Albany , after have be , in the early 
 period of her life , essentially the woman who have one friend , who let 
 the wax of her nature be stamp in one clear die , became , in the twenty 
 year which separate the death of Alfieri from her own , pre - eminently 
 the woman with many friend , a blurred personality in which we recognise 
 trace of the mental effigy of many and various people . Mme . d'Albany 
 be , therefore , in superficial sympathy with nearly everyone , and in 
 deep antagonism with no one : she be the ideal of the woman who keep a 
 literary and political salon . at that time especially , when Italy be 
 visit only by people of a certain social standing , society be carry 
 on by a most complicated system of letter of introduction , and everyone 
 of any note bring a letter to Mme . d'Albany . " La grande lanterne 
 magique passe tout par votre salon , " write Sismondi to the Countess ; 
 and the metaphor could not be truer . writer and artist , beautiful 
 woman , diplomatist , journalist , pedant , man of science , woman of 
 fashion , Châteaubriand and Mme . de Staël , Lamartine and Paul Louis 
 Courier , Mme . Récamier and the Duchess of Devonshire , Canova and 
 Foscolo , and Sismondi and Werner , the whole intellectual world of the 
 Empire and the Restoration , all seem to be project , figure now 
 flit past like shadow , now dwell long , clear and colour , upon 
 the rather colourless and patternless background of Mme . d'Albany 's 
 house ; nay , of Mme . d'Albany herself . such reader as may wish to have 
 all these figure , remember or forget , point out to they , call 
 by their right name and title , treat with the perfect impartiality 
 of a valet de place expound monument , or of a chamberlain 
 announce the guest at a levée , may refer to the two volume of 
 Baron Alfred von Reumont ; and such reader   and I hope they be more 
 numerous   as may wish to examine some of the nobler and more interesting 
 of these project shadow of man and woman , may read with pleasure and 
 profit the letter of Sismondi , Bonstetten , Mme . de Souza and Mme . de 
 Staël to the Countess of Albany , and the interesting page of criticism 
 in which they have be imbed by M. St.-René Taillandier . with regard 
 to myself , I feel that the time and space which have be give I in 
 order to analyse or reconstruct the curious type and curious individual 
 call Louise d'Albany be both nearly exhausted ; and I can therefore 
 select to dwell upon , of these many magic - lantern man and woman , of 
 these friend of the Countess , only two , because they seem to I to 
 exemplify my remark about the friendship of a woman whose vocation it 
 be to have many friend . the two be Sismondi and Foscolo . 

 two or three year after Alfieri 's death , somewhere about the year 1806 
 or 1807 , there be introduce to Mme . d'Albany a sort of half - italian , 
 half - french Swiss , a man young in year and singularly young - with the 
 peculiar earnestness , gravity , purity which belong sometimes to 
 youth - in spirit , Jean Charles Léonard Simonde de Sismondi . quietly 
 idealistic , with one of those northern , eminently protestant mind which 
 imagine the principle of good to be more solemnly serious , the principle 
 of evil more vainly negative , than be , alas , the case in this world - M. 
 de Sismondi , full of the heroism of mediæval Italy which he be study 
 with a view to his great work , come to the house of Alfieri , to the 
 woman whom Alfieri have love , as to thing most reverend and almost 
 sacred . the Countess of Albany receive he very well ; and this good 
 reception , the motherly cordiality of this woman with that light in her 
 hazel eye , that welcome graciousness in the line of her mouth , which 
 Lamartine have charmingly describe , with the " parole suave , manière 
 san apprêt , familiarité rassurante , " " which make one doubt whether she 
 be descend to the level of her visitor , or raise he up to her 
 own , " - this reception by this woman , who be , moreover , still surround 
 by a halo of Alfieri 's glory , fairly conquer the heart , the pure , 
 warm , grave and truthful heart of young Sismondi . he see she often , on 
 his way between Geneva , whither he be call by his family business and 
 his lecture , and Pescia , a little town nestle among the olive of the 
 Lucchese Apennine , where he be for ever sigh to join his mother , to 
 resume his walk , his reading with this noble old woman . Florence , the 
 house on the Lung Arno , have an almost romantic fascination for Sismondi ; 
 those pass visit , at interval of month , when Mme . d'Albany would 
 devote herself entirely to the traveller , sit chatting , or rather   we 
 feel that   listen to the young man 's enthusiastic talk about liberty , 
 letter , and philanthropy , about Alfieri and Mme . de Staël , enable 
 Sismondi to make up for himself a sort of half - imaginary Countess of 
 Albany , to whom he pour out all his hope and fear in innumerable 
 letter , for whom he long as   alas !   we perhaps long only for the 
 phantom of our own creating . that Mme . d'Albany be , after all , a 
 shallow woman ; that she adore a mediocre M. Fabre   to whom Sismondi 
 invariably send respectful message   and half dislike the memory of 
 Alfieri ; that she have call Mme . de Staël , Sismondi 's goddess , about 
 whom he be for ever expatiating , " a mad woman who always want to 
 inspire passion , and feel nothing , and make her reader feel nothing " 
  I be quote from an unpublished letter at Siena ; that she prefer 
 despotism on the whole to liberty , and have no particular belief or 
 interest in the heroic thing of the present and future ; that she be a 
 lover of gossip and scandal , sometimes   as Gino Capponi say   hard and 
 disagreeable ; that she inspire some man , like d'Azeglio and Giordani , 
 with a positive repulsion as a vulgar - minded , spiteful , meddlesome old 
 thing ; that there should be any other Mme . d'Albany than the one of his 
 noble fancy , than the woman whose image   fashion by himself   he love 
 to unite with the image of his own sweet , serious , shy , noble - minded 
 mother : all these thing M. de Sismondi , who never guess himself to be 
 otherwise than the most unpoetical and practical of man , never dream 
 of . so Sismondi go on writing to Mme . d'Albany , pour out his grief 
 at Mme . de Staël 's persecution , his scheme of general improvement , all 
 the interest which fill his gentle , austere , and enthusiastic mind . 
 1814 come , and 1815 . Sismondi have always hat , with the hatred of an 
 italian mediæval patriot , and the hatred of an eighteenth - century 
 philanthropist , the despotism , the bureaucratic levelling , the great 
 military slaughter of Napoleon ; but when he see Napoleon succeed by 
 the inept and wicked government of the Restoration , his heart seem to 
 burst . a Swiss , scarcely acquaint with France , the passion for the 
 principle of liberty and good sense and progress which France have 
 represent , the passion for France itself , burst out in he with 
 generous ardour . this man suffer intensely at what to he , as to Byron 
 and to Shelley   we must recollect the introduction of the Revolt of 
 Islam   , seem the battle between progress and retrogression ; and 
 suffer all the more as he be too pure and just - minded not to feel the 
 impossibility of complete sympathy with either side . Mme . d'Albany 
 answer his letter with olympic serenity . what be it to she which get 
 the upper hand ? she be by this time one of those placid mixture of 
 optimism and pessimism which do not expect good to triumph , simply 
 because they do not care whether good do triumph . Sismondi , in his 
 adoration of she , think this might be the result of a superior 
 magnanimity of character ; yet he keep conjure she to take an interest 
 in the tragedy which be take place before her eye . if she will take 
 no interest , will not fabre ? " do M. Fabre not feel himself turn 
 French again ? " write Sismondi , and there be a pathetic insistency 
 in the question . Fabre think of his picture , his collection of 
 antique , perhaps of his dinner ; of anything save France and political 
 event . Mme . d'Albany smile serenely , and chaff Sismondi a little for 
 his political passion . Sismondi , of all man the most loyal to the idea 
 he have form of his friend , seem never to have permit himself to 
 see the real woman , the real abyss of indifference , beneath his ideal 
 Mme . d'Albany . but there be few thing more pathetic , I think , than the 
 letter of this enthusiastic man to this cold woman ; than the belief of 
 Sismondi - writing that the retrograde measure of which he read in the 
 paper give he fit of fever , that the post day on which he expect 
 political news be day of frenzied expectation - in the moral fibre , 
 the faculty for indignation , of this pleasant , indifferent , cynical 
 quasi - widow of Alfieri . 

 the story of the Countess and Foscolo be an even sad instance of 
 those melancholy little psychological drama which go on , unseen to the 
 world , in a man 's soul ; little drama without outward event , without 
 death or parting or such - like similar visible catastrophe , but the 
 action of which be the slow murder of an affection , of an ideal , of a 
 belief in the loyalty , sympathy , and comprehension of another . the 
 character and history of Ugo Foscolo , like Chénier , half a Greek in 
 blood , and more than half a Greek in passionate love of beauty and 
 indomitable love of liberty , be amongst the most interesting in italian 
 literature ; and I regret that I can say but little of they in this 
 place . review his brief life , his long career from the moment when , 
 scarcely more than a boy , he have enter the service of liberty as a 
 soldier , a political writer , and a poet , only to taste the bitterness of 
 the betrayal of Campo Formio , he write , in 1823 , from London , where he 
 be slowly die , to his sister Rubina : " I be now nearly forty - six ; 
 and you , although young than myself , can recollect how miserable , 
 how unquiet and uncertain our life have always be ever since our 
 childhood . " poor , vain , passionate and proud , tear between the selfish 
 impulse of an exactingly sensuous and imaginative nature , and the rigid 
 sense of duty of a heroic and generous mind , Ugo Foscolo be one of the 
 early and most genuine victim of that sickness of disappointed hope 
 and betray enthusiasm , of that Weltschmerz of which personal 
 misfortune seem as but the least dreadful part , that come upon the 
 noble mind after the Revolution , and which he have paint , with 
 great energy and truthfulness , in his early novel Jacopo Ortis . his 
 career break by his determination never to come to term with any 
 sort of baseness , his happiness destroy by political disappointment , 
 literary feud , and a number of love affair into which his weak , more 
 passionate and vainer , yet not more ungenerous temper be for ever 
 embroil he , Foscolo come to Florence , ill and miserable , in the year 
 1812 . the Countess of Albany , recognise in he a something - a mixture 
 of independence , of passion , of vanity , of truthfulness , of pose - which 
 resemble Alfieri in his early day   though , as she be unable to 
 see , a nobler Alfieri , wider - minded , warmer - hearte , bear in a nobler 
 civilization and destine to give to Italy a nobler example , the pattern 
 for her Leopardi , than Alfieri have be able to give   - the Countess of 
 Albany receive Foscolo well . his letter be full of allusion to the 
 hour which he spend seat at the little round table in Mme . d'Albany 's 
 drawing - room , opposite to the " Muse " newly buy of Canova , narrate 
 to she his many and tangled love affair ; love affair in which he leave 
 his heart on all the briar , and in which , however , by an instinct which 
 show the very nobleness of his nature , he seem to have be impel 
 rather towards woman whom he must love sincerely and unhappily , than 
 towards Marchesa di Prié and Lady Ligonier , like Alfieri ; love affair 
 in which , alas , there be also a good dose of the vanity of a poet and a 
 notorious beau . Mme . d'Albany , as we have see , love gossip ; and , be 
 a kind , helpful woman , she also sincerely like become the confidant 
 of other folk 's woe . she take a real affection for this strange 
 Foscolo . Foscolo , in return , ill , sore of heart , solitary , gradually 
 get to love this gentle , sympathise Countess with a sort of filial 
 devotion , but a filial devotion into which there enter also somewhat 
 of the feeling of a wound man towards his nurse , of the feeling of a 
 devout man towards his Madonna . 

 his letter be full of this feeling : " my friend and not the friend of 
 my good fortune , " he write to Mme . d'Albany in 1813 , " I seem to have 
 leave home , mother , friend , and almost the person dear to my heart in 
 leave Florence . " again , " I have in you , mia Signora , a friend and a 
 mother ; a person , in short , such as no name can express , but such as 
 suffice to console I in the misery which be perhaps incurable 
 and interminable . " her letter be a real ray of sunlight in his 
 gloomy life , they be ' so full of graciousness , and condescension and 
 benevolence and love . I venture to use this last word , because I feel 
 the sentiment which it express in myself towards you . " 

 his health , his work , his money - matter , his love - affair , be all 
 get into a more and more lamentable condition , in which Mme . 
 d'Albany 's sympathy come as a blessing , when the catastrophe of 
 1814 and 1815 , which to Italy mean the commencement of a state of 
 degradation and misery much more intolerable and hopeless than any 
 previous one , come and drown the various bitterness of poor 
 Foscolo 's life in a sea of bitterness . " Italy , " write Foscolo to Mme . 
 d'Albany in 1814 , " be a corpse ; and a corpse which must not be touch 
 if the stench thereof be not to be make more horrible . and yet I see 
 certain crazy creature fantasticate way of bring she to life ; for 
 myself , I should wish she to be bury with myself , and overwhelm by 
 the sea , or that some new Phaeton should precipitate upon her the 
 flaming heaven , so that the ash should be scatter to the four 
 wind , and that the nation come and to come should forget the infamy 
 of our time . amen . " 

 how strongly we feel in this outburst that , despite his despair , or 
 perhaps on account of it , Foscolo be himself one of those " crazy 
 creature fantasticate way of bring Italy to life ! " but the 
 Countess do not understand ; she could conceive like Bonaparte and 
 serve he , or like the restoration and serve it ; but to love an 
 abstract Italy which do not yet exist , to hate equally all those who 
 deprive it of freedom , that be not within her comprehension . and as 
 she could not comprehend this feeling , the mainspring of Foscolo 's soul , 
 so she could understand of Foscolo only the slighter , mean thing : his 
 trouble and intrigue , his love and quarrel . the moment come when the 
 grief of miscomprehension be reveal to poor Foscolo ; when he see 
 how little he be understand by this woman whom he love as a mother . 
 Foscolo have refuse , latterly , to serve Napoleon ; he refuse , also , 
 to serve the Austrians . hat for his independent way both by the 
 Bonapartists and the reactionist , surround by spy , he be force 
 to quit Italy never to return . he write to explain his motif to Mme . 
 d'Albany . Mme . d'Albany write back in a way which show that she 
 believe the assertion of Foscolo 's enemy ; that she ascribe to 
 cowardice , to meanness , to a base desire to make himself conspicuous , 
 the self - inflict exile which he have take upon he : a letter which the 
 editor of Foscolo 's correspondence describe to we in one 
 word - unworthy . 

 this letter come upon Foscolo like a thunder - clap . " so thus , " he write 
 to the Countess in August 1815 , " generosity and justice be banish 
 even from nobler soul . your letter , Signora Contessa , grieve I , and 
 confer upon I , at the same time , two advantage : it diminish 
 suddenly the perpetual nostalgia which I have feel for Florence , and it 
 afford I an occasion to try my strength of spirit .... my hatred for 
 the tyranny with which Bonaparte be oppress Italy do not imply 
 that I should love the house of Austria . the difference for I be 
 that I hop that Bonaparte 's ambition might bring about , if not the 
 independence of Italy , at least such magnanimous deed as might raise 
 the Italians ; whereas the regular government of Austria preclude all 
 such hope . I should be mad and infamous if I desire for Italy , which 
 require peace at any price , new disorder and slaughtering ; but I 
 should consider myself madder still and more infamous if , have despise 
 to serve the foreigner who have fall , I should accept to serve the 
 foreigner who have succeed .... but if your accusation of inconstancy be 
 unjust , your accusation that I want to ' passer pour original ' be 
 actually offensive and mock . " 

 later , in his solitary wandering , Foscolo 's heart seem to have melt 
 towards his former friend ; he write her one or two letter , conciliate , 
 friendly , but how different from the former one ! the Countess of 
 Albany , whom he have love and trust , be dead ; the woman who remain 
 be dear to he as a mere relic of that dead ideal . 

 such be the story of Mme . d'Albany 's friendship for two of the noble 
 spirit , Sismondi and Foscolo , of their day ; the noble , the one in his 
 pure austerity , the other in his magnanimous passionateness , that ever 
 cross the path of the beloved of Alfieri . 




 CHAPTER XX . 

 SANTA CROCE . 


 with her other friend , who give less of their own heart and ask less 
 of her , Mme . d'Albany be more fortunate . she contrive to connect 
 herself by correspondence with the most eminent man and woman of the 
 most different view and temper ; she make her salon in Florence , as M. 
 St. René Taillandier have observe , a sort of adjunct to the cosmopolitan 
 salon of Mme . de Staël at Coppet . her effort in so doing be crown 
 with the very high success . in 1809 Napoleon request Mme . d'Albany 
 to leave Florence for Paris , where , he add with a mixture of brutality 
 and sarcasm , she might indulge her love of art in the new gallery of 
 the Louvre , and where her social talent could no long spread 
 dissatisfaction with his government , as be the case in Italy . 

 the one year 's residence in Paris , which Napoleon 's jealous meddlesomeness 
 force upon she , be , in itself , a very enjoyable time , spend with the 
 friend whom she have leave in ' 93 , and with a whole host of new one whom 
 she have make since . she return to Florence with a large number of 
 devoted correspondent than ever ; her salon become more and more brilliant ; 
 and when , after Waterloo , the whole english world of politic , fashion , 
 and letter pour on to the Continent , her house become , as Sismondi 
 say , the wall on which all the most brilliant figure of the great 
 magic lantern be project . 

 thus , see crowd of the most distinguished and delightful people , 
 receive pile of the most interesting and adore letter , happy , 
 self - satisfy , Mme . d'Albany grow into an old woman . every evening 
 until ten , the room of the Casa Alfieri be throw open ; the servant 
 in the Stuart livery usher in the guest , the tea be serve in 
 those famous service emblazon with the royal arm of England . the 
 Countess have not yet abandon her regal pretension ; for all her 
 condescend cordiality towards the elect , she could assume air of 
 social superiority which some folk scarcely brook , and she be 
 evidently pleased when , half in earnest , Mme . de Staël address she as 
 " my dear Sovereign , " " my dear Queen , " and even when that vulgar woman of 
 genius , Lady Morgan , make a buffoonish scene about the " dead usurper , " 
 on the death of George III . but Mme . d'Albany herself be get to 
 look and talk less and less like a queen , either the Queen of Great 
 Britain or the queen of Hearts ; she be fat , squat , snub , dress with 
 an eternal red shawl   now the property of an intimate friend of mine , 
 in a dress extremely suggestive of an old house - keeper . she be , when 
 not do the queen , cordial , cheerful in manner , love to have 
 child about she , to spoil they with cake and see they romp and 
 dance ; free and easy , cynical , Rabelaisian , if I may use the expression , 
 as such mongrel Frenchwomen be apt to grow with year ; the nick - name 
 which she give to a member of a family where the tradition of she and 
 her way still persist , reveal a wealth of coarse fun which be rather 
 strange in a woman who be once the Beatrice or Laura of a poet . she be 
 active , mentally and bodily , never give up her multifarious reading , 
 her letter - writing ; never forego her invariable morning walk , in a 
 big bonnet and the legendary red shawl , down the Lung Arno and into the 
 Cascine . 

 such be Louise of Stolberg , Countess of Albany , widow of Prince Charles 
 Edward , widow , in a sense , of the poet Vittorio Alfieri ; and such , at 
 the age of seventy - two , do death overtake she , on the 29th January 
 1824 . her property she bequeath to Fabre whom a false rumour have 
 call her husband ; and Fabre leave it jointly to his native town of 
 Montpellier , and to his friend the Cavaliere Emilio Santarelli , who 
 still live and recollect Mme . d'Albany . 

 the famous epitaph , compose by Alfieri for himself , have be mangle by 
 Mme . d'Albany and those who help she and Canova in devise his tomb ; 
 the companion epitaph , the one in which Alfieri describe the Countess 
 as bury next to he , be also mangle in its adaptation to a tomb 
 erect in Santa Croce , entirely separate from Alfieri 's . on that 
 monument of Mme . d'Albany , in the chapel where moulder the fresco of 
 Masolino , there be not a word of that sentence of Alfieri 's about the 
 dead woman have be to he dearer and more respected than any other 
 human thing . Mme . d'Albany have change into quite another be between 
 1803 and 1824 ; the friend of Sismondi , of Foscolo , of Mme . de Staël , the 
 worldly friend of many friend , seem to have no connection with the 
 lady who have weep for Alfieri in the convent at Rome , who have bear 
 with all Alfieri 's misanthropic fury after the Revolution , any more 
 than with the delicate intellectual girl whom Charles Edward have nearly 
 do to death in his drunken jealousy . so , on the whole , Fabre , and 
 whosoever assist Fabre , be right in concoct a new epitaph . 

 but to we , who have follow the career - whose lesson be that of the 
 meanness which lurk in noble thing , the nobility which lurk in mean 
 one - of this woman from her inauspicious wedding - day to the placid day 
 of her death , to we Louise of Stolberg , Countess of Albany , queen of 
 Great Britain , France , and Ireland , will remain , for all blame we 
 may give she and her time , a figure to remember and reflect upon , 
 principally because of those suppress word of her epitaph : " A 
 Victorio Alferio ultra re omne dilecta , et quasi mortale numen ab 
 ipso constanter habita et observata . " 
