PENELOPE BRANDLING 

 by 

 VERNON LEE 


 a tale of the WELSH coast in the EIGHTEENTH CENTURY 


 to 

 AUGUSTINE bulteau 

 this story 

 of northern wrecker , 

 in RETURN for a piece of PARIAN 

 marble picked up in the 

 MEDITERRANEAN SURF 

 AT PALO 




 GRANDFEY , NEAR F. , in SWITZERLAND . 


  May 15 , 1822 . 

 have reach an age when the morrow be more than uncertain , and 
 know how soon all verbal tradition become blur and distort , I , 
 Sophia Penelope , daughter of Jacques de Morat , a cadet of the count of 
 that name , sometime a captain in the service of King Louis XV . , and of 
 Sophia Hamilton , his wife ; and furthermore , widow of the late Sir 
 Eustace Brandling , ninth baronet , of St. Salvat 's Castle , in the county 
 of Glamorgan , have yield to the wish of my dear surviving son , and 
 be prepare to consign to paper , for the benefit of their child and 
 grandchild , some account of those circumstance in my life which 
 decide that the lot of this family should so long have be cast in 
 foreign part and remote colony , instead of in its ancestral and 
 legitimate home . 

 I can the well fulfil this last duty to my dear one , live and dead , 
 that I have by I a journal which , as it chance , I be in the habit of 
 keep at that period ; and require to draw upon my memory only for such 
 detail as happen to be miss in that casual record of my daily life 
 some fifty year ago . and first of all let I explain to my child 's 
 child that I begin to keep this journal two year after my marriage 
 with their grandfather , with the idea of send it regularly to my 
 dear mother , from whom , for the first time in my young life , I be 
 separate by my husband 's unexpected succession and our removal from 
 Switzerland to his newly - inherit estate in Wales . let I also explain 
 that before this event , which take place in the spring of seventeen 
 hundred and seventy - two , Sir Eustace Brandling be merely a young 
 Englishman of handsome person , gentlemanly bearing , an uncommon 
 knowledge of the liberal art and science , and a most blameless and 
 amiable temper , but with no expectation of fortune in the future , and 
 only a modest competence in the present . so that it be regard in our 
 Canton and among our relation as a proof of my dear mother 's high - fly 
 and romantic temper , and of the unpractical influence of the writing of 
 Rousseau and other philosopher , that she should have allow her only 
 child to contract such a marriage . and at the time of its celebration it 
 do indeed appear improbable that we should ever cease reside with my 
 dearest mother on her little domain of Grandfey ; still more that our 
 existence of pastoral and philosophic happiness should ever be exchange 
 for the nightmare of dishonour and misery which follow it . 

 the beginning of our calamity be , as I say , on the death of Sir 
 Thomas Brandling , my husband 's only brother . I have preserve a most 
 vivid recollection of the day which bring we that news , perhaps 
 because , look back upon ever after , it seem the definite boundary of 
 a whole part of our life , leave so quickly and utterly behind , as the 
 shore be leave even with the first few stroke of the oar . my dear 
 mother and I be in the laundry , where the maid be busy put by 
 the freshly iron linen . my mother , who be ever more skilful with her 
 hand , as she be nimbler in her thought , than I , have put aside all the 
 most delicate piece and the lace to dress and iron herself ; while I , 
 who have make a number of large bundle of lavender   our garden have 
 never produce it in so great profusion , be stand on a chair and 
 place they in the shelf of the press , between each bale of sheet 
 and table linen which the maid have lift up to I . when , look 
 through the open glass door , I see Vincent , the farm servant , hurrying 
 along the lime walk , and across the kitchen garden , and wave a packet 
 at we . he have be to the city to buy sugar , I remember , for the 
 raspberry jam , which my mother , an excellent cook , have decide to 
 sweeten a second time , for fear of its turning . 

 " he seem very excited , " say my mother , look out . " I declare he have 
 a book or packet , perhaps it be the Journal des Savants for Eustace , 
 or that opera by Monsieur Gluck , which your uncle promise you . I hope 
 he have not forget the nutmeg . " I write down these childish detail 
 because I cherish they for year , as one might cherish a blade of 
 grass or a leaf , carelessly put as a marker in a book , and belong to 
 a country one will never revisit . 

 " it be a letter for Eustace , " say my mother , " and very heavy too . I be 
 glad Vincent have more money than necessary , for it must have cost a lot 
 at the post . " and go under my husband 's laboratory window she ask 
 whether he want the letter at once , or would wait to open it at dinner 
 time . " I be only clean my instrument , " he answer , " let I have 
 the letter now . " his voice , as I hear it through all those year , sound 
 so happy and boyish . it be alter , and it seem at the time naturally 
 enough , when he presently come down to the laundry and say very 
 briefly , " my brother be dead ... it be suppose a stab from a drunken 
 sailor at Bristol . a shocking business . it be my Uncle Hubert who 
 write . " he have sit down by the iron table and speak in short , dry 
 sentence . 

 there be something extraordinary about his voice , not grief , but 
 agitation , which somehow make it utterly impossible for I to do what 
 would have be natural under the circumstance , to put my arm round 
 his neck and tell he I share his trouble . instead of which every word 
 he utter seem to ward I off as with the sword 's point , and to cover 
 himself , as a fencer cover his vital . 

 " get some brandy for he , Penelope . he be feel faint , " say my 
 mother , toss I her key . I obey , feel that she understand and I 
 do not , as often happen between we . I be a few minute away , for I 
 have to cross the yard to the dwelling house , and then I find that my 
 mother have give I the wrong key . I fill a glass from a jar of 
 cherry we have just put up , and return to the laundry . my husband be 
 white , but do not look at all faint . he be lean his elbow on the 
 deal table cover with blanket , and nervously fold and stretch a 
 ruffle which lie by the bowl of starch . when I come in he suddenly 
 stop speak , and my mother see that I notice it . 

 " eustace be say , my dear , " she say , " that he will have to 
 go - almost immediately - to England , on account of the property . he 
 want to go on alone , and fetch you later , when thing should be a 
 little to right . but I be tell he , Penelope , that I feel sure you 
 would recognise it as your duty to go with he from the very first , and 
 help he through any difficulty . " 

 my dear mother have resume her ironing ; and as she say these last 
 word , her voice tremble a little , and she stoop very attentively 
 over the cap she be smooth . 

 Eustace be sit there , so unlike himself suddenly , and mutter 
 nervously , " I really can see no occasion , Maman , for anything of the 
 sort . " 

 I can not say what possess I ; I verily think a presentiment of the 
 future . but I put down the plate and glass , look from my mother to my 
 husband , and burst into a childish flood of tear . I hear my husband 
 give a little peevish " ah ! " rise , leave the room , and then bang the door 
 of his laboratory upstairs behind he . and then I feel my dear mother 's 
 arm about I , and her kiss on my cheek . I mop my eye with my apron , 
 but at first I could not see properly for the tear . when I be able to 
 see again what strike I be the scene through the long window , open 
 down to the ground . 

 it be a lovely evening , and the air full of the sweetness of lime 
 blossom . the low sunlight make the plaster of our big old house a pale 
 golden , and the old woodwork of its wooden eave , wide and shape like 
 an inverted boat , as be the swiss fashion , of a beautiful rosy purple . 
 the dog be lie on the house step , by the great tub of hydrangea 
 and flower pomegranate ; and beyond the sanded yard I could see the 
 bent back of Vincent stoop among the hive in the kitchen garden . the 
 grass beyond be brilliant green , all powder with hemlock flower ; and 
 the sun make a deep track in the avenue , along which the cow be 
 trot home to be milk . I feel my heart break , as once or twice I 
 have foolishly do as a child , and in a manner in which I have never 
 feel it again despite all my later misery . I suppose it be that I be 
 only then really cease to be a child , though I have be marry two 
 year . it be evidently in my mother 's thought , for she follow my 
 glance with her , and then say very solemnly , and kiss I again   she 
 have not let go of I all this while , " my poor little Penelope ! you must 
 learn to be a woman . you will want all your strength and all your 
 courage to help your husband . " 

 that be really the end , or the beginning . there be some week of 
 plan - making and preparation , a bad dream which have fade away from my 
 memory . and then , at the beginning of August of that year - 1772 - my 
 husband and I start from Grandfey for St. Salvat 's . 




 I 


  September 29 , 1772 . 

 this be my first night in what , henceforward , be go to be my home . 
 the thought should be a happy and a solemn one ; but it merely go on 
 and on in my head like the word of a song in some unknown language . 
 Eustace have go below to his uncle ; and I be alone in this great room , 
 and also , I imagine , in the whole wing of this great house . the wax 
 light on the dressing - table , and the unsnuffed dip with which the old 
 housekeeper light we through endless passage , leave all the corner dark . 
 but the moonlight pour in through the vast , cage - like window . the moon 
 be shin on a strip of sea above the tree - top , and the noise of the 
 sea be quite close ; a noise quite unlike that of any running water , and 
 methink very melancholy and hopeless in expression . I try to enjoy it 
 like a play , or a romance which one read ; and indeed , the whole 
 impression of this castle be marvellously romantic . 

 when Eustace have unstrappe my package , and in his tender manner place 
 all my little property in order , he take I in his arm , mean 
 thereby to welcome I to my new home and the house of his father . we 
 be stand by the window , and I try , foolishly it seem , to hide my 
 weakness of spirit   for I confess to have feel a great longing to cry 
 by point to that piece of moonlit sea , and repeat a line of 
 Ossian , at the beginning of the description of the pirate cross the 
 sea to the house of Erved . foolishly , for although that passage be a 
 favourite with Eustace , indeed one we often read during our courtship , 
 he be annoy at my thinking of such matter , I suppose , at such a 
 moment ; and answer with that kind of irritated deprecation that be so 
 new to I ; embrace I indeed once more , but leave I immediately to 
 go to his uncle . 

 Foolish Penelope ! it be this no doubt which make I feel lonely just 
 now ; and I can hear you , dear mother , chide I laughingly , for 
 give so much weight to such an incident . eustace will return 
 presently , as gentle and sympathise as ever , and all will be right 
 with I . meanwhile , I will note down the event of this day , so 
 memorable in my life . 

 we seem to ride for innumerable hour , I in the hire chaise , and my 
 husband on the horse he have buy at Bristol . the road wind endlessly 
 up and down , through a green country , with barely a pale patch of reaped 
 field , and all veil in mist and drive rain . there seem no village 
 anywhere , only at distance of mile , a scant cottage or two of grey 
 stone and thatch ; and once or twice during all those hour , a desolate 
 square tower among distant tree ; and all along rough hedge and grey 
 wall with stone project like battlement . inland mountain line 
 like cliff , dim in the rain ; and at last , over the pale green field , 
 the sea - quite pale , almost white . we have to ask our way more than once , 
 lose it again in this vague country without landmark , where 
 everything appear and disappear in mist . I have begin to feel as if 
 St. Salvat 's have no real existence , when Eustace ride up to the chaise 
 window and point out the top of a tower , and a piece of battlemented 
 wall , emerge from the misty wood , and a minute after we be at a 
 tall gate tower , with a broken escutcheon and a drawbridge , which 
 clank up behind we so soon as we be over . we stop in a great 
 castle yard , with paved path across a kind of bowling green , and at the 
 step of the house , build unevenly all round , battlemente and turrete , 
 with huge project window make of little pane . 

 there be a lot of man upon the step , who surround the postchaise ; 
 they be roughly and variously dress , some like fisherman and 
 keeper , but none as I have hitherto see the gentleman of this country . 
 but as we stop , another come down the step with a masterful air , 
 push they aside , open the chaise , lift I out , and make I a very 
 fine bow as I stand quite astonished at the suddenness of his way . he 
 be dress entirely in black broadcloth , with a frizzled wig and band , 
 as clergyman be dress here , and black cloth gaiter . 

 " may it please the fair Lady Brandling , " he say , with a fine gesture , 
 " to accept the hearty welcome of her old Uncle Hubert , and of her other 
 kinsman . " the other come troop round awkwardly , with little show of 
 manner . but the one call Hubert , the clergyman , give I his arm , 
 waive they away , say something about my be tired from the long 
 ride , and sweep , nay , almost carry I up the great staircase and 
 through the passage to the room where dinner be spread . of this he 
 excuse himself from partake , allege the lateness of the hour and 
 his feeble digestion ; but he sit over against my husband and I while we 
 be eat , drink wine with I , and keep up a ceaseless flow of 
 conversation , rather fulsomely affable methought and pack with 
 needless witticism ; but which free I from the embarrassment produce 
 by the novelty of the situation , by my husband 's almost utter silence , 
 and also , I must add , by the man 's own scrutinise examination of I . I 
 be heartily glad when , the glass be remove , he summon the 
 housekeeper , and with another very fine bow , commit I to her 
 charge . eustace beg to be excuse for accompany I to my chamber , 
 and promise to return and drink his wine presently with his kinsman . 

 and now , dear mother , I have tell you of our arrival at St. Salvat 's ; 
 and I have confess to you my childish fear of I know not what . " mere 
 bodily fatigue ! " I hear you briskly exclaim , and chide I for such 
 childish feeling . but if you be here , dearest mother , you would take 
 I also in your arm , and I should know that you know it be not all 
 foolishness and cowardice , that you would know what it be , for the first 
 time in my little life , to be without you . 


  October 5 , 1772 . 

 it have stop rain at last , and Eustace , who be again the kind 
 and most considerate of man , have take I all over the castle and the 
 ground , or at least a great part . St. Salvat 's be even more 
 romantically situated than I have think ; and with its tower and 
 battlement hide in deep wood , it make one think of castle , like 
 that of Otranto , which one read of in novel ; nay , I be the more 
 remind of the latter work of fiction   which eustace believe to be 
 from the pen of the accomplish Mr. Walpole , whom we know in Paris , 
 that there be , let into the stonework on either side of the porch , huge 
 head of warrior , fillet and crown with laurel , which though 
 purport to be those of the Emperors Augustus and Trajan , yet look as 
 if they might fit into some gigantic helmet such as we read of in that 
 admirable tale . 

 from the house , which have be build at various time   Eustace be of 
 opinion mainly in the time of the famous Cardinal Wolsey , as the 
 architecture , it appear , be similar to that of his Majesty 's palace at 
 Hampton Court , into the old castle ; from the house , as I say , the 
 garden descend in great terrace and step into the wood and to the 
 sea . the garden be indeed very much neglect , and will require no 
 doubt , a considerable expenditure of labour ; but I be secretly charm 
 by their wild luxuriance : a great vine and a pear tree hang about the 
 mullione window almost unprune , and the box and bay tree have grow 
 into thicket in the extraordinary kindliness of this warm , moist 
 climate . there be in the middle of the terrace , a pond all overgrow 
 with lily , and with a break leaden statue of a nymph . here , when he 
 be a child , Eustace be will not to watch for the transformation into a 
 fairy of a great water snake which be say to have live in that pond 
 for century ; but I well remember his awakening my compassion by 
 tell I how , one day , his brother Thomas , wish to displease he , 
 trap the poor harmless creature and cruelly skin it alive . " that 
 be the place of my poor water snake , " Eustace say to - day ; and it be 
 the first time since our come , that he have allude to his own or his 
 family 's past . poor Eustace ! I be deeply touch by the evident painful 
 memory awaken by return to St. Salvat 's , which have over - cloud his 
 reserved and sensitive nature , in a manner I have not notice   thank 
 Heaven   since our marriage . but to return to the castle , or rather its 
 ground . what chiefly delight my romantic temper be the wood in which 
 it be hide , and its singular position , on an utterly isolate little 
 bay of this wild and dangerous coast . you go down the terrace into a 
 narrow ravine , line with every manner of fern , and full of venerable 
 tree ; past the little church of which our Uncle Hubert be the 
 incumbent , alongside some ruin building , once the quarter of the 
 Brandlings ' trooper , across a field full of yellow bog flower , and on 
 to a high wall . and on the other side of that wall , quite unexpected , be 
 the white , misty sea , dash against a bit of sand and low pale rock , 
 where our uncle ' fishing boat be draw up , and chafing , far off 
 against the sunken reef of this murderous coast . and to the right and 
 the left , great clump of wind - bent tree and sharp cliff appear and 
 disappear in the faint , misty sunshine . 

 as we stand on the sea wall , listen to the rustle of the wave , a 
 ship , with three mast and full sail , pass slowly at a great 
 distance , to my very great pleasure . 

 " where be she go , do you know ? " I ask rather childishly . 

 " to Bristol , " answer Eustace curtly . " it be perhaps , some West 
 Indiaman , laden with sugar , and spirit , and coffee and cotton . all the 
 vessel bind for Bristol sail in front of St. Salvat 's . " 

 " and be not the coast very dangerous ? " I ask , for the sight of that 
 gallant ship have fascinate I . " be there not wreck sometimes along 
 those reef we see there ? " 

 " sometimes ! " exclaim Eustace sadly . " why at season , almost daily . all 
 that wood which make the blue flame you like so much , be the timber of 
 wreck vessel , pick up along this coast . " 

 my eye rest on the boat draw up on the sand of the little cove : 
 stout black boat , such as Eustace have point out to I at Bristol as 
 pilchard boat . 

 " and when there be a wreck ? " I ask , " do your uncle go out to save the 
 poor people with those boat ? " 

 " alas , dear Lady Brandling , " answer an unexpected voice at my elbow , 
 " it be not give to poor weak mortal like we to contend with the 
 decree of a just , though wrathful providence . " 

 I turn round and there stand , lean on the sea wall , with his big 
 liquorice - colour eye fix on I , and a smile   methought   of polite 
 acquiescence in shipwreck , our uncle , the Reverend Hubert , in his fine 
 black coat and frizzle white wig . 


  October 12 , 1772 . 

 we have be here over a fortnight now , and although it feel as if I 
 never could grow accustomed to all this strangeness , it seem month ; 
 and those year at Grandfey , all my life before my marriage , and before 
 our journey , a vivid dream . 

 where shall I begin ? during the first week Eustace and I have our meal , 
 as seem but natural , in the great hall with his uncle and his one 
 cousin . for two day thing go decently enough . the uncle - Simon , 
 Edward , Gwyn , David , and the cousin , Evan , son of David , be evidently 
 under considerable restraint , and fear   methought   of the Reverend 
 Hubert , who seem somehow a creature from another planet . the latter sit 
 by Eustace and I , at the high end of the table ; the other , and with 
 they the Bailiff Lloyd , at the low . the service be rough but clean , 
 and the behaviour , although gloomily constrain , decent and 
 gentlemanly . but little by little a spirit of rebellion seem to arise . 
 it begin by young Evan , a sandy - haired lad of seventeen , come to 
 dinner with hand unwashed and red from skin , as he tell we , an 
 otter ; and on the Reverend Hubert bid he go wash before appear 
 in my presence , his father , David , take his part , force the lad 
 into his chair , and say something in the unintelligible Welsh 
 language , which contain some rudeness towards I , for he plainly 
 nod in my direction and strike the table with his fist . at this the 
 Reverend Hubert get up , take the boy Evan by the shoulder and lead he 
 to the door , without one of the party demur . " the lovely Lady 
 Brandling , " he say , turn to I as he resume his place , " must 
 forgive this young Caliban , unaccustomed like the one of the play , to 
 beautiful princess . " I notice he love to lard his speech with 
 literary reminiscence , and be indeed a well read person than one 
 would expect to meet in such a place . this be , however , only the 
 beginning . Uncle David appear next night undoubtedly in liquor , and 
 be with difficulty constrain to decent behaviour . Simon , a heavy , 
 lubberly creature , arrive all cover with mud , in shirtsleeve , and 
 smell vilely of stale fish . then it be the turn of Edward , a great 
 black man , with a scar on his cheek , to light his pipe at table , and 
 pinch the Welsh serve wench as she pass , and whisper to she in Welsh 
 some jest which make the other roar . Eustace and Hubert , between whom I 
 sit at the far end , pretend not to notice , though Eustace redden 
 visibly , and Hubert take an odd green colour , which seem to be the 
 complexion of his anger . and then while our clergyman uncle and Eustace 
 busily fall to discuss literature , and even   in a manner which , 
 under other circumstance , would have make I laugh   quote the 
 classic , the conversation at the low end become loud and violent in 
 Welsh . 

 " they be discuss the likelihood of a shoal of pilchard , " say 
 Hubert to I with a faint uneasy smile . " my brother , I grieve to say , 
 dear Lady Brandling , be but country breed , and very rough diamond ; and 
 the Saxon , as they call our christian language , be a difficulty to their 
 heathenishness . " 

 " so great a difficulty , apparently , " I answer , suddenly rise from 
 the table , for I feel indignant with the want of spirit of my two 
 gentleman , " that methink I shall in future leave they to their 
 familiar Welsh , and order my meal in my parlour , where you two 
 gentleman may , if you choose , have they with I . " Eustace turn 
 crimson , bit his lip ; Uncle Hubert go very green ; and I own I myself 
 be astonish at my decision of tone and attitude : it be like an 
 unknown I speak with my voice . 

 contrary to my expectation , neither Eustace nor Hubert manifest any 
 vexation with I . we go upstairs and sit down to card as if nothing 
 have happen . but the next day Hubert bring I a long message of 
 apology , which I confess sound very much of his making up , from Uncle 
 David . but add that he quite agree that it be well that Eustace 
 and I should have our meal above , " and leave the hog to their wash . " 
 " only , " he say , with that politeness which I like so little   though 
 Heaven know politeness ought to be a welcome drug in this place , " I 
 trust my dear young niece will not cast I out of the paradise I have , 
 after so many year , taste of ; and allow her old rough Uncle Hubert 
 occasionally to breathe the air of refinement she have bring to this 
 castle . " 

 yet I notice he have but rarely eat with Eustace and I ; come up , 
 however , to drink wine   or pretend , for he never empty his glass and 
 complain he have but a weak head , or play card , or hear I sing to the 
 harpsichord , a performance of which he seem inordinately fond . 

 I can not help wonder what Eustace and he discuss , besides literature , 
 over their wine . for Eustace must surely intend , soon or later , to 
 resume his position of master of St. Salvat 's , and dispose , some way , of 
 the crew of Caliban uncle . 


  October 18 , 1772 . 

 I ought to say something to my dear mother   though I be get doubtful 
 of distress she with my small and temporary trouble   about the 
 domestic economy of St. Salvat 's . this be odd enough , to my thinking . 
 the great part of the castle be unoccupied , and from what I have see , 
 quite out of repair ; nor should I have deem it possible that so many 
 fine dwelling - room could ever have be fill and choke up , as be 
 here the case , with lumber , and , indeed , litter , of all kind . the 
 uncle , all except Hubert , be lodge in the great south wing , and I 
 should guess in a manner more suitable to their look than to their 
 birth , while Eustace and I occupy his mother 's apartment , do up in 
 the late reign , in the north wing look on the sea . the centre of the 
 castle be take up by the great hall , go from ground to ceiling , so 
 that the two half be virtually isolate ; certainly isolate so far as 
 I be concern , since the fear of eavesdropping on my uncle ' brawling 
 have already stop my use the gallery which run under the ceiling of 
 the hall , and connect my apartment with the main staircase . the dairy , 
 still - room , pantry , and even the kitchen be in outhouse , from which 
 the serve man bring in the food often in pour rain in an incredibly 
 reckless manner . I say ' serve man , " because one of the peculiarity 
 of St. Salvat 's   for I can scarce believe it to be an universal practice 
 in England or even in Wales   be the predominance of the male sex . but 
 let not your fancy construe this as a sign of grandeur , or conjure up 
 bevy of lacquey in long coat and silver badge ! like master , like 
 man ; the man at St. Salvat 's have the same unkempt , sea - wolfish look as 
 the master , be equally foul in their habit and possess even less 
 English . by some strange freak the cook only be not of these part , 
 indeed , a mulatto , know only Spanish . " all good sea - fare folk , 
 able to man the boat on a stormy night , " explain Uncle Gwyn , as if it 
 be quite natural that the castle of St. Salvat 's should be a 
 headquarters of pilchard fishing ! I have only see the mulatto at a 
 distance , and at first believe he to be an invention of Uncle Simon 's , 
 the wag of the family , who inform I he have he off a notorious pirate 
 ship , where he have learn to grill d - - d french frog during the late 
 war and serve they up with caper . 

 the small number of woman servant be scarce to be regret , judge by 
 the few there be . though whether , indeed , these slut should be judge 
 at all as serve woman I feel inclined to doubt ; for no secret be make 
 of the dairymaid and the laundress be the sultanas of Uncles Simon 
 and Gwyn , with whom they often sit to meal ; while the little waiting 
 wench at first allot to I be too obviously court by the oaf Evan 
 to be keep in my service . Uncle Hubert have indeed think it needful to 
 explain to I that the gentry of these part all live bad than 
 heathen , and have attempt   but the subject give I little 
 satisfaction   to confirm this by the chronique galante of the 
 neighbourhood ; ' tis wonderful how quick the man be at take a hint , and 
 adapt his view to his listener ' , at least to mine . to come back to 
 the maid , if such a name can be apply here , I find the only reputable 
 woman in the castle   her age , and something in her manner give she a 
 claim to such an adjective   be Mrs. Davies , the suppose housekeeper , 
 who now attend on my   luckily very simple   want . she be the 
 foster - mother and nurse of my brother - in - law , the late Baronet ; and ' tis 
 plain there be no love lose betwixt Eustace and she . indeed , I seem to 
 guess she may have help to make his infancy the sad and solitary one 
 it be . yet , for all this suspicion , and a confused impression   which I 
 can not   account for   that the woman be set over we to spy , I be bind to 
 say that of all people here , not except Uncle Hubert here , Mrs. 
 davy be the one most to my taste . she have be notably beautiful , and 
 despite considerable age , have an uncommon active and erect bearing ; and 
 there be about her harsh , dark face , and silent , abrupt manner , 
 something which put I at ease by its strength and straightforwardness . 
 this seem curious after say she have be set to spy ; but ' tis my 
 impression that in this heathenish country spy , aye , and I can fancy 
 robbing and murdering , might be do with a clean conscience as a duty 
 towards one 's master ; and Hubert , and the memory of Sir Thomas , be the 
 real master , and not Eustace and I .... will it always be so ? thing 
 look like it ; and yet , at the bottom of my soul , I find a hope , almost 
 an expectation , that with God 's grace I shall clean out this augean 
 stable , and burn out these wasp 's nest .... 


  October 29 . 

 on my asking about prayer , a practice I have notice in every family 
 since my arrival in England , Uncle Hubert excuse himself by explain 
 that most of the common folk about here have follow Mr. Wesley 's sect , 
 and for the rest few of the household understand English . the same 
 reason methought prevent his fulfil his clergyman 's office in 
 public ; and when three Sundays have pass , I get to think that the 
 church in the glen be never open at all . to my surprise last night , 
 be Saturday , the Reverend Hubert invite we very solemnly to Divine 
 Service the follow morning ; invite , for his manner be very much 
 that of a man request one 's company at a concert or theatrical 
 entertainment . I be just return , and I confess my astonishment . Uncle 
 Hubert , though in a style by no mean to my taste , and with no kind of 
 real religious spirit , be undoubtedly a preacher of uncommon genius , nor 
 be there any possibility , methought , that his extempore sermon be 
 learn by heart . the flow rhetorical style , more like that of romish 
 divine , be of a piece also with his conversation , and he have the look 
 of enjoyment of one conscious of his own power . I own the interest of 
 the performance   for such I feel it   be so great that it be only on 
 reflection I perceive the utter and almost indecent inappropriateness 
 thereof . despite the lack of English , the entire household , save the 
 mulatto , be present , mostly asleep in constrain attitude ; and the 
 other uncle , all except David and Gwyn , lie snore in their pew . 

 my own impression be oddly disagreeable ; but on the service end , I 
 bring myself to compliment our uncle . " you should have be a bishop , " 
 I say , " at your age , Uncle Hubert . " 

 he sigh deeply , " a bishop ? I ought to have - I might have 
 be - everything , anything - save for this cursed place and my own 
 weakness . but doubtless , " he add , hypocritically , " it be a just decree 
 of Providence that have decide thus . but it be hard sometimes . there be 
 two nature in we , occasionally , and the one vanquishe and overwhelm 
 the other . in I , " and here he begin to laugh , " the fisherman for 
 pilchard have get the well of the fisherman for soul . " 

 " fishing appear to have wondrous attraction , " I answer negligently . 

 he turn and look at I scrutinisingly . " we have all have the passion , 
 we brandling , " he say , " except that superfine gentleman yonder , " 
 nod at Eustace . and add , in a loud , emphatic voice , " and none of 
 we have be a more devoted fisherman , you will admit , dear Eustace , than 
 your lamented father . " 

 Eustace , I think , turn pale , but it might have be the greenish 
 light through the bottle - glass window of the little church , on whose 
 damp floor we three be stand before the tomb of the Brandlings of 
 former time , quaint pyramid of kneeling figure , son and daughter 
 taper downward from the kneeling father and mother ; and recumbent 
 knight , obliterate by century in the ruin roofless chapel , so that 
 the dog at their foot , the sword by their side , let alone their poor 
 wash feature , be scarce distinguishable .... 

 " they look like drown people , " I say , and indeed the green light 
 through the tree and the bottle glass , and the greenish damp stain all 
 round , make the church seem like a sea cave , with the sea moaning round 
 it . 

 " where have you see drown people , Penelope ? " ask Eustace , and I 
 feel a little reproved for the horridness of my imagining . 

 " nowhere , " I hastily answer ; " just a fancy that pass through my 
 head . and you say there be so many wreck on this coast , you know . " 

 " we be all wreck on the ocean of Time , " remark the Reverend Hubert , 
 " overwhelm by its flood . " 

 " you be the bishop now , " I laugh , " not the pilchard fisher , " and we 
 go through the damp churchyard of huddle grassy mound and crooked 
 gravestone under the big tree of the glen . 

 " Eustace , " I say that evening , " I wish I might not be bury down 
 there , " and then , consider that all his ancestor be , I feel sorry . 

 but he clasp my arm very tenderly , and exclaim with a look of deep 
 pain , " for God 's sake do not speak of such thing , my love . even in jest 
 the word make I feel faint and sick . " 

 Poor Eustace ! I fear he be not well ; and that what he have find at St. 
 Salvat 's be eat into his spirit . 


  November 15 , 1772 . 

 I have be feel doubtful , for some day past , whether to send my 
 diary regularly to my mother , lest she should be distress   at that 
 great distance   by my account of this place and our life here . yet I 
 feel as if something have suddenly happen , a window suddenly close or 
 a door slam in my face , when Eustace beg I to - day to be very 
 reserve in anything I write in my letter . 

 " these country postmaster , " he say , not without hesitation , " be not 
 to be trust with any secret ; they be know to amuse their leisure 
 and entertain their gossip with the letter which pass through their 
 hand . " he laugh , but not very naturally . " some day , " he say , " I will 
 be send a special messenger to Cardiff , and then your diary - for I 
 know that you be keep one - shall go to your mother . but for the 
 present I would not say more than needful about ... about our 
 surrounding , my dear Penelope . " 

 I feel childishly vex . 

 " ' tis that hateful Uncle Hubert ; " I cry , " that read our letter , 
 Eustace ! I feel sure of it ! " 

 " nonsense , " answer Eustace . " I tell you that it be a well - know habit 
 among postmaster and postmistress in this country , " and he go away 
 a little displeased , as I think . 

 my poor journal ! and yet I shall continue write it , and perhaps even 
 more frankly now it will be read only by I ; for while I write I seem to 
 be talk to my dear mother , and to be a little less solitary .... 




 II 


  December 21 , 1772 . 

 Winter have come on : a melancholy , wet and stormy winter , without the 
 glitter of snow and ice ; and with the sea moaning or roaring by turn . I 
 think with longing   though I hope poor Eustace do not guess how near I 
 sometimes be to cry for homesickness   of our sledging party with 
 the dear cheerful neighbour at Grandfey ; of the skating on the pond , 
 and the long walk on the crisp frozen snow , when Eustace and I would 
 snowball or make long slide , laugh like child . at St. Salvat 's 
 there be no neighbour ; or if there be   but the near large house be 
 ten mile off , and belong to a noble lord who never leave London   they 
 do not show themselves . I do not even know what there be or be not in 
 the country that lie inland ; in fact , since our come , I have never 
 leave the ground and park of St. Salvat 's , nor go beyond the old 
 fortified wall which encircle they . my very curiosity have gradually 
 fade . I have never press Hubert for the saddle horse and the equipage 
  the coach - house contain only break - down coach of the day of King 
 George I.   which he promise rather vaguely to procure for I on our 
 first come ; I have no wish to pass beyond that drawbridge ; like a 
 cage bird , I have grow accustomed to my prison . since the bad weather 
 I have even cease my ramble in the shrubbery and on the grass - grow 
 terrace : the path to the sea have be slippery with mud ; besides I hate 
 that melancholy winter sea , always threaten or complain . 

 I stay within door for day together , without pleasure or profit , 
 read old play and novel which I throw aside , or put a few 
 stitch into useless tambour work ; I who could formerly not live a day 
 within door , nor do whatever I set to do without childish 
 strenuousness ! 

 these two or three day past I have be try to find diversion in 
 read the history of these part , where the Brandlings - king of this 
 part of Wales in the time of King Arthur , crusader later , and great 
 baron fight at Crecy and at Agincourt - once play so great a part , 
 and now they have dwindle into common smuggler , for ' tis my grow 
 persuasion that such be the real trade hide under the name of pilchard 
 fishing - defrauder of the King 's Exchequer , and who know ? for all 
 Hubert 's rank as magistrate , no well than thief and outlaw 
 ruffian . 

 Hubert have be show I the family archive . he lay great store by 
 all these deed and paper , and one be surprised in a house so utterly 
 give over to neglect , to find anything in such good order . he save the 
 archive himself he tell I , when   as I have always forget to note 
 down   the library of the castle be burn down on the occasion of my 
 late brother - in - law 's wake ; a barbarous funereal feast habitual in 
 these part , and during which a drunken guest set fire to the drapery 
 of the coffin . I do not ask whether the body of Sir Thomas , which have 
 be bring by sea from Bristol after his violent end there , have be 
 destroy in this extraordinary pyre ; and I judge that it be from 
 Eustace 's silence and Hubert 's evident avoidance of the point . perhaps 
 he be conscious that his effort be direct to a different object , 
 for it be well nigh miraculous how he should have save those shelf 
 full of document and all that number of valuable book bind with the 
 Brandling arm . 

 " you must have risk your life in the flame ! " I exclaim with 
 admiration at the man 's heroism . 

 he bid I look at his hand , which indeed bear trace of dreadful 
 burning . 

 " I care about my ancestor , " he answer , " perhaps more , to say the 
 truth , than for my living kinsfolk . besides , " he add , " I ought to say 
 that I have take the precaution to remove the most valuable book before 
 give over the library to their drunken rite . as it be , they burn 
 my poor dead nephew to ash like the phoenix of the Poets , only that 
 he , poor lad , will not arise from they till the day of judgment ! " 


  January 12 , 1773 . 

 a horrid circumstance have just happen , and oddly enough in that same 
 library which have be burn , all but its ancient wall , at my 
 brother - in - law 's funeral , I have persuade Eustace to turn it into a 
 laboratory , for I think a certain melancholy may be due to the restless 
 idleness in which he have be live ever since we come here . in 
 build one of the furnace the mason have to make a deep cavity in the 
 wall ; and there , what should appear , but a number of skeleton , nine or 
 ten , wall up erect in the thickness of the masonry . I be take the 
 air on the terrace outside , and hear the man 's exclamation , run to 
 the spot . it be a ghastly sight . but my uncle Simon , who be smoke 
 his pipe in the great empty room , burst into uncontrollable laughter 
 over my horror ; and go up to a little heap of moulder bone which 
 have fall out with the plaster , pick up a green and spongy shin and 
 bring it to I . " here be some material for Eustace ready to hand ! " he 
 cry with a vile oath . " let he try whether he can bring these pretty 
 fellow to life again in his devil 's cooking pot , " and he thrust the 
 horrid object under my nose . 

 at this moment Hubert appear , and , with his wolf 's eye , take in all 
 at a glance . 

 " Fie , fie , " he cry , strike that horrid relic out of his brother 's 
 hand , " be these fit sight for a lady , you hog , Simon ? " and take I 
 brusquely by the hand , lead I away , and , in the pantry , try to make 
 I swallow a dose of brandy , with much petting and cosset . 

 " our ancestor , dear Lady Brandling   for so he affect to call I , be 
 but rough soldier , though prince of these part ; and the relic of 
 their game scarce fit for your pretty eye . but have a sup of brandy , 
 my dear , ' twill set you right . " 

 I loathe the mealy - mouthed black creature , methought , bad than 
 drunken Simon , and bad almost than those horrid dead man . 

 " no , thank you , uncle , " I say , " my stomach be strong than you think . 
 my ancestor also be soldier - soldier on the field of battle - though 
 I never hear of their bricke up their enemy in the house wall . " 

 " Nay , nay , " he cry , " but that be an evil habit of those day , dear 
 Lady Brandling , hundred and thousand of year ago , when we be 
 sovereign prince . " 

 " hundred and thousand of year ago ? " I answer , for I hat he at 
 that moment , " ah well , I have think it be scarce so far remove from 
 we as all that . " 


  January 31 , 1773 . 

 a curious feeling have be torment I of late , of self - reproach for I 
 scarce know what , of lack of helpfulness , almost of disloyalty towards 
 my husband . since we have be here , indeed I think ever since the first 
 announcement of Sir Thomas 's death , Eustace have alter in his manner 
 towards I ; a whole side of his life have , I feel , be hide from I . 
 have I a right to it ? this be what have be debate in my mind . a man 
 may have concern which it be no duty of his to share with a wife ; not 
 because she be only a wife , and he a husband , for my dear Eustace 's mind 
 be too enlightened and generous , too thoroughly imbue with the noble 
 doctrine of our day , to admit of such a difference . but there be one 
 of my mother 's saying which have work very deeply into my mind . it be 
 on the eve of my wedding . " remember , dear little Penelope , " she say , 
 " that no degree of love , however pure , noble , and perfect , can really 
 make two soul into one soul . all appearance to the contrary be a mere 
 delusion and dangerous . every human soul have its own nature , its 
 necessary law , and demand liberty and privacy to develop they ; and 
 be this not the case , no soul , however loving and courageous , could 
 ever help another , for it would have no strength , no understanding , no 
 life , with which to bring help . remember this , my child , till the moment 
 come when you shall understand it , and , I hope , act in the light of its 
 comprehension . " 

 well , methink that ever since that day when the letter arrive which 
 change our destiny , I have not merely remember , but learn to 
 understand these word . so that I have fight against the soreness of 
 feel that , on some matter at least , I be exclude from my husband 's 
 confidence . after two year of such utter openness of heart as have 
 exist between we three - our mother , Eustace , and , young and weak 
 though I feel , myself - such free discussion of all idea and interest , 
 of his scientific work , even to detail which I could not grasp , after 
 this there be undoubtedly something strange in the absolute reserve , 
 indeed the utter silence , he maintain about everything concern his 
 family , his property , and our position and circumstance , the more so 
 that , at the time of our marriage he often confide to I detail 
 connect with it . thus , in that past which seem already so remote , he 
 have often describe to I this very house , these very room , tell I his 
 childish solitude and terror , and speak quite freely of the unhappy 
 life of his mother by the side of his cruel and violent father , and 
 among his father 's brutal besotte companion ; he have tell I of the 
 horrid heartlessness with which his only brother play upon his 
 sensitiveness and abuse his weakness , and of the evil habit , the 
 odious scene of intemperance and violence from which he be screen 
 by his poor mother , and finally save by her generous decision to part 
 with he and have he educate abroad . he have mention the continual 
 brawl of his uncle . but since his succession to the property , never a 
 word have allude to any of these thing , nor to the knowledge he have 
 give I of they . once or twice , when I have mention , quite naturally , 
 his dead brother , his mother   I be actually occupy her apartment , 
 sleep in her bed , and only yesterday Eustace spend the afternoon 
 mending and tune her harpsichord for I , he have let the subject drop , 
 or divert the conversation in an unmistakable manner . Nay , what be 
 more significant , and more puzzling , Eustace have never give I a clue 
 to whether he know of the arrangement , the life , we should find here ; 
 before our arrival , he have never mention that the castle be , to all 
 intent and purpose , in the hand of his kinsman ; nor have he drop a 
 word in explanation of so extraordinary a circumstance . and I have never 
 ask he whether he know to what manner of life he be bring I , 
 whether he intend it to continue , what be his reason and plan . I 
 have respect his reserve . but have I be perfectly loyal in hide my 
 wonder , my disappointment , my sorrow ? 


  February 5 , 1773 . 

 I can not make up my mind about Uncle Hubert . be he our fellow - victim or 
 the ringleader of this usurping gang of ruffian ? the more I see , the 
 more I hesitate upon the point . but , as time go on , I hesitate less 
 and less in my dislike of he , although I own it often seem 
 unreasonable and ungrateful . the man not only try to make himself 
 agreeable to we , but I almost think he feel kindly . he have a real 
 appreciation of Eustace 's genius ; and , indeed , it be this , most likely , 
 which sometimes cause I to think well , though I fear never kindly , 
 of he . it be quite wonderful how he light up whenever he can get 
 eustace   no easy matter   to speak on philosophic subject ; it be a kind 
 of transfiguration , and all the obliquity and fawningness about the 
 creature vanishe . he have a good knowledge of mathematic , Eustace tell 
 I , be a skilful mechanic , and would evidently enjoy assist my 
 husband in his experiment if he would let he . towards myself he have , I 
 do believe , a kind of sentiment , and what be bad , of paternal 
 sentiment ! worse because my whole nature recoil from he . he be most 
 passionately fond of music , play fairly on the viol , and take quite a 
 childish pleasure in make I sing and play . I ought indeed to be 
 grateful towards he , for his presence , although distasteful I think to 
 both of we , be a boon , in so far as it relieve the strain of feel 
 that there be a secret - a something which have come between my husband 
 and I . alas , alas ! that the presence of a third person , of a person 
 such as Hubert , should ever have come to be a boon ! but I dare not face 
 this thought . it be bad than any of the bad reality and bad 
 probability of this bad place . 

 if only Hubert would not make I present , force I thus to feel how 
 hugely I hate have to accept anything from he . it begin   almost as a 
 bribe , methought   in the shape of a fine gold watch and equipage the 
 very day after Uncle Edward 's misbehaviour . then , some time after , a cut 
 of handsome Lyons brocade , enough for a gown , though Heaven know there 
 be no occasion for such finery at St. Salvat 's ! and this evening , after 
 listen to I through some song of Monsieur Piccini , and teach I 
 some of the plaintive air of the Welsh peasantry , the man draw from his 
 coat a fine shagreen case , which prove to contain a string of large and 
 very regularly shape and sorted pearl . I feel I could not bear it . 
 " be they pearl of my mother - in - law 's ? " I ask without thank he , 
 and in a tone anything , I fear , but grateful . instead of be angry and 
 turn green , as I expect , Uncle Hubert look merely very much hurt 
 and answer : 

 " have they be heirloom it would have be your husband , not your 
 uncle , to hand they you . eustace be the head of the family , not I. " 

 " the less say about the family and its head , " I answer hotly , " the 
 well , Uncle Hubert , " and I feel sorry the moment after . 

 " I do not deny it , " he reply very quietly , in a manner which cut I to 
 the quick . " at any rate these pearl be mine , and I hope you will 
 accept they from I as a token of admiration and regard - or , " and he 
 fall back into his cringing yet banter manner which I hate so , ' shall 
 we say , as be write on the fair cup and saucer , ' a present for a 
 good girl from Bristol . ' " 

 how I hate Uncle Hubert ! 

 I have leave the pearl on the harpsichord . this morning I find the green 
 shagreen case on the dress table ; Hubert evidently refuse to let I 
 off his present . but I doubt whether I shall ever muster up civility 
 enough to wear they . ' tis a pity , for lack of wear make pearl 
 tarnish . 

 I have just open the case to look at they . this be very curious . the 
 case be new , have the smell of new leather ; and the diamond clasp look 
 recently furbish , even to a little chalk about it . but - the man must 
 be oddly ignorant in such matter - the pearl , see by daylight , have 
 evidently not come from a jeweller 's . for they be yellow , tarnished , 
 unworn for year ; they have be lie in this house , and , heirloom or 
 not , there be something wrong about they . 

 I have be glad of a pretext , however poor , of return they . 

 " Uncle Hubert , " I say , hand he the case , " you must put these pearl 
 in a box with hole in it , and put they back in the sea . " 

 I never see so strange a look in a man 's face . " back in the sea ! what do 
 you mean , dear Lady Brandling ? " he cry . " why do you suspect these 
 pearl of come from the sea ? " 

 " all pearl do come from the sea , I think , and that be why sea water 
 cure they when they have get tarnish from lack of wear . " 

 he burst into an awkward laugh , " to think , " he say , " that I have 
 actually forget that pearl be not a kind of stone , that they come 
 out of shell fish . " 


  February 20 , 1773 . 

 God help I and forgive my ingratitude for the great , unspeakable 
 blessing he have give I . but this also , it would seem , be to become a 
 source of estrangement between I and Eustace . ever since this great 
 hope have arise in my soul , there have come with it the belief also that 
 this child , which he use so greatly to long for   vainly try to hide 
 his disappointment out of gentleness towards I   would bring we once 
 more together . perhaps it be wicked graspingness to count upon two 
 happiness when one have be grant to I . be this as it may , my 
 ingratitude have be horribly chasten . I tell my husband this morning . 
 he be surprised ; take aback ; but give no sign of joy . " be you quite 
 sure ? " he repeat anxiously . and on my reiterate my certainty , he 
 merely ejaculate , " ah ... ' tis an unfortunate moment , " and add , 
 catch himself up , " the good will be that I send you , when the time 
 approach , to Bristol or to Bath . I shall be sure of your being well 
 see to there . " 

 I nearly burst into tear , not at this proposal , but at the evident 
 manner in which the thought of our child suggest only small 
 difficulty and worry to his mind . " to Bristol ! to Bath ! " I 
 exclaim , " and you speak as if you intend leave I there alone ! but 
 Eustace , why should not our child be bear in your house and mine ? " I 
 feel my eye blaze with long pen up impatience . 

 " because , my dear little Penelope , " he answer coldly and sharply , " it 
 be the custom of your country and mine that lady of your condition 
 should have every advantage of medical skill and attendance , and 
 therefore remove to town for such purpose . " 

 " would it not be worth while to break through such a habit , " I ask , 
 " to have a physician here at the proper time ? besides , " I add , " I 
 promise , and in your presence , that should this event ever take place , 
 I should send for my mother . " 

 " I shall be delighted , " he answer , always in the same tone , " if my 
 mother - in - law find it worth while to make so great a journey as that 
 from Switzerland to Bath - for Bath be the more suitable place , upon 
 consideration . but see that , as I have twice say before , you will 
 have every care you may require , I really think the suggestion would be 
 a mere indiscretion - to all party . " 

 he be busy arrange the instrument in his laboratory . I should have 
 leave he ; but I feel my heart swell and overflow , and remain stand 
 by he in silence . 

 " it be too cold for you here , " he say very tenderly after a moment , 
 " have you not well go back to your room ? " 

 I could not answer . but after a moment , " Eustace , Eustace ! " I cry , 
 " do not   you care ? be not   you glad ? why do you talk only of plan and 
 difficulty ? why do you want to send I away , to leave I all alone 
 when our child be bear ? " 

 he give a sigh , partly of impatience . " do not let we discuss this again , 
 dear Penelope , " he say , " and oblige I by not talk nonsense . of 
 course I be glad ; it go without say . and if I send you away - if I 
 deprive myself of the joy of be with you , believe I , it be because I 
 can not help it . my presence be require here . and now , " he add , 
 put his arm round my waist , but with small genuine tenderness , 
 methought , " now let we have do with this subject , my dear , and do I 
 the kindness to return to your warm room . " 

 o God , o God , take pity on my loneliness ! for with the dearest of 
 mother , and what be once the kind of husband , and the joy of this 
 come child , I be surely the loneliest of woman ! 


  February 27 , 1773 . 

 God forgive I , I say again , and with great reason , for I now 
 recognise that my sense of loneliness and of estrangement ; all my 
 selfish misery , have be the fruit of my own lack of courage and of 
 love kindness . this child , though yet unborn , have bring I strength 
 and counsel ; the certainty of its existence seem , in a way , to have 
 change I ; and I look back upon myself such as I be but a few week 
 ago , as upon some one different , an immature girl , without 
 responsibility or power to help . and now I feel as if I could help , 
 and as if I must . for I be the strong of the two . what have befall 
 Eustace ? I can but vaguely guess ; yet this I know , that without my help 
 eustace be a lost man ; his happiness , his courage , his honour , go or 
 go . my mother use to tell we , I remember , the legend of a clan in her 
 own country , where the future chieftain , on come of age , be put into 
 possession of some secret so terrible that it turn he from a 
 light - hearted boy into a serious and joyless man . St. Salvat 's have 
 work on Eustace in some similar manner . on arrive here , or , indeed , 
 before arrive , he have learn something which have poison his life 
 and sap his manhood . what that something be , I can in a measure 
 guess , and it seem to I as if I ought to help he either to struggle 
 with or else to bear it , although bear it seem little to my taste . 
 it be some time since I have see through the silly fiction of the 
 pilchard fishery of St. Salvat 's ; and although I have not be out of my 
 way to manifest this knowledge , I have not hide it , methink , from 
 Eustace or even from Uncle Hubert . the room and room cram with 
 apparent lumber , the going and come of carrier ' wagon   so that my 
 husband 's case of instrument and my new pianoforte arrive from 
 Bristol as by magic , the amount of money   the very maid gamble for 
 gold in the laundry   in this beggarly house ; and the nocturnal and 
 mysterious nature of the fishing expedition , would open the eye even 
 of one as foolish and inexperienced as I ; nor be any care take to 
 deceive I . St. Salvat 's Castle be simply the headquarters of the 
 smuggling business , preside over by my uncle and doubtless 
 constitute the chief resource of this poor untilled corner of the 
 world . break his Majesty 's law and defraud his Exchequer be 
 certainly offence ; but I confess that they seem to I pardonable one , 
 when one think of the deed of violence by which our ancestor mostly 
 make their fortune , let alone the art of intrigue by which so many of 
 our polished equal increase theirs . perhaps it be be tell the 
 prowess of our Alpine smuggler , carry their pack through 
 snow - field and along hide crevasse , and let themselves down from 
 immeasurable rock ; perhaps it be these story tell to I in my 
 childhood by the farm servant which have leave I thus lax in my 
 notion . this much I know , that the certainty of the uncle be 
 smuggler , even if smuggling involve , as it must , occasional act of 
 violence against the officer of the Excise , do not increase the 
 loathing which I feel towards the uncle . nor would this fact , take in 
 itself , suffice to explain Eustace 's melancholy . what prey upon his 
 mind must rather be the disgust and disgrace of find his house and 
 property put to such us by such man . 

 for Eustace be a man of thought , not of action ; and I can understand 
 that the problem how to change this order of thing must weigh upon he 
 in proportion as he feel himself so little fit for its solution . 
 with this be doubtless mingle a sense of responsibility towards I , and 
 perhaps   for his dreamer 's conscience be most tender   of exaggerated 
 shame for bring I here . if this be as I think , it be for I to help 
 my husband to break the bad spell which St. Salvat 's have cast over he . 
 and I will and can ! the child will help I . for no child of mine shall 
 ever be bear into slavery and disgrace such as , I feel , be ours . 




 III 


  April 10 , 1773 . 

 the spring gale have begin , and with they the " fishing " as it be 
 call , have become constant . rough weather , I suppose , be favourable to 
 the smuggling operation , as it leave this terrible coast in the hand 
 of those who know every inch of its reef and rock and quicksand , and 
 who possess the only safe landing - place for mile , the little cove 
 beyond the churchyard in the glen . 

 be this as it may , these expedition have leave the castle wonderfully 
 peaceful ; the sound of brawl no long rise perpetually from the big 
 hall and the courtyard . the uncle be away for day and night at a 
 time , take with they every male creature about the place . even Hubert , 
 seize , as he say , by a fit of his master passion , have not appear for 
 day . the sluttish maid and the old rheumatic gardener be lodge in 
 the outhouse , or be take a holiday in the neighbouring village ; and 
 the house have be , methink , give over to ourselves and Mrs. Davies , 
 who wait assiduously in her silent manner , and no doubt keep the 
 uncle inform of all our doing . it be three day that Eustace and I 
 have be alone together . but the knowledge of what he will not 
 confess , and of what I have not the courage to ask , sit between we at 
 meal , make we constrain during our walk , even like the presence of 
 a living stranger . 


  April 20 , 1773 . 

 the gale have be get bad and bad ; and the sound of the sea , 
 the wind in the tree and chimney , have be fill the castle with 
 lamentation . this evening , at the harpsichord , I could no long hear , 
 or at least no long listen to , my own voice . I shut the instrument and 
 sit idle by the fire , while every beam and rafter strained and groan 
 like the timber of a ship in the storm . my husband also be quite 
 unstrung . he walk up and down , without a word . suddenly a thought 
 enter my mind ; it be extraordinary and inhuman that it should not have 
 do so before . 

 " I hope Hubert and the uncle be not out to - night , " I say . 

 Eustace stop in his walking , straight before the fire and star long 
 into it . 

 " perhaps they have return already , " he answer . " I hope so , " and with 
 the excuse of some note to put in order in his study , he bid I 
 good - night and hop I should go to bed soon . 

 but shall I be able to sleep on such a night ! 


  April 21st . 

 I understand now . but , Good God , what new and frightful mystery and 
 doubt ! 

 it be late when I go to bed last night ; and , against all expectation , 
 I fall into a heavy sleep . I be awaken out of dream of shipwreck by 
 a great light in my eye . the moon have rise , almost full , and dispel 
 the cloud . and the storm be over . indeed , I think it be the 
 stillness , after so many day of rag noise , which have waken I as 
 much as the moonlight . I be alone ; for Eustace , these week past , have 
 sleep in the closet next door , as he read deep into the night and say 
 my condition require unbroken rest . it be so beautiful and peaceful , I 
 seem draw into the light . I rise and stand in the big uncurtained 
 window , which , with its black mullion cast their shadow on the 
 floor , look more than ever like a great glass cage . it be so lovely 
 and mild that I throw back a lattice and look out : the salt smell and 
 the sea breeze leave by the storm rush up and meet I . beyond the tree 
 the moonlight be strike upon the white of the breaker , for though 
 the gale be over the sea be still pound furiously upon the reef . 
 my eye have seek at first the moon , the moonlit offing ; to my 
 amazement , they fall the next instant on a great ship quite close to 
 shore . she seem in rapid movement , pitch and roll with all her 
 might ; but after a moment I notice that she do not move forward , but 
 remain stationary above the same tree top . she seem enchant , or 
 rather she look like some captive creature struggle desperately to 
 get free . I be too much take up by the strangeness of the sight to 
 reflect that no sane crew would have anchor in such a spot , and no 
 anchorage have hold in the turmoil of such a sea . moreover , I know too 
 little of such matter to guess that the ship must have run upon one of 
 the reef , and that every breaker must lift she up to crash and shiver 
 herself upon its sawlike edge ; indeed I have no notion of any danger ; and 
 when I see light on the ship , and other move against her hull , my 
 only think be that I be watch the smuggler at their work . as I 
 do so , a sudden doubt , of which I feel ashamed , leap into my mind ; 
 and , feel indignant with myself the while , I creep to the door of the 
 dressing - room . be Eustace there ? I noiselessly turn the handle and 
 push open the door . I can not say what be my feeling , whether most 
 of shame or of a kind of terror when , by the light of a lamp , I see my 
 husband kneel by the side of his camp bed , with his head bury in 
 the pillow , like a man in agony . he be completely dress . on hear 
 the door open he start to his foot and cry in a terrible voice " what 
 do you want with I ? " 

 I be overwhelmed with shame at my evil thought . 

 " O Eustace , " I answer foolishly , and without thinking of the bearing 
 of my word , " the ship ! I only want to call you to look at the ship . " 
 he pay no attention to my presence . 

 " the ship ! the ship ! " he cry - " be she go ? " and rush to the window . 

 the ship , sure enough , be go . where she have be her three great 
 mast still project from the water . slowly they disappear , and 
 another sharp black point , which must have be her bowsprit as she 
 heel over , rise and sink in its turn . 

 how long we stand , Eustace and I , silently watch , I can not tell . 

 " there be light alongside , " I exclaim , " the uncle ' boat must 
 have be there . there have be time to save the crew . o Eustace , let we 
 run down and help ! " 

 but Eustace hold I very tight . " do not be a fool , Penelope . you will 
 catch your death of cold and endanger the child . the people of the ship 
 be save or drown by this time . " 


  June 12 , 1773 . 

 but a few month ago I write in this diary that no child of mine should 
 ever be bear into slavery and dishonour . alas , poor foolish Penelope ! 
 what ill - omen word be those ! and yet I can not believe that God 
 would have visit their presumptuousness upon I with such horrid 
 irony . may God , who know all thing , must know that those word be 
 even more justified than I dream of at the time : the slavery and 
 dishonour surpass my most evil apprehension . indeed , may it not be 
 that in take away our child while yet unborn he do so in his mercy to 
 it and to its wretched parent ? surely . and if my husband surprise I , 
 some month back , by his indifference in the face of what we be about 
 to gain , ' tis he , perhaps , who be surprised in his turn at the strange 
 resignation with which I take my loss . for indeed , I be resign , be 
 acquiescent , and , below the regret which come shudder across I , I 
 feel a marvellous peacefulness in the depth of my being . no ! no child 
 should ever be bear in such a house , into such a life as this .... 

          

 I be still shatter in body   I understand that for day recovery be 
 give up as hopeless , and my mind seem misty , and like what a ghost 's 
 might be , after so many hour of unconsciousness , and of what , have it 
 endure , would have be call death . but little by little shred of 
 recollection be come back to I , and I will write they down . some 
 strangely sweet one . the sense , even as life be slip away , that 
 all Eustace 's love and tenderness have return ; that it be he   for no 
 physician could be get , or be allow , in this dreadful place   he 
 himself who wrestle for I with death , and bring I back to life . 

 moment return to my memory of surpass , unspeakable sweetness , which 
 penetrate through all pain : be lift in his arm , handle like a 
 child ; see his eye , which seem to hold and surround I like his 
 arm ; and hear his word as when he thank God , over and over again , 
 and almost like one demente , for have cause he to study medicine . I 
 feel I be re - enter life upon the strong , full tide of incomparable 
 love . 

 let I not seem ungrateful , for I be not . most strangely there have 
 mingle in this great flood of life - give tenderness the sense also of 
 the affection of poor Mrs. Davies . I call she poor , because there be , 
 I know not why , something oddly pathetic in her sudden devotion to I . 
 when I meet her wild eye grow quite tender and hear her crooning 
 exclamation in her unintelligible language , I have , even in the midst of 
 my own weakness , the sort of half pity gratitude which we feel for 
 the love of an animal , of something strong and naturally savage , grow 
 very gentle towards one . 


  July 5 , 1773 . 

 be that hideous thing true ? do it ever happen ? or be some shred of 
 nightmare return ever and again out of the black depth of my 
 sickness ? it come and go , and every time new doubt - hope it may be 
 a dream , fear it may be reality - come with it . 

 it be three day after the shipwreck ; the weather have calm , and for 
 the first time I venture abroad into the park . that much and a little 
 more be real , and bear in my mind the indescribable quality of 
 certainty . I have wander down the glen and through the churchyard , and 
 I remember pause before the great stone cross , cover with curious 
 basket work pattern , and wonder whether when it be make - a thousand 
 year ago - woman about to be mother have feel as great perplexity and 
 loneliness as I , and at the same time , as great joy . I cross the piece 
 of boggy meadow , vivid green in the fitful sunshine , and climb upon 
 the sea - wall and sit down . I be tired ; and the solitude , the sunshine , 
 the faint silken rustle of the sea on the reef , the salt smell - all 
 fill I with a languid happiness quite unspeakable . all this I know , I 
 be certain of , as the scratching of my pen ; in fact , those moment on 
 the sea - wall be , in a manner , the late thing of which I have vivid 
 certainty ; all that come later - my illness , the news of my miscarriage , 
 my recovery , and even this present moment , seem comparatively unreal . 
 I do not know how long I may have sit there . I be listen to the sea , 
 to the wind in my hair , and watch the foam run in little feathery 
 ball along the sand , when I hear voice , and see three man wad 
 among the rock a little way off , as if in search of something . my eye 
 follow they lazily , and then I see close under I , what I have take at 
 first for a heap of seaweed and sea refuse cast upon the sand , but 
 which , as my eye fix it , become - or methought it become - something 
 hideous and terrible ; so that for very horror I could not shriek . and 
 then , while my eye be fix on it , methought   for as I write it seem 
 a dream   the three man wad over in its direction , and one silently 
 point it out to the other . they come round , one turn a moment , and 
 instead of a human face , I see under his loop - up hat a loosely fitting 
 black mask . then they gather round that thing the three of they , and 
 touch it with a boat - hook , mutter to each other . then one stoop 
 down and do I know not what , stuff , as he do so , something into the 
 pocket of his coat , and then put out a hand to one of his companion , 
 receive back something narrow , which catch a glint of sun . they all 
 three stoop together ; methought the water against the sand and the 
 pale foam heap suddenly change colour , but that must surely be my 
 nightmare . 

 " well like that , " a voice say in English . between they they raise 
 the thing up and carry it through the shallow water to a boat moor 
 by the rock . and then my voice become loosened . I give a cry , which 
 seem to echo all round , and I jump down from the sea - wall , and fly 
 across the meadow and tear up the glen , till I fall full length by the 
 neglect pond with the break leaden nymph . for as they take it up , 
 the thing have divide in two , and somehow I have know the one be a 
 mother and the other a child ; one be I , and the other I still carry 
 within I . and the voice which have say " well like that " be Hubert 's . 
 but as I write , I know it must have be a vision of my sickness . 

          

 " Eustace , " I ask , " how do it begin ? do I dream - or do you find I 
 lie by the fountain on the terrace - the fountain of your poor water 
 snake ? " 

 " forget it , dearest , " Eustace say , very quietly and sweetly , and with 
 the old gentle truthfulness in his eye . " you must have over - walk that 
 hot morning and get a sunstroke or faint with fatigue . we do find you 
 by the fountain - that be to say , our good Mrs. Davies do . " and davy 
 merely nod . 


  July 15 , 1773 . 

 shall I ever know whether it really happen ? methink that have I 
 certainty I could face , stand up to , it . but to go on sink and 
 weltering in this hideous doubt ! 


  August 1 , 1773 . 

 the certainty have come ; and God in Heaven , what undreame certainty 
 besides ! I do not really want it , though I tell myself I do . for I 
 feel that Mrs. davy know , that she be watch her opportunity to 
 tell I ; and I , a coward , evade what I must some day learn . at last it 
 have come . 

 it be this morning . this morning ! it seem week and month ago - a 
 whole lifetime pass since ! she be brush my hair , one of the many 
 service require by my weakness , and which she perform with wonderful 
 tenderness . we see one another 's face , but only reflect in the mirror ; 
 and I recognise when she be go to speak . 

 " Lady Brandling , " she say in her odd Welsh way - " Lady Brandling fall 
 ill because she see some thing from the sea - wall . " 

 I know what she mean - for be not my own thought for ever go over 
 that same ground ? but the sense of be surround by enemy , the 
 whole horrid mystery about this accursed place , have teach I caution 
 and even cunning . davy have be as a mother to I in my illness ; but I 
 remember my first impression of her unfriendliness towards Eustace and 
 I , and of her be put to spy upon we . so I affect not to 
 understand ; and indeed , her singular mixture of English and Welsh , her 
 outlandish mode of address , give some countenance to the pretence . 

 " what do you mean , davy ? " I ask , but without look up in the glass 
 for fear of meet her eye there . " what have the sea - wall to do with my 
 illness ? it be not there you find I when I faint . you tell I it 
 be by the fountain . " 

 the old woman take a paper from her stay , and out of it a muddy piece 
 of linen which she spread out on the dressing - table in front of I . it 
 be a handkerchief of mine ; and I understand that she have find it , 
 treasure it as a sign of what I have witness . the place , the moment , 
 might mean my death - warrant ; for what I think I see have be really 
 see . 

 " it be on the sea - wall the morning that Lady Brandling faint in the 
 shrubbery , " she answer . and I feel that her eye be on my face , 
 ask what I have see that day . 

 I make a prodigious effort over myself . 

 " and why have you keep it in that state instead of wash it ? do 
 you - be it pick up then or only now ? I suppose some one else find 
 it ? " 

 merciful God ! how every word of that last sentence beat itself out in my 
 heart and throat ! - and yet I hear the word pronounce lightly , 
 indifferently . 

 " I pick it up myself , my lady , " answer Mrs. Davies . " I go down to 
 the sea - wall after I have put Lady Brandling to bed . I think she might 
 have leave something there . I think I should like to go there before 
 the other come . I think Lady Brandling have see something . I want 
 Lady Brandling to tell I truly if she see something on the sea - wall . " 

 I feel it be a struggle , perhaps a struggle for life and death between 
 she and I . I take a comb in my hand , to press it and steady I ; and I 
 look up in the mirror and face davy 's eye , ready , I know , to fix 
 themselves on mine . " perhaps I may answer your question later , davy , " 
 I say . " but first you must answer mine : be I right in think that you 
 be set to spy upon my husband and I from the moment we first come to 
 St. Salvat 's ? " 

 a great change come over Davies 's face . whatever her intention , she 
 have not expect this , and do not know how to meet it . I feel that , 
 be her intention evil , I now hold she in my hand , powerless for the 
 time be . 

 but to my infinite surprise , and after only a short silence , she look 
 into my eye quite simply and answer without hesitate . 

 " Lady Brandling be right . I be set to spy on Lady Brandling at the 
 beginning . I do not love Lady Brandling at the beginning ; her husband 
 be take the place of Sir Thomas . but I love Lady Brandling now . " 

 I could have swear that it be true , for she have show it throughout my 
 illness . but I keep my counsel and answer very coldly , 

 " it be not a question whether you love I or not , davy . you 
 acknowledge that you be the spy of Mr. Hubert and his brother . and if 
 you be not spy for their benefit , why be you watch I as I 
 come up the glen the day I be take ill ? why do you go to the sea - wall 
 to see in case I have leave anything behind ; and why do you treasure this 
 handkerchief as a proof that I have be there ? " 

 Mrs. Davies hesitate ; but only , I believe , because she find it 
 difficult to make her situation clear . 

 " Lady Brandling must try and understand , " she answer . " I be not 
 spy for Mr. Hubert . I have not spy for Mr. Hubert for a long 
 while . I keep the handkerchief to show Lady Brandling that I know what 
 have make her faint that day . also to show she that other do not know . 
 Lady Brandling be safe . she must know that they do not yet know . if they 
 know what Lady Brandling perhaps shall have see , Lady Brandling and her 
 husband be dead people , like the people in the ship ; dead like Sir 
 Thomas . " 

 dead like Sir Thomas ! I repeat to myself . but I still keep my eye 
 fix on hers in the glass , where she stand behind I , brush in hand . 

 " davy , " I say , " you must explain if I be to understand . you tell I 
 you love I now though you do not love I at first . you tell I you 
 be place to spy over I by Mr. Hubert , and you tell I that you be 
 not spy for he when you go to see whether I have leave anything on 
 the sea - wall . you have be good and kind beyond word during my 
 sickness , and I desire to believe in you . but I dare not . why should I 
 believe that you have really change so completely ? why should I believe 
 that you be with I , and against they ? " 

 Mrs. Davies 's face change strangely . it seem to I to express deep 
 perplexity and almost agonise helplessness . she twist her finger and 
 raise her shoulder . she be wrestle with my unbelief . suddenly she 
 lean over the dressing table close to I . 

 " listen , " she say . " I have learn thing since then . Hubert tell I 
 lie , but I learn . I be against they because I know they try to 
 kill my son . " 

 a look of incredulity must have pass over my face , for she add , 

 " aye ; they only try to kill one of my son , Hugh , who I think have 
 go overboard , whom they think they have drown , but who have come and 
 tell I . but - " and she fix her eye on mine , " they do kill my 
 other son ; I know that now . my other son of the heart , not the belly . 
 and that son , my Lady , be your brother - in - law , Sir Thomas Brandling . " 

 and then davy make a strange imperious gesture , and I must need 
 listen to her talk . I have since piece it together out of her odd 
 enigmatic sentence . my late brother - in - law , after year of passive 
 connivance in their doing , which pay for his debauchery in foreign 
 land , become restive , or be suspect by his uncle , and condemn by 
 they to death as a danger to their evil association . Sir Thomas be 
 decoy home , and , accord to their habit in case of mutiny , take 
 out , a prisoner , to the deep part of the channel , and drown . the 
 report be spread that he have be kill in a drunken brawl at Bristol , 
 a show of legal proceeding be institute by his uncle in that city 
  naturally to no effect , there be no murderer there to discover , and 
 a corpse bring back by they for solemn burial at St. Salvat 's . but 
 instead of be inter in the family vault , the body of the false Sir 
 Thomas be destroy by the burning of the Chapel during his wake . the 
 suspicion of Mrs. Davies appear to have be awaken by this fact , 
 and by the additional one that she be not allow to see the corpse of 
 her beloved foster - son . her own son Hugh , Sir Thomas 's foster brother , 
 disappear about this time ; and Hubert appear to have make the 
 distracted mother believe that her own boy be the murderer of Sir 
 Thomas , and have meet with death at his hand ; the whole unlikely story 
 be far garnish for the poor credulous woman with a doubt that 
 the murder of her foster - son have be , in some manner , the result of a 
 conspiracy to bring about the succession of my husband . all this she 
 seem to have believe at the time of our come , and for this reason to 
 have lend herself most willingly to spy upon my husband and I , in hope 
 of get the proof of his guilt . but her suspicion gradually 
 change , and her whole attitude in the matter be utterly reverse when , 
 a few day before the wreck of the great Indiaman and my adventure on 
 the sea - wall , her son , whom she believe dead , have steal back in 
 disguise and tell she of an expedition in which the uncle have carry a 
 man to the high sea , gag and bind , and drown he : a man who be 
 not one of their crew and whose stature and the colour of whose hair 
 answer to those of the nominal master of St. Salvat 's . her son , in an 
 altercation over some booty , have let out his suspicion to my uncle , and 
 have escape death only by timely flight mask under accidental drowning 
 from a fishing boat . since this revelation davy 's devotion to the dead 
 Sir Thomas have transfer itself to Eustace and I , and her one thought 
 have become revenge against the man who have kill her darling . 

 davy tell I all this , as I say , in short , enigmatic sentence ; and I 
 scarcely know whether her tale seem to I more inevitably true or more 
 utterly false in its hideous complication of unlikely horror . when she 
 have do : 

 " davy , " I ask she solemnly , " you have be a spy , you have , by your 
 saying , be the accomplice of the most horrid criminal that ever 
 disgrace the world . why should I believe one word of what you tell I ? " 

 davy hesitate as before , then look I full in the face " if Lady 
 Brandling can not believe what it be needful that she should believe , let 
 she ask her husband whether I be tell she a lie . Lady Brandling 's 
 husband know , and he be afraid of tell she because he be afraid of 
 they . " davy have be kneel by the dressing - table , as if to make 
 herself hear to I without speak above a whisper . 

 I muster all my courage , for these last word touch I close , 
 fill I with a far more real and nearer horror than all her hideous 
 tale . 

 " davy , " I say , " kindly finish brush my hair . when it be brush I 
 can do it up myself ; and you may go and wash that handkerchief . " 

 the old woman rise from her knee without a word , and finish brush 
 my hair very carefully . then she hand I the hairpin and comb 
 ceremoniously . as she do so she murmur beneath her breath : 

 " Lady Brandling be a courageous lady . I love Lady Brandling for her 
 courage . " she curtsy and withdraw . when the door be well close on 
 she I feel I could bear the strain no more ; I lean my head on the 
 dressing table and burst into a flood of silent tear . 

 at that moment Eustace come in . " Good God ! " he say , " what be the 
 matter ? " take my hand and try to raise I up . 

 but I hide my face . " oh , Eustace , " I answer , " when I think of our 
 child ! " 

 but what I be say , God help I , be not true . 


  October 1 , 1773 . 

 what frightful suspicion be these which I have allow to creep 
 insidiously into my mind ! do he or do he not know ? do he know yet ? 
 every time we meet I feel my eye seek his face , scan his 
 feature , and furtively try to read their meaning , alas ! alas ! as if 
 he be a stranger . and I spend my day piece together bit of the 
 past , and every day they make a different and more perplexing pattern . I 
 remember his change of manner on receive the news of his brother 's 
 death , and the gloom which hang over he during our journey and after 
 our arrival here . I think then that it be the unexpected return to 
 the scene of his unhappy childhood ; and that his constraint and silence 
 with I be due to his difficulty in deal with the shocking state of 
 thing he find await he . it seem natural enough that Eustace , a 
 thinker , a dreamer even , should feel harass at his inability to clean 
 out this den of iniquity . but why have remain here ? good God , be my 
 husband a mere pensioner of all this hideousness , as his wretched 
 brother seem to have be ? and even for that miserable debauch 
 creature the day come when he turn against his master , and face 
 death , perhaps like a gentleman . death .... how unjust I be grow to 
 Eustace ! I ought to try and put myself in his place , and see thing as 
 he would see they , not with the horrified eye of a stranger . like I , 
 he may have believe at first that St. Salvat 's be merely a nest of 
 smuggler .... or he may have have only vague fear of bad , haunt he 
 like bad dream of his childhood .... 

 besides , this frightful trade in drowned man and their good have , from 
 what davy tell I , be for century the chief employment of this 
 dreadful coast . whole village , and several of the first family of the 
 country , practise it turn about with smuggling . davy be ready with a 
 string of name , she express no special horror and her conscience 
 perhaps represent that of these people ; an unlawful trade , but not 
 without its side of peril , commend it to barbarous mind like highway 
 robbery or the exploit of buccaneer , whom popular ballad treat as 
 hero . 

 but why have I recourse to such explanation ? man , even man as noble as 
 my husband , be marvellously sway by all manner of notion of honour , 
 false and barbarous , often cause they to commit crime in order to 
 screen those of their blood or of their class . some word of Hubert 's 
 keep recur in my memory , to the effect that all the Brandlings be 
 give up to what the villain call pilchard fishing , and none more 
 devotedly than Eustace 's own father . I remember and now understand the 
 tone in which he add " all of we Brandlings except this superfine 
 gentleman here . " those word mean that however great his horror of it 
 all , Eustace could not break loose from that complicity of silence . for 
 to expose the matter would be condemn all his kinsman to a shameful 
 death , to the public gallow ; it would be uncover the dishonour of 
 his dead brother , of his father , and all his race .... what right have I 
 to ask my husband to do what no other man would do in his place ? 

 but perhaps he do not know , or be not certain yet .... to what a size 
 have I allow my horrid suspicion to grow ! behold I find excuse 
 for an offence which very likely have never be commit ; and while 
 seemingly condone , condemn my husband in my mind , without give 
 he a chance of self - defence ! what a confusion of disloyalty and 
 duplicity my fear have breed in my soul ! anything be well than this ; I 
 owe it to Eustace to tell he my suspicion , and I will tell he . 


  November 2 , 1773 . 

 I have speak . o marvellous , most unexpected reward of frankness and 
 loyalty , however tardy ! the nightmare have vanish , leave paradise in 
 my soul . for inconceivable as it seem , this day , on which I learn 
 that we be prisoner , already condemn most likely , and at well doom 
 to die before very long , this day have be of unmixed , overflowing joy , 
 such as I never know or dream of . 

 Eustace , belove , that ever I could have doubt you ! and yet that very 
 doubt , that sin against our love be what have bring I such blissful 
 certainty . and even the shameful question , ask with burn cheek , 
 " do you know all ? " have be redeem , transfigure , and will remain for 
 ever in my soul like the initial bar of some ineffably tender and 
 triumphant piece of music . 

 let I go over it once more , our conversation , love ; feel it all over 
 again , feel it for ever and ever . 

 when I have speak those word , Eustace , you take my hand , and look 
 long into my face . 

 " my poor Penelope , " you say , " what dreadful thought my cowardice and 
 want of faith have bring upon you ! why do I not recognise that your 
 soul be strong enough to bear the truth ? you ought to have learn it 
 from I , as soon as I myself feel certain of it , instead of my run 
 the risk of your discover it all alone , you poor , poor little 
 child ! " 

 be ever those small word speak so greatly ? have any man be such a 
 man in his gentleness and humility ? and then you go on , beloved , and I 
 write down your word in order to feel they once more sink into my 
 heart . 

 " but Penelope , " you say , " ' twa not mere unmanly shirk , though there 
 may have be some of that mix with it . my fault lie chiefly in not 
 have be able to do without you , dearest , not have leave you safe 
 with your mother while I come over to this accursed place ; and in 
 put the suspicion I have behind I in order to bring you here . 
 nothing can wipe out that , and I be pay the just price of my 
 weakness , and see you pay it ! ... but once here , Penelope , and once 
 certain of the bad , it be impossible for I to tell you the truth . 
 impossible , because I know that if you know what I have learn , it would 
 be far more difficult for I to get you away , to get you to leave I 
 behind in this hideous place . do you remember when I propose send 
 you to Bath for our child 's birth ? it seem the last chance of save 
 you , and you resist and think I cruel and unloving ! how could I say 
 ' go ! because your life may any day be forfeit like mine , and go alone ! 
 because - well - because I be a hostage , a man condemn to death if he 
 stir , a prisoner as much as if I be chain to the wall of this 
 house . ' have I say that , you would have refuse to go , Penelope . but 
 now , my dear .... " and you bent down and kiss I very mournfully . 

 " but now , Eustace , " I answer , and I hear that my voice be solemn , 
 " but now I can stay with you , because I know as much as you do , and they 
 will soon know that I do so , even if they do not know yet . I may stay 
 with you , because I be a prisoner like you , and condemn like you . we 
 can live , because we have to die - together . " 

 Eustace , you fold I in your arm and I feel you sob . but I loosen 
 your hand and kiss they one by one , and say , " Nay , Eustace , why 
 should you grieve ? do we not love each other ? be we not together , 
 quite together , and together for always ? " 

 we be stand by the big window in my room , and as we clasp one 
 another , our eye , follow each other 's , rest on the sea above the 
 tree top . it be a silvery band under a misty silver sunset ; very sweet 
 and solemn . our soul , methought , be sail in its endless 
 peacefulness . for the first time , I be aware of what love be ; I seem 
 to understand what poetry be about and what music mean ; death , which 
 hang over we , be shrink to its true paltriness , and the eternity of 
 life somehow reveal all in one moment . I have know happiness . I thank 
 God , and belove , I thank thee also . 




 IV 


 here end the diary keep half a century ago by the woman of twenty - two , 
 who be once myself . those of whom it treat , my mother , my husband , 
 poor faithful davy and the wretched villain of St. Salvat 's , have 
 long since cease to live , and those for whose benefit I gather together 
 these memory - my son and daughter , be not yet bear at the time 
 this diary deal with . 

 in order to complete my story I can , therefore , seek only in my own 
 solitary memory ; and , stand all alone , look into that far away past 
 which only my own eye and heart be leave to descry . 

          

 after the scene with which my diary close , and when we could compare 
 all that each of we know of our strange situation , it appear to my 
 husband and I that we have everything to gain , and at all event nothing 
 to lose   since we know our life in jeopardy   by a desperate attempt to 
 escape from what be virtually our prison . Eustace have sum up our 
 position when he have say that we be hostage in the hand of the 
 uncle . for these villain , unconscious of any bond of family honour , 
 make sure that our escape would infallibly bring about the exposure of 
 their infamous practice . 

 it appear that after the murder of my brother - in - law , whom the most 
 violent of the gang have put to death on a mere threat of betrayal , the 
 uncle have take for grant that Eustace would accept some manner of 
 pension as his brother have do , and like he , leave St. Salvat 's in 
 their undisputed possession . and they have be considerably nonplus 
 when my husband declare his intention of return to Wales . the 
 perception of the blunder they have commit in get rid of my 
 brother - in - law , make they follow the guidance of Hubert , who have oppose 
 the murder of Sir Thomas , if not from humanity , at all event from 
 prudence . it be Hubert 's view that since Eustace refuse to stay away , 
 no difficulty should be put in the way of his coming , but on the 
 contrary , that he be take , so to speak , in a trap , and once at St. 
 Salvat 's , persuade or compel into become a passive , if not an 
 active , accomplice . Hubert have therefore write so pressingly about the 
 need of put the property to right , of make a new start at St. 
 Salvat 's , and of therefore bring I and settle at once in the 
 place , that Eustace have judge the rumour concern the real trade of 
 his kinsman , and his own childish suspicion , to have be mere 
 exaggeration , and imagine that the uncle , bring to order by so 
 superior a man as Hubert , be perhaps even willing to abandon the 
 dangerous business of smuggling which have be carry on almost 
 avowedly during the lifetime of his father . such be the trap lay by 
 Hubert ; and Eustace , partly from guilelessness and partly from a sense 
 of duty to St. Salvat 's , walk straight in , carry I with he as an 
 additional pledge to evil fortune . he be scarcely in , when the door , 
 like the drawbridge which have rise after our entry into that frightful 
 place , close and show he he be a prisoner . it be Hubert 's plan to 
 make use of our presence   which , moreover , put an end to his own 
 isolation among those besotte villain   in order to remove whatever 
 suspicion might exist in the outside world . the presence of a studious 
 and gentlemanly owner , of a young wife and possible child , be to 
 make people believe that a new leaf have be turn over at St. 
 Salvat 's , and that the old former page of its history be not so 
 shocking as evil report have have it . so , during the first week after 
 our arrival , and while the brother be be coerce into an attempt 
 at decent behaviour , Eustace be be importune with every kind of 
 plan which should draw he into further complicity , and compromise he 
 along with the rest of the band . Hubert , be a clergyman , have since 
 his eld brother 's death , also be the chief magistrate of the 
 district ; and , shocking to relate , this wrecker and murderer have sit in 
 judgment on poacher and footpad . have make use of this position to 
 silence any inclination to blab about St. Salvat 's , he be apprehensive 
 of this scandal get to headquarters , and therefore desirous of 
 put in his place a man as clear of suspicion and as obviously just 
 as Eustace , yet whom he imagine he could always coerce in all vital 
 matter . but Eustace see through this fine scheme at once , and 
 resolutely refuse to become a magistrate in Hubert 's place . this be 
 the first hint Hubert receive that it be useless to seek an accomplice 
 in his nephew ; and this recognition speedily grow into a fear lest 
 Eustace might become a positive danger , particularly if he ever learn 
 for certain that Sir Thomas have not be murder at Bristol , but at St. 
 Salvat 's . the situation be make more critical by the fact that on 
 discover what manner of place the castle really be , Eustace have 
 declare with perfect simplicity , his intention of take I back to my 
 mother . it be then he have learn in as many word , that both he and I 
 be prisoner , and that he , at all event , would never leave St. 
 Salvat 's alive . thus the terrible month have be spend in gauge the 
 depth of his miserable situation , in make and unmake plan for my 
 escape , for send I away without let I guess the real reason , 
 all of which have be frustrate by my miscarriage and the long illness 
 follow upon it . and meanwhile , Eustace have have to endure the constant 
 company of his gaoler Hubert , the wretch 's occasional attempt to 
 compromise he in the doing of the gang ; and what be horrid of all , 
 Hubert 's very sincere pleasure in our presence and conversation , and his 
 ceaseless attempt to strike up some kind of friendship . 

 now , the discovery that I be aware of the frightful mystery of the 
 place , have entirely alter our position : first , because it be probable 
 that the uncle now consider I as much of a danger as my husband , and 
 therefore as an equally indispensable hostage ; and secondly , because it 
 be evident that I could no long be induce to leave St. Salvat 's by 
 myself . our only remain hope be flight . but how elude the vigilance 
 of our gaoler and overcome the obstacle they have build up around we ? 
 Day after day , and night after night , Eustace and I go over and over 
 our possibility ; but they seem to diminish , and difficulty to 
 increase , the more we discuss they . the house and ground be 
 guard , and our action spy upon . we be cut off from the outer 
 world , for we have long since understand that our letter , even when 
 despatch , be intercept and read by Hubert . but the bad 
 difficulty almost be the lack of money . for some month past , Hubert 
 have take to dole it out only in trifle sum and on our asking for 
 it , and he supply our need and even fancy with such lavishness , 
 forestall they in many instance , that a request for any considerable 
 sum would have be tantamount to an intimation of our intend flight . 
 such be the external obstacle ; I find , moreover , that there be 
 other one in the character and circumstance of my poor fellow 
 prisoner . my husband 's natural incapacity for plan active measure 
 and take sudden decision , be not at all diminish , but the reverse , 
 by his fear for my safety . and his indecision be aggravate by all 
 manner of scruple ; for he consider it cowardly to leave St. Salvat 's 
 in the undisputed possession of the villain who usurp it ; and he 
 waver between a wish to punish the murder of his brother and that 
 prejudice   which I have rightly divine   against expose his kinsman and 
 his dead father to public infamy , however well earn by they . 

 this miserable state of doubt and fear be bring to a sudden close , as 
 I vaguely expect it would , by a new move on the part of our 
 adversary . it be in the spring of 1774 , and we have be at St. 
 Salvat 's about eighteen month , which feel much more like as many year . 
 one evening after supper , as I sit in my room idly listen to the 
 sound , now so terrible to I , of the sea on the rock , I be suddenly 
 arouse by the sound , no less frightful to my ear , of the brawling of 
 the uncle below . I rise in alarm , for my apartment be completely 
 isolate from the part of the house which they occupy , and for month 
 past all the intermediate door have be keep carefully close by the 
 tacit consent of both party . the noise become great ; I could 
 distinguish the drunken voice of Simon and Richard , and a sharp 
 altercation between the other one , and just as I have step , beyond my 
 own door , I hear a horrid yell of curse , a scuffle , and the door 
 opposite , which close the main staircase , fly open , and what be my 
 astonishment when my husband appear , push forward , or rather hurl 
 along by Hubert . the latter shout to I to go back , and have thrust 
 eustace into my room , he disappear as suddenly as he have come , 
 slam the door after he . as he do so I hear the key click ; he have 
 lock we in . 

 my husband be in a shocking condition , his clothe tear half off he , 
 his hair in disorder , and the blood dripping from his arm . 

 " do not be frightened , " he cry , " ' tis merely a comedy of those filthy 
 villain , " and he show I that his wound be merely a long scratch . 
 " they want to frighten we , " he add , " the drunken brute want to 
 force I through some beastly form of initiation into their gang . 
 Faugh ! " and he look at his arm , which I be wash ; " they do it with 
 a broken bottle , the hog ! and as to Hubert , and his fine save I from 
 their clutch , that , I take it , be mere play - act too , the most 
 sicken part of the business , and mean only to give you a scare . " 

 Eustace have throw himself gloomily into a chair , and I have never see 
 he before with such a look of disgust and indignation . I be by no 
 mean as certain as he that no serious mischief have be intend , or 
 that Hubert have not save he from real danger . but that new look in he 
 awake a sudden hope in I , and I determine to strike while the iron be 
 hot . " Eustace , " I say very gravely as I bind a handkerchief round his 
 arm , " if your impression be correct , this be almost the bad of our 
 misery . certainly no child of mine shall ever be bear into such ignominy 
 as this . it be high time we go . well to die like decent folk than 
 allow ourselves to be hack about by these drunken brute and push 
 through door by a theatrical villain like Hubert . " 

 " you be right , Penelope , " he answer , bury his face in his chair . 
 " I have be a miserable coward . " and , to my horror , I hear he sob 
 like a child who have be strike for the first time . 

 that decide I . but what to do ? a desperate resolution come to I . as 
 davy be brush my hair that night , I look at she once more in 
 the mirror , and , assume the most matter - of - fact tone I could muster , 
 " davy , " I say , " Sir Eustace and I have decide on leave St. 
 Salvat 's , and we be take you with we on our travel ; unless you 
 should prefer to betray we to Mr. Hubert , which be the good thing you 
 can do for yourself . " 

 what make I say those last word ? be it a desire to threaten , a 
 stupid , taunt spirit , or the reckless frankness of one who think 
 herself doom ? would it might have be the latter . but of all the 
 thing which I would give some of my life to cancel , those word be the 
 foremost ; and remorse and shame seize I as I write they . 

 but instead of answer these , the faithful creature throw herself on 
 her knee and cover my hand with kiss . " all be ready , " she say 
 after a moment , " and Lady Brandling will start on Saturday . " 

 she have be watch and plan for week , and have already think 
 out and prepare every detail of our flight with extraordinary 
 ingenuity . she place the saving of her whole lifetime at our service , 
 a considerable sum , and far beyond our need ; and she have contrive to 
 communicate with her son , the one who have every good reason to bear a 
 grudge to the villain of St. Salvat 's . my husband and I be to walk on 
 foot , and separately , out of the ground ; horse be to meet we at a 
 give point of the road , and take we , not to Swansea or Bristol , as 
 would be expect , but to Milford , there to embark for Ireland , a 
 country where all trace of we would easily be lose , and whence we could 
 easily re - enter England or take ship for the continent , as circumstance 
 should dictate at the moment . 

 the next Saturday have be fix upon for our flight , because davy 
 know that the uncle would be away on an important smuggling expedition 
 in a distant part of the coast . the maid , very few in number , and any 
 of the servant leave behind , davy have undertake to intoxicate or drug 
 into harmlessness . only one evil chance remain , and that we none of we 
 dare to mention : what if Hubert , as be sometimes the case , should stay 
 behind ? 

 I do not know how I contrive to live through the three day which 
 separate we from Saturday ; there be , apparently , moment in our life 
 so strangely unlike all other , so unnatural to our whole being , that 
 the memory refuse to register they or even bear their trace . all I know 
 be that Eustace spend all his time in his laboratory , construct 
 various appliance , an occupation which I explain as impose upon 
 himself in order to deaden any doubt or scruple , such as be natural 
 to his character , for the only opposition he have make to our plan of 
 escape be on the score that it mean leave St. Salvat 's in the hand 
 of the uncle . 

 at last come Friday night . Friday , June 26 , 1774 , davy have bring we 
 word that the uncle have go down to the boat , take all the 
 available man with they , save an old break - down ship 's carpenter , who 
 live with the keeper in the gate tower , and the husband of one of the 
 sluttish woman , who lie sick of the quinsy in the outhouse contain 
 the office . only , only , Hubert remain ! have his suspicion be 
 awaken ? be he detain on business ? be he ail ? methought it be 
 the first of these possibility . for on Friday morning he come to my 
 apartment , which be not his will not , early in the day and offer to pay 
 I a visit . but davy have the presence of mind to answer that I be 
 sick , and lest he should doubt it , to force I to bed at once , and 
 borrow certain medicine from he . after this he seek for Eustace , and 
 find he busy among his chemical instrument , his suspicion , if he 
 have any , be quiet ; and , have din , he go down to his own small 
 boat , a very fast sailer , and which he manage alone , often outstrip 
 the heavy boat of his brother and nephew . the ground be now clear . 
 my husband remain , I believe , in his laboratory ; davy go down to 
 supper with the maid , whom she have undertake to drug ; we be to meet 
 again in my room at daybreak . I can not say for sure , but I believe I 
 spend that night try to pray and wait for daylight . 

 the month be June and day come early ; ... a dull day , thin rain 
 stream down continuously , hush everything , even the sea on the 
 rock become inaudible ; only , I remember , a bird sing below my window , 
 and the note he sing long run in my ear and torment I . I have sew 
 some diamond and some piece of gold into my clothe , and those of my 
 husband and of davy . I stuff a few valuable , very childishly 
 choose , for I take my diary , some of Eustace 's love - letter , and the 
 little cap I have knit for the baby who be never bear , into my 
 pocket . and I wait . presently Eustace come ; he have a serviceable 
 sword , a large knife , and a pair of pistol in his great coat ; he hand 
 I a small pistol , show I that it be prim , and give I at the 
 same time a little fold white paper . " you be a brave woman , 
 Penelope , " he say , kiss I , " and I know there be no likelihood of 
 your use either of these thing rashly or in a moment of panic . but 
 our enterprise be uncertain ; we may possibly be part , and I have no 
 right to let you fall alive into the hand of those villain . " then , he 
 sit down at my work - table and begin draw on a sheet of paper , while I 
 look out of the window and listen to the unvarying song of that 
 bird . davy do not come , and it be broad daylight . but neither of we 
 venture to remark on this fact or to speak our fear . then , after about 
 half an hour 's fruitless waiting Eustace declare that we must have 
 misunderstood davy 's instruction , and insist , much against my 
 wish , upon go down to see whether she be not wait for we below . 
 a secret fear have seize my husband that the old woman , whom I have now 
 get to trust quite absolutely , might after all have remain from first 
 to last a spy of Hubert 's . as Eustace leave he turn round and say , 
 " remember what you have in your pocket , Penelope ; and if I do not return 
 within ten minute , come down the main staircase and sing the first bar 
 of ' Phyllis plus avare que tendre ' I shall be on the watch for it . " 

 I hat his foolish obstinacy : far well , I think , have await 
 davy in the appoint place , and together . 

 I think so all the more when , after some ten minute have elapse , a 
 light rap come on the wainscot door near my bed , the door lead to the 
 back staircase , and opposite to the one by which Eustace have take his 
 departure . 

 " come in , davy , " I say joyfully . 

 " it be not davy , dear Lady Brandling , " say a voice which make I feel 
 suddenly sick ; and in come Hubert , bow . he be dress with uncommon 
 neatness , not in his fisherman 's clothe , but as a clergyman , and , what 
 be by no mean constantly the case with he , he be fresh shaven . in a 
 flash I understand that he have return overnight , or perhaps not go 
 away at all . 

 " it be not davy , " he repeat , " but I have come with her excuse to 
 your ladyship ; a sudden ailment , and one from which it be not usual to 
 recover at she , or indeed , any age , prevent she wait on you . I have 
 be give she some of the consolation of religion , and hear she 
 confession , a practice I by no mean reject as Popish , " and the villain 
 smile suavely . " and now , as she can no long benefit by my presence , I 
 think I would come and make her excuse , and offer myself , though 
 unskilful , to pack your ladyship 's portmanteau in her place . " 

 " you have kill davy ! " I exclaim , spring up from the sofa on 
 which I be seat . Hubert make a deprecatory gesture and force I 
 down again seat himself insolently close to I . " Fie , fie ! " he say , 
 " those be not word for a pretty young lady to use to her old uncle . 
 have you not learn your Catechism , my dear ? it be say there , ' thou 
 shalt not kill , ' mean thereby , kill anything save vermin . and , by the 
 way , " continue the villain , take my arm and prevent my rise , 
 " that be just what I want to talk about . I have a prejudice against 
 kill member of my own family , a prejudice not share by my brother , 
 bad luck to the sot , or else you would not be Lady Brandling as yet , 
 and that poor , silly coxcomb of a Thomas would still be enjoy his 
 glass and his lass . I hate a scandal , and intend to avoid one ; also , I 
 be genuinely attach to you and to your husband , for though a milksop , 
 he be a man of part and education , and I relish his conversation . yes , 
 my dear . I know what you be go to ask ! the precious Eustace be quite 
 safe , without a scratch in any part of his gentlemanly white body ; and 
 no harm shall come to he - on one condition : that you , my pretty vixen , 
 for you be a virago , a warlike lady , my dear niece , that you swear 
 very solemnly that neither you nor he will ever again attempt to leave 
 St. Salvat 's . " 

 he have take my hand and be look in my eye with a villainous 
 expression . 

 " what do you say to that ? " he go on . " I know you to be a woman of 
 spirit and of honour , bind by an oath , and capable of make your 
 husband respect it . you have nothing to gain by refuse . you be alone 
 with I in this house . your faithful davy be as dead as a door - nail . 
 your virtuous spouse be quite safe downstair , for I have take the 
 precaution to relieve he of all those dangerous sword and pistol of 
 his , which a learn man might hurt himself with . I give you five 
 minute to make up your mind . if you accept my term , you and Sir 
 Eustace Brandling shall live honoured and happy at St. Salvat 's among 
 your obliged kinsman . if you refuse , I shall , very reluctantly , hand 
 over your husband to my brother ' tender mercy when they return home 
 presently ; and , as they do not know how to behave to a lady , I shall 
 myself make it a point to act as a man of refinement and a tender heart 
 should act towards a very pretty little shrew , " and the creature dare 
 to touch I with his lip upon my neck . 

 I shrink back upon the sofa half paralyse , and with not strength enough 
 to grow hot and crimson . Hubert rise , lock the door , and , to my 
 relief , sit down to the harpsichord , on which he begin to pick out a 
 tune . it be that very " Phyllis plus avare que tendre , " which I have 
 sing to my husband and he some day before . be it a coincidence ; or 
 have he overheard we appoint it as a signal , and be he mock and 
 torture Eustace as well as I ? 

 " an elegant little air , egad , " he say , " I wish I could remember the 
 second part . do not   let my strumming disturb you . you have still four 
 minute to think over your answer , dear Lady Brandling . " the familiar 
 note arouse I from my stupor . I get up and walk slowly to the 
 harpsichord , at which Hubert be loll and strumming . 

 " well , my dear ? " he ask insolently , and the note seem to ooze out 
 from under his finger , " have I get the tune right ? be that it ? " 

 " the tune , " I answer , " be this : Mr. Hubert Brandling , in the name of 
 God Almighty , whose ministry you have defile , and whose law you have 
 place yourself outside , I take it upon myself to judge and put you to 
 death as a wrecker and a murderer . " I draw Eustace 's pistol from my 
 pocket , aim steadily and fire . I be half stun by the report ; but 
 through the smoke of my own weapon , I see Hubert reel and fall across 
 the harpsichord , whose jangling mingle with his short , sharp cry . even 
 after fifty year , I quite understand how I do that , and when I 
 recall it all , I feel that , old as I be , I would do it over again . what 
 I can not explain be what I do afterwards , nor the amazing coolness and 
 clearness of head which I enjoy at that moment . for without lose a 
 minute I go to the harpsichord , and despite the horrid , hot trickle 
 all over my hand , I turn out his pocket and take his key . then I 
 leave the room , lock it from the outside , and go downstairs singing 
 that french shepherd 's song at the top of my voice . the fearful 
 stillness be begin to frighten I , when , just as I feel my throat 
 grow dry and my voice faint , the same tune answer I in a low whistle , 
 from out of Hubert 's study . I know my husband 's whistle , and yet the 
 fact of Hubert 's room , the fact that Hubert have be strum that 
 tune , fill I , for the first time , with horror . but I find the key on 
 the bunch , and unlock the door . eustace be seat in an arm chair , 
 unbound , but his clothe tear as after a scuffle . 

 " Eustace , " I say , " I - I have kill Hubert . " but to my astonishment he 
 barely give I time to utter the word ; and start from the chair : 

 " quick , quick ! " he cry , " there be not a moment to lose . another ten 
 minute and we also be dead ! " and seize my arm he drag I away , down 
 the remain stair , out by the main door and then at a run across the 
 yard and up into the dripping shrubbery . 

 " Eustace , Eustace ! " I cry breathless , " this be not the way ; we shall 
 be see from the stable . " 

 " no matter , " he answer hoarsely , and drag , almost carry , I 
 along , " run , Penelope , for our life . " 

 after about five minute of desperate and , it seem to I , random and 
 mad climbing up through the wet bush , he suddenly stop and draw 
 forth his watch . 

 " where be davy ? at the turn of the road ? not in the house , at least , 
 there be no one in the house ? no one except - except that dead man ? " 

 I think that fear have make he lose his wit , and I dare not tell he 
 that besides that dead man , the house hold also a dead woman , our poor , 
 faithful davy . 

 " she be out of danger , " I answer . we have , by some miracle , find our 
 way to a place where the wall , which fortify St. Salvat 's , be partly 
 break at the top , and overgrow by bush . with a decision I should 
 never have expect from he , and an extraordinary degree of strength 
 and agility , my husband climb on to the wall , pull I up , let 
 himself drop into the dry ditch beyond , and receive I in his arm . 
 then , seize I again by the hand , we start off once more at a mad 
 run through the wood , stumble and tear ourselves against the 
 branch . 

 " up the knoll ! " he repeat . " I must see ! I must see ! " and he seem to 
 I quite mad . 

 once at the top of the knoll , he stop . it be woode all the way up , 
 but just here be an open space of grass burrow by rabbit and set 
 with stunted juniper . it be full in sight of St. Salvat 's , and if ever 
 there could be a dangerous place to stop in , it be this . but Eustace 
 point to the wet grass , " sit down , " he say , and sit down himself , 
 after look at his watch again . " there be five minute more , " he 
 repeat , remain , despite my entreaty , seat on the soft ground 
 among the rabbit hole , his face turn to St. Salvat 's . 

 " you be sure davy be safe ? " he ask , again draw out his watch . 

 " davy be dead , " I answer , count on the effect it would have on 
 he , " Hubert have murder she ... before ... I .... " 

 Eustace 's eye kindle strangely . " ah ! be it so ? " he cry , " then poor 
 davy will have a splendid funeral ! all I regret be that that villain 
 should share in the honour . " so say , he start up on to his foot , 
 and pull out his watch , look from it to the tower and battlement 
 nestle in the tree of the hollow beneath we . 

 " half past seven less a minute , less half a minute , less ... now ! " he 
 cry . 

 as if he have shout a word of command , an enormous sheet of flame leapt 
 up into the air , like the flash at a cannon 's mouth ; the hill shake and 
 the air bellow , and we fall back half stun . when I could see once 
 more , my husband be stand at the brink of the knoll , his arm 
 fold , and look calmly before he . 

 the outline of tower and battlement have entirely disappear ; and 
 only the skeleton of the great tree , black and branchless , stand out 
 like the broken mast of wreck vessel against the distant pale and 
 misty sea . 

 " I have burn out their nest . my house shall be pollute no more , " say 
 my husband very quietly . and then , kiss I as we stand on the brink 
 of the green sward , with the rain fall gently upon we , " come , 
 Penelope , " he add take my hand , " we be outlaws and felon ; but we 
 have save our liberty and our honour . " 

 and , hand in hand , we walk swiftly but quietly towards the high road 
 to Milford . 

          


 the forego page be sufficient record for those of my child and 
 grandchild who have hear the tale from my lip , and sufficient 
 explanation for the remoter posterity of Eustace Brandling and myself , 
 of the mystery which overhang their family in the latter part of the 
 eighteenth century . I have only a few legal detail to add . 

 by the explosion which my husband 's skill in chemistry and mechanic have 
 enable he to procure and to time , all the main building of St. 
 Salvat 's Castle have be utterly destroy ; hide in their ruin the 
 fate alike of the faithful Davies and of the atrocious Hubert ; and 
 hiding , for anything , that be know to the contrary , two other 
 presumable victim - my husband and myself . the gang of villain , 
 deprive of its headquarters , and deprive of its master spirit , 
 speedily fall to piece . Richard and Gwyn appear to have come to a 
 violent end in quarrel over the booty of the last wicked expedition ; 
 Simon and Evan , and some of their follower end in prison , on a charge 
 of pillage the ruin and dig for treasure while the property , in 
 the absence of it master , be still in the hand of the law ; but it be 
 probable that this condemnation be intend to save they from a bad 
 punishment , as the authority gradually get wind of the real trade 
 which have be carry on in the castle . 

 from the villain of St. Salvat 's Eustace and I be now safe . but we 
 have take the law into our own hand ; and the justice which have be 
 unable to defend we while innocent , be bind to punish our act towards 
 the guilty . my husband 's word have be true : he and I be outlaws and 
 felon . our case be privily place before the King and his minister , 
 when we have leave England and have rejoin my mother in her country . in 
 consideration of the unusual circumstance it be decide that the 
 baronetcy should not lapse , nor the land be forfeit to the Crown , but 
 be hold over for our possible heir , while ourselves should be account 
 as mysteriously disappear , and forbid to enter the kingdom . so we 
 wander for many year in the new world and the old ; and it be far 
 from St. Salvat 's that our child be successively bear . and it be 
 only on the death of my dear husband , which occur in 1802 , that a 
 Brandling , our eld son , reappear and claim his title and 
 inheritance . it be the wish of my son Piers that I should accompany he 
 and his wife to England , and help to rebuild the home which I have help 
 to destroy . but the recollection of the place have only grow in terror , 
 and I have ever adhere to my resolution not to set eye on it again . I 
 have spend the year of my widowhood at Grandfey , my dear dead mother 's 
 little property in Switzerland , where Eustace and I have be so happy 
 before he succeed to St. Salvat 's . and it be at Grandfey , among the 
 meadow again white with hemlock and the lime avenue again in blossom , 
 that I await , amid the sound of cowbell and of mountain stream , Death , 
 who have hold I in his clutch fifty year ago in that castle hide 
 among the tree above the white wail Northern sea . 
