kenelm CHILLINGLY 

 his adventures and opinion 


 by Edward Bulwer Lytton 

  LORD LYTTON 




 BOOK I. 



 CHAPTER I. 

 SIR PETER CHILLINGLY , of Exmundham , Baronet , F.R.S. and F.A.S. , be the 
 representative of an ancient family , and a land proprietor of some 
 importance . he have marry young ; not from any ardent inclination for 
 the connubial state , but in compliance with the request of his parent . 
 they take the pain to select his bride ; and if they might have choose 
 well , they might have choose bad , which be more than can be say for 
 many man who choose wife for themselves . Miss Caroline Brotherton be 
 in all respect a suitable connection . she have a pretty fortune , which 
 be of much use in buy a couple of farm , long desiderate by the 
 Chillinglys as necessary for the rounding of their property into a 
 ring - fence . she be highly connected , and bring into the county that 
 experience of fashionable life acquire by a young lady who have attend 
 a course of ball for three season , and go out in matrimonial 
 honour , with credit to herself and her chaperon . she be handsome 
 enough to satisfy a husband 's pride , but not so handsome as to keep 
 perpetually on the qui vive a husband 's jealousy . she be consider 
 highly accomplish ; that is , she play upon the pianoforte so that any 
 musician would say she " be very well teach ; " but no musician would 
 go out of his way to hear she a second time . she paint in 
 water - colours - well enough to amuse herself . she know french and italian 
 with an elegance so lady - like that , without have read more than 
 select extract from author in those language , she speak they both 
 with an accent more correct than we have any reason to attribute to 
 Rousseau or Ariosto . what else a young lady may acquire in order to be 
 style highly accomplished I do not pretend to know ; but I be sure that 
 the young lady in question fulfil that requirement in the opinion 
 of the good master . it be not only an eligible match for Sir 
 Peter Chillingly , - it be a brilliant match . it be also a very 
 unexceptionable match for Miss Caroline Brotherton . this excellent 
 couple get on together as most excellent couple do . a short time after 
 marriage , Sir Peter , by the death of his parent - who , have marry 
 their heir , have nothing leave in life worth the trouble of live 
 for - succeed to the hereditary estate ; he live for nine month of 
 the year at Exmundham , go to town for the other three month . Lady 
 Chillingly and himself be both very glad to go to town , be bore at 
 Exmundham ; and very glad to go back to Exmundham , be bore in town . 
 with one exception it be an exceedingly happy marriage , as marriage 
 go . Lady Chillingly have her way in small thing ; Sir Peter his way in 
 great . small thing happen every day ; great thing once in three year . 
 once in three year Lady Chillingly give way to Sir Peter ; household so 
 manage go on regularly . the exception to their connubial happiness be , 
 after all , but of a negative description . their affection be such 
 that they sigh for a pledge of it ; fourteen year have he and Lady 
 Chillingly remain unvisite by the little stranger . 

 now , in default of male issue , Sir Peter 's estate pass to a distant 
 cousin as heir - at - law ; and during the last four year this heir - at - law 
 have evince his belief that practically speak he be already 
 heir - apparent ; and   though Sir Peter be a much young man than 
 himself , and as healthy as any man well can be   have make his 
 expectation of a speedy succession unpleasantly conspicuous . he have 
 refuse his consent to a small exchange of land with a neighbouring 
 squire , by which Sir Peter would have obtain some good arable land , 
 for an outlying unprofitable wood that produce nothing but fagot and 
 rabbit , with the blunt declaration that he , the heir - at - law , be fond 
 of rabbit - shooting , and that the wood would be convenient to he next 
 season if he come into the property by that time , which he very possibly 
 might . he dispute Sir Peter 's right to make his customary fall of 
 timber , and have even threaten he with a bill in Chancery on that 
 subject . in short , this heir - at - law be exactly one of those person 
 to spite whom a land proprietor would , if single , marry at the age of 
 eighty in the hope of a family . 

 nor be it only on account of his very natural wish to frustrate the 
 expectation of this unamiable relation that Sir Peter Chillingly 
 lament the absence of the little stranger . although belong to that 
 class of country gentleman to whom certain political reasoner deny the 
 intelligence vouchsafe to other member of the community , Sir Peter be 
 not without a considerable degree of book - learning and a great taste 
 for speculative philosophy . he sigh for a legitimate inheritor to the 
 store of his erudition , and , be a very benevolent man , for a more 
 active and useful dispenser of those benefit to the human race which 
 philosopher confer by strike hard against each other ; just as , how 
 full soever of spark a flint may be , they might lurk conceal in the 
 flint till doomsday , if the flint be not hit by the steel . Sir Peter , 
 in short , long for a son amply endow with the combative quality , in 
 which he himself be deficient , but which be the first essential to all 
 seeker after renown , and especially to benevolent philosopher . 

 under these circumstance one may well conceive the joy that fill 
 the household of Exmundham and extend to all the tenantry on that 
 venerable estate , by whom the present possessor be much beloved and 
 the prospect of an heir - at - law with a special eye to the preservation 
 of rabbit much detest , when the medical attendant of the Chillinglys 
 declare that ' her ladyship be in an interesting way ; ' and to what 
 height that joy culminate when , in due course of time , a male baby be 
 safely entbrone in his cradle . to that cradle Sir Peter be summon . 
 he enter the room with a lively bind and a radiant countenance : he 
 quit it with a musing step and an overcloud brow . 

 yet the baby be no monster . it do not come into the world with two 
 head , as some baby be say to have do ; it be form as baby be 
 in general ; be on the whole a thrive baby , a fine baby . nevertheless , 
 its aspect awe the father as already it have awe the nurse . the 
 creature look so unutterably solemn . it fix its eye upon Sir Peter 
 with a melancholy reproachful stare ; its lip be compress and draw 
 downward as if discontentedly meditate its future destiny . the nurse 
 declare in a frightened whisper that it have utter no cry on face 
 the light . it have take possession of its cradle in all the dignity of 
 silent sorrow . a more saddened and a more thoughtful countenance a human 
 being could not exhibit if he be leave the world instead of enter 
 it . 

 " Hem ! " say Sir Peter to himself on regain the solitude of his 
 library ; " a philosopher who contribute a new inhabitant to this vale of 
 tear take upon himself very anxious responsibility - " 

 at that moment the joy - bell ring out from the neighbouring church 
 tower , the summer sun shine into the window , the bee hum among the 
 flower on the lawn . Sir Peter rouse himself and look forth , " after 
 all , " say he , cheerily , " the vale of tear be not without a smile . " 



 CHAPTER II . 

 a FAMILY council be hold at Exmundham Hall to deliberate on the name 
 by which this remarkable infant should be admit into the Christian 
 community . the junior branch of that ancient house consist , first , 
 of the obnoxious heir - at - law - a Scotch branch name Chillingly Gordon . 
 he be the widow father of one son , now of the age of three , and 
 happily unconscious of the injury inflict on his future prospect by 
 the advent of the new - bear , which could not be truthfully say of his 
 Caledonian father . Mr. Chillingly Gordon be one of those man who get on 
 in the world with out our be able to discover why . his parent die 
 in his infancy and leave he nothing ; but the family interest procure 
 he an admission into the Charterhouse School , at which illustrious 
 academy he obtain no remarkable distinction . nevertheless , as soon as 
 he leave it the State take he under its special care , and appoint he 
 to a clerkship in a public office . from that moment he continue to get 
 on in the world , and be now a Commissioner of Customs , with a salary of 
 L1500 a year . as soon as he have be thus enable to maintain a wife , 
 he select a wife who assist to maintain himself . she be an irish 
 peer 's widow , with a jointure of L2000 a year . 

 a few month after his marriage , Chillingly Gordon effect insurance 
 on his wife 's life , so as to secure himself an annuity of L1000 a year 
 in case of her decease . as she appear to be a fine healthy woman , some 
 year young than her husband , the deduction from his income effect 
 by the annual payment for the insurance seem an over - sacrifice of 
 present enjoyment to future contingency . the result bear witness to 
 his reputation for sagacity , as the lady die in the second year of 
 their wedding , a few month after the birth of her only child , and of a 
 heart - disease which have be latent to the doctor , but which , no doubt , 
 Gordon have affectionately discover before he have insure a life too 
 valuable not to need some compensation for its loss . he be now , then , 
 in the possession of L2500 a year , and be therefore very well off , 
 in the pecuniary sense of the phrase . he have , moreover , acquire a 
 reputation which give he a social rank beyond that accord to he by 
 a discerning State . he be consider a man of solid judgment , and 
 his opinion upon all matter , private and public , carry weight . the 
 opinion itself , critically examine , be not worth much , but the way he 
 announce it be impose . Mr. Fox say that ' no one ever be so wise as 
 Lord Thurlow look . ' Lord Thurlow could not have look wise than Mr. 
 Chillingly Gordon . he have a square jaw and large red bushy eyebrow , 
 which he lower down with great effect when he deliver judgment . 
 he have another advantage for acquire grave reputation . he be a very 
 unpleasant man . he could be rude if you contradict he ; and as few 
 person wish to provoke rudeness , so he be seldom contradict . 

 Mr. Chillingly Mivers , another cadet of the house , be also 
 distinguish , but in a different way . he be a bachelor , now about the 
 age of thirty - five . he be eminent for a supreme well - breed contempt for 
 everybody and everything . he be the originator and chief proprietor of 
 a public journal call " the Londoner , " which have lately be set up on 
 that principle of contempt , and we need not say , be exceedingly popular 
 with those lead member of the community who admire nobody and 
 believe in nothing . Mr. Chillingly Mivers be regard by himself and 
 by other as a man who might have achieve the high success in any 
 branch of literature , if he have deign to exhibit his talent therein . 
 but he do not so deign , and therefore he have full right to imply that , 
 if he have write an epic , a drama , a novel , a history , a metaphysical 
 treatise , Milton , Shakspeare , Cervantes , Hume , Berkeley would have be 
 nowhere . he hold greatly to the dignity of the anonymous ; and even in 
 the journal which he originate nobody could ever ascertain what he 
 write . but , at all event , Mr. Chillingly Mivers be what Mr. Chillingly 
 Gordon be not ; namely , a very clever man , and by no mean an unpleasant 
 one in general society . 

 the Rev. John Stalworth Chillingly be a decided adherent to the creed 
 of what be call " muscular Christianity , " and a very fine speciman 
 of it too . a tall stout man with broad shoulder , and that division of 
 low limb which intervene between the knee and the ankle powerfully 
 develop . he would have knock down a deist as soon as look at 
 he . it be tell by the Sieur de Joinville , in his Memoir of Louis , the 
 sainted king , that an assembly of divine and theologian convene the 
 Jews of an oriental city for the purpose of argue with they on the 
 truth of Christianity , and a certain knight , who be at that time 
 cripple , and support himself on crutch , ask and obtain 
 permission to be present at the debate . the Jews flock to the summon , 
 when a prelate , select a learn rabbi , mildly put to he the lead 
 question whether he own the divine conception of our Lord . " certainly 
 not , " reply the rabbi ; whereon the pious knight , shock by such 
 blasphemy , uplift his crutch and fell the rabbi , and then fling 
 himself among the other misbeliever , whom he soon disperse in 
 ignominious flight and in a very belabour condition . the conduct of 
 the knight be report to the sainted king , with a request that it 
 should be properly reprimand ; but the sainted king deliver himself 
 of this wise judgment : - 

 " if a pious knight be a very learn clerk , and can meet in fair 
 argument the doctrine of the misbeliever , by all mean let he argue 
 fairly ; but if a pious knight be not a learn clerk , and the argument 
 go against he , then let the pious knight cut the discussion short by 
 the edge of his good sword . " 

 the Rev. John Stalworth Chillingly be of the same opinion as Saint 
 Louis ; otherwise , he be a mild and amiable man . he encourage cricket 
 and other manly sport among his rural parishioner . he be a skilful 
 and bold rider , but he do not hunt ; a convivial man - and take his 
 bottle freely . but his taste in literature be of a refined and 
 peaceful character , contrast therein the tendency some might have 
 expect from his muscular development of Christianity . he be a great 
 reader of poetry , but he dislike Scott and Byron , whom he consider 
 flashy and noisy ; he maintain that Pope be only a versifier , and that 
 the great poet in the language be Wordsworth ; he do not care much 
 for the ancient classic ; he refuse all merit to the french poet ; he 
 know nothing of the italian , but he dabble in German , and be incline 
 to bore one about the " Hermann and Dorothea " of Goethe . he be marry 
 to a homely little wife , who revere he in silence , and think there 
 would be no schism in the church if he be in his right place as 
 Archbishop of Canterbury ; in this opinion he entirely agree with his 
 wife . 

 besides these three male specimen of the chillingly race , the fairer 
 sex be represent , in the absence of her ladyship , who still keep she 
 room , by three female Chillinglys , sister of Sir Peter , and all three 
 spinster . perhaps one reason why they have remain single be , that 
 externally they be so like each other that a suitor must have be 
 puzzle which to choose , and may have be afraid that if he do choose 
 one , he should be catch next day kiss another one in mistake . they 
 be all tall , all thin , with long throat - and beneath the throat a 
 fine development of bone . they have all pale hair , pale eyelid , pale 
 eye , and pale complexion . they all dress exactly alike , and their 
 favourite colour be a vivid green : they be so dressed on this 
 occasion . 

 as there be such similitude in their person , so , to an ordinary 
 observer , they be exactly the same in character and mind . very 
 well behave , with proper notion of female decorum : very distant and 
 reserve in manner to stranger ; very affectionate to each other and 
 their relation or favourite ; very good to the poor , whom they look 
 upon as a different order of creation , and treat with that sort of 
 benevolence which humane people bestow upon dumb animal . their mind 
 have be nourish on the same book - what one read the other have read . 
 the book be mainly divide into two class , - novel , and what they 
 call " good book . " they have a habit of take a speciman of each 
 alternately ; one day a novel , then a good book , then a novel again , and 
 so on . thus if the imagination be overwarme on Monday , on Tuesday it 
 be cool down to a proper temperature ; and if frost - bite on Tuesday , 
 it take a tepid bath on Wednesday . the novel they choose be indeed 
 rarely of a nature to raise the intellectual thermometer into blood 
 heat : the hero and heroine be model of correct conduct . Mr. 
 James 's novel be then in vogue , and they unite in say that those 
 " be novel a father might allow his daughter to read . " but though an 
 ordinary observer might have fail to recognize any distinction between 
 these three lady , and , find they habitually dress in green , would 
 have say they be as much alike as one pea be to another , they have 
 their idiosyncratic difference , when duly examine . Miss Margaret , the 
 eld , be the command one of the three ; it be she who regulate 
 their household   they all live together , keep the joint purse , and 
 decide every doubtful point that arise : whether they should or should 
 not ask Mrs. So - and - so to tea ; whether Mary should or should not be 
 discharge ; whether or not they should go to Broadstairs or to Sandgate 
 for the month of October . in fact , Miss Margaret be the WILL of the 
 body corporate . 

 Miss Sibyl be of milder nature and more melancholy temperament ; she have 
 a poetic turn of mind , and occasionally write verse . some of these 
 have be print on satin paper , and sell for object of beneficence 
 at charity bazaar . the county newspaper say that the verse " be 
 characterize by all the elegance of a cultured and feminine mind . " the 
 other two sister agree that Sibyl be the genius of the household , 
 but , like all genius , not sufficiently practical for the world . 
 Miss Sarah Chillingly , the young of the three , and now just in her 
 forty - fourth year , be look upon by the other as " a dear thing , 
 inclined to be naughty , but such a darling that nobody could have the 
 heart to scold she . " Miss Margaret say ' she be a giddy creature . " Miss 
 Sibyl write a poem on she , entitle , " warn to a young Lady against 
 the Pleasures of the World . " they all call she Sally ; the other 
 two sister have no diminutive synonyms . Sally be a name indicative of 
 fastness . but this Sally would not have be think fast in another 
 household , and she be now little likely to sally out of the one she 
 belong to . these sister , who be all many year old than Sir 
 Peter , live in a handsome , old - fashioned , red - brick house , with a large 
 garden at the back , in the principal street of the capital of their 
 native county . they have each L10,000 for portion ; and if he could have 
 marry all three , the heir - at - law would have marry they , and settle 
 the aggregate L30,000 on himself . but we have not yet come to recognize 
 Mormonism as legal , though if our social progress continue to slide in 
 the same groove as at present , Heaven only know what triumph over 
 the prejudice of our ancestor may not be achieve by the wisdom of our 
 descendant ! 



 CHAPTER III . 

 SIR PETER stand on his hearthstone , survey the guest seat in 
 semicircle , and say : " friend , - in Parliament , before anything 
 affect the fate of a Bill be discuss , it be , I believe , necessary 
 to introduce the Bill . " he pause a moment , rang the bell , and say to 
 the servant who enter , " tell Nurse to bring in the Baby . " 

 Mr. CHILLINGLY GORDON . - " I do not   see the necessity for that , Sir Peter . 
 we may take the existence of the Baby for grant . " 

 Mr. MIVERS . - " it be an advantage to the reputation of Sir Peter 's work 
 to preserve the incognito . Omne ignotum pro magnifico . " 

 the REV . JOHN STALWORTH CHILLINGLY . - " I do not   approve the cynical 
 levity of such remark . of course we must all be anxious to see , in the 
 early stage of be , the future representative of our name and race . 
 who would not wish to contemplate the source , however small , of the 
 Tigris or the Nile ! - " 

 MISS SALLY   titter . - " he ! he ! " 

 MISS MARGARET . - " for shame , you giddy thing ! " 

 the Baby enter in the nurse 's arm . all rise and gather round the Baby 
 with one exception , - Mr. Gordon , who have cease to be heir - at - law . 

 the Baby return the gaze of its relation with the most contemptuous 
 indifference . Miss Sibyl be the first to pronounce an opinion on the 
 Baby 's attribute . say she , in a solemn whisper , " what a heavenly 
 mournful expression ! it seem so grieve to have leave the angel ! " 

 the REV . JOHN . - " that be prettily say , Cousin Sibyl ; but the infant 
 must pluck up its courage and fight its way among mortal with a good 
 heart , if it want to get back to the angel again . and I think it will ; 
 a fine child . " he take it from the nurse , and move it deliberately up 
 and down , as if to weigh it , say cheerfully , " monstrous heavy ! by the 
 time it be twenty it will be a match for a prize - fighter of fifteen 
 stone ! " 

 Therewith he stride to Gordon , who as if to show that he now consider 
 himself wholly apart from all interest in the affair of a family who 
 have so ill - treat he in the birth of that Baby , have take up the 
 " Times " newspaper and conceal his countenance beneath the ample sheet . 
 the Parson abruptly snatch away the " Times " with one hand , and , 
 with the other substituting to the indignant eye of the ci - devant 
 heir - at - law the spectacle of the Baby , say , " kiss it . " 

 " kiss it ! " echo Chillingly Gordon , push back his chair - " kiss 
 it ! pooh , sir , stand off ! I never kiss my own baby : I shall not kiss 
 another man 's . take the thing away , sir : it be ugly ; it have black eye . " 

 Sir Peter , who be near - sighted , put on his spectacle and examine 
 the face of the new - bear . " true , " say he , " it have black eye , - very 
 extraordinary : portentous : the first Chillingly that ever have black 
 eye . " 

 " its mamma have black eye , " say Miss Margaret : " it take after its 
 mamma ; it have not the fair beauty of the Chillinglys , but it be not 
 ugly . " 

 " sweet infant ! " sigh Sibyl ; " and so good ; do not cry . " 

 " it have neither cry nor crow since it be bear , " say the nurse ; 
 " bless its little heart . " 

 she take the Baby from the Parson 's arm , and smooth back the frill of 
 its cap , which have get ruffle . 

 " you may go now , Nurse , " say Sir Peter . 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 " I agree with Mr. Shandy , " say Sir Peter , resume his stand on the 
 hearthstone , " that among the responsibility of a parent the choice of 
 the name which his child be to bear for life be one of the grave . and 
 this be especially so with those who belong to the order of baronet . 
 in the case of a peer his christian name , fuse into his titular 
 designation , disappear . in the case of a Mister , if his baptismal 
 be cacophonous or provocative of ridicule , he need not ostentatiously 
 parade it : he may drop it altogether on his visit card , and may be 
 imprint as Mr. Jones instead of Mr. Ebenezer Jones . in his signature , 
 save where the form of the law demand Ebenezer in full , he may only 
 use an initial and be your obedient servant E. Jones , leave it to be 
 conjecture that E. stand for Edward or Ernest , - name inoffensive , and 
 not suggestive of a Dissenting Chapel , like Ebenezer . if a man call 
 Edward or Ernest be detect in some youthful indiscretion , there be 
 no indelible stain on his moral character : but if an Ebenezer be so 
 detect he be set down as a hypocrite ; it produce that shock on the 
 public mind which be feel when a profess saint be prove to be a 
 bit of a sinner . but a baronet never can escape from his baptismal : it 
 can not lie perdu ; it can not shrink into an initial , it stand forth 
 glaringly in the light of day ; christen he Ebenezer , and he be Sir 
 Ebenezer in full , with all its perilous consequence if he ever succumb 
 to those temptation to which even baronet be expose . but , my 
 friend , it be not only the effect that the sound of a name have upon 
 other which be to be thoughtfully consider : the effect that his name 
 produce on the man himself be perhaps still more important . some name 
 stimulate and encourage the owner ; other deject and paralyze he : I 
 be a melancholy instance of that truth . Peter have be for many 
 generation , as you be aware , the baptismal to which the eldest - bear 
 of our family have be devote . on the altar of that name I have be 
 sacrifice . never have there be a Sir Peter Chillingly who have , in any 
 way , distinguish himself above his fellow . that name have be a dead 
 weight on my intellectual energy . in the catalogue of illustrious 
 englishman there be , I think , no immortal Sir Peter , except Sir Peter 
 Teazle , and he only exist on the comic stage . " 

 MISS sibyl . - " Sir Peter Lely ? " 

 SIR PETER CHILLINGLY . - " that painter be not an Englishman . he be bear 
 in Westphalia , famous for ham . I confine my remark to the child of 
 our native land . I be aware that in foreign country the name be not an 
 extinguisher to the genius of its owner . but why ? in other country its 
 sound be modify . Pierre Corneille be a great man ; but I put it to 
 you whether , have he be an Englishman , he could have be the father of 
 european tragedy as Peter Crow ? " 

 MISS sibyl . - " impossible ! " 

 MISS SALLY . - " he ! he ! " 

 MISS MARGARET . - " there be nothing to laugh at , you giddy child ! " 

 SIR PETER . - " my son shall not be petrify into Peter . " 

 MR . CHILLINGLY GORDON . - " if a man be such a fool - and I do not   say your 
 son will not be a fool , Cousin Peter - as to be influence by the sound 
 of his own name , and you want the booby to turn the world topsy - turvy , 
 you have well call he Julius Caesar or Hannibal or Attila or 
 Charlemagne . " 

 SIR PETER ,   who excel mankind in imperturbability of temper . - " on the 
 contrary , if you inflict upon a man the burden of one of those name , 
 the glory of which he can not reasonably expect to eclipse or even to 
 equal , you crush he beneath the weight . if a poet be call John 
 Milton or William Shakspeare , he could not dare to publish even a 
 sonnet . no : the choice of a name lie between the two extreme of 
 ludicrous insignificance and oppressive renown . for this reason I have 
 order the family pedigree to be suspend on yonder wall . let we 
 examine it with care , and see whether , among the Chillinglys themselves 
 or their alliance , we can discover a name that can be bear with 
 become dignity by the destine head of our house - a name neither too 
 light nor too heavy . " 

 Sir Peter here lead the way to the family tree - a goodly roll of 
 parchment , with the arm of the family emblazon at the top . those arm 
 be simple , as ancient heraldic coat be , - three fish argent on 
 a field azure ; the crest a mermaid 's head . all flock to inspect the 
 pedigree except Mr. Gordon , who resume the " Times " newspaper . 

 " I never could quite make out what kind of fish these be , " say 
 the Rev. John Stalworth . " they be certainly not pike which form the 
 emblematic blazon of the hotoft , and be still grim enough to frighten 
 future Shakspeares on the scutcheon of the Warwickshire Lucys . " 

 " I believe they be tench , " say Mr. Mivers . " the tench be a fish that 
 know how to keep itself safe by a philosophical taste for an obscure 
 existence in deep hole and slush . " 

 SIR PETER . - " no , Mivers ; the fish be dace , a fish that , once 
 introduce into any pond , never can be get out again . you may drag 
 the water ; you may let off the water ; you may say , ' those dace be 
 extirpate , ' - vain thought ! - the dace reappear as before ; and in this 
 respect the arm be really emblematic of the family . all the disorder 
 and revolution that have occur in England since the Heptarchy have 
 leave the Chillinglys the same race in the same place . somehow or other 
 the Norman Conquest do not despoil they ; they hold fief under Eudo 
 Dapifer as peacefully as they have hold they under King Harold ; they take 
 no part in the Crusades , nor the Wars of the Roses , nor the Civil Wars 
 between Charles the First and the Parliament . as the dace stick to the 
 water and the water stick by the dace , so the Chillinglys stick to the 
 land and the land stick by the Chillinglys . perhaps I be wrong to wish 
 that the new Chillingly may be a little less like a dace . " 

 " oh ! " cry Miss Margaret , who , mount on a chair , have be inspect 
 the pedigree through an eye - glass , " I do not   see a fine christian name 
 from the beginning , except Oliver . " 

 SIR PETER . - " that chillingly be bear in Oliver Cromwell 's Protectorate , 
 and name Oliver in compliment to he , as his father , bear in the reign 
 of James I. , be christen James . the three fish always swam with 
 the stream . oliver ! - Oliver not a bad name , but significant of radical 
 doctrine . " 

 Mr. MIVERS . - " I do not   think so . Oliver Cromwell make short work of 
 radical and their doctrine ; but perhaps we can find a name less awful 
 and revolutionary . " 

 " I have it ! I have it ! " cry the Parson . " here be a descent from Sir 
 Kenelm Digby and Venetia Stanley . Sir Kenelm Digby ! no fine speciman of 
 muscular Christianity . he fight as well as he write ; eccentric , it be 
 true , but always a gentleman . call the boy Kenelm ! " 

 " a sweet name , " say Miss Sibyl : " it breathe of romance . " 

 " Sir Kenelm Chillingly ! it sound well , - imposing ! " say Miss Margaret . 

 " and , " remark Mr. Mivers , " it have this advantage - that while it have 
 sufficient association with honourable distinction to affect the mind of 
 the namesake and rouse his emulation , it be not that of so stupendous 
 a personage as to defy rivalry . Sir Kenelm Digby be certainly an 
 accomplished and gallant gentleman ; but what with his silly superstition 
 about sympathetic powder , etc . , any man nowadays might be clever in 
 comparison without be a prodigy . yes , let we decide on Kenelm . " 

 Sir Peter meditate . " certainly , " say he , after a pause , " certainly 
 the name of Kenelm carry with it very crotchety association ; and I be 
 afraid that Sir Kenelm Digby do not make a prudent choice in marriage . 
 the fair Venetia be no well than she should be ; and I should wish 
 my heir not to be lead away by beauty but we d a woman of respectable 
 character and decorous conduct . " 

 Miss MARGARET . - " a british matron , of course ! " 

 three sister   in chorus . - " of course ! of course ! " 

 " but , " resume Sir Peter , " I be crotchety myself , and crotchet be 
 innocent thing enough ; and as for marriage the Baby can not marry 
 to - morrow , so that we have ample time to consider that matter . Kenelm 
 Digby be a man any family might be proud of ; and , as you say , sister 
 Margaret , Kenelm Chillingly do not sound amiss : Kenelm Chillingly it 
 shall be ! " 

 the Baby be accordingly christen Kenelm , after which ceremony its 
 face grow long than before . 



 CHAPTER V. 

 before his relation disperse , Sir Peter summon Mr. Gordon into his 
 library . 

 " Cousin , " say he , kindly , " I do not blame you for the want of family 
 affection , or even of humane interest , which you exhibit towards the 
 New - bear . " 

 " blame I , Cousin Peter ! I should think not . I exhibit as much 
 family affection and humane interest as could be expect from 
 I , - circumstance consider . " 

 " I own , " say Sir Peter , with all his wonte mildness , " that after 
 remain childless for fourteen year of wed life , the advent of 
 this little stranger must have occasion you a disagreeable surprise . 
 but , after all , as I be many year young than you , and in the course 
 of nature shall outlive you , the loss be less to yourself than to your 
 son , and upon that I wish to say a few word . you know too well the 
 condition on which I hold my estate not to be aware that I have 
 not legally the power to saddle it with any bequest to your boy . the 
 New - bear succeed to the fee - simple as last in tail . but I intend , 
 from this moment , to lay by something every year for your son out of my 
 income ; and , fond as I be of London for a part of the year , I shall now 
 give up my town - house . if I live to the year the Psalmist allot to 
 man , I shall thus accumulate something handsome for your son , which may 
 be take in the way of compensation . " 

 Mr. Gordon be by no mean soften by this generous speech . however , 
 he answer more politely than be his will not , " my son will be very much 
 oblige to you , should he ever need your intend bequest . " pause a 
 moment , he add with a cheerful smile , " a large percentage of infant 
 die before attain the age of twenty - one . " 

 " Nay , but I be tell your son be an uncommonly fine healthy child . " 

 " my son , Cousin Peter ! I be not think of my son , but of your . your 
 have a big head . I should not wonder if he have water in it . I do not   wish 
 to alarm you , but he may go off any day , and in that case it be not 
 likely that Lady Chillingly will condescend to replace he . so you will 
 excuse I if I still keep a watchful eye on my right ; and , however 
 painful to my feeling , I must still dispute your right to cut a stick 
 of the field timber . " 

 " that be nonsense , Gordon . I be tenant for life without impeachment of 
 waste , and can cut down all timber not ornamental . " 

 " I advise you not , Cousin Peter . I have tell you before that I shall try 
 the question at law , should you provoke it , amicably , of course . right 
 be right ; and if I be drive to maintain mine , I trust that you be of 
 a mind too liberal to allow your family affection for I and mine to be 
 influence by a decree of the Court of Chancery . but my fly be wait . 
 I must not miss the train . " 

 " well , good - by , Gordon . shake hand . " 

 " shake hand ! - of course , of course . by the by , as I come through the 
 lodge , it seem to I sadly out of repair . I believe you be liable for 
 dilapidation . good - by . " 

 " the man be a hog in armour , " soliloquize Sir Peter , when his cousin 
 be go ; " and if it be hard to drive a common pig in the way he do not 
 choose to go , a hog in armour be indeed undrivable . but his boy ought 
 not to suffer for his father 's hoggishness ; and I shall begin at once to 
 see what I can lay by for he . after all , it be hard upon Gordon . poor 
 Gordon ; poor fellow ! poor fellow ! still I hope he will not go to law 
 with I . I hate law . and a worm will turn , especially a worm that be put 
 into Chancery . " 



 CHAPTER VI . 

 despite the sinister semi - prediction of the ci - devant heir - at - law , 
 the youthful Chillingly pass with safety , and indeed with dignity , 
 through the infant stage of existence . he take his measle and 
 whooping - cough with philosophical equanimity . he gradually acquire 
 the use of speech , but he do not too lavishly exercise that special 
 attribute of humanity . during the early year of childhood he speak 
 as little as if he have be prematurely train in the school of 
 Pythagoras . but he evidently speak the less in order to reflect the 
 more . he observe closely and ponder deeply over what he observe . at 
 the age of eight he begin to converse more freely , and it be in that 
 year that he startle his mother with the question , " Mamma , be you not 
 sometimes overpower by the sense of your own identity ? " 

 Lady Chillingly , - I be about to say rush , but Lady chillingly never 
 rush , - Lady Chillingly glide less sedately than she will not to Sir 
 Peter , and repeat her son 's question , say , " the boy be grow 
 troublesome , too wise for any woman : he must go to school . " 

 Sir Peter be of the same opinion . but where on earth do the child get 
 hold of so long a word as " identity , " and how do so extraordinary and 
 puzzle a metaphysical question come into his head ? Sir Peter summon 
 Kenelm , and ascertain that the boy , have free access to the library , 
 have fasten upon Locke on the Human Understanding , and be prepared to 
 dispute with that philosopher upon the doctrine of innate idea . Quoth 
 Kenelm , gravely , " a want be an idea ; and if , as soon as I be bear , I 
 feel the want of food and know at once where to turn for it , without 
 be teach , surely I come into the world with an ' innate idea . ' " 

 Sir Peter , though he dabble in metaphysics , be pose , and scratch 
 his head without get out a proper answer as to the distinction 
 between idea and instinct . " my child , " he say at last , " you do not 
 know what you be talk about : go and take a good gallop on your black 
 pony ; and I forbid you to read any book that be not give to you by 
 myself or your mamma . Stick to ' Puss in Boots . ' " 



 CHAPTER VII . 

 SIR PETER order his carriage and drive to the house of the stout 
 parson . that doughty ecclesiastic hold a family live a few mile 
 distant from the Hall , and be the only one of the cousin with whom Sir 
 Peter habitually commune on his domestic affair . 

 he find the Parson in his study , which exhibit taste other 
 than clerical . over the chimney - piece be range fencing - foil , 
 boxing - glove , and staff for the athletic exercise of single - stick ; 
 cricket - bat and fishing - rod fill up the angle . there be 
 sundry print on the wall : one of Mr. Wordsworth , flank by two of 
 distinguished race - horse ; one of a Leicestershire short - horn , with 
 which the Parson , who farm his own glebe and breed cattle in its rich 
 pasture , have win a prize at the county show ; and on either side of that 
 animal be the portrait of Hooker and Jeremy Taylor . there be dwarf 
 book - case contain miscellaneous work very handsomely bound ; at 
 the open window , a stand of flower - pot , the flower in full bloom . the 
 Parson 's flower be famous . 

 the appearance of the whole room be that of a man who be tidy and neat 
 in his habit . 

 " Cousin , " say Sir Peter , " I have come to consult you . " and therewith he 
 relate the marvellous precocity of Kenelm Chillingly . " you see the name 
 begin to work on he rather too much . he must go to school ; and now 
 what school shall it be ? private or public ? " 

 the REV . JOHN STALWORTH . - " there be a great deal to be say for or 
 against either . at a public school the chance be that Kenelm will 
 no long be overpower by a sense of his own identity ; he will more 
 probably lose identity altogether . the bad of a public school be that 
 a sort of common character be substitute for individual character . 
 the master , of course , can not   attend to the separate development of each 
 boy 's idiosyncrasy . all mind be throw into one great mould , and come 
 out of it more or less in the same form . an Etonian may be clever or 
 stupid , but , as either , he remain emphatically etonian . a public school 
 ripen talent , but its tendency be to stifle genius . then , too , a public 
 school for an only son , heir to a good estate , which will be entirely at 
 his own disposal , be apt to encourage reckless and extravagant habit ; 
 and your estate require careful management , and leave no margin for an 
 heir 's note - of - hand and post - obit . on the whole , I be against a public 
 school for Kenelm . " 

 " well then , we will decide on a private one . " 

 " hold ! " say the Parson : " a private school have its drawback . you can 
 seldom produce large fish in small pond . in private school the 
 competition be narrow , the energy stint . the schoolmaster 's wife 
 interfere , and generally coddle the boy . there be not manliness 
 enough in those academy ; no fagging , and very little fighting . a 
 clever boy turn out a prig ; a boy of feebler intellect turn out a 
 well - behave young lady in trouser . nothing muscular in the system . 
 decidedly the namesake and descendant of Kenelm Digby should not go to a 
 private seminary . " 

 " so far as I gather from your reasoning , " say Sir Peter , with 
 characteristic placidity , " Kenelm Chillingly be not to go to school at 
 all . " 

 " it do look like it , " say the Parson , candidly ; " but , on 
 consideration , there be a medium . there be school which unite the good 
 quality of public and private school , large enough to stimulate and 
 develop energy mental and physical , yet not so framed as to melt all 
 character in one crucible . for instance , there be a school which have 
 at this moment one of the first scholar in Europe for head - master , - a 
 school which have turn out some of the most remarkable man of the 
 rise generation . the master see at a glance if a boy be clever , and 
 take pain with he accordingly . he be not a mere teacher of hexameter 
 and sapphic . his learning embrace all literature , ancient and modern . 
 he be a good writer and a fine critic ; admire Wordsworth . he wink at 
 fight : his boy know how to use their fist ; and they be not in the 
 habit of sign post - obit before they be fifteen . Merton School be 
 the place for Kenelm . " 

 " thank you , " say Sir Peter . " it be a great comfort in life to find 
 somebody who can decide for one . I be an irresolute man myself , and in 
 ordinary matter willingly let Lady chillingly govern I . " 

 " I should like to see a wife govern I , " say the stout Parson . 

 " but you be not married to Lady Chillingly . and now let we go into the 
 garden and look at your dahlia . " 



 CHAPTER VIII . 

 the youthful confuter of Locke be despatch to Merton School , and 
 rank , accord to his merit , as lag of the penultimate form . when he 
 come home for the Christmas holiday he be more saturnine than ever ; 
 in fact , his countenance bear the impression of some absorbing grief . 
 he say , however , that he like school very well , and elude all other 
 question . but early the next morning he mount his black pony and 
 ride to the Parson 's rectory . the reverend gentleman be in his farmyard 
 examine his bullock when Kenelm accost he thus briefly , - 

 " Sir , I be disgrace , and I shall die of it if you can not help to set I 
 right in my own eye . " 

 " my dear boy , do not   talk in that way . come into my study . " 

 as soon as they enter that room , and the Parson have carefully close 
 the door , he take the boy 's arm , turn he round to the light , and see 
 at once that there be something very grave on his mind . chuck he 
 under the chin , the Parson say cheerily , " hold up your head , Kenelm . I 
 be sure you have do nothing unworthy of a gentleman . " 

 " I do not   know that . I fight a boy very little big than myself , and 
 I have be lick . I do not give in , though ; but the other boy pick 
 I up , for I could not stand any long ; and the fellow be a great 
 bully ; and his name be Butt ; and he be the son of a lawyer ; and he get my 
 head into chancery ; and I have challenge he to fight again next 
 half ; and unless you can help I to lick he , I shall never be good for 
 anything in the world , - never . it will break my heart . " 

 " I be very glad to hear you have have the pluck to challenge he . just 
 let I see how you double your fist . well , that be not amiss . now , put 
 yourself into a fighting attitude , and hit out at I , - hard ! hard ! 
 Pooh ! that will never do . you should make your blow as straight as 
 an arrow . and that be not the way to stand . stop , - so : well on your 
 haunch ; weight on the left leg ; good ! now , put on these glove , and 
 I will give you a lesson in boxing . " 

 five minute afterwards Mrs. John Chillingly , enter the room to 
 summon her husband to breakfast , stand astounded to see he with his 
 coat off , and parry the blow of Kenelm , who fly at he like a young 
 tiger . the good pastor at that moment might certainly have appear a 
 fine type of muscular Christianity , but not of that kind of Christianity 
 out of which one make Archbishops of Canterbury . 

 " good gracious I ! " falter Mrs. John Chillingly ; and then , wife - like , 
 fly to the protection of her husband , she seize Kenelm by the 
 shoulder , and give he a good shaking . the Parson , who be sadly out 
 of breath , be not displeased at the interruption , but take that 
 opportunity to put on his coat , and say , " we will begin again to - morrow . 
 now , come to breakfast . " but during breakfast Kenelm 's face still 
 betray dejection , and he talk little and eat less . 

 as soon as the meal be over , he draw the Parson into the garden and 
 say , " I have be think , sir , that perhaps it be not fair to Butt 
 that I should be take these lesson ; and if it be not fair , I would rather 
 not - " 

 " give I your hand , my boy ! " cry the Parson , transport . " the name 
 of Kenelm be not throw away upon you . the natural desire of man in 
 his attribute of fight animal   an attribute in which , I believe , he 
 excel all other animate being , except a quail and a gamecock   be to 
 beat his adversary . but the natural desire of that culmination of man 
 which we call gentleman be to beat his adversary fairly . a gentleman 
 would rather be beat fairly than beat unfairly . be not that your 
 thought ? " 

 " yes , " reply Kenelm , firmly ; and then , begin to philosophize , he 
 add , " and it stand to reason ; because if I beat a fellow unfairly , I 
 do not   really beat he at all . " 

 " Excellent ! but suppose that you and another boy go into examination 
 upon Caesar 's Commentaries or the multiplication table , and the other 
 boy be clever than you , but you have take the trouble to learn the 
 subject and he have not : should you say you beat he unfairly ? " 

 Kenelm meditate a moment , and then say decidedly , " no . " 

 " that which apply to the use of your brain apply equally to the use 
 of your fist . do you comprehend I ? " 

 " yes , sir ; I do now . " 

 " in the time of your namesake , Sir Kenelm Digby , gentleman wear sword , 
 and they learn how to use they , because , in case of quarrel , they have 
 to fight with they . nobody , at least in England , fight with sword 
 now . it be a democratic age , and if you fight at all , you be reduce to 
 fist ; and if Kenelm Digby learn to fence , so Kenelm Chillingly must 
 learn to box ; and if a gentleman thrash a drayman twice his size , who 
 have not learn to box , it be not unfair ; it be but an exemplification 
 of the truth that knowledge be power . come and take another lesson on 
 box to - morrow . " 

 Kenelm remount his pony and return home . he find his father 
 saunter in the garden with a book in his hand . " Papa , " say Kenelm , 
 " how do one gentleman write to another with whom he have a quarrel , 
 and he do not   want to make it up , but he have something to say about the 
 quarrel which it be fair the other gentleman should know ? " 

 " I do not   understand what you mean . " 

 " well , just before I go to school I remember hear you say that you 
 have a quarrel with Lord Hautfort , and that he be an ass , and you would 
 write and tell he so . when you write do you say , ' you be an ass ' ? be 
 that the way one gentleman write to another ? " 

 " upon my honour , Kenelm , you ask very odd question . but you can not 
 learn too early this fact , that irony be to the high - breed what 
 billingsgate be to the vulgar ; and when one gentleman think another 
 gentleman an ass , he do not say it point - blank : he imply it in the 
 politest term he can invent . Lord Hautfort deny my right of free 
 warren over a trout - stream that run through his land . I do not   care a 
 rush about the trout - stream , but there be no doubt of my right to fish 
 in it . he be an ass to raise the question ; for , if he have not , I 
 should not have exercise the right . as he do raise the question , I be 
 oblige to catch his trout . " 

 " and you write a letter to he ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " how do you write , Papa ? what do you say ? " 

 " something like this . ' Sir Peter Chillingly present his compliment 
 to Lord Hautfort , and think it fair to his lordship to say that he have 
 take the good legal advice with regard to his right of free warren ; 
 and trust to be forgive if he presume to suggest that Lord Hautfort 
 might do well to consult his own lawyer before he decide on dispute 
 they . ' " 

 " thank you , Papa . I see . " 

 that evening Kenelm write the following letter : - 


 Mr. Chillingly present his compliment to Mr. Butt , and think it fair 
 to Mr. Butt to say that he be take lesson in boxing ; and trust to be 
 forgive if he presume to suggest that Mr. Butt might do well to take 
 lesson himself before fight with Mr. Chillingly next half . 


 " Papa , " say Kenelm the next morning , " I want to write to a schoolfellow 
 whose name be Butt ; he be the son of a lawyer who be call a serjeant . 
 I do not   know where to direct to he . " 

 " that be easily ascertain , " say Sir Peter . " Serjeant Butt be an 
 eminent man , and his address will be in the Court Guide . " 

 the address be find , - Bloomsbury Square ; and Kenelm direct his 
 letter accordingly . in due course he receive this answer , - 


 you be an insolent little fool , and I will thrash you within an inch of 
 your life . 

 ROBERT BUTT . 


 after the receipt of that polite epistle , Kenelm Chillingly 's scruple 
 vanish , and he take daily lesson in muscular Christianity . 

 Kenelm return to school with a brow clear from care , and three day 
 after his return he write to the Reverend John , - 


 DEAR SIR , - I have lick Butt . Knowledge be power . 

 your affectionate KENELM . 

 P. S. - now that I have lick Butt , I have make it up with he . 


 from that time Kenelm prosper . eulogistic letter from the illustrious 
 head - master shower in upon Sir Peter . at the age of sixteen Kenelm 
 Chillingly be the head of the school , and , quit it finally , 
 bring home the follow letter from his Orbilius to Sir Peter , mark 
 " confidential " : - 


 DEAR SIR PETER CHILLINGLY , - I have never feel more anxious for the 
 future career of any of my pupil than I do for that of your son . he be 
 so clever that , with ease to himself , he may become a great man . he be 
 so peculiar that it be quite as likely that he may only make himself 
 know to the world as a great oddity . that distinguished teacher Dr. 
 Arnold say that the difference between one boy and another be not so 
 much talent as energy . your son have talent , have energy : yet he want 
 something for success in life ; he want the faculty of amalgamation . he 
 be of a melancholic and therefore unsocial temperament . he will not act 
 in concert with other . he be lovable enough : the other boy like he , 
 especially the small one , with whom he be a sort of hero ; but he 
 have not one intimate friend . so far as school learning be concern , 
 he might go to college at once , and with the certainty of distinction 
 provide he choose to exert himself . but if I may venture to offer an 
 advice , I should say employ the next two year in let he see 
 a little more of real life and acquire a due sense of its practical 
 object . send he to a private tutor who be not a pedant , but a man 
 of letter or a man of the world , and if in the metropolis so much the 
 well . in a word , my young friend be unlike other people ; and , with 
 quality that might do anything in life , I fear , unless you can get 
 he to be like other people , that he will do nothing . excuse the freedom 
 with which I write , and ascribe it to the singular interest with which 
 your son have inspire I . I have the honour to be , dear Sir Peter , 

 your truly , WILLIAM HORTON . 


 upon the strength of this letter Sir Peter do not indeed summon another 
 family council ; for he do not consider that his three maiden sister 
 could offer any practical advice on the matter . and as to Mr. Gordon , 
 that gentleman have go to law on the great timber question , and 
 have be signally beat thereon , have inform Sir Peter that he 
 disown he as a cousin and despise he as a man ; not exactly in those 
 word , - more covertly , and therefore more stingingly . but Sir Peter 
 invite Mr. Mivers for a week 's shooting , and request the Reverend 
 John to meet he . 

 Mr. Mivers arrive . the sixteen year that have elapse since he be 
 first introduce to the reader have make no perceptible change in his 
 appearance . it be one of his maxim that in youth a man of the world 
 should appear old than he be ; and in middle age , and thence to his 
 die day , young . and he announce one secret for attain that art 
 in these word : " begin your wig early , thus you never become gray . " 

 unlike most philosopher , Mivers make his practice conform to his 
 precept ; and while in the prime of youth inaugurate a wig in a 
 fashion that defy the flight of time , not curly and hyacinthine , but 
 straight - haired and unassuming . he look five - and - thirty from the day 
 he put on that wig at the age of twenty - five . he look five - and - thirty 
 now at the age of fifty - one . 

 " I mean , " say he , " to remain thirty - five all my life . no well age to 
 stick at . People may choose to say I be more , but I shall not own it . no 
 one be bind to criminate himself . " 

 Mr. Mivers have some other aphorism on this important subject . one 
 be , " refuse to be ill . never tell people you be ill ; never own it to 
 yourself . illness be one of those thing which a man should resist on 
 principle at the onset . it should never be allow to get in the thin 
 end of the wedge . but take care of your constitution , and , have 
 ascertain the good habit for it , keep to they like clockwork . " Mr. 
 Mivers would not have miss his constitutional walk in the Park before 
 breakfast if , by go in a cab to St. Giles 's , he could have save the 
 city of London from conflagration . 

 another aphorism of his be , " if you want to keep young , live in a 
 metropolis ; never stay above a few week at a time in the country . take 
 two man of similar constitution at the age of twenty - five ; let one live 
 in London and enjoy a regular sort of club life ; send the other to some 
 rural district , preposterously call ' salubrious . ' look at these man 
 when they have both reach the age of forty - five . the London man have 
 preserve his figure : the rural man have a paunch . the London man have 
 an interesting delicacy of complexion : the face of the rural man be 
 coarse - grain and perhaps jowly . " 

 a third axiom be , " do not   be a family man ; nothing age one like 
 matrimonial felicity and paternal tie . never multiply care , and pack 
 up your life in the brief compass you can . why add to your carpet - bag 
 of trouble the content of a lady 's imperial and bonnet - box , and the 
 travel fourgon require by the nursery ? Shun ambition : it be so 
 gouty . it take a great deal out of a man 's life , and give he nothing 
 worth have till he have cease to enjoy it . " another of his aphorism 
 be this , " a fresh mind keep the body fresh . take in the idea of the 
 day , drain off those of yesterday . as to the morrow , time enough to 
 consider it when it become to - day . " 

 preserve himself by attention to these rule , Mr. Mivers appear at 
 Exmundham totus , tere , but not rotundus , - a man of middle height , 
 slender , upright , with well - cut , small , slight feature , thin lip , 
 enclose an excellent set of tooth , even , white , and not indebte 
 to the dentist . for the sake of those tooth he shun acid wine , 
 especially hock in all its variety , culinary sweet , and hot drink . 
 he drink even his tea cold . 

 " there be , " he say , " two thing in life that a sage must preserve at 
 every sacrifice , the coat of his stomach and the enamel of his tooth . 
 some evil admit of consolation : there be no comforter for dyspepsia 
 and toothache . " a man of letter , but a man of the world , he have so 
 cultivate his mind as both that he be fear as the one and like as 
 the other . as a man of letter he despise the world ; as a man of the 
 world he despise letter . as the representative of both he revere 
 himself . 



 CHAPTER IX . 

 on the evening of the third day from the arrival of Mr. Mivers , he , the 
 Parson , and Sir Peter be seat in the host 's parlour , the Parson in 
 an armchair by the ingle , smoke a short cutty - pipe ; miver at length 
 on the couch , slowly inhale the perfume of one of his own choice 
  trabuco . Sir Peter never smoke . there be spirit and hot water and 
 lemon on the table . the Parson be fame for skill in the composition 
 of toddy . from time to time the Parson sip his glass , and Sir Peter 
 less frequently do the same . it be needless to say that Mr. Mivers 
 eschew toddy ; but beside he , on a chair , be a tumbler and a large 
 carafe of iced water . 

 SIR PETER . - " Cousin Mivers , you have now have time to study Kenelm , 
 and to compare his character with that assign to he in the Doctor 's 
 letter . " 

 miver   languidly . - " ay . " 

 SIR PETER . - " I ask you , as a man of the world , what you think I have 
 good do with the boy . shall I send he to such a tutor as the Doctor 
 suggest ? Cousin John be not of the same mind as the Doctor , and think 
 that Kenelm 's oddity be fine thing in their way , and should not be 
 prematurely grind out of he by contact with worldly tutor and London 
 pavement . " 

 " ay , " repeat Mr. Mivers more languidly than before . after a pause he 
 add , " Parson John , let we hear you . " 

 the Parson lay aside his cutty - pipe and empty his fourth tumbler of 
 toddy ; then , throw back his head in the dreamy fashion of the great 
 Coleridge when he indulge in a monologue , he thus begin , speak 
 somewhat through his nose , - 

 " at the morning of life - " 

 here Mivers shrug his shoulder , turn round on his couch , and 
 close his eye with the sigh of a man resign himself to a homily . 

 " at the morning of life , when the dew - " 

 " I know the dew be come , " say miver . " dry they , if you please ; 
 nothing so unwholesome . we anticipate what you mean to say , which be 
 plainly this , when a fellow be sixteen he be very fresh : so he be ; pass 
 on ; what then ? " 

 " if you mean to interrupt I with your habitual cynicism , " say the 
 Parson , " why do you ask to hear I ? " 

 " that be a mistake I grant ; but who on earth could conceive that you 
 be go to commence in that florid style ? morning of life indeed ! 
 bosh ! " 

 " Cousin Mivers , " say Sir Peter , " you be not review John 's style in 
 ' the Londoner ; ' and I will beg you to remember that my son 's morning of 
 life be a serious thing to his father , and not to be nip in its bud 
 by a cousin . Proceed , John ! " 

 Quoth the Parson , good - humouredly , " I will adapt my style to the taste 
 of my critic . when a fellow be at the age of sixteen , and very fresh 
 to life , the question be whether he should begin thus prematurely to 
 exchange the idea that belong to youth for the idea that properly 
 belong to middle age , - whether he should begin to acquire that knowledge 
 of the world which middle - aged man have acquire and can teach . I think 
 not . I would rather have he yet a while in the company of the poet ; 
 in the indulgence of glorious hope and beautiful dream , form to 
 himself some type of the Heroic , which he will keep before his eye as 
 a standard when he go into the world as man . there be two school of 
 think for the formation of character , - the Real and the Ideal . I would 
 form the character in the Ideal school , in order to make it bold and 
 grander and lovelier when it take its place in that every - day life 
 which be call real . and therefore I be not for place the descendant 
 of Sir Kenelm Digby , in the interval between school and college , with a 
 man of the world , probably as cynical as Cousin Mivers and live in the 
 stony thoroughfare of London . " 

 MR . MIVERS   rouse himself . - " before we plunge into that Serbonian 
 bog - the controversy between the Realistic and the Idealistic 
 academician - I think the first thing to decide be what you want Kenelm 
 to be hereafter . when I order a pair of shoe , I decide beforehand what 
 kind of shoe they be to be , - court pump or strong walking shoe ; 
 and I do not   ask the shoemaker to give I a preliminary lecture upon the 
 different purpose of locomotion to which leather can be apply . if , 
 Sir Peter , you want Kenelm to scribble lackadaisical poem , listen to 
 Parson John ; if you want to fill his head with pastoral rubbish about 
 innocent love , which may end in marry the miller 's daughter , listen 
 to Parson John ; if you want he to enter life a soft - headed greenhorn , 
 who will sign any bill carry 50 per cent to which a young scamp ask 
 he to be security , listen to Parson John ; in fine , if you wish a clever 
 lad to become either a pigeon or a ring - dove , a credulous booby or a 
 sentimental milksop , Parson John be the good adviser you can have . " 

 " but I do not   want my son to ripen into either of those imbecile 
 development of specie . " 

 " then do not   listen to Parson John ; and there be an end of the 
 discussion . " 

 " no , there be not . I have not hear your advice what to do if John 's 
 advice be not to be take . " 

 Mr. Mivers hesitate . he seem puzzle . 

 " the fact be , " say the Parson , " that miver get up ' the Londoner ' 
 upon a principle that regulate his own mind , - find fault with the way 
 everything be do , but never commit yourself by say how anything can 
 be do well . " 

 " that be true , " say miver , candidly . " the destructive order of mind be 
 seldom ally to the constructive . I and ' the Londoner ' be destructive 
 by nature and by policy . we can reduce a building into rubbish , but we 
 do not   profess to turn rubbish into a building . we be critic , and , as 
 you say , not such fool as to commit ourselves to the proposition of 
 amendment that can be criticise by other . nevertheless , for your 
 sake , Cousin Peter , and on the condition that if I give my advice you 
 will never say that I give it , and if you take it that you will never 
 reproach I if it turn out , as most advice do , very ill , - I will 
 depart from my custom and hazard my opinion . " 

 " I accept the condition . " 

 " well then , with every new generation there spring up a new order of 
 idea . the early the age at which a man seize the idea that will 
 influence his own generation , the more he have a start in the race with 
 his contemporary . if Kenelm comprehend at sixteen those intellectual 
 sign of the time which , when he go up to college , he will find young 
 man of eighteen or twenty only just prepared to comprehend , he 
 will produce a deep impression of his power for reasoning and their 
 adaptation to actual life , which will be of great service to he later . 
 now the idea that influence the mass of the rise generation never 
 have their well - head in the generation itself . they have their source in 
 the generation before they , generally in a small minority , neglect or 
 contemn by the great majority which adopt they later . therefore a lad 
 at the age of sixteen , if he want to get at such idea , must come 
 into close contact with some superior mind in which they be conceive 
 twenty or thirty year before . I be consequently for place Kenelm with 
 a person from whom the new idea can be learn . I be also for his being 
 place in the metropolis during the process of this initiation . with 
 such introduction as be at our command , he may come in contact not 
 only with new idea , but with eminent man in all vocation . it be a 
 great thing to mix betime with clever people . one pick their brain 
 unconsciously . there be another advantage , and not a small one , in 
 this early entrance into good society . a youth learn manner , 
 self - possession , readiness of resource ; and he be much less likely to 
 get into scrape and contract taste for low vice and mean dissipation , 
 when he come into life wholly his own master , after have acquire 
 a predilection for refined companionship under the guidance of those 
 competent to select it . there , I have talk myself out of breath . and 
 you have well decide at once in favour of my advice ; for as I be of a 
 contradictory temperament , myself of to - morrow may probably contradict 
 myself of to - day . " 

 Sir Peter be greatly impressed with his cousin 's argumentative 
 eloquence . 

 the Parson smoke his cutty - pipe in silence until appeal to by Sir 
 Peter , and he then say , " in this programme of education for a Christian 
 gentleman , the part of Christian seem to I leave out . " 

 " the tendency of the age , " observe Mr. Mivers , calmly , " be towards that 
 omission . secular education be the necessary reaction from the special 
 theological training which arise in the dislike of one set of Christians 
 to the teaching of another set ; and as these antagonist will not agree 
 how religion be to be teach , either there must be no teaching at all , 
 or religion must be eliminate from the tuition . " 

 " that may do very well for some huge system of national education , " say 
 Sir Peter , " but it do not apply to Kenelm , as one of a family all of 
 whose member belong to the Established Church . he may be teach the 
 creed of his forefather without offend a dissenter . " 

 " which Established Church be he to belong to ? " ask Mr. Mivers , - " high 
 Church , Low Church , Broad Church , Puseyite Church , Ritualistic Church , 
 or any other Established Church that may be come into fashion ? " 

 " Pshaw ! " say the Parson . " that sneer be out of place . you know very 
 well that one merit of our Church be the spirit of toleration , which 
 do not magnify every variety of opinion into a heresy or a schism . 
 but if Sir Peter send his son at the age of sixteen to a tutor who 
 eliminate the religion of Christianity from his teaching , he deserve 
 to be thrash within an inch of his life ; and , " continue the Parson , 
 eye Sir Peter sternly , and mechanically turn up his cuff , " I 
 should like to thrash he . " 

 " gently , John , " say Sir Peter , recoiling ; " gently , my dear kinsman . my 
 heir shall not be educate as a heathen , and Mivers be only banter 
 we . Come , Mivers , do you happen to know among your London friend some 
 man who , though a scholar and a man of the world , be still a Christian ? " 

 " a Christian as by law establish ? " 

 " well - yes . " 

 " and who will receive Kenelm as a pupil ? " 

 " of course I be not put , such question to you out of idle 
 curiosity . " 

 " I know exactly the man . he be originally intend for order , and be 
 a very learn theologian . he relinquish the thought of the clerical 
 profession on succeed to a small land estate by the sudden death of 
 an eld brother . he then come to London and buy experience : that 
 be , he be naturally generous ; he become easily take in ; get into 
 difficulty ; the estate be transfer to trustee for the benefit of 
 creditor , and on the payment of L400 a year to himself . by this time 
 he be marry and have two child . he find the necessity of employ 
 his pen in order to add to his income , and be one of the able 
 contributor to the periodical press . he be an elegant scholar , an 
 effective writer , much court by public man , a thorough gentleman , have 
 a pleasant house , and receive the good society . have be once take 
 in , he defy any one to take he in again . his experience be not 
 buy too dearly . no more acute and accomplished man of the world . the 
 three hundred a year or so that you would pay for Kenelm would suit he 
 very well . his name be Welby , and he live in Chester Square . " 

 " no doubt he be a contributor to ' the Londoner , ' " say the Parson , 
 sarcastically . 

 " true . he write our classical , theological , and metaphysical article . 
 suppose I invite he to come here for a day or two , and you can see he 
 and judge for yourself , Sir Peter ? " 

 " do . " 



 CHAPTER X. 

 MR . WELBY arrive , and please everybody . a man of the happy manner , 
 easy and courteous . there be no pedantry in he , yet you could soon see 
 that his reading cover an extensive surface , and here and there 
 have dive deeply . he enchant the Parson by his comment on Saint 
 Chrysostom ; he dazzle Sir Peter with his lore in the antiquity of 
 ancient Britain ; he captivate Kenelm by his readiness to enter into 
 that most disputatious of science call metaphysic ; while for Lady 
 Chillingly , and the three sister who be invite to meet he , he be 
 more entertaining , but not less instructive . equally at home in novel 
 and in good book , he give to the spinster a list of innocent work 
 in either ; while for Lady Chillingly he sparkle with anecdote of 
 fashionable life , the new bon mot , the late scandal . in fact , 
 Mr. Welby be one of those brilliant person who adorn any society 
 amidst which they be throw . if at heart he be a disappointed man , 
 the disappointment be conceal by an even serenity of spirit ; he 
 have entertain high and justifiable hope of a brilliant career and a 
 last reputation as a theologian and a preacher ; the succession to 
 his estate at the age of twenty - three have change the nature of his 
 ambition . the charm of his manner be such that he spring at once into 
 the fashion , and become beguile by his own genial temperament into that 
 less but pleasanter kind of ambition which content itself with social 
 success and enjoy the present hour . when his circumstance compel 
 he to eke out his income by literary profit , he slide into the groove 
 of periodical composition , and resign all thought of the labour 
 require for any complete work , which might take much time and be 
 attend with scanty profit . he still remain very popular in society , 
 and perhaps his general reputation for ability make he fearful to 
 hazard it by any great undertaking . he be not , like Mivers , a despiser 
 of all man and all thing ; but he regard man and thing as an 
 indifferent though good - natured spectator regard the throng street 
 from a drawing - room window . he could not be call blase , but he be 
 thoroughly desillusionne . once over - romantic , his character now be so 
 entirely imbue with the neutral tint of life that romance offend his 
 taste as an obtrusion of violent colour into a sober woof . he be become 
 a thorough Realist in his code of criticism , and in his worldly mode 
 of action and thought . but Parson John do not perceive this , for 
 Welby listen to that gentleman 's eulogy on the Ideal school without 
 trouble himself to contradict they . he have grow too indolent to be 
 combative in conversation , and only as a critic betray such pugnacity 
 as remain to he by the polished cruelty of sarcasm . 

 he come off with fly colour through an examination into his Church 
 orthodoxy institute by the Parson and Sir Peter . amid a cloud of 
 ecclesiastical erudition , his own opinion vanish in those of the 
 father . in truth , he be a Realist , in religion as in everything else . 
 he regard Christianity as a type of existent civilization , which 
 ought to be reverence , as one might recognize the other type of that 
 civilization ; such as the liberty of the press , the representative 
 system , white neckcloth and black coat of an evening , etc . he 
 belong , therefore , to what he himself call the school of Eclectical 
 Christiology ; and accommodate the reasoning of deism to the doctrine 
 of the Church , if not as a creed , at least as an institution . finally , 
 he unite all the Chillingly vote in his favour ; and when he depart 
 from the Hall carry off Kenelm for his initiation into the new idea 
 that be to govern his generation . 



 CHAPTER XI . 

 KENELM remain a year and a half with this distinguished preceptor . 
 during that time he learn much in book - lore ; he see much , too , of the 
 eminent man of the day , in literature , the law , and the senate . he see , 
 also , a good deal of the fashionable world . fine lady , who have be 
 friend of his mother in her youth , take he up , counsel and pet 
 he , - one in especial , the Marchioness of Glenalvon , to whom he be 
 endear by grateful association , for her young son have be a 
 fellow - pupil of Kenelm at Merton School , and Kenelm have save his life 
 from drown . the poor boy die of consumption later , and her grief for 
 his loss make her affection for Kenelm yet more tender . Lady Glenalvon 
 be one of the queen of the London world . though in the fiftieth 
 year she be still very handsome : she be also very accomplished , very 
 clever , and very kind - hearted , as some of such queen be ; just one 
 of those woman invaluable in form the manner and elevate the 
 character of young man destine to make a figure in after - life . but she 
 be very angry with herself in think that she fail to arouse any 
 such ambition in the heir of the Chillinglys . 

 it may here be say that Kenelm be not without great advantage of form 
 and countenance . he be tall , and the youthful grace of his proportion 
 conceal his physical strength , which be extraordinary rather from the 
 iron texture than the bulk of his thews and sinew . his face , though it 
 certainly lack the roundness of youth , have a grave , sombre , haunt 
 sort of beauty , not artistically regular , but picturesque , peculiar , 
 with large dark expressive eye , and a certain indescribable combination 
 of sweetness and melancholy in his quiet smile . he never laugh 
 audibly , but he have a quick sense of the comic , and his eye would laugh 
 when his lip be silent . he would say queer , droll , unexpected thing 
 which pass for humour ; but , save for that gleam in the eye , he could 
 not have say they with more seeming innocence of intentional joke if he 
 have be a monk of La Trappe look up from the grave he be dig in 
 order to utter " memento mori . " 

 that face of his be a great " take in . " woman think it full of 
 romantic sentiment ; the face of one easily move to love , and whose love 
 would be replete alike with poetry and passion . but he remain as proof 
 as the youthful Hippolytus to all female attraction . he delight the 
 Parson by keep up his practice in athletic pursuit ; and obtain a 
 reputation at the pugilistic school , which he attend regularly , as the 
 good gentleman boxer about town . 

 he make many acquaintance , but still form no friendship . yet every 
 one who see he much conceive affection for he . if he do not return 
 that affection , he do not repel it . he be exceedingly gentle in voice 
 and manner , and have all his father 's placidity of temper : child and 
 dog take to he as by instinct . 

 on leave Mr. Welby 's , Kenelm carry to Cambridge a mind largely 
 stock with the new idea that be bud into leaf . he certainly 
 astonish the other freshman , and occasionally puzzle the mighty 
 Fellows of Trinity and St. John 's . but he gradually withdraw himself 
 much from general society . in fact , he be too old in mind for his 
 year ; and after have mix in the choice circle of a metropolis , 
 college supper and wine party have little charm for he . he maintain 
 his pugilistic renown ; and on certain occasion , when some delicate 
 undergraduate have be bully by some gigantic bargeman , his muscular 
 Christianity nobly develop itself . he do not do as much as he might 
 have do in the more intellectual way of academical distinction . 
 still , he be always among the first in the college examination ; he win 
 two university prize , and take a very creditable degree , after which 
 he return home , more odd , more saturnine - in short , less like other 
 people - than when he have leave Merton School . he have weave a solitude 
 round he out of his own heart , and in that solitude he sit still and 
 watchful as a spider sit in his web . 

 whether from natural temperament or from his educational training under 
 such teacher as Mr. Mivers , who carry out the new idea of reform by 
 revere nothing in the past , and Mr. Welby , who accept the routine of 
 the present as realistic , and pooh - poohe all vision of the future as 
 idealistic , Kenelm 's chief mental characteristic be a kind of tranquil 
 indifferentism . it be difficult to detect in he either of those 
 ordinary incentive to action , - vanity or ambition , the yearning for 
 applause or the desire of power . to all female fascination he have be 
 hitherto star - proof . he have never experience love , but he have read 
 a good deal about it ; and that passion seem to he an unaccountable 
 aberration of human reason , and an ignominious surrender of the 
 equanimity of thought which it should be the object of masculine nature 
 to maintain undisturbed . a very eloquent book in praise of celibacy , and 
 entitle " the Approach to the Angels , " write by that eminent Oxford 
 scholar , Decimus Roach , have produce so remarkable an effect upon his 
 youthful mind that , have he be a Roman Catholic , he might have become 
 a monk . where he most evince ardour it be a logician 's ardour for 
 abstract truth ; that be , for what he consider truth : and , as what 
 seem truth to one man be sure to seem falsehood to some other man , this 
 predilection of his be not without its inconvenience and danger , as 
 may probably be see in the following chapter . 

 meanwhile , rightly to appreciate his conduct therein , I entreat thee , O 
 candid reader   not that any reader ever be candid , to remember that he 
 be brimful of new idea , which , meet by a deep and hostile undercurrent 
 of old idea , become more provocatively billowy and surge . 



 CHAPTER XII . 

 there have be great festivity at Exmundham , in celebration of the 
 honour bestow upon the world by the fact that Kenelm Chillingly have 
 live twenty - one year in it . 

 the young heir have make a speech to the assemble tenant and other 
 admit reveller , which have by no mean add to the exhilaration of 
 the proceeding . he speak with a fluency and self - possession which be 
 surprising in a youth address a multitude for the first time . but his 
 speech be not cheerful . 

 the principal tenant on the estate , in propose his health , have 
 naturally refer to the long line of his ancestor . his father 's 
 merit as man and landlord have be enthusiastically commemorate ; and 
 many happy augury for his own future career have be draw , partly 
 from the excellence of his parentage , partly from his own youthful 
 promise in the honour achieve at the University . 

 Kenelm Chillingly in reply largely avail himself of those new idea 
 which be to influence the rise generation , and with which he have 
 be render familiar by the journal of Mr. Mivers and the conversation 
 of Mr. Welby . 

 he briefly dispose of the ancestral part of the question . he observe 
 that it be singular to note how long any give family or , dynasty could 
 continue to flourish in any give nook of matter in creation , without 
 any exhibition of intellectual power beyond those display by a 
 succession of vegetable crop . " it be certainly true , " he say , " that 
 the Chillinglys have live in this place from father to son for about a 
 fourth part of the history of the world , since the date which Sir Isaac 
 Newton assign to the Deluge . but , so far as can be judge by existent 
 record , the world have not be in any way wise or well for their 
 existence . they be bear to eat as long as they could eat , and when 
 they could eat no long they die . not that in this respect they be 
 a whit less insignificant than the generality of their fellow - creature . 
 Most of we now present , " continue the youthful orator , " be only bear 
 in order to die ; and the chief consolation of our wound pride in 
 admit this fact be in the probability that our posterity will not 
 be of more consequence to the scheme of Nature than we ourselves be . " 
 pass from that philosophical view of his own ancestor in particular , 
 and of the human race in general , Kenelm Chillingly then touch with 
 serene analysis on the eulogy lavish on his father as man and 
 landlord . 

 " as man , " he say , " my father no doubt deserve all that can be say 
 by man in favour of man . but what , at the good , be man ? a crude , 
 struggle , undeveloped embryo , of whom it be the high attribute that 
 he feel a vague consciousness that he be only an embryo , and can not 
 complete himself till he cease to be a man ; that be , until he become 
 another be in another form of existence . we can praise a dog as 
 a dog , because a dog be a complete ens , and not an embryo . but to 
 praise a man as man , forget that he be only a germ out of which a 
 form wholly different be ultimately to spring , be equally opposed 
 to Scriptural belief in his present crudity and imperfection , and to 
 psychological or metaphysical examination of a mental construction 
 evidently design for purpose that he can never fulfil as man . that my 
 father be an embryo not more incomplete than any present be quite true ; 
 but that , you will see on reflection , be say very little on his 
 behalf . even in the boasted physical formation of we man , you be 
 aware that the well - shaped amongst we , accord to the last scientific 
 discovery , be only a development of some hideous hairy animal , such 
 as a gorilla ; and the ancestral gorilla itself have its own aboriginal 
 forefather in a small marine animal shape like a two - neck bottle . the 
 probability be that , some day or other , we shall be exterminate by a 
 new development of specie . 

 " as for the merit assign to my father as landlord , I must 
 respectfully dissent from the panegyric so rashly bestow on he . for 
 all sound reasoner must concur in this , that the first duty of an owner 
 of land be not to the occupier to whom he lease it , but to the nation 
 at large . it be his duty to see that the land yield to the community 
 the utmost it can yield . in order to effect this object , a landlord 
 should put up his farm to competition , exact the high rent he can 
 possibly get from responsible competitor . competitive examination be 
 the enlightened order of the day , even in profession in which the good 
 man would have quality that defy examination . in agriculture , happily , 
 the principle of competitive examination be not so hostile to the choice 
 of the good man as it must be , for instance , in diplomacy , where a 
 Talleyrand would be exclude for know no language but his own ; and 
 still more in the army , where promotion would be deny to an officer 
 who , like Marlborough , could not spell . but in agriculture a landlord 
 have only to inquire who can give the high rent , have the large 
 capital , subject by the strict penalty of law to the condition of 
 a lease dictate by the most scientific agriculturist under penalty 
 fix by the most cautious conveyancer . by this mode of procedure , 
 recommend by the most liberal economist of our age , - bar those 
 still more liberal who deny that property in land be any property at 
 all , - by this mode of procedure , I say , a landlord do his duty to his 
 country . he secure tenant who can produce the most to the community by 
 their capital , test through competitive examination in their banker ' 
 account and the security they can give , and through the rigidity of 
 covenant suggest by a Liebig and reduce into law by a Chitty . but on 
 my father 's land I see a great many tenant with little skill and less 
 capital , ignorant of a Liebig and revolt from a Chitty , and no 
 filial enthusiasm can induce I honestly to say that my father be a good 
 landlord . he have prefer his affection for individual to his duty 
 to the community . it be not , my friend , a question whether a handful of 
 farmer like yourself go to the workhouse or not . it be a consumer 's 
 question . do you produce the maximum of corn to the consumer ? 

 " with respect to myself , " continue the orator , warm as the cold 
 he have engender in his audience become more freezingly feel , - " with 
 respect to myself , I do not deny that , owe to the accident of training 
 for a very faulty and contract course of education , I have obtain 
 what be call ' honour ' at the University of Cambridge ; but you must 
 not regard that fact as a promise of any worth in my future passage 
 through life . some of the most useless person - especially narrow - minded 
 and bigote - have acquire far high honour at the University than 
 have fall to my lot . 

 " I thank you no less for the civil thing you have say of I and of my 
 family ; but I shall endeavour to walk to that grave to which we be all 
 bind with a tranquil indifference as to what people may say of I in 
 so short a journey . and the soon , my friend , we get to our journey 's 
 end , the well our chance of escape a great many pain , trouble , 
 sin , and disease . so that when I drink to your good health , you must 
 feel that in reality I wish you an early deliverance from the ill to 
 which flesh be expose , and which so generally increase with our year 
 that good health be scarcely compatible with the decay faculty of 
 old age . gentleman , your good health ! " 



 CHAPTER XIII . 

 the morning after these birthday rejoicing , Sir Peter and Lady 
 chillingly hold a long consultation on the peculiarity of their heir , 
 and the good mode of instill into his mind the expediency either 
 of entertain more pleasing view , or at least of profess less 
 unpopular sentiment ; compatibly of course , though they do not say it , 
 with the new idea that be to govern his century . have come to an 
 agreement on this delicate subject , they go forth , arm in arm , in 
 search of their heir . Kenelm seldom meet they at breakfast . he be an 
 early riser , and accustom to solitary ramble before his parent be 
 out of bed . 

 the worthy pair find Kenelm seat on the bank of a trout - stream that 
 meander through Chillingly Park , dip his line into the water , and 
 yawning , with apparent relief in that operation . 

 " do fishing amuse you , my boy ? " say Sir Peter , heartily . 

 " not in the least , sir , " answer Kenelm . 

 " then why do you do it ? " ask Lady Chillingly . 

 " because I know nothing else that amuse I more . " 

 " ah ! that be it , " say Sir Peter : " the whole secret of Kenelm 's oddity 
 be to be find in these word , my dear ; he need amusement . voltaire 
 say truly , ' amusement be one of the want of man . ' and if Kenelm could 
 be amuse like other people , he would be like other people . " 

 " in that case , " say Kenelm , gravely , and extract from the water 
 a small but lively trout , which settle itself in Lady Chillingly 's 
 lap , - " in that case I would rather not be amuse . I have no interest 
 in the absurdity of other people . the instinct of self - preservation 
 compel I to have some interest in my own . " 

 " Kenelm , sir , " exclaim Lady Chillingly , with an animation into which 
 her tranquil ladyship be very rarely betray , " take away that horrid 
 damp thing ! put down your rod and attend to what your father say . your 
 strange conduct give we cause of serious anxiety . " 

 Kenelm unhook the trout , deposit the fish in his basket , and raise 
 his large eye to his father 's face , say , " what be there in my conduct 
 that occasion you displeasure ? " 

 " not displeasure , Kenelm , " say Sir Peter , kindly , " but anxiety ; your 
 mother have hit upon the right word . you see , my dear son , that it be 
 my wish that you should distinguish yourself in the world . you might 
 represent this county , as your ancestor have do before . I have look 
 forward to the proceeding of yesterday as an admirable occasion for 
 your introduction to your future constituent . Oratory be the talent 
 most appreciated in a free country , and why should you not be an orator ? 
 demosthene say that delivery , delivery , delivery , be the art of 
 oratory ; and your delivery be excellent , graceful , self - possess , 
 classical . " 

 " Pardon I , my dear father , demosthene do not say delivery , 
 nor action , as the word be commonly render ; he say , ' act , or 
 stage - play , ' - the art by which a man deliver a speech in a feigned 
 character , whence we get the word hypocrisy . Hypocrisy , hypocrisy , 
 hypocrisy ! be , accord to demosthene , the triple art of the orator . 
 do you wish I to become triply a hypocrite ? " 

 " Kenelm , I be ashamed of you . you know as well as I do that it be only 
 by metaphor that you can twist the word ascribe to the great Athenian 
 into the sense of hypocrisy . but assume it , as you say , to mean not 
 delivery , but act , I understand why your debut as an orator be 
 not successful . your delivery be excellent , your act defective . 
 an orator should please , conciliate , persuade , prepossess . you do the 
 reverse of all this ; and though you produce a great effect , the effect 
 be so decidedly to your disadvantage that it would have lose you an 
 election on any husting in England . " 

 " be I to understand , my dear father , " say Kenelm , in the mournful and 
 compassionate tone with which a pious minister of the Church reprove 
 some abandon and hoary sinner , - " be I to understand that you would 
 commend to your son the adoption of deliberate falsehood for the gain of 
 a selfish advantage ? " 

 " deliberate falsehood ! you impertinent puppy ! " 

 " Puppy ! " repeat Kenelm , not indignantly but musingly , - " puppy ! a 
 well - breed puppy take after its parent . " 

 Sir Peter burst out laugh . 

 Lady Chillingly rise with dignity , shake her gown , unfold her parasol , 
 and stalk away speechless . 

 " now , look you , Kenelm , " say Sir Peter , as soon as he have compose 
 himself . " these quip and humour of yours be amusing enough to an 
 eccentric man like myself , but they will not do for the world ; and 
 how at your age , and with the rare advantage you have have in an early 
 introduction to the good intellectual society , under the guidance of a 
 tutor acquaint with the new idea which be to influence the 
 conduct of statesman , you could have make so silly a speech as you do 
 yesterday , I can not understand . " 

 " my dear father , allow I to assure you that the idea I express be 
 the new idea most in vogue , - idea express in still plainer , or , if 
 you prefer the epithet , still silly term than I employ . you will 
 find they instill into the public mind by ' the Londoner ' and by most 
 intellectual journal of a liberal character . " 

 " Kenelm , Kenelm , such idea would turn the world topsy - turvy . " 

 " new idea always do tend to turn old idea topsy - turvy . and the world , 
 after all , be only an idea , which be turn topsy - turvy with every 
 successive century . " 

 " you make I sick of the word ' idea . ' leave off your metaphysics and 
 study real life . " 

 " it be real life which I do study under Mr. Welby . he be the 
 Archimandrite of Realism . it be sham life which you wish I to study . to 
 oblige you I be willing to commence it . I dare say it be very pleasant . 
 real life be not ; on the contrary - dull , " and Kenelm yawn again . 

 " have you no young friend among your fellow - collegian ? " 

 " friend ! certainly not , sir . but I believe I have some enemy , who 
 answer the same purpose as friend , only they do not   hurt one so much . " 

 " do you mean to say that you live alone at Cambridge ? " 

 " no , I live a good deal with Aristophanes , and a little with conic 
 Sections and Hydrostatics . " 

 " Books . Dry company . " 

 " more innocent , at least , than moist company . do you ever get drunk , 
 sir ? " 

 " Drunk ! " 

 " I try to do so once with the young companion whom you would commend 
 to I as friend . I do not   think I succeed , but I wake with a headache . 
 real life at college abound with headache . " 

 " Kenelm , my boy , one thing be clear : you must travel . " 

 " as you please , sir . Marcus Antoninus say that it be all one to a stone 
 whether it be throw upwards or downward . when shall I start ? " 

 " very soon . of course there be preparation to make ; you should have a 
 travel companion . I do not   mean a tutor , - you be too clever and 
 too steady to need one , - but a pleasant , sensible , well - mannered young 
 person of your own age . " 

 " my own age , - male or female ? " 

 Sir Peter try hard to frown . the utmost he could do be to reply 
 gravely , " FEMALE ! if I say you be too steady to need a tutor , it be 
 because you have hitherto seem little likely to be lead out of your 
 way by female allurement . among your other study may I inquire if you 
 have include that which no man have ever yet thoroughly master , - the 
 study of woman ? " 

 " certainly . do you object to my catch another trout ? " 

 " Trout be - bless , or the reverse . so you have study woman . I should 
 never have think it . where and when do you commence that department 
 of science ? " 

 " when ? ever since I be ten year old . where ? first in your own house , 
 then at college . hush ! - a bite , " and another trout leave its native 
 element and alight on Sir Peter 's nose , whence it be solemnly 
 transfer to the basket . 

 " at ten year old , and in my own house ! that flaunt hussy Jane , the 
 under - housemaid - " 

 " jane ! no , sir . Pamela , Miss Byron , Clarissa , - female in Richardson , 
 who , accord to Dr. Johnson , ' teach the passion to move at the 
 command of virtue . ' I trust for your sake that Dr. Johnson do not err 
 in that assertion , for I find all these female at night in your own 
 private apartment . " 

 " oh ! " say Sir Peter , " that be all ? " 

 " all I remember at ten year old , " reply Kenelm . 

 " and at Mr. Welby 's or at college , " proceed Sir Peter , timorously , 
 " be your acquaintance with female of the same kind ? " 

 Kenelm shake his head . " much worse : they be very naughty indeed at 
 college . " 

 " I should think so , with such a lot of young fellow run after 
 they . " 

 " very few fellow run after the female . I mean - rather avoid they . " 

 " so much the well . " 

 " no , my father , so much the bad ; without an intimate knowledge of 
 those female there be little use go to college at all . " 

 " explain yourself . " 

 " every one who receive a classical education be introduce into their 
 society , - Pyrrha and Lydia , Glycera and Corinna , and many more of the 
 same sort ; and then the female in Aristophanes , what do you say to 
 they , sir ? " 

 " be it only female who live two thousand or three thousand year ago , 
 or more probably never live at all , whose intimacy you have cultivate ? 
 have you never admire any real woman ? " 

 " real woman ! I never meet one . never meet a woman who be not a sham , 
 a sham from the moment she be tell to be pretty - behaved , conceal her 
 sentiment , and look fib when she do not speak they . but if I be to 
 learn sham life , I suppose I must put up with sham woman . " 

 " have you be cross in love that you speak so bitterly of the sex ? " 

 " I do not   speak bitterly of the sex . examine any woman on her oath , and 
 she will own she be a sham , always have be , and always will be , and be 
 proud of it . " 

 " I be glad your mother be not by to hear you . you will think differently 
 one of these day . meanwhile , to turn to the other sex , be there no 
 young man of your own rank with whom you would like to travel ? " 

 " certainly not . I hate quarrel . " 

 " as you please . but you can not go quite alone : I will find you a good 
 travel - servant . I must write to town to - day about your preparation , 
 and in another week or so I hope all will be ready . your allowance will 
 be whatever you like to fix it at ; you have never be extravagant , 
 and - boy - I love you . amuse yourself , enjoy yourself , and come back 
 cure of your oddity , but preserve your honour . " 

 Sir Peter bend down and kiss his son 's brow . Kenelm be move ; he 
 rise , put his arm round his father 's shoulder , and lovingly say , in 
 an undertone , " if ever I be tempt to do a base thing , may I remember 
 whose son I be : I shall be safe then . " he withdraw his arm as he say 
 this , and take his solitary way along the bank of the stream , forgetful 
 of rod and line . 



 CHAPTER XIV . 

 the young man continue to skirt the side of the stream until he reach 
 the boundary pale of the park . here , place on a rough grass mound , 
 some former proprietor , of a social temperament , have build a kind of 
 belvidere , so as to command a cheerful view of the high road below . 
 mechanically the heir of the Chillinglys ascend the mound , seat 
 himself within the belvidere , and lean his chin on his hand in a 
 thoughtful attitude . it be rarely that the building be honour by a 
 human visitor : its habitual occupant be spider . of those industrious 
 insect it be a well - populate colony . their webs , darken with 
 dust and ornament with the wing and leg and skeleton of many an 
 unfortunate traveller , clung thick to angle and window - sill , festoon 
 the rickety table on which the young man lean his elbow , and describe 
 geometrical circle and rhomboid between the gap rail that form 
 the back of venerable chair . one large black spider - who be probably 
 the old inhabitant , and hold possession of the good place by the 
 window , ready to offer perfidious welcome to every wing itinerant 
 who might be tempt to turn aside from the high road for the sake of 
 a little cool and repose - rush from its innermost penetralia at the 
 entrance of Kenelm , and remain motionless in the centre of its mesh , 
 star at he . it do not seem quite sure whether the stranger be too 
 big or not . 

 " it be a wonderful proof of the wisdom of Providence , " say Kenelm , 
 " that whenever any large number of its creature form a community 
 or class , a secret element of disunion enter into the heart of the 
 individual form the congregation , and prevent their co - operate 
 heartily and effectually for their common interest . ' the flea would 
 have drag I out of bed if they have be unanimous , ' say the great 
 Mr. Curran ; and there can be no doubt that if all the spider in this 
 commonwealth would unite to attack I in a body , I should fall a victim 
 to their combine nipper . but spider , though inhabit the same 
 region , constitute the same race , animate by the same instinct , 
 do not combine even against a butterfly : each seek his own special 
 advantage , and not that of the community at large . and how completely 
 the life of each thing resemble a circle in this respect , that it can 
 never touch another circle at more than one point . Nay , I doubt if it 
 quite touch it even there , - there be a space between every atom ; self 
 be always selfish : and yet there be eminent master in the Academe of 
 New Ideas who wish to make we believe that all the work class of a 
 civilized world could merge every difference of race , creed , intellect , 
 individual propensity and interest into the construction of a single 
 web , stock as a larder in common ! " here the soliloquist come to a dead 
 stop , and , lean out of the window , contemplate the high road . it be 
 a very fine high road , straight and level , keep in excellent order by 
 turn pike at every eight mile . a pleasant greensward border it on 
 either side , and under the belvidere the benevolence of some mediaeval 
 Chillingly have place a little drinking - fountain for the refreshment of 
 wayfarer . close to the fountain stand a rude stone bench , overshadow 
 by a large willow , and command from the high table - ground on which 
 it be place a wide view of cornfield , meadow , and distant hill , 
 suffuse in the mellow light of the summer sun . along that road there 
 come successively a wagon fill with passenger seat on straw , - an 
 old woman , a pretty girl , two child ; then a stout farmer go to 
 market in his dog - cart ; then three fly carry fare to the near 
 railway station ; then a handsome young man on horseback , a handsome 
 young lady by his side , a groom behind . it be easy to see that the 
 young man and young lady be lover . see it in his ardent look and 
 serious lip part but for whisper only to be hear by she ; see it 
 in her downcast eye and heighten colour . " ' alas ! regardless of 
 their doom , ' " mutter Kenelm , " what trouble those ' little victim ' 
 be prepare for themselves and their progeny ! would I could lend they 
 Decimus Roach 's ' approach to the Angels ' ! " the road now for some minute 
 become solitary and still , when there be hear to the right a sprightly 
 sort of carol , half sing , half recite , in musical voice , with a 
 singularly clear enunciation , so that the word reach Kenelm 's ear 
 distinctly . they run thus : - 


  " Black Karl look forth from his cottage door , 
  he look on the forest green ; 
  and down the path , with his dog before , 
  come the Ritter of Neirestein : 
  singing , singing , lustily sing , 
  down the path with his dog before , 
  come the Ritter of Neirestein . " 


 at a voice so English , attune to a strain so Germanic , Kenelm prick 
 up attentive ear , and , turn his eye down the road , beheld , emerge 
 from the shade of beech that overhang the park pale , a figure that 
 do not altogether harmonize with the idea of a Ritter of Neirestein . it 
 be , nevertheless , a picturesque figure enough . the man be attire in a 
 somewhat threadbare suit of Lincoln green , with a high - crown Tyrolese 
 hat ; a knapsack be sling behind his shoulder , and he be attend by a 
 white pomeranian dog , evidently foot - sore , but do his good to appear 
 proficient in the chase by limp some yard in advance of his master , 
 and sniff into the hedge for rat and mouse , and such small deer . 

 by the time the pedestrian have reach to the close of his refrain he 
 have gain the fountain , and greet it with an exclamation of pleasure . 
 slip the knapsack from his shoulder , he fill the iron ladle 
 attach to the basin . he then call the dog by the name of Max , and 
 hold the ladle for he to drink . not till the animal have satisfy his 
 thirst do the master assuage his own . then , lift his hat and bath 
 his temple and face , the pedestrian seat himself on the bench , 
 and the dog nestle on the turf at his foot . after a little pause the 
 wayfarer begin again , though in a low and slow tone , to chant his 
 refrain , and proceed , with abrupt snatch , to link the verse on 
 to another stanza . it be evident that he be either endeavour to 
 remember or to invent , and it seem rather like the latter and more 
 laborious operation of mind . 


  " ' why on foot , why on foot , Ritter Karl , ' quoth he , 
  ' and not on thy palfrey gray ? ' 


 Palfrey gray - hum - gray . 


  " ' the run of ill - luck be too strong for I , 
  ' and have gallop my steed away . ' 


 that will do : good ! " 

 " good indeed ! he be easily satisfied , " mutter Kenelm . " but such 
 pedestrian do not   pass the road every day . let we talk to he . " so 
 say he slip quietly out of the window , descend the mound , 
 and let himself into the road by a screen wicket - gate , take his 
 noiseless stand behind the wayfarer and beneath the bowery willow . 

 the man have now sink into silence . perhaps he have tire himself of 
 rhyme ; or perhaps the mechanism of verse - making have be replace by 
 that kind of sentiment , or that kind of revery , which be common to the 
 temperament of those who indulge in verse - making . but the loveliness 
 of the scene before he have catch his eye , and fix it into an intent 
 gaze upon woode landscape stretch far and far to the range 
 of hill on which the heaven seem to rest . 

 " I should like to hear the rest of that german ballad , " say a voice , 
 abruptly . 

 the wayfarer start , and , turn round , present to Kenelm 's view 
 a countenance in the ripe noon of manhood , with lock and beard of a 
 deep rich auburn , bright blue eye , and a wonderful nameless charm both 
 of feature and expression , very cheerful , very frank , and not without a 
 certain nobleness of character which seem to exact respect . 

 " I beg your pardon for my interruption , " say Kenelm , lift his hat : 
 " but I overheard you recite ; and though I suppose your verse be a 
 translation from the German , I do not   remember anything like they in such 
 popular german poet as I happen to have read . " 

 " it be not a translation , sir , " reply the itinerant . " I be only 
 try to string together some idea that come into my head this fine 
 morning . " 

 " you be a poet , then ? " say Kenelm , seat himself on the bench . 

 " I dare not say poet . I be a verse - maker . " 

 " Sir , I know there be a distinction . many poet of the present day , 
 consider very good , be uncommonly bad verse - maker . for my part , I 
 could more readily imagine they to be good poet if they do not make 
 verse at all . but can I not hear the rest of the ballad ? " 

 " alas ! the rest of the ballad be not yet make . it be rather a long 
 subject , and my flight be very brief . " 

 " that be much in their favour , and very unlike the poetry in fashion . 
 you do not belong , I think , to this neighbourhood . be you and your dog 
 travel far ? " 

 " it be my holiday time , and I ramble on through the summer . I be 
 travel far , for I travel till September . life amid summer field be 
 a very joyous thing . " 

 " be it indeed ? " say Kenelm , with much naivete . " I should have think 
 that long before September you would have get very much bored with the 
 field and the dog and yourself altogether . but , to be sure , you 
 have the resource of verse - making , and that seem a very pleasant and 
 absorb occupation to those who practise it , - from our old friend 
 Horace , knead laboured alcaic into honey in his summer ramble among 
 the water woodland of Tibur , to Cardinal Richelieu , employ himself 
 on french rhyme in the interval between chop off nobleman 's head . 
 it do not seem to signify much whether the verse be good or bad , 
 so far as the pleasure of the verse - maker himself be concern ; for 
 Richelieu be as much charm with his occupation as Horace be , and his 
 verse be certainly not horatian . " 

 " surely at your age , sir , and with your evident education - " 

 " say culture ; that be the word in fashion nowadays . " 

 " well , your evident culture , you must have make verse . " 

 " latin verse , yes ; and occasionally greek . I be oblige to do so at 
 school . it do not amuse I . " 

 " try English . " 

 Kenelm shake his head . " not i. every cobbler should stick to his last . " 

 " well , put aside the verse - making : do not   you find a sensible 
 enjoyment in those solitary summer walk , when you have nature all to 
 yourself , - enjoyment in mark all the mobile evanescent change in her 
 face , - her laugh , her smile , her tear , her very frown ! " 

 " assume that by nature you mean a mechanical series of external 
 phenomenon , I object to your speaking of a machinery as if it be a 
 person of the feminine gender , - her laugh , her smile , etc . as 
 well talk of the laugh and smile of a steam - engine . but to descend to 
 common - sense . I grant there be some pleasure in solitary ramble in fine 
 weather and amid vary scenery . you say that it be a holiday excursion 
 that you be enjoy . I presume , therefore , that you have some 
 practical occupation which consume the time that you do not devote to a 
 holiday ? " 

 " yes ; I be not altogether an idler . I work sometimes , though not so hard 
 as I ought . ' life be earnest , ' as the poet say . but I and my dog be 
 rest now , and as I have still a long walk before I I must wish you 
 good - day . " 

 " I fear , " say Kenelm , with a grave and sweet politeness of tone and 
 manner , which he could command at time , and which , in its difference 
 from merely conventional urbanity , be not without fascination , - " I 
 fear that I have offend you by a question that must have seem to you 
 inquisitive , perhaps impertinent ; accept my excuse : it be very rarely 
 that I meet any one who interest I ; and you do . " as he speak he 
 offer his hand , which the wayfarer shake very cordially . 

 " I should be a churl indeed if your question could have give I 
 offence . it be rather perhaps I who be guilty of impertinence , if I 
 take advantage of my seniority in year and tender you a counsel . do not 
 despise Nature or regard she as a steam - engine ; you will find in her 
 a very agreeable and conversable friend if you will cultivate she 
 intimacy . and I do not   know a well mode of do so at your age , and 
 with your strong limb , than put a knapsack on your shoulder and 
 turn foot - traveller like myself . " 

 " Sir , I thank you for your counsel ; and I trust we may meet again 
 and interchange idea as to the thing you call Nature , - a thing which 
 science and art never appear to see with the same eye . if to an artist 
 Nature have a soul , why , so have a steam - engine . art gift with soul all 
 matter that it contemplate : science turn all that be already gift 
 with soul into matter . good - day , sir . " 

 here Kenelm turn back abruptly , and the traveller go his way , 
 silently and thoughtfully . 



 CHAPTER XV . 

 KENELM retrace his step homeward under the shade of his " old 
 hereditary tree . " one might have think his path along the 
 greensward , and by the side of the babble rivulet , be pleasanter and 
 more conducive to peaceful thought than the broad , dusty thoroughfare 
 along which plod the wanderer he have quit . but the man addict to 
 revery form his own landscape and colour his own sky . 

 " it be , " soliloquize Kenelm Chillingly , " a strange yearning I have 
 long feel , - to get out of myself , to get , as it be , into another man 's 
 skin , and have a little variety of thought and emotion . one 's self be 
 always the same self ; and that be why I yawn so often . but if I can not 
 get into another man 's skin , the next good thing be to get as unlike 
 myself as I possibly can do . let I see what be myself . myself be 
 Kenelm Chillingly , son and heir to a rich gentleman . but a fellow with 
 a knapsack on his back , sleep at wayside inn , be not at all like 
 Kenelm Chillingly ; especially if he be very short of money and may come 
 to want a dinner . perhaps that sort of fellow may take a lively view 
 of thing : he can not   take a dull one . Courage , Myself : you and I can 
 but try . " 

 for the next two day Kenelm be observe to be unusually pleasant . he 
 yawn much less frequently , walk with his father , play piquet 
 with his mother , be more like other people . Sir Peter be charm : 
 he ascribe this happy change to the preparation he be make 
 for Kenelm 's travel in style . the proud father be in active 
 correspondence with his great London friend , seek letter of 
 introduction for Kenelm to all the court of Europe . portmanteau , with 
 every modern convenience , be order ; an experienced courier , who 
 could talk all language and cook french dish if require , be 
 invite to name his term . in short , every arrangement worthy a young 
 patrician 's entrance into the great world be in rapid progress , when 
 suddenly Kenelm Chillingly disappear , leave behind he on Sir 
 Peter 's library table the follow letter : - 


 MY VERY DEAR FATHER , - Obedient to your desire , I depart in search of 
 real life and real person , or of the good imitation of they . forgive 
 I , I beseech you , if I commence that search in my own way . I have see 
 enough of lady and gentleman for the present : they must be all very 
 much alike in every part of the world . you desire I to be amuse . I 
 go to try if that be possible . lady and gentleman be not amusing ; the 
 more ladylike or gentlemanlike they be , the more insipid I find they . 
 my dear father , I go in quest of adventure like Amadis of Gaul , like Don 
 Quixote , like Gil Blas , like Roderick Random ; like , in short , the only 
 people seek real life , the people who never exist except in book . 
 I go on foot ; I go alone . I have provide myself with a large amount of 
 money than I ought to spend , because every man must buy experience , 
 and the first fee be heavy . in fact , I have put fifty pound into my 
 pocket - book and into my purse five sovereign and seventeen shilling . 
 this sum ought to last I a year ; but I dare say inexperience will do 
 I out of it in a month , so we will count it as nothing . since you have 
 ask I to fix my own allowance , I will beg you kindly to commence it 
 this day in advance , by an order to your banker to cash my check to the 
 amount of five pound , and to the same amount monthly ; namely , at the 
 rate of sixty pound a year . with that sum I can not   starve , and if I 
 want more it may be amusing to work for it . pray do not   send after I , 
 or institute inquiry , or disturb the household and set all the 
 neighbourhood talk , by any mention either of my project or of your 
 surprise at it . I will not fail to write to you from time to time . 
 you will judge well what to say to my dear mother . if you tell she the 
 truth , which of course I should do do I tell she anything , my request 
 be virtually frustrated , and I shall be the talk of the county . you , 
 I know , do not   think tell fib be immoral when it happen to be 
 convenient , as it would be in this case . 

 I expect to be absent a year or eighteen month ; if I prolong my travel 
 it shall be in the way you propose . I will then take my place in polite 
 society , call upon you to pay all expense , and fib on my own account 
 to any extent require by that world of fiction which be people by 
 illusion and govern by sham . 

 Heaven bless you , my dear Father , and be quite sure that if I get into 
 any trouble require a friend , it be to you I shall turn . as yet I have 
 no other friend on earth , and with prudence and good luck I may escape 
 the infliction of any other friend . 

  your ever affectionately , 

  KENELM . 

 P. S. - Dear Father , I open my letter in your library to say again " bless 
 you , " and to tell you how fondly I kiss your old beaver glove , which 
 I find on the table . 


 when Sir Peter come to that postscript he take off his spectacle and 
 wipe they : they be very moist . 

 then he fall into a profound meditation . Sir Peter be , as I have say , 
 a learn man ; he be also in some thing a sensible man , and he have a 
 strong sympathy with the humorous side of his son 's crotchety character . 
 what be to be say to Lady Chillingly ? that matron be quite guiltless 
 of any crime which should deprive she of a husband 's confidence in 
 a matter relate to her only son . she be a virtuous matron ; moral 
 irreproachable , manner dignify , and she - baronety . any one see 
 she for the first time would intuitively say , " your ladyship . " be 
 this a matron to be suppress in any well - order domestic circle ? Sir 
 Peter 's conscience loudly answer , " no ; " but when , put conscience 
 into his pocket , he regard the question at issue as a man of the 
 world , Sir Peter feel that to communicate the content of his son 's 
 letter to Lady Chillingly would be the foolish thing he could 
 possibly do . do she know that Kenelm have abscond with the family 
 dignity invest in his very name , no marital authority short of such 
 abuse of power as constitute the offence of cruelty in a wife 's 
 action for divorce from social board and nuptial bed could prevent Lady 
 chillingly from summon all the groom , send they in all direction 
 with strict order to bring back the runaway dead or alive ; the wall 
 would be placard with hand - bill , " stray from his home , " etc . ; the 
 police would be telegraph private instruction from town to town ; 
 the scandal would stick to Kenelm Chillingly for life , accompany with 
 vague hint of criminal propensity and insane hallucination ; he would 
 be ever afterwards point out as " the MAN who have disappear . " and to 
 disappear and to turn up again , instead of be murder , be the most 
 hateful thing a man can do : all the newspaper bark at he , " Tray , 
 Blanche , Sweetheart , and all ; " strict explanation of the unseemly fact 
 of his safe existence be demand in the name of public decorum , and no 
 explanation be accept ; it be life save , character lose . 

 Sir Peter seize his hat and walk forth , not to deliberate whether to 
 fib or not to fib to the wife of his bosom , but to consider what kind of 
 fib would the most quickly sink into the bosom of his wife . 

 a few turn to and fro on the terrace suffice for the conception and 
 mature of the fib select ; a proof that Sir Peter be a practised 
 fibber . he re - enter the house , pass into her ladyship 's habitual 
 sitting - room , and say with careless gayety , " my old friend the Duke of 
 Clareville be just set off on a tour to Switzerland with his family . 
 his young daughter , Lady Jane , be a pretty girl , and would not be a 
 bad match for Kenelm . " 

 " Lady Jane , the young daughter with fair hair , whom I see last as 
 a very charming child , nurse a lovely doll present to she by the 
 Empress Eugenie , - a good match indeed for Kenelm . " 

 " I be glad you agree with I . would it not be a favourable step towards 
 that alliance , and an excellent thing for Kenelm generally , if he be 
 to visit the continent as one of the Duke 's travel party ? " 

 " of course it would . " 

 " then you approve what I have do ; the Duke start the day after 
 to - morrow , and I have pack Kenelm off to town , with a letter to my old 
 friend . you will excuse all leave take . you know that though the good 
 of son he be an odd fellow ; and see that I have talk he into it , 
 I strike while the iron be hot , and send he off by the express at nine 
 o'clock this morning , for fear that if I allow any delay he would talk 
 himself out of it . " 

 " do you mean to say Kenelm be actually go ? good gracious . " 

 Sir Peter steal softly from the room , and summon his valet , say , " I 
 have send Mr. Chillingly to London . pack up the clothe he be likely 
 to want , so that he can have they send at once , whenever he write for 
 they . " 

 and thus , by a judicious violation of truth on the part of his father , 
 that exemplary truth - teller Kenelm Chillingly save the honour of 
 his house and his own reputation from the breath of scandal and the 
 inquisition of the police . he be not " the MAN who have disappear . " 




 BOOK II . 



 CHAPTER I. 

 KENELM CHILLINGLY have quit the paternal home at daybreak before any 
 of the household be astir . " unquestionably , " say he , as he walk 
 along the solitary lane , - " unquestionably I begin the world as poet 
 begin poetry , an imitator and a plagiarist . I be imitate an itinerant 
 verse - maker , as , no doubt , he begin by imitate some other maker 
 of verse . but if there be anything in I , it will work itself out in 
 original form . and , after all , the verse - maker be not the inventor of 
 idea . adventure on foot be a notion that remount to the age of fable . 
 Hercules , for instance ; that be the way in which he get to heaven , as 
 a foot - traveller . how solitary the world be at this hour ! be it not for 
 that reason that this be of all hour the most beautiful ? " 

 here he pause , and look around and above . it be the very height of 
 summer . the sun be just rise over gentle slop upland . all the 
 dew on the hedgerow sparkle . there be not a cloud in the heaven . up 
 rise from the green blade of corn a solitary skylark . his voice wake up 
 the other bird . a few minute more and the joyous concert begin . 
 Kenelm reverently doff his hat , and bow his head in mute homage and 
 thanksgiving . 



 CHAPTER II . 

 about nine o'clock Kenelm enter a town some twelve mile distant from 
 his father 's house , and towards which he have designedly make his way , 
 because in that town he be scarcely if at all know by sight , and he 
 might there make the purchase he require without attract any 
 mark observation . he have select for his travel costume a 
 shooting - dress , as the simple and least likely to belong to his 
 rank as a gentleman . but still in its very cut there be an air of 
 distinction , and every labourer he have meet on the way have touch his 
 hat to he . besides , who wear a shooting - dress in the middle of June , 
 or a shooting - dress at all , unless he be either a game - keeper or a 
 gentleman license to shoot ? 

 Kenelm enter a large store - shop for ready - make clothe and purchase 
 a suit such as might be wear on Sundays by a small country yeoman or 
 tenant - farmer of a petty holding , - a stout coarse broadcloth upper 
 garment , half coat , half jacket , with waistcoat to match , strong 
 corduroy trouser , a smart Belcher neckcloth , with a small stock of 
 linen and woollen sock in harmony with the other raiment . he buy 
 also a leathern knapsack , just big enough to contain this wardrobe , and 
 a couple of book , which with his comb and brush he have bring away 
 in his pocket ; for among all his trunk at home there be no knapsack . 

 these purchase make and pay for , he pass quickly through the town , 
 and stop at a humble inn at the outskirt , to which he be attract 
 by the notice , " refreshment for man and beast . " he enter a little 
 sand parlour , which at that hour he have all to himself , call for 
 breakfast , and devour the good part of a fourpenny loaf with a couple 
 of hard egg . 

 thus recruit , he again sally forth , and deviate into a thick wood 
 by the roadside , he exchange the habiliment with which he have leave 
 home for those he have purchase , and by the help of one or two big 
 stone sink the relinquished garment into a small but deep pool which 
 he be lucky enough to find in a bush - grow dell much haunted by snipe 
 in the winter . 

 " now , " say Kenelm , " I really begin to think I have get out of myself . 
 I be in another man 's skin ; for what , after all , be a skin but a soul 's 
 clothing , and what be clothing but a decenter skin ? of its own natural 
 skin every civilized soul be ashamed . it be the height of impropriety 
 for any one but the low kind of savage to show it . if the pure 
 soul now existent upon earth , the Pope of Rome 's or the Archbishop of 
 Canterbury 's , be to pass down the Strand with the skin which nature 
 give to it bare to the eye , it would be bring up before a magistrate , 
 prosecute by the Society for the Suppression of Vice , and commit to 
 jail as a public nuisance . 

 " decidedly I be now in another man 's skin . Kenelm Chillingly , I no 
 long 

  " remain 

  " your faithfully ; 

 " but be , 

  " with profound consideration , 

  " your obedient humble servant . " 

 with light step and elated crest , the wanderer , thus transform , sprang 
 from the wood into the dusty thoroughfare . he have travel on for about 
 an hour , meeting but few other passenger , when he hear to the right a 
 loud shrill young voice , " help ! help ! I will not go ; I tell you , I will 
 not ! " just before he stand , by a high five - bar gate , a pensive gray 
 cob attach to a neat - look gig . the bridle be loose on the cob 's 
 neck . the animal be evidently accustomed to stand quietly when order 
 to do so , and glad of the opportunity . 

 the cry , " help , help ! " be renew , mingle with loud tone in a 
 rougher voice , tone of wrath and menace . evidently these sound do 
 not come from the cob . Kenelm look over the gate , and see a few yard 
 distant in a grass field a well - dress boy struggle violently against 
 a stout middle - aged man who be rudely haul he along by the arm . 

 the chivalry natural to a namesake of the valiant Sir Kenelm Digby 
 be instantly arouse . he vault over the gate , seize the man by the 
 collar , and exclaim , " for shame ! what be you do to that poor boy ? 
 let he go ! " 

 " why the devil do you interfere ? " cry the stout man , his eye glare 
 and his lip foam with rage . " ah , be you the villain ? yes , no doubt 
 of it . I will give it to you , jackanape , " and still grasp the boy with 
 one hand , with the other the stout man dart a blow at Kenelm , from 
 which nothing less than the practise pugilistic skill and natural 
 alertness of the youth thus suddenly assaulted could have save his eye 
 and nose . as it be , the stout man have the bad of it : the blow be 
 parried , return with a dexterous manoeuvre of Kenelm 's right foot in 
 cornish fashion , and procumbit humi bos ; the stout man lie sprawl 
 on his back . the boy , thus release , seize hold of Kenelm by the arm , 
 and hurry he along up the field , cry , " come , come before he get 
 up ! save I ! save I ! " Ere he have recover his own surprise , the boy 
 have drag Kenelm to the gate , and jump into the gig , sob forth , 
 " get in , get in , I can not   drive ; get in , and drive - you . quick ! quick ! " 

 " but - " begin Kenelm . 

 " get in , or I shall go mad . " Kenelm obey ; the boy give he the rein , 
 and seize the whip himself , apply it lustily to the cob . on sprang 
 the cob . " stop , stop , stop , thief ! villain ! Holloa ! thief ! thief ! 
 thief ! stop ! " cry a voice behind . Kenelm involuntarily turn his 
 head and beheld the stout man perch upon the gate and gesticulate 
 furiously . it be but a glimpse ; again the whip be ply , the cob 
 frantically break into a gallop , the gig jolt and bump and swerve , 
 and it be not till they have put a good mile between themselves and the 
 stout man that Kenelm succeed in obtain possession of the whip and 
 calm the cob into a rational trot . 

 " young gentleman , " then say Kenelm , " perhaps you will have the goodness 
 to explain . " 

 " by and by ; get on , that be a good fellow ; you shall be well pay for it , 
 well and handsomely . " 

 Quoth Kenelm , gravely , " I know that in real life payment and service 
 naturally go together . but we will put aside the payment till you tell 
 I what be to be the service . and first , whither be I to drive you ? we 
 be come to a place where three road meet ; which of the three shall I 
 take ? " 

 " oh , I do not   know ; there be a finger - post . I want to get to , - but it be 
 a secret ; you will not betray I ? promise , - swear . " 

 " I do not   swear except when I be in a passion , which , I be sorry to say , 
 be very seldom ; and I do not   promise till I know what I promise ; neither 
 do I go on drive runaway boy in other man 's gig unless I know that I 
 be take they to a safe place , where their papa and mamma can get at 
 they . " 

 " I have no papa , no mamma , " say the boy , dolefully and with quivering 
 lip . 

 " poor boy ! I suppose that burly brute be your schoolmaster , and you be 
 run away home for fear of a flogging . " 

 the boy burst out laugh ; a pretty , silvery , merry laugh : it thrill 
 through Kenelm Chillingly . " no , he would not flog I : he be not a 
 schoolmaster ; he be bad than that . " 

 " be it possible ? what be he ? " 

 " an uncle . " 

 " Hum ! uncle be proverbial for cruelty ; be so in the classical day , 
 and Richard III . be the only scholar in his family . " 

 " eh ! classical and Richard III . ! " say the boy , startle , and look 
 attentively at the pensive driver . " who be you ? you talk like a 
 gentleman . " 

 " I beg pardon . I will not do so again if I can help it . " - " decidedly , " 
 think Kenelm , " I be begin to be amuse . what a blessing it be to 
 get into another man 's skin , and another man 's gig too ! " Aloud , " here 
 we be at the fingerpost . if you be run away from your uncle , it be 
 time to inform I where you be run to . " 

 here the boy lean over the gig and examine the fingerpost . then he 
 clap his hand joyfully . 

 " all right ! I think so , ' to Tor - Hadham , eighteen mile . ' that be the 
 road to ' Tor - Hadham . " 

 " do you mean to say I be to drive you all that way , - eighteen mile ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " and to whom be you go ? " 

 " I will tell you by and by . do go on ; do , pray . I can not   drive - never 
 drive in my life - or I would not ask you . pray , pray , do not   desert I ! 
 if you be a gentleman you will not ; and if you be not a gentleman , 
 I have get L10 in my purse , which you shall have when I be safe at 
 Tor - Hadham . do not   hesitate : my whole life be at stake ! " and the boy 
 begin once more to sob . 

 Kenelm direct the pony 's head towards Tor - Hadham , and the boy cease 
 to sob . 

 " you be a good , dear fellow , " say the boy , wipe his eye . " I be 
 afraid I be take you very much out of your road . " 

 " I have no road in particular , and would as soon go to Tor - Hadham , which 
 I have never see , as anywhere else . I be but a wanderer on the face of 
 the earth . " 

 " have you lose your papa and mamma too ? why , you be not much old than 
 I be . " 

 " little gentleman , " say Kenelm , gravely , " I be just of age , and you , I 
 suppose , be about fourteen . " 

 " what fun ! " cry the boy , abruptly . " be not   it fun ? " 

 " it will not be fun if I be sentence to penal servitude for steal 
 your uncle 's gig , and rob his little nephew of L10 . by the by , that 
 choleric relation of yours mean to knock down somebody else when he 
 strike at I . he ask , ' be you the villain ? ' pray who be the villain ? 
 he be evidently in your confidence . " 

 " Villain ! he be the most honourable , high - minded - but no matter now : 
 I will introduce you to he when we reach Tor - Hadham . whip that pony : he 
 be crawl . " 

 " it be up hill : a good man spar his beast . " 

 no art and no eloquence could extort from his young companion any 
 further explanation than Kenelm have yet receive ; and indeed , as the 
 journey advance , and they approach their destination , both party 
 sink into silence . Kenelm be seriously consider that his first day 's 
 experience of real life in the skin of another have place in some peril 
 his own . he have knock down a man evidently respectable and well to do , 
 have carry off that man 's nephew , and make free with that man 's good 
 and chattel ; namely , his gig and horse . all this might be explain 
 satisfactorily to a justice of the peace , but how ? by return to his 
 former skin ; by avow himself to be Kenelm Chillingly , a distinguished 
 university medalist , heir to no ignoble name and some L10,000 a year . 
 but then what a scandal ! he who abhor scandal ; in vulgar parlance , 
 what a " row ! " he who deny that the very word " row " be sanction 
 by any classic authority in the english language . he would have to 
 explain how he come to be find disguise , carefully disguise , in 
 garment such as no baronet 's eld son - even though that baronet be 
 the least ancestral man of mark whom it suit the convenience of a First 
 Minister to recommend to the Sovereign for exaltation over the rank 
 of Mister - be ever beheld in , unless he have take flight to the 
 gold - digging . be this a position in which the heir of the Chillinglys , 
 a distinguished family , whose coat - of - arm date from the early 
 authenticate period of English heraldry under Edward III . as Three 
 Fishes azure , could be place without grievous slur on the cold and 
 ancient blood of the Three Fishes ? 

 and then individually to himself , Kenelm , irrespectively of the Three 
 Fishes , - what a humiliation ! he have put aside his respected father 's 
 deliberate preparation for his entrance into real life ; he have 
 perversely choose his own walk on his own responsibility ; and here , 
 before half the first day be over , what an infernal scrape he have 
 walk himself into ! and what be his excuse ? a wretched little boy , 
 sob and chuckle by turn , and yet who be clever enough to twist 
 Kenelm Chillingly round his finger ; twist he , a man who think 
 himself so much wise than his parent , - a man who have gain honour at 
 the University , - a man of the grave temperament , - a man of so nicely 
 critical a turn of mind that there be not a law of art or nature in 
 which he do not detect a flaw ; that he should get himself into this 
 mess be , to say the least of it , an uncomfortable reflection . 

 the boy himself , as Kenelm glance at he from time to time , become 
 impish and will - of - the - Wisp - ish . sometimes he laugh to himself loudly , 
 sometimes he weep to himself quietly ; sometimes , neither laugh nor 
 weeping , he seem absorb in reflection . twice as they come near to 
 the town of Tor - Hadham , Kenelm nudge the boy , and say , " my boy , I must 
 talk with you ; " and twice the boy , withdraw his arm from the nudge , 
 have answer dreamily , " Hush ! I be think . " 

 and so they enter the town of Tor - Hadham , the cob very much do up . 



 CHAPTER III . 

 " now , young sir , " say Kenelm , in a tone calm , but peremptory , - " now we 
 be in the town , where be I to take you ? and wherever it be , there to 
 say good - by . " 

 " no , not good - by . stay with I a little bit . I begin to feel frightened , 
 and I be so friendless ; " and the boy , who have before resent the 
 slight nudge on the part of Kenelm , now wound his arm into Kenelm 's , 
 and clung to he caressingly . 

 I do not   know what my reader have hitherto thought of Kenelm Chillingly : 
 but , amid all the curve and winding of his whimsical humour , there be 
 one way that go straight to his heart ; you have only to be weak than 
 himself and ask his protection . 

 he turn round abruptly ; he forget all the strangeness of his position , 
 and reply : " little brute that you be , I will be shoot if I forsake you 
 if in trouble . but some compassion be also due to the cob : for his sake 
 say where we be to stop . " 

 " I be sure I can not   say : I never be here before . let we go to a nice 
 quiet inn . drive slowly : we will look out for one . " 

 Tor - Hadham be a large town , not nominally the capital of the county , 
 but , in point of trade and bustle and life , virtually the capital . the 
 straight street , through which the cob go as slowly as if he have 
 be draw a triumphal car up the Sacred Hill , present an animate 
 appearance . the shop have handsome facade and plate - glass window ; 
 the pavement exhibit a lively concourse , evidently not merely of 
 business , but of pleasure , for a large proportion of the passer - by be 
 compose of the fair sex , smartly dress , many of they young and some 
 pretty . in fact a regiment of her Majesty 's - - -th hussar have be 
 send into the town two day before ; and , between the officer of that 
 fortunate regiment and the fair sex in that hospitable town , there be 
 a natural emulation which should make the great number of slain and 
 wound . the advent of these hero , professional subtracter from 
 hostile and multiplier of friendly population , give a stimulus to 
 the caterer for those amusement which bring young folk 
 together , - archery - meeting , rifle - shooting , concert , ball , announce 
 in bill attach to board and wall and expose at shop - windows . 

 the boy look eagerly forth from the gig , scan especially these 
 advertisement , till at length he utter an excited exclamation , " ah , I 
 be right : there it be ! " 

 " there what be ? " ask Kenelm , - " the inn ? " his companion do not answer , 
 but Kenelm follow the boy 's eye perceive an immense hand - bill . 


  " to - MORROW NIGHT THEATRE OPENS . 

  " RICHARD III . Mr. COMPTON . " 


 " do just ask where the theatre be , " say the boy , in a whisper , turn 
 away his head . 

 Kenelm stop the cob , make the inquiry , and be direct to take the 
 next turn to the right . in a few minute the compo portico of an ugly 
 dilapidated building , dedicate to the Dramatic Muses , present itself 
 at the angle of a dreary , deserted lane . the wall be placard with 
 play - bill , in which the name of Compton stand forth as gigantic as 
 capital could make it . the boy draw a sigh . " now , " say he , " let we 
 look out for an inn near here , - the near . " 

 no inn , however , beyond the rank of a small and questionable look 
 public - house be apparent , until at a distance somewhat remote from the 
 theatre , and in a quaint , old - fashion , desert square , a neat , 
 newly whitewash house display upon its frontispiece , in large black 
 letter of funereal aspect , " Temperance Hotel . " 

 " stop , " say the boy ; " do not   you think that would suit we ? it look 
 quiet . " 

 " could not look more quiet if it be a tombstone , " reply Kenelm . 

 the boy put his hand upon the rein and stop the cob . the cob be in 
 that condition that the slight touch suffice to stop he , though he 
 turn his head somewhat ruefully as if in doubt whether hay and corn 
 would be within the regulation of a Temperance Hotel . Kenelm descend 
 and enter the house . a tidy woman emerge from a sort of glass 
 cupboard which constitute the bar , minus the comfort drink 
 associate with the beau ideal of a bar , but which display instead 
 two large decanter of cold water with tumbler a discretion , and 
 sundry plate of thin biscuit and sponge - cake . this tidy woman 
 politely inquire what be his " pleasure . " 

 " pleasure , " answer Kenelm , with his usual gravity , " be not the word I 
 should myself have choose . but could you oblige my horse - I mean that 
 horse - with a stall and a feed of oat , and that young gentleman and 
 myself with a private room and a dinner ? " 

 " Dinner ! " echo the hostess , - " dinner ! " 

 " a thousand pardon , ma'am . but if the word ' dinner ' shock you I retract 
 it , and would say instead something to eat and drink . ' " 

 " drink ! this be strictly a Temperance Hotel , sir . " 

 " oh , if you do not   eat and drink here , " exclaim Kenelm , fiercely , for 
 he be famish , " I wish you good morning . " 

 " stay a bit , sir . we do eat and drink here . but we be very simple 
 folk . we allow no fermented liquor . " 

 " not even a glass of beer ? " 

 " only ginger - beer . Alcohols be strictly forbid . we have tea and 
 coffee and milk . but most of our customer prefer the pure liquid . as 
 for eating , sir , - anything you order , in reason . " 

 Kenelm shake his head and be retreat , when the boy , who have spring 
 from the gig and overheard the conversation , cry petulantly , " what 
 do it signify ? who want ferment liquor ? water will do very well . 
 and as for dinner , - anything convenient . please , ma'am , show we into a 
 private room : I be so tired . " the last word be say in a caressing 
 manner , and so prettily , that the hostess at once change her tone , 
 and mutter , " poor boy ! " and , in a still more subdued mutter , " what 
 a pretty face he have ! " nod , and lead the way up a very clean 
 old - fashioned staircase . 

 " but the horse and gig , where be they to go ? " say Kenelm , with a pang 
 of conscience on reflect how ill treat hitherto have be both horse 
 and owner . 

 " oh , as for the horse and gig , sir , you will find Jukes 's livery - stable 
 a few yard far down . we do not   take in horse ourselves ; our 
 customer seldom keep they : but you will find the good of accommodation 
 at Jukes 's . " 

 Kenelm conduct the cob to the livery - stable thus indicate , and 
 wait to see he walk about to cool , well rub down , and make 
 comfortable over half a peck of oats , - for Kenelm Chillingly be a 
 humane man to the brute creation , - and then , in a state of ravenous 
 appetite , return to the Temperance Hotel , and be usher into a small 
 drawing - room , with a small bit of carpet in the centre , six small chair 
 with cane seat , print on the wall descriptive of the various 
 effect of intoxicate liquor upon sundry specimen of mankind , - some 
 resemble ghost , other fiend , and all with a general aspect of 
 beggary and perdition ; contrast by Happy - Family picture , - smile 
 wife , portly husband , rosy infant , emblematic of the beatified 
 condition of member of the Temperance Society . 

 a table with a spotless cloth , and knife and fork for two , chiefly , 
 however , attract Kenelm 's attention . 

 the boy be stand by the window , seemingly gaze on a small aquarium 
 which be there place , and contain the usual variety of small fish , 
 reptile , and insect , enjoy the pleasure of Temperance in its 
 native element , include , of course , an occasional meal upon each 
 other . 

 " what be they go to give we to eat ? " inquire Kenelm . " it must be 
 ready by this time I should think . " 

 here he give a brisk tug at the bell - pull . the boy advance from 
 the window , and as he do so Kenelm be strike with the grace of his 
 bearing , and the improvement in his look , now that he be without his 
 hat , and rest and ablution have refresh from heat and dust the delicate 
 bloom of his complexion . there be no doubt about it that he be an 
 exceedingly pretty boy , and if he live to be a man would make many a 
 lady 's heart ache . it be with a certain air of gracious superiority 
 such as be seldom warrant by superior rank if it be less than royal , 
 and chiefly become a marked seniority in year , that this young 
 gentleman , approach the solemn heir of the Chillinglys , hold out his 
 hand and say , - 

 " Sir , you have behave extremely well , and I thank you very much . " 

 " your Royal Highness be condescend to say so , " reply Kenelm 
 Chillingly , bow low , " but have you order dinner ? and what be 
 they go to give we ? no one seem to answer the bell here . as it be a 
 Temperance Hotel , probably all the servant be drunk . " 

 " why should they be drunk at a Temperance Hotel ? " 

 " why ! because , as a general rule , people who flagrantly pretend to 
 anything be the reverse of that which they pretend to . a man who set 
 up for a saint be sure to be a sinner , and a man who boast that he be a 
 sinner be sure to have some feeble , maudlin , snivel bit of saintship 
 about he which be enough to make he a humbug . masculine honesty , 
 whether it be saint - like or sinner - like , do not label itself either 
 saint or sinner . Fancy Saint Augustine label himself saint , or 
 Robert Burns sinner ; and therefore , though , little boy , you have 
 probably not read the poem of Robert Burns , and have certainly not read 
 the ' Confessions ' of Saint Augustine , take my word for it , that both 
 those personage be very good fellow ; and with a little difference of 
 training and experience , Burns might have write the ' Confessions ' and 
 augustine the poem . power above ! I be starve . what do you order for 
 dinner , and when be it to appear ? " 

 the boy , who have open to an enormous width a naturally large pair of 
 hazel eye , while his tall companion in fustian trouser and Belcher 
 neckcloth speak thus patronizingly of Robert Burns and Saint Augustine , 
 now reply , with rather a deprecatory and shamefaced aspect , " I be 
 sorry I be not think of dinner . I be not so mindful of you as I 
 ought to have be . the landlady ask I what we would have . I say , 
 ' what you like ; ' and the landlady mutter something about - " here the 
 boy hesitate . 

 " yes . about what ? mutton - chop ? " 

 " no . Cauliflowers and rice - pudding . " 

 Kenelm Chillingly never swear , never rag . where ruder being of 
 human mould swear or rag , he vent displeasure in an expression of 
 countenance so pathetically melancholic and lugubrious that it would 
 have melt the heart of an hyrcanian tiger . he turn his countenance 
 now on the boy , and murmur " Cauliflower ! - Starvation ! " sink into 
 one of the cane - bottom chair , and add quietly , ' so much for human 
 gratitude . " 

 the boy be evidently smite to the heart by the bitter sweetness 
 of this reproach . there be almost tear in his voice , as he say 
 falteringly , " pray forgive I , I be ungrateful . I will run down and see 
 what there be ; " and , suit the action to the word , he disappear . 

 Kenelm remain motionless ; in fact he be plunge into one of those 
 revery , or rather absorption of inward and spiritual being , into 
 which it be say that the consciousness of the indian dervish can be by 
 prolong fasting preternaturally resolve . the appetite of all man 
 of powerful muscular development be of a nature far exceed the 
 property of any reasonable number of cauliflower and rice - pudding 
 to satisfy . Witness Hercules himself , whose craving for substantial 
 nourishment be the stand joke of the classic poet . I do not   know 
 that Kenelm Chillingly would have beat the Theban Hercules either in 
 fighting or in eat ; but , when he want to fight or when he want 
 to eat , Hercules would have have to put forth all his strength not to be 
 beat . 

 after ten minute ' absence , the boy come back radiant . he tap Kenelm 
 on the shoulder , and say playfully , " I make they cut a whole loin into 
 chop , besides the cauliflower ; and such a big rice - pudding , and egg 
 and bacon too ! cheer up ! it will be serve in a minute . " 

 " a - h ! " say Kenelm . 

 " they be good people ; they do not mean to stint you : but most of their 
 customer , it seem , live upon vegetable and farinaceous food . there 
 be a society here form upon that principle ; the landlady say they be 
 philosopher ! " 

 at the word " philosopher " Kenelm 's crest rise as that of a practised 
 hunter at the cry of " Yoiks ! Tally - ho ! " " philosopher ! " say he , 
 " philosopher indeed ! o ignoramus , who do not even know the structure 
 of the human tooth ! look you , little boy , if nothing be leave on this 
 earth of the present race of man , as we be assure upon great authority 
 will be the case one of these day , - and a mighty good riddance it will 
 be , - if nothing , I say , of man be leave except fossil of his tooth and 
 his thumb , a philosopher of that superior race which will succeed to 
 man would at once see in those relic all his characteristic and all 
 his history ; would say , compare his thumb with the talon of an eagle , 
 the claw of a tiger , the hoof of a horse , the owner of that thumb must 
 have be lord over creature with talon and claw and hoof . you may 
 say the monkey tribe have thumb . true ; but compare an ape 's thumb with 
 a man 's : could the big ape 's thumb have build Westminster Abbey ? but 
 even thumb be trivial evidence of man as compare with his tooth . 
 look at his tooth ! " - here Kenelm expand his jaw from ear to ear 
 and display semicircle of ivory , so perfect for the purpose of 
 mastication that the most artistic dentist might have despair of 
 his power to imitate they , - " look , I say , at his tooth ! " the 
 boy involuntarily recoil . " be the tooth those of a miserable 
 cauliflower - eater ? or be it purely by farinaceous food that the 
 proprietor of tooth like man 's obtain the rank of the sovereign 
 destroyer of creation ? no , little boy , no , " continue Kenelm , close 
 his jaw , but advance upon the infant , who at each stride recede 
 towards the aquarium , - " no ; man be the master of the world , because 
 of all create being he devour the great variety and the great 
 number of create thing . his tooth evince that man can live upon every 
 soil from the torrid to the frozen zone , because man can eat everything 
 that other creature can not eat . and the formation of his tooth prove 
 it . a tiger can eat a deer ; so can man : but a tiger can not   eat an eel ; 
 man can . an elephant can eat cauliflower and rice - pudding ; so can man ! 
 but an elephant can not   eat a beefsteak ; man can . in sum , man can 
 live everywhere , because he can eat anything , thank to his dental 
 formation ! " conclude Kenelm , make a prodigious stride towards the 
 boy . " Man , when everything else fail he , eat his own specie . " 

 " do not ; you frighten I , " say the boy . " aha ! " clap his hand with a 
 sensation of gleeful relief , " here come the mutton - chop ! " 

 a wonderfully clean , well - wash , indeed well - wash - out , middle - aged 
 parlour - maid now appear , dish in hand . put the dish on the table 
 and take off the cover , the handmaiden say civilly , though frigidly , 
 like one who live upon salad and cold water , " mistress be sorry to have 
 keep you wait , but she think you be Vegetarians . " 

 after help his young friend to a mutton - chop , Kenelm help himself , 
 and reply gravely , " tell your mistress that if she have only give 
 we vegetable , I should have eat you . tell she that though man be 
 partially graminivorous , he be principally carnivorous . tell she that 
 though a swine eat cabbage and such like , yet where a swine can get 
 a baby , it eat the baby . tell she , " continue Kenelm   now at his third 
 chop , " that there be no animal that in digestive organ more resemble 
 man than a swine . ask she if there be any baby in the house ; if so , it 
 would be safe for the baby to send up some more chop . " 

 as the acute observer could rarely be quite sure when Kenelm 
 Chillingly be in jest or in earnest , the parlour - maid pause a moment 
 and attempt a pale smile . Kenelm lift his dark eye , unspeakably sad 
 and profound , and say mournfully , " I should be so sorry for the baby . 
 bring the chop ! " the parlour - maid vanish . the boy lay down his 
 knife and fork , and look fixedly and inquisitively on Kenelm . Kenelm , 
 unheede the look , place the last chop on the boy 's plate . 

 " no more , " cry the boy , impulsively , and return the chop to the 
 dish . " I have din : I have have enough . " 

 " little boy , you lie , " say Kenelm ; " you have not have enough to keep 
 body and soul together . eat that chop or I shall thrash you : whatever I 
 say I do . " 

 somehow or other the boy feel quell ; he eat the chop in silence , again 
 look at Kenelm 's face , and say to himself , " I be afraid . " 

 the parlour - maid here enter with a fresh supply of chop and a dish of 
 bacon and egg , soon follow by a rice - pudding bake in a tin dish , and 
 of size sufficient to have nourish a charity school . when the repast 
 be finish , Kenelm seem to forget the dangerous property of the 
 carnivorous animal ; and stretch himself indolently out , appear 
 to be as innocently ruminative as the most domestic of animal 
 graminivorous . 

 then say the boy , rather timidly , " may I ask you another favour ? " 

 " be it to knock down another uncle , or to steal another gig and cob ? " 

 " no , it be very simple : it be merely to find out the address of a friend 
 here ; and when find to give he a note from I . " 

 " do the commission press ? ' after dinner , rest a while , ' saith the 
 proverb ; and proverb be so wise that no one can guess the author 
 of they . they be suppose to be fragment of the philosophy of the 
 antediluvian : come to we pack up in the ark . " 

 " really , indeed , " say the boy , seriously . " how interesting ! no , my 
 commission do not press for an hour or so . do you think , sir , they have 
 any drama before the Deluge ? " 

 " Drama ! not a doubt of it . man who live one or two thousand year have 
 time to invent and improve everything ; and a play could have have its 
 natural length then . it would not have be necessary to crowd the 
 whole history of Macbeth , from his youth to his old age , into an absurd 
 epitome of three hour . one can not trace a touch of real human nature in 
 any actor 's delineation of that very interesting Scotchman , because 
 the actor always come on the stage as if he be the same age when he 
 murder Duncan , and when , in his sear and yellow leaf , he be lop 
 off by Macduff . " 

 " do you think Macbeth be young when he murder Duncan ? " 

 " certainly . no man ever commit a first crime of violent nature , such as 
 murder , after thirty ; if he begin before , he may go on up to any age . 
 but youth be the season for commence those wrong calculation which 
 belong to irrational hope and the sense of physical power . you thus 
 read in the newspaper that the person who murder their sweetheart be 
 generally from two to six and twenty ; and person who murder from other 
 motif than love - that be , from revenge , avarice , or ambition - be 
 generally about twenty - eight , - Iago 's age . twenty - eight be the usual 
 close of the active season for get rid of one 's fellow - creature ; a 
 prize - fighter fall off after that age . I take it that Macbeth be about 
 twenty - eight when he murder Duncan , and from about fifty - four to sixty 
 when he begin to whine about miss the comfort of old age . but 
 can any audience understand that difference of year in see a 
 three - hour ' play ? or do any actor ever pretend to impress it on the 
 audience , and appear as twenty - eight in the first act and a sexagenarian 
 in the fifth ? " 

 " I never think of that , " say the boy , evidently interested . " but I 
 never see ' Macbeth . ' I have see ' Richard III . : ' be not that nice ? do not 
 you dote on the play ? I do . what a glorious life an actor 's must be ! " 

 Kenelm , who have be hitherto rather talk to himself than to his 
 youthful companion , here rouse his attention , look on the boy 
 intently , and say , - 

 " I see you be stage - stricken . you have run away from home in order to 
 turn player , and I should not wonder if this note you want I to give be 
 for the manager of the theatre or one of his company . " 

 the young face that encounter Kenelm 's dark eye become very flushed , 
 but set and defiant in its expression . 

 " and what if it be ? would not you give it ? " 

 " what ! help a child of your age run away from his home , to go upon the 
 stage against the consent of his relation ? certainly not . " 

 " I be not a child ; but that have nothing to do with it . I do not   want to 
 go on the stage , at all event without the consent of the person who 
 have a right to dictate my action . my note be not to the manager of 
 the theatre , nor to one of his company ; but it be to a gentleman who 
 condescend to act here for a few night ; a thorough gentleman , - a great 
 actor , - my friend , the only friend I have in the world . I say frankly I 
 have run away from home so that he may have that note , and if you will 
 not give it some one else will ! " 

 the boy have rise while he speak , and he stand erect beside the 
 recumbent Kenelm , his lip quivering , his eye suffuse with suppress 
 tear , but his whole aspect resolute and determine . evidently , if he 
 do not get his own way in this world , it would not be for want of will . 

 " I will take your note , " say Kenelm . 

 " there it be ; give it into the hand of the person it be address 
 to , - Mr. Herbert Compton . " 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 KENELM take his way to the theatre , and inquire of the door - keeper for 
 Mr. Herbert Compton . that functionary reply , " Mr. Compton do not act 
 to - night , and be not in the house . " 

 " where do he lodge ? " 

 the door - keeper point to a grocer 's shop on the other side of the way , 
 and say tersely , " there , private door ; knock and ring . " 

 Kenelm do as he be direct . a slatternly maid - servant open the 
 door , and , in answer to his interrogatory , say that Mr. Compton be at 
 home , but at supper . 

 " I be sorry to disturb he , " say Kenelm , raise his voice , for he 
 hear a clatter of knife and plate within a room hard by at his left , 
 " but my business require to see he forthwith ; " and , push the maid 
 aside , he enter at once the adjoining banquet - hall . 

 before a savoury stew smell strongly of onion sit a man very much at 
 his ease , without coat or neckcloth , - a decidedly handsome man , his hair 
 cut short and his face closely shaven , as befit an actor who have wig 
 and beard of all hue and form at his command . the man be not alone ; 
 opposite to he sit a lady , who might be a few year young , of a 
 somewhat faded complexion , but still pretty , with good stage feature 
 and a profusion of blond ringlet . 

 " Mr. Compton , I presume , " say Kenelm , with a solemn bow . 

 " my name be Compton : any message from the theatre ? or what do you want 
 with I ? " 

 " i - nothing ! " reply Kenelm ; and then deepen his naturally mournful 
 voice into tone ominous and tragic , continue , " by whom you be want 
 let this explain ; " therewith he place in Mr. Compton 's hand the letter 
 with which he be charge , and stretch his arm and interlace his 
 finger in the pose of Talma as Julius Caesar , add , " ' Qu'en dis - tu , 
 Brute ? ' " 

 whether it be from the sombre aspect and awe - inspire delivery of 
 the messenger , or the sight of the handwriting on the address of the 
 missive , Mr. Compton 's countenance suddenly fall , and his hand rest 
 irresolute , as if not dare to open the letter . 

 " never mind I , dear , " say the lady with blond ringlet , in a tone of 
 sting affability : " read your billet - doux ; do not   keep the young man 
 waiting , love ! " 

 " Nonsense , Matilda , nonsense ! billet - doux indeed ! more likely a bill 
 from Duke the tailor . excuse I for a moment , my dear . follow I , sir , " 
 and rise , still with shirtsleeve uncover , he quit the room , 
 close the door after he , motion Kenelm into a small parlour on the 
 opposite side of the passage , and by the light of a suspend gas - lamp 
 run his eye hastily over the letter , which , though it seem very short , 
 draw from he sundry exclamation . " good heaven , how very absurd ! 
 what be to be do ? " then , thrust the letter into his trouser - pocket , 
 he fix upon Kenelm a very brilliant pair of dark eye , which soon 
 drop before the steadfast look of that saturnine adventurer . 

 " be you in the confidence of the writer of this letter ? " ask Mr. 
 Compton , rather confusedly . 

 " I be not the confidant of the writer , " answer Kenelm , " but for the 
 time be I be the protector ! " 

 " Protector ! " 

 " Protector . " 

 Mr. Compton again eye the messenger , and this time fully realize the 
 gladiatorial development of that dark stranger 's physical form , he grow 
 many shade paler , and involuntarily retreat towards the bell - pull . 

 after a short pause , he say , " I be request to call on the writer . if 
 I do so , may I understand that the interview will be strictly private ? " 

 " so far as I be concern , yes : on the condition that no attempt be make 
 to withdraw the writer from the house . " 

 " certainly not , certainly not ; quite the contrary , " exclaim Mr. 
 Compton , with genuine animation . " say I will call in half an hour . " 

 " I will give your message , " say Kenelm , with a polite inclination of 
 his head ; " and pray pardon I if I remind you that I style myself the 
 protector of your correspondent , and if the slight advantage be 
 take of that correspondent 's youth and inexperience or the small 
 encouragement be give to plan of abduction from home and friend , the 
 stage will lose an ornament and Herbert Compton vanish from the scene . " 
 with these word Kenelm leave the player stand aghast . gain the 
 street - door , a lad with a band - box run against he and be nearly upset . 

 " Stupid , " cry the lad , " can not   you see where you be go ? give this 
 to Mrs. Compton . " 

 " I should deserve the title you give if I do for nothing the business 
 for which you be pay , " reply Kenelm , sententiously , and stride on . 



 CHAPTER V. 

 " I have fulfil my mission , " say Kenelm , on rejoin his travel 
 companion . " Mr. Compton say he would be here in half an hour . " 

 " you see he ? " 

 " of course : I promise to give your letter into his own hand . " 

 " be he alone ? " 

 " no ; at supper with his wife . " 

 " his wife ! what do you mean , sir ? - wife ! he have no wife . " 

 " appearance be deceitful . at least he be with a lady who call he 
 ' dear ' and ' love ' in as spiteful a tone of voice as if she have be his 
 wife ; and as I be come out of his street - door a lad who run against 
 I ask I to give a band - box to Mrs. Compton . " 

 the boy turn as white as death , stagger back a few step , and 
 drop into a chair . 

 a suspicion which during his absence have suggest itself to Kenelm 's 
 inquire mind now take strong confirmation . he approach softly , draw 
 a chair close to the companion whom fate have force upon he , and say 
 in a gentle whisper , - 

 " this be no boy 's agitation . if you have be deceive or mislead , and 
 I can in any way advise or aid you , count on I as woman under the 
 circumstance count on man and gentleman . " 

 the boy start to his foot , and pace the room with disorder step , 
 and a countenance work with passion which he attempt vainly to 
 suppress . suddenly arrest his step , he seize Kenelm 's hand , press 
 it convulsively , and say , in a voice struggle against a sob , - 

 " I thank you , - I bless you . leave I now : I would be alone . alone , too , 
 I must face this man . there may be some mistake yet ; go . " 

 " you will promise not to leave the house till I return ? " 

 " yes , I promise that . " 

 " and if it be as I fear , you will then let I counsel with and advise 
 you ? " 

 " heaven help I , if so ! whom else should I trust to ? go , go ! " 

 Kenelm once more find himself in the street , beneath the mingled light 
 of gas - lamp and the midsummer moon . he walk on mechanically till he 
 reach the extremity of the town . there he halt , and seat himself 
 on a milestone , indulge in these meditation : - 

 " Kenelm , my friend , you be in a still bad scrape than I think you 
 be an hour ago . you have evidently now get a woman on your hand . what 
 on earth be you to do with she ? a runaway woman , who , mean to run 
 off with somebody else - such be the cross and contradiction in human 
 destiny - have run off with you instead . what mortal can hope to be safe ? 
 the last thing I think could befall I when I get up this morning be 
 that I should have any trouble about the other sex before the day be 
 over . if I be of an amatory temperament , the Fates might have some 
 justification for lead I into this snare , but , as it be , those 
 meddle old maid have none . Kenelm , my friend , do you think you ever 
 can be in love ? and , if you be in love , do you think you could be a 
 great fool than you be now ? " 

 Kenelm have not decide this knotty question in the conference hold with 
 himself , when a light and soft strain of music come upon his ear . it be 
 but from a string instrument , and might have sound thin and tinkle 
 but for the stillness of the night , and that peculiar addition of 
 fulness which music acquire when it be bear along a tranquil air . 
 presently a voice in song be hear from the distance accompany 
 the instrument . it be a man 's voice , a mellow and a rich voice , but 
 Kenelm 's ear could not catch the word . mechanically he move on towards 
 the quarter from which the sound come , for Kenelm Chillingly have music 
 in his soul , though he be not quite aware of it himself . he see before 
 he a patch of greensward , on which grow a solitary elm with a seat 
 for wayfarer beneath it . from this sward the ground recede in a wide 
 semicircle border partly by shop , partly by the tea - garden of a 
 pretty cottage - like tavern . round the table scatter throughout the 
 garden be group quiet customer , evidently belong to the class 
 of small tradespeople or superior artisan . they have an appearance of 
 decorous respectability , and be listen intently to the music . so 
 be many person at the shop - door and at the window of upper room . 
 on the sward , a little in advance of the tree , but beneath its shadow , 
 stand the musician , and in that musician Kenelm recognize the wanderer 
 from whose talk he have conceive the idea of the pedestrian excursion 
 which have already bring he into a very awkward position . the 
 instrument on which the singer accompany himself be a guitar , and his 
 song be evidently a love - song , though , as it be now draw near to 
 its close , Kenelm could but imperfectly guess at its general meaning . 
 he hear enough to perceive that its word be at least free from the 
 vulgarity which generally characterize street ballad , and be yet 
 simple enough to please a very homely audience . 

 when the singer end there be no applause ; but there be evident 
 sensation among the audience , - a feeling as if something that have give 
 a common enjoyment have cease . presently the white pomeranian dog , who 
 have hitherto keep himself out of sight under the seat of the elm - tree , 
 advance , with a small metal tray between his tooth , and , after look 
 round he deliberately , as if to select whom of the audience should 
 be honour with the commencement of a general subscription , gravely 
 approach Kenelm , stand on his hind leg , star at he , and present 
 the tray . 

 Kenelm drop a shilling into that depository , and the dog , look 
 gratify , take his way towards the tea - garden . lift his hat , for he 
 be , in his way , a very polite man , Kenelm approach the singer , and , 
 trust to the alteration in his dress for not be recognize by a 
 stranger who have only once before encounter he he say , - 

 " judge by the little I hear , you sing very well , sir . may I ask who 
 compose the word ? " 

 " they be mine , " reply the singer . 

 " and the air ? " 

 " mine too . " 

 " accept my compliment . I hope you find these manifestation of genius 
 lucrative ? " 

 the singer , who have not hitherto vouchsafe more than a careless glance 
 at the rustic garb of the questioner , now fix his eye full upon 
 Kenelm , and say , with a smile , " your voice betray you , sir . we have 
 meet before . " 

 " true ; but I do not then notice your guitar , nor , though acquaint 
 with your poetical gift , suppose that you select this primitive 
 method of make they publicly know . " 

 " nor do I anticipate the pleasure of meet you again in the character 
 of Hobnail . Hist ! let we keep each other 's secret . I be know hereabouts 
 by no other designation than that of the ' Wandering Minstrel . ' " 

 " it be in the capacity of minstrel that I address you . if it be not an 
 impertinent question , do you know any song which take the other side of 
 the case ? " 

 " what case ? I do not   understand you , sir . " 

 " the song I hear seem in praise of that sham call love . do not   you 
 think you could say something more new and more true , treat that 
 aberration from reason with the contempt it deserve ? " 

 " not if I be to get my travel expense pay . " 

 " what ! the folly be so popular ? " 

 " do not your own heart tell you so ? " 

 " not a bit of it , - rather the contrary . your audience at present 
 seem folk who live by work , and can have little time for such idle 
 phantasy ; for , as it be well observe by Ovid , a poet who write much 
 on that subject , and profess the most intimate acquaintance with it , 
 ' idleness be the parent of love . ' can not   you sing something in praise of 
 a good dinner ? everybody who work hard have an appetite for food . " 

 the singer again fix on Kenelm his inquire eye , but not detect a 
 vestige of humour in the grave face he contemplate , be rather puzzle 
 how to reply , and therefore remain silent . 

 " I perceive , " resume Kenelm , " that my observation surprise you : the 
 surprise will vanish on reflection . it have be say by another poet , 
 more reflective than Ovid , that ' the world be govern by love and 
 hunger . ' but hunger certainly have the lion 's share of the government ; 
 and if a poet be really to do what he pretend to do , - namely , represent 
 nature , - the great part of his lay should be address to the 
 stomach . " here , warm with his subject , Kenelm familiarly lay his 
 band on the musician 's shoulder , and his voice take a tone border on 
 enthusiasm . " you will allow that a man in the normal condition of health 
 do not fall in love every day . but in the normal condition of health 
 he be hungry every day . Nay , in those early year when you poet say he 
 be most prone to love , he be so especially disposed to hunger that 
 less than three meal a day can scarcely satisfy his appetite . you may 
 imprison a man for month , for year , nay , for his whole life , - from 
 infancy to any age which Sir Cornewall Lewis may allow he to 
 attain , - without let he be in love at all . but if you shut he up 
 for a week without put something into his stomach , you will find he 
 at the end of it as dead as a door - nail . " 

 here the singer , who have gradually retreat before the energetic 
 advance of the orator , sink into the seat by the elm - tree and say 
 pathetically , " Sir , you have fairly argue I down . will you please to 
 come to the conclusion which you deduce from your premise ? " 

 " simply this , that where you find one human being who care about love , 
 you will find a thousand susceptible to the charm of a dinner ; and if 
 you wish to be the popular minne - singer or troubadour of the age , appeal 
 to nature , sir , - appeal to nature ; drop all hackneyed rhapsody about a 
 rosy cheek , and strike your lyre to the theme of a beefsteak . " 

 the dog have for some minute regain his master 's side , stand on 
 his hind leg , with the tray , tolerably well fill with copper coin , 
 between his tooth ; and now , justly aggrieve by the inattention which 
 detain he in that artificial attitude , drop the tray and growl 
 at Kenelm . 

 at the same time there come an impatient sound from the audience in the 
 tea - garden . they want another song for their money . 

 the singer rise , obedient to the summon . " excuse I , sir ; but I be 
 call upon to - " 

 " to sing again ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " and on the subject I suggest ? " 

 " no , indeed . " 

 " what ! love , again ? " 

 " I be afraid so . " 

 " I wish you good evening then . you seem a well - educate man , - more shame 
 to you . perhaps we may meet once more in our ramble , when the question 
 can be properly argue out . " 

 Kenelm lift his hat , and turn on his heel . before he reach the 
 street , the sweet voice of the singer again smite his ear ; but the only 
 word distinguishable in the distance , ring out at the close of the 
 refrain , be " love . " 

 " fiddle - de - dee , " say Kenelm . 



 CHAPTER VI . 

 AS Kenelm regain the street dignify by the edifice of the Temperance 
 Hotel , a figure , dress picturesquely in a spanish cloak , brush 
 hurriedly by he , but not so fast as to be unrecognized as the 
 tragedian . " Hem ! " mutter Kenelm , " I do not   think there be much triumph 
 in that face . I suspect he have be scold . " 

 the boy - if Kenelm 's travel companion be still to be so 
 designate - be lean against the mantelpiece as Kenelm re - enter 
 the dining - room . there be an air of profound dejection about the boy 's 
 listless attitude and in the droop tearless eye . 

 " my dear child , " say Kenelm , in the soft tone of his plaintive 
 voice , " do not honour I with any confidence that may be painful . but 
 let I hope that you have dismiss forever all thought of go on the 
 stage . " 

 " yes , " be the scarce audible answer . 

 " and now only remain the question , ' what be to be do ? ' " 

 " I be sure I do not   know , and I do not   care . " 

 " then you leave it to I to know and to care ; and assume for the 
 moment as a fact that which be one of the great lie in this 
 mendacious world - namely , that all man be brother - you will consider 
 I as an eld brother , who will counsel and control you as he would 
 an imprudent young - sister . I see very well how it be . somehow or other 
 you , have first admire Mr. Compton as Romeo or Richard III . , make his 
 acquaintance as Mr. Compton . he allow you to believe he a single 
 man . in a romantic moment you escape from your home , with the design of 
 adopt the profession of the stage and of become Mrs. Compton . " 

 " oh , " break out the girl , since her sex must now be declare , " oh , " she 
 exclaim , with a passionate sob , " what a fool I have be ! only do not 
 think bad of I than I deserve . the man do deceive I ; he do not 
 think I should take he at his word , and follow he here , or his wife 
 would not have appear . I should not have know he have one and - and - " 
 here her voice be choke under her passion . 

 " but now you have discover the truth , let we thank Heaven that you be 
 save from shame and misery . I must despatch a telegram to your uncle : 
 give I his address . " 

 " no , no . " 

 " there be not a ' no ' possible in this case , my child . your reputation 
 and your future must be save . leave I to explain all to your uncle . 
 he be your guardian . I must send for he ; nay , nay , there be no option . 
 hate I now for enforce your will : you will thank I hereafter . and 
 listen , young lady ; if it do pain you to see your uncle , and encounter 
 his reproach , every fault must undergo its punishment . a brave nature 
 undergo it cheerfully , as a part of atonement . you be brave . submit , 
 and in submit rejoice ! " 

 there be something in Kenelm 's voice and manner at once so kindly and 
 so command that the wayward nature he address fairly succumb . 
 she give he her uncle 's address , " John Bovill , Esq . , Oakdale , near 
 Westmere . " and after give it , she fix her eye mournfully upon her 
 young adviser , and say with a simple , dreary pathos , " now , will you 
 esteem I more , or rather despise I less ? " 

 she look so young , nay , so childlike , as she thus speak , that Kenelm 
 feel a parental inclination to draw she on his lap and kiss away 
 her tear . but he prudently conquer that impulse , and say , with a 
 melancholy half - smile , - 

 " if human being despise each other for be young and foolish , the 
 soon we be exterminate by that superior race which be to succeed we 
 on earth the well it will be . adieu , till your uncle come . " 

 " what ! you leave I here - alone ? " 

 " Nay , if your uncle find I under the same roof , now that I know you 
 be his niece , do not   you think he would have a right to throw I out 
 of the window ? allow I to practise for myself the prudence I preach 
 to you . send for the landlady to show you your room , shut yourself in 
 there , go to bed , and do not   cry more than you can help . " 

 Kenelm shoulder the knapsack he have deposit in a corner of the room , 
 inquire for the telegraph - office , despatch a telegram to Mr. Bovill , 
 obtain a bedroom at the Commercial Hotel , and fall asleep , mutter 
 these sensible word , - 

 " Rouchefoucauld be perfectly right when he say , ' very few people would 
 fall in love if they have not hear it so much talk about . ' " 



 CHAPTER VII . 

 KENELM CHILLINGLY rise with the sun , accord to his usual custom , and 
 take his way to the Temperance Hotel . all in that sober building seem 
 still in the arm of Morpheus . he turn towards the stable in which he 
 have leave the gray cob , and have the pleasure to see that ill - use animal 
 in the healthful process of rub down . 

 " that be right , " say he to the hostler . " I be glad to see you be so 
 early a riser . " 

 " why , " quoth the hostler , " the gentleman as own the pony knock I 
 up at two o'clock in the morning , and please enough he be to see the 
 creature again lie down in the clean straw . " 

 " oh , he have arrive at the hotel , I presume ? - a stout gentleman ? " 

 " yes , stout enough ; and a passionate gentleman too . come in a yellow and 
 two poster , knock up the temperance and then knock up I to see 
 for the pony , and be much put out as he could not get any grog at the 
 temperance . " 

 " I dare say he be . I wish he have get his grog : it might have put he in 
 well humour . poor little thing ! " mutter Kenelm , turn away ; " I be 
 afraid she be in for a regular vituperation . my turn next , I suppose . 
 but he must be a good fellow to have come at once for his niece in the 
 dead of the night . " 

 about nine o'clock Kenelm present himself again at the Temperance 
 Hotel , inquire for Mr. Bovill , and be show by the prim maid - servant 
 into the drawing - room , where he find Mr. Bovill seat amicably at 
 breakfast with his niece , who of course be still in boy 's clothing , 
 have no other costume at hand . to Kenelm 's great relief , Mr. Bovill 
 rise from the table with a beam countenance , and extend his hand 
 to Kenelm , say , - 

 " Sir , you be a gentleman ; sit down , sit down and take breakfast . " 

 then , as soon as the maid be out of the room , the uncle continue , - 

 " I have hear all your good conduct from this young simpleton . thing 
 might have be bad , sir . " 

 Kenelm bow his head , and draw the loaf towards he in silence . then , 
 consider that some apology be due to his entertainer , he say , - 

 " I hope you forgive I for that unfortunate mistake , when - " 

 " you knock I down , or rather trip I up . all right now . Elsie , 
 give the gentleman a cup of tea . pretty little rogue , be she not ? and a 
 good girl , in spite of her nonsense . it be all my fault let she go 
 to the play and be intimate with Miss Lockit , a stage - stricken , foolish 
 old maid , who ought to have know well than to lead she into all this 
 trouble . " 

 " no , uncle , " cry the girl , resolutely ; " do not   blame she , nor any one 
 but I . " 

 Kenelm turn his dark eye approvingly towards the girl , and see that 
 her lip be firmly set ; there be an expression , not of grief nor 
 shame , but compress resolution in her countenance . but when her eye 
 meet his they fall softly , and a blush mantle over her cheek up to she 
 very forehead . 

 " ah ! " say the uncle , " just like you , Elsie ; always ready to take 
 everybody 's fault on your own shoulder . well , well , say no more about 
 that . now , my young friend , what bring you across the country tramp 
 it on foot , eh ? a young man 's whim ? " as he speak , he eye Kenelm very 
 closely , and his look be that of an intelligent man not unaccustomed to 
 observe the face of those he converse with . in fact a more shrewd man 
 of business than Mr. Bovill be seldom meet with on ' Change or in market . 

 " I travel on foot to please myself , sir , " answer Kenelm , curtly , and 
 unconsciously set on his guard . 

 " of course you do , " cry Mr. Bovill , with a jovial laugh . " but it seem 
 you do not   object to a chaise and pony whenever you can get they for 
 nothing , - ha , ha ! - excuse I , - a joke . " 

 herewith Mr. Bovill , still in excellent good - humour , abruptly change 
 the conversation to general matter , - agricultural prospect , chance of 
 a good harvest , corn trade , money market in general , politic , state of 
 the nation . Kenelm feel there be an attempt to draw he out , to sound , 
 to pump he , and reply only by monosyllable , generally significant 
 of ignorance on the question broach ; and at the close , if the 
 philosophical heir of the Chillinglys be in the habit of allow 
 himself to be surprised he would certainly have be startle when Mr. 
 Bovill rise , slap he on the shoulder , and say in a tone of great 
 satisfaction , " just as I think , sir ; you know nothing of these 
 matter : you be a gentleman bear and breed ; your clothe can not   disguise 
 you , sir . Elsie be right . my dear , just leave we for a few minute : I 
 have something to say to our young friend . you can get ready meanwhile 
 to go with I . " Elsie leave the table and walk obediently towards the 
 doorway . there she halt a moment , turn round , and look timidly 
 towards Kenelm . he have naturally rise from his seat as she rise , and 
 advance some pace as if to open the door for she . thus their look 
 encounter . he could not interpret that shy gaze of her : it be 
 tender , it be deprecate , it be humble , it be plead ; a man 
 accustom to female conquest might have think it be something more , 
 something in which be the key to all . but that something more be an 
 unknown tongue to Kenelm Chillingly . 

 when the two man be alone , Mr. Bovill reseat himself and motion to 
 Kenelm to do the same . " now , young sir , " say the former , " you and I can 
 talk at our ease . that adventure of yours yesterday may be the lucky 
 thing that could happen to you . " 

 " it be sufficiently lucky if I have be of any service to your niece . 
 but her own good sense would have be her safeguard if she have be 
 alone , and discover , as she would have do , that Mr. Compton have , 
 knowingly or not , mislead she to believe that he be a single man . " 

 " Hang Mr. Compton ! we have do with he . I be a plain man , and I come 
 to the point . it be you who have carry off my niece ; it be with you 
 that she come to this hotel . now when Elsie tell I how well you 
 have behave , and that your language and manner be those of a real 
 gentleman , my mind be make up . I guess pretty well what you be ; you 
 be a gentleman 's son ; probably a college youth ; not overburden with 
 cash ; have a quarrel with your governor , and he keep you short . do not 
 interrupt I . well , Elsie be a good girl and a pretty girl , and will 
 make a good wife , as wife go ; and , hark ye , she have L20,000 . so just 
 confide in I ; and if you do not   like your parent to know about it till 
 the thing be do and they be only get to forgive and bless you , why , you 
 shall marry Elsie before you can say Jack Robinson . " 

 for the first time in his life Kenelm Chillingly be seize with 
 terror , - terror and consternation . his jaw drop ; his tongue be 
 palsy . if hair ever stand on end , his hair do . at last , with 
 superhuman effort , he gasp out the word , " Marry ! " 

 " yes ; marry . if you be a gentleman you be bind to it . you have 
 compromise my niece , - a respectable , virtuous girl , sir ; an orphan , but 
 not unprotected . I repeat , it be you who have pluck she from my very 
 arm , and with violence and assault elope with she ; and what would the 
 world say if it know ? would it believe in your prudent conduct ? - conduct 
 only to be explain by the respect you feel due to your future wife . 
 and where will you find a well ? where will you find an uncle who will 
 part with his ward and L20,000 without ask if you have a sixpence ? 
 and the girl have take a fancy to you ; I see it : would she have give up 
 that player so easily if you have not steal her heart ? would you break 
 that heart ? no , young man : you be not a villain . shake hand on it ! " 

 " Mr. Bovill , " say Kenelm , recover his wonted equanimity , " I be 
 inexpressibly flatter by the honour you propose to I , and I do not 
 deny that Miss Elsie be worthy of a much well man than myself . but 
 I have inconceivable prejudice against the connubial state . if it be 
 permit to a member of the Established Church to cavil at any sentence 
 write by Saint Paul , - and I think that liberty may be permit to a 
 simple layman , since eminent member of the clergy criticise the whole 
 Bible as freely as if it be the history of Queen Elizabeth by Mr. 
 Froude , - I should demur at the doctrine that it be well to marry than 
 to burn : I myself should prefer burn . with these sentiment it would 
 ill become any one entitle to that distinction of ' gentleman ' which you 
 confer on I to lead a fellow - victim to the sacrificial altar . as for 
 any reproach attach to Miss Elsie , since in my telegram I direct you 
 to ask for a young gentleman at this hotel , her very sex be not know in 
 this place unless you divulge it . and - " 

 here Kenelm be interrupt by a violent explosion of rage from the 
 uncle . he stamp his foot ; he almost foam at the mouth ; he double 
 his fist , and shake it in Kenelm 's face . 

 " Sir , you be mock I : John Bovill be not a man to be jeered in this 
 way . you shall marry the girl . I will not have she thrust back upon I 
 to be the plague of my life with her whim and tantrum . you have take 
 she , and you shall keep she , or I will break every bone in your skin . " 

 " break they , " say Kenelm , resignedly , but at the same time fall back 
 into a formidable attitude of defence , which cool the pugnacity of his 
 accuser . Mr. Bovill sink into his chair , and wipe his forehead . Kenelm 
 craftily pursue the advantage he have gain , and in mild accent 
 proceed to reason , - 

 " when you recover your habitual serenity of humour , Mr. Bovill , you 
 will see how much your very excusable desire to secure your niece 's 
 happiness , and , I may add , to reward what you allow to have be 
 forbearing and well - breed conduct on my part , have hurry you into an 
 error of judgment . you know nothing of I . I may be , for what you know , 
 an impostor or swindler ; I may have every bad quality , and yet you be 
 to be content with my assurance , or rather your own assumption , that 
 I be bear a gentleman , in order to give I your niece and her L20,000 . 
 this be temporary insanity on your part . allow I to leave you to 
 recover from your excitement . " 

 " stop , sir , " say Mr. Bovill , in a changed and sullen tone ; " I be not 
 quite the madman you think I . but I dare say I have be too hasty and 
 too rough . nevertheless the fact be as I have state they , and I do 
 not see how , as a man of honour , you can get off marry my niece . the 
 mistake you make in run away with she be , no doubt , innocent on 
 your part : but still there it be ; and suppose the case come before a 
 jury , it would be an ugly one for you and your family . marriage alone 
 could mend it . come , come , I own I be too business - like in rush to 
 the point at once , and I no long say , ' marry my niece off - hand . ' you 
 have only see she disguised and in a false position . pay I a visit at 
 Oakdale ; stay with I a month ; and if at the end of that time you do not 
 like she well enough to propose , I will let you off and say no more about 
 it . " 

 while Mr. Bovill thus speak , and Kenelm listen , neither see that the 
 door have be noiselessly open and that Elsie stand at the threshold . 
 now , before Kenelm could reply , she advance into the middle of the 
 room , and , her small figure draw up to its full height , her cheek 
 glowing , her lip quivering , exclaim , - 

 " Uncle , for shame ! " then address Kenelm in a sharp tone of anguish , 
 " oh , do not believe I know anything of this ! " she cover her face with 
 both hand and stand mute . 

 all of chivalry that Kenelm have receive with his baptismal appellation 
 be arouse . he spring up , and , bend his knee as he draw one of her 
 hand into his own , he say , - 

 " I be as convince that your uncle 's word be abhorrent to you as I be 
 that you be a pure - hearted and high - spirited woman , of whose friendship 
 I shall be proud . we meet again . " then release her hand , he address 
 Mr. Bovill : " Sir , you be unworthy the charge of your niece . have you not 
 be so , she would have commit no imprudence . if she have any female 
 relation , to that relation transfer your charge . " 

 " I have ! I have ! " cry Elsie ; " my lost mother 's sister : let I go to 
 she . " 

 " the woman who keep a school ! " say Mr. Bovill sneeringly . 

 " why not ? " ask Kenelm . 

 " she never would go there . I propose it to she a year ago . the minx 
 would not go into a school . " 

 " I will now , Uncle . " 

 " well , then , you shall at once ; and I hope you will be put on bread and 
 water . Fool ! fool ! you have spoil your own game . Mr. Chillingly , now 
 that Miss Elsie have turn she back on herself , I can convince you that 
 I be not the mad man you think I . I be at the festive meeting hold 
 when you come of age : my brother be one of your father 's tenant . I do 
 not recognize your face immediately in the excitement of our encounter 
 and in your change of dress ; but in walk home it strike I that I have 
 see it before , and I know it at once when you enter the room to - day . 
 it have be a tussle between we which should beat the other . you have 
 beat I ; and thank to that idiot ! if she have not put she speak into my 
 wheel , she would have live to be ' my lady . ' now good - day , sir . " 

 " Mr. Bovill , you offer to shake hand : shake hand now , and promise 
 I , with the good grace of one honourable combatant to another , that 
 Miss Elsie shall go to her aunt the schoolmistress at once if she wish 
 it . Hark ye , my friend "   this in Mr. Bovill 's ear : " a man can never 
 manage a woman . till a woman marry , a prudent man leave she to woman ; 
 when she do marry , she manage her husband , and there be an end of it . " 

 Kenelm be go . 

 " oh , wise young man ! " murmur the uncle . " Elsie , dear , how can you go 
 to your aunt 's while you be in that dress ? " 

 Elsie start as from a trance , her eye direct towards the 
 doorway through which Kenelm have vanish . " this dress , " she say 
 contemptuously , " this dress ; be not that easily alter with shop in 
 the town ? " 

 " Gad ! " mutter Mr. Bovill , " that youngster be a second Solomon ; and if 
 I can not   manage Elsie , she will manage a husband - whenever she get one . " 



 CHAPTER VIII . 

 " by the power that guard innocence and celibacy , " soliloquize Kenelm 
 Chillingly , " but I have have a narrow escape ! and have that amphibious 
 creature be in girl 's clothe instead of boy 's , when she intervene 
 like the deity of the ancient drama , I might have plunge my armorial 
 fish into hot water . though , indeed , it be hard to suppose that a 
 young lady head - over - ear in love with Mr. Compton yesterday could have 
 consign her affection to I to - day . still she look as if she could , 
 which prove either that one be never to trust a woman 's heart or never 
 to trust a woman 's look . Decimus Roach be right . man must never relax 
 his flight from the woman , if he strive to achieve an ' approach to the 
 Angels . ' " 

 these reflection be make by Kenelm Chillingly as , have turn his 
 back upon the town in which such temptation and trial have befall 
 he , he take his solitary way along a footpath that wind through mead 
 and cornfield , and shorten by three mile the distance to a cathedral 
 town at which he propose to rest for the night . 

 he have travel for some hour , and the sun be begin to slope 
 towards a range of blue hill in the west , when he come to the margin 
 of a fresh rivulet , overshadow by feathery willow and the quivering 
 leaf of silvery italian poplar . tempt by the quiet and cool of 
 this pleasant spot , he fling himself down on the bank , draw from his 
 knapsack some crust of bread with which he have wisely provide himself , 
 and , dip they into the pure lymph as it ripple over its pebbly bed , 
 enjoy one of those luxurious repast for which epicure would exchange 
 their banquet in return for the appetite of youth . then , recline along 
 the bank , and crush the wild thyme that grow good and sweetest in 
 woode covert , provide they be neighbour by water , no matter whether 
 in pool or rill , he resign himself to that intermediate state between 
 thought and dream - land which we call " revery . " at a little distance he 
 hear the low still sound of the mower 's scythe , and the air come to his 
 brow sweet with the fragrance of new - mow hay . 

 he be rouse by a gentle tap on the shoulder , and turn lazily round , 
 see a good - humour jovial face upon a pair of massive shoulder , and 
 hear a hearty and win voice say , - 

 " young man , if you be not too tired , will you lend a hand to get in 
 my hay ? we be very short of hand , and I be afraid we shall have rain 
 pretty soon . " 

 Kenelm rise and shake himself , gravely contemplate the stranger , and 
 reply in his customary sententious fashion , " man be bear to help his 
 fellow - man , - especially to get in hay while the sun shin . I be at your 
 service . " 

 " that be a good fellow , and I be greatly oblige to you . you see I have 
 count on a gang of rove haymaker , but they be buy up 
 by another farmer . this way ; " and lead on through a gap in the 
 brushwood , he emerge , follow by Kenelm , into a large meadow , 
 one - third of which be still under the scythe , the rest be occupy 
 with person of both sex , toss and spread the cut grass . among 
 the latter , Kenelm , strip to his shirt - sleeve , soon find himself 
 toss and spread like the rest , with his usual melancholy 
 resignation of mien and aspect . though a little awkward at first in 
 the use of his unfamiliar implement , his practice in all athletic 
 accomplishment bestow on he that invaluable quality which be term 
 " handiness , " and he soon distinguish himself by the superior activity 
 and neatness with which he perform his work . something - it might be in 
 his countenance or in the charm of his be a stranger - attract the 
 attention of the feminine section of haymaker , and one very pretty girl 
 who be near to he than the rest attempt to commence conversation . 

 " this be new to you , " she say smile . 

 " nothing be new to I , " answer Kenelm , mournfully . " but allow I to 
 observe that to do thing well you should only do one thing at a time . I 
 be here to make hay and not conversation . " 

 " my ! " say the girl , in amazed ejaculation , and turn off with a toss 
 of her pretty head . 

 " I wonder if that jade have get an uncle , " think Kenelm . the farmer , 
 who take his share of work with the man , halt now and then to look 
 round , notice Kenelm 's vigorous application with much approval , and at 
 the close of the day 's work shake he heartily by the hand , leave a 
 two - shilling piece in his palm . the heir of the Chillinglys gaze on 
 that honorarium , and turn it over with the finger and thumb of the 
 leave hand . 

 " be not   it eno ' ? " say the farmer , nettle . 

 " pardon I , " answer Kenelm . " but , to tell you the truth , it be the 
 first money I ever earn by my own bodily labour ; and I regard it with 
 equal curiosity and respect . but if it would not offend you , I would 
 rather that , instead of the money , you have offer I some supper ; for I 
 have taste nothing but bread and water since the morning . " 

 " you shall have the money and supper both , my lad , " say the farmer , 
 cheerily . " and if you will stay and help till I have get in the hay , I 
 dare say my good woman can find you a well bed than you will get in the 
 village inn ; if , indeed , you can get one there at all . " 

 " you be very kind . but before I accept your hospitality excuse one 
 question : have you any niece about you ? " 

 " niece ! " echo the farmer , mechanically thrust his hand into his 
 breech - pocket as if in search of something there , " niece about I ! 
 what do you mean ? be that a newfangled word for copper ? " 

 " not for copper , though perhaps for brass . but I speak without 
 metaphor . I object to niece upon abstract principle , confirm by the 
 test of experience . " 

 the farmer star , and think his new friend not quite so sound in his 
 mental as he evidently be in his physical conformation , but reply , 
 with a laugh , " make yourself easy , then . I have only one niece , and she 
 be married to an iron - monger and live in Exeter . " 

 on enter the farmhouse , Kenelm 's host conduct he straight into the 
 kitchen , and cry out , in a hearty voice , to a comely middle - aged dame , 
 who , with a stout girl , be intent on culinary operation , " Hulloa ! old 
 woman , I have bring you a guest who have well earn his supper , for he 
 have do the work of two , and I have promise he a bed . " 

 the farmer 's wife turn sharply round . " he be heartily welcome to 
 supper . as to a bed , " she say doubtfully , " I do not   know . " but here her 
 eye settle on Kenelm ; and there be something in his aspect so 
 unlike what she expect to see in an itinerant haymaker , that she 
 involuntarily drop a courtesy , and resume , with a change of tone , 
 " the gentleman shall have the guest - room : but it will take a little time 
 to get ready ; you know , John , all the furniture be cover up . " 

 " well , wife , there will be leisure eno ' for that . he do not   want to go to 
 roost till he have sup . " 

 " certainly not , " say Kenelm , sniff a very agreeable odour . 

 " where be the girl ? " ask the farmer . 

 " they have be in these five minute , and go upstairs to tidy 
 themselves . " 

 " what girl ? " falter Kenelm , retreat towards the door . " I think 
 you say you have no niece . " 

 " but I do not say I have no daughter . why , you be not afraid of they , 
 be you ? " 

 " Sir , " reply Kenelm , with a polite and politic evasion of that 
 question , " if your daughter be like their mother , you can not   say that 
 they be not dangerous . " 

 " come , " cry the farmer , look very much pleased , while his dame 
 smile and blush , " come , that be as nicely say as if you be 
 canvass the county . ' tis not among haymaker that you learn 
 manner , I guess ; and perhaps I have be make too free with my 
 better . " 

 " what ! " quoth the courteous Kenelm , " do you mean to imply that you be 
 too free with your shilling ? apologize for that , if you like , but I 
 do not   think you will get back the shilling . I have not see so much of 
 this life as you have , but , accord to my experience , when a man once 
 part with his money , whether to his better or his worser , the chance 
 be that he will never see it again . " 

 at this aphorism the farmer laugh ready to kill himself , his wife 
 chuckle , and even the maid - of - all - work grin . Kenelm , preserve his 
 unalterable gravity , say to himself , - 

 " wit consist in the epigrammatic expression of a commonplace truth , and 
 the dull remark on the worth of money be almost as sure of successful 
 appreciation as the dull remark on the worthlessness of woman . 
 certainly I be a wit without know it . " 

 here the farmer touch he on the shoulder - touch it , do not slap 
 it , as he would have do ten minute before - and say , - 

 " we must not disturb the Missis or we shall get no supper . I will just go 
 and give a look into the cow - sheds . do you know much about cow ? " 

 " yes , cow produce cream and butter . the good cow be those which 
 produce at the least cost the good cream and butter . but how the good 
 cream and butter can be produce at a price which will place they free 
 of expense on a poor man 's breakfast - table be a question to be settle 
 by a Reformed Parliament and a Liberal Administration . in the meanwhile 
 let we not delay the supper . " 

 the farmer and his guest quit the kitchen and enter the farmyard . 

 " you be quite a stranger in these part ? " 

 " quite . " 

 " you do not   even know my name ? " 

 " no , except that I hear your wife call you John . " 

 " my name be John Saunderson . " 

 " ah ! you come from the North , then ? that be why you be so sensible and 
 shrewd . name that end in ' son ' be chiefly bear by the descendant of 
 the Danes , to whom King Alfred , Heaven bless he ! peacefully assign 
 no less than sixteen english county . and when a dane be call 
 somebody 's son , it be a sign that he be the son of a somebody . " 

 " by gosh ! I never hear that before . " 

 " if I think you have I should not have say it . " 

 " now I have tell you my name , what be yours ? " 

 " a wise man ask question and a fool answer they . suppose for a moment 
 that I be not a fool . " 

 Farmer Saunderson scratch his head , and look more puzzled than 
 become the descendant of a dane settle by King Alfred in the north of 
 England . 

 " dash it , " say he at last , " but I think you be Yorkshire too . " 

 " Man , who be the most conceited of all animal , say that he alone have 
 the prerogative of thought , and condemn the other animal to the mean 
 mechanical operation which he call instinct . but as instinct be 
 unerring and thought generally go wrong , man have not much to boast of 
 accord to his own definition . when you say you think , and take it 
 for grant , that I be Yorkshire , you err . I be not Yorkshire . confine 
 yourself to instinct , can you divine when we shall sup ? the cow you be 
 about to visit divine to a moment when they shall be feed . " 

 say the farmer , recover his sense of superiority to the guest whom 
 he oblige with a supper , " in ten minute . " then , after a pause , and 
 in a tone of deprecation , as if he fear he might be think fine , he 
 continue , " we do not   sup in the kitchen . my father do , and so do I 
 till I marry ; but my Bess , though she be as good a farmer 's wife as 
 ever wear shoe - leather , be a tradesman 's daughter , and have be bring 
 up different . you see she be not without a good bit of money : but even 
 if she have be , I should not have like her folk to say I have lower 
 she ; so we sup in the parlour . " 

 Quoth Kenelm , " the first consideration be to sup at all . supper 
 concede , every man be more likely to get on in life who would rather 
 sup in his parlour than his kitchen . meanwhile , I see a pump ; while you 
 go to the cow I will stay here and wash my hand of they . " 

 " hold ! you seem a sharp fellow , and certainly no fool . I have a son , 
 a good smart chap , but stick up ; crow it over we all ; think no small 
 beer of himself . you would do I a service , and he too , if you would let he 
 down a peg or two . " 

 Kenelm , who be now hard at work at the pump - handle , only reply by a 
 gracious nod . but as he seldom lose an opportunity for reflection , he 
 say to himself , while he lave his face in the stream from the spout , 
 " one can not   wonder why every small man think it so pleasant to let down 
 a big one , when a father ask a stranger to let down his own son for 
 even fancy that he be not small beer . it be upon that principle in 
 human nature that criticism wisely relinquish its pretension as an 
 analytical science , and become a lucrative profession . it rely on the 
 pleasure its reader find in let a man down . " 



 CHAPTER IX . 

 it be a pretty , quaint farmhouse , such as might well go with two or 
 three hundred acre of tolerably good land , tolerably well farm by an 
 active old - fashioned tenant , who , though he do not use mowing - machine 
 nor steam - plough nor dabble in chemical experiment , still bring 
 an adequate capital to his land and make the capital yield a very fair 
 return of interest . the supper be lay out in a good - sized though 
 low - pitch parlour with a glaze door , now wide open , as be all the 
 lattice window , look into a small garden , rich in those straggling 
 old english flower which be nowadays banish from garden more 
 pretentious and ; infinitely less fragrant . at one corner be an arbour 
 cover with honeysuckle , and opposite to it a row of beehive . the room 
 itself have an air of comfort , and that sort of elegance which indicate 
 the preside genius of feminine taste . there be shelf suspend 
 to the wall by blue ribbon , and fill with small book neatly bind ; 
 there be flower - pot in all the window - sill ; there be a small 
 cottage piano ; the wall be grace partly with engraved portrait of 
 county magnate and prize oxen ; partly with sampler in worst - work , 
 comprise verse of moral character and the name and birthday of 
 the farmer 's grandmother , mother , wife , and daughter . over the 
 chimney - piece be a small mirror , and above that the trophy of a fox 's 
 brush ; while niche into an angle in the room be a glaze cupboard , 
 rich with specimen of old china , Indian and English . 

 the party consist of the farmer , his wife , three buxom daughter , and 
 a pale - face slender lad of about twenty , the only son , who do not take 
 willingly to farming : he have be educate at a superior grammar school , 
 and have high notion about the March of Intellect and the Progress of 
 the Age . 

 Kenelm , though among the gravest of mortal , be one of the least shy . 
 in fact shyness be the usual symptom of a keen amour propre ; and of 
 that quality the youthful Chillingly scarcely possess more than do 
 the three Fishes of his hereditary scutcheon . he feel himself perfectly 
 at home with his entertainer ; take care , however , that his attention 
 be so equally divide between the three daughter as to prevent all 
 suspicion of a particular preference . " there be safety in number , " 
 think he , " especially in odd number . the three Graces never marry , 
 neither do the nine mus . " 

 " I presume , young lady , that you be fond of music , " say Kenelm , 
 glance at the piano . 

 " yes , I love it dearly , " say the eld girl , speak for the other . 

 Quoth the farmer , as he heap the stranger 's plate with boil beef and 
 carrot , " thing be not what they be when I be a boy ; then it be 
 only great tenant - farmer who have their girl teach the piano , and 
 send their boy to a good school . now we small folk be for help our 
 child a step or two high than our own place on the ladder . " 

 " the schoolmaster be abroad , " say the son , with the emphasis of a sage 
 add an original aphorism to the store of philosophy . 

 " there be , no doubt , a great equality of culture than there be in 
 the last generation , " say Kenelm . " People of all rank utter the same 
 commonplace idea in very much the same arrangement of syntax . and in 
 proportion as the democracy of intelligence extend - a friend of mine , 
 who be a doctor , tell I that complaint formerly reserved to what be 
 call aristocracy   though what that word mean in plain English I do not 
 know   be equally share by the commonalty - tic - douloureux and other 
 neuralgic malady abound . and the human race , in England at least , be 
 become more slight and delicate . there be a fable of a man who , when 
 he become exceedingly old , be turn into a grasshopper . England 
 be very old , and be evidently approach the grasshopper state of 
 development . perhaps we do not   eat as much beef as our forefather do . 
 may I ask you for another slice ? " 

 Kenelm 's remark be somewhat over the head of his audience . but 
 the son , take they as a slur upon the enlightened spirit of the age , 
 colour up and say , with a knit brow , " I hope , sir , that you be 
 not an enemy to progress . " 

 " that depend : for instance , I prefer stay here , where I be well off , 
 to go far and fare bad . " 

 " well say ! " cry the farmer . 

 not deign to notice that interruption , the son take up Kenelm 's reply 
 with a sneer , " I suppose you mean that it be to fare bad , if you march 
 with the time . " 

 " I be afraid we have no option but to march with the time ; but when we 
 reach that stage when to march any far be to march into old age , we 
 should not be sorry if time would be kind enough to stand still ; and all 
 good doctor concur in advise we to do nothing to hurry he . " 

 " there be no sign of old age in this country , sir ; and thank Heaven we 
 be not stand still ! " 

 " grasshopper never do ; they be always hop and jump , and make 
 what they think ' progress , ' till   unless they hop into the water and be 
 swallow up prematurely by a carp or a frog   they die of the exhaustion 
 which hop and jump unremitting naturally produce . may I ask you , Mrs. 
 Saunderson , for some of that rice - pudding ? " 

 the farmer , who , though he do not quite comprehend Kenelm 's 
 metaphorical mode of argue , see delightedly that his wise son look 
 more posed than himself , cry with great glee , " Bob , my boy , - Bob , our 
 visitor be a little too much for you ! " 

 " oh , no , " say Kenelm , modestly . " but I honestly think Mr. Bob would be 
 a wise man , and a weighty man , and more remove from the grasshopper 
 state , if he would think less and eat more pudding . " 

 when the supper be over the farmer offer Kenelm a clay pipe fill 
 with shag , which that adventurer accept with his habitual resignation 
 to the ill of life ; and the whole party , except Mrs. Saunderson , 
 stroll into the garden . Kenelm and Mr. Saunderson seat themselves 
 in the honeysuckle arbour : the girl and the advocate of progress stand 
 without among the garden flower . it be a still and lovely night , the 
 moon at her full . the farmer , seat face his hayfield , smoke on 
 placidly . Kenelm , at the third whiff , lay aside his pipe , and glance 
 furtively at the three Graces . they form a pretty group , all cluster 
 together near the silence beehive , the two young seat on the 
 grass strip that border the flower - bed , their arm over each other 's 
 shoulder , the eld one stand behind they , with the moonlight 
 shin soft on her auburn hair . 

 Young Saunderson walk restlessly by himself to and fro the path of 
 gravel . 

 " it be a strange thing , " ruminate Kenelm , " that girl be not 
 unpleasant to look at if you take they collectively , - two or three bound 
 up together ; but if you detach any one of they from the bunch , the odd 
 be that she be as plain as a pikestaff . I wonder whether that bucolical 
 grasshopper , who be so enamoured of the hop and jump that he call 
 ' progress , ' class the society of the Mormons among the evidence of 
 civilized advancement ? there be a good deal to be say in favour of 
 take a whole lot of wife as one may buy a whole lot of cheap razor . 
 for it be not impossible that out of a dozen a good one may be find . 
 and then , too , a whole nosegay of variegate bloom , with a fade 
 leaf here and there , must be more agreeable to the eye than the same 
 monotonous solitary lady 's smock . but I fear these reflection be 
 naughty ; let we change they . farmer , " he say aloud , " I suppose your 
 handsome daughter be too fine to assist you much . I do not see they 
 among the haymaker . " 

 " oh , they be there , but by themselves , in the back part of the 
 field . I do not want they to mix with all the girl , many of whom be 
 stranger from other place . I do not   know anything against they ; but as 
 I do not   know anything for they , I think it as well to keep my lass 
 apart . " 

 " but I should have suppose it wise to keep your son apart from they . I 
 see he in the thick of those nymph . " 

 " well , " say the farmer , musingly , and withdraw his pipe from his 
 lip , " I do not   think lass not quite well bring up , poor thing ! 
 do as much harm to the lad as they can do to proper - behave lass ; 
 leastway my wife do not think so . ' keep good girl from bad girl , ' 
 say she , ' and good girl will never go wrong . ' and you will find there 
 be something in that when you have girl of your own to take care of . " 

 " without wait for that time , which I trust may never occur , I can 
 recognize the wisdom of your excellent wife 's observation . my own 
 opinion be , that a woman can more easily do mischief to her own sex than 
 to our ; since , of course , she can not exist without do mischief to 
 somebody or other . " 

 " and good , too , " say the jovial farmer , thump his fist on the table . 
 " what should we be without woman ? " 

 " very much well , I take it , sir . Adam be as good as gold , and never 
 have a qualm of conscience or stomach till Eve seduce he into eating 
 raw apple . " 

 " young man , thou'st be cross in love . I see it now . that be why thou 
 look'st so sorrowful . " 

 " sorrowful ! do you ever know a man cross in love who look less 
 sorrowful when he come across a pudding ? " 

 " hey ! but thou canst ply a good knife and fork , that I will say for 
 thee . " here the farmer turn round , and gaze on Kenelm with deliberate 
 scrutiny . that scrutiny accomplish , his voice take a somewhat 
 more respectful tone , as he resume , " do you know that you puzzle I 
 somewhat ? " 

 " very likely . I be sure that I puzzle myself . say on . " 

 " look at your dress and - and - " 

 " the two shilling you give I ? yes - " 

 " I take you for the son of some small farmer like myself . but now I 
 judge from your talk that you be a college chap , - anyhow , a gentleman . 
 be not   it so ? " 

 " my dear Mr. Saunderson , I set out on my travel , which be not long 
 ago , with a strong dislike to tell lie . but I doubt if a man can get 
 along through this world without find that the faculty of lying be 
 bestow on he by Nature as a necessary mean of self - preservation . 
 if you be go to ask I any question about myself , I be sure that 
 I shall tell you lie . perhaps , therefore , it may be good for both if 
 I decline the bed you proffer I , and take my night 's rest under a 
 hedge . " 

 " Pooh ! I do not   want to know more of a man 's affair than he think fit 
 to tell I . stay and finish the haymaking . and I say , lad , I be glad you 
 do not   seem to care for the girl ; for I see a very pretty one try to 
 flirt with you , and if you do not   mind she will bring you into trouble . " 

 " how ? do she want to run away from her uncle ? " 

 " Uncle ! bless you , she do not   live with he ! she live with her 
 father ; and I never know that she want to run away . in fact , Jessie 
 Wiles - that be her name - be , I believe , a very good girl , and everybody 
 like she , - perhaps a little too much ; but then she know she be a 
 beauty , and do not object to admiration . " 

 " no woman ever do , whether she be a beauty or not . but I do not   yet 
 understand why Jessie Wiles should bring I into trouble . " 

 " because there be a big hulking fellow who have go half out of his wit 
 for she ; and when he fancy he see any other chap too sweet on she he 
 thrash he into a jelly . so , youngster , you just keep your skin out of 
 that trap . " 

 " Hem ! and what do the girl say to those proof of affection ? do she 
 like the man the well for thrash other admirer into jelly ? " 

 " poor child ! no ; she hat the very sight of he . but he swear she 
 shall marry nobody else if he hang for it . and , to tell you the truth , 
 I suspect that if Jessie do seem to trifle with other a little too 
 lightly , it be to draw away this bully 's suspicion from the only man I 
 think she do care for , - a poor sickly young fellow who be cripple by 
 an accident , and whom Tom Bowles could brain with his little finger . " 

 " this be really interesting , " cry Kenelm , show something like 
 excitement . " I should like to know this terrible suitor . " 

 " that be easy eno ' , " say the farmer , dryly . " you have only to take 
 a stroll with Jessie Wiles after sunset , and you will know more of Tom 
 Bowles than you be likely to forget in a month . " 

 " thank you very much for your information , " say Kenelm , in a soft tone , 
 grateful but pensive . " I hope to profit by it . " 

 " Do . I should be sorry if any harm come to thee ; and Tom Bowles in one 
 of his fury be as bad to cross as a mad bull . so now , as we must be up 
 early , I will just take a look round the stable , and then off to bed ; and 
 I advise you to do the same . " 

 " thank you for the hint . I see the young lady have already go in . 
 good - night . " 

 pass through the garden , Kenelm encounter the junior Saunderson . 

 " I fear , " say the Votary of Progress , " that you have find the governor 
 awful slow . what have you be talk about ? " 

 " girl , " say Kenelm , " a subject always awful , but not necessarily 
 slow . " 

 " girl , - the governor be talk about girl ? you joke . " 

 " I wish I do joke , but that be a thing I could never do since I come 
 upon earth . even in the cradle , I feel that life be a very serious 
 matter , and do not allow of joke . I remember too well my first dose 
 of castor - oil . you too , Mr. Bob , have doubtless imbibe that initiatory 
 preparation to the sweet of existence . the corner of your mouth have 
 not recover from the downward curve into which it so rigidly drag 
 they . like myself , you be of grave temperament , and not easily move 
 to jocularity , - nay , an enthusiast for Progress be of necessity a man 
 eminently dissatisfied with the present state of affair . and chronic 
 dissatisfaction resent the momentary relief of a joke . " 

 " give off chaff , if you please , " say Bob , lower the didascular 
 intonation of his voice , " and just tell I plainly , do not my father 
 say anything particular about I ? " 

 " not a word : the only person of the male sex of whom he say anything 
 particular be Tom Bowles . " 

 " what , fight Tom ! the terror of the whole neighbourhood ! ah , I guess 
 the old gentleman be afraid lest Tom may fall foul upon I . but Jessie 
 Wiles be not worth a quarrel with that brute . it be a cry shame in 
 the government - " 

 " what ! have the Government fail to appreciate the heroism of Tom 
 Bowles , or rather to restrain the excess of its ardour ? " 

 " Stuff ! it be a shame in the Government not to have compel his father 
 to put he to school . if education be universal - " 

 " you think there would be no brute in particular . it may be so ; but 
 education be universal in China , and so be the bastinado . I think , 
 however , that you say the schoolmaster be abroad , and that the age of 
 enlightenment be in full progress . " 

 " yes , in the town , but not in these obsolete rural district ; and that 
 bring I to the point . I feel lost , throw away here . I have something 
 in I , sir , and it can only come out by collision with equal mind . so 
 do I a favour , will you ? " 

 " with the great pleasure . " 

 " give the governor a hint that he can not   expect I , after the education 
 I have have , to follow the plough and fatten pig ; and that Manchester be 
 the place for I . " 

 " why Manchester ? " 

 " because I have a relation in business there who will give I a 
 clerkship if the governor will consent . and Manchester rule England . " 

 " Mr. Bob Saunderson , I will do my good to promote your wish . this be 
 a land of liberty , and every man should choose his own walk in it , so 
 that , at the last , if he go to the dog , he go to they without that 
 disturbance of temper which be naturally occasion by the sense of 
 be drive to their jaw by another man against his own will . he have 
 then no one to blame but himself . and that , Mr. Bob , be a great comfort . 
 when , have get into a scrape , we blame other , we unconsciously 
 become unjust , spiteful , uncharitable , malignant , perhaps revengeful . 
 we indulge in feeling which tend to demoralize the whole character . 
 but when we only blame ourselves , we become modest and penitent . we make 
 allowance for other . and indeed self - blame be a salutary exercise of 
 conscience , which a really good man perform every day of his life . and 
 now , will you show I the room in which I be to sleep , and forget for a 
 few hour that I be alive at all : the good thing that can happen to we 
 in this world , my dear Mr. Bob ! there be never much amiss with our day , 
 so long as we can forget about they the moment we lay our head on the 
 pillow . " 

 the two young man enter the house amicably , arm in arm . the girl have 
 already retire , but Mrs. Saunderson be still up to conduct her 
 visitor to the guest 's chamber , - a pretty room which have be furnish 
 twenty - two year ago on the occasion of the farmer 's marriage , at the 
 expense of Mrs. Saunderson 's mother , for her own occupation when she 
 pay they a visit , and with its dimity curtain and trellis paper it 
 still look as fresh and new as if decorate and furnish yesterday . 

 leave alone , Kenelm undressed , and before he get into bed , bar 
 his right arm , and double it , gravely contemplate its muscular 
 development , pass his left hand over that prominence in the upper 
 part which be vulgarly call the ball . satisfied apparently with the 
 size and the firmness of that pugilistic protuberance , he gently sigh 
 forth , " I fear I shall have to lick Thomas Bowles . " in five minute more 
 he be asleep . 



 CHAPTER X. 

 the next day the hay - mowing be complete , and a large portion of the 
 hay already make cart away to be stack . Kenelm acquit himself 
 with a credit not less praiseworthy than have previously win Mr. 
 Saunderson 's approbation . but instead of reject as before the 
 acquaintance of Miss Jessie Wiles , he contrive towards noon to place 
 himself near to that dangerous beauty , and commence conversation . " I be 
 afraid I be rather rude to you yesterday , and I want to beg pardon . " 

 " oh , " answer the girl , in that simple intelligible English which 
 be more frequent among our village folk nowadays than many popular 
 novelist would lead we into supposing , " oh , I ought to ask pardon for 
 take a liberty in speak to you . but I think you would feel strange , 
 and I intend it kindly . " 

 " I be sure you do , " return Kenelm , chivalrously rake her portion of 
 hay as well as his own , while he speak . " and I want to be good friend 
 with you . it be very near the time when we shall leave off for 
 dinner , and Mrs. Saunderson have fill my pocket with some excellent 
 beef - sandwich , which I shall be happy to share with you , if you do not 
 object to dine with I here , instead of go home for your dinner . " 

 the girl hesitate , and then shake her head in dissent from the 
 proposition . 

 " be you afraid that your neighbour will think it wrong ? " 

 Jessie curl up her lip with a pretty scorn , and say , " I do not   much 
 care what other folk say , but be not   it wrong ? " 

 " not in the least . let I make your mind easy . I be here but for a day 
 or two : we be not likely ever to meet again ; but , before I go , I should 
 be glad if I could do you some little service . " as he speak he have 
 pause from his work , and , lean on his rake , fix his eye , for the 
 first time attentively , on the fair haymaker . 

 yes , she be decidedly pretty , - pretty to a rare degree : luxuriant brown 
 hair neatly tie up , under a straw hat doubtless of her own plaiting ; 
 for , as a general rule , nothing more educate the village maid for the 
 destiny of flirt than the accomplishment of straw - plaiting . she have 
 large , soft blue eye , delicate small feature , and a complexion more 
 clear in its healthful bloom than rural beauty generally retain 
 against the influence of wind and sun . she smile and slightly colour 
 as he gaze on she , and , lift her eye , give he one gentle , trustful 
 glance , which might have bewitch a philosopher and deceive a roue . 
 and yet Kenelm by that intuitive knowledge of character which be often 
 truthful where it be least disturb by the doubt and cavil of 
 acquire knowledge , feel at once that in that girl 's mind coquetry , 
 perhaps unconscious , be conjoin with an innocence of anything 
 bad than coquetry as complete as a child 's . he bow his head , in 
 withdraw his gaze , and take she into his heart as tenderly as if she 
 have be a child appeal to it for protection . 

 " certainly , " he say inly , " certainly I must lick Tom Bowles ; yet stay , 
 perhaps after all she like he . " 

 " but , " he continue aloud , " you do not see how I can be of any service 
 to you . before I explain , let I ask which of the man in the field be 
 Tom Bowles ? " 

 " Tom Bowles ? " exclaim Jessie , in a tone of surprise and alarm , and 
 turn pale as she look hastily round ; " you frighten I , sir : but 
 he be not here ; he do not work in the field . but how come you to hear 
 of Tom Bowles ? " 

 " Dine with I and I will tell you . look , there be a quiet place in yon 
 corner under the thorn - tree by that piece of water . see , they be 
 leave off work : I will go for a can of beer , and then , pray , let I 
 join you there . " 

 Jessie pause for a moment as if doubtful still ; then again glance at 
 Kenelm , and assure by the grave kindness of his countenance , utter a 
 scarce audible assent and move away towards the thorn - tree . 

 as the sun now stand perpendicularly over their head , and the hand 
 of the clock in the village church tower , soar over the hedgerow , 
 reach the first hour after noon , all work cease in a sudden silence : 
 some of the girl go back to their home ; those who stay group 
 together , apart from the man , who take their way to the shadow of a 
 large oak - tree in the hedgerow , where beer keg and can await they . 



 CHAPTER XI . 

 " and now , " say Kenelm , as the two young person , have finish their 
 simple repast , sit under the thorn - tree and by the side of the water , 
 fringe at that part with tall reed through which the light summer 
 breeze stir with a pleasant murmur , " now I will talk to you about Tom 
 Bowles . be it true that you do not   like that brave young fellow ? I say 
 young , as I take his youth for grant . " 

 " like he ! I hate the sight of he . " 

 " do you always hate the sight of he ? you must surely at one time have 
 allow he to think that you do not ? " 

 the girl wince , and make no answer , but pluck a daffodil from the 
 soil , and tear it ruthlessly to piece . 

 " I be afraid you like to serve your admirer as you do that ill - fat 
 flower , " say Kenelm , with some severity of tone . " but conceal in 
 the flower you may sometimes find the sting of a bee . I see by your 
 countenance that you do not tell Tom Bowles that you hat he till it 
 be too late to prevent his lose his wit for you . " 

 " no ; I be not   so bad as that , " say Jessie , look , nevertheless , 
 rather ashamed of herself ; " but I be silly and giddy - like , I own ; and , 
 when he first take notice of I , I be pleased , without think much of 
 it , because , you see , Mr. Bowles   emphasis on Mr.    be high up than 
 a poor girl like I . he be a tradesman , and I be only a shepherd 's 
 daughter ; though , indeed , Father be more like Mr. Saunderson 's foreman 
 than a mere shepherd . but I never think anything serious of it , and 
 do not suppose he do ; that be , at first . " 

 " so Tom Bowles be a tradesman . what trade ? " 

 " a farrier , sir . " 

 " and , I be tell , a very fine young man . " 

 " I do not   know as to that : he be very big . " 

 " and what make you hate he ? " 

 " the first thing that make I hate he be that he insult Father , who 
 be a very quiet , timid man , and threaten I do not   know what if Father 
 do not make I keep company with he . make I indeed ! but Mr. Bowles be 
 a dangerous , bad - hearted , violent man , and - do not   laugh at I , sir , but 
 I dream one night he be murder I . and I think he will too , if he 
 stay here : and so do his poor mother , who be a very nice woman , and 
 want he to go away ; but he will not . " 

 " Jessie , " say Kenelm , softly , " I say I want to make friend with 
 you . do you think you can make a friend of I ? I can never be more than 
 friend . but I should like to be that . can you trust I as one ? " 

 " yes , " answer the girl , firmly , and , as she lift her eye to he , 
 their look be pure from all vestige of coquetry , - guileless , frank , 
 grateful . 

 " be there not another young man who court you more civilly than Tom 
 Bowles do , and whom you really could find it in your heart to like ? " 

 Jessie look round for another daffodil , and not find one , content 
 herself with a bluebell , which she do not tear to piece , but caress 
 with a tender hand . Kenelm bend his eye down on her charming face 
 with something in their gaze rarely see there , - something of that 
 unreasoning , inexpressible human fondness , for which philosopher of 
 his school have no excuse . have ordinary mortal , like you or myself , for 
 instance , peer through the leaf of the thorn - tree , we should have 
 sigh or frown , accord to our several temperament ; but we should 
 all have say , whether spitefully or envyingly , " happy young lover ! " 
 and should all have blunder lamentably in so say . 

 still , there be no deny the fact that a pretty face have a very unfair 
 advantage over a plain one . and , much to the discredit of Kenelm 's 
 philanthropy , it may be reasonably doubted whether , have Jessie Wiles 
 be endow by nature with a snub nose and a squint , Kenelm would have 
 volunteer his friendly service , or meditate battle with Tom Bowles 
 on her behalf . 

 but there be no touch of envy or jealousy in the tone with which he 
 say , - 

 " I see there be some one you would like well enough to marry , and 
 that you make a great difference in the way you treat a daffodil and a 
 bluebell . who and what be the young man whom the bluebell represent ? 
 come , confide . " 

 " we be much bring up together , " say Jessie , still look down , 
 and still smooth the leaf of the bluebell . " his mother live in the 
 next cottage ; and my mother be very fond of he , and so be Father 
 too ; and , before I be ten year old , they use to laugh when poor will 
 call I his little wife . " here the tear which have start to Jessie 's 
 eye begin to fall over the flower . " but now Father would not hear of 
 it ; and it can not   be . and I have   try to care for some one else , and I 
 can not , and that be the truth . " 

 " but why ? have he turn out ill ? - take to poach or drink ? " 

 " no , no , no ; he be as steady and good a lad as ever live . but - but - " 

 " yes ; but - " 

 " he be a cripple now ; and I love he all the well for it . " here Jessie 
 fairly sob . 

 Kenelm be greatly move , and prudently hold his peace till she have a 
 little recover herself ; then , in answer to his gentle questioning , he 
 learn that will Somers - till then a healthy and strong lad - have fall 
 from the height of a scaffolding , at the age of sixteen , and be so 
 seriously injure that he be move at once to the hospital . when he 
 come out of it - what with the fall , and what with the long illness which 
 have follow the effect of the accident - he be not only crippled for 
 life , but of health so delicate and weakly that he be no long fit for 
 outdoor labour and the hard life of a peasant . he be an only son of a 
 widow mother , and his sole mode of assist she be a very precarious 
 one . he have teach himself basket - making ; and though , Jessie say , his 
 work be very ingenious and clever , still there be but few customer 
 for it in that neighbourhood . and , alas ! even if Jessie 's father would 
 consent to give his daughter to the poor cripple , how could the poor 
 cripple earn enough to maintain a wife ? 

 " and , " say Jessie , ' still I be happy , walk out with he on Sunday 
 evening , or go to sit with he and his mother ; for we be both 
 young , and can wait . but I dare not   do it any more now : for Tom Bowles 
 have swear that if I do he will beat he before my eye ; and will have a 
 high spirit , and I should break my heart if any harm happen to he on 
 my account . " 

 " as for Mr. Bowles , we will not think of he at present . but if will could 
 maintain himself and you , your father would not object nor you either to 
 a marriage with the poor cripple ? " 

 " Father would not ; and as for I , if it be not   for disobey Father , 
 I would marry he to - morrow . I can work . " 

 " they be go back to the hay now ; but after that task be over , let I 
 walk home with you , and show I Will 's cottage and Mr. Bowles 's shop or 
 forge . " 

 " but you will not say anything to Mr. Bowles . he would not   mind your being 
 a gentleman , as I now see you be , sir ; and he be dangerous , - oh , so 
 dangerous ! - and so strong . " 

 " never fear , " answer Kenelm , with the near approach to a laugh he 
 have ever make since childhood ; " but when we be relieve , wait for I a 
 few minute at yon gate . " 



 CHAPTER XII . 

 KENELM speak no more to his new friend in the hayfield ; but when the 
 day 's work be over he look round for the farmer to make an excuse 
 for not immediately join the family supper . however , he do not see 
 either Mr. Saunderson or his son . both be busy in the stackyard . 
 well pleased to escape excuse and the question it might provoke , Kenelm 
 therefore put on the coat he have lay aside and join Jessie , who 
 have wait for he at the gate . they enter the lane side by side , 
 follow the stream of villager who be slowly wend their homeward 
 way . it be a primitive english village , not adorn on the one hand 
 with fancy or model cottage , nor on the other hand indicate penury 
 and squalor . the church rise before they gray and Gothic , back by the 
 red cloud in which the sun have set , and border by the glebe - land 
 of the half - see parsonage . then come the village green , with a 
 pretty schoolhouse ; and to this succeed a long street of scatter 
 whitewash cottage , in the midst of their own little garden . 

 as they walk the moon rise in full splendour , silver the road 
 before they . 

 " who be the squire here ? " ask Kenelm . " I should guess he to be a good 
 sort of man , and well off . " 

 " yes , Squire Travers ; he be a great gentleman , and they say very rich . 
 but his place be a good way from this village . you can see it if you 
 stay , for he give a harvest - home supper on Saturday , and Mr. Saunderson 
 and all his tenant be go . it be a beautiful park , and Miss Travers 
 be a sight to look at . oh , she be lovely ! " continue Jessie , with an 
 unaffected burst of admiration ; for woman be more sensible of the charm 
 of each other 's beauty than man give they credit for . 

 " as pretty as yourself ? " 

 " oh , pretty be not the word . she be a thousand time handsomer ! " 

 " Humph ! " say Kenelm , incredulously . 

 there be a pause , break by a quick sigh from Jessie . 

 " what be you sigh for ? - tell I . " 

 " I be think that a very little can make folk happy , but that 
 somehow or other that very little be as hard to get as if one set one 's 
 heart on a great deal . " 

 " that be very wisely say . everybody covet a little something for which , 
 perhaps , nobody else would give a straw . but what be the very little 
 thing for which you be sigh ? " 

 " Mrs. Bawtrey want to sell that shop of her . she be get old , and 
 have have fit ; and she can get nobody to buy ; and if will have that shop 
 and I could keep it , - but ' tis no use thinking of that . " 

 " what shop do you mean ? " 

 " there ! " 

 " where ? I see no shop . " 

 " but it be the shop of the village , - the only one , - where the 
 post - office be . " 

 " ah ! I see something at the window like a red cloak . what do they 
 sell ? " 

 " everything , - tea and sugar and candle and shawl and gown and cloak 
 and mouse - trap and letter - paper ; and Mrs. Bawtrey buy poor Will 's 
 basket , and sell they for a good deal more than she pay . " 

 " it seem a nice cottage , with a field and orchard at the back . " 

 " yes . Mrs. Bawtrey pay L8 a year for it ; but the shop can well afford 
 it . " 

 Kenelm make no reply . they both walk on in silence , and have now 
 reach the centre of the village street when Jessie , look up , 
 utter an abrupt exclamation , give an affrighted start , and then come 
 to a dead stop . 

 Kenelm 's eye follow the direction of her , and see , a few yard 
 distant , at the other side of the way , a small red brick house , with 
 thatched shed adjoin it , the whole standing in a wide yard , over 
 the gate of which lean a man smoke a small cutty - pipe . " it be Tom 
 Bowles , " whisper Jessie , and instinctively she twin her arm into 
 Kenelm 's ; then , as if on second thought , withdraw it , and say , still 
 in a whisper , " go back now , sir ; do . " 

 " not i. it be Tom Bowles whom I want to know . hush ! " 

 for here Tom Bowles have throw down his pipe and be come slowly 
 across the road towards they . 

 Kenelm eye he with attention . a singularly powerful man , not so tall 
 as Kenelm by some inch , but still above the middle height , herculean 
 shoulder and chest , the low limb not in equal proportion , - a sort 
 of slouch , shamble gait . as he advance the moonlight fall on his 
 face ; it be a handsome one . he wear no hat , and his hair , of a 
 light brown , curl close . his face be fresh - colour , with aquiline 
 feature ; his age apparently about six or seven and twenty . come 
 nearer and nearer , whatever favourable impression the first glance 
 at his physiognomy might have make on Kenelm be dispel , for the 
 expression of his face change and become fierce and lower . 

 Kenelm be still walk on , Jessie by his side , when Bowles rudely 
 thrust himself between they , and seize the girl 's arm with one hand , 
 he turn his face full on Kenelm , with a menacing wave of the other 
 hand , and say in a deep burly voice , 

 " who be you ? " 

 " let go that young woman before I tell you . " 

 " if you be not   a stranger , " answer Bowles , seem as if he try to 
 suppress a rise fit of wrath , " you would be in the kennel for those word . 
 but I s'pose you do not   know that I be Tom Bowles , and I do not   choose the 
 girl as I be after to keep company with any other man . so you be off . " 

 " and I do not   choose any other man to lay violent hand on any girl 
 walk by my side without tell he that he be a brute ; and that I 
 only wait till he have both his hand at liberty to let he know that he 
 have not a poor cripple to deal with . " 

 Tom Bowles could scarcely believe his ear . Amaze swallow up for 
 the moment every other sentiment . mechanically he loosen his hold of 
 Jessie , who flee off like a bird release . but evidently she think 
 of her new friend 's danger more than her own escape ; for instead of 
 shelter herself in her father 's cottage , she run towards a group 
 of labourer who , near at hand , have stop loiter before the 
 public - house , and return with those ally towards the spot in which 
 she have leave the two man . she be very popular with the villager , who , 
 strong in the sense of number , overcome their awe of Tom Bowles , and 
 arrive at the place half run , half stride , in time , they hop , 
 to interpose between his terrible arm and the bone of the unoffending 
 stranger . 

 meanwhile Bowles , have recover his first astonishment , and scarcely 
 notice Jessie 's escape , still leave his right arm extend towards the 
 place she have vacate , and with a quick back - stroke of the left level 
 at Kenelm 's face , growl contemptuously , " thou'lt find one hand enough 
 for thee . " 

 but quick as be his aim , Kenelm catch the lift arm just above the 
 elbow , cause the blow to waste itself on air , and with a simultaneous 
 advance of his right knee and foot dexterously trip up his bulky 
 antagonist , and lay he sprawl on his back . the movement be 
 so sudden , and the stun it occasion so utter , morally as well as 
 physically , that a minute or more elapse before Tom Bowles pick 
 himself up . and he then stand another minute glower at his 
 antagonist , with a vague sentiment of awe almost like a superstitious 
 panic . for it be noticeable that , however fierce and fearless a man or 
 even a wild beast may be , yet if either have hitherto be only familiar 
 with victory and triumph , never yet have meet with a foe that could 
 cope with its force , the first effect of a defeat , especially from 
 a despise adversary , unhinge and half paralyze the whole nervous 
 system . but as fight Tom gradually recover to the consciousness of 
 his own strength , and the recollection that it have be only foil by 
 the skilful trick of a wrestler , and not the hand - to - hand might of a 
 pugilist , the panic vanish , and Tom Bowles be himself again . " oh , 
 that be your sort , be it ? we do not   fight with our heel hereabouts , like 
 cornisher and donkey : we fight with our fist , youngster ; and since 
 you will have a bout at that , why , you must . " 

 " Providence , " answer Kenelm , solemnly , ' send I to this village 
 for the express purpose of lick Tom Bowles . it be a signal mercy 
 vouchsafe to yourself , as you will one day acknowledge . " 

 again a thrill of awe , something like that which the demagogue in 
 Aristophanes might have feel when brave by the sausage - maker , shoot 
 through the valiant heart of Tom Bowles . he do not like those ominous 
 word , and still less the lugubrious tone of voice in which they 
 be utter , but resolve , at least , to proceed to battle with 
 more preparation than he have at first design , he now deliberately 
 disencumber himself of his heavy fustian jacket and vest , roll up 
 his shirt - sleeve , and then slowly advanced towards the foe . 

 Kenelm have also , with still great deliberation , take off his 
 coat - which he fold up with care , as be both a new and an only one , 
 and deposit by the hedge - side - and bared arm , lean indeed and almost 
 slight , as compare with the vast muscle of his adversary , but firm in 
 sinew as the hind leg of a stag . 

 by this time the labourer , lead by Jessie , have arrive at the spot , and 
 be about to crowd in between the combatant , when Kenelm wave they 
 back and say in a calm and impressive voice , - 

 " stand round , my good friend , make a ring , and see that it be fair play 
 on my side . I be sure it will be fair on Mr. Bowles 's . he be big enough 
 to scorn what be little . and now , Mr. Bowles , just a word with you in 
 the presence of your neighbour . I be not go to say anything uncivil . 
 if you be rather rough and hasty , a man be not always master of 
 himself - at least so I be tell - when he think more than he ought to 
 do about a pretty girl . but I can not   look at your face even by this 
 moonlight , and though its expression at this moment be rather cross , 
 without be sure that you be a fine fellow at bottom , and that if you 
 give a promise as man to man you will keep it . be that so ? " 

 one or two of the bystander murmur assent ; the other press round 
 in silent wonder . 

 " what be all that soft - sawder about ? " say Tom Bowles , somewhat 
 falteringly . 

 " simply this : if in the fight between we I beat you , I ask you to 
 promise before your neighbour that you will not by word or deed mol 
 or interfere again with Miss Jessie Wiles . " 

 " eh ! " roar Tom . " be it that you be after she ? " 

 " suppose I be , if that please you ; and on my side , I promise that if 
 you beat I , I quit this place as soon as you leave I well enough to do 
 so , and will never visit it again . what ! do you hesitate to promise ? be 
 you really afraid I shall lick you ? " 

 " you ! I would smash a dozen of you to powder . " 

 " in that case , you be safe to promise . come , ' tis a fair bargain . be 
 not   it , neighbour ? " 

 win over by Kenelm 's easy show of good temper , and by the sense of 
 justice , the bystander join in a common exclamation of assent . 

 " come , Tom , " say an old fellow , " the gentleman can not   speak fair ; and 
 we shall all think you be afeard if you hold back . " 

 Tom 's face work : but at last he growl , " well , I promise ; that be , if 
 he beat I . " 

 " all right , " say Kenelm . " you hear , neighbour ; and Tom Bowles could 
 not show that handsome face of his among you if he break his word . shake 
 hand on it . " 

 fight Tom sulkily shake hand . 

 " well now , that be what I call English , " say Kenelm , " all pluck and no 
 malice . fall back , friend , and leave a clear space for we . " 

 the man all recede ; and as Kenelm take his ground , there be a supple 
 ease in his posture which at once bring out into clear evidence the 
 nervous strength of his build , and , contrast with Tom 's bulk of chest , 
 make the latter look clumsy and topheavy . 

 the two man face each other a minute , the eye of both vigilant and 
 steadfast . Tom 's blood begin to fire up as he gaze ; nor , with all his 
 outward calm ; be Kenelm insensible of that proud beat of the heart 
 which be arouse by the fierce joy of combat . Tom strike out first and 
 a blow be parry , but not return ; another and another blow , - still 
 parried , still unreturne . Kenelm , act evidently on the defensive , 
 take all the advantage for that strategy which he derive from superior 
 length of arm and light agility of frame . perhaps he wish to 
 ascertain the extent of his adversary 's skill , or to try the endurance 
 of his wind , before he venture on the hazard of attack . Tom , gall to 
 the quick that blow which might have fell an ox be thus ward 
 off from their mark , and dimly aware that he be encounter some 
 mysterious skill which turn his brute strength into waste force and 
 might overmaster he in the long run , come to a rapid conclusion that 
 the soon he bring that brute strength to bear the well it would be 
 for he . accordingly , after three round , in which without once break 
 the guard of his antagonist he have receive a few playful tap on 
 the nose and mouth , he draw back and make a bull - like rush at his 
 foe , - bull - like , for it butt full at he with the powerful down - bent 
 head , and the two fist do duty as horn . the rush spend , he find 
 himself in the position of a man mill . I take it for grant that 
 every Englishman who can call himself a man - that be , every man who 
 have be an english boy , and , as such , be compel to the use of 
 his fist - know what a " mill " be . but I sing not only " pueris , " but 
 " virginibus . " lady , " a mill , " - use with reluctance and contempt for 
 myself that slang in which ladywriter indulge , and girl of the Period 
 know much well than they do their Murray , - " a mill , " - speak not to 
 ladywriter , not to girl of the Period , but to innocent damsel , and in 
 explanation to those foreigner who only understand the english language 
 as teach by Addison and Macaulay , - a " mill " periphrastically mean 
 this : your adversary , in the noble encounter between fist and fist , have 
 so plunge his head that it get catch , as in a vice , between the side 
 and double left arm of the adversary , expose that head , unprotected 
 and helpless , to be pound out of recognizable shape by the right fist 
 of the opponent . it be a situation in which raw superiority of force 
 sometimes find itself , and be seldom spar by disciplined superiority 
 of skill . Kenelm , his right fist raise , pause for a moment , then , 
 loosen the left arm , release the prisoner , and give he a 
 friendly slap on the shoulder , he turn round to the spectator and 
 say apologetically , " he have a handsome face : it would be a shame to 
 spoil it . " 

 Tom 's position of peril be so obvious to all , and that good - humour 
 abnegation of the advantage which the position give to the adversary 
 seem so generous , that the labourer actually hurrah . Tom , himself 
 feel as if treat like a child ; and alas , and alas for he ! in wheel 
 round , and regathere himself up , his eye rest on Jessie 's face . her 
 lip be apart with breathless terror : he fancy they be apart with 
 a smile of contempt . and now he become formidable . he fight as fight 
 the bull in the presence of the heifer , who , as he know too well , will 
 go with the conqueror . 

 if Tom have never yet fight with a man teach by a prizefighter , so 
 never yet have Kenelm encounter a strength which , but for the lack of 
 that teaching , would have conquer his own . he could act no long on 
 the defensive ; he could no long play , like a dexterous fencer , with 
 the sledge - hammer of those mighty arm . they break through his guard ; 
 they sound on his chest as on an anvil . he feel that do they alight 
 on his head he be a lost man . he feel also that the blow spend on the 
 chest of his adversary be idle as the stroke of a cane on the hide 
 of a rhinoceros . but now his nostril dilate ; his eye flash fire : 
 Kenelm Chillingly have cease to be a philosopher . Crash come his 
 blow - how unlike the swing roundabout hit of Tom Bowles ! - straight 
 to its aim as the rifle - ball of a Tyrolese or a british marksman 
 at Aldershot , - all the strength of nerve , sinew , purpose , and mind 
 concentre in its vigour , - crash just at that part of the front where 
 the eye meet , and follow up with the rapidity of lightning , flash 
 upon flash , by a more restrained but more disabling blow with the left 
 hand just where the left ear meet throat and jaw - bone . 

 at the first blow Tom Bowles have reel and stagger , at the second he 
 throw up his hand , make a jump in the air as if shoot through the heart , 
 and then heavily fall forwards , an inert mass . 

 the spectator press round he in terror . they think he be dead . 
 Kenelm knelt , pass quickly his hand over Tom 's lip , pulse , and heart , 
 and then rise , say , humbly and with an air of apology , - 

 " if he have be a less magnificent creature , I assure you on my honour 
 that I should never have venture that second blow . the first would have 
 do for any man less splendidly endow by nature . lift he gently ; 
 take he home . tell his mother , with my kind regard , that I will call and 
 see she and he to - morrow . and , stop , do he ever drink too much beer ? " 

 " well , " say one of the villager , " Tom can drink . " 

 " I think so . too much flesh for that muscle . go for the near 
 doctor . you , my lad ? good ; off with you ; quick . no danger , but perhaps 
 it may be a case for the lancet . " 

 Tom Bowles be lift tenderly by four of the stout man present and 
 bear into his home , evince no sign of consciousness ; but his face , 
 where not clout with blood , be very pale , very calm , with a slight 
 froth at the lip . 

 Kenelm pull down his shirt - sleeve , put on his coat , and turn to 
 Jessie , - 

 " now , my young friend , show I Will 's cottage . " 

 the girl come to he , white and trembling . she do not dare to speak . 
 the stranger have become a new man in her eye . perhaps he frighten she 
 as much as Tom Bowles have do . but she quicken her pace , leave the 
 public - house behind till she come to the farth end of the village . 
 Kenelm walk beside she , mutter to himself : and though Jessie catch 
 his word , happily she do not understand ; for they repeat one of 
 those bitter reproach on her sex as the main cause of all strife , 
 bloodshed , and mischief in general , with which the classic author 
 abound . his spleen soothe by that recourse to the lesson of the 
 ancient , Kenelm turn at last to his silent companion , and say kindly 
 but gravely , - 

 " Mr. Bowles have give I his promise , and it be fair that I should now 
 ask a promise from you . it be this : just consider how easily a girl so 
 pretty as you can be the cause of a man 's death . have Bowles strike I 
 where I strike he I should have be past the help of a surgeon . " 

 " oh ! " groan Jessie , shuddering , and cover her face with both hand . 

 " and , put aside that danger , consider that a man may be hit mortally 
 on the heart as well as on the head , and that a woman have much to answer 
 for who , no matter what her excuse , forget what misery and what guilt 
 can be inflict by a word from her lip and a glance from her eye . 
 consider this , and promise that , whether you marry Will Somers or not , 
 you will never again give a man fair cause to think you can like he 
 unless your own heart tell you that you can . will you promise that ? " 

 " I will , indeed , - indeed . " Poor Jessie 's voice die in sob . 

 " there , my child , I do not   ask you not to cry , because I know how much 
 woman like cry ; and in this instance it do you a great deal 
 of good . but we be just at the end of the village ; which be Will 's 
 cottage ? " 

 Jessie lift her head , and point to a solitary , small thatch 
 cottage . 

 " I would ask you to come in and introduce I ; but that might look too 
 much like crow over poor Tom Bowles . so good - night to you , Jessie , 
 and forgive I for preach . " 



 CHAPTER XIII . 

 KENELM knock at the cottage door ; a voice say faintly , " come in . " 

 he stoop his head , and step over the threshold . 

 since his encounter with Tom Bowles his sympathy have go with that 
 unfortunate lover : it be natural to like a man after you have beat 
 he ; and he be by no mean predispose to favour Jessie 's preference 
 for a sickly cripple . 

 yet , when two bright , soft , dark eye , and a pale intellectual 
 countenance , with that nameless aspect of refinement which delicate 
 health so often give , especially to the young , greet his quiet gaze , 
 his heart be at once win over to the side of the rival . will Somers be 
 seat by the hearth , on which a few live ember despite the warmth of 
 the summer evening still burn ; a rude little table be by his side , 
 on which be lay osi twig and white peeled chip , together with an 
 open book . his hand , pale and slender , be at work on a small basket 
 half finish . his mother be just clear away the tea - thing from 
 another table that stand by the window . will rose , with the good 
 breeding that belong to the rural peasant , as the stranger enter ; the 
 widow look round with surprise , and drop her simple courtesy , - a 
 little thin woman , with a mild , patient face . 

 the cottage be very tidily keep , as it be in most village home where 
 the woman have it her own way . the deal dresser opposite the door have 
 its display of humble crockery . the whitewashed wall be relieve with 
 coloured print , chiefly scriptural subject from the New Testament , 
 such as the Return of the Prodigal Son , in a blue coat and yellow 
 inexpressible , with his stocking about his heel . 

 at one corner there be pile up basket of various size , and at 
 another corner be an open cupboard contain book , - an article of 
 decorative furniture find in cottage much more rarely than colour 
 print and gleam crockery . 

 all this , of course , Kenelm could not at a glance comprehend in detail . 
 but as the mind of a man accustom to generalization be marvellously 
 quick in form a sound judgment , whereas a mind accustom to dwell 
 only on detail be wonderfully slow at arrive at any judgment at all , 
 and when it do , the probability be that it will arrive at a wrong one , 
 Kenelm judge correctly when he come to this conclusion : " I be among 
 simple english peasant ; but , for some reason or other , not to be 
 explain by the relative amount of wage , it be a favourable speciman 
 of that class . " 

 " I beg your pardon for intrude at this hour , Mrs. Somers , " say 
 Kenelm , who have be too familiar with peasant from his early 
 childhood not to know how quickly , when in the presence of their 
 household god , they appreciate respect , and how acutely they feel the 
 want of it . " but my stay in the village be very short , and I should not 
 like to leave without see your son 's basket - work , of which I have 
 hear much . " 

 " you be very good , sir , " say will , with a pleased smile that 
 wonderfully brighten up his face . " it be only just a few common thing 
 that I keep by I . any fine sort of work I mostly do by order . " 

 " you see , sir , " say Mrs. Somers , " it take so much more time for pretty 
 work - basket , and such like ; and unless do to order , it might be 
 a chance if he could get it sell . but pray be seat , sir , " and Mrs. 
 Somers place a chair for her visitor , " while I just run up stair for 
 the work - basket which my son have make for Miss Travers . it be to go home 
 to - morrow , and I put it away for fear of accident . " 

 Kenelm seat himself , and , draw his chair near to Will 's , take up 
 the half - finish basket which the young man have lay down on the table . 

 " this seem to I very nice and delicate workmanship , " say Kenelm ; " and 
 the shape , when you have finish it , will be elegant enough to please 
 the taste of a lady . " 

 " it be for Mrs. Lethbridge , " say will : ' she want something to hold 
 card and letter ; and I take the shape from a book of drawing which 
 Mr. Lethbridge kindly lend I . you know Mr. Lethbridge , sir ? he be a 
 very good gentleman . " 

 " no , I do not   know he . who be he ? " 

 " our clergyman , sir . this be the book . " 

 to Kenelm 's surprise , it be a work on Pompeii , and contain woodcut 
 of the implement and ornament , mosaic and fresco , find in that 
 memorable little city . 

 " I see this be your model , " say Kenelm ; " what they call a patera , 
 and rather a famous one . you be copy it much more truthfully than I 
 should have suppose it possible to do in substitute basket - work for 
 bronze . but you observe that much of the beauty of this shallow bowl 
 depend on the two dove perch on the brim . you can not   manage that 
 ornamental addition . " 

 " Mrs. Lethbridge think of put there two little stuff 
 canary - bird . " 

 " do she ? good heaven ! " exclaim Kenelm . 

 " but somehow , " continue will , " I do not like that , and I make bold to 
 say so . " 

 " why do not you do it ? " 

 " well , I do not   know ; but I do not think it would be the right thing . " 

 " it would have be very bad taste , and spoil the effect of your 
 basket - work ; and I will endeavour to explain why . you see here , in the 
 next page , a drawing of a very beautiful statue . of course this statue 
 be intend to be a representation of nature , but nature idealize . you 
 do not   know the meaning of that hard word , idealize , and very few people 
 do . but it mean the performance of a something in art accord to the 
 idea which a man 's mind form to itself out of a something in nature . 
 that something in nature must , of course , have be carefully study 
 before the man can work out anything in art by which it be faithfully 
 represent . the artist , for instance , who make that statue , must have 
 know the proportion of the human frame . he must have make study 
 of various part of it , - head and hand , and arm and leg , and so 
 forth , - and have do so , he then put together all his various 
 study of detail , so as to form a new whole , which be intend to 
 personate an idea form in his own mind . do you go with I ? " 

 " partly , sir ; but I be puzzle a little still . " 

 " of course you be ; but you will puzzle yourself right if you think over 
 what I say . now if , in order to make this statue , which be compose of 
 metal or stone , more natural , I stick on it a wig of real hair , would 
 not you feel at once that I have spoil the work ; that as you clearly 
 express it , ' it would not be the right thing ' ? and instead of make the 
 work of art more natural , I should have make it laughably unnatural , by 
 force insensibly upon the mind of he who look at it the contrast 
 between the real life , represent by a wig of actual hair , and the 
 artistic life , represent by an idea embody in stone or metal . the 
 high the work of art   that be , the high the idea it represent as a 
 new combination of detail take from nature , the more it be degrade 
 or spoilt by an attempt to give it a kind of reality which be out 
 of keep with the material employ . but the same rule apply to 
 everything in art , however humble . and a couple of stuff canary - bird 
 at the brim of a basket - work imitation of a greek drinking - cup would be 
 as bad taste as a wig from the barber 's on the head of a marble statue 
 of Apollo . " 

 " I see , " say will , his head downcast , like a man ponder , - " at least 
 I think I see ; and I be very much oblige to you , sir . " 

 Mrs. Somers have long since return with the work - basket , but stand with 
 it in her hand , not dare to interrupt the gentleman , and listen to 
 his discourse with as much patience and as little comprehension as if it 
 have be one of the controversial sermon upon ritualism with which on 
 great occasion Mr. Lethbridge favour his congregation . 

 Kenelm have now exhaust his critical lecture - from which certain 
 poet and novelist who contrive to caricature the ideal by their 
 attempt to put wig of real hair upon the head of stone statue might 
 borrow a useful hint or two if they would condescend to do so , which 
 be not likely - perceive Mrs. Somers stand by he , take from her 
 the basket , which be really very pretty and elegant , subdivide 
 into various compartment for the implement in use among lady , and 
 bestow on it a well - merit eulogium . 

 " the young lady mean to finish it herself with ribbon , and line it 
 with satin , " say Mrs. Somers , proudly . 

 " the ribbon will not be amiss , sir ? " say will , interrogatively . 

 " not at all . your natural sense of the fitness of thing tell you 
 that ribbon go well with straw and light straw - like work such as this ; 
 though you would not put ribbon on those rude hamper and game - basket 
 in the corner . like to like ; a stout cord go suitably with they : just 
 as a poet who understand his art employ pretty expression for poem 
 intend to be pretty and suit a fashionable drawing - room , and carefully 
 shun they to substitute a simple cord for poem intend to be strong 
 and travel far , despite of rough usage by the way . but you really 
 ought to make much more money by this fancy - work than you could as a 
 day - labourer . " 

 will sigh . " not in this neighbourhood , sir ; I might in a town . " 

 " why not move to a town , then ? " 

 the young man colour , and shake his head . 

 Kenelm turn appealingly to Mrs. Somers . " I will be willing to go 
 wherever it would be good for my boy , sir . but - " and here she check 
 herself , and a tear trickle silently down her cheek . 

 will resume , in a more cheerful tone , " I be get a little know 
 now , and work will come if one wait for it . " Kenelm do not deem it 
 courteous or discreet to intrude far on Will 's confidence in the 
 first interview ; and he begin to feel , more than he have do at first , 
 not only the dull pain of the bruise he have receive in the recent 
 combat , but also somewhat more than the weariness which follow long 
 summer - day 's work in the open air . he therefore , rather abruptly , now 
 take his leave , say that he should be very glad of a few specimen of 
 Will 's ingenuity and skill , and would call or write to give direction 
 about they . 

 just as he come in sight of Tom Bowles 's house on his way back to Mr. 
 Saunderson 's , Kenelm see a man mount a pony that stand tie up at the 
 gate , and exchange a few word with a respectable - look woman 
 before he ride on . he be pass by Kenelm without notice , when that 
 philosophical vagrant stop he , say , " if I be not mistaken , sir , 
 you be the doctor . there be not much the matter with Mr. Bowles ? " 

 the doctor shake his head . " I can not   say yet . he have have a very ugly blow 
 somewhere . " 

 " it be just under the left ear . I do not aim at that exact spot : 
 but Bowles unluckily swerve a little aside at the moment , perhaps in 
 surprise at a tap between his eye immediately precede it : and so , as 
 you say , it be an ugly blow that he receive . but if it cure he of 
 the habit of give ugly blow to other people who can bear they less 
 safely , perhaps it may be all for his good , as , no doubt , sir , your 
 schoolmaster say when he flog you . " 

 " bless my soul ! be you the man who fight with he , - you ? I can not 
 believe it . " 

 " why not ? " 

 " why not ! so far as I can judge by this light , though you be a tall 
 fellow , Tom Bowles must be a much heavy weight than you be . " 

 " Tom Spring be the champion of England ; and accord to the record of 
 his weight , which history have preserve in her archive , Tom Spring be 
 a light weight than I be . " 

 " but be you a prize - fighter ? " 

 " I be as much that as I be anything else . but to return to Mr. Bowles , 
 be it necessary to bleed he ? " 

 " yes ; he be unconscious , or nearly so , when I come . I take away a few 
 ounce ; and I be happy to say he be now sensible , but must be keep very 
 quiet . " 

 " no doubt ; but I hope he will be well enough to see I to - morrow . " 

 " I hope so too ; but I can not   say yet . Quarrel about a girl , - eh ? " 

 " it be not about money . and I suppose if there be no money and no 
 woman in the world , there would be no quarrel and very few doctor . 
 good - night , Sir . " 

 " it be a strange thing to I , " say Kenelm , as he now open the 
 garden - gate of Mr. Saunderson 's homestead , " that though I have   have nothing 
 to eat all day , except a few pitiful sandwich , I do not   feel the least 
 hungry . such arrest of the lawful duty of the digestive organ never 
 happen to I before . there must be something weird and ominous in it . " 

 on enter the parlour , the family party , though they have long since 
 finish supper , be still seat round the table . they all rise at 
 the sight of Kenelm . the fame of his achievement have precede he . he 
 check the congratulation , the compliment , and the question 
 which the hearty farmer rapidly heap upon he , with a melancholic 
 exclamation , " but I have lose my appetite ! no honour can compensate for 
 that . let I go to bed peaceably , and perhaps in the magic land of sleep 
 Nature may restore I by a dream of supper . " 



 CHAPTER XIV . 

 KENELM rise betime the next morning somewhat stiff and uneasy , but 
 sufficiently recover to feel ravenous . fortunately , one of the 
 young lady , who attend specially to the dairy , be already up , and 
 supply the starve hero with a vast bowl of bread and milk . he then 
 stroll into the hayfield , in which there be now very little left 
 to do , and but few hand besides his own be employ . Jessie be not 
 there . Kenelm be glad of that . by nine o'clock his work be over , and 
 the farmer and his man be in the yard complete the rick . Kenelm 
 steal away unobserved , bent on a round of visit . he call first at the 
 village shop keep by Mrs. Bawtrey , which Jessie have point out to 
 he , on pretence of buy a gaudy neckerchief ; and soon , thank to his 
 habitual civility , make familiar acquaintance with the shopwoman . she 
 be a little sickly old lady , her head shake , as with palsy , somewhat 
 deaf , but still shrewd and sharp , render mechanically so by long 
 habit of shrewdness and sharpness . she become very communicative , speak 
 freely of her desire to give up the shop , and pass the rest of her day 
 with a sister , widow like herself , in a neighbouring town . since she 
 have lose her husband , the field and orchard attach to the shop have 
 cease to be profitable , and become a great care and trouble ; and the 
 attention the shop require be wearisome . but she have twelve year 
 unexpired of the lease grant for twenty - one year to her husband on 
 low term , and she want a premium for its transfer , and a purchaser 
 for the stock of the shop . Kenelm soon draw from she the amount of the 
 sum she require for all , - L45 . 

 " you be not   think of it for yourself ? " she ask , put on her 
 spectacle , and examine he with care . 

 " perhaps so , if one could get a decent living out of it . do you keep a 
 book of your loss and your gain ? " 

 " in course , sir , " she say proudly . " I keep the book in my goodman 's 
 time , and he be one who could find out if there be a farthe wrong , 
 for he have be in a lawyer 's office when a lad . " 

 " why do he leave a lawyer 's office to keep a little shop ? " 

 " well , he be bear a farmer 's son in this neighbourhood , and he always 
 have a hankering after the country , and - and besides that - " 

 " yes . " 

 " I will tell you the truth ; he have get into a way of drinking speerrit , 
 and he be a good young man , and want to break himself of it , and he 
 take the temperance oath ; but it be too hard on he , for he could not 
 break himself of the company that lead he into liquor . and so , one time 
 when he come into the neighbourhood to see his parent for the Christmas 
 holiday , he take a bit of like to I ; and my father , who be squire 
 Travers 's bailiff , have just die , and leave I a little money . and so , 
 somehow or other , we come together , and get this house and the land 
 from the Squire on lease very reasonable ; and my goodman be well 
 eddyeate , and much thought of , and never be tempt to drink , now 
 that he have a missis to keep he in order , have a many little thing put 
 into his way . he could help to measure timber , and know about drain , 
 and he get some bookkeeping from the farmer about ; and we keep cow 
 and pig and poultry , and so we do very well , specially as the Lord be 
 merciful and send we no child . " 

 " and what do the shop bring in a year since your husband die ? " 

 " you have good judge for yourself . will you look at the book , and take 
 a peep at the land and apple - tree ? but they be be neglect since my 
 goodman die . " 

 in another minute the heir of the Chillinglys be seat in a neat 
 little back parlour , with a pretty though confine view of the orchard 
 and grass slope behind it , and bend over Mrs. Bawtrey 's ledger . 

 some customer for cheese and bacon come now into the shop , the old 
 woman leave he to his study . though they be not of a nature familiar 
 to he , he bring to they , at least , that general clearness of head and 
 quick seizure of important point which be common to most man who have 
 go through some disciplined training of intellect , and be accustom 
 to extract the pith and marrow out of many book on many subject . the 
 result of his examination be satisfactory ; there appear to he a 
 clear balance of gain from the shop alone of somewhat over L40 a year , 
 take the average of the last three year . close the book , he then 
 let himself out of the window into the orchard , and thence into the 
 neighbour grass field . both be , indeed , much neglect ; the tree 
 want pruning , the field manure . but the soil be evidently of rich 
 loam , and the fruit - tree be abundant and of ripe age , generally 
 look healthy in spite of neglect . with the quick intuition of a man 
 bear and breed in the country , and pick up scrap of rural knowledge 
 unconsciously , Kenelm convince himself that the land , properly manage , 
 would far more than cover the rent , rate , tithe , and all incidental 
 outgoing , leave the profit of the shop as the clear income of the 
 occupier . and no doubt with clever young people to manage the shop , its 
 profit might be increase . 

 not think it necessary to return at present to Mrs. Bawtrey 's , Kenelm 
 now bent his way to Tom Bowles 's . 

 the house - door be close . at the summon of his knock it be quickly 
 open by a tall , stout , remarkably fine - look woman , who might have 
 tell fifty year , and carry they off lightly on her ample shoulder . 
 she be dress very respectably in black , her brown hair braid simply 
 under a neat tight - fitting cap . her feature be aquiline and 
 very regular : altogether there be something about her majestic and 
 Cornelia - like . she might have sit for the model of that roman matron , 
 except for the fairness of her anglo - Saxon complexion . 

 " what be your pleasure ? " she ask , in a cold and somewhat stern voice . 

 " Ma'am , " answer Kenelm , uncovering , " I have call to see Mr. Bowles , 
 and I sincerely hope he be well enough to let I do so . " 

 " no , sir , he be not well enough for that ; he be lie down in his own 
 room , and must be keep quiet . " 

 " may I then ask you the favour to let I in ? I would say a few word to 
 you , who be his mother if I mistake not . " Mrs. Bowles pause a moment 
 as if in doubt ; but she be at no loss to detect in Kenelm 's manner 
 something superior to the fashion of his dress , and suppose the visit 
 might refer to her son 's professional business , she open the door 
 wide , draw aside to let he pass first , and when he stand midway in 
 the parlour , request he to take a seat , and , to set he the example , 
 seat herself . 

 " Ma'am , " say Kenelm , " do not regret to have admit I , and do not 
 think hardly of I when I inform you that I be the unfortunate cause of 
 your son 's accident . " 

 Mrs. Bowles rise with a start . " you be the man who beat my boy ? " 

 " no , ma'am , do not say I beat he . he be not beat . he be so brave 
 and so strong that he would easily have beat I if I have not , by good 
 luck , knock he down before he have time to do so . Pray , ma'am , retain 
 your seat and listen to I patiently for a few moment . " 

 Mrs. Bowles , with an indignant heave of her Juno - like bosom , and with 
 a superbly haughty expression of countenance which suit well with its 
 aquiline formation , tacitly obey . 

 " you will allow , ma'am , " recommence Kenelm , " that this be not the first 
 time by many that Mr. Bowles have come to blow with another man . be I 
 not right in that assumption ? " 

 " my son be of hasty temper , " reply Mrs. Bowles , reluctantly , " and 
 people should not aggravate he . " 

 " you grant the fact , then ? " say Kenelm , imperturbably , but with a 
 polite inclination of head . " Mr. Bowles have often be engage in these 
 encounter , and in all of they it be quite clear that he provoke the 
 battle ; for you must be aware that he be not the sort of man to whom any 
 other would be dispose to give the first blow . yet , after these little 
 incident have occur , and Mr. Bowles have , say , half kill the person 
 who aggravate he , you do not feel any resentment against that person , 
 do you ? Nay , if he have want nursing , you would have go and nurse 
 he . " 

 " I do not   know as to nursing , " say Mrs. Bowles , begin to lose she 
 dignity of mien ; " but certainly I should have be very sorry for he . 
 and as for Tom , - though I say it who should not say , - he have no more 
 malice than a baby : he would go and make it up with any man , however badly 
 he have beat he . " 

 " just as I suppose ; and if the man have sulk and would not make it up , 
 Tom would have call he a bad fellow , and feel inclined to beat he 
 again . " 

 Mrs. Bowles 's face relax into a stately smile . 

 " well , then , " pursue Kenelm , " I do but humbly imitate Mr. Bowles , and I 
 come to make it up and shake hand with he . " 

 " no , sir , - no , " exclaim Mrs. Bowles , though in a low voice , and 
 turn pale . " do not   think of it . ' tis not the blow ; he will get over 
 those fast enough : ' tis his pride that be hurt ; and if he see you there 
 might be mischief . but you be a stranger , and go away : do go soon ; do 
 keep out of his way ; do ! " and the mother clasp her hand . 

 " Mrs. Bowles , " say Kenelm , with a change of voice and aspect , - a 
 voice and aspect so earnest and impressive that they still and awe 
 she , - " will you not help I to save your son from the danger into which 
 that hasty temper and that mischievous pride may at any moment hurry 
 he ? do it never occur to you that these be the cause of terrible 
 crime , bring terrible punishment ; and that against brute force , 
 impel by savage passion , society protect itself by the hulk and 
 the gallow ? " 

 " Sir ; how dare you - " 

 " hush ! if one man kill another in a moment of ungovernable wrath , that 
 be a crime which , though heavily punish by the conscience , be gently 
 deal with by the law , which call it only manslaughter ; but if a motive 
 to the violence , such as jealousy or revenge , can be assign , and there 
 should be no witness by to prove that the violence be not premeditate , 
 then the law do not call it manslaughter , but murder . be it not that 
 think which make you so imploringly exclaim , ' go soon ; keep out of his 
 way ' ? " 

 the woman make no answer , but , sink back in her chair , gasp for 
 breath . 

 " Nay , madam , " resume Kenelm , mildly ; " banish your fear . if you will 
 help I I feel sure that I can save your son from such peril , and I 
 only ask you to let I save he . I be convinced that he have a good and 
 a noble nature , and he be worth save . " and as he thus say he take she 
 hand . she resign it to he and return the pressure , all her pride 
 soften as she begin to weep . 

 at length , when she recover voice , she say , - 

 " it be all along of that girl . he be not so till she cross he , and 
 make he half mad . he be not the same man since then , - my poor Tom ! " 

 " do you know that he have give I his word , and before his 
 fellow - villager , that if he have the bad of the fight he would never 
 mol Jessie Wiles again ? " 

 " yes , he tell I so himself ; and it be that which weigh on he now . he 
 brood and brood and mutter , and will not be comfort ; and - and I do 
 fear that he mean revenge . and again , I implore you to keep out of his 
 way . " 

 " it be not revenge on I that he think of . suppose I go and be see no 
 more , do you think in your own heart that that girl 's life be safe ? " 

 " what ! my Tom kill a woman ! " 

 " do you never read in your newspaper of a man who kill his sweetheart , 
 or the girl who refuse to be his sweetheart ? at all event , you 
 yourself do not approve this frantic suit of his . if I have hear 
 rightly , you have wish to get Tom out of the village for some time , 
 till Jessie Wiles be - we will say , marry , or go elsewhere for good . " 

 " yes , indeed , I have wish and pray for it many be the time , both for 
 her sake and for his . and I be sure I do not   know what we shall do if 
 he stay , for he have be lose custom fast . the squire have take away 
 his , and so have many of the farmer ; and such a trade as it be in his 
 good father 's time ! and if he would go , his uncle , the veterinary at 
 Luscombe , would take he into partnership ; for he have no son of his own , 
 and he know how clever Tom be : there be not   a man who know more about 
 horse ; and cow , too , for the matter of that . " 

 " and if Luscombe be a large place , the business there must be more 
 profitable than it can be here , even if Tom get back his custom ? " 

 " oh yes ! five time as good , - if he would but go ; but he will not hear of 
 it . " 

 " Mrs. Bowles , I be very much oblige to you for your confidence , and I 
 feel sure that all will end happily now we have have this talk . I will not 
 press far on you at present . Tom will not stir out , I suppose , till 
 the evening . " 

 " ah , sir , he seem as if he have no heart to stir out again , unless for 
 something dreadful . " 

 " Courage ! I will call again in the evening , and then you just take I 
 up to Tom 's room , and leave I there to make friend with he , as I have 
 with you . do not   say a word about I in the meanwhile . " 

 " but - " 

 " ' but , ' Mrs. Bowles , be a word that cool many a warm impulse , stifle 
 many a kindly thought , put a dead stop to many a brotherly deed . nobody 
 would ever love his neighbour as himself if he listen to all the but 
 that could be say on the other side of the question . " 

 CHAPTER XV . 

 KENELM now bent his way towards the parsonage , but just as he near 
 its glebe - land he meet a gentleman whose dress be so evidently clerical 
 that he stop and say , - 

 " have I the honour to address Mr. Lethbridge ? " 

 " that be my name , " say the clergyman , smile pleasantly . " anything I 
 can do for you ? " 

 " yes , a great deal , if you will let I talk to you about a few of your 
 parishioner . " 

 " my parishioner ! I beg your pardon , but you be quite a stranger to I , 
 and , I should think , to the parish . " 

 " to the parish , - no , I be quite at home in it ; and I honestly believe 
 that it have never know a more officious busybody , thrust himself 
 into its most private affair . " 

 Mr. Lethbridge star , and , after a short pause , say , " I have hear of 
 a young man who have be stay at Mr. Saunderson 's , and be indeed at 
 this moment the talk of the village . you be - " 

 " that young man . alas ! yes . " 

 " Nay , " say Mr. Lethbridge , kindly , " I can not myself , as a minister 
 of the Gospel , approve of your profession , and , if I might take the 
 liberty , I would try and dissuade you from it ; but still , as for the 
 one act of free a poor girl from the most scandalous persecution , and 
 administering , though in a rough way , a lesson to a savage brute who 
 have long be the disgrace and terror of the neighbourhood , I can not 
 honestly say that it have my condemnation . the moral sense of a community 
 be generally a right one : you have win the praise of the village . under 
 all the circumstance , I do not withhold mine . you wake this morning and 
 find yourself famous . do not sigh ' alas . ' " 

 " Lord Byron wake one morning and find himself famous , and the result 
 be that he sigh ' alas ' for the rest of his life . if there be two 
 thing which a wise man should avoid , they be fame and love . Heaven 
 defend I from both ! " 

 again the parson star ; but be of compassionate nature , and incline 
 to take mild view of everything that belong to humanity , he say , with 
 a slight inclination of his head , - 

 " I have always hear that the Americans in general enjoy the advantage 
 of a well education than we do in England , and their reading public 
 be infinitely large than our ; still , when I hear one of a calling 
 not highly consider in this country for intellectual cultivation or 
 ethical philosophy cite Lord Byron , and utter a sentiment at variance 
 with the impetuosity of inexperienced youth , but which have much to 
 commend it in the eye of a reflective Christian impress with the 
 nothingness of the object mostly covet by the human heart , I be 
 surprised , and - oh , my dear young friend , surely your education might 
 fit you for something well ! " 

 it be among the maxim of Kenelm Chillingly 's creed that a sensible man 
 should never allow himself to be surprised ; but here he be , to use 
 a popular idiom , " take aback , " and lower himself to the rank of 
 ordinary mind by say , simply , " I do not   understand . " 

 " I see , " resume the clergyman , shake his head gently , " as I always 
 suspect , that in the vaunted education bestow on Americans , the 
 elementary principle of Christian right and wrong be more neglect 
 than they be among our own humble class . yes , my young friend , you 
 may quote poet , you may startle I by remark on the nothingness of 
 human fame and human love , derive from the precept of heathen poet , 
 and yet not understand with what compassion , and , in the judgment 
 of most sober - minded person , with what contempt , a human being who 
 practise your vocation be regard . " 

 " have I a vocation ? " say Kenelm . " I be very glad to hear it . what be my 
 vocation ? and why must I be an American ? " 

 " why , surely I be not misinformed ? you be the American - I forget his 
 name - who have come over to contest the belt of prize - fighting with 
 the champion of England . you be silent ; you hang your head . by your 
 appearance , your length of limb , your gravity of countenance , your 
 evident education , you confirm the impression of your birth . your 
 prowess have prove your profession . " 

 " Reverend sir , " say Kenelm , with his unutterable seriousness of aspect , 
 " I be on my travel in search of truth and in flight from sham , but 
 so great a take - in as myself I have not yet encounter . remember I in 
 your prayer . I be not an American ; I be not a prize - fighter . I 
 honour the first as the citizen of a grand republic try his good to 
 accomplish an experiment in government in which he will find the 
 very prosperity he tend to create will soon or later destroy his 
 experiment . I honour the last because strength , courage , and sobriety 
 be essential to the prize - fighter , and be among the chief ornament 
 of king and hero . but I be neither one nor the other . and all I 
 can say for myself be , that I belong to that very vague class commonly 
 call english gentleman , and that , by birth and education , I have a 
 right to ask you to shake hand with I as such . " 

 Mr. Lethbridge star again , raise his hat , bow , and shake hand . 

 " you will allow I now to speak to you about your parishioner . you take 
 an interest in Will Somers ; so do I. he be clever and ingenious . but it 
 seem there be not sufficient demand here for his basket , and he would , 
 no doubt , do well in some neighbouring town . why do he object to 
 move ? " 

 " I fear that poor will would pine away to death if he lose sight of that 
 pretty girl for whom you do such chivalrous battle with Tom Bowles . " 

 " the unhappy man , then , be really in love with Jessie Wiles ? and do you 
 think she no less really care for he ? " 

 " I be sure of it . " 

 " and would make he a good wife ; that be , as wife go ? " 

 " a good daughter generally make a good wife . and there be not a father 
 in the place who have a well child than Jessie be to hers . she really 
 be a girl of a superior nature . she be the cleverest pupil at our 
 school , and my wife be much attach to she . but she have something 
 well than mere cleverness : she have an excellent heart . " 

 " what you say confirm my own impression . and the girl 's father have no 
 other objection to Will Somers than his fear that will could not support 
 a wife and family comfortably . 

 " he can have no other objection save that which would apply equally to 
 all suitor . I mean his fear lest Tom Bowles might do she some mischief , 
 if he know she be about to marry any one else . " 

 " you think , then , that Mr. Bowles be a thoroughly bad and dangerous 
 person ? " 

 " thoroughly bad and dangerous , and bad since he have take to 
 drink . " 

 " I suppose he do not take to drinking till he lose his wit for Jessie 
 Wiles ? " 

 " no , I do not   think he do . " 

 " but , Mr. Lethbridge , have you never use your influence over this 
 dangerous man ? " 

 " of course , I do try , but I only get insult . he be a godless animal , 
 and have not be inside a church for year . he seem to have get 
 a smattering of such vile learning as may be find in infidel 
 publication , and I doubt if he have any religion at all . " 

 " Poor Polyphemus ! no wonder his Galatea shun he . " 

 " Old Wiles be terribly frightened , and ask my wife to find Jessie a 
 place as servant at a distance . but Jessie can not   bear the thought of 
 leave . " 

 " for the same reason which attach will Somers to the native soil ? " 

 " my wife think so . " 

 " do you believe that if Tom Bowles be out of the way , and Jessie 
 and will be man and wife , they could earn a sufficient livelihood as 
 successor to Mrs. Bawtrey , will add the profit of his basket - work 
 to those of the shop and land ? " 

 " a sufficient livelihood ! of course . they would be quite rich . I know 
 the shop use to turn a great deal of money . the old woman , to be sure , 
 be no long up to the business , but still she retain a good custom . " 

 " will Somers seem in delicate health . perhaps if he have a less weary 
 struggle for a livelihood , and no fear of lose Jessie , his health 
 would improve . " 

 " his life would be save , sir . " 

 " then , " say Kenelm , with a heavy sigh and a face as long as an 
 undertaker 's , " though I myself entertain a profound compassion for that 
 disturbance to our mental equilibrium which go by the name of ' love , ' 
 and I be the last person who ought to add to the care and sorrow which 
 marriage entail upon its victim , - I say nothing of the woe 
 destine to those whom marriage usually add to a population already 
 overcrowded , - I fear that I must be the mean of bring these two 
 love - bird into the same cage . I be ready to purchase the shop and its 
 appurtenance on their behalf , on the condition that you will kindly 
 obtain the consent of Jessie 's father to their union . as for my brave 
 friend Tom Bowles , I undertake to deliver they and the village from that 
 exuberant nature , which require a large field for its energy . Pardon 
 I for not let you interrupt I . I have not yet finish what I have 
 to say . allow I to ask if Mrs. Grundy reside in this village . " 

 " Mrs. Grundy ! oh , I understand . of course ; wherever a woman have a 
 tongue , there Mrs. Grundy have a home . " 

 " and see that Jessie be very pretty , and that in walk with she I 
 encounter Mr. Bowles , might not Mrs. Grundy say , with a toss of her 
 head , ' that it be not out of pure charity that the stranger have be so 
 liberal to Jessie Wiles ' ? but if the money for the shop be pay through 
 you to Mrs. Bawtrey , and you kindly undertake all the contingent 
 arrangement , Mrs. Grundy will have nothing to say against any one . " 

 Mr. Lethbridge gaze with amaze at the solemn countenance before he . 

 " Sir , " he say , after a long pause , " I scarcely know how to express my 
 admiration of a generosity so noble , so thoughtful , and accompany with 
 a delicacy , and , indeed , with a wisdom , which - which - " 

 " pray , my dear sir , do not make I still more ashamed of myself than I 
 be at present for an interference in love matter quite alien to my own 
 conviction as to the good mode of make an ' approach to the Angels . ' 
 to conclude this business , I think it well to deposit in your hand 
 the sum of L45 , for which Mrs. Bawtrey have agree to sell the remainder 
 of her lease and stock - in - hand ; but , of course , you will not make 
 anything public till I be go , and Tom Bowles too . I hope I may get 
 he away to - morrow ; but I shall know to - night when I can depend on his 
 departure , and till he go I must stay . " 

 as he speak , Kenelm transfer from his pocket - book to Mr. Lethbridge 's 
 hand bank - note to the amount specify . 

 " may I at least ask the name of the gentleman who honour I with his 
 confidence , and have bestow so much happiness on member of my flock ? " 

 " there be no great reason why I should not tell you my name , but I see 
 no reason why I should . you remember Talleyrand 's advice , ' if you be 
 in doubt whether to write a letter or not , do not . ' the advice apply to 
 many doubt in life besides that of letter - writing . Farewell , sir ! " 

 " a most extraordinary young man , " mutter the parson , gaze at the 
 recede form of the tall stranger ; then gently shake his head , he 
 add , " quite an original . " he be content with that solution of the 
 difficulty which have puzzle he . may the reader be the same . 



 CHAPTER XVI . 

 after the family dinner , at which the farmer 's guest display more 
 than his usual power of appetite , Kenelm follow his host towards the 
 stackyard , and say , - 

 " my dear Mr. Saunderson , though you have no long any work for I to 
 do , and I ought not to trespass far on your hospitality , yet if I 
 might stay with you another day or so , I should be very grateful . " 

 " my dear lad , " cry the farmer , in whose estimation Kenelm have rise 
 prodigiously since the victory over Tom Bowles , " you be welcome to stay 
 as long as you like , and we shall be all sorry when you go . indeed , at 
 all event , you must stay over Saturday , for you shall go with we to 
 the squire 's harvest - supper . it will be a pretty sight , and my girl be 
 already count on you for a dance . " 

 " Saturday , - the day after to - morrow . you be very kind ; but merrymaking 
 be not much in my way , and I think I shall be on my road before you set 
 off to the squire 's supper . " 

 " Pooh ! you shall stay ; and , I say , young ' un , if you want more to do , I 
 have a job for you quite in your line . " 

 " what be it ? " 

 " thrash my ploughman . he have be insolent this morning , and he be the 
 big fellow in the county , next to Tom Bowles . " 

 here the farmer laugh heartily , enjoy his own joke . 

 " thank you for nothing , " say Kenelm , rub his bruise . " a burn 
 child dread the fire . " 

 the young man wander alone into the field . the day be become 
 overcast , and the cloud threaten rain . the air be exceedingly still ; 
 the landscape , miss the sunshine , wear an aspect of gloomy solitude . 
 Kenelm come to the bank of the rivulet not far from the spot on which 
 the farmer have first find he . there he sit down , and lean his cheek 
 on his hand , with eye fix on the still and darken stream lapsing 
 mournfully away : sorrow enter into his heart and ting its musing . 

 " be it then true , " say he , soliloquize , " that I be bear to pass 
 through life utterly alone ; ask , indeed , for no sister - half of 
 myself , disbelieve its possibility , shrink from the thought 
 of it , - half scorning , half pity those who sigh for it ? - thing 
 unattainable , - well sigh for the moon ! 

 " yet if other man sigh for it , why do I stand apart from they ? if the 
 world be a stage , and all the man and woman in it merely player , be I 
 to be the solitary spectator , with no part in the drama and no interest 
 in the vicissitude of its plot ? many there be , no doubt , who covet as 
 little as I do the part of ' Lover , ' ' with a woful ballad , make to his 
 mistress 's eyebrow ; ' but then they covet some other part in the drama , 
 such as that of soldier ' bearded as a pard , ' or that of justice ' in fair 
 round belly with fat capon line . ' but I no ambition fire : I have no 
 longing either to rise or to shine . I do not   desire to be a colonel , nor 
 an admiral , nor a member of Parliament , nor an alderman ; I do not yearn 
 for the fame of a wit , or a poet , or a philosopher , or a diner - out , or 
 a crack shot at a rifle - match or a battue . decidedly , I be the one 
 looker - on , the one bystander , and have no more concern with the active 
 world than a stone have . it be a horrible phantasmal crotchet of Goethe , 
 that originally we be all monad , little segregated atom adrift in 
 the atmosphere , and carry hither and thither by force over which we 
 have no control , especially by the attraction of other monad , so 
 that one monad , compel by porcine monad , crystallize into a pig ; 
 another , hurry along by heroic monad , become a lion or an Alexander . 
 now it be quite clear , " continue Kenelm , shift his position and 
 cross the right leg over the left , " that a monad intend or 
 fit for some other planet may , on its way to that destination , be 
 encounter by a current of other monad blow earthward , and be 
 catch up in the stream and whirl on , till , to the marring of 
 its whole proper purpose and scene of action , it settle 
 here , - conglomerate into a baby . probably that lot have befall I : my 
 monad , mean for another region in space , have be drop into this , 
 where it can never be at home , never amalgamate with other monad nor 
 comprehend why they be in such a perpetual fidget . I declare I know 
 no more why the mind of human being should be so restlessly agitated 
 about thing which , as most of they own , give more pain than pleasure , 
 than I understand why that swarm of gnat , which have such a very short 
 time to live , do not give itself a moment 's repose , but go up and 
 down , rise and fall as if it be on a seesaw , and make as much 
 noise about its insignificant alternation of ascent and descent as if 
 it be the hum of man . and yet , perhaps , in another planet my monad 
 would have frisk and jump and dance and seesaw with congenial 
 monad , as contentedly and as sillily as do the monad of man and gnat 
 in this alien Vale of Tears . " 

 Kenelm have just arrive at that conjectural solution of his perplexity 
 when a voice be hear singing , or rather modulate to that kind of 
 chant between recitative and song , which be so pleasingly effective 
 where the intonation be pure and musical . they be so in this 
 instance , and Kenelm 's ear catch every word in the following song : - 


  CONTENT . 

  " there be time when the trouble of life be still ; 
  the bee wander lose in the depth of June , 
  and I pause where the chime of a silver rill 
  sing the linnet and lark to their rest at noon . 

  " say my soul , ' see how calmly the wavelet glide , 
  though so narrow their way to their ocean vent ; 
  and the world that I traverse be wide , be wide , 
  and yet be too narrow to hold content ' 

  " o my son , never say that the world be wide ; 
  the rill in its bank be less closely pent : 
  it be thou who art shoreless on every side , 
  and thy width will not let thee enclose content . " 


 as the voice cease Kenelm lift his head . but the bank of the brook 
 be so curve and so clothe with brushwood that for some minute the 
 singer be invisible . at last the bough before he be put aside , and 
 within a few pace of himself pause the man to whom he have commend 
 the praise of a beefsteak , instead of those which minstrelsy in its 
 immemorial error dedicate to love . 

 " Sir , " say Kenelm , half rise , " well meet once more . have you ever 
 listen to the cuckoo ? " 

 " Sir , " answer the minstrel , " have you ever feel the presence of the 
 summer ? " 

 " permit I to shake hand with you . I admire the question by which you 
 have countermet and rebuke my own . if you be not in a hurry , will you 
 sit down and let we talk ? " 

 the minstrel incline his head and seat himself . his dog - now emerge 
 from the brushwood - gravely approach Kenelm , who with great gravity 
 regard he ; then , wag his tail , repose on his haunch , 
 intent with ear erect on a stir in the neighbouring reed , evidently 
 consider whether it be cause by a fish or a water - rat . 

 " I ask you , sir , if you have ever listen to the cuckoo from no 
 irrelevant curiosity ; for often on summer day , when one be talk with 
 one 's self , - and , of course , puzzle one 's self , - a voice break out , 
 as it be from the heart of Nature , so far be it and yet so near ; and 
 it say something very quieting , very musical , so that one be tempt 
 inconsiderately and foolishly to exclaim , ' nature reply to I . ' the 
 cuckoo have serve I that trick pretty often . your song be a well 
 answer to a man 's self - questioning than he can ever get from a cuckoo . " 

 " I doubt that , " say the minstrel . " Song , at the good , be but the echo 
 of some voice from the heart of Nature . and if the cuckoo 's note seem 
 to you such a voice , it be an answer to your questioning perhaps more 
 simply truthful than man can utter , if you have rightly construe the 
 language . " 

 " my good friend , " answer Kenelm , " what you say sound very prettily ; 
 and it contain a sentiment which have be amplify by certain critic 
 into that measureless domain of dunderhead which be vulgarly call 
 BOSH . but though nature be never silent , though she abuse the privilege 
 of her age in be tediously gossip and garrulous , Nature never 
 reply to our question : she can not   understand an argument ; she have 
 never read Mr. Mill 's work on Logic . in fact , as it be truly say by a 
 great philosopher , ' nature have no mind . ' every man who address she be 
 compel to force upon she for a moment the loan of his own mind . and 
 if she answer a question which his own mind put to she , it be only 
 by such a reply as his own mind teach to her parrot - like lip . and as 
 every man have a different mind , so every man get a different answer . 
 Nature be a lie old humbug . " 

 the minstrel laugh merrily ; and his laugh be as sweet as his chant . 

 " poet would have a great deal to unlearn if they be to look upon 
 nature in that light . " 

 " bad poet would , and so much the well for they and their reader . " 

 " be not good poet student of Nature ? " 

 " student of Nature , certainly , as surgeon study anatomy by dissect 
 a dead body . but the good poet , like the good surgeon , be the man who 
 consider that study merely as the necessary A b C , and not as the 
 all - in - all essential to skill in his practice . I do not give the fame 
 of a good surgeon to a man who fill a book with detail , more or less 
 accurate , of fibre and nerve and muscle ; and I do not   give the fame of 
 a good poet to a man who make an inventory of the Rhine or the Vale of 
 Gloucester . the good surgeon and the good poet be they who understand 
 the live man . what be that poetry of drama which Aristotle justly 
 rank as the high ? be it not a poetry in which description of 
 inanimate Nature must of necessity be very brief and general ; in which 
 even the external form of man be so indifferent a consideration that it 
 will vary with each actor who perform the part ? a Hamlet may be fair 
 or dark . a Macbeth may be short or tall . the merit of dramatic poetry 
 consist in the substituting for what be commonly call Nature   namely , 
 external and material Nature   creature intellectual , emotional , but 
 so purely immaterial that they may be say to be all mind and soul , 
 accept the temporary loan of any such body at hand as actor may 
 offer , in order to be make palpable and visible to the audience , but 
 need no such body to be palpable and visible to reader . the 
 high kind of poetry be therefore that which have least to do with 
 external Nature . but every grade have its merit more or less genuinely 
 great , accord as it instil into Nature that which be not there , - the 
 reason and the soul of man . " 

 " I be not much disposed , " say the minstrel , " to acknowledge any one 
 form of poetry to be practically high than another ; that be , so far as 
 to elevate the poet who cultivate what you call the high with some 
 success above the rank of the poet who cultivate what you call a very 
 inferior school with a success much more triumphant . in theory , dramatic 
 poetry may be high than lyric , and ' Venice Preserved ' be a very 
 successful drama ; but I think Burns a great poet than Otway . " 

 " possibly he may be ; but I know of no lyrical poet , at least among the 
 modern , who treat less of nature as the mere outward form of thing , 
 or more passionately animate her framework with his own human heart , 
 than do Robert Burns . do you suppose when a Greek , in some perplexity 
 of reason or conscience , address a question to the oracular oak - leaf 
 of Dodona that the oak - leaf answer he ? do not   you rather believe 
 that the question suggest by his mind be answer by the mind of 
 his fellow - man , the priest , who make the oak - leave the mere vehicle 
 of communication , as you and I might make such vehicle in a sheet of 
 writing - paper ? be not the history of superstition a chronicle of the 
 folly of man in attempt to get answer from external Nature ? " 

 " but , " say the minstrel , " have I not somewhere hear or read that the 
 experiment of Science be the answer make by Nature to the question 
 put to she by man ? " 

 " they be the answer which his own mind suggest to she , - nothing more . 
 his mind study the law of matter , and in that study make experiment 
 on matter ; out of those experiment his mind , accord to its previous 
 knowledge or natural acuteness , arrive at its own deduction , and 
 hence arise the science of mechanic and chemistry , etc . but the matter 
 itself give no answer : the answer vary accord to the mind that 
 put the question ; and the progress of science consist in the perpetual 
 correction of the error and falsehood which precede mind conceive 
 to be the correct answer they receive from Nature . it be the 
 supernatural within we , - namely , Mind , - which can alone guess at the 
 mechanism of the natural , namely , Matter . a stone can not question a 
 stone . " 

 the minstrel make no reply . and there be a long silence , break but by 
 the hum of the insect , the ripple of onward wave , and the sigh of the 
 wind through reed . 



 CHAPTER XVII . 

 SAID Kenelm , at last break silence - 


  " ' Rapiamus , amici , 
  Occasionem de die , dumque virent genu , 
  Et decet , obducta solvatur fronte senectus ! ' " 


 " be not that quotation from Horace ? " ask the minstrel . 

 " yes ; and I make it insidiously , in order to see if you have not acquire 
 what be call a classical education . " 

 " I might have receive such education , if my taste and my destiny 
 have not withdraw I in boyhood from study of which I do not then 
 comprehend the full value . but I do pick up a smattering of Latin at 
 school ; and from time to time since I leave school I have endeavour to 
 gain some little knowledge of the most popular latin poet ; chiefly , I 
 own to my shame , by the help of literal english translation . " 

 " as a poet yourself , I be not sure that it would be an advantage to know 
 a dead language so well that its form and mode of thought run , 
 though perhaps unconsciously , into those of the live one in which you 
 compose . Horace might have be a still well poet if he have not know 
 Greek well than you know Latin . " 

 " it be at least courteous in you to say so , " answer the singer , with a 
 pleased smile . 

 " you would be still more courteous , " say Kenelm , " if you would pardon 
 an impertinent question , and tell I whether it be for a wager that you 
 wander through the land , Homer - like , as a wandering minstrel , and allow 
 that intelligent quadrupe your companion to carry a tray in his mouth 
 for the reception of penny ? " 

 " no , it be not for a wager ; it be a whim of mine , which I fancy from 
 the tone of your conversation you could understand , be apparently 
 somewhat whimsical yourself . " 

 " so far as whim go , be assure of my sympathy . " 

 " well , then , though I follow a calling by the exercise of which I secure 
 a modest income , my passion be verse . if the season be always summer , 
 and life be always youth , I should like to pass through the world 
 singing . but I have never venture to publish any verse of mine . if 
 they fall still - bear it would give I more pain than such wound to 
 vanity ought to give to a bearded man ; and if they be assail or 
 ridicule it might seriously injure I in my practical vocation . that 
 last consideration , be I quite alone in the world , might not much 
 weigh on I ; but there be other for whose sake I should like to make 
 fortune and preserve station . many year ago - it be in Germany - I fall 
 in with a german student who be very poor , and who do make money by 
 wander about the country with lute and song . he have since become a 
 poet of no mean popularity , and he have tell I that he be sure he find 
 the secret of that popularity in habitually consult popular taste 
 during his rove apprenticeship to song . his example strongly impress 
 I . so I begin this experiment ; and for several year my summer have 
 be all partly spend in this way . I be only know , as I think I tell 
 you before , in the round I take as ' the Wandering Minstrel ; ' I receive 
 the trifling money that be bestow on I as proof of a certain 
 merit . I should not be pay by poor people if I do not please ; and the 
 song which please they good be generally those I love good myself . 
 for the rest , my time be not throw away , - not only as regard bodily 
 health , but healthfulness of mind : all the current of one 's idea 
 become so freshen by month of playful exercise and varied 
 adventure . " 

 " yes , the adventure be varied enough , " say Kenelm , somewhat ruefully ; 
 for he feel , in shift his posture , a sharp twinge of his bruised 
 muscle . " but do not   you find those mischief - maker , the woman , always 
 mix themselves up with adventure ? " 

 " bless they ! of course , " say the minstrel , with a ring laugh . " in 
 life , as on the stage , the petticoat interest be always the strong . " 

 " I do not   agree with you there , " say Kenelm , dryly . " and you seem to 
 I to utter a claptrap beneath the rank of your understanding . however , 
 this warm weather indispose one to disputation ; and I own that a 
 petticoat , provide it be red , be not without the interest of colour in 
 a picture . " 

 " well , young gentleman , " say the minstrel , rise , " the day be wear 
 on , and I must wish you good - by ; probably , if you be to ramble about 
 the country as I do , you would see too many pretty girl not to teach 
 you the strength of petticoat interest , - not in picture alone ; and 
 should I meet you again I may find you write love - verse yourself . " 

 " after a conjecture so unwarrantable , I part company with you less 
 reluctantly than I otherwise might do . but I hope we shall meet again . " 

 " your wish flatter I much ; but , if we do , pray respect the confidence 
 I have place in you , and regard my wandering minstrelsy and my dog 's 
 tray as sacred secret . should we not so meet , it be but a prudent 
 reserve on my part if I do not give you my right name and address . " 

 " there you show the cautious common - sense which belong rarely to lover 
 of verse and petticoat interest . what have you do with your guitar ? " 

 " I do not pace the road with that instrument : it be forward to I 
 from town to town under a borrow name , together with other raiment 
 that this , should I have cause to drop my character of wandering 
 minstrel . " 

 the two man here exchange a cordial shake of the hand . and as the 
 minstrel go his way along the river - side , his voice in chanting seem 
 to lend to the wavelet a lively murmur , to the reed a less plaintive 
 sigh . 



 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 in his room , solitary and brooding , sit the defeat hero of a hundred 
 fight . it be now twilight ; but the shutter have be partially close 
 all day , in order to exclude the sun , which have never before be 
 unwelcome to Tom Bowles , and they still remain so , make the twilight 
 doubly twilight , till the harvest moon , rise early , shoot its ray 
 through the crevice , and force a silvery track amid the shadow of the 
 floor . 

 the man 's head droop on his breast ; his strong hand rest 
 listlessly on his knee : his attitude be that of utter despondency and 
 prostration . but in the expression of his face there be the sign of 
 some dangerous and restless thought which belie not the gloom but the 
 stillness of the posture . his brow , which be habitually open and 
 frank , in its defying aggressive boldness , be now contract into deep 
 furrow , and lower darkly over his downcast , half - close eye . his 
 lip be so tightly compressed that the face lose its roundness , and 
 the massive bone of the jaw stand out hard and salient . now and then , 
 indeed , the lip open , give vent to a deep , impatient sigh , but they 
 reclose as quickly as they have part . it be one of those crisis in 
 life which find all the element that make up a man 's former self in 
 lawless anarchy ; in which the Evil One seem to enter and direct the 
 storm ; in which a rude untutored mind , never before harbour a thought 
 of crime , see the crime start up from an abyss , feel it to be an 
 enemy , yet yield to it as a fate . so that when , at the last , some 
 wretch , sentence to the gibbet , shudderingly look back to the moment 
 " that tremble between two world , " - the world of the man guiltless , 
 the world of the man guilty , - he say to the holy , highly educated , 
 rational , passionless priest who confess he and call he " brother , " 
 " the devil put it into my head . " 

 at that moment the door open ; at its threshold there stand the man 's 
 mother - whom he have never allow to influence his conduct , though he 
 love she well in his rough way - and the hat fellow - man whom he long 
 to see dead at his foot . the door reclose : the mother be go , without 
 a word , for her tear choke she ; the fellow - man be alone with he . Tom 
 Bowles look up , recognize his visitor , clear his brow , and rub 
 his mighty hand . 



 CHAPTER XIX . 

 KENELM CHILLINGLY draw a chair close to his antagonist 's , and silently 
 lay a hand on his . 

 Tom Bowles take up the hand in both his own , turn it curiously towards 
 the moonlight , gaze at it , poise it , then with a sound between groan 
 and laugh toss it away as a thing hostile but trivial , rise and lock 
 the door , come back to his seat and say bluffly , - 

 " what do you want with I now ? " 

 " I want to ask you a favour . " 

 " Favour ? " 

 " the great which man can ask from man , - friendship . you see , my dear 
 Tom , " continue Kenelm , make himself quite at home , throw his arm 
 over the back of Tom 's chair , and stretch his leg comfortably as 
 one do by one 's own fireside ; " you see , my dear Tom , that man like 
 us - young , single , not on the whole bad - look as man go - can 
 find sweetheart in plenty . if one do not like we , another will ; 
 sweetheart be sow everywhere like nettle and thistle . but the 
 rare thing in life be a friend . now , tell I frankly , in the course 
 of your wandering do you ever come into a village where you could not 
 have get a sweetheart if you have ask for one ; and if , have get 
 a sweetheart , you have lose she , do you think you would have have any 
 difficulty in find another ? but have you such a thing in the world , 
 beyond the pale of your own family , as a true friend , - a man friend ; and 
 suppose that you have such a friend , - a friend who would stand by you 
 through thick and thin ; who would tell you your fault to your face , and 
 praise you for your good quality behind your back ; who would do all 
 he could to save you from a danger , and all he could to get you out of 
 one , - suppose you have such a friend and lose he , do you believe that 
 if you live to the age of Methuselah you could find another ? you do not 
 answer I ; you be silent . well , Tom , I ask you to be such a friend to 
 I , and I will be such a friend to you . " 

 Tom be so thoroughly " take aback " by this address that he remain 
 dumfounde . but he feel as if the cloud in his soul be break , and 
 a ray of sunlight be force its way through the sullen darkness . 
 at length , however , the recede rage within he return , though with 
 vacillate step , and he growl between his tooth , - 

 " a pretty friend indeed , rob I of my girl ! go along with you ! " 

 " she be not your girl any more than she be or ever can be mine . " 

 " what , you be not   after she ? " 

 " certainly not ; I be go to Luscombe , and I ask you to come with I . 
 do you think I be go to leave you here ? " 

 " what be it to you ? " 

 " everything . Providence have permit I to save you from the most 
 lifelong of all sorrow . for - think ! can any sorrow be more lasting 
 than have be yours if you have attain your wish ; if you have force or 
 frighten a woman to be your partner till death do part , - you love 
 she , she loathe you ; you conscious , night and day , that your very love 
 have insure her misery , and that misery haunt you like a ghost ! - that 
 sorrow I have save you . may Providence permit I to complete my work , 
 and save you also from the most irredeemable of all crime ! look into 
 your soul , then recall the thought which all day long , and not least at 
 the moment I cross this threshold , be rise up , make reason dumb 
 and conscience blind , and then lie your hand on your heart and say , ' I 
 be guiltless of a dream of murder . ' " 

 the wretched man spring up erect , menacing , and , meet Kenelm 's calm , 
 steadfast , pity gaze , drop no less suddenly , - drop on the 
 floor , cover his face with his hand , and a great cry come forth 
 between sob and howl . 

 " Brother , " say Kenelm , kneel beside he , and twin his arm round 
 the man 's heaving breast , " it be over now ; with that cry the demon that 
 madden you have flee forever . " 



 CHAPTER XX . 

 when , some time after , Kenelm quit the room and join Mrs. Bowles 
 below , he say cheerily , " all right ; Tom and I be swear friend . we be 
 go together to Luscombe the day after to - morrow , - Sunday ; just write 
 a line to his uncle to prepare he for Tom 's visit , and send thither 
 his clothe , as we shall walk , and steal forth unobserved betime in 
 the morning . now go up and talk to he ; he want a mother 's soothing and 
 petting . he be a noble fellow at heart , and we shall be all proud of he 
 some day or other . " 

 as he walk towards the farmhouse , Kenelm encounter Mr. Lethbridge , 
 who say , " I have come from Mr. Saunderson 's , where I go in search of 
 you . there be an unexpected hitch in the negotiation for Mrs. Bawtrey 's 
 shop . after see you this morning I fall in with Mr. Travers 's 
 bailiff , and he tell I that her lease do not give she the power 
 to sublet without the squire 's consent ; and that as the premise be 
 originally let on very low term to a favoured and responsible tenant , 
 Mr. Travers can not be expect to sanction the transfer of the lease 
 to a poor basket - marker : in fact , though he will accept Mrs. Bawtrey 's 
 resignation , it must be in favour of an applicant whom he desire to 
 oblige . on hear this , I ride over to the Park and see Mr. Travers 
 himself . but he be obdurate to my pleading . all I could get he to say 
 be , ' let the stranger who interest himself in the matter come and talk 
 to I . I should like to see the man who thrash that brute Tom Bowles : 
 if he get the well of he perhaps he may get the well of I . bring 
 he with you to my harvest - supper to - morrow evening . ' now , will you 
 come ? " 

 " Nay , " say Kenelm , reluctantly ; " but if he only ask I in order to 
 gratify a very vulgar curiosity , I do not   think I have much chance of 
 serve Will Somers . what do you say ? " 

 " the squire be a good man of business , and , though no one can call he 
 unjust or grasping , still he be very little touch by sentiment ; and 
 we must own that a sickly cripple like poor will be not a very eligible 
 tenant . if , therefore , it depend only on your chance with the squire , 
 I should not be very sanguine . but we have an ally in his daughter . she 
 be very fond of Jessie Wiles , and she have show great kindness to Will . 
 in fact , a sweet , more benevolent , sympathize nature than that of 
 Cecilia Travers do not exist . she have great influence with her father , 
 and through her you may win he . " 

 " I particularly dislike have anything to do with woman , " say Kenelm , 
 churlishly . " parson be accustomed to get round they . surely , my dear 
 sir , you be more fit for that work than I be . " 

 " permit I humbly to doubt that proposition ; one do not   get very 
 quickly round the woman when one carry the weight of year on one 's 
 back . but whenever you want the aid of a parson to bring your own wooing 
 to a happy conclusion , I shall be happy , in my special capacity of 
 parson , to perform the ceremony require . " 

 " Dii meliora ! " say Kenelm , gravely . " some ill be too serious to be 
 approach even in joke . as for Miss Travers , the moment you call she 
 benevolent you inspire I with horror . I know too well what a benevolent 
 girl be , - officious , restless , fidgety , with a snub nose , and her pocket 
 full of tract . I will not go to the harvest - supper . " 

 " Hist ! " say the Parson , softly . they be now pass the cottage of 
 Mrs. Somers ; and while Kenelm be harangue against benevolent girl , 
 Mr. Lethbridge have pause before it , and be furtively look in at the 
 window . " Hist ! and come here , - gently . " 

 Kenelm obey , and look in through the window . will be seat ; Jessie 
 Wiles have nestle herself at his foot , and be hold his hand in both 
 her , look up into his face . her profile alone be see , but its 
 expression be unutterably soft and tender . his face , bent downward 
 towards she , wear a mournful expression ; nay , the tear be roll 
 silently down his cheek . Kenelm listen and hear she say , " do not   talk 
 so , will , you break my heart ; it be I who be not worthy of you . " 

 " Parson , " say Kenelm , as they walk on , " I must go to that confound 
 harvest - supper . I begin to think there be something true in the 
 venerable platitude about love in a cottage . and will Somers must be 
 marry in haste , in order to repent at leisure . " 

 " I do not   see why a man should repent have marry a good girl whom he 
 love . " 

 " you do not ? answer I candidly . do you ever meet a man who repent 
 have marry ? " 

 " of course I have ; very often . " 

 " well , think again , and answer as candidly . do you ever meet a man who 
 repent not have marry ? " 

 the Parson muse , and be silent . 

 " Sir , " say Kenelm , " your reticence prove your honesty , and I respect 
 it . " so say , he bound off , and leave the Parson cry out wildly , 
 " but - but - " 



 CHAPTER XXI . 

 MR . SAUNDERSON and Kenelm sit in the arbour : the former sip his grog 
 and smoke his pipe ; the latter look forth into the summer night 
 sky with an earnest yet abstract gaze , as if he be try to count 
 the star in the Milky Way . 

 " ha ! " say Mr. Saunderson , who be conclude an argument ; " you see it 
 now , do not   you ? " 

 " I ? not a bit of it . you tell I that your grandfather be a farmer , 
 and your father be a farmer , and that you have be a farmer for thirty 
 year ; and from these premise you deduce the illogical and irrational 
 conclusion that therefore your son must be a farmer . " 

 " young man , you may think yourself very know 'cause you have be at 
 the ' varsity , and sweep away a headful of book - learning . " 

 " stop , " quoth Kenelm . " you grant that a university be learn . " 

 " well , I suppose so . " 

 " but how could it be learn if those who quit it bring the 
 learning away ? we leave it all behind we in the care of the tutor . but 
 I know what you be go to say , - that it be not because I have read 
 more book than you have that I be to give myself air and pretend to 
 have more knowledge of life than a man of your year and experience . 
 agree , as a general rule . but do not every doctor , however wise and 
 skilful , prefer take another doctor 's opinion about himself , even 
 though that other doctor have just start in practice ? and see that 
 doctor , take they as a body , be monstrous clever fellow , be not 
 the example they set we worth follow ? do it not prove that no man , 
 however wise , be a good judge of his own case ? now , your son 's case 
 be really your case : you see it through the medium of your liking and 
 disliking ; and insist upon force a square peg into a round hole , 
 because in a round hole you , be a round peg , feel tight and 
 comfortable . now I call that irrational . " 

 " I do not   see why my son have any right to fancy himself a square peg , " 
 say the farmer , doggedly , " when his father and his grandfather and his 
 great - grandfather have be round peg ; and it be agin ' nature for 
 any creature not to take after its own kind . a dog be a pointer or 
 a sheep - dog accord as its forebear be pointer or sheep - dog . 
 there , " cry the farmer , triumphantly , shake the ash out of his 
 pipe . " I think I have pose you , young master ! " 

 " no ; for you have take it for grant that the breed have not be 
 cross . but suppose that a sheep - dog have marry a pointer , be you 
 sure that his son will not be more of a pointer than a sheep - dog ? " 

 Mr. Saunderson arrest himself in the task of refill his pipe , and 
 scratch his head . 

 " you see , " continue Kenelm , " that you have cross the breed . you 
 marry a tradesman 's daughter , and I dare say her grandfather and 
 great - grandfather be tradesman too . now , most son take after their 
 mother , and therefore Mr. Saunderson junior take after his kind on the 
 distaff side , and come into the world a square peg , which can only be 
 tight and comfortable in a square hole . it be no use arguing , farmer : 
 your boy must go to his uncle ; and there be an end of the matter . " 

 " by gole ! " say the farmer , " you seem to think you can talk I out of 
 my sens . " 

 " no ; but I think if you have your own way you would talk your son into 
 the workhouse . " 

 " what ! by stick to the land like his father before he ? let a man 
 stick by the land , and the land will stick by he . " 

 " let a man stick in the mud , and the mud will stick to he . you put 
 your heart in your farm , and your son would only put his foot into it . 
 courage ! do not   you see that Time be a whirligig , and all thing come 
 round ? every day somebody leave the land and go off into trade . by 
 and by he grow rich , and then his great desire be to get back to 
 the land again . he leave it the son of a farmer : he return to it as a 
 squire . your son , when he get to be fifty , will invest his saving in 
 acre , and have tenant of his own . Lord , how he will lay down the law 
 to they ! I would not advise you to take a farm under he . " 

 " catch I at it ! " say the farmer . " he would turn all the content of 
 the ' pothecary 's shop into my fallow , and call it ' progress . ' " 

 " let he physic the fallow when he have farm of his own : keep yours out 
 of his chemical clutch . come , I shall tell he to pack up and be off 
 to his uncle 's next week ? " 

 " well , well , " say the farmer , in a resign tone : " a wilful man must 
 e'en have his way . " 

 " and the good thing a sensible man can do be not to cross it . Mr. 
 Saunderson , give I your honest hand . you be one of those man who put 
 the son of good father in mind of their own ; and I think of mine when 
 I say ' God bless you ! ' " 

 quit the farmer , Kenelm re - enter the house , and seek Mr. 
 Saunderson junior in his own room . he find that young gentleman still 
 up , and read an eloquent tract on the Emancipation of the Human Race 
 from all Tyrannical Control , - Political , Social , Ecclesiastical , and 
 Domestic . 

 the lad look up sulkily , and say , on encounter Kenelm 's 
 melancholic visage , " ah ! I see you have talk with the old governor , 
 and he will not hear of it . " 

 " in the first place , " answer Kenelm , ' since you value yourself on 
 a superior education , allow I to advise you to study the English 
 language , as the form of it be maintain by the eld author , whom , 
 in spite of an Age of Progress , man of superior education esteem . no one 
 who have go through that study ; no one , indeed , who have study the Ten 
 Commandments in the vernacular , - commit the mistake of suppose that 
 ' the old governor ' be a synonymous expression for ' father . ' in the 
 second place , since you pretend to the superior enlightenment which 
 result from a superior education , learn to know well your own self 
 before you set up as a teacher of mankind . excuse the liberty I take , 
 as your sincere well - wisher , when I tell you that you be at present 
 a conceited fool , - in short , that which make one boy call another an 
 ' ass . ' but when one have a poor head he may redeem the average balance of 
 humanity by increase the wealth of the heart . try and increase your . 
 your father consent to your choice of your lot at the sacrifice of 
 all his own inclination . this be a sore trial to a father 's pride , a 
 father 's affection ; and few father make such sacrifice with a good 
 grace . I have thus keep my promise to you , and enforce your wish on 
 Mr. Saunderson 's judgment , because I be sure you would have be a very 
 bad farmer . it now remain for you to show that you can be a very good 
 tradesman . you be bind in honour to I and to your father to try your 
 good to be so ; and meanwhile leave the task of upset the world 
 to those who have no shop in it , which would go crash in the general 
 tumble . and so good - night to you . " 

 to these admonitory word , sacro digna silentio , Saunderson junior 
 listen with a dropping jaw and fascinated star eye . he feel like 
 an infant to whom the nurse have give a hasty shake , and who be too 
 stupefy by that operation to know whether he be hurt or not . 

 a minute after Kenelm have quit the room he reappear at the door , 
 and say in a conciliatory whisper , " do not   take it to heart that I 
 call you a conceited fool and an ass . these term be no doubt just as 
 applicable to myself . but there be a more conceited fool and a great 
 ass than either of we ; and that be the Age in which we have the 
 misfortune to be bear , - an Age of Progress , Mr. Saunderson , junior ! - an 
 Age of Prigs . " 




 BOOK III . 



 CHAPTER I. 

 if there be a woman in the world who might be form and fit 
 to reconcile Kenelm Chillingly to the sweet trouble of love and the 
 pleasant bickering of wed life , one might reasonably suppose that 
 that woman could be find in Cecilia Travers . an only daughter and 
 lose her mother in childhood , she have be raise to the mistress - ship 
 of a household at an age in which most girl be still put their 
 doll to bed ; and thus have early acquire that sense of responsibility , 
 accompany with the habit of self - reliance , which seldom fail to give 
 a certain nobility to character ; though almost as often , in the case of 
 woman , it steal away the tender gentleness which constitute the charm 
 of their sex . 

 it have not do so in the instance of Cecilia Travers , because she be 
 so womanlike that even the exercise of power could not make she manlike . 
 there be in the depth of her nature such an instinct of sweetness that 
 wherever her mind toil and wander it gather and hoard honey . 

 she have one advantage over most girl in the same rank of life , - she 
 have not be teach to fritter away such capacity for culture as 
 Providence give she in the sterile nothingness which be call 
 feminine accomplishment . she do not paint figure out of draw 
 in meagre water - colour ; she have not devote year of her life to the 
 inflicting on polite audience the boredom of italian bravura , which 
 they could hear well sing by a third - rate professional singer in 
 a metropolitan music - hall . I be afraid she have no other female 
 accomplishment than those by which the sempstress or embroideress earn 
 her daily bread . that sort of work she love , and she do it deftly . 

 but if she have not be profitlessly plague by master , Cecilia Travers 
 have be singularly favour by her father 's choice of a teacher : no 
 great merit in he either . he have a prejudice against professional 
 governess , and it chance that among his own family connection be a 
 certain Mrs. Campion , a lady of some literary distinction , whose husband 
 have hold a high situation in one of our public office , and living , much 
 to his satisfaction , up to a very handsome income , have die , much to the 
 astonishment of other , without leave a farthing behind he . 

 fortunately , there be no child to provide for . a small government 
 pension be allot to the widow ; and as her husband 's house have be 
 make by her one of the pleasantest in London , she be popular enough to 
 be invite by numerous friend to their country seat ; among other , by 
 Mr. Travers . she come intend to stay a fortnight . at the end of that 
 time she have grow so attach to Cecilia , and Cecilia to she , and her 
 presence have become so pleasant and so useful to her host , that 
 the Squire entreat she to stay and undertake the education of his 
 daughter . Mrs. Campion , after some hesitation , gratefully consent ; and 
 thus Cecilia , from the age of eight to her present age of nineteen , have 
 the inestimable advantage of live in constant companionship with a 
 woman of richly cultivate mind , accustom to hear the good criticism 
 on the good book , and add to no small accomplishment in literature 
 the refinement of manner and that sort of prudent judgment which result 
 from habitual intercourse with an intellectual and gracefully world - wise 
 circle of society : so that Cecilia herself , without be at all blue or 
 pedantic , become one of those rare young woman with whom a well - educate 
 man can converse on equal term ; from whom he gain as much as he can 
 impart to she ; while a man who , not care much about book , be still 
 gentleman enough to value good breeding , feel a relief in exchange the 
 form of his native language without the shock of hear that a bishop 
 be " a swell " or a croquet - party " awfully jolly . " 

 in a word , Cecilia be one of those woman whom Heaven form for man 's 
 helpmate ; who , if he be bear to rank and wealth , would , as his 
 partner , reflect on they a new dignity , and add to their enjoyment by 
 bring forth their duty ; who , not less if the husband she choose be 
 poor and struggling , would encourage , sustain , and soothe he , take she 
 own share of his burden , and temper the bitterness of life with the 
 all - recompense sweetness of her smile . 

 little , indeed , as yet have she ever think of love or of lover . she 
 have not even form to herself any of those ideal which float before 
 the eye of most girl when they enter their teen . but of two thing 
 she feel inly convince : first , that she could never we d where she do 
 not love ; and secondly , that where she do love it would be for life . 

 and now I close this sketch with a picture of the girl herself . she have 
 just come into her room from inspect the preparation for the evening 
 entertainment which her father be to give to his tenant and rural 
 neighbour . 

 she have throw aside her straw hat , and put down the large basket which 
 she have empty of flower . she pause before the glass , smooth back 
 the ruffle band of her hair , - hair of a dark , soft chestnut , silky 
 and luxuriant , - never pollute , and never , so long as she live , to be 
 pollute by auricomous cosmetic , far from that delicate darkness , every 
 tint of the colour traditionally dedicated to the lock of Judas . 

 her complexion , usually of that soft bloom which incline to paleness , 
 be now heighten into glow by exercise and sunlight . the feature be 
 small and feminine ; the eye dark with long lash ; the mouth singularly 
 beautiful , with a dimple on either side , and part now in a half - smile 
 at some pleasant recollection , give a glimpse of small tooth 
 glistening as pearl . but the peculiar charm of her face be in an 
 expression of serene happiness , that sort of happiness which seem as if 
 it have never be interrupt by a sorrow , have never be trouble by a 
 sin , - that holy kind of happiness which belong to innocence , the light 
 reflect from a heart and conscience alike at peace . 



 CHAPTER II . 

 it be a lovely summer evening for the squire 's rural entertainment . Mr. 
 Travers have some guest stay with he : they have din early for 
 the occasion , and be now group with their host a little before six 
 o'clock on the lawn . the house be of irregular architecture , alter 
 or add to at various period from the reign of Elizabeth to that of 
 Victoria : at one end , the old part , a gable with mullion window ; 
 at the other , the new part , a flat - roof wing , with modern sash 
 opening to the ground , the intermediate part much hide by a veranda 
 cover with creeper in full bloom . the lawn be a spacious table - land 
 face the west , and back by a green and gentle hill , crown with 
 the ruin of an ancient priory . on one side of the lawn stretch a 
 flower - garden and pleasure - ground , originally plan by Repton ; on the 
 opposite angle of the sward be place two large marquee , - one for 
 dancing , the other for supper . towards the south the view be leave open , 
 and command the prospect of an old English park , not of the stateliest 
 character ; not intersect with ancient avenue , nor clothe 
 with profitless fern as lair for deer : but the park of a careful 
 agriculturist , unite profit with show , the sward duly drain and 
 nourish , fit to fatten bullock in an incredibly short time , and 
 somewhat spoilt to the eye by subdivision of wire fence . Mr. Travers 
 be renowned for skilful husbandry , and the general management of 
 land to the good advantage . he have come into the estate while still in 
 childhood , and thus enjoy the accumulation of a long minority . he have 
 enter the Guards at the age of eighteen , and have more command of 
 money than most of his contemporary , though they might be of high 
 rank and the son of rich man , he have be much court and much 
 plunder . at the age of twenty - five he find himself one of the leader 
 of fashion , renowne chiefly for reckless daring where - ever honour could 
 be pluck out of the nettle danger : a steeple - chaser , whose exploit 
 make a quiet man 's hair stand on end ; a rider across country , take 
 leap which a more cautious huntsman carefully avoid . know at Paris 
 as well as in London , he have be admire by lady whose smile have 
 cost he duel , the mark of which still remain in glorious scar 
 on his person . no man ever seem more likely to come to dire 
 grief before attain the age of thirty , for at twenty - seven all the 
 accumulation of his minority be go ; and his estate , which , when he 
 come of age , be scarcely three thousand a year , but entirely at his own 
 disposal , be mortgage up to its eye . 

 his friend begin to shake their head and call he " poor fellow ; " but , 
 with all his wild fault , Leopold Travers have be wholly pure from the 
 two vice out of which a man do not often redeem himself . he have never 
 drunk and he have never gamble . his nerve be not break , his brain 
 be not besotte . there be plenty of health in he yet , mind and body . 
 at the critical period of his life he marry for love , and his choice 
 be a most felicitous one . the lady have no fortune ; but though handsome 
 and high - bear , she have no taste for extravagance , and no desire for 
 other society than that of the man she love . so when he say , " let we 
 settle in the country and try our good to live on a few hundred , lie 
 by , and keep the old place out of the market , " she consent with a 
 joyful heart : and marvel it be to all how this wild Leopold Travers 
 do settle down ; do take to cultivate his home farm with his man from 
 sunrise to sunset like a common tenant - farmer ; do contrive to pay the 
 interest on the mortgage , and keep his head above water . after some 
 year of pupilage in this school of thrift , during which his habit 
 become form and his whole character brace , Leopold Travers suddenly 
 find himself again rich , through the wife whom he have so prudently 
 married without other dower than her love and her virtue . her only 
 brother , Lord Eagleton , a Scotch peer , have be engage in marriage to a 
 young lady , consider to be a rare prize in the lottery of wedlock . 
 the marriage be break off under very disastrous circumstance ; but the 
 young lord , good - looking and agreeable , be naturally expect to seek 
 speedy consolation in some other alliance . nevertheless he do not 
 do so : he become a confirmed invalid , and die single , leave to his 
 sister all in his power to save from the distant kinsman who succeed 
 to his land and title , - a goodly sum , which not only suffice to pay 
 off the mortgage on Neesdale Park but bestow on its owner a surplus 
 which the practical knowledge of country life that he have acquire 
 enable he to devote with extraordinary profit to the general 
 improvement of his estate . he replace tumble - down old farm building 
 with new construction on the most approve principle ; buy or 
 pension off certain slovenly incompetent tenant ; throw sundry petty 
 holding into large farm suit to the building he construct ; 
 purchase here and there small bit of land , commodious to the farm 
 they adjoin , and complete the integrity of his ring - fence ; stub 
 up profitless wood which diminish the value of neighbouring arable 
 by obstruct sun and air and harbour legion of rabbit ; and 
 then , seek tenant of enterprise and capital , more than double his 
 original yearly rental , and perhaps more than triple the market value 
 of his property . simultaneously with this acquisition of fortune , he 
 emerge from the inhospitable and unsocial obscurity which his previous 
 poverty have compel , take an active part in county business , prove 
 himself an excellent speaker at public meeting , subscribe liberally to 
 the hunt , and occasionally join in it , - a less bold but a wise rider 
 than of yore . in short , as Themistocles boast that he could make a 
 small state great , so Leopold Travers might boast with equal truth , 
 that , by his energy , his judgment , and the weight of his personal 
 character , he have make the owner of a property which have be at 
 his accession to it of third - rate rank in the county a personage so 
 considerable that no knight of the shire against whom he declare could 
 have be elect , and if he have determine to stand himself he would 
 have be choose free of expense . 

 but he say , on be solicit to become a candidate , " when a man once 
 give himself up to the care and improvement of a land estate , he 
 have no time and no heart for anything else . an estate be an income or 
 a kingdom , accord as the owner choose to take it . I take it as a 
 kingdom , and I can not be roi faineant , with a steward for maire du 
 palais . a king do not go into the House of Commons . " 

 three year after this rise in the social ladder , Mrs. Travers be 
 seize with congestion of the lung follow by pleurisy , and die after 
 less than a week 's illness . leopold never wholly recover her loss . 
 though still young and always handsome , the idea of another wife , the 
 love of another woman , be notion which he dismiss from his , mind 
 with a quiet scorn . he be too masculine a creature to parade grief . 
 for some week , indeed , he shut himself up in his own room , so rigidly 
 seclude that he would not see even his daughter . but one morning he 
 appear in his field as usual , and from that day resume his old 
 habit , and gradually renew that cordial interchange of hospitality 
 which have popularly distinguish he since his accession to wealth . 
 still people feel that the man be change ; he be more taciturn , 
 more grave : if always just in his dealing , he take the hard side of 
 justice , where in his wife 's time he have take the gentler . perhaps , to 
 a man of strong will , the habitual intercourse with an amiable woman be 
 essential for those occasion in which will well prove the fineness of 
 its temper by the facility with which it can be bent . 

 it may be say that Leopold Travers might have find such intercourse in 
 the intimate companionship of his own daughter . but she be a mere child 
 when his wife die , and she grow up to womanhood too insensibly for 
 he to note the change . besides , where a man have find a wife his 
 all - in - all , a daughter can never supply her place . the very reverence 
 due to child preclude unrestrained confidence ; and there be not 
 that sense of permanent fellowship in a daughter which a man have in a 
 wife , - any day a stranger may appear and carry she off from he . at all 
 event Leopold do not own in Cecilia the soften influence to 
 which he have yield in her mother . he be fond of she , proud of she , 
 indulgent to she ; but the indulgence have its set limit . whatever she 
 ask solely for herself he grant ; whatever she wish for matter 
 under feminine control - the domestic household , the parish school , the 
 alms - receive poor - obtain his gentle consideration . but when she 
 have be solicit by some offend out - of - door dependant or some petty 
 default tenant to use her good office in favour of the culprit , Mr. 
 Travers check her interference by a firm " no , " though utter in a 
 mild accent , and accompany with a masculine aphorism to the effect 
 that " there would be no such thing as strict justice and discipline 
 order in the world if a man yield to a woman 's pleading in any matter 
 of business between man and man . " from this it will be see that 
 Mr. Lethbridge have overrate the value of Cecilia 's alliance in the 
 negotiation respect Mrs. Bawtrey 's premium and shop . 



 CHAPTER III . 

 if , have just peruse what have thus be write on the biographical 
 antecedent and mental characteristic of Leopold Travers , you , my dear 
 reader , be to be personally present to that gentleman as he now 
 stand , the central figure of the group gather round he , on his 
 terrace , you would probably be surprised , - nay , I have no doubt you 
 would say to yourself , " not at all the sort of man I expect . " in that 
 slender form , somewhat below the middle height ; in that fair countenance 
 which still , at the age of forty - eight , retain a delicacy of feature 
 and of colour which be of almost womanlike beauty , and , from the 
 quiet placidity of its expression , convey at first glance the notion of 
 almost womanlike mildness , - it would be difficult to recognize a man who 
 in youth have be renowned for reckless daring , in mature year more 
 honourably distinguish for steadfast prudence and determined purpose , 
 and who , alike in fault or in merit , be as emphatically masculine as 
 a biped in trouser can possibly be . 

 Mr. Travers be listen to a young man of about two and twenty , the 
 eld son of the rich nobleman of the county , and who intend to 
 start for the representation of the shire at the next general election , 
 which be close at hand . the Hon . George Belvoir be tall , incline to be 
 stout , and will look well on the husting . he have have those pain take 
 with his education which an english peer generally do take with the 
 son intend to succeed to the representation of an honourable name and 
 the responsibility of high station . if eld son do not often make 
 as great a figure in the world as their young brother , it be not 
 because their mind be less cultivate , but because they have less 
 motive power for action . George Belvoir be well read , especially 
 in that sort of reading which befit a future senator , - history , 
 statistic , political economy , so far as that dismal science be 
 compatible with the agricultural interest . he be also well - principle , 
 have a strong sense of discipline and duty , be prepare in politic 
 firmly to uphold as right whatever be propose by his own party , and 
 to reject as wrong whatever be propose by the other . at present he be 
 rather loud and noisy in the assertion of his opinion , - young man fresh 
 from the University generally be . it be the secret wish of Mr. Travers 
 that George Belvoir should become his son - in - law ; less because of his 
 rank and wealth   though such advantage be not of a nature to be 
 despise by a practical man like Leopold Travers   than on account of 
 those quality in his personal character which be likely to render 
 he an excellent husband . 

 seat on wire bench , just without the veranda , but shade by its 
 fragrant festoon , be Mrs. Campion and three lady , the wife of 
 neighbouring squire . Cecilia stand a little apart from they , bend 
 over a long - back skye terrier , whom she be teach to stand on his 
 hind leg . 

 but see , the company be arrive ! how suddenly that green space , ten 
 minute ago so solitary , have become animate and populous ! 

 indeed the park now present a very lively appearance : van , cart , and 
 farmer ' chaise be see in crowded procession along the wind road ; 
 foot - passenger be swarm towards the house in all direction . the 
 herd and flock in the various enclosure stop graze to stare at 
 the unwonted invader of their pasture : yet the orderly nature of their 
 host impart a respect for order to his ruder visitor ; not even a 
 turbulent boy attempt to scale the fence , or creep through their 
 wire ; all thread the narrow turnstile which give egress from one 
 subdivision of the sward to another . 

 Mr. Travers turn to George Belvoir : " I see old farmer Steen 's 
 yellow gig . mind how you talk to he , George . he be full of whim and 
 crotchet , and if you once brush his feather the wrong way he will be 
 as vindictive as a parrot . but he be the man who must second you at 
 the nomination . no other tenant - farmer carry the same weight with his 
 class . " 

 " I suppose , " say George , " that if Mr. Steen be the good man to second 
 I at the husting , he be a good speaker ? " 

 " a good speaker ? in one sense he be . he never say a word too much . the 
 last time he second the nomination of the man you be to succeed , this 
 be his speech : ' Brother Electors , for twenty year I have be one of 
 the judge at our county cattle - show . I know one animal from another . 
 look at the specimen before we to - day none of they be as good 
 of their kind as I have   see elsewhere . but if you choose Sir John Hogg 
 you will not get the wrong sow by the ear ! ' " 

 " at least , " say George , after a laugh at this sample of eloquence 
 unadorned , " Mr. Steen do not err on the side of flattery in his 
 commendation of a candidate . but what make he such an authority with 
 the farmer ? be he a first - rate agriculturist ? " 

 " in thrift , yes ! - in spirit , no ! he say that all expensive experiment 
 should be leave to gentleman farmer . he be an authority with other 
 tenant : firstly , because he be a very keen censor of their landlord ; 
 secondly , because he hold himself thoroughly independent of his own ; 
 thirdly , because he be suppose to have study the political bearing 
 of question that affect the land interest , and have more than once 
 be summon to give his opinion on such subject to Committees of both 
 Houses of Parliament . here he come . Observe , when I leave you to talk 
 to he : firstly , that you confess utter ignorance of practical farming ; 
 nothing enrage he like the presumption of a gentleman farmer like 
 myself : secondly , that you ask his opinion on the publication of 
 Agricultural Statistics , just modestly intimate that you , as at 
 present advise , think that inquisitorial research into a man 's 
 business involve principle oppose to the British Constitution . and on 
 all that he may say as to the shortcoming of landlord in general , and 
 of your father in particular , make no reply , but listen with an air of 
 melancholy conviction . how do you do , Mr. Steen , and how be the mistress ? 
 why have you not bring she with you ? " 

 " my good woman be in the straw again , squire . who be that youngster ? " 

 " Hist ! let I introduce Mr. Belvoir . " 

 Mr. Belvoir offer his hand . 

 " no , sir ! " vociferate Steen , put both his own hand behind he . " no 
 offence , young gentleman . but I do not   give my hand at first sight to 
 a man who want to shake a vote out of it . not that I know anything 
 against you . but , if you be a farmer 's friend rabbit be not , and my 
 lord your father be a great one for rabbit . " 

 " indeed you be mistaken there ! " cry George , with vehement 
 earnestness . Mr. Travers give he a nudge , as much as to say , " hold your 
 tongue . " George understand the hint , and be carry off meekly by Mr. 
 Steen down the solitude of the plantation . 

 the guest now arrive fast and thick . they consist chiefly not only 
 of Mr. Travers 's tenant , but of farmer and their family within 
 the range of eight or ten mile from the Park , with a few of the 
 neighbouring gentry and clergy . 

 it be not a supper intend to include the labour class ; for Mr. 
 Travers have an especial dislike to the custom of exhibit peasant 
 at feeding - time , as if they be so many tamed animal of an inferior 
 specie . when he entertain work - people , he make they comfortable in 
 their own way ; and peasant feel more comfortable when not invite to be 
 star out of countenance . 

 " well , Lethbridge , " say Mr. Travers , " where be the young gladiator you 
 promise to bring ? " 

 " I do bring he , and he be by my side not a minute ago . he have 
 suddenly give I the slip : ' abiit , evasit , erupit . ' I be look round 
 for he in vain when you accost I . " 

 " I hope he have not see some guest of mine whom he want to fight . " 

 " I hope not , " answer the Parson , doubtfully . " he be a strange fellow . 
 but I think you will be pleased with he ; that be , if he can be find . 
 oh , Mr. Saunderson , how do you do ? have you see your visitor ? " 

 " no , sir , I have just come . my mistress , Squire , and my three girl ; and 
 this be my son . " 

 " a hearty welcome to all , " say the graceful Squire ;   turn to 
 Saunderson junior , " I suppose you be fond of dancing . get yourself a 
 partner . we may as well open the ball . " 

 " thank you , sir , but I never dance , " say Saunderson junior , with an air 
 of austere superiority to an amusement which the March of Intellect have 
 leave behind . 

 " then you will have less to regret when you be grow old . but the band 
 be strike up ; we must adjourn to the marquee . George "   Mr. Belvoir , 
 escape from Mr. Steen , have just make his appearance , " will you give 
 your arm to Cecilia , to whom I think you be engage for the first 
 quadrille ? " 

 " I hope , " say George to Cecilia , as they walk towards the marquee , 
 " that Mr. Steen be not an average speciman of the elector I shall have 
 to canvass . whether he have be bring up to honour his own father and 
 mother I can not   pretend to say , but he seem bent upon teach I not 
 to honour mine . have take away my father 's moral character upon the 
 unfounded allegation that he love rabbit well than mankind , he then 
 assail my innocent mother on the score of religion , and inquire when 
 she be go over to the Church of Rome , base that inquiry on the 
 assertion that she have take away her custom from a protestant grocer 
 and confer it on a Papist . " 

 " those be favourable sign , Mr. Belvoir . Mr. Steen always preface a 
 kindness by a great deal of incivility . I ask he once to lend I a 
 pony , my own being suddenly take lame , and he seize that opportunity 
 to tell I that my father be an impostor in pretend to be a judge of 
 cattle ; that he be a tyrant , screw his tenant in order to indulge 
 extravagant habit of hospitality ; and imply that it would be a 
 great mercy if we do not live to apply to he , not for a pony , but for 
 parochial relief . I go away indignant . but he send I the pony . I be 
 sure he will give you his vote . " 

 " meanwhile , " say George , with a timid attempt at gallantry , as they now 
 commence the quadrille , " I take encouragement from the belief that I 
 have the good wish of Miss Travers . if lady have vote , as Mr. Mill 
 recommend , why , then - " 

 " why , then , I should vote as Papa do , " say Miss Travers , simply . " and 
 if woman have vote , I suspect there would be very little peace in any 
 household where they do not vote as the man at the head of it wish 
 they . " 

 " but I believe , after all , " say the aspirant to Parliament , seriously , 
 " that the advocate for female suffrage would limit it to woman 
 independent of masculine control , widow and spinster vote in right 
 of their own independent tenement . " 

 " in that case , " say Cecilia , " I suppose they would still generally go 
 by the opinion of some man they rely on , or make a very silly choice 
 if they do not . " 

 " you underrate the good sense of your sex . " 

 " I hope not . do you underrate the good sense of your , if , in far more 
 than half the thing appertain to daily life , the wise man say , 
 ' well leave they to the woman ' ? but you be forget the figure , 
  cavalier seul . " 

 " by the way , " say George , in another interval of the dance , " do 
 you know a Mr. Chillingly , the son of Sir Peter , of Exmundham , in 
 Westshire ? " 

 " no ; why do you ask ? " 

 " because I think I catch a glimpse of his face : it be just as Mr. 
 Steen be bear I away down that plantation . from what you say , I 
 must suppose I be mistaken . " 

 " chillingly ! but surely some person be talk yesterday at dinner 
 about a young gentleman of that name as be likely to stand for 
 Westshire at the next election , but who have make a very unpopular and 
 eccentric speech on the occasion of his come of age . " 

 " the same man : I be at college with he , - a very singular character . he 
 be think clever ; win a prize or two ; take a good degree : but it be 
 generally say that he would have deserve a much high one if some of 
 his paper have not contain covert jest either on the subject or the 
 examiner . it be a dangerous thing to set up as a humourist in practical 
 life , - especially public life . they say Mr. Pitt have naturally a great 
 deal of wit and humour , but he wisely suppress any evidence of those 
 quality in his parliamentary speech . just like Chillingly , to turn 
 into ridicule the important event of festivity in honour of his come 
 of age , - an occasion that can never occur again in the whole course of 
 his life . " 

 " it be bad taste , " say Cecilia , " if intentional . but perhaps he be 
 misunderstood , or take by surprise . " 

 " Misunderstood , - possibly ; but take by surprise , - no . the cool 
 fellow I ever meet . not that I have meet he very often . latterly , indeed , 
 at Cambridge he live much alone . it be say that he read hard . I doubt 
 that ; for my room be just over his , and I know that he be much 
 more frequently out of door than in . he ramble a good deal about the 
 country on foot . I have see he in by - lane a dozen mile distant from 
 the town when I have be rid back from the bunt . he be fond of the 
 water , and pull a mighty strong oar , but decline to belong to our 
 University crew ; yet if ever there be a fight between undergraduate 
 and bargeman , he be sure to be in the midst of it . yes , a very great 
 oddity indeed , full of contradiction , for a milder , quieter fellow in 
 general intercourse you could not see ; and as for the jest of which 
 he be accuse in his examination paper , his very face should 
 have acquit he of the charge before any impartial jury of his 
 countryman . " 

 " you sketch quite an interesting picture of he , " say Cecilia . " I wish 
 we do know he : he would be worth see . " 

 " and , once see , you would not easily forget he , - a dark , handsome 
 face , with large melancholy eye , and with one of those spare slender 
 figure which enable a man to disguise his strength , as a fraudulent 
 billiard - player disguise his play . " 

 the dance have cease during this conversation , and the speaker be now 
 walk slowly to and fro the lawn amid the general crowd . 

 " how well your father play the part of host to these rural folk ! " say 
 George , with a secret envy . " do observe how quietly he put that shy 
 young farmer at his ease , and now how kindly he deposit that lame old 
 lady on the bench , and place the stool under her foot . what a canvasser 
 he would be ! and how young he still look , and how monstrous handsome ! " 

 this last compliment be utter as Travers , have make the old 
 lady comfortable , have join the three Miss Saundersons , divide his 
 pleasant smile equally between they ; and seemingly unconscious of the 
 admiring glance which many another rural beauty direct towards he 
 as he pass along . about the man there be a certain indescribable 
 elegance , a natural suavity free from all that affectation , whether 
 of forced heartiness or condescending civility , which too often 
 characterize the well - mean effort of provincial magnate to 
 accommodate themselves to person of inferior station and breeding . it 
 be a great advantage to a man to have pass his early youth in that 
 most equal and most polished of all democracy , - the good society of 
 large capital . and to such acquire advantage Leopold Travers add the 
 inborn quality that please . 

 later in the evening Travers , again accost Mr. Lethbridge , say , " I 
 have be talk much to the Saundersons about that young man who do 
 we the inestimable service of punish your ferocious parishioner , 
 Tom Bowles ; and all I hear so confirm the interest your own 
 account inspire I with that I should really like much to make his 
 acquaintance . have not he turn up yet ? " 

 " no ; I fear he must have go . but in that case I hope you will take 
 his generous desire to serve my poor basket - maker into benevolent 
 consideration . " 

 " do not press I ; I feel so reluctant to refuse any request of your . 
 but I have my own theory as to the management of an estate , and my 
 system do not allow of favour . I should wish to explain that to the 
 young stranger himself ; for I hold courage in such honour that I do not 
 like a brave man to leave these part with an impression that Leopold 
 Travers be an ungracious churl . however , he may not have go . I will 
 go and look for he myself . just tell Cecilia that she have dance enough 
 with the gentry , and that I have tell Farmer Turby 's son , a fine young 
 fellow and a capital rider across country , that I expect he to show my 
 daughter that he can dance as well as he rid . " 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 quitting Mr. Lethbridge , Travers turn with quick step towards the more 
 solitary part of the ground . he do not find the object of his search 
 in the walk of the plantation ; and , on take the circuit of his 
 demesne , wind his way back towards the lawn through a sequester rocky 
 hollow in the rear of the marquee , which have be devote to a fernery . 
 here he come to a sudden pause ; for , seat a few yard before he on 
 a gray crag , and the moonlight full on his face , he see a solitary man , 
 look upwards with a still and mournful gaze , evidently absorb in 
 abstract contemplation . 

 recall the description of the stranger which he have hear from Mr. 
 Lethbridge and the saunderson , Mr. Travers feel sure that he have come 
 on he at last . he approach gently ; and , be much conceal by the 
 tall fern , Kenelm   for that itinerant it be   do not see he advance , 
 until he feel a hand on his shoulder , and , turn round , beheld a 
 win smile and hear a pleasant voice . 

 " I think I be not mistaken , " say Leopold Travers , " in assume you to 
 be the gentleman whom Mr. Lethbridge promise to introduce to I , and 
 who be stay with my tenant , Mr. Saunderson ? " 

 Kenelm rise and bow . traver see at once that it be the bow of a man 
 in his own world , and not in keep with the Sunday costume of a petty 
 farmer . " Nay , " say he , " let we talk seat ; " and place himself on the 
 crag , he make room for Kenelm beside he . 

 " in the first place , " resume Travers , " I must thank you for have 
 do a public service in put down the brute force which have long 
 tyrannize over the neighbourhood . often in my young day I have feel 
 the disadvantage of height and sinew , whenever it would have be a 
 great convenience to terminate dispute or chastise insolence by a 
 resort to man 's primitive weapon ; but I never more lament my physical 
 inferiority than on certain occasion when I would have give my ear to 
 be able to thrash Tom Bowles myself . it have be as great a disgrace to 
 my estate that that bully should so long have infest it as it be 
 to the King of Italy not to be able with all his army to put down a 
 brigand in Calabria . " 

 " Pardon I , Mr. Travers , but I be one of those rare person who do not 
 like to hear ill of their friend . Mr. Thomas Bowles be a particular 
 friend of mine . " 

 " eh ! " cry Travers , aghast . " ' friend ! ' you be joke . 

 " you would not accuse I of joke if you know I well . but surely you 
 have feel that there be few friend one like more cordially , and ought 
 to respect more heedfully , than the enemy with whom one have just make it 
 up . " 

 " you say well , and I accept the rebuke , " say Travers , more and more 
 surprised . " and I certainly have less right to abuse Mr. Bowles than 
 you have , since I have not the courage to fight he . to turn to another 
 subject less provocative . Mr. Lethbridge have tell I of your amiable 
 desire to serve two of his young parishioner , will Somers and Jessie 
 Wiles , and of your generous offer to pay the money Mrs. Bawtrey demand 
 for the transfer of her lease . to that negotiation my consent be 
 necessary , and that consent I can not give . shall I tell you why ? " 

 " pray do . your reason may admit of argument . " 

 " every reason admit of argument , " say Mr. Travers , amuse at the calm 
 assurance of a youthful stranger in anticipate argument with a skilful 
 proprietor on the management of his own property . " I do not , however , 
 tell you my reason for the sake of argument , but in vindication of my 
 seeming want of courtesy towards yourself . I have have a very hard and a 
 very difficult task to perform in bring the rental of my estate up 
 to its proper value . in do so , I have be compel to adopt one 
 uniform system , equally apply to my large and my pettiest holding . 
 that system consist in secure the good and safe tenant I can , 
 at the rent compute by a valuer in whom I have confidence . to this 
 system , universally adopt on my estate , though it incur much 
 unpopularity at first , I have at length succeed in reconcile the 
 public opinion of my neighbourhood . People begin by say I be 
 hard ; they now acknowledge I be just . if I once give way to favour or 
 sentiment , I unhinge my whole system . every day I be subject to move 
 solicitation . Lord Twostars , a keen politician , beg I to give a 
 vacant farm to a tenant because he be an excellent canvasser , and have 
 always vote straight with the party . Mrs. Fourstars , a most benevolent 
 woman , entreat I not to dismiss another tenant , because he be in 
 distressed circumstance and have a large family ; very good reason 
 perhaps for my excuse he an arrear , or allow he a retire 
 pension , but the bad reason in the world for let he continue to 
 ruin himself and my land . now , Mrs. Bawtrey have a small holding on lease 
 at the inadequate rent of l8 a year . she ask L45 for its transfer , but 
 she can not   transfer the lease without my consent ; and I can get L12 a 
 year as a moderate rental from a large choice of competent tenant . it 
 will well answer I to pay she the L45 myself , which I have no doubt 
 the incoming tenant would pay I back , at least in part ; and if he do 
 not , the additional rent would be good interest for my expenditure . 
 now , you happen to take a sentimental interest , as you pass through the 
 village , in the love of a needy cripple whose utmost industry have but 
 serve to save himself from parish relief , and a giddy girl without a 
 sixpence , and you ask I to accept these very equivocal tenant instead 
 of substantial one , and at a rent one - third less than the market value . 
 suppose that I yield to your request , what become of my reputation 
 for practical , business - like justice ? I shall have make an inroad into 
 the system by which my whole estate be manage , and have invite all 
 manner of solicitation on the part of friend and neighbour , which I 
 could no long consistently refuse , have show how easily I can be 
 persuade into compliance by a stranger whom I may never see again . and 
 be you sure , after all , that , if you do prevail on I , you would do 
 the individual good you aim at ? it be , no doubt , very pleasant to think 
 one have make a young couple happy . but if that young couple fail in 
 keep the little shop to which you would transplant they   and 
 nothing more likely : peasant seldom become good shopkeeper , and find 
 themselves , with a family of child , dependent solely , not on the arm 
 of a strong labourer , but the ten finger of a sickly cripple , who make 
 clever basket , for which there be but slight and precarious demand in 
 the neighbourhood , may you not have insure the misery of the couple you 
 wish to render happy ? " 

 " I withdraw all argument , " say Kenelm , with an aspect so humiliated and 
 deject , that it would have soften a Greenland bear , or a Counsel for 
 the prosecution . " I be more and more convinced that of all the sham in 
 the world that of benevolence be the great . it seem so easy to 
 do good , and it be so difficult to do it . everywhere , in this hateful 
 civilized life , one run one 's head against a system . a system , Mr. 
 Travers , be man 's servile imitation of the blind tyranny of what in our 
 ignorance we call ' Natural Laws , ' a mechanical something through which 
 the world be rule by the cruelty of General Principles , to the utter 
 disregard of individual welfare . by Natural Laws creature prey on each 
 other , and big fish eat little one upon system . it be , nevertheless , 
 a hard thing for the little fish . every nation , every town , every 
 hamlet , every occupation , have a system , by which , somehow or other , the 
 pond swarm with fish , of which a great many inferior contribute to 
 increase the size of a superior . it be an idle benevolence to keep 
 one solitary gudgeon out of the jaw of a pike . here be I do what I 
 think the simple thing in the world , ask a gentleman , evidently 
 as good - natured as myself , to allow an old woman to let she premise to 
 a deserve young couple , and pay what she ask for it out of my own 
 money . and I find that I be run against a system , and invade all 
 the law by which a rental be increase and an estate improve . Mr. 
 Travers , you have no cause for regret in not have beat Tom Bowles . 
 you have beat his victor , and I now give up all dream of further 
 interference with the Natural Laws that govern the village which I 
 have visit in vain . I have mean to remove Tom Bowles from that quiet 
 community . I shall now leave he to return to his former habit , - to 
 marry Jessie Wiles , which he certainly will do , and - " 

 " hold ! " cry Mr. Travers . " do you mean to say that you can induce Tom 
 Bowles to leave the village ? " 

 " I have induce he to do it , provide Jessie Wiles marry the 
 basket - maker ; but , as that be out of the question , I be bind to tell 
 he so , and he will stay . " 

 " but if he leave , what would become of his business ? his mother could 
 not keep it on ; his little place be a freehold ; the only house in the 
 village that do not belong to I , or I should have eject he long 
 ago . would he sell the premise to I ? " 

 " not if he stay and marry Jessie Wiles . but if he go with I to 
 Luscombe and settle in that town as a partner to his uncle , I suppose 
 he would be too glad to sell a house of which he can have no pleasant 
 recollection . but what then ? you can not violate your system for the 
 sake of a miserable forge . " 

 " it would not violate my system if , instead of yield to a sentiment , 
 I gain an advantage ; and , to say truth , I should be very glad to buy 
 that forge and the field that go with it . " 

 " ' tis your affair now , not mine , Mr. Travers . I no long presume to 
 interfere . I leave the neighbourhood to - morrow : see if you can negotiate 
 with Mr. Bowles . I have the honour to wish you a good evening . " 

 " Nay , young gentleman , I can not allow you to quit I thus . you have 
 decline apparently to join the dancer , but you will at least join the 
 supper . come ! " 

 " thank you sincerely , no . I come here merely on the business which your 
 system have settle . " 

 " but I be not sure that it be settle . " here Mr. Travers wind his arm 
 within Kenelm 's , and look he full in the face , say , " I know that 
 I be speak to a gentleman at least equal in rank to myself , but as 
 I enjoy the melancholy privilege of be the old man , do not think 
 I take an unwarrantable liberty in ask if you object to tell I your 
 name . I should like to introduce you to my daughter , who be very partial 
 to Jessie Wiles and to Will Somers . but I can not   venture to inflame her 
 imagination by designate you as a prince in disguise . " 

 " Mr. Travers , you express yourself with exquisite delicacy . but I 
 be just start in life , and I shrink from mortify my father by 
 associate my name with a signal failure . suppose I be an anonymous 
 contributor , say , to ' the Londoner , ' and I have just bring that 
 highly intellectual journal into discredit by a feeble attempt at 
 a good - natured criticism or a generous sentiment , would that be the 
 fitting occasion to throw off the mask , and parade myself to a mocking 
 world as the imbecile violator of an establish system ? should I not , 
 in a moment so untoward , more than ever desire to merge my insignificant 
 unit in the mysterious importance which the small Singular obtain 
 when he make himself a Plural , and speak not as ' I , ' but as ' we ' ? 
  we be insensible to the charm of young lady ; we be not bribe 
 by supper ; we , like the witch of ' Macbeth , ' have no name on earth ; 
  we be the great wisdom of the great number ; we be so upon 
 system ; we salute you , Mr. Travers , and depart unassailable . " 

 here Kenelm rise , doff and replace his hat in majestic salutation , 
 turn towards the entrance of the fernery , and find himself suddenly 
 face to face with George Belvoir , behind whom follow , with a throng 
 of guest , the fair form of Cecilia . George Belvoir catch Kenelm by the 
 hand , and exclaim , " chillingly ! I think I could not be mistake . " 

 " chillingly ! " echo Leopold Travers from behind . " be you the son of my 
 old friend Sir Peter ? " 

 thus discover and environ , Kenelm do not lose his wonted presence 
 of mind ; he turn round to Leopold Travers , who be now close in his 
 rear , and whisper , " if my father be your friend , do not disgrace his 
 son . do not say I be a failure . deviate from your system , and let will 
 Somers succeed Mrs. Bawtrey . " then revert his face to Mr. Belvoir , he 
 say tranquilly , " yes ; we have meet before . " 

 " Cecilia , " say Travers , now interpose , " I be happy to introduce to 
 you as Mr. Chillingly , not only the son of an old friend of mine , 
 not only the knight - errant of whose gallant conduct on behalf of your 
 protegee Jessie Wiles we have hear so much , but the eloquent arguer who 
 have conquer my well judgment in a matter on which I think myself 
 infallible . tell Mr. Lethbridge that I accept Will Somers as a tenant 
 for Mrs. Bawtrey 's premise . " 

 Kenelm grasp the Squire 's hand cordially . " may it be in my power to do 
 a kind thing to you , in spite of any system to the contrary ! " 

 " Mr. Chillingly , give your arm to my daughter . you will not now object 
 to join the dancer ? " 



 CHAPTER V. 

 CECILIA steal a shy glance at Kenelm as the two emerge from the fernery 
 into the open space of the lawn . his countenance please she . she 
 think she discover much latent gentleness under the cold and 
 mournful gravity of its expression ; and , attribute the silence he 
 maintain to some painful sense of an awkward position in the abrupt 
 betrayal of his incognito , seek with womanly tact to dispel his 
 suppose embarrassment . 

 " you have choose a delightful mode of see the country this lovely 
 summer weather , Mr. Chillingly . I believe such pedestrian exercise be 
 very common with university student during the long vacation . " 

 " very common , though they generally wander in pack like wild dog or 
 Australian dingoe . it be only a tame dog that one find on the road 
 travel by himself ; and then , unless he behave very quietly , it be 
 ten to one that he be stone as a mad dog . " 

 " but I be afraid , from what I hear , that you have not be travel 
 very quietly . " 

 " you be quite right , Miss Travers , and I be a sad dog if not a mad one . 
 but pardon I : we be near the marquee ; the band be strike up , and , 
 alas ! I be not a dancing dog . " 

 he release Cecilia 's arm , and bow . 

 " let we sit here a while , then , " say she , motion to a garden - bench . 
 " I have no engagement for the next dance , and , as I be a little tired , I 
 shall be glad of a reprieve . " 

 Kenelm sigh , and , with the air of a martyr stretch himself on the 
 rack , take his place beside the fair girl in the county . 

 " you be at college with Mr. Belvoir ? " 

 " I be . " 

 " he be think clever there ? " 

 " I have not a doubt of it . " 

 " you know he be canvass our county for the next election . my father 
 take a warm interest in his success , and think he will be a useful 
 member of Parliament . " 

 " of that I be certain . for the first five year he will be call 
 pushing , noisy , and conceited , much sneered at by man of his own age , 
 and cough down on great occasion ; for the five follow year he 
 will be consider a sensible man in committee , and a necessary feature 
 in debate ; at the end of those year he will be an under - secretary ; in 
 five year more he will be a Cabinet Minister , and the representative of 
 an important section of opinion ; he will be an irreproachable private 
 character , and his wife will be see wear the family diamond at all 
 the great party . she will take an interest in politic and theology ; 
 and if she die before he , her husband will show his sense of wed 
 happiness by choose another lady , equally fit to wear the family 
 diamond and to maintain the family consequence . " 

 in spite of her laughter , Cecilia feel a certain awe at the solemnity of 
 voice and manner with which Kenelm deliver these oracular sentence , 
 and the whole prediction seem strangely in unison with her own 
 impression of the character whose fate be thus shadow out . 

 " be you a fortune - teller , Mr. Chillingly ? " she ask , falteringly , and 
 after a pause . 

 " as good a one as any whose hand you could cross with a shilling . " 

 " will you tell I my fortune ? " 

 " no ; I never tell the fortune of lady , because your sex be credulous , 
 and a lady might believe what I tell she . and when we believe such and 
 such be to be our fate , we be too apt to work out our life into the 
 verification of the belief . if Lady Macbeth have disbelieve in the 
 witch , she would never have persuade she lord to murder Duncan . " 

 " but can you not predict I a more cheerful fortune than that tragical 
 illustration of yours seem to threaten ? " 

 " the future be never cheerful to those who look on the dark side of 
 the question . Mr. Gray be too good a poet for people to read nowadays , 
 otherwise I should refer you to his line in the ' Ode to Eton 
 College , ' - 


  " ' see how all around we wait 
  the minister of human fate , 
  and black Misfortune 's baleful train . ' 


 " meanwhile it be something to enjoy the present . we be young ; we 
 be listen to music ; there be no cloud over the summer star ; our 
 conscience be clear ; our heart untrouble : why look forward in search 
 of happiness ? shall we ever be happy than we be at this moment ? " 

 here Mr. Travers come up . " we be go to supper in a few minute , " 
 say he ; " and before we lose sight of each other , Mr. Chillingly , I wish 
 to impress on you the moral fact that one good turn deserve another . I 
 have yield to your wish , and now you must yield to mine . come and stay 
 a few day with I , and see your benevolent intention carry out . " 

 Kenelm pause . now that he be discover , why should he not pass a few 
 day among his equal ? reality or sham might be study with squire 
 no less than with farmer ; besides , he have take a liking to Travers . 
 that graceful ci - devant Wildair , with the slight form and the delicate 
 face , be unlike rural squire in general . Kenelm pause , and then say 
 frankly , - 

 " I accept your invitation . would the middle of next week suit you ? " 

 " the soon the well . why not to - morrow ? " 

 " to - morrow I be pre - engaged to an excursion with Mr. Bowles . that may 
 occupy two or three day , and meanwhile I must write home for other 
 garment than those in which I be a sham . " 

 " come any day you like . " 

 " agree . " 

 " agree ; and , hark ! the supper - bell . " 

 " supper , " say Kenelm , offer his arm to Miss Travers , - ' supper be a 
 word truly interesting , truly poetical . it associate itself with the 
 entertainment of the ancient , with the Augustan age , with Horace and 
 Maecenas ; with the only elegant but too fleeting period of the modern 
 world ; with the noble and wit of Paris , when Paris have wit and 
 noble ; with Moliere and the warm - hearted Duke who be say to have be 
 the original of Moliere 's misanthrope ; with Madame de Sevigne and the 
 Racine whom that inimitable letter - writer deny to be a poet ; with 
 Swift and Bolingbroke ; with Johnson , Goldsmith , and Garrick . epoch be 
 signalize by their eating . I honour he who revive the Golden Age of 
 supper . " so say , his face brighten . 



 CHAPTER VI . 


 KENELM CHILLINGLY , ESQ . , to SIR PETER CHILLINGLY , BART . , ETC . 

 MY DEAR FATHER , - I be alive and unmarried . Providence have watch over 
 I in these respect ; but I have have narrow escape . Hitherto I have not 
 acquire much worldly wisdom in my travel . it be true that I have be 
 pay two shilling as a day labourer , and , in fact , have fairly earn 
 at least six shilling more ; but against that additional claim I 
 generously set off , as an equivalent , my board and lodge . on the other 
 hand , I have spend forty - five pound out of the fifty which I devote 
 to the purchase of experience . but I hope you will be a gainer by 
 that investment . send an order to Mr. William Somers , basket - maker , 
 Graveleigh , - - -shire , for the hamper and game - basket you require , 
 and I undertake to say that you will save twenty per cent on that 
 article   all expense of carriage deduct   and do a good action into 
 the bargain . you know , from long habit , what a good action be worth 
 well than I do . I dare say you will be more pleased to learn than I 
 be to record the fact that I have be again decoy into the society of 
 lady and gentleman , and have accept an invitation to pass a few day 
 at Neesdale Park with Mr. Travers , - christen Leopold , who call you 
 " his old friend , " - a term which I take for grant belong to that class 
 of poetic exaggeration in which the " dear " and " darling " of conjugal 
 intercourse may be categorize . have for that visit no suitable 
 garment in my knapsack , kindly tell Jenkes to forward I a portmanteau 
 full of those which I habitually wear as Kenelm Chillingly , direct 
 to I at " Neesdale Park , near Beaverston . " let I find it there on 
 Wednesday . 

 I leave this place to - morrow morning in company with a friend of the 
 name of Bowles : no relation to the reverend gentleman of that name who 
 hold the doctrine that a poet should bore we to death with fiddle - faddle 
 minutia of natural object in preference to that study of the 
 insignificant creature man , in his relation to his specie , to which 
 Mr. Pope limit the range of his inferior muse ; and who , practise as 
 he preach , write some very nice verse , to which the Lake school and 
 its successor be largely indebted . my Mr. Bowles have exercise his 
 faculty upon man , and have a powerful inborn gift in that line which 
 only require cultivation to render he a match for any one . his more 
 masculine nature be at present much obscure by that pass cloud 
 which , in conventional language , be call " a hopeless attachment . " but 
 I trust , in the course of our excursion , which be to be take on foot , 
 that this vapour may consolidate by motion , as some old - fashioned 
 astronomer hold that the nebula do consolidate into a matter - of - fact 
 world . be it Rochefoucauld who say that a man be never more likely to 
 form a hopeful attachment for one than when his heart be soften by a 
 hopeless attachment to another ? may it be long , my dear father , before 
 you condole with I on the first or congratulate I on the second . 

  your affectionate son , 

  KENELM . 

 direct to I at Mr. Travers 's . kind love to my mother . 


 the answer to this letter be here subjoin as the most convenient place 
 for its insertion , though of course it be not receive till some day 
 after the date of my next chapter . 


 SIR PETER CHILLINGLY , BART . , TO KENELM CHILLINGLY , ESQ . 

 MY DEAR boy , - with this I despatch the portmanteau you require to the 
 address that you give . I remember well Leopold Travers when he be in 
 the Guards , - a very handsome and a very wild young fellow . but he 
 have much more sense than people give he credit for , and frequent 
 intellectual society ; at least I meet he very often at my friend 
 Campion 's , whose house be then the favourite rendezvous of 
 distinguished person . he have very win manner , and one could not 
 help take an interest in he . I be very glad when I hear he have 
 marry and reform . here I beg to observe that a man who contract a 
 taste for low company may indeed often marry , but he seldom reform when 
 he do so . and , on the whole , I should be much pleased to hear that the 
 experience which have cost you forty - five pound have convince you that 
 you might be well employ than earn two , or even six shilling as 
 a day - labourer . 

 I have not give your love to your mother , as you request . in fact , 
 you have place I in a very false position towards that other author of 
 your eccentric being . I could only guard you from the inquisition of the 
 police and the notoriety of descriptive hand - bill by allow my lady 
 to suppose that you have go abroad with the Duke of Clairville and his 
 family . it be easy to tell a fib , but it be very difficult to untell 
 it . however , as soon as you have make up your mind to resume your normal 
 position among lady and gentleman , I should be greatly oblige if 
 you would apprise I . I do not   wish to keep a fib on my conscience a 
 day long than may be necessary to prevent the necessity of tell 
 another . 

 from what you say of Mr. Bowles 's study of Man , and his inborn talent 
 for that scientific investigation , I suppose that he be a professed 
 Metaphysician , and I should be glad of his candid opinion upon the 
 Primary Basis of Morals , a subject upon which I have for three year 
 meditate the consideration of a critical paper . but have lately read 
 a controversy thereon between two eminent philosopher , in which each 
 accuse the other of not understand he , I have resolve for the 
 present to leave the Basis in its unsettled condition . 

 you rather alarm I when you say you have have a narrow escape from 
 marriage . should you , in order to increase the experience you set out 
 to acquire , decide on try the effect of a Mrs. Chillingly upon your 
 nervous system , it would be well to let I know a little beforehand , so 
 that I might prepare your mother 's mind for that event . such household 
 trifle be within her special province ; and she would be much put out 
 if a Mrs. Chillingly drop on her unawares . 

 this subject , however , be too serious to admit of a jest even between 
 two person who understand , so well as you and I do , the secret cipher 
 by which each other 's outward style of jest be to be gravely interpret 
 into the irony which say one thing and mean another . my dear boy , you 
 be very young ; you be wander about in a very strange manner , and 
 may , no doubt , meet with many a pretty face by the way , with which you 
 may fancy that you fall in love . you can not think I a barbarous , tyrant 
 if I ask you to promise I , on your honour , that you will not propose 
 to any young lady before you come first to I and submit the case to my 
 examination and approval . you know I too well to suppose that I should 
 unreasonably withhold my consent if convince that your happiness be 
 at stake . but while what a young man may fancy to be love be often a 
 trivial incident in his life , marriage be the great event in it ; 
 if on one side it may involve his happiness , on the other side it 
 may insure his misery . Dearest , good , and oddest of son , give I the 
 promise I ask , and you will free my breast from a terribly anxious 
 thought which now sit on it like a nightmare . 

 your recommendation of a basket - maker come opportunely . all such 
 matter go through the bailiff 's hand , and it be but the other day 
 that Green be complain of the high price of the man he employ for 
 hamper and game - basket . Green shall write to your protege . 

 keep I informed of your proceeding as much as your anomalous character 
 will permit ; so that nothing may diminish my confidence that the man who 
 have the honour to be christen Kenelm will not disgrace his name , but 
 acquire the distinction deny to a Peter . 

 your affectionate father . 



 CHAPTER VII . 

 villager lie abe on Sundays later than on workday , and no shutter be 
 unclosed in a window of the rural street through which Kenelm Chillingly 
 and Tom Bowles go , side by side , in the still soft air of the Sabbath 
 morn . side by side they go on , cross the pastoral glebe - land , 
 where the kine still drowsily recline under the bowery shade of 
 glint chestnut leaf ; and diving thence into a narrow lane or 
 by - road , wind deep between lofty bank all tangle with convolvulus 
 and wild - rose and honeysuckle . 

 they walk in silence , for Kenelm , after one or two vain attempt at 
 conversation , have the tact to discover that his companion be in no mood 
 for talk ; and be himself one of those creature whose mind glide 
 easily into the dreamy monologue of revery , he be not displeased to 
 muse on undisturbed , drink quietly into his heart the subdue joy of 
 the summer morn , with the freshness of its sparkling dew , the wayward 
 carol of its early bird , the serene quietude of its limpid breezy 
 air . only when they come to fresh turning in the road that lead towards 
 the town to which they be bind , Tom Bowles step before his 
 companion , indicate the way by a monosyllable or a gesture . thus they 
 journey for hour , till the sun attain power , and a little wayside 
 inn near a hamlet invite Kenelm to the thought of rest and food . 

 " Tom , " say he then , rouse from his revery , " what do you say to 
 breakfast ? " 

 Answered Tom sullenly , " I be not hungry ; but as you like . " 

 " thank you , then we will stop here a while . I find it difficult to 
 believe that you be not hungry , for you be very strong , and there be 
 two thing which generally accompany great physical strength : the one be 
 a keen appetite ; the other be - though you may not suppose it , and it be 
 not commonly know - a melancholic temperament . " 

 " eh ! - a what ? " 

 " a tendency to melancholy . of course you have hear of Hercules : you 
 know the saying ' as strong as Hercules ' ? " 

 " yes , of course . " 

 " well , I be first lead to the connection between strength , appetite , and 
 melancholy , by read in an old author name Plutarch that Hercules 
 be among the most notable instance of melancholy temperament which the 
 author be enable to quote . that must have be the traditional notion 
 of the Herculean constitution ; and as for appetite , the appetite of 
 Hercules be a standard joke of the comic writer . when I read that 
 observation it set I think , be myself melancholic and have 
 an exceedingly good appetite . sure enough , when I begin to collect 
 evidence , I find that the strong man with whom I make acquaintance , 
 include prize - fighter and irish drayman , be disposed to look upon 
 life more on the shady than the sunny side of the way ; in short , they 
 be melancholic . but the kindness of Providence allow they to enjoy 
 their meal , as you and I be about to do . " in the utterance of this 
 extraordinary crotchet Kenelm have halt his step ; but now stride 
 briskly forward he enter the little inn , and after a glance at its 
 larder , order the whole content to be bring out and place within a 
 honeysuckle arbour which he spy in the angle of a bowling - green at the 
 rear of the house . 

 in addition to the ordinary condiment of loaf and butter and egg and 
 milk and tea , the board soon groan beneath the weight of pigeon - pie , 
 cold rib of beef , and shoulder of mutton , remain of a feast which the 
 member of a monthly rustic club have hold there the day before . Tom eat 
 little at first ; but example be contagious , and gradually he vie with 
 his companion in the diminution of the solid viand before he . then he 
 call for brandy . 

 " no , " say Kenelm . " no , Tom ; you have promise I friendship , and that 
 be not compatible with brandy . Brandy be the bad enemy a man like 
 you can have ; and would make you quarrel even with I . if you want a 
 stimulus I allow you a pipe . I do not   smoke myself , as a rule , but there 
 have be time in my life when I require soothe , and then I have 
 feel that a whiff of tobacco still and soften one like the kiss of a 
 little child . bring this gentleman a pipe . " 

 Tom grunt , but take to the pipe kindly , and in a few minute , during 
 which Kenelm leave he in silence , a lower furrow between his brow 
 smooth itself away . 

 gradually he feel the sweetening influence of the day and the place , of 
 the merry sunbeam at play amid the leaf of the arbour , of the frank 
 perfume of the honeysuckle , of the warble of the bird before they sink 
 into the taciturn repose of a summer noon . 

 it be with a reluctant sigh that he rise at last , when Kenelm say , " we 
 have yet far to go : we must push on . " 

 the landlady , indeed , have already give they a hint that she and 
 the family want to go to church , and to shut up the house in their 
 absence . Kenelm draw out his purse , but Tom do the same with a return 
 of cloud on his brow , and Kenelm see that he would be mortally offend 
 if suffer to be treat as an inferior ; so each pay his due share , 
 and the two man resume their wandering . this time it be along a 
 by - path amid field , which be a short cut than the lane they have 
 previously follow , to the main road to Luscombe . they walk 
 slowly till they come to a rustic foot - bridge which span a gloomy 
 trout - stream , not noisy , but with a low , sweet murmur , doubtless the 
 same stream beside which , many mile away , Kenelm have converse with the 
 minstrel . just as they come to this bridge there float to their ear 
 the distant sound of the hamlet church - bell . 

 " now let we sit here a while and listen , " say Kenelm , seat himself 
 on the baluster of the bridge . " I see that you bring away your pipe 
 from the inn , and provide yourself with tobacco : refill the pipe and 
 listen . " 

 Tom half smile and obey . 

 " o friend , " say Kenelm , earnestly , and after a long pause of thought , 
 " do you not feel what a blessed thing it be in this mortal life to be 
 ever and anon remind that you have a soul ? " 

 Tom , startle , withdraw the pipe from his lip , and mutter , - 

 " eh ! " 

 Kenelm continue , - 

 " you and I , Tom , be not so good as we ought to be : of that there be no 
 doubt ; and good people would say justly that we should now be within 
 yon church itself rather than listen to its bell . grant , my friend , 
 grant ; but still it be something to hear that bell , and to feel by the 
 train of thought which begin in our innocent childhood , when we say 
 our prayer at the knee of a mother , that we be lift beyond this 
 visible nature , beyond these field and wood and water , in which , fair 
 though they be , you and I miss something ; in which neither you nor I be 
 as happy as the kine in the field , as the bird on the bough , as the 
 fish in the water : lift to a consciousness of a sense vouchsafe to 
 you and to I , not vouchsafe to the kine , to the bird , and the fish , - a 
 sense to comprehend that Nature have a God , and Man have a life hereafter . 
 the bell say that to you and to I . be that bell a thousand time 
 more musical it could not say that to beast , bird , and fish . do you 
 understand I , Tom ? " 

 Tom remain silent for a minute , and then reply , " I never think of 
 it before ; but , as you put it , I understand . " 

 " nature never give to a live thing capacity not practically mean 
 for its benefit and use . if Nature give to we capacity to believe 
 that we have a creator whom we never see , of whom we have no direct 
 proof , who be kind and good and tender beyond all that we know of kind 
 and good and tender on earth , it be because the endowment of capacity 
 to conceive such a being must be for our benefit and use : it would not 
 be for our benefit and use if it be a lie . again , if Nature have give 
 to we a capacity to receive the notion that we live again , no matter 
 whether some of we refuse so to believe , and argue against it , - why , the 
 very capacity to receive the idea   for unless we receive it we could 
 not argue against it   prove that it be for our benefit and use ; and if 
 there be no such life hereafter , we should be govern and influence , 
 arrange our mode of life , and mature our civilization , by obedience 
 to a lie , which Nature falsify herself in give we the capacity to 
 believe . you still understand I ? " 

 " yes ; it bother I a little , for you see I be not a parson 's man ; but I 
 do understand . " 

 " then , my friend , study to apply , - for it require constant 
 study , - study to apply that which you understand to your own case . you 
 be something more than Tom Bowles , the smith and doctor of horse ; 
 something more than the magnificent animal who rag for his mate and 
 fight every rival : the bull do that . you be a soul endow with the 
 capacity to receive the idea of a creator so divinely wise and great 
 and good that , though act by the agency of general law , he can 
 accommodate they to all individual case , so that - take into account 
 the life hereafter , which he grant to you the capacity to believe - all 
 that trouble you now will be prove to you wise and great and good 
 either in this life or the other . Lay that truth to your heart , friend , 
 now - before the bell stop ring ; recall it every time you hear the 
 church - bell ring again . and oh , Tom , you have such a noble nature ! - " 

 " I - I ! do not   jeer I , - do not . " 

 " such a noble nature ; for you can love so passionately , you can war so 
 fiercely , and yet , when convince that your love would be misery to 
 she you love , can resign it ; and yet , when beat in your war , can so 
 forgive your victor that you be walk in this solitude with he as a 
 friend , know that you have but to drop a foot behind he in order to 
 take his life in an unguarded moment ; and rather than take his life , you 
 would defend it against an army . do you think I be so dull as not to see 
 all that ? and be not all that a noble nature ? " 

 Tom Bowles cover his face with his hand , and his broad breast heave . 

 " well , then , to that noble nature I now trust . I myself have do little 
 good in life . I may never do much ; but let I think that I have not 
 cross your life in vain for you and for those whom your life can 
 colour for good or for bad . as you be strong , be gentle ; as you 
 can love one , be kind to all ; as you have so much that be grand as 
 Man , - that is , the high of God 's work on earth , - let all your act 
 attach your manhood to the idea of he , to whom the voice of the bell 
 appeal . ah ! the bell be hush ; but not your heart , Tom , - that speak 
 still . " 

 Tom be weep like a child . 



 CHAPTER VIII . 

 now when our two traveller resume their journey , the relationship 
 between they have undergo a change ; nay , you might have say that their 
 character be also change . for Tom find himself pour out his 
 turbulent heart to Kenelm , confide to this philosophical scoffer at 
 love all the passionate humanity of love , - its hope , its anguish , its 
 jealousy , its wrath , - the all that link the gentle of emotion to 
 tragedy and terror . and Kenelm , listen tenderly , with softened eye , 
 utter not one cynic word , - nay , not one playful jest . he , feel that 
 the gravity of all he hear be too solemn for mockery , too deep even 
 for comfort . true love of this sort be a thing he have never know , 
 never wish to know , never think he could know , but he sympathize 
 in it not the less . strange , indeed , how much we do sympathize , on 
 the stage , for instance , or in a book , with passion that have never 
 agitate ourselves ! have Kenelm jest or reason or preach , Tom would 
 have shrink at once into dreary silence ; but Kenelm say nothing , save 
 now and then , as he rest his arm , brother - like , on the strong man 's 
 shoulder , he murmur , " poor fellow ! " so , then , when Tom have finish 
 his confession , he feel wondrously relieve and comfort . he have 
 cleanse his bosom of the perilous stuff that weigh upon the heart . 

 be this good result effect by Kenelm 's artful diplomacy , or by that 
 insight into human passion vouchsafe unconsciously to himself , by 
 gleam or in flash , to this strange man who survey the object and 
 pursuit of his fellow with a yearning desire to share they , murmur 
 to himself , " I can not , I do not stand in this world ; like a ghost I 
 glide beside it , and look on " ? 

 thus the two man continue their way slowly , amid soft pasture and 
 yellowing cornfield , out at length into the dusty thoroughfare of 
 the main road . that gain , their talk insensibly change its tone : it 
 become more commonplace ; and Kenelm permit himself the license of 
 those crotchet by which he extract a sort of quaint pleasantry out of 
 commonplace itself ; so that from time to time Tom be startle into the 
 mirth of laughter . this big fellow have one very agreeable gift , which 
 be only grant , I think , to man of genuine character and affectionate 
 disposition , - a spontaneous and sweet laugh , manly and frank , but not 
 boisterous , as you might have suppose it would be . but that sort of 
 laugh have not before come from his lip , since the day on which his love 
 for Jessie Wiles have make he at war with himself and the world . 

 the sun be set when from the brow of a hill they behold the spire 
 of luscombe , imbed amid the level meadow that stretch below , 
 water by the same stream that have wind along their more rural 
 pathway , but which now expand into stately width , and need , to span 
 it , a mighty bridge fit for the convenience of civilized traffic . the 
 town seem near , but it be full two mile off by road . 

 " there be a short cut across the field beyond that stile , which lead 
 straight to my uncle 's house , " say Tom ; " and I dare say , sir , that you 
 will be glad to escape the dirty suburb by which the road pass before 
 we get into the town . " 

 " a good thought , Tom . it be very odd that fine town always be 
 approach by dirty suburb ; a covert symbolical satire , perhaps , on the 
 way to success in fine town . avarice or ambition go through very mean 
 little street before they gain the place which they jostle the crowd to 
 win , - in the Townhall or on ' Change . happy the man who , like you , Tom , 
 find that there be a short and a clean and a pleasanter way to goal 
 or to rest - place than that through the dirty suburb ! " 

 they meet but few passenger on their path through the field , - a 
 respectable , staid , elderly couple , who have the air of a Dissenting 
 minister and his wife ; a girl of fourteen lead a little boy seven 
 year young by the hand ; a pair of lover , evidently lover at 
 least to the eye of Tom Bowles ; for , on regard they as they pass 
 unheede he , he wince , and his face change . even after they have 
 pass , Kenelm see on the face that pain linger there : the lip be 
 tightly compressed , and their corner gloomily draw down . 

 just at this moment a dog rush towards they with a short quick 
 bark , - a pomeranian dog with pointed nose and prick ear . it hush 
 its bark as it near Kenelm , sniff his trouser , and wag its tail . 

 " by the sacred Nine , " cry Kenelm , " thou art the dog with the tin tray ! 
 where be thy master ? " 

 the dog seem to understand the question , for it turn its head 
 significantly ; and Kenelm see , seat under a lime - tree , at a good 
 distance from the path , a man , with book in hand , evidently employ in 
 sketching . 

 " come this way , " he say to Tom : " I recognize an acquaintance . you 
 will like he . " Tom desire no new acquaintance at that moment , but he 
 follow Kenelm submissively . 



 CHAPTER IX . 

 " you see we be fat to meet again , " say Kenelm , stretch himself 
 at his ease beside the Wandering Minstrel , and motion Tom to do the 
 same . " but you seem to add the accomplishment of draw to that of 
 verse - making ! you sketch from what you call Nature ? " 

 " from what I call Nature ! yes , sometimes . " 

 " and do you not find in drawing , as in verse - making , the truth that I 
 have before seek to din into your reluctant ear ; namely , that nature 
 have no voice except that which man breathe into she out of his mind ? 
 I would lay a wager that the sketch you be now take be rather an 
 attempt to make she embody some thought of your own , than to present she 
 outline as they appear to any other observer . permit I to judge for 
 myself . " and he bend over the sketch - book . it be often difficult for 
 one who be not himself an artist nor a connoisseur to judge whether the 
 pencil jotting in an impromptu sketch be by the hand of a profess 
 master or a mere amateur . Kenelm be neither artist nor connoisseur , but 
 the mere pencil - work seem to he much what might be expect from any 
 man with an accurate eye who have take a certain number of lesson from 
 a good drawing - master . it be enough for he , however , that it furnish 
 an illustration of his own theory . " I be right , " he cry triumphantly . 
 " from this height there be a beautiful view , as it present itself to 
 I ; a beautiful view of the town , its meadow , its river , harmonize by 
 the sunset ; for sunset , like gilding , unite conflict colour , and 
 soften they in unite . but I see nothing of that view in your sketch . 
 what I do see be to I mysterious . " 

 " the view you suggest , " say the minstrel , " be no doubt very fine , but 
 it be for a Turner or a Claude to treat it . my grasp be not wide enough 
 for such a landscape . " 

 " I see indeed in your sketch but one figure , a child . " 

 " Hist ! there she stand . Hist ! while I put in this last touch . " 

 Kenelm strain his sight , and see far off a solitary little girl , who 
 be toss something in the air   he could not distinguish what , and 
 catch it as it fall . she seem stand on the very verge of the 
 upland , back by rose - cloud gather round the set sun ; below lay 
 in confused outline the great town . in the sketch those outline seem 
 infinitely more confused , be only indicate by a few bold stroke ; 
 but the figure and face of the child be distinct and lovely . there 
 be an ineffable sentiment in her solitude ; there be a depth of quiet 
 enjoyment in her mirthful play , and in her upturned eye . 

 " but at that distance , " ask Kenelm , when the wanderer have finish his 
 last touch , and , after contemplate it , silently close his book , and 
 turn round with a genial smile , " but at that distance , how can you 
 distinguish the girl 's face ? how can you discover that the dim object 
 she have just throw up and recaught be a ball make of flower ? do you 
 know the child ? " 

 " I never see she before this evening ; but as I be seat here she be 
 stray around I alone , weave into chain some wild - flower which 
 she have gather by the hedgerow yonder , next the high road ; and as she 
 string they she be chant to herself some pretty nursery rhyme . 
 you can well understand that when I hear she thus chant I become 
 interested , and as she come near I I speak to she , and we soon make 
 friend . she tell I she be an orphan , and bring up by a very old man 
 distantly related to she , who have be in some small trade and now live 
 in a crowded lane in the heart of the town . he be very kind to she , and 
 be confine himself to the house by age or ailment he send she out to 
 play in the field on summer sunday . she have no companion of her own 
 age . she say she do not like the other little girl in the lane ; and 
 the only little girl she like at school have a grander station in life , 
 and be not allow to play with she , and so she come out to play alone ; 
 and as long as the sun shin and the flower bloom , she say she never 
 want other society . " 

 " Tom , do you hear that ? as you will be reside in Luscombe , find out 
 this strange little girl , and be kind to she , Tom , for my sake . " 

 Tom put his large hand upon Kenelm 's , make no other answer ; but he 
 look hard at the minstrel , recognize the genial charm of his voice 
 and face , and slide along the grass nearer to he . 

 the minstrel continue : " while the child be talk to I I 
 mechanically take the flower - chain from her hand , and not think 
 what I be about , gather they up into a ball . suddenly she see what 
 I have do , and instead of scold I for spoil her pretty chain , 
 which I richly deserve , be delighted to find I have twist they into a 
 new plaything . she run off with the ball , toss it about till , excited 
 with her own joy , she get to the brow of the hill , and I begin my 
 sketch . " 

 " be that charming face you have draw like her ? " 

 " no ; only in part . I be think of another face while I sketch , but 
 it be not like that either ; in fact , it be one of those patchwork which 
 we call ' fancy head , ' and I mean it to be another version of a thought 
 that I have just put into rhyme when the child come across I . " 

 " may we hear the rhyme ? " 

 " I fear that if it do not bore yourself it would bore your friend . " 

 " I be sure not . Tom , do you sing ? " 

 " well , I have sing , " say Tom , hang his head sheepishly , " and I 
 should like to hear this gentleman . " 

 " but I do not know these verse , just make , well enough to sing they ; it 
 be enough if I can recall they well enough to recite . " here the minstrel 
 pause a minute or so as if for recollection , and then , in the sweet 
 clear tone and the rare purity of enunciation which characterize his 
 utterance , whether in recital or song , give to the follow verses a 
 touching and a varied expression which no one could discover in merely 
 read they . 


  the FLOWER - GIRL by the crossing . 

  " by the muddy crossing in the crowd street 
  stand a little maid with her basket full of posy , 
  proffer all who pass her choice of knit sweet , 
  Tempting age with heart' - ease , court Youth with rose . 

  " age disdain the heart's - ease , 
  Love reject the rose ; 
  London life be busy , - 
  who can stop for posy ? 

  " one man be too grave , another be too gay ; 
  this man have his hothouse , that man not a penny : 
  floweret too be common in the month of May , 
  and the thing most common least attract the many . 

  " Ill , on London crossing , 
  fare the sale of posy ; 
  Age disdain the heart's - ease , 
  Youth reject the rose . " 


 when the verse - maker have do , he do not pause for approbation , nor 
 look modestly down , as do most people who recite their own verse , but 
 unaffectedly think much more of his art than his audience , hurry on 
 somewhat disconsolately , - 

 " I see with great grief that I be well at sketch than rhyme . can 
 you "   appeal to Kenelm   " even comprehend what I mean by the verse ? " 

 KENELM . - " do you comprehend , Tom ? " 

 TOM   in a whisper . - " no . " 

 KENELM . - " I presume that by his flower - girl our friend mean to 
 represent not only poetry , but a poetry like his own , which be not at 
 all the sort of poetry now in fashion . I , however , expand his meaning , 
 and by his flower - girl I understand any image of natural truth or beauty 
 for which , when we be live the artificial life of crowded street , we 
 be too busy to give a penny . " 

 " take it as you please , " say the minstrel , smile and sigh at the 
 same time ; " but I have not express in word that which I do mean half 
 so well as I have express it in my sketch - book . " 

 " ah ! and how ? " ask Kenelm . 

 " the image of my thought in the sketch , be it poetry or whatever you 
 prefer to call it , do not stand forlorn in the crowded street : the 
 child stand on the brow of the green hill , with the city stretch in 
 confused fragment below , and , thoughtless of penny and passer - by , 
 she be play with the flower she have gather ; but in play cast 
 they heavenward , and follow they with heavenward eye . " 

 " good ! " mutter Kenelm , " good ! " and then , after a long pause , he add , 
 in a still low mutter , " pardon I that remark of mine the other day 
 about a beefsteak . but own that I be right : what you call a sketch from 
 Nature be but a sketch of your own thought . " 



 CHAPTER X. 

 the child with the flower - ball have vanish from the brow of the hill ; 
 sink down amid the street below , the rose - clouds have fade from the 
 horizon ; and night be close round , as the three man enter the 
 thick of the town . Tom press Kenelm to accompany he to his uncle 's , 
 promise he a hearty welcome and bed and board , but Kenelm decline . 
 he entertain a strong persuasion that it would be well for the 
 desire effect on Tom 's mind that he should be leave alone with his 
 relation that night , but propose that they should spend the next day 
 together , and agree to call at the veterinary surgeon 's in the morning . 

 when Tom quit they at his uncle 's door , Kenelm say to the minstrel , 
 " I suppose you be go to some inn ; may I accompany you ? we can sup 
 together , and I should like to hear you talk upon poetry and Nature . " 

 " you flatter I much ; but I have friend in the town , with whom I lodge , 
 and they be expect I . do you not observe that I have change my 
 dress ? I be not know here as the ' Wandering Minstrel . ' " 

 Kenelm glance at the man 's attire , and for the first time observe 
 the change . it be still picturesque in its way , but it be such as 
 gentleman of the high rank frequently wear in the country , - the 
 knickerbocker costume , - very neat , very new , and complete , to the 
 square - toed shoe with their latchet and buckle . 

 " I fear , " say Kenelm , gravely , " that your change of dress betoken 
 the neighbourhood of those pretty girl of whom you speak in an early 
 meeting . accord to the darwinian doctrine of selection , fine plumage 
 go far in decide the preference of Jenny Wren and her sex , only we 
 be tell that fine - feather bird be very seldom songster as well . it 
 be rather unfair to rival when you unite both attraction . " 

 the minstrel laugh . " there be but one girl in my friend 's house , - his 
 niece ; she be very plain , and only thirteen . but to I the society of 
 woman , whether ugly or pretty , be an absolute necessity ; and I have be 
 trudge without it for so many day that I can scarcely tell you how 
 my thought seem to shake off the dust of travel when I find myself 
 again in the presence of - " 

 " Petticoat interest , " interrupt Kenelm . " take care of yourself . my 
 poor friend with whom you find I be a grave warning against petticoat 
 interest , from which I hope to profit . he be pass through a great 
 sorrow ; it might have be bad than sorrow . my friend be go to stay 
 in this town . if you be stay here too , pray let he see something 
 of you . it will do he a wondrous good if you can beguile he from this 
 real life into the garden of poetland ; but do not sing or talk of love 
 to he . " 

 " I honour all lover , " say the minstrel , with real tenderness in his 
 tone , " and would willingly serve to cheer or comfort your friend , if I 
 could ; but I be bind elsewhere , and must leave Luscombe , which I visit 
 on business - money business - the day after to - morrow . " 

 " so , too , must I. at least give we both some hour of your time 
 to - morrow . " 

 " certainly ; from twelve to sunset I shall be rove about , - a mere 
 idler . if you will both come with I , it will be a great pleasure to 
 myself . agree ! well , then , I will call at your inn to - morrow at twelve ; 
 and I recommend for your inn the one face we , - the Golden Lamb . I have 
 hear it recommend for the attribute of civil people and good fare . " 

 Kenelm feel that he here receive his conge , and well comprehend the 
 fact that the minstrel , desire to preserve the secret of his name , do 
 not give the address of the family with whom he be a guest . 

 " but one word more , " say Kenelm . " your host or hostess , if resident 
 here , can , no doubt , from your description of the little girl and the 
 old man her protector , learn the child 's address . if so , I should like 
 my companion to make friend with she . Petticoat interest there at least 
 will be innocent and safe . and I know nothing so likely to keep a big , 
 passionate heart like Tom 's , now ache with a horrible void , 
 occupy and soften , and turn to direction pure and gentle , as an 
 affectionate interest in a little child . " 

 the minstrel change colour : he even start . " Sir , be you a wizard 
 that you say that to I ? " 

 " I be not a wizard , but I guess from your question that you have a 
 little child of your own . so much the well : the child may keep you out 
 of much mischief . remember the little child . good evening . " 

 Kenelm cross the threshold of the Golden Lamb , engage his room , make 
 his ablution , order , and , with his usual zest , partook of his evening 
 meal ; and then , feel the pressure of that melancholic temperament 
 which he so strangely associate with Herculean constitution , rouse 
 himself up , and , seek a distraction from thought , saunter forth 
 into the gaslit street . 

 it be a large handsome town , - handsomer than Tor - Hadham , on account of 
 its site in a valley surround by woode hill , and water by the fair 
 stream whose winding we have see as a brook , - handsomer , also , because 
 it boast a fair cathedral , well clear to the sight , and surround 
 by venerable old house , the residence of the clergy or of the quiet 
 lay gentry with mediaeval taste . the main street be throng with 
 passenger , - some soberly return home from the evening service ; some , 
 the young , linger in pleasant promenade with their sweetheart or 
 family , or arm in arm with each other , and have the air of 
 bachelor or maiden unattached . through this street Kenelm pass with 
 inattentive eye . a turn to the right take he towards the cathedral and 
 its surrounding . there all be solitary . the solitude please he , 
 and he linger long , gaze on the noble church lift its spire and 
 turret into the deep blue starry air . 

 musingly , then , he stray on , enter a labyrinth of gloomy lane , in 
 which , though the shop be closed , many a door stand open , with man 
 of the work class loll against the threshold , idly smoke their 
 pipe , or woman seat on the doorstep gossip , while noisy child 
 be play or quarrel in the kennel . the whole do not present the 
 indolent side of an English Sabbath in the pleasantest and rosy point 
 of view . somewhat quicken his step , he enter a broad street , 
 attract to it involuntarily by a bright light in the centre . on 
 near the light he find that it shine forth from a gin - palace , of 
 which the mahogany door open and shut momently as customer go in 
 and out . it be the handsome building he have see in his walk , next to 
 that of the cathedral . " the new civilization versus the old , " murmur 
 Kenelm . as he so murmur , a hand be lay on his arm with a sort 
 of timid impudence . he look down and see a young face , but it have 
 survive the look of youth ; it be worn and hard , and the bloom on it 
 be not that of Nature 's giving . " be you kind to - night ? " ask a husky 
 voice . 

 " Kind ! " say Kenelm , with mournful tone and soften eye , " kind ! alas , 
 my poor sister mortal ! if pity be kindness , who can see you and not be 
 kind ? " 

 the girl release his arm , and he walk on . she stand some moment 
 gaze after he till out of sight , then she draw her hand suddenly 
 across her eye , and retrace her step , be , in her turn , catch hold 
 of by a rougher hand than her , as she pass the gin - palace . she shake 
 off the grasp with a passionate scorn , and go straight home . home ! be 
 that the right word ? poor sister mortal ! 



 CHAPTER XI . 

 and now Kenelm find himself at the extremity of the town , and on the 
 bank of the river . small squalid house still line the bank for some 
 way , till , near the bridge , they abruptly cease , and he pass 
 through a broad square again into the main street . on the other side 
 of the street there be a row of villa - like mansion , with garden 
 stretching towards the river . 

 all around in the thoroughfare be silent and desert . by this time 
 the passenger have go home . the scent of night - flower from the 
 villa - garden come sweet on the starlit air . Kenelm pause to inhale it , 
 and then lift his eye , hitherto downcast , as be the eye of man 
 in meditative mood , he behold , on the balcony of the near villa , 
 a group of well - dress person . the balcony be unusually wide and 
 spacious . on it be a small round table , on which be place wine and 
 fruit . three lady be seat round the table on wire - work chair , 
 and on the side near to Kenelm , one man . in that man , now slightly 
 turn his profile , as if to look towards the river , Kenelm recognize 
 the minstrel . he be still in his picturesque knickerbocker dress , 
 and his clear - cut feature , with the cluster curl of hair , and 
 Rubens - like hue and shape of beard , have more than their usual beauty , 
 soften in the light of sky , to which the moon , just risen , add 
 deep and fuller radiance . the lady be in evening dress , but Kenelm 
 could not distinguish their face hide behind the minstrel . he move 
 softly across the street , and take his stand behind a buttress in 
 the low wall of the garden , from which he could have full view of the 
 balcony , unseen himself . in this watch he have no other object than 
 that of a vague pleasure . the whole grouping have in it a kind of scenic 
 romance , and he stop as one stop before a picture . 

 he then see that of the three lady one be old ; another be a 
 slight girl of the age of twelve or thirteen ; the third appear to be 
 somewhere about seven or eight and twenty . she be dress with more 
 elegance than the other . on her neck , only partially veil by a thin 
 scarf , there be the glitter of jewel ; and , as she now turn she 
 full face towards the moon , Kenelm see that she be very handsome , - a 
 strike kind of beauty , calculate to fascinate a poet or an 
 artist , - not unlike Raphael 's Fornarina , dark , with warm tint . 

 now there appear at the open window a stout , burly , middle - aged 
 gentleman , look every inch of he a family man , a moneyed man , sleek 
 and prosperous . he be bald , fresh - colour , and with light whisker . 

 " Holloa , " he say , in an accent very slightly foreign , and with a loud 
 clear voice , which Kenelm hear distinctly , " be it not time for you to 
 come in ? " 

 " do not   be so tiresome , Fritz , " say the handsome lady , half petulantly , 
 half playfully , in the way lady address the tiresome spouse they lord 
 it over . " your friend have be sulk the whole evening , and be only 
 just begin to be pleasant as the moon rise . " 

 " the moon have a good effect on poet and other mad folk , I dare say , " 
 say the bald man , with a good - humour laugh . " but I can not   have my 
 little niece lay up again just as she be on the mend : Annie , come in . " 

 the girl obey reluctantly . the old lady rise too . 

 " ah , Mother , you be wise , " say the bald man ; " and a game at euchre be 
 safe than poetize in night air . " he wind his arm round the old lady 
 with a careful fondness , for she move with some difficulty as if rather 
 lame . " as for you two sentimentalist and moon - gazer , I give you ten 
 minute ' time , - not more , mind . " 

 " Tyrant ! " say the minstrel . 

 the balcony now hold only two form , - the minstrel and the handsome 
 lady . the window be closed , and partially veil by muslin drapery , 
 but Kenelm catch glimpse of the room within . he could see that the 
 room , light by a lamp on the centre table and candle elsewhere , be 
 decorate and fit up with cost and in a taste not english . he could 
 see , for instance , that the ceiling be paint , and the wall be not 
 paper , but paint in panel between arabesque pilaster . 

 " they be foreigner , " think Kenelm , " though the man do speak 
 English so well . that account for play euchre of a Sunday evening , 
 as if there be no harm in it . Euchre be an american game . the man 
 be call Fritz . ah ! I guess - Germans who have live a good deal in 
 America ; and the verse - maker say he be at Luscombe on pecuniary 
 business . doubtless his host be a merchant , and the verse - maker in some 
 commercial firm . that account for his concealment of name , and fear of 
 its be know that he be addict in his holiday to taste and habit 
 so opposed to his calling . " 

 while he be thus think , the lady have draw her chair close to the 
 minstrel , and be speak to he with evident earnestness , but in tone 
 too low for Kenelm to hear . still it seem to he , by her manner and by 
 the man 's look , as if she be speak in some sort of reproach , 
 which he seek to deprecate . then he speak , also in a whisper , and 
 she avert her face for a moment ; then she hold out her hand , and the 
 minstrel kiss it . certainly , thus see , the two might well be take 
 for lover ; and the soft night , the fragrance of the flower , silence 
 and solitude , star and moon light , all girt they as with an atmosphere 
 of love . presently the man rise and lean over the balcony , prop 
 his cheek on his hand , and gaze on the river . the lady rise too , 
 and also lean over the balustrade , her dark hair almost touch the 
 auburn lock of her companion . 

 Kenelm sigh . be it from envy , from pity , from fear ? I know not ; but 
 he sigh . 

 after a brief pause , the lady say , still in low tone , but not too low 
 this time to escape Kenelm 's fine sense of hearing , - 

 " tell I those verse again . I must remember every word of they when you 
 be go . " 

 the man shake his head gently , and answer , but inaudibly . 

 " do , " say the lady ; ' set they to music later ; and the next time you 
 come I will sing they . I have think of a title for they . " 

 " what ? " ask the minstrel . 

 " Love 's quarrel . " 

 the minstrel turn his head , and their eye meet , and , in meeting , 
 linger long . then he move away , and with face turn from she 
 and towards the river , give the melody of his wondrous voice to the 
 follow line : - 


  LOVE 's QUARREL . 

  " stand by the river , gaze on the river , 
  see it pave with starbeam , - heaven be at our foot ; 
  now the wave be trouble , now the rush quiver ; 
  Vanished be the starlight : it be a deceit . 

  " come a little cloudlet ' twixt ourselves and heaven , 
  and from all the river fade the silver track ; 
  put thine arm around I , whisper low , ' forgive ! ' 
  see how on the river starlight settle back . " 


 when he have finish , still with face turn aside , the lady do not , 
 indeed , whisper " forgive , " nor put her arm around he ; but , as if by 
 irresistible impulse , she lay her hand lightly on his shoulder . 

 the minstrel start . 

 there come to his ear , - he know not from whence , from whom , - 

 " Mischief ! mischief ! remember the little child ! " 

 " hush ! " he say , star round . " do you not hear a voice ? " 

 " only your , " say the lady . 

 " it be our guardian angel 's , Amalie . it come in time . we will go 
 within . " 



 CHAPTER XII . 

 the next morning betime Kenelm visit Tom at his uncle 's home . a 
 comfortable and respectable home it be , like that of an owner in easy 
 circumstance . the veterinary surgeon himself be intelligent , and 
 apparently educate beyond the range of his calling ; a childless 
 widower , between sixty and seventy , live with a sister , an old maid . 
 they be evidently much attach to Tom , and delight by the hope of 
 keep he with they . Tom himself look rather sad , but not sullen , 
 and his face brighten wonderfully at first sight of Kenelm . that 
 oddity make himself as pleasant and as much like other people as he 
 could in converse with the old widower and the old maid , and take 
 leave , engage Tom to be at his inn at half past twelve , and spend the 
 day with he and the minstrel . he then return to the Golden Lamb , and 
 wait there for his first visitant ; the minstrel . that votary of the 
 muse arrive punctually at twelve o'clock . his countenance be less 
 cheerful and sunny than usual . Kenelm make no allusion to the scene 
 he have witness , nor do his visitor seem to suspect that Kenelm have 
 witness it or be the utterer of that warning voice . 

 KENELM . - " I have ask my friend Tom Bowles to come a little later , 
 because I wish you to be of use to he , and , in order to be so , I 
 should suggest how . " 

 THE MINSTREL . - " pray do . " 

 KENELM . - " you know that I be not a poet , and I do not have much 
 reverence for verse - making merely as a craft . " 

 THE MINSTREL . - " neither have I. " 

 KENELM . - " but I have a great reverence for poetry as a priesthood . I 
 feel that reverence for you when you sketch and talk priesthood 
 last evening , and place in my heart - I hope forever while it beat - the 
 image of the child on the sunlit hill , high above the abode of man , 
 toss her flower - ball heavenward and with heavenward eye . " 

 the singer 's cheek colour high , and his lip quiver : he be very 
 sensitive to praise ; most singer be . 

 Kenelm resume , " I have be educate in the realistic school , and with 
 realism I be discontent , because in realism as a school there be no 
 truth . it contain but a bit of truth , and that the cold and hard 
 bit of it , and he who utter a bit of truth and suppresse the rest of 
 it tell a lie . " 

 the MINSTREL   slyly . - " do the critic who say to I , ' sing of 
 beefsteak , because the appetite for food be a real want of daily life , 
 and do not   sing of art and glory and love , because in daily life a man 
 may do without such idea , ' - tell a lie ? " 

 KENELM . - " thank you for that rebuke . I submit to it . no doubt I do tell 
 a lie , - that be , if I be quite in earnest in my recommendation , and if 
 not in earnest , why - " 

 THE MINSTREL . - " you belie yourself . " 

 KENELM . - " very likely . I set out on my travel to escape from sham , and 
 begin to discover that I be a sham par excellence . but I suddenly 
 come across you , as a boy dull by his syntax and his vulgar fraction 
 suddenly come across a pleasant poem or a picture - book , and feel his 
 wit brighten up . I owe you much : you have do I a world of good . " 

 " I can not guess how . " 

 " possibly not , but you have show I how the realism of Nature herself 
 take colour and life and soul when see on the ideal or poetic side 
 of it . it be not exactly the word that you say or sing that do I the 
 good , but they awaken within I new train of thought , which I seek 
 to follow out . the good teacher be the one who suggest rather than 
 dogmatize , and inspire his listener with the wish to teach himself . 
 therefore , o singer ! whatever be the worth in critical eye of your 
 song , I be glad to remember that you would like to go through the world 
 always sing . " 

 " pardon I : you forget that I add , ' if life be always young , and the 
 season be always summer . ' " 

 " I do not forget . but if youth and summer fade for you , you leave youth 
 and summer behind you as you pass along , - behind in heart which mere 
 realism would make always old , and count their slothful beat under 
 the gray of a sky without sun or star ; wherefore I pray you to consider 
 how magnificent a mission the singer 's be , - to harmonize your life with 
 your song , and toss your flower , as your child do , heavenward , with 
 heavenward eye . think only of this when you talk with my sorrowing 
 friend , and you will do he good , as you have do I , without be 
 able to guess how a seeker after the beautiful , such as you , carry we 
 along with he on his way ; so that we , too , look out for beauty , and see 
 it in the wild - flower to which we have be blind before . " 

 here Tom enter the little sand parlour where this dialogue have be 
 hold , and the three man sally forth , take the short cut from the 
 town into the field and woodland . 



 CHAPTER XIII . 

 whether or not his spirit be raise by Kenelm 's praise and 
 exhortation , the minstrel that day talk with a charm that spellbound 
 Tom , and Kenelm be satisfied with brief remark on his side tend to 
 draw out the principal performer . 

 the talk be draw from outward thing , from natural object , - object 
 that interest child , and man who , like Tom Bowles , have be 
 accustom to view surrounding more with the heart 's eye than the 
 mind 's eye . this rover about the country know much of the habit of 
 bird and beast and insect , and tell anecdote of they with a mixture 
 of humour and pathos , which fascinate Tom 's attention , make he laugh 
 heartily , and sometimes bring tear into his big blue eye . 

 they din at an inn by the wayside , and the dinner be mirthful ; then 
 they wend their way slowly back . by the decline daylight their talk 
 grow somewhat graver , and Kenelm take more part in it . Tom listen 
 mute , - still fascinated . at length , as the town come in sight , they 
 agree to halt a while , in a bosky nook soft with moss and sweet with 
 wild thyme . 

 there , as they lie stretch at their ease , the bird hymn vesper 
 song amid the bough above , or dropping , noiseless and fearless , for 
 their evening food on the sward around they , the wanderer say to 
 Kenelm , " you tell I that you be no poet , yet I be sure you have a 
 poet 's perception : you must have write poetry ? " 

 " not I ; as I before tell you , only school verse in dead language : but 
 I find in my knapsack this morning a copy of some rhyme , make by a 
 fellow - collegian , which I put into my pocket meaning to read they to 
 you both . they be not verse like your , which evidently burst from you 
 spontaneously , and be not imitate from any other poet . these verse 
 be write by a Scotchman , and smack of imitation from the old ballad 
 style . there be little to admire in the word themselves , but there 
 be something in the idea which strike I as original , and impress I 
 sufficiently to keep a copy , and somehow or other it get into the leaf 
 of one of the two book I carry with I from home . " 

 " what be those book ? book of poetry both , I will venture to wager - " 

 " Wrong ! both metaphysical , and dry as a bone . Tom , light your pipe , and 
 you , sir , lean more at ease on your elbow ; I should warn you that the 
 ballad be long . patience ! " 

 " attention ! " say the minstrel . 

 " Fire ! " add Tom . 

 Kenelm begin to read , - and he read well . 


  LORD RONALD 'S BRIDE . 

  PART I. 

  " why gather the crowd in the market - place 
  Ere the star have yet leave the sky ? " 
  " for a holiday show and an act of grace , - 
  at the sunrise a witch shall die . " 

  " what deed have she do to deserve that doom ? 
  have she blight the stand corn , 
  or rifle for philter a dead man 's tomb , 
  or rid mother of babe new - bear ? " 

  " her pact with the fiend be not thus reveal , 
  she teach sinner the Word to hear ; 
  the hungry she feed , and the sick she heal , 
  and be hold as a Saint last year . 

  " but a holy man , who at Rome have be , 
  have discover , by book and bell , 
  that the marvel she work be through arts unclean , 
  and the lie of the Prince of Hell . 

  " and our Mother the Church , for the dame be rich , 
  and her husband be Lord of Clyde , 
  would fain have be mild to this saint - like witch 
  if her sin she have not deny . 

  " but hush , and come near to see the sight , 
  Sheriff , halberd , and torchman , - look ! 
  that be the witch stand mute in her garb of white , 
  by the priest with his bell and book . " 

  so the witch be consume on the sacred pyre , 
  and the priest grow in power and pride , 
  and the witch leave a son to succeed his sire 
  in the hall and the land of Clyde . 

  and the infant wax comely and strong and brave , 
  but his manhood have scarce begin , 
  when his vessel be launch on the northern wave 
  to the shore which be near the sun . 

  PART II . 

  Lord Ronald have come to his hall in Clyde 
  with a bride of some unknown race ; 
  compare with the man who would kiss that bride 
  Wallace wight be a coward base . 

  her eye have the glare of the mountain - cat 
  when it spring on the hunter 's spear , 
  at the head of the board when that lady sate 
  hungry man could not eat for fear . 

  and the tone of her voice have that deadly growl 
  of the bloodhound that scent its prey ; 
  no storm be so dark as that lady 's scowl 
  under tress of wintry gray . 

  " Lord Ronald ! man marry for love or gold , 
  mickle rich must have be thy bride ! " 
  " Man 's heart may be buy , woman 's hand be sell , 
  on the bank of our northern Clyde . 

  " my bride be , in sooth , mickle rich to I 
  though she bring not a groat in dower , 
  for her face , couldst thou see it as I do see , 
  be the fair in hall or bower ! " 

  Quoth the bishop one day to our lord the king , 
  " Satan reign on the Clyde alway , 
  and the taint in the blood of the witch doth cling 
  to the child that she bring to day . 

  " Lord Ronald hath come from the Paynim land 
  with a bride that appal the sight ; 
  like his dam she hath mole on her dread right hand , 
  and she turn to a snake at night . 

  " it be plain that a Scot who can blindly dote 
  on the face of an eastern ghoul , 
  and a ghoul who be worth not a silver groat , 
  be a Scot who have lose his soul . 

  " it be wise to have do with this demon tree 
  which have teem with such caukere fruit ; 
  add the soil where it stand to my holy See , 
  and consign to the flame its root . " 

  " holy man ! " quoth King James , and he laugh , " we know 
  that thy tongue never wag in vain , 
  but the Church cist be full , and the king 's be low , 
  and the Clyde be a fair domain . 

  " yet a knight that be bewitch by a laidly fere 
  need not much to dissolve the spell ; 
  we will summon the bride and the bridegroom here 
  be at hand with thy book and bell . " 

  PART III . 

  Lord Ronald stand up in King James 's court , 
  and his dame by his dauntless side ; 
  the baron who come in the hope of sport 
  shake with fright when they see the bride . 

  the bishop , though arm with his bell and book , 
  grow as white as if turn to stone ; 
  it be only our king who could face that look , 
  but he speak with a trembling tone . 

  " Lord Ronald , the knight of thy race and mine 
  should have mate in their own degree ; 
  what parentage , say , hath that bride of thine 
  who hath come from the far countree ? 

  " and what be she dowry in gold or land , 
  or what be the charm , I pray , 
  that a comely young gallant should woo the hand 
  of the ladye we see to - day ? " 

  and the lord would have laugh , but that awful dame 
  strike they dumb with her thunder - frown : 
  " Saucy king , do I utter my father 's name , 
  Thou wouldst kneel as his liegeman down . 

  " though I bring to Lord Ronald nor land nor gold , 
  nor the bloom of a fading cheek ; 
  yet , be I a widow , both young and old 
  would my hand and my dowry seek . 

  " for the wish that he covet the most below , 
  and would hide from the saint above , 
  which he dare not to pray for in weal or woe , 
  be the dowry I bring my love . 

  " let every man look in his heart and see 
  what the wish he most lust to win , 
  and then let he fasten his eye on I 
  while he think of his darling sin . " 

  and every man - bishop , and lord , and king 
  Thought of what he most wish to win , 
  and , fix his eye on that grewsome thing , 
  he behold his own darling sin . 

  no long a ghoul in that face he see ; 
  it be fair as a boy 's first love : 
  the voice that have curdle his vein with awe 
  be the coo of the woodland dove . 

  each heart be on flame for the peerless dame 
  at the price of the husband 's life ; 
  bright claymore flash out , and loud voice shout , 
  " in thy widow shall be my wife . " 

  then darkness fall over the palace hall , 
  more dark and more dark it fall , 
  and a death - groan boom hoarse underneath the pall , 
  and be drown amid roar and yell . 

  when light through the lattice - pane stole once more , 
  it be gray as a wintry dawn , 
  and the bishop lie cold on the regal floor , 
  with a stain on his robe of lawn . 

  Lord Ronald be stand beside the dead , 
  in the scabbard he plunge his sword , 
  and with visage as wan as the corpse , he say , 
  " Lo ! my ladye hath keep her word . 

  " now I leave she to other to woo and win , 
  for no long I find she fair ; 
  could I look on the face of my darling sin , 
  I should see but a dead man 's there . 

  " and the dowry she bring I be here return , 
  for the wish of my heart have die , 
  it be quench in the blood of the priest who burn 
  my sweet mother , the Saint of Clyde . " 

  Lord Ronald stride over the stony floor , 
  not a hand be outstretche to stay ; 
  Lord Ronald have pass through the gap door , 
  not an eye ever trace the way . 

  and the ladye , leave widow , be prize above 
  all the maiden in hall and bower , 
  many barter their life for that ladye 's love , 
  and their soul for that ladye 's dower . 

  God grant that the wish which I dare not pray 
  be not that which I lust to win , 
  and that ever I look with my first dismay 
  on the face of my darling sin ! 


 as he cease , Kenelm 's eye fall on Tom 's face upturned to his own , with 
 open lip , an intent stare , and paled cheek , and a look of that high 
 sort of terror which belong to awe . the man , then recover himself , 
 try to speak , and attempt a sickly smile , but neither would do . 
 he rise abruptly and walk away , creep under the shadow of a dark 
 beech - tree , and stand there lean against the trunk . 

 " what say you to the ballad ? " ask Kenelm of the singer . 

 " it be not without power , " answer he . 

 " ay , of a certain kind . " 

 the minstrel look hard at Kenelm , and drop his eye , with a 
 heighten glow on his cheek . 

 " the Scotch be a thoughtful race . the Scot who write this thing may 
 have think of a day when he see beauty in the face of a darling sin ; 
 but , if so , it be evident that his sight recover from that glamoury . 
 shall we walk on ? Come , Tom . " 

 the minstrel leave they at the entrance of the town , say , " I regret 
 that I can not see more of either of you , as I quit Luscombe at daybreak . 
 here , by the by , I forgot to give it before , be the address you want . " 

 KENELM . - " of the little child . I be glad you remember she . " 

 the minstrel again look hard at Kenelm , this time without drop his 
 eye . Kenelm 's expression of face be so simply quiet that it might be 
 almost call vacant . 

 Kenelm and Tom continue to walk on towards the veterinary surgeon 's 
 house , for some minute silently . then Tom say in a whisper , " do you 
 not mean those rhyme to hit I here - here ? " and he strike his breast . 

 " the rhyme be write long before I see you , Tom ; but it be well if 
 their meaning strike we all . of you , my friend , I have no fear now . be 
 you not already a change man ? " 

 " I feel as if I be go through a change , " answer Tom , in slow , 
 dreary accent . " in hear you and that gentleman talk so much of 
 thing that I never think of , I feel something in I , - you will laugh 
 when I tell you , - something like a bird . " 

 " like a bird , - good ! - a bird have wing . " 

 " just so . " 

 " and you feel wing that you be unconscious of before , flutter and 
 beat themselves as against the wire of a cage . you be true to 
 your instinct then , my dear fellow - man , - instinct of space and Heaven . 
 Courage ! - the cage - door will open soon . and now , practically speak , 
 I give you this advice in parting : you have a quick and sensitive mind 
 which you have allow that strong body of yours to incarcerate and 
 suppress . give that mind fair play . attend to the business of your 
 call diligently ; the craving for regular work be the healthful 
 appetite of mind : but in your spare hour cultivate the new idea which 
 your talk with man who have be accustom to cultivate the mind more 
 than the body have sow within you . belong to a book - club , and interest 
 yourself in book . a wise man have say , ' book widen the present by 
 add to it the past and the future . ' seek the company of educate man 
 and educate woman too ; and when you be angry with another , reason 
 with he : do not   knock he down ; and do not   be knock down yourself by an 
 enemy much strong than yourself , - drink . do all this , and when I see 
 you again you will be - " 

 " stop , sir , - you will see I again ? " 

 " yes , if we both live , I promise it . " 

 " when ? " 

 " you see , Tom , we have both of we something in our old self which we 
 must work off . you will work off your something by repose , and I must 
 work off mine , if I can , by move about . so I be on my travel . May 
 we both have new self well than the old self , when we again shake 
 hand ! for your part try your good , dear Tom , and Heaven prosper you . " 

 " and Heaven bless you ! " cry Tom , fervently , with tear roll 
 unheeded from his bold blue eye . 



 CHAPTER XIV . 

 THOUGH Kenelm leave Luscombe on Tuesday morning , he do not appear at 
 Neesdale Park till the Wednesday , a little before the dressing - bell for 
 dinner . his adventure in the interim be not worth repeat . he have 
 hop he might fall in again with the minstrel , but he do not . 

 his portmanteau have arrive , and he heave a sigh as he case himself in 
 a gentleman 's evening dress . " alas ! I have soon get back again into my 
 own skin . " 

 there be several other guest in the house , though not a 
 large party , - they have be ask with an eye to the approach 
 election , - consist of squire and clergy from remoter part of the 
 county . chief among the guest in rank and importance , and render by 
 the occasion the central object of interest , be George Belvoir . 

 Kenelm bear his part in this society with a resignation that partook of 
 repentance . 

 the first day he speak very little , and be consider a very dull young 
 man by the lady he take in to dinner . Mr. Travers in vain try to draw 
 he out . he have anticipate much amusement from the eccentricity of 
 his guest , who have talk volubly enough in the fernery , and be sadly 
 disappoint . " I feel , " he whisper to Mrs. Campion , " like poor Lord 
 Pomfret , who , charm with Punch 's lively conversation , buy he , and 
 be greatly surprised that , when he have once bring he home , Punch 
 would not talk . " 

 " but your Punch listen , " say Mrs. Campion , " and he observe . " 

 George Belvoir , on the other hand , be universally declare to be very 
 agreeable . though not naturally jovial , he force himself to appear 
 so , - laugh loud with the squire , and enter heartily with 
 their wife and daughter into such topic as county - ball and 
 croquet - party ; and when after dinner he have , Cato - like , ' warm his 
 virtue with wine , ' the virtue come out very lustily in praise of good 
 man , - namely , man of his own party , - and anathema on bad man , - namely , 
 man of the other party . 

 now and then he appeal to Kenelm , and Kenelm always return the same 
 answer , " there be much in what you say . " 

 the first evening close in the usual way in country house . there be 
 some lounge under moonlight on the terrace before the house ; then 
 there be some singing by young lady amateur , and a rubber of whist for 
 the elder ; then wine - and - water , hand - candlestick , a smoking - room for 
 those who smoke , and bed for those who do not . 

 in the course of the evening , Cecilia , partly in obedience to the duty 
 of hostess and partly from that compassion for shyness which kindly and 
 high - breed person entertain , have go a little out of her way to allure 
 Kenelm forth from the estranged solitude he have contrive to weave 
 around he . in vain for the daughter as for the father . he reply to 
 she with the quiet self - possession which should have convince she that 
 no man on earth be less entitled to indulgence for the gentlemanlike 
 infirmity of shyness , and no man less need the duty of any hostess 
 for the augmentation of his comfort , or rather for his diminished sense 
 of discomfort ; but his reply be in monosyllable , and make with the 
 air of a man who say in his heart , " if this creature would but leave I 
 alone ! " 

 Cecilia , for the first time in her life , be pique , and , strange to 
 say , begin to feel more interest about this indifferent strange than 
 about the popular , animate , pleasant George Belvoir , who she know by 
 womanly instinct be as much in love with she as he could be . 

 Cecilia Travers that night on retire to rest tell she maid , smilingly , 
 that she be too tired to have her hair do ; and yet , when the maid 
 be dismiss , she look at herself in the glass more gravely and more 
 discontentedly than she have ever look there before ; and , tired though 
 she be , stand at the window gaze into the moonlit night for a good 
 hour after the maid leave she . 



 CHAPTER XV . 

 KENELM CHILLINGLY have now be several day a guest at Neesdale Park . 
 he have recover speech ; the other guest have go , include George 
 Belvoir . Leopold Travers have take a great fancy to Kenelm . Leopold 
 be one of those man , not uncommon perhaps in England , who , with great 
 mental energy , have little book - knowledge , and when they come 
 in contact with a book - reader who be not a pedant feel a pleasant 
 excitement in his society , a source of interest in compare note with 
 he , a constant surprise in finding by what venerable authority the 
 deduction which their own mother - wit have draw from life be support , 
 or by what cogent argument derive from book those deduction be 
 contravene or upset . Leopold Travers have in he that sense of humour 
 which generally accompany a strong practical understanding   no man , 
 for instance , have more practical understanding than a Scot , and no man 
 have a keener susceptibility to humour , and not only enjoy Kenelm 's 
 odd way of express himself , but very often mistook Kenelm 's irony for 
 opinion speak in earnest . 

 since his early removal from the capital and his devotion to 
 agricultural pursuit , it be so seldom that Leopold Travers meet a man 
 by whose conversation his mind be divert to other subject than those 
 which be incidental to the commonplace routine of his life that he 
 find in Kenelm 's view of man and thing a source of novel amusement , 
 and a stirring appeal to such metaphysical creed of his own as have be 
 form unconsciously , and have long repose unexamined in the recess of 
 an intellect shrewd and strong , but more accustomed to dictate than to 
 argue . Kenelm , on his side , see much in his host to like and to admire ; 
 but , reverse their relative position in point of year , he converse 
 with Travers as with a mind young than his own . indeed , it be one 
 of his crotchety theory that each generation be in substance mentally 
 old than the generation precede it , especially in all that relate 
 to science ; and , as he would say , " the study of life be a science , and 
 not an art . " 

 but Cecilia , - what impression do she create upon the young visitor ? 
 be he alive to the charm of her rare beauty , to the grace of a mind 
 sufficiently store for commune with those who love to think and to 
 imagine , and yet sufficiently feminine and playful to seize the sportive 
 side of reality , and allow their proper place to the trifle which 
 make the sum of human thing ? an impression she do make , and that 
 impression be new to he and pleasing . Nay , sometimes in her presence 
 and sometimes when alone , he fall into abstract consultation with 
 himself , say , " Kenelm Chillingly , now that thou hast get back into 
 thy proper skin , dost thou not think that thou hadst well remain 
 there ? couldst thou not be content with thy lot as err descendant 
 of Adam , if thou couldst win for thy mate so faultless a descendant of 
 Eve as now flit before thee ? " but he could not abstract from himself 
 any satisfactory answer to the question he have address to himself . 

 once he say abruptly to Travers , as , on their return from their 
 ramble , they catch a glimpse of Cecilia 's light form bend over the 
 flower - bed on the lawn , " do you admire Virgil ? " 

 " to say truth I have not read Virgil since I be a boy ; and , between you 
 and I , I then think he rather monotonous . " 

 " perhaps because his verse be so smooth in its beauty ? " 

 " probably . when one be very young one 's taste be faulty ; and if a poet 
 be not faulty , we be apt to think he want vivacity and fire . " 

 " thank you for your lucid explanation , " answer Kenelm , add musingly 
 to himself , " I be afraid I should yawn very often if I be married to a 
 Miss Virgil . " 



 CHAPTER XVI . 

 the house of Mr. Travers contain a considerable collection of family 
 portrait , few of they well paint , but the squire be evidently proud 
 of such evidence of ancestry . they not only occupy a considerable 
 space on the wall of the reception room , but swarm into the 
 principal sleeping - chamber , and smile or frown on the beholder from 
 dark passage and remote lobby . one morning , Cecilia , on her way 
 to the china closet , find Kenelm gaze very intently upon a female 
 portrait consign to one of those obscure receptacle by which through 
 a back staircase he gain the only approach from the hall to his 
 chamber . 

 " I do not   pretend to be a good judge of painting , " say Kenelm , as 
 Cecilia pause beside he ; " but it strike I that this picture be very 
 much well than most of those to which place of honour be assign in 
 your collection . and the face itself be so lovely that it would add an 
 embellishment to the princely gallery . " 

 " yes , " say Cecilia , with a half - sigh . " the face be lovely , and the 
 portrait be consider one of Lely 's rare masterpiece . it use to 
 hang over the chimney - piece in the drawing - room . my father have it place 
 here many year ago . " 

 " perhaps because he discover it be not a family portrait ? " 

 " on the contrary , - because it grieve he to think it be a family 
 portrait . hush ! I hear his footstep : do not   speak of it to he ; do not   let 
 he see you look at it . the subject be very painful to he . " 

 here Cecilia vanish into the china closet and Kenelm turn off to his 
 own room . 

 what sin commit by the original in the time of Charles II . but only 
 discover in the reign of Victoria could have justify Leopold Travers 
 in remove the most pleasing portrait in the house from the honour 
 place it have occupy , and banish it to so obscure a recess ? Kenelm 
 say no more on the subject , and indeed an hour afterwards have dismiss 
 it from his thought . the next day he ride out with Travers and 
 Cecilia . their way pass through quiet shady lane without any purposed 
 direction , when suddenly , at the spot where three of those lane meet on 
 an angle of common ground , a lonely gray tower , in the midst of a wide 
 space of grass - land which look as if it have once be a park , with 
 huge bole of pollarded oak dot the space here and there , rise 
 before they . 

 " Cissy ! " cry Travers , angrily rein in his horse and stop short 
 in a political discussion which he have force upon Kenelm , " Cissy ! 
 how come this ? we have take the wrong turn ! no matter , I see there , " 
 point to the right , " the chimney - pot of old Mondell 's homestead . he 
 have not yet promise his vote to George Belvoir . I will go and have a talk 
 with he . turn back , you and Mr. Chillingly , - meet I at Terner 's Green , 
 and wait for I there till I come . I need not excuse myself to you , 
 chillingly . a vote be a vote . " so say , the Squire , whose ordinary 
 riding - horse be an old hunter , halt , turn , and , no gate be 
 visible , put the horse over a stiff fence and vanish in the direction 
 of old Mondell 's chimney - pot . Kenelm , scarcely hear his host 's 
 instruction to Cecilia and excuse to himself , remain still and 
 gaze on the old tower thus abruptly obtrude on his view . 

 though no learn antiquarian like his father , Kenelm have a strange 
 fascinating interest in all relic of the past ; and old gray tower , 
 where they be not church tower , be very rarely to be see in England . 
 all around the old gray tower speak with an unutterable mournfulness 
 of a past in ruin : you could see remain of some large Gothic building 
 once attach to it , rise here and there in fragment of deeply 
 buttress wall ; you could see in a dry ditch , between high ridge , 
 where there have be a fortified moat : nay , you could even see where 
 once have be the bailey hill from which a baron of old have dispense 
 justice . seldom indeed do the most acute of antiquarian discover 
 that remnant of Norman time on land still hold by the old of 
 anglo - Norman family . then , the wild nature of the demesne around ; 
 those range of sward , with those old giant oak - trunk , hollow within 
 and pollard at top , - all speak , in unison with the gray tower , of a 
 past as remote from the reign of Victoria as the pyramid be from the 
 sway of the Viceroy of Egypt . 

 " let we turn back , " say Miss Travers ; " my father would not like I to 
 stay here . " 

 " pardon I a moment . I wish my father be here ; he would stay till 
 sunset . but what be the history of that old tower ? a history it must 
 have . " 

 " every home have a history , even a peasant 's hut , " say Cecilia . " but do 
 pardon I if I ask you to comply with my father 's request . I at least 
 must turn back . " 

 thus command , Kenelm reluctantly withdraw his gaze from the ruin and 
 regain Cecilia , who be already some pace in return down the lane . 

 " I be far from a very inquisitive man by temperament , " say Kenelm , ' so 
 far as the affair of the living be concern . but I should not care to 
 open a book if I have no interest in the past . pray indulge my curiosity 
 to learn something about that old tower . it could not look more 
 melancholy and solitary if I have build it myself . " 

 " its most melancholy association be with a very recent past , " answer 
 Cecilia . " the tower , in remote time , form the keep of a castle 
 belong to the most ancient and once the most powerful family in these 
 part . the owner be baron who take active share in the Wars of the 
 Roses . the last of they side with Richard III . , and after the battle 
 of Bosworth the title be attaint , and the large portion of the land 
 be confiscate . loyalty to a Plantagenet be of course treason to 
 a Tudor . but the regeneration of the family rest with their direct 
 descendant , who have save from the general wreck of their fortune what 
 may be call a good squire 's estate , - about , perhaps , the same rental 
 as my father 's , but of much large acreage . these squire , however , 
 be more look up to in the county than the wealthy peer . they 
 be still by far the old family in the county ; and trace in their 
 pedigree alliance with the most illustrious house in english history . 
 in themselves too for many generation they be a high - spirit , 
 hospitable , popular race , live unostentatiously on their income , and 
 content with their rank of squire . the castle , ruin by time and 
 siege , they do not attempt to restore . they dwelt in a house near to 
 it , build about Elizabeth 's time , which you could not see , for it lie 
 in a hollow behind the tower , - a moderate - sized , picturesque , country 
 gentleman 's house . our family intermarry with they , - the portrait you 
 see be a daughter of their house , - and very proud be any squire in the 
 county of intermarriage with the Fletwodes . " 

 " Fletwode , - that be their name ? I have a vague recollection of have 
 hear the name connect with some disastrous - oh , but it can not   be the 
 same family : pray go on . " 

 " I fear it be the same family . but I will finish the story as I have 
 hear it . the property descend at last to one Bertram Fletwode , who , 
 unfortunately , obtain the reputation of be a very clever man of 
 business . there be some mining company in which , with other gentleman 
 in the county , he take great interest ; invest largely in share ; 
 become the head of the direction - " 

 " I see ; and be of course ruin . " 

 " no ; bad than that : he become very rich ; and , unhappily , become 
 desirous of be rich still . I have hear that there be a great 
 mania for speculation just about that time . he embark in these , and 
 prosper , till at last he be induce to invest a large share of the 
 fortune thus acquire in the partnership of a bank which enjoy a high 
 character . up to that time he have retain popularity and esteem in 
 the county ; but the squire who share in the adventure of the mining 
 company , and know little or nothing about other speculation in which 
 his name do not appear , profess to be shock at the idea of a 
 Fletwode of Fletwode be ostensibly join in partnership with a Jones 
 of Clapham in a London bank . " 

 " slow folk , those country squire , - behind the progress of the age . 
 well ? " 

 " I have hear that Bertram Fletwode be himself very reluctant to take 
 this step , but be persuade to do so by his son . this son , Alfred , be 
 say to have still great talent for business than the father , and 
 have be not only associate with but consult by he in all the later 
 speculation which have prove so fortunate . Mrs. Campion know Alfred 
 Fletwode very well . she describe he as handsome , with quick , eager 
 eye ; showy and impose in his talk ; immensely ambitious , more 
 ambitious than avaricious , - collect money less for its own sake than 
 for that which it could give , - rank and power . accord to she it be 
 the dear wish of his heart to claim the old barony , but not before 
 there could go with the barony a fortune adequate to the lustre of a 
 title so ancient , and equal to the wealth of modern peer with high 
 nominal rank . " 

 " a poor ambition at the good ; of the two I should prefer that of a poet 
 in a garret . but I be no judge . thank Heaven I have no ambition . 
 still , all ambition , all desire to rise , be interesting to he who be 
 ignominiously content if he do not fall . so the son have his way , 
 and Fletwode join company with Jones on the road to wealth and the 
 peerage ; meanwhile do the son marry ? if so , of course the daughter of 
 a duke or a millionnaire . tuft - hunting , or money - making , at the risk of 
 degradation and the workhouse . progress of the age ! " 

 " no , " reply Cecilia , smile at this outburst , but smile sadly , 
 " Fletwode do not marry the daughter of a duke or a millionnaire ; but 
 still his wife belong to a noble family , - very poor , but very proud . 
 perhaps he marry from motif of ambition , though not of gain . her 
 father be of much political influence that might perhaps assist his 
 claim to the barony . the mother , a woman of the world , enjoy a high 
 social position , and nearly related to a connection of ours , - Lady 
 Glenalvon . " 

 " Lady Glenalvon , the dearest of my lady friend ! you be connect with 
 she ? " 

 " yes ; Lord Glenalvon be my mother 's uncle . but I wish to finish my 
 story before my father join we . Alfred Fletwode do not marry till long 
 after the partnership in the bank . his father , at his desire , have buy 
 up the whole business , Mr. Jones have die . the bank be carry on 
 in the name of Fletwode and Son . but the father have become merely a 
 nominal or what I believe be call a ' sleep ' partner . he have long 
 cease to reside in the county . the old house be not grand enough for 
 he . he have purchase a palatial residence in one of the home county ; 
 live there in great splendour ; be a munificent patron of science 
 and art ; and in spite of his early addiction to business - like 
 speculation he appear to have be a singularly accomplish , 
 high - breed gentleman . some year before his son 's marriage , Mr. Fletwode 
 have be afflict with partial paralysis , and his medical attendant 
 enjoin rigid abstention from business . from that time he never 
 interfere with his son 's management of the bank . he have an only 
 daughter , much young than Alfred . Lord Eagleton , my mother 's brother , 
 be engage to be married to she . the wedding - day be fix , - when the 
 world be startle by the news that the great firm of Fletwode and Son 
 have stop payment ; be that the right phrase ? " 

 " I believe so . " 

 " a great many people be ruin in that failure . the public indignation 
 be very great . of course all the Fletwode property go to the 
 creditor . old Mr. Fletwode be legally acquit of all other offence 
 than that of overconfidence in his son . Alfred be convict of 
 fraud , - of forgery . I do not , of course , know the particular , they be 
 very complicated . he be sentence to a long term of servitude , but 
 die the day he be condemn ; apparently by poison , which he have long 
 secrete about his person . now you can understand why my father , who 
 be almost gratuitously sensitive on the point of honour , remove into a 
 dark corner the portrait of Arabella Fletwode , - his own ancestress , but 
 also the ancestress of a convict felon : you can understand why the 
 whole subject be so painful to he . his wife 's brother be to have 
 marry the felon 's sister ; and though , of course , that marriage be 
 tacitly break off by the terrible disgrace that have befall the 
 Fletwodes , yet I do not   think my poor uncle ever recover the blow to 
 his hope . he go abroad , and die in Madeira of a slow decline . " 

 " and the felon 's sister , do she die too ? " 

 " no ; not that I know of . Mrs. Campion say that she see in a newspaper 
 the announcement of old Mr. Fletwode 's death , and a paragraph to the 
 effect that after that event Miss Fletwode have sail from Liverpool to 
 New York . " 

 " Alfred Fletwode 's wife go back , of course , to her family ? " 

 " alas ! no , - poor thing ! she have not be many month marry when the 
 bank break ; and among his friend her wretched husband appear to have 
 forge the name of the trustee to her marriage settlement , and sell 
 out the sum which would otherwise have serve she as a competence . 
 her father , too , be a great sufferer by the bankruptcy , have by 
 his son - in - law 's advice place a considerable portion of his moderate 
 fortune in Alfred 's hand for investment , all of which be involve in 
 the general wreck . I be afraid he be a very hard - hearted man : at all 
 event his poor daughter never return to he . she die , I think , even 
 before the death of Bertram Fletwode . the whole story be very dismal . " 

 " dismal indeed , but pregnant with salutary warning to those who live 
 in an age of progress . here you see a family of fair fortune , living 
 hospitably , beloved , revere , more look up to by their neighbour than 
 the wealthy noble ; no family not proud to boast alliance with it . 
 all at once , in the tranquil record of this happy race , appear that 
 darling of the age , that hero of progress , - a clever man of business . he 
 be content to live as his father ! he be content with such trifle 
 as competence , respect , and love ! much too clever for that . the age be 
 money - making , - go with the age ! he go with the age . bear a gentleman 
 only , he exalt himself into a trader . but at least he , it seem , if 
 greedy , be not dishonest . he be bear a gentleman , but his son be 
 bear a trader . the son be a still cleverer man of business ; the son be 
 consult and trust . aha ! he too go with the age ; to greed he 
 link ambition . the trader 's son wish to return - what ? to the rank of 
 gentleman ? - gentleman ! nonsense ! everybody be a gentleman nowadays , - to 
 the title of Lord . how end it all ! could I sit but for twelve hour in 
 the innermost heart of that Alfred Fletwode ; could I see how , step by 
 step from his childhood , the dishonest son be avariciously lead on by 
 the honest father to depart from the old vestigia of Fletwodes of 
 Fletwode , - scorn the Enough to covet the More , gain the More to 
 sigh , ' it be not the Enough , ' - I think I might show that the age live 
 in a house of glass , and have well not for its own sake throw stone on 
 the felon ! " 

 " ah , but , Mr. Chillingly , surely this be a very rare exception in the 
 general - " 

 " Rare ! " interrupt Kenelm , who be excited to a warmth of passion which 
 would have startle his most intimate friend,-if indeed an intimate 
 friend have ever be vouchsafe to he , - " rare ! nay , how common - I do not 
 say to the extent of forgery and fraud , but to the extent of degradation 
 and ruin - be the greed of a little More to those who have the Enough ! be 
 the discontent with competence , respect , and love , when catch sight 
 of a money - bag ! how many well - descend county family , curse with 
 an heir who be call a clever man of business , have vanish from the 
 soil ! a company start , the clever man join it one bright day . Pouf ! 
 the old estate and the old name be powder . ascend higher . take noble 
 whose ancestral title ought to be to english ear like the sound of 
 clarion , awaken the most slothful to the scorn of money - bag and 
 the passion for renown . Lo ! in that mocking dance of death call 
 the Progress of the Age , one who do not find Enough in a sovereign 's 
 revenue , and seek the little More as a gambler on the turf by the 
 advice of blackleg ! lo ! another , with land wide than his great 
 ancestor ever possess , must still go in for the little More , add 
 acre to acre , heap debt upon debt ! Lo ! a third , whose name , bear by 
 his ancestor , be once the terror of England 's foe , - the landlord of 
 a hotel ! a fourth , - but why go on through the list ? another and another 
 still succeed ; each on the Road to Ruin , each in the Age of Progress . 
 ah , Miss Travers ! in the old time it be through the Temple of Honour 
 that one pass to the Temple of Fortune . in this wise age the process 
 be reverse . but here come your father . " 

 " a thousand pardon ! " say Leopold Travers . " that numskull Mondell keep 
 I so long with his old - fashioned Tory doubt whether liberal politic 
 be favourable to agricultural prospect . but as he owe a round sum to 
 a Whig lawyer I have to talk with his wife , a prudent woman ; convince 
 she that his own agricultural prospect be safe on the Whig side of 
 the question ; and , after kiss his baby and shake his hand , book 
 his vote for George Belvoir , - a plumper . " 

 " I suppose , " say Kenelm to himself , and with that candour which 
 characterize he whenever he talk to himself , " that Travers have take 
 the right road to the Temple , not of Honour , but of honour , in every 
 country , ancient or modern , which have adopt the system of popular 
 suffrage . " 



 CHAPTER XVII . 

 the next day Mrs. Campion and Cecilia be seat under the veranda . 
 they be both ostensibly employ on two several piece of embroidery , 
 one intend for a screen , the other for a sofa - cushion ; but the mind of 
 neither be on her work . 

 MRS . CAMPION . - " have Mr. Chillingly say when he mean to take leave ? " 

 CECILIA . - " not to I . how much my dear father enjoy his conversation ! " 

 MRS . CAMPION . - " cynicism and mockery be not so much the fashion among 
 young man in your father 's day as I suppose they be now , and therefore 
 they seem new to Mr. Travers . to I they be not new , because I see 
 more of the old than the young when I live in London , and cynicism and 
 mockery be more natural to man who be leave the world than to those 
 who be enter it . " 

 CECILIA . - " Dear Mrs. Campion , how bitter you be , and how unjust ! 
 you take much too literally the jesting way in which Mr. Chillingly 
 express himself . there can be no cynicism in one who go out of his 
 way to make other happy . " 

 MRS . CAMPION . - " you mean in the whim of make an ill - assorted marriage 
 between a pretty village flirt and a sickly cripple , and settle a 
 couple of peasant in a business for which they be wholly unfit . " 

 CECILIA . - " Jessie Wiles be not a flirt , and I be convinced that she will 
 make Will Somers a very good wife , and that the shop will be a great 
 success . " 

 MRS . CAMPION . - " we shall see . still , if Mr. Chillingly 's talk belie his 
 action , he may be a good man , but he be a very affected one . " 

 CECILIA . - " have I not hear you say that there be person so natural 
 that they seem affect to those who do not understand they ? " 

 Mrs. Campion raise her eye to Cecilia 's face , drop they again over 
 her work , and say , in grave undertone , - " take care , Cecilia . " 

 " take care of what ? " 

 " my dear child , forgive I ; but I do not like the warmth with which 
 you defend Mr. Chillingly . " 

 " would not my father defend he still more warmly if he have hear you ? " 

 " man judge of man in their relation to man . I be a woman , and judge of 
 man in their relation to woman . I should tremble for the happiness of 
 any woman who join her fate with that of Kenelm Chillingly . " 

 " my dear friend , I do not understand you to - day . " 

 " Nay ; I do not mean to be so solemn , my love . after all , it be nothing 
 to we whom Mr. Chillingly may or may not marry . he be but a pass 
 visitor , and , once go , the chance be that we may not see he again 
 for year . " 

 thus speak , Mrs. Campion again raise her eye from her work , 
 steal a sidelong glance at Cecilia ; and her mother - like heart sink 
 within she , on notice how suddenly pale the girl have become , and how 
 her lip quiver . Mrs. Campion have enough knowledge of life to feel 
 aware that she have commit a grievous blunder . in that early stage 
 of virgin affection , when a girl be unconscious of more than a certain 
 vague interest in one man which distinguish he from other in her 
 thought , - if she hear he unjustly disparage , if some warn against 
 he be imply , if the probability that he will never be more to she 
 than a pass acquaintance be forcibly obtrude on she , - suddenly that 
 vague interest , which might otherwise have fade away with many another 
 girlish fancy , become arrest , consolidated ; the quick pang it 
 occasion make she involuntarily , and for the first time , question 
 herself , and ask , " do I love ? " but when a girl of a nature so delicate 
 as that of Cecilia Travers can ask herself the question , " do I love ? " 
 her very modesty , her very shrink from acknowledge that any power 
 over her thought for weal or for woe can be acquire by a man , except 
 through the sanction of that love which only become divine in her eye 
 when it be earnest and pure and self - devote , make she prematurely 
 disposed to answer " yes . " and when a girl of such a nature in her own 
 heart answer " yes " to such a question , even if she deceive herself at 
 the moment , she begin to cherish the deceit till the belief in her love 
 become a reality . she have adopt a religion , false or true , and she 
 would despise herself if she could be easily convert . 

 Mrs. Campion have so contrive that she have force that question upon 
 Cecilia , and she fear , by the girl 's change of countenance , that the 
 girl 's heart have answer " yes . " 



 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 while the conversation just narrated take place , Kenelm have walk forth 
 to pay a visit to Will Somers . all obstacle to Will 's marriage be now 
 clear away ; the transfer of lease for the shop have be sign , and 
 the bann be to be publish for the first time on the follow 
 Sunday . we need not say that Will be very happy . Kenelm then pay a 
 visit to Mrs. Bowles , with whom he stay an hour . on reentere the 
 Park , he see Travers , walk slowly , with downcast eye and his hand 
 clasp behind he   his habit when in thought . he do not observe 
 Kenelm 's approach till within a few foot of he , and he then greet his 
 guest in listless accent , unlike his usual cheerful tone . 

 " I have be visit the man you have make so happy , " say Kenelm . 

 " who can that be ? " 

 " will Somers . do you make so many people happy that your reminiscence of 
 they be lose in their number ? " 

 Travers smile faintly , and shake his head . 

 Kenelm go on . " I have also see Mrs. Bowles , and you will be please 
 to hear that Tom be satisfied with his change of abode : there be no 
 chance of his return to Graveleigh ; and Mrs. Bowles take very kindly 
 to my suggestion that the little property you wish for should be sell 
 to you , and , in that case , she would remove to Luscombe to be near her 
 son . " 

 " I thank you much for your thought of I , " say Travers , " and the affair 
 shall be see to at once , though the purchase be no long important to 
 I . I ought to have tell you three day ago , but it slip my memory , 
 that a neighbouring squire , a young fellow just come into his property , 
 have offer to exchange a capital farm , much near to my residence , 
 for the land I hold in Graveleigh , include Saunderson 's farm and the 
 cottage : they be quite at the outskirt of my estate , but run into 
 his , and the exchange will be advantageous to both . still I be glad that 
 the neighbourhood should be thoroughly rid of a brute like Tom Bowles . " 

 " you would not call he brute if you know he ; but I be sorry to hear 
 that will Somers will be under another landlord . " 

 " it do not matter , since his tenure be secure for fourteen year . " 

 " what sort of man be the new landlord ? " 

 " I do not   know much of he . he be in the army till his father die , 
 and have only just make his appearance in the county . he have , however , 
 already earn the character of be too fond of the other sex : it be 
 well that pretty Jessie be to be safely marry . " 

 Travers then relapse into a moody silence from which Kenelm find it 
 difficult to rouse he . at length the latter say kindly , - 

 " my dear Mr. Travers , do not think I take a liberty if I venture to 
 guess that something have happen this morning which trouble or vexe 
 you . when that be the case , it be often a relief to say what it be , even 
 to a confidant so unable to advise or to comfort as myself . " 

 " you be a good fellow , chillingly , and I know not , at least in these 
 part , a man to whom I would unburden myself more freely . I be put out , 
 I confess ; disappoint unreasonably , in a cherish wish , and , " he 
 add , with a slight laugh , " it always annoy I when I do not   have my 
 own way . " 

 " so it do I . " 

 " do not   you think that George Belvoir be a very fine young man ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 " I call he handsome ; he be steady , too , than most man of his 
 age , and of his command of money ; and yet he do not want spirit nor 
 knowledge of life . to every advantage of rank and fortune he add the 
 industry and the ambition which attain distinction in public life . " 

 " quite true . be he go to withdraw from the election after all ? " 

 " good heaven , no ! " 

 " then how do he not let you have your own way ? " 

 " it be not he , " say Travers , peevishly ; " it be Cecilia . do not   you 
 understand that George be precisely the husband I would choose for she ; 
 and this morning come a very well write manly letter from he , ask 
 my permission to pay his address to she . " 

 " but that be your own way so far . " 

 " yes , and here come the balk . of course I have to refer it to Cecilia , 
 and she positively decline , and have no reason to give ; do not deny 
 that George be good - look and sensible , that he be a man of whose 
 preference any girl might be proud ; but she choose to say she can not 
 love he , and when I ask why she can not love he , have no other answer 
 than that ' she can not say . ' it be too provoking . " 

 " it be provoke , " answer Kenelm ; " but then Love be the most 
 dunderheade of all the passion ; it never will listen to reason . the 
 very rudiment of logic be unknown to it . ' love have no wherefore , ' say 
 one of those latin poet who write love - verse call elegy , - a name 
 which we modern appropriate to funeral dirge . for my own part , I can not 
 understand how any one can be expect voluntarily to make up his mind 
 to go out of his mind . and if Miss Travers can not go out of her mind 
 because George Belvoir do , you could not argue she into do so if 
 you talk till doomsday . " 

 Travers smile in spite of himself , but he answer gravely , " certainly , 
 I would not wish Cissy to marry any man she dislike , but she do not 
 dislike George ; no girl could : and where that be the case , a girl so 
 sensible , so affectionate , so well bring up , be sure to love , after 
 marriage , a thoroughly kind and estimable man , especially when she have 
 no previous attachment , - which , of course , Cissy never have . in fact , 
 though I do not wish to force my daughter 's will , I be not yet dispose 
 to give up my own . do you understand ? " 

 " perfectly . " 

 " I be the more inclined to a marriage so desirable in every way , because 
 when Cissy come out in London , which she have not yet do , she be 
 sure to collect round her face and her presumptive inheritance all the 
 handsome fortune - hunter and title vaurien ; and if in love there 
 be no wherefore , how can I be sure that she may not fall in love with a 
 scamp ? " 

 " I think you may be sure of that , " say Kenelm . " Miss Travers have too 
 much mind . " 

 " yes , at present ; but do you not say that in love people go out of 
 their mind ? " 

 " true ! I forget that . " 

 " I be not then disposed to dismiss poor George 's offer with a decided 
 negative , and yet it would be unfair to mislead he by encouragement . in 
 fact , I will be hang if I know how to reply . " 

 " you think Miss Travers do not dislike George Belvoir , and if she see 
 more of he may like he well , and it would be good for she as well as 
 for he not to put an end to that , chance ? " 

 " exactly so . " 

 " why not then write : ' my dear George , - you have my good wish , but my 
 daughter do not seem disposed to marry at present . let I consider 
 your letter not write , and continue on the same term as we be 
 before . ' perhaps , as George know Virgil , you might find your own 
 schoolboy recollection of that poet useful here , and add , varium et 
 mutabile semper femina ; hackneyed , but true . " 

 " my dear Chillingly , your suggestion be capital . how the deuce at your 
 age have you contrive to know the world so well ? " 

 Kenelm answer in the pathetic tone so natural to his voice , " by be 
 only a looker - on ; alas ! " 

 Leopold Travers feel much relieved after he have write his reply 
 to George . he have not be quite so ingenuous in his revelation to 
 chillingly as he may have seem . conscious , like all proud and 
 fond father , of his daughter 's attraction , he be not without some 
 apprehension that Kenelm himself might entertain an ambition at variance 
 with that of George Belvoir : if so , he deem it well to put an end to 
 such ambition while yet in time : partly because his interest be already 
 pledge to George ; partly because , in rank and fortune , George be the 
 well match ; partly because George be of the same political party as 
 himself , - while Sir Peter , and probably Sir Peter 's heir , espouse the 
 opposite side ; and partly also because , with all his personal liking to 
 Kenelm , Leopold Travers , as a very sensible , practical man of the world , 
 be not sure that a baronet 's heir who tramp the country on foot in 
 the dress of a petty farmer , and indulge pugilistic propensity in 
 martial encounter with stalwart farrier , be likely to make a safe 
 husband and a comfortable son - in - law . Kenelm 's word , and still more his 
 manner , convince Travers that any apprehension of rivalry that he have 
 previously conceive be utterly groundless . 



 CHAPTER XIX . 

 the same evening , after dinner   during that lovely summer month they 
 din at Neesdale Park at an unfashionably early hour , Kenelm , in 
 company with Travers and Cecilia , ascend a gentle eminence at the back 
 of the garden , on which there be some picturesque ivy - grow ruin of 
 an ancient priory , and command the good view of a glorious sunset and 
 a subject landscape of vale and wood , rivulet and distant hill . 

 " be the delight in scenery , " say Kenelm , " really an acquire gift , 
 as some philosopher tell we ? be it true that young child and rude 
 savage do not feel it ; that the eye must be educate to comprehend its 
 charm , and that the eye can be only educate through the mind ? " 

 " I should think your philosopher be right , " say Travers . " when I be 
 a schoolboy , I think no scenery be like the flat of a cricket ground ; 
 when I hunt at Melton , I think that unpicturesque country more 
 beautiful than Devonshire . it be only of late year that I feel a 
 sensible pleasure in scenery for its own sake , apart from association 
 of custom or the us to which we apply they . " 

 " and what say you , Miss Travers ? " 

 " I scarcely know what to say , " answer Cecilia , musingly . " I can 
 remember no time in my childhood when I do not feel delight in that 
 which seem to I beautiful in scenery , but I suspect that I vaguely 
 distinguish one kind of beauty from another . a common field with 
 daisy and buttercup be beautiful to I then , and I doubt if I see 
 anything more beautiful in extensive landscape . " 

 " true , " say Kenelm : " it be not in early childhood that we carry the 
 sight into distance : as be the mind so be the eye ; in early childhood 
 the mind revel in the present , and the eye rejoice most in the thing 
 near to it . I do not   think in childhood that we - 

  " ' watch with wistful eye the set sun . ' " 

 " ah ! what a world of thought in that word ' wistful ' ! " murmur Cecilia , 
 as her gaze rivet itself on the western heaven , towards which Kenelm 
 have point as he speak , where the enlarging orb rest half its disk on 
 the rim of the horizon . 

 she have seat herself on a fragment of the ruin , back by the hollow 
 of a broken arch . the last ray of the sun linger on her young face , 
 and then lose themselves in the gloom of the arch behind . there be a 
 silence for some minute , during which the sun have sink . rosy cloud in 
 thin flake still float , momently wan : and the eve - star steal forth 
 steadfast , bright , and lonely , - nay , lonely not now ; that sentinel have 
 arouse a host . 

 say a voice , " no sign of rain yet , Squire . what will become of the 
 turnip ? " 

 " real life again ! who can escape it ? " mutter Kenelm , as his eye rest 
 on the burly figure of the squire 's bailiff . 

 " ha ! north , " say Travers , " what bring you here ? no bad news , I hope ? " 

 " indeed , yes , Squire . the Durham bull - " 

 " the Durham bull ! what of he ? you frighten I . " 

 " take bad . Colic . " 

 " excuse I , chillingly , " cry Travers ; " I must be off . a most valuable 
 animal , and no one I can trust to doctor he but myself . " 

 " that be true enough , " say the bailiff , admiringly . " there be not a 
 veterinary in the county like the squire . " 

 Travers be already go , and the pant bailiff have hard work to catch 
 he up . 

 Kenelm seat himself beside Cecilia on the ruin fragment . 

 " how I envy your father ! " say he . 

 " why just at this moment , - because he know how to doctor the bull ? " 
 say Cecilia , with a sweet low laugh . 

 " well , that be something to envy . it be a pleasure to relieve from pain 
 any of God 's creature , - even a Durham bull . " 

 " indeed , yes . I be justly rebuke . " 

 " on the contrary you be to be justly praise . your question suggest 
 to I an amiable sentiment in place of the selfish one which be 
 uppermost in my thought . I envy your father because he create for 
 himself so many object of interest ; because while he can appreciate the 
 mere sensuous enjoyment of a landscape and a sunset , he can find mental 
 excitement in turnip crop and bull . happy , Miss Travers , be the 
 Practical Man . " 

 " when my dear father be as young as you , Mr. Chillingly , I be sure that 
 he have no more interest in turnip and bull than you have . I do not 
 doubt that some day you will be as practical as he be in that respect . " 

 " do you think so - sincerely ? " 

 Cecilia make no answer . 

 Kenelm repeat the question . 

 " sincerely , then , I do not know whether you will take interest in 
 precisely the same thing that interest my father ; but there be other 
 thing than turnip and cattle which belong to what you call ' practical 
 life , ' and in these you will take interest , as you take in the fortune 
 of Will Somers and Jessie Wiles . " 

 " that be no practical interest . I get nothing by it . but even if that 
 interest be practical , - I mean productive , as cattle and turnip crop 
 be , - a succession of Somerses and Wileses be not to be hop for . 
 history never repeat itself . " 

 " may I answer you , though very humbly ? " 

 " Miss Travers , the wise man that ever exist never be wise enough 
 to know woman ; but I think most man ordinarily wise will agree in this , 
 that woman be by no mean a humble creature , and that when she say she 
 ' answer very humbly , ' she do not mean what she say . permit I to 
 entreat you to answer very loftily . " 

 Cecilia laugh and blush . the laugh be musical ; the blush be - what ? 
 let any man , seat beside a girl like Cecilia at starry twilight , find 
 the right epithet for that blush . I pass it by epithetless . but she 
 answer , firmly though sweetly , - 

 " be there not thing very practical , and affect the happiness , not 
 of one or two individual , but of innumerable thousand , in which a man 
 like Mr. Chillingly can not fail to feel interest , long before he be my 
 father 's age ? " 

 " forgive I : you do not answer ; you question . I imitate you , and ask 
 what be those thing as applicable to a man like Mr. Chillingly ? " 

 Cecilia gather herself up , as with the desire to express a great deal 
 in short substance , and then say , - 

 " in the expression of thought , literature ; in the conduct of action , 
 politic . " 

 Kenelm Chillingly star , dumfounde . I suppose the great enthusiast 
 for woman 's right could not assert more reverentially than he do the 
 cleverness of woman ; but among the thing which the cleverness of woman 
 do not achieve , he have always place " laconic . " " no woman , " he be 
 will not to say , " ever invent an axiom or a proverb . " 

 " Miss Travers , " he say at last , " before we proceed far , vouchsafe 
 to tell I if that very terse reply of yours be spontaneous and 
 original ; or whether you have not borrow it from some book which I 
 have not chance to read ? " 

 Cecilia ponder honestly , and then say , " I do not   think it be from any 
 book ; but I owe so many of my thought to Mrs. Campion , and she live so 
 much among clever man , that - " 

 " I see it all , and accept your definition , no matter whence it come . 
 you think I might become an author or a politician . do you ever read an 
 essay by a live author call ' Motive Power ' ? " 

 " no . " 

 " that essay be design to intimate that without motive power a man , 
 whatever his talent or his culture , do nothing practical . the 
 mainspring of motive power be Want and Ambition . they be absent 
 from my mechanism . by the accident of birth I do not require bread and 
 cheese ; by the accident of temperament and of philosophical culture 
 I care nothing about praise or blame . but without want of bread and 
 cheese , and with a most stolid indifference to praise and blame , do you 
 honestly think that a man will do anything practical in literature or 
 politic ? ask Mrs. Campion . " 

 " I will not ask she . be the sense of duty nothing ? " 

 " alas ! we interpret duty so variously . of mere duty , as we commonly 
 understand the word , I do not think I shall fail more than other man . 
 but for the fair development of all the good that be in we , do you 
 believe that we should adopt some line of conduct against which our 
 whole heart rebel ? can you say to the clerk , ' be a poet ' ? can you say 
 to the poet , ' be a clerk ' ? it be no more to the happiness of a man 's 
 be to order he to take to one career when his whole heart be set 
 on another , than it be to order he to marry one woman when it be to 
 another woman that his heart will turn . " 

 Cecilia here wince and look away . Kenelm have more tact than most man 
 of his age , - that is , a keener perception of subject to avoid ; but then 
 Kenelm have a wretched habit of forget the person he talk to and 
 talk to himself . utterly oblivious of George Belvoir , he be talk 
 to himself now . not then observe the effect his mal - a - propos dogma 
 have produce on his listener , he go on , " happiness be a word very 
 lightly use . it may mean little ; it may mean much . by the word 
 happiness I would signify , not the momentary joy of a child who get 
 a plaything , but the last harmony between our inclination and our 
 object ; and without that harmony we be a discord to ourselves , we be 
 incompletion , we be failure . yet there be plenty of adviser who say 
 to we , ' it be a duty to be a discord . ' I deny it . " 

 here Cecilia rise and say in a low voice , " it be get late . we must 
 go homeward . " 

 they descend the green eminence slowly , and at first in silence . 
 the bat , emerge from the ivied ruin they leave behind , flit and 
 skim before they , chase the insect of the night . a moth , escape 
 from its pursuer , alight on Cecilia 's breast , as if for refuge . 

 " the bat be practical , " say Kenelm ; " they be hungry , and their 
 motive power to - night be strong . their interest be in the insect they 
 chase . they have no interest in the star ; but the star lure the moth . " 

 Cecilia draw her slight scarf over the moth , so that it might not 
 fly off and become a prey to the bat . " yet , " say she , " the moth be 
 practical too . " 

 " ay , just now , since it have find an asylum from the danger that 
 threaten it in its course towards the star . " 

 Cecilia feel the beating of her heart , upon which lie the moth 
 conceal . do she think that a deep and more tender meaning than they 
 outwardly express be couch in these word ? if so , she err . they 
 now near the garden gate , and Kenelm pause as he open it . " see , " 
 he say , " the moon have just rise over those dark fir , make the still 
 night stiller . be it not strange that we mortal , place amid perpetual 
 agitation and tumult and strife , as if our natural element , conceive a 
 sense of holiness in the image antagonistic to our real life ; I mean 
 in image of repose ? I feel at the moment as if I suddenly be 
 make well , now that heaven and earth have suddenly become yet more 
 tranquil . I be now conscious of a purer and sweet moral than either I 
 or you draw from the insect you have shelter . I must come to the poet 
 to express it , - 


  " ' the desire of the moth for the star , 
  of the night for the morrow ; 
  the devotion to something afar 
  from the sphere of our sorrow . ' 


 " oh , that something afar ! that something afar ! never to be reach on 
 this earth , - never , never ! " 

 there be such a wail in that cry from the man 's heart that Cecilia 
 could not resist the impulse of a divine compassion . she lay her hand 
 on his , and look on the dark wildness of his upward face with eye 
 that Heaven mean to be well of comfort to grieve man . at the light 
 touch of that hand Kenelm start , look down , and meet those soothe 
 eye . 

 " I be happy to tell you that I have save my Durham , " cry out Mr. 
 Travers from the other side of the gate . 



 CHAPTER XX . 

 AS Kenelm that night retire to his own room , he pause on the 
 landing - place opposite to the portrait which Mr. Travers have consign 
 to that desolate exile . this daughter of a race dishonour in its 
 extinction might well have be the glory of the house she have enter 
 as a bride . the countenance be singularly beautiful , and of a character 
 of beauty eminently patrician ; there be in its expression a gentleness 
 and modesty not often find in the female portrait of Sir Peter 
 Lely , and in the eye and in the smile a wonderful aspect of innocent 
 happiness . 

 " what a speak homily , " soliloquize Kenelm , address the picture , 
 " against the ambition thy fair descendant would awake in I , art thou , 
 o lovely image ! for generation thy beauty live in this canvas , a thing 
 of joy , the pride of the race it adorn . Owner after owner say 
 to admire guest , ' yes , a fine portrait , by lely ; she be my 
 ancestress , - a Fletwode of Fletwode . ' now , lest guest should remember 
 that a Fletwode marry a Travers thou art thrust out of sight ; not even 
 Lely 's art can make thee of value , can redeem thine innocent self from 
 disgrace . and the last of the Fletwodes , doubtless the most ambitious of 
 all , the most bent on restore and regilde the old lordly name , die 
 a felon ; the infamy of one live man be so large that it can blot 
 out the honour of the dead . " he turn his eye from the smile of 
 the portrait , enter his own room , and , seat himself by the 
 writing - table , draw blotting - book and note - paper towards he , take 
 up the pen , and instead of writing fall into deep revery . there be a 
 slight frown on his brow , on which frown be rare . he be very angry 
 with himself . 

 " Kenelm , " he say , enter into his customary dialogue with that self , 
 " it become you , forsooth , to moralize about the honour of race which 
 have no affinity with you . Son of Sir Peter Chillingly , look at home . 
 be you quite sure that you have not say or do or look a something 
 that may bring trouble to the hearth on which you be receive as guest ? 
 what right have you to be moan forth your egotism , not remember 
 that your word fall on compassionate ear , and that such word , hear 
 at moonlight by a girl whose heart they move to pity , may have danger 
 for her peace ? shame on you , Kenelm ! shame ! know too what her 
 father 's wish be ; and know too that you have not the excuse of 
 desire to win that fair creature for yourself . what do you mean , 
 Kenelm ? I do not   hear you ; speak out . oh , ' that I be a vain coxcomb to 
 fancy that she could take a fancy to I : ' well , perhaps I be ; I hope so 
 earnestly ; and at all event , there have be and shall be no time for 
 much mischief . we be off to - morrow , Kenelm ; bestir yourself and pack 
 up , write your letter , and then ' put out the light , - put out the 
 light ! ' " 

 but this converser with himself do not immediately set to work , as 
 agree upon by that twofold one . he rise and walk restlessly to and 
 fro the floor , stop ever and anon to look at the picture on the 
 wall . 

 several of the worst paint of the family portrait have be consign 
 to the room tenant by Kenelm , which , though both the old and 
 large bed - chamber in the house , be always appropriate to a bachelor 
 male guest , partly because it be without dressing - room , remote , and 
 only approach by the small back - staircase , to the landing - place of 
 which Arabella have be banish in disgrace ; and partly because it have 
 the reputation of be haunt , and lady be more alarmed by that 
 superstition than man be suppose to be . the portrait on which Kenelm 
 now pause to gaze be of various date , from the reign of Elizabeth to 
 that of George III . , none of they by eminent artist , and none of they 
 the effigy of ancestor who have leave name in history , - in short , such 
 portrait as be often see in the country house of well - bear squire . 
 one family type of feature or expression pervade most of these 
 portrait ; feature clear - cut and hardy , expression open and honest . 
 and though not one of those dead man have be famous , each of they have 
 contribute his unostentatious share , in his own simple way , to the 
 movement of his time . that worthy in ruff and corselet have man his 
 own ship at his own cost against the Armada ; never have be repay by 
 the thrifty Burleigh the expense which have harass he and diminish 
 his patrimony ; never have be even knight . that gentleman with short 
 straight hair , which overhang his forehead , lean on his sword 
 with one hand , and a book open in the other hand , have serve as 
 representative of his county town in the Long Parliament , fight under 
 Cromwell at Marston Moor , and , resist the Protector when he remove 
 the " bauble , " be one of the patriot incarcerate in " Hell hole . " he , 
 too , have diminish his patrimony , maintain two trooper and two 
 horse at his own charge , and " Hell hole " be all he get in return . 
 a third , with a sleeker expression of countenance , and a large wig , 
 flourish in the quiet time of Charles II . , have only be a justice 
 of the peace , but his alert look show that he have be a very active 
 one . he have neither increase nor diminish his ancestral fortune . a 
 fourth , in the costume of William III . 's reign , have somewhat add to 
 the patrimony by become a lawyer . he must have be a successful one . 
 he be inscribe " sergeant - at - law . " a fifth , a lieutenant in the army , 
 be kill at Blenheim ; his portrait be that of a very young and 
 handsome man , take the year before his death . his wife 's portrait be 
 place in the drawing - room because it be paint by Kneller . she be 
 handsome too , and marry again a nobleman , whose portrait , of course , 
 be not in the family collection . here there be a gap in chronological 
 arrangement , the lieutenant 's heir be an infant ; but in the time 
 of George II . another Travers appear as the governor of a West India 
 colony . his son take part in a very different movement of the age . he be 
 represent old , venerable , with white hair , and underneath his 
 effigy be inscribe , " follower of Wesley . " his successor complete the 
 collection . he be in naval uniform ; he be in full length , and one of his 
 leg be a wooden one . he be Captain , R.N. , and inscribe , " fight under 
 Nelson at Trafalgar . " that portrait would have find more dignified 
 place in the reception - room if the face have not be forbiddingly ugly , 
 and the picture itself a villanous daub . 

 " I see , " say Kenelm , stop short , " why Cecilia Travers have be 
 rear to talk of duty as a practical interest in life . these man of a 
 former time seem to have live to discharge a duty , and not to follow 
 the progress of the age in the chase of a money - bag , - except perhaps 
 one , but then to be sure he be a lawyer . Kenelm , rouse up and listen 
 to I ; whatever we be , whether active or indolent , be not my favourite 
 maxim a just and a true one ; namely , ' a good man do good by live ' ? 
 but , for that , he must be a harmony and not a discord . Kenelm , you lazy 
 dog , we must pack up . " 

 Kenelm then refill his portmanteau , and label and direct it to 
 Exmundham , after which he write these three note : - 


 NOTE I. 

 to the marchioness of GLENALVON . 

 MY DEAR FRIEND and MONITRESS , - I have leave your last letter a month 
 unanswered . I could not reply to your congratulation on the event of my 
 attain the age of twenty - one . that event be a conventional sham , 
 and you know how I abhor sham and convention . the truth be that I be 
 either much young than twenty - one or much old . as to all design on 
 my peace in stand for our county at the next election , I wish to 
 defeat they , and I have do so ; and now I have commence a course of 
 travel . I have intend on start to confine it to my native country . 
 intention be mutable . I be go abroad . you shall hear of my 
 whereabout . I write this from the house of Leopold Travers , who , I 
 understand from his fair daughter , be a connection of your ; a man to be 
 highly esteemed and cordially like . 

 no , in spite of all your flattering prediction , I shall never be 
 anything in this life more distinguished than what I be now . Lady 
 Glenalvon allow I to sign myself her grateful friend , 

 K. C. 


 NOTE II . 

 DEAR COUSIN MIVERS , - I be go abroad . I may want money ; for , in order 
 to rouse motive power within I , I mean to want money if I can . when I 
 be a boy of sixteen you offer I money to write attack upon veteran 
 author for " the Londoner . " will you give I money now for a similar 
 display of that grand New Idea of our generation ; namely , that the less 
 a man know of a subject the well he understand it ? I be about to 
 travel into country which I have never see , and among race I have 
 never know . my arbitrary judgment on both will be invaluable to " the 
 Londoner " from a Special Correspondent who share your respect for the 
 anonymous , and whose name be never to be divulge . direct your answer by 
 return to I , poste restante , Calais . 

 your truly , 

 K. C. 


 NOTE III . 

 MY DEAR FATHER , - I find your letter here , whence I depart to - morrow . 
 Excuse haste . I go abroad , and shall write to you from Calais . 

 I admire Leopold Travers very much . after all , how much of self - balance 
 there be in a true english gentleman ! toss he up and down where you 
 will , and he always alight on his foot , - a gentleman . he have one child , 
 a daughter name Cecilia , - handsome enough to allure into wedlock any 
 mortal whom Decimus Roach have not convince that in celibacy lie the 
 right " approach to the Angels . " moreover , she be a girl whom one can 
 talk with . even you could talk with she . traver wish she to marry 
 a very respectable , good - look , promising gentleman , in every way 
 ' suitable , " as they say . and if she do , she will rival that pink and 
 perfection of polished womanhood , Lady Glenalvon . I send you back my 
 portmanteau . I have pretty well exhausted my experience - money , but have 
 not yet encroach on my monthly allowance . I mean still to live upon 
 that , eke it out , if necessary , by the sweat of my brow or brain . but 
 if any case require extra fund should occur , - a case in which that 
 extra would do such real good to another that I feel you would do 
 it , - why , I must draw a check on your banker . but understand that be 
 your expense , not mine , and it be you who be to be repay in Heaven . 
 Dear father , how I do love and honour you every day more and more ! 
 promise you not to propose to any young lady till I come first to you 
 for consent ! - oh , my dear father , how could you doubt it ? how doubt 
 that I could not be happy with any wife whom you could not love as a 
 daughter ? accept that promise as sacred . but I wish you have ask I 
 something in which obedience be not much too facile to be a test of 
 duty . I could not have obey you more cheerfully if you have ask I to 
 promise never to propose to any young lady at all . have you ask I to 
 promise that I would renounce the dignity of reason for the frenzy of 
 love , or the freedom of man for the servitude of husband , then I might 
 have seek to achieve the impossible ; but I should have die in the 
 effort ! - and thou wouldst have know that remorse which haunt the bed 
 of the tyrant . 

 your affectionate son , 

 K. C. 



 CHAPTER XXI . 

 the next morning Kenelm surprise the party at breakfast by appear 
 in the coarse habiliment in which he have first make his host 's 
 acquaintance . he do not glance towards Cecilia when he announce his 
 departure ; but , his eye rest on Mrs. Campion , he smile , perhaps a 
 little sadly , at see her countenance brighten up and hear her give 
 a short sigh of relief . traver try hard to induce he to stay a few 
 day long , but Kenelm be firm . " the summer be wear away , " say he , 
 " and I have far to go before the flower fade and the snow fall . on the 
 third night from this I shall sleep on foreign soil . " 

 " you be go abroad , then ? " ask Mrs. Campion . 

 " yes . " 

 " a sudden resolution , Mr. Chillingly . the other day you talk of 
 visit the Scotch lake . " 

 " true ; but , on reflection , they will be crowd with holiday tourist , 
 many of whom I shall probably know . abroad I shall be free , for I shall 
 be unknown . " 

 " I suppose you will be back for the hunting season , " say Travers . 

 " I think not . I do not hunt fox . " 

 " probably we shall at all event meet in London , " say Travers . " I 
 think , after long rustication , that a season or two in the bustling 
 capital may be a salutary change for mind as well as for body ; and it 
 be time that Cecilia be present and her court - dress specially 
 commemorate in the column of the ' Morning Post . ' " 

 Cecilia be seemingly too busied behind the tea - urn to heed this 
 reference to her debut . 

 " I shall miss you terribly , " cry Travers , a few moment afterwards , 
 and with a hearty emphasis . " I declare that you have quite unsettle I . 
 your quaint saying will be ring in my ear long after you be go . " 

 there be a rustle as of a woman 's dress in sudden change of movement 
 behind the tea - urn . 

 " Cissy , " say Mrs. Campion , " be we ever to have our tea ? " 

 " I beg pardon , " answer a voice behind the urn . " I hear Pompey "   the 
 skye terrier   " whine on the lawn . they have shut he out . I will be 
 back presently . " 

 Cecilia rise and be go . Mrs. Campion take her place at the tea - urn . 

 " it be quite absurd of Cissy to be so fond of that hideous dog , " say 
 Travers , petulantly . 

 " its hideousness be its beauty , " return Mrs. Campion , laugh . " Mr. 
 Belvoir select it for she as have the long back and the short 
 leg of any dog he could find in Scotland . " 

 " ah , George give it to she ; I forget that , " say Travers , laugh 
 pleasantly . 

 it be some minute before Miss Travers return with the Skye 
 terrier , and she seem to have recover her spirit in regain that 
 ornamental accession to the party ; talk very quickly and gayly , and 
 with flushed cheek , like a young person excite by her own overflow of 
 mirth . 

 but when , half an hour afterwards , Kenelm take leave of she and Mrs. 
 Campion at the hall - door , the flush be go , her lip be tightly 
 compress , and her parting word be not audible . then , as his figure 
  side by side with her father , who accompany his guest to the lodge 
 swiftly pass across the lawn and vanish amid the tree beyond , Mrs. 
 Campion wind a mother - like arm around her waist and kiss she . 
 Cecilia shiver and turn her face to her friend smile ; but such a 
 smile , - one of those smile that seem brimful of tear . 

 " thank you , dear , " she say meekly ; and , glide away towards the 
 flower - garden , linger a while by the gate which Kenelm have open 
 the night before . then she go with languid step up the green slope 
 towards the ruin priory . 




 BOOK IV . 



 CHAPTER I. 

 it be somewhat more than a year and a half since Kenelm Chillingly leave 
 England , and the scene now be in London , during that early and more 
 sociable season which precede the Easter holiday , - season in which 
 the charm of intellectual companionship be not yet wither away in the 
 heated atmosphere of crowd room , - season in which party be small , 
 and conversation extend beyond the interchange of commonplace with 
 one 's next neighbour at a dinner - table , - season in which you have a 
 fair chance of find your warm friend not absorb by the superior 
 claim of their chilly acquaintance . 

 there be what be call a conversazione at the house of one of those 
 Whig nobleman who yet retain the graceful art of bring agreeable 
 people together , and collect round they the true aristocracy , which 
 combine letter and art and science with hereditary rank and political 
 distinction , - that art which be the happy secret of the Lansdownes and 
 holland of the last generation . Lord Beaumanoir be himself a genial , 
 well - read man , a good judge of art , and a pleasant talker . he have a 
 charming wife , devote to he and to her child , but with enough love 
 of general approbation to make herself as popular in the fashionable 
 world as if she seek in its gayetie a refuge from the dulness of 
 domestic life . 

 amongst the guest at the Beaumanoirs , this evening be two man , seat 
 apart in a small room , and converse familiarly . the one might be about 
 fifty - four ; he be tall , strongly build , but not corpulent , somewhat 
 bald , with black eyebrow , dark eye , bright and keen , mobile lip round 
 which there play a shrewd and sometimes sarcastic smile . 

 this gentleman , the Right Hon . Gerard Danvers , be a very influential 
 member of Parliament . he have , when young for english public life , 
 attain to high office ; but - partly from a great distaste to the 
 drudgery of administration ; partly from a pride of temperament , which 
 unfit he for the subordination that a Cabinet owe to its chief ; 
 partly , also , from a not uncommon kind of epicurean philosophy , at once 
 joyous and cynical , which seek the pleasure of life and hold very 
 cheap its honours - he have obstinately decline to re - enter office , and 
 only speak on rare occasion . on such occasion he carry great weight , 
 and , by the brief expression of his opinion , command more vote than 
 many an orator infinitely more eloquent . despite his want of ambition , 
 he be fond of power in his own way , - power over the people who have 
 power ; and , in the love of political intrigue , he find an amusement for 
 an intellect very subtle and very active . at this moment he be bent on 
 a new combination among the leader of different section in the same 
 party , by which certain veteran be to retire , and certain young man 
 to be admit into the Administration . it be an amiable feature in his 
 character that he have a sympathy with the young , and have help to 
 bring into Parliament , as well as into office , some of the ablest of 
 a generation later than his own . he give they sensible counsel , 
 be pleased when they succeed , and encourage they when they 
 fail , - always provide that they have stuff enough in they to redeem 
 the failure ; if not , he gently drop they from his intimacy , but 
 maintain sufficiently familiar term with they to be pretty sure that 
 he could influence their vote whenever he so desire . 

 the gentleman with whom he be now converse be young , about 
 five - and - twenty ; not yet in Parliament , but with an intense desire to 
 obtain a seat in it , and with one of those reputation which a youth 
 carry away from school and college , justify , not by honour purely 
 academical , but by an impression of ability and power create on the 
 mind of his contemporary and endorse by his elder . he have do 
 little at the University beyond take a fair degree , except acquire 
 at the debating society the fame of an exceedingly ready and adroit 
 speaker . on quit college he have write one or two political 
 article in a quarterly review , which create a sensation ; and though 
 belong to no profession , and have but a small yet independent 
 income , society be very civil to he , as to a man who would some day or 
 other attain a position in which he could damage his enemy and serve 
 his friend . something in this young man 's countenance and bearing 
 tend to favour the credit give to his ability and his promise . in his 
 countenance there be no beauty ; in his bear no elegance . but in that 
 countenance there be vigour , there be energy , there be audacity . a 
 forehead wide but low , protuberant in those organ over the brow which 
 indicate the quality fit for perception and judgment , - quality 
 for every - day life ; eye of the clear english blue , small , somewhat 
 sunken , vigilant , sagacious , penetrate ; a long straight upper 
 lip , significant of resolute purpose ; a mouth in which a student 
 of physiognomy would have detect a dangerous charm . the smile 
 be captivate , but it be artificial , surround by dimple , and 
 display tooth white , small , strong , but divide from each other . the 
 expression of that smile would have be frank and candid to all who 
 fail to notice that it be not in harmony with the brood forehead 
 and the steely eye ; that it seem to stand distinct from the rest 
 of the face , like a feature that have learn its part . there be that 
 physical power in the back of the head which belong to man who make 
 their way in life , - combative and destructive . all gladiator have it ; 
 so have great debater and great reformer , - that is , reformer who can 
 destroy , but not necessarily reconstruct . so , too , in the bearing of the 
 man there be a hardy self - confidence , much too simple and unaffected 
 for his bad enemy to call it self - conceit . it be the bearing of one 
 who know how to maintain personal dignity without seem to care about 
 it . never servile to the great , never arrogant to the little ; so little 
 over - refined that it be never vulgar , - a popular bearing . 

 the room in which these gentleman be seat be separate from the 
 general suite of apartment by a lobby off the landing - place , and serve 
 for Lady Beaumanoir 's boudoir . very pretty it be , but simply furnish , 
 with chintz drapery . the wall be adorn with drawing in 
 water - colour , and precious specimen of china on fanciful Parian 
 bracket . at one corner , by a window that look southward and open 
 on a spacious balcony , glaze in and fill with flower , stand one of 
 those high trellis screen , first invent , I believe , in Vienna , and 
 along which ivy be so train as to form an arbour . 

 the recess thus construct , and which be completely out of sight from 
 the rest of the room , be the hostess 's favourite writing - nook . the two 
 man I have describe be seat near the screen , and have certainly no 
 suspicion that any one could be behind it . 

 " yes , " say Mr. Danvers , from an ottoman niche in another recess of the 
 room , " I think there will be an opening at Saxboro ' soon : Milroy want a 
 Colonial Government ; and if we can reconstruct the Cabinet as I propose , 
 he would get one . Saxboro ' would thus be vacant . but , my dear fellow , 
 Saxboro ' be a place to be woo through love , and only win through 
 money . it demand liberalism from a candidate , - two kind of liberalism 
 seldom united ; the liberalism in opinion which be natural enough to a 
 very poor man , and the liberalism in expenditure which be scarcely to 
 be obtain except from a very rich one . you may compute the cost of 
 Saxboro ' at L3000 to get in , and about L2000 more to defend your seat 
 against a petition , - the defeat candidate nearly always petition . 
 L5000 be a large sum ; and the bad of it be , that the extreme opinion 
 to which the member for Saxboro ' must pledge himself be a drawback to 
 an official career . violent politician be not the good raw material 
 out of which to manufacture fortunate placeman . " 

 " the opinion do not so much matter ; the expense do . I can not afford 
 L5000 , or even L3000 . " 

 " would not Sir Peter assist ? he have , you say , only one son ; and if 
 anything happen to that son , you be the next heir . " 

 " my father quarrel with Sir Peter , and harass he by an imprudent 
 and ungracious litigation . I scarcely think I could apply to he for 
 money to obtain a seat in Parliament upon the democratic side of the 
 question ; for , though I know little of his politic , I take it for 
 grant that a country gentleman of old family and L10,000 a year can not 
 well be a democrat . " 

 " then I presume you would not be a democrat if , by the death of your 
 cousin , you become heir to the Chillinglys . " 

 " I be not sure what I might be in that case . there be time when a 
 democrat of ancient lineage and good estate could take a very high 
 place amongst the aristocracy . " 

 " Humph ! my dear Gordon , vous irez loin . " 

 " I hope to do so . measure myself against the man of my own day , I do 
 not see many who should outstrip I . " 

 " what sort of a fellow be your cousin Kenelm ? I meet he once or twice 
 when he be very young , and read with Welby in London . People then 
 say that he be very clever ; he strike I as very odd . " 

 " I never see he , but from all I hear , whether he be clever or whether 
 he be odd , he be not likely to do anything in life , - a dreamer . " 

 " write poetry perhaps ? " 

 " capable of it , I dare say . " 

 just then some other guest come into the room , amongst they a lady 
 of an appearance at once singularly distinguished and singularly 
 prepossessing , rather above the common height , and with a certain 
 indescribable nobility of air and presence . Lady Glenalvon be one of 
 the queen of the London world , and no queen of that world be ever 
 less worldly or more queen - like . side by side with the lady be Mr. 
 Chillingly Mivers . Gordon and Mivers interchange friendly nod , and the 
 former saunter away and be soon lose amid a crowd of other young 
 man , with whom , as he could converse well and lightly on thing which 
 interested they , he be rather a favourite , though he be not an 
 intimate associate . Mr. Danvers retire into a corner of the adjoining 
 lobby , where he favour the french ambassador with his view on the 
 state of Europe and the reconstruction of Cabinets in general . 

 " but , " say Lady Glenalvon to Chillingly Mivers , " be you quite sure 
 that my old young friend Kenelm be here ? since you tell I so , I have 
 look everywhere for he in vain . I should so much like to see he 
 again . " 

 " I certainly catch a glimpse of he half an hour ago ; but before I 
 could escape from a geologist who be bore I about the silurian 
 system , Kenelm have vanish . " 

 " perhaps it be his ghost ! " 

 " well , we certainly live in the most credulous and superstitious age 
 upon record ; and so many people tell I that they converse with the 
 dead under the table that it seem impertinent in I to say that I do not 
 believe in ghost . " 

 " tell I some of those incomprehensible story about table - rap , " 
 say Lady Glenalvon . " there be a charming , snug recess here behind the 
 screen . " 

 Scarcely have she enter the recess when she draw back with a start and 
 an exclamation of amaze . seat at the table within the recess , his chin 
 rest on his hand , and his face cast down in abstract revery , be a 
 young man . so still be his attitude , so calmly mournful the expression 
 of his face , so estranged do he seem from all the motley but brilliant 
 assemblage which circle around the solitude he have make for himself , 
 that he might well have be deem one of those visitant from another 
 world whose secret the intruder have wish to learn . of that intruder 's 
 presence he be evidently unconscious . recover her surprise , she 
 steal up to he , place her hand on his shoulder , and utter his name 
 in a low gentle voice . at that sound Kenelm Chillingly look up . 

 " do you not remember I ? " ask Lady Glenalvon . before he could answer , 
 miver , who have follow the marchioness into the recess , interpose . 

 " my dear Kenelm , how be you ? when do you come to London ? why have you 
 not call on I ; and what on earth be you hide yourself for ? " 

 Kenelm have now recover the self - possession which he rarely lose long 
 in the presence of other . he return cordially his kinsman 's greeting , 
 and kiss with his wonted chivalrous grace the fair hand which the lady 
 withdraw from his shoulder and extend to his pressure . " remember you ! " 
 he say to Lady Glenalvon with the kindliest expression of his soft dark 
 eye ; " I be not so far advanced towards the noon of life as to forget 
 the sunshine that brighten its morning . my dear miver , your question 
 be easily answer . I arrive in England two week ago , stay at 
 Exmundham till this morning , to - day din with Lord Thetford , whose 
 acquaintance I make abroad , and be persuade by he to come here and 
 be introduce to his father and mother , the Beaumanoirs . after I have 
 undergo that ceremony , the sight of so many strange face frighten 
 I into shyness . enter this room at a moment when it be quite 
 deserted , I resolve to turn hermit behind the screen . " 

 " why , you must have see your cousin Gordon as you come into the room . " 

 " but you forget I do not   know he by sight . however , there be no one in 
 the room when I enter ; a little later some other come in , for I hear 
 a faint buzz , like that of person talk in a whisper . however , I be 
 no eavesdropper , as a person behind a screen be on the dramatic stage . " 

 this be true . even have Gordon and Danvers talk in a loud tone , 
 Kenelm have be too absorb in his own thought to have hear a word of 
 their conversation . 

 " you ought to know young Gordon ; he be a very clever fellow , and have an 
 ambition to enter Parliament . I hope no old family quarrel between his 
 bear of a father and dear Sir Peter will make you object to meet he . " 

 " Sir Peter be the most forgiving of man , but he would scarcely forgive 
 I if I decline to meet a cousin who have never offend he . " 

 " well say . come and meet Gordon at breakfast to - morrow , - ten o'clock . I 
 be still in the old room . " 

 while the kinsman thus converse , Lady Glenalvon have seat herself on 
 the couch beside Kenelm , and be quietly observe his countenance . 
 now she speak . " my dear Mr. Mivers , you will have many opportunity of 
 talk with Kenelm ; do not grudge I five minute ' talk with he now . " 

 " I leave your ladyship alone in your hermitage . how all the man in this 
 assembly will envy the hermit ! " 



 CHAPTER II . 

 " I be glad to see you once more in the world , " say Lady Glenalvon ; " and 
 I trust that you be now prepared to take that part in it which ought to 
 be no mean one if you do justice to your talent and your nature . " 

 KENELM . - " when you go to the theatre , and see one of the piece which 
 appear now to be the fashion , which would you rather be , - an actor or a 
 looker - on ? " 

 LADY GLENALVON . - " my dear young friend , your question sadden I . " 
  after a pause .   - " but though I use a stage metaphor when I express 
 my hope that you would take no mean part in the world , the world be not 
 really a theatre . life admit of no looker - on . speak to I frankly , as 
 you use to do . your face retain its old melancholy expression . be you 
 not happy ? " 

 KENELM . - " Happy , as mortal go , I ought to be . I do not think I be 
 unhappy . if my temper be melancholic , melancholy have a happiness of its 
 own . Milton show that there be as many charm in life to be find on 
 the Penseroso side of it as there be on the Allegro . " 

 LADY GLENALVON . - " Kenelm , you save the life of my poor son , and when , 
 later , he be take from I , I feel as if he have commend you to my 
 care . when at the age of sixteen , with a boy 's year and a man 's heart , 
 you come to London , do I not try to be to you almost as a mother ? and 
 do you not often tell I that you could confide to I the secret of 
 your heart more readily than to any other ? " 

 " you be to I , " say Kenelm , with emotion , " that most precious and 
 sustain good genius which a youth can find at the threshold of 
 life , - a woman gently wise , kindly sympathize , sham he by the 
 spectacle of her own purity from all gross error , elevate he from 
 mean taste and object by the exquisite , ineffable loftiness of soul 
 which be only find in the noble order of womanhood . come , I will open 
 my heart to you still . I fear it be more wayward than ever . it still 
 feel estranged from the companionship and pursuit natural to my age 
 and station . however , I have be seek to brace and harden my nature , 
 for the practical end of life , by travel and adventure , chiefly among 
 rougher variety of mankind than we meet in drawing - room . now , in 
 compliance with the duty I owe to my dear father 's wish , I come back 
 to these circle , which under your auspex I enter in boyhood , and 
 which even then seem to I so inane and artificial . take a part in the 
 world of these circle ; such be your wish . my answer be brief . I have 
 be do my good to acquire a motive power , and have not succeed . I 
 see nothing that I care to strive for , nothing that I care to gain . the 
 very time in which we live be to I , as to Hamlet , out of joint ; and 
 I be not bear like Hamlet to set they right . ah ! if I could look on 
 society through the spectacle with which the poor hidalgo in ' Gil Blas ' 
 look on his meagre board , - spectacle by which cherry appear the 
 size of peach , and tomtit as large as turkey ! the imagination which 
 be necessary to ambition be a great magnifier . " 

 " I have know more than one man , now very eminent , very active , who 
 at your age feel the same estrangement from the practical pursuit of 
 other . " 

 " and what reconcile those man to such pursuit ? " 

 " that diminish sense of individual personality , that unconscious 
 fusion of one 's own be into other existence , which belong to home 
 and marriage . " 

 " I do not   object to home , but I do to marriage . " 

 " depend on it there be no home for man where there be no woman . " 

 " Prettily say . in that case I resign the home . " 

 " do you mean seriously to tell I that you never see the woman you could 
 love enough to make she your wife , and never enter any home that you do 
 not quit with a touch of envy at the happiness of married life ? " 

 " seriously , I never see such a woman ; seriously , I never enter such a 
 home . " 

 " Patience , then ; your time will come , and I hope it be at hand . listen 
 to I . it be only yesterday that I feel an indescribable longing to 
 see you again , - to know your address that I might write to you ; for 
 yesterday , when a certain young lady leave my house after a week 's visit , 
 I say this girl would make a perfect wife , and , above all , the exact 
 wife to suit Kenelm Chillingly . " 

 " Kenelm Chillingly be very glad to hear that this young lady have leave 
 your house . " 

 " but she have not leave London : she be here to - night . she only stay 
 with I till her father come to town , and the house he have take for the 
 season be vacant ; those event happen yesterday . " 

 " fortunate event for I : they permit I to call on you without danger . " 

 " have you no curiosity to know , at least , who and what be the young lady 
 who appear to I so well suited to you ? " 

 " no curiosity , but a vague sensation of alarm . " 

 " well , I can not talk pleasantly with you while you be in this 
 irritate mood , and it be time to quit the hermitage . come , there be 
 many person here , with some of whom you should renew old acquaintance , 
 and to some of whom I should like to make you know . " 

 " I be prepared to follow Lady Glenalvon wherever she deign to lead 
 I , - except to the altar with another . " 



 CHAPTER III . 

 the room be now full , - not overcrowded , but full , - and it be rarely 
 even in that house that so many distinguished person be collect 
 together . a young man thus honour by so grande a dame as Lady 
 Glenalvon could not but be cordially welcome by all to whom she 
 present he , Ministers and parliamentary leader , ball - giver , and 
 beauty in vogue , - even author and artist ; and there be something in 
 Kenelm Chillingly , in his strike countenance and figure , in that calm 
 ease of manner natural to his indifference to effect , which seem to 
 justify the favour show to he by the brilliant princess of fashion and 
 mark he out for general observation . 

 that first evening of his reintroduction to the polite world be 
 a success which few young man of his year achieve . he produce a 
 sensation . just as the room be thin , Lady Glenalvon whisper to 
 Kenelm , - 

 " come this way : there be one person I must reintroduce you to ; thank I 
 for it hereafter . " 

 Kenelm follow the marchioness , and find himself face to face with 
 Cecilia Travers . she be lean on her father 's arm , look very 
 handsome , and her beauty be heighten by the blush which overspread 
 her cheek as Kenelm Chillingly approach . 

 Travers greet he with great cordiality ; and Lady Glenalvon ask he 
 to escort she to the refreshment - room , Kenelm have no option but to offer 
 his arm to Cecilia . 

 Kenelm feel somewhat embarrassed . " have you be long in town , Miss 
 Travers ? " 

 " a little more than a week , but we only settle into our house 
 yesterday . " 

 " ah , indeed ! be you then the young lady who - " he stop short , and 
 his face grow gentle and graver in its expression . 

 " the young lady who - what ? " ask Cecilia with a smile . 

 " who have be stay with Lady Glenalvon ? " 

 " yes ; do she tell you ? " 

 " she do not mention your name , but praise that young lady so justly 
 that I ought to have guess it . " 

 Cecilia make some not very audible answer , and on enter the 
 refreshment - room other young man gather round she , and Lady Glenalvon 
 and Kenelm remain silent in the midst of a general small - talk . when 
 Travers , after give his address to Kenelm , and , of course , press 
 he to call , leave the house with Cecilia , Kenelm say to Lady Glenalvon , 
 musingly , " so that be the young lady in whom I be to see my fate : you 
 know that we have meet before ? " 

 " yes , she tell I when and where . besides , it be not two year since you 
 write to I from her father 's house . do you forget ? " 

 " ah , " say Kenelm , so abstractedly that he seem to be dream , " no 
 man with his eye open rush on his fate : when he do so his sight be 
 go . love be blind . they say the blind be very happy , yet I never meet 
 a blind man who would not recover his sight if he could . " 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 Mr. CHILLINGLY miver never give a dinner at his own room . when he 
 do give a dinner it be at Greenwich or Richmond . but he give 
 breakfast - party pretty often , and they be consider pleasant . 
 he have handsome bachelor apartment in Grosvenor Street , daintily 
 furnish , with a prevalent air of exquisite neatness , a good library 
 store with book of reference , and adorn with presentation copy 
 from author of the day , very beautifully bind . though the room serve 
 for the study of the professed man of letter , it have none of the untidy 
 litter which generally characterize the study of one whose vocation it 
 be to deal with book and paper . even the implement for writing 
 be not apparent , except when require . they lie conceal in a vast 
 cylinder bureau , French make , and French polish . within that bureau 
 be numerous pigeon - hole and secret drawer , and a profound well with 
 a separate patent lock . in the well be deposit the article intend 
 for publication in " the Londoner , " proof - sheet , etc . ; pigeon - hole 
 be devoted to ordinary correspondence ; secret drawer to confidential 
 note , and outline of biography of eminent man now live , but 
 intend to be complete for publication the day after their death . 

 no man write such funeral composition with a lively pen than that 
 of Chillingly Mivers ; and the large and miscellaneous circle of 
 his visit acquaintance allow he to ascertain , whether by 
 authoritative report or by personal observation , the sign of mortal 
 disease in the illustrious friend whose dinner he accept , and whose 
 fail pulse he instinctively feel in return the pressure of their 
 hand ; so that he be often able to put the finishing - stroke to their 
 obituary memorial day , week , even month , before their fate take the 
 public by surprise . that cylinder bureau be in harmony with the secrecy 
 in which this remarkable man shroud the production of his brain . in 
 his literary life Mivers have no " I , " there he be ever the inscrutable , 
 mysterious " we . " he be only " I " when you meet he in the world , and 
 call he Mivers . 

 Adjoining the library on one side be a small dining or rather breakfast 
 room , hang with valuable picture , - present from live painter . 
 many of these painter have be severely handle by Mr. Mivers in his 
 existence as " we , " - not always in " the Londoner . " his most pungent 
 criticism be often contribute to other intellectual journal 
 conduct by member of the same intellectual clique . painter know not 
 how contemptuously " we " have treat they when they meet Mr. Mivers . 
 his " I " be so complimentary that they send he a tribute of their 
 gratitude . 

 on the other side be his drawing - room , also enrich by many gift , 
 chiefly from fair hand , - embroider cushion and table - cover , bit 
 of Sevres or old Chelsea , elegant knick - knack of all kind . fashionable 
 authoress pay great court to Mr. Mivers ; and in the course of his 
 life as a single man , he have other female adorer besides fashionable 
 authoress . 

 Mr. Mivers have already return from his early constitutional walk 
 in the Park , and be now seat by the cylinder secretaire with a 
 mild - look man , who be one of the most merciless contributor to " the 
 Londoner " and no unimportant councillor in the oligarchy of the clique 
 that go by the name of the " Intellectuals . " 

 " well , " say Mivers , languidly , " I can not   even get through the book ; 
 it be as dull as the country in November . but , as you justly say , 
 the writer be an ' Intellectual , ' and a clique would be anything 
 but intellectual if it do not support its member . review the book 
 yourself ; mind and make the dulness of it the signal proof of its merit . 
 say : ' to the ordinary class of reader this exquisite work may appear 
 less brilliant than the flippant smartness of ' - any other author you 
 like to name ; ' but to the well educate and intelligent every line be 
 pregnant with , ' etc . by the way , when we come by and by to review the 
 exhibition at Burlington House , there be one painter whom we must try 
 our good to crush . I have not see his picture myself , but he be a new 
 man ; and our friend , who have see he , be terribly jealous of he , and 
 say that if the good judge do not put he down at once , the villanous 
 taste of the public will set he up as a prodigy . a low - live fellow 
 too , I hear . there be the name of the man and the subject of the 
 picture . see to it when the time come . meanwhile , prepare the way for 
 onslaught on the picture by occasional sneer at the painter . " here 
 Mr. Mivers take out of his cylinder a confidential note from the jealous 
 rival and hand it to his mild - look confrere ; then rise , he 
 say , " I fear we must suspend our business till to - morrow ; I expect two 
 young cousin to breakfast . " 

 as soon as the mild - look man be go , Mr. Mivers saunter to his 
 drawing - room window , amiably offer a lump of sugar to a canary - bird 
 send to he as a present the day before , and who , in the gild cage 
 which make part of the present , scan he suspiciously and refuse the 
 sugar . 

 Time have remain very gentle in its dealing with Chillingly Mivers . 
 he scarcely look a day old than when he be first present to the 
 reader on the birth of his kinsman Kenelm . he be reap the fruit of 
 his own sage maxim . free from whisker and safe in wig , there be no 
 sign of gray , no suspicion of dye . superiority to passion , abnegation of 
 sorrow , indulgence of amusement , avoidance of excess , have keep away the 
 crow' - foot , preserve the elasticity of his frame and the unflushed 
 clearness of his gentlemanlike complexion . the door open , and a 
 well - dress valet , who have live long enough with Mivers to grow very 
 much like he , announce Mr. Chillingly Gordon . 

 " good morning , " say miver ; " I be much pleased to see you talk so 
 long and so familiarly with danver : other , of course , observe it , and 
 it add a step to your career . it do you great good to be see in a 
 drawing - room talk apart with a somebody . but may I ask if the talk 
 itself be satisfactory ? " 

 " not at all : Danvers throw cold water on the notion of Saxboro ' , and 
 do not even hint that his party will help I to any other opening . 
 Party have few opening at its disposal nowadays for any young man . the 
 schoolmaster be abroad have sweep away the school for statesman as 
 he have sweep away the school for actor , - an evil , and an evil of a far 
 great consequence to the destiny of the nation than any good likely 
 to be get from the system that succeed it . " 

 " but it be of no use rail against thing that can not   be help . if I 
 be you , I would postpone all ambition of Parliament and read for the 
 bar . " 

 " the advice be sound , but too unpalatable to be take . I be resolve to 
 find a seat in the House , and where there be a will there be a way . " 

 " I be not so sure of that . " 

 " but I be . " 

 " judge by what your contemporary at the University tell I of your 
 speech at the Debating Society , you be not then an ultra - radical . 
 but it be only an ultra - radical who have a chance of success at 
 Saxboro ' . " 

 " I be no fanatic in politic . there be much to be say on all side : 
  coeteris paribus , I prefer the win side to the losing ; nothing 
 succeed like success . " 

 " ay , but in politic there be always reaction . the win side one day 
 may be the lose side another . the lose side represent a minority , 
 and a minority be sure to comprise more intellect than a majority : in 
 the long run intellect will force its way , get a majority and then lose 
 it , because with a majority it will become stupid . " 

 " Cousin Mivers , do not the history of the world show you that a single 
 individual can upset all theory as to the comparative wisdom of the 
 few or the many ? take the wise few you can find , and one man of genius 
 not a tithe so wise crush they into powder . but then that man of 
 genius , though he despise the many , must make use of they . that 
 do , he rule they . do not   you see how in free country political 
 destination resolve themselves into individual impersonation ? at 
 a general election it be one name around which elector rally . the 
 candidate may enlarge as much as he please on political principle , but 
 all his talk will not win he vote enough for success , unless he say , 
 ' I go with Mr. A. , ' the minister , or with Mr. Z. , the chief of the 
 opposition . it be not the Tories who beat the whig when Mr. Pitt 
 dissolve Parliament . it be Mr. Pitt who beat Mr. Fox , with whom in 
 general political principle - slave - trade , roman catholic emancipation , 
 parliamentary reform - he certainly agree much more than he do with any 
 man in his own cabinet . " 

 " take care , my young cousin , " cry Mivers , in accent of alarm ; " do not 
 set up for a man of genius . Genius be the bad quality a public man can 
 have nowadays : nobody heed it , and everybody be jealous of it . " 

 " pardon I , you mistake ; my remark be purely objective , and intend 
 as a reply to your argument . I prefer at present to go with the many 
 because it be the win side . if we then want a man of genius to keep 
 it the win side , by subjugate its partisan to his will , he will 
 be sure to come . the few will drive he to we , for the few be always 
 the enemy of the one man of genius . it be they who distrust , - it be 
 they who be jealous , - not the many . you have allow your judgment , 
 usually so clear , to be somewhat dim by your experience as a critic . 
 the critic be the few . they have infinitely more culture than the 
 many . but when a man of real genius appear and assert himself , the 
 critic be seldom such fair judge of he as the many be . if he be not 
 one of their oligarchical clique , they either abuse , or disparage , or 
 affect to ignore he ; though a time at last come when , have gain 
 the many , the critic acknowledge he . but the difference between the 
 man of action and the author be this , that the author rarely find this 
 acknowledgment till he be dead , and it be necessary to the man of action 
 to enforce it while he be alive . but enough of this speculation : you ask 
 I to meet Kenelm ; be he not come ? " 

 " yes , but I do not ask he till ten o'clock . I ask you at half - past 
 nine , because I wish to hear about Danvers and Saxboro ' , and also to 
 prepare you somewhat for your introduction to your cousin . I must be 
 brief as to the last , for it be only five minute to the hour , and he 
 be a man likely to be punctual . Kenelm be in all way your opposite . I 
 do not   know whether he be cleverer or less clever ; there be no scale of 
 measurement between you : but he be wholly void of ambition , and might 
 possibly assist your . he can do what he like with Sir Peter ; 
 and consider how your poor father - a worthy man , but 
 cantankerous - harass and persecute Sir Peter , because Kenelm come 
 between the estate and you , it be probable that Sir Peter bear you a 
 grudge , though Kenelm declare he incapable of it ; and it would be 
 well if you could annul that grudge in the father by conciliate the 
 goodwill of the son . " 

 " I should be glad so to annul it ; but what be Kenelm 's weak side ? - the 
 turf ? the hunting - field ? woman ? poetry ? one can only conciliate a man by 
 get on his weak side . " 

 " Hist ! I see he from the window . Kenelm 's weak side be , when I know 
 he some year ago , and I rather fancy it still be - " 

 " well , make haste ! I hear his ring at your door - bell . " 

 " a passionate longing to find ideal truth in real life . " 

 " ah ! " say Gordon , " as I think , - a mere dreamer " 



 CHAPTER V. 

 KENELM enter the room . the young cousin be introduce , shake hand , 
 recede a step , and gaze at each other . it be scarcely possible 
 to conceive a great contrast outwardly than that between the two 
 Chillingly representative of the rise generation . each be silently 
 impress by the sense of that contrast . each feel that the contrast 
 imply antagonism , and that if they two meet in the same arena it must 
 be as rival combatant ; still , by some mysterious intuition , each feel a 
 certain respect for the other , each divine in the other a power that 
 he could not fairly estimate , but against which his own power would 
 be strongly tasked to contend . so might exchange look a thorough - breed 
 deer - hound and a half - breed mastiff : the bystander could scarcely doubt 
 which be the nobler animal ; but he might hesitate which to bet on , if 
 the two come to deadly quarrel . meanwhile the thorough - breed deer - hound 
 and the half - breed mastiff sniff at each other in polite salutation . 
 Gordon be the first to give tongue . 

 " I have long wish to know you personally , " say he , throw into his 
 voice and manner that delicate kind of deference which a well - bear cadet 
 owe to the destine head of his house . " I can not conceive how I miss 
 you last night at Lady Beaumanoir 's , where miver tell I he meet you ; 
 but I leave early . " 

 here Mivers lead the way to the breakfast - room , and , there seat , the 
 host become the principal talker , run with lively glibness over the 
 principal topic of the day , - the last scandal , the last new book , the 
 reform of the army , the reform of the turf , the critical state of Spain , 
 and the debut of an italian singer . he seem an embodied Journal , 
 include the lead article , the Law Reports , Foreign Intelligence , 
 the Court Circular , down to the Births , Deaths , and marriage . Gordon 
 from time to time interrupt this flow of soul with brief , trenchant 
 remark , which evince his own knowledge of the subject treat , and 
 a habit of look on all subject connect with the pursuit and 
 business of mankind from a high ground appropriate to himself , and 
 through the medium of that blue glass which convey a wintry aspect to 
 summer landscape . Kenelm say little , but listen attentively . 

 the conversation arrest its discursive nature , to settle upon a 
 political chief , the high in fame and station of that party to which 
 miver profess - not to belong , he belong to himself alone , but to 
 appropinquate . miver speak of this chief with the great distrust , 
 and in a spirit of general depreciation . Gordon acquiesce in the 
 distrust and the depreciation , add , " but he be master of the 
 position , and must , of course , be support through thick and thin for 
 the present . " 

 " yes , for the present , " say miver , " one have no option . but you will 
 see some clever article in ' the Londoner ' towards the close of the 
 session , which will damage he greatly , by praise he in the wrong 
 place , and deepen the alarm of important follower , - an alarm now at 
 work , though suppress . " 

 here Kenelm ask , in humble tone , why Gordon think that a minister 
 he consider so untrustworthy and dangerous must for the present be 
 support through thick and thin . 

 " because at present a member elect so to support he would lose his 
 seat if he do not : need must when the devil drive . " 

 KENELM . - " when the devil drive , I should have think it well to 
 resign one 's seat on the coach ; perhaps one might be of some use , out of 
 it , in help to put on the drag . " 

 miver . - " Cleverly say , Kenelm . but , metaphor apart , Gordon be right . 
 a young politician must go with his party ; a veteran journalist like 
 myself be more independent . so long as the journalist blame everybody , 
 he will have plenty of reader . " 

 Kenelm make no reply , and Gordon change the conversation from man 
 to measure . he speak of some Bills before Parliament with remarkable 
 ability , evince much knowledge of the subject , much critical 
 acuteness , illustrate their defect , and prove the danger of their 
 ultimate consequence . 

 Kenelm be greatly strike with the vigour of this cold , clear mind , and 
 own to himself that the House of Commons be a fitting place for its 
 development . 

 " but , " say miver , " would you not be oblige to defend these Bills if 
 you be member for Saxboro ' ? " 

 " before I answer your question , answer I this : dangerous as the Bills 
 be , be it not necessary that they shall pass ? have not the public so 
 resolve ? " 

 " there can be no doubt of that . " 

 " then the member for Saxboro ' can not be strong enough to go against the 
 public . " 

 " progress of the age ! " say Kenelm , musingly . " do you think the class of 
 gentleman will long last in England ? " 

 " what do you call gentleman ? the aristocracy by birth ? - the 
  gentilshomme ? " 

 " Nay , I suppose no law can take away a man 's ancestor , and a class of 
 well - bear man be not to be exterminate . but a mere class of well - bear 
 man - without duty , responsibility , or sentiment of that which 
 become good birth in devotion to country or individual honour - do no 
 good to a nation . it be a misfortune which statesman of democratic creed 
 ought to recognize , that the class of the well - bear can not be destroy : 
 it must remain as it remain in Rome and remain in France , after all 
 effort to extirpate it , as the most dangerous class of citizen when 
 you deprive it of the attribute which make it the most serviceable . 
 I be not speak of that class ; I speak of that unclassified order 
 peculiar to England , which , no doubt , form itself originally from 
 the ideal standard of honour and truth suppose to be maintain by the 
  gentilshomme , or well - bear , no long require pedigree and acre to 
 confer upon its member the designation of gentleman ; and when I hear 
 a ' gentleman ' say that he have no option but to think one thing and say 
 another , at whatever risk to his country , I feel as if in the progress 
 of the age the class of gentleman be about to be supersede by some 
 fine development of specie . " 

 Therewith Kenelm rise , and would have take his departure , if Gordon have 
 not seize his hand and detain he . 

 " my dear cousin , if I may so call you , " he say , with the frank manner 
 which be usual to he , and which suit well the bold expression of his 
 face and the clear ring of his voice , " I be one of those who , from an 
 over - dislike to sentimentality and can not , often make those not intimately 
 acquaint with they think bad of their principle than they deserve . 
 it may be quite true that a man who go with his party dislike the 
 measure he feel bind to support , and say so openly when among 
 friend and relation , yet that man be not therefore devoid of loyalty 
 and honour ; and I trust , when you know I well , you will not think it 
 likely I should derogate from that class of gentleman to which we both 
 belong . " 

 " pardon I if I seem rude , " answer Kenelm ; " ascribe it to my 
 ignorance of the necessity of public life . it strike I that where a 
 politician think a thing evil , he ought not to support it as good . but 
 I dare say I be mistaken . " 

 " entirely mistaken , " say miver , " and for this reason : in politic 
 formerly there be a direct choice between good and evil . that rarely 
 exist now . man of high education , have to choose whether to accept or 
 reject a measure force upon their option by constituent body of very 
 low education , be call upon to weigh evil against evil , - the evil of 
 accept or the evil of reject ; and if they resolve on the first , it 
 be as the less evil of the two . " 

 " your definition be perfect , " say Gordon , " and I be content to rest 
 on it my excuse for what my cousin deem insincerity . " 

 " I suppose that be real life , " say Kenelm , with his mournful smile . 

 " of course it be , " say miver . 

 " every day I live , " sigh Kenelm , ' still more confirm my conviction 
 that real life be a phantasmal sham . how absurd it be in philosopher to 
 deny the existence of apparition ! what apparition we , live man , must 
 seem to the ghost ! 


  " ' the spirit of the wise 
  Sit in the cloud and mock we . ' " 



 CHAPTER VI . 

 CHILLINGLY GORDON do not fail to confirm his acquaintance with Kenelm . 
 he very often look in upon he of a morning , sometimes join he 
 in his afternoon ride , introduce he to man of his own set who be 
 mostly busy member of Parliament , rise barrister , or political 
 journalist , but not without a proportion of brilliant idler , - club 
 man , sporting man , man of fashion , rank , and fortune . he do so with a 
 purpose , for these person speak well of he , - speak well not only 
 of his talent , but of his honourable character . his general nickname 
 amongst they be " HONEST GORDON . " Kenelm at first think this sobriquet 
 must be ironical ; not a bit of it . it be give to he on account of 
 the candour and boldness with which he express opinion embody that 
 sort of cynicism which be vulgarly call " the absence of humbug . " the 
 man be certainly no hypocrite ; he affect no belief which he do not 
 entertain . and he have very few belief in anything , except the first 
 half of the adage , " every man for himself , - and God for we all . " 

 but whatever Chillingly Gordon 's theoretical disbelief in thing which 
 make the current creed of the virtuous , there be nothing in his conduct 
 which evince predilection for vice : he be strictly upright in all 
 his dealing , and in delicate matter of honour be a favourite umpire 
 amongst his coeval . though so frankly ambitious , no one could accuse 
 he of attempt to climb on the shoulder of patron . there be 
 nothing servile in his nature ; and , though he be perfectly prepared to 
 bribe elector if necessary , no money could have buy himself . his one 
 master - passion be the desire of power . he sneer at patriotism as a 
 wear - out prejudice , at philanthropy as a sentimental catch - word . he do 
 not want to serve his country , but to rule it . he do not want to 
 raise mankind , but to rise himself . he be therefore unscrupulous , 
 unprincipled , as hungerer after power for itself too often be ; yet 
 still if he get power he would probably use it well , from the clearness 
 and strength of his mental perception . the impression he make on Kenelm 
 may be see in the following letter : - 


 to SIR PETER CHILLINGLY , BART . , ETC . 

 MY DEAR FATHER , - you and my dear mother will be pleased to hear that 
 London continue very polite to I : that " arida nutrix leonum " enroll 
 I among the pet class of lion which lady of fashion admit into the 
 society of their lapdog . it be somewhere about six year since I be 
 allow to gaze on this peep - show through the loophole of Mr. Welby 's 
 retreat . it appear to I , perhaps erroneously , that even within that 
 short space of time the tone of ' society " be perceptibly change . that 
 the change be for the well be an assertion I leave to those who belong 
 to the progressista party . 

 I do not   think nearly so many young lady six year ago paint their 
 eyelid and dye their hair : a few of they there might be , imitator of 
 the slang invent by schoolboy and circulate through the medium of 
 small novelist ; they might use such expression as ' stunning , " " cheek , " 
 " awfully jolly , " etc . but now I find a great many who have advance to 
 a slang beyond that of verbal expression , - a slang of mind , a slang 
 of sentiment , a slang in which very little seem leave of the woman and 
 nothing at all of the lady . 

 Newspaper essayist assert that the young man of the day be to blame 
 for this ; that the young man like it ; and the fair husband - angler dress 
 their fly in the colour most likely to attract a nibble . whether this 
 excuse be the true one I can not pretend to judge ; but it strike I that 
 the man about my own age who affect to be fast be a more languid race 
 than the man from ten to twenty year old , whom they regard as slow . 
 the habit of dram - drinking in the morning be a very new idea , an idea 
 greatly in fashion at the moment . Adonis call for a " pick - me - up " before 
 he have strength enough to answer a billet - doux from Venus . Adonis 
 have not the strength to get nobly drunk , but his delicate constitution 
 require stimulant , and he be always tipple . 

 the man of high birth or renown for social success belong , my 
 dear father , to your time , be still distinguish by an air of good 
 breeding , by a style of conversation more or less polished and not 
 without evidence of literary culture , from man of the same rank in 
 my generation , who appear to pride themselves on respect nobody and 
 know nothing , not even grammar . still we be assure that the world 
 go on steadily improve . that new idea be in full vigour . 

 society in the concrete have become wonderfully conceited as to its 
 own progressive excellence , and the individual who form the concrete 
 entertain the same complacent opinion of themselves . there be , of 
 course , even in my brief and imperfect experience , many exception to 
 what appear to I the prevalent characteristic of the rise generation 
 in ' society . " of these exception I must content myself with name the 
 most remarkable . Place aux dames , the first I name be Cecilia Travers . 
 she and her father be now in town , and I meet they frequently . I 
 can conceive no civilized era in the world which a woman like Cecilia 
 Travers would not grace and adorn , because she be essentially the type 
 of woman as man like to imagine woman ; namely , on the fair side of 
 the womanly character . and I say " woman " rather than " girl , " because 
 among " girl of the Period " Cecilia Travers can not be class . you might 
 call her damsel , virgin , maiden , but you could no more call her girl 
 than you could call a well - bear french demoiselle fille . she be 
 handsome enough to please the eye of any man , however fastidious , but 
 not that kind of beauty which dazzle all man too much to fascinate one 
 man ; for - speak , thank Heaven , from mere theory - I apprehend that the 
 love for woman have in it a strong sense of property ; that one require 
 to individualize one 's possession as be wholly one 's own , and not 
 a possession which all the public be invite to admire . I can readily 
 understand how a rich man , who have what be call a show place , in which 
 the splendid room and the stately garden be open to all inspector , 
 so that he have no privacy in his own demesne , run away to a pretty 
 cottage which he have all to himself , and of which he can say , " this be 
 home ; this be all mine . " 

 but there be some kind of beauty which be eminently show 
 place , - which the public think they have as much a right to admire as 
 the owner have ; and the show place itself would be dull and perhaps fall 
 out of repair , if the public could be exclude from the sight of it . 

 the beauty of Cecilia Travers be not that of a show place . there be a 
 feeling of safety in she . if Desdemona have be like she , Othello would 
 not have be jealous . but then Cecilia would not have deceive she 
 father ; nor I think have tell a blackamoor that she wish " Heaven 
 have make she such a man . " her mind harmonize with her person : it be 
 a companionable mind . her talent be not showy , but , take they 
 altogether , they form a pleasant whole : she have good sense enough in 
 the practical affair of life , and enough of that ineffable womanly gift 
 call tact to counteract the effect of whimsical nature like mine , 
 and yet enough sense of the humouristic view of life not to take too 
 literally all that a whimsical man like myself may say . as to temper , 
 one never know what a woman 's temper be - till one put she out of it . 
 but I imagine her , in its normal state , to be serene , and dispose to 
 be cheerful . now , my dear father , if you be not one of the clever 
 of man you would infer from this eulogistic mention of Cecilia Travers 
 that I be in love with she . but you no doubt will detect the truth that 
 a man in love with a woman do not weigh her merit with so steady a 
 hand as that which guide this steel pen . I be not in love with Cecilia 
 Travers . I wish I be . when Lady Glenalvon , who remain wonderfully 
 kind to I , say , day after day , " Cecilia Travers would make you a 
 perfect wife , " I have no answer to give ; but I do not   feel the least 
 inclined to ask Cecilia Travers if she would waste her perfection on one 
 who so coldly concede it . 

 I find that she persist in reject the man whom her father wish 
 she to marry , and that he have console himself by marry somebody 
 else . no doubt other suitor as worthy will soon present themselves . 

 oh , dearest of all my friend , - sole friend whom I regard as a 
 confidant , - shall I ever be in love ? and if not , why not ? sometimes 
 I feel as if , with love as with ambition , it be because I have some 
 impossible ideal in each , that I must always remain indifferent to the 
 sort of love and the sort of ambition which be within my reach . I have 
 an idea that if I do love , I should love as intensely as Romeo , and 
 that think inspire I with vague foreboding of terror ; and if I 
 do find an object to arouse my ambition , I could be as earnest in its 
 pursuit as - whom shall I name ? - Caesar or Cato ? I like Cato 's 
 ambition the well of the two . but people nowadays call ambition an 
 impracticable crotchet , if it be invest on the lose side . Cato would 
 have save Rome from the mob and the dictator ; but Rome could not be 
 save , and Cato fall on his own sword . have we a Cato now , the verdict 
 at a coroner 's inquest would be , ' suicide while in a state of unsound 
 mind ; " and the verdict would have be prove by his senseless 
 resistance to a mob and a dictator ! talk of ambition , I come to the 
 other exception to the youth of the day ; I have name a demoiselle , I 
 now name a damoiseau . imagine a man of about five - and - twenty , and who 
 be morally about fifty year old than a healthy man of sixty , - imagine 
 he with the brain of age and the flower of youth ; with a heart absorb 
 into the brain , and give warm blood to frigid idea : a man who sneer 
 at everything I call lofty , yet would do nothing that he think mean ; to 
 whom vice and virtue be as indifferent as they be to the Aesthetics 
 of Goethe ; who would never jeopardize his career as a practical reasoner 
 by an imprudent virtue , and never sully his reputation by a degrading 
 vice . imagine this man with an intellect keen , strong , ready , 
 unscrupulous , dauntless , - all cleverness and no genius . imagine this 
 man , and then do not be astonish when I tell you he be a Chillingly . 

 the Chillingly race culminate in he , and become Chillinglyest . in 
 fact , it seem to I that we live in a day precisely suited to the 
 Chillingly idiosyncrasy . during the ten century or more that our 
 race have hold local habitation and a name , it have be as airy nothing . 
 its representative live in hot - blooded time , and be compel to 
 skulk in still water with their emblematic dace . but the time now , my 
 dear father , be so cold - blooded that you can not   be too cold - blooded to 
 prosper . what could chillingly Mivers have be in an age when people 
 care twopence - halfpenny about their religious creed , and their 
 political party deem their cause be sacred and their leader be 
 hero ? chillingly Mivers would not have find five subscriber to 
 " the Londoner . " but now " the Londoner " be the favourite organ of the 
 intellectual public ; it sneer away all the foundation of the social 
 system , without an attempt at reconstruction ; and every new journal set 
 up , if it keep its head above water , model itself on " the Londoner . " 
 chillingly Mivers be a great man , and the most potent writer of the age , 
 though nobody know what he have write . chillingly Gordon be a still 
 more notable instance of the rise of the Chillingly worth in the modern 
 market . 

 there be a general impression in the most authoritative circle that 
 chillingly Gordon will have high rank in the van of the come man . his 
 confidence in himself be so thorough that it infect all with whom he 
 come into contact , - myself include . 

 he say to I the other day , with a sang - froid worthy of the icy 
 Chillingly , " I mean to be Prime Minister of England : it be only a 
 question of time . " now , if chillingly Gordon be to be Prime Minister , it 
 will be because the increase cold of our moral and social atmosphere 
 will exactly suit the development of his talent . 

 he be the man above all other to argue down the declaimer of 
 old - fashioned sentimentality , - love of country , care for its position 
 among nation , zeal for its honour , pride in its renown .   oh , if 
 you could hear he philosophically and logically sneer away the word 
 " prestige " !   such notion be fast be classify as " bosh . " and 
 when that classification be complete , - when England have no colony to 
 defend , no navy to pay for , no interest in the affair of other nation , 
 and have attain to the happy condition of Holland , - then Chillingly 
 Gordon will be her Prime Minister . 

 yet while , if ever I be sting into political action , it will be by 
 abnegation of the Chillingly attribute , and in opposition , however 
 hopeless , to Chillingly Gordon , I feel that this man can not be 
 suppress , and ought to have fair play ; his ambition will be infinitely 
 more dangerous if it become sour by delay . I propose , my dear father , 
 that you should have the honour of lay this clever kinsman under 
 an obligation , and enable he to enter Parliament . in our last 
 conversation at Exmundham , you tell I of the frank resentment of Gordon 
  pere , when my come into the world shut he out from the Exmundham 
 inheritance ; you confide to I your intention at that time to lay 
 by yearly a sum that might ultimately serve as a provision for Gordon 
  fil , and as some compensation for the loss of his expectation when 
 you realize your hope of an heir ; you tell I also how this generous 
 intention on your part have be frustrate by a natural indignation at 
 the eld Gordon 's conduct in his harass and costly litigation , and 
 by the addition you have be tempt to make to the estate in a purchase 
 which add to its acreage , but at a rate of interest which diminish 
 your own income , and preclude the possibility of further saving . now , 
 chance to meet your lawyer , Mr. Vining , the other day , I learn from 
 he that it have be long a wish which your delicacy prevent your 
 naming to I , that I , to whom the fee - simple descend , should join with 
 you in cut off the entail and resettle the estate . he show I 
 what an advantage this would be to the property , because it would leave 
 your hand free for many improvement in which I heartily go with the 
 progress of the age , for which , as merely tenant for life , you could not 
 raise the money except upon ruinous term ; new cottage for labourer , 
 new building for tenant , the consolidation of some old mortgage and 
 charge on the rent - roll , etc . and allow I to add that I should like 
 to make a large increase to the jointure of my dear mother . vining say , 
 too , that there be a part of the outlying land which , as be near a 
 town , could be sell to considerable profit if the estate be resettle . 

 let we hasten to complete the necessary deed , and so obtain the L20,000 
 require for the realization of your noble and , let I add , your just 
 desire to do something for Chillingly Gordon . in the new deed of 
 settlement we could insure the power of will the estate as we 
 please , and I be strongly against devise it to Chillingly Gordon . 
 it may be a crotchet of mine , but one which I think you share , that the 
 owner of english soil should have a son 's love for the native land , and 
 Gordon will never have that . I think , too , that it will be good for his 
 own career , and for the establishment of a frank understanding between 
 we and himself , that he should be fairly tell that he would not be 
 benefit in the event of our death . twenty thousand pound give to he 
 now would be a great boon to he than ten time the sum twenty year 
 later . with that at his command , he can enter Parliament , and have an 
 income , add to what he now possess , if modest , still sufficient to 
 make he independent of a minister 's patronage . 

 pray humour I , my dear father , in the proposition I venture to 
 submit to you . 

  your affectionate son , KENELM . 


 from SIR PETER CHILLINGLY to KENELM CHILLINGLY . 

 my DEAR BOY , - you be not worthy to be a Chillingly ; you be decidedly 
 warm - blooded : never be a load lift off a man 's mind with a gentler 
 hand . yes , I have wish to cut off the entail and resettle the 
 property ; but , as it be eminently to my advantage to do so , I shrink 
 from ask it , though eventually it would be almost as much to your own 
 advantage . what with the purchase I make of the Faircleuch land - which 
 I could only effect by money borrow at high interest on my personal 
 security , and pay off by yearly instalment , eat largely into 
 income - and the old mortgage , etc . , I own I have be pinch of late 
 year . but what rejoice I the most be the power to make home for our 
 honest labourer more comfortable , and near to their work , which last 
 be the chief point , for the old cottage in themselves be not bad ; the 
 misfortune be , when you build an extra room for the child , the silly 
 people let it out to a lodger . 

 my dear boy , I be very much touch by your wish to increase your 
 mother 's jointure , - a very proper wish , independently of filial feeling , 
 for she bring to the estate a very pretty fortune , which , the trustee 
 consent to my investing in land ; and though the land complete our 
 ring - fence , it do not bring in two per cent , and the condition of 
 the entail limit the right of jointure to an amount below that which a 
 widow Lady Chillingly may fairly expect . 

 I care more about the provision on these point than I do for the 
 interest of old Chillingly Gordon 's son . I have mean to behave very 
 handsomely to the father ; and when the return for behave handsomely 
 be be put into Chancery - A Worm will turn . nevertheless , I agree with 
 you that a son should not be punish for his father 's fault ; and , if 
 the sacrifice of L20,000 make you and myself feel that we be well 
 Christians and truer gentleman , we shall buy that feeling very cheaply . 


 Sir Peter then proceed , half jestingly , half seriously , to combat 
 Kenelm 's declaration that he be not in love with Cecilia Travers ; and , 
 urge the advantage of marriage with one whom Kenelm allow would be 
 a perfect wife , astutely remark that unless Kenelm have a son of his 
 own it do not seem to he quite just to the next of kin to will the 
 property from he , upon no well plea than the want of love for his 
 native country . " he would love his country fast enough if he have 10,000 
 acre in it . " 

 Kenelm shake his head when he come to this sentence . 

 " be even then love for one 's country but cupboard - love after all ? " say 
 he ; and he postpone finish the perusal of his father 's letter . 



 CHAPTER VII . 

 KENELM CHILLINGLY do not exaggerate the social position he have acquire 
 when he class himself amongst the lion of the fashionable world . I 
 dare not count the number of three - cornered note shower upon he by 
 the fine lady who grow romantic upon any kind of celebrity ; or the 
 carefully seal envelope , contain letter from fair Anonymas , who 
 ask if he have a heart , and would be in such a place in the Park at 
 such an hour . what there be in Kenelm Chillingly that should make he 
 thus favour , especially by the fair sex , it would be difficult to say , 
 unless it be the two - fold reputation of be unlike other people , and 
 of be unaffectedly indifferent to the gain of any reputation at all . 
 he might , have he so pleased , have easily establish a proof that 
 the prevalent though vague belief in his talent be not altogether 
 unjustified . for the article he have send from abroad to " the Londoner " 
 and by which his travel expense be defray , have be stamp 
 by that sort of originality in tone and treatment which rarely fail to 
 excite curiosity as to the author , and meet with more general praise 
 than perhaps it deserve . 

 but Mivers be true to his contract to preserve inviolable the incognito 
 of the author , and Kenelm regard with profound contempt the article 
 themselves and the reader who praise they . 

 just as misanthropy with some person grow out of benevolence 
 disappoint , so there be certain nature - and Kenelm Chillingly 's be 
 perhaps one of they - in which indifferentism grow out of earnestness 
 baffle . 

 he have promise himself pleasure in renew acquaintance with his old 
 tutor , Mr. Welby , - pleasure in refresh his own taste for metaphysic 
 and casuistry and criticism . but that accomplished professor of realism 
 have retire from philosophy altogether , and be now enjoy a holiday 
 for life in the business of a public office . a minister in favour of 
 whom , when in opposition , Mr. Welby , in a moment of whim , write some 
 very able article in a lead journal , have , on accede to power , 
 present the realist with one of those few good thing still leave to 
 ministerial patronage , - a place worth about L1,200 a year . his morning 
 thus engage in routine work , Mr. Welby enjoy his evening in a 
 convivial way . 

 " inveni portum , " he say to Kenelm ; " I plunge into no troubled water 
 now . but come and dine with I to - morrow , tete - a - tete . my wife be at 
 St. Leonard 's with my youngest bear for the benefit of sea - air . " Kenelm 
 accept the invitation . 

 the dinner would have content a Brillat - Savarin : it be faultless ; and 
 the claret be that rare nectar , the Lafitte of 1848 . 

 " I never share this , " say Welby , " with more than one friend at a time . " 

 Kenelm seek to engage his host in discussion on certain new work in 
 vogue , and which be compose accord to purely realistic canon of 
 criticism . " the more realistic ; these book pretend to be , the less 
 real they be , " say Kenelm . " I be half inclined to think that the whole 
 school you so systematically seek to build up be a mistake , and that 
 realism in art be a thing impossible . " 

 " I dare say you be right . I take up that school in earnest because I 
 be in a passion with pretender to the Idealistic school ; and whatever 
 one take up in earnest be generally a mistake , especially if one be in 
 a passion . I be not in earnest and I be not in a passion when I write 
 those article to which I be indebted for my office . " Mr. Welby here 
 luxuriously stretch his limb , and lift his glass to his lip , 
 voluptuously inhale its bouquet . 

 " you sadden I , " return Kenelm . " it be a melancholy thing to find that 
 one 's mind be influence in youth by a teacher who mock at his own 
 teaching . " 

 Welby shrug his shoulder . " life consist in the alternate process of 
 learning and unlearning ; but it be often wise to unlearn than to learn . 
 for the rest , as I have cease to be a critic , I care little whether I 
 be wrong or right when I play that part . I think I be right now as a 
 placeman . let the world go its own way , provide the world let you live 
 upon it . I drain my wine to the lee , and cut down hope to the brief 
 span of life . reject realism in art if you please , and accept realism in 
 conduct . for the first time in my life I be comfortable : my mind , have 
 wear out its walking - shoe , be now enjoy the luxury of slipper . who 
 can deny the realism of comfort ? " 

 " have a man a right , " Kenelm say to himself , as he enter his brougham , 
 " to employ all the brilliancy of a rare wit , all the acquisition of as 
 rare a scholarship , to the scaring of the young generation out of the 
 safe old road which youth leave to itself would take , - old road skirt 
 by romantic river and bowery tree , - direct they into new path on 
 long sandy flat , and then , when they be faint and footsore , to tell 
 they that he care not a pin whether they have wear out their shoe in 
 right path or wrong path , for that he have attain the summum bonum 
 of philosophy in the comfort of easy slipper ? " 

 before he could answer the question he thus put to himself , his brougham 
 stop at the door of the minister whom Welby have contribute to bring 
 into power . 

 that night there be a crowded muster of the fashionable world at the 
 great man 's house . it happen to be a very critical moment for the 
 minister . the fate of his cabinet depend on the result of a motion 
 about to be make the following week in the House of Commons . the great 
 man stand at the entrance of the apartment to receive his guest , and 
 among the guest be the framer of the hostile motion and the leader 
 of the opposition . his smile be not less gracious to they than to his 
 dear friend and stanch supporter . 

 " I suppose this be realism , " say Kenelm to himself ; " but it be not 
 truth , and it be not comfort . " lean against the wall near the 
 doorway , he contemplate with grave interest the strike countenance 
 of his distinguished host . he detect beneath that courteous smile 
 and that urbane manner the sign of care . the eye be absent , the cheek 
 pinch , the brow furrow . Kenelm turn away his look , and glance 
 over the animate countenance of the idle lounger along commoner 
 thoroughfare in life . their eye be not absent ; their brow be 
 not furrow ; their mind seem quite at home in exchange nothing . 
 interest many of they have in the approach struggle , but it be 
 much such an interest as better of small sum may have on the Derby 
 day , - just enough to give piquancy to the race ; nothing to make gain a 
 great joy , or loss a keen anguish . 

 " our host be look ill , " say Mivers , accost Kenelm . " I detect 
 symptom of suppress gout . you know my aphorism , ' nothing so gouty as 
 ambition , ' especially parliamentary ambition . " 

 " you be not one of those friend who press on my choice of life that 
 source of disease ; allow I to thank you . " 

 " your thank be misplace . I strongly advise you to devote yourself to 
 a political career . " 

 " despite the gout ? " 

 " despite the gout . if you could take the world as I do , my advice might 
 be different . but your mind be overcrowded with doubt and fantasy and 
 crotchet , and you have no choice but to give they vent in active life . " 

 " you have something to do in make I what I be , - an idler ; something 
 to answer for as to my doubt , fantasy , and crotchet . it be by your 
 recommendation that I be place under the tuition of Mr. Welby , and at 
 that critical age in which the bent of the twig form the shape of the 
 tree . " 

 " and I pride myself on that counsel . I repeat the reason for which I 
 give it : it be an incalculable advantage for a young man to start in 
 life thoroughly initiate into the New Ideas which will more or less 
 influence his generation . Welby be the able representative of these 
 idea . it be a wondrous good fortune when the propagandist of the 
 New Ideas be something more than a bookish philosopher , - when he be 
 a thorough ' man of the world , ' and be what we emphatically call 
 ' practical . ' yes , you owe I much that I secure to you such tuition , 
 and save you from twaddle and sentiment , the poetry of Wordsworth and 
 the muscular Christianity of Cousin John . " 

 " what you say that you save I from might have do I more good than 
 all you confer on I . I suspect that when education succeed 
 in place an old head upon young shoulder the combination be not 
 healthful : it clog the blood and slacken the pulse . however , I must 
 not be ungrateful ; you mean kindly . yes , I suppose Welby be practical : 
 he have no belief , and he have get a place . but our host , I presume , be 
 also practical ; his place be a much high one than Welby 's , and yet he 
 be surely not without belief ? " 

 " he be bear before the new idea come into practical force ; but 
 in proportion as they have do so , his belief have necessarily 
 disappear . I do not   suppose that he believe in much now , except the 
 two proposition : firstly , that if he accept the new idea he will have 
 power and keep it , and if he do not accept they power be out of the 
 question ; and , secondly , that if the new idea be to prevail he be the 
 good man to direct they safely , - belief quite enough for a minister . no 
 wise minister should have more . " 

 " do he not believe that the motion he be to resist next week be a bad 
 one ? " 

 " a bad one of course , in its consequence , for if it succeed it will 
 upset he ; a good one in itself I be sure he must think it , for he would 
 bring it on himself if he be in opposition . " 

 " I see that Pope 's definition be still true , ' party be the madness of 
 the many for the gain of the few . ' " 

 " no , it be not true . madness be a wrong word apply to the many : the 
 many be sane enough ; they know their own object , and they make use of 
 the intellect of the few in order to gain their object . in each party 
 it be the many that control the few who nominally lead they . a man 
 become Prime Minister because he seem to the many of his party the 
 fit person to carry out their view . if he presume to differ from 
 these view , they put he into a moral pillory , and pelt he with their 
 dirty stone and their rottenest egg . " 

 " then the maxim should be reverse , and party be rather the madness of 
 the few for the gain of the many ? 

 " of the two , that be the more correct definition . " 

 " let I keep my sens and decline to be one of the few . " 

 Kenelm move away from his cousin 's side , and enter one of the less 
 crowd room , see Cecilia Travers seat there in a recess with Lady 
 Glenalvon . he join they , and after a brief interchange of a few 
 commonplace , Lady Glenalvon quit her post to accost a foreign 
 ambassadress , and Kenelm sink into the chair she vacate . 

 it be a relief to his eye to contemplate Cecilia 's candid brow ; to 
 his ear to hearken to the soft voice that have no artificial tone , and 
 utter no cynical witticism . 

 " do not   you think it strange , " say Kenelm , " that we English should so 
 mould all our habit as to make even what we call pleasure as little 
 pleasurable as possible ? we be now in the beginning of June , the fresh 
 outburst of summer , when every day in the country be a delight to eye 
 and ear , and we say , ' the season for hot room be begin . ' we alone 
 of civilized race spend our summer in a capital , and cle to the 
 country when the tree be leafless and the brooks freeze . " 

 " certainly that be a mistake ; but I love the country in all season , 
 even in winter . " 

 " provide the country house be full of London people ? " 

 " No ; that be rather a drawback . I never want companion in the country . " 

 " true ; I should have remember that you differ from young lady in 
 general , and make companion of book . they be always more conversable 
 in the country than they be in town ; or rather , we listen there to they 
 with less distracted attention . ha ! do I not recognize yonder the fair 
 whisker of George Belvoir ? who be the lady lean on his arm ? " 

 " do not   you know ? - Lady Emily Belvoir , his wife . " 

 " ah ! I be tell that he have marry . the lady be handsome . she will 
 become the family diamond . do she read Blue - book ? " 

 " I will ask she if you wish . " 

 " Nay , it be scarcely worth while . during my ramble abroad I see but 
 few english newspaper . I do , however , learn that George have win his 
 election . have he yet speak in Parliament ? " 

 " yes ; he move the answer to the Address this session , and be much 
 compliment on the excellent tone and taste of his speech . he speak 
 again a few week afterwards , I fear not so successfully . " 

 " cough down ? " 

 " something like it . " 

 " do he good ; he will recover the cough , and fulfil my prophecy of his 
 success . " 

 " have you do with poor George for the present ? if so , allow I to ask 
 whether you have quite forget Will Somers and Jessie Wiles ? " 

 " forgotten they ! no . " 

 " but you have never ask after they ? " 

 " I take it for grant that they be as happy as could be expect . 
 pray assure I that they be . " 

 " I trust so now ; but they have have trouble , and have leave Graveleigh . " 

 " Trouble ! leave Graveleigh ! you make I uneasy . pray explain . " 

 " they have not be three month marry and instal in the home they 
 owe to you , when poor will be seize with a rheumatic fever . he be 
 confine to his bed for many week ; and , when at last he could move from 
 it , be so weak as to be still unable to do any work . during his illness 
 Jessie have no heart and little leisure to attend to the shop . of course 
 i - that be , my dear father - give they all necessary assistance ; but - " 

 " I understand ; they be reduce to object of charity . Brute that I be , 
 never to have think of the duty I owe to the couple I have bring 
 together . but pray go on . " 

 " you be aware that just before you leave we my father receive a 
 proposal to exchange his property at Graveleigh for some land more 
 desirable to he ? " 

 " I remember . he close with that offer . " 

 " yes ; Captain Stavers , the new landlord of Graveleigh , seem to be 
 a very bad man ; and though he could not turn the Somerses out of the 
 cottage so long as they pay rent , which we take care they do pay , - yet 
 out of a very wicked spite he set up a rival shop in one of his other 
 cottage in the village , and it become impossible for these poor young 
 people to get a livelihood at Graveleigh . " 

 " what excuse for spite against so harmless a young couple could Captain 
 Stavers find or invent ? " 

 Cecilia look down and colour . " it be a revengeful feeling against 
 Jessie . " 

 " ah , I comprehend . " 

 " but they have now leave the village , and be happily settle elsewhere . 
 will have recover his health , and they be prosper much more than 
 they could ever have do at Graveleigh . " 

 " in that change you be their benefactress , Miss Travers ? " say Kenelm , 
 in a more tender voice and with a soft eye than he have ever before 
 evince towards the heiress . 

 " no , it be not I whom they have to thank and bless . " 

 " who , then , be it ? your father ? " 

 " no . do not question I . I be bind not to say . they do not themselves 
 know ; they rather believe that their gratitude be due to you . " 

 " to I ! be I to be forever a sham in spite of myself ? my dear Miss 
 Travers , it be essential to my honour that I should undeceive this 
 credulous pair ; where can I find they ? " 

 " I must not say ; but I will ask permission of their conceal 
 benefactor , and send you their address . " 

 a touch be lay on Kenelm 's arm , and a voice whisper , " may I ask you 
 to present I to Miss Travers ? " 

 " Miss Travers , " say Kenelm , " I entreat you to add to the list of your 
 acquaintance a cousin of mine , - Mr. Chillingly Gordon . " 

 while Gordon address to Cecilia the well - breed conventionalism with 
 which acquaintance in London drawing - room usually commence , Kenelm , 
 obedient to a sign from Lady Glenalvon , who have just re - enter the 
 room , quit his seat , and join the marchioness . 

 " be not that young man whom you leave talk with Miss Travers your 
 clever cousin Gordon ? " 

 " the same . " 

 " she be listen to he with great attention . how his face brighten up 
 as he talk ! he be positively handsome , thus animate . " 

 " yes , I could fancy he a dangerous wooer . he have wit and liveliness and 
 audacity ; he could be very much in love with a great fortune , and talk 
 to the owner of it with a fervour rarely exhibit by a Chillingly . 
 well , it be no affair of mine . " 

 " it ought to be . " 

 Alas and alas ! that " ought to be ; " what depth of sorrowful meaning lie 
 within that simple phrase ! how happy would be our life , how grand our 
 action , how pure our soul , if all could be with we as it ought to be ! 



 CHAPTER VIII . 

 we often form cordial intimacy in the confine society of a country 
 house , or a quiet watering - place , or a small Continental town , which 
 fade away into remote acquaintanceship in the mighty vortex of London 
 life , neither party be to blame for the estrangement . it be so with 
 Leopold Travers and Kenelm Chillingly . traver , as we have see , have 
 feel a powerful charm in the converse of the young stranger , so in 
 contrast with the routine of the rural companionship to which his alert 
 intellect have for many year circumscribe its range . but on reappear 
 in London the season before Kenelm again meet he , he have renew old 
 friendship with man of his own standing , - officer in the regiment of 
 which he have once be a popular ornament , some of they still unmarried , 
 a few of they like himself widow , other who have be his rival 
 in fashion , and be still pleasant idler about town ; and it rarely 
 happen in a metropolis that we have intimate friendship with those of 
 another generation , unless there be some common tie in the cultivation 
 of art and letter , or the action of kindre sympathy in the party 
 strife of politic . therefore Travers and Kenelm have have little familiar 
 communication with each other since they first meet at the Beaumanoirs ' . 
 now and then they find themselves at the same crowded assembly , and 
 interchanged nod and salutation . but their habit be different ; the 
 house at which they be intimate be not the same , neither do they 
 frequent the same club . Kenelm 's chief bodily exercise be still that 
 of long and early ramble into rural suburb ; Leopold 's be that of 
 a late ride in the row . of the two , Leopold be much more the man of 
 pleasure . once restore to metropolitan life , a temper constitutionally 
 eager , ardent , and convivial take kindly , as in early youth , to its 
 light range of enjoyment . 

 have the intercourse between the two man be as frankly familiar as it 
 have be at Neesdale Park , Kenelm would probably have see much more of 
 Cecilia at her own home ; and the admiration and esteem with which she 
 already inspire he might have ripen into much warm feeling , have 
 he thus be bring into clear comprehension of the soft and womanly 
 heart , and its tender predisposition towards himself . 

 he have say somewhat vaguely in his letter to Sir Peter , that ' sometimes 
 he feel as if his indifference to love , as to ambition , be because he 
 have some impossible ideal in each . " take that conjecture to task , 
 he could not honestly persuade himself that he have form any ideal of 
 woman and wife with which the reality of Cecilia Travers be at war . on 
 the contrary , the more he think over the characteristic of Cecilia , 
 the more they seem to correspond to any ideal that have float before 
 he in the twilight of dreamy revery ; and yet he know that he be not 
 in love with she , that his heart do not respond to his reason ; and 
 mournfully he resign himself to the conviction that nowhere in 
 this planet , from the normal pursuit of whose inhabitant he feel so 
 estranged , be there wait for he the smile playmate , the earnest 
 helpmate . as this conviction strengthen , so an increase weariness 
 of the artificial life of the metropolis , and of all its object and 
 amusement , turn his thought with an intense yearning towards the 
 Bohemian freedom and fresh excitement of his foot rambling . he often 
 think with envy of the wandering minstrel , and wonder whether , if he 
 again traverse the same range of country , he might encounter again that 
 vagrant singer . 



 CHAPTER IX . 

 it be nearly a week since Kenelm have meet Cecilia , and he be sit 
 in his room with Lord Thetford at that hour of three in the afternoon 
 which be find the most difficult to dispose of by idler about town . 
 amongst young man of his own age and class with whom Kenelm assort in 
 the fashionable world , perhaps the one whom he like the good , and of 
 whom he see the most , be this young heir of the Beaumanoirs ; and though 
 Lord Thetford have nothing to do with the direct stream of my story , it 
 be worth pause a few minute to sketch an outline of one of the 
 good whom the last generation have produce for a part that , owe to 
 accident of birth and fortune , young man like Lord Thetford must play 
 on that stage from which the curtain be not yet draw up . destine to 
 be the head of a family that unite with princely possession and a 
 historical name a keen though honourable ambition for political power , 
 Lord Thetford have be care fully educate , especially in the new idea 
 of his time . his father , though a man of no ordinary talent , have never 
 take a prominent part in public life . he desire his eld son to do 
 so . the Beaumanoirs have be whig from the time of William III . they 
 have share the good and the ill fortune of a party which , whether we 
 side with it or not , no politician who dread extreme in the government 
 of a State so pre - eminently artificial that a prevalent extreme at 
 either end of the balance would be fatal to equilibrium , can desire to 
 become extinct or feeble so long as a constitutional monarchy exist 
 in England . from the reign of George I. to the death of George IV . , the 
 Beaumanoirs be in the ascendant . visit their family portrait gallery , 
 and you must admire the eminence of a house which , during that interval 
 of less than a century , contribute so many man to the service of the 
 State or the adornment of the Court , - so many Ministers , Ambassadors , 
 general , Lord Chamberlains , and Masters of the horse . when the young 
 Pitt beat the great Whig Houses , the Beaumanoirs vanish into comparative 
 obscurity ; they reemerge with the accession of William IV . , and once 
 more produce bulwark of the state and ornament of the Crown . the 
 present Lord of Beaumanoir , poco curante in politic though he be , have 
 at least hold high office at Court ; and , as a matter of course , he be 
 Lord Lieutenant of his county , as well as Knight of the Garter . he be 
 a man whom the chief of his party have be accustom to consult on 
 critical question . he give his opinion confidentially and modestly , 
 and when they be reject never take offence . he think that a time 
 be come when the head of the Beaumanoirs should descend into the list 
 and fight hand - to - hand with any Hodge or Hobson in the cause of his 
 country for the benefit of the Whigs . too lazy or too old to do this 
 himself , he say to his son , " you must do it : without effort of mine the 
 thing may last my life . it need effort of yours that the thing may last 
 through your own . " 

 Lord Thetford cheerfully respond to the paternal admonition . he curb 
 his natural inclination , which be neither inelegant nor unmanly ; for , 
 on the one side , he be very fond of music and painting , an accomplished 
 amateur , and deem a sound connoisseur in both ; and , on the other side , 
 he have a passion for all field sport , and especially for hunting . he 
 allow no such attraction to interfere with diligent attention to the 
 business of the House of Commons . he serve in Committees , he take the 
 chair at public meeting on sanitary question or project for social 
 improvement , and acquit himself well therein . he have not yet speak in 
 debate , but he have only be two year in Parliament , and he take his 
 father 's wise advice not to speak till the third . but he be not without 
 weight among the well - bear youth of the party , and have in he the stuff 
 out of which , when it become season , the corinthian capital of a 
 Cabinet may be very effectively carve . in his own heart he be convince 
 that his party be go too far and too fast ; but with that party he 
 go on light - heartedly , and would continue to do so if they go to 
 Erebus . but he would prefer their go the other way . for the rest , a 
 pleasant , bright - eyed young fellow , with vivid animal spirit ; and , in 
 the holiday moment of reprieve from public duty he bring sunshine into 
 draggle hunting - field , and a fresh breeze into heated ballroom . 

 " my dear fellow , " say Lord Thetford , as he throw aside his cigar , " I 
 quite understand that you bore yourself : you have nothing else to do . " 

 " what can I do ? " 

 " work . " 

 " work ! " 

 " yes , you be clever enough to feel that you have a mind ; and mind be a 
 restless inmate of body : it crave occupation of some sort , and regular 
 occupation too ; it need its daily constitutional exercise . do you give 
 your mind that ? " 

 " I be sure I do not   know , but my mind be always busy itself about 
 something or other . " 

 " in a desultory way , - with no fix object . " 

 " true . " 

 " write a book , and then it will have its constitutional . " 

 " Nay , my mind be always write a book   though it may not publish 
 one , always jot down impression , or invent incident , or 
 investigate character ; and between you and I , I do not think that I 
 do bear myself so much as I do formerly . other people bear I more than 
 they do . " 

 " because you will not create an object in common with other people : come 
 into Parliament , side with a party , and you have that object . " 

 " do you mean seriously to tell I that you be not bored in the House of 
 Commons ? " 

 " with the speaker very often , yes ; but with the strife between the 
 speaker , no . the House of Commons life have a peculiar excitement 
 scarcely understand out of it ; but you may conceive its charm when you 
 observe that a man who have once be in the thick of it feel forlorn 
 and shelve if he lose his seat , and even repine when the accident 
 of birth transfer he to the serener air of the Upper House . try that 
 life , Chillingly . " 

 " I might if I be an ultra - radical , a Republican , a Communist , a 
 Socialist , and wish to upset everything exist , for then the strife 
 would at least be a very earnest one . " 

 " but could not you be equally in earnest against those revolutionary 
 gentleman ? " 

 " be you and your leader in earnest against they ? they do not   appear to 
 I so . " 

 Thetford be silent for a minute . " well , if you doubt the principle of 
 my side , go with the other side . for my part , I and many of our party 
 would be glad to see the Conservatives strong . " 

 " I have no doubt they would . no sensible man like to be carry off his 
 leg by the rush of the crowd behind he ; and a crowd be less headlong 
 when it see a strong force array against it in front . but it seem 
 to I that , at present , Conservatism can but be what it now be , - a party 
 that may combine for resistance , and will not combine for inventive 
 construction . we be live in an age in which the process of 
 unsettlement be go blindly at work , as if impel by a Nemesis as 
 blind as itself . new idea come beat into surf and surge against 
 those which former reasoner have consider as fix bank and 
 breakwater ; and the new idea be so mutable , so fickle , that those 
 which be consider novel ten year ago be deem obsolete to - day , 
 and the new one of to - day will in their turn be obsolete to - morrow . 
 and , in a sort of fatalism , you see statesman yield way to these 
 successive mockery of experiment , - for they be experiment against 
 experience , - and say to each other with a shrug of the shoulder , 
 ' Bismillah ! it must be so ; the country will have it , even though it 
 send the country to the dog . ' I do not   feel sure that the country will 
 not go there the soon , if you can only strengthen the conservative 
 element enough to set it up in office , with the certainty of knock 
 it down again . alas ! I be too dispassionate a looker - on to be fit for a 
 partisan : would I be not ! address yourself to my cousin Gordon . " 

 " ay , Chillingly Gordon be a come man , and have all the earnestness you 
 find absent in party and in yourself . " 

 " you call he earnest ? " 

 " thoroughly , in the pursuit of one object , - the advancement of 
 Chillingly Gordon . if he get into the House of Commons , and succeed 
 there , I hope he will never become my leader ; for if he think 
 Christianity in the way of his promotion , he would bring in a bill for 
 its abolition . " 

 " in that case would he still be your leader ? " 

 " my dear Kenelm , you do not   know what be the spirit of party , and how 
 easily it make excuse for any act of its leader . of course , if Gordon 
 bring in a bill for the abolition of Christianity , it would be on the 
 plea that the abolition be good for the Christians , and his follower 
 would cheer that enlighten sentiment . " 

 " ah , " say Kenelm , with a sigh , " I own myself the dull of blockhead ; 
 for instead of tempt I into the field of party politic , your talk 
 leave I in stolid amaze that you do not take to your heel , where 
 honour can only be save by flight . " 

 " Pooh ! my dear Chillingly , we can not run away from the age in which we 
 live : we must accept its condition and make the good of they ; and if 
 the House of Commons be nothing else , it be a famous debating society 
 and a capital club . think over it . I must leave you now . I be go 
 to see a picture at the exhibition which have be most truculently 
 criticise in ' the Londoner , ' but which I be assure , on good authority , 
 be a work of remarkable merit . I can not   bear to see a man snarl and 
 sneer down , no doubt by jealous rival , who have their influence in 
 journal , so I shall judge of the picture for myself . if it be really 
 as good as I be tell , I shall talk about it to everybody I meet ; and in 
 matter of art I fancy my word go for something . study art , my dear 
 Kenelm . no gentleman 's education be complete if he do not   know a good 
 picture from a bad one . after the exhibition I shall just have time for 
 a canter round the Park before the debate of the session , which begin 
 to - night . " 

 with a light step the young man quit the room , hum an air from 
 the " Figaro " as he descend the stair . from the window Kenelm watch 
 he swing himself with careless grace into his saddle and riding 
 briskly down the street , - in form and face and bear a very model of 
 young , high - bear , high - breed manhood . " the Venetians , " mutter Kenelm , 
 " decapitate Marino Faliero for conspire against his own order , - the 
 noble . the Venetians love their institution , and have faith in they . 
 be there such love and such faith among the English ? " 

 as he thus soliloquize he hear a shrilling sort of squeak ; and a 
 showman station before his window the stage on which Punch satirize 
 the law and morality of the world , " kill the beadle and defy the 
 devil . " 



 CHAPTER X. 

 KENELM turn from the sight of Punch and Punch 's friend the cur , as his 
 servant , enter , say a person from the country , who would not give 
 his name , ask to see he . 

 think it might be some message from his father , Kenelm order the 
 stranger to be admit , and in another minute there enter a young man 
 of handsome countenance and powerful frame , in whom , after a surprised 
 stare , Kenelm recognize Tom Bowles . difficult indeed would have be 
 that recognition to an unobservant beholder : no trace be leave of the 
 sullen bully or the village farrier ; the expression of the face be mild 
 and intelligent , - more bashful than hardy ; the brute strength of the 
 form have lose its former clumsiness , the simple dress be that of a 
 gentleman , - to use an expressive idiom , the whole man be wonderfully 
 " tone down . " 

 " I be afraid , sir , I be take a liberty , " say Tom , rather nervously , 
 twiddle his hat between his finger . 

 " I should be a great friend to liberty than I be if it be always 
 take in the same way , " say Kenelm , with a touch of his saturnine 
 humour ; but then yield at once to the warm impulse of his nature , 
 he grasp his old antagonist 's hand and exclaim , " my dear Tom , you 
 be so welcome . I be so glad to see you . sit down , man ; sit down : make 
 yourself at home . " 

 " I do not know you be back in England , sir , till within the last few 
 day ; for you do say that when you come back I should see or hear from 
 you , " and there be a tone of reproach in the last word . 

 " I be to blame , forgive I , " say Kenelm , remorsefully . " but how do 
 you find I out ? you do not then , I think , even know my name . that , 
 however , it be easy enough to discover ; but who give you my address in 
 this lodging ? " 

 " well , sir , it be Miss Travers ; and she bid I come to you . otherwise , 
 as you do not send for I , it be scarcely my place to call uninvited . " 

 " but , my dear Tom , I never dream that you be in London . one do not 
 ask a man whom one suppose to be more than a hundred mile off to pay 
 one an afternoon call . you be still with your uncle , I presume ? and I 
 need not ask if all thrive well with you : you look a prosperous man , 
 every inch of you , from crown to toe . " 

 " yes , " say Tom ; " thank you kindly , sir , I be do well in the way of 
 business , and my uncle be to give I up the whole concern at Christmas . " 

 while Tom thus speak Kenelm have summon his servant , and order up 
 such refreshment as could be find in the larder of a bachelor in 
 lodging . " and what bring you to town , Tom ? " 

 " Miss Travers write to I about a little business which she be good 
 enough to manage for I , and say you wish to know about it ; and so , 
 after turn it over in my mind for a few day , I resolve to come to 
 town : indeed , " add Tom , heartily , " I do wish to see your face again . " 

 " but you talk riddle . what business of yours could Miss Travers imagine 
 I wish to know about ? " 

 Tom colour high , and look very embarrassed . luckily , the servant 
 here enter with the refreshment - tray allow he time to recover 
 himself . Kenelm help he to a liberal slice of cold pigeon - pie , 
 press wine on he , and do not renew the subject till he think his 
 guest 's tongue be likely to be more freely set loose ; then he say , 
 lay a friendly hand on Tom 's shoulder , " I have be think over 
 what pass between I and Miss Travers . I wish to have the new 
 address of Will Somers ; she promise to write to his benefactor to ask 
 permission to give it . you be that benefactor ? " 

 " do not   say benefactor , sir . I will tell how it come about if you will 
 let I . you see , I sell my little place at Graveleigh to the new Squire , 
 and when Mother remove to Luscombe to be near I , she tell I how 
 poor Jessie have be annoy by Captain Stavers , who seem to think 
 his purchase include the young woman on the property along with the 
 standing timber ; and I be half afraid that she have give some cause for 
 his persecution , for you know she have a blink of those soft eye of 
 her that might charm a wise man out of his skin and put a fool there 
 instead . " 

 " but I hope she have do with those blink since her marriage . " 

 " well , and I honestly think she have . it be certain she do not encourage 
 Captain Stavers , for I go over to Graveleigh myself on the sly , and 
 lodge conceal with one of the cottager who owe I a kindness ; and 
 one day , as I be at watch , I see the Captain peer over the stile 
 which divide Holmwood from the glebe , - you remember Holmwood ? " 

 " I can not   say I do . " 

 " the footway from the village to Squire Travers 's go through the 
 wood , which be a few hundred yard at the back of Will Somers 's orchard . 
 presently the Captain draw himself suddenly back from the stile , and 
 disappear among the tree , and then I see Jessie come from the 
 orchard with a basket over her arm , and walk quick towards the wood . 
 then , sir , my heart sink . I feel sure she be go to meet the Captain . 
 however , I creep along the hedgerow , hide myself , and get into the 
 wood almost as soon as Jessie get there , by another way . under the cover 
 of the brushwood I steal on till I see the Captain come out from the 
 copse on the other side of the path , and plant himself just before 
 Jessie . then I see at once I have wrong she . she have not expect to 
 see he , for she hastily turn back , and begin to run homeward ; but he 
 catch she up , and seize she by the arm . I could not hear what he say , 
 but I hear her voice quite sharp with fright and anger . and then he 
 suddenly seize her round the waist , and she scream , and I spring 
 forward - " 

 " and thrash the Captain ? " 

 " no , I do not , " say Tom ; " I have make a vow to myself that I never 
 would be violent again if I could help it . so I take he with one hand 
 by the cuff of the neck , and with the other by the waistband , and just 
 pitch he on a bramble bush , - quite mildly . he soon pick himself up , 
 for he be a dapper little chap , and become very blustering and abusive . 
 but I keep my temper , and say civilly , ' little gentleman , hard word 
 break no bone ; but if ever you molest Mrs. Somers again , I will carry 
 you into her orchard , souse you into the duck - pond there , and call all 
 the villager to see you scramble out of it again ; and I will do it 
 now if you be not off . I dare say you have hear of my name : I be Tom 
 Bowles . ' upon that his face , which be before very red , grow very white , 
 and mutter something I do not hear , he walk away . 

 " Jessie - I mean Mrs. Somers - seem at first as much frighten at I 
 as she have be at the Captain ; and though I offer to walk with she to 
 Miss Travers 's , where she be go with a basket which the young lady 
 have order , she refuse , and go back home . I feel hurt , and return 
 to my uncle 's the same evening ; and it be not for month that I hear 
 the Captain have be spiteful enough to set up an opposition shop , and 
 that poor will have be take ill , and his wife be confine about the 
 same time , and the talk be that they be in distress and might have to 
 be sell up . 

 " when I hear all this , I think that after all it be my rough tongue 
 that have so anger the Captain and be the cause of his spite , and so 
 it be my duty to make it up to poor Will and his wife . I do not know 
 how to set about mend matter , but I think I would go and talk to Miss 
 Travers ; and if ever there be a kind heart in a girl 's breast , hers be 
 one . " 

 " you be right there , I guess . what do Miss Travers say ? " 

 " Nay ; I hardly know what she do say , but she set I think , and it 
 strike I that Jessie - Mrs. Somers - have well move to a distance , and 
 out of the Captain 's reach , and that will would do well in a less 
 out - of - the - way place . and then , by good luck , I read in the newspaper 
 that a stationary and a fancywork business , with a circulate library , 
 be to be sell on moderate term at Moleswich , the other side of London . 
 so I take the train and go to the place , and think the shop would 
 just suit these young folk , and not be too much work for either ; then I 
 go to Miss Travers , and I have a lot of money lie by I from the sale 
 of the old forge and premise , which I do not know what to do with ; and 
 so , to cut short a long story , I buy the business , and Will and his 
 wife be settle at Moleswich , thriving and happy , I hope , sir . " 

 Tom 's voice quiver at the last word , and he turn aside quickly , 
 pass his hand over his eye . 

 Kenelm be greatly move . 

 " and they do not   know what you do for they ? " 

 " to be sure not . I do not   think will would have let he self be 
 beholden to I . ah ! the lad have a spirit of his own , and Jessie - Mrs. 
 Somers - would have feel pain and humble that I should even think of 
 such a thing . Miss Travers manage it all . they take the money as a loan 
 which be to be pay by instalment . they have send Miss Travers more 
 than one instalment already , so I know they be do well . " 

 " a loan from Miss Travers ? " 

 " no ; Miss Travers want to have a share in it , but I beg she not . it 
 make I happy to do what I do all myself ; and Miss Travers feel for I 
 and do not press . they perhaps think it be Squire Travers   though he be 
 not a man who would like to say it , for fear it should bring applicant 
 on he , or some other gentleman who take an interest in they . " 

 " I always say you be a grand fellow , Tom . but you be grander still 
 than I think you . " 

 " if there be any good in I , I owe it to you , sir . think what a drunken , 
 violent brute I be when I first meet you . those walk with you , and I 
 may say that other gentleman 's talk , and then that long kind letter I 
 have from you , not sign in your name , and write from abroad , - all 
 these change I , as the child be change at nurse . " 

 " you have evidently read a good deal since we part . " 

 " yes ; I belong to our young man 's library and institute ; and when of an 
 evening I get hold of a book , especially a pleasant story - book , I do not 
 care for other company . " 

 " have you never see any other girl you could care for , and wish to 
 marry ? " 

 " ah , sir , " answer Tom , " a man do not go so mad for a girl as I 
 do for Jessie Wiles , and when it be all over , and he have come to his 
 sens , put his heart into joint again as easily as if it be only a 
 broken leg . I do not   say that I may not live to love and to marry another 
 woman : it be my wish to do so . but I know that I shall love Jessie to my 
 die day ; but not sinfully , sir , - not sinfully . I would not wrong she 
 by a thought . " 

 there be a long pause . 

 at last Kenelm say , " you promise to be kind to that little girl with 
 the flower - ball ; what have become of she ? " 

 " she be quite well , thank you , sir . my aunt have take a great fancy to 
 she , and so have my mother . she come to they very often of an evening , 
 and bring she work with she . a quick , intelligent little thing , and 
 full of pretty thought . on Sundays , if the weather be fine , we stroll 
 out together in the field . " 

 " she have be a comfort to you , Tom . " 

 " oh , yes . " 

 " and love you ? " 

 " I be sure she do ; an affectionate , grateful child . " 

 " she will be a woman soon , Tom , and may love you as a woman then . " 

 Tom look indignant and rather scornful at that suggestion , and 
 hasten to revert to the subject more immediately at his heart . 

 " Miss Travers say you would like to call on Will Somers and his wife ; 
 will you ? Moleswich be not far from London , you know . " 

 " certainly , I will call . " 

 " I do hope you will find they happy ; and if so , perhaps you will kindly 
 let I know ; and - and - I wonder whether Jessie 's child be like she ? it 
 be a boy ; somehow or other I would rather it have be a girl . " 

 " I will write you full particular . but why not come with I ? " 

 " no , I do not   think I could do that , just at present . it unsettle I 
 sadly when I do again see her sweet face at Graveleigh , and she be 
 still afraid of I too ! that be a sharp pang . " 

 " she ought to know what you have do for she , and will . " 

 " on no account , sir ; promise I that . I should feel mean if I humble 
 they , - that way . " 

 " I understand , though I will not as yet make you any positive promise . 
 meanwhile , if you be stay in town , lodge with I ; my landlady can 
 find you a room . " 

 " thank you heartily , sir ; but I go back by the evening train ; and , bless 
 I ! how late it be now ! I must wish you good - by . I have some commission 
 to do for my aunt , and I must buy a new doll for Susey . " 

 " Susey be the name of the little girl with the flower - ball ? " 

 " yes . I must run off now ; I feel quite light at heart see you again 
 and find that you receive I still so kindly , as if we be equal . " 

 " ah , Tom , I wish I be your equal , - nay , half as noble as Heaven have 
 make you ! " 

 Tom laugh incredulously , and go his way . 

 " this mischievous passion of love , " say Kenelm to himself , " have its 
 good side , it seem , after all . if it be nearly make a wild beast of 
 that brave fellow , - nay , bad than wild beast , a homicide doom to 
 the gibbet , - so , on the other hand , what a refined , delicate , chivalrous 
 nature of gentleman it have develop out of the stormy element of its 
 first madness ! yes , I will go and look at this new - married couple . I 
 dare say they be already snarl and spit at each other like cat 
 and dog . Moleswich be within reach of a walk . " 





 BOOK V. 



 CHAPTER I. 

 two day after the interview record in the last chapter of the 
 previous Book , Travers , chance to call at Kenelm 's lodging , be tell 
 by his servant that Mr. Chillingly have leave London , alone , and have give 
 no order as to forward letter . the servant do not know where he 
 have go , or when he would return . 

 traver repeat this news incidentally to Cecilia , and she feel 
 somewhat hurt that he have not write she a line respect Tom 's visit . 
 she , however , guess that he have go to see the somerse , and would 
 return to town in a day or so . but week pass , the season draw to its 
 close , and of Kenelm Chillingly she see or hear nothing : he have 
 wholly vanish from the London world . he have but write a line to his 
 servant , order he to repair to Exmundham and await he there , and 
 enclose he a check to pay outstanding bill . 

 we must now follow the devious step of the strange being who have grow 
 into the hero of this story . he have leave his apartment at daybreak long 
 before his servant be up , with his knapsack , and a small portmanteau , 
 into which he have thrust - besides such additional article of dress as 
 he think he might possibly require , and which his knapsack could not 
 contain - a few of his favourite book . drive with these in a hack - cab 
 to the Vauxhall station , he direct the portmanteau to be forward 
 to Moleswich , and fling the knapsack on his shoulder , walk slowly 
 along the drowsy suburb that stretch far into the landscape , before , 
 breathe more freely , he find some evidence of rural culture on 
 either side of the high road . it be not , however , till he have leave the 
 roof and tree of pleasant Richmond far behind he that he begin to 
 feel he be out of reach of the metropolitan disquieting influence . 
 finding at a little inn , where he stop to breakfast , that there be 
 a path along field , and in sight of the river , through which he could 
 gain the place of his destination , he then quit the high road , 
 and traverse one of the lovely district in one of our lovely 
 county , he reach Moleswich about noon . 



 CHAPTER II . 

 ON enter the main street of the pretty town , the name of Somers , 
 in gilt capital , be sufficiently conspicuous over the door of a very 
 imposing shop . it boast two plate - glass window , at one of which be 
 tastefully exhibit various article of fine stationery , embroidery 
 pattern , etc . ; at the other , no less tastefully , sundry specimen of 
 ornamental basket - work . 

 Kenelm cross the threshold and recognize behind the counter - fair 
 as ever , but with an expression of face more staid , and a figure more 
 rounded and matron - like - his old friend Jessie . there be two or three 
 customer before she , between whom she be divide her attention . while 
 a handsome young lady , seat , be say , in a somewhat loud but cheery 
 and pleasant voice , " do not mind I , Mrs. Somers : I can wait , " Jessie 's 
 quick eye dart towards the stranger , but too rapidly to distinguish 
 his feature , which , indeed , he turn away , and begin to examine the 
 basket . 

 in a minute or so the other customer be serve and have depart ; and 
 the voice of the lady be again hear , " now , Mrs. Somers , I want to see 
 your picture - book and toy . I be give a little child 's party this 
 afternoon , and I want to make they as happy as possible . " 

 " somewhere or other , on this planet , or before my Monad be whisk 
 away to it , I have hear that voice , " mutter Kenelm . while Jessie be 
 alertly bring forth her toy and picture - book , she say , " I be sorry 
 to keep you wait , sir ; but if it be the basket you come about , I can 
 call my husband . " 

 " do , " say Kenelm . 

 " William , William , " cry Mrs. Somers ; and after a delay long enough to 
 allow he to slip on his jacket , William Somers emerge from the back 
 parlour . 

 his face have lose its old trace of suffering and ill health ; it be 
 still somewhat pale , and retain its expression of intellectual 
 refinement . 

 " how you have improve in your art ! " say Kenelm , heartily . 

 William start , and recognize Kenelm at once . he spring forward and 
 take Kenelm 's outstretched hand in both his own , and , in a voice between 
 laugh and crying , exclaim , " Jessie , Jessie , it be he ! - he whom we 
 pray for every night . God bless you ! God bless and make you as happy as 
 he permit you to make I ! " 

 before this little speech be falter out , Jessie be by her husband 's 
 side , and she add , in a low voice , but tremulous with deep feeling , 
 " and I too ! " 

 " by your leave , will , " say Kenelm , and he salute Jessie 's white 
 forehead with a kiss that could not have be kindly or cold if it 
 have be her grandfather 's . 

 meanwhile the lady have rise noiselessly and unobserve , and steal up 
 to Kenelm , look he full in the face . 

 " you have another friend here , sir , who have also some cause to thank 
 you - " 

 " I think I remember your voice , " say Kenelm , look puzzle . " but 
 pardon I if I can not recall your feature . where have we meet before ? " 

 " give I your arm when we go out , and I will bring myself to your 
 recollection . but no : I must not hurry you away now . I will call 
 again in half an hour . Mrs. Somers , meanwhile put up the thing I 
 have select . I will take they away with I when I come back from the 
 vicarage , where I have leave the pony - carriage . " so , with a parting nod 
 and smile to Kenelm , she turn away , and leave he bewildered . 

 " but who be that lady , will ? " 

 " a Mrs. Braefield . she be a new comer . " 

 " she may well be that , will , " say Jessie , smile , " for she have only 
 be marry six month . " 

 " and what be her name before she marry ? " 

 " I be sure I do not   know , sir . it be only three month since we come 
 here , and she have be very kind to we and an excellent customer . 
 everybody like she . Mr. Braefield be a city gentleman and very rich ; 
 and they live in the fine house in the place , and see a great deal of 
 company . " 

 " well , I be no wise than I be before , " say Kenelm . " People who ask 
 question very seldom be . " 

 " and how do you find we out , sir ? " say Jessie . " oh ! I guess , " she 
 add , with an arch glance and smile . " of course , you have see Miss 
 Travers , and she tell you . " 

 " you be right . I first learn your change of residence from she , and 
 think I would come and see you , and be introduce to the baby , - a boy , 
 I understand ? like you , will ? " 

 " no , sir , the picture of Jessie . " 

 " Nonsense , will ; it be you all over , even to its little hand . " 

 " and your good mother , will , how do you leave she ? " 

 " oh , sir ! " cry Jessie , reproachfully ; " do you think we could have the 
 heart to leave Mother , - so lone and rheumatic too ? she be tend baby 
 now , - always do while I be in the shop . " 

 here Kenelm follow the young couple into the parlour , where , seat by 
 the window , they find old Mrs. Somers read the Bible and rock the 
 baby , who sleep peacefully in its cradle . 

 " will , " say Kenelm , bend his dark face over the infant , " I will 
 tell you a pretty thought of a foreign poet 's , which have be thus badly 
 translate : 


  " ' blest babe , a boundless world this bed so narrow seem to thee ; 
  grow man , and narrower than this bed the boundless world shall 
  be . ' " 1 


   1   Schiller . 


 " I do not   think that be true , sir , " say will , simply ; " for a happy home 
 be a world wide enough for any man . " 

 tear start into Jessie 's eye ; she bend down and kiss - not the 
 baby , but the cradle . " will made it . " she add blushing , " I mean the 
 cradle , sir . " 

 Time fly past while Kenelm talk with Will and the old mother , for 
 Jessie be soon summon back to the shop ; and Kenelm be startle when 
 he find the half - hour 's grace allow to he be over , and Jessie put 
 her head in at the door and say , " Mrs. Braefield be wait for you . " 

 " good - by , will ; I shall come to see you again soon ; and my mother give 
 I a commission to buy I do not   know how many specimen of your craft . " 



 CHAPTER III . 

 a SMART pony - phaeton , with a box for a driver in livery equally smart , 
 stand at the shop - door . 

 " now , Mr. Chillingly , " say Mrs. Braefield , " it be my turn to run away 
 with you ; get in ! " 

 " eh ! " murmur Kenelm , gaze at she with large dreamy eye . " be it 
 possible ? " 

 " quite possible ; get in . Coachman , home ! yes , Mr. Chillingly , you meet 
 again that giddy creature whom you threaten to thrash ; it would have 
 serve her right . I ought to feel so ashamed to recall myself to your 
 recollection , and yet I be not a bit ashamed . I be proud to show you 
 that I have turn out a steady , respectable woman , and , my husband 
 tell I , a good wife . " 

 " you have only be six month marry , I hear , " say Kenelm , dryly . " I 
 hope your husband will say the same six year hence . " 

 " he will say the same sixty year hence , if we live as long . " 

 " how old be he now ? " 

 " thirty - eight . " 

 " when a man want only two year of his hundredth , he probably have 
 learn to know his own mind ; but then , in most case , very little mind 
 be leave to he to know . " 

 " do not   be satirical , sir ; and do not   talk as if you be rail at 
 marriage , when you have just leave as happy a young couple as the sun 
 ever shine upon ; and owe , - for Mrs. Somers have tell I all about her 
 marriage , - owe their happiness to you . " 

 " their happiness to I ! not in the least . I help they to marry , and in 
 spite of marriage they help each other to be happy . " 

 " you be still unmarried yourself ? " 

 " yes , thank Heaven ! " 

 " and be you happy ? " 

 " no ; I can not   make myself happy : myself be a discontent brute . " 

 " then why do you say ' thank Heaven ' ? " 

 " because it be a comfort to think I be not make somebody else 
 unhappy . " 

 " do you believe that if you love a wife who love you , you should make 
 her unhappy ? " 

 " I be sure I do not   know ; but I have not see a woman whom I could love 
 as a wife . and we need not push our inquiry far . what have become 
 of that ill - treat gray cob ? " 

 " he be quite well , thank you , when I last hear of he . " 

 " and the uncle who would have inflict I upon you , if you have not so 
 gallantly defend yourself ? " 

 " he be live where he do live , and have marry his housekeeper . he 
 feel a delicate scruple against take that step till I be marry 
 myself and out of the way . " 

 here Mrs. Braefield , begin to speak very hurriedly , as woman who 
 seek to disguise emotion often do , inform Kenelm how unhappy she have 
 feel for week after have find an asylum with her aunt , - how she have 
 be sting by remorse and oppress by a sense of humiliation at the 
 thought of her folly and the odious recollection of Mr. Compton , - how 
 she have declare to herself that she would never marry any one 
 now - never ! how Mr. Braefield happen to be on a visit in the 
 neighbourhood , and see she at church , - how he have seek an introduction 
 to she , - and how at first she rather dislike he than not ; but he be 
 so good and so kind , and when at last he propose - and she have frankly 
 tell he all about her girlish flight and infatuation - how generously he 
 have thank she for a candour which have place she as high in his esteem 
 as she have be before in his love . " and from that moment , " say Mrs. 
 Braefield , passionately , " my whole heart leap to he . and now you know 
 all ; and here we be at the Lodge . " 

 the pony - phaeton go with great speed up a broad gravel - drive , border 
 with rare evergreen , and stop at a handsome house with a portico in 
 front , and a long conservatory at the garden side , - one of those house 
 which belong to " city gentleman , " and often contain more comfort and 
 exhibit more luxury than many a stately manorial mansion . 

 Mrs. Braefield evidently feel some pride as she lead Kenelm through 
 the handsome hall , pave with malvern tile and adorn with Scagliola 
 column , and into a drawing - room furnish with much taste and opening 
 on a spacious flower - garden . 

 " but where be Mr. Braefield ? " ask Kenelm . 

 " oh , he have take the rail to his office ; but he will be back long 
 before dinner , and of course you dine with we . " 

 " you be very hospitable , but - " 

 " no but : I will take no excuse . do not   fear that you shall have only 
 mutton - chop and a rice - pudding ; and , besides , I have a child 's party 
 come at two o'clock , and there will be all sort of fun . you be fond 
 of child , I be sure ? " 

 " I rather think I be not . but I have never clearly ascertain my own 
 inclination upon that subject . " 

 " well , you shall have ample opportunity to do so to - day . and oh ! I 
 promise you the sight of the lovely face that you can picture to 
 yourself when you think of your future wife . " 

 " my future wife , I hope , be not yet bear , " say Kenelm , wearily , and 
 with much effort suppress a yawn . " but at all event , I will stay 
 till after two o'clock ; for two o'clock , I presume , mean luncheon . " 

 Mrs. Braefield laugh . " you retain your appetite ? " 

 " Most single man do , provide they do not   fall in love and become double 
 up . " 

 at this abominable attempt at a pun , Mrs. Braefield disdain to laugh ; 
 but turn away from its perpetrator she take off her hat and glove 
 and pass her hand lightly over her forehead , as if to smooth back 
 some vagrant tress in lock already sufficiently sheen and trim . she be 
 not quite so pretty in female attire as she have appear in boy 's 
 dress , nor do she look quite as young . in all other respect she be 
 wonderfully improve . there be a serener , a more settle intelligence 
 in her frank bright eye , a milder expression in the play of her part 
 lip . Kenelm gaze at she with pleased admiration . and as now , turn 
 from the glass , she encounter his look , a deep colour come into the 
 clear delicacy of her cheek , and the frank eye moisten . she come up 
 to he as he sit , and take his hand in both her , press it warmly . 
 " ah , Mr. Chillingly , " she say , with impulsive tremulous tone , " look 
 round , look round this happy , peaceful home ! - the life so free from a 
 care , the husband whom I so love and honour ; all the blessing that I 
 might have so recklessly lose forever have I not meet with you , have I be 
 punish as I deserve . how often I think of your word , that ' you 
 would be proud of my friendship when we meet again ' ! what strength they 
 give I in my hour of humble self - reproach ! " her voice here die away 
 as if in the effort to suppress a sob . 

 she release his hand , and , before he could answer , pass quickly 
 through the open sash into the garden . 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 the child have come , - some thirty of they , pretty as english child 
 generally be , happy in the joy of the summer sunshine , and the 
 flower lawn , and the feast under cover of an awning suspend between 
 chestnut - tree , and carpet with sward . 

 no doubt Kenelm hold his own at the banquet , and do his good to 
 increase the general gayety , for whenever he speak the child listen 
 eagerly , and when he have do they laugh mirthfully . 

 " the fair face I promise you , " whisper Mrs. Braefield , " be not here 
 yet . I have a little note from the young lady to say that Mrs. Cameron 
 do not feel very well this morning , but hop to recover sufficiently 
 to come later in the afternoon . " 

 " and pray who be Mrs. Cameron ? " 

 " ah ! I forget that you be a stranger to the place . Mrs. Cameron be the 
 aunt with whom Lily resides . be it not a pretty name , Lily ? " 

 " very ! emblematic of a spinster that do not spin , with a white head 
 and a thin stalk . " 

 " then the name belie my Lily , as you will see . " 

 the child now finish their feast , and betook themselves to dance 
 in an alley smooth for a croquet - ground , and to the sound of a violin 
 play by the old grandfather of one of the party . while Mrs. Braefield 
 be busy herself with form the dance , Kenelm seize the occasion 
 to escape from a young nymph of the age of twelve who have sit next he 
 at the banquet , and take so great a fancy to he that he begin to fear 
 she would vow never to forsake his side , and steal away undetected . 

 there be time when the mirth of other only sadden we , especially 
 the mirth of child with high spirit , that jar on our own quiet mood . 
 glide through a dense shrubbery , in which , though the lilac be 
 fade , the laburnum still retain here and there the wan gold of its 
 cluster , Kenelm come into a recess which bound his step and invite 
 he to repose . it be a circle , so form artificially by slight 
 trellis , to which clung parasite rose heavy with leaf and flower . 
 in the midst play a tiny fountain with a silvery murmur sound ; at 
 the background , dominate the place , rise the crest of stately tree , 
 on which the sunlight shimmer , but which rampire out all horizon 
 beyond . even as in life do the great dominant passion - love , ambition , 
 desire of power or gold or fame or knowledge - form the proud background 
 to the brief - live floweret of our youth , lift our eye beyond the 
 smile of their bloom , catch the glint of a loftier sunbeam , and yet , 
 and yet , exclude our sight from the length and the width of the space 
 which extend behind and beyond they . 

 Kenelm throw himself on the turf beside the fountain . from afar come the 
 whoop and the laugh of the child in their sport or their dance . at 
 the distance their joy do not sadden he , - he marvel why ; and thus , 
 in muse revery , think to explain the why to himself . 

 " the poet , " so run his lazy thinking , " have tell we that ' distance lend 
 enchantment to the view , ' and thus compare to the charm of distance 
 the illusion of hope . but the poet narrow the scope of his own 
 illustration . distance lend enchantment to the ear as well as to the 
 sight ; nor to these bodily sens alone . memory no less than hope owe 
 its charm to ' the far away . ' 

 " I can not imagine myself again a child when I be in the midst of 
 young noisy child . but as their noise reach I here , subdue and 
 mellow , and know , thank Heaven , that the urchin be not within 
 reach of I , I could readily dream myself back into childhood , and into 
 sympathy with the lose playfield of school . 

 " so surely it must be with grief : how different the terrible agony for 
 a beloved one just go from earth , to the soft regret for one who 
 disappear into Heaven year ago ! so with the art of poetry : how 
 imperatively , when it deal with the great emotion of tragedy , it must 
 remove the actor from we , in proportion as the emotion be to elevate , 
 and the tragedy be to please we by the tear it draw ! imagine our shock 
 if a poet be to place on the stage some wise gentleman with whom we 
 din yesterday , and who be discover to have kill his father and 
 marry his mother . but when Oedipus commit those unhappy mistake 
 nobody be shock . Oxford in the nineteenth century be a long way off 
 from Thebes three thousand or four thousand year ago . 

 " and , " continue Kenelm , plunge deeply into the maze of metaphysical 
 criticism , " even where the poet deal with person and thing close upon 
 our daily sight , - if he would give they poetic charm he must resort to 
 a sort of moral or psychological distance ; the nearer they be to we 
 in external circumstance , the far they must be in some internal 
 peculiarity . werter and Clarissa Harlowe be describe as 
 contemporary of their artistic creation , and with the minute detail 
 of apparent realism ; yet they be at once remove from our daily life 
 by their idiosyncrasy and their fate . we know that while Werter 
 and Clarissa be so near to we in much that we sympathize with they as 
 friend and kinsfolk , they be yet as much remote from we in the poetic 
 and idealize side of their nature as if they belong to the age of 
 Homer ; and this it be that invest with charm the very pain which their 
 fate inflict on we . thus , I suppose , it must be in love . if the love 
 we feel be to have the glamour of poetry , it must be love for some 
 one morally at a distance from our ordinary habitual self ; in short , 
 differ from we in attribute which , however near we draw to the 
 possessor , we can never approach , never blend , in attribute of our 
 own ; so that there be something in the love one that always remain an 
 ideal , - a mystery , - ' a sun - bright summit mingle with the sky ' ! " 

 herewith the soliloquist 's musing glide vaguely into mere revery . he 
 close his eye drowsily , not asleep , nor yet quite awake ; as sometimes 
 in bright summer day when we recline on the grass we do close our eye , 
 and yet dimly recognize a golden light bath the drowsy lid ; and 
 athwart that light image come and go like dream , though we know that 
 we be not dream . 



 CHAPTER V. 

 from this state , half comatose , half unconscious , Kenelm be rouse 
 slowly , reluctantly . something strike softly on his cheek , - again a 
 little less softly ; he open his eye , they fall first upon two tiny 
 rosebud , which , on strike his face , have fall on his breast ; and 
 then look up , he see before he , in an opening of the trellis 
 circle , a female child 's laugh face . her hand be still uplifted 
 charge with another rosebud , but behind the child 's figure , look 
 over her shoulder and hold back the menacing arm , be a face as 
 innocent but lovelier far , - the face of a girl in her first youth , 
 frame round with the blossom that festoon the trellise . how the face 
 become the flower ! it seem the fairy spirit of they . 

 Kenelm start and rise to his foot . the child , the one whom he have so 
 ungallantly escape from ran towards he through a wicket in the circle . 
 her companion disappear . 

 " be it you ? " say Kenelm to the child , " you who pelt I so cruelly ? 
 ungrateful creature ! do I not give you the good strawberry in the 
 dish and all my own cream ? " 

 " but why do you run away and hide yourself when you ought to be dance 
 with I ? " reply the young lady , evade , with the instinct of her sex , 
 all answer to the reproach she have deserve . 

 " I do not run away , and it be clear that I do not mean to hide myself , 
 since you so easily find I out . but who be the young lady with you ? 
 I suspect she pelt I too , for she seem to have run away to hide 
 herself . " 

 " no , she do not pelt you ; she want to stop I , and you would have have 
 another rosebud - oh , so much big ! - if she have not hold back my arm . 
 do not   you know she , - do not   you know Lily ? " 

 " no ; so that be lily ? you shall introduce I to she . " 

 by this time they have pass out of the circle through the little wicket 
 opposite the path by which Kenelm have enter , and opening at once on 
 the lawn . here at some distance the child be group , some recline 
 on the grass , some walk to and fro , in the interval of the dance . 

 in the space between the group and the trellise Lily be walk alone 
 and quickly . the child leave Kenelm 's side and run after her friend , soon 
 overtook , but do not succeed in arrest her step . Lily do not pause 
 till she have reach the grassy ball - room , and here all the child 
 come round she and shut out her delicate form from Kenelm 's sight . 

 before he have reach the place , Mrs. Braefield meet he . 

 " Lily be come ! " 

 " I know it : I have see she . " 

 " be not she beautiful ? " 

 " I must see more of she if I be to answer critically ; but before you 
 introduce I , may I be permit to ask who and what be lily ? " 

 Mrs. Braefield pause a moment before she answer , and yet the 
 answer be brief enough not to need much consideration . " she be a Miss 
 Mordaunt , an orphan ; and , as I before tell you , reside with her aunt , 
 Mrs. Cameron , a widow . they have the prettiest cottage you ever see on 
 the bank of the river , or rather rivulet , about a mile from this place . 
 Mrs. Cameron be a very good , simple - hearted woman . as to Lily , I can 
 praise her beauty only with safe conscience , for as yet she be a mere 
 child , - her mind quite unformed . " 

 " do you ever meet any man , much less any woman , whose mind be form ? " 
 mutter Kenelm . " I be sure mine be not , and never will be on this 
 earth . " 

 Mrs. Braefield do not hear this low - voice observation . she be 
 look about for Lily ; and perceive she at last as the child who 
 surround she be disperse to renew the dance , she take Kenelm 's 
 arm , lead he to the young lady , and a formal introduction take place . 

 Formal as it could be on those sunlit sward , amidst the joy of summer 
 and the laugh of child . in such scene and such circumstance formality 
 do not last long . I know not how it be , but in a very few minute 
 Kenelm and Lily have cease to be stranger to each other . they find 
 themselves seat apart from the rest of the merry - maker , on the bank 
 shadow by lime - tree ; the man listen with downcast eye , the girl 
 with mobile shifting glance now on earth , now on heaven , and talk 
 freely ; gayly , - like the babble of a happy stream , with a silvery dulcet 
 voice and a sparkle of ripple smile . 

 no doubt this be a reversal of the formality of well - breed life , and 
 conventional narrating thereof . accord to they , no doubt , it be for 
 the man to talk and the maid to listen ; but I state the fact as they 
 be , honestly . and Lily know no more of the formality of drawing - room 
 life than a skylark fresh from its nest know of the song - teacher and 
 the cage . she be still so much of a child . Mrs. Braefield be right : 
 her mind be still so unformed . 

 what she do talk about in that first talk between they that could make 
 the meditative Kenelm listen so mutely , so intently , I know not , at 
 least I could not jot it down on paper . I fear it be very egotistical , 
 as the talk of child generally be , - about herself and her aunt , and 
 her home and her friend ; all her friend seem child like herself , 
 though young , - Clemmy the chief of they . Clemmy be the one who have 
 take a fancy to Kenelm . and amidst all this ingenuous prattle there 
 come flash of a quick intellect , a lively fancy , - nay , even a poetry 
 of expression or of sentiment . it might be the talk of a child , but 
 certainly not of a silly child . but as soon as the dance be over , 
 the little one again gather round Lily . evidently she be the prime 
 favourite of they all ; and as her companion have now become tired 
 of dancing , new sport be propose , and Lily be carry off to 
 " Prisoner 's Base . " 

 " I be very happy to make your acquaintance , Mr. Chillingly , " say a 
 frank , pleasant voice ; and a well - dress , good - look man hold out his 
 hand to Kenelm . 

 " my husband , " say Mrs. Braefield , with a certain pride in her look . 

 Kenelm respond cordially to the civility of the master of the house , 
 who have just return from his city office , and leave all its care 
 behind he . you have only to look at he to see that he be prosperous , 
 and deserve to be so . there be in his countenance the sign of strong 
 sense , of good - humour , - above all , of an active energetic temperament . a 
 man of broad smooth forehead , keen hazel eye , firm lip and jaw ; with a 
 happy contentment in himself , his house , the world in general , mantle 
 over his genial smile , and outspoken in the metallic ring of his voice . 

 " you will stay and dine with we , of course , " say Mr. Braefield ; " and , 
 unless you want very much to be in town to - night , I hope you will take a 
 bed here . " 

 Kenelm hesitate . 

 " do stay at least till to - morrow , " say Mrs. Braefield . Kenelm hesitate 
 still ; and while hesitate his eye rest on Lily , lean on the arm 
 of a middle - aged lady , and approach the hostess , - evidently to take 
 leave . 

 " I can not resist so tempt an invitation , " say Kenelm , and he fall 
 back a little behind Lily and her companion . 

 " thank you much for so pleasant a day , " say Mrs. Cameron to the 
 hostess . " Lily have enjoy herself extremely . I only regret we could not 
 come early . " 

 " if you be walk home , " say Mr. Braefield , " let I accompany you . I 
 want to speak to your gardener about his heart's - ease : it be much fine 
 than mine . " 

 " if so , " say Kenelm to Lily , " may I come too ? of all flower that grow , 
 heart' - ease be the one I most prize . " 

 a few minute afterwards Kenelm be walk by the side of Lily along 
 the bank of a little stream , tributary to the Thames ; Mrs. Cameron and 
 Mr. Braefield in advance , for the path only hold two abreast . 

 suddenly Lily leave his side , allure by a rare butterfly - I think it be 
 call the Emperor of Morocco - that be sun its yellow wing upon 
 a group of wild reed . she succeed in capture this wanderer in her 
 straw hat , over which she draw her sun - veil . after this notable capture 
 she return demurely to Kenelm 's side . 

 " do you collect insect ? " say that philosopher , as much surprised as it 
 be his nature to be at anything . 

 " only butterfly , " answer lily ; " they be not insect , you know ; they 
 be soul . " 

 " emblem of soul you mean , - at least , so the Greeks prettily 
 represent they to be . " 

 " no , real soul , - the soul of infant that die in their cradle 
 unbaptized ; and if they be take care of , and not eat by bird , and 
 live a year then they pass into fairy . " 

 " it be a very poetical idea , Miss Mordaunt , and found on evidence 
 quite as rational as other assertion of the metamorphosis of one 
 creature into another . perhaps you can do what the philosopher 
 can not , - tell I how you learn a new idea to be an incontestable 
 fact ? " 

 " I do not   know , " reply Lily , look very much puzzle ; " perhaps I 
 learn it in a book , or perhaps I dream it . " 

 " you could not make a wise answer if you be a philosopher . but you 
 talk of take care of butterfly ; how do you do that ? do you impale 
 they on pin stick into a glass case ? " 

 " impale they ! how can you talk so cruelly ? you deserve to be pinch by 
 the fairy . " 

 " I be afraid , " think Kenelm , compassionately , " that my companion have 
 no mind to be form ; what be euphoniously call ' an innocent . ' " 

 he shake his head and remain silent . Lily resume , - 

 " I will show you my collection when we get home ; they seem so happy . I 
 be sure there be some of they who know I : they will feed from my hand . 
 I have only have one die since I begin to collect they last summer . " 

 " then you have keep they a year : they ought to have turn into 
 fairy . " 

 " I suppose many of they have . of course I let out all those that have 
 be with I twelve month : they do not   turn to fairy in the cage , 
 you know . now I have only those I catch this year , or last autumn ; the 
 prettiest do not   appear till the autumn . " 

 the girl here bend her uncovered head over the straw hat , her tress 
 shadow it , and utter love word to the prisoner . then again she 
 look up and around she , and abruptly stop , and exclaim , - 

 " how can people live in town ? how can people say they be ever dull in 
 the country ? look , " she continue , gravely and earnestly , " look at that 
 tall pine - tree , with its long branch sweep over the water ; see how , 
 as the breeze catch it , it change its shadow , and how the shadow 
 change the play of the sunlight on the brook : - 


  " ' wave your top , ye pine ; 
  with every plant , in sign of worship wave . ' 


 " what an interchange of music there must be between Nature and a poet ! " 

 Kenelm be startle . this " an innocent " ! - this a girl who have no mind to 
 be form ! in that presence he could not be cynical ; could not speak of 
 nature as a mechanism , a lie humbug , as he have do to the man poet . 
 he reply gravely , - 

 " the Creator have gift the whole universe with language , but few be 
 the heart that can interpret it . happy those to whom it be no foreign 
 tongue , acquire imperfectly with care and pain , but rather a native 
 language , learn unconsciously from the lip of the great mother . to 
 they the butterfly 's wing may well buoy into heaven a fairy 's soul ! " 

 when he have thus say Lily turn , and for the first time attentively 
 look into his dark soft eye ; then instinctively she lay her light 
 hand on his arm , and say in a low voice , " talk on ; talk thus : I like to 
 hear you . " 

 but Kenelm do not talk on . they have now arrive at the garden - gate of 
 Mrs. Cameron 's cottage , and the elder person in advance pause at the 
 gate and walk with they to the house . 

 it be a long , low , irregular cottage , without pretension to 
 architectural beauty , yet exceedingly picturesque , - a flower - garden , 
 large , but in proportion to the house , with parterre in which the 
 colour be exquisitely assorted , slop to the grassy margin of the 
 rivulet , where the stream expand into a lake - like basin , narrow 
 at either end by lock , from which with gentle sound flow shallow 
 waterfall . by the bank be a rustic seat , half overshadow by the 
 droop bough of a vast willow . 

 the inside of the house be in harmony with the exterior , - cottage - like , 
 but with an unmistakable air of refinement about the room , even in the 
 little entrance - hall , which be paint in pompeian fresco . 

 " come and see my butterfly - cage , " say Lily , whisperingly . 

 Kenelm follow she through the window that open on the garden ; and 
 at one end of a small conservatory , or rather greenhouse , be the 
 habitation of these singular favourite . it be as large as a small 
 room ; three side of it form by minute wirework , with occasional 
 drapery of muslin or other slight material , and cover at interval , 
 sometimes within , sometimes without , by dainty creeper ; a tiny cistern 
 in the centre , from which upsprang a sparkling jet . lily cautiously 
 lift a sash - door and glide in , close it behind she . her entrance 
 set in movement a multitude of gossamer wing , some flutter round 
 she , some more boldly settle on her hair or dress . Kenelm think 
 she have not vainly boast when she say that some of the creature have 
 learn to know she . she release the Emperor of Morocco from her hat ; 
 it circle round she fearlessly , and then vanish amidst the leaf of 
 the creeper . lily open the door and come out . 

 " I have hear of a philosopher who tame a wasp , " say Kenelm , " but 
 never before of a young lady who tame butterfly . " 

 " no , " say Lily , proudly ; " I believe I be the first who attempt it . 
 I do not   think I should have attempt it if I have be tell that other 
 have succeed before I . not that I have succeed quite . no matter ; if 
 they do not   love I , I love they . " 

 they re - enter the drawing - room , and Mrs. Cameron address Kenelm . 

 " do you know much of this part of the country , Mr. Chillingly ? " 

 " it be quite new to I , and more rural than many district far from 
 London . " 

 " that be the good fortune of most of our home county , " say Mr. 
 Braefield ; " they escape the smoke and din of manufacturing town , and 
 agricultural science have not demolish their leafy hedgerow . the 
 walk through our green lane be as much border with convolvulus and 
 honeysuckle as they be when Izaak Walton saunter through they to 
 angle in that stream ! " 

 " do tradition say that he angle in that stream ? I think his haunt 
 be rather on the other side of London . " 

 " possibly ; I be not learn in Walton or in his art , but there be an old 
 summer - house , on the other side of the lock yonder , on which be carve 
 the name of Izaak Walton , but whether by his own hand or another be who 
 shall say ? have Mr. Melville be here lately , Mrs. Cameron ? " 

 " no , not for several month . " 

 " he have have a glorious success this year . we may hope that at last his 
 genius be acknowledge by the world . I mean to buy his picture , but I 
 be not in time : a Manchester man be before I . " 

 " who be Mr. Melville ? any relation to you ? " whisper Kenelm to Lily . 

 " Relation , - I scarcely know . yes , I suppose so , because he be my 
 guardian . but if he be the near relation on earth , I could not love 
 he more , " say Lily , with impulsive eagerness , her cheek flush , her 
 eye fill with tear . 

 " and he be an artist , - a painter ? " ask Kenelm . 

 " oh , yes ; no one paint such beautiful picture , - no one so clever , no 
 one so kind . " 

 Kenelm strove to recollect if he have ever hear the name of Melville as 
 a painter , but in vain . Kenelm , however , know but little of painter : 
 they be not in his way ; and he own to himself , very humbly , that 
 there might be many a live painter of eminent renown whose name and 
 work would be strange to he . 

 he glance round the wall ; Lily interpret his look . " there be no 
 picture of his here , " say she ; " there be one in my own room . I will 
 show it you when you come again . " 

 " and now , " say Mr. Braefield , rise , " I must just have a word with 
 your gardener , and then go home . we dine early here than in London , 
 Mr. Chillingly . " 

 as the two gentleman , after take leave , re - enter the hall , Lily 
 follow they and say to Kenelm , " what time will you come to - morrow to 
 see the picture ? " 

 Kenelm avert his head , and then reply , not with his wonte courtesy , 
 but briefly and brusquely , - 

 " I fear I can not call to - morrow . I shall be far away by sunrise . " 

 Lily make no answer , but turn back into the room . 

 Mr. Braefield find the gardener water a flower - border , confer 
 with he about the heart's - ease , and then join Kenelm , who have halt 
 a few yard beyond the garden - gate . 

 " a pretty little place that , " say Mr. Braefield , with a sort of lordly 
 compassion , as become the owner of Braefieldville . " what I call quaint . " 

 " yes , quaint , " echo Kenelm , abstractedly . 

 " it be always the case with house enlarge by degree . I have hear my 
 poor mother say that when Melville or Mrs. Cameron first buy it , it 
 be little well than a mere labourer 's cottage , with a field attach 
 to it . and two or three year afterwards a room or so more be build , 
 and a bit of the field take in for a garden ; and then by degree the 
 whole part now inhabit by the family be build , leave only the old 
 cottage as a scullery and washhouse ; and the whole field be turn 
 into the garden , as you see . but whether it be Melville 's money or the 
 aunt 's that do it , I do not   know . more likely the aunt 's . I do not   see 
 what interest Melville have in the place : he do not go there often , I 
 fancy ; it be not his home . " 

 " Mr. Melville , it seem , be a painter , and , from what I hear you say , a 
 successful one . " 

 " I fancy he have little success before this year . but surely you see his 
 picture at the exhibition ? " 

 " I be ashamed to say I have not be to the exhibition . " 

 " you surprise I . however , Melville have three picture there , - all very 
 good ; but the one I wish to buy make much more sensation than the 
 other , and have suddenly lift he from obscurity into fame . " 

 " he appear to be a relation of Miss Mordaunt 's , but so distant a 
 one that she could not even tell I what grade of cousinship he could 
 claim . " 

 " nor can I. he be her guardian , I know . the relationship , if any , must , 
 as you say , be very distant ; for Melville be of humble extraction , while 
 any one can see that Mrs. Cameron be a thorough gentlewoman , and Lily 
 Mordaunt be her sister 's child . I have hear my mother say that it be 
 Melville , then a very young man , who buy the cottage , perhaps with 
 Mrs. Cameron 's money ; say it be for a widow lady , whose husband 
 have leave she with very small mean . and when Mrs. Cameron arrive with 
 Lily , then a mere infant , she be in deep mourning , and a very young 
 woman herself , - pretty too . if Melville have be a frequent visitor 
 then , of course there would have be scandal ; but he very seldom come , 
 and when he do , he lodge in a cottage , Cromwell Lodge , on the other 
 side of the brook ; now and then bring with he a fellow - lodger , - some 
 other young artist , I suppose , for the sake of angle . so there could 
 be no cause for scandal , and nothing can be more blameless than poor 
 Mrs. Cameron 's life . my mother , who then reside at Braefieldville , take 
 a great fancy to both Lily and her aunt , and when by degree the cottage 
 grow into a genteel sort of place , the few gentry in the neighbourhood 
 follow my mother 's example and be very kind to Mrs. Cameron , so that 
 she have now her place in the society about here , and be much like . " 

 " and Mr. Melville ? - do he still very seldom come here ? " 

 " to say truth , he have not be at all since I settle at Braefieldville . 
 the place be leave to my mother for her life , and I be not much there 
 during her occupation . in fact , I be then a junior partner in our firm , 
 and conduct the branch business in New York , come over to England 
 for my holiday once a year or so . when my mother die , there be much to 
 arrange before I could settle personally in England , and I do not come 
 to settle at Braefieldville till I marry . I do see Melville on one of 
 my visit to the place some year ago ; but , between ourselves , he be not 
 the sort of person whose intimate acquaintance one would wish to court . 
 my mother tell I he be an idle , dissipated man , and I have hear from 
 other that he be very unsteady . Mr. - - - , the great painter , tell 
 I that he be a loose fish ; and I suppose his habit be against his 
 get on , till this year , when , perhaps , by a lucky accident , he have 
 paint a picture that raise he to the top of the tree . but be not 
 Miss Lily wondrously nice to look at ? what a pity her education have be 
 so much neglect ! " 

 " have it ? " 

 " have not you discover that already ? she have not have even a 
 music - master , though my wife say she have a good ear , and can sing 
 prettily enough . as for reading I do not   think she have read anything but 
 fairy tale and poetry , and such silly stuff . however , she be very young 
 yet ; and now that her guardian can sell his picture , it be to be hop 
 that he will do more justice to his ward . painter and actor be not so 
 regular in their private life as we plain man be , and great allowance 
 be to be make for they ; still , every one be bind to do his duty . I be 
 sure you agree with I ? " 

 " certainly , " say Kenelm , with an emphasis which startle the merchant . 
 " that be an admirable maxim of your : it seem a commonplace , yet how 
 often , when it be put into our head , it strike as a novelty ! a duty 
 may be a very difficult thing , a very disagreeable thing , and , what 
 be strange , it be often a very invisible thing . it be present , - close 
 before we , and yet we do not   see it ; somebody shout its name in our 
 ear , ' duty , ' and straight it tower before we a grim giant . pardon I 
 if I leave you : I can not   stay to dine . duty summon I elsewhere . make my 
 excuse to Mrs. Braefield . " 

 before Mr. Braefield could recover his self - possession , Kenelm have 
 vault over a stile and be go . 



 CHAPTER VI . 

 KENELM walk into the shop keep by the somerse , and find Jessie 
 still at the counter . " give I back my knap sack . thank you , " he say , 
 fling the knapsack across his shoulder . " now , do I a favour . a 
 portmanteau of mine ought to be at the station . send for it , and keep it 
 till I give further direction . I think of go to Oxford for a day 
 or two . Mrs. Somers , one more word with you . think , answer frankly , be 
 you , as you say this morning , thoroughly happy , and yet married to the 
 man you love ? " 

 " oh , so happy ! " 

 " and wish for nothing beyond ? do not wish will to be other than he be ? " 

 " God forbid ! you frighten I , sir . " 

 " frighten you ! be it so . everyone who be happy should be frightened 
 lest happiness fly away . do your good to chain it , and you will , for you 
 attach Duty to happiness ; and , " mutter Kenelm , as he turn from the 
 shop , " duty be sometimes not a rose - colour tie , but a heavy iron - hue 
 clog . " 

 he stride on through the street towards the sign - post with " To Oxford " 
 inscribe thereon . and whether he speak literally of the knapsack , or 
 metaphorically of duty , he murmur , as he strode , - 


  " a pedlar 's pack that bow the bearer down . " 



 CHAPTER VII . 



 KENELM might have reach Oxford that night , for he be a rapid and 
 untirable pedestrian ; but he halt a little after the moon rise , and 
 lay himself down to rest beneath a new - mow haystack , not very far from 
 the high road . 

 he do not sleep . meditatingly prop on his elbow , he say to 
 himself , - 

 " it be long since I have wonder at nothing . I wonder now : can this be 
 love , - really love , - unmistakably love ? Pooh ! it be impossible ; the 
 very last person in the world to be in love with . let we reason upon 
 it , - you , myself , and i. to begin with , - face ! what be face ? in a few 
 year the most beautiful face may be very plain . take the Venus at 
 Florence . animate she ; see she ten year after ; a chignon , front tooth 
  blue or artificially white , mottled complexion , double chin , - all that 
 sort of plump prettiness go into double chin . face , bah ! what man of 
 sense - what pupil of Welby , the realist - can fall in love with a face ? 
 and even if I be simpleton enough to do so , pretty face be as common 
 as daisy . Cecilia Travers have more regular feature ; Jessie Wiles a 
 rich colouring . I be not in love with they , - not a bit of it . myself , 
 you have nothing to say there . well , then , mind ? talk of mind , indeed ! 
 a creature whose favourite companionship be that of butterfly , and who 
 tell I that butterfly be the soul of infant unbaptize . what an 
 article for ' the Londoner , ' on the culture of young woman ! what a girl 
 for Miss Garrett and Miss Emily Faithfull ! put aside Mind as we have 
 do face . what rest ? - the Frenchman 's ideal of happy marriage ? 
 congenial circumstance of birth , fortune , taste , habit . worse still . 
 myself , answer honestly , be you not floor ? " 

 Whereon " Myself " take up the parable and answer , " o thou fool ! why 
 wert thou so ineffably bless in one presence ? why , in quit that 
 presence , do Duty become so grim ? why dost thou address to I those 
 inept pedantic questioning , under the light of yon moon , which have 
 suddenly cease to be to thy thought an astronomical body and have 
 become , forever and forever , identify in thy heart 's dream with 
 romance and poesy and first love ? why , instead of gaze on that 
 uncomfortable orb , art thou not quicken thy step towards a cozy inn 
 and a good supper at Oxford ? Kenelm , my friend , thou art in for it . no 
 disguise the fact : thou art in love ! " 

 " I will be hang if I be , " say the Second in the Dualism of Kenelm 's 
 mind ; and therewith he shift his knapsack into a pillow , turn his 
 eye from the moon , and still could not sleep . the face of Lily still 
 haunt his eye ; the voice of Lily still ring in his ear . 

 oh , my reader ! dost thou here ask I to tell thee what Lily be 
 like ? - be she dark ? be she fair ? be she tall ? be she short ? never 
 shalt thou learn these secret from I . imagine to thyself the be to 
 which thine whole of life , body and mind and soul , move irresistibly as 
 the needle to the pole . let she be tall or short , dark or fair , she be 
 that which out of all womankind have suddenly become the one woman for 
 thee . fortunate art thou , my reader , if thou chance to have hear the 
 popular song of " my Queen " sing by the one lady who alone can sing it 
 with expression worthy the verse of the poetess and the music of the 
 composition , by the sister of the exquisite songstress . but if thou hast 
 not hear the verse thus sing , to an accompaniment thus compose , still 
 the word themselves be , or ought to be , familiar to thee , if thou art , 
 as I take for grant , a lover of the true lyrical muse . Recall then 
 the word suppose to be utter by he who know himself destine to do 
 homage to one he have not yet beheld : - 


  " she be stand somewhere , - she I shall honour , 
  she that I wait for , my queen , my queen ; 
  whether her hair be golden or raven , 
  whether her eye be hazel or blue , 
  I know not now , it will be engraven 
  some day hence as my lovely hue . 
  she may be humble or proud , my lady , 
  or that sweet calm which be just between ; 
  but whenever she come , she will find I ready 
  to do her homage , my queen , my queen . " 


 be it possible that the cruel boy - god " who sharpen his arrow on the 
 whetstone of the human heart " have find the moment to avenge himself 
 for the neglect of his altar and the scorn of his power ? must that 
 redoubte knight - errant , the hero of this tale , despite the Three Fishes 
 on his charmed shield , at last veil the crest and bow the knee , and 
 murmur to himself , " she have come , my queen " ? 



 CHAPTER VIII . 

 the next morning Kenelm arrive at Oxford , - " Verum secretumque 
 Mouseion . " 

 if there be a place in this busy island which may distract the 
 passion of youth from love to scholarship , to ritualism , to mediaeval 
 association , to that sort of poetical sentiment or poetical fanaticism 
 which a Mivers and a Welby and an advocate of the Realistic School would 
 hold in contempt , - certainly that place be Oxford , - home ; nevertheless , 
 of great thinker and great actor in the practical world . 

 the vacation have not yet commence , but the commencement be near at 
 hand . Kenelm think he could recognize the lead man by their slow 
 walk and more abstracted expression of countenance . among the Fellows 
 be the eminent author of that book which have so powerfully fascinate 
 the early adolescence of Kenelm Chillingly , and who have himself be 
 subject to the fascination of a yet strong spirit . the Rev. Decimus 
 Roach have be ever an intense and reverent admirer of John Henry 
 Newman , - an admirer , I mean , of the pure and lofty character of the 
 man , quite apart from sympathy with his doctrine . but although Roach 
 remain an unconverted protestant of orthodox , if High Church , creed , 
 yet there be one tenet he do hold in common with the author of the 
 " Apologia . " he rank celibacy among the virtue most dear to Heaven . 
 in that eloquent treatise , " the Approach to the Angels , " he not only 
 maintain that the state of single blessedness be strictly incumbent 
 on every member of a christian priesthood , but to be commend to the 
 adoption of every conscientious layman . 

 it be the desire to confer with this eminent theologian that have 
 induce Kenelm to direct his step to Oxford . 

 Mr. Roach be a friend of Welby , at whose house , when a pupil , 
 Kenelm have once or twice meet he , and be even more charm by his 
 conversation than by his treatise . 

 Kenelm call on Mr. Roach , who receive he very graciously , and , not 
 be a tutor or examiner , place his time at Kenelm 's disposal ; take 
 he the round of the college and the Bodleian ; invite he to dine in 
 his college - hall ; and after dinner lead he into his own room , and give 
 he an excellent bottle of Chateau Margeaux . 

 Mr. Roach be somewhere about fifty , - a good - look man and evidently 
 think himself so ; for he wear his hair long behind and part in the 
 middle , which be not do by man who form modest estimate of their 
 personal appearance . 

 Kenelm be not long in draw out his host on the subject to which that 
 profound thinker have devote so much meditation . 

 " I can scarcely convey to you , " say Kenelm , " the intense admiration 
 with which I have study your noble work , ' approach to the Angels . ' it 
 produce a great effect on I in the age between boyhood and youth . but 
 of late some doubt on the universal application of your doctrine have 
 creep into my mind . " 

 " ay , indeed ? " say Mr. Roach , with an expression of interest in his 
 face . 

 " and I come to you for their solution . " 

 Mr. Roach turn away his head , and push the bottle to Kenelm . 

 " I be quite willing to concede , " resume the heir of the Chillinglys , 
 " that a priesthood should stand apart from the distracting care of a 
 family , and pure from all carnal affection . " 

 " Hem , hem , " grunt Mr. Roach , take his knee on his lap and caressing 
 it . 

 " I go far , " continue Kenelm , " and suppose with you that the 
 Confessional have all the importance , whether in its monitory or its 
 cheering effect upon repentant sinner , which be attach to it by 
 the Roman Catholics , and that it ought to be no less cultivate by the 
 Reformed Church , it seem to I essential that the Confessor should have 
 no well half to whom it can be even suspect he may , in an unguarded 
 moment , hint at the frailty of one of her female acquaintance . " 

 " I push that argument too far , " murmur Roach . 

 " not a bit of it . celibacy in the Confessor stand or fall with the 
 Confessional . your argument there be as sound as a bell . but when it 
 come to the layman , I think I detect a difference . " 

 Mr. Roach shake his head , and reply stoutly , " no ; if celibacy be 
 incumbent on the one , it be equally incumbent on the other . I say ' if . ' " 

 " permit I to deny that assertion . do not fear that I shall insult your 
 understanding by the popular platitude ; namely , that if celibacy be 
 universal , in a very few year the human race would be extinct . as you 
 have justly observe , in answer to that fallacy , ' it be the duty of each 
 human soul to strive towards the high perfection of the spiritual 
 state for itself , and leave the fate of the human race to the care of 
 the Creator . ' if celibacy be necessary to spiritual perfection , how do 
 we know but that it may be the purpose and decree of the all Wise that 
 the human race , have attain to that perfection , should disappear 
 from earth ? universal celibacy would thus be the euthanasia of mankind . 
 on the other hand , if the Creator decide that the human race , have 
 culminate to this crowning but barren flower of perfection , should 
 nevertheless continue to increase and multiply upon earth , have you not 
 victoriously exclaim , ' presumptuous mortal ! how canst thou presume 
 to limit the resource of the Almighty ? would it not be easy for he to 
 continue some other mode , unexpose to trouble and sin and passion , as 
 in the nuptial of the vegetable world , by which the generation will 
 be renew ? can we suppose that the angel - the immortal company 
 of heaven - be not hourly increase in number , and extend their 
 population throughout infinity ? and yet in heaven there be no marrying 
 nor give in marriage . ' all this , clothe by you in word which my 
 memory only serve I to quote imperfectly , - all this I unhesitatingly 
 concede . " 

 Mr. Roach rise and bring another bottle of the Chateau Margeaux from 
 his cellaret , fill Kenelm 's glass , reseat himself , and take the 
 other knee into his lap to caress . 

 " but , " resume Kenelm , " my doubt be this . " 

 " ah ! " cry Mr. Roach , " let we hear the doubt . " 

 " in the first place , be celibacy essential to the high state of 
 spiritual perfection ; and , in the second place , if it be , be mortal , 
 as at present constituted , capable of that culmination ? " 

 " very well put , " say Mr. Roach , and he toss off his glass with more 
 cheerful aspect than he have hitherto exhibit . 

 " you see , " say Kenelm , " we be compel in this , as in other question 
 of philosophy , to resort to the inductive process , and draw our theory 
 from the fact within our cognizance . now look round the world , be it 
 the fact that old maid and old bachelor be so much more spiritually 
 advanced than married folk ? do they pass their time , like an indian 
 dervish , in serene contemplation of divine excellence and beatitude ? 
 be they not quite as worldly in their own way as person who have be 
 marry as often as the Wife of Bath , and , generally speak , more 
 selfish , more frivolous , and more spiteful ? I be sure I do not   wish to 
 speak uncharitably against old maid and old bachelor . I have three 
 aunt who be old maid , and fine specimen of the genus ; but I be sure 
 they would all three have be more agreeable companion , and quite as 
 spiritually gifted , if they have be happily marry , and be caress 
 their child , instead of lapdog . so , too , I have an old bachelor 
 cousin , Chillingly Mivers , whom you know . as clever as a man can be . 
 but , Lord bless you ! as to be wrap in spiritual meditation , he 
 could not be more devoted to the thing of earth if he have marry as 
 many wife as Solomon , and have as many child as Priam . finally , have 
 not half the mistake in the world arise from a separation between the 
 spiritual and the moral nature of man ? be it not , after all , through his 
 dealing with his fellow - man that man make his safe ' approach to the 
 angel ' ? and be not the moral system a very muscular system ? do it not 
 require for healthful vigour plenty of continued exercise , and do it 
 not get that exercise naturally by the relationship of family , with 
 all the wide collateral struggle with life which the care of family 
 necessitate ? 

 " I put these question to you with the humblest diffidence . I expect to 
 hear such answer as will thoroughly convince my reason , and I shall be 
 delighted if so . for at the root of the controversy lie the passion of 
 love . and love must be a very disquieting , troublesome emotion , and have 
 lead many hero and sage into wonderful weakness and folly . " 

 " gently , gently , Mr. Chillingly ; do not   exaggerate . love , no doubt , 
 be - ahem - a disquieting passion . still , every emotion that change life 
 from a stagnant pool into the freshness and play of a running stream be 
 disquieting to the pool . not only love and its fellow - passion , such as 
 ambition , but the exercise of the reasoning faculty , which be always at 
 work in change our idea , be very disquieting . love , Mr. Chillingly , 
 have its good side as well as its bad . pass the bottle . " 

 KENELM   pass the bottle . - " yes , yes ; you be quite right in 
 put the adversary 's case strongly , before you demolish it : all good 
 rhetorician do that . pardon I if I be up to that trick in argument . 
 assume that I know all that can be say in favour of the abnegation of 
 common - sense , euphoniously call ' love , ' and proceed to the demolition 
 of the case . " 

 the REV . DECIMUS ROACH   hesitatingly . - " the demolition of the case ? 
 humph ! the passion be ingraft in the human system as part and parcel 
 of it , and be not to be demolish so easily as you seem to think . 
 Love , take rationally and morally by a man of good education and sound 
 principle , be - be - " 

 KENELM . - " well , be what ? " 

 the REV . DECIMUS ROACH . - " a - a - a - thing not to be despise . like the 
 sun , it be the great colourist of life , Mr. Chillingly . and you be so 
 right : the moral system do require daily exercise . what can give that 
 exercise to a solitary man , when he arrive at the practical age in 
 which he can not sit for six hour at a stretch musing on the divine 
 essence ; and rheumatism or other ailment forbid his adventure into 
 the wild of Africa as a missionary ? at that age , Nature , which will 
 be hear , Mr. Chillingly , demand her right . a sympathize female 
 companion by one 's side ; innocent little child climb one 's 
 knee , - lovely , bewitch picture ! who can be Goth enough to rub it out , 
 who fanatic enough to paint over it the image of a Saint Simeon sit 
 alone on a pillar ? take another glass . you do not   drink enough , Mr. 
 Chillingly . " 

 " I have drunk enough , " reply Kenelm , in a sullen voice , " to think I 
 see double . I imagine that before I sit the austere adversary of the 
 insanity of love and the misery of wedlock . now , I fancy I listen to 
 a pule sentimentalist utter the platitude which the other Decimus 
 Roach have already refute . certainly either I see double , or you amuse 
 yourself with mock my appeal to your wisdom . " 

 " not so , Mr. Chillingly . but the fact be , that when I write that book 
 of which you speak I be young , and youth be enthusiastic and one - side . 
 now , with the same disdain of the excess to which love may hurry weak 
 intellect , I recognize its benignant effect when take , as I before 
 say , rationally , - take rationally , my young friend . at that period 
 of life when the judgment be mature , the soothe companionship of 
 an amiable female can not but cheer the mind , and prevent that morose 
 hoar - frost into which solitude be chill and make rigid by increase 
 year . in short , Mr. Chillingly , have convince myself that I err 
 in the opinion once too rashly put forth , I owe it to Truth , I owe it to 
 Mankind , to make my conversion know to the world . and I be about next 
 month to enter into the matrimonial state with a young lady who - " 

 " say no more , say no more , Mr. Roach . it must be a painful subject to 
 you . let we drop it . " 

 " it be not a painful subject at all ! " exclaim Mr. Roach , with warmth . 
 " I look forward to the fulfilment of my duty with the pleasure which 
 a well - train mind always ought to feel in recant a fallacious 
 doctrine . but you do I the justice to understand that of course I do 
 not take this step I propose - for my personal satisfaction . no , sir , 
 it be the value of my example to other which purify my motif and 
 animate my soul . " 

 after this concluding and noble sentence , the conversation droop . host 
 and guest both feel they have have enough of each other . Kenelm soon rise 
 to depart . 

 Mr. Roach , on take leave of , he at the door , say , with marked 
 emphasis , - 

 " not for my personal satisfaction , - remember that . whenever you hear my 
 conversion discuss in the world , say that from my own lip you hear 
 these word , - not for MY PERSONAL satisfaction . no ! my kind regard to 
 Welby , - a married man himself , and a father : he will understand I . " 



 CHAPTER IX . 

 on quit Oxford , Kenelm wander for several day about the country , 
 advance to no definite goal , meet with no noticeable adventure . 
 at last he find himself mechanically retrace his step . a magnetic 
 influence he could not resist draw he back towards the grassy mead and 
 the sparkling rill of Moleswich . 

 " there must be , " say he to himself , " a mental , like an optical , 
 illusion . in the last , we fancy we have see a spectre . if we dare not 
 face the apparition , - dare not attempt to touch it , - run superstitiously 
 away from it , - what happen ? we shall believe to our die day that it 
 be not an illusion , that it be a spectre ; and so we may be craze for 
 life . but if we manfully walk up to the phantom , stretch our hand 
 to seize it , oh ! it fade into thin air , the cheat of our eyesight be 
 dispel , and we shall never be ghost - ride again . so it must be with 
 this mental illusion of mine . I see an image strange to my experience : 
 it seem to I , at first sight , clothe with a supernatural charm ; like 
 an unreasone coward , I run away from it . it continue to haunt I ; I 
 can not shut out its apparition . it pursue I by day alike in the haunt 
 of man , - alike in the solitude of nature ; it visit I by night in my 
 dream . I begin to say this must be a real visitant from another world : 
 it must be love ; the love of which I read in the Poets , as in the poet 
 I read of witchcraft and ghost . surely I must approach that apparition 
 as a philosopher like Sir David Brewster would approach the black 
 cat seat on a hearth - rug , which he tell we that some lady of his 
 acquaintance constantly see till she go into a world into which black 
 cat be not hold to be admit . the more I think of it the less 
 it appear to I possible that I can be really in love with a wild , 
 half - educate , anomalous creature , merely because the apparition of 
 her face haunt I . with perfect safety , therefore , I can approach the 
 creature ; in proportion as I see more of she the illusion will vanish . I 
 will go back to Moleswich manfully . " 

 thus say Kenelm to himself , and himself answer , - " go ; for thou canst 
 not help it . think thou that dace can escape the net that have mesh 
 a Roach ? no , - 


  ' come it will , the day decree by fate , ' 


 when thou must succumb to the ' nature which will be hear . ' well 
 succumb now , and with a good grace , than resist till thou hast reach 
 thy fiftieth year , and then make a rational choice not for thy personal 
 satisfaction . " 

 Whereupon Kenelm answer to himself , indignantly , " Pooh ! thou flippant . 
 my alter ego , thou know not what thou art talk about ! it be 
 not a question of nature ; it be a question of the supernatural , - an 
 illusion , - a phantom ! " thus Kenelm and himself continue to quarrel with 
 each other ; and the more they quarrel , the nearer they approach 
 to the haunted spot in which have be see , and flee from , the fatal 
 apparition of first love . 




 BOOK VI . 



 CHAPTER I. 

 SIR PETER have not hear from Kenelm since a letter inform he that 
 his son have leave town on an excursion , which would probably be short , 
 though it might last a few week ; and the good Baronet now resolve to 
 go to London himself , take his chance of Kenelm 's return , and if 
 still absent , at least learn from Mivers and other how far that very 
 eccentric planet have contrive to steer a regular course amidst the 
 fix star of the metropolitan system . he have other reason for his 
 journey . he wish to make the acquaintance of Chillingly Gordon 
 before hand he over the L20,000 which Kenelm have release in that 
 resettlement of estate , the necessary deed of which the young heir have 
 sign before quit London for Moleswich . Sir Peter wish still more 
 to see Cecilia Travers , in whom Kenelm 's account of she have inspire a 
 very strong interest . 

 the day after his arrival in town Sir Peter breakfast with miver . 

 " upon my word you be very comfortable here , " say Sir Peter , glance 
 at the well - appoint table , and round the well - furnish room . 

 " naturally so : there be no one to prevent my be comfortable . I be not 
 marry ; taste that omelette . " 

 " some man declare they never know comfort till they be marry , Cousin 
 Miners . " 

 " some man be reflect body , and catch a pallid gleam from the 
 comfort which a wife concentre on herself . with a fortune so modest and 
 secure , what comfort , possess by I now , would not a Mrs. Chillingly 
 Mivers ravish from my hold and appropriate to herself ! instead of these 
 pleasant room , where should I be lodge ? in a dingy den look on 
 a backyard exclude from the sun by day and vocal with cat by night ; 
 while Mrs. Mivers luxuriate in two drawing - room with southern aspect 
 and perhaps a boudoir . my brougham would be tear from my us and 
 monopolize by ' the angel of my hearth , ' cloud in her crinoline and 
 halve by her chignon . no ! if ever I marry - and I never deprive myself 
 of the civility and needlework which single lady waste upon I by 
 say I shall not marry - it will be when woman have fully establish 
 their right ; for then man may have a chance of vindicate their own . 
 then if there be two drawing - room in the house I shall take one ; 
 if not , we will toss up who shall have the back parlour ; if we keep a 
 brougham , it will be exclusively mine three day in the week ; if Mrs. M. 
 want l200 a year for her wardrobe she must be content with one , the 
 other half will belong to my personal decoration ; if I be oppress by 
 proof - sheet and printer ' devil , half of the oppression fall to she 
 lot , while I take my holiday on the croquet ground at Wimbledon . yes , 
 when the present wrong of woman be exchange for equality with man , I 
 will cheerfully marry ; and to do the thing generous , I will not oppose 
 Mrs. M. 's voting in the vestry or for Parliament . I will give she my own 
 vote with pleasure . " 

 " I fear , my dear cousin , that you have infect Kenelm with your selfish 
 idea on the nuptial state . he do not seem inclined to marry , - eh ? " 

 " not that I know of . " 

 " what sort of girl be Cecilia Travers ? " 

 " one of those superior girl who be not likely to tower into that 
 terrible giantess call a ' superior woman . ' a handsome , well - educate , 
 sensible young lady , not spoil by be an heiress ; in fine , just the 
 sort of girl whom you could desire to fix on for a daughter - in - law . " 

 " and you do not   think Kenelm have a fancy for she ? " 

 " honestly speak , I do not . " 

 " any counter - attraction ? there be some thing in which son do not 
 confide in their father . you have never hear that Kenelm have be a 
 little wild ? " 

 " wild he be , as the noble savage who run in the wood , " say Cousin 
 Mivers . 

 " you frighten I ! " 

 " before the noble savage run across the squaw , and be wise enough to 
 run away from they . Kenelm have run away now somewhere . " 

 " yes , he do not tell I where , nor do they know at his lodging . 
 a heap of note on his table and no direction where they be to 
 be forward . on the whole , however , he have hold his own in London 
 society , - eh ? " 

 " certainly ! he have be more court than most young man , and perhaps 
 more talk of . oddity generally be . " 

 " you own he have talent above the average ? do you not think he will make 
 a figure in the world some day , and discharge that debt to the literary 
 store or the political interest of his country , which alas , I and my 
 predecessor , the other Sir Peters , fail to do ; and for which I hail 
 his birth , and give he the name of Kenelm ? " 

 " upon my word , " answer Mivers , - who have now finish his breakfast , 
 retreat to an easy - chair , and take from the chimney - piece one of his 
 famous trabuco , - " upon my word , I can not   guess ; if some great reverse 
 of fortune befell he , and he have to work for his livelihood , or if some 
 other direful calamity give a shock to his nervous system and jolt it 
 into a fussy , fidgety direction , I dare say he might make a splash in 
 that current of life which bear man on to the grave . but you see he 
 want , as he himself very truly say , the two stimulant to definite 
 action , - poverty and vanity . " 

 " surely there have be great man who be neither poor nor vain ? " 

 " I doubt it . but vanity be a rule motive that take many form 
 and many alias : call it ambition , call it love of fame , still its 
 substance be the same , - the desire of applause carry into fussiness of 
 action . " 

 " there may be the desire for abstract truth without care for applause . " 

 " certainly . a philosopher on a desert island may amuse himself by 
 meditate on the distinction between light and heat . but if , on 
 return to the world , he publish the result of his meditation , vanity 
 step in and desire to be applaud . " 

 " Nonsense , Cousin Mivers , he may rather desire to be of use and benefit 
 to mankind . you do not   deny that there be such a thing as philanthropy . " 

 " I do not   deny that there be such a thing as humbug . and whenever I meet 
 a man who have the face to tell I that he be take a great deal 
 of trouble , and put himself very much out of his way , for a 
 philanthropical object , without the slight idea of reward either in 
 praise or pence , I know that I have a humbug before I , - a dangerous 
 humbug , a swindle humbug , a fellow with his pocket full of villanous 
 prospectus and appeal to subscriber . " 

 " Pooh , pooh ; leave off that affectation of cynicism : you be not a 
 bad - hearted fellow ; you must love mankind ; you must have an interest in 
 the welfare of posterity . " 

 " love mankind ? interest in posterity ? bless my soul , Cousin Peter , I 
 hope you have no prospectus in your pocket ; no scheme for drain 
 the Pontine Marshes out of pure love to mankind ; no proposition for 
 double the income - tax , as a reserve fund for posterity , should our 
 coal - field fail three thousand year hence . love of mankind ! Rubbish ! 
 this come of live in the country . " 

 " but you do love the human race ; you do care for the generation that 
 be to come . " 

 " I ! not a bit of it . on the contrary , I rather dislike the human race , 
 take it altogether , and include the australian bushman ; and I do not 
 believe any man who tell I that he would grieve half as much if 
 ten million of human being be swallow up by an earthquake at a 
 considerable distance from his own residence , say Abyssinia , as he would 
 for a rise in his butcher 's bill . as to posterity , who would consent 
 to have a month 's fit of the gout or tic - douloureux in order that in the 
 fourth thousand year , A. D. , posterity should enjoy a perfect system of 
 sewage ? " 

 Sir Peter , who have recently be afflict by a very sharp attack 
 of neuralgia , shake his head , but be too conscientious not to keep 
 silence . 

 " to turn the subject , " say miver , relighte the cigar which he have 
 lay aside while deliver himself of his amiable opinion , " I think 
 you would do well , while in town , to call on your old friend Travers , 
 and be introduce to Cecilia . if you think as favourably of she as I do , 
 why not ask father and daughter to pay you a visit at Exmundham ? girl 
 think more about a man when they see the place which he can offer 
 to they as a home , and Exmundham be an attractive place to 
 girl , - picturesque and romantic . " 

 " a very good idea , " cry Sir Peter , heartily . " and I want also to make 
 the acquaintance of Chillingly Gordon . give I his address . " 

 " here be his card on the chimney - piece , take it ; you will always find 
 he at home till two o'clock . he be too sensible to waste the forenoon 
 in rid out in Hyde Park with young lady . " 

 " give I your frank opinion of that young kinsman . Kenelm tell I that 
 he be clever and ambitious . " 

 " Kenelm speak truly . he be not a man who will talk stuff about love of 
 mankind and posterity . he be of our day , with large , keen , wide - awake 
 eye , that look only on such portion of mankind as can be of use to 
 he , and do not spoil their sight by pore through crack telescope 
 to catch a glimpse of posterity . Gordon be a man to be a Chancellor of 
 the Exchequer , perhaps a Prime Minister . " 

 " and old Gordon 's son be clever than my boy , - than the namesake of 
 Kenelm Digby ! " and Sir Peter sigh . 

 " I do not say that . I be clever than Chillingly Gordon , and the 
 proof of it be that I be too clever to wish to be Prime Minister , - very 
 disagreeable office , hard work , irregular hour for meal , much abuse 
 and confirm dyspepsia . " 

 Sir Peter go away rather down - hearted . he find chillingly Gordon at 
 home in a lodging in Jermyn Street . though prepossess against he by 
 all he have hear , Sir Peter be soon propitiate in his favour . Gordon 
 have a frank man - of - the - world way with he , and much too fine a tact 
 to utter any sentiment likely to displease an old - fashioned country 
 gentleman , and a relation who might possibly be of service in his 
 career . he touch briefly , and with apparent feeling , on the unhappy 
 litigation commence by his father ; speak with affectionate praise of 
 Kenelm ; and with a discriminating good - nature of Mivers , as a man who , 
 to parody the epigram on Charles II . , 


  " never say a kindly thing 
  and never do a harsh one . " 


 then he draw Sir Peter on to talk of the country and agricultural 
 prospect . learn that among his object in visit town be the wish 
 to inspect a patented hydraulic ram that might be very useful for his 
 farm - yard , which be ill supply with water . startle the Baronet by 
 evince some practical knowledge of mechanic ; insist on accompany 
 he to the city to inspect the ram ; do so , and approve the purchase ; 
 take he next to see a new american reaping - machine , and do not part 
 with he till he have obtain Sir Peter 's promise to dine with he at 
 the Garrick ; an invitation peculiarly agreeable to Sir Peter , who have 
 a natural curiosity to see some of the more recently distinguish 
 frequenter of that social club . as , on quit Gordon , Sir Peter take 
 his way to the house of Leopold Travers , his thought turn with much 
 kindliness towards his young kinsman . " Mivers and Kenelm , " quoth he to 
 himself , " give I an unfavourable impression of this lad ; they represent 
 he as worldly , self - seeking , and so forth . but Mivers take such 
 cynical view of character , and Kenelm be too eccentric to judge fairly 
 of a sensible man of the world . at all event , it be not like an egotist 
 to put himself out of his way to be so civil to an old fellow like I . a 
 young man about town must have pleasanter mode of pass his day than 
 inspect hydraulic ram and reaping - machine . clever they allow he to 
 be . yes , decidedly clever , and not offensively clever , - practical . " 

 Sir Peter find Travers in the dining - room with his daughter , Mrs. 
 Campion , and Lady Glenalvon . Travers be one of those man rare in middle 
 age , who be more often to be find in their drawing - room than in their 
 private study ; he be fond of female society ; and perhaps it be this 
 predilection which contribute to preserve in he the charm of good 
 breeding and win manner . the two man have not meet for many year ; 
 not indeed since Travers be at the zenith of his career of fashion , 
 and Sir Peter be one of those pleasant dilettanti and half humoristic 
 conversationalist who become popular and courted diner - out . 

 Sir Peter have originally be a moderate Whig because his father 
 have be one before he ; but he leave the Whig party with the Duke of 
 Richmond , Mr. Stanley   afterwards Lord Derby , and other , when it 
 seem to he that that party have cease to be moderate . 

 Leopold Travers have , as a youth in the Guards , be a high tory , but , 
 side with Sir Robert Peel on the repeal of the Corn Laws , remain 
 with the Peelites after the bulk of the Tory party have renounce the 
 guidance of their former chief , and now go with these Peelites in 
 whatever direction the progress of the age might impel their stride in 
 advance of Whigs and in defiance of Tories . 

 however , it be not the politic of these two gentleman that be in 
 question now . as I have just say , they have not meet for many year . 
 Travers be very little change . Sir Peter recognize he at a glance ; 
 Sir Peter be much change , and Travers hesitate before , on hear 
 his name announce , he feel quite sure that it be the right Sir Peter 
 towards whom he advance , and to whom he extend his cordial hand . 
 traver preserve the colour of his hair and the neat proportion of his 
 figure , and be as scrupulously well dressed as in his dandy day . Sir 
 Peter , originally very thin and with fair lock and dreamy blue eye , 
 have now become rather portly , - at least towards the middle of he , - and 
 very gray ; have long ago take to spectacle ; his dress , too , be very 
 old - fashioned , and make by a country tailor . he look quite as much 
 a gentleman as Travers do ; quite perhaps as healthy , allow for 
 difference of year ; quite as likely to last his time . but between they 
 there be the difference of the nervous temperament and the lymphatic . 
 traver , with less brain than Sir Peter , have keep his brain constantly 
 active ; Sir Peter have allow his brain to dawdle over old book and 
 lazily delight in let the hour slip by . therefore Travers still 
 look young , alert , - up to his day , up to anything ; while Sir Peter , 
 enter that drawing - room , seem a sort of Rip van Winkle who have 
 sleep through the past generation , and look on the present with eye 
 yet drowsy . still , in those rare moment when he be thoroughly rouse 
 up , there would have be find in Sir Peter a glow of heart , nay , 
 even a vigour of thought , much more expressive than the constitutional 
 alertness that characterize Leopold Travers , of the attribute we most 
 love and admire in the young . 

 " my dear Sir Peter , be it you ? I be so glad to see you again , " say 
 Travers . " what an age since we meet , and how condescendingly kind you 
 be then to I ; silly fop that I be ! but bygone be bygone ; come 
 to the present . let I introduce to you , first , my value friend , Mrs. 
 Campion , whose distinguished husband you remember . ah , what pleasant 
 meeting we have at his house ! and next , that young lady of whom she 
 take motherly charge , my daughter Cecilia . Lady Glenalvon , your wife 's 
 friend , of course need no introduction : time stand still with she . " 

 Sir Peter lower his spectacle , which in reality he only want for 
 book in small print , and gaze attentively on the three lady , - at 
 each gaze a bow . but while his eye be still lingeringly fix on 
 Cecilia , Lady Glenalvon advance , naturally in right of rank and the 
 claim of old acquaintance , the first of the three to greet he . 

 " alas , my dear Sir Peter ! time do not stand still for any of we ; but 
 what matter , if it leave pleasant footprint ? when I see you again , my 
 youth come before I , - my early friend , Caroline Brotherton , now Lady 
 Chillingly ; our girlish walk with each other ; wreath and ball - dress 
 the practical topic ; prospective husband , the dream at a distance . come 
 and sit here : tell I all about Caroline . " 

 Sir Peter , who have little to say about Caroline that could possibly 
 interest anybody but himself , nevertheless take his seat beside Lady 
 Glenalvon , and , as in duty bind , make the most flattering account 
 of his She Baronet which experience or invention would allow . all the 
 while , however , his thought be on Kenelm , and his eye on Cecilia . 

 Cecilia resume some mysterious piece of lady 's work , no matter 
 what , - perhaps embroidery for a music - stool , perhaps a pair of slipper 
 for her father   which , be rather vain of his foot and know they 
 look well in plain morocco , he will certainly never wear . Cecilia 
 appear absorb in her occupation ; but her eye and her thought be 
 on Sir Peter . why , my lady reader may guess . and oh , so flatteringly , 
 so lovingly fix ! she think he have a most charming , intelligent , 
 benignant countenance . she admire even his old - fashioned frock - coat , 
 high neckcloth , and strapped trouser . she venerate his gray hair , 
 pure of dye . she try to find a close resemblance between that 
 fair , blue - eye , plumpish , elderly gentleman and the lean , dark - eye , 
 saturnine , lofty Kenelm ; she detect the likeness which nobody else 
 would . she begin to love Sir Peter , though he have not say a word to 
 she . 

 ah ! on this , a word for what it be worth to you , my young reader . you , 
 sir , wish to marry a girl who be to be deeply , lastingly in love with 
 you , and a thoroughly good wife practically , consider well how she take 
 to your parent ; how she attach to they an inexpressible sentiment , 
 a disinterested reverence ; even should you but dimly recognize the 
 sentiment , or feel the reverence , how if between you and your parent 
 some little cause of coldness arise , she will charm you back to honour 
 your father and your mother , even though they be not particularly 
 genial to she : well , if you win that sort of girl as your wife think you 
 have get a treasure . you have win a woman to whom Heaven have give the 
 two good attribute , - intense feeling of love , intense sense of duty . 
 what , my dear lady reader , I say of one sex , I say of another , though 
 in a less degree ; because a girl who marry become of her husband 's 
 family , and the man do not become of his wife 's . still I distrust the 
 depth of any man 's love to a woman , if he do not feel a great degree 
 of tenderness   and forbearance where difference arise   for her parent . 
 but the wife must not so put they in the foreground as to make the 
 husband think he be cast in the cold of the shadow . pardon this 
 intolerable length of digression , dear reader : it be not altogether a 
 digression , for it belong to my tale that you should clearly understand 
 the sort of girl that be personify in Cecilia Travers . 

 " what have become of Kenelm ? " ask Lady Glenalvon . 

 " I wish I could tell you , " answer Sir Peter . " he write I word that he 
 be go forth on ramble into ' fresh wood and pasture new , ' perhaps 
 for some week . I have not have a word from he since . " 

 " you make I uneasy , " say Lady Glenalvon . " I hope nothing can have 
 happen to he : he can not have fall ill . " 

 Cecilia stop her work , and look up wistfully . 

 " make your mind easy , " say Travers with a laugh ; " I be in this secret . 
 he have challenge the champion of England , and go into the country to 
 train . " 

 " very likely , " say Sir Peter , quietly : " I should not be in the least 
 surprised ; should you , Miss Travers ? " 

 " I think it more probable that Mr. Chillingly be do some kindness to 
 other which he wish to keep conceal . " 

 Sir Peter be pleased with this reply , and draw his chair nearer to 
 Cecilia 's . Lady Glenalvon , charm to bring those two together , soon 
 rise and take leave . 

 Sir Peter remain nearly an hour talk chiefly with Cecilia , who win 
 her way into his heart with extraordinary ease ; and he do not quit the 
 house till he have engage her father , Mrs. Campion , and herself to pay 
 he a week 's visit at Exmundham , towards the end of the London season , 
 which be fast approach . 

 have obtain this promise , Sir Peter go away , and ten minute 
 after Mr. Chillingly Gordon enter the drawing - room . he have already 
 establish a visit acquaintance with the traverse . traver 
 have take a liking to he . Mrs. Campion find he an extremely 
 well - inform , unaffected young man , very superior to young man in 
 general . Cecilia be cordially polite to Kenelm 's cousin . altogether 
 that be a very happy day for Sir Peter . he enjoy greatly his dinner 
 at the Garrick , where he meet some old acquaintance and be present to 
 some new " celebrity . " he observe that Gordon stand well with these 
 eminent person . though as yet undistinguished himself , they treat he 
 with a certain respect , as well as with evident liking . the most eminent 
 of they , at least the one with the most solidly establish reputation , 
 say in Sir Peter 's ear , " you may be proud of your nephew Gordon ! " 

 " he be not my nephew , only the son of a very distant cousin . " 

 " sorry for that . but he will shed lustre on kinsfolk , however distant . 
 clever fellow , yet popular ; rare combination , - sure to rise . " 

 Sir Peter suppress a gulp in the throat . " ah , if some one as eminent 
 have speak thus of Kenelm ! " 

 but he be too generous to allow that half - envious sentiment to last 
 more than a moment . why should he not be proud of any member of the 
 family who could irradiate the antique obscurity of the chillingly race ? 
 and how agreeable this clever young man make himself to Sir Peter ! 

 the next day Gordon insist on accompany he to see the late 
 acquisition in the British Museum , and various other exhibition , and 
 go at night to the Prince of Wales 's Theatre , where Sir Peter be 
 infinitely delighted with an admirable little comedy by Mr. Robertson , 
 admirably place on the stage by Marie Wilton . the day after , when 
 Gordon call on he at his hotel , he clear his throat , and thus 
 plunge at once into the communication he have hitherto delay . 

 " Gordon , my boy , I owe you a debt , and I be now , thank to Kenelm , able 
 to pay it . " 

 Gordon give a little start of surprise , but remain silent . 

 " I tell your father , shortly after Kenelm be bear , that I mean to give 
 up my London house , and lie by L1000 a year for you , in compensation 
 for your chance of succeed to Exmundham should I have die childless . 
 well , your father do not seem to think much of that promise , and go 
 to law with I about certain unquestionable right of mine . how so 
 clever a man could have make such a mistake would puzzle I , if I do 
 not remember that he have a quarrelsome temper . Temper be a thing that 
 often dominate cleverness , - an uncontrollable thing ; and allowance 
 must be make for it . not be of a quarrelsome temper myself   the 
 Chillinglys be a placid race , I do not make the allowance for your 
 father 's differing , and   for a chillingly   abnormal , constitution . the 
 language and the tone of his letter respect it nettle I . I do 
 not see why , thus treat , I should pinch myself to lay by a thousand a 
 year . facility for buy a property most desirable for the possessor 
 of Exmundham present themselves . I buy it with borrow money , and 
 though I give up the house in London , I do not lay by the thousand a 
 year . " 

 " my dear Sir Peter , I have always regret that my poor father 
 be mislead - perhaps out of too paternal a care for my suppose 
 interest - into that unhappy and fruitless litigation , after which 
 no one could doubt that any generous intention on your part would be 
 finally abandon . it have be a grateful surprise to I that I have 
 be so kindly and cordially receive into the family by Kenelm and 
 yourself . pray oblige I by drop all reference to pecuniary matter : 
 the idea of compensation to a very distant relative for the loss of 
 expectation he have no right to form , be too absurd , for I at least , 
 ever to entertain . " 

 " but I be absurd enough to entertain it , though you express yourself in 
 a very high - minded way . to come to the point , Kenelm be of age , and we 
 have cut off the entail . the estate of course remain absolutely with 
 Kenelm to dispose of , as it do before , and we must take it for grant 
 that he will marry ; at all event he can not fall into your poor father 's 
 error : but whatever Kenelm hereafter do with his property , it be 
 nothing to you , and be not to be count upon . even the title die with 
 Kenelm if he have no son . on resettle the estate , however , sum 
 of money have be realize which , as I state before , enable I to 
 discharge the debt which Kenelm heartily agree with I be due to 
 you . L20,000 be now lie at my banker ' to be transfer to your ; 
 meanwhile , if you will call on my solicitor , Mr. Vining , Lincoln's - inn , 
 you can see the new deed and give to he your receipt for the L20,000 , 
 for which he hold my cheque . stop ! stop ! stop ! I will not hear a. word : 
 no thank ; they be not due . " 

 here Gordon , who have during this speech utter various brief 
 exclamation , which Sir Peter do not heed , catch hold of his kinsman 's 
 hand , and , despite of all struggle , press his lip on it . " I must 
 thank you ; I must give some vent to my emotion , " cry Gordon . " this 
 sum , great in itself , be far more to I than you can imagine : it open 
 my career ; it assure my future . " 

 " So Kenelm tell I ; he say that sum would be more use to you now than 
 ten time the amount twenty year hence . " 

 " so it will , - it will . and Kenelm consent to this sacrifice ? " 

 " consent ! urge it . " 

 Gordon turn away his face , and Sir Peter resume : " you want to get 
 into Parliament ; very natural ambition for a clever young fellow . I 
 do not   presume to dictate politic to you . I hear you be what be call 
 a Liberal ; a man may be a Liberal , I suppose , without be a Jacobin . " 

 " I hope so , indeed . for my part I be anything but a violent man . " 

 " Violent , no ! who ever hear of a violent chillingly ? but I be read 
 in the newspaper to - day a speech address to some popular audience , 
 in which the orator be for divide all the land and all the capital 
 belong to other people among the work class , calmly and quietly , 
 without any violence , and deprecate violence : but say , perhaps very 
 truly , that the people to be rob might not like it , and might offer 
 violence ; in which case woe betide they ; it be they who would be guilty 
 of violence ; and they must take the consequence if they resist the 
 reasonable , proposition of himself and his friend ! that , I suppose , be 
 among the new idea with which Kenelm be more familiar than I be . do you 
 entertain those new idea ? " 

 " certainly not : I despise the fool who do . " 

 " and you will not abet revolutionary measure if you get into 
 Parliament ? " 

 " my dear Sir Peter , I fear you have hear very false report of my 
 opinion if you put such question . listen , " and therewith Gordon 
 launch into dissertation very clever , very subtle , which commit 
 he to nothing , beyond the wisdom of guide popular opinion into right 
 direction : what might be right direction he do not define ; he leave 
 Sir Peter to guess they . Sir Peter do guess they , as Gordon mean he 
 should , to be the direction which he , Sir Peter , think right ; and he 
 be satisfied . 

 that subject dispose of , Gordon say , with much apparent feeling , " May 
 I ask you to complete the favour you have lavish on I ? I have never 
 see Exmundham , and the home of the race from which I spring have a deep 
 interest for time . will you allow I to spend a few day with you , and 
 under the shade of your own tree take lesson in political science from 
 one who have evidently reflect on it profoundly ? " 

 " profoundly , no ; a little , - a little , as a mere bystander , " say Sir 
 Peter , modestly , but much flattered . " come , my dear boy , by all mean ; 
 you will have a hearty welcome . by the by , Travers and his handsome 
 daughter promise to visit I in about a fortnight , why not come at the 
 same time ? " 

 a sudden flash light up the young man 's countenance . 

 " I shall be so delighted , " he cry . " I be but slightly acquaint with 
 Mr. Travers , but I like he much , and Mrs. Campion be so well informed . " 

 " and what say you to the girl ? " 

 " the girl , Miss Travers . oh , she be very well in her way . but I do not 
 talk with young lady more than I can help . " 

 " then you be like your cousin Kenelm ? " 

 " I wish I be like he in other thing . " 

 " no , one such oddity in a family be quite enough . but though I would 
 not have you change to a Kenelm , I would not change Kenelm for the most 
 perfect model of a son that the world can exhibit . " deliver himself 
 of this burst of parental fondness , Sir Peter shake hand with Gordon , 
 and walk off to Mivers , who be to give he luncheon and then 
 accompany he to the station . Sir Peter be to return to Exmundham by 
 the afternoon express . 

 leave alone , Gordon indulge in one of those luxurious guess into the 
 future which form the happy moment in youth when so ambitious as 
 his . the sum Sir Peter place at his disposal would insure his entrance 
 in Parliament . he count with confidence on early success there . he 
 extend the scope of his view . with such success he might calculate 
 with certainty on a brilliant marriage , augment his fortune , and 
 confirm his position . he have previously fix his thought on Cecilia 
 Travers . I will do he the justice to say not from mercenary motif 
 alone , but not certainly with the impetuous ardour of youthful love . he 
 think she exactly fit to be the wife of an eminent public man , in 
 person , acquirement , dignified yet popular manner . he esteem she , he 
 like she , and then her fortune would add solidity to his position . in 
 fact , he have that sort of rational attachment to Cecilia which wise man , 
 like Lord Bacon and Montaigne , would commend to another wise man seek 
 a wife . what opportunity of awake in herself a similar , perhaps a 
 warmer , attachment the visit to Exmundham would afford ! he have learn 
 when he have call on the traverse that they be go thither , and 
 hence that burst of family sentiment which have procure the invitation 
 to himself . 

 but he must be cautious , he must not prematurely awaken Travers 's 
 suspicion . he be not as yet a match that the squire could approve of 
 for his heiress . and , though he be ignorant of Sir Peter 's design 
 on that , young lady , he be much too prudent to confide his own to a 
 kinsman of whose discretion he have strong misgiving . it be enough for 
 he at present that way be open for his own resolute energy . and 
 cheerfully , though musingly , he weigh its obstacle , and divine its 
 goal , as he pace his floor with bended head and restless stride , now 
 quick , now slow . 

 Sir Peter , in the meanwhile , find a very good luncheon prepare for 
 he at Mivers 's room , which he have all to himself , for his host never 
 ' spoil his dinner and insult his breakfast " by that intermediate 
 meal . he remain at his desk write brief note of business , or 
 of pleasure , while Sir Peter do justice to lamb cutlet and grill 
 chicken . but he look up from his task , with raise eyebrow , when 
 Sir Peter , after a somewhat discursive account of his visit to the 
 traverse , his admiration of Cecilia , and the adroitness with which , 
 act on his cousin 's hint , he have engage the family to spend a few 
 day at Exmundham , add , " and , by the by , I have ask young Gordon to 
 meet they . " 

 " to meet they ! meet Mr. and Miss Travers ! you have ? I think you wish 
 Kenelm to marry Cecilia . I be mistaken , you mean Gordon ! " 

 " Gordon , " exclaim Sir Peter , drop his knife and fork . " nonsense , 
 you do not   suppose that Miss Travers prefer he to Kenelm , or that 
 he have the presumption to fancy that her father would sanction his 
 address ? " 

 " I indulge in no supposition of the sort . I content myself with 
 think that Gordon be clever , insinuating , young ; and it be a very 
 good chance of better himself that you have throw in his way . 
 however , it be no affair of mine ; and though on the whole I like 
 Kenelm well than Gordon , still I like Gordon very well , and I have 
 an interest in follow his career which I can not   say I have in 
 conjecture what may be Kenelm 's - more likely no career at all . " 

 " miver , you delight in provoke I ; you do say such uncomfortable 
 thing . but , in the first place , Gordon speak rather slightingly of Miss 
 Travers . " 

 " ah , indeed ; that be a bad sign , " mutter Mivers . 

 Sir Peter do not hear he , and go on . 

 " and , besides , I feel pretty sure that the dear girl have already a 
 regard for Kenelm which allow no room for a rival . however , I shall not 
 forget your hint , but keep a sharp lookout ; and , if I see the young man 
 want to be too sweet on Cecilia , I shall cut short his visit . " 

 " give yourself no trouble in the matter ; it will do no good . marriage 
 be make in heaven . Heaven 's will be do . if I can get away I will 
 run down to you for a day or two . perhaps in that case you can ask Lady 
 Glenalvon . I like she , and she like Kenelm . have you finish ? I see 
 the brougham be at the door , and we have to call at your hotel to take 
 up your carpet - bag . " 

 Mivers be deliberately seal his note while he thus speak . he now 
 ring for his servant , give order for their delivery , and then follow 
 Sir Peter down stair and into the brougham . not a word would he say 
 more about Gordon , and Sir Peter shrink from tell he about the 
 L20,000 . chillingly Mivers be perhaps the last person to whom Sir 
 Peter would be tempt to parade an act of generosity . miver might not 
 unfrequently do a generous act himself , provide it be not divulge ; 
 but he have always a sneer for the generosity of other . 



 CHAPTER II . 

 wander back towards Moleswich , Kenelm find himself a little before 
 sunset on the bank of the garrulous brook , almost opposite to the house 
 inhabit by Lily Mordaunt . he stand long and silently by the grassy 
 margin , his dark shadow fall over the stream , break into fragment 
 by the eddy and strife of wave , fresh from their leap down the 
 neighbouring waterfall . his eye rest on the house and the garden lawn 
 in the front . the upper window be open . " I wonder which be her , " he 
 say to himself . at last he catch a glimpse of the gardener , bend 
 over a flower border with his watering - pot , and then move slowly 
 through the little shrubbery , no doubt to his own cottage . now the lawn 
 be solitary , save that a couple of thrush drop suddenly on the 
 sward . 

 " good evening , sir , " say a voice . " a capital spot for trout this . " 

 Kenelm turn his head , and beheld on the footpath , just behind he , 
 a respectable elderly man , apparently of the class of a small retail 
 tradesman , with a fishing - rod in his hand and a basket belt to his 
 side . 

 " for trout , " reply Kenelm ; " I dare say . a strangely attractive spot 
 indeed . " 

 " be you an angler , sir , if I may make bold to inquire ? " ask the 
 elderly man , somewhat perhaps puzzle as to the rank of the stranger ; 
 noticing , on the one hand , his dress and his mien , on the other , sling 
 to his shoulder , the worn and shabby knapsack which Kenelm have carry , 
 at home and abroad , the precede year . 

 " ay , I be an angler . " 

 " then this be the good place in the whole stream . look , sir , there 
 be Izaak Walton 's summer - house ; and far down you see that white , 
 neat - look house . well , that be my house , sir , and I have an apartment 
 which I let to gentleman angler . it be generally occupy throughout 
 the summer month . I expect every day to have a letter to engage it , 
 but it be vacant now . a very nice apartment , sir , - sit - room and 
 bedroom . " 

 " Descende ceolo , et dic age tibia , " say Kenelm . 

 " Sir ? " say the elderly man . 

 " I beg you ten thousand pardon . I have have the misfortune to have be 
 at the university , and to have learn a little Latin , which sometimes 
 come back very inopportunely . but , speak in plain English , what 
 I mean to say be this : I invoke the Muse to descend from heaven and 
 bring with she - the original say a fife , but I mean - a fishing - rod . I 
 should think your apartment would suit I exactly ; pray show it to I . " 

 " with the great pleasure , " say the elderly man . " the Muse need not 
 bring a fishing - rod ! we have all sort of tackle at your service , and a 
 boat too , if you care for that . the stream hereabout be so shallow and 
 narrow that a boat be of little use till you get far down . " 

 " I do not   want to get far down ; but should I want to get to the 
 opposite bank , without wad across , would the boat take I or be there 
 a bridge ? " 

 " the boat can take you . it be a flat - bottomed punt , and there be a 
 bridge too for foot - passenger , just opposite my house ; and between 
 this and Moleswich , where the stream widen , there be a ferry . the stone 
 bridge for traffic be at the farth end of the town . " 

 " good . let we go at once to your house . " 

 the two man walk on . 

 " by the by , " say Kenelm , as they walk , " do you know much of the 
 family that inhabit the pretty cottage on the opposite side , which we 
 have just leave behind ? " 

 " Mrs. Cameron 's . yes , of course , a very good lady ; and Mr. Melville , the 
 painter . I be sure I ought to know , for he have often lodge with I 
 when he come to visit Mrs. Cameron . he recommend my apartment to his 
 friend , and they be my good lodger . I like painter , sir , though I 
 do not   know much about painting . they be pleasant gentleman , and easily 
 content with my humble roof and fare . " 

 " you be quite right . I do not   know much about painting myself ; but I be 
 inclined to believe that painter , judge not from what I have see of 
 they , for I have not a single acquaintance among they personally , but 
 from what I have read of their life , be , as a general rule , not only 
 pleasant but noble gentleman . they form within themselves desire to 
 beautify or exalt commonplace thing , and they can only accomplish their 
 desire by a constant study of what be beautiful and what be exalt . 
 a man constantly so engaged ought to be a very noble gentleman , even 
 though he may be the son of a shoeblack . and live in a high world 
 than we do , I can conceive that he be , as you say , very well content 
 with humble roof and fare in the world we inhabit . " 

 " exactly , sir ; I see - I see now , though you put it in a way that never 
 strike I before . " 

 " and yet , " say Kenelm , look benignly at the speaker , " you seem to 
 I a well - educate and intelligent man ; reflective on thing in general , 
 without be unmindful of your interest in particular , especially when 
 you have lodging to let . do not be offend . that sort of man be not 
 perhaps bear to be a painter , but I respect he highly . the world , sir , 
 require the vast majority of its inhabitant to live in it , - to live 
 by it . ' each for himself , and God for we all . ' the great happiness 
 of the great number be well secure by a prudent consideration for 
 Number one . " 

 somewhat to Kenelm 's surprise   allow that he have now learn enough 
 of life to be occasionally surprise   the elderly man here make a dead 
 halt , stretch out his hand cordially , and cry , " hear , hear ! I see 
 that , like I , you be a decide democrat . " 

 " Democrat ! Pray , may I ask , not why you be one , - that would be a 
 liberty , and democrats resent any liberty take with themselves ; but why 
 you suppose I be ? " 

 " you speak of the great happiness of the great number . that be 
 a democratic sentiment surely ! besides , do not you say , sir , that 
 painter , - painter , sir , painter , even if they be the son of 
 shoeblack , be the true gentleman , - the true nobleman ? " 

 " I do not say that exactly , to the disparagement of other gentleman and 
 noble . but if I do , what then ? " 

 " Sir , I agree with you . I despise rank ; I despise duke and earl and 
 aristocrat . ' an honest man 's the noble work of God . ' some poet say 
 that . I think Shakspeare . wonderful man , Shakspeare . a tradesman 's 
 son , - butcher , I believe . eh ! my uncle be a butcher , and might have 
 be an alderman . I go along with you heartily , heartily . I be a 
 democrat , every inch of I . shake hand , sir , shake hand ; we be all 
 equal . ' each man for himself , and God for we all . ' " 

 " I have no objection to shake hand , " say Kenelm ; " but do not   let I owe 
 your condescension to false pretence . though we be all equal before 
 the law , except the rich man , who have little chance of justice as 
 against a poor man when submit to an english jury , yet I utterly deny 
 that any two man you select can be equal . one must beat the other 
 in something ; and , when one man beat another , democracy cease and 
 aristocracy begin . " 

 " Aristocracy ! I do not   see that . what do you mean by aristocracy ? " 

 " the ascendency of the well man . in a rude State the well man be 
 the strong ; in a corrupt State , perhaps the more roguish ; in modern 
 republic the jobber get the money and the lawyer get the power . in 
 well - order States alone aristocracy appear at its genuine worth : 
 the well man in birth , because respect for ancestry secure a high 
 standard of honour ; the well man in wealth , because of the immense 
 use to enterprise , energy , and the fine art , which rich man must be if 
 they follow their natural inclination ; the well man in character , the 
 well man in ability , for reason too obvious to define ; and these two 
 last will beat the other in the government of the State , if the state 
 be flourish and free . all these four class of well man constitute 
 true aristocracy ; and when a well government than a true aristocracy 
 shall be devise by the wit of man , we shall not be far off from 
 the Millennium and the reign of saint . but here we be at the 
 house , - your , be it not ? I like the look of it extremely . " 

 the elderly man now enter the little porch , over which clamber 
 honeysuckle and ivy intertwine , and usher Kenelm into a pleasant 
 parlour , with a bay window , and an equally pleasant bedroom behind it . 

 " will it do , sir ? " 

 " perfectly . I take it from this moment . my knapsack contain all I shall 
 need for the night . there be a portmanteau of mine at Mr. Somers 's shop , 
 which can be send here in the morning . " 

 " but we have not settle about the term , " say the elderly man , 
 begin to feel rather doubtful whether he ought thus to have 
 instal in his home a stalwart pedestrian of whom he know nothing , 
 and who , though talk glibly enough on other thing , have preserve an 
 ominous silence on the subject of payment . 

 " term ? true , name they . " 

 " include board ? " 

 " certainly . chameleon live on air ; democrat on wind bag . I have a 
 more vulgar appetite , and require mutton . " 

 " meat be very dear now - a - day , " say the elderly man , " and I be afraid , 
 for board and lodge I can not charge you less than L3 3s . , - say L3 a 
 week . my lodger usually pay a week in advance . " 

 " agree , " say Kenelm , extract three sovereign from his purse . " I 
 have din already : I want nothing more this evening ; let I detain you 
 no far . be kind enough to shut the door after you . " 

 when he be alone , Kenelm seat himself in the recess of the bay 
 window , against the casement , and look forth intently . yes ; he be 
 right : he could see from thence the home of Lily . not , indeed , more than 
 a white gleam of the house through the interstice of tree and shrub , 
 but the gentle lawn slop to the brook , with the great willow at the 
 end dip its bough into the water , and shut out all view beyond 
 itself by its bower of tender leaf . the young man bend his face on his 
 hand and muse dreamily : the evening deepen ; the star come forth ; 
 the ray of the moon now peer aslant through the arching dip of the 
 willow , silver their way as they steal to the wave below . 

 " shall I bring light , sir ? or do you prefer a lamp or candle ? " ask 
 a voice behind , - the voice of the elderly man 's wife . " do you like the 
 shutter close ? " 

 the question startle the dreamer . they seem mock his own old 
 mocking on the romance of love . lamp or candle , practical light for 
 prosaic eye , and shutter close against moon and star ! 

 " thank you , ma'am , not yet , " he say ; and rise quietly he place his 
 hand on the window - sill , swing himself through the open casement , and 
 pass slowly along the margin of the rivulet , by a path checker 
 alternately with shade and starlight ; the moon yet more slowly rise 
 above the willow , and lengthen its track along the wavelet . 



 CHAPTER III . 

 THOUGH Kenelm do not think it necessary at present to report to his 
 parent or his London acquaintance his recent movement and his present 
 resting - place , it never enter into his head to lurk perdu in the 
 immediate vicinity of Lily 's house , and seek opportunity of meet 
 she clandestinely . he walk to Mrs. Braefield 's the next morning , find 
 she at home , and say in rather a more off - hand manner than be habitual 
 to he , " I have hire a lodging in your neighbourhood , on the bank of 
 the brook , for the sake of its trout - fishing . so you will allow I to 
 call on you sometimes , and one of these day I hope you will give I the 
 dinner I so unceremoniously reject some day ago . I be then summon 
 away suddenly , much against my will . " 

 " yes ; my husband say that you shoot off from he with a wild exclamation 
 about duty . " 

 " quite true ; my reason , and I may say my conscience , be greatly 
 perplex upon a matter extremely important and altogether new to I . I 
 go to Oxford , - the place above all other in which question of 
 reason and conscience be most deeply consider , and perhaps 
 least satisfactorily solve . relieve in my mind by my visit to a 
 distinguished ornament of that university , I feel I might indulge in a 
 summer holiday , and here I be . " 

 " ah ! I understand . you have religious doubt , - think perhaps of turn 
 Roman Catholic . I hope you be not go to do so ? " 

 " my doubt be not necessarily of a religious nature . pagan have 
 entertain they . " 

 " whatever they be I be pleased to see they do not prevent your 
 return , " say Mrs. Braefield , graciously . " but where have you find a 
 lodging ; why not have come to we ? my husband would have be scarcely 
 less glad than myself to receive you . " 

 " you say that so sincerely , and so cordially , that to answer by a brief 
 ' I thank you ' seem rigid and heartless . but there be time in life 
 when one yearn to be alone , - to commune with one 's own heart , and , if 
 possible , be still ; I be in one of those moody time . Bear with I . " 

 Mrs. Braefield look at he with affectionate , kindly interest . she 
 have go before he through the solitary road of young romance . she 
 remember her dreamy , dangerous girlhood , when she , too , have yearn to 
 be alone . 

 " bear with you ; yes , indeed . I wish , Mr. Chillingly , that I be your 
 sister , and that you would confide in I . something trouble you . " 

 " trouble I , - no . my thought be happy one , and they may sometimes 
 perplex I , but they do not trouble . " 

 Kenelm say this very softly ; and in the warm light of his musing 
 eye , the sweet play of his tranquil smile , there be an expression 
 which do not belie his word . 

 " you have not tell I where you have find a lodging , " say Mrs. 
 Braefield , somewhat abruptly . 

 " do I not ? " reply Kenelm , with an unconscious start , as from an 
 abstract reverie . " with no undistinguished host , I presume , for when 
 I ask he this morning for the right address of this cottage , in order 
 to direct such luggage as I have to be send there , he give I his card 
 with a grand air , say , ' I be pretty well know at Moleswich , by 
 and beyond it . ' I have not yet look at his card . oh , here it 
 be , - ' Algernon Sidney Gale Jones , Cromwell Lodge ; ' you laugh . what do 
 you know of he ? " 

 " I wish my husband be here ; he would tell you more about he . Mr. 
 Jones be quite a character . " 

 " so I perceive . " 

 " a great radical , - very talkative and troublesome at the vestry ; but our 
 vicar , Mr. Emlyn , say there be no real harm in he , that his bark be 
 bad than his bite , and that his republican or radical notion must be 
 lay to the door of his godfather ! in addition to his name of Jones , he 
 be unhappily christen Gale ; Gale Jones be a noted radical orator 
 at the time of his birth . and I suppose Algernon Sidney be prefix 
 to Gale in order to devote the new - bear more emphatically to republican 
 principle . " 

 " naturally , therefore , Algernon Sidney Gale Jones baptize his house 
 Cromwell Lodge , see that Algernon Sidney hold the Protectorate in 
 especial abhorrence , and that the original Gale Jones , if an honest 
 radical , must have do the same , consider what rough usage the 
 advocate of Parliamentary Reform meet with at the hand of his Highness . 
 but we must be indulgent to man who have be unfortunately christen 
 before they have any choice of the name that be to rule their fate . 
 I myself should have be less whimsical have I not be name after a 
 Kenelm who believe in sympathetic powder . apart from his political 
 doctrine , I like my landlord : he keep his wife in excellent order . she 
 seem frightened at the sound of her own footstep , and glide to and 
 fro , a pallid image of submissive womanhood in list slipper . " 

 " great recommendation certainly , and Cromwell Lodge be very prettily 
 situate . by the by , it be very near Mrs. Cameron 's . " 

 " now I think of it , so it be , " say Kenelm , innocently . ah ! my friend 
 Kenelm , enemy of sham , and truth - teller , par excellence , what hast 
 thou come to ? how be the mighty fall ! " since you say you will dine 
 with we , suppose we fix the day after to - morrow , and I will ask Mrs. 
 Cameron and Lily . " 

 " the day after to - morrow : I shall be delighted . " 

 " an early hour ? " 

 " the early the well . " 

 " be six o'clock too early ? " 

 " too early ! certainly not ; on the contrary . good - day : I must now go to 
 Mrs. Somers ; she have charge of my portmanteau . " 

 then Kenelm rise . 

 " poor dear Lily ! " say Mrs. Braefield ; " I wish she be less of a 
 child . " 

 Kenelm reseat himself . 

 " be she a child ? I do not   think she be actually a child . " 

 " not in year ; she be between seventeen and eighteen : but my husband 
 say that she be too childish to talk to , and always tell I to take 
 she off his hand ; he would rather talk with Mrs. Cameron . " 

 " indeed ! " 

 " still I find something in she . " 

 " indeed ! " 

 " not exactly childish , nor quite womanish . " 

 " what then ? " 

 " I can not   exactly define . but you know what Mr. Melville and Mrs. Cameron 
 call she as a pet name ? " 

 " no . " 

 " Fairy ! fairy have no age ; fairy be neither child nor woman . " 

 " Fairy . she be call fairy by those who know she good ? Fairy ! " 

 " and she believe in fairy . " 

 " do she ? - so do I. Pardon I , I must be off . the day after 
 to - morrow , - six o'clock . " 

 " wait one moment , " say Elsie , go to her writing - table . " since you 
 pass Grasmere on your way home , will you kindly leave this note ? " 

 " I think Grasmere be a lake in the north ? " 

 " yes ; but Mr. Melville choose to call the cottage by the name of the 
 lake . I think the first picture he ever sell be a view of Wordsworth 's 
 house there . here be my note to ask Mrs. Cameron to meet you ; but if you 
 object to be my messenger - " 

 " object ! my dear Mrs. Braefield . as you say , I pass close by the 
 cottage . " 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 KENELM go with somewhat rapid pace from Mrs. Braefield 's to the shop 
 in the High Street keep by Will Somers . Jessie be behind the counter , 
 which be throng with customer . Kenelm give she a brief direction 
 about his portmanteau , and then pass into the back parlour , where 
 her husband be employ on his basket , - with the baby 's cradle in 
 the corner , and its grandmother rock it mechanically , as she read a 
 wonderful missionary tract full of tale of miraculous conversion : into 
 what sort of Christians we will not pause to inquire . 

 " and so you be happy , will ? " say Kenelm , seat himself between the 
 basket - maker and the infant ; the dear old mother beside he , read the 
 tract which link her dream of life eternal with life just open 
 in the cradle that she rock . he not happy ! how he pity the man who 
 could ask such a question . 

 " Happy , sir ! I should think so , indeed . there be not a night on which 
 Jessie and I , and mother too , do not pray that some day or other you may 
 be as happy . by and by the baby will learn to pray ' God bless papa , and 
 mamma , grandmamma , and Mr. Chillingly . ' " 

 " there be some one else much more deserving of prayer than I , though 
 need they less . you will know some day : pass it by now . to return to 
 the point : you be happy ; if I ask why , would you not say , ' because I 
 have marry the girl I love , and have never repent ' ? " 

 " well , sir , that be about it ; though , beg your pardon , I think it 
 could be put more prettily somehow . " 

 " you be right there . but perhaps love and happiness never yet find any 
 word that could fitly express they . good - bye , for the present . " 

 ah ! if it be as mere materialist , or as many middle - aged or elderly 
 folk , who , if materialist , be so without know it , unreflectingly 
 say , " the main element of happiness be bodily or animal health and 
 strength , " that question which chillingly put would appear a very 
 unmeaning or a very insulting one address to a pale cripple , who 
 however improve of late in health , would still be sickly and ail 
 all his life , - put , too , by a man of the rare conformation of physical 
 power that nature can adapt to physical enjoyment , - a man who , since 
 the age in which memory commence , have never know what it be to 
 be unwell , who could scarcely understand you if you talk of a 
 finger - ache , and whom those refinement of mental culture which 
 multiply the delight of the sens have endow with the most exquisite 
 conception of such happiness as mere nature and its instinct can give ! 
 but will do not think the question unmeaning or insulting . he , the poor 
 cripple , feel a vast superiority on the scale of joyous be over the 
 young Hercules , well bear , cultured , and wealthy , who could know so 
 little of happiness as to ask the crippled basket - maker if he be 
 happy . - he , bless husband and father ! 



 CHAPTER V. 

 LILY be seat on the grass under a chestnut - tree on the lawn . a white 
 cat , not long emerge from kittenhood , curl itself by her side . on her 
 lap be an open volume , which she be read with the great delight . 

 Mrs. Cameron come from the house , look round , perceive the girl , and 
 approach ; and either she move so gently , or Lily be so absorb in 
 the book , that the latter be not aware of her presence till she feel 
 a light hand on her shoulder , and , look up , recognize her aunt 's 
 gentle face . 

 " ah ! Fairy , Fairy , that silly book , when you ought to be at your French 
 verb . what will your guardian say when he come and find you have so 
 waste time ? " 

 " he will say that fairy never waste their time ; and he will scold you 
 for say so . " Therewith Lily throw down the book , spring to her foot , 
 wound her arm round Mrs. Cameron 's neck , and kiss she fondly . " there ! 
 be that waste time ? I love you so , aunty . in a day like this I think I 
 love everybody and everything ! " as she say this , she draw up her lithe 
 form , look into the blue sky , and with part lip seem to drink in 
 air and sunshine . then she wake up the doze cat , and begin chase it 
 round the lawn . 

 Mrs. Cameron stand still , regard she with moistened eye . just at 
 that moment Kenelm enter through the garden gate . he , too , stand 
 still , his eye fix on the undulating movement of Fairy 's exquisite 
 form . she have arrest her favourite , and be now at play with it , 
 shake off her straw hat , and draw the ribbon attach to it 
 tantalizingly along the smooth grass . her rich hair , thus release and 
 dishevel by the exercise , fall partly over her face in wavy ringlet ; 
 and her musical laugh and word of sportive endearment sound on 
 Kenelm 's ear more joyously than the thrill of the skylark , more sweetly 
 than the coo of the ring - dove . 

 he approach towards Mrs. Cameron . Lily turn suddenly and see he . 
 instinctively she smooth back her loosened tress , replace the straw 
 hat , and come up demurely to his side just as he have accost her aunt . 

 " Pardon my intrusion , Mrs. Cameron . I be the bearer of this note from 
 Mrs. Braefield . " while the aunt read the note , he turn to the niece . 

 " you promise to show I the picture , Miss Mordaunt . " 

 " but that be a long time ago . " 

 " too long to expect a lady 's promise to be keep ? " 

 Lily seem to ponder that question , and hesitate before she answer . 

 " I will show you the picture . I do not   think I ever break a promise yet , 
 but I shall be more careful how I make one in future . " 

 " why so ? " 

 " because you do not value mine when I make it , and that hurt I . " Lily 
 lift up her head with a bewitching stateliness , and add gravely , " I 
 be offend . " 

 " Mrs. Braefield be very kind , " say Mrs. Cameron ; ' she ask we to dine 
 the day after to - morrow . you would like to go , Lily ? " 

 " all grow - up people , I suppose ? no , thank you , dear aunt . you go alone , 
 I would rather stay at home . may I have little Clemmy to play with ? she 
 will bring Juba , and Blanche be very partial to Juba , though she do 
 scratch he . " 

 " very well , my dear , you shall have your playmate , and I will go by 
 myself . " 

 Kenelm stand aghast . " you will not go , Miss Mordaunt ; Mrs. Braefield 
 will be so disappointed . and if you do not   go , whom shall I have to talk 
 to ? I do not   like grow - up people well than you do . " 

 " you be go ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 " and if I go you will talk to I ? I be afraid of Mr. Braefield . he be so 
 wise . " 

 " I will save you from he , and will not utter a grain of wisdom . " 

 " Aunty , I will go . " 

 here Lily make a bound and catch up Blanche , who , take her kiss 
 resignedly , star with evident curiosity upon Kenelm . 

 here a bell within the house ring the announcement of luncheon . Mrs. 
 Cameron invite Kenelm to partake of that meal . he feel as Romulus might 
 have feel when first invite to taste the ambrosia of the god . yet 
 certainly that luncheon be not such as might have please Kenelm 
 Chillingly in the early day of the Temperance Hotel . but somehow or 
 other of late he have lose appetite ; and on this occasion a very modest 
 share of a very slender dish of chicken fricasseed , and a few cherry 
 daintily arrange on vine leaf , which Lily select for he , content 
 he , - as probably a very little ambrosia content Romulus while 
 feast his eye on Hebe . 

 Luncheon over , while Mrs. Cameron write her reply to Elsie , Kenelm 
 be conduct by Lily into her own own room , in vulgar parlance she 
  boudoir , though it do not look as if any one ever bouder'd there . 
 it be exquisitely pretty , - pretty not as a woman 's , but as a child 's 
 dream of the own own room she would like to have , - wondrously neat and 
 cool , and pure - looking ; a trellis paper , the trellis gay with rose and 
 woodbine , and bird and butterfly ; drapery of muslin , festoon with 
 dainty tassel and ribbon ; a dwarf bookcase , that seem well store , 
 at least as to binding ; a dainty little writing - table in french 
  marqueterie , look too fresh and spotless to have know hard 
 service . the casement be open , and in keep with the trellis paper ; 
 woodbine and rose from without encroached on the window - side , gently 
 stir by the faint summer breeze , and waft sweet odour into the 
 little room . Kenelm go to the window , and glance on the view beyond . 
 " I be right , " he say to himself ; " I divine it . " but though he 
 speak in a low inward whisper , Lily , who have watch his movement in 
 surprise , overheard . 

 " you divine it . divine what ? " 

 " nothing , nothing ; I be but talk to myself . " 

 " tell I what you divine : I insist upon it ! " and Fairy petulantly 
 stamp her tiny foot on the floor . 

 " do you ? then I obey . I have take a lodging for a short time on the 
 other side of the brook , - Cromwell Lodge , - and see your house as I 
 pass , I divine that your room be in this part of it . how soft here 
 be the view of the water ! ah ! yonder be Izaak Walton 's summer - house . " 

 " do not   talk about Izaak Walton , or I shall quarrel with you , as I do 
 with Lion when he want I to like that cruel book . " 

 " who be Lion ? " 

 " Lion , - of course , my guardian . I call he Lion when I be a little 
 child . it be on see in one of his book a print of a lion play 
 with a little child . " 

 " ah ! I know the design well , " say Kenelm , with a slight sigh . " it be 
 from an antique greek gem . it be not the lion that play with the child , 
 it be the child that master the lion , and the Greeks call the child 
 ' love . ' " 

 this idea seem beyond Lily 's perfect comprehension . she pause before 
 she answer , with the naivete of a child six year old , - 

 " I see now why I master Blanche , who will not make friend with any 
 one else : I love Blanche . ah , that remind I , - come and look at the 
 picture . " 

 she go to the wall over the writing - table , draw a silk curtain aside 
 from a small painting in a dainty velvet framework , and point to it , 
 cry with triumph , " look there ! be it not beautiful ? " 

 Kenelm have be prepare to see a landscape , or a group , or anything but 
 what he do see : it be the portrait of Blanche when a kitten . 

 little elevate though the subject be , it be treat with graceful 
 fancy . the kitten have evidently cease from play with the cotton 
 reel that lie between her paw , and be fix her gaze intently on a 
 bulfinch that have light on a spray within her reach . 

 " you understand , " say Lily , place her hand on his arm , and draw 
 he towards what she think the good light for the picture ; " it be 
 Blanche 's first sight of a bird . look well at her face ; do not   you see a 
 sudden surprise , - half joy , half fear ? she cease to play with the reel . 
 her intellect - or , as Mr. Braefield would say , ' her instinct ' - be for 
 the first time arouse . from that moment Blanche be no long a mere 
 kitten . and it require , oh , the most careful education , to teach she 
 not to kill the poor little bird . she never do now , but I have such 
 trouble with she . " 

 " I can not say honestly that I do see all that you do in the picture ; 
 but it seem to I very simply paint , and be , no doubt , a striking 
 likeness of Blanche at that early age . " 

 " so it be . Lion draw the first sketch from life with his pencil ; and 
 when he see how pleased I be with it - he be so good - he put it on 
 canvas , and let I sit by he while he paint it . then he take it away , 
 and bring it back finished and frame as you see , last May , a present 
 for my birthday . " 

 " you be bear in May - with the flower . " 

 " the good of all the flower be bear in May , - violet . " 

 " but they be bear in the shade , and cle to it . surely , as a child of 
 May , you love the sun ! " 

 " I love the sun ; it be never too bright nor too warm for I . but I do not 
 think that , though bear in May , I be bear in sunlight . I feel more like 
 my own native self when I creep into the shade and sit down alone . I can 
 weep then . " 

 as she thus shyly end , the character of her whole countenance be 
 change : its infantine mirthfulness be go ; a grave , thoughtful , even 
 a sad expression settle on the tender eye and the tremulous lip . 

 Kenelm be so touch that word fail he , and there be silence for 
 some moment between the two . at length Kenelm say , slowly , - 

 " you say your own native self . do you , then , feel , as I often do , that 
 there be a second , possibly a native , self , deep hide beneath the 
 self , - not merely what we show to the world in common   that may be 
 merely a mask , but the self that we ordinarily accept even when in 
 solitude as our own , an inner innermost self , oh so different and 
 so rarely come forth from its hiding - place , assert its right of 
 sovereignty , and put out the other self as the sun put out a star ? " 

 have Kenelm thus speak to a clever man of the world - to a Chillingly 
 Mivers , to a Chillingly Gordon - they certainly would not have understand 
 he . but to such man he never would have thus speak . he have a vague 
 hope that this childlike girl , despite so much of childlike talk , would 
 understand he ; and she do at once . 

 advance close to he , again lay her hand on his arm , and look up 
 towards his bended face with startled wonder eye , no long sad , yet 
 not mirthful , - 

 " how true ! you have feel that too ? where be that innermost self , 
 so deep down , - so deep ; yet when it do come forth , so much 
 high , - high , - immeasurably high than one 's everyday self ? it do 
 not tame the butterfly ; it long to get to the star . and then , - and 
 then , - ah , how soon it fade back again ! you have feel that . do it not 
 puzzle you ? " 

 " very much . " 

 " be there no wise book about it that help to explain ? " 

 " no wise book in my very limited reading even hint at the puzzle . I 
 fancy that it be one of those insoluble question that rest between the 
 infant and his maker . mind and soul be not the same thing , and what 
 you and I call ' wise man ' be always confound the two - " 

 fortunately for all party - especially the reader ; for Kenelm have here 
 get on the back of one of his most cherished hobby , the distinction 
 between psychology and metaphysic , soul and mind scientifically or 
 logically consider - Mrs. Cameron here enter the room , and ask he 
 how he like the picture . 

 " very much . I be no great judge of the art . but it please I at once , 
 and now that Miss Mordaunt have interpret the intention of the painter 
 I admire it yet more . " 

 " Lily choose to interpret his intention in her own way , and insist 
 that Blanche 's expression of countenance convey an idea of her capacity 
 to restrain her destructive instinct , and be teach to believe that it 
 be wrong to kill bird for mere sport . for food she need not kill they , 
 see that Lily take care that she have plenty to eat . but I do not 
 think that Mr. Melville have the slight suspicion that he have 
 indicate that capacity in his picture . " 

 " he must have do so , whether he suspect it or not , " say Lily , 
 positively ; " otherwise he would not be truthful . " 

 " why not truthful ? " ask Kenelm . 

 " do not   you see ? if you be call upon to describe truthfully the 
 character of any little child , would you only speak of such naughty 
 impulse as all child have in common , and not even hint at the 
 capacity to be make well ? " 

 " admirably put ! " say Kenelm . " there be no doubt that a much fiercer 
 animal than a cat - a tiger , for instance , or a conquer hero - may be 
 teach to live on the kind possible term with the creature on which 
 it be its natural instinct to prey . " 

 " yes , yes ; hear that , aunty ! you remember the Happy Family that we 
 see eight year ago , at Moleswich fair , with a cat not half so nice as 
 Blanche allow a mouse to bite her ear ? well , then , would Lion not 
 have be shamefully false to Blanche if he have not " - 

 Lily pause and look half shyly , half archly , at Kenelm , then add , 
 in slow , deep - draw tone - " give a glimpse of her innermost self ? " 

 " innermost self ! " repeat Mrs. Cameron , perplex and laugh gently . 

 Lily steal near to Kenelm and whisper , - 

 " be not one 's innermost self one 's good self ? " 

 Kenelm smile approvingly . the fairy be rapidly deepen her spell 
 upon he . if Lily have be his sister , his betrothed , his wife , how 
 fondly he would have kiss she ! she have express a thought over which 
 he have often inaudibly brood , and she have clothe it with all the 
 charm of her own infantine fancy and womanlike tenderness . Goethe have 
 say somewhere , or be report to have say , " there be something in 
 every man 's heart , that , if you know it , would make you hate he . " what 
 Goethe say , still more what Goethe be report to have say , be never 
 to be take quite literally . no comprehensive genius - genius at once 
 poet and thinker - ever can be so take . the sun shin on a dunghill . 
 but the sun have no predilection for a dunghill . it only comprehend a 
 dunghill as it do a rose . still Kenelm have always regard that loose 
 ray from Goethe 's prodigal orb with an abhorrence most unphilosophical 
 for a philosopher so young as generally to take upon oath any word 
 of so great a master . Kenelm think that the root of all private 
 benevolence , of all enlighten advance in social reform , lie in the 
 adverse theorem , - that in every man 's nature there lie a something 
 that , could we get at it , cleanse it , polish it , render it visibly clear 
 to our eye , would make we love he . and in this spontaneous , uncultured 
 sympathy with the result of so many laborious struggle of his own 
 scholastic intellect against the dogma of the german giant , he feel as 
 if he have find a young - true , but oh , how much more subduing , because 
 so much young - sister of his own man 's soul . then come , so strongly , 
 the sense of her sympathy with his own strange innermost self , which a 
 man will never feel more than once in his life with a daughter of 
 Eve , that he dare not trust himself to speak . he somewhat hurry his 
 leave - taking . 

 pass in the rear of the garden towards the bridge which lead to his 
 lodging , he find on the opposite bank , at the other end of the bridge , 
 Mr. Algernon Sidney Gale Jones peacefully angle for trout . 

 " will you not try the stream to - day , sir ? take my rod . " Kenelm 
 remember that Lily have call Izaak Walton 's book " a cruel one , " and 
 shake his head gently , go his way into the house . there he seat 
 himself silently by the window , and look towards the grassy lawn 
 and the dip willow , and the gleam of the white wall through the 
 girdling tree , as he have look the eve before . 

 " ah ! " he murmur at last , " if , as I hold , a man but tolerably good 
 do good unconsciously merely by the act of living , - if he can no more 
 traverse his way from the cradle to the grave , without let fall , 
 as he pass , the germ of strength , fertility , and beauty , than can a 
 reckless wind or a vagrant bird , which , where it pass , leave behind 
 it the oak , the corn - sheaf , or the flower , - ah , if that be so , how 
 tenfold the good must be , if the man find the gentle and purer 
 duplicate of his own being in that mysterious , undefinable union which 
 Shakspeares and day - labourer equally agree to call love ; which Newton 
 never recognize , and which descarte   his only rival in the realm 
 of thought at once severe and imaginative   reduce into link of early 
 association , explain that he love woman who squint , because , when 
 he be a boy , a girl with that infirmity squint at he from the other 
 side of his father 's garden - wall ! ah ! be this union between man and 
 woman what it may ; if it be really love , really the bond which embrace 
 the innermost and bettermost self of both , - how daily , hourly , momently , 
 should we bless God for have make it so easy to be happy and to be 
 good ! " 



 CHAPTER VI . 

 the dinner - party at Mr. Braefield 's be not quite so small as Kenelm 
 have anticipate . when the merchant hear from his wife that Kenelm 
 be come , he think it would be but civil to the young gentleman to 
 invite a few other person to meet he . 

 " you see , my dear , " he say to Elsie , " Mrs. Cameron be a very good , 
 simple sort of woman , but not particularly amusing ; and Lily , though a 
 pretty girl , be so exceedingly childish . we owe much , my sweet Elsie , 
 to this Mr. Chillingly , " - here there be a deep tone of feeling in his 
 voice and look , - " and we must make it as pleasant for he as we can . 
 I will bring down my friend Sir Thomas , and you ask Mr. Emlyn and his 
 wife . Sir Thomas be a very sensible man , and Emlyn a very learn one . 
 so Mr. Chillingly will find people worth talk to . by the by , when I 
 go to town I will send down a haunch of venison from Groves 's . " 

 so when Kenelm arrive , a little before six o'clock , he find in the 
 drawing - room the Rev. Charles Emlyn , vicar of Moleswich proper , with 
 his spouse , and a portly middle - aged man , to whom , as Sir Thomas Pratt , 
 Kenelm be introduce . Sir Thomas be an eminent city banker . the 
 ceremony of introduction over , Kenelm steal to Elsie 's side . 

 " I think I be to meet Mrs. Cameron . I do not   see she . " 

 " she will be here presently . it look as if it might rain , and I have 
 send the carriage for she and Lily . ah , here they be ! " 

 Mrs. Cameron enter , clothe in black silk . she always wear black ; and 
 behind she come Lily , in the spotless colour that become her name ; 
 no ornament , save a slender gold chain to which be append a single 
 locket , and a single blush rise in her hair . she look wonderfully 
 lovely ; and with that loveliness there be a certain nameless air of 
 distinction , possibly owe to delicacy of form and colouring ; possibly 
 to a certain grace of carriage , which be not without a something of 
 pride . 

 Mr. Braefield , who be a very punctual man , make a sign to his servant , 
 and in another moment or so dinner be announce . Sir Thomas , of course , 
 take in the hostess ; Mr. Braefield , the vicar 's wife   she be a dean 's 
 daughter ; Kenelm , Mrs. Cameron ; and the vicar , Lily . 

 on seat themselves at the table Kenelm be on the left hand , next to 
 the hostess , and separate from Lily by Mrs. Cameron and Mr. Emlyn ; 
 and when the vicar have say grace , Lily glance behind his back and her 
 aunt 's at Kenelm   who do the same thing , make at he what the French 
 call a moue . the pledge to she have be break . she be between two 
 man very much grow up , - the vicar and the host . Kenelm return the 
  moue with a mournful smile and an involuntary shrug . 

 all be silent till , after his soup and his first glass of sherry , Sir 
 Thomas begin , - 

 " I think , Mr. Chillingly , we have meet before , though I have not the 
 honour then of make your acquaintance . " Sir Thomas pause before he 
 add , " not long ago ; the last State ball at Buckingham Palace . " 

 Kenelm bend his head acquiescingly . he have be at that ball . 

 " you be talk with a very charming woman , - a friend of mine , - Lady 
 Glenalvon . " 

  Sir Thomas be Lady Glenalvon 's banker . 

 " I remember perfectly , " say Kenelm . " we be seat in the picture 
 gallery . you come to speak to Lady Glenalvon , and I yield to you my 
 place on the settee . " 

 " quite true ; and I think you join a young lady , very handsome , - the 
 great heiress , Miss Travers . " 

 Kenelm again bow , and , turn away as politely as he could , address 
 himself to Mrs. Cameron . Sir Thomas , satisfy that he have impress 
 on his audience the fact of his friendship with Lady Glenalvon and his 
 attendance at the court ball , now direct his conversational power 
 towards the vicar , who , utterly foil in the attempt to draw out 
 Lily , meet the baronet 's advance with the ardour of a talker too long 
 suppress . Kenelm continue , unmolested , to ripen his acquaintance with 
 Mrs. Cameron . she do not , however , seem to lend a very attentive ear to 
 his preliminary commonplace remark about scenery or weather , but at his 
 first pause , say , - 

 " Sir Thomas speak about a Miss Travers : be she relate to a gentleman 
 who be once in the Guards , Leopold Travers ? " 

 " she be his daughter . do you ever know Leopold Travers ? " 

 " I have hear he mention by friend of mine long ago , - long ago , " 
 reply Mrs. Cameron with a sort of weary languor , not unwonted , in her 
 voice and manner ; and then , as if dismiss the bygone reminiscence 
 from her thought , change the subject . 

 " Lily tell I , Mr. Chillingly , that you say you be stay at Mr. 
 Jones 's , Cromwell Lodge . I hope you be make comfortable there . " 

 " very . the situation be singularly pleasant . " 

 " yes , it be consider the prettiest spot on the brook - side , and use to 
 be a favourite resort for angler ; but the trout , I believe , be grow 
 scarce ; at least , now that the fishing in the Thames be improve , poor 
 Mr. Jones complain that his old lodger desert he . of course you take 
 the room for the sake of the fishing . I hope the sport may be well 
 than it be say to be . " 

 " it be of little consequence to I : I do not care much about fishing ; 
 and since Miss Mordaunt call the book which first entice I to take 
 to it ' a cruel one , ' I feel as if the trout have become as sacred as 
 crocodile be to the ancient Egyptians . " 

 " Lily be a foolish child on such matter . she can not bear the thought of 
 give pain to any dumb creature ; and just before our garden there be a 
 few trout which she have tame . they feed out of her hand ; she be always 
 afraid they will wander away and get catch . " 

 " but Mr. Melville be an angler ? " 

 " several year ago he would sometimes pretend to fish , but I believe 
 it be rather an excuse for lie on the grass and read ' the cruel 
 book , ' or perhaps , rather , for sketching . but now he be seldom here till 
 autumn , when it grow too cold for such amusement . " 

 here Sir Thomas 's voice be so loudly raise that it stop the 
 conversation between Kenelm and Mrs. Cameron . he have get into some 
 question of politic on which he and the vicar do not agree , and 
 the discussion threaten to become warm , when Mrs. Braefield , with 
 a woman 's true tact , broach a new topic , in which Sir Thomas be 
 immediately interested , relate to the construction of a conservatory 
 for orchid that he meditate add to his country - house , and in 
 which frequent appeal be make to Mrs. Cameron , who be consider an 
 accomplish florist , and who seem at some time or other in her life 
 to have acquire a very intimate acquaintance with the costly family of 
 orchid . 

 when the lady retire Kenelm find himself seat next to Mr. Emlyn , 
 who astound he by a complimentary quotation from one of his own 
 latin prize poem at the university , hop he would make some stay at 
 Moleswich , tell he of the principal place in the neighbourhood worth 
 visit , and offer he the run of his library , which he flatter 
 himself be rather rich , both in the good edition of Greek and latin 
 classic and in early english literature . Kenelm be much pleased with 
 the scholarly vicar , especially when Mr. Emlyn begin to speak about Mrs. 
 Cameron and Lily . of the first he say , " she be one of those woman in 
 whom quiet be so predominant that it be long before one can know what 
 undercurrent of good feeling flow beneath the unruffled surface . 
 I wish , however , she be a little more active in the management and 
 education of her niece , - a girl in whom I feel a very anxious interest , 
 and whom I doubt if Mrs. Cameron understand . perhaps , however , only 
 a poet , and a very peculiar sort of poet , can understand she : lily 
 Mordaunt be herself a poem . " 

 " I like your definition of she , " say Kenelm . " there be certainly 
 something about she which differ much from the prose of common life . " 

 " you probably know Wordsworth 's line : 


  " ' ... and she shall lean her ear 
  in many a secret place 
  where rivulet dance their wayward round , 
  and beauty , bear of murmur sound , 
  shall pass into her face . ' 


 " they be line that many critic have find unintelligible ; but Lily 
 seem like the live key to they . " 

 Kenelm 's dark face light up , but he make no answer . 

 " only , " continue Mr. Emlyn , " how a girl of that sort , leave wholly to 
 herself , untrained , undisciplined , be to grow up into the practical us 
 of womanhood , be a question that perplex and sadden I . " 

 " any more wine ? " ask the host , close a conversation on commercial 
 matter with Sir Thomas . " no ? - shall we join the lady ? " 



 CHAPTER VII . 

 the drawing - room be desert ; the lady be in the garden . as Kenelm 
 and Mr. Emlyn walk side by side towards the group   Sir Thomas and Mr. 
 Braefield follow at a little distance , the former ask , somewhat 
 abruptly , " what sort of man be Miss Cameron 's guardian , Mr. Melville ? " 

 " I can scarcely answer that question . I see little of he when he come 
 here . formerly , he use to run down pretty often with a harum - scarum 
 set of young fellow , quarter at Cromwell Lodge , - Grasmere have no 
 accommodation for they , - student in the Academy , I suppose . for some 
 year he have not bring those person , and when he do come himself it 
 be but for a few day . he have the reputation of be very wild . " 

 further conversation be here stop . the two man , while they thus 
 talk , have be diverge from the straight way across the lawn towards 
 the lady , turn into sequester path through the shrubbery ; now 
 they emerge into the open sward , just before a table , on which coffee 
 be serve , and round which all the rest of the party be gather . 

 " I hope , Mr. Emlyn , " say Elsie 's cheery voice , " that you have dissuade 
 Mr. Chillingly from turn Papist . I be sure you have take time enough 
 to do so . " 

 Mr. Emlyn , protestant every inch of he , slightly recoil from Kenelm 's 
 side . " do you meditate turn - " he could not conclude the sentence . 

 " be not alarmed , my dear sir . I do but own to Mrs. Braefield that I 
 have pay a visit to Oxford in order to confer with a learn man on 
 a question that puzzle I , and as abstract as that feminine pastime , 
 theology , be now - a - day . I can not convince Mrs. Braefield that Oxford 
 admit other puzzle in life than those which amuse the lady . " here 
 Kenelm drop into a chair by the side of Lily . 

 Lily half turn she back to he . 

 " have I offend again ? " 

 Lily shrug her shoulder slightly and would not answer . 

 " I suspect , Miss Mordaunt , that among your good quality , nature have 
 omit one ; the bettermost self within you should replace it . " 

 Lily here abruptly turn to he her front face : the light of the sky 
 be become dim , but the evening star shine upon it . 

 " how ! what do you mean ? " 

 " be I to answer politely or truthfully ? " 

 " truthfully ! oh , truthfully ! what be life without truth ? " 

 " even though one believe in fairy ? " 

 " fairy be truthful , in a certain way . but you be not truthful . you 
 be not think of fairy when you - " 

 " when I what ? " 

 " find fault with I . " 

 " I be not sure of that . but I will translate to you my thought , so far 
 as I can read they myself , and to do so I will resort to the fairy . 
 let we suppose that a fairy have place her changeling into the cradle of 
 a mortal : that into the cradle she drop all manner of fairy gift which 
 be not bestow on mere mortal ; but that one mortal attribute she 
 forget . the changeling grow up ; she charm those around she : they 
 humour , and pet , and spoil she . but there arise a moment in which the 
 omission of the one mortal gift be feel by her admirer and friend . 
 guess what that be . " 

 Lily ponder . " I see what you mean ; the reverse of truthfulness , 
 politeness . " 

 " no , not exactly that , though politeness slide into it unawares : it be 
 a very humble quality , a very unpoetic quality ; a quality that many dull 
 people possess ; and yet without it no fairy can fascinate mortal , when 
 on the face of the fairy settle the first wrinkle . can you not guess it 
 now ? " 

 " no : you vex I ; you provoke I ; " and Lily stamp her foot petulantly , 
 as in Kenelm 's presence she have stamp it once before . " speak plainly , 
 I insist . " 

 " Miss Mordaunt , excuse I : I dare not , " say Kenelm , rise with a sort 
 of bow one make to the Queen ; and he cross over to Mrs. Braefield . 

 Lily remain , still pout fiercely . 

 Sir Thomas take the chair Kenelm have vacate . 



 CHAPTER VIII . 

 the hour for parting come . of all the guest , Sir Thomas alone stay 
 at the house a guest for the night . Mr. and Mrs. Emlyn have their own 
 carriage . Mrs. Braefield 's carriage come to the door for Mrs. Cameron 
 and Lily . 

 Said Lily , impatiently and discourteously , " who would not rather walk on 
 such a night ? " and she whisper to her aunt . 

 Mrs. Cameron , listen to the whisper and obedient to every whim 
 of Lily 's , say , " you be too considerate , dear Mrs. Braefield ; Lily 
 prefer walk home ; there be no chance of rain now . " 

 Kenelm follow the step of the aunt and niece , and soon overtake they 
 on the brook - side . 

 " a charming night , Mr. Chillingly , " say Mrs. Cameron . 

 " an english summer night ; nothing like it in such part of the world as 
 I have visit . but , alas ! of english summer night there be but few . " 

 " you have travel much abroad ? " 

 " much , no , a little ; chiefly on foot . " 

 Lily hitherto have not say a word , and have be walk with downcast 
 head . now she look up and say , in the mild and most conciliatory 
 of human voice , - 

 " you have be abroad ; " then , with an acquiescence in the manner of 
 the world which to he she have never yet manifest , she add his 
 name , " Mr. Chillingly , " and go on , more familiarly . " what a breadth 
 of mean the word ' abroad ' convey ! away , afar from one 's self , from 
 one 's everyday life . how I envy you ! you have be abroad : so have Lion " 
  here draw herself up , " I mean my guardian , Mr. Melville . " 

 " certainly , I have be abroad , but afar from myself - never . it be an 
 old saying , - all old saying be true ; most new saying be false , - a 
 man carry his native soil at the sole of his foot . " 

 here the path somewhat narrow . Mrs. Cameron go on first , Kenelm and 
 Lily behind ; she , of course , on the dry path , he on the dewy grass . 

 she stop he . " you be walk in the wet , and with those thin 
 shoe . " Lily move instinctively away from the dry path . 

 homely though that speech of Lily 's be , and absurd as say by a fragile 
 girl to a gladiator like Kenelm , it light up a whole world of womanhood : 
 it show all that undiscoverable land which be hide to the learn 
 Mr. Emlyn , all that land which an uncomprehende girl seize and reign 
 over when she become wife and mother . 

 at that homely speech , and that impulsive movement , Kenelm halt , in 
 a sort of dream maze . he turn timidly , " can you forgive I for my 
 rude word ? I presume to find fault with you . " 

 " and so justly . I have be think over all you say , and I feel you 
 be so right ; only I still do not quite understand what you mean by 
 the quality for mortal which the fairy do not give to her changeling . " 

 " if I do not dare say it before , I should still less dare to say it 
 now . " 

 " do . " there be no long the stamp of the foot , no long the flash 
 from her eye , no long the wilfulness which say , " I insist ; " - 

 " do ; " soothingly , sweetly , imploringly . 

 thus push to it , Kenelm pluck up courage , and not trust himself 
 to look at Lily , answer brusquely , - 

 " the quality desirable for man , but more essential to woman in 
 proportion as they be fairy - like , though the trite thing possible , be 
 good temper . " 

 Lily make a sudden bind from his side , and join her aunt , walk 
 through the wet grass . 

 when they reach the garden - gate , Kenelm advance and open it . lily 
 pass he by haughtily ; they gain the cottage - door . 

 " I do not   ask you in at this hour , " say Mrs. Cameron . " it would be but a 
 false compliment . " 

 Kenelm bow and retreat . Lily leave her aunt 's side , and come towards 
 he , extend her hand . 

 " I shall consider your word , Mr. Chillingly , " she say , with a 
 strangely majestic air . " at present I think you be not right . I be not 
 ill - temper ; but - " here she pause , and then add with a loftiness 
 of mien which , have she not be so exquisitely pretty , would have be 
 rudeness - " in any case I forgive you . " 



 CHAPTER IX . 

 there be a good many pretty villa in the outskirt of Moleswich , and 
 the owner of they be generally well off , and yet there be little of 
 what be call visit society ; owe perhaps to the fact that there 
 not be among these proprietor any person belong to what be 
 commonly call " the aristocratic class , " there be a vast deal of 
 aristocratic pretension . the family of Mr. A - - - , who have enrich 
 himself as a stock - jobber , turn up its nose at the family of Mr. 
 B - - - , who have enrich himself still more as a linen - draper , while the 
 family of Mr. B - - - show a very cold shoulder to the family of Mr. 
 C - - - , who have become rich than either of they as a pawnbroker , 
 and whose wife wear diamond , but drop she h 's . England would be a 
 community so aristocratic that there would be no living in it , if one 
 could exterminate what be now call " aristocracy . " the Braefields be 
 the only person who really draw together the antagonistic atom of the 
 Moleswich society , partly because they be acknowledge to be the first 
 person there , in right not only of old settlement   the Braefields have 
 hold Braefieldville for four generation , but of the wealth derive 
 from those department of commercial enterprise which be recognize as 
 the high , and of an establishment consider to be the most elegant 
 in the neighbourhood ; principally because Elsie , while exceedingly 
 genial and cheerful in temper , have a certain power of will   as she 
 runaway folly have manifest , and when she get people together 
 compel they to be civil to each other . she have commence this 
 gracious career by inaugurate child 's party , and when the 
 child become friend the parent necessarily grow close together . 
 still her task have only recently begin , and its effect be not in 
 full operation . thus , though it become know at Moleswich that a young 
 gentleman , the heir to a baronetcy and a high estate , be sojourn at 
 Cromwell Lodge , no overture be make to he on the part of the A 's , 
 B 's , and C 's . the vicar , who call on Kenelm the day after the dinner 
 at Braefieldville , explain to he the social condition of the place . 
 " you understand , " say he , " that it will be from no want of courtesy on 
 the part of my neighbour if they do not offer you any relief from 
 the pleasure of solitude . it will be simply because they be shy , not 
 because they be uncivil . and , it be this consideration that make 
 I , at the risk of seem too forward , entreat you to look into the 
 vicarage any morning or evening on which you feel tired of your own 
 company ; suppose you drink tea with we this evening , - you will find a 
 young lady whose heart you have already win . " 

 " whose heart I have win ! " falter Kenelm , and the warm blood rush to 
 his cheek . 

 " but , " continue the vicar , smile , ' she have no matrimonial design on 
 you at present . she be only twelve year old , - my little girl Clemmy . " 

 " Clemmy ! - she be your daughter ? I do not know that . I very gratefully 
 accept your invitation . " 

 " I must not keep you long from your amusement . the sky be just cloud 
 enough for sport . what fly do you use ? " 

 " to say truth , I doubt if the stream have much to tempt I in the way of 
 trout , and I prefer ramble about the lane and by - path to 


  " ' the noiseless angler 's solitary stand . ' 

 " I be an indefatigable walker , and the home scenery round the place have 
 many charm for I . besides , " add Kenelm , feel conscious that he 
 ought to find some more plausible excuse than the charm of home scenery 
 for locate himself long in Cromwell Lodge , " besides , I intend to 
 devote myself a good deal to read . I have be very idle of late , and 
 the solitude of this place must be favourable to study . " 

 " you be not intend , I presume , for any of the learn profession ? " 

 " the learn profession , " reply Kenelm , " be an invidious form of 
 speech that we be do our good to eradicate from the language . 
 all profession now - a - day be to have much about the same amount of 
 learn . the learning of the military profession be to be level 
 upwards , the learning of the scholastic to be level downwards . 
 Cabinet minister sneer at the us of Greek and Latin . and even 
 such masculine study as Law and Medicine be to be adapt to the 
 measurement of taste and propriety in college for young lady . no , 
 I be not intend for any profession ; but still an ignorant man like 
 myself may not be the bad for a little book - reading now and then . " 

 " you seem to be badly provide with book here , " say the vicar , 
 glance round the room , in which , on a table in the corner , lay 
 half - a - dozen old - look volume , evidently belong not to the lodger 
 but to the landlord . " but , as I before say , my library be at your 
 service . what branch of reading do you prefer ? " 

 Kenelm be , and look , puzzle . but after a pause he answer : 

 " the more remote it be from the present day , the well for I . you say 
 your collection be rich in mediaeval literature . but the middle 
 age be so copy by the modern goth , that I might as well read 
 translation of Chaucer or take lodging in Wardour Street . if you have 
 any book about the manner and habit of those who , accord to 
 the new idea in science , be our semi - human progenitor in the 
 transition state between a marine animal and a gorilla , I should be very 
 much edify by the loan . " 

 " alas , " say Mr. Emlyn , laugh , " no such book have be leave to we . " 

 " no such book ? you must be mistake . there must be plenty of they 
 somewhere . I grant all the wonderful power of invention bestow on 
 the creator of poetic romance ; still not the sovereign master in that 
 realm of literature - not Scott , not Cervantes , not Goethe , not even 
 Shakspeare - could have presume to rebuild the past without such 
 material as they find in the book that record it . and though I , no 
 less cheerfully , grant that we have now live among we a creator of 
 poetic romance immeasurably more inventive than they , - appeal to our 
 credulity in portent the most monstrous , with a charm of style the 
 most conversationally familiar , - still I can not conceive that even that 
 unrivalle romance - writer can so bewitch our understanding as to make 
 we believe that , if Miss Mordaunt 's cat dislike to wet her foot , it be 
 probably because in the prehistoric age her ancestor live in the dry 
 country of Egypt ; or that when some lofty orator , a Pitt or a gladstone , 
 rebut with a polished smile which reveal his canine tooth the rude 
 assault of an opponent , he betray his descent from a ' semi - human 
 progenitor ' who be accustomed to snap at his enemy . surely , surely 
 there must be some book still extant write by philosopher before the 
 birth of Adam , in which there be authority , even though but in mythic 
 fable , for such poetic invention . surely , surely some early chronicler 
 must depose that they see , see with their own eye , the great gorilla 
 who scratch off their hairy covering to please the eye of the young 
 lady of their specie , and that they note the gradual metamorphosis 
 of one animal into another . for , if you tell I that this illustrious 
 romance - writer be but a cautious man of science , and that we must accept 
 his invention accord to the sober law of evidence and fact , there 
 be not the most incredible ghost story which do not well satisfy the 
 common sense of a sceptic . however , if you have no such book , lend 
 I the most unphilosophical you possess , - on magic , for instance , - the 
 philosopher 's stone " - 

 " I have some of they , " say the vicar , laugh ; " you shall choose for 
 yourself . " 

 " if you be go homeward , let I accompany you part of the way : I 
 do not   yet know where the church and the vicarage be , and I ought to 
 know before I come in the evening . " 

 Kenelm and the vicar walk side by side , very sociably , across the 
 bridge and on the side of the rivulet on which stand Mrs. Cameron 's 
 cottage . as they skirt the garden pale at the rear of the cottage , 
 Kenelm suddenly stop in the middle of some sentence which have 
 interested Mr. Emlyn , and as suddenly arrest his step on the turf 
 that border the lane . a little before he stand an old peasant woman , 
 with whom lily , on the opposite side of the garden pale , be converse . 
 Mr. Emlyn do not at first see what Kenelm see ; turn round rather 
 to gaze on his companion , surprise by his abrupt halt and silence . the 
 girl put a small basket into the old woman 's hand , who then drop a 
 low curtsy , and utter low a " God bless you . " low though it be , Kenelm 
 overhear it , and say abstractedly to Mr. Emlyn , " be there a great 
 link between this life and the next than God 's blessing on the young , 
 breathe from the lip of the old ? " 



 CHAPTER X. 

 " and how be your good man , Mrs. Haley ? " say the vicar , who have now 
 reach the spot on which the old woman stand , - with Lily 's fair face 
 still bend down to she , - while Kenelm slowly follow he . 

 " thank you kindly , sir , he be well ; out of his bed now . the young lady 
 have do he a power of good - " 

 " hush ! " say Lily , colour . " make haste home now ; you must not keep 
 he wait for his dinner . " 

 the old woman again curtsy , and go off at a brisk pace . 

 " do you know , Mr. Chillingly , " say Mr. Emlyn , " that Miss Mordaunt be 
 the good doctor in the place ? though if she go on make so many cure 
 she will find the number of her patient rather burdensome . " 

 " it be only the other day , " say Lily , " that you scold I for the 
 good cure I have yet make . " 

 " I ? - oh ! I remember ; you lead that silly child Madge to believe that 
 there be a fairy charm in the arrowroot you send she . own you deserve 
 a scolding there . " 

 " no , I do not . I dress the arrowroot , and be I not Fairy ? I have just 
 get such a pretty note from Clemmy , Mr. Emlyn , ask I to come up this 
 evening and see her new magic lantern . will you tell she to expect I ? 
 and , mind , no scolding . " 

 " and all magic ? " say Mr. Emlyn ; " be it so . " 

 Lily and Kenelm have not hitherto exchange a word . she have reply with 
 a grave inclination of her head to his silent bow . but now she turn to 
 he shyly and say , " I suppose you have be fish all the morning ? " 

 " no ; the fish hereabout be under the protection of a Fairy , - whom I 
 dare not displease . " 

 Lily 's face brighten , and she extend her hand to he over the 
 paling . " good - day ; I hear aunty 's voice : those dreadful french verb ! " 

 she disappear among the shrub , amid which they hear the thrill of 
 her fresh young voice sing to herself . 

 " that child have a heart of gold , " say Mr. Emlyn , as the two man walk 
 on . " I do not exaggerate when I say she be the good doctor in the 
 place . I believe the poor really do believe that she be a fairy . of 
 course we send from the vicarage to our ail parishioner who require 
 it , food and wine ; but it never seem to do they the good that her 
 little dish make by her own tiny hand do ; and I do not   know if you 
 notice the basket that old woman take away , - Miss Lily teach Will 
 Somers to make the prettiest little basket ; and she put her jelly or 
 other savoury into dainty porcelain gallipot nicely fit into the 
 basket , which she trim with ribbon . it be the look of the thing that 
 tempt the appetite of the invalid , and certainly the child may well be 
 call Fairy at present ; but I wish Mrs. Cameron would attend a little 
 more strictly to her education . she can not   be a fairy forever . " 

 Kenelm sigh , but make no answer . 

 Mr. Emlyn then turn the conversation to erudite subject , and so they 
 come in sight of the town , when the vicar stop and point towards 
 the church , of which the spire rise a little to the left , with two aged 
 yew - tree half shadow the burial - ground , and in the rear a glimpse of 
 the vicarage see amid the shrub of its garden ground . 

 " you will know your way now , " say the vicar ; " excuse I if I quit you : 
 I have a few visit to make ; among other , to poor Haley , husband to the 
 old woman you see . I read to he a chapter in the Bible every day ; yet 
 still I fancy that he believe in fairy charm . " 

 " well believe too much , than too little , " say Kenelm ; and he turn 
 aside into the village and spend half - an - hour with Will , look at the 
 pretty basket Lily have teach Will to make . then , as he go slowly 
 homeward , he turn aside into the churchyard . 

 the church , build in the thirteenth century , be not large , but it 
 probably suffice for its congregation , since it betray no sign of 
 modern addition ; restoration or repair it need not . the century have 
 but mellow the tint of its solid wall , as little injure by the huge 
 ivy stem that shoot forth their aspire leaf to the very summit of 
 the stately tower as by the slender rose which have be train 
 to climb up a foot or so of the massive buttress . the site of the 
 burial - ground be unusually picturesque : shelter towards the north by 
 a rise ground clothe with wood , slop down at the south towards 
 the glebe pasture - ground through which run the brooklet , sufficiently 
 near for its brawling gurgle to be hear on a still day . Kenelm sit 
 himself on an antique tomb , which be evidently appropriate to some one 
 of high than common rank in bygone day , but on which the sculpture 
 be wholly obliterate . 

 the stillness and solitude of the place have their charm for his 
 meditative temperament ; and he remain there long , forgetful of time , 
 and scarcely hear the boom of the clock that warn he of its lapse . 

 when suddenly , a shadow - the shadow of a human form - fall on the grass 
 on which his eye dreamily rest . he look up with a start , and beheld 
 Lily stand before he mute and still . her image be so present in his 
 thought at the moment that he feel a thrill of awe , as if the thought 
 have conjure up her apparition . she be the first to speak . 

 " you here , too ? " she say very softly , almost whisperingly . " too ! " 
 echo Kenelm , rise ; " too ! ' tis no wonder that I , a stranger to 
 the place , should find my step attract towards its most venerable 
 building . even the most careless traveller , halt at some remote 
 abode of the living , turn aside to gaze on the burial - ground of the 
 dead . but my surprise be that you , Miss Mordaunt , should be attract 
 towards the same spot . " 

 " it be my favourite spot , " say Lily , " and always have be . I have sit 
 many an hour on that tombstone . it be strange to think that no one know 
 who sleep beneath it . the ' Guide Book to Moleswich , ' though it give 
 the history of the church from the reign in which it be first build , 
 can only venture a guess that this tomb , the grand and old in the 
 burial - ground , be tenant by some member of a family name Montfichet , 
 that be once very powerful in the county , and have become extinct since 
 the reign of Henry VI . but , " add Lily , " there be not a letter of the 
 name Montfichet leave . I find out more than any one else have do ; I 
 learn black - letter on purpose ; look here , " and she point to a small 
 spot in which the moss have be remove . " do you see those figure ? 
 be they not xviii ? and look again , in what be once the line above 
 the figure , ELE . it must have be an Eleanor , who die at the age of 
 eighteen - " 

 " I rather think it more probable that the figure refer to the date 
 of the death , 1318 perhaps ; and so far as I can decipher black - letter , 
 which be more in my father 's line than mine , I think it be AL , not EL , 
 and that it seem as if there have be a letter between L and the second 
 E , which be now effaced . the tomb itself be not likely to belong to any 
 powerful family then resident at the place . their monument , accord 
 to usage , would have be within the church , - probably in their own 
 mortuary chapel . " 

 " do not   try to destroy my fancy , " say Lily , shake her head ; " you 
 can not succeed , I know her history too well . she be young , and some one 
 love she , and build over her the fine tomb he could afford ; and see 
 how long the epitaph must have be ! how much it must have speak in 
 her praise and of his grief . and then he go his way , and the tomb be 
 neglect , and her fate forget . " 

 " my dear Miss Mordaunt , this be indeed a wild romance to spin out of so 
 slender a thread . but even if true , there be no reason to think that a 
 life be forget , though a tomb be neglect . " 

 " perhaps not , " say Lily , thoughtfully . " but when I be dead , if I can 
 look down , I think it would please I to see my grave not neglect by 
 those who have love I once . " 

 she move from he as she say this , and go to a little mound that 
 seem not long since raise ; there be a simple cross at the head and 
 a narrow border of flower round it . Lily knelt beside the flower and 
 pull out a stray weed . then she rise , and say to Kenelm , who have 
 follow , and now stand beside she , - 

 " she be the little grandchild of poor old Mrs. Hales . I could not cure 
 she , though I try hard : she be so fond of I , and die in my arm . 
 no , let I not say ' die , ' - surely there be no such thing as die . ' Tis 
 but a change of life , - 


  ' Less than the void between two wave of air , 
  the space between existence and a soul . ' " 


 " whose line be those ? " ask Kenelm . 

 " I do not   know ; I learn they from Lion . do not   you believe they to be 
 true ? " 

 " yes . but the truth do not render the thought of quit this scene 
 of life for another more pleasing to most of we . see how soft and gentle 
 and bright be all that live summer land beyond ; let we find subject 
 for talk from that , not from the graveyard on which we stand . " 

 " but be there not a summer land fair than that we see now ; and which 
 we do see , as in a dream , well when we take subject of talk from the 
 graveyard ? " without wait for a reply , Lily go on . " I plant these 
 flower : Mr. Emlyn be angry with I ; he say it be ' Popish . ' but he 
 have not the heart to have they take up ; I come here very often to see 
 to they . do you think it wrong ? poor little Nell ! she be so fond of 
 flower . and the Eleanor in the great tomb , she too perhaps know some 
 one who call she Nell ; but there be no flower round her tomb . poor 
 Eleanor ! " 

 she take the nosegay she wear on her bosom , and as she repasse the tomb 
 lay it on the mouldering stone . 



 CHAPTER XI . 

 they quit the burial - ground , take their way to Grasmere . Kenelm 
 walk by Lily 's side ; not a word pass between they till they come in 
 sight of the cottage . 

 then Lily stop abruptly , and lift towards he her charming face , 
 say , - 

 " I tell you I would think over what you say to I last night . I have 
 do so , and feel I can thank you honestly . you be very kind : I never 
 before think that I have a bad temper ; no one ever tell I so . but I 
 see now what you mean ; sometimes I feel very quickly , and then I show 
 it . but how do I show it to you , Mr. Chillingly ? " 

 " do you not turn your back to I when I seat myself next you in 
 Mrs. Braefield 's garden , vouchsafe I no reply when I ask if I have 
 offend ? " 

 Lily 's face become bath in blush , and her voice falter , as she 
 answer , - 

 " I be not offend ; I be not in a bad temper then : it be bad than 
 that . " 

 " bad ? what could it possibly be ? " 

 " I be afraid it be envy . " 

 " envy of what ? of whom ? " 

 " I do not   know how to explain ; after all , I fear aunty be right , and the 
 fairy tale put very silly , very naughty thought into one 's head . when 
 Cinderella 's sister go to the king 's ball , and Cinderella be leave 
 alone , do not she long to go too ? do not she envy her sister ? " 

 " ah ! I understand now : Sir Charles speak of the Court Ball . " 

 " and you be there talk with handsome lady - and - oh ! I be so 
 foolish and feel sore . " 

 " you , who when we first meet wonder how people who could live in 
 the country prefer to live in town , do then sometimes contradict 
 yourself , and sigh for the great world that lie beyond these quiet 
 water bank . you feel that you have youth and beauty , and wish to be 
 admire ! " 

 " it be not that exactly , " say Lily , with a perplexed look in her 
 ingenuous countenance , " and in my well moment , when the ' bettermost 
 self ' come forth , I know that I be not make for the great world you 
 speak of . but you see - " here she pause again , and as they have now 
 enter the garden , drop wearily on a bench beside the path . Kenelm 
 seat himself there too , wait for she to finish her broken sentence . 

 " you see , " she continue , look down embarrassed , and describe vague 
 circle on the gravel with her fairy - like foot , " that at home , ever 
 since I can remember , they have treat I as if - well , as if I 
 be - what shall I say ? the child of one of your great lady . even 
 Lion , who be so noble , so grand , seem to think when I be a mere 
 infant that I be a little queen : once when I tell a fib he do not 
 scold I ; but I never see he look so sad and so angry as when he say , 
 ' never again forget that you be a lady . ' and , but I tire you - " 

 " tire I , indeed ! go on . " 

 " no , I have say enough to explain why I have at time proud thought , 
 and vain thought ; and why , for instance , I say to myself , ' perhaps my 
 place of right be among those fine lady whom he - ' but it be all over 
 now . " she rise hastily with a pretty laugh , and bound towards Mrs. 
 Cameron , who be walk slowly along the lawn with a book in her hand . 



 CHAPTER XII . 

 it be a very merry party at the vicarage that evening . Lily have not 
 be prepare to meet Kenelm there , and her face brighten wonderfully 
 as at her entrance he turn from the book - shelf to which Mr. Emlyn 
 be direct his attention . but instead of meet his advance , she 
 dart off to the lawn , where Clemmy and several other child greet 
 she with a joyous shout . 

 " not acquaint with Macleane 's Juvenal ? " say the reverend scholar ; 
 " you will be greatly pleased with it ; here it be , - a posthumous work , 
 edit by George Long . I can lend you Munro 's Lucretius , ' 69 . aha ! we 
 have some scholar yet to pit against the Germans . " 

 " I be heartily glad to hear it , " say Kenelm . " it will be a long time 
 before they will ever wish to rival we in that game which Miss Clemmy 
 be now form on the lawn , and in which England have recently acquire a 
 european reputation . " 

 " I do not   take you . what game ? " 

 " Puss in the Corner . with your leave I will look out and see whether 
 it be a win game for puss - in the long - run . " Kenelm join the 
 child , amidst whom Lily seem not the least childlike . resist all 
 overture from Clemmy to join their play , he seat himself on a sloping 
 bank at a little distance , - an idle looker - on . his eye follow Lily 's 
 nimble movement , his ear drink in the music of her joyous laugh . could 
 that be the same girl whom he have see tend the flower - bed amid the 
 gravestone ? Mrs. Emlyn come across the lawn and join he , seat 
 herself also on the bank . Mrs. Emlyn be an exceedingly clever woman : 
 nevertheless she be not formidable , - on the contrary , pleasing ; and 
 though the lady in the neighbourhood say ' she talk like a book , ' 
 the easy gentleness of her voice carry off that offence . 

 " I suppose , Mr. Chillingly , " say she , " I ought to apologize for 
 my husband 's invitation to what must seem to you so frivolous an 
 entertainment as a child 's party . but when Mr. Emlyn ask you to come 
 to we this evening , he be not aware that Clemmy have also invite she 
 young friend . he have look forward to rational conversation with you 
 on his own favourite study . " 

 " it be not so long since I leave school , but that I prefer a half holiday 
 to lesson , even from a tutor so pleasant as Mr. Emlyn , - 


  " ' ah , happy year , - once more who would not be a boy ! ' " 


 " Nay , " say Mrs. Emlyn , with a grave smile . " who that have start so 
 fairly as Mr. Chillingly in the career of man would wish to go back and 
 resume a place among boy ? " 

 " but , my dear Mrs. Emlyn , the line I quote be wring from the heart of 
 a man who have already outstrip all rival in the race - ground he have 
 choose , and who at that moment be in the very maytime of youth and of 
 fame . and if such a man at such an epoch in his career could sigh to ' be 
 once more a boy , ' it must have be when he be think of the boy 's 
 half holiday , and recoil from the task work he be condemn to learn 
 as man . " 

 " the line you quote be , I think , from ' Childe Harold , ' and surely 
 you would not apply to mankind in general the sentiment of a poet so 
 peculiarly self - reflect   if I may use that expression , and in whom 
 sentiment be often so morbid . " 

 " you be right , Mrs. Emlyn , " say Kenelm , ingenuously . " still a boy 's 
 half holiday be a very happy thing ; and among mankind in general 
 there must be many who would be glad to have it back again , - Mr. Emlyn 
 himself , I should think . " 

 " Mr. Emlyn have his half holiday now . do you not see he stand just 
 outside the window ? do you not hear he laugh ? he be a child again 
 in the mirth of his child . I hope you will stay some time in the 
 neighbourhood ; I be sure you and he will like each other . and it be such 
 a rare delight to he to get a scholar like yourself to talk to . " 

 " Pardon I , I be not a scholar ; a very noble title that , and not to be 
 give to a lazy trifl on the surface of book - lore like myself . " 

 " you be too modest . my husband have a copy of your Cambridge prize 
 verse , and say ' the Latinity of they be quite beautiful . ' I quote his 
 very word . " 

 " latin verse - making be a mere knack , little more than a proof that one 
 have an elegant scholar for one 's tutor , as I certainly have . but it be by 
 special grace that a real scholar can send forth another real scholar , 
 and a Kennedy produce a Munro . but to return to the more interesting 
 question of half holiday ; I declare that Clemmy be lead off your 
 husband in triumph . he be actually go to be Puss in the Corner . " 

 " when you know more of Charles , - I mean my husband , - you will discover 
 that his whole life be more or less of a holiday . perhaps because he be 
 not what you accuse yourself of be : he be not lazy ; he never wish 
 to be a boy once more ; and taskwork itself be holiday to he . he enjoy 
 shut himself up in his study and reading ; he enjoy a walk with 
 the child ; he enjoy visit the poor ; he enjoy his duty as a 
 clergyman . and though I be not always content for he , though I think 
 he should have have those honour in his profession which have be 
 lavish on man with less ability and less learning , yet he be never 
 discontent himself . shall I tell you his secret ? " 

 " do . " 

 " he be a thanks - give Man . you , too , must have much to thank God 
 for , Mr. Chillingly ; and in thanksgiving to God do there not blend 
 usefulness to man , and such sense of pastime in the usefulness as make 
 each day a holiday ? " 

 Kenelm look up into the quiet face of this obscure pastor 's wife with 
 a startled expression in his own . 

 " I see , ma'am , " say he , " that you have devote much thought to the 
 study of the aesthetical philosophy as expound by german thinker , 
 whom it be rather difficult to understand . " 

 " I , Mr. Chillingly ! good gracious ! no ! what do you mean by your 
 aesthetical philosophy ? " 

 " accord to aesthetic , I believe man arrive at his high state 
 of moral excellence when labour and duty lose all the harshness of 
 effort , - when they become the impulse and habit of life ; when as the 
 essential attribute of the beautiful , they be , like beauty , enjoy 
 as pleasure ; and thus , as you express , each day become a holiday : a 
 lovely doctrine , not perhaps so lofty as that of the Stoics , but more 
 bewitching . only , very few of we can practically merge our care and our 
 worry into so serene an atmosphere . " 

 " some do so without know anything of aesthetic and with no pretence 
 to be stoic ; but , then , they be Christians . " 

 " there be some such Christians , no doubt ; but they be rarely to be meet 
 with . take Christendom altogether , and it appear to comprise the most 
 agitated population in the world ; the population in which there be the 
 great grumbling as to the quantity of labour to be do , the 
 loud complaint that duty instead of a pleasure be a very hard and 
 disagreeable struggle , and in which holiday be fewest and the moral 
 atmosphere least serene . perhaps , " add Kenelm , with a deep shade of 
 thought on his brow , " it be this perpetual consciousness of struggle ; 
 this difficulty in merge toil into ease , or stern duty into placid 
 enjoyment ; this refusal to ascend for one 's self into the calm of an air 
 aloof from the cloud which darken , and the hail - storm which beat 
 upon , the fellow - man we leave below , - that make the troubled life of 
 Christendom dearer to Heaven , and more conducive to Heaven 's design in 
 render earth the wrestling - ground and not the resting - place of man , 
 than be that of the Brahmin , ever seek to abstract himself from 
 the Christian 's conflict of action and desire , and to carry into its 
 extreme practice the aesthetic theory , of bask undisturbed in the 
 contemplation of the most absolute beauty human thought can reflect from 
 its idea of divine good ! " 

 whatever Mrs. Emlyn might have say in reply be interrupt by the rush 
 of the child towards she ; they be tired of play , and eager for tea 
 and the magic lantern . 



 CHAPTER XIII . 

 the room be duly obscure and the white sheet attach to the wall ; the 
 child be seat , hush , and awe - stricken . and Kenelm be place next 
 to Lily . 

 the trite thing in our mortal experience be among the most 
 mysterious . there be more mystery in the growth of a blade of grass than 
 there be in the wizard 's mirror or the feat of a spirit medium . Most of 
 we have know the attraction that draw one human being to another , and 
 make it so exquisite a happiness to sit quiet and mute by another 's 
 side ; which still for the moment the busy thought in our brain , the 
 most turbulent desire in our heart , and render we but conscious of a 
 present ineffable bliss . Most of we have know that . but who have ever 
 be satisfied with any metaphysical account of its why or wherefore ? we 
 can but say it be love , and love at that early section of its history 
 which have not yet escape from romance ; but by what process that other 
 person have become single out of the whole universe to attain such 
 special power over one be a problem that , though many have attempt to 
 solve it , have never attain to solution . in the dim light of the room 
 Kenelm could only distinguish the outline of Lily 's delicate face , but 
 at each new surprise in the show , the face intuitively turn to his , 
 and once , when the terrible image of a sheeted ghost , pursue a guilty 
 man , pass along the wall , she draw close to he in her childish 
 fright , and by an involuntary innocent movement lay her hand on his . he 
 detain it tenderly , but , alas ! it be withdraw the next moment ; 
 the ghost be succeed by a couple of dancing dog . and Lily 's ready 
 laugh - partly at the dog , partly at her own previous alarm - vex 
 Kenelm 's ear . he wish there have be a succession of ghost , each more 
 appalling than the last . 

 the entertainment be over , and after a slight refreshment of cake 
 and wine - and - water the party break up ; the child visitor go away 
 attend by servant - maid who have come for they . Mrs. Cameron and Lily 
 be to walk home on foot . 

 " it be a lovely night , Mrs. Cameron , " say Mr. Emlyn , " and I will attend 
 you to your gate . " 

 " permit I also , " say Kenelm . 

 " ay , " say the vicar , " it be your own way to Cromwell Lodge . " 

 the path lead they through the churchyard as the near approach to the 
 brook - side . the moonbeam shimmer through the yew - tree and rest on 
 the old tomb ; play , as it be , round the flower which Lily 's hand 
 have that day drop upon its stone . she be walk beside Kenelm , the 
 eld two a few pace in front . 

 " how silly I be , " say she , " to be so frightened at the false ghost ! I 
 do not   think a real one would frighten I , at least if see here , in this 
 love moonlight , and on God 's ground ! " 

 " ghost , be they permit to appear except in a magic lantern , could 
 not harm the innocent . and I wonder why the idea of their apparition 
 should always have be associate with such phantasy of horror , 
 especially by sinless child , who have the least reason to dread 
 they . " 

 " oh , that be true , " cry lily ; " but even when we be grow up there 
 must be time in which we should so long to see a ghost , and feel what a 
 comfort , what a joy it would be . " 

 " I understand you . if some one very dear to we have vanish from our 
 life ; if we feel the anguish of the separation so intensely as to efface 
 the thought that life , as you say so well , ' never die ; ' well , yes , 
 then I can conceive that the mourner would yearn to have a glimpse of 
 the vanish one , be it but to ask the sole and only question he could 
 desire to put , ' art thou happy ? may I hope that we shall meet again , 
 never to part , - never ? ' " 

 Kenelm 's voice tremble as he speak , tear stand in his eye . a 
 melancholy - vague , unaccountable , overpowering - pass across his heart , 
 as the shadow of some dark - wing bird pass over a quiet stream . 

 " you have never yet feel this ? " ask Lily doubtingly , in a soft voice , 
 full of tender pity , stop short and look into his face . 

 " I ? no . I have never yet lose one whom I so love and so yearn to see 
 again . I be but think that such loss may befall we all ere we too 
 vanish out of sight . " 

 " Lily ! " call forth Mrs. Cameron , halt at the gate of the 
 burial - ground . 

 " yes , auntie ? " 

 " Mr. Emlyn want to know how far you have get in ' Numa Pompilius . ' come 
 and answer for yourself . " 

 " oh , those tiresome grow - up people ! " whisper Lily , petulantly , to 
 Kenelm . " I do like Mr. Emlyn ; he be one of the very good of man . but 
 still he be grow up , and his ' Numa Pompilius ' be so stupid . " 

 " my first french lesson - book . no , it be not stupid . read on . it have 
 hint of the prettiest fairy tale I know , and of the fairy in especial 
 who bewitch my fancy as a boy . " 

 by this time they have gain the gate of the burial - ground . 

 " what fairy tale ? what fairy ? " ask Lily , speak quickly . 

 " she be a fairy , though in heathen language she be call a 
 nymph , - Egeria . she be the link between man and god to he she love ; 
 she belong to the race of god . true , she , too , may vanish , but she can 
 never die . " 

 " well , Miss Lily , " say the vicar , " and how far in the book I lend 
 you , - ' Numa Pompilius . ' " 

 " ask I this day next week . " 

 " I will ; but mind you be to translate as you go on . I must see the 
 translation . " 

 " very well . I will do my good , " answer Lily meekly . lily now walk 
 by the vicar 's side , and Kenelm by Mrs. Cameron 's , till they reach 
 grasmere . 

 " I will go on with you to the bridge , Mr. Chillingly , " say the vicar , 
 when the lady have disappear within their garden . " we have little 
 time to look over my book , and , by the by , I hope you at least take the 
 Juvenal . " 

 " no , Mr. Emlyn ; who can quit your house with an inclination for satire ? 
 I must come some morning and select a volume from those work which give 
 pleasant view of life and bequeath favourable impression of mankind . 
 your wife , with whom I have have an interesting conversation , upon the 
 principle of aesthetical philosophy - " 

 " my wife ! Charlotte ! she know nothing about aesthetical philosophy . " 

 " she call it by another name , but she understand it well enough to 
 illustrate the principle by example . she tell I that labour and duty 
 be so take up by you - 


  ' in den heitern Regionen 
  wo die reinen Formen wohnen , ' 


 that they become joy and beauty , - be it so ? " 

 " I be sure that Charlotte never say anything half so poetical . but , in 
 plain word , the day pass with I very happily . I should be ungrateful 
 if I be not happy . Heaven have bestow on I so many source of 
 love , - wife , child , book , and the calling which , when one quit 
 one 's own threshold , carry love along with it into the world beyond ; 
 a small world in itself , - only a parish , - but then my call link it 
 with infinity . " 

 " I see ; it be from the source of love that you draw the supply for 
 happiness . " 

 " surely ; without love one may be good , but one could scarcely be happy . 
 no one can dream of a heaven except as the abode of love . what writer be 
 it who say , ' how well the human heart be understand by he who first 
 call God by the name of Father ' ? " 

 " I do not remember , but it be beautifully say . you evidently do not 
 subscribe to the argument in Decimus Roach 's ' approach to the Angels . ' " 

 " ah , Mr. Chillingly ! your word teach I how lacerate a man 's happiness 
 may be if he do not keep the claw of vanity closely par . I actually 
 feel a keen pang when you speak to I of that eloquent panegyric on 
 celibacy , ignorant that the only thing I ever publish which I fancy 
 be not without esteem by intellectual reader be a Reply to ' the 
 Approach to the Angels , ' - a youthful book , write in the first year 
 of my marriage . but it obtain success : I have just revise the tenth 
 edition of it . " 

 " that be the book I will select from your library . you will be please 
 to hear that Mr. Roach , whom I see at Oxford a few day ago , recant his 
 opinion , and , at the age of fifty , be about to be marry ; he beg I 
 to add , ' not for his own personal satisfaction . ' " 

 " go to be marry ! - Decimus Roach ! I think my Reply would convince 
 he at last . " 

 " I shall look to your Reply to remove some linger doubt in my own 
 mind . " 

 " Doubts in favour of celibacy ? " 

 " well , if not for layman , perhaps for a priesthood . " 

 " the most forcible part of my Reply be on that head : read it 
 attentively . I think that , of all section of mankind , the clergy be 
 those to whom , not only for their own sake , but for the sake of the 
 community , marriage should be most commend . why , sir , " continue the 
 vicar , warm up into oratorical enthusiasm , " be you not aware that 
 there be no home in England from which man who have serve and adorn 
 their country have issue forth in such prodigal number as those of 
 the clergy of our Church ? what other class can produce a list so crowd 
 with eminent name as we can boast in the son we have rear and send 
 forth into the world ? how many statesman , soldier , sailor , lawyer , 
 physician , author , man of science , have be the son of us village 
 pastor ? naturally : for with we they receive careful education ; they 
 acquire of necessity the simple taste and discipline habit which lead 
 to industry and perseverance ; and , for the most part , they carry with 
 they throughout life a purer moral code , a more systematic reverence for 
 thing and thought religious , associate with their early image 
 of affection and respect , than can be expect from the son of layman 
 whose parent be wholly temporal and worldly . Sir , I maintain that this 
 be a cogent argument , to be consider well by the nation , not only in 
 favour of a married clergy , - for , on that score , a million of Roaches 
 could not convert public opinion in this country , - but in favour of the 
 Church , the Established Church , which have be so fertile a nursery 
 of illustrious layman ; and I have often think that one main and 
 undetected cause of the low tone of morality , public and private , 
 of the great corruption of manner , of the more prevalent scorn 
 of religion which we see , for instance , in a country so civilized as 
 France , be , that its clergy can train no son to carry into the contest 
 of earth the steadfast belief in accountability to Heaven . " 

 " I thank you with a full heart , " say Kenelm . " I shall ponder well over 
 all that you have so earnestly say . I be already disposed to give up 
 all linger crotchet as to a bachelor clergy ; but , as a layman , 
 I fear that I shall never attain to the purified philanthropy of Mr. 
 Decimus Roach , and , if ever I do marry , it will be very much for my 
 personal satisfaction . " 

 Mr. Emlyn laugh good - humouredly , and , as they have now reach the 
 bridge , shake hand with Kenelm , and walk homeward , along the 
 brook - side and through the burial - ground , with the alert step and the 
 uplifted head of a man who have joy in life and admit of no fear in 
 death . 



 CHAPTER XIV . 

 for the next two week or so Kenelm and Lily meet not indeed so often 
 as the reader might suppose , but still frequently ; five time at Mrs. 
 Braefield 's , once again at the vicarage , and twice when Kenelm have 
 call at Grasmere ; and , be invite to stay to tea at one of those 
 visit , he stay the whole evening . Kenelm be more and more fascinated 
 in proportion as he see more and more of a creature so exquisitely 
 strange to his experience . she be to he not only a poem , but a poem in 
 the Sibylline Books ; enigmatical , perplex conjecture , and somehow or 
 other mysteriously blend its interest with vision of the future . 

 Lily be indeed an enchanting combination of opposite rarely blend 
 into harmony . her ignorance of much that girl know before they number 
 half her year be so relieved by candid , innocent simplicity , so 
 adorn by pretty fancy and sweet belief , and so contrast and light 
 up by gleam of a knowledge that the young lady we call well educate 
 seldom exhibit , - knowledge derive from quick observation of external 
 Nature , and impressionable susceptibility to its varying and subtle 
 beauty . this knowledge have be perhaps first instill , and 
 subsequently nourish , by such poetry as she have not only learn by 
 heart , but take up as inseparable from the healthful circulation of her 
 thought ; not the poetry of our own day , - most young lady know enough 
 of that , - but select fragment from the verse of old , most of they 
 from poet now little read by the young of either sex , poet dear to 
 spirit like Coleridge or Charles Lamb , - none of they , however , so dear 
 to she as the solemn melody of Milton . much of such poetry she have 
 never read in book : it have be teach she in childhood by her guardian 
 the painter . and with all this imperfect , desultory culture , there be 
 such dainty refinement in her every look and gesture , and such deep 
 woman - tenderness of heart . since Kenelm have commend " Numa Pompilius " 
 to her study , she have take very lovingly to that old - fashioned romance , 
 and be fond of talk to he about Egeria as of a creature who have 
 really exist . 

 but what be the effect that he , - the first man of year correspondent 
 to her own with whom she have ever familiarly converse , - what be the 
 effect that Kenelm Chillingly produce on the mind and the heart of 
 Lily ? 

 this be , after all , the question that puzzle he the most , - not 
 without reason : it might have puzzle the shrewd bystander . the 
 artless candour with which she manifest she like to he be at 
 variance with the ordinary character of maiden love ; it seem more the 
 fondness of a child for a favourite brother . and it be this uncertainty 
 that , in his own thought , justify Kenelm for linger on , and 
 believe that it be necessary to win , or at least to learn more of , 
 her secret heart before he could venture to disclose his own . he do not 
 flatter himself with the pleasing fear that he might be endanger 
 her happiness ; it be only his own that be risk . then , in all those 
 meeting , all those conversation to themselves , there have pass none 
 of the word which commit our destiny to the will of another . if in the 
 man 's eye love would force its way , Lily 's frank , innocent gaze chill 
 it back again to its inward cell . joyously as she would spring 
 forward to meet he , there be no tell - tale blush on her cheek , no 
 self - betray tremor in her clear , sweet - toned voice . no ; there have not 
 yet be a moment when he could say to himself , " she love I . " often he 
 say to himself , " she know not yet what love be . " 

 in the interval of time not pass in Lily 's society , Kenelm would 
 take long ramble with Mr. Emlyn , or saunter into Mrs. Braefield 's 
 drawing - room . for the former he conceive a more cordial sentiment of 
 friendship than he entertain for any man of his own age , - a friendship 
 that admit the noble element of admiration and respect . 

 Charles Emlyn be one of those character in which the colour appear 
 pale unless the light be bring very close to they , and then each 
 tint seem to change into a warm and rich one . the manner which , at 
 first , you would call merely gentle , become unaffectedly genial ; 
 the mind you at first might term inert , though well - inform , you now 
 acknowledge to be full of disciplined vigour . Emlyn be not , however , 
 without his little amiable foible ; and it be , perhaps , these that make 
 he lovable . he be a great believer in human goodness , and very easily 
 impose upon by cunning appeal to " his well - know benevolence . " he 
 be dispose to overrate the excellence of all that he once take to his 
 heart . he think he have the good wife in the world , the good child , 
 the good servant , the good beehive , the good pony , and the good 
 house - dog . his parish be the most virtuous , his church the most 
 picturesque , his vicarage the prettiest , certainly , in the whole 
 shire , - perhaps , in the whole kingdom . probably it be this philosophy 
 of optimism which contribute to lift he into the serene realm of 
 aesthetic joy . 

 he be not without his dislikes as well as liking . though a liberal 
 Churchman towards protestant dissenter , he cherish the odium 
 theologicum for all that savoured of Popery . perhaps there be another 
 cause for this besides the purely theological one . early in life a young 
 sister of his have be , to use his phrase , ' secretly entrap " into 
 conversion to the roman catholic faith , and have since enter a convent . 
 his affection have be deeply wound by this loss to the range of 
 they . Mr. Emlyn have also his little infirmity of self - esteem rather 
 than of vanity . though he have see very little of any world beyond that 
 of his parish , he pique himself on his knowledge of human nature and of 
 practical affair in general . certainly no man have read more about they , 
 especially in the book of the ancient classic . perhaps it be owe 
 to this that he so little understand Lily , - a character to which the 
 ancient classic afford no counterpart nor clue ; and perhaps it be 
 this also that make Lily think he ' so terribly grow up . " thus , despite 
 his mild good - nature , she do not get on very well with he . 

 the society of this amiable scholar please Kenelm the more , because 
 the scholar evidently have not the remotest idea that Kenelm 's sojourn at 
 Cromwell Lodge be influence by the vicinity to Grasmere . Mr. Emlyn be 
 sure that he know human nature , and practical affair in general , too 
 well to suppose that the heir to a rich baronet could dream of take 
 for wife a girl without fortune or rank , the orphan ward of a low - bear 
 artist only just struggle into reputation ; or , indeed , that a 
 Cambridge prizeman , who have evidently read much on grave and dry 
 subject , and who have no less evidently see a great deal of polished 
 society , could find any other attraction in a very imperfectly - educate 
 girl , who tame butterfly and know no more than they do of 
 fashionable life , than Mr. Emlyn himself feel in the presence of a 
 pretty wayward innocent child , the companion and friend of his Clemmy . 

 Mrs. Braefield be more discerning ; but she have a good deal of tact , and 
 do not as yet scare Kenelm away from her house by let he see how 
 much she have discern . she would not even tell her husband , who , absent 
 from the place on most morning , be too absorb in the care of his 
 own business to interest himself much in the affair of other . 

 now Elsie , be still of a romantic turn of mind , have take it into 
 her head that Lily Mordaunt , if not actually the princess to be find in 
 poetic drama whose rank be for a while keep conceal , be yet one of 
 the higher - bear daughter of the ancient race whose name she bore , 
 and in that respect no derogatory alliance for Kenelm Chillingly . a 
 conclusion she have arrive at from no well evidence than the well - breed 
 appearance and manner of the aunt , and the exquisite delicacy of the 
 niece 's form and feature , with the undefinable air of distinction 
 which accompany even her most careless and sportive moment . but Mrs. 
 Braefield also have the wit to discover that , under the infantine way 
 and phantasy of this almost self - teach girl , there lay , as yet 
 undeveloped , the element of a beautiful womanhood . so that altogether , 
 from the very day she first re - encountered Kenelm , Elsie 's thought have 
 be that Lily be the wife to suit he . once conceive that idea , her 
 natural strength of will make her resolve on give all facility to 
 carry it out silently and unobtrusively , and therefore skilfully . 

 " I be so glad to think , " she say one day , when Kenelm have join she 
 walk through the pleasant shrubbery in her garden ground , " that you 
 have make such friend with Mr. Emlyn . though all hereabout like he so 
 much for his goodness , there be few who can appreciate his learning . 
 to you it must be a surprise as well as pleasure to find , in this quiet 
 humdrum place , a companion so clever and well - inform : it compensate 
 for your disappointment in discover that our brook yield such bad 
 sport . " 

 " do not   disparage the brook ; it yield the pleasantest bank on which 
 to lie down under old pollard oak at noon , or over which to saunter 
 at morn and eve . where those charm be absent even a salmon could 
 not please . yes ; I rejoice to have make friend with Mr. Emlyn . I have 
 learn a great deal from he , and be often ask myself whether I 
 shall ever make peace with my conscience by put what I have learn 
 into practice . " 

 " may I ask what special branch of learning be that ? " 

 " I scarcely know how to define it . suppose we call it ' worth - whileism . ' 
 among the New Ideas which I be recommend to study as those that must 
 govern my generation , the not - worth - while Idea hold a very high rank ; 
 and be myself naturally of calm and equable constitution , that new 
 idea make the basis of my philosophical system . but since I have become 
 intimate with Charles Emlyn I think there be a great deal to be say in 
 favour of worth - whileism , old idea though it be . I see a man who , with 
 very commonplace material for interest or amusement at his command , 
 continue to be always interested or generally amuse ; I ask myself why 
 and how ? and it seem to I as if the cause start from fix belief 
 which settle his relation with God and man , and that settlement he will 
 not allow any speculation to disturb . be those belief questionable or 
 not by other , at least they be such as can not displease a deity , and 
 can not fail to be kindly and useful to fellow - mortal . then he plant 
 these belief on the soil of a happy and genial home , which tend to 
 confirm and strengthen and call they into daily practice ; and when he 
 go forth from home , even to the farth verge of the circle that 
 surround it , he carry with he the home influence of kindliness 
 and use . possibly my line of life may be draw to the verge of a wide 
 circle than his ; but so much the well for interest and amusement , if 
 it can be draw from the same centre ; namely , fix belief daily warm 
 into vital action in the sunshine of a congenial home . " 

 Mrs. Braefield listen to this speech with pleased attention , and as 
 it come to its close , the name of Lily tremble on her tongue , for she 
 divine that when he speak of home Lily be in his thought ; but she 
 check the impulse , and reply by a generalized platitude . 

 " certainly the first thing in life be to secure a happy and congenial 
 home . it must be a terrible trial for the good of we if we marry without 
 love . " 

 " terrible , indeed , if the one love and the other do not . " 

 " that can scarcely be your case , Mr. Chillingly , for I be sure you could 
 not marry where you do not love ; and do not think I flatter you when I 
 say that a man far less gifted than you can scarcely fail to be love by 
 the woman he woo and win . " 

 Kenelm , in this respect one of the modest of human being , shake his 
 head doubtingly , and be about to reply in self - disparagement , when , 
 lift his eye and look round , he halt mute and still as if 
 root to the spot . they have enter the trellis circle through the 
 rose of which he have first catch sight of the young face that have 
 haunt he ever since . 

 " ah ! " he say abruptly ; " I can not stay long here , dream away the 
 work - day hour in a fairy ring . I be go to town to - day by the next 
 train . " 

 " Yoa be come back ? " 

 " of course , - this evening . I leave no address at my lodging in London . 
 there must be a large accumulation of letter ; some , no doubt , from my 
 father and mother . I be only go for they . good - by . how kindly you 
 have listen to I ! " 

 " shall we fix a day next week for see the remain of the old Roman 
 villa ? I will ask Mrs. Cameron and her niece to be of the party . " 

 " any day you please , " say Kenelm joyfully . 



 CHAPTER XV . 

 KENELM do indeed find a huge pile of letter and note on reach his 
 forsaken apartment in Mayfair ; many of they merely invitation for day 
 long past , none of they of interest except two from Sir Peter , three 
 from his mother , and one from Tom Bowles . 

 Sir Peter 's be short . in the first he gently scold Kenelm for go 
 away without communicate any address ; and state the acquaintance he 
 have form with Gordon , the favourable impression that young gentleman 
 have make on he , the transfer of the L20,000 and the invitation give to 
 Gordon , the traverse , and Lady Glenalvon . the second , date much later , 
 note the arrival of his invite guest , dwelt with warmth unusual to 
 Sir Peter on the attraction of Cecilia , and take occasion to refer , 
 not the less emphatically because as it be incidentally , to the sacred 
 promise which Kenelm have give he never to propose to a young lady 
 until the case have be submit to the examination and receive 
 the consent of Sir Peter . " come to Exmundham , and if I do not give my 
 consent to propose to Cecilia Travers hold I a tyrant and rebel . " 

 Lady Chillingly 's letter be much long . they dwelt more 
 complainingly on his persistence in eccentric habit ; so exceedingly 
 unlike other people , quit London at the very height of the season , 
 go without even a servant nobody know where : she do not wish to 
 wound his feeling ; but still those be not the way natural to a young 
 gentleman of station . if he have no respect for himself , he ought to have 
 some consideration for his parent , especially his poor mother . she then 
 proceed to comment on the elegant manner of Leopold Travers , and the 
 good sense and pleasant conversation of Chillingly Gordon , a young man 
 of whom any mother might be proud . from that subject she diverge to 
 mildly querulous reference to family matter . Parson John have express 
 himself very rudely to Mr. Chillingly Gordon upon some book by a 
 foreigner , - Comte or Count , or some such name , - on which , so far as 
 she could pretend to judge , Mr. Gordon have utter some very benevolent 
 sentiment about humanity , which , in the most insolent manner , Parson 
 John have denounce as an attack on religion . but really Parson John 
 be too High Church for she . have thus dispose of Parson John , she 
 indulge some ladylike wailing on the singular costume of the three 
 Miss Chillinglys . they have be ask by Sir Peter , unknown to she - so 
 like he - to meet their guest ; to meet Lady Glenalvon and Miss Travers , 
 whose dress be so perfect   here she describe their dress ; and they 
 come in pea - green with pelerine of mock blonde , and Miss Sally with 
 corkscrew ringlet and a wreath of jessamine , " which no girl after 
 eighteen would venture to wear . " 

 " but , my dear , " add her ladyship , " your poor father 's family be 
 certainly great oddity . I have more to put up with than any one know . 
 I do my good to carry it off . I know my duty , and will do they . " 

 family grievance thus duly record and lament , Lady Chillingly 
 return to her guest . 

 evidently unconscious of her husband 's design on Cecilia , she dismiss 
 she briefly : " a very handsome young lady , though rather too blonde for 
 her taste , and certainly with an air distingue . " lastly , she enlarge 
 on the extreme pleasure she feel on meet again the friend of her 
 youth , Lady Glenalvon . 

 " not at all spoilt by the education of the great world , which , alas ! 
 obedient to the duty of wife and mother , however little my sacrifice 
 be appreciate , I have long since relinquish . Lady Glenalvon suggest 
 turn that hideous old moat into a fernery , - a great improvement . of 
 course your poor father make objection . " 

 Tom 's letter be write on black - edge paper , and run thus : - 


 DEAR SIR , - since I have the honour to see you in London I have have a sad 
 loss : my poor uncle be no more . he die very suddenly after a hearty 
 supper . one doctor say it be apoplexy , another valvular disease of the 
 heart . he have leave I his heir , after provide for his sister : no one 
 have an idea that he have save so much money . I be quite a rich man now . 
 and I shall leave the veterinary business , which of late - since I 
 take to reading , as you kindly advise - be not much to my like the 
 principal corn - merchant here have offer to take I into partnership ; 
 and , from what I can see , it will be a very good thing and a great rise 
 in life . but , sir , I can not   settle to it at present ; I can not   settle , as 
 I would wish to anything . I know you will not laugh at I when I say I 
 have a strange longing to travel for a while . I have be read book 
 of travel , and they get into my head more than any other book . but I 
 do not   think I could leave the country with a contented heart till I have 
 have just another look at you know whom , - just to see she , and know she 
 be happy . I be sure I could shake hand with Will and kiss her little 
 one without a wrong thought . what do you say to that , dear sir ? you 
 promise to write to I about she . but I have not hear from you . susey , 
 the little girl with the flower - ball , have have a loss too : the poor old 
 man she live with die within a few day of my dear uncle 's decease . 
 Mother move here , as I think you know , when the forge at Graveleigh be 
 sell ; and she be go to take Susey to live with she . she be quite fond 
 of Susey . pray let I hear from you soon ; and do , dear sir , give I your 
 advice about travel - and about she . you see I should like she to 
 think of I more kindly when I be in distant part . 

  I remain , dear sir , 

  your grateful servant , 

  T. BOWLES . 

 P.S. - Miss Travers have send I Will be last remittance . there be 
 very little owe I now ; so they must be thrive . I hope she be not 
 overwork . 


 on return by the train that evening , Kenelm go to the house of Will 
 Somers . the shop be already close , but he be admit by a trusty 
 servant - maid to the parlour , where he find they all at supper , except 
 indeed the baby , who have long since retire to the cradle , and the 
 cradle have be remove upstairs . Will and Jessie be very proud when 
 Kenelm invite himself to share their repast , which , though simple , 
 be by no mean a bad one . when the meal be over and the supper thing 
 remove , Kenelm draw his chair near to the glass door which lead into a 
 little garden very neatly keep - for it be Will 's pride to attend to it 
 before he sit down to his more professional work . the door be open , 
 and admit the coolness of the starlit air and the fragrance of the 
 sleeping flower . 

 " you have a pleasant home here , Mrs. Somers . " 

 " we have , indeed , and know how to bless he we owe it to . " 

 " I be rejoice to think that . how often when God design a 
 special kindness to we he put the kindness into the heart of a 
 fellow - man , - perhaps the last fellow - man we should have think of ; but 
 in bless he we thank God who inspire he . now , my dear friend , I 
 know that you all three suspect I of be the agent whom God choose for 
 his benefit . you fancy that it be from I come the loan which enable 
 you to leave Graveleigh and settle here . you be mistaken , - you look 
 incredulous . " 

 " it could not be the squire , " exclaim Jessie . " Miss Travers assure 
 I that it be neither he nor herself . oh , it must be you , sir . I beg 
 pardon , but who else could it be ? " 

 " your husband shall guess . suppose , will , that you have behave ill 
 to some one who be nevertheless dear to you , and on think over it 
 afterwards feel very sorry and much ashamed of yourself , and suppose 
 that later you have the opportunity and the power to render a service to 
 that person , do you think you would do it ? " 

 " I should be a bad man if I do not . " 

 " Bravo ! and suppose that when the person you thus serve come to know 
 it be you who render the service , he do not feel thankful , he do 
 not think it handsome of you , thus to repair any little harm he might 
 have do you before , but become churlish and sore and cross - grained , 
 and with a wretched false pride say that because he have offend you 
 once he resent your take the liberty of befriend he now , would 
 you not think that person an ungrateful fellow ; ungrateful not only to 
 you his fellow - man , - that be of less moment , - but ungrateful to the 
 God who put it into your heart to be his human agent in the benefit 
 receive ? " 

 " well , sir , yes , certainly , " say will , with all the superior refinement 
 of his intellect to that of Jessie , unaware of what Kenelm be drive 
 at ; while Jessie , press her hand tightly together , turn pale , 
 and with a frightened hurried glance towards Will 's face , answer , 
 impulsively , - 

 " oh , Mr. Chillingly , I hope you be not think , not speak , of Mr. 
 Bowles ? " 

 " whom else should I think or speak of ? " 

 will rise nervously from his chair , all his feature writhe . 

 " Sir , sir , this be a bitter blow , - very bitter , very . " 

 Jessie rush to Will , fling her arm round he and sob . Kenelm 
 turn quietly to old Mrs. Somers , who have suspend the work on which 
 since supper she have be employ , knit sock for the baby , - 

 " my dear Mrs. Somers , what be the good of be a grandmother and 
 knitting sock for baby grandchild , if you can not assure those silly 
 child of yours that they be too happy in each other to harbour any 
 resentment against a man who would have part they , and now repent ? " 

 somewhat to Kenelm 's admiration , I dare not say surprise , old Mrs. 
 Somers , thus appeal to , rise from her seat , and , with a dignity of 
 thought or of feel no one could have anticipate from the quiet 
 peasant woman , approach the wed pair , lift Jessie 's face with one 
 hand , lay the other on Will 's head , and say , " if you do not   long to see 
 Mr. Bowles again and say ' the Lord bless you , sir ! ' you do not   deserve 
 the Lord 's blessing upon you . " Therewith she go back to her seat , and 
 resume her knitting . 

 " thank Heaven , we have pay back the good part of the loan , " say will , 
 in very agitated tone , " and I think , with a little pinch , Jessie , 
 and with sell off some of the stock , we might pay the rest ; and 
 then , " - and then he turn to Kenelm , - " and then , sir , we will "   here a 
 gulp   " thank Mr. Bowles . " 

 " this do not   satisfy I at all , will , " answer Kenelm ; " and since I 
 help to bring you two together , I claim the right to say I would never 
 have do so could I have guess you could have trust your wife so 
 little as to allow a remembrance of Mr. Bowles to be a thought of pain . 
 you do not feel humiliate when you imagine that it be to I you owe 
 some money which you have be honestly pay off . well , then , I will 
 lend you whatever trifle remain to discharge your whole debt to Mr. 
 Bowles , so that you may soon be able to say to he , ' thank you . ' 
 but between you and I , will , I think you will be a fine fellow and a 
 manly fellow if you decline to borrow that trifle of I ; if you feel 
 you would rather say ' thank you ' to Mr. Bowles , without the silly 
 notion that when you have pay he his money you owe he nothing for his 
 kindness . " 

 will look away irresolutely . Kenelm go on : " I have receive a letter 
 from Mr. Bowles to - day . he have come into a fortune , and think of go 
 abroad for a time ; but before he go , he say he should like to shake 
 hand with Will , and be assure by Jessie that all his old rudeness be 
 forgive . he have no notion that I should blab about the loan : he wish 
 that to remain always a secret . but between friend there need be no 
 secret . what say you , Will ? as head of this household , shall Mr. Bowles 
 be welcome here as a friend or not ? " 

 " kindly welcome , " say old Mrs. Somers , look up from the sock . 

 " Sir , " say will , with sudden energy , " look here ; you have never be in 
 love , I dare say . if you have , you would not be so hard on I . Mr. Bowles 
 be in love with my wife there . Mr. Bowles be a very fine man , and I be 
 a cripple . " 

 " oh , Will ! will ! " cry Jessie . 

 " but I trust my wife with my whole heart and soul ; and , now that 
 the first pang be over , Mr. Bowles shall be , as mother say , kindly 
 welcome , - heartily welcome . " 

 " shake hand . now you speak like a man , Will . I hope to bring Bowles 
 here to supper before many day be over . " 

 and that night Kenelm write to Mr. Bowles : 


 MY dear TOM , - come and spend a few day with I at Cromwell Lodge , 
 Moleswich . Mr. and Mrs. Somers wish much to see and to thank you . I 
 could not remain forever degrade in order to gratify your whim . they 
 would have it that I buy their shop , etc . , and I be force in 
 self - defence to say who it be . More on this and on travel when you 
 come . 

  your true friend , 

  K. C. 



 CHAPTER XVI . 

 MRS . CAMERON be seat alone in her pretty drawing - room , with a book 
 lie open , but unheeded , on her lap . she be look away from its 
 page , seemingly into the garden without , but rather into empty space . 

 to a very acute and practise observer , there be in her countenance an 
 expression which baffle the common eye . 

 to the common eye it be simply vacant ; the expression of a quiet , 
 humdrum woman , who might have be think of some quiet humdrum 
 household detail , - find that too much for she , and be now not think 
 at all . 

 but to the true observer , there be in that face indication of 
 a troubled past , still haunt with ghost never to be lay at 
 rest , - indication , too , of a character in herself that have undergo 
 some revolutionary change ; it have not always be the character of a 
 woman quiet and humdrum . the delicate outline of the lip and nostril 
 evince sensibility , and the deep and downward curve of it bespoke 
 habitual sadness . the softness of the look into space do not tell of 
 a vacant mind , but rather of a mind subdue and over - burden by the 
 weight of a secret sorrow . there be also about her whole presence , in 
 the very quiet which make her prevalent external characteristic , the 
 evidence of manner form in a high - breed society , - the society in which 
 quiet be connect with dignity and grace . the poor understand this 
 well than her rich acquaintance at Moleswich , when they say , " Mrs. 
 Cameron be every inch a lady . " to judge by her feature she must once 
 have be pretty , not a showy prettiness , but decidedly pretty . now , 
 as the feature be small , all prettiness have fade away in cold gray 
 colouring , and a sort of tame and slumber timidity of aspect . she 
 be not only not demonstrative , but must have impose on herself as a 
 duty the suppression of demonstration . who could look at the formation 
 of those lip , and not see that they belong to the nervous , quick , 
 demonstrative temperament ? and yet , observe she again more closely , 
 that suppression of the constitutional tendency to candid betrayal of 
 emotion would the more enlist our curiosity or interest ; because , if 
 physiognomy and phrenology have any truth in they , there be little 
 strength in her character . in the womanly yieldingness of the 
 short curved upper lip , the plead timidity of the regard , the 
 disproportionate but elegant slenderness of the head between the ear 
 and the neck , there be the token of one who can not resist the will , 
 perhaps the whim , of another whom she either love or trust . 

 the book open on her lap be a serious book on the doctrine of grace , 
 write by a popular clergyman of what be term " the Low Church . " she 
 seldom read any but serious book , except where such care as she give 
 to Lily 's education compel she to read " Outlines of history and 
 Geography , " or the elementary french book use in seminary for 
 young lady . yet if any one have decoy Mrs. Cameron into familiar 
 conversation , he would have discover that she must early have receive 
 the education give to young lady of station . she could speak 
 and write french and italian as a native . she have read , and still 
 remember , such classic author in either language as be concede to 
 the use of pupil by the well - regulate taste of orthodox governess . 
 she have a knowledge of botany , such as botany be teach twenty year 
 ago . I be not sure that , if her memory have be fairly arouse , she 
 might not have come out strong in divinity and political economy , as 
 expound by the popular manual of Mrs. Marcet . in short , you could see 
 in she a thoroughbred English lady , who have be teach in a generation 
 before Lily 's , and immeasurably superior in culture to the ordinary run 
 of english young lady teach nowadays . so , in what after all be very 
 minor accomplishment , - now make major accomplishment , - such as music , 
 it be impossible that a connoisseur should hear her play on the piano 
 without remark , " that woman have have the good master of her time . " 
 she could only play piece that belong to her generation . she have 
 learn nothing since . in short , the whole intellectual culture have come 
 to a dead stop long year ago , perhaps before Lily be bear . 

 now , while she be gaze into space Mrs. Braefield be announce . Mrs. 
 Cameron do not start from revery . she never start . but she make a 
 weary movement of annoyance , resettle herself , and lay the serious 
 book on the sofa table . elsie enter , young , radiant , dress in all the 
 perfection of the fashion , that is , as ungracefully as in the eye of an 
 artist any gentlewoman can be ; but rich merchant who be proud of their 
 wife so insist , and their wife , in that respect , submissively obey 
 they . 

 the lady interchange customary salutation , enter into the customary 
 preliminary of talk , and after a pause Elsie begin in earnest . 

 " but sha'n't   I see Lily ? where be she ? " 

 " I fear she have go into the town . a poor little boy , who do our 
 errand , have meet with an accident , - fall from a cherry - tree . " 

 " which he be rob ? " 

 " probably . " 

 " and Lily have go to lecture he ? " 

 " I do not   know as to that ; but he be much hurt , and Lily have go to see 
 what be the matter with he . " 

 Mrs. Braefield , in her frank outspoken way , - " I do not   take much to girl 
 of Lily 's age in general , though I be passionately fond of child . you 
 know how I do take to Lily ; perhaps because she be so like a child . but 
 she must be an anxious charge to you . " 

 Mrs. Cameron reply by an anxious " no ; she be still a child , a very 
 good one ; why should I be anxious ? " 

 Mrs. Braefield , impulsively , - " why , your child must now be eighteen . " 

 Mrs. Cameron , - " Eighteen - be it possible ! how time fly ! though in a 
 life so monotonous as mine , time do not seem to fly , it slip on 
 like the lapse of water . let I think , - eighteen ? no , she be but 
 seventeen , - seventeen last May . " 

 Mrs. Braefield , - " Seventeen ! a very anxious age for a girl ; an age in 
 which doll cease and lover begin . " 

 Mrs. Cameron , not so languidly , but still quietly , - " Lily never care 
 much for doll , - never much for lifeless pet ; and as to lover , she 
 do not dream of they . " 

 Mrs. Braefield , briskly , - " there be no age after six in which girl do 
 not dream of lover . and here another question arise . when a girl so 
 lovely as Lily be eighteen next birthday , may not a lover dream of she ? " 

 Mrs. Cameron , with that wintry cold tranquillity of manner , which 
 imply that in put such question an interrogator be take a 
 liberty , - " as no lover have appear , I can not trouble myself about his 
 dream . " 

 say Elsie inly to herself , " this be the stupid woman I ever meet ! " 
 and aloud to Mrs. Cameron , - " do you not think that your neighbour , Mr. 
 Chillingly , be a very fine young man ? " 

 " I suppose he would be generally consider so . he be very tall . " 

 " a handsome face ? " 

 " handsome , be it ? I dare say . " 

 " what do Lily say ? " 

 " about what ? " 

 " about Mr. Chillingly . do she not think he handsome ? " 

 " I never ask she . " 

 " my dear Mrs. Cameron , would it not be a very pretty match for Lily ? the 
 Chillinglys be among the old family in Burke 's ' Landed Gentry , ' 
 and I believe his father , Sir Peter , have a considerable property . " 

 for the first time in this conversation Mrs. Cameron betray emotion . 
 a sudden flush overspread her countenance , and then leave it pale 
 than before . after a pause she recover her accustomed composure , and 
 reply , rudely , - 

 " it would be no friend to Lily who could put such notion into her 
 head ; and there be no reason to suppose that they have enter into Mr. 
 Chillingly 's . " 

 " would you be sorry if they do ? surely you would like your niece to 
 marry well , and there be few chance of she do so at Moleswich . " 

 " Pardon I , Mrs. Braefield , but the question of Lily 's marriage I have 
 never discuss , even with her guardian . nor , consider the childlike 
 nature of her taste and habit , rather than the year she have number , 
 can I think the time have yet come for discuss it at all . " 

 Elsie , thus rebuke , change the subject to some newspaper topic which 
 interest the public mind at the moment and very soon rise to depart . 
 Mrs. Cameron detain the hand that her visitor hold out , and say in 
 low tone , which , though embarrassed , be evidently earnest , " my dear 
 Mrs. Braefield , let I trust to your good sense and the affection with 
 which you have honour my niece not to incur the risk of unsettling 
 her mind by a hint of the ambitious project for her future on which you 
 have speak to I . it be extremely improbable that a young man of 
 Mr. Chillingly 's expectation would entertain any serious thought of 
 marry out of his own sphere of life , and - " 

 " Stop , Mrs. Cameron , I must interrupt you . Lily 's personal attraction 
 and grace of manner would adorn any station ; and have I not rightly 
 understand you to say that though her guardian , Mr. Melville , be , as we 
 all know , a man who have rise above the rank of his parent , your niece , 
 Miss Mordaunt , be like yourself , by birth a gentlewoman ? " 

 " yes , by birth a gentlewoman , " say Mrs. Cameron , raise her head with 
 a sudden pride . but she add , with as sudden a change to a sort of 
 freeze humility , " what do that matter ? a girl without fortune , 
 without connection , bring up in this little cottage , the ward of a 
 professional artist , who be the son of a city clerk , to whom she owe 
 even the home she have find , be not in the same sphere of life as Mr. 
 Chillingly , and his parent could not approve of such an alliance for 
 he . it would be most cruel to she , if you be to change the innocent 
 pleasure she may take in the conversation of a clever and well - inform 
 stranger into the troubled interest which , since you remind I of she 
 age , a girl even so childlike and beautiful as Lily might conceive in 
 one represent to she as the possible partner of her life . do not   commit 
 that cruelty ; do not   - do not , I implore you ! " 

 " trust I , " cry the warm - hearted Elsie , with tear rush to her 
 eye . " what you say so sensibly , so nobly , never strike I before . I 
 do not know much of the world , - know nothing of it till I marry , - and 
 be very fond of Lily , and have a strong regard for Mr. Chillingly , 
 I fancy I could not serve both well than - than - but I see now ; he 
 be very young , very peculiar ; his parent might object , not to lily 
 herself , but to the circumstance you name . and you would not wish 
 she to enter any family where she be not as cordially welcome as she 
 deserve to be . I be glad to have have this talk with you . happily , I 
 have do no mischief as yet . I will do none . I have come to propose 
 an excursion to the remain of the Roman Villa , some mile off , and to 
 invite you and Mr. Chillingly . I will no long try to bring he and 
 Lily together . " 

 " thank you . but you still misconstrue I . I do not think that Lily care 
 half so much for Mr. Chillingly as she do for a new butterfly . I do 
 not fear their come together , as you call it , in the light in which 
 she now regard he , and in which , from all I observe , he regard she . 
 my only fear be that a hint might lead she to regard he in another way , 
 and that way impossible . " 

 Elsie leave the house extremely bewilder , and with a profound contempt 
 for Mrs. Cameron 's knowledge of what may happen to two young person 
 " bring together . " 



 CHAPTER XVII . 

 now , on that very day , and about the same hour in which the conversation 
 just record between Elsie and Mrs. Cameron take place , Kenelm , in his 
 solitary noonday wandering , enter the burial - ground in which Lily have 
 some short time before surprise he . and there he find she , stand 
 beside the flower border which she have place round the grave of the 
 child whom she have tend and nurse in vain . 

 the day be cloudless and sunless ; one of those day that so often 
 instil a sentiment of melancholy into the heart of an english summer . 

 " you come here too often , Miss Mordaunt , " say Kenelm , very softly , as 
 he approach . 

 Lily turn her face to he , without any start of surprise , with no 
 brightening change in its pensive expression , - an expression rare to the 
 mobile play of her feature . 

 " not too often . I promise to come as often as I could ; and , as I tell 
 you before , I have never break a promise yet . " 

 Kenelm make no answer . presently the girl turn from the spot , and 
 Kenelm follow she silently till she halt before the old tombstone 
 with its effaced inscription . 

 " see , " she say , with a faint smile , " I have put fresh flower there . 
 since the day we meet in this churchyard , I have think so much of that 
 tomb , so neglected , so forgotten , and - " she pause a moment , and go 
 on abruptly , " do you not often find that you be much too - what be 
 the word ? ah ! too egotistical , consider and ponder and dream 
 greatly too much about yourself ? " 

 " yes , you be right there ; though , till you so accuse I , my conscience 
 do not detect it . " 

 " and do not   you find that you escape from be so haunted by the thought 
 of yourself , when you think of the dead ? they can never have any 
 share in your existence here . when you say , ' I shall do this or that 
 to - day ; ' when you dream , ' I may be this or that to - morrow , ' you be 
 think and dream , all by yourself , for yourself . but you be out of 
 yourself , beyond yourself , when you think and dream of the dead , who can 
 have nothing to do with your to - day or your to - morrow . " 

 as we all know , Kenelm Chillingly make it one of the rule of his life 
 never to be take by surprise . but when the speech I have write down 
 come from the lip of that tamer of butterfly , he be so startled that 
 all it occur to he to say , after a long pause , be , - 

 " the dead be the past ; and with the past rest all in the present or 
 the future that can take we out of our natural self . the past decide 
 our present . by the past we divine our future . history , poetry , science , 
 the welfare of state , the advancement of individual , be all connect 
 with tombstone of which inscription be effaced . you be right to 
 honour the moulder tombstone with fresh flower . it be only in the 
 companionship of the dead that one cease to be an egotist . " 

 if the imperfectly educate Lily have be above the quick comprehension 
 of the academical Kenelm in her speech , so Kenelm be now above the 
 comprehension of Lily . she , too , pause before she reply , - 

 " if I know you well , I think I could understand you well . I wish you 
 know Lion . I should like to hear you talk with he . " 

 while thus converse , they have leave the burial - ground , and be in the 
 pathway tread by the common wayfarer . 

 Lily resume , - " yes , I should like to hear you talk with Lion . " 

 " you mean your guardian , Mr. Melville ? " 

 " yes , you know that . " 

 " and why should you like to hear I talk to he ? " 

 " because there be some thing in which I doubt if he be altogether 
 right , and I would ask you to express my doubt to he ; you would , would 
 you not ? " 

 " but why can you not express they yourself to your guardian ; be you 
 afraid of he ? " 

 " Afraid , no indeed ! but - ah , how many people there be come this way ! 
 there be some tiresome public meeting in the town to - day . let we take 
 the ferry : the other side of the stream be much pleasanter ; we shall 
 have it more to ourselves . " 

 turn aside to the right while she thus speak , Lily descend a 
 gradual slope to the margin of the stream , on which they find an old 
 man dozily recline in his ferry - boat . 

 as , seat side by side , they be slowly bear over the still water 
 under a sunless sky , Kenelm would have renew the subject which his 
 companion have begin , but she shake her head , with a significant glance 
 at the ferryman . evidently what she have to say be too confidential to 
 admit of a listener , not that the old ferryman seem likely to take 
 the trouble of listen to any talk that be not address to he . 
 Lily soon do address her talk to he , " so , Brown , the cow have quite 
 recover . " 

 " yes , Miss , thank to you , and God bless you . to think of your beating 
 the old witch like that ! " 

 " ' tis not I who beat the witch , Brown ; ' tis the fairy . fairy , you 
 know , be much more powerful than witch . " 

 " so I find , Miss. " 

 Lily here turn to Kenelm ; " Mr. Brown have a very nice milch - cow that 
 be suddenly take very ill , and both he and his wife be convince 
 that the cow be bewitch . " 

 " of course it be , that stand to reason . do not Mother Wright tell my 
 old woman that she would repent of sell milk , and abuse her dreadful ; 
 and be not the cow take with shiver that very night ? " 

 " gently , Brown . Mother Wright do not say that your wife would repent of 
 sell milk , but of put water into it . " 

 " and how do she know that , if she be not a witch ? we have the good of 
 customer among the gentlefolk , and never any one that complain . " 

 " and , " answer Lily to Kenelm , unheede this last observation , which 
 be make in a sullen manner , " Brown have a horrid notion of entice 
 Mother Wright into his ferry - boat and throw she into the water , in 
 order to break the spell upon the cow . but I consult the fairy , and 
 give he a fairy charm to tie round the cow 's neck . and the cow be quite 
 well now , you see . so , Brown , there be no necessity to throw mother 
 Wright into the water , because she say you put some of it into the 
 milk . but , " she add , as the boat now touch the opposite bank , ' shall 
 I tell you , Brown , what the fairy say to I this morning ? " 

 " do , Miss. " 

 " it be this : if Brown 's cow yield milk without any water in it , and 
 if water get into it when the milk be sell , we , the fairy , will pinch 
 Mr. Brown black and blue ; and when Brown have his next fit of rheumatic 
 he must not look to the fairy to charm it away . " 

 Herewith Lily drop a silver groat into Brown 's hand , and sprang 
 lightly ashore , follow by Kenelm . 

 " you have quite convert he , not only as to the existence , but as to 
 the beneficial power of fairy , " say Kenelm . 

 " ah , " answer Lily very gravely , " ah , but would it not be nice if there 
 be fairy still ? good fairy , and one could get at they ? tell they 
 all that trouble and puzzle we , and win from they charm against the 
 witchcraft we practise on ourselves ? " 

 " I doubt if it would be good for we to rely on such supernatural 
 counsellor . our own soul be so boundless that the more we explore 
 they the more we shall find world spread upon world into 
 infinity ; and among the world be Fairyland . " he add , inly to 
 himself , " be I not in Fairyland now ? " 

 " hush ! " whisper Lily . " do not   speak more yet awhile . I be think over 
 what you have just say , and try to understand it . " 

 thus walk silently they gain the little summer - house which 
 tradition dedicate to the memory of Izaak Walton . Lily enter it and 
 seat herself ; Kenelm take his place beside she . it be a small octagon 
 building which , judge by its architecture , might have be build 
 in the troubled reign of Charles I. ; the wall plaster within be 
 thickly cover with name and date , and inscription in praise of 
 angling , in tribute to Izaak , or with quotation from his book . on 
 the opposite side they could see the lawn of Grasmere , with its great 
 willow dip into the water . the stillness of the place , with its 
 association of the angler 's still life , be in harmony with the quiet 
 day , its breezeless air , and cloud - vest sky . 

 " you be to tell I your doubt in connection with your guardian , 
 doubt if he be right in something which you leave unexplained , which 
 you could not yourself explain to he . " 

 Lily start as from thought alien to the subject thus reintroduce . 
 " yes , I can not mention my doubt to he because they relate to I , and 
 he be so good . I owe he so much that I could not bear to vex he by a 
 word that might seem like reproach or complaint . you remember , " here she 
 draw near to he ; and with that ingenuous confide look and movement 
 which have , not unfrequently , enrapture he at the moment , and sadden 
 he on reflection , - too ingenuous , too confiding , for the sentiment 
 with which he yearn to inspire she , - she turn towards he her frank 
 untimorous eye , and lay her hand on his arm : " you remember that I say 
 in the burial - ground how much I feel that one be constantly think 
 too much of one 's self . that must be wrong . in talk to you only about 
 myself I know I be wrong , but I can not help it : I must do so . do not 
 think ill of I for it . you see I have not be bring up like other 
 girl . be my guardian right in that ? perhaps if he have insist upon 
 not let I have my own wilful way , if he have make I read the book 
 which Mr. and Mrs. Emlyn want to force on I , instead of the poem and 
 fairy tale which he give I , I should have have so much more to think of 
 that I should have think less of myself . you say that the dead be 
 the past ; one forget one 's self when one think of the dead . if I have 
 read more of the past , have more subject of interest in the dead whose 
 history it tell , surely I should be less shut up , as it be , in my 
 own small , selfish heart ? it be only very lately I have think of this , 
 only very lately that I have feel sorrow and shame in the thought that I 
 be so ignorant of what other girl know , even little Clemmy . and I dare 
 not say this to Lion when I see he next , lest he should blame himself , 
 when he only mean to be kind , and use to say , ' I do not   want Fairy to 
 be learn , it be enough for I to think she be happy . ' and oh , I be so 
 happy , till - till of late ! " 

 " because till of late you only know yourself as a child . but , now that 
 you feel the desire of knowledge , childhood be vanish . do not vex 
 yourself . with the mind which nature have bestow on you , such learning 
 as may fit you to converse with those dread ' grow - up folk ' will come 
 to you very easily and quickly . you will acquire more in a month now 
 than you would have acquire in a year when you be a child , and 
 task - work be loathe , not court . your aunt be evidently well 
 instruct , and if I might venture to talk to she about the choice of 
 book - " 

 " no , do not   do that . Lion would not like it . " 

 " your guardian would not like you to have the education common to other 
 young lady ? " 

 " Lion forbid my aunt to teach I much that I rather wish to learn . 
 she want to do so , but she have give it up at his wish . she only now 
 tease I with those horrid french verbs , and that I know be a mere 
 make - belief . of course on Sunday it be different ; then I must not read 
 anything but the Bible and sermon . I do not   care so much for the sermon 
 as I ought , but I could read the Bible all day , every week - day as well 
 as Sunday ; and it be from the Bible that I learn that I ought to think 
 less about myself . " 

 Kenelm involuntarily press the little hand that lie so innocently on 
 his arm . 

 " do you know the difference between one kind of poetry and another ? " 
 ask Lily , abruptly . 

 " I be not sure . I ought to know when one kind be good and another kind 
 be bad . but in that respect I find many people , especially profess 
 critic , who prefer the poetry which I call bad to the poetry I think 
 good . " 

 " the difference between one kind of poetry and another , suppose they 
 both to be good , " say Lily , positively , and with an air of triumph , " be 
 this , - I know , for Lion explain it to I , - in one kind of poetry the 
 writer throw himself entirely out of his existence , he put himself 
 into other existence quite strange to his own . he may be a very good 
 man , and he write his good poetry about very wicked man : he would not 
 hurt a fly , but he delight in describe murderer . but in the other 
 kind of poetry the writer do not put himself into other existence , he 
 express his own joy and sorrow , his own individual heart and mind . 
 if he could not hurt a fly , he certainly could not make himself at home 
 in the cruel heart of a murderer . there , Mr. Chillingly , that be the 
 difference between one kind of poetry and another . " 

 " very true , " say Kenelm , amuse by the girl 's critical definition . 
 " the difference between dramatic poetry and lyrical . but may I ask what 
 that definition have to do with the subject into which you so suddenly 
 introduce it ? " 

 " much ; for when Lion be explain this to my aunt , he say , ' a perfect 
 woman be a poem ; but she can never be a poem of the one kind , never can 
 make herself at home in the heart with which she have no connection , 
 never feel any sympathy with crime and evil ; she must be a poem of the 
 other kind , weave out poetry from her own thought and fancy . ' and , 
 turn to I , he say , smile , ' that be the poem I wish Lily to be . 
 too many dry book would only spoil the poem . ' and you now see why I be 
 so ignorant , and so unlike other girl , and why Mr. and Mrs. Emlyn look 
 down upon I . " 

 " you wrong at least Mr. Emlyn , for it be he who first say to I , ' lily 
 Mordaunt be a poem . ' " 

 " do he ? I shall love he for that . how pleased Lion will be ! " 

 " Mr. Melville seem to have an extraordinary influence over your mind , " 
 say Kenelm , with a jealous pang . 

 " of course . I have neither father nor mother : Lion have be both to 
 I . Aunty have often say , ' you can not be too grateful to your guardian ; 
 without he I should have no home to shelter you , no bread to give you . ' 
 he never say that : he would be very angry with aunty if he know she have 
 say it . when he do not call I Fairy he call I Princess . I would 
 not displease he for the world . " 

 " he be very much old than you ; old enough to be your father , I hear . " 

 " I dare say . but if he be twice as old I could not love he well . " 

 Kenelm smile : the jealousy be go . certainly not thus could any girl , 
 even Lily , speak of one with whom , however she might love he , she be 
 likely to fall in love . 

 Lily now rise up , rather slowly and wearily . " it be time to go home : 
 aunty will be wonder what keep I away , - come . " 

 they take their way towards the bridge opposite to Cromwell Lodge . 

 it be not for some minute that either break silence . Lily be the 
 first to do so , and with one of those abrupt change of topic which be 
 common to the restless play of her secret thought . 

 " you have father and mother still live , Mr. Chillingly ? " 

 " thank Heaven , yes . " 

 " which do you love the good ? " 

 " that be scarcely a fair question . I love my mother very much ; but my 
 father and I understand each other well than - " 

 " I see : it be so difficult to be understand . no one understand I . " 

 " I think I do . " 

 Lily shake her head with an energetic movement of dissent . 

 " at least as well as a man can understand a young lady . " 

 " what sort of young lady be Miss Cecilia Travers ? " 

 " Cecilia Travers ! when and how do you ever hear that such a person 
 exist ? " 

 " that big London man whom they call Sir Thomas mention her name the 
 day we din at Braefieldville . " 

 " I remember , - as have be at the Court ball . " 

 " he say she be very handsome . " 

 " so she be . " 

 " be she a poem too ? " 

 " No ; that never strike I . " 

 " Mr. Emlyn , I suppose , would call she perfectly bring up , - well 
 educate . he would not raise his eyebrow at she as he do at I , - poor 
 I , Cinderella ! " 

 " ah , Miss Mordaunt , you need not envy she . again let I say that you 
 could very soon educate yourself to the level of any young lady who 
 adorn the Court ball . " 

 " ay ; but then I should not be a poem , " say Lily , with a shy , arch 
 side - glance at his face . 

 they be now on the bridge , and before Kenelm could answer Lily resume 
 quickly , " you need not come any far ; it be out of your way . " 

 " I can not be so disdainfully dismiss , Miss Mordaunt ; I insist on 
 see you to at least your garden gate . " 

 Lily make no objection and again speak , - 

 " what sort of country do you live in when at home ; be it like this ? " 

 " not so pretty ; the feature be large , more hill and dale and 
 woodland : yet there be one feature in our ground which remind I a 
 little of this landscape , - a light stream , somewhat wide , indeed , 
 than your brooklet ; but here and there the bank be so like those by 
 Cromwell Lodge that I sometimes start and fancy myself at home . I have 
 a strange love for rivulet and all running water , and in my foot 
 wandering I find myself magnetically attract towards they . " 

 Lily listen with interest , and after a short pause say , with a 
 half - suppress sigh , " your home be much fine than any place here , even 
 than Braefieldville , be it not ? Mrs. Braefield say your father be very 
 rich . " 

 " I doubt if he be rich than Mr. Braefield ; and , though his house may 
 be large than Braefieldville , it be not so smartly furnish , and have 
 no such luxurious hothouse and conservatory . my father 's taste be 
 like mine , very simple . give he his library , and he would scarcely miss 
 his fortune if he lose it . he have in this one immense advantage over 
 I . " 

 " you would miss fortune ? " say Lily , quickly . 

 " not that ; but my father be never tired of book . and shall I own it ? 
 there be day when book tire I almost as much as they do you . " 

 they be now at the garden gate . lily , with one hand on the latch , hold 
 out the other to Kenelm , and her smile light up the dull sky like a burst 
 of sunshine , as she look in his face and vanish . 




 BOOK VII . 



 CHAPTER I. 

 KENELM do not return home till dusk , and just as he be sit down to 
 his solitary meal there be a ring at the bell , and Mrs. Jones usher 
 in Mr. Thomas Bowles . 

 though that gentleman have never write to announce the day of his 
 arrival , he be not the less welcome . 

 " only , " say Kenelm , " if you preserve the appetite I have lose , I fear 
 you will find meagre fare to - day . sit down , man . " 

 " thank you , kindly , but I din two hour ago in London , and I really 
 can eat nothing more . " 

 Kenelm be too well - breed to press unwelcome hospitality . in a very few 
 minute his frugal repast be end ; the cloth remove , the two man be 
 leave alone . 

 " your room be here , of course , Tom ; that be engage from the day I 
 ask you , but you ought to have give I a line to say when to expect 
 you , so that I could have put our hostess on her mettle as to dinner or 
 supper . you smoke still , of course : light your pipe . " 

 " thank you , Mr. Chillingly , I seldom smoke now ; but if you will excuse a 
 cigar , " and Tom produce a very smart cigar - case . 

 " do as you would at home . I shall send word to Will Somers that you and 
 I sup there to - morrow . you forgive I for let out your secret . 
 all straightforward now and henceforth . you come to their hearth as a 
 friend , who will grow dearer to they both every year . ah , Tom , this love 
 for woman seem to I a very wonderful thing . it may sink a man into 
 such deep of evil , and lift a man into such height of good . " 

 " I do not   know as to the good , " say Tom , mournfully , and lay aside 
 his cigar . 

 " go on smoking : I should like to keep you company ; can you spare I one 
 of your cigar ? " 

 Tom offer his case . Kenelm extract a cigar , light it , draw a few 
 whiff , and , when he see that Tom have resume his own cigar , recommenced 
 conversation . 

 " you do not   know as to the good ; but tell I honestly , do you think if 
 you have not love Jessie Wiles , you would be as good a man as you be 
 now ? " 

 " if I be well than I be , it be not because of my love for the girl . " 

 " what then ? " 

 " the loss of she . " 

 Kenelm start , turn very pale , throw aside the cigar , rise , and 
 walk the room to and fro with very quick but very irregular stride . 

 Tom continue quietly . " suppose I have win Jessie and marry she , I 
 do not   think any idea of improve myself would have enter my head . my 
 uncle would have be very much offend at my marrying a day - labourer 's 
 daughter , and would not have invite I to Luscombe . I should have 
 remain at Graveleigh , with no ambition of be more than a common 
 farrier , an ignorant , noisy , quarrelsome man ; and if I could not have 
 make Jessie as fond of I as I wish , I should not have break myself 
 of drinking , and I shudder to think what a brute I might have be , when 
 I see in the newspaper an account of some drunken wife - beater . how do 
 we know but what that wife - beater love his wife dearly before marriage , 
 and she do not care for he ? his home be unhappy , and so he take to 
 drink and to wife - beating . " 

 " I be right , then , " say Kenelm , halt his stride , " when I tell you 
 it would be a miserable fate to be married to a girl whom you love to 
 distraction , and whose heart you could never warm to you , whose life you 
 could never render happy . " 

 " so right ! " 

 " let we drop that part of the subject at present , " say Kenelm , 
 reseat himself , " and talk about your wish to travel . though content 
 that you do not marry Jessie , though you can now , without anguish , 
 greet she as the wife of another , still there be some lingering 
 thought of she that make you restless ; and you feel that you could more 
 easily wrench yourself from these thought in a marked change of scene 
 and adventure , that you might bury they altogether in the soil of a 
 strange land . be it so ? " 

 " ay , something of that , sir . " 

 then Kenelm rouse himself to talk of foreign land , and to map out a 
 plan of travel that might occupy some month . he be pleased to find 
 that Tom have already learn enough of French to make himself understand 
 at least upon commonplace matter , and still more pleased to discover 
 that he have be not only read the proper guide - book or manual 
 descriptive of the principal place in Europe worth visit , but that 
 he have acquire an interest in the place ; interest in the fame attach 
 to they by their history in the past , or by the treasure of art they 
 contain . 

 so they talk far into the night ; and when Tom retire to his room , 
 Kenelm let himself out of the house noiselessly , and walk with slow 
 step towards the old summer - house in which he have sit with Lily . the 
 wind have rise , scatter the cloud that have veil the precede day , 
 so that the star be see in far chasm of the sky beyond , - see for 
 a while in one place , and , when the swift cloud roll over they there , 
 shin out elsewhere . amid the vary sound of the tree , through 
 which sweep the night gust , Kenelm fancy he could distinguish the 
 sigh of the willow on the opposite lawn of Grasmere . 



 CHAPTER II . 

 KENELM despatch a note to Will Somers early the next morning , invite 
 himself and Mr. Bowles to supper that evening . his tact be sufficient 
 to make he aware that in such social meal there would be far less 
 restraint for each and all concerned than in a more formal visit 
 from Tom during the day - time ; and when Jessie , too , be engage with 
 customer to the shop . 

 but he lead Tom through the town and show he the shop itself , with 
 its pretty good at the plate - glass window , and its general air of 
 prosperous trade ; then he carry he off into the lane and field of 
 the country , draw out the mind of his companion , and impress with 
 great admiration of its marked improvement in culture , and in the train 
 of thought which culture open out and enriche . 

 but throughout all their multiform range of subject Kenelm could 
 perceive that Tom be still preoccupy and abstract : the idea of the 
 come interview with Jessie weigh upon he . 

 when they leave Cromwell Lodge at nightfall , to repair to the supper at 
 Will be ; Kenelm notice that Bowles have avail himself of the content 
 of his carpet - bag to make some refined alteration in his dress . the 
 alteration become he . 

 when they enter the parlour , will rise from his chair with the 
 evidence of deep emotion on his face , advance to Tom , take his hand and 
 grasp and drop it without a word . Jessie salute both guest alike , 
 with droop eyelid and an elaborate curtsy . the old mother alone be 
 perfectly self - possess and up to the occasion . 

 " I be heartily glad to see you , Mr. Bowles , " say she , " and so all three 
 of we be , and ought to be ; and if baby be old , there would be four . " 

 " and where on earth have you hide baby ? " cry Kenelm . " surely he 
 might have be keep up for I to - night , when I be expect ; the last 
 time I sup here I take you by surprise , and therefore have no right to 
 complain of baby 's want of respect to her parent ' friend . " 

 Jessie raise the window - curtain , and point to the cradle behind it . 
 Kenelm link his arm in Tom 's , lead he to the cradle , and , leave 
 he alone to gaze on the sleep inmate , seat himself at the table , 
 between old Mrs. Somers and Will . Will 's eye be turn away towards 
 the curtain , Jessie hold its fold aside , and the formidable Tom , 
 who have be the terror of his neighbourhood , bend smile over 
 the cradle : till at last he lay his large hand on the pillow , gently , 
 timidly , careful not to awake the helpless sleeper , and his lip move , 
 doubtless with a blessing ; then he , too , come to the table , seat 
 himself , and Jessie carry the cradle upstairs . 

 will fix his keen , intelligent eye on his bygone rival ; and notice 
 the changed expression of the once aggressive countenance , the change 
 costume in which , without tinge of rustic foppery , there be the token 
 of a certain gravity of station scarcely compatible with a return to old 
 love and old habit in the village world , the last shadow of jealousy 
 vanish from the clear surface of Will 's affectionate nature . 

 " Mr. Bowles , " he exclaim , impulsively , " you have a kind heart , and a 
 good heart , and a generous heart . and your corning here to - night on this 
 friendly visit be an honour which - which " - " which , " interrupt Kenelm , 
 compassionate Will 's embarrassment , " be on the side of we single man . 
 in this free country a married man who have a male baby may be father 
 to the Lord Chancellor or the Archbishop of Canterbury . but - well , my 
 friend , such a meeting as we have to - night do not come often ; and 
 after supper let we celebrate it with a bowl of punch . if we have 
 headache the next morning none of we will grumble . " 

 Old Mrs. Somers laugh out jovially . " bless you , sir , I do not think 
 of the punch ; I will go and see about it , " and , baby 's sock still in 
 her hand , she hasten from the room . 

 what with the supper , what with the punch , and what with Kenelm 's art 
 of cheery talk on general subject , all reserve , all awkwardness , all 
 shyness between the convivialist , rapidly disappear . Jessie mingle 
 in the talk ; perhaps   except only Kenelm   she talk more than the 
 other , artlessly , gayly , no vestige of the old coquetry ; but , now and 
 then , with a touch of genteel finery , indicative of her rise in life , 
 and of the contact of the fancy shopkeeper with noble customer . it be 
 a pleasant evening ; Kenelm have resolve that it should be so . not a 
 hint of the obligation to Mr. Bowles escape until Will , follow his 
 visitor to the door , whisper to Tom , " you do not   want thank , and I 
 can not   express they . but when we say our prayer at night , we have always 
 ask God to bless he who bring we together , and have since make we 
 so prosperous , - I mean Mr. Chillingly . to - night there will be another 
 besides he , for whom we shall pray , and for whom baby , when he be 
 old , will pray too . " 

 Therewith Will 's voice thicken ; and he prudently recede , with no 
 unreasonable fear lest the punch might make he too demonstrative of 
 emotion if he say more . 

 Tom be very silent on the return to Cromwell Lodge ; it do not seem the 
 silence of depressed spirit , but rather of quiet meditation , from which 
 Kenelm do not attempt to rouse he . 

 it be not till they reach the garden pale of Grasmere that Tom , 
 stop short , and turn his face to Kenelm , say , " I be very 
 grateful to you for this evening , - very . " 

 " it have revive no painful thought then ? " 

 " no ; I feel so much calm in mind than I ever believe I could have 
 be , after see she again . " 

 " be it possible ! " say Kenelm , to himself . " how should I feel if I ever 
 see in Lily the wife of another man , the mother of his child ? " at that 
 question he shudder , and an involuntary groan escape from his lip . 
 just then have , willingly in those precinct , arrest his step when 
 Tom pause to address he , something softly touch the arm which he have 
 rest on the garden pale . he look , and see that it be Blanche . 
 the creature , impel by its instinct towards night - wandering , have , 
 somehow or other , escape from its own bed within the house , and hear 
 a voice that have grow somewhat familiar to its ear , creep from among 
 the shrub behind upon the edge of the pale . there it stand , with arch 
 back , purr low as in pleased salutation . 

 Kenelm bend down and cover with kiss the blue ribbon which Lily 's 
 hand have bind round the favourite 's neck . Blanche submit to the 
 caress for a moment , and then catch a slight rustle among the shrub 
 make by some awake bird , spring into the thick of the quivering leaf 
 and vanish . 

 Kenelm move on with a quick impatient stride , and no further word be 
 exchange between he and his companion till they reach their lodging 
 and part for the night . 



 CHAPTER III . 

 the next day , towards noon , Kenelm and his visitor , walk together 
 along the brook - side , stop before Izaak Walton 's summer - house , and , 
 at Kenelm 's suggestion , enter therein to rest , and more at their ease 
 to continue the conversation they have begin . 

 " you have just tell I , " say Kenelm , " that you feel as if a load be 
 take off your heart , now that you have again meet Jessie Somers , and 
 that you find she so change that she be no long the woman you love . 
 as to the change , whatever it be , I own , it seem to I for the well , 
 in person , in manner , in character ; of course I should not say this , if 
 I be not convinced of your perfect sincerity when you assure I that 
 you be cure of the old wound . but I feel so deeply interested in the 
 question how a fervent love , once entertain and enthrone in the heart 
 of a man so earnestly affectionate and so warm - blooded as yourself , can 
 be , all of a sudden , at a single interview , expel or transfer into 
 the calm sentiment of friendship , that I pray you to explain . " 

 " that be what puzzle I , sir , " answer Tom , pass his hand over his 
 forehead . " and I do not   know if I can explain it . 

 " think over it , and try . " 

 Tom muse for some moment and then begin . " you see , sir , that I be 
 a very different man myself when I fall in love with Jessie Wiles , and 
 say , ' come what may , that girl shall be my wife . nobody else shall have 
 she . ' " 

 " agree ; go on . " 

 " but while I be become a different man , when I think of she - and I 
 be always think of she - I still picture she to myself as the same 
 Jessie Wiles ; and though , when I do see she again at Graveleigh , after 
 she have marry - the day - " 

 " you save she from the insolence of the squire . " 

 " she be but very recently married . I do not realize she as married . I 
 do not see her husband , and the difference within myself be only 
 then begin . well , so all the time I be read and thinking , and 
 strive to improve my old self at Luscombe , still Jessie Wiles haunt 
 I as the only girl I have ever love , ever could love ; I could not 
 believe it possible that I could ever marry any one else . and lately I 
 have be much pressed to marry some one else ; all my family wish it : 
 but the face of Jessie rise up before I , and I say to myself , ' I 
 should be a base man if I marry one woman , while I could not get 
 another woman out of my head . ' I must see Jessie once more , must learn 
 whether her face be now really the face that haunt I when I sit alone ; 
 and I have see she , and it be not that face : it may be handsomer , but 
 it be not a girl 's face , it be the face of a wife and a mother . and , 
 last evening , while she be talk with an open - heartedness which I 
 have never find in she before , I become strangely conscious of the 
 difference in myself that have be silently at work within the last two 
 year or so . then , sir , when I be but an ill - condition , uneducated , 
 petty village farrier , there be no inequality between I and a peasant 
 girl ; or , rather , in all thing except fortune , the peasant girl 
 be much above I . but last evening I ask myself , watch she and 
 listen to her talk , ' if Jessie be now free , should I press she to 
 be my wife ? ' and I answer myself , ' no . ' " 

 Kenelm listen with rapt attention , and exclaim briefly , but 
 passionately , " why ? " 

 " it seem as if I be give myself air to say why . but , sir , lately I 
 have be throw among person , woman as well as man , of a high class 
 than I be bear in ; and in a wife I should want a companion up to their 
 mark , and who would keep I up to mine ; and ah , sir , I do not   feel as if 
 I could find that companion in Mrs. Somers . " 

 " I understand you now , Tom . but you be spoil a silly romance of 
 mine . I have fancy the little girl with the flower face would grow up 
 to supply the loss of Jessie ; and , I be so ignorant of the human heart , 
 I do think it would take all the year require for the little girl to 
 open into a woman , before the loss of the old love could be supply . I 
 see now that the poor little child with the flower face have no chance . " 

 " Chance ? why , Mr. Chillingly , " cry Tom , evidently much nettle , " Susey 
 be a dear little thing , but she be scarcely more than a mere charity 
 girl . Sir , when I last see you in London you touch on that matter as 
 if I be still the village farrier 's son , who might marry a village 
 labourer 's daughter . but , " add Tom , soften down his irritated tone 
 of voice , " even if Susey be a lady bear I think a man would make a 
 very great mistake , if he think he could bring up a little girl to 
 regard he as a father ; and then , when she grow up , expect she to accept 
 he as a lover . " 

 " ah , you think that ! " exclaim Kenelm , eagerly , and turn eye that 
 sparkle with joy towards the lawn of Grasmere . " you think that ; it be 
 very sensibly say , - well , and you have be press to marry , and have 
 hang back till you have see again Mrs. Somers . now you will be well 
 dispose to such a step ; tell I about it ? " 

 " I say , last evening , that one of the principal capitalist at 
 Luscombe , the lead corn - merchant , have offer to take I into 
 partnership . and , sir , he have an only daughter , she be a very amiable 
 girl , have have a first - rate education , and have such pleasant manner and 
 way of talk , quite a lady . if I marry she I should soon be the first 
 man in Luscombe , and Luscombe , as you be no doubt aware , return two 
 member to Parliament ; who know , but that some day the farrier 's son 
 might be - " Tom stop abruptly , abash at the aspire thought which , 
 while speak , have deepen his hardy colour and flash from his 
 honest eye . 

 " ah ! " say Kenelm , almost mournfully , " be it so ? must each man in his 
 life play many part ? ambition succeed to love , the reasoning brain to 
 the passionate heart . true , you be change ; my Tom Bowles be go . " 

 " not go in his undying gratitude to you , sir , " say Tom , with great 
 emotion . " your Tom Bowles would give up all his dream of wealth or of 
 rise in life , and go through fire and water to serve the friend who 
 first bid he be a new Tom Bowles ! do not   despise I as your own work : 
 you say to I that terrible day , when madness be on my brow and crime 
 within my heart , ' I will be to you the true friend man ever find in 
 man . ' so you have be . you command I to read ; you command I to 
 think ; you teach I that body should be the servant of mind . " 

 " hush , hush , time be alter ; it be you who can teach I now . teach 
 I , teach I ; how do ambition replace love ? how do the desire to 
 rise in life become the all - master passion , and , should it prosper , 
 the all - atone consolation of our life ? we can never be as happy , 
 though we rise to the throne of the Caesars , as we dream that we 
 could have be , have Heaven but permit we to dwell in the obscure 
 village , side by side with the woman we love . " 

 Tom be exceedingly startle by such a burst of irrepressible passion 
 from the man who have tell he that , though friend be find only once 
 in a life , sweetheart be as plentiful as blackberry . 

 again he sweep his hand over his forehead , and reply hesitatingly : " I 
 can not   pretend to say what maybe the case with other . but to judge by my 
 own case , it seem to I this : a young man who , out of his own business , 
 have nothing to interest or excite he , find content , interest , and 
 excitement when he fall in love ; and then , whether for good or ill , he 
 think there be nothing like love in the world , he do not   care a fig for 
 ambition then . over and over again do my poor uncle ask I to come to 
 he at Luscombe , and represent all the worldly advantage it would be 
 to I ; but I could not leave the village in which Jessie live , and , 
 besides , I feel myself unfit to be anything high than I be . but 
 when I have be some time at Luscombe , and gradually get accustom to 
 another sort of people , and another sort of talk , then I begin to feel 
 interest in the same object that interested those about I ; and when , 
 partly by mix with well educate man , and partly by the pain I 
 take to educate myself , I feel that I might now more easily rise above 
 my uncle 's rank of life than two year ago I could have rise above 
 a farrier 's forge , then the ambition to rise do stir in I , and grow 
 strong every day . Sir , I do not   think you can wake up a man 's intellect 
 but what you wake with it emulation . and , after all , emulation be 
 ambition . " 

 " then , I suppose , I have no emulation in I , for certainly I have no 
 ambition . " 

 " that I can not   believe , sir ; other thought may cover it over and keep it 
 down for a time . but soon or later , it will force its way to the top , 
 as it have do with I . to get on in life , to be respect by those who 
 know you , more and more as you grow old , I call that a manly desire . I 
 be sure it come as naturally to an Englishman as - as - " 

 " as the wish to knock down some other Englishman who stand in his way 
 do . I perceive now that you be always a very ambitious man , Tom ; the 
 ambition have only take another direction . Caesar might have be 


  " ' but the first wrestler on the green . ' 


 " and now , I suppose , you abandon the idea of travel : you will return to 
 Luscombe , cure of all regret for the loss of Jessie ; you will marry the 
 young lady you mention , and rise , through progressive step of alderman 
 and mayor , into the rank of member for Luscombe . " 

 " all that may come in good time , " answer Tom , not resent the tone 
 of irony in which he be address , " but I still intend to travel : a 
 year so spend must render I all the more fit for any station I aim at . 
 I shall go back to Luscombe to arrange my affair , come to term with 
 Mr. Leland the corn - merchant , against my return , and - " 

 " the young lady be to wait till then . " 

 " emily - " 

 " oh , that be the name ? emily ! a much more elegant name than Jessie . " 

 " emily , " continue Tom , with an unruffled placidity , - which , consider 
 the aggravating bitterness for which Kenelm have exchange his wonte 
 dulcitude of indifferentism , be absolutely saintlike , " Emily know 
 that if she be my wife I should be proud of she , and will esteem I 
 the more if she feel how resolved I be that she shall never be ashamed 
 of I . " 

 " Pardon I , Tom , " say Kenelm soften , and lay his hand on his 
 friend 's shoulder with brotherlike tenderness . " nature have make you a 
 thorough gentleman ; and you could not think and speak more nobly if you 
 have come into the world as the head of all the howard . " 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 TOM go away the next morning . he decline to see Jessie again , say 
 curtly , " I do not   wish the impression make on I the other evening to 
 incur a chance of be weaken . " 

 Kenelm be in no mood to regret his friend 's departure . despite all 
 the improvement in Tom 's manner and culture , which raise he so 
 much near to equality with the polite and instruct heir of the 
 Chillinglys , Kenelm would have feel more in sympathy and rapport with 
 the old disconsolate fellow - wanderer who have recline with he on the 
 grass , listen to the minstrel 's talk or verse , than he do with 
 the practical , rise citizen of Luscombe . to the young lover of Lily 
 Mordaunt there be a discord , a jar , in the knowledge that the human 
 heart admit of such well - reason , well - justify transfer of 
 allegiance ; a Jessie to - day , or an Emily to - morrow ; " La reine est morte : 
 vive la reine " 

 an hour or two after Tom have go , Kenelm find himself almost 
 mechanically lead towards Braefieldville . he have instinctively divine 
 Elsie 's secret wish with regard to himself and Lily , however skilfully 
 she think she have conceal it . 

 at Braefieldville he should hear talk of Lily , and in the scene where 
 Lily have be first beheld . 

 he find Mrs. Braefield alone in the drawing - room , seat by a table 
 cover with flower , which she be assort and intermix for the 
 vas to which they be destine . 

 it strike he that her manner be more reserved than usual and somewhat 
 embarrassed ; and when , after a few preliminary matter of small talk , 
 he rush boldly in media re and ask if she have see Mrs. Cameron 
 lately , she reply briefly , " yes , I call there the other day , " 
 and immediately change the conversation to the troubled state of the 
 Continent . 

 Kenelm be resolve not to be so put off , and presently return to the 
 charge . 

 " the other day you propose an excursion to the site of the roman villa , 
 and say you would ask Mrs. Cameron to be of the party . perhaps you have 
 forget it ? " 

 " no ; but Mrs. Cameron decline . we can ask the Emlyns instead . he will 
 be an excellent cicerone . " 

 " Excellent ! why do Mrs. Cameron decline ? " 

 Elsie hesitate , and then lift her clear brown eye to his face , with 
 a sudden determination to bring matter to a crisis . 

 " I can not say why Mrs. Cameron decline , but in decline she act very 
 wisely and very honourably . listen to I , Mr. Chillingly . you know how 
 highly I esteem , and how cordially I like you , and judge by what I 
 feel for some week , perhaps long , after we part at Tor Hadham - " 
 here again she hesitate , and , with a half laugh and a slight blush , 
 again go resolutely on . " if I be Lily 's aunt or eld sister , I 
 should do as Mrs. Cameron do ; decline to let Lily see much more of a 
 young gentleman too much above she in wealth and station for - " 

 " stop , " cry Kenelm , haughtily , " I can not allow that any man 's wealth 
 or station would warrant his presumption in think himself above Miss 
 Mordaunt . " 

 " above she in natural grace and refinement , certainly not . but in the 
 world there be other consideration which , perhaps , Sir Peter and Lady 
 Chillingly might take into account . " 

 " you do not think of that before you last see Mrs. Cameron . " 

 " honestly speak , I do not . assured that Miss Mordaunt be a 
 gentlewoman by birth , I do not sufficiently reflect upon other 
 disparity . " 

 " you know , then , that she be by birth a gentlewoman ? " 

 " I only know it as all here do , by the assurance of Mrs. Cameron , whom 
 no one could suppose not to be a lady . but there be different degree 
 of lady and of gentleman , which be little heed in the ordinary 
 intercourse of society , but become very perceptible in question of 
 matrimonial alliance ; and Mrs. Cameron herself say very plainly that 
 she do not consider her niece to belong to that station in life from 
 which Sir Peter and Lady Chillingly would naturally wish their son 
 should select his bride . then   hold out her hand   pardon I if I have 
 wound or offend you . I speak as a true friend to you and to Lily 
 both . earnestly I advise you , if Miss Mordaunt be the cause of your 
 linger here , earnestly I advise you to leave while yet in time for 
 her peace of mind and your own . " 

 " her peace of mind , " say Kenelm , in low falter tone , scarcely 
 hear the rest of Mrs. Braefield 's speech . " her peace of mind ? do 
 you sincerely think that she care for I , - could care for I , - if I 
 stay ? " 

 " I wish I could answer you decidedly . I be not in the secret of her 
 heart . I can but conjecture that it might be dangerous for the peace of 
 any young girl to see too much of a man like yourself , to divine that he 
 love she , and not to be aware that he could not , with the approval of 
 his family , ask she to become his wife . " 

 Kenelm bend his face down , and cover it with his right hand . he do 
 not speak for some moment . then he rise , the fresh cheek very pale , and 
 say , - 

 " you be right . Miss Mordaunt 's peace of mind must be the first 
 consideration . excuse I if I quit you thus abruptly . you have give I 
 much to think of , and I can only think of it adequately when alone . " 



 CHAPTER V. 


 from KENELM CHILLINGLY to SIR PETER CHILLINGLY . 


 MY FATHER , MY DEAR FATHER , - this be no reply to your letter . I know 
 not if itself can be call a letter . I can not yet decide whether it be 
 mean to reach your hand . tired with talk to myself , I sit down to 
 talk to you . often have I reproach myself for not see every fitting 
 occasion to let you distinctly know how warmly I love , how deeply I 
 reverence you ; you , o friend , o father . but we Chillinglys be not a 
 demonstrative race . I do not   remember that you , by word , ever express 
 to I the truth that you love your son infinitely more than he 
 deserve . yet , do I not know that you would send all your beloved old 
 book to the hammer rather than I should pine in vain for some untried , 
 if sinless , delight on which I have set my heart ? and do you not 
 know equally well , that I would part with all my heritage , and turn 
 day - labourer , rather than you should miss the beloved old book ? 

 that mutual knowledge be take for grant in all that my heart yearn 
 to pour forth to your own . but , if I divine aright , a day be come 
 when , as between you and I , there must be a sacrifice on the part of 
 one to the other . if so , I implore that the sacrifice may come from 
 you . how be this ? how be I so ungenerous , so egotistical , so selfish , so 
 ungratefully unmindful of all I already owe to you , and may never repay ? 
 I can only answer , " it be fate , it be nature , it be love " - 

      

 here I must break off . it be midnight , the moon halt opposite to the 
 window at which I sit , and on the stream that run below there be a long 
 narrow track on which every wave tremble in her light ; on either side 
 of the moonlit track all the other wave , run equally to their grave 
 in the invisible deep , seem motionless and dark . I can write no more . 

 ......... 

   date two day later . 

 they say she be beneath we in wealth and station . be we , my father - we , 
 two well - bear gentleman - coveter of gold or lackey of the great ? when 
 I be at college , if there be any there more heartily despise than 
 another it be the parasite and the tuft - hunter ; the man who choose his 
 friend accord as their money or their rank might be of use to he . 
 if so mean where the choice be so little important to the happiness and 
 career of a man who have something of manhood in he , how much more mean 
 to be the parasite and tuft - hunter in decide what woman to love , what 
 woman to select as the sweetener and ennobler of one 's everyday life ! 
 could she be to my life that sweetener , that ennobler ? I firmly believe 
 it . already life itself have gain a charm that I never even guess in 
 it before ; already I begin , though as yet but faintly and vaguely , to 
 recognize that interest in the object and aspiration of my fellow - man 
 which be strong in those whom posterity rank among its ennobler . in 
 this quiet village it be true that I might find example enough to prove 
 that man be not mean to meditate upon life , but to take active part in 
 it , and in that action to find his us . but I doubt if I should have 
 profit by such example ; if I should not have look on this 
 small stage of the world as I have look on the large one , with the 
 indifferent eye of a spectator on a trite familiar play carry on 
 by ordinary actor , have not my whole being suddenly leap out of 
 philosophy into passion , and , at once make warmly human , sympathize 
 with humanity wherever it burn and glow . ah , be there to be 
 any doubt of what station , as mortal bride , be due to she , - she , my 
 princess , my fairy ? if so , how contented you shall be , my father , with 
 the worldly career of your son ! how perseveringly he will strive 
  and when do perseverance fail ?   to supply all his deficiency of 
 intellect , genius , knowledge , by the energy concentrate on a single 
 object which - more than intellect , genius , knowledge , unless they attain 
 to equal energy equally concentrate - command what the world call 
 honour . 

 yes , with she , with she as the bearer of my name , with she to whom I , 
 whatever I might do of good or of great , could say , " it be thy work , " 
 I promise that you shall bless the day when you take to your arm a 
 daughter . 

 ......... 

 " thou art in contact with the beloved in all that thou feelest elevated 
 above thee . " so it be write by one of those weird german who search 
 in our bosom for the seed of bury truth , and conjure they into 
 flower before we ourselves be even aware of the seed . 

 every thought that associate itself with my beloved seem to I bear 
 with wing . 

 ......... 

 I have just see she , just part from she . since I have be 
 tell - kindly , wisely tell - that I have no right to hazard her peace of 
 mind unless I be privileged to woo and to win she , I promise myself 
 that I would shun her presence until I have bar my heart to you , as I 
 be do now , and receive that privilege from yourself ; for even have I 
 never make the promise that bind my honour , your consent and blessing 
 must hallow my choice . I do not feel as if I could dare to ask one 
 so innocent and fair to we d an ungrateful , disobedient son . but this 
 evening I meet she , unexpectedly , at the vicar 's , an excellent man , from 
 whom I have learn much ; whose precept , whose example , whose delight 
 in his home , and his life at once active and serene , be in harmony with 
 my own dream when I dream of she . 

 I will tell you the name of the beloved ; hold it as yet a profound 
 secret between you and I . but oh for the day when I may hear you call 
 she by that name , and print on her forehead the only kiss by man of 
 which I should not be jealous . 

 it be Sunday , and after the evening service it be my friend 's custom 
 to gather his child round he , and , without any formal sermon or 
 discourse , engage their interest in subject harmonious to association 
 with the sanctity of the day ; often not directly bear upon religion ; 
 more often , indeed , playfully start from some little incident or some 
 slight story - book which have amuse the child in the course of the 
 past week , and then gradually wind into reference to some sweet moral 
 precept or illustration from some divine example . it be a maxim with 
 he that , while much that child must learn they can only learn well 
 through conscious labour , and as positive task - work , yet religion should 
 be connect in their mind not with labour and task - work , but should 
 become insensibly infuse into their habit of thought , blend 
 itself with memory and image of peace and love ; with the indulgent 
 tenderness of the early teacher , the sinless mirthfulness of the 
 early home ; with consolation in after sorrow , support through after 
 trial , and never part company with its twin sister , Hope . 

 I enter the vicar 's room this evening just as the group have collect 
 round he . by the side of his wife sit a lady in whom I feel a keen 
 interest . her face wear that kind of calm which speak of the lassitude 
 bequeath by sorrow . she be the aunt of my beloved one . Lily have 
 nestle herself on a low ottoman , at the good pastor 's foot , with one 
 of his little girl , round whose shoulder she have wind her arm . she be 
 much more fond of the companionship of child than that of girl of 
 her own age . the vicar 's wife , a very clever woman , once , in my hearing , 
 take she to task for this preference , ask she why she persist in 
 group herself with mere infant who could teach she nothing ? ah ! 
 could you have see the innocent , angel - like expression of her face when 
 she answer simply , " I suppose because with they I feel safe , I mean 
 nearer to God . " 

 Mr. Emlyn - that be the name of the vicar - deduce his homily this 
 evening from a pretty fairy tale which Lily have be tell to his 
 child the day before , and which he draw she on to repeat . 

 take , in brief , the substance of the story : - 

 " once on a time , a king and queen make themselves very unhappy because 
 they have no heir to their throne ; and they pray for one ; and lo , on 
 some bright summer morning , the queen , wake from sleep , see a cradle 
 beside her bed , and in the cradle a beautiful sleeping babe . great 
 day throughout the kingdom ! but as the infant grow up , it become very 
 wayward and fretful : it lose its beauty ; it would not learn its lesson ; 
 it be as naughty as a child could be . the parent be very sorrowful ; 
 the heir , so long for , promise to be a great plague to themselves 
 and their subject . at last one day , to add to their trouble , two little 
 bump appear on the prince 's shoulder . all the doctor be consult 
 as to the cause and the cure of this deformity . of course they try 
 the effect of back - band and steel machine , which give the poor little 
 prince great pain , and make he more unamiable than ever . the bump , 
 nevertheless , grow large , and as they increase , so the prince sicken 
 and pin away . at last a skilful surgeon propose , as the only chance 
 of save the prince 's life , that the bump should be cut out ; and the 
 next morning be fix for that operation . but at night the queen see , 
 or dream she see , a beautiful shape stand by her bedside . and it 
 say to she reproachfully , ' ungrateful woman ! how wouldst thou repay I 
 for the precious boon that my favour bestow on thee ! in I behold the 
 queen of the Fairies . for the heir to thy kingdom , I consign to thy 
 charge an infant from Fairyland , to become a blessing to thee and to 
 thy people ; and thou wouldst inflict upon it a death of torture by the 
 surgeon 's knife . ' and the queen answer , ' precious indeed thou mayest 
 call the boon , - a miserable , sickly , feverish changeling . ' 

 " ' art thou so dull , ' say the beautiful visitant , ' as not to comprehend 
 that the early instinct of the fairy child would be those of 
 discontent , at the exile from its native home ? and in that discontent it 
 would have pin itself to death , or grow up , soured and malignant , 
 a fairy still in its power but a fairy of wrath and evil , have not the 
 strength of its inborn nature suffice to develop the growth of its 
 wing . that which thy blindness condemn as the deformity of the 
 human - bear , be to the fairy - bear the crown perfection of its beauty . 
 Woe to thee , if thou suffer not the wing of the fairy child to grow . ' 

 " and the next morning the queen send away the surgeon when he come with 
 his horrible knife , and remove the back - board and the steel machine 
 from the prince 's shoulder , though all the doctor predict that the 
 child would die . and from that moment the royal heir begin to recover 
 bloom and health . and when at last , out of those deform bump , 
 bud delicately forth the plumage of snow - white wing , the wayward 
 peevishness of the prince give place to sweet temper . instead of 
 scratch his teacher , he become the quick and most docile of 
 pupil , grow up to be the joy of his parent and the pride of their 
 people ; and people say , ' in he we shall have hereafter such a king as 
 we have never yet know . ' " 

 here end Lily 's tale . I can not convey to you a notion of the pretty , 
 playful manner in which it be tell . then she say , with a grave shake 
 of the head , " but you do not seem to know what happen afterwards . do 
 you suppose that the prince never make use of his wing ? listen to I . 
 it be discover by the courtier who attend on his Royal Highness 
 that on certain night , every week , he disappear . in fact , on these 
 night , obedient to the instinct of the wing , he fly from palace 
 hall into Fairyland ; come back thence all the more lovingly dispose 
 towards the human home from which he have escape for a while . " 

 " oh , my child , " interpose the preacher earnestly , " the wing would 
 be give to we in vain if we do not obey the instinct which allure we 
 to soar ; vain , no less , would be the soar , be it not towards 
 the home whence we come , bear back from its native air a strong 
 health , and a serener joy ; more reconcile to the duty of earth by 
 every new flight into heaven . " 

 as he thus complete the moral of Lily 's fairy tale , the girl rise 
 from her low seat , take his hand , kiss it reverently , and walk away 
 towards the window . I could see that she be affect even to tear , 
 which she seek to conceal . later in the evening , when we be 
 disperse on the lawn , for a few minute before the party break up , Lily 
 come to my side timidly and say , in a low whisper , - 

 " be you angry with I ? what have I do to displease you ? " 

 " angry with you ; displeased ? how can you think of I so unjustly ? " 

 " it be so many day since you have call , since I have see you , " 
 she say so artlessly , look up at I with eye in which tear still 
 seem to tremble . 

 before I could trust myself to reply , her aunt approach , and notice 
 I with a cold and distant " good - night , " lead away her niece . 

 I have calculate on walk back to their home with they , as I generally 
 have do when we meet at another house . but the aunt have probably 
 conjecture I might be at the vicarage that evening , and in order to 
 frustrate my intention have engage a carriage for their return . no doubt 
 she have be warn against permit further intimacy with her niece . 

 my father , I must come to you at once , discharge my promise , and receive 
 from your own lip your consent to my choice ; for you will consent , will 
 you not ? but I wish you to be prepare beforehand , and I shall therefore 
 put up these disjoint fragment of my commune with my own heart and 
 with your , and post they to - morrow . expect I to follow they after 
 leave you a day free to consider they alone , - alone , my dear father : 
 they be mean for no eye but your . 

 K. C. 



 CHAPTER VI . 

 the next day Kenelm walk into the town , post his voluminous letter 
 to Sir Peter , and then look in at the shop of Will Somers , mean to 
 make some purchase of basket - work or trifle fancy good in Jessie 's 
 pretty store of such article , that might please the taste of his 
 mother . 

 on enter the shop his heart beat quick . he see two young form 
 bend over the counter , examine the content of a glass case . one 
 of these customer be Clemmy ; in the other there be no mistaking the 
 slight graceful shape of Lily Mordaunt . Clemmy be exclaim , " oh , it 
 be so pretty , Mrs. Somers ! but , " turn her eye from the counter to a 
 silk purse in her hand , she add sorrowfully , " I can not   buy it . I have 
 not get enough , not by a great deal . " 

 " and what be it , Miss Clemmy ? " ask Kenelm . 

 the two girl turn round at his voice , and Clemmy 's face brighten . 

 " look here , " she say , " be it not too lovely ? " 

 the object thus admire and coveted be a little gold locket , enrich 
 by a cross compose of small pearl . 

 " I assure you , miss , " say Jessie , who have acquire all the coax art 
 of her trade , " it be really a great bargain . Miss Mary Burrows , who be 
 here just before you come , buy one not nearly so pretty and give ten 
 shilling more for it . " 

 Miss Mary Burrows be the same age as Miss Clementina Emlyn , and there 
 be a rivalry as to smartness between those youthful beauty . " Miss 
 burrow ! " sigh Clemmy , very scornfully . 

 but Kenelm 's attention be distract from Clemmy 's locket to a little 
 ring which Lily have be persuade by Mrs. Somers to try on , and which 
 she now draw off and return with a shake of the head . Mrs. Somers , who 
 see that she have small chance of sell the locket to Clemmy , be now 
 address herself to the eld girl more likely to have sufficient 
 pocket - money , and whom , at all event , it be quite safe to trust . 

 " the ring fit you so nicely , Miss Mordaunt , and every young lady of 
 your age wear at least one ring ; allow I to put it up . " she add in 
 a low voice , " though we only sell the article in this case on 
 commission , it be all the same to we whether we be pay now or at 
 Christmas . " 

 " ' tis no use tempt I , Mrs. Somers , " say Lily , laughing , and then 
 with a grave air , " I promise Lion , I mean my guardian , never to run 
 into debt , and I never will . " 

 Lily turn resolutely from the perilous counter , take up a paper 
 that contain a new ribbon she have buy for Blanche , and Clemmy 
 reluctantly follow she out of the shop . 

 Kenelm linger behind and select very hastily a few trifle , to be 
 send to he that evening with some specimen of basket - work leave to 
 Will be tasteful discretion ; then purchase the locket on which Clemmy 
 have set her heart ; but all the while his thought be fix on the ring 
 which Lily have try on . it be no sin against etiquette to give the 
 locket to a child like Clemmy , but would it not be a cruel impertinence 
 to offer a gift to Lily ? 

 Jessie speak : " Miss Mordaunt take a great fancy to this ring , Mr. 
 Chillingly . I be sure her aunt would like she to have it . I have a great 
 mind to put it by on the chance of Mrs. Cameron 's calling here . it would 
 be a pity if it be buy by some one else . " 

 " I think , " say Kenelm , " that I will take the liberty of show it to 
 Mrs. Cameron . no doubt she will buy it for her niece . add the price 
 of it to my bill . " he seize the ring and carry it off ; a very poor 
 little simple ring , with a single stone shape as a heart , not half the 
 price of the locket . 

 Kenelm rejoin the young lady just where the path split into two , the 
 one lead direct to Grasmere , the other through the churchyard to 
 the vicarage . he present the locket to Clemmy with brief kindly word 
 which easily remove any scruple she might have have in accept it ; 
 and , delight with her acquisition , she bound off to the vicarage , 
 impatient to show the prize to her mamma and sister , and more 
 especially to Miss Mary Burrows , who be come to lunch with they . 

 Kenelm walk on slowly by Lily 's side . 

 " you have a good heart , Mr. Chillingly , " say she , somewhat abruptly . 
 " how it must please you to give such pleasure ! dear little Clemmy ! " 

 this artless praise , and the perfect absence of envy or thought of self 
 evince by her joy that her friend 's wish be gratify , though her own 
 be not , enchant Kenelm . 

 " if it please to give pleasure , " say he , " it be your turn to be 
 pleased now ; you can confer such pleasure upon I . " 

 " how ? " she ask , falteringly , and with quick change of colour . 

 " by concede to I the same right your little friend have allow . " 

 and he draw forth the ring . 

 Lily rear her head with a first impulse of haughtiness . but when 
 her eye meet his the head droop down again , and a slight shiver run 
 through her frame . 

 " Miss Mordaunt , " resume Kenelm , master his passionate longing to 
 fall at her foot and say , " but , oh ! in this ring it be my love that 
 I offer , - it be my troth that I pledge ! " " Miss Mordaunt , spare I the 
 misery of think that I have offend you ; least of all would I do so 
 on this day , for it may be some little while before I see you again . 
 I be go home for a few day upon a matter which may affect the 
 happiness of my life , and on which I should be a bad son and an 
 unworthy gentleman if I do not consult he who , in all that concern 
 my affection , have train I to turn to he , the father ; in all that 
 concern my honour to he , the gentleman . " 

 a speech more unlike that which any delineator of manner and moral in 
 the present day would put into the mouth of a lover , no critic in " The 
 Londoner " could ridicule . but , somehow or other , this poor little tame 
 of butterfly and teller of fairy tale comprehend on the instant all 
 that this most eccentric of human being thus frigidly leave untold . 
 into her innermost heart it sink more deeply than would the most ardent 
 declaration put into the lip of the booby or the scamp in whom 
 delineator of manner in the present day too often debase the 
 magnificent chivalry embody in the name of " lover . " 

 where these two have , while speak , halt on the path along the 
 brook - side , there be a bench , on which it so happen that they have 
 seat themselves week before . a few moment later on that bench they 
 be seat again . 

 and the trumpery little ring with its turquoise heart be on Lily 's 
 finger , and there they continue to sit for nearly half an hour ; 
 not talk much , but wondrously happy ; not a single vow of troth 
 interchange . no , not even a word that could be construe into " I love . " 
 and yet when they rise from the bench , and go silently along the 
 brook - side , each know that the other be belove . 

 when they reach the gate that admit into the garden of Grasmere , 
 Kenelm make a slight start . Mrs. Cameron be lean over the gate . 
 whatever alarm at the appearance Kenelm might have feel be certainly 
 not share by Lily ; she advance lightly before he , kiss her aunt on 
 the cheek , and pass on across the lawn with a bind in her step and 
 the carol of a song upon her lip . 

 Kenelm remain by the gate , face to face with Mrs. Cameron . she open 
 the gate , put her arm in his , and lead he back along the brook - side . 

 " I be sure , Mr. Chillingly , " she say , " that you will not impute to my 
 word any meaning more grave than that which I wish they to convey , 
 when I remind you that there be no place too obscure to escape from the 
 ill - nature of gossip , and you must own that my niece incur the chance 
 of its notice if she be see walk alone in these by - path with a 
 man of your age and position , and whose sojourn in the neighbourhood , 
 without any ostensible object or motive , have already begin to excite 
 conjecture . I do not for a moment assume that you regard my niece in any 
 other light than that of an artless child , whose originality of taste 
 or fancy may serve to amuse you ; and still less do I suppose that she 
 be in danger of misrepresent any attention on your part . but for her 
 sake I be bind to consider what other may say . excuse I , then , if I 
 add that I think you be also bind in honour and in good feeling to do 
 the same . Mr. Chillingly , it would give I a great sense of relief if it 
 suit your plan to move from the neighbourhood . " 

 " my dear Mrs. Cameron , " answer Kenelm , who have listen to this speech 
 with imperturbable calm of visage , " I thank you much for your candour , 
 and I be glad to have this opportunity of inform you that I be about 
 to move from this neighbourhood , with the hope of return to it in 
 a very few day and rectify your mistake as to the point of view 
 in which I regard your niece . in a word , " here the expression of his 
 countenance and the tone of his voice undergo a sudden change , " it be 
 the dear wish of my heart to be empower by my parent to assure you 
 of the warmth with which they will welcome your niece as their daughter , 
 should she deign to listen to my suit and intrust I with the charge of 
 her happiness . " 

 Mrs. Cameron stop short , gaze into his face with a look of 
 inexpressible dismay . 

 " no ! Mr. Chillingly , " she exclaim , " this must not be , - can not be . put 
 out of your mind an idea so wild . a young man 's senseless romance . 
 your parent can not consent to your union with my niece ; I tell you 
 beforehand they can not . " 

 " but why ? " ask Kenelm , with a slight smile , and not much impressed by 
 the vehemence of Mrs. Cameron 's adjuration . 

 " why ? " she repeat passionately ; and then recover something of her 
 habitual weariness of quiet . " the why be easily explain . Mr. Kenelm 
 Chillingly be the heir of a very ancient house and , I be tell , of 
 considerable estate . Lily Mordaunt be a nobody , an orphan , without 
 fortune , without connection , the ward of a humbly bear artist , to 
 whom she owe the roof that shelter she ; she be without the ordinary 
 education of a gentlewoman ; she have see nothing of the world in which 
 you move . your parent have not the right to allow a son so young 
 as yourself to throw himself out of his proper sphere by a rash and 
 imprudent alliance . and , never would I consent , never would Walter 
 Melville consent , to she enter into any family reluctant to receive 
 she . there , - that be enough . dismiss the notion so lightly entertain . 
 and farewell . " 

 " Madam , " answer Kenelm very earnestly , " believe I , that have I not 
 entertain the hope approach to conviction that the reason you urge 
 against my presumption will not have the weight with my parent which 
 you ascribe to they , I should not have speak to you thus frankly . Young 
 though I be , still I might fairly claim the right to choose for myself 
 in marriage . but I give to my father a very binding promise that I would 
 not formally propose to any one till I have acquaint he with my desire 
 to do so , and obtain his approval of my choice ; and he be the last man 
 in the world who would withhold that approval where my heart be set on 
 it as it be now . I want no fortune with a wife , and should I ever care 
 to advance my position in the world , no connection would help I like 
 the approve smile of the woman I love . there be but one qualification 
 which my parent would deem they have the right to exact from my 
 choice of one who be to bear our name . I mean that she should have the 
 appearance , the manner , the principle , and - my mother at least might 
 add - the birth of a gentlewoman . well , as to appearance and manner , I 
 have see much of fine society from my boyhood , and find no one among 
 the highest bear who can excel the exquisite refinement of every look , 
 and the inborn delicacy of every thought , in she of whom , if mine , I 
 shall be as proud as I shall be fond . as to defect in the frippery 
 and tinsel of a boarding - school education , they be very soon remedie . 
 remain only the last consideration , - birth . Mrs. Braefield inform I 
 that you have assure she that , though circumstance into which as yet 
 I have no right to inquire , have make she the ward of a man of humble 
 origin , Miss Mordaunt be of gentle birth . do you deny that ? " 

 " no , " say Mrs. Cameron , hesitating , but with a flash of pride in her 
 eye as she go on . " no . I can not deny that my niece be descend from 
 those who , in point of birth , be not unequal to your own ancestor . 
 but what of that ? " she add , with a bitter despondency of tone . 
 " equality of birth cease when one fall into poverty , obscurity , 
 neglect , nothingness ! " 

 " really this be a morbid habit on your part . but , since we have thus 
 speak so confidentially , will you not empower I to answer the question 
 which will probably be put to I , and the answer to which will , I doubt 
 not , remove every obstacle in the way of my happiness ? whatever the 
 reason which might very sufficiently induce you to preserve , whilst 
 live so quietly in this place , a discreet silence as to the parentage 
 of Miss Mordaunt and your own , - and I be well aware that those whom 
 alter circumstance of fortune have compel to alter mode of life 
 may disdain to parade to stranger the pretension to a high station 
 than that to which they reconcile their habit , - whatever , I say , 
 such reason for silence to stranger , should they preclude you from 
 confide to I , an aspirant to your niece 's hand , a secret which , after 
 all , can not be conceal from her future husband ? " 

 " from her future husband ? of course not , " answer Mrs. Cameron . " but I 
 decline to be question by one whom I may never see again , and of whom 
 I know so little . I decline , indeed , to assist in remove any obstacle 
 to a union with my niece , which I hold to be in every way unsuited to 
 either party . I have no cause even to believe that my niece would accept 
 you if you be free to propose to she . you have not , I presume , speak 
 to she as an aspirant to her hand . you have not address to she 
 any declaration of your attachment , or seek to extract from her 
 inexperience any word that warrant you in think that her heart will 
 break if she never see you again . " 

 " I do not merit such cruel and taunt question , " say Kenelm , 
 indignantly . " but I will say no more now . when we again meet let I hope 
 you will treat I less unkindly . adieu ! " 

 " Stay , sir . a word or two more . you persist in ask your father and 
 Lady Chillingly to consent to your proposal to Miss Mordaunt ? " 

 " certainly I do . " 

 " and you will promise I , on your word as a gentleman , to state fairly 
 all the cause which might fairly operate against their consent , - the 
 poverty , the humble rearing , the imperfect education of my niece , - so 
 that they might not hereafter say you have entrap their consent , and 
 avenge themselves for your deceit by contempt for she ? " 

 " ah , madam , madam , you really try my patience too far . but take my 
 promise , if you can hold that of value from one whom you can suspect of 
 deliberate deceit . " 

 " I beg your pardon , Mr. Chillingly . Bear with my rudeness . I have be 
 so take by surprise , I scarcely know what I be say . but let we 
 understand each other completely before we part . if your parent 
 withhold their consent you will communicate it to I ; I only , not to 
 Lily . I repeat I know nothing of the state of her affection . but it 
 might embitter any girl 's life to be lead on to love one whom she could 
 not marry . " 

 " it shall be as you say . but if they do consent ? " 

 " then you will speak to I before you seek an interview with Lily , for 
 then come another question : will her guardian consent ? - and - and - " 

 " and what ? " 

 " no matter . I rely on your honour in this request , as in all else . 
 good - day . " 

 she turn back with hurried footstep , mutter to herself , " but they 
 will not consent . Heaven grant that they will not consent , or if they 
 do , what - what be to be say or do ? oh , that Walter Melville be 
 here , or that I know where to write to he ! " 

 on his way back to Cromwell Lodge , Kenelm be overtake by the vicar . 

 " I be come to you , my dear Mr. Chillingly , first to thank you for the 
 very pretty present with which you have gladden the heart of my little 
 Clemmy , and next to ask you to come with I quietly to - day to meet Mr. 
  - - - , the celebrate antiquarian , who come to Moleswich this morning 
 at my request to examine that old Gothic tomb in our churchyard . only 
 think , though he can not read the inscription any well than we can , he 
 know all about its history . it seem that a young knight renowne for 
 feat of valour in the reign of Henry IV . marry a daughter of one of 
 those great Earls of Montfichet who be then the most powerful family 
 in these part . he be slay in defend the church from an assault by 
 some disorderly rioter of the Lollard faction ; he fall on the very spot 
 where the tomb be now place . that account for its situation in the 
 churchyard , not within the fabric . Mr. - - - discover this fact in 
 an old memoir of the ancient and once famous family to which the young 
 knight Albert belong , and which come , alas ! to so shameful an end , 
 the Fletwodes , baron of Fletwode and Malpas . what a triumph over pretty 
 Lily Mordaunt , who always choose to imagine that the tomb must be that of 
 some heroine of her own romantic invention ! do come to dinner ; Mr. - - - 
 be a most agreeable man , and full of interesting anecdote . " 

 " I be so sorry I can not . I be oblige to return home at once for a few 
 day . that old family of Fletwode ! I think I see before I , while we 
 speak , the gray tower in which they once hold sway ; and the last of the 
 race follow Mammon along the Progress of the Age , - a convict felon ! 
 what a terrible satire on the pride of birth ! " 

 Kenelm leave Cromwell Lodge that evening , but he still keep on his 
 apartment there , say he might be back unexpectedly any day in the 
 course of the next week . 

 he remain two day in London , wish all that he have communicate to 
 Sir Peter in write to sink into his father 's heart before a personal 
 appeal to it . 

 the more he revolve the ungracious manner in which Mrs. Cameron have 
 receive his confidence , the less importance he attach to it . an 
 exaggerated sense of disparity of fortune in a person who appear 
 to he to have the pride so common to those who have know well day , 
 couple with a nervous apprehension lest his family should ascribe to 
 she any attempt to ensnare a very young man of considerable worldly 
 pretension into a marriage with a penniless niece , seem to account 
 for much that have at first perplexed and anger he . and if , as he 
 conjecture , Mrs. Cameron have once hold a much high position in the 
 world than she do now , - a conjecture warrant by a certain peculiar 
 conventional undeniable elegance which characterize her habitual 
 manner , - and be now , as she imply , actually a dependant on the bounty 
 of a painter who have only just acquire some professional distinction , 
 she might well shrink from the mortification of become an object of 
 compassion to her rich neighbour ; nor , when he come to think of it , 
 have he any more right than those neighbour to any confidence as to 
 her own or Lily 's parentage , so long as he be not formally entitle to 
 claim admission into her privity . 

 London seem to he intolerably dull and wearisome . he call nowhere 
 except at Lady Glenalvon 's ; he be glad to hear from the servant that 
 she be still at Exmundham . he rely much on the influence of the queen 
 of the fashion with his mother , whom he know would be more difficult to 
 persuade than Sir Peter , nor do he doubt that he should win to his side 
 that sympathize and warm - hearted queen . 



 CHAPTER VII . 

 it be somewhere about three week since the party invite by Sir Peter 
 and Lady Chillingly assemble at Exmundham , and they be still there , 
 though people invite to a country house have seldom compassion 
 enough for the dulness of its owner to stay more than three day . Mr. 
 Chillingly Mivers , indeed , have not exceed that orthodox limit . quietly 
 observant , during his stay , of young Gordon 's manner towards Cecilia , 
 and her towards he , he have satisfy himself that there be no 
 cause to alarm Sir Peter , or induce the worthy baronet to regret the 
 invitation he have give to that clever kinsman . for all the visitor 
 remain Exmundham have a charm . 

 to Lady Glenalvon , because in the hostess she meet she most familiar 
 friend when both be young girl , and because it please she to note 
 the interest which Cecilia Travers take in the place so associate with 
 memory of the man to whom it be Lady Glenalvon 's hope to see she 
 united . to Chillingly Gordon , because no opportunity could be so 
 favourable for his own well - conceal design on the hand and heart of 
 the heiress . to the heiress herself the charm need no explanation . 

 to Leopold Travers the attraction of Exmundham be unquestionably less 
 fascinating . still even he be well pleased to prolong his stay . his 
 active mind find amusement in wander over an estate the acreage of 
 which would have warrant a much large rental , and lecture Sir Peter 
 on the old - fashioned system of husbandry which that good - natured easy 
 proprietor permit his tenant to adopt , as well as on the number of 
 superfluous hand that be employ on the pleasure - ground and in the 
 general management of the estate , such as carpenter , sawyer , woodman , 
 bricklayer , and smith . 

 when the squire say , " you could do just as well with a third of those 
 costly dependant , " Sir Peter , unconsciously plagiarize the answer of 
 the old french grand seigneur , reply , " very likely . but the question 
 be , could the rest do just as well without I ? " 

 Exmundham , indeed , be a very expensive place to keep up . the house , 
 build by some ambitious Chillingly three century ago , would have be 
 large for an owner of thrice the revenue ; and though the flower - garden 
 be small than that at Braefieldville , there be path and drive 
 through mile of young plantation and old woodland that furnish lazy 
 occupation to an army of labourer . no wonder that , despite his nominal 
 ten thousand a year , Sir Peter be far from be a rich man . Exmundham 
 devour at least half the rental . the active mind of Leopold Travers 
 also find ample occupation in the store of his host 's extensive 
 library . 

 traver , never much of a reader , be by no mean a despiser of learning , 
 and he soon take to historical and archaeological research with the 
 ardour of a man who must always throw energy into any pursuit that 
 occasion present as an escape from indolence . Indolent Leopold Travers 
 never could be . but , more than either of these resource of occupation , 
 the companionship of Chillingly Gordon excite his interest and 
 quicken the current of his thought . always fond of renew his own 
 youth in the society of the young , and of the sympathize temperament 
 which belong to cordial nature , he have , as we have see , enter very 
 heartily into the ambition of George Belvoir , and reconcile himself 
 very pliably to the humour of Kenelm Chillingly . but the first of these 
 two be a little too commonplace , the second a little too eccentric , to 
 enlist the complete good - fellowship which , be alike very clever and 
 very practical , Leopold Travers establish with that very clever and 
 very practical representative of the rise generation , Chillingly 
 Gordon . between they there be this meeting - ground , political and 
 worldly , a great contempt for innocuous old - fashioned notion ; add to 
 which , in the mind of Leopold Travers , be a contempt - which would 
 have be complete , but that the contempt admit dread - of harmful 
 new - fashioned notion which , interpret by his thought , threaten 
 ruin to his country and downfall to the folly of existent society , 
 and which , interpret by his language , tame itself into the man of the 
 world 's phrase , " go too far for I . " notion which , by the much 
 more cultivate intellect and the immeasurably more soaring ambition of 
 Chillingly Gordon , might be view and criticise thus : " could I accept 
 these doctrine ? I do not   see my way to be Prime Minister of a country 
 in which religion and capital be still power to be consult . and , 
 put aside religion and capital , I do not   see how , if these doctrine 
 pass into law , with a good coat on my back I should not be a sufferer . 
 either I , as have a good coat , should have it tear off my back as a 
 capitalist , or , if I remonstrate in the name of moral honesty , be put 
 to death as a religionist . " 

 therefore when Leopold Travers say , " of course we must go on , " 
 chillingly Gordon smile and answer , " certainly , go on . " and when 
 Leopold Travers add , " but we may go too far , " chillingly Gordon shake 
 his dead , and reply , " how true that be ! certainly too far . " 

 apart from the congeniality of political sentiment , there be other 
 point of friendly contact between the old and young man . each be 
 an exceedingly pleasant man of the world ; and , though Leopold Travers 
 could not have plumb certain deep in Chillingly Gordon 's nature , - and 
 in every man 's nature there be deep which his able observer can not 
 fathom , - yet he be not wrong when he say to himself , " Gordon be a 
 gentleman . " 

 utterly would my reader misconceive that very clever young man , if they 
 hold he to be a hypocrite like Blifil or Joseph Surface . chillingly 
 Gordon , in every private sense of the word , be a gentleman . if he have 
 stake his whole fortune on a rubber at whist , and an undetected glance 
 at his adversary 's hand would have make the difference between loss and 
 gain , he would have turn away his head and say , " hold up your card . " 
 Neither , as I have have occasion to explain before , be he actuate 
 by any motive in common with the vulgar fortune - hunter in his secret 
 resolve to win the hand of the heiress . he recognize no inequality of 
 worldly gift between they . he say to himself , " whatever she may give 
 I in money , I shall amply repay in worldly position if I succeed , and 
 succeed I certainly shall . if I be as rich as Lord Westminster , and 
 still care about be Prime Minister , I should select she as the most 
 fitting woman I have see for a Prime Minister 's wife . " 

 it must be acknowledge that this sort of self - commune , if not that of 
 a very ardent lover , be very much that of a sensible man set high 
 value on himself , bent on achieve the prize of a public career , and 
 desirous of securing in his wife a woman who would adorn the station 
 to which he confidently aspire . in fact , no one so able as Chillingly 
 Gordon would ever have conceive the ambition of be Minister of 
 England if in all that in private life constitute the english gentleman 
 he could be fairly subject to reproach . 

 he be but in public life what many a gentleman honest in private life 
 have be before he , an ambitious , resolute egotist , by no mean without 
 personal affection , but hold they all subordinate to the object 
 of personal ambition , and with no more of other principle than that 
 of expediency in reference to his own career than would cover a silver 
 penny . but expediency in itself he deem the statesman 's only rational 
 principle . and to the consideration of expediency he bring a very 
 unprejudiced intellect , quite fit to decide whether the public 
 opinion of a free and enlightened people be for turn St. Paul 's 
 Cathedral into an Agapemone or not . 

 during the summer week he have thus vouchsafe to the turf and grove 
 of Exmundham , Leopold Travers be not the only person whose good opinion 
 Chillingly Gordon have ingratiate . he have win the warm approbation 
 from Mrs. Campion . his conversation remind she of that which she have 
 enjoy in the house of her depart spouse . in talk with Cecilia she 
 be fond of contrast he to Kenelm , not to the favour of the 
 latter , whose humour she utterly fail to understand , and whom she 
 pertinaciously describe as ' so affected . " " a most superior young man 
 Mr. Gordon , so well inform , so sensible , - above all , so natural . " such 
 be her judgment upon the unavowed candidate to Cecilia 's hand ; and 
 Mrs. Campion require no avowal to divine the candidature . even Lady 
 Glenalvon have begin to take friendly interest in the fortune of this 
 promise young man . Most woman can sympathize with youthful ambition . 
 he impress she with a deep conviction of his ability , and still more 
 with respect for their concentration upon practical object of power 
 and renown . she too , like Mrs. Campion , begin to draw comparison 
 unfavourable to Kenelm between the two cousin : the one seem so 
 slothfully determine to hide his candle under a bushel , the other so 
 honestly disposed to set his light before man . she feel also annoy and 
 angry that Kenelm be thus absent himself from the paternal home at 
 the very time of her first visit to it , and when he have so felicitous 
 an opportunity of see more of the girl in whom he know that Lady 
 Glenalvon deem he might win , if he would properly woo , the wife that 
 would well suit he . so that when one day Mrs. Campion , walk through 
 the garden alone with Lady Glenalvon while from the garden into the 
 park go Chillingly Gordon , arm - in - arm with Leopold Travers , abruptly 
 ask , " do not   you think that Mr. Gordon be smite with Cecilia , though 
 he , with his moderate fortune , do not dare to say so ? and do not   you 
 think that any girl , if she be as rich as Cecilia will be , would be 
 more proud of such a husband as Chillingly Gordon than of some silly 
 earl ? " 

 Lady Glenalvon answer curtly , but somewhat sorrowfully , " yes . " 

 after a pause she add , " there be a man with whom I do once think she 
 would have be happy than with any other . one man who ought to be 
 dearer to I than Mr. Gordon , for he save the life of my son , and who , 
 though perhaps less clever than Mr. Gordon , still have a great deal of 
 talent within he , which might come forth and make he - what shall I 
 say ? - a useful and distinguished member of society , if marry to a girl 
 so sure of raise any man she marry as Cecilia Travers . but if I be 
 to renounce that hope , and look through the range of young man bring 
 under my notice , I do not   know one , put aside consideration of rank 
 and fortune , I should prefer for a clever daughter who go heart and 
 soul with the ambition of a clever man . but , Mrs. Campion , I have not 
 yet quite renounce my hope ; and , unless I do , I yet think there be one 
 man to whom I would rather give Cecilia , if she be my daughter . " 

 Therewith Lady Glenalvon so decidedly break off the subject of 
 conversation that Mrs. Campion could not have renew it without such a 
 breach of the female etiquette of good breeding as Mrs. Campion be the 
 last person to adventure . 

 Lady Chillingly could not help be pleased with Gordon . he be light 
 in hand , serve to amuse her guest , and make up a rubber of whist in 
 case of need . 

 there be two person , however , with whom Gordon make no ground ; 
 namely , Parson John and Sir Peter . when Travers praise he one day for 
 the solidity of his part and the soundness of his judgment , the Parson 
 reply snappishly , " yes , solid and sound as one of those table you 
 buy at a broker 's ; the thickness of the varnish hide the defect in 
 the joint : the whole framework be rickety . " but when the Parson be 
 indignantly urge to state the reason by which he arrive at so harsh 
 a conclusion , he could only reply by an assertion which seem to his 
 questioner a declamatory burst of parsonic intolerance . 

 " because , " say Parson John , " he have no love for man , and no reverence 
 for God . and no character be sound and solid which enlarge its surface 
 at the expense of its support . " 

 on the other hand , the favour with which Sir Peter have at first regard 
 Gordon gradually vanish , in proportion as , act on the hint miver 
 have originally throw out but do not deem it necessary to repeat , he 
 watch the pain which the young man take to insinuate himself into 
 the good grace of Mr. Travers and Mrs. Campion , and the artful and 
 half - suppress gallantry of his manner to the heiress . 

 perhaps Gordon have not venture thus " to feel his way " till after miver 
 have depart ; or perhaps Sir Peter 's parental anxiety render he , in 
 this instance , a shrewd observer than be the man of the world , 
 whose natural acuteness be , in matter of affection , not unfrequently 
 render languid by his acquire philosophy of indifferentism . 

 More and more every day , every hour , of her sojourn beneath his roof , 
 do Cecilia become dearer to Sir Peter , and strong and strong became 
 his wish to secure she for his daughter - in - law . he be inexpressibly 
 flatter by her preference for his company : ever at hand to share his 
 customary walk , his kindly visit to the cottage of peasant or the 
 homestead of petty tenant ; wherein both be sure to hear many a 
 simple anecdote of Master Kenelm in his childhood , anecdote of whim or 
 good - nature , of considerate pity or reckless courage . 

 throughout all these variety of thought or feel in the social 
 circle around she , Lady Chillingly preserve the unmoved calm of she 
 dignified position . a very good woman certainly , and very ladylike . no 
 one could detect a flaw in her character , or a fold awry in her flounce . 
 she be only , like the god of Epicurus , too good to trouble her serene 
 existence with the care of we simple mortal . not that she be without 
 a placid satisfaction in the tribute which the world lay upon she 
 altar ; nor be she so supremely goddess - like as to soar above the 
 household affection which humanity entail on the dweller and denizen 
 of earth . she like her husband as much as most elderly wife like their 
 elderly husband . she bestow upon Kenelm a like somewhat more warm , 
 and mingle with compassion . his eccentricity would have puzzle she , 
 if she have allow herself to be puzzle : it trouble she less to pity 
 they . she do not share her husband 's desire for his union with Cecilia . 
 she think that her son would have a high place in the county if he 
 marry Lady Jane , the Duke of Clanville 's daughter ; and " that be what 
 he ought to do , " say Lady Chillingly to herself . she entertain 
 none of the fear that have induce Sir Peter to extract from Kenelm 
 the promise not to pledge his hand before he have receive his father 's 
 consent . that the son of Lady Chillingly should make a mesalliance , 
 however crotchety he might be in other respect , be a thought that it 
 would have so disturb she to admit that she do not admit it . 

 such be the condition of thing at Exmundham when the lengthy 
 communication of Kenelm reach Sir Peter 's hand . 




 BOOK VIII . 



 CHAPTER I. 

 never in his whole life have the mind of Sir Peter be so agitated as it 
 be during and after the perusal of Kenelm 's flighty composition . he have 
 receive it at the breakfast - table , and , open it eagerly , run his eye 
 hastily over the content , till he very soon arrive at sentence 
 which appal he . Lady Chillingly , who be fortunately busy at the 
 tea - urn , do not observe the dismay on his countenance . it be visible 
 only to Cecilia and to Gordon . neither guess who that letter be from . 

 " no bad news , I hope , " say Cecilia , softly . 

 " bad news , " echo Sir Peter . " no , my dear , no ; a letter on business . 
 it seem terribly long , " and he thrust the packet into his pocket , 
 muttering , ' see to it by and by . " 

 " that slovenly farmer of your , Mr. Nostock , have fail , I suppose , " 
 say Mr. Travers , look up and observe a quiver on his host 's 
 lip . " I tell you he would , - a fine farm too . let I choose you another 
 tenant . " 

 Sir Peter shake his head with a wan smile . 

 " Nostock will not fail . there have be six generation of nostock on 
 the farm . " 

 " so I should guess , " say Travers , dryly . 

 " and - and , " falter Sir Peter , " if the last of the race fail , he must 
 lean upon I , and - if one of the two break down - it shall not be - " 

 " shall not be that cross - cropping blockhead , my dear Sir Peter . this be 
 carry benevolence too far . " 

 here the tact and savoir vivre of Chillingly Gordon come to the rescue 
 of the host . possess himself of the " Times " newspaper , he utter an 
 exclamation of surprise , genuine or simulated , and read aloud an extract 
 from the lead article , announce an impending change in the Cabinet . 

 as soon as he could quit the breakfast - table , Sir Peter hurry into 
 his library and there give himself up to the study of Kenelm 's unwelcome 
 communication . the task take he long , for he stop at interval , 
 overcome by the struggle of his heart , now melt into sympathy with the 
 passionate eloquence of a son hitherto so free from amorous romance , and 
 now sorrow for the ruin of his own cherished hope . this uneducated 
 country girl would never be such a helpmate to a man like Kenelm as 
 would have be Cecilia Travers . at length , have finish the letter , 
 he bury his head between his clasp hand , and try hard to 
 realize the situation that place the father and son into such direct 
 antagonism . 

 " but , " he murmur , " after all it be the boy 's happiness that must be 
 consult . if he will not be happy in my way , what right have I to say 
 that he shall not be happy in his ? " 

 just then Cecilia come softly into the room . she have acquire the 
 privilege of enter his library at will ; sometimes to choose a book of 
 his recommendation , sometimes to direct and seal his letter , - Sir Peter 
 be grateful to any one who save he an extra trouble , - and 
 sometimes , especially at this hour , to decoy he forth into his wonte 
 constitutional walk . 

 he lift his face at the sound of her approach tread and her win 
 voice , and the face be so sad that the tear rush to her eye on 
 see it . she lay her hand on his shoulder , and say pleadingly , " Dear 
 Sir Peter , what be it , - what be it ? " 

 " ah - ah , my dear , " say Sir Peter , gather up the scatter sheet of 
 Kenelm 's effusion with hurried , tremble hand . " do not   ask , - do not   talk 
 of it ; ' tis but one of the disappointment that all of we must undergo , 
 when we invest our hope in the uncertain will of other . " 

 then , observe that the tear be trickle down the girl 's fair , pale 
 cheek , he take her hand in both his , kiss her forehead , and say , 
 whisperingly , " pretty one , how good you have be to I ! Heaven bless 
 you . what a wife you will be to some man ! " 

 thus say , he shamble out of the room through the open casement . she 
 follow he impulsively , wonderingly ; but before she reach his side 
 he turn round , wave his hand with a gently repel gesture , and 
 go his way alone through dense fir - grove which have be plant in 
 honour of Kenelm 's birth . 



 CHAPTER II . 

 KENELM arrive at Exmundham just in time to dress for dinner . his 
 arrival be not unexpected , for the morning after his father have 
 receive his communication , Sir Peter have say to Lady Chillingly - " that 
 he have hear from Kenelm to the effect that he might be down any day . " 

 " quite time he should come , " say Lady Chillingly . " have you his letter 
 about you ? " 

 " no , my dear Caroline . of course he send you his kind love , poor 
 fellow . " 

 " why poor fellow ? have he be ill ? " 

 " no ; but there seem to be something on his mind . if so we must do what 
 we can to relieve it . he be the good of son , Caroline . " 

 " I be sure I have nothing to say against he , except , " add she 
 ladyship , reflectively , " that I do wish he be a little more like other 
 young man . " 

 " Hum - like Chillingly Gordon , for instance ? " 

 " well , yes ; Mr. Gordon be a remarkably well - breed , sensible young man . 
 how different from that disagreeable , bearish father of his , who go to 
 law with you ! " 

 " very different indeed , but with just as much of the chillingly blood in 
 he . how the Chillinglys ever give birth to a Kenelm be a question much 
 more puzzling . " 

 " oh , my dear Sir Peter , do not   be metaphysical . you know how I hate 
 puzzle . " 

 " and yet , Caroline , I have to thank you for a puzzle which I can never 
 interpret by my brain . there be a great many puzzle in human nature 
 which can only be interpret by the heart . " 

 " very true , " say Lady Chillingly . " I suppose Kenelm be to have his old 
 room , just opposite to Mr. Gordon 's . " 

 " Ay - ay , just opposite . opposite they will be all their life . only 
 think , Caroline , I have make a discovery ! " 

 " dear I ! I hope not . your discovery be generally very expensive , and 
 bring we in contact with such very odd people . " 

 " this discovery shall not cost we a penny , and I do not   know any people 
 so odd as not to comprehend it . briefly it be this : to genius the 
 first requisite be heart ; it be no requisite at all to talent . my dear 
 Caroline , Gordon have as much talent as any young man I know , but he 
 want the first requisite of genius . I be not by any mean sure that 
 Kenelm have genius , but there be no doubt that he have the first requisite 
 of genius , - heart . heart be a very perplexing , wayward , irrational 
 thing ; and that perhaps account for the general incapacity to 
 comprehend genius , while any fool can comprehend talent . my dear 
 Caroline , you know that it be very seldom , not more than once in three 
 year , that I presume to have a will of my own against a will of your ; 
 but should there come a question in which our son 's heart be concern , 
 then   speak between ourselves   my will must govern your . " 

 " Sir Peter be grow more odd every day , " say Lady Chillingly to 
 herself when leave alone . " but he do not mean ill , and there be bad 
 husband in the world . " 

 Therewith she ring for her maid , give requisite order for the preparing 
 of Kenelm 's room , which have not be sleep in for many month , and then 
 consult that functionary as to the adaptation of some dress of her , 
 too costly to be lay aside , to the style of some dress less costly 
 which Lady Glenalvon have import from Paris as la derniere mode . 

 on the very day on which Kenelm arrive at Exmundham , Chillingly Gordon 
 have receive this letter from Mr. Gerald Danvers . 


 DEAR GORDON , - in the ministerial change announce as rumour in the 
 public paper , and which you may accept as certain , that sweet little 
 cherub - be to be send to sit up aloft and pray there for the life of 
 poor Jack ; namely , of the government he leave below . in accept the 
 peerage , which I persuade he to do , - create a vacancy for the 
 borough of - - - , just the place for you , far well in every way than 
 Saxborough . - - - promise to recommend you to his committee . come to 
 town at once . your , etc . 

  G. DANVERS . 


 Gordon show this letter to Mr. Travers , and , on receive the hearty 
 good - wish of that gentleman , say , with emotion partly genuine , partly 
 assume , " you can not guess all that the realization of your good - wish 
 would be . once in the House of Commons , and my motif for action be 
 so strong that - do not think I very conceited if I count upon 
 parliamentary success . " 

 " my clear Gordon , I be as certain of your success as I be of my own 
 existence . " 

 " should I succeed , - should the great prize of public life be within 
 my reach , - should I lift myself into a position that would warrant my 
 presumption , do you think I could come to you and say , ' there be an 
 object of ambition dearer to I than power and office , - the hope of 
 attain which be the strong of all my motif of action ? and in 
 that hope shall I also have the good - wish of the father of Cecilia 
 Travers ? " 

 " my dear fellow , give I your hand ; you speak manfully and candidly as a 
 gentleman should speak . I answer in the same spirit . I do not   pretend 
 to say that I have not entertain view for Cecilia which include 
 hereditary rank and establish fortune in a suitor to her hand , though 
 I never should have make they imperative condition . I be neither 
 potentate nor parvenu enough for that ; and I can never forget "   here 
 every muscle in the man 's face twitch   " that I myself marry for 
 love , and be so happy . how happy Heaven only know ! still , if you have 
 thus speak a few week ago , I should not have reply very favourably 
 to your question . but now that I have see so much of you , my answer be 
 this : if you lose your election , - if you do not   come into Parliament 
 at all , you have my good - wish all the same . if you win my daughter 's 
 heart , there be no man on whom I would more willingly bestow her hand . 
 there she be , by herself too , in the garden . go and talk to she . " 

 Gordon hesitate . he know too well that he have not win her heart , though 
 he have no suspicion that it be give to another . and he be much 
 too clever not to know also how much he hazard who , in affair of 
 courtship , be premature . 

 " ah ! " he say , " I can not express my gratitude for word so generous , 
 encouragement so cheer . but I have never yet dare to utter to Miss 
 Travers a word that would prepare she even to harbour a thought of I as 
 a suitor . and I scarcely think I should have the courage to go through 
 this election with the grief of her rejection on my heart . " 

 " well , go in and win the election first ; meanwhile , at all event , take 
 leave of Cecilia . " 

 Gordon leave his friend , and join Miss Travers , resolve not indeed 
 to risk a formal declaration , but to sound his way to his chance of 
 acceptance . 

 the interview be very brief . he do sound his way skilfully , and feel 
 it very unsafe for his footstep . the advantage of have gain the 
 approval of the father be too great to be lose altogether , by one of 
 those decide answer on the part of the daughter which allow of no 
 appeal , especially to a poor gentleman who woo an heiress . 

 he return to Travers , and say simply , " I bear with I her good - wish 
 as well as your . that be all . I leave myself in your kind hand . " 

 then he hurry away to take leave of his host and hostess , say a few 
 significant word to the ally he have already gain in Mrs. Campion , and 
 within an hour be on his road to London , pass on his way the train 
 that bear Kenelm to Exmundham . Gordon be in high spirit . at least he 
 feel as certain of win Cecilia as he do of win his election . 

 " I have never yet fail in what I desire , " say he to himself , 
 " because I have ever take pain not to fail . " 

 the cause of Gordon 's sudden departure create a great excitement in 
 that quiet circle , share by all except Cecilia and Sir Peter . 



 CHAPTER III . 

 KENELM do not see either father or mother till he appear at dinner . 
 then he be seat next to Cecilia . there be but little conversation 
 between the two ; in fact , the prevalent subject of talk be general and 
 engrossing , the interest in Chillingly Gordon 's election ; prediction 
 of his success , of what he would do in Parliament . " where , " say Lady 
 Glenalvon , " there be such a dearth of rise young man , that if he be 
 only half as clever as he be he would be a gain . " 

 " a gain to what ? " ask Sir Peter , testily . " to his country ? about which 
 I do not   believe he care a brass button . " 

 to this assertion Leopold Travers reply warmly , and be not less 
 warmly back by Mrs. Campion . 

 " for my part , " say Lady Glenalvon , in conciliatory accent , " I think 
 every able man in Parliament be a gain to the country ; and he may not 
 serve his country less effectively because he do not boast of his 
 love for it . the politician I dread most be those so rampant in France 
 nowadays , the bawl patriot . when Sir Robert Walpole say , ' all 
 those man have their price , ' he point to the man who call themselves 
 ' patriot . ' " 

 " Bravo ! " cry Travers . 

 " Sir Robert Walpole show his love for his country by corrupt it . 
 there be many way besides bribe for corrupt a country , " say 
 Kenelm , mildly , and that be Kenelm 's sole contribution to the general 
 conversation . 

 it be not till the rest of the party have retire to rest that the 
 conference , long for by Kenelm , dread by Sir Peter , take place in 
 the library . it last deep into the night ; both part with lightened 
 heart and a fonder affection for each other . Kenelm have draw so 
 charm a picture of the Fairy , and so thoroughly convinced Sir Peter 
 that his own feeling towards she be those of no pass youthful 
 fancy , but of that love which have its root in the innermost heart , 
 that though it be still with a sigh , a deep sigh , that he dismiss 
 the thought of Cecilia , Sir Peter do dismiss it ; and , take comfort at 
 last from the positive assurance that Lily be of gentle birth , and 
 the fact that her name of Mordaunt be that of ancient and illustrious 
 house , say , with half a smile , " it might have be bad , my dear 
 boy . I begin to be afraid that , in spite of the teaching of Mivers and 
 Welby , it be ' the Miller 's daughter , ' after all . but we still have 
 a difficult task to persuade your poor mother . in cover your first 
 flight from our roof I unluckily put into her head the notion of Lady 
 Jane , a duke 's daughter , and the notion have never get out of it . that 
 come of fib . " 

 " I count on Lady Glenalvon 's influence on my mother in support of 
 your own , " say Kenelm . " if so accept an oracle in the great world 
 pronounce in my favour , and promise to present my wife at Court and 
 bring she into fashion , I think that my mother will consent to allow we 
 to reset the old family diamond for her next reappearance in London . 
 and then , too , you can tell she that I will stand for the county . I will 
 go into Parliament , and if I meet there our clever cousin , and find that 
 he do not care a brass button for the country , take my word for it , I 
 will lick he more easily than I lick Tom Bowles . " 

 " Tom Bowles ! who be he ? - ah ! I remember some letter of yours in which 
 you speak of a Bowles , whose favourite study be mankind , a moral 
 philosopher . " 

 " moral philosopher , " answer Kenelm , " have so muddle their brain 
 with the alcohol of new idea that their moral leg have become shaky , 
 and the humane would rather help they to bed than give they a licking . 
 my Tom Bowles be a muscular Christian , who become no less muscular , but 
 much more Christian , after he be lick . " 

 and in this pleasant manner these two oddity settle their conference , 
 and go up to bed with arm wrap round each other 's shoulder . 



 CHAPTER IV . 

 KENELM find it a much hard matter to win Lady Glenalvon to his side 
 than he have anticipate . with the strong interest she have take in 
 Kenelm 's future , she could not but revolt from the idea of his union 
 with an obscure portionless girl whom he have only know a few week , 
 and of whose very parentage he seem to know nothing , save an assurance 
 that she be his equal in birth . and , with the desire , which she have 
 cherish almost as fondly as Sir Peter , that Kenelm might win a bride 
 in every way so worthy of his choice as Cecilia Travers , she feel not 
 less indignant than regretful at the overthrow of her plan . 

 at first , indeed , she be so provoke that she would not listen to 
 his pleading . she break away from he with a rudeness she have never 
 exhibit to any one before , refuse to grant he another interview in 
 order to re - discuss the matter , and say that , so far from use her 
 influence in favour of his romantic folly , she would remonstrate well 
 with Lady Chillingly and Sir Peter against yield their assent to his 
 " thus throw himself away . " 

 it be not till the third day after his arrival that , touch by the 
 grave but haughty mournfulness of his countenance , she yield to the 
 argument of Sir Peter in the course of a private conversation with that 
 worthy baronet . still it be reluctantly   she do not fulfil her threat 
 of remonstrance with Lady Chillingly   that she concede the point , 
 that a son who , succeed to the absolute fee - simple of an estate , have 
 volunteer the resettlement of it on term singularly generous to both 
 his parent , be entitle to some sacrifice of their inclination on a 
 question in which he deem his happiness vitally concerned ; and that he 
 be of age to choose for himself independently of their consent , but for 
 a previous promise extract from he by his father , a promise which , 
 rigidly construe , be not extend to Lady Chillingly , but confine 
 to Sir Peter as the head of the family and master of the household . the 
 father 's consent be already give , and , if in his reverence for both 
 parent Kenelm could not dispense with his mother 's approval , surely 
 it be the part of a true friend to remove every scruple from his 
 conscience , and smooth away every obstacle to a love not to be condemn 
 because it be disintereste . 

 after this conversation , Lady Glenalvon seek Kenelm , find he 
 gloomily musing on the bank of the trout - stream , take his arm , lead he 
 into the sombre glade of the fir - grove , and listen patiently to 
 all he have to say . even then her woman 's heart be not win to his 
 reasoning , until he say pathetically , " you thank I once for save 
 your son 's life : you say then that you could never repay I ; you can 
 repay I tenfold . could your son , who be now , we trust , in heaven , look 
 down and judge between we , do you think he would approve you if you 
 refuse ? " 

 then Lady Glenalvon weep , and take his hand , kiss his forehead as 
 a mother might kiss it , and say , " you triumph ; I will go to Lady 
 Chillingly at once . marry she whom you so love , on one condition : marry 
 she from my house . " 

 Lady Glenalvon be not one of those woman who serve a friend by 
 half . she know well how to propitiate and reason down the apathetic 
 temperament of Lady Chillingly ; she do not cease till that lady herself 
 come into Kenelm 's room , and say very quietly , - 

 " so you be go to propose to Miss Mordaunt , the Warwickshire 
 Mordaunts I suppose ? Lady Glenalvon say she be a very lovely girl , 
 and will stay with she before the wedding . and as the young lady be an 
 orphan Lady Glenalvon 's uncle the Duke , who be connect with the eld 
 branch of the Mordaunts , will give she away . it will be a very brilliant 
 affair . I be sure I wish you happy ; it be time you should have sow your 
 wild oat . " 

 two day after the consent thus formally give , Kenelm quit 
 Exmundham . Sir Peter would have accompany he to pay his respect to 
 the intended , but the agitation he have go through bring on a sharp 
 twinge of the gout , which consign his foot to flannel . 

 after Kenelm have go , Lady Glenalvon go into Cecilia 's room . Cecilia 
 be seat very desolately by the open window . she have detect that 
 something of an anxious and painful nature have be weigh upon the 
 mind of father and son , and have connect it with the letter which have 
 so disturb the even mind of Sir Peter ; but she do not divine what the 
 something be , and if mortify by a certain reserve , more distant than 
 heretofore , which have characterize Kenelm 's manner towards herself , 
 the mortification be less sensibly feel than a tender sympathy for the 
 sadness she have observe on his face and yearn to soothe . his reserve 
 have , however , make her own manner more reserved than of old , for which 
 she be now rather chide herself than reproach he . 

 Lady Glenalvon put her arm round Cecilia 's neck and kiss she , 
 whispering , " that man have so disappoint I : he be so unworthy of the 
 happiness I have once hop for he ! " 

 " whom do you speak of ? " murmur Cecilia , turn very pale . 

 " Kenelm Chillingly . it seem that he have conceive a fancy for some 
 penniless girl whom he have meet in his wandering , have come here to 
 get the consent of his parent to propose to she , have obtain their 
 consent , and be go to propose . " 

 Cecilia remain silent for a moment with her eye close , then she 
 say , " he be worthy of all happiness , and he would never make an 
 unworthy choice . Heaven bless he - and - and - " she would have add , 
 " his bride , " but her lip refuse to utter the word bride . 

 " Cousin Gordon be worth ten of he , " cry Lady Glenalvon , indignantly . 

 she have serve Kenelm , but she have not forgive he . 



 CHAPTER V. 

 KENELM sleep in London that night , and , the next day , be singularly 
 fine for an english summer , he resolve to go to Moleswich on foot . he 
 have no need this time to encumber himself with a knapsack ; he have leave 
 sufficient change of dress in his lodging at Cromwell Lodge . 

 it be towards the evening when he find himself in one of the prettiest 
 rural village by which 


  " wander the hoary Thames along 
  his silver - winding way . " 


 it be not in the direct road from London to Moleswich , but it be a 
 pleasanter way for a pedestrian . and when , quit the long street of 
 the sultry village , he come to the shelve margin of the river , he be 
 glad to rest a while , enjoy the cool of the rippling water , and listen 
 to their placid murmur amid the rush in the border shallow . he 
 have ample time before he . his ramble while at Cromwell Lodge have make 
 he familiar with the district for mile round Moleswich , and he know 
 that a footpath through the field at the right would lead he , in less 
 than an hour , to the side of the tributary brook on which Cromwell Lodge 
 be place , opposite the wooden bridge which conduct to Grasmere and 
 Moleswich . 

 to one who love the romance of history , english history , the whole 
 course of the Thames be full of charm . ah ! could I go back to the day 
 in which young generation than that of Kenelm Chillingly be unborn , 
 when every wave of the Rhine speak of history and romance to I , what 
 fairy should meet on thy bank , o thou our own Father Thames ! perhaps 
 some day a german pilgrim may repay tenfold to thee the tribute render 
 by the english kinsman to the Father Rhine . 

 listen to the whisper of the reed , Kenelm Chillingly feel the 
 haunt influence of the legendary stream . many a poetic incident or 
 tradition in antique chronicle , many a votive rhyme in song , dear to 
 forefather whose very name have become a poetry to we , throng dimly 
 and confusedly back to his memory , which have little care to retain such 
 graceful trinket in the treasure - house of love . but everything that , 
 from childhood upward , connect itself with romance , revive with yet 
 fresher bloom in the memory of he who love . 

 and to this man , through the first perilous season of youth , so 
 abnormally safe from youth 's most wonted peril , - to this would - be 
 pupil of realism , this learn adept in the school of a Welby or a 
 Mivers , - to this man , love come at last as with the fatal power of 
 the fabled Cytherea ; and with that love all the realism of life become 
 ideal , all the stern line of our commonplace destiny undulate into 
 curve of beauty , all the trite sound of our every - day life attune 
 into delicacy of song . how full of sanguine yet dreamy bliss be his 
 heart - and seem his future - in the gentle breeze and the soften glow 
 of that summer eve ! he should see Lily the next morn , and his lip be 
 now free to say all that they have as yet suppress . 

 suddenly he be rouse from the half - awake , half - asleep happiness that 
 belong to the moment in which we transport ourselves into Elysium , by 
 the carol of a voice more loudly joyous than that of his own heart - 


  " singing , singing , 
  lustily sing , 
  down the road , with his dog before , 
  come the Ritter of Nierestein . " 


 Kenelm turn his head so quickly that he frighten Max , who have for 
 the last minute be stand behind he inquisitively with one paw 
 raise , and sniff , in some doubt whether he recognize an old 
 acquaintance ; but at Kenelm 's quick movement the animal break into a 
 nervous bark , and run back to his master . 

 the minstrel , little heed the figure recline on the bank , would have 
 pass on with his light tread and his cheery carol , but Kenelm rise to 
 his foot , and hold out his hand , say , " I hope you do not   share Max 's 
 alarm at meet I again ? " 

 " ah , my young philosopher , be it indeed you ? " 

 " if I be to be designate a philosopher it be certainly not i. and , 
 honestly speak , I be not the same . I , who spend that pleasant day 
 with you among the field round Luscombe two year ago - " 

 " or who advise I at Tor Hadham to string my lyre to the praise of a 
 beefsteak . I , too , be not quite the same , - I , whose dog present you 
 with the begging - tray . " 

 " yet you still go through the world singing . " 

 " even that vagrant singing time be pretty well over . but I disturb you 
 from your repose ; I would rather share it . you be probably not go my 
 way , and as I be in no hurry , I should not like to lose the opportunity 
 chance have so happily give I of renew acquaintance with one who have 
 often be present to my thought since we last meet . " thus say , the 
 minstrel stretch himself at ease on the bank , and Kenelm follow his 
 example . 

 there certainly be a change in the owner of the dog with the 
 begging - tray , a change in costume , in countenance , in that indescribable 
 self - evidence which we call " manner . " the costume be not that Bohemian 
 attire in which Kenelm have first encounter the wandering minstrel , nor 
 the studied , more graceful garb , which so well become his shapely form 
 during his visit to Luscombe . it be now neatly simple , the cool and 
 quiet summer dress any english gentleman might adopt in a long rural 
 walk . and as he uncover his head to court the cool breeze , there 
 be a graver dignity in the man 's handsome Rubens - like face , a line of 
 more concentrated thought in the spacious forehead , a thread or two of 
 gray shimmering here and there through the thick auburn curl of hair 
 and beard . and in his manner , though still very frank , there be just 
 perceptible a sort of self - assertion , not offensive , but manly ; such 
 as do not misbecome one of mature year , and of some establish 
 position , address another man much young than himself , who in 
 all probability have achieve no position at all beyond that which the 
 accident of birth might assign to he . 

 " yes , " say the minstrel , with a half - suppress sigh , " the last year 
 of my vagrant holiday have come to its close . I recollect that the first 
 day we meet by the road - side fountain , I advise you to do like I , seek 
 amusement and adventure as a foot - traveller . now , see you , evidently 
 a gentleman by education and birth , still a foot - traveller , I feel as if 
 I ought to say , ' you have have enough of such experience : vagabond life 
 have its peril as well as charm ; cease it , and settle down . ' " 

 " I think of do so , " reply Kenelm , laconically . 

 " in a profession ? - army , law , medicine ? " 

 " no . " 

 " ah , in marriage then . right ; give I your hand on that . so a petticoat 
 indeed have at last find its charm for you in the actual world as well 
 as on the canvas of a picture ? " 

 " I conclude , " say Kenelm , evade any direct notice of that playful 
 taunt , " I conclude from your remark that it be in marriage you be 
 about to settle down . " 

 " ay , could I have do so before I should have be save from many 
 error , and be many year near to the goal which dazzle my sight 
 through the haze of my boyish dream . " 

 " what be that goal , - the grave ? " 

 " the grave ! that which allow of no grave , - fame . " 

 " I see - despite of what you just now say - you still mean to go through 
 the world seek a poet 's fame . " 

 " alas ! I resign that fancy , " say the minstrel , with another half - sigh . 
 " it be not indeed wholly , but in great part the hope of the poet 's fame 
 that make I a truant in the way to that which destiny , and such few 
 gift as Nature concede to I , mark out for my proper and only goal . 
 but what a strange , delusive Will - o'-the - Wisp the love of verse - making 
 be ! how rarely a man of good sense deceive himself as to other thing 
 for which he be fit , in which he can succeed ; but let he once drink 
 into his be the charm of verse - making , how the glamour of the charm 
 bewitch his understanding ! how long it be before he can believe that 
 the world will not take his word for it , when he cry out to sun , moon , 
 and star , ' I , too , be a poet . ' and with what agony , as if at the 
 wrench of soul from life , he resign himself at last to the conviction 
 that whether he or the world be right , it come to the same thing . who 
 can plead his cause before a court that will not give he a hearing ? " 

 it be with an emotion so passionately strong , and so intensely painful , 
 that the owner of the dog with the begging - tray thus speak , that Kenelm 
 feel , through sympathy , as if he himself be tear asunder by the wrench 
 of life from soul . but then Kenelm be a mortal so eccentric that , if 
 a single acute suffering endure by a fellow mortal could be bring 
 before the evidence of his sens , I doubt whether he would not have 
 suffer as much as that fellow - mortal . so that , though if there be a 
 thing in the world which Kenelm Chillingly would care not to do , it be 
 verse - making , his mind involuntarily hasten to the argument by which 
 he could well mitigate the pang of the verse - maker . 

 Quoth he : " accord to my very scanty reading , you share the love 
 of verse - making with man the most illustrious in career which have 
 achieve the goal of fame . it must , then , be a very noble love : 
 Augustus , Pollio , Varius , Maecenas , - the great statesman of their 
 day , - they be verse - maker . Cardinal Richelieu be a verse - maker ; 
 Walter Raleigh and Philip Sidney , Fox , Burke , Sheridan , Warren 
 Hastings , canning , even the grave William Pitt , - all be verse - maker . 
 verse - making do not retard - no doubt the quality essential to 
 verse - making accelerate - their race to the goal of fame . what great 
 painter have be verse - maker ! Michael Angelo , Leonardo da Vinci , 
 Salvator Rosa " - and Heaven know how may other great name Kenelm 
 Chillingly might have proceed to add to his list , if the minstrel have 
 not here interpose . 

 " what ! all those mighty painter be verse - maker ? " 

 " verse - maker so good , especially Michael Angelo , - the great painter 
 of all , - that they would have have the fame of poet , if , unfortunately 
 for that goal of fame , their glory in the sister art of painting do not 
 outshine it . but when you give to your gift of song the modest title of 
 verse - making , permit I to observe that your gift be perfectly distinct 
 from that of the verse - maker . your gift , whatever it may be , could not 
 exist without some sympathy with the non verse - make human heart . 
 no doubt in your foot travel , you have acquire not only observant 
 intimacy with external Nature in the shift hue at each hour of a 
 distant mountain , in the lengthening shadow which yon sunset cast on 
 the water at our foot , in the habit of the thrush drop fearlessly 
 close beside I , in that turf moisten by its neighbourhood to those 
 dripping rush , all of which I could describe no less accurately than 
 you , - as a Peter Bell might describe they no less accurately than a 
 William Wordsworth . but in such song of your as you have permit I 
 to hear , you seem to have escape out of that elementary accidence 
 of the poet 's art , and to touch , no matter how slightly , on the only 
 lasting interest which the universal heart of man can have in the song 
 of the poet ; namely , in the sound which the poet 's individual sympathy 
 draw forth from the latent chord in that universal heart . as for what 
 you call ' the world , ' what be it more than the fashion of the present 
 day ? how far the judgment of that be worth a poet 's pain I can not   pretend 
 to say . but of one thing I be sure , that while I could as easily square 
 the circle as compose a simple couplet address to the heart of a 
 simple audience with sufficient felicity to decoy their praise 
 into Max 's begging - tray , I could spin out by the yard the sort of 
 verse - making which characterize the fashion of the present day . " 

 much flatter , and not a little amuse , the wandering minstrel turn 
 his bright countenance , no long dim by a cloud , towards that of his 
 lazily recline consoler , and answer gayly , - 

 " you say that you could spin out by the yard verse in the fashion of 
 the present day . I wish you would give I a speciman of your skill in 
 that handiwork . " 

 " very well ; on one condition , that you will repay my trouble by 
 a speciman of your own verse , not in the fashion of the present 
 day , - something which I can construe . I defy you to construe mine . " 

 " agree . " 

 " well , then , let we take it for grant that this be the augustan age of 
 english poetry , and that the english language be dead , like the Latin . 
 suppose I be write for a prize - medal in English , as I write at 
 college for a prize - medal in Latin : of course , I shall be successful in 
 proportion as I introduce the verbal elegance peculiar to our Augustan 
 age , and also catch the prevail poetic characteristic of that 
 classical epoch . 

 " now I think that every observant critic will admit that the striking 
 distinction of the poetry most in the fashion of the present day , 
 namely , of the Augustan age , be , - first , a selection of such verbal 
 elegance as would have be most repulsive to the barbaric taste of the 
 precede century ; and , secondly , a very lofty disdain of all prosaic 
 condescension to common - sense , and an elaborate cultivation of that 
 element of the sublime which Mr. Burke define under the head of 
 obscurity . 

 " these premise concede , I will only ask you to choose the metre . blank 
 verse be very much in fashion just now . " 

 " Pooh ! blank verse indeed ! I be not go so to free your experiment 
 from the difficulty of rhyme . " 

 " it be all one to I , " say Kenelm , yawning ; " rhyme be it : heroic or 
 lyrical ? " 

 " heroic be old - fashioned ; but the Chaucer couplet , as bring to 
 perfection by our modern poet , I think the well adapt to dainty 
 leaf and uncrackable nut . I accept the modern Chaucerian . the 
 subject ? " 

 " oh , never trouble yourself about that . by whatever title your Augustan 
 verse - maker label his poem , his genius , like Pindar 's , disdain to be 
 cramp by the subject . listen , and do not   suffer Max to howl , if he can 
 help it . here go . " 

 and in an affected but emphatic sing - song Kenelm begin : - 


  " in Attica the gentle Pythias dwelt . 
  youthful he be , and pass rich : he feel 
  as if nor youth nor rich could suffice 
  for bliss . dark - eyed Sophronia be a nice 
  girl : and one summer day , when Neptune drive 
  his sea - car slowly , and the olive grove 
  that skirt Ilissus , to thy shell , Harmonia , 
  ripple , he say ' I love thee ' to Sophronia . 
  Crocus and iris , when they hear he , wag 
  their pretty head in glee : the honey - bag 
  Bees become altar : and the forest dive 
  her plumage smooth . such be the charm of love . 
  of this sweet story do ye long for more ? 
  wait till I publish it in volume four ; 
  which certain critic , my good friend , will cry 
  up beyond Chaucer . take their word for ' t. I 
  say ' trust they , but not read , - or you will not buy . ' " 


 " you have certainly keep your word , " say the minstrel , laugh ; " and 
 if this be the augustan age , and the English be a dead language , you 
 deserve to win the prize - medal . " 

 " you flatter I , " say Kenelm , modestly . " but if I , who never before 
 string two rhyme together , can improvise so readily in the style of the 
 present day , why should not a practical rhymester like yourself dash off 
 at a sit a volume or so in the same style ; disguise completely the 
 verbal elegance borrow , add to the delicacy of the rhyme by the 
 frequent introduction of a line that will not scan , and tower yet 
 more into the sublime by become yet more unintelligible ? do that , and 
 I promise you the most glowing panegyric in ' the Londoner , ' for I will 
 write it myself . " 

 " ' the Londoner ' ! " exclaim the minstrel , with an angry flush on his 
 cheek and brow , " my bitter , relentless enemy . " 

 " I fear , then , you have as little study the critical press of the 
 Augustan age as you have imbue your muse with the classical spirit of 
 its verse . for the art of write a man must cultivate himself . the art 
 of be review consist in cultivate the acquaintance of reviewer . 
 in the Augustan age criticism be cliquism . belong to a clique and you 
 be Horace or Tibullus . Belong to no clique and , of course , you be 
 Bavius or Maevius . ' the Londoner ' be the enemy of no man : it hold all 
 man in equal contempt . but as , in order to amuse , it must abuse , it 
 compensate the praise it be compel to bestow upon the member of its 
 clique by heap additional scorn upon all who be cliqueless . hit he 
 hard : he have no friend . " 

 " ah , " say the minstrel , " I believe that there be much truth in what you 
 say . I never have a friend among the clique . and Heaven know with what 
 pertinacity those from whom I , in utter ignorance of the rule which 
 govern so - call organ of opinion , have hop , in my time of struggle , 
 for a little sympathy , a kindly encouragement , have combine to crush 
 I down . they succeed long . but at last I venture to hope that I 
 be beat they . happily , Nature endow I with a sanguine , joyous , 
 elastic temperament . he who never despair seldom completely fail . " 

 this speech rather perplexed Kenelm , for have not the minstrel declare 
 that his singing day be over , that he have decide on the renunciation 
 of verse - making ? what other path to fame , from which the critic have 
 not be able to exclude his step , be he , then , now pursue , - he whom 
 Kenelm have assume to belong to some commercial moneymaking firm ? no 
 doubt some less difficult prose - track , probably a novel . everybody 
 write novel nowadays , and as the public will read novel without be 
 tell to do so , and will not read poetry unless they be tell that they 
 ought , possibly novel be not quite so much at the mercy of clique as 
 be the poem of our Augustan age . 

 however , Kenelm do not think of seek for further confidence on that 
 score . his mind at that moment , not unnaturally , wander from book and 
 critic to love and wedlock . 

 " our talk , " say he , " have digress into fretful course ; permit I 
 to return to the starting - point . you be go to settle down into the 
 peace of home . a peaceful home be like a good conscience . the rain 
 without do not pierce its roof , the wind without do not shake its 
 wall . if not an impertinent question , be it long since you have know 
 your intended bride ? " 

 " yes , very long . " 

 " and always love she ? " 

 " always , from her infancy . out of all womankind , she be design to be 
 my life 's playmate and my soul 's purifier . I know not what might have 
 become of I , if the thought of she have not walk beside I as my 
 guardian angel . for , like many vagrant from the beat high road of 
 the world , there be in my nature something of that lawlessness which 
 belong to high animal spirit , to the zest of adventure , and the warm 
 blood that run into song , chiefly because song be the voice of a joy . 
 and no doubt , when I look back on the past year I must own that I have 
 too often be lead astray from the object set before my reason , and 
 cherish at my heart , by err impulse or wanton fancy . " 

 " Petticoat interest , I presume , " interpose Kenelm , dryly . 

 " I wish I could honestly answer ' no , ' " say the minstrel , colour 
 high . " but from the bad , from all that would have permanently blast 
 the career to which I intrust my fortune , all that would have render 
 I unworthy of the pure love that now , I trust , await and crown 
 my dream of happiness , I have be save by the haunt smile in a 
 sinless infantine face . only once be I in great peril , - that hour of 
 peril I recall with a shudder . it be at Luscombe . " 

 " at luscombe ! " 

 " in the temptation of a terrible crime I think I hear a voice say , 
 ' Mischief ! remember the little child . ' in that supervention which be so 
 readily accept as a divine warning , when the imagination be morbidly 
 excited , and when the conscience , though lull asleep for a moment , be 
 still asleep so lightly that the sigh of a breeze , the fall of a leaf , 
 can awake it with a start of terror , I take the voice for that of my 
 guardian angel . think it over later , and couple the voice with the 
 moral of those weird line you repeat to I so appositely the next 
 day , I conclude that I be not mistaken when I say it be from your lip 
 that the voice which preserve I come . " 

 " I confess the impertinence : you pardon it ? " 

 the minstrel seize Kenelm 's hand and press it earnestly . 

 " pardon it ! oh , could you but guess what cause I have to be grateful , 
 everlastingly grateful ! that sudden cry , the remorse and horror of my 
 own self that it strike into I , - deepen by those rugged line which 
 the next day make I shrink in dismay from ' the face of my darling 
 sin ' ! then come the turning - point of my life . from that day , the lawless 
 vagabond within I be kill . I mean not , indeed , the love of Nature 
 and of song which have first allure the vagabond , but the hatred of 
 steadfast habit and of serious work , - that be kill . I no long 
 trifle with my calling : I take to it as a serious duty . and when I see 
 she , whom fate have reserve and rear for my bride , her face be no 
 long in my eye that of the playful child ; the soul of the woman be 
 dawn into it . it be but two year since that day , to I so eventful . 
 yet my fortune be now secure . and if fame be not establish , I be at 
 last in a position which warrant my saying to she I love , ' the time have 
 come when , without fear for thy future , I can ask thee to be mine . ' " 

 the man speak with so fervent a passion that Kenelm silently leave he 
 to recover his wonte self - possession , - not unwilling to be silent , - not 
 unwilling , in the softness of the hour , pass from roseate sunset into 
 starry twilight , to murmur to himself , " and the time , too , have come for 
 I ! " 

 after a few moment the minstrel resume lightly and cheerily , - 

 " Sir , your turn : pray have you long know - judging by our former 
 conversation you can not have long love - the lady whom you have woo 
 and win ? " 

 as Kenelm have neither as yet woo nor win the lady in question , and do 
 not deem it necessary to enter into any detail on the subject of love 
 particular to himself , he reply by a general observation , - 

 " it seem to I that the come of love be like the coming of spring : 
 the date be not to be reckon by the calendar . it may be slow and 
 gradual ; it may be quick and sudden . but in the morning , when we wake 
 and recognize a change in the world without , verdure on the tree , 
 blossom on the sward , warmth in the sunshine , music in the air , then we 
 say Spring have come ! " 

 " I like your illustration . and if it be an idle question to ask a lover 
 how long he have know the beloved one , so it be almost as idle to ask if 
 she be not beautiful . he can not but see in her face the beauty she have 
 give to the world without . " 

 " true ; and that think be poetic enough to make I remind you that I 
 favour you with the maiden speciman of my verse - making on condition 
 that you repay I by a speciman of your own practical skill in the art . 
 and I claim the right to suggest the theme . let it be - " 

 " of a beefsteak ? " 

 " tush , you have wear out that tasteless joke at my expense . the theme 
 must be of love , and if you could improvise a stanza or two expressive 
 of the idea you just utter I shall listen with yet more pleased 
 attention . " 

 " alas ! I be no improvisatore . yet I will avenge myself on your former 
 neglect of my craft by chant to you a trifle somewhat in unison with 
 the thought you ask I to versify , but which you would not stay to hear 
 at Tor Hadham   though you do drop a shilling into Max 's tray ; it be 
 one of the song I sing that evening , and it be not ill - receive by my 
 humble audience . 


  " the BEAUTY of the mistress be in the LOVER 's EYE . 

  " be she not pretty , my Mabel May ? 
  nobody ever yet call she so . 
  be not her lineament faultless , say ? 
  if I must answer you plainly , no . 

  " Joy to believe that the maid I love 
  none but myself as she be can see ; 
  Joy that she steal from her heaven above , 
  and be only reveal on this earth to I ! " 


 as soon as he have finish this very artless ditty , the minstrel rise 
 and say , - 

 " now I must bid you good - by . my way lie through those meadow , and 
 yours no doubt along the high road . " 

 " not so . permit I to accompany you . I have a lodging not far from 
 hence , to which the path through the field be the short way . " 

 the minstrel turn a somewhat surprised and somewhat inquisitive look 
 towards Kenelm . but feeling , perhaps , that have withhold from his 
 fellow - traveller all confidence as to his own name and attribute , he 
 have no right to ask any confidence from that gentleman not voluntarily 
 make to he , he courteously say " that he wish the way be long , 
 since it would be so pleasantly halve , " and stride forth at a brisk 
 pace . 

 the twilight be now close into the brightness of a starry summer 
 night , and the solitude of the field be unbroken . both these man , 
 walk side by side , feel supremely happy . but happiness be like wine ; 
 its effect differ with the differ temperament on which it 
 act . in this case garrulous and somewhat vaunting with the one man , 
 warm - colour , sensuous , impressionable to the influence of external 
 Nature , as an Aeolian harp to the rise or fall of a pass wind ; and , 
 with the other man , taciturn and somewhat modestly express , saturnine , 
 meditative , not indeed dull to the influence of external Nature , but 
 deem they of no value , save where they pass out of the domain of 
 the sensuous into that of the intellectual , and the soul of man dictate 
 to the soulless Nature its own question and its own reply . 

 the minstrel take the talk on himself , and the talk charm his 
 listener . it become so really eloquent in the tone of its utterance , in 
 the frank play of its delivery , that I could no more adequately describe 
 it than a reporter , however faithful to every word a true orator may 
 say , can describe that which , apart from all word , belong to the 
 presence of the orator himself . 

 not , then , venture to report the language of this singular itinerant , 
 I content myself with say that the substance of it be of the 
 nature on which it be say most man can be eloquent : it be personal 
 to himself . he speak of aspiration towards the achievement of a name , 
 date back to the dawn of memory ; of early obstacle in lowly birth , 
 stint fortune ; of a sudden opening to his ambition while yet in 
 boyhood , through the generous favour of a rich man , who say , " the child 
 have genius : I will give it the discipline of culture ; one day it shall 
 repay to the world what it owe to I ; " of study passionately begin , 
 earnestly pursue , and mournfully suspend in early youth . he do not 
 say how or wherefore : he rush on to dwell upon the struggle for a 
 livelihood for himself and those dependent on he ; how in such struggle 
 he be compel to divert toil and energy from the systematic pursuit 
 of the object he have once set before he ; the necessity for money 
 be too urgent to be postpone to the vision of fame . " but even , " he 
 exclaim , passionately , " even in such hasty and crude manifestation 
 of what be within I , as circumstance limit my power , I know that 
 I ought to have find from those who profess to be authoritative judge 
 the encouragement of praise . how much well , then , I should have do 
 if I have find it ! how a little praise warm out of a man the good 
 that be in he , and the sneer of a contempt which he feel to be unjust 
 chill the ardour to excel ! however , I force my way , so far as be then 
 most essential to I , the sufficing breadmaker for those I love ; and in 
 my holiday of song and ramble I find a delight that atone for all the 
 rest . but still the desire of fame , once conceive in childhood , once 
 nourish through youth , never die but in our grave . foot and hoof may 
 tread it down , bud , leaf , stalk ; its root be too deep below the surface 
 for they to reach , and year after year stalk and leaf and bud re - emerge . 
 Love may depart from our mortal life : we console ourselves ; the beloved 
 will be reunite to we in the life to come . but if he who set his heart 
 on fame lose it in this life , what can console he ? " 

 " do you not say a little while ago that fame allow of no grave ? " 

 " true ; but if we do not achieve it before we ourselves be in the grave , 
 what comfort can it give to we ? love ascend to heaven , to which we hope 
 ourselves to ascend ; but fame remain on the earth , which we shall never 
 again revisit . and it be because fame be earth - bear that the desire for 
 it be the most lasting , the regret for the want of it the most bitter , 
 to the child of earth . but I shall achieve it now ; it be already in my 
 grasp . " 

 by this time the traveller have arrive at the brook , face the wooden 
 bridge beside Cromwell Lodge . 

 here the minstrel halt ; and Kenelm with a certain tremble in his 
 voice , say , " be it not time that we should make ourselves know to 
 each other by name ? I have no long any cause to conceal mine , indeed I 
 never have any cause strong than whim , - Kenelm Chillingly , the only son 
 of Sir Peter , of Exmundham , - - -shire . " 

 " I wish your father joy of so clever a son , " say the minstrel with his 
 wonte urbanity . " you already know enough of I to be aware that I be 
 of much humbler birth and station than you ; but if you chance to have 
 visit the exhibition of the Royal Academy this year - ah ! I understand 
 that start - you might have recognize a picture of which you have see 
 the rudimentary sketch , ' the Girl with the Flower - ball , ' one of three 
 picture very severely handle by ' the Londoner , ' but , in spite of 
 that potent enemy , insure fortune and promise fame to the wandering 
 minstrel , whose name , if the sight of the picture have induce you to 
 inquire into that , you would have find to be Walter Melville . next 
 January I hope , thank to that picture , to add , ' associate of the Royal 
 Academy . ' the public will not let they keep I out of it , in spite of 
 ' the Londoner . ' you be probably an expected guest at one of the more 
 impose villa from which we see the distant light . I be go to a 
 very humble cottage , in which henceforth I hope to find my establish 
 home . I be there now only for a few day , but pray let I welcome you 
 there before I leave . the cottage be call Grasmere . " 



 CHAPTER VI . 

 the minstrel give a cordial parting shake of the hand to the 
 fellow - traveller whom he have advise to settle down , not notice how 
 very cold have become the hand in his own genial grasp . lightly he pass 
 over the wooden bridge , precede by Max , and merrily , when he have gain 
 the other side of the bridge , come upon Kenelm 's ear , through the hush 
 of the luminous night , the verse of the uncompleted love - song , - 


  " singing , singing , 
  lustily sing , 
  down the road , with his dog before , 
  come the Ritter of Nierestein . " 


 love - song , uncompleted ; why uncompleted ? it be not give to Kenelm to 
 divine the why . it be a love - song versify one of the prettiest fairy 
 tale in the world , which be a great favourite with Lily , and which 
 Lion have promise Lily to versify , but only to complete it in her 
 presence and to her perfect satisfaction . 



 CHAPTER VII . 

 if I could not venture to place upon paper the exact word of an 
 eloquent coveter of fame , the earth - bear , still less can I dare to place 
 upon paper all that pass through the voiceless heart of a coveter of 
 love , the heaven - bear . 

 from the hour in which Kenelm Chillingly have part from Walter Melville 
 until somewhere between sunrise and noon the next day , the summer 
 joyousness of that external nature which do now and then , though , for 
 the most part , deceitfully , address to the soul of man question and 
 answer all her soulless own , laugh away the gloom of his misgiving . 

 no doubt this Walter Melville be the beloved guardian of Lily ; no doubt 
 it be Lily whom he designate as reserve and rear to become his 
 bride . but on that question Lily herself have the sovereign voice . it 
 remain yet to be see whether Kenelm have deceive himself in the 
 belief that have make the world so beautiful to he since the hour of 
 their last parting . at all event it be due to she , due even to his 
 rival , to assert his own claim to her choice . and the more he recall 
 all that Lily have ever say to he of her guardian , so openly , so 
 frankly , proclaim affection , admiration , gratitude , the more 
 convincingly his reasoning allay his fear , whispering , " so might 
 a child speak of a parent : not so do the maiden speak of the man she 
 love ; she can scarcely trust herself to praise . " 

 in fine , it be not in despondent mood , nor with deject look , that , 
 a little before noon , Kenelm cross the bridge and re - enter the 
 enchant land of Grasmere . in answer to his inquiry , the servant who 
 open the door say that neither Mr. Melville nor Miss Mordaunt be 
 at home ; they have but just go out together for a walk . he be about to 
 turn back , when Mrs. Cameron come into the hall , and , rather by 
 gesture than word , invite he to enter . Kenelm follow she into the 
 drawing - room , take his seat beside she . he be about to speak , when 
 she interrupt he in a tone of voice so unlike its usual languor , so 
 keen , so sharp , that it sound like a cry of distress . 

 " I be just about to come to you . happily , however , you find I alone , 
 and what may pass between we will be soon over . but first tell I : you 
 have see your parent ; you have ask their consent to we d a girl such 
 as I describe ; tell I , oh tell I that that consent be refuse ! " 

 " on the contrary , I be here with their full permission to ask the hand 
 of your niece . " 

 Mrs. Cameron sink back in her chair , rock herself to and fro in the 
 posture of a person in great pain . 

 " I fear that . Walter say he have meet you last evening ; that you , like 
 himself , entertain the thought of marriage . you , of course when you 
 learn his name , must have know with whom his thought be connect . 
 happily , he could not divine what be the choice to which your youthful 
 fancy have be so blindly lead . " 

 " my dear Mrs. Cameron , " say Kenelm , very mildly , but very firmly , " you 
 be aware of the purpose for which I leave Moleswich a few day ago , 
 and it seem to I that you might have forestall my intention , the 
 intention which bring I ; thus early to your house . I come to say to 
 Miss Mordaunt 's guardian , ' I ask the hand of your ward . if you also woo 
 she , I have a very noble rival . with both of we no consideration for our 
 own happiness can be comparable to the duty of consult her . let she 
 choose between the two . ' " 

 " impossible ! " exclaim Mrs. Cameron ; " impossible . you know not what you 
 say ; know not , guess not , how sacred be the claim of Walter Melville 
 to all that the orphan whom he have protect from her very birth can 
 give he in return . she have no right to a preference for another : her 
 heart be too grateful to admit of one . if the choice be give to she 
 between he and you , it be he whom she would choose . solemnly I assure 
 you of this . do not , then , subject she to the pain of such a choice . 
 suppose , if you will , that you have attract her fancy , and that now you 
 proclaim your love and urge your suit , she would not , must not , the 
 less reject your hand , but you might cloud her happiness in accept 
 Melville 's . be generous . conquer your own fancy ; it can be but a pass 
 one . speak not to she , nor to Mr. Melville , of a wish which can never be 
 realize . go hence , silently , and at once . " 

 the word and the manner of the pale implore woman strike a vague 
 awe into the heart of her listener . but he do not the less resolutely 
 answer , " I can not obey you . it seem to I that my honour command I 
 to prove to your niece that , if I mistook the nature of her feeling 
 towards I , I do not , by word or look , lead she to believe mine towards 
 herself be less in earnest than they be ; and it seem scarcely less 
 honourable towards my worthy rival to endanger his own future happiness , 
 should he discover later that his bride would have be happy with 
 another . why be so mysteriously apprehensive ? if , as you say , with such 
 apparent conviction , there be no doubt of your niece 's preference for 
 another , at a word from her own lip I depart , and you will see I no 
 more . but that word must be say by she ; and if you will not permit I 
 to ask for it in your own house , I will take my chance of find she 
 now , on her walk with Mr. Melville ; and , could he deny I the right to 
 speak to she alone , that which I would say can be say in his presence . 
 Ah ! madam , have you no mercy for the heart that you so needlessly 
 torture ? if I must bear the bad , let I learn it , and at once . " 

 " learn it , then , from my lip , " say Mrs. Cameron , speak with voice 
 unnaturally calm , and feature rigidly set into stern composure . " and I 
 place the secret you wring from I under the seal of that honour which 
 you so vauntingly make your excuse for imperille the peace of the home 
 I ought never to have suffer you to enter . an honest couple , of 
 humble station and narrow mean , have an only son , who evince in early 
 childhood talent so remarkable that they attract the notice of 
 the father 's employer , a rich man of very benevolent heart and very 
 cultivate taste . he send the child , at his expense , to a first - rate 
 commercial school , mean to provide for he later in his own firm . 
 the rich man be the head partner of an eminent bank ; but very infirm 
 health , and taste much estranged from business , have induce he to 
 retire from all active share in the firm , the management of which be 
 confine to a son whom he idolize . but the talent of the protege he 
 have send to school take there so passionate a direction towards art 
 and estrange from trade , and his design in draw when show to 
 connoisseur be deem so promising of future excellence , that the 
 patron change his original intention , enter he as a pupil in the 
 studio of a distinguished french painter , and afterwards bid he 
 perfect his taste by the study of italian and flemish masterpiece . 

 " he be still abroad , when - " here Mrs. Cameron stop , with visible 
 effort , suppress a sob , and go on , whisperingly , through tooth 
 clench together - " when a thunderbolt fall on the house of the patron , 
 shatter his fortune , blast his name . the son , unknown to the 
 father , have be decoy into speculation which prove unfortunate : the 
 loss might have be easily retrieve in the first instance ; unhappily 
 he take the wrong course to retrieve it , and launch into new hazard . 
 I must be brief . one day the world be startle by the news that a firm , 
 fame for its suppose wealth and solidity , be bankrupt . Dishonesty 
 be allege , be prove , not against the father , - he go forth from 
 the trial , censure indeed for neglect , not condemn for fraud , but a 
 penniless pauper . the - son , the son , the idolize son , be remove from 
 the prisoner 's dock , a convict felon , sentence to penal servitude ; 
 escape that sentence by - by - you guess - you guess . how could he escape 
 except through death ? - death by his own guilty deed ? " 

 almost as much overpower by emotion as Mrs. Cameron herself , Kenelm 
 cover his bended face with one hand , stretch out the other blindly 
 to clasp her own , but she would not take it . 

 a dreary foreboding . again before his eye rise the old gray 
 tower , - again in his ear thrill the tragic tale of the Fletwodes . 
 what be yet leave untold hold the young man in spell - bind silence . Mrs. 
 Cameron resume , - 

 " I say the father be a penniless pauper ; he die lingeringly 
 bedridden . but one faithful friend do not desert that bed , - the youth 
 to whose genius his wealth have minister . he have come from abroad 
 with some modest saving from the sale of copy or sketch make in 
 Florence . these saving keep a roof over the head of the old man and 
 the two helpless , break - hearted woman , - pauper like himself , - his own 
 daughter and his son 's widow . when the saving be go , the young man 
 stoop from his destine calling , find employment somehow , no matter 
 how alien to his taste , and these three whom his toil support never 
 want a home or food . well , a few week after her husband 's terrible 
 death , his young widow   they have not be a year married   give birth to 
 a child , - a girl . she do not survive the exhaustion of her confinement 
 many day . the shock of her death snap the feeble thread of the poor 
 father 's life . both be bear to the grave on the same day . before they 
 die , both make the same prayer to their sole two mourner , the felon 's 
 sister , the old man 's young benefactor . the prayer be this , that the 
 new - bear infant should be rear , however humbly , in ignorance of her 
 birth , of a father 's guilt and shame . she be not to pass a suppliant 
 for charity to rich and high - bear kinsfolk , who have vouchsafe no word 
 even of pity to the felon 's guiltless father and as guiltless wife . that 
 promise have be keep till now . I be that daughter . the name I bear , 
 and the name which I give to my niece , be not ours , save as we may 
 indirectly claim they through alliance century ago . I have never 
 marry . I be to have be a bride , bring to the representative of 
 no ignoble house what be to have be a princely dower ; the wedding day 
 be fix , when the bolt fall . I have never again see my betrothed . he 
 go abroad and die there . I think he love I ; he know I love he . 
 who can blame he for desert I ? who could marry the felon 's sister ? 
 who would marry the felon 's child ? who but one ? the man who know 
 her secret , and will guard it ; the man who , care little for other 
 education , have help to instil into her spotless childhood so steadfast 
 a love of truth , so exquisite a pride of honour , that do she know such 
 ignominy rest on her birth she would pine herself away . " 

 " be there only one man on earth , " cry Kenelm , suddenly , rear his 
 face , - till then conceal and downcast , - and with a loftiness of pride 
 on its aspect , new to its wonte mildness , " be there only one man who 
 would deem the virgin at whose foot he desire to kneel and say , ' deign 
 to be the queen of my life , ' not far too noble in herself to be debase 
 by the sin of other before she be even bear ; be there only one man 
 who do not think that the love of truth and the pride of honour be 
 most royal attribute of woman or of man , no matter whether the father 
 of the woman or the man be pirate as lawless as the father of 
 Norman king , or liar as unscrupulous , where their own interest 
 be concern , as have be the crown representative of line as 
 deservedly famous as Caesars and Bourbons , Tudors and stuart ? nobility , 
 like genius , be inborn . one man alone guard her secret ! - guard a 
 secret that if make known could trouble a heart that recoil from shame ! 
 ah , madam , we Chillinglys be a very obscure , undistinguished race , but 
 for more than a thousand year we have be english gentleman . guard her 
 secret rather than risk the chance of discovery that could give she a 
 pang ! I would pass my whole life by her side in Kamtchatka , and even 
 there I would not snatch a glimpse of the secret itself with mine own 
 eye : it should be so closely muffle and wrap round by the fold of 
 reverence and worship . " 

 this burst of passion seem to Mrs. Cameron the senseless declamation 
 of an inexperienced , hot - headed young man ; and put it aside , much 
 as a great lawyer dismisse as balderdash the florid rhetoric of some 
 junior counsel , rhetoric in which the great lawyer have once indulge , 
 or as a woman for whom romance be over dismisse as idle verbiage some 
 romantic sentiment that befool her young daughter , Mrs. Cameron simply 
 reply , " all this be hollow talk , Mr. Chillingly ; let we come to the 
 point . after all I have say , do you mean to persist in your suit to my 
 niece ? " 

 " I persist . " 

 " what ! " she cry , this time indignantly , and with generous indignation ; 
 " what , even be it possible that you could win your parent ' consent to 
 marry the child of a man condemn to penal servitude , or , consistently 
 with the duty a son owe to parent , conceal that fact from they , 
 could you , bear to a station on which every gossip will ask , ' who and 
 what be the name of the future Lady Chillingly ? ' believe that the 
 who and the what will never be discover ! have you , a mere stranger , 
 unknown to we a few week ago , a right to say to Walter Melville , 
 ' resign to I that which be your sole reward for the sublime sacrifice , 
 for the loyal devotion , for the watchful tenderness of patient year ' ? " 

 " surely , madam , " cry Kenelm , more startled , more shake in soul by 
 this appeal , than by the previous revelation , ' surely , when we 
 last part , when I confide to you my love for your niece , when you 
 consent to my proposal to return home and obtain my father 's approval 
 of my suit , - surely then be the time to say , ' no ; a suitor with claim 
 paramount and irresistible have come before you . ' " 

 " I do not then know , Heaven be my witness , I do not then even suspect , 
 that Walter Melville ever dream of seek a wife in the child who have 
 grow up under his eye . you must own , indeed , how much I discourage 
 your suit ; I could not discourage it more without reveal the secret 
 of her birth , only to be reveal as an extreme necessity . but my 
 persuasion be that your father would not consent to your alliance with 
 one so far beneath the expectation he be entitle to form , and the 
 refusal of that consent would terminate all further acquaintance between 
 you and Lily , leave her secret undisclosed . it be not till you have 
 leave , only indeed two day ago , that I receive a letter from Walter 
 Melville , - a letter which tell I what I have never before conjecture . 
 here be the letter , read it , and then say if you have the heart to 
 force yourself into rivalry , with - with - " she break off , choke by she 
 exertion , thrust the letter into his hand , and with keen , eager , hungry 
 stare watch his countenance while he read . 



  - - - STREET , BLOOMSBURY . 

 MY DEAR FRIEND , - Joy and triumph ! my picture be complete , the picture 
 on which for so many month I have work night and day in this den of 
 a studio , without a glimpse of the green field , conceal my address 
 from every one , even from you , lest I might be tempt to suspend my 
 labour . the picture be complete : it be sell ; guess the price ! fifteen 
 hundred guineas , and to a dealer , - a dealer ! think of that ! it be to be 
 carry about the country exhibit by itself . you remember those three 
 little landscape of mine which two year ago I would gladly have sell 
 for ten pound , only neither Lily nor you would let I . my good friend 
 and early patron , the german merchant at Luscombe , who call on 
 I yesterday , offer to cover they with guineas thrice pile over the 
 canvas . imagine how happy I feel when I force he to accept they as a 
 present . what a leap in a man 's life it be when he can afford to say , " I 
 give ! " now then , at last , at last I be in a position which justify the 
 utterance of the hope which have for eighteen year be my solace , my 
 support ; be the sunbeam that ever shine through the gloom when my fate 
 be at the dark ; be the melody that buoy I aloft as in the 
 song of the skylark , when in the voice of man I hear but the laugh of 
 scorn . do you remember the night on which Lily 's mother besought we 
 to bring up her child in ignorance of her parentage , not even to 
 communicate to unkind and disdainful relative that such a child be 
 bear ? do you remember how plaintively , and yet how proudly , she , so 
 nobly bear , so luxuriously nurture , clasp my hand when I venture 
 to remonstrate , and say that her own family could not condemn her child 
 because of the father 's guilt , - she , the proud woman I ever know , she 
 whose smile I can at rare moment detect in Lily , raise her head from 
 her pillow , and gasp forth , - 

 " I be die : the last word of the dying be command . I command you to 
 see that my child 's lot be not that of a felon 's daughter transport to 
 the hearth of noble . to be happy , her lot must be humble : no roof too 
 humble to shelter , no husband too humble to we d , the felon 's daughter . " 

 from that hour I form a resolve that I would keep hand and heart 
 free , that when the grandchild of my princely benefactor grow up into 
 womanhood I might say to she , " I be humbly bear , but thy mother would 
 have give thee to I . " the newborn , consign to our charge , have now 
 ripen into woman , and I have now so assure my fortune that it be 
 no long poverty and struggle that I should ask she to share . I be 
 conscious that , be her fate not so exceptional , this hope of mine 
 would be a vain presumption , - conscious that I be but the creature 
 of her grandsire 's bounty , and that from it spring all I ever can 
 be , - conscious of the disparity in years,-conscious of many a past error 
 and present fault . but , as fate so ordain , such consideration be 
 trivial ; I be her rightful choice . what other choice , compatible with 
 these necessity which weigh , dear and honoured friend , immeasurably 
 more on your sense of honour than they do upon mine ? and yet mine be 
 not dull . grant , then , that you , her near and most responsible 
 relative , do not contemn I for presumption , all else seem to I clear . 
 Lily 's childlike affection for I be too deep and too fond not to 
 warm into a wife 's love . happily , too , she have not be rear in the 
 stereotype boarding - school shallowness of knowledge and vulgarity of 
 gentility ; but educate , like myself , by the free influence of Nature , 
 longing for no hall and palace save those that we build as we list , in 
 fairyland ; educate to comprehend and share the fancy which be 
 more than booklore to the worshipper of art and song . in a day or two , 
 perhaps the day after you receive this , I shall be able to escape from 
 London , and most likely shall come on foot as usual . how I long to 
 see once more the woodbine on the hedgerow , the green blade of the 
 cornfield , the sunny lapse of the river , and dearer still the tiny 
 fall of our own little noisy rill ! meanwhile I entreat you , dearest , 
 gentlest , most honored of such few friend as my life have hitherto win 
 to itself , to consider well the direct purport of this letter . if you , 
 bear in a grade so much high than mine , feel that it be unwarrantable 
 insolence in I to aspire to the hand of my patron 's grandchild , say so 
 plainly ; and I remain not less grateful for your friendship than I be 
 to your goodness when din for the first time at your father 's palace . 
 Shy and sensitive and young , I feel that his grand guest wonder why I 
 be invite to the same board as themselves . you , then court , admire , 
 you have sympathetic compassion on the raw , sullen boy ; leave those , who 
 then seem to I like the god and goddess of a heathen Pantheon , to 
 come and sit beside your father 's protege and cheeringly whisper to 
 he such word as make a low - bear ambitious lad go home light - hearted , 
 say to himself , " some day or other . " and what it be to an ambitious 
 lad , fancy himself lift by the god and goddess of a Pantheon , to 
 go home light - hearted muttering to himself , " some day or other , " I doubt 
 if even you can divine . 

 but should you be as kind to the presumptuous man as you be to the 
 bashful boy , and say , " realize be the dream , fulfil be the object of 
 your life ! take from I as her next of kin , the last descendant of your 
 benefactor , " then I venture to address to you this request . you be in 
 the place of mother to your sister 's child , act for she as a keeper now , 
 to prepare her mind and heart for the come change in the relation 
 between she and I . when I last see she , six month ago , she be still 
 so playfully infantine that it half seem to I I should be sin 
 against the reverence due to a child , if I say too abruptly , " you be 
 woman , and I love you not as child but as woman . " and yet , time be 
 not allow to I for long , cautious , and gradual slide from the 
 relationship of friend into that of lover . I now understand what the 
 great master of my art once say to I , " a career be a destiny . " by one 
 of those merchant prince who now at Manchester , as they do once at 
 Genoa or Venice , reign alike over those two civilizer of the world 
 which to dull eye seem antagonistic , Art and Commerce , an offer be make 
 to I for a picture on a subject which strike his fancy : an offer so 
 magnificently liberal that his commerce must command my art ; and the 
 nature of the subject compel I to seek the bank of the Rhine as 
 soon as may be . I must have all the hue of the foliage in the meridian 
 glory of summer . I can but stay at Grasmere a very few day ; but 
 before I leave I must know this , be I go to work for Lily or be I 
 not ? on the answer to that question depend all . if not to work for she , 
 there would be no glory in the summer , no triumph in art to I : I refuse 
 the offer . if she say , " yes ; it be for I you work , " then she become 
 my destiny . she assure my career . here I speak as an artist : nobody who 
 be not an artist can guess how sovereign over even his moral being , at 
 a certain critical epoch in his career of artist or his life of man , 
 be the success or the failure of a single work . but I go on to speak as 
 man . my love for Lily be such for the last six month that , though if 
 she reject I I should still serve art , still yearn for fame , it would 
 be as an old man might do either . the youth of my life would be go . 

 as man I say , all my thought , all my dream of happiness , distinct from 
 art and fame , be sum up in the one question , " be Lily to be my wife 
 or not ? " 

  your affectionately , 

  W. M. 


 Kenelm return the letter without a word . 

 enrage by his silence , Mrs. Cameron exclaim , " now , sir , what say you ? 
 you have scarcely know Lily five week . what be the feverish fancy of 
 five week ' growth to the lifelong devotion of a man like this ? do you 
 now dare to say , ' I persist ' ? " 

 Kenelm wave his hand very quietly , as if to dismiss all conception of 
 taunt and insult and say with his soft melancholy eye fix upon the 
 working feature of Lily 's aunt , " this man be more worthy of she than 
 I. he pray you , in his letter , to prepare your niece for that change of 
 relationship which he dread too abruptly to break to her himself . have 
 you do so ? " 

 " I have ; the night I get the letter . " 

 " and - you hesitate ; speak truthfully , I implore . and she - " 

 " she , " answer Mrs. Cameron , feel herself involuntarily compel to 
 obey the voice of that prayer - ' she seem stunned at first , muttering , 
 ' this be a dream : it can not be true , - can not ! I Lion 's wife - I - I ! 
 I , his destiny ! in I his happiness ! ' and then she laugh her pretty 
 child 's laugh , and put her arm round my neck , and say , ' you be 
 jest , aunty . he could not write thus ! ' so I put that part of his 
 letter under her eye ; and when she have convince herself , her face 
 become very grave , more like a woman 's face than I ever see it ; and 
 after a pause she cry out passionately , ' can you think I - can I think 
 myself - so bad , so ungrateful , as to doubt what I should answer , if 
 Lion ask I whether I would willingly say or do anything that make he 
 unhappy ? if there be such a doubt in my heart , I would tear it out 
 by the root , heart and all ! ' oh , Mr. Chillingly ! there would be no 
 happiness for she with another , know that she have blight the life 
 of he to whom she owe so much , though she never will learn how 
 much more she owe . " Kenelm not reply to this remark , Mrs. Cameron 
 resume , " I will be perfectly frank with you , Mr. Chillingly . I be not 
 quite satisfied with Lily 's manner and look the next morning , that is , 
 yesterday . I do fear there might be some struggle in her mind in which 
 there enter a thought of yourself . and when Walter , on his arrival 
 here in the evening , speak of you as one he have meet before in his rural 
 excursion , but whose name he only learn on part at the bridge by 
 Cromwell Lodge , I see that Lily turn pale , and shortly afterwards 
 go to her own room for the night . fear that any interview with you , 
 though it would not alter her resolve , might lessen her happiness on 
 the only choice she can and ought to adopt , I resolve to visit you this 
 morning , and make that appeal to your reason and your heart which I have 
 do now , - not , I be sure , in vain . hush ! I hear his voice ! " 

 Melville enter the room , Lily lean on his arm . the artist 's comely 
 face be radiant with ineffable joyousness . leave Lily , he reach 
 Kenelm 's side as with a single bound , shake he heartily by the hand , 
 say , " I find that you have already be a welcome visitor in this 
 house . long may you be so , so say I , so   I answer for she   say my fair 
 betrothed , to whom I need not present you . " 

 Lily advance , and hold out her hand very timidly . Kenelm touch rather 
 than clasp it . his own strong hand tremble like a leaf . he venture 
 but one glance at her face . all the bloom have die out of it , but the 
 expression seem to he wondrously , cruelly tranquil . 

 " your betrothed ! your future bride ! " he say to the artist , with a 
 mastery over his emotion render less difficult by the single glance 
 at that tranquil face . " I wish you joy . all happiness to you , Miss 
 Mordaunt . you have make a noble choice . " 

 he look round for his hat ; it lie at his foot , but he do not see 
 it ; his eye wander away with uncertain vision , like those of a 
 sleep - walker . 

 Mrs. Cameron pick up the hat and give it to he . 

 " thank you , " he say meekly ; then with a smile half sweet , half bitter , 
 " I have so much to thank you for , Mrs. Cameron . " 

 " but you be not go already , - just as I enter too . hold ! Mrs. Cameron 
 tell I you be lodge with my old friend Jones . come and stop a 
 couple of day with we : we can find you a room ; the room over your 
 butterfly cage , eh , Fairy ? " 

 " thank you too . thank you all . no ; I must be in London by the first 
 train . " 

 speak thus , he have find his way to the door , bow with the quiet 
 grace that characterize all his movement , and be go . 

 " pardon his abruptness , Lily ; he too love ; he too be impatient to 
 find a betrothed , " say the artist gayly : " but now he know my dear 
 secret , I think I have a right to know his ; and I will try . " 

 he have scarcely utter the word before he too have quit the room and 
 overtaken Kenelm just at the threshold . 

 " if you be go back to Cromwell Lodge , - to pack up , I suppose , - let 
 I walk with you as far as the bridge . " 

 Kenelm incline his head assentingly and tacitly as they pass through 
 the garden - gate , wind backwards through the lane which skirt the 
 garden pale ; when , at the very spot in which the day after their first 
 and only quarrel Lily 's face have be see brighten through the 
 evergreen , that day on which the old woman , quit she , say , " God 
 bless you ! " and on which the vicar , walk with Kenelm , speak of her 
 fairy charm ; well , just in that spot Lily 's face appear again , not 
 this time brighten through the evergreen , unless the pale gleam 
 of the pale moon can be say to brighten . Kenelm see , start , halt . 
 his companion , then in the rush of a gladsome talk , of which Kenelm have 
 not hear a word , neither see nor halt ; he walk on mechanically , 
 gladsome , and talk . 

 Lily stretch forth her hand through the evergreen . Kenelm take it 
 reverentially . this time it be not his hand that tremble . 

 " good - by , " she say in a whisper , " good - by forever in this world . you 
 understand , - you do understand I . say that you do . " 

 " I understand . noble child ! noble choice ! God bless you ! God comfort 
 I ! " murmur Kenelm . their eye meet . oh , the sadness ; and , alas ! oh the 
 love in the eye of both ! 

 Kenelm pass on . 

 all say in an instant . how many all be say in an instant ! Melville 
 be in the midst of some glowing sentence , begin when Kenelm drop 
 from his side , and the end of the sentence be this : 

 " word can not say how fair seem life ; how easy seem conqu of fame , 
 date from this day - this day " - and in his turn he halt , look round 
 on the sunlit landscape , and breathe deep , as if to drink into his soul 
 all of the earth 's joy and beauty which his gaze could compass and the 
 arch of the horizon bind . 

 " they who know she even the good , " resume the artist , stride on , 
 " even her aunt , never could guess how serious and earnest , under all 
 her infantine prettiness of fancy , be that girl 's real nature . we be 
 walk along the brook - side , when I begin to tell how solitary the 
 world would be to I if I could not win she to my side ; while I speak 
 she have turn aside from the path we have take , and it be not till we 
 be under the shadow of the church in which we shall be married that 
 she utter the word that give to every cloud in my fate the silver 
 lining ; imply thus how solemnly connect in her mind be the thought 
 of love with the sanctity of religion . " 

 Kenelm shudder , - the church , the burial - ground , the old Gothic tomb , 
 the flower round the infant 's grave ! 

 " but I be talk a great deal too much about myself , " resume the 
 artist . " lover be the most consummate of all egotist , and the 
 most garrulous of all gossip . you have wish I joy on my destine 
 nuptial , when shall I wish you joy on your ? since we have begin to 
 confide in each other , you be in my debt as to a confidence . " 

 they have now gain the bridge . Kenelm turn round abruptly , " good - day ; 
 let we part here . I have nothing to confide to you that might not seem 
 to your ear a mockery when I wish you joy . " so say , so obey in 
 spite of himself the anguish of his heart , Kenelm wring his companion 's 
 hand with the force of an uncontrollable agony , and speed over the 
 bridge before Melville recover his surprise . 

 the artist would have small claim to the essential attribute of 
 genius - namely , the intuitive sympathy of passion with passion - if that 
 secret of Kenelm 's which he have so lightly say " he have acquire the 
 right to learn , " be not reveal to he as by an electric flash . " poor 
 fellow ! " he say to himself pityingly ; " how natural that he should fall 
 in love with Fairy ! but happily he be so young , and such a philosopher , 
 that it be but one of those trial through which , at least ten time a 
 year , I have go with wound that leave not a scar . " 

 thus soliloquizing , the warm - blooded worshipper of Nature return 
 homeward , too blest in the triumph of his own love to feel more than a 
 kindly compassion for the wounded heart , consign with no doubt of 
 the healing result to the fickleness of youth and the consolation of 
 philosophy . not for a moment do the happy rival suspect that Kenelm 's 
 love be return ; that an atom in the heart of the girl who have 
 promise to be his bride could take its light or shadow from any love 
 but his own . yet , more from delicacy of respect to the rival so suddenly 
 self - betray than from any more prudential motive , he do not speak 
 even to Mrs. Cameron of Kenelm 's secret and sorrow ; and certainly 
 neither she nor Lily be disposed to ask any question that concern the 
 depart visitor . 

 in fact the name of Kenelm Chillingly be scarcely , if at all , mention 
 in that household during the few day which elapse before Walter 
 Melville quit Grasmere for the bank of the Rhine , not to return till 
 the autumn , when his marriage with Lily be to take place . during 
 those day Lily be calm and seemingly cheerful ; her manner towards 
 she betroth , if more subdue , not less affectionate than of old . 
 Mrs. Cameron congratulate herself on have so successfully get rid of 
 Kenelm Chillingly . 



 CHAPTER VIII . 

 so , then , but for that officious warning , utter under the balcony 
 at Luscombe , Kenelm Chillingly might never have have a rival in Walter 
 Melville . but ill would any reader construe the character of Kenelm , do 
 he think that such a thought increase the bitterness of his sorrow . 
 no sorrow in the thought that a noble nature have be save from the 
 temptation to a great sin . 

 the good man do good merely by live . and the good he do may often 
 mar the plan he form for his own happiness . but he can not regret that 
 Heaven have permit he to do good . 

 what Kenelm do feel be perhaps well explain in the letter to Sir 
 Peter , which be here subjoin : - 


 " MY DEAREST FATHER , - never till my die day shall I forget that 
 tender desire for my happiness with which , overcome all worldly 
 consideration , no matter at what disappointment to your own cherish 
 plan or ambition for the heir to your name and race , you send I 
 away from your roof , these word ring in my ear like the sound of 
 joy - bell , ' choose as you will , with my blessing on your choice . I open 
 my heart to admit another child : your wife shall be my daughter . ' it 
 be such an unspeakable comfort to I to recall those word now . of all 
 human affection gratitude be surely the holy ; and it blend itself 
 with the sweetness of religion when it be gratitude to a father . and , 
 therefore , do not grieve too much for I , when I tell you that the hope 
 which enchant I when we part be not to be fulfil . her hand be 
 pledge to another , - another with claim upon her preference to which 
 mine can not be compare ; and he be himself , put aside the accident 
 of birth and fortune , immeasurably my superior . in that thought - I mean 
 the thought that the man she select deserve she more than I do , and 
 that in his happiness she will blend her own - I shall find comfort , so 
 soon as I can fairly reason down the first all - engross selfishness 
 that follow the sense of unexpected and irremediable loss . meanwhile 
 you will think it not unnatural that I resort to such aid for change 
 of heart as be afford by change of scene . I start for the continent 
 to - night , and shall not rest till I reach Venice , which I have not yet 
 see . I feel irresistibly attract towards still canal and gliding 
 gondola . I will write to you and to my dear mother the day I arrive . 
 and I trust to write cheerfully , with full account of all I see and 
 encounter . do not , dearest father , in your letter to I , revert or 
 allude to that grief which even the tender word from your own tender 
 self might but chafe into pain more sensitive . after all , a disappointed 
 love be a very common lot . and we meet every day , man - ay , and woman 
 too - who have know it , and be thoroughly cure . the manly of our 
 modern lyrical poet have say very nobly , and , no doubt , very justly , 


  " to bear be to conquer our fate . 


  " ever your love son , 

  " K. C. " 



 CHAPTER IX . 

 nearly a year and a half have elapse since the date of my last chapter . 
 two Englishmen be - the one seat , the other recline at length - on 
 one of the mound that furrow the ascent of Posilippo . before they 
 spread the noiseless sea , bask in the sunshine , without visible 
 ripple ; to the left there be a distant glimpse through gap of 
 brushwood of the public garden and white water of the Chiaja . they be 
 friend who have chance to meet abroad unexpectedly , joined company , and 
 travel together for many month , chiefly in the East . they have be 
 but a few day in Naples . the elder of the two have important affair in 
 England which ought to have summon he back long since . but he do not 
 let his friend know this ; his affair seem to he less important than 
 the duty he owe to one for whom he entertain that deep and noble 
 love which be something strong than brotherly , for with brotherly 
 affection it combine gratitude and reverence . he know , too , that 
 his friend be oppress by a haunting sorrow , of which the cause be 
 divine by one , not reveal by the other . 

 to leave he , so beloved , alone with that sorrow in strange land , be a 
 thought not to be cherish by a friend so tender ; for in the friendship 
 of this man there be that sort of tenderness which complete a nature , 
 thoroughly manlike , by give it a touch of the woman 's . 

 it be a day which in our northern climate be that of winter : in the 
 southern clime of Naples it be mild as an english summer day , linger 
 on the brink of autumn ; the sun slop towards the west , and already 
 gather around it roseate and purple fleece ; elsewhere the deep blue 
 sky be without a cloudlet . 

 both have be for some minute silent ; at length the man recline on 
 the grass - it be the young man - say suddenly , and with no previous 
 hint of the subject introduce , " Lay your hand on your heart , Tom , and 
 answer I truly . be your thought as clear from regret as the heaven 
 above we be from a cloud ? man take regret from tear that have cease 
 to flow , as the heavens take cloud from the rain that have cease to 
 fall . " 

 " Regrets ? ah , I understand , for the loss of the girl I once love to 
 distraction ! no ; surely I make that clear to you many , many , many month 
 ago , when I be your guest at Moleswich . " 

 " ay , but I have never , since then , speak to you on that subject . I do 
 not dare . it seem to I so natural that a man , in the early struggle 
 between love and reason , should say , ' reason shall conquer , and 
 have conquer ; ' and yet - and yet - as time glide on , feel that the 
 conqueror who can not put down rebellion have a very uneasy reign . 
 answer I not as at Moleswich , during the first struggle , but now , in 
 the after - day , when reaction from struggle come . " 

 " upon my honour , " answer the friend , " I have have no reaction at all . 
 I be cure entirely , when I have once see Jessie again , another man 's 
 wife , mother to his child , happy in her marriage ; and , whether she be 
 change or not , - very different from the sort of wife I should like to 
 marry , now that I be no long a village farrier . " 

 " and , I remember , you speak of some other girl whom it would suit you 
 to marry . you have be long abroad from she . do you ever think of 
 she , - think of she still as your future wife ? can you love she ? can you , 
 who have once love so faithfully , love again ? " 

 " I be sure of that . I love emily well than I do when I leave England . 
 we correspond . she write such nice letter . " Tom hesitate , blush , 
 and continue timidly , " I should like to show you one of her letter . " 

 " do . " 

 Tom draw forth the last of such letter from his breast - pocket . 

 Kenelm raise himself from the grass , take the letter , and read slowly , 
 carefully , while Tom watch in vain for some approve smile to 
 brighten up the dark beauty of that melancholy face . 

 certainly it be the letter a man in love might show with pride to a 
 friend : the letter of a lady , well educate , well bring up , evince 
 affection modestly , intelligence modestly too ; the sort of letter in 
 which a mother who love her daughter , and approve the daughter 's 
 choice , could not have suggest a correction . 

 as Kenelm give back the letter , his eye meet his friend 's . those be 
 eager eye , - eye hunger for praise . Kenelm 's heart smite he for 
 that bad of sin in friendship , - want of sympathy ; and that uneasy 
 heart force to his lip congratulation , not perhaps quite sincere , but 
 which amply satisfy the lover . in utter they , Kenelm rise to his 
 foot , throw his arm round his friend 's shoulder , and say , " be you not 
 tired of this place , Tom ? I be . let we go back to England to - morrow . " 
 Tom 's honest face brighten vividly . " how selfish and egotistical I 
 have be ! " continue Kenelm ; " I ought to have think more of you , your 
 career , your marriage , - pardon I - " 

 " Pardon you , - pardon ! do not   I owe to you all , - owe to you Emily herself ? 
 if you have never come to Graveleigh , never say , ' be my friend , ' what 
 should I have be now ? what - what ? " 

 the next day the two friend quit Naples en route for England , not 
 exchange many word by the way . the old loquacious crotchety humour 
 of Kenelm have desert he . a dull companion than he be you could not 
 have conceive . he might have be the hero of a young lady 's novel . 
 it be only when they part in London , that Kenelm evince more secret 
 purpose , more external emotion than one of his heraldic Daces shift 
 from the bed to the surface of a waveless pond . 

 " if I have rightly understand you , Tom , all this change in you , all this 
 cure of torture regret , be wrought , work lastingly , - work so as 
 to leave you heart - free for the world 's action and a home 's peace , on 
 that eve when you see she whose face till then have haunt you , another 
 man 's happy wife , and in so see she , either her face be change or 
 your heart become so . " 

 " quite true . I might express it otherwise , but the fact remain the 
 same . " 

 " God bless you , Tom ; bless you in your career without , in your home 
 within , " say Kenelm , wring his friend 's hand at the door of the 
 carriage that be to whirl to love and wealth and station the whilom 
 bully of a village , along the iron groove of that contrivance which , 
 though now the tritest of prosaic reality , seem once too poetical 
 for a poet 's wild vision . 



 CHAPTER X. 

 a WINTER 's evening at Moleswich . very different from a winter sunset 
 at Naples . it be intensely cold . there have be a slight fall of snow , 
 accompany with severe , bright , clean frost , a thin sprinkling of white 
 on the pavement . Kenelm Chillingly enter the town on foot , no long 
 a knapsack on his back . pass through the main street , he pause a 
 moment at the door of Will Somers . the shop be closed . no , he would 
 not stay there to ask in a roundabout way for news . he would go in 
 straightforwardly and manfully to Grasmere . he would take the inmate 
 there by surprise . the soon he could bring Tom 's experience home 
 to himself , the well . he have school his heart to rely on that 
 experience , and it bring he back the old elasticity of his stride . 
 in his lofty carriage and buoyant face be again visible the old 
 haughtiness of the indifferentism that keep itself aloof from the 
 turbulent emotion and conventional frivolity of those whom its 
 philosophy pity and scorn . 

 " ha ! ha ! " laugh he who like Swift never laugh aloud , and often 
 laugh inaudibly . " ha ! ha ! I shall exorcise the ghost of my grief . I 
 shall never be haunt again . if that stormy creature whom love might 
 have madden into crime , if he be cure of love at once by a single 
 visit to the home of she whose face be change to he , - for the smile 
 and the tear of it have become the property of another man , - how much 
 more should I be leave without a scar ! I , the heir of the Chillinglys ! 
 I , the kinsman of a Mivers ! I , the pupil of a Welby ! I - I , Kenelm 
 Chillingly , to be thus - thus - " here , in the midst of his boastful 
 soliloquy , the well - remember brook rush suddenly upon eye and ear , 
 gleam and moan under the wintry moon . Kenelm Chillingly stop , 
 cover his face with his hand , and burst into a passion of tear . 

 recover himself slowly , he go on along the path , every step of 
 which be haunt by the form of Lily . he reach the garden gate of 
 Grasmere , lift the latch , and enter . as he do so , a man , touch 
 his hat , rush beside , and advance before he , - the village postman . 
 Kenelm draw back , allow the man to pass to the door , and as he thus 
 draw back , he catch a side view of light window look on the 
 lawn , - the window of the pleasant drawing - room in which he have first 
 hear Lily speak of her guardian . 

 the postman leave his letter , and regain the garden gate , while 
 Kenelm still stand wistfully gaze on those light window . he have , 
 meanwhile , advance along the whitened sward to the light , say to 
 himself , " let I just see she and her happiness , and then I will knock 
 boldly at the door , and say , ' good - evening , Mrs. Melville . ' " 

 so Kenelm steal across the lawn , and , station himself at the angle of 
 the wall , look into the window . 

 Melville , in dressing - robe and slipper , be seat alone by the 
 fireside . his dog be lazily stretch on the hearth rug . one by one the 
 feature of the room , as the scene of his vanish happiness , grow out 
 from its stillness ; the delicately tinted wall , the dwarf bookcase , 
 with its feminine ornament on the upper shelf ; the piano stand in 
 the same place . Lily 's own small low chair ; that be not in its old 
 place , but thrust into a remote angle , as if it have pass into disuse . 
 Melville be read a letter , no doubt one of those which the postman 
 have leave . surely the content be pleasant , for his fair face , always 
 frankly expressive of emotion , brighten wonderfully as he read on . 
 then he rise with a quick , brisk movement , and pull the bell hastily . 

 a neat maid - servant enter , - a strange face to Kenelm . Melville give 
 she some brief message . " he have have joyous news , " think Kenelm . " he 
 have send for his wife that she may share his joy . " presently the door 
 open , and enter not Lily , but Mrs. Cameron . 

 she look change . her natural quietude of mien and movement the same , 
 indeed , but with more languor in it . her hair have become gray . Melville 
 be stand by the table as she approach he . he put the letter into 
 her hand with a gay , proud smile , and look over her shoulder while 
 she read it , point with his finger as to some line that should more 
 emphatically claim her attention . 

 when she have finish her face reflect his smile . they exchange a 
 hearty shake of the hand , as if in congratulation . 

 " ah , " think Kenelm , " the letter be from Lily . she be abroad . perhaps 
 the birth of a first - bear . " 

 just then Blanche , who have not be visible before , emerge from under 
 the table , and as Melville reseat himself by the fireside , spring into 
 his lap , rub herself against his breast . the expression of his face 
 change ; he utter some low exclamation . Mrs. Cameron take the creature 
 from his lap , stroke it quietly , carry it across the room , and put 
 it outside the door . then she seat herself beside the artist , place 
 her hand in his , and they converse in low tone , till Melville 's face 
 again grow bright , and again he take up the letter . 

 a few minute later the maid - servant enter with the tea - thing , 
 and after arrange they on the table approach the window . Kenelm 
 retreat into the shade , the servant close the shutter and draw the 
 curtain ; that scene of quiet home comfort vanish from the eye of the 
 looker - on . 

 Kenelm feel strangely perplexed . what have become of Lily ? be she indeed 
 absent from her home ? have he conjecture rightly that the letter 
 which have evidently so gladdened Melville be from she , or be 
 it possible - here a thought of joy seize his heart and hold he 
 breathless - be it possible that , after all , she have not marry her 
 guardian ; have find a home elsewhere , - be free ? he move on far 
 down the lawn , towards the water , that he might well bring before his 
 sight that part of the irregular building in which Lily formerly have she 
 sleep - chamber , and her " own - own room . " 

 all be dark there ; the shutter inexorably close . the place with which 
 the childlike girl have associate she most childlike fancy , taming and 
 tend the honey - drinker destine to pass into fairy , that fragile 
 tenement be not close against the wind and snow ; its door be 
 drearily open ; gap in the delicate wire - work ; of its dainty draperie a 
 few tattered shred hang here and there ; and on the depopulated floor 
 the moonbeam rest cold and ghostly . no spray from the tiny fountain ; 
 its basin chip and mouldering ; the scanty water therein frozen . of 
 all the pretty wild one that Lily fancy she could tame , not one . ah ! 
 yes , there be one , probably not of the old familiar number ; a stranger 
 that might have creep in for shelter from the first blast of 
 winter , and now clung to an angle in the farth wall , its wing 
 fold , - asleep , not dead . but Kenelm see it not ; he notice only the 
 general desolation of the spot . 

 " natural enough , " think he . " she have outgrow all such pretty 
 silliness . a wife can not remain a child . still , if she have belong to 
 I - " the thought choke even his inward , unspoken utterance . he turn 
 away , pause a moment under the leafless bough of the great willow 
 still dip into the brook , and then with impatient step stride back 
 towards the garden gate . 

 " no , - no , - no . I can not now enter that house and ask for Mrs. Melville . 
 trial enough for one night to stand on the old ground . I will return to 
 the town . I will call at Jessie 's , and there I can learn if she indeed 
 be happy . " 

 so he go on by the path along the brook - side , the night momently 
 colder and colder , and momently clear and clear , while the moon 
 noiselessly glide into loftier height . wrap in his abstract 
 thought , when he come to the spot in which the path split in twain , 
 he do not take that which lead more directly to the town . his step , 
 naturally enough follow the train of his thought , lead he along 
 the path with which the object of his thought be associate . he find 
 himself on the burial - ground , and in front of the old ruin tomb with 
 the effaced inscription . 

 " ah ! child ! child ! " he murmur almost audibly , " what depth of woman 
 tenderness lie conceal in thee ! in what love sympathy with the 
 past - sympathy only vouchsafe to the tender woman and the high 
 poet - didst thou lie thy flower on the tomb , to which thou didst give 
 a poet 's history interpret by a woman 's heart , little dream that 
 beneath the stone sleep a hero of thine own fallen race . " 

 he pass beneath the shadow of the yew , whose leave no winter wind 
 can strew , and pause at the ruin tomb , - no flower now on its stone , 
 only a sprinkling of snow at the foot of it , - sprinkling of snow at the 
 foot of each humbler grave - mound . motionless in the frosty air rest 
 the pointed church - spire , and through the frosty air , high and high 
 up the arch of heaven , soar the unpausing moon . around and below and 
 above she , the star which no science can number ; yet not less difficult 
 to number be the thought , desire , aspiration which , in a space of 
 time briefer than a winter 's night , can pass through the infinite deep 
 of a human soul . 

 from his stand by the Gothic tomb , Kenelm look along the churchyard 
 for the infant 's grave which Lily 's pious care have border with votive 
 flower . yes , in that direction there be still a gleam of colour ; could 
 it be of flower in that bite winter time ? - the moon be so deceptive , 
 it silver into the hue of the jessamine the green of the everlasting . 

 he pass towards the white grave - mound . his sight have dupe he ; no 
 pale flower , no green " everlasting " on its neglect border , - only brown 
 mould , wither stalk , streak of snow . 

 " and yet , " he say sadly , ' she tell I she have never break a promise ; 
 and she have give a promise to the die child . ah ! she be too happy now 
 to think of the dead . " 

 so murmur , he be about to turn towards the town , when close by 
 that child 's grave he see another . round that other there be pale 
 " everlasting , " dwarf blossom of the laurestinus ; at the four angle 
 the droop bud of a Christmas rise ; at the head of the grave be a 
 white stone , its sharp edge cut into the starlit air ; and on the 
 head , in fresh letter , be inscribe these word : - 


  to the Memory of 
  L. M. 
  Aged 17 , 
  die October 29 , a. D. 18 - , 
  this stone , above the grave to which her mortal 
  remain be consign , beside that of an infant not 
  more sinless , be consecrate by those who 
  most mourn and miss she , 
  ISABEL CAMERON , 
  WALTER MELVILLE . 
  " suffer the little child to come unto I . " 



 CHAPTER XI . 

 the next morning Mr. Emlyn , pass from his garden to the town of 
 Moleswich , descry a human form stretch on the burial - ground , 
 stir restlessly but very slightly , as if with an involuntary shiver , 
 and utter broken sound , very faintly hear , like the moan that a 
 man in pain strive to suppress and can not . 

 the rector hasten to the spot . the man be lie , his face downward , 
 on a grave - mound , not dead , not asleep . 

 " poor fellow overtake by drink , I fear , " think the gentle pastor ; and 
 as it be the habit of his mind to compassionate error even more than 
 grief , he accost the suppose sinner in very soothing tone - try to 
 raise he from the ground - and with very kindly word . 

 then the man lift his face from its pillow on the grave - mound , look 
 round he dreamily into the gray , blank air of the cheerless morn , 
 and rise to his foot quietly and slowly . the vicar be startle ; he 
 recognize the face of he he have last see in the magnificent affluence 
 of health and strength . but the character of the face be change , - so 
 change ! its old serenity of expression , at once grave and sweet , 
 succeed by a wild trouble in the heavy eyelid and tremble lip . 

 " Mr. Chillingly , - you ! be it possible ? " 

 " Varus , Varus , " exclaim Kenelm , passionately , " what hast thou do 
 with my legion ? " 

 at that quotation of the well - know greeting of Augustus to his 
 unfortunate general , the scholar recoil . have his young friend 's mind 
 desert he , - daze , perhaps , by over - study ? 

 he be soon reassure ; Kenelm 's face settle back into calm , though a 
 dreary calm , like that of the wintry day . 

 " I beg pardon , Mr. Emlyn ; I have not quite shake off the hold of a 
 strange dream . I dream that I be bad off than Augustus : he do not 
 lose the world when the legion he have trust to another vanish into 
 a grave . " 

 here Kenelm link his arm in that of the rector , - on which he lean 
 rather heavily , - and draw he on from the burial - ground into the open 
 space where the two path meet . 

 " but how long have you return to Moleswich ? " ask Emlyn ; " and how 
 come you to choose so damp a bed for your morning slumber ? " 

 " the wintry cold creep into my vein when I stand in the burial - ground , 
 and I be very weary ; I have no sleep at night . do not let I take you 
 out of your way ; I be go on to Grasmere . so I see , by the record on a 
 gravestone , that it be more than a year ago since Mr. Melville lose his 
 wife . " 

 " Wife ? he never marry . " 

 " what ! " cry Kenelm . " Whose , then , be that gravestone , - ' L. M. ' ? " 

 " alas ! it be our poor Lily 's . " 

 " and she die unmarried ? " 

 as Kenelm say this he look up , and the sun break out from the 
 gloomy haze of the morning . " I may claim thee , then , " he think within 
 himself , " claim thee as mine when we meet again . " 

 " unmarried , - yes , " resume the vicar . " she be indeed betroth to her 
 guardian ; they be to have be marry in the autumn , on his return 
 from the Rhine . he go there to paint on the spot itself his great 
 picture , which be now so famous , - ' Roland , the Hermit Knight , look 
 towards the convent lattice for a sight of the Holy Nun . ' Melville have 
 scarcely go before the symptom of the disease which prove fatal to 
 poor Lily betray themselves ; they baffle all medical skill , - rapid 
 decline . she be always very delicate , but no one detect in her the 
 seed of consumption . Melville only return a day or two before her 
 death . dear childlike Lily ! how we all mourn for she ! - not least the 
 poor , who believe in her fairy charm . " 

 " and least of all , it appear , the man she be to have marry . " 

 " he ? - Melville ? how can you wrong he so ? his grief be 
 intense - overpowering - for the time . " 

 " for the time ! what time ? " mutter Kenelm , in tone too low for the 
 pastor 's ear . 

 they move on silently . Mr. Emlyn resume , - 

 " you notice the text on Lily 's gravestone - ' suffer the little child 
 to come unto I ' ? she dictate it herself the day before she die . I be 
 with she then , so I be at the last . " 

 " be you - be you - at the last - the last ? good - day , Mr. Emlyn ; we 
 be just in sight of the garden gate . and - excuse I - I wish to see Mr. 
 Melville alone . " 

 " well , then , good - day ; but if you be make any stay in the 
 neighbourhood , will you not be our guest ? we have a room at your 
 service . " 

 " I thank you gratefully ; but I return to London in an hour or so . hold , 
 a moment . you be with she at the last ? she be resign to die ? " 

 " resign ! that be scarcely the word . the smile leave upon her lip be 
 not that of human resignation : it be the smile of a divine joy . " 



 CHAPTER XII . 

 " yes , sir , Mr. Melville be at home in his studio . " 

 Kenelm follow the maid across the hall into a room not build at the 
 date of Kenelm 's former visit to the house : the artist , make Grasmere 
 his chief residence after Lily 's death , have add it at the back of 
 the neglect place wherein Lily have encage " the soul of infant 
 unbaptized . " 

 a lofty room , with a casement partially darken , to the bleak north ; 
 various sketch on the wall ; gaunt specimen of antique furniture , 
 and of gorgeous italian silk , scatter about in confused disorder ; 
 one large picture on its easel curtain ; another as large , and half 
 finish , before which stand the painter . he turn quickly , as Kenelm 
 enter the room unannounced , let fall brush and palette , come up to he 
 eagerly , grasp his hand , droop his head on Kenelm 's shoulder , and 
 say , in a voice struggle with evident and strong emotion , - 

 " since we part , such grief ! such a loss ! " 

 " I know it ; I have see her grave . let we not speak of it . why 
 so needlessly revive your sorrow ? so - so - your sanguine hope be 
 fulfil : the world at last have do you justice ? Emlyn tell I that 
 you have paint a very famous picture . " 

 Kenelm have seat himself as he thus speak . the painter still stand with 
 deject attitude on the middle of the floor , and brush his hand 
 over his moistened eye once or twice before he answer , " yes , wait a 
 moment , do not   talk of fame yet . Bear with I . the sudden sight of you 
 unnerve I . " 

 the artist here seat himself also on an old worm - eat Gothic chest , 
 rumple and chafe the golden or tinselled thread of the embroider 
 silk , so rare and so time - wear , fling over the Gothic chest , so rare 
 also , and so worm - eat . 

 Kenelm look through half - close lid at the artist , and his lip , 
 before slightly curve with a secret scorn , become gravely compress . 
 in Melville 's struggle to conceal emotion the strong man recognize a 
 strong man , - recognize , and yet only wonder ; wonder how such a man , 
 to whom Lily have pledge her hand , could so soon after the loss of Lily 
 go on paint picture , and care for any praise bestow on a yard of 
 canvas . 

 in a very few minute Melville recommence conversation , - no more 
 reference to Lily than if she have never exist . " yes , my last picture 
 have be indeed a success , - a reward complete , if tardy , for all the 
 bitterness of former struggle make in vain , for the gall sense of 
 injustice , the anguish of which only an artist know , when unworthy 
 rival be rank before he . 


  " ' foe quick to blame , and friend afraid to praise . ' 


 " true that I have still much to encounter ; the clique still seek to 
 disparage I , but between I and the clique there stand at last the 
 giant form of the public , and at last critic of graver weight than the 
 clique have deign to accord to I a high rank than even the public 
 yet acknowledge . ah , Mr. Chillingly , you do not profess to be a judge of 
 painting , but , excuse I , just look at this letter . I receive it 
 only last night from the great connoisseur of my art , certainly in 
 England , perhaps in Europe . " here Melville draw , from the side - pocket 
 of his picturesque moyen age surtout , a letter sign by a name 
 authoritative to all who , be painter themselves , acknowledge 
 authority in one who could no more paint a picture himself than Addison , 
 the able critic of the great poem modern Europe have produce , could 
 have write ten line of the " Paradise Lost , " and thrust the letter 
 into Kenelm 's hand . Kenelm read it listlessly , with an increase 
 contempt for an artist who could so find in gratified vanity consolation 
 for the life go from earth . but , listlessly as he read the letter , the 
 sincere and fervent enthusiasm of the laudatory content impress he , 
 and the preeminent authority of the signature could not be deny . 

 the letter be write on the occasion of Melville 's recent election to 
 the dignity of R. A. , successor to a very great artist whose death have 
 create a vacancy in the Academy . he return the letter to Melville , 
 say , " this be the letter I see you read last night as I look 
 in at your window . indeed , for a man who care for the opinion of other 
 man , this letter be very flattering ; and for the painter who care for 
 money , it must be very pleasant to know by how many guineas every inch 
 of his canvas may be cover . " unable long to control his passion of 
 rage , of scorn , of agonizing grief , Kenelm then burst forth : " man , man , 
 whom I once accept as a teacher on human life , - a teacher to warm , to 
 brighten , to exalt mine own indifferent , dreamy , slow - pulse self ! have 
 not the one woman whom thou didst select out of this overcrowded world 
 to be bone of thy bone , flesh of thy flesh , vanish evermore from the 
 earth , - little more than a year since her voice be silence , her heart 
 cease to beat ? but how slight be such loss to thy life compare to the 
 worth of a compliment that flatter thy vanity ! " 

 the artist rise to his foot with an indignant impulse . but the angry 
 flush fade from his cheek as he look on the countenance of his 
 rebuker . he walk up to he , and attempt to take his hand , but Kenelm 
 snatch it scornfully from his grasp . 

 " poor friend , " say Melville , sadly and soothingly , " I do not think you 
 love she thus deeply . pardon I . " he draw a chair close to Kenelm 's , 
 and after a brief pause go on thus , in very earnest tone , " I be not 
 so heartless , not so forgetful of my loss as you suppose . but reflect , 
 you have but just learn of her death , you be under the first shock of 
 grief . More than a year have be give to I for gradual submission to 
 the decree of Heaven . now listen to I , and try to listen calmly . I 
 be many year old than you : I ought to know well the condition 
 on which man hold the tenure of life . life be composite , many - side : 
 nature do not permit it to be lastingly monopolize by a single 
 passion , or while yet in the prime of its strength to be lastingly 
 blight by a single sorrow . survey the great mass of our common race , 
 engage in the various calling , some the humblest , some the lofty , 
 by which the business of the world be carry on , - can you justly 
 despise as heartless the poor trader , or the great statesman , when it 
 may be but a few day after the loss of some one nearest and dear to 
 his heart , the trader reopen his shop , the statesman reappear in his 
 office ? but in I , the votary of art , in I you behold but the weakness 
 of gratified vanity ; if I feel joy in the hope that my art may triumph , 
 and my country may add my name to the list of those who contribute to 
 her renown , where and when ever live an artist not sustain by that 
 hope , in privation , in sickness , in the sorrow he must share with his 
 kind ? nor be this hope that of a feminine vanity , a sickly craving for 
 applause ; it identify itself with glorious service to our land , to 
 our race , to the child of all after time . our art can not triumph , our 
 name can not live , unless we achieve a something that tend to beautify 
 or ennoble the world in which we accept the common heritage of toil and 
 of sorrow , in order therefrom to work out for successive multitude a 
 recreation and a joy . " 

 while the artist thus speak Kenelm lift towards his face eye charge 
 with suppress tear . and the face , kindling as the artist vindicate 
 himself from the young man 's bitter charge , become touchingly sweet in 
 its grave expression at the close of the not ignoble defence . 

 " Enough , " say Kenelm , rise . " there be a ring of truth in what you 
 say . I can conceive the artist 's , the poet 's escape from this world , 
 when all therein be death and winter , into the world he create and 
 colour at his will with the hue of summer . so , too , I can conceive 
 how the man whose life be sternly fit into the groove of a trader 's 
 calling , or a statesman 's duty , be bear on by the force of custom , 
 afar from such brief halting - spot as a grave . but I be no poet , no 
 artist , no trader , no statesman ; I have no calling , my life be fix 
 into no groove . Adieu . " 

 " hold a moment . not now , but somewhat later , ask yourself whether any 
 life can be permit to wander in space , a monad detach from the 
 life of other . into some groove or other , soon or later , it 
 must settle , and be bear on obedient to the law of Nature and the 
 responsibility to God . " 



 CHAPTER XIII 

 KENELM go back alone , and with downcast look , through the desolate , 
 flowerless garden , when at the other side of the gate a light touch be 
 lay on his arm . he look up , and recognize Mrs. Cameron . 

 " I see you , " she say , " from my window come to the house , and I have 
 be wait for you here . I wish to speak to you alone . allow I to 
 walk beside you . " ' 

 Kenelm incline his head assentingly , but make no answer . they be 
 nearly midway between the cottage and the burial - ground when Mrs. 
 Cameron resume , her tone quick and agitated , contrast her habitual 
 languid quietude , - 

 " I have a great weight on my mind ; it ought not to be remorse . I act 
 as I think in my conscience for the good . but oh , Mr. Chillingly , if I 
 err , - if I judge wrongly , do say you at least forgive I . " she seize 
 his hand , press it convulsively . Kenelm mutter inaudibly : a sort 
 of dreary stupor have succeed to the intense excitement of grief . Mrs. 
 Cameron go on , - 

 " you could not have marry Lily ; you know you could not . the secret of 
 her birth could not , in honour , have be conceal from your parent . 
 they could not have consent to your marriage ; and even if you have 
 persist , without that consent and in spite of that secret , to press 
 for it , - even have she be yours - " 

 " might she not be live now ? " cry Kenelm , fiercely . 

 " no , - no ; the secret must have come out . the cruel world would have 
 discover it ; it would have reach her ear . the shame of it would 
 have kill she . how bitter then would have be her short interval of 
 life ! as it be , she pass away , - resign and happy . but I own that I 
 do not , could not , understand she , could not believe she feeling for 
 you to be so deep . I do think that when she know her own heart she 
 would find that love for her guardian be its strong affection . she 
 assent , apparently without a pang , to become his wife ; and she seem 
 always so fond of he , and what girl would not be ? but I be mistaken , 
 deceive . from the day you see she last , she begin to fade away ; but 
 then Walter leave a few day after , and I think that it be his absence 
 she mourn . she never own to I that it be your , - never till too 
 late , - too late , - just when my sad letter have summon he back , only 
 three day before she die . have I know early , while yet there be 
 hope of recovery , I must have write to you , even though the obstacle 
 to your union with she remain the same . oh , again I implore you , say 
 that if I err you forgive I . she do , kiss I so tenderly . she do 
 forgive I . will not you ? it would have be her wish . " 

 " her wish ? do you think I could disobey it ? I know not if I have 
 anything to forgive . if I have , now could I not forgive one who love 
 she ? God comfort we both . " 

 he bend down and kiss Mrs. Cameron 's forehead . the poor woman throw 
 her arm gratefully , lovingly round he , and burst into tear . 

 when she have recover her emotion , she say , - 

 " and now , it be with so much light a heart that I can fulfil her 
 commission to you . but , before I place this in your hand , can you 
 make I one promise ? never tell Melville how she love you . she be so 
 careful he should never guess that . and if he know it be the thought of 
 union with he which have kill she , he would never smile again . " 

 " you would not ask such a promise if you could guess how sacred from all 
 the world I hold the secret that you confide to I . by that secret 
 the grave be change into an altar . our bridal now be only a while 
 defer . " 

 Mrs. Cameron place a letter in Kenelm 's hand , and murmur in accent 
 break by a sob , " she give it to I the day before her last , " leave he , 
 and with quick vacillate step hurry back towards the cottage . she 
 now understand he , at last , too well not to feel that on open that 
 letter he must be alone with the dead . 

 it be strange that we need have so little practical household knowledge 
 of each other to be in love . never till then have Kenelm 's eye rest 
 upon Lily 's handwriting . and he now gaze at the formal address on the 
 envelope with a sort of awe . unknown handwriting come to he from an 
 unknown world , - delicate , tremulous handwriting , - handwriting not of one 
 grow up , yet not of a child who have long to live . 

 he turn the envelope over and over , - not impatiently , as do the 
 lover whose heart beat at the sound of the approach footstep , but 
 lingeringly , timidly . he would not break the seal . 

 he be now so near the burial - ground . where should the first letter 
 ever receive from she - the sole letter he ever could receive - be so 
 reverentially , lovingly read , as at her grave ? 

 he walk on to the burial - ground , sit down by the grave , break the 
 envelope ; a poor little ring , with a poor little single turquoise , 
 roll out and rest at his foot . the letter contain only these 
 word , - 


 the ring come back to you . I could not live to marry another . I never 
 know how I love you - till , till I begin to pray that you might not love 
 I too much . darling ! darling ! good - by , darling ! 

  LILY . 

 do not   let Lion ever see this , or ever know what it say to you . he be so 
 good , and deserve to be so happy . do you remember the day of the ring ? 
 Darling ! darling ! 



 CHAPTER XIV . 

 somewhat more than another year have roll away . it be early spring 
 in London . the tree in the park and square be bud into leaf and 
 blossom . Leopold Travers have have a brief but serious conversation with 
 his daughter , and now go forth on horseback . handsome and graceful 
 still , Leopold Travers when in London be pleased to find himself 
 scarcely less the fashion with the young than he be when himself in 
 youth . he be now rid along the bank of the Serpentine , no one well 
 mount , well dress , well looking , or talk with great fluency 
 on the topic which interest his companion . 

 Cecilia be in the small drawing - room , which be exclusively 
 appropriate to her use , alone with Lady Glenalvon . 

 LADY GLENALVON . - " I own , my dear , dear Cecilia , that I arrange myself at 
 last on the side of your father . how earnestly at one time I have hop 
 that Kenelm Chillingly might woo and win the bride that seem to I 
 most fit to adorn and to cheer his life , I need not say . but when at 
 Exmundham he ask I to befriend his choice of another , to reconcile 
 his mother to that choice , - evidently not a suitable one , - I give he 
 up . and though that affair be at an end , he seem little likely ever to 
 settle down to practical duty and domestic habit , an idle wanderer 
 over the face of the earth , only hear of in remote place and with 
 strange companion . perhaps he may never return to England . " 

 CECILIA . - " he be in England now , and in London . " 

 LADY GLENALVON . - " you amaze I ! who tell you so ? " 

 CECILIA . - " his father , who be with he . Sir Peter call yesterday , and 
 speak to I so kindly . " Cecilia here turn aside her face to conceal 
 the tear that have start to her eye . 

 LADY GLENALVON . - " do Mr. Travers see Sir Peter ? " 

 CECILIA . - " yes ; and I think it be something that pass between they 
 which make my father speak to I - for the first time - almost sternly . " 

 LADY GLENALVON . - " in urge Chillingly Gordon 's suit ? " 

 CECILIA . - " command I to reconsider my rejection of it . he have 
 contrive to fascinate my father . " 

 LADY GLENALVON . - " so he have I . of course you might choose among other 
 candidate for your hand one of much high worldly rank , of much large 
 fortune ; yet , as you have already reject they , Gordon 's merit become 
 still more entitled to a fair hearing . he have already leap into 
 a position that mere rank and mere wealth can not attain . man of all 
 party speak highly of his parliamentary ability . he be already 
 mark in public opinion as a come man , - a future minister of the 
 high grade . he have youth and good look ; his moral character be 
 without a blemish : yet his manner be so free from affected austerity , 
 so frank , so genial . any woman might be pleased with his companionship ; 
 and you , with your intellect , your culture , - you , so bear for high 
 station , - you of all woman might be proud to partake the anxiety of 
 his career and the reward of his ambition . " 

 CECILIA   clasp her hand tightly together . - " I can not , I can not . he 
 may be all you say , - I know nothing against Mr. Chillingly Gordon , - but 
 my whole nature be antagonistic to his , and even be it not so - " 

 she stop abruptly , a deep blush warm up her fair face , and 
 retreat to leave it coldly pale . 

 LADY GLENALVON   tenderly kiss she . - " you have not , then , even 
 yet conquer the first maiden fancy ; the ungrateful one be still 
 remember ? " 

 Cecilia bow her head on her friend 's breast , and murmur imploringly , 
 " do not   speak against he ; he have be so unhappy . how much he must have 
 love ! " 

 " but it be not you whom he love . " 

 " something here , something at my heart , tell I that he will love I 
 yet ; and , if not , I be content to be his friend . " 



 CHAPTER XV . 

 while the conversation just related take place between Cecilia and 
 Lady Glenalvon , Chillingly Gordon be seat alone with Mivers in 
 the comfortable apartment of the cynical old bachelor . Gordon have 
 breakfast with his kinsman , but that meal be long over ; the two 
 man have find much to talk about on matter very interesting to the 
 young , nor without interest to the eld one . 

 it be true that Chillingly Gordon have , within the very short space of 
 time that have elapse since his entrance into the House of Commons , 
 achieve one of those reputation which mark out a man for early 
 admission into the progressive career of office , - not a very showy 
 reputation , but a very solid one . he have none of the gift of the 
 genuine orator , no enthusiasm , no imagination , no imprudent burst of 
 fiery word from a passionate heart . but he have all the gift of 
 an exceedingly tell speaker , - a clear metallic voice ; well - breed , 
 appropriate action , not less dignified for be somewhat too quiet ; 
 readiness for extempore reply ; industry and method for prepared 
 exposition of principle or fact . but his principal merit with the 
 chief of the assembly be in the strong good sense and worldly tact 
 which make he a safe speaker . for this merit he be largely indebted to 
 his frequent conference with Chillingly Mivers . that gentleman , whether 
 owe to his social quality or to the influence of " the Londoner " on 
 public opinion , enjoy an intimate acquaintance with the chief of all 
 party , and be up to his ear in the wisdom of the world . " nothing , " 
 he would say , " hurt a young parliamentary speaker like violence in 
 opinion , one way or the other . shun it . always allow that much may be 
 say on both side . when the chief of your own side suddenly adopt a 
 violence , you can go with they or against they , accord as good suit 
 your own book . " 

 " so , " say miver , recline on his sofa , and approach the end of his 
 second Trabuco   he never allow himself more than two , ' so I think we 
 have pretty well settle the tone you must take in your speech to - night . 
 it be a great occasion . " 

 " true . it be the first time in which the debate have be arrange so 
 that I may speak at ten o'clock or later . that in itself be a great 
 leap ; and it be a Cabinet minister whom I be to answer , - luckily , he 
 be a very dull fellow . do you think I might hazard a joke , - at least a 
 witticism ? " 

 " at his expense ? decidedly not . though his office compel he to 
 introduce this measure , he be by no mean in its favour when it be 
 discuss in the Cabinet ; and though , as you say , he be dull , it be 
 precisely that sort of dulness which be essential to the formation 
 of every respectable Cabinet . joke at he , indeed ! learn that gentle 
 dulness never love a joke - at its own expense . vain man ! seize the 
 occasion which your blame of his measure afford you to secure his 
 praise of yourself ; compliment he . enough of politic . it never do to 
 think too much over what one have already decide to say . brood over 
 it , one may become too much in earnest , and commit an indiscretion . so 
 Kenelm have come back ? " 

 " yes . I hear that news last night , at White 's , from Travers . Sir Peter 
 have call on Travers . " 

 " traver still favour your suit to the heiress ? " 

 " More , I think , than ever . success in Parliament have great effect on a 
 man who have success in fashion and respect the opinion of club . but 
 last night he be unusually cordial . between you and I , I think he be 
 a little afraid that Kenelm may yet be my rival . I gather that from a 
 hint he let fall of the unwelcome nature of Sir Peter 's talk to he . " 

 " why have Travers conceive a dislike to poor Kenelm ? he seem partial 
 enough to he once . " 

 " ay , but not as a son - in - law , even before I have a chance of become so . 
 and when , after Kenelm appear at Exmundham , while Travers be stay 
 there , Travers learn , I suppose from Lady Chillingly , that Kenelm have 
 fall in love with and want to marry some other girl , who it 
 seem reject he ; and still more when he hear that Kenelm have be 
 subsequently travel on the continent in company with a low - live 
 fellow , the drunken , riotous son of a farrier , you may well conceive how 
 so polished and sensible a man as Leopold Travers would dislike the 
 idea of give his daughter to one so little likely to make an agreeable 
 son - in - law . Bah ! I have no fear of Kenelm . by the way , do Sir Peter say 
 if Kenelm have quite recover his health ? he be at death 's door some 
 eighteen month ago , when Sir Peter and Lady Chillingly be summon to 
 town by the doctor . " 

 " my dear Gordon , I fear there be no chance of your succession to 
 Exmundham . Sir Peter say that his wander Hercules be as stalwart 
 as ever , and more equable in temperament , more taciturn and grave , - in 
 short , less odd . but when you say you have no fear of Kenelm 's rivalry , 
 do you mean only as to Cecilia Travers ? " 

 " neither as to that nor as to anything in life ; and as to the succession 
 to Exmundham , it be his to leave as he please , and I have cause to 
 think he would never leave it to I . more likely to Parson John or the 
 parson 's son , - or why not to yourself ? I often think that for the prize 
 immediately set before my ambition I be well off without land : land be 
 a great obfuscator . " 

 " Humph , there be some truth in that . yet the fear of land and 
 obfuscation do not seem to operate against your suit to Cecilia 
 Travers ? " 

 " her father be likely enough to live till I maybe content to ' rest and 
 be thankful ' in the Upper House ; and I should not like to be a landless 
 peer . " 

 " you be right there ; but I should tell you that , now Kenelm have come 
 back , Sir Peter have set his heart on his son 's be your rival . " 

 " for Cecilia ? " 

 " perhaps ; but certainly for parliamentary reputation . the senior member 
 for the county mean to retire , and Sir Peter have be urge to allow 
 his son to be bring forward , - from what I hear , with the certainty of 
 success . " 

 " what ! in spite of that wonderful speech of his on come of age ? " 

 " Pooh ! that be now understand to have be but a bad joke on the new 
 idea , and their organ , include ' the Londoner . ' but if Kenelm do 
 come into the House , it will not be on your side of the question ; and 
 unless I greatly overrate his ability - which very likely I do - he will 
 not be a rival to despise . except , indeed , that he may have one fault 
 which in the present day would be enough to unfit he for public life . " 

 " and what be that fault ? " 

 " treason to the blood of the Chillinglys . this be the age , in England , 
 when one can not be too much of a Chillingly . I fear that if Kenelm do 
 become bewilder by a political abstraction , - call it , no matter what , 
 say , ' love of his country , ' or some such old - fashioned crotchet , - I 
 fear , I greatly fear , that he may be - in earnest . " 



 CHAPTER the last . 

 it be a field night in the House of Commons , - an adjourn debate , 
 open by George Belvoir , who have be , the last two year , very slowly 
 creep on in the favour , or rather the indulgence of the House , and 
 more than justify Kenelm 's prediction of his career . heir to a noble 
 name and vast estate , extremely hard - work , very well informed , it 
 be impossible that he should not creep on . that night he speak sensibly 
 enough , assist his memory by frequent reference to his note ; 
 listen to courteously , and greet with a faint " hear , hear ! " of 
 relief when he have do . 

 then the House gradually thin till nine o'clock , at which hour it 
 become very rapidly crowd . a Cabinet minister have solemnly rise , 
 deposit on the table before he a formidable array of print paper , 
 include a corpulent blue - book . lean his arm on the red box , he 
 commence with this awe - compelling sentence , - 

 " Sir , I join issue with the right honourable gentleman opposite . he 
 say this be not raise as a party question . I deny it . her Majesty 's 
 Government be put upon their trial . " 

 here there be cheer , so loudly , and so rarely greet a speech from 
 that Cabinet minister , that he be put out , and have much to " hum " and to 
 " ha , " before he could recover the thread of his speech . then he go on , 
 with unbroken but lethargic fluency ; read long extract from the public 
 paper , inflict a whole page from the blue - book , wind up with a 
 peroration of respectable platitude , glance at the clock , see that he 
 have complete the hour which a Cabinet minister who do not profess to 
 be oratorical be expect to speak , but not to exceed ; and sit down . 

 up rise a crowd of eager face , from which the Speaker , as previously 
 arrange with the party whip , select one , - a young face , hardy , 
 intelligent , emotionless . 

 I need not say that it be the face of Chillingly Gordon . his position 
 that night be one that require dexterous management and delicate tact . 
 he habitually support the government ; his speech have be hitherto 
 in their favour . on this occasion he differ from the Government . the 
 difference be know to the chief of the Opposition , and hence the 
 arrangement of the whip , that he should speak for the first time after 
 ten o'clock , and for the first time in reply to a Cabinet minister . 
 it be a position in which a young party man make or mar his future . 
 chillingly Gordon speak from the third row behind the government ; he have 
 be duly caution by Mivers not to affect a conceited independence , or 
 an adhesion to " violence " in ultra - liberal opinion , by seat 
 himself below the gangway . speak thus , amid the rank and file of the 
 ministerial supporter , any opinion at variance with the mouthpiece of 
 the Treasury Bench would be sure to produce a more effective sensation 
 than if deliver from the rank of the mutinous Bashi Bazouks divide 
 by the gangway from well discipline force . his first brief sentence 
 enthral the House , conciliate the ministerial side , keep the 
 Opposition side in suspense . the whole speech be , indeed , felicitously 
 adroit , and especially in this , that , while in opposition to the 
 Government as a whole , it express the opinion of a powerful section 
 of the Cabinet , which , though at present a minority , yet be the most 
 enamoured of a New Idea , the progress of the age would probably render 
 a safe investment for the confidence which honest Gordon repose in its 
 chance of beat its colleague . 

 it be not , however , till Gordon have conclude that the cheer of his 
 audience - impulsive and hearty as be the cheer of that assembly when 
 the evidence of intellect be unmistakable - make manifest to the gallery 
 and the reporter the full effect of the speech he have deliver . the 
 chief of the opposition whisper to his next neighbour , " I wish we 
 could get that man . " the Cabinet minister whom Gordon have answer - more 
 pleased with a personal compliment to himself than displeased with an 
 attack on the measure his office compel he to advocate - whisper to 
 his chief , " that be a man we must not lose . " 

 two gentleman in the Speaker 's gallery , who have sit there from the 
 opening of the debate , now quit their place . come into the lobby , 
 they find themselves commingle with a crowd of member who have also 
 quit their seat , after Gordon 's speech , in order to discuss its 
 merit , as they gather round the refreshment table for orange or 
 soda - water . among they be George Belvoir , who , on sight of the young 
 of the two gentleman issue from the Speaker 's gallery , accost he 
 with friendly greeting , - 

 " ha ! chillingly , how be you ? do not know you be in town . be 
 here all the evening ? yes ; very good debate . how do you like Gordon 's 
 speech ? " 

 " I like yours much well . " 

 " mine ! " cry George , very much flattered and very much surprised . " oh , 
 mine be a mere humdrum affair , a plain statement of the reason for the 
 vote I should give . and Gordon 's be anything but that . you do not like 
 his opinion ? " 

 " I do not   know what his opinion be . but I do not like his idea . " 

 " I do not   quite understand you . what idea ? " 

 " the new one ; by which it be show how rapidly a great state can be 
 make small . " 

 here Mr. Belvoir be take aside by a brother member , on an important 
 matter to be bring before the committee on salmon fishery , on which 
 they both serve ; and Kenelm , with his companion , Sir Peter , thread 
 his way through the crowded lobby and disappear . emerge into the 
 broad space , with its lofty clock - tower , Sir Peter halt , and point 
 towards the old Abbey , half in shadow , half in light , under the tranquil 
 moonbeam , say , - 

 " it tell much for the duration of a people when it accord with the 
 instinct of immortality in a man ; when an honour tomb be deem 
 recompense for the toil and danger of a noble life . how much of the 
 history of England Nelson sum up in the simple word , - ' victory or 
 Westminster Abbey . ' " 

 " admirably express , my dear father , " say Kenelm , briefly . 

 " I agree with your remark , which I overheard , on Gordon 's speech , " 
 resume Sir Peter . " it be wonderfully clever ; yet I should have be 
 sorry to hear you speak it . it be not by such sentiment that nelson 
 become great . if such sentiment should ever be national , the cry will 
 not be ' victory or Westminster Abbey ! ' but ' Defeat and the three per 
 cent ! ' " 

 pleased with his own unwonted animation , and with the sympathizing 
 half - smile on his son 's taciturn lip , Sir Peter then proceed more 
 immediately to the subject which press upon his heart . Gordon 's 
 success in Parliament , Gordon 's suit to Cecilia Travers , favour , as 
 Sir Peter have learn , by her father , reject as yet by herself , be 
 somehow inseparably mix up in Sir Peter 's mind and his word , as he 
 seek to kindle his son 's emulation . he dwell on the obligation which 
 a country impose on its citizen , especially on the young and vigorous 
 generation to which the destiny of those to follow be intrust ; 
 and with these stern obligation he combine all the cheering and tender 
 association which an english public man connect with an English home : 
 the wife with a smile to soothe the care , and a mind to share the 
 aspiration , of a life that must go through labour to achieve renown ; 
 thus , in all he say , bind together , as if they could not be 
 disparte , Ambition and Cecilia . 

 his son do not interrupt he by a word , Sir Peter in his eagerness not 
 notice that Kenelm have draw he aside from the direct thoroughfare , 
 and have now make halt in the middle of Westminster bridge , bend 
 over the massive parapet and gaze abstractedly upon the wave of 
 the starlit river . on the right the stately length of the people 's 
 legislative palace , so new in its date , so elaborately in each detail 
 ancient in its form , stretch on towards the lowly and jagged roof of 
 penury and crime . well might these be so near to the hall of a people 's 
 legislative palace : near to the heart of every legislator for a people 
 must be the mighty problem how to increase a people 's splendour and its 
 virtue , and how to diminish its penury and its crime . 

 " how strange it be , " say Kenelm , still bend over the parapet , 
 " that throughout all my desultory wandering I have ever be attract 
 towards the sight and the sound of running water , even those of the 
 humblest rill ! of what thought , of what dream , of what memory , 
 colour the history of my past , the wave of the humblest rill could 
 speak , be the wave themselves not such supreme philosopher , - rouse 
 indeed on their surface , vex by a check to their own course , but so 
 indifferent to all that make gloom or death to the mortal who think 
 and dream and feel beside their bank . " 

 " bless I , " say Peter to himself , " the boy have get back to his old vein 
 of humour and melancholy . he have not hear a word I have be say . 
 Travers be right . he will never do anything in life . why do I christen 
 him Kenelm ? he might as well have be christen Peter . " still , loth 
 to own that his eloquence have be expend in vain and that the wish of 
 his heart be doom to expire disappoint , Sir Peter say aloud , " you 
 have not listen to what I say ; Kenelm , you grieve I . " 

 " grieve you ! you ! do not say that , Father , dear Father . listen to you ! 
 every word you have say have sink into the deep deep of my heart . 
 pardon my foolish , purposeless snatch of talk to myself : it be but my 
 way , only my way , dear Father ! " 

 " boy , boy , " cry Sir Peter , with tear in his voice , " if you could 
 get out of those odd way of yours I should be so thankful . but if 
 you can not , nothing you can do shall grieve I . only , let I say this ; 
 running water have have a great charm for you . with a humble rill you 
 associate thought , dream , memorie in your past . but now you halt by 
 the stream of the mighty river : before you the senate of an empire wide 
 than Alexander 's ; behind you the market of a commerce to which that of 
 Tyre be a pitiful trade . look far down , those squalid hovel , 
 how much there to redeem or to remedy ; and out of sight , but not very 
 distant , the nation 's Walhalla , ' victory or Westminster Abbey ! ' the 
 humble rill have witness your past . have the mighty river no effect on 
 your future ? the rill keep no record of your past : shall the river 
 keep no record of your future ? ah , boy , boy , I see you be dream 
 still , - no use talk . let we go home . " 

 " I be not dream , I be tell myself that the time have come to 
 replace the old Kenelm with the new idea , by a new Kenelm with the 
 Ideas of Old . ah ! perhaps we must , - at whatever cost to ourselves , - we 
 must go through the romance of life before we clearly detect what be 
 grand in its reality . I can no long lament that I stand estranged 
 from the object and pursuit of my race . I have learn how much I have 
 with they in common . I have know love ; I have know sorrow . " 

 Kenelm pause a moment , only a moment , then lift the head which , 
 during that pause , have droop , and stand erect at the full height of 
 his stature , startle his father by the change that have pass over his 
 face ; lip , eye , his whole aspect , eloquent with a resolute enthusiasm , 
 too grave to be the flash of a pass moment . 

 " ay , ay , " he say , " victory or Westminster Abbey ! the world be a 
 battle - field in which the bad wound be the deserter , stricken as 
 they seek to fly , and hush the groan that would betray the secret of 
 their inglorious hiding - place . the pain of wound receive in the thick 
 of the fight be scarcely feel in the joy of service to some honour 
 cause , and be amply atone by the reverence for noble scar . my choice 
 be make . not that of deserter , that of soldier in the rank . " 

 " it will not be long before you rise from the rank , my boy , if you hold 
 fast to the Idea of Old , symbolize in the English battle - cry , ' victory 
 or Westminster Abbey . ' " 

 so say , Sir Peter take his son 's arm , lean on it proudly ; and so , 
 into the crowded thoroughfare , from the halting - place on the modern 
 bridge that span the legendary river , pass the Man of the Young 
 Generation to fate beyond the verge of the horizon to which the eye of 
 my generation must limit their wistful gaze . 



 the END . 
