WHAT will he do with it 


 by " Pisistratus Caxton " 

  Lord Lytton 


 in two VOLUMES 



 VOL . I. 



 what will he do with it ? 




 BOOK I. 



 CHAPTER I. 

  in which the history open with a description of the social manner , 
  habit , and amusement of the English People , as exhibit in an 
  immemorial National Festivity . - character to be commemorate in the 
  history , introduce and graphically portray , with a nasological 
  illustration . - original suggestion as to the idiosyncrasy 
  engender by trade and calling , with other matter worthy of 
  note , convey in artless dialogue after the manner of Herodotus , 
  Father of History   mother unknown . 

 it be a summer fair in one of the prettiest village in Surrey . the 
 main street be line with booth , abound in toy , gleam crockery , 
 gay ribbon , and gild ginger bread . far on , where the street 
 widen into the ample village - green , rise the more pretending fabric 
 which lodge the attractive form of the Mermaid , the Norfolk Giant ; the 
 Pig - faced Lady , the Spotted Boy , and the Calf with two head ; while 
 high over even these edifice , and occupy the most conspicuous 
 vantage - ground , a lofty stage promise to rural playgoer the " Grand 
 Melodramatic Performance of the Remorseless Baron and the Bandit 's 
 child . " music , lively if artless , resound on every side , - drum , 
 fife , penny - whistle , cat - call , and a hand - organ play by a dark 
 foreigner , from the height of whose shoulder a cynical but observant 
 monkey eye the hubbub and crack his nut . 

 it be now sunset , - the throng at the full , - an animate , joyous 
 scene . the , day have be sultry ; no cloud be to be see , except low 
 on the western horizon , where they stretch , in lengthen ridge of 
 gold and purple , like the border - land between earth and sky . the tall 
 elm on the green be still , save , near the great stage , one or two , 
 upon which have climb young urchin , whose laugh face peer 
 forth , here and there , from the foliage tremble under their restless 
 movement . 

 amidst the crowd , as it stream saunteringly along , be two 
 spectator ; stranger to the place , as be notably prove by the 
 attention they excite , and the broad joke their dress and appearance 
 provoke from the rustic wit , - joke which they take with amused 
 good - humour , and sometimes retaliate with a zest which have already make 
 they very popular personage . indeed , there be that about they which 
 propitiate liking . they be young ; and the freshness of enjoyment be 
 so visible in their face , that it beget a sympathy , and wherever they 
 go , other face brighten round they . 

 one of the two whom we have thus individualized be of that enviable 
 age , range from five - and - twenty to seven - and - twenty , in which , if a 
 man can not contrive to make life very pleasant , - pitiable indeed must be 
 the state of his digestive organ . but you might see by this gentleman 's 
 countenance that if there be many like he , it would be a bad world 
 for the doctor . his cheek , though not highly colour , be yet ruddy 
 and clear ; his hazel eye be lively and keen ; his hair , which escape 
 in loose cluster from a jean shooting - cap set jauntily on a well - shape 
 head , be of that deep sunny auburn rarely see but in person of 
 vigorous and hardy temperament . he be good - look on the whole , and 
 would have deserve the more flattering epithet of handsome , but for his 
 nose , which be what the french call " a nose in the air , " - not a nose 
 supercilious , not a nose provocative , as such nose mostly be , but a 
 nose decidedly in earnest to make the good of itself and of thing in 
 general , - a nose that would push its way up in life , but so pleasantly 
 that the most irritable finger would never itch to lay hold of it . with 
 such a nose a man might play the violoncello , marry for love , or even 
 write poetry , and yet not go to the dog . 

 never would he stick in the mud so long as he follow that nose in the 
 air . 

 by the help of that nose this gentleman wear a black velveteen jacket 
 of foreign cut ; a mustache and imperial   then much rarer in England 
 than they have be since the Siege of Sebastopol ; and yet leave you 
 perfectly convinced that he be an honest Englishman , who have not only 
 no design on your pocket , but would not be easily dupe by any design 
 upon his own . 

 the companion of the personage thus sketch might be somewhere about 
 seventeen ; but his gait , his air , his lithe , vigorous frame , show a 
 manliness at variance with the boyish bloom of his face . he strike 
 the eye much more than his eld comrade . not that he be regularly 
 handsome , - far from it ; yet it be no paradox to say that he be 
 beautiful , at least , few indeed be the woman who would not have call 
 he so . his hair , long like his friend 's , be of a dark chestnut , with 
 gold gleam through it where the sun fall , incline to curl , and 
 singularly soft and silken in its texture . his large , clear , dark - blue , 
 happy eye be fringe with long ebon lash , and set under brow which 
 already wear the expression of intellectual power , and , well still , 
 of frank courage and open loyalty . his complexion be fair , and somewhat 
 pale , and his lip in laugh show tooth exquisitely white and even . 
 but though his profile be clearly cut , it be far from the greek 
 ideal ; and he want the height of stature which be usually consider 
 essential to the personal pretension of the male sex . without be 
 positively short , he be still under middle height , and from the compact 
 development of his proportion , seem already to have attain his full 
 growth . his dress , though not foreign , like his comrade 's , be peculiar : 
 a broad - brim straw hat , with a wide blue ribbon ; shirt collar turn 
 down , leave the throat bare ; a dark - green jacket of thin material 
 than cloth ; white trouser and waistcoat complete his costume . he 
 look like a mother 's darling , - perhaps he be one . 

 scratch across his back go one of those ingenious mechanical 
 contrivance familiarly in vogue at fair , which be design to impress 
 upon the victim to whom they be apply , the pleasing conviction that 
 his garment be rent in twain . 

 the boy turn round so quickly that he catch the arm of the 
 offender , - a pretty village - girl , a year or two young than himself . 
 " find in the act , sentence , punish , " cry he , snatch a kiss , and 
 receive a gentle slap . " and now , good for evil , here be a ribbon for 
 you ; choose . " 

 the girl slunk back shyly , but her companion push she forward , and 
 she end by select a cherry - colour ribbon , for which the boy pay 
 carelessly , while his elder and wise friend look at he with grave , 
 compassionate rebuke , and grumble out , - " Dr. Franklin tell we that 
 once in his life he pay too dear for a whistle ; but then he be only 
 seven year old , and a whistle have its us . but to pay such a price for 
 a scratch - back ! - prodigal ! come along . " 

 as the friend stroll on , naturally enough all the young girl who 
 wish for ribbon , and be possess of scratch - back , follow in 
 their wake . Scratch go the instrument , but in vain . 

 " lass , " say the elder , turn sharply upon they his nose in the air , 
 " ribbon be plentiful , - shilling scarce ; and kiss , though pleasant 
 in private , be insipid in public . what , still ! beware ! know that , 
 innocent as we seem , we be woman - eater ; and if you follow we far , 
 you be devour ! " so say , he expand his jaw to a width so 
 preternaturally large , and exhibit a row of grinder so formidable , 
 that the girl fall back in consternation . the friend turn down 
 a narrow alley between the booth , and though still pursue by some 
 adventurous and mercenary spirit , be comparatively undisturbed as 
 they thread their way along the back of the booth , and arrive at 
 last on the village - green , and in front of the Great Stage . 

 " Oho , Lionel ! " quoth the eld friend ; " thespian and classical , - worth 
 seeing , no doubt . " then turn to a grave cobbler in leathern apron , 
 who be regard with saturnine interest the motley figure range 
 in front of the curtain as the Drumatis Persona , he say , " you seem 
 attract , sir ; you have probably already witness the performance . " 
 " yes , " return the Cobbler ; " this be the third day , and to - morrow 's 
 the last . I be not   miss once yet , and I sha ' not   miss ; but it be not 
 what it be a while back . " 

 " ' that be sad ; but then the same thing be say of everything by 
 everybody who have reach your respectable age , friend . summer , and 
 sun , stupid old watering - place , and pretty young woman , ` be not   what 
 they be a while back . ' if man and thing go on degenerate in this 
 way , our grandchild will have a dull time of it . " 

 the Cobbler eye the young man , and nod approvingly . he have sense 
 enough to comprehend the ironical philosophy of the reply ; and our 
 Cobbler love talk out of the common way . " you speak truly and 
 cleverly , sir . but if old folk do always say that thing be bad than 
 they be , ben't   there always summat in what be always say ? I be for the 
 old time ; my neighbour , Joe Spruce , be for the new , and say we be all 
 a - progressing . but he be a pink ; I ' m a blue . " 

 " you be a blue ? " say the boy Lionel ; " I do not   understand . " 

 " Young ' un , I be a Tory , - that be blue ; and Spruce be a Rad , - that be pink ! 
 and , what be more to the purpose , he be a tailor , and I be a cobbler . " 

 " Aha ! " say the elder , with much interest ; " more to the purpose be it ? 
 how so ? " 

 the Cobbler put the forefinger of the right hand on the forefinger 
 of the left ; it be the gesture of a man about to ratiocinate or 
 demonstrate , as Quintilian , in his remark on the oratory of finger , 
 probably observe ; or if he have fail to do so , it be a blot in his 
 essay . 

 " you see , sir , " quoth the Cobbler , " that a man 's business have a deal 
 to do with his manner of thinking . every trade , I take it , have idea as 
 belong to it . butcher do not   see life as baker do ; and if you talk to 
 a dozen tallow - chandler , then to a dozen blacksmith , you will see 
 tallow - chandler be peculiar , and blacksmith too . " 

 " you be a keen observer , " say he of the jean cap , admiringly ; " your 
 remark be new to I ; I dare say it be true . " 

 " course it be ; and the star have summat to do with it ; for if they 
 order a man 's calling , it stand to reason that they order a man 's mind 
 to fit it . now , a tailor sit on his board with other , and be always 
 a - talk with them , and a - read the news ; therefore he think , as his 
 fellow do , smart and sharp , bang up to the day , but nothing ' riginal 
 and all his own , like . but a cobbler , " continue the man of leather , 
 with a majestic air , ' sit by hisself , and talk with hisself ; and what 
 he think get into his head without be put there by another man 's 
 tongue . " 

 " you enlighten I more and more , " say our friend with the nose in the 
 air , bow respectfully , - " a tailor be gregarious , a cobbler solitary . 
 the gregarious go with the future , the solitary stick by the past . I 
 understand why you be a Tory and perhaps a poet . " 

 " well , a bit of one , " say the Cobbler , with an iron smile . " and many 
 be the cobbler who be a poet , - or discover marvellous thing in a 
 crystal , - whereas a tailor , sir "   speak with great contempt , " only 
 see the upper leather of the world 's sole in a newspaper . " 

 here the conversation be interrupt by a sudden pressure of the crowd 
 towards the theatre . the two young friend look up , and see that the 
 new object of attraction be a little girl , who seem scarcely ten 
 year old , though in truth she be about two year old . she have just 
 emerge from behind the curtain , make her obeisance to the crowd , and 
 be now walk in front of the stage with the prettiest possible air 
 of infantine solemnity . " poor little thing ! " say Lionel . " poor little 
 thing ! " say the Cobbler . and have you be there , my reader , ten to 
 one but you would have say the same . and yet she be attire in white 
 satin , with spangled flounce and a tinsel jacket ; and she wear a wreath 
 of flower   to be sure , the flower be not real   on her long fair 
 curl , with gaudy bracelet   to be sure , the stone be mock   on her 
 slender arm . still there be something in she that all this finery 
 could not vulgarize ; and since it could not vulgarize , you pity she 
 for it . she have one of those charming face that look straight into 
 the heart of we all , young and old . and though she seem quite 
 self - possess , there be no effrontery in her air , but the ease of 
 a little lady , with a simple child 's unconsciousness that there be 
 anything in her situation to induce you to sigh , " poor thing ! " 

 " you should see her act , young gent , " say the Cobbler : ' she play 
 uncommon . but if you have see he as teach she , - see he a year ago . " 

 " who be he ? " 

 " Waife , sir ; mayhap you have hear speak of Waife ? " 

 " I blush to say , no . " 

 " why , he might have make his fortune at Common Garden ; but that be a long 
 story . poor fellow ! he be break down now , anyhow . but she take care of 
 he , little darling : God bless thee ! " and the Cobbler here exchange a 
 smile and a nod with the little girl , whose face brighten when she see 
 he amidst the crowd . 

 " by the brush and pallet of Raphael ! " cry the elder of the young man , 
 " before I be many hour old I must have that child 's head ! " 

 " her head , man ! " cry the Cobbler , aghast . 

 " in my sketch - book . you be a poet , - I a painter . you know the little 
 girl ? " 

 " do not   I ! she and her grandfather lodge with I ; her 
 grandfather , - that be Waife , - marvellous man ! but they ill - use he ; and 
 if it warn't   for she , he would starve . he feed they all once : he can feed 
 they no long ; he would starve . that be the world : they use up a genus , 
 and when it fall on the road , push on ; that be what Joe Spruce call 
 a - progressing . but there be the drum ! they be a - go to act ; will not   you 
 look in , gent ? " 

 " of course , " cry Lionel , - " of course . and , hark ye , Vance , we will toss 
 up which shall be the first to take that little girl 's head . " 

 " murderer in either sense of the word ! " say Vance , with a smile that 
 would have become Correggio if a tyro have offer to toss up which 
 should be the first to paint a cherub . 




 CHAPTER II . 

  the historian take a view of the british stage as represent by 
  the irregular drama , the regular have   ere the date of the event 
  to which this narrative be restrict   disappear from the vestige 
  of creation . 

 they enter the little theatre , and the Cobbler with they ; but the 
 last retire modestly to the threepenny row . the young gentleman be 
 favour with reserved seat , price one shilling . " very dear , " murmur 
 Vance , as he carefully button the pocket to which he restore a 
 purse weave from link of steel , after the fashion of chain mail . ah , 
 Messieurs and Confreres the Dramatic Authors , do not flatter yourself 
 that we be about to give you a complacent triumph over the Grand 
 Melodrame of " the Remorseless Baron and the Bandit 's child . " we grant it 
 be horrible rubbish , regard in an aesthetic point of view , but it be 
 mighty effective in the theatrical . nobody yawn ; you do not even hear 
 a cough , nor the cry of that omnipresent baby , who be always sure to set 
 up an unappeasable wail in the midmost interest of a classical five - act 
 piece , represent for the first time on the metropolitan board . here 
 the story rush on , per fas aut nefas , and the audience go with it . 
 certe , some man who understand the stage must have put the incident 
 together , and then leave it to each illiterate histrio to find the 
 word , - word , my dear confrere , signify so little in an act play . 
 the movement be the thing . grand secret ! Analyze , practise it , and 
 restore to grateful star that lose Pleiad the British Acting Drama . 

 of course the Bandit be an ill - use and most estimable man . he have some 
 mysterious right to the Estate and Castle of the Remorseless Baron . 
 that title usurper , therefore , do all in his power to hunt the Bandit 
 out in his fastness and bring he to a bloody end . here the interest 
 centre itself in the Bandit 's child , who , we need not say , be the 
 little girl in the wreath and spangle , style in the playbill " Miss 
 Juliet Araminta Wife , " and the incident consist in her various 
 device to foil the pursuit of the Baron and save her father . some of 
 these incident be indebted to the Comic Muse , and keep the audience 
 in a broad laugh . her arch playfulness here be exquisite . with what 
 vivacity she dupe the High Sheriff , who have the command of his king 
 to take the Bandit alive or dead , into the belief that the very Lawyer 
 employ by the Baron be the criminal in disguise , and what pearly 
 tooth she show when the Lawyer be seize and gag ! how dexterously 
 she ascertain the weak point in the character of the " King 's 
 Lieutenant "   jeune premier , who be depute by his royal master to aid 
 the Remorseless Baron in trounce the Bandit ! how cunningly she learn 
 that he be in love with the Baron 's ward   jeune amoureuse , whom that 
 unworthy noble intend to force into a marriage with himself on account 
 of her fortune ! how prettily she pass note to and fro , the Lieutenant 
 never suspect that she be the Bandit 's child , and at last get the 
 king 's soldier on her side , as the event prove ! and oh , how gayly , and 
 with what mimic art , she steal into the Baron 's castle , disguise as 
 a witch , startle his conscience with revelation and prediction , 
 frighten all the vassal with blue light and chemical illusion , and 
 venture even into the usurper 's own private chamber , while the tyrant 
 be toss restless on the couch , over which hang his terrible sword , 
 abstract from his coffer the deed that prove the well right of 
 the persecute Bandit ! then , when he wake before she could escape 
 with her treasure , and pursue she with his sword , with what glee she 
 apparently set herself on fire , and skip out of the casement in an 
 explosion of cracker ! and when the drama approach its denouement , 
 when the Baron 's man , and the royal officer of justice , have , despite 
 all her art , track the Bandit to the cave , in which , after various 
 retreat , he lie hide , wound by shot , and bruise by a fall from a 
 precipice , - with what admirable byplay she hover around the spot , with 
 what pathos she seek to decoy away the pursuer ! it be the skylark 
 playing round the nest . and when all be vain , - when , no long to be 
 deceive , the enemy seek to seize she , how mockingly she elude 
 they , bound up the rock , and shake her slight finger at they in scorn ! 
 surely she will save that estimable Bandit still ! now , hitherto , though 
 the Bandit be the nominal hero of the piece , though you be always 
 hearing of he , - his wrong , virtue , hairbreadth escape , - he have never 
 be see . not Mrs. Harris , in the immortal narrative , be more quote 
 and more mythical . but in the last scene there be the Bandit , there in 
 his cavern , helpless with bruise and wound , lie on a rock . in rush 
 the enemy , Baron , High Sheriff , and all , to seize he . not a word 
 speak the Bandit , but his attitude be sublime , - even Vance cry 
 " bravo ; " and just as he be seize , halter round his neck , and about 
 to be hang , down from the chasm above leap his child , hold 
 the title - deed , filch from the Baron , and by her side the King 's 
 Lieutenant , who proclaim the Bandit 's pardon , with due restoration 
 to his honour and estate , and consign to the astounded Sheriff the 
 august person of the Remorseless Baron . then the affect scene , father 
 and child in each other 's arm ; and then an exclamation , which have be 
 long hover about the lip of many of the audience , break out , " Waife , 
 Waife ! " yes , the Bandit , who appear but in the last scene , and even 
 then utter not a word , be the once great actor on that itinerant 
 thespian stage , know through many a fair for his exuberant humour , his 
 impromptu joke , his arch eye , his redundant life of drollery , and the 
 strange pathos or dignity with which he could suddenly exalt a jester 's 
 part , and call forth tear in the startled hush of laughter ; he whom the 
 Cobbler have rightly say , " might have make a fortune at Covent Garden . " 
 there be the remnant of the old popular mime ! - all his attribute of 
 eloquence reduce to dumb show ! masterly touch of nature and of art 
 in this representation of he , - touch which all who have ever in former 
 year see and hear he on that stage feel simultaneously . he come in 
 for his personal portion of dramatic tear . " Waife , Waife ! " cry many a 
 village voice , as the little girl lead he to the front of the stage . 

 he hobble ; there be a bandage round his eye . the plot , in describe 
 the accident that have befall the Bandit , idealize the genuine 
 infirmity of the man , - infirmity that have befall he since last 
 see in that village . he be blind of one eye ; he have become crippled ; 
 some malady of the trachea or larynx have seemingly break up the once 
 joyous key of the old pleasant voice . he do not trust himself to speak , 
 even on that stage , but silently bend his head to the rustic audience ; 
 and Vance , who be an habitual playgoer , see in that simple salutation 
 that the man be an artistic actor . all be over , the audience stream 
 out , much affected , and talk one to the other . it have not be at all 
 like the ordinary stage exhibition at a village fair . Vance and Lionel 
 exchange look of surprise , and then , by a common impulse , move 
 towards the stage , push aside the curtain , which have fall , and be 
 in that strange world which have so many reduplication , fragment of 
 one break mirror , whether in the proud theatre or the lowliest 
 barn , - nay , whether in the palace of king , the cabinet of statesman , 
 the home of domestic life , - the world we call " behind the Scenes . " 




 CHAPTER III . 

  strike illustration of lawless tyranny and infant avarice 
  exemplified in the social condition of Great Britain . - 
  Superstitions of the dark age still in force amongst the trading 
  community , furnish valuable hint to certain american 
  journalist , and highly suggestive of reflection humiliating to the 
  national vanity . 

 the Remorseless Baron , who be no other than the managerial proprietor 
 of the stage , be lean against a side - scene with a pot of porter 
 in his hand . the King 's Lieutenant might be see on the background , 
 toast a piece of cheese on the point of his loyal sword . the Bandit 
 have creep into a corner , and the little girl be cling to he 
 fondly as his hand be stroke her fair hair . Vance look round , and 
 approach the Bandit , - " Sir , allow I to congratulate you ; your bow be 
 admirable . I have never see John Kemble ; before my time : but I shall 
 fancy I have see he now , - see he on the night of his retirement from 
 the stage . as to your grandchild , Miss Juliet Araminta , she be a perfect 
 chrysolite . " 

 before Mr. Waife could reply , the Remorseless Baron step up in a 
 spirit worthy of his odious and arbitrary character . " what do you do 
 here , sir ? I allow no conspirator behind the scene earwigge my 
 people . " 

 " I beg pardon respectfully : I be an artist , - a pupil of the Royal 
 Academy ; I should like to make a sketch of Miss Juliet Araminta . " 

 " sketch ! nonsense . " 

 " Sir , " say Lionel , with the seasonable extravagance of early youth , " my 
 friend would , I be sure , pay for the sitting - handsomely ! " 

 " ha ! " say the manager , soften , " you speak like a gentleman , sir : but , 
 sir , Miss Juliet Araminta be under my protection ; in fact , she be my 
 property . call and speak to I about it to - morrow , before the first 
 performance begin , which be twelve o'clock . happy to see any of your 
 friend in the reserved seat . busy now , and - and - in short - excuse 
 I - servant , sir - servant , sir . " 

 the Baron 's manner leave no room for further parley . Vance bow , smile , 
 and retreat . but meanwhile his young friend have seize the opportunity 
 to speak both to Waife and his grandchild ; and when Vance take his arm 
 and draw he away , there be a puzzle , muse expression on Lionel 's 
 face , and he remain silent till they have get through the press of 
 such straggler as still loitered before the stage , and be in a quiet 
 corner of the sward . star and moon be then up , - a lovely summer 
 night . 

 " what on earth be you think of , Lionel ? I have put to you three 
 question , and you have not answer one . " 

 " Vance , " answer Lionel , slowly , " the oddest thing ! I be so 
 disappointed in that little girl , - greedy and mercenary ! " 

 " precocious villain ! how do you know that she be greedy and mercenary ? " 

 " listen : when that surly old manager come up to you , I say 
 something - civil , of course - to Waife , who answer in a hoarse , break 
 voice , but in very good language . well , when I tell the manager that 
 you would pay for the sitting , the child catch hold of my arm hastily , 
 pull I down to her own height , and whisper , ' how much will he 
 give ? ' confuse by a question so point - blank , I answer at random , ' I 
 do not   know ; ten shilling , perhaps . ' you should have see her face ! " 

 " see her face ! radiant , - I should think so . too much by half ! " exclaim 
 Vance . " ten shilling ! spendthrift ! " " too much ! she look as you might 
 look if one offer you ten shilling for your picture of ' Julius Caesar 
 consider whether he should cross the Rubicon . ' but when the 
 manager have declare she to be his property , and appoint you to 
 call to - morrow , - imply that he be to be pay for allow she to 
 sit , - her countenance become overcast , and she mutter sullenly , ' I will 
 not sit ; I will not ! ' then she turn to her grandfather , and something 
 very quick and close be whisper between the two ; and she pull I 
 by the sleeve , and say in my ear - oh , but so eagerly ! - ' I want three 
 pound , sir , - three pound ! - if he would give three pound ; and come to 
 our lodging , - Mr. Merle , Willow Lane . three pound , - three ! ' and with 
 those word hiss in my ear , and come from that fairy mouth , which 
 ought to drop pearl and diamond , I leave she , " add Lionel , as gravely 
 as if he be sixty , " and lose an illusion ! " 

 " three pound ! " cry Vance , raise his eyebrow to the high arch 
 of astonishment , and lift his nose in the air towards the majestic 
 moon , - " three pound ! - a fabulous sum ! who have three pound to throw 
 away ? duke , with a hundred thousand a year in acre , have not three 
 pound to draw out of their pocket in that reckless , profligate manner . 
 three pound ! - what could I not buy for three pound ? I could buy the 
 Dramatic Library , bind in calf , for three pound ; I could buy a dress 
 coat for three pound   silk lining not include ; I could be lodge for 
 a month for three pound ! and a jade in tinsel , just enter on her 
 teen , to ask three pound for what ? for become immortal on the canvas 
 of Francis Vance ? - bother ! " 

 here Vance feel a touch on his shoulder . he turn round quickly , as a 
 man out of temper do under similar circumstance , and behold the sweat 
 face of the Cobbler . 

 " well , master , do not she act fine ? - how d'ye like she ? " 

 " not much in her natural character ; but she set a mighty high value on 
 herself . " 

 " Anan , I do not   take you . " 

 " she will not catch I take she ! three pound ! - three kingdom ! stay , " 
 cry Lionel to the Cobbler ; " do not you say she lodge with you ? be 
 you Mr. Merle ? " 

 " Merle 's my name , and she do lodge with I , - Willow Lane . " 

 " come this way , then , a few yard down the road , - more quiet . tell I 
 what the child mean , if you can ; " and Lionel relate the offer of 
 his friend , the reply of the manager , and the grasp avarice of Miss 
 Juliet Araminta . 

 the Cobbler make no answer ; and when the young friend , surprised at his 
 silence , turn to look at he , they see he be wipe his eye with his 
 sleeve . 

 " poor little thing ! " he say at last , and still more pathetically than 
 he have utter the same word at her appearance in front of the stage ; 
 " ' tis all for her grandfather ; I guess , - I guess . " 

 " oh , " cry Lionel , joyfully , " I be so glad to think that . it alter the 
 whole case , you see , Vance . " 

 " it do not   alter the case of the three pound , " grumble Vance . " what be 
 her grandfather to I , that I should give his grandchild three pound , 
 when any other child in the village would have leap out of her skin to 
 have her face upon my sketch - book and five shilling in her pocket ? Hang 
 her grandfather ! " 

 they be now in the main road . the Cobbler seat himself on a lonely 
 milestone , and look first at one of the face before he , then at the 
 other ; that of Lionel seem to attract he the most , and in speak it 
 be Lionel whom he address . 

 " young master , " he say , " it be now just four year ago , when Mr. Rugge , 
 come here , as he and his troop have do at fair - time ever sin ' I can 
 mind of , bring with he the man you have see to - night , William Waife ; 
 I call he Gentleman Waife . however that man fall into sick strait , 
 how he come to join sich a caravan , would puzzle most head . it puzzle 
 Joe Spruce , uncommon ; it do not   puzzle I . " 

 " why ? " ask Vance . 

 " cos of Saturn ! " 

 " Satan ? " 

 " Saturn , - dead agin his second and Tenth House , I will swear . Lord of 
 Ascendant , mayhap ; in combustion of the Sun , - who know ? " 

 " you be not an astrologer ? " say Vance , suspiciously , edge off . 

 " bit of it ; no offence . " 

 " what do it signify ? " say Lionel , impatiently ; " go on . so you call 
 Mr. Waife ' Gentleman Waife ; ' and if you have not be an astrologer you 
 would have be puzzle to see he in such a calling . " 

 " ay , that be it ; for he warn't   like any as we ever see on these board 
 hereabout ; and yet he warn't   exactly like a Lunnon actor , as I have 
 see them in Lunnon , either , but more like a clever fellow who act for 
 the spree of the thing . he have sich droll jest , and look so comical , 
 yet not commonlike , but always what I call a gentleman , - just as if 
 one o ' ye two be do a bit of sport to please your friend . well , 
 he draw hugely , and so he do , every time he come , so that the great 
 family in the neighbourhood would go to hear he ; and he lodge in my 
 house , and have pleasant way with he , and be what I call a scollard . 
 but still I do not   want to deceive ye , and I should judge he to have 
 be a wild dog in his day . Mercury ill - aspecte , - not a doubt of it . 
 last year it so happen that one of the great gent who belong to a 
 Lunnon theatre be here at fair - time . whether he have hear of Waife 
 chanceway , and come express to judge for hisself , I can not   say ; like 
 eno ' . and when he have see Gentleman Waife act , he send for he to the 
 inn - Red Lion - and offer he a power o ' money to go to Lunnon , - Common 
 Garden . well , sir , Waife do not take to it all at once , but hem and 
 haw , and be at last quite coax into it , and so he go . but 
 bad luck come on it ; and I know there would , for I see it all in my 
 crystal . " 

 " oh , " exclaim Vance , " a crystal , too ; really it be get late , and 
 if you have your crystal about you , you might see that we want to sup . " 

 " what happen ? " ask Lionel , more blandly , for he see the Cobbler , who 
 have mean to make a great effect by the introduction of the crystal , be 
 offend . 

 " what happen ? why , just what I foreseed . there be an accident in the 
 railway ' tween this and Lunnon , and poor Waife lose an eye , and be a 
 cripple for life : so he could not go on the Lunnon stage at all ; and 
 what be bad , he be a long time atwixt life and death , and get summat 
 bad on his chest wi ' catch cold , and lose his voice , and become the 
 sad object you have gaze on , young happy thing that ye be . " 

 " but he get some compensation from the railway , I suppose ? " say Vance , 
 with the unfeeling equanimity of a stoical demon . 

 " he do , and spend it . I suppose the gentleman break out in he as soon 
 as he have money , and , ill though he be , the money go . then it seem 
 he have no help for it but to try and get back to Mr. Rugge . but Mr. 
 Rugge be sore and spiteful at his leaving ; for Rugge count on he , 
 and have even think of take the huge theatre at York , and bring 
 out Gentleman Waife as his trump card . but it warn't   fat , and Rugge 
 think himself ill - use , and so at first he would have nothing more to 
 say to Waife . and truth be , what could the poor man do for Rugge ? but 
 then Waife produce little Sophy . " 

 " you mean Juliet Araminta ? " say Vance . 

 " Same - in private life she be Sophy . and Waife teach she to act , 
 and put together the play for she . and Rugge catch at she ; and 
 she support Waife with what she get ; for Rugge only give he four 
 shilling a week , and that go on ' baccy and such like . " 

 " such like - drink , I presume ? " say Vance . 

 " no - he do not   drink . but he do smoke , and he have little genteel way 
 with he , and four shilling go on them . and they have be about the 
 country this spring , and do well , and now they be here . but Rugge 
 behave shock hard to both on them : and I do not   believe he have any 
 right to she in law , as he pretend , - only a sort of understanding which 
 she and her grandfather could break if they please ; and that be what 
 they wish to do , and that be why little Sophy want the three pound . " 

 " how ? " cry Lionel , eagerly . " if they have three pound could they get 
 away ? and if they do , how could they live ? where could they go ? " 

 " that be their secret . but I hear Waife say - the first night they come 
 here - I that if he could get three pound , he have hit on a plan to 
 be independent like . I tell you what put his back up : it be Rugge 
 insist on his come on the stage agin , for he do not like to be 
 see such a wreck . but he be force to give in ; and so he contrive 
 to cut up that play - story , and appear hisself at the last without 
 speak . " 

 " my good friend , " cry young Lionel , " we be greatly oblige to you 
 for your story ; and we should much like to see little Sophy and her 
 grandfather at your house to - morrow , - can we ? " 

 " certain sure you can , after the play be over ; to - night , if you like . " 

 " no , to - morrow : you see my friend be impatient to get back now ; we will 
 call to - morrow . " 

 " ' t be the last day of their stay , " say the Cobbler . " but you can not   be 
 sure to see they safely at my house afore ten o'clock at night ; and not 
 a word to Rugge ! mum ! " 

 " not a word to Rugge , " return Lionel ; " good - night to you . " 

 the young man leave the Cobbler still seat on the milestone , gaze on 
 the star and ruminating . they walk briskly down the road . 

 " it be I who have have the talk now , " say Lionel , in his soft tone . 
 he be bent on coax three pound out of his rich friend , and that 
 might require some management . for amongst the wild youngster in Mr. 
 Vance 's profession , there run many a joke at the skill with which he 
 parry irregular assault on his purse ; and that gentleman , with his 
 nose more than usually in the air , have once observe to such scoffer 
 " that they be quite welcome to any joke at his expense , " a wag 
 have exclaim , " at your expense ! do not   fear ; if a joke be worth a 
 farthing , you would never give that permission . " 

 so when Lionel make that innocent remark , the softness of his tone 
 warn the artist of some snake in the grass , and he prudently remain 
 silent . Lionel , in a voice still sweet , repeat , - " it be I who have 
 all the talk now ! " 

 " naturally , " then return Vance , " naturally you have , for it be you , 
 I suspect , who alone have the intention to pay for it , and three pound 
 appear to be the price . Dearish , eh ? " 

 " ah , Vance , if I have three pound ! " 

 " tush ; and say no more till we have sup . I have the hunger of a 
 wolf . " 

 just in sight of the next milestone the young traveller turn a few 
 yard down a green lane , and reach a small inn on the bank of the 
 Thames . here they have sojourn for the last few day , sketching , 
 boat , roam about the country from sunrise , and return to supper 
 and bed at nightfall . it be the pleasant little inn , - an arbour , 
 cover with honeysuckle , between the porch and the river , - a couple of 
 pleasure - boat moor to the bank ; and now all the wave ripple under 
 the moonlight . 

 " supper and light in the arbour , " cry Vance to the waiting - maid , 
 " hey , presto , quick ! while we turn in to wash our hand . and hark ! a 
 quart jug of that capital whiskey - toddy . " 




 CHAPTER IV . 

  be a chapter that link the past to the future by the gradual 
  elucidation of antecedent . 

 o wayside inn and pedestrian ramble ! o summer night , under 
 honeysuckle arbour , on the bank of starry wave ! o Youth , Youth ! 

 Vance ladle out the toddy and light his cigar ; then , lean his head 
 on his hand and his elbow on the table , he look with an artist 's eye 
 along the glance river . 

 " after all , " say he , " I be glad I be a painter ; and I hope I may live 
 to be a great one . " 

 " no doubt , if you live , you will be a great one , " cry Lionel , with 
 cordial sincerity . " and if I , who can only just paint well enough to 
 please myself , find that it give a new charm to nature - " 

 " cut sentiment , " quoth Vance , " and go on . " 

 " what , " continue Lionel , unchille by the admonitory interruption , 
 " must you feel who can fix a fade sunshine - a fleeting face - on a 
 scrap of canvas , and say ' Sunshine and Beauty , live there forever ! ' " 

 VANCE . - " forever ! no ! colour perish , canvas rot . what remain to we 
 of Zeuxis ? still it be prettily say on behalf of the poetic side of the 
 profession ; there be a prosaic one ; - we will blink it . yes ; I be glad to 
 be a painter . but you must not catch the fever of my calling . your poor 
 mother would never forgive I if she think I have make you a dauber by 
 my example . " 

 lionel   gloomily . - " no . I shall not be a painter ! but what can I be ? 
 how shall I ever build on the earth one of the castle I have build in 
 the air ? fame look so far , - Fortune so impossible . but one thing I be 
 bent upon "   speak with knit brow and clench tooth , " I will gain an 
 independence somehow , and support my mother . " 

 VANCE . - " your mother be support : she have the pension - " 

 lionel . - " of a captain 's widow ; and "   he add with a flushed cheek   " a 
 first floor that she let to lodger . " 

 VANCE . - " no shame in that ! peer let house ; and on the continent , 
 prince let not only first floor , but fifth and sixth floor , to say 
 nothing of attic and cellar . in begin the world , friend Lionel , 
 if you do not   wish to get chafe at every turn , fold up your pride 
 carefully , put it under lock and key , and only let it out to air upon 
 grand occasion . Pride be a garment all stiff brocade outside , all 
 grate sackcloth on the side next to the skin . even king do not   wear 
 the dalmaticum except at a coronation . independence you desire ; good . 
 but be you dependent now ? your mother have give you an excellent 
 education , and you have already put it to profit . my dear boy , " add 
 Vance , with unusual warmth , " I honour you ; at your age , on leave 
 school , to have shut yourself up , translate Greek and latin per sheet 
 for a bookseller , at less than a valet 's wage , and all for the purpose 
 of buy comfort for your mother ; and have a few pound in your own 
 pocket , to rove your little holiday with I and pay your share of the 
 cost ! ah , there be energy and spirit and life in all that , Lionel , 
 which will find upon rock some castle as fine as any you have build in 
 air . your hand , my boy . " 

 this burst be so unlike the practical dryness , or even the more 
 unctuous humour , of Frank Vance , that it take Lionel by surprise , and 
 his voice falter as he press the hand hold out to he . he answer , 
 " I do not   deserve your praise , Vance , and I fear the pride you tell I to 
 put under lock and key have the large share of the merit you ascribe to 
 well motif . independent ? no ! I have never be so . " 

 VANCE . - " well , you depend on a parent : who , at seventeen do not ? " 

 lionel . - " I do not mean my mother ; of course , I could not be too proud 
 to take benefit from she . but the truth be simply this - , my father 
 have a relation , not very near , indeed , - a cousin , at about as distant 
 a remove , I fancy , as a cousin well can be . to this gentleman my mother 
 write when my poor father die ; and he be generous , for it be he who 
 pay for my schooling . I do not know this till very lately . I have a 
 vague impression , indeed , that I have a powerful and wealthy kinsman who 
 take an interest in I , but whom I have never see . " 

 VANCE . - " never see ? " 

 lionel . - " no . and here come the sting . on leave school last 
 Christmas , my mother , for the first time , tell I the extent of my 
 obligation to this benefactor , and inform I that he wish to know 
 my own choice as to a profession , - that if I prefer Church or Bar , he 
 would maintain I at college . " 

 VANCE . - " body o ' I ! where be the sting in that ? help yourself to toddy , 
 my boy , and take more genial view of life . " 

 LIONEL . - " you have not hear I out . I then ask to see my benefactor 's 
 letter ; and my mother , unconscious of the pain she be about to 
 inflict , show I not only the last one , but all she have receive from 
 he . oh , Vance , they be terrible , those letter ! the first begin by 
 a dry acquiescence in the claim of kindred , a curt proposal to pay my 
 schooling ; but not one word of kindness , and a stern proviso that the 
 writer be never to see nor hear from I . he want no gratitude ; he 
 disbelieve in all profession of it . his favour would cease if I 
 molest he . ' molest ' be the word ; it be bread throw to a dog . " 

 VANCE . - " Tut ! only a rich man 's eccentricity . a bachelor , I presume ? " 

 lionel . - " my mother say he have be marry , and be a widower . " 

 VANCE . - " any child ? " 

 lionel . - " my mother say none live ; but I know little or nothing about 
 his family . " 

 Vance look with keen scrutiny into the face of his boyfriend , and , 
 after a pause , say , drily , - " Plain as a pikestaff . your relation be one 
 of those man who , have no child , suspect and dread the attention 
 of an heir presumptive ; and what have make this sting , as you call it , 
 keener to you be - pardon I - be in some silly word of your mother , who , 
 in show you the letter , have hint to you that that heir you might 
 be , if you be sufficiently pliant and subservient . be I not right ? " 

 Lionel hang his head , without reply . 

 VANCE   cheeringly . - " so , so ; no great harm as yet . enough of the first 
 letter . what be the last ? " 

 lionel . - " still more offensive . he , this kinsman , this patron , desire 
 my mother to spare he those reference to her son 's ability and 
 promise , which , though natural to herself , have slight interest to 
 he , - he , the condescend benefactor ! as to his opinion , what could 
 I care for the opinion of one I have never see ? all that could sensibly 
 affect my - oh , but I can not go on with those cutting phrase , which 
 imply but this , ' all I can care for be the money of a man who insult I 
 while he give it . ' " 

 VANCE   emphatically . - " without be a wizard , I should say your 
 relative be rather a disagreeable person , - not what be call urbane 
 and amiable , - in fact , a brute . " 

 LIONEL . - " you will not blame I , then , when I tell you that I resolve 
 not to accept the offer to maintain I at college , with which the letter 
 close . luckily Dr. Wallis   the head master of my school , who have 
 always be very kind to I , have just undertake to supervise a popular 
 translation of the classic . he recommend I , at my request , to the 
 publisher engage in the undertaking , as not incapable of translate 
 some of the less difficult latin author , - subject to his correction . 
 when I have finish the first instalment of the work thus intrust to 
 I , my mother grow alarmed for my health , and insist on my take some 
 recreation . you be about to set out on a pedestrian tour . I have , as 
 you say , some pound in my pocket ; and thus I have pass with you the 
 merry day of my life . " 

 VANCE . - " what say your civil cousin when your refusal to go to college 
 be convey to he ? " 

 lionel . - " he do not answer my mother 's communication to that effect 
 till just before I leave home , and then , - no , it be not his last letter 
 from which I repeat that wither extract , - no , the last be more 
 galling still , for in it he say that if , in spite of the ability and 
 promise that have be so vaunted , the dulness of a college and the 
 labour of learn profession be so distasteful to I , he have no 
 desire to dictate to my choice , but that as he do not wish one who be , 
 however remotely , of his blood , and bear the name of Haughton , to turn 
 shoeblack or pickpocket - Vance - Vance ! " 

 VANCE . - " lock up your pride - the sackcloth fret you - and go on ; and 
 that therefore he - " 

 lionel . - " would buy I a commission in the army , or get I an 
 appointment in India . " 

 VANCE . - " which do you take ? " 

 lionel   passionately . " which ! so offer , - which ? - of course neither ! 
 but distrust the tone of my mother 's reply , I sit down , the evening 
 before I leave home , and write myself to this cruel man . I do not show 
 any letter to my mother , - do not tell she of it . I write shortly , - that 
 if he would not accept my gratitude , I would not accept his benefit ; 
 that shoeblack I might be , - pickpocket , no ! that he need not fear I 
 should disgrace his blood or my name ; and that I would not rest till , 
 soon or later , I have pay he back all that I have cost he , and feel 
 relieve from the burden of an obligation which - which - " the boy 
 pause , cover his face with his hand , and sob . 

 Vance , though much move , pretend to scold his friend , but find 
 that ineffectual , fairly rise , wound his arm brother - like round he , and 
 draw he from the arbour to the shelve margin of the river . " Comfort , " 
 then say the Artist , almost solemnly , as here , from the inner depth 
 of his character , the true genius of the man come forth and 
 speak , - " comfort , and look round ; see where the islet interrupt the 
 tide , and how smilingly the stream flow on . see , just where we stand , 
 how the slight pebble be fret the wave would the wave if not 
 fretted make that pleasant music ? a few mile far on , and the river 
 be span by a bridge , which busy foot now be cross : by the side 
 of that bridge now be rise a palace ; all the man who rule England have 
 room in that palace . at the rear of the palace soar up the old Abbey 
 where king have their tomb in right of the name they inherit ; man , 
 lowly as we , have find tomb there , in right of the name which they 
 make . think , now , that you stand on that bridge with a boy 's lofty hope , 
 with a man 's steadfast courage ; then turn again to that stream , calm 
 with starlight , flow on towards the bridge , - spite of islet and 
 pebble . " 

 Lionel make no audible answer , though his lip murmur , but he press 
 close and close to his friend 's side ; and the tear be already dry 
 on his cheek , though their dew still glisten in his eye . 




 CHAPTER V. 

  Speculations on the moral quality of the Bandit . - Mr. Vance , with 
  mingle emotion , foresee that the acquisition of the Bandit 's 
  acquaintance may be attend with pecuniary loss . 

 Vance loosen the boat from its mooring , step in , and take up the 
 oar . Lionel follow , and sit by the stern . the Artist row on slowly , 
 whistle melodiously in time to the dash of the oar . they soon come to 
 the bank of garden - ground surround with turf on which fairy might 
 have dance one of those villa never see out of England . from the 
 window of the villa the light gleam steadily ; over the bank , 
 dip into the water , hang large willow breathlessly ; the boat gently 
 brush aside their pendent bough , and Vance rest in a grassy cove . 

 " and faith , " say the Artist , gayly , - " faith , " say he , light his 
 third cigar , " it be time we should bestow a few word more on the 
 Remorseless Baron and the Bandit 's child ! what a cock - and - a - bull story 
 the Cobbler tell we ! he must have think we precious green . " 

 LIONEL   rouse . - " Nay , I see nothing so wonderful in the story , though 
 much that be sad . you must allow that Waife may have be a good actor : 
 you become quite excited merely at his attitude and bow . natural , 
 therefore , that he should have be invite to try his chance on the 
 London stage ; not improbable that he may have meet with an accident by 
 the train , and so lose his chance forever ; natural , then , that he should 
 press into service his poor little grandchild , natural , also , that , 
 hardly treat and his pride hurt , he should wish to escape . " 

 VANCE . - " and more natural than all that he should want to extract from 
 our pocket three pound , the Bandit ! no , Lionel , I tell you what be 
 not probable , that he should have dispose of that clever child to a 
 vagabond like Rugge : she play admirably . the manager who be to have 
 engage he would have engage she if he have see she . I be puzzle . " 

 LIONEL . - " true , she be an extraordinary child . I can not say how she have 
 interested I . " he take out his purse , and begin count its content . 
 " I have nearly three pound leave , " he cry joyously . " L2 . 18 . if 
 I give up the thought of a long excursion with you , and go quietly 
 home - " 

 VANCE . - " and not pay your share of the bill yonder ? " 

 lionel . - " ah , I forget that ! but come , I be not too proud to borrow from 
 you : it be not for a selfish purpose . " 

 VANCE . - " borrow from I , Cato ! that come of fall in with bandit and 
 their child . no ; but let we look at the thing like man of sense . 
 one story be good till another be tell . I will call by myself on Rugge 
 to - morrow , and hear what he say ; and then , if we judge favourably of 
 the Cobbler 's version , we will go at night and talk with the Cobbler 's 
 lodger ; and I dare say , " add Vance , kindly , but with a sigh , - " I 
 daresay the three pound will be coax out of I ! after all , her head 
 be worth it . I want an idea for Titania . " 

 lionel   joyously . - " my dear Vance , you be the good fellow in the 
 world . " 

 VANCE . - " small compliment to humankind ! take the oar : it be your turn 
 now . " 

 Lionel obey ; the boat once more dance along the tide - thoro ' 
 reed , - -thoro ' wave , skirt the grassy islet - out into pale 
 moonlight . they talk but by fit and start . what of ? - a thousand 
 thing ! bright young heart , eloquent young tongue ! no sin in the 
 past ; hope gleam through the future . o summer night , on the glass 
 of starry wave ! o Youth , Youth ! 




 CHAPTER VI . 

  wherein the historian track the public character that fret their 
  hour on the stage , into the bosom of private life . - the reader be 
  invite to arrive at a conclusion which may often , in period of 
  perplexity , restore ease to his mind ; namely , that if man will 
  reflect on all the hope he have nourish , all the fear he have 
  admit , all the project he have form , the wise thing he can 
  do , nine time out of ten , with hope , fear , and project , be to let 
  they end with the chapter - in smoke . 

 it be past nine o'clock in the evening of the following day . the 
 exhibition at Mr. Rugge 's theatre have close for the season in that 
 village , for it be the conclusion of the fair . the final performance 
 have be begin and end somewhat early than on former night . the 
 theatre be to be clear from the ground by daybreak , and the whole 
 company to proceed onward betime in the morning . another fair await 
 they in an adjoining county , and they have a long journey before they . 

 Gentleman Waife and his Juliet Araminta have go to their lodging over 
 the Cobbler 's stall . their room be homely enough , but have an air not 
 only of the comfortable , but the picturesque . the little sit - room 
 be very old - fashioned , - panel in wood that have once be paint 
 blue , with a quaint chimney - piece that reach to the ceiling . that 
 part of the house speak of the time of Charles I. , it might have be 
 tenant by a religious Roundhead ; and , frame - in over the low door , 
 there be a grim , faded portrait of a pinch - faced saturnine man , with 
 long lank hair , starch band , and a length of upper lip that betoken 
 relentless obstinacy of character , and might have curl in sullen glee 
 at the monarch 's scaffold , or preach an interminable sermon to the 
 stout Protector . on a table , under the deep - sink window , be neatly 
 array a few sober - looking old book ; you would find amongst they 
 Colley 's " astrology , " Owen Feltham 's " resolve , " Glanville " on Witches , " 
 the " Pilgrim 's progress , " an early edition of " Paradise Lost , " and 
 an old Bible ; also two flower - pot of clay brightly redden , and 
 contain stock ; also two small worsted rug , on one of which rest a 
 carve cocoa - nut , on the other an egg - shape ball of crystal , - that last 
 the pride and joy of the cobbler 's visionary soul . a door leave wide open 
 communicate with an inner room   very low be its ceiling , in which the 
 Bandit sleep , if the severity of his persecutor permit he to sleep . 
 in the corner of the sitting - room , near that door , be a small horsehair 
 sofa , which , by the aid of sheet and a needlework coverlid , do duty 
 for a bed , and be consign to the Bandit 's child . here the tenderness 
 of the Cobbler 's heart be visible , for over the coverlid be strew 
 sprig of lavender and leaf of vervain ; the last , be it say , to 
 induce happy dream , and scare away witchcraft and evil spirit . on 
 another table , near the fireplace , the child be busy in set out 
 the tea - thing for her grandfather . she have leave in the property - room 
 of the theatre her robe of spangle and tinsel , and appear now in 
 a simple frock . she have no long the look of Titania , but that of a 
 lively , active , affectionate human child ; nothing theatrical about she 
 now , yet still , in her graceful movement , so nimble but so noiseless , 
 in her slight fair hand , in her transparent colouring , there be 
 Nature 's own lady , - that something which strike we all as well - bear and 
 high - breed : not that it necessarily be so ; the semblance of aristocracy , 
 in female childhood more especially , be often delusive . the 
  souvenance flower , work into the collar of prince , spring up 
 wild on field and fall . 

 Gentleman Waife , wrap negligently in a gray dressing - gown and seat 
 in an old leathern easy - chair , be evidently out of sort . he do not 
 seem to heed the little preparation for his comfort , but , rest his 
 cheek on his right hand , his left droop on his crossed knee , - an 
 attitude rarely see in a man when his heart be light and his spirit 
 high . his lip move : he be talk to himself . though he have lay 
 aside his theatrical bandage over both eye , he wear a black patch 
 over one , or rather where one have be ; the eye expose be of singular 
 beauty , dark and brilliant . for the rest , the man have a striking 
 countenance , rugge , and rather ugly than otherwise , but by no mean 
 unprepossessing ; full of line and wrinkle and strong muscle , with 
 large lip of wondrous pliancy , and an aspect of wistful sagacity , that , 
 no doubt , on occasion could become exquisitely comic , - dry comedy , - the 
 comedy that make other roar when the comedian himself be as grave as a 
 judge . 

 you might see in his countenance , when quite in its natural repose , that 
 Sorrow have pass by there ; yet the instant the countenance break into 
 play , you would think that Sorrow must have be send about her business 
 as soon as the respect due to that visitor , so accustomed to have she 
 own way , would permit . though the man be old , you could not call 
 he aged . one - eyed and crippled , still , mark the muscular arm , the 
 expansive chest , you would have scarcely call he break or infirm . 
 and hence there be a certain indescribable pathos in his whole 
 appearance , as if Fate have brand , on face and form , character in 
 which might be read her agency on career and mind , - pluck an eye 
 from intelligence , shorten one limb for life 's progress , yet leave whim 
 sparkle out in the eye she have spar , and a light heart 's wild spring 
 in the limb she have maim not . 

 " come , Grandy , come , " say the little girl , coaxingly ; " your tea will 
 get quite cold ; your toast be ready , and here be such a nice egg ; Mr. 
 Merle say you may be sure it be new lay . come , do not   let that hateful 
 man fret you : smile on your own Sophy ; come . " 

 " if , " say Mr. Waife , in a hollow undertone , if I be alone in the 
 world - " 

 " oh , Grandy ! " 

  " ' I know a spot on which a bed - post grow , 
  and do remember where a roper live . ' 

 delightful prospect , not to be indulge ; for if I be in peace at one 
 end of the rope , what would chance to my Sophy , leave forlorn at the 
 other ? " 

 " do not   talk so , or I shall think you be sorry to have take care of 
 I . " 

 " care of thee , oh , child ! and what care ? it be thou who takest care of 
 I . put thy hand from thy mouth ; sit down , darling , there , opposite , 
 and let we talk . now , Sophy , thou hast often say that thou wouldst be 
 glad to be out of this mode of life , even for one humbler and hard : 
 think well , be it so ? " 

 " oh , yes , indeed , grandfather . " 

 " no more tinsel dress and flowery wreath ; no more applause ; no more 
 of the dear divine stage excitement ; the heroine and fairy vanish ; 
 only a little commonplace child in dingy gingham , with a purblind 
 cripple for thy sole charge and playmate ; Juliet Araminta evaporate 
 evermore into little Sophy ! " 

 " it would be so nice ! " answer little Sophy , laugh merrily . 

 " what would make it nice ? " ask the Comedian , turn on her his 
 solitary pierce eye , with curious interest in his gaze . 

 Sophy leave her seat , and place herself on a stool at her grandfather 's 
 knee ; on that knee she clasp her tiny hand , and shake aside her 
 curl , look into his face with confident fondness . evidently these two 
 be much more than grandfather and grandchild : they be friend , they 
 be equals , they be in the habit of consult and prattle with 
 each other . she get at his meaning , however covert his humour ; and he to 
 the core of her heart , through its careless babble . between you and I , 
 Reader , I suspect that , in spite of the Comedian 's sagacious wrinkle , 
 the one be as much a child as the other . 

 " well , " say Sophy , " I will tell you , Grandy , what would make it nice : 
 no one would vex and affront you , - we should be all by ourselves ; and 
 then , instead of those nasty lamp and those dreadful paint creature , 
 we could go out and play in the field and gather daisy ; and I could 
 run after butterfly , and when I be tired I should come here , where I 
 be now , any time of the day , and you would tell I story and pretty 
 verse , and teach I to write a little well than I do now , and make 
 such a wise little woman of I ; and if I wear gingham - but it need not 
 be dingy , Grandy - it would be all mine , and you would be all mine too , 
 and we would keep a bird , and you would teach it to sing ; and oh , would it not 
 be nice ! " 

 " but still , Sophy , we should have to live , and we could not live upon 
 daisy and butterfly . and I can not   work now ; for the matter of that , I 
 never could work : more shame for I , but so it be . Merle say the fault 
 be in the star , - with all my heart . but the star will not go to the 
 jail or the workhouse instead of I . and though they want nothing to 
 eat , we do . " 

 " but , Grandy , you have say every day since the first walk you take 
 after come here , that if you have three pound , we could get away and 
 live by ourselves and make a fortune ! " 

 " a fortune ! - that be a strong word : let it stand . a fortune ! but still , 
 Sophy , though we should be free of this thrice - execrable Rugge , the 
 scheme I have in my head lie remote from daisy and butterfly . we 
 should have to dwell in town and exhibit ! " 

 " on a stage , Grandy ? " say Sophy , resign , but sorrowful . 

 " no , not exactly : a room would do . " 

 " and I should not wear those horrid , horrid dress , nor mix with those 
 horrid , horrid paint people . " 

 " no . " 

 " and we should be quite alone , you and I ? " 

 " Hum ! there would be a third . " 

 " oh , Grandy , Grandy ! " cry Sophy , in a scream of shrill alarm . " I know , 
 I know ; you be think of join we with the Pig - faced Lady ! " 

 MR . WAIFE   not a muscle relax . - " a well - speak and pleasing 
 gentlewoman . but no such luck : three pound would not buy she . " 

 SOPHIE . - " I be glad of that : I do not   care so much for the Mermaid ; she be 
 dead and stuff . but , oh ! "   another scream   " perhaps ' t be the Spotted 
 boy ? " 

 MR . WAIFE . - " calm your sanguine imagination ; you aspire too high ! but 
 this I will tell you , that our companion , whatsoever or whosoever that 
 companion may be , will be one you will like . " 

 " I do not   believe it , " say Sophy , shake her head . " I only like you . 
 but who be it ? " 

 " alas ! " say Mr. Waife , " it be no use pamper ourselves with vain 
 hope : the three pound be not forthcoming . you hear what that brute 
 Rugge say , that the gentleman who want to take your portrait have 
 call on he this morning , and offer 10 . for a sitting , - that be , 
 5s . for you , 5s . for Rugge ; and Rugge think the term reasonable . " 

 " but I say I would not sit . " 

 " and when you do say it , you hear Rugge 's language to I - to you . 
 and now you must think of pack up , and be off at dawn with the rest . 
 and , " add the comedian , colour high , " I must again parade , to boor 
 and clown , this mangle form ; again set myself out as a spectacle of 
 bodily infirmity , - man 's last degradation . and this I have come to - I ! " 

 " no , no , Grandy , it will not last long ! we will get the three pound . 
 we have always hop on ! - hope still ! and , besides , I be sure those 
 gentleman will come here tonight . Mr. Merle say they would , at ten 
 o'clock . it be near ten now , and your tea cold as a stone . " 

 she hang on his neck caressingly , kiss his furrowed brow , and leave 
 a tear there , and thus coax he till he set - to quietly at his meal ; 
 and Sophy share it - though she have no appetite in sorrow for 
 he - but to keep he company ; that do , she light his pipe with the 
 good canaster , - his sole luxury and expense ; but she always contrive 
 that he should afford it . 

 Mr. Waife draw a long whiff , and take a more serene view of affair . 
 he who doth not smoke hath either know no great grief , or refuseth 
 himself the soft consolation , next to that which come from Heaven . 
 " what , soft than woman ? " whisper the young reader . young reader , 
 woman tease as well as console . woman make half the sorrow which she 
 boast the privilege to soothe . woman console we , it be true , while we 
 be young and handsome ! when we be old and ugly , woman snub and scold 
 we . on the whole , then , woman in this scale , the weed in that , Jupiter , 
 hang out thy balance , and weigh they both ; and if thou give the 
 preference to woman , all I can say be , the next time Juno ruffle 
 thee , - o Jupiter , try the weed . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

  the historian , in pursuance of his stern duty , reveal to the 
  scorn of future age some of the occult practice which discredit 
  the march of light in the nineteenth century . 

 " may I come in ? " ask the Cobbler , outside the door . " certainly come 
 in , " say Gentleman Waife . Sophy look wistfully at the aperture , and 
 sigh to see that Merle be alone . she creep up to he . 

 " will they not come ? " she whisper . " I hope so , pretty one ; it be not 
 ten yet . " 

 " take a pipe , Merle , " say Gentleman Waife , with a Grand Comedian air . 

 " no , thank you kindly ; I just look in to ask if I could do anything 
 for ye , in case - in case ye must go tomorrow . " 

 " nothing : our luggage be small , and soon pack . Sophy have the money to 
 discharge the mean part of our debt to you . " 

 " I do not   value that , " say the Cobbler , colour . 

 " but we value your esteem , " say Mr. Waife , with a smile that would have 
 become a field - marshal . " and so , Merle , you think , if I be a break - down 
 vagrant , it must be put to the long account of the celestial body ! " 

 " not a doubt of it , " return the Cobbler , solemnly . " I wish you would 
 give I date and place of Sophy 's birth that be what I want ; I would take she 
 horryscope . I be sure she would be lucky . " 

 " I would rather not , please , " say Sophy , timidly . 

 " rather not ? - very odd . why ? " 

 " I do not   want to know the future . " 

 " that be odder and odder , " quoth the Cobbler , star ; " I never hear a 
 girl say that afore . " 

 " wait till she be old , Mr. Merle , " say Waife : " girl do not   want to 
 know the future till they want to be marry . " 

 " Summat in that , " say the Cobbler . he take up the crystal . " have you 
 look into this ball , pretty one , as I bade ye ? " 

 " yes , two or three time . " 

 " ha ! and what do you see ? " 

 " my own face make very long , " say Sophy , - " as long as that - , " 
 stretch out her hand . 

 the Cobbler shake his head dolefully , and screw up one eye , apply 
 the other to the mystic ball . 

 MR . WAIFE . - " perhaps you will see if those two gentleman be come . " 

 SOPHY . - " do , do ! and if they will give we three pound ! " 

 COBBLER   triumphantly . - " then you do care to know the future , after 
 all ? " 

 SOPHY . - " yes , so far as that go ; but do not   look any far , pray . " 

 cobbler   intent upon the ball , and speak slowly , and in jerk . - " a 
 mist now . ha ! an arm with a besom - sweep all before it . " 

 SOPHY   frighten . - " send it away , please . " 

 cobbler - " it be go . ha ! there be Rugge , - look very angry , - savage , 
 indeed . " 

 WAIFE . - " good sign that ! proceed . " 

 COBBLER . - " shake his fist ; go . ha ! a young man , boyish , dark hair . " 

 sophy   clap her hand . - " that be the young gentleman - the very 
 young one , I mean - with the kind eye ; be he come ? - be he , be he ? " 

 WAIFE - " examine his pocket ! do you see there three pound ? " 

 COBBLER   testily . - " do not   be a - interrupting . ha ! he be talk with 
 another gentleman , bearded . " 

 SOPHY   whispering to her grandfather . - " the old young gentleman . " 

 cobbler   put down the crystal , and with great decision . - " they 
 be come here ; I see have they at the corner of the lane , by the 
 public - house , two minute ' walk to this door . " he take out a great 
 silver watch : " look , Sophy , when the minute - hand get there   or before , 
 if they walk briskly , you will hear they knock . " 

 Sophy clasp her hand in mute suspense , half - credulous , half - doubting ; 
 then she go and open the room - door , and stand on the landing - place 
 to listen . Merle approach the Comedian , and say in a low voice , " I 
 wish for your sake she have the gift . " 

 WAIFE . - " the gift ! - the three pound ! - so do I ! " 

 COBBLER . - " Pooh ! worth a hundred time three pound ; the gift , - the 
 spirituous gift . " 

 WAIFE . - " spirituous ! do not   like the epithet , - smell of gin ! " 

 COBBLER . - " spirituous gift to see in the crystal : if she have that , she 
 might make your fortune . " 

 WAIFE   with a ' sudden change of countenance . - " ah ! I never think of 
 that . but if she have not the gift , I could teach it she , - eh ? " 

 cobbler   indignantly . - " I do not think to hear this from you , Mr. 
 Waife . teach she , - you ! make she an impostor , and of the wicked kind , 
 invent lie between earth and they as dwell in the seven sphere ! 
 Fie ! no , if she have not   the gift natural , let she alone : what here be not 
 heaven - send be devil - teach . " 

 WAIFE   awe , but dubious . - " then you really think you see all that you 
 describe , in that glass egg ? " 

 COBBLER . - " think ! - be I a liar ? I speak truth , and the proof 
 be - there - ! " Rat - tat go the knocker at the door . 

 " the two minute be just up , " say the Cobbler ; and Cornelius Agrippa 
 could not have say it with more wizardly effect . 

 " they be come , indeed , " say Sophy , re - enter the room softly : " I 
 hear their voice at the threshold . " 

 the Cobbler pass by in silence , descend the stair , and conduct 
 Vance and Lionel into the Comedian 's chamber ; there he leave they , his 
 brow overcast . Gentleman Waife have displease he sorely . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

  show the art by which a man , however high in the air Nature may 
  have form his nose , may be lead by that nose , and in direction 
  perversely opposite to those which , in follow his nose , he might 
  be suppose to take ; and , therefore , that nation the most liberally 
  endow with practical good sense , and in conceit thereof , carry 
  their nose the most horizontally aloof , when they come into 
  conference with nation more skilled in diplomacy and more practise 
  in ' stage - play , " end by the surrender of the precise object which it 
  be intend they should surrender before they lay their nose 
  together . 

 we all know that demosthene say , everything in oratory be 
 act , - stage - play . be it in oratory alone that the saying hold 
 good ? apply it to all circumstance of fife , ' stage - play , stage - play , 
 stage - play ! " - only ar est celare artem , conceal the art . Gleesome in 
 soul to behold his visitor , calculate already on the three pound 
 to be extract from they , see in that hope the crisis in his own 
 checker existence , Mr. Waife rise from his seat in superb upocrisia 
 or stage - play , and ask , with mild dignity , - " to what be I indebted , 
 gentleman , for the honour of your visit ? " 

 in spite of his , nose , even Vance be take aback . Pope say that Lord 
 Bolingbroke have " the nobleman air . " a great comedian Lord Bolingbroke 
 surely be . but , ah , have Pope see Gentleman Waife ! take advantage 
 of the impression he have create , the actor add , with the fine 
 imaginable breeding , - " but pray be seat ; " and , once see they 
 seat , resume his easy - chair , and feel himself master of the 
 situation . 

 " Hum ! " say Vance , recover his self - possession , after a pause - " hum ! " 

 " Hem ! " re - echo Gentleman Waife ; and the two man eye each other much 
 in the same way as Admiral Napier might have eye the fort of Cronstadt , 
 and the fort of Cronstadt have eye Admiral Napier . 

 Lionel strike in with that youthful boldness which play the deuce with 
 all dignified strategical science . 

 " you must be aware why we come , sir ; Mr. Merle will have explain . my 
 friend , a distinguished artist , wish to make a sketch , if you do not 
 object , of this young lady 's very " - 

 " pretty little face , " quoth Vance , take up the dis course . " Mr. Rugge , 
 this morning , be willing , - I understand that your grandchild refuse . 
 we be come here to see if she will be more complaisant under your own 
 roof , or under Mr. Merle 's , which , I take it , be the same thing for 
 the present . " - Sophy have sidle up to Lionel . he might not have be 
 flatter if he know why she prefer he to Vance . she look on he 
 as a boy , a fellow - child ; and an instinct , moreover , tell she , that 
 more easily through he than his shrewd - looking bearded guest could she 
 attain the object of her cupidity , - " three pound ! " 

 " three pound ! " whisper Sophy , with the tone of an angel , into 
 Lionel 's thrilling ear . 

 MR . WAIFE . - " Sir , I will be frank with you . " at that ominous 
 commencement , Mr. Vance recoil , and mechanically button his trouser 
 pocket . Mr. Waife note the gesture with his one eye , and proceed 
 cautiously , feel his way , as it be , towards the interior of the 
 recess thus protect . " my grandchild decline your flattering proposal 
 with my full approbation . she do not consider - neither do i - that 
 the managerial right of Mr. Rugge entitle he to the moiety of she 
 face - off the stage . " the Comedian pause , and with a voice , the mimic 
 drollery of which no hoarseness could altogether mar , chant the old 
 line , - 

  " ' my face be my fortune , sir , ' she say . " 

 Vance smile ; Lionel laugh ; Sophy nestle still near to the boy . 

 GENTLEMAN WAIFE   with pathos and dignity . - " you see before you an old 
 man : one way of life be the same to I as another . but she , - do you 
 think Mr. Rugge 's stage the right place for she ? " 

 VANCE . - " certainly not . why do you not introduce she to the London 
 Manager who would have engage yourself ? " 

 Waife could not conceal a slight change of countenance . " how do I know 
 she would have succeed ? she have never then trod the board . besides , 
 what strike you as so good in a village show may be poor enough in a 
 metropolitan theatre . gentleman , I do my good for she ; you can not 
 think otherwise , since she maintain I ! I be no OEdipus , yet she be my 
 Antigone . " 

 VANCE . - " you know the classic , sir . Mr. Merle say you be a 
 scholar ! - read Sophocles in his native Greek , I presume , sir ? " 

 MR . WAIFE . - " you jeer at the unfortunate : I be use to it . " 

 VANCE   confuse . - " I do not mean to wound you : I beg pardon . but your 
 language and manner be not what - what one might expect to find in a - in 
 a - Bandit persecute by a remorseless Baron . " 

 MR . WAIFE . - " Sir , you say you be an artist . have you hear no tale of 
 your professional brother , - man of genius the high , who win fame , 
 which I never do , and fail of fortune , as I have do ? their own 
 fault , perhaps , - improvidence , wild habit , ignorance of the way how to 
 treat life and deal with their fellow - man ; such fault may have be 
 mine too . I suffer for it : no matter ; I ask none to save I . you be a 
 painter : you would place her feature on your canvas ; you would have 
 her rank amongst your own creation . she may become a part of your 
 immortality . prince may gaze on the effigy of the innocent happy 
 childhood , to which your colour lend imperishable glow . they may ask 
 who and what be this fair creature ? will you answer , ' one whom I find 
 in tinsel , and so left , sure that she would die in rag ! ' - save she ! " 

 Lionel draw forth his purse , and pour its content on the table . Vance 
 cover they with his broad hand , and sweep they into his own pocket ! at 
 that sinister action Waife feel his heart sink into his shoe ; but his 
 face be as calm as a Roman 's , only he resume his pipe with a prolonged 
 and testy whiff . 

 " it be I who be to take the portrait , and it be I who will pay for it , " 
 say Vance . " I understand that you have a press occasion for " - 

 " three pound ! " mutter Sophy , sturdily , through the tear which her 
 grandfather 's pathos have draw forth from her downcast eye , " three 
 pound - three - three . " 

 " you shall have they . but listen : I mean only to take a sketch ; I must 
 now have a finished portrait . I can not take this by candlelight . you 
 must let I come here to - morrow ; and yet to - morrow , I understand , you 
 mean to leave ? " 

 WAIFE . - " if you will generously bestow on we the sum you say , we shall 
 not leave the village till you have complete your picture . it be Mr. 
 Rugge and his company we will leave . " 

 VANCE . - " and may I venture to ask what you propose to do , towards a new 
 livelihood for yourself and your grandchild , by the help of a sum 
 which be certainly much for I to pay , - enormous , I might say , quoad 
 I , - but small for a capital whereon to set up a business ? " 

 WAIFE . - " excuse I if I do not answer that very natural question at 
 present . let I assure you that that precise sum be want for an 
 investment which promise she and myself an easy existence . but to 
 insure my scheme , I must keep it secret . do you believe I ? " 

 " I do ! " cry Lionel ; and Sophy , whom by this time he have draw upon his 
 lap , put her arm gratefully round his neck . 

 " there be your money , sir , beforehand , " say Vance , decline downward 
 his betrayed and resentful nose , and deposit three sovereign on the 
 table . 

 " and how do you know , " say Waife , smile , " that I may not be off 
 to - night with your money and your model ! " 

 " well , " say Vance , curtly , " I think it be on the card . still , as John 
 Kemble say when rebuke for too large an alm , 

  " ' it be not often that I do these thing , 
  but when I do , I do they handsomely . ' " 

 " well apply , and well deliver , sir , " say the Comedian , " only you 
 should put a little more emphasis on the word do . " 

 " do I not put enough ? I be sure I feel it strongly ; no one can feel the 
 do more ! " 

 Waife 's pliant face relax into a genial brightness . the equivoque 
 charm he . however , not affect to comprehend it , he thrust back 
 the money , and say , - " no , sir , not a shilling till the picture be 
 complete . Nay , to relieve your mind , I will own that , have I no scruple 
 more delicate , I would rather receive nothing till Mr. Rugge be go . 
 true , he have no right to any share in it . but you see before you a 
 man who , when it come to arguing , could never take a wrangler 's 
 degree , - never get over the Asses ' Bridge , sir . pluck at it score of 
 time clean as a feather . but do not go yet . you come to give we money : 
 give we what , be I rich , I should value more highly , - a little of your 
 time . you , sir , be an artist ; and you , young gentleman ? " address 
 Lionel . 

 lionel   colour . - " I - be nothing as yet . " 

 WAIFE . - " you be fond of the drama , I presume , both of you ? apropos of 
 John Kemble , you , sir , say that you have never hear he . allow I , so 
 far as this crack voice can do it , to give you a faint idea of he . " 

 " I shall be delighted , " say Vance , draw nearer to the table , and 
 feel more at his ease . " but since I see you smoke , may I take the 
 liberty to light my cigar ? " 

 " make yourself at home , " say Gentleman Waife , with the good - humour of 
 a fatherly host . and , all the while , Lionel and Sophy be babble 
 together , she still upon his lap . 

 Waife begin his imitation of John Kemble . despite the crack voice , it 
 be admirable . one imitation draw on another ; then succeed anecdote 
 of the stage , of the Senate , of the Bar . Waife have hear great orator , 
 whom every one still admire for the speech which nobody nowadays 
 ever read ; he give a lively idea of each . and then come saying of 
 dry humour and odd scrap of worldly observation ; and time fly on 
 pleasantly till the clock strike twelve , and the young guest tear 
 themselves away . 

 " Merle , Merle ! " cry the Comedian , when they be go . 

 Merle appear . 

 " we do not   go to - morrow . when Rugge send for we   as he will do at 
 daybreak , say so . you shall lodge we a few day long , and then - and 
 then - my little Sophy , kiss I , kiss I ! you be save at least from 
 those horrid paint creature ! " 

 " ah , ah ! " growl Merle from below , " he have get the money ! glad to 
 hear it . but , " he add , as he glance at sundry weird and astrological 
 symbol with which he have be divert himself , " that be not it . the 
 true horary question , be , what will he do with it ? " 




 CHAPTER IX . 

  the historian show that , notwithstanding the progressive spirit of 
  the time , a Briton be not permit , without an effort , " to 
  progress " accord to his own inclination . 

 Sophy could not sleep . at first she be too happy . without be 
 conscious of any degradation in her lot amongst the itinerant artist 
 of Mr. Rugge 's exhibition , - how could she , when her beloved and revere 
 protector have be one of those artist for year ? - yet instinctively 
 she shrink from their contact . Doubtless , while absorb in some 
 stir part , she forget companion , audience , all , and enjoy 
 what she perform , - necessarily enjoy , for she acting be really 
 excellent , and where no enjoyment there no excellence ; but when the 
 histrionic enthusiasm be not positively at work , she creep to she 
 grandfather with something between loathing and terror of the " paint 
 creature " and her own borrow tinsel . 

 but , more than all , she feel acutely every indignity or affront offer 
 to Gentleman Waife . Heaven know , these be not few ; and to escape from 
 such a life - to be with her grandfather alone , have he all to herself 
 to tend and to pet , to listen to and to prattle with - seem to her the 
 consummation of human felicity . ah , but should she be all alone ? just 
 as she be lull herself into a doze , that question seize and rouse 
 she . and then it be not happiness that keep she wake : it be what be 
 less rare in the female breast , curiosity . who be to be the mysterious 
 third , to whose acquisition the three pound be evidently to be 
 devote ? what new face have she purchase by the loan of her own ? not the 
 Pig - faced Lady nor the Spotted boy . could it be the Norfolk Giant or the 
 Calf with two head ? horrible idea ! monstrous phantasmagoria begin to 
 stalk before her eye ; and to charm they away , with great fervour she 
 fall to say her prayer , - an act of devotion which she have forget , 
 in her excitement , to perform before rest her head on the pillow , - an 
 omission , let we humbly hope , not note down in very dark character by 
 the record angel . 

 that act over , her thought take a more comely aspect than have be wear 
 by the precede phantasy , reflect Lionel 's kind look and repeat 
 his gentle word . " Heaven bless he ! " she say with emphasis , as a 
 supplement to the habitual prayer ; and then tear gather to her 
 grateful eyelid , for she be one of those being whose tear come 
 slow from sorrow , quick from affection . and so the gray dawn find she 
 still - wakeful , and she rise , bath her cheek in the cold fresh water , 
 and draw they forth with a glow like Hebe 's . dress herself with the 
 quiet activity which characterize all her movement , she then open 
 the casement and inhale the air . all be still in the narrow lane ; the 
 shop yet unclose . but on the still tree behind the shop the bird 
 be begin to stir and chirp . Chanticleer , from some neighbouring 
 yard , ring out his brisk rereillee . pleasant English summer dawn in the 
 pleasant english country village . she stretch her graceful neck far 
 from the casement , try to catch a glimpse of the blue river . she 
 have see its majestic flow on the day they have arrive at the fair , and 
 long to gain its bank ; then her servitude to the stage forbid she . 
 now she be to be free ! o joy ! now she might have her careless hour of 
 holiday ; and , forgetful of Waife 's warning that their vocation must 
 be ply in town , she let her fancy run riot amidst vision of green 
 field and laugh water , and in fond delusion gather the daisy 
 and chase the butterfly . Changeling transfer into that low 
 world of art from the cradle of civil Nature , her human child 's heart 
 yearn for the human childlike delight . all child love the country , 
 the flower , the sward , the bird , the butterfly ; or if some do not , 
 despair , o Philanthropy , of their afterlive ! 

 she close the window , smile to herself , steal through the adjoining 
 doorway , and see that her grandfather be still asleep . then she busy 
 herself in put the little sitting - room to right , reset the table 
 for the morning meal , water the stock , and finally take up the 
 crystal and look into it with awe , wonder why the Cobbler could 
 see so much , and she only the distorted reflection of her own face . so 
 interested , however , for once , do she become in the inspection of this 
 mystic globe , that she do not notice the dawn pass into broad daylight , 
 nor hear a voice at the door below , - nor , in short , take into cognition 
 the external world , till a heavy tread shake the floor , and then , 
 start , she behold the Remorseless Baron , with a face black enough to 
 have darken the crystal of Dr. Dee himself . 

 " Ho , ho , " say Mr. Rugge , in hiss accent which have often thrill 
 the threepenny gallery with anticipative horror . " Rebellious , eh ? - will not 
 come ? where be your grandfather , baggage ? " 

 Sophy let fall the crystal - a mercy it be not brokenand gaze vacantly 
 on the Baron . 

 " your vile scamp of a grandfather ? " 

 SOPHY   with spirit . - " he be not vile . you ought to be ashamed of 
 yourself speak so , Mr. Rugge ! " 

 here simultaneously , Mr. Waife , hastily indue in his gray 
 dressing - gown , present himself at the aperture of the bedroom door , 
 and the Cobbler on the threshold of the sitting - room . the Comedian 
 stand mute , trust perhaps to the impose effect of his attitude . 
 the Cobbler , yield to the impulse of untheatric man , put his head 
 doggedly on one side , and with both hand on his hip say , 

 " civil word to my lodger , master , or out you go ! " 

 the Remorseless Baron glare vindictively , first at one and then at the 
 other ; at length he stride up to Waife , and say , with a wither grin , 
 " I have something to say to you ; shall I say it before your landlord ? " 

 the Comedian wave his hand to the Cobbler . 

 " leave we , my friend ; I shall not require you . step this way , Mr. 
 Rugge . " Rugge enter the bedroom , and Waife close the door behind he . 

 " Anan , " quoth the Cobbler , scratch his head . " I do not   quite take your 
 grandfather 's giving in . british ground here ! but your Ascendant can not 
 surely be in such malignant conjunction with that obstreperous tyrant as 
 to bind you to he hand and foot . let us see what the crystal think of 
 it . ' take it up gently , and come downstairs with I . " 

 " please , no ; I will stay near Grandfather , " say Sophy , resolutely . " he 
 sha'n't   be leave helpless with that rude man . " 

 the Cobbler could not help smile . " Lord love you , " say he ; " you have 
 a spirit of your own , and if you be my wife I should be afraid of 
 you . but I will not   stand here eavesdropping ; mayhap your grandfather have 
 secret I be not to hear : call I if I be want . " he descend . Sophy , 
 with less noble disdain of eavesdropping , stand in the centre of the 
 room , hold her breath to listen . she hear no sound ; she have half a 
 mind to put her ear to the keyhole , but that seem even to she a mean 
 thing , if not absolutely require by the necessity of the case . so there 
 she still stand , her head bend down , her finger raise : oh , that Vance 
 could have so paint she ! 




 CHAPTER X. 

  show the cause why man and nation , when one man or nation 
  wish to get for its own arbitrary purpose what the other man or 
  nation do not desire to part with , be apt to ignore the mild 
  precept of Christianity , shock the sentiment and upset the 
  theory of Peace Societies . 

 " be I to understand , " say Mr. Rugge , in a whisper , when Waife have draw 
 he to the farth end of the inner room , with the bed - curtain between 
 their position and the door , deaden the sound of their voice , - " be I 
 to understand that , after my take you and that child to my theatre out 
 of charity , and at your own request , you be go to quit I without 
 warning , - french leave ; be that british conduct ? " 

 " Mr. Rugge , " reply Waife , deprecatingly , " I have no engagement with 
 you beyond an experimental trial . we be free on both side for three 
 month , - you to dismiss we any day , we to leave you . the experiment do 
 not please we : we thank you and depart . " 

 rugge . - " that be not the truth . I say I be free to dismiss you both , 
 if the child do not suit . you , poor helpless creature , could be of no 
 use . but I never hear you say you be to be free too . stand to reason 
 not ! put my engagement at a Waife 's mercy ! I , Lorenzo Rugge ! - stuff ! 
 but I be a just man , and a liberal man , and if you think you ought to 
 have a high salary , if this ungrateful proceeding be only , as I take 
 it , a strike for wage , I will meet you . Juliet Araminta do play 
 well than I could have suppose ; and I will conclude an engagement on 
 good term , as we be to have do if the experiment answer , for 
 three year . " Waife shake his head . " you be very good , Mr. Rugge , but 
 it be not a strike . my little girl do not like the life at any price ; 
 and , since she support I , I be bind to please she . besides , " say 
 the actor , with a stiff manner , " you have break faith with I . it be 
 fully understand that I be to appear no more on your stage ; all my task 
 be to advise with you in the performance , remodel the play , help in 
 the stage - management ; and you take advantage of my penury , and , when I 
 ask for a small advance , insist on force these relic of what I 
 be upon the public pity . enough : we part . I bear no malice . " 

 rugge . - " oh , do not   you ? no more do i. but I be a Briton , and I have the 
 spirit of one . you have well not make an enemy of I . " 

 WAIFE . - " I be above the necessity of make enemy . I have an enemy 
 ready make in myself . " 

 Rugge place a strong bony hand upon the cripple 's arm . " I dare say you 
 have ! a bad conscience , sir . how would you like your past life look 
 into , and blab out ? " 

 GENTLEMAN WAIFE   mournfully . - " the last four year of it have be 
 spend in your service , Mr. Rugge . if their record have be blab out 
 for my benefit , there would not have be a dry eye in the house . " 

 rugge . " I disdain your sneer . when a scorpion nurse at my bosom sneer 
 at I , I leave it to its own reflection . but I do not   speak of the year 
 in which that scorpion have be enjoy a salary and smoking canaster 
 at my expense . I refer to an early dodge in its checkered existence . 
 ha , sir , you wince ! I suspect I can find out something about you which 
 would - " 

 WAIFE   fiercely . - " would what ? " 

 rugge . - " oh , low your tone , sir ; no bully I . I suspect ! I have 
 good reason for suspicion ; and if you sneak off in this way , and cheat 
 I out of my property in Juliet Araminta , I will leave no stone unturne 
 to prove what I suspect : look to it , slight man ! come , I do not   wish to 
 quarrel ; make it up , and "   draw out his pocket - book   " if you want 
 cash down , and will have an engagement in black and white for three 
 year for Juliet Araminta , you may squeeze a good sum out of I , and go 
 yourself where you please : you will never be trouble by I . what I want 
 be the girl . " 

 all the actor lay aside , Waife growl out , " and hang I ; sir , if you 
 shall have the girl ! " 

 at this moment Sophy open the door wide , and enter boldly . she have 
 hear her grandfather 's voice raise , though its hoarse tone do not 
 allow she to distinguish his word . she be alarmed for he . she come 
 in , his guardian fairy , to protect he from the oppressor of six foot 
 high . Rugge 's arm be raise , not indeed to strike , but rather to 
 declaim . Sophy slide between he and her grandfather , and , cling round 
 the latter , fling out her own arm , the forefinger raise menacingly 
 towards the Remorseless Baron . how you would have clap if you have 
 see she so at Covent Garden ! but I will swear the child do not know she 
 be act . Rugge do , and be strike with admiration and regretful rage 
 at the idea of lose she . 

 " Bravo ! " say he , involuntarily . " come , come , Waife , look at she : she 
 be bear for the stage . my heart swell with pride . she be my property , 
 morally speak ; make she so legally ; and hark , in your ear , fifty 
 pound . take I in the humour , - Golconda open , - fifty pound ! " 

 " no , " say the vagrant . 

 " well , " say Rugge , sullenly ; " let she speak for herself . " 

 " speak , child . you do not   wish to return to Mr. Rugge , - and without I , 
 too , - do you , Sophy ? " 

 " without you , Grandy ! I would rather die first . " 

 " you hear she ; all be settle between we . you have have our service up 
 to last night ; you have pay we up to last night ; and so good morning to 
 you , Mr. Rugge . " 

 " my dear child , " say the manager , soften his voice as much as he 
 could , " do consider . you shall be so make of without that stupid old 
 man . you think I cross , but ' t be he who irritate and put I out 
 of temper . I ' m uncommon fond of child . I have a babe of my own 
 once , - upon my honour , I have , - and if it have not be for convulsion , 
 cause by teethe , I should be a father still . supply to I the place 
 of that beloved babe . you shall have such fine dress ; all new , - choose 
 them yourself , - mince veal and raspberry tart for dinner every Sunday . 
 in three year , under my care , you will become a great actress , and make 
 your fortune , and marry a lord , - lord go out of their wit for great 
 actress , - whereas , with he , what will you do ? drudge and rot and 
 starve ; and he can not   live long , and then where will you be ? ' t be a 
 shame to hold she so , you idle old vagabond . " 

 " I do not   hold she , " say Waife , try to push she away . " there be 
 something in what the man say . choose for yourself , Sophy . " 

 SOPHY   suppress a sob . - " how can you have the heart to talk so , 
 Grandy ? I tell you , Mr. Rugge , you be a bad man , and I hate you , and 
 all about you ; and I will stay with Grandfather ; and I do not   care if I do 
 starve : he sha'n't ! " 

 MR . RUGGE   clap both hand on the crown of his hat , and stride to 
 the door . - " William Waife , beware ' t be do . I be your enemy . as for 
 you , too dear but abandon infant , stay with he : you will find out very 
 soon who and what he be ; your pride will have a fall , when - " 

 Waife spring forward , despite his lameness , - both his fist clench , 
 his one eye ablaze ; his broad burly torso confront and daunt the 
 stormy manager . Taller and young though Rugge be , he cower before 
 the cripple he have so long taunt and humble . the word stand arrest 
 on his tongue . " leave the room instantly ! " thunder the actor , in a 
 voice no long break . " blacken my name before that child by one word , 
 and I will dash the next down your throat . " Rugge rush to the door , 
 and keep it ajar between Waife and himself , he then thrust in his 
 head , hiss forth , 

 " fly , caitiff , fly ! my revenge shall track your secret and place you in 
 my power . Juliet Araminta shall yet be mine . " with these awful word the 
 Remorseless Baron clear the stair in two bound , and be out of the 
 house . 

 Waife smile contemptuously . but as the street - door clang on the 
 form of the angry manager , the colour fade from the old man 's face . 
 exhaust by the excitement he have go through , he sink on a chair , 
 and , with one quick gasp as for breath , faint away . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

  progress of the Fine Arts . - biographical anecdote . - fluctuation in 
  the value of money . - speculative tendency of the time . 

 whatever the shock which the brutality of the Remorseless Baron 
 inflict on the nervous system of the persecuted but triumphant Bandit , 
 it have certainly subside by the time Vance and Lionel enter Waife 's 
 apartment ; for they find grandfather and grandchild seat near the 
 open window , at the corner of the table   on which they have make room for 
 their operation by the removal of the carve cocoanut , the crystal egg , 
 and the two flower - pot , eagerly engage , with many a silvery laugh 
 from the lip of Sophy , in the game of dominos . 

 Mr. Waife have be devote himself , for the last hour and more , to the 
 instruction of Sophy in the mystery of that intellectual amusement ; 
 and such pain do he take , and so impressive be his exhortation , 
 that his happy pupil could not help think to herself that this be 
 the new art upon which Waife depend for their future livelihood . she 
 spring up , however , at the entrance of the visitor , her face beam 
 with grateful smile ; and , run to Lionel and take he by the hand , 
 while she courtesie with more respect to Vance , she exclaim , " we be 
 free ! thank to you , thank to you both ! he be go ! Mr. Rugge be go ! " 

 " so I see on pass the green ; stage and all , " say Vance , while Lionel 
 kiss the child and press she to his side . it be astonish how 
 paternal he feel , - how much she have creep into his heart . 

 " pray , sir , " ask Sophy , timidly , glance to Vance , " have the Norfolk 
 Giant go too ? " 

 VANCE . - " I fancy so - all the show be either go or go . " 

 SOPHY . - " the Calf with two head ? " 

 VANCE . - " do you regret it ? " 

 SOPHY . - " oh , dear , no . " 

 Waife , who after a profound bow , and a cheery " good day , gentleman , " 
 have hitherto remain silent , put away the domino , now say , " I 
 suppose , sir , you would like at once to begin your sketch ? " 

 VANCE . - " yes ; I have bring all my tool ; see , even the canvas . I wish 
 it be large , but it be all I have with I of that material : ' t be 
 already stretch ; just let I arrange the light . " 

 WAIFE . - " if you do not   want I , gentleman , I will take the air for 
 half - an - hour or so . in fact , I may now feel free to look after my 
 investment . " 

 SOPHY   whisper Lionel . - " you be sure the Calf have go as well as 
 the Norfolk Giant ? " 

 Lionel wonderingly reply that he think so ; and Waife disappear 
 into his room , whence he soon emerge , have doff his dressing - gown 
 for a black coat , by no means threadbare , and well brush . Hat , 
 stick , and glove in hand , he really seem respectable , - more than 
 respectable , - Gentleman Waife every inch of he ; and say , " look your 
 good , Sophy , and sit still , if you can , " nod pleasantly to the three , 
 and hobble down the stair . Sophy - whom Vance have just settle into a 
 chair , with her head bend partially down   three - quarter , as the artist 
 have release 

  " the loose train of her amber - drop hair , " 

 and be contemplate aspect and position with a painter 's meditative 
 eye - start up , to his great discomposure , and rush to the window . she 
 return to her seat with her mind much relieve . Waife be walk in 
 an opposite direction to that which lead towards the whilolm quarter of 
 the Norfolk Giant and the two - headed Calf . 

 " come , come , " say Vance , impatiently , " you have break an idea in half . 
 I beg you will not stir till I have place you ; and then , if all else of 
 you be still , you may exercise your tongue . I give you leave to talk . " 

 SOPHY   penitentially . - " I be so sorry - I beg pardon . will that do , 
 sir ? " 

 VANCE . - " Head a little more to the right , - so , Titania watch bottom 
 asleep . will you lie on the floor , Lionel , and do Bottom ? " 

 lionel   indignantly . - " Bottom ! have I an ass 's head ? " 

 VANCE . - " Immaterial ! I can easily imagine that you have one . I want 
 merely an outline of figure , - something sprawl and ungainly . " 

 lionel   sulkily . - " much oblige to you ; imagine that too . " 

 VANCE . - " do not   be so disobliging . it be necessary that she should look 
 fondly at something , - expression in the eye . " Lionel at once recline 
 himself incumbent in a position as little sprawling and ungainly as he 
 could well contrive . 

 VANCE . - " Fancy , Miss Sophy , that this young gentleman be very dear to 
 you . have you get a brother ? " 

 SOPHY . - " ah , no , sir . " 

 VANCE . - " Hum . but you have , or have have , a doll ? " 

 SOPHY . - " oh , yes ; Grandfather give I one . " 

 VANCE . - " and you be fond of that doll ? " 

 SOPHY . - " Very . " 

 VANCE . - " Fancy that young gentleman be your doll grow big , that it 
 be asleep , and you be watch that no one hurt it ; Mr. Rugge , for 
 instance . throw your whole soul into that thought , - love for doll , 
 apprehension of Rugge . Lionel , keep still , and shut your eye ; do . " 

 lionel   grumble . - " I do not come here to be make a doll of . " 

 VANCE . - " coax he to be quiet , Miss Sophy , and sleep peaceably , or I 
 shall do he a mischief . I can be a Rugge , too , if I be put out . " 

 SOPHY   in the soft tone . - " do try and sleep , sir : shall I get you a 
 pillow ? " 

 lionel . - " no , thank you : I be very comfortable now , " settle his head 
 upon his arm ; and after one upward glance towards Sophy , the lid 
 close reluctantly over his softened eye . a ray of sunshine come aslant 
 through the half - shut window , and play along the boy 's cluster hair 
 and smooth pale cheek . Sophy 's gaze rest on he most benignly . 

 " just so , " say Vance ; " and now be silent till I have get the attitude 
 and fix the look . " 

 the artist sketch away rapidly with a bold practise hand , and all be 
 silent for about half - an - hour , when he say , " you may get up , Lionel ; I 
 have do with you for the present . " 

 SOPHY . - " and I too - may I see ? " 

 VANCE . - " no , but you may talk now . so you have a doll ? what have become of 
 it ? " 

 SOPHY . - " I leave it behind , sir . Grandfather think it would distract I 
 from attend to his lesson and learn my part . " 

 VANCE . - " you love your grandfather more than the doll ? " 

 SOPHY . - " oh ! a thousand million million time more . " 

 VANCE . - " he bring you up , I suppose ? have you no father , - no mother ? " 

 SOPHY . - " I have only Grandfather . " 

 LIONEL . - " have you always live with he ? " 

 SOPHY . - " Dear I , no ; I be with Mrs. Crane till Grandfather come from 
 abroad , and take I away , and put I with some very kind people ; and 
 then , when Grandfather have that bad accident , I come to stay with he , 
 and we have be together ever since . " 

 LIONEL . - " be Mrs. Crane no relation of your ? " 

 SOPHY . - " no , I suppose not , for she be not kind ; I be so miserable : 
 but do not   talk of it ; I forget that now . I only wish to remember from 
 the time Grandfather take I in his lap , and tell I to be a good child 
 and love he ; and I have be happy ever since . " 

 " you be a dear good child , " say Lionel , emphatically , " and I wish I 
 have you for my sister . " 

 VANCE . - " when your grandfather have receive from I that exorbitant - not 
 that I grudge it - sum , I should like to ask , what will he do with it ? as 
 he say it be a secret , I must not pump you . " 

 SOPHY . - " what will he do with it ? I should like to know , too , sir ; but 
 whatever it be I do not   care , so long as I and Grandfather be together . " 

 here Waife re - enter . " well , how go on the picture ? " 

 VANCE . - " tolerably , for the first sitting ; I require two more . " 

 WAIFE . - " certainly ; only - only "   he draw aside Vance , and whisper , 
 " only the day after to - morrow , I fear I shall want the money . it be an 
 occasion that never will occur again : I would seize it . " 

 VANCE . - " take the money now . " 

 WAIFE . - " well , thank you , sir ; you be sure now that we shall not run 
 away ; and I accept your kindness ; it will make all safe . " 

 Vance , with surprising alacrity , slip the sovereign into the old 
 man 's hand ; for truth to say , though thrifty , the artist be really 
 generous . his organ of caution be large , but that of acquisitiveness 
 moderate . moreover , in those moment when his soul expand with his 
 art , he be insensibly less alive to the value of money . and strange it 
 be that , though States strive to fix for that commodity the most abide 
 standard , yet the value of money to the individual who regard it 
 shift and fluctuate , go up and down half - a - dozen time a day . 
 for any part , I honestly declare that there be hour in the 
 twenty - four - such , for instance , as that just before breakfast , or that 
 succeed a page of this history in which I have be put out of temper 
 with my performance and myself - when any one in want of five shilling 
 at my disposal would find my value of that sum put it quite out of his 
 reach ; while at other time - just after dinner , for instance , or when I 
 have effect what seem to I a happy stroke , or a good bit of colour , 
 in this historical composition - the value of those five shilling be 
 so much depreciate that I might be , - I think so , at least , - I might be 
 almost tempt to give they away for nothing . under some such mysterious 
 influence in the money - market , Vance therefore feel not the loss of 
 his three sovereign ; and return to his easel , drive away Lionel and 
 Sophy , who have take that opportunity to gaze on the canvas . 

 " do not   do her justice at all , " quoth Lionel ; " all the feature 
 exaggerated . " 

 " and you pretend to paint ! " return Vance , in great scorn , and throw 
 a cloth over his canvas . " to - morrow , Mr. Waife , the same hour . now , 
 Lionel , get your hat , and come away . " 

 Vance carry off the canvas , and Lionel follow slowly . Sophy gaze 
 at their depart form from the open window ; Waife stump about the 
 room , rub his hand , " he will do ; he will do : I always think so . " 
 Sophy turn : " who will do ? - the young gentleman ? do what ? " 

 waife.-"the young gentleman?-as if I be think of he ! our new 
 companion ; I have be with he this last hour . wonderful natural 
 gift . " 

 SOPHY   ruefully . - " it be alive , then ? " 

 WAIFE . - " alive ! yes , I should think so . " 

 SOPHY   half - cry .   - " I be very sorry ; I know I shall hate it . " 

 WAIFF . - " Tut , darling : get I my pipe ; I be happy . " 

 SOPHY   cut short her fit of ill - humour . - " be you ? then I be , and I 
 will not hate it . " 




 CHAPTER XII . 

  in which it be show that a man do this or decline to do that for 
  reason well know to himself , - a reserve which be extremely 
  conducive to the social interest of a community , since the 
  conjecture into the origin and nature of those reason stimulate 
  the inquire faculty , and furnish the staple of modern 
  conversation . and as it be not to be deny that , if their 
  neighbour leave they nothing to guess at , three - fourth of civilized 
  humankind , male or female , would have nothing to talk about ; so we 
  can not too gratefully encourage that needful curiosity term by the 
  inconsiderate tittle - tattle or scandal , which save the vast 
  majority of our specie from be reduce to the degraded condition 
  of dumb animal . 

 the next day the sitting be renew : but Waife do not go out , and 
 the conversation be a little more restrained ; or rather , Waife have the 
 large share in it . the Comedian , when he please , could certainly be 
 very entertaining . it be not so much in what he say as his manner of 
 say it . he be a strange combination of sudden extreme , at one while 
 on a tone of easy but not undignified familiarity with his visitor , 
 as if their equal in position , their superior in year ; then abruptly , 
 humble , deprecate , almost obsequious , almost servile ; and then again , 
 jerk as it be into pride and stiffness , fall back , as if the 
 effort be impossible , into meek dejection . still the prevalent 
 character of the man 's mood and talk be social , quaint , cheerful . 
 evidently he be by original temperament a droll and joyous humourist , 
 with high animal spirit ; and , withal , an infantine simplicity at time , 
 like the clever man who never learn the world and be always take in . 

 a circumstance , trifle in itself , but suggestive of speculation either 
 as to the character or antecedent circumstance of Gentleman Waife , do 
 not escape Vance 's observation . since his rupture with Mr. Rugge , there 
 be a considerable amelioration in that affection of the trachea , which , 
 while his engagement with Rugge last , have render the Comedian 's 
 dramatic talent unavailable on the stage . he now express himself 
 without the pathetic hoarseness or cavernous wheeze which have previously 
 throw a wet blanket over his effort at discourse . but Vance put no 
 very stern construction on the dissimulation which his change seem 
 to denote . since Waife be still one - eyed and a cripple , he might very 
 excusably shrink from reappearance on the stage , and affect a third 
 infirmity to save his pride from the exhibition of the two infirmity 
 that be genuine . 

 that which most puzzle Vance be that which have most puzzle the 
 Cobbler , - what could the man once have be ? how fall so low ? - for 
 fall it be , that be clear . the painter , though not himself of 
 patrician extraction , have be much in the good society . he have be 
 a pet favourite in great house . he have travel . he have see the 
 world . he have the habit and instinct of good society . 

 now , in what the french term the beau monde , there be little trait 
 that reveal those who have enter it , - certain trick of phrase , 
 certain mode of expression , - even the pronunciation of familiar word , 
 even the modulation of an accent . a man of the most refined bearing may 
 not have these peculiarity ; a man , otherwise coarse and brusque in his 
 manner , may . the slang of the beau monde be quite apart from the code 
 of high breeding . now and then , something in Waife 's talk seem to show 
 that he have light on that beau - world ; now and then , that something 
 wholly vanish . so that Vance might have say , " he have be admit 
 there , not inhabit it . " 

 yet Vance could not feel sure , after all ; comedian be such take in . 
 but be the man , by the profession of his early life , a comedian ? 
 Vance ask the question adroitly . 

 " you must have take to the stage young ? " say he . 

 " the stage ! " say Waife ; " if you mean the public stage , no . I have 
 act pretty often in youth , even in childhood , to amuse other , never 
 professionally to support myself , till Mr. Rugge civilly engage I four 
 year ago . " 

 " be it possible , - with your excellent education ! but pardon I ; I have 
 hint my surprise at your late vocation before , and it displease you . " 

 " displease I ! " say Waife , with an abject , depressed manner ; " I hope I 
 say nothing that would have misbecome a poor break vagabond like I . 
 I be no prince in disguise , - a good - for - nothing varlet who should be too 
 grateful to have something to keep himself from a dunghill . " 

 LIONEL . - " do not   talk so . and but for your accident you might now be 
 the great attraction on the metropolitan stage . who do not respect a 
 really fine actor ? " 

 WAIFE   gloomily . - " the metropolitan stage ! I be talk into it : I be 
 glad even of the accident that save I ; say no more of that , no more 
 of that . but I have spoil your sitting . Sophy , you see , have leave she 
 chair . " 

 " I have do for to - day , " say Vance ; " to - morrow , and my task be end . " 

 Lionel come up to Vance and whisper he ; the painter , after a pause , 
 nod silently , and then say to Waife , 

 " we be go to enjoy the fine weather on the Thames   after I have put 
 away these thing , and shall return to our inn - not far hence - to sup , 
 at eight o'clock . supper be our principal meal ; we rarely spoil our day 
 by the ceremonial of a formal dinner . will you do we the favour to sup 
 with we ? our host have a wonderful whiskey , which when raw be Glenlivat , 
 but refine into toddy be nectar . bring your pipe , and let we hear John 
 Kemble again . " 

 Waife 's face light up . " you be most kind ; nothing I should like 
 so much . but - " and the light flee , the face darken - " but no ; I 
 can not - you do not   know - that be - I - I have make a vow to myself to 
 decline all such temptation . I humbly beg you will excuse I . " 

 VANCE . - " Temptations ! of what kind , - the whiskey toddy ? " 

 WAIFE   puff away a sigh . - " ah , yes ; whiskey toddy , if you please . 
 perhaps I once love a glass too well , and could not resist a glass too 
 much now ; and if I once break the rule and become a tippler , what would 
 happen to Juliet Araminta ? for her sake do not   press I . " 

 " oh , do go , Grandy ; he never drink , - never anything strong than tea , 
 I assure you , sir : it can not   be that . " 

 " it be , silly child , and nothing else , " say Waife , positively , draw 
 himself up , - " excuse I . " 

 Lionel begin brush his hat with his sleeve , and his face work ; at 
 last he say , " well , sir , then may I ask another favour ? Mr. Vance and 
 I be go to - morrow , after the sitting , to see Hampton Court ; we have 
 keep that excursion to the last before leave these part . would you 
 and little Sophy come with we in the boat ? we will have no whiskey 
 toddy , and we will bring you both safe home . " 

 WAIFE . - " what - I ! what - I ! you be very young , sir , - a gentleman bear 
 and breed , I will swear ; and you to be see , perhaps by some of your 
 friend or family , with an old vagrant like I , in the Queen 's 
 palace , - the public gardens ! I should be the vile wretch if I take 
 such advantage of your goodness . ' pretty company , ' they would say , ' you 
 have get into . ' with I ! with I ! do not   be alarm , Mr. Vance not to be 
 think of . " 

 the young man be deeply affected . 

 " I can not   accept that reason , " say Lionel , tremulously , " though I must 
 not presume to derange your habit . but she may go with we , may not   she ? 
 we will take care of she , and she be dress so plainly and neatly , and 
 look such a little lady "   turn to Vance . 

 " yes , let she come with we , " say the artist , benevolently ; though he 
 by no mean share in Lionel 's enthusiastic desire for her company . he 
 think she would be greatly in their way . 

 " Heaven bless you both ! " answer Waife ; " and she want a holiday ; she 
 shall have it . " 

 " I would rather stay with you , Grandy : you will be so lone . " 

 " no , I wish to be out all to - morrow,-the investment ! I shall not be 
 alone ; make friend with our future companion , Sophy . " 

 " and can do without I already ? heigh - ho ! " 

 VANCE . - " so that be settle ; good - by to you . " 




 CHAPTER xiii . 

  inspiring effect of the Fine Arts : the vulgar be move by their 
  exhibition into generous impulse and flight of fancy , check by 
  the ungracious severity of their superior , as exemplify in the 
  instance of Cobbler Merle and his servant of - all - work . 

 the next day , perhaps with the idea of remove all scruple from Sophy 's 
 mind , Waife have already go after his investment when the friend 
 arrive . Sophy at first be dull and dispirit , but by degree she 
 brighten up ; and when , the sit over and the picture do   save 
 such final touch as Vance reserve for solitary study , she be 
 permit to gaze at her own effigy , she burst into exclamation of 
 frank delight . " be I like that ! be it possible ? oh , how beautiful ! Mr. 
 Merle , Mr. Merle , Mr. Merle ! " and run out of the room before Vance 
 could stop she , she return with the Cobbler , follow , too , by a thin 
 gaunt girl , whom he pompously call his housekeeper , but who in sober 
 truth be servant - of - all - work . wife he have none : his horoscope , he say , 
 have Saturn in square to the Seventh House , forbid he to venture 
 upon matrimony . all gather round the picture ; all admire , and with 
 justice : it be a chef - d'oeuvre . vance in his mature day never paint 
 more charmingly . the three pound prove to be the good outlay of 
 capital he have ever make . please with his work , he be pleased even 
 with that unsophisticated applause . 

 " you must have Mercury and Venus very strongly aspecte , " quoth the 
 Cobbler ; " and if you have the Dragon 's Head in the Tenth House , you may 
 count on be much talk of after you be dead . " 

 " after I be dead ! - sinister oman ! " say Vance , discompose . " I have no 
 faith in artist who count on be talk of after they be dead . never 
 know a dauber who do not ! but stand back : time fly ; tie up your hair ; 
 put on your bonnet , Titania . you have a shawl ? - not tinsel , I hope ! 
 quieter the well . you stay and see to she , Lionel . " 

 say the gaunt servant - of - all - work to Mr. Merle , " I would let the gentleman 
 paint I , if he like : shall I tell he , master ? " 

 " go back to the bacon , foolish woman . why , he give L3 for her likeness , 
 'cause of her Benefics ! but you would have to give he three year ' wage 
 afore he would look you straight in the face , 'cause , you see , your aspect 
 be crook . and , " add the Cobbler , philosophizing , " when the Malefics 
 be dead agin a girl 's mug , man be so constitute by natur ' that he 
 can not   take to that mug unless it have a golden handle . do not   fret , ' t be 
 not your fault : bear under Scorpio , - coarse - limbe , - dull complexion ; 
 and the Head of the Dragon aspecte of Infortunes in all your angles . " 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

  the historian take advantage of the summer hour vouchsafe to the 
  present life of Mr. Waife 's grandchild , in order to throw a few 
  gleam of light on her past . - he lead she into the palace of our 
  king , and moralize thereon ; and , enter the Royal Gardens , show 
  the uncertainty of human event , and the insecurity of british law , 
  by the abrupt seizure and constrain deportation of an innocent and 
  unforebode Englishman . 

 such a glorious afternoon ! the capricious english summer be so kind 
 that day to the child and her new friend ! when Sophy 's small foot once 
 trod the sward , have she be really queen of the Green People , sward 
 and footstep could not more joyously have meet together . the grasshopper 
 bound in fearless trust upon the hem of her frock ; she throw herself 
 down on the grass and catch he , but , oh , so tenderly ! and the gay 
 insect , dear to poet and fairy , seem to look at she from that quaint 
 sharp face of his with sagacious recognition , rest calmly on the 
 palm of her pretty hand ; then when he spring off , little moth - like 
 butterfly peculiar to the margin of running water quiver up from 
 the herbage , flutter round she . and there , in front , lie the Thames , 
 glitter through the willow , Vance get ready the boat , Lionel 
 seat by her side , a child like herself , his pride of incipient manhood 
 all forget ; happy in her glee ; she love he for the joy she feel , 
 and blend his image evermore in her remembrance with her first summer 
 holiday , - with sunny beam , glisten leaf , warble bird , fairy 
 wing , sparkle wave . oh , to live so in a child 's heart , - innocent , 
 blessed , angel - like , - well , well than the troubled reflection upon 
 woman 's later thought , well than that mournful illusion , over which 
 tear so bitter be daily shed , - well than First Love ! they enter 
 the boat . Sophy have never , to the good of her recollection , be in 
 a boat before . all be new to she : the lifelike speed of the little 
 vessel ; that world of cool green weed , with the fish dart to and 
 fro ; the musical chime of oar ; those distant stately swan . she be 
 silent now - her heart be very full . 

 " what be you think of , Sophy ? " ask Lionel , rest on the oar . 

 " think ! - I be not think . " 

 " what then ? " 

 " I do not   know , - feeling , I suppose . " 

 " feel what ? " 

 " as if between sleep and wake ; as the water perhaps feel , with the 
 sunlight on it ! " 

 " Poetical , " say Vance , who , somewhat of a poet himself , naturally 
 sneer at poetical tendency in other ; " but not so bad in its way . 
 ah , have I hurt your vanity ? there be tear in your eye . " 

 " no , sir , " say Sophy , falteringly . " but I be think then . " 

 " ah , " say the artist , " that be the bad of it ; after feel ever come 
 thought ; what be yours ? " 

 " I be sorry poor Grandfather be not here , that be all . " 

 " it be not our fault : we press he cordially , " say Lionel . 

 " you do indeed , sir , thank you ! and I do not   know why he refuse you . " 
 the young man exchange compassionate glance . 

 Lionel then seek to make her talk of her past life , tell he more of 
 Mrs. Crane . who and what be she ? 

 Sophy could not or would not tell . the remembrance be painful ; she 
 have evidently try to forget they . and the people with whom Waife have 
 place she , and who have be kind ? 

 the Misses Burton ; and they keep a day - school , and teach Sophy to read , 
 write , and cipher . they live near London , in a lane opening on a great 
 common , with a green rail before the house , and have a good many pupil , 
 and keep a tortoise shell cat and a canary . not much to enlighten she 
 listener do Sophy impart here . 

 and now they near that stately palace , rich in association of storm 
 and splendour , - of the grand Cardinal ; the iron - clothe protector ; Dutch 
 William of the immortal memory , whom we try so hard to like , and in 
 spite of the great Whig historian , that Titian of English prose , can 
 only frigidly respect . hard task for we Britons to like a Dutchman who 
 dethrone his father - in - law , and drink schnap ! Prejudice certainly ; 
 but so it be . hard still to like Dutch William 's unfilial Fran ! like 
 Queen Mary ! I could as soon like Queen Goneril ! romance fly from the 
 prosperous phlegmatic AEneas ; fly from his plump Lavinia , his " fidus 
 Achates , " bentinck ; fly to follow the poor deserted fugitive Stuart , 
 with all his sin upon his head . king have no right divine , except 
 when depose and fall ; they be then invest with the awe that 
 belong to each solemn image of mortal vicissitude , - vicissitude that 
 startle the Epicurean , " insanientis sapientiae consultus , " and strike 
 from his careless lyre the note that attest a god ! some proud shadow 
 chase another from the throne of Cyrus , and Horace hear in the thunder 
 the rush of Diespiter , and identify Providence with the Fortune that 
 snatch off the diadem in her whirring swoop . but front discrowne 
 take a new majesty to generous nature : in all sleek prosperity there be 
 something commonplace ; in all grand adversity , something royal . 

 the boat shoot to the shore ; the young people land , and enter the 
 arch of the desolate palace . they gaze on the great hall and the 
 presence - chamber , and the long suite of room with fade portrait ; 
 Vance as an artist , Lionel as an enthusiastic , well - read boy , Sophy as 
 a wonder , bewildered , ignorant child . and then they emerge into the 
 noble garden , with its regal tree . group be there of well dress 
 person . Vance hear himself call by name . he have forget the London 
 world , - forget , amidst his midsummer rambling , that the London 
 season be still ablaze ; and there , straggler from the great focus , 
 fine people , with languid tone and artificial jaded smile , catch he 
 in his wanderer 's dress , and walk side by side with the infant wonder 
 of Mr. Rugge 's show , exquisitely neat indeed , but still in a coloured 
 print , of a pattern familiar to his observant eye in the window of many 
 a shop lavish of ticket , and invite you to come in by the assurance 
 that it be ' sell off . " the artist stop , colour , bow , answer 
 the listless question put to he with shy haste : he then attempt to 
 escape ; they would not let he . 

 " you must come back and dine with we at the Star and Garter , " say Lady 
 Selina Vipont . " a pleasant party , - you know most of they , - the Dudley 
 Slowes , dear old Lady Frost , those pretty Ladies Prymme , Janet and 
 Wilhelmina . " 

 " we can not   let you off , " say , sleepily , Mr. Crampe , a fashionable wit , 
 who rarely make more than one bon mot in the twenty - four hour , and 
 spend the rest of his time in a torpid state . 

 VANCE . - " really you be too kind , but I be not even dress for - " 

 LADY SELINA . - " so charmingly dress - so picturesque ! besides , what 
 matter ? every one know who you be . where on earth have you be ? " 

 VANCE . - " ramble about , take sketch . " 

 LADY SELINA   direct her eyeglass towards Lionel and Sophy , who stand 
 aloof . - " but your companion , your brother ? and that pretty little 
 girl , - your sister , I suppose ? " 

 VANCE   shudder . - " no , not relation . I take charge of the 
 boy , - clever young fellow ; and the little girl be - " 

 LADY SELINA . - " yes . the little girl be - " 

 VANCE . - " a little girl , as you see : and very pretty , as you 
 say , - subject for a picture . " 

 LADY SELINA   indifferently . - " oh , let the child go and amuse 
 themselves somewhere . now we have find you ; positively you be our 
 prisoner . " 

 Lady Selina Vipont be one of the queen of London ; she have with she 
 that habit of command natural to such royalty . Frank Vance be no 
 tuft - hunter , but once under social influence , they have their effect 
 on he , as on most man who be bl with nose in the air . those great 
 lady , it be true , never buy his picture ; but they give he the 
 position which induce other to buy they . Vance love his art ; his art 
 need its career . its career be certainly brighten and quicken by 
 the help of rank and fashion . 

 in short , Lady Selina triumph , and the painter step back to Lionel . 
 " I must go to Richmond with these people . I know you will excuse I . 
 I shall be back to - night somehow . by the by , as you be go to the 
 post - office here for the letter you expect from your mother , ask for 
 my letter too . you will take care of little Sophy , and   in a whisper 
 hurry she out of the garden , or that Grand Mogul feminine , Lady Selina , 
 whose condescension would crush the Andes , will be stop she as my 
  protege , fall in rapture with that horrid colour print , say , 
 ' dear , what pretty sprig ! where can such thing be get ? ' and learn 
 perhaps how Frank Vance save the Bandit 's child from the Remorseless 
 Baron . ' t be your turn now . save your friend . the Baron be a lamb 
 compare to a fine lady . " he press Lionel 's unresponde hand , and be 
 off to join the polite merrymaking of the Frosts , Slowes , and Prymmes . 

 Lionel 's pride run up to the fever - heat of its thermometer ; more rouse , 
 though , on behalf of the unconscious Sophy than himself . 

 " let we come into the town , lady - bird , and choose a doll . you may have 
 one now , without fear of distract you from what I hate to think you 
 ever stoop to perform . " 

 as Lionel , his crest erect and nostril dilate , and hold Sophy firmly 
 by the hand , take his way out from the garden , he be oblige to pass 
 the patrician party , of whom Vance now make one . 

 his countenance and air , as he sweep by , strike they all , especially 
 Lady Selina . " a very distinguished - looking boy , " say she . " what a fine 
 face ! who do you say he be , Mr. Vance ? " 

 VANCE . - " his name be Haughton , - Lionel Haughton . " 

 LADY SELINA . - " Haughton ! Haughton ! any relation to poor dear Captain 
 Haughton , - Charlie Haughton , as he be generally call ? " 

 Vance , know little more of his young friend 's parentage than that his 
 mother let lodging , at which , once domiciliate himself , he have make 
 the boy 's acquaintance , and that she enjoy the pension of a captain 's 
 widow , reply carelessly , - 

 " his father be a captain , but I do not   know whether he be a Charlie . " 

 MR . CRAMPE   the wit . - " charlie be extinct ! I have the last in a 
 fossil , - box and all . " 

 general laugh . Wit shut up again . 

 LADY SELINA . - " he have a great look of Charlie Haughton . do you know if 
 he be connect with that extraordinary man , Mr. Darrell ? " 

 VANCE . - " upon my word , I do not . what Mr. Darrell do you mean ? " 

 Lady Selina , with one of those sublime look of celestial pity with 
 which personage in the great world forgive ignorance of name and 
 genealogy in those not bear within its orbit , reply , " oh , to be 
 sure . it be not exactly in the way of your delightful art to know Mr. 
 Darrell , one of the first man in Parliament , a connection of mine . " 

 LADY frost   nippingly . - " you mean Guy Darrell , the lawyer . " 

 LADY SELINA . - " lawyer - true ; now I think of it , he be a lawyer . but his 
 chief fame be in the House of Commons . all party agree that he 
 might have command any station ; but he be too rich perhaps to care 
 sufficiently about office . at all event , Parliament be dissolve 
 when he be at the height of his reputation , and he refuse to be 
 re - elect . " 

 one SIR GREGORY STOLLHEAD   a member of the House of Commons , young , 
 wealthy , a constant attendant , of great promise , with speech that 
 be fill with fact , and empty the bench . - " I have hear of he . 
 before my time ; lawyer not much weight in the House now . " 

 LADY SELINA . - " I be tell that Mr. Darrell do not speak like a lawyer . 
 but his career be over ; life in the country , and see nobody ; a 
 thousand pity ; a connection of mine , too ; great loss to the country . 
 ask your young friend , Mr. Vance , if Mr. Darrell be not his relation . I 
 hope so , for his sake . now that our party be in power , Mr. Darrell could 
 command anything for other , though he have cease to act with we . our 
 party be not forgetful of talent . " 

 LADY FROST   with icy crispness . - " I should think not : it have so little 
 of that kind to remember . " 

 SIR GREGORY . - " talent be not want in the House of Commons now ; do not 
 go down , in fact . business assembly . " 

 LADY SELINA   suppress a yawn . - " beautiful day ! we have well think 
 of go back to Richmond . " 

 general assent , and slow retreat . 




 CHAPTER XV . 

  the historian record the attachment to public business which 
  distinguish the british legislator . - touch instance of the 
  regret which ever in patriotic bosom attend the neglect of a 
  public duty . 

 from the dusty height of a rumble - tumble affix to Lady Selina Vipont 's 
 barouche , and by the animate side of Sir Gregory Stollhead , Vance 
 catch sight of Lionel and Sophy at a corner of the spacious green 
 near the Palace . he sigh ; he envy they . he think of the boat , 
 the water , the honeysuckle arbour at the little inn , - pleasure he have 
 deny himself , - pleasure all in his own way . they seem still more 
 alluring by contrast with the prospect before he ; formal dinner at the 
 Star and Garter , with title Prymmes , Slowes , and frost , a couple of 
 guineas a head , include light wine , which he do not drink , and the 
 expense of a chaise back by himself . but such be life and its social 
 duty , - such , above all , ambition and a career . who that would leave 
 a name on his tombstone can say to his own heart , " Perish star 
 and garter : my existence shall pass from day to day in honeysuckle 
 arbour ! " 

 Sir Gregory Stollhead interrupt Vance 's revery by an impassioned 
 sneeze . " dreadful smell of hay ! " say the legislator , with watery 
 eye . " be you subject to the hay fever ? I be ! a - tisha - tisha - tisha 
  sneeze   - country frightfully unwholesome at this time of year . and 
 to think that I ought now to be in the House , - in my committee - room ; no 
 smell of hay there ; most important committee . " 

 VANCE   rouse himself . - " ah - on what ? " 

 SIR GREGORY   regretfully . - " sewer . " 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

  sign of an impending revolution , which , like all revolution , seem 
  to come of a sudden , though its cause have long be at work ; and 
  to go off in a tantrum , though its effect must run on to the end of 
  a history . 

 Lionel could not find in the toy - shop of the village a doll good enough 
 to satisfy his liberal inclination , but he buy one which amply 
 content the humbler aspiration of Sophy . he then stroll to the 
 post - office . there be several letter for Vance ; one for himself in 
 his mother 's handwriting . he delay open it for the moment . the day 
 be far advanced Sophy must be hungry . in vain she declare she be not . 
 they pass by a fruiterer 's stall . the strawberry and cherry 
 be temptingly fresh ; the sun still very powerful . at the back of the 
 fruiterer 's be a small garden , or rather orchard , smile cool through 
 the open door ; little table lay out there . the good woman who keep 
 the shop be accustom to the want and taste of humble metropolitan 
 visitor . but the garden be luckily now empty : it be before the usual 
 hour for tea - party ; so the young folk have the pleasantest table under 
 an apple - tree , and the choice of the fresh fruit . milk and cake be 
 add to the fare . it be a banquet , in Sophy 's eye , worthy that happy 
 day . and when Lionel have finish his share of the feast , eat fast , 
 as spirit , impatient boy form to push on in life and spoil their 
 digestion be apt to do ; and while Sophy be still linger over the 
 last of the strawberry , he throw himself back on his chair and draw 
 forth his letter . Lionel be extremely fond of his mother , but her 
 letter be not often those which a boy be over - eager to read . it 
 be not all mother who understand what boy be , - their quick 
 susceptibility , their precocious manliness , all their mystical way 
 and oddity . a letter from Mrs. Haughton generally somewhat fretted and 
 irritated Lionel 's high - string nerve , and he have instinctively put 
 off the task of read the one he hold , till satisfied hunger and 
 cool - breathing shadow , and rest from the dusty road , have lend their 
 soothe aid to his undeveloped philosophy . 

 he break the seal slowly ; another letter be enclose within . at 
 the first few word his countenance change ; he utter a slight 
 exclamation , read on eagerly ; then , before conclude his mother 's 
 epistle , hastily tear open that which it have contain , run his eye over 
 its content , and , drop both letter on the turf below , rest his 
 face on his hand in agitated thought . thus run his mother 's letter : 

 MY DEAR BOY , - how could you ! do it slyly ! ! unknown to your own mother ! ! 
 I could not believe it of you ! ! ! ! take advantage of my confidence 
 in show you the letter of your father 's cousin , to write to 
 himself - clandestinely ! - you , who I think have such an open character , 
 and who ought to appreciate mine . every one who know I say I be a 
 woman in ten thousand , - not for beauty and talent   though I have have my 
 admirer for they too , but for GOODNESS I as a wife and mother , I may 
 say I have be exemplary . I have sore trial with the dear captain - and 
 IMMENSE temptation . but he say on his death - bed , " Jessica , you be 
 an angel . " and I have have offer since , - IMMENSE offer , - but I devote 
 myself to my child , as you know . and what I have put up with , let 
 the first floor , nobody can tell ; and only a widow 's pension , - go 
 before a magistrate to get it pay ! and to think my own child , for whom 
 I have bear so much , should behave so cruelly to I ! clandestine ! that 
 be that which stab I . Mrs. Inman find I cry , and say , " what be 
 the matter ? - you who be such an angel , cry like a baby ! " and I could 
 not help say , " ' t be the serpent 's tooth , Mrs. L " what you write 
 to your benefactor   and I have hop patron   I do not   care to guess ; 
 something very rude and imprudent it must be , judge by the few line 
 he address to I . I do not   mind copy they for you to read . all my 
 act be aboveboard , as often and often Captain H. use to say , " your 
 heart be in a glass case , Jessica ; " and so it be ! but my son keep his 
 under lock and key . 

 " Madam   this be what he write to I , your son have think fit to 
 infringe the condition upon which I agree to assist you on his behalf . 
 I enclose a reply to himself , which I beg you will give to his own hand 
 without break the seal . since it do not seem to you indiscreet to 
 communicate to a boy of his year letter write solely to yourself , 
 you can not blame I if I take your imply estimate of his capacity to 
 judge for himself of the nature of a correspondence , and of the view 
 and temper of , madam , your very obedient servant . " and that be all to I . 

 I send his letter to you , - seal unbroken . I conclude he have do with 
 you forever , and your career be lose ! but if it be so , oh , my poor , poor 
 child I at that thought I have not the heart to scold you far . if it 
 be so , come home to I , and I will work and slave for you , and you shall 
 keep up your head and be a gentleman still , as you be , every inch of 
 you . do not   mind what I have   say at the beginning , dear : do not   you 
 know I be hasty ; and I be hurt . but you could not mean to be sly and 
 underhand : ' twa only your high spirit , and it be my fault ; I should 
 not have show you the letter . I hope you be well , and have quite lose 
 that nasty cough , and that Mr. Vance treat you with proper respect . I 
 think he rather too push and familiar , though a pleasant young man 
 on the whole . but , after all , he be only a painter Bless you , my child , 
 and do not   have secret again from your poor mother . 

  JESSICA HAUGHTON . 


 the enclose letter be as follow : - 

  LIONEL HAUGHTON , - some man might be displease at receive such a 
  letter as you have address to I ; I be not . at your year , and 
  under the same circumstance , I might have write a letter much in 
  the same spirit . relieve your mind : as yet you owe I no 
  obligation ; you have only receive back a debt due to you . my 
  father be poor ; your grandfather , Robert Haughton , assist he in 
  the cost of my education . I have assist your father 's son ; we be 
  quit . before , however , we decide on have do with each other 
  for the future , I suggest to you to pay I a short visit . probably 
  I shall not like you , nor you I . but we be both gentleman , and 
  need not show dislike too coarsely . if you decide on come , come 
  at once , or possibly you may not find I here . if you refuse , I 
  shall have a poor opinion of your sense and temper , and in a week I 
  shall have forget your existence . I ought to add that your 
  father and I be once warm friend , and that by descent I be the 
  head not only of my own race , which end with I , but of the 
  Haughton family , of which , though your line assume the name , it be 
  but a young branch . nowadays young man be probably not bring 
  up to care for these thing : I be . your , 

  GUY HAUGHTON DARRELL . 

  MANOR HOUSE , FAWLEY . 

 Sophy pick up the fallen letter , place they on Lionel 's lap , and 
 look into his face wistfully . he smile , resume his mother 's epistle , 
 and read the concluding passage , which he have before omit . their 
 sudden turn from reproof to tenderness melt he . he begin to feel that 
 his mother have a right to blame he for an act of concealment . still she 
 never would have consent to his writing such a letter ; and have that 
 letter be attend with so ill a result ? again he read Mr. Darrell 's 
 blunt but not offensive line . his pride be soothe : why should he not 
 now love his father 's friend ? he rise briskly , pay for the fruit , and 
 go his way back to the boat with Sophy . as his oar cut the wave he 
 talk gayly , but he cease to interrogate Sophy on her past . energetic , 
 sanguine , ambitious , his own future enter now into his thought . 
 still , when the sun sink as the inn come partially into view from the 
 winding of the bank and the fringe of the willow , his mind again 
 settle on the patient , quiet little girl , who have not venture to ask 
 he one question in return for all he have put so unceremoniously to she . 
 indeed , she be silently muse over word he have inconsiderately let 
 fall , - " what I hate to think you have ever stoop to perform . " little 
 could Lionel guess the unquiet thought which those word might 
 hereafter call forth from the brood deepening meditation of lonely 
 childhood ! at length say the boy abruptly , as he have say once before , 

 " I wish , Sophy , you be my sister . " he add in a sadden tone , " I 
 never have a sister : I have so long for one ! however , surely we shall 
 meet again . you go to - morrow so must I. " 

 Sophy 's tear flow softly , noiselessly . 

 " cheer up , lady - bird , I wish you like I half as much as I like you ! " 

 " I do like you : oh , so much ! " cry Soppy , passionately . " well , then , 
 you can write , you say ? " 

 " a little . " 

 " you shall write to I now and then , and I to you . I will talk to your 
 grandfather about it . ah , there he be , surely ! " the boat now run into 
 the shelve creek , and by the honeysuckle arbour stand Gentleman Waife , 
 lean on his stick . 

 " you be late , " say the actor , as they land , and Sophy spring into 
 his arm . " I begin to be uneasy , and come here to inquire after you . you 
 have not catch cold , child ? " 

 SOPHY . - " oh , no . " 

 LIONEL . - " she be the good of child . pray , come into the inn , Mr. 
 Waife ; no toddy , but some refreshment . " 

 WAIFE . - " I thank you , - no , sir ; I wish to get home at once . I walk 
 slowly ; it will be dark soon . " 

 Lionel try in vain to detain he . there be a certain change in Mr. 
 Waife 's manner to he : it be much more distant ; it be even pettish , 
 if not surly . Lionel could not account for it ; think it mere whim 
 at first : but as he walk part of the way back with they towards the 
 village , this asperity continue , nay increase . Lionel be hurt ; he 
 arrest his step . 

 " I see you wish to have your grandchild to yourself now . may I call 
 early to - morrow ? Sophy will tell you that I hope we may not altogether 
 lose sight of each other . I will give you my address when I call . " 

 " what time to - morrow , sir ? " 

 " about nine . " 

 Waife bow his head and walk on , but Sophy look back towards her 
 boy friend , sorrowfully , gratefully ; twilight in the sky that have be 
 so sunny , - twilight in her face that have be so glad ! she look back 
 once , twice , thrice , as Lionel halt on the road and kiss his hand . 
 the third time Waife say with unwonted crossness , - 

 " enough of that , Sophy ; look after young man be not proper ! what do 
 he mean about ' see each other , and give I his address ' ? " 

 " he wish I to write to he sometimes and he would write to I . " 

 Waife 's brow contract ; but if , in the excess of grandfatherly 
 caution , he could have suppose that the bright - hearted boy of seventeen 
 meditate ulterior ill to that fairy child in such a scheme for 
 correspondence , he must have be in his dotage , and he have not hitherto 
 evince any sign of that . 

 Farewell , pretty Sophy ! the evening star shin upon yon elm - tree that 
 hide thee from view . fading - fading grow the summer landscape ; fade 
 already from the landscape thy gentle image ! so end a holiday in life . 
 Hallow it , Sophy ; hallow it , Lionel ! Life 's holiday be not too many ! 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

  by this chapter it appeareth that he who set out on a career can 
  scarcely expect to walk in perfect comfort , if he exchange his own 
  thick - sole shoe for dress - boot which be make for another man 's 
  measure , and that the say boot may not the less pinch for be 
  brilliantly varnish . - it also showeth , for the instruction of Men 
  and States , the connection between democratic opinion and wound 
  self - love ; so that , if some liberal statesman desire to rouse 
  against an aristocracy the class just below it , he have only to 
  persuade a fine lady to be exceedingly civil " to that sort of 
  people . " 

 Vance , return late at night , find his friend still up in the little 
 parlour , the window open , pace the floor with restless stride , 
 stop now and then to look at the moon upon the river . 

 " such a day as I have have ! and twelve shilling for the fly , ' pike not 
 include , " say Vance , much out of humour - 

  " ' I fly from plate , I fly from pomp , 

 I fly from falsehood 's specious grin ; ' I forget the third line . I know 
 the last be - " 

  ' to find my welcome at an inn . ' 

 you be silent : I annoy you by go - could not help it - pity I , and 
 lock up your pride . " 

 " no , my dear Vance , I be hurt for a moment , but that be long since 
 over ! " 

 " still you seem to have something on your mind , " say Vance , who have now 
 finish read his letter , light his cigar , and be lean against 
 the window as the boy continue to walk to and fro . 

 " that be true : I have . I should like your advice . read that letter . 
 ought I to go ? would it look mercenary , grasp ? you know what I mean . " 

 Vance approach the candle and take the letter . he glance first at 
 the signature . " Darrell , " he exclaim . " oh , it be so , then ! " he read 
 with great attention , put down the letter , and shake Lionel by the hand . 
 " I congratulate you : all be settle as it should be . go ? of course : you 
 would be an ill - mannered lout if you do not . be it far from hence must 
 you return to town first ? " 

 lionel . - " no , I find I can get across the country , - two hour by the 
 railway . there be a station at the town which bear the post - mark of the 
 letter . I shall make for that , if you advise it . " 

 " you know I should advise it , or you would not have torture your 
 intellect by those research into Bradshaw . " 

 " shrewdly say , " answer Lionel , laugh ; " but I wish for your 
 sanction of my crude impression . " 

 " you never tell I your cousin 's name be Darrell : not that I should 
 have be much wise if you have ; but , thunder and lightning , Lionel ! do 
 you know that your cousin Darrell be a famous man ? " 

 lionel . - " Famous ! - nonsense . I suppose he be a good lawyer , for I have 
 hear my mother say , with a sort of contempt , that he have make a great 
 fortune at the bar . " 

 VANCE . - " but he be in Parliament . " 

 LIONEL . - " be he ? I do not know . " 

 VANCE . - " and this be senatorial fame ! you never hear your schoolfellow 
 talk of Mr. Darrell ? - they would not have know his name if you have 
 boast of it ? " 

 lionel . - " certainly not . " 

 VANCE . - " would your schoolfellow have know the name of Wilkie , of 
 Landseer , of Turner , Maclise ? I speak of painter . " 

 LIONEL . - " I should think so , indeed . " 

 VANCE   soliloquize . - " and yet her serene sublimity - ship , Lady Selina 
 Vipont , say to I with divine compassion , ' not in the way of your 
 delightful art to know such man as Mr. Darrell ! ' oh , as if I do not see 
 through it , too , when she say , a propos of my jean cap and velveteen 
 jacket , ' what matter how you dress ? every one know who you be ! ' 
 would she have say that to the earl of Dunder , or even to Sir Gregory 
 Stollhead ? no . I be the painter Frank Vance , - nothing more nor less ; and 
 if I stand on my head in a check shirt and a sky - colour apron , Lady 
 Selina Vipont would kindly murmur , ' only Frank Vance the painter : what 
 do it signify ? ' aha ! - and they think to put I to use , puppet and lay 
 figure ! it be I who put they to use ! Hark ye , Lionel , you be near 
 akin to these fine folk than I know of . promise I one thing : you may 
 become of their set , by right of your famous Mr. Darrell ; if ever you 
 hear an artist , musician , scribbler , no matter what , ridicule as a 
 tuft - hunter , - seek the great , and so forth , - before you join in the 
 laugh , ask some great man 's son , with a pedigree that date from the 
 Ark , ' be you not a toad - eater too ? do you want political influence ; do 
 you stand contested election ; do you curry and fawn upon greasy Sam 
 the butcher and grimy Tom the blacksmith for a vote ? why ? useful to your 
 career , necessary to your ambition ? aha ! be it mean to curry and fawn 
 upon white - handed woman and elegant coxcomb ? tut , tut ! useful to 
 a career , necessary to ambition ! ' " Vance pause , out of breath . the 
 spoil darling of the circle , - he , to talk such republican rubbish ! 
 certainly he must have take his two guineas ' worth out of those light 
 wine . nothing so treacherous ! they inflame the brain like fire , while 
 melt on the palate like ice . all inhabitant of lightwine country 
 be quarrelsome and democratic . 

 lionel   astounded . - " no one , I be sure , could have mean to call you a 
 tuft - hunter ; of course , every one know that a great painter - " 

 VANCE . - " date from Michael Angelo , if not from Zeuxis ! common 
 individual trace their pedigree from their own father ! the child of 
 art from art 's founder ! " 

 oh , Vance , Vance , you be certainly drunk ! if that come from dining 
 with fine people at the Star and Garter , you would be a happy man and 
 as good a painter if your toddy be never sip save in honeysuckle 
 arbour . 

 " but , " say Lionel , bewildered , and strive to turn his friend 's 
 thought , " what have all this to do with Mr. Darrell ? " 

 VANCE . - " Mr. Darrell might have be one of the first man in the 
 kingdom . Lady Selina Vipout say so , and she be relate , I believe , to 
 every member in the Cabinet . Mr. Darrell can push you in life , and make 
 your fortune , without any great trouble on your own part . bless your 
 star , and rejoice that you be not a painter ! " 

 Lionel fling his arm round the artist 's broad breast . " vance , you be 
 cruel ! " it be his turn to console the painter , as the painter have three 
 night before a propos of the same Mr. Darrell console he . Vance 
 gradually sober down , and the young man walk forth in the moonlight . 
 and the eternal star have the same kind look for Vance as they have 
 vouchsafe to Lionel . 

 " when do you start ? " ask the painter , as they mount the stair to 
 bed . 

 " to - morrow evening . I miss the early train , for I must call first and 
 take leave of Sophy . I hope I may see she again in after life . " 

 " and I hope , for your sake , that if so , she may not be in the same 
 coloured print , with Lady Selina Vipont 's eyeglass upon she ! " 

 " what ! " say Lionel , laughing ; " be Lady Selina Vipont so formidably 
 rude ? " 

 " Rude ! nobody be rude in that delightful set . Lady Selina Vipont be 
 excruciatingly - civil . " 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

  be devote exclusively to a reflection , not inapposite to the 
  event in this history nor to those in any other which chronicle 
  the life of man . 

 there be one warning lesson in life which few of we have not receive , 
 and no book that I can call to memory have note down with an adequate 
 emphasis . it be this : " beware of part ! " the true sadness be not in 
 the pain of the parting , it be in the when and the how you be to meet 
 again with the face about to vanish from your view ! from the passionate 
 farewell to the woman who have your heart in her keeping , to the cordial 
 good - by exchange with pleasant companion at a watering - place , a 
 country - house , or the close of a festive day 's blithe and careless 
 excursion , - a cord , strong or weak , be snap asunder in every 
 parting , and Time 's busy finger be not practise in re - splicing break 
 tie . meet again you may ; will it be in the same way ? - with the same 
 sympathy ? - with the same sentiment ? will the soul , hurry on in 
 diverse path , unite once more , as if the interval have be a dream ? 
 rarely , rarely ! have you not , after even a year , even a month 's absence , 
 return to the same place , find the same group reassemble , and yet 
 sigh to yourself , " but where be the charm that once breathe from the 
 spot , and once smile from the face ? " a poet have say , " eternity itself 
 can not restore the loss strike from the minute . " be you happy in the 
 spot on which you tarry with the person whose voice be now melodious 
 to your ear ? beware of parting ; or , if part you must , say not in 
 insolent defiance to Time and Destiny , " what matter ! - we shall soon 
 meet again . " 

 Alas , and alas ! when we think of the lip which murmur , " soon meet 
 again , " and remember how in heart , soul , and think , we stand forever 
 divide the one from the other , when , once more face to face , we each 
 inly exclaim , " Met again ! " 

 the air that we breathe make the medium through which sound be 
 convey ; be the instrument unchanged , be the force which be apply to 
 it the same , still the air that thou se not , the air to thy ear give 
 the music . 

 ring a bell underneath an exhausted receiver , thou wilt scarce hear the 
 sound ; give the bell due vibration by free air in warm daylight , or sink 
 it down to the heart of the ocean , where the air , all compress , fill 
 the vessel around it , ' and the chime , hear afar , start thy soul , 
 check thy footstep , unto deep call the deep , - a voice from the ocean 
 be bear to thy soul . 

 where then the change , when thou sayest , " Lo , the same metal , - why so 
 faint - hear the ringing ? " ask the air that thou se not , or above 
 thee in sky , or below thee in ocean . art thou sure that the bell , so 
 faint - heard , be not strike underneath an exhausted receiver ? 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

  the wandering inclination of nomad tribe not to be account for 
  on the principle of action peculiar to civilized man , who be 
  accustomed to live in good house and able to pay the income tax . - 
  when the money that once belong to a man civilized vanishe into 
  the pocket of a nomad , neither lawful art nor occult science can , 
  with certainty , discover what he will do with it . - Mr. Vance 
  narrowly escape well - merit punishment from the nail of the 
  British Fair - Lionel Haughton , in the temerity of youth , brave the 
  danger of a British Railway . 

 the morning be dull and overcast , rain gathering in the air , when Vance 
 and Lionel walk to Waife 's lodging . as Lionel place his hand on the 
 knocker of the private door , the Cobbler , at his place by the window in 
 the stall beside , glance towards he , and shake his head . 

 " no use knock , gentleman . will you kindly step in ? - this way . " 

 " do you mean that your lodger be out ? " ask Vance . 

 " Gone ! " say the Cobbler , thrust his awl with great vehemence through 
 the leather destine to the repair of a ploughman 's boot . 

 " gone - for good ! " cry Lionel ; " you can not mean it . I call by 
 appointment . " 

 " sorry , sir , for your trouble . stop a bit ; I have a letter here for 
 you . " the Cobbler dive into a drawer , and from a medley of nail and 
 thong draw forth a letter address to L. Haughton , Esq . 

 " be this from Waife ? how on earth do he know my surname ? you never 
 mention it , Vance ? " 

 " not that I remember . but you say you find he at the inn , and 
 they know it there . it be on the brass - plate of your knapsack . no 
 matter , - what do he say ? " and Vance look over his friend 's shoulder 
 and read . 

  SIR , - I most respectfully thank you for your condescending kindness 
  to I and my grandchild ; and your friend , for his timely and 
  generous aid . you will pardon I that the necessity which know no 
  law oblige I to leave this place some hour before the time of 
  your propose visit . my grandchild say you intend to ask she 
  sometimes to write to you . excuse I , sir - on reflection , you will 
  perceive how different your way of life be from those which she 
  must tread with I . you see before you a man who - but I forget ; you 
  see he no more , and probably never will . 

  your most humble and most oblige , obedient servant , 

  W. W. 

 VANCE . - " who never more may trouble you - trouble you ! where have they 
 go ? " 

 COBBLER . - " do not   know ; would you like to take a peep in the 
 crystal - perhaps you have   the gift , unbeknown ? " 

 VANCE . - " not i - bah ! come away , Lionel . " 

 " do not sophy even leave any message for I ? " ask the boy , 
 sorrowfully . 

 " to be sure she do ; I forgot - no , not exactly a message , but this - I be 
 to be sure to give it to you . " and out of his miscellaneous receptacle 
 the Cobbler extract a little book . Vance look and laugh , - " The 
 Butterflies ' Ball and the Grasshoppers ' Feast . " 

 Lionel do not share the laugh . he pluck the book to himself , and read 
 on the fly - leaf , in a child 's irregular scrawl , blister , too , with the 
 unmistakable trace of fall tear , these word : - 

  do not scorn it . I have nothing else I can think of which be all 
  Mine . Miss Jane Burton give it I for be Goode . Grandfather 
  say you be too high for we , and that I shall not see you More ; but 
  I shall never forget how kind you be , never - never . Sophy . 

 say the Cobbler , his awl upright in the hand which rest on his knee , 
 " what a plague do the ' stronomer discover Herschel for ? you see , sir , " 
 address Vance , " thing odd and strange all come along o ' Herschel . " 

 " what ! - Sir John ? " 

 " no , the star he poke out . he be a awful star for female ! hat them 
 like poison ! I suspect he be be worrite hisself into her nativity , 
 for I get out from she the year , month , and day she be bear , hour 
 unbeknown , but , calkeiating by noon , Herschel be dead agin she in the 
 Third and Ninth House , - Voyages , Travels , Letters , News , Church Matters , 
 and such like . but it will all come right after he be transit . she 
 Jupiter must be good . but I only hope , " add the Cobbler , solemnly , 
 " that they will not   go a - discover any more star . the world do a deal 
 well without the new one , and they do talk of a Neptune - as bad as 
 Saturn ! " 

 " and this be the last of she ! " say Lionel , sadly , put the book into 
 his breast - pocket . " Heaven shield she wherever she go ! " 

 VANCE . - " do not   you think Waife and the poor little girl will come back 
 again ? " 

 COBBLER . - " P'raps ; I know he be look hard into the county map at the 
 stationer 's over the way ; that seem as if he do not mean to go very 
 far . p'rap he may come back . " 

 VANCE . - " do he take all his good with he ? " 

 COBBLER . - " Barrin ' an old box , - nothing in it , I expect , but theatre 
 rubbish , - play - book , paint , an old wig , and sick like . he have good 
 clothe , - always have ; and so have she , but they do not   make more than a 
 bundle . " 

 VANCE . " but surely you must know what the old fellow 's project be . he 
 have get from I a great sum : what will he do with it ? " 

 COBBLER . - " just what have be a - bother I . what will he do with it ? 
 I cast a figure to know ; could not make it out . strange sign in Twelfth 
 House . enemy and big animal . well , well , he be a marbellous man , and 
 if he warn't   a misbeliever in the crystal , I should say he be under 
 Herschel ; for you see , sir "   lay hold of Vance 's button , as he see 
 that gentleman turn to escape , - " you see Herschel , though he be a 
 sinister chap eno ' , specially in affair connect with t ' other sex , 
 dispose the native to dive into the mystery of natur ' . I be a Herschel 
 man , out and outer ; bear in March , and - " 

 " as mad as its hare , " mutter Vance , wrench his button from the 
 Cobbler 's grasp , and impatiently stride off . but he do not effect his 
 escape so easily , for , close at hand , just at the corner of the lane , 
 a female group , head by Merle 's gaunt housekeeper , have be silently 
 collect from the moment the two friend have pause at the Cobbler 's 
 door . and this petticoate divan suddenly close round the painter , 
 one pull he by the sleeve , another by the jacket , and a third , with 
 a nose upon which somebody have sit in early infancy , whisper , " please , 
 sir , take my picter fust . " 

 Vance star aghast , - " your picture , you drab ! " here another model of 
 rustic charm , who might have furnish an ideal for the fat scullion in 
 " Tristram Shandy , " bob a courtesy put in her rival claim . 

 " Sir , if you do not   objex to come into the kitching after the family 
 have go to bed , I do not   care if I let you make a minnytur of I for 
 two pound . " 

 " miniature of you , porpoise ! " 

 " polly , sir , not Porpus , - ax pardon . I shall clean myself , and I have a 
 butyful new cap , - Honeytun , and - " 

 " let the gentleman go , will you ? " say a third ; " I be surprised at ye , 
 polly . the kitching , unbeknown ! Sir , I be in the nussery ; yes , sir ; and 
 Alissus say you may take I any time , purvide you will take the 
 babby , in the back parlour ; yes , sir , No . 5 in the High Street . Mrs. 
 Spratt , - yes , sir . Babby have have the small - pox ; in case you be a married 
 gentleman with a family ; quite safe there ; yes , sir . " 

 Vance could endure no more , and , forgetful of that gallantry which 
 should never desert the male sex , burst through the phalanx with an 
 anathema , blacken alike the beauty and the virtue of those on whom it 
 fall , that would have justify a cry of shame from every manly bosom , 
 and which at once change into shrill wrath the supplicatory tone with 
 which he have be hitherto address . down the street he hurry and 
 down the street follow the insult fair . " Hiss - hiss - no gentleman , 
 no gentleman ! aha - skulk off - do - low blaggurd ! " shriek Polly . from 
 their counter shop - folk rush to their door . Stray dog , excited 
 by the clamour , run wildly after the fugitive man , yelp " in madding 
 bray " ! Vance , fear to be claw by the female if he merely walk , 
 sure to be bite by the dog if he run , amble on , strove to look 
 compose , and carry his nose high in its native air , till , clear the 
 street , he see a hedgerow to the right ; leap it with an agility which 
 no stimulus less preternatural than that of self - preservation could have 
 give to his limb , and then shoot off like an arrow , and do not 
 stop , till , out of breath , he drop upon the bench in the sheltering 
 honeysuckle arbour . here he be still fan himself with his cap , and 
 mutter unmentionable expletive , when he be join by Lionel , who 
 have tarry behind to talk more about Sophy to the Cobbler , and 
 who , unconscious that the din which smite his ear be cause by his 
 ill - star friend , have be entice to go upstairs and look after Sophy 
 in the crystal , - vainly . when Vance have recite his misadventure , and 
 Lionel have sufficiently condole with he , it become time for the latter 
 to pay his share of the bill , pack up his knapsack , and start for the 
 train . now , the station could only be reach by penetrate the heart 
 of the village , and Vance swear that he have have enough of that . " peste ! " 
 say he ; " I should pass right before no . 5 in the High Street , and the 
 nuss and the babby will be there on the threshold , like Virgil 's picture 
 of the infernal region , 

  " ' infantumque anima ; flente in limine primo . ' 

 we will take leave of each other here . I shall go by the boat to 
 Chertsey whenever I shall have sufficiently recover my shaken nerve . 
 there be one or two picturesque spot to be see in that neighbourhood . 
 in a few day I shall be in town ! write to I there , and tell I how you 
 get on . shake hand , and Heaven speed you . but , ah ! now you have pay 
 your moiety of the bill , have you enough leave for the train ? " 

 " oh , yes , the fare be but a few shilling ; but , to be sure , a fly to 
 Fawley ? I ought not to go on foot "   proudly ; " and , too , suppose he 
 affront I , and I have to leave his house suddenly ? may I borrow a 
 sovereign ? my mother will call and repay it . " 

 VANCE   magnificently . - " there it be , and not much more leave in my 
 purse , - that curse Star and Garter ! and those three pound ! " 

 lionel   sigh . - " which be so well spend ! before you sell that 
 picture , do let I make a copy . " 

 VANCE . - " well take a model of your own . village full of they ; you 
 could bargain with a porpoise for half the money which I be dupe into 
 squander away on a chit ! but do not   look so grave ; you may copy I if 
 you can ! " 

 " time to start , and must walk brisk , sir , " say the jolly landlord , 
 look in . 

 " good - by , good - by . " 

 and so depart Lionel Haughton upon an emprise as momentous to that 
 youth - errant as Perilous Bridge or Dragon 's Cave could have be to 
 knight - errant of old . 

 " before we decide on have do with each other , a short visit , " - so 
 run the challenge from he who have everything to give unto he who 
 have everything to gain . and how do Lionel Haughton , the ambitious 
 and aspire , contemplate the venture in which success would admit he 
 within the gate of the golden Carduel an equal in the list with the 
 son of paladin , or throw he back to the arm of the widow who let a 
 first floor in the back street of Pimlico ? truth to say , as he stride 
 musingly towards the station for start , where the smoke - cloud now 
 curl from the wheel - track of iron , truth to say , the anxious doubt 
 which disturb he be not that which his friend might have feel on 
 his behalf . in word , it would have shape itself thus , - " where be 
 that poor little Sophy ! and what will become of she - what ? " but when , 
 launch on the journey , hurry on to its goal , the thought of the 
 ordeal before he force itself on his mind , he mutter inly to 
 himself , " do with each other ; let it be as he please , so that I 
 do not fawn on his pleasure . well a million time enter life as a 
 penniless gentleman , who must work his way up like a man , than as one 
 who creep on his knee into fortune , sham birthright of gentleman or 
 soil honour of man . " therefore take into account the poor cousin 's 
 vigilant pride on the qui vive for offence , and the rich cousin 's 
 temper   as judge by his letter   rude enough to resent it , we must own 
 that if Lionel Haughton have at this moment what be commonly call " a 
 chance , " the question as yet be not , what be that chance ? but , what 
 will he do with it ? and as the reader advance in this history , he will 
 acknowledge that there be few question in this world so frequently 
 agitated , to which the solution be more important to each puzzle mortal 
 than that upon which start every sage 's discovery , every novelist 's 
 plot , - that which apply to MAN 'S LIFE , from its first sleep in the 
 cradle , " what will he do with it ? " 




 BOOK II . 




 CHAPTER I. 

  Primitive character of the country in certain district of Great 
  Britain . - connection between the feature of surround scenery and 
  the mental and moral inclination of man , after the fashion of all 
  sound ethnological historian . - a charioteer , to whom an experience 
  of british law suggest an ingenious mode of arrest the progress 
  of Roman Papacy , carry Lionel Haughton and his fortune to a place 
  which allow of description and invite repose . 

 in safety , but with naught else rare enough , in a railway train , to 
 deserve commemoration , Lionel reach the station to which he be bind . 
 he there inquire the distance to Fawley Manor House ; it be five mile . 
 he order a fly , and be soon wheel briskly along a rough parish 
 road , through a country strongly contrast the gay river scenery he 
 have so lately quit , - quite as English , but rather the England of a 
 former race than that which spread round our own generation like one 
 vast suburb of garden - ground and villa . here , nor village nor spire , 
 nor porter 's lodge come in sight . Rare even be the cornfield ; wide 
 space of unenclosed common open , solitary and primitive , on the road , 
 border by large wood , chiefly of beech , close the horizon with 
 ridge of undulate green . in such an England , Knights Templars might 
 have wend their way to scatter monastery , or fugitive partisan in 
 the bloody war of the Roses have find shelter under leafy covert . 

 the scene have its romance , its beauty - half savage , half gentle - lead 
 perforce the mind of any cultivate and imaginative gazer far back from 
 the present day , wake up long - forget passage from old poet . the 
 stillness of such waste of sward , such deep of woodland , induce the 
 nurture of revery , gravely soft and lulling . there , ambition might give 
 rest to the wheel of Ixion , Avarice to the sieve of the Danaids ; there , 
 disappoint Love might muse on the brevity of all human passion , and 
 count over the torture heart that have find peace in holy meditation , 
 or be now still under grassy knoll . see where , at the crossing of 
 three road upon the waste , the landscape suddenly unfold , an upland 
 in the distance , and on the upland a building , the first sign of social 
 man . what be the building ? only a silence windmill , the sail dark and 
 sharp against the dull leaden sky . 

 Lionel touch the driver , - " be we yet on Mr. Darrell 's property ? " of 
 the extent of that property he have involuntarily conceive a vast idea . 

 " Lord , sir , no ; we be two mile from Squire Darrell 's . he han't   much 
 property to speak of hereabout . but he buy a good bit o ' land , too , 
 some year ago , ten or twelve mile t ' other side o ' the county . first 
 time you be go to Fawley , sir ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " ah ! I do not   mind see you afore ; and I should have know you if I 
 have , for it be seldom indeed I have a fare to Fawley old Manor House . it 
 must be , I take it , four or five year ago sin ' I wor there with a gent , 
 and he go away while I wor feed the horse ; do I out o ' my back 
 fare . what bisness have he to walk when he come in my fly ? Shabby . " 

 " Mr. Darrell live very retire , then ? see few person ? " " s'pose so . I 
 never seed he as I know on ; see'd two o ' his hosse though , - rare good 
 un ; " and the driver whip on his own horse , take to whistling , and 
 Lionel ask no more . 

 at length the chaise stop at a carriage gate , recede from the 
 road , and deeply shadow by venerable tree , - no lodge . the driver , 
 dismounting , open the gate . 

 " be this the place ? " 

 the driver nod assent , remount , and drive on rapidly through what 
 night by courtesy he call a park . the enclosure be indeed little 
 beyond that of a good - sized paddock ; its boundary be visible on 
 every side : but swell upland cover with massy foliage slop down 
 to its wild , irregular turf soil , - soil poor for pasturage , but pleasant 
 to the eye ; with dell and dingle , bosk of fantastic pollard ; dot 
 oak of vast growth ; here and there a weird hollow thorn - tree ; patch 
 of fern and gorse . Hoarse and loud caw the rook ; and deep , deep as 
 from the innermost core of the lovely woodland come the mellow note of 
 the cuckoo . a few moment more a wind of the road bring the house in 
 sight . at its rear lay a piece of water , scarcely large enough to be 
 style a lake ; too wind in its shaggy bank , its end too conceal 
 by tree and islet , to be call by the dull name of pond . such as it be 
 it arrest the eye before the gaze turn towards the house : it have an 
 air of tranquillity so sequester , so solemn . a lively man of the world 
 would have be seize with spleen at the first glimpse of it ; but he 
 who have know some great grief , some anxious care , would have drink 
 the calm into his weary soul like an anodyne . the house , - small , low , 
 ancient , about the date of Edward VI . , before the stately architecture 
 of Elizabeth . few house in England so old , indeed , as Fawley Manor 
 House . a vast weight of roof , with high gable ; window on the upper 
 story project far over the low part ; a cover porch with a coat 
 of half - obliterate arm deep panel over the oak door . nothing grand , 
 yet all how venerable ! but what be this ? close beside the old , quiet , 
 unassume Manor House rise the skeleton of a superb and costly 
 pile , - a palace uncomplete , and the work evidently suspend , - perhaps 
 long since , perhaps now forever . no busy workman nor animate 
 scaffold . the perforated battlement roof over with visible 
 haste , - here with slate , there with tile ; the Elizabethan mullion 
 casement unglazed ; some roughly board across , - some with star 
 forlorn aperture , that show floorless chamber , for wind to whistle 
 through and rat to tenant . weed and long grass be grow over 
 block of stone that lie at hand . a wallflower have force itself into 
 root on the sill of a giant oriel . the effect be startling . a fabric 
 which he who conceive it must have found for posterity , - so solid 
 its masonry , so thick its wall , - and thus abruptly leave to moulder ; 
 a palace construct for the reception of crowd guest , the pomp 
 of stately revel , abandon to owl and bat . and the homely old house 
 beside it , which that lordly hall be doubtless design to replace , 
 look so safe and tranquil at the baffled presumption of its spectral 
 neighbour . 

 the driver have ring the bell , and now turn back to the chaise meet 
 Lionel 's inquire eye , and say , " yes ; Squire Darrell begin to build 
 that - many year ago - when I be a boy . I heerd say it be to be the 
 show - house of the whole county . be stop these ten or a dozen 
 year . " 

 " why ? - do you know ? " 

 " no one know . squire be a laryer , I b'leve : perhaps he put it into 
 Chancery . my wife 's grandfather be put into Chancery jist as he be 
 grow up , and never grow afterwards : never get out o ' it ; nout ever 
 do . there be our churchwarden come to I with a petition to sign agin 
 the Pope . say I , ' that old Pope be always in trouble : what be he bin 
 do now ? ' say he , ' spread ! he be a - get into Parlyment , and he be now 
 get a colledge , and we pay for it . I do not   know how to stop he . ' 
 say I , ' put the Pope into Chancery , along with wife 's grandfather , and 
 he will never spread agin . ' " 

 the driver have thus just disposed of the Papacy , when an elderly servant 
 out of livery open the door . Lionel spring from the chaise , and pause 
 in some confusion : for then , for the first time , there dart across 
 he the idea that he have never write to announce his acceptance of Mr. 
 Darrell 's invitation ; that he ought to have do so ; that he might not 
 be expect . meanwhile the servant survey he with some surprise . " Mr. 
 Darrell ? " hesitate Lionel , inquiringly . 

 " not at home , sir , " reply the man , as if Lionel 's business be over , 
 and he have only to re - enter his chaise . the boy be naturally rather 
 bold than shy , and he say , with a certain assure air , " my name be 
 Haughton . I come here on Mr. Darrell 's invitation . " 

 the servant 's face change in a moment ; he bow respectfully . " I beg 
 pardon , sir . I will look for my master ; he be somewhere on the ground . " 
 the servant then approach the fly , take out the knapsack , and , 
 observe Lionel have his purse in his hand , say , " allow I to save you 
 that trouble , sir . driver , round to the stable - yard . " step back into 
 the house , the servant throw open a door to the left , on entrance , and 
 advance a chair . " if you will wait here a moment , sir , I will seek for 
 my master . " 




 CHAPTER II . 

 Guy Darrell - and Stilled Life . 

 the room in which Lionel now find himself be singularly quaint . an 
 antiquarian or architect would have discover at a glance that at some 
 period it have form part of the entrance - hall ; and when , in Elizabeth 's 
 or James the First 's day , the refinement in manner begin to penetrate 
 from baronial mansion to the home of the gentry , and the entrance - hall 
 cease to be the common refectory of the owner and his dependant , this 
 apartment have be screen off by perforated panel , which for the 
 sake of warmth and comfort have be fill up into solid wainscot by a 
 succeed generation . thus one side of the room be richly carve with 
 geometrical design and arabesque pilaster , while the other three side 
 be in small simple panel , with a deep fantastic frieze in plaster , 
 depict a deer - chase in relief and running be tween woodwork and 
 ceiling . the ceiling itself be relieve by long pendant without any 
 apparent meaning , and by the crest of the Darrells , - a heron , wreathe 
 round with the family motto , " Ardua petit Ardea . " it be a dining - room , 
 as be show by the character of the furniture . but there be no attempt 
 on the part of the present owner , and there have clearly be none on 
 the part of his predecessor , to suit the furniture to the room . the 
 furniture , indeed , be of the heavy , graceless taste of George the 
 first , - cumbrous chair in walnut - tree , with a worm - eat mosaic of the 
 heron on their homely back , and a fade blue worst on their seat ; 
 a marvellously ugly sideboard to match , and on it a couple of black 
 shagreen case , the lid of which be fling open , and discover the 
 pistol - shape handle of silver knife . the mantelpiece reach to the 
 ceiling , in panel compartment , with heraldic shield , and support 
 by rude stone caryatide . on the wall be several picture , - family 
 portrait , for the name be inscribe on the frame . they vary in 
 date from the reign of Elizabeth to that of George I. a strong 
 family likeness pervade they all , - high feature , dark hair , grave 
 aspect , - save indeed one , a Sir Ralph Haughton Darrell , in a dress 
 that speak he of the holiday date of Charles II . , - all knot , lace , and 
 ribbon ; evidently the beau of the race ; and he have blue eye , a 
 blonde peruke , a careless profligate smile , and look altogether as 
 devil - I - care , rakehelly , handsome , good - for - nought , as ever swear at a 
 drawer , beat a watchman , charm a lady , terrify a husband , and hum 
 a song as he pink his man . 

 Lionel be still gaze upon the effigy of this airy cavalier when the 
 door behind he open very noiselessly , and a man of impose presence 
 stand on the threshold , - stand so still , and the carve moulding of the 
 doorway so shadow , and as it be case round his figure , that Lionel , 
 on turn quickly , might have mistake he for a portrait bring 
 into bold relief from its frame by a sudden fall of light . we hear it , 
 indeed , familiarly say that such a one be like an old picture . never 
 could it be more appositely say than of the face on which the young 
 visitor gaze , much startled and somewhat awed . not such as inferior 
 limner have paint in the portrait there , though it have something 
 in common with those family lineament , but such as might have look 
 tranquil power out of the canvas of Titian . 

 the man step forward , and the illusion pass . " I thank you , " he 
 say , hold out his hand , " for take I at my word , and answer I 
 thus in person . " he pause a moment , survey Lionel 's countenance with 
 a keen but not unkindly eye , and add softly , " very like your father . " 

 at these word Lionel involuntarily press the hand which he have take . 
 that hand do not return the pressure . it lie an instant in Lionel 's 
 warm clasp - not repel , not respond - and be then very gently 
 withdraw . 

 " do you come from London ? " 

 " no , sir ; I find your letter yesterday at Hampton Court . I have be 
 stay some day in that neighbourhood . I come on this morning : I be 
 afraid too unceremoniously ; your kind welcome reassure I there . " 

 the word be well choose and frankly say . probably they please 
 the host , for the expression of his countenance be , on the whole , 
 propitious ; but he merely incline his head with a kind of lofty 
 indifference , then , glance at his watch , he ring the bell . the servant 
 enter promptly . " let dinner be serve within an hour . " 

 " pray , sir , " say Lionel , " do not change your hour on my account . " 

 Mr. Darrell 's brow slightly contract . Lionel 's tact be in fault 
 there ; but the great man answer quietly , " all hour be the same to 
 I ; and it be strange if a host could be derange by consideration to 
 his guest , - on the first day too . be you tired ? would you like to go to 
 your room , or look out for half an hour ? the sky be clear . " 

 " I should so like to look out , sir . " 

 " this way then . " 

 Mr. Darrell , cross the hall , throw open a door opposite to that 
 by which Lionel enter , and the lake   we will so call it   lay before 
 they , - separate from the house only by a shelving gradual declivity , on 
 which be a few bed of flower , - not the most in vogue nowadays , and 
 dispose in ramble old - fashioned parterre . at one angle , a quaint and 
 dilapidate sun - dial ; at the other , a long bowling - alley , terminate 
 by one of those summer - house which the dutch taste , follow the 
 Revolution of 1688 , bring into fashion . Mr. Darrell pass down this 
 alley   no bowl there now , and observe that Lionel look curiously 
 towards the summer - house , of which the door stand open , enter it . a 
 lofty room with coved ceiling , paint with roman trophy of helm and 
 fasce , alternate with crossed fife and fiddle , paint also . 

 " amsterdam manner , " say Mr. Darrell , slightly shrug his shoulder . 
 " here a former race hear music , sing glee , and smoke from clay pipe . 
 that age soon pass , unsuited to english energy , which be not to be 
 unite with Holland phlegm ! but the view from the window - look out there . 
 I wonder whether man in wig and woman in hoop enjoy that . it be a 
 mercy they do not clip those bank into a straight canal ! " 

 the view be indeed lovely , - the water look so blue and so large and 
 so limpid , wood and curve bank reflect deep on its peaceful bosom . 

 " how Vance would enjoy this ! " cry Lionel . " it would come into a 
 picture even well than the Thames . " 

 " Vance ? who be Vance ? " 

 " the artist , - a great friend of mine . surely , sir , you have hear of he 
 or see his picture ! " 

 " himself and his picture be since my time . day tread down day for 
 the recluse , and he forget that celebrity rise with their sun , to 
 wane with their moon , 

  " ' truditur die die , 
  novaeque pergunt interire lunae ' " 

 " all sun do not set ; all moon do not wane ! " cry Lionel , with 
 blunt enthusiasm . " when Horace speak elsewhere of the julian star , he 
 compare it to a moon - ' inter igne minore ' - and surely Fame be not 
 among the orb which ' pergunt interire , ' - hasten on to perish ! " 

 " I be glad to see that you retain your recollection of Horace , " 
 say Mr. Darrell , frigidly , and without continue the allusion to 
 celebrity ; " the most charming of all poet to a man of my year , and " 
  he very dryly add   " the most useful for popular quotation to man at 
 any age . " 

 then saunter forth carelessly , he descend the slop turf , come to 
 the water - side , and throw himself at length on the grass : the wild thyme 
 which he crush send up its bruise fragrance . there , rest his face 
 on his hand , Darrell gaze along the water in abstract silence . Lionel 
 feel that he be forget ; but he be not hurt . by this time a strong 
 and admire interest for his cousin have spring up within his breast : 
 he would have find it difficult to explain why . but whosoever at that 
 moment could have see Guy Darrell 's musing countenance , or whosoever , 
 a few minute before , could have hear the very sound of his voice , 
 sweetly , clearly full ; each slow enunciation unaffectedly , mellowly 
 distinct , - make musical the homely ; roughest word , would have 
 understand and share the interest which Lionel could not explain . there 
 be live human face , which , independently of mere physical beauty , 
 charm and enthrall we more than the most perfect lineament which 
 greek sculptor ever lend to a marble face ; there be key - note in the 
 thrilling human voice , simply utter , which can haunt the heart , rouse 
 the passion , lull rampant multitude , shake into dust the throne of 
 guard king , and effect more wonder than ever yet have be work 
 by the most artful chorus or the deft quill . 

 in a few minute the swan from the farth end of the water come 
 sailing swiftly towards the bank on which darrell recline . he have 
 evidently make friend with they , and they rest their white breast 
 close on the margin , seek to claim his notice with a low hiss 
 salutation , which , it be to be hop , they change for something less 
 sibilant in that famous song with which they depart this life . 

 Darrell look up . " they come to be feed , " say he , ' smooth emblem of 
 the great social union . affection be the offspring of utility . I be 
 useful to they : they love I . " he rise , uncover , and bow to the 
 bird in mock courtesy : " friend , I have no bread to give you . " 

 LIONEL . - " let I run in for some . I would be useful too . " 

 MR . DARRELL . - " Rival ! - useful to my swan ? " 

 lionel   tenderly . - " or to you , sir . " 

 he feel as if he have say too much , and without wait for permission , 
 run indoor to find some one whom he could ask for the bread . 

 " sonless , childless , hopeless , objectless ! " say Darrell , murmuringly to 
 himself , and sink again into revery . 

 by the time Lionel return with the bread , another pet friend have 
 join the master . a tame doe have catch sight of he from her covert 
 far away , come in light bound to his side , and be push her delicate 
 nostril into his droop hand . at the sound of Lionel 's hurried step , 
 she take flight , trot off a few pace , then turn , look . 

 " I do not know you have deer here . " 

 " Deer ! - in this little paddock ! - of course not ; only that doe . Fairthorn 
 introduce she here . by the by , " continue Darrell , who be now throw 
 the bread to the swan , and have resume his careless , unmeditative 
 manner , " you be not aware that I have a brother hermit , - a companion 
 be side the swan and the doe . Dick Fairthorn be a year or two young 
 than myself , the son of my father 's bailiff . he be the clever boy at 
 his grammar - school . unluckily he take to the flute , and unfit 
 himself for the present century . he condescend , however , to act as my 
 secretary , - a fair classical scholar , play chess , be useful to I , - I 
 be useful to he . we have an affection for each other . I never forgive 
 any one who laugh at he . the half - hour bell , and you will meet he at 
 dinner . shall we come in and dress ? " 

 they enter the house ; the same man - servant be in attendance in the 
 hall . " show Mr. Haughton to his room . " Darrell incline his head - I 
 use that phrase , for the gesture be neither bow nor nod - turn down a 
 narrow passage and disappear . 

 lead up an uneven staircase of oak , black as ebony , with huge 
 balustrade , and newel - post support clumsy ball , Lionel be 
 conduct to a small chamber , modernize a century ago by a fade 
 chinese paper , and a mahogany bedstead , which take up three - fourth of 
 the space , and be crest with dingy plume , that give it the cheerful 
 look of a hearse ; and there the attendant say , " have you the key of 
 your knapsack , sir ? shall I put out your thing to dress ? " dress ! then 
 for the first time the boy remember that he have bring with he no 
 evening dress , - nay , evening dress , properly so call , he possess 
 not at all in any corner of the world . it have never yet enter into 
 his mode of existence . call to mind when you be a boy of seventeen , 
 " betwixt two age hover like a star , " and imagine Lionel 's 
 sensation . he feel his cheek burn as if he have be detect in a 
 crime . " I have no dress thing , " he say piteously ; " only a change 
 of linen , and this , " glance at the summer jacket . the servant be 
 evidently a most gentleman - like man : his native sphere that of groom of 
 the chamber . " I will mention it to Mr. Darrell ; and if you will favour 
 I with your address in London , I will send to telegraph for what you 
 want against to - morrow . " 

 " many thank , " answer Lionel , recover his presence of mind ; " I will 
 speak to Mr. Darrell myself . " 

 " there be the hot water , sir ; that be the bell . I have the honour to 
 be place at your command . " the door close , and Lionel unlock his 
 knapsack ; other trouser , other waistcoat have he , - those wear at the 
 fair , and once white . alas ! they have not since then pass to the care 
 of the laundress . other shoe , - double - sole for walk . there be no 
 help for it but to appear at dinner , attire as he have be before , in 
 his light pedestrian jacket , morning waistcoat flower with sprig , and 
 a fawn - colour nether man . could it signify much , - only two man ? could 
 the grave Mr. Darrell regard such trifle ? - yes , if they intimate want 
 of due respect . 

  " Durum ! se fit levius Patientia 
  Quicquid corrigere est nefas . " 

 on descend the stair , the same high - breed domestic be in wait to 
 show he into the library . Mr. Darrell be there already , in the simple 
 but punctilious costume of a gentleman who retain in seclusion the 
 habit customary in the world . at the first glance Lionel think he 
 see a slight cloud of displeasure on his host 's brow . he go up to 
 Mr. Darrell ingenuously , and apologize for the deficiency of his 
 itinerant wardrobe . " say the truth , " say his host ; " you think you 
 be come to an old churl , with whom ceremony be misplace . " 

 " indeed no ! " exclaim Lionel . " but - but I have so lately leave school . " 

 " your mother might have think for you . " 

 " I do not stay to consult she , indeed , sir ; I hope you be not 
 offend . " 

 " no , but let I not offend you if I take advantage of my year and our 
 relationship to remark that a young man should be careful not to let 
 himself down below the standard of his own rank . if a king could bear 
 to hear that he be only a ceremonial , a private gentleman may remember 
 that there be but a ceremonial between himself and - his hatter ! " 

 Lionel feel the colour mount his brow ; but Darrell press the 
 distasteful theme no far , and seemingly forget its purport , 
 turn his remark carelessly towards the weather . " it will be fair 
 to - morrow : there be no mist on the hill yonder . since you have a painter 
 for a friend , perhaps you yourself be a draughtsman . there be some 
 landscape effect here which Fairthorn shall point out to you . " 

 " I fear , Mr. Darrell , " say Lionel , look down , " that to - morrow I must 
 leave you . " 

 " so soon ? well , I suppose the place must be very dull . " 

 " not that - not that ; but I have offend you , and I would not repeat 
 the offence . I have not the ' ceremonial ' necessary to mark I as a 
 gentleman , - either here or at home . " 

 " so ! bold frankness and ready wit command ceremonial , " return 
 Darrell , and for the first time his lip wear a smile . " let I present 
 to you Mr. Fairthorn , " as the door , opening , show a shambling awkward 
 figure , with loose black knee - breech and buckled shoe . the figure 
 make a strange sidelong bow ; and hurry in a lateral course , like a 
 crab suddenly alarm , towards a dim recess protect by a long table , 
 sink behind a curtain fold , and seem to vanish as a crab do amidst 
 the shingle . 

 " three minute yet to dinner , and two before the lettercarrier go , " 
 say the host , glance at his watch . " Mr. Fairthorn , will you write a 
 note for I ? " there be a mutter from behind the curtain . Darrell walk 
 to the place , and whisper a few word , return to the hearth , rang 
 the bell . " another letter for the post , mill : Mr. Fairthorn be seal 
 it . you be look at my book - shelf , Lionel . as I understand 
 that your master speak highly of you , I presume that you be fond of 
 reading . " 

 " I think so , but I be not sure , " answer Lionel , whom his cousin 's 
 conciliatory word have restore to ease and good - humour . 

 " you mean , perhaps , that you like read , if you may choose your own 
 book . " 

 " or rather , if I may choose my own time to read they , and that would not 
 be on bright summer day . " 

 " without sacrifice bright summer day , one find one have make little 
 progress when the long winter night come . " 

 " yes , sir . but must the sacrifice be pay in book ? I fancy I learn as 
 much in the play - ground as I do n the schoolroom , and for the last few 
 month , in much my own master , read hard in the forenoon , it be true , 
 for many hour at a stretch , and yet again for a few hour at evening , 
 but ramble also through the street , or listen to a few friend 
 whom I have contrive to make , - I think , if I can boast of any progress 
 at all , the book have the small share in it . " 

 " you would , then , prefer an active life to a studious one ? " 

 " oh , yes - yes . " 

 " dinner be serve , " say the decorous Mr. Mills , throw open the door . 




 CHAPTER III . 

  in our happy country every man 's house be his castle . but however 
  stoutly he fortify it , Care enter , as surely as she do in Horace 's 
  time , through the portico of a Roman 's villa . nor , whether 
  ceiling be fret with gold and ivory , or whether only colour 
  with whitewash , do it matter to care any more than it do to a 
  house - fly . but every tree , be it cedar or blackthorn , can harbour 
  its singing - bird ; and few be the home in which , from nooks least 
  suspect , there start not a music . be it quite true that , " non 
  avium citharaeque cantus somnum reducent " ? would not even Damocles 
  himself have forget the sword , if the lute - player have chance on 
  the note that lull ? 

 the dinner be simple enough , but well dressed and well serve . one 
 footman , in plain livery , assist Mr. Mills . Darrell eat sparingly , and 
 drank only water , which be place by his side ice , with a single glass 
 of wine at the close of the repast , which he drink on bend his head 
 to Lionel , with a certain knightly grace , and the prefatory word of 
 " welcome here to a Haughton . " Mr. Fairthorn be less abstemious ; taste 
 of every dish , after examine it long through a pair of tortoise - shell 
 spectacle , and drink leisurely through a bottle of port , hold up 
 every glass to the light . Darrell talk with his usual cold but not 
 uncourteous indifference . a remark of Lionel on the portrait in the 
 room turn the conversation chiefly upon picture , and the host show 
 himself thoroughly accomplish in the attribute of the various school 
 and master . Lionel , who be very fond of the art , and indeed paint 
 well for a youthful amateur , listen with great delight . 

 " surely , sir , " say he , strike much with a very subtile observation 
 upon the cause why the italian master admit of copyist with great 
 facility than the Flemish , - ' surely , sir , you yourself must have 
 practise the art of painting ? " 

 " not I ; but I instruct myself as a judge of picture , because at one 
 time I be a collector . " 

 Fairthorn , speak for the first time : " the rare collection , - such 
 Albert Durers ! such holbein ! and that head by Leonardo da Vinci ! " 
 he stop ; look extremely frightened ; help himself to the port , 
 turn his back upon his host , to hold , as usual , the glass to the 
 light . 

 " be they here , sir ? " ask Lionel . 

 Darrell 's face darken , and he make no answer ; but his head sink on his 
 breast , and he seem suddenly absorb in gloomy thought . Lionel 
 feel that he have touch a wrong chord , and glance timidly towards 
 Fairthorn ; but that gentleman cautiously hold up his finger , and then 
 rapidly put it to his lip , and as rapidly draw it away . after that 
 signal the boy do not dare to break the silence , which now last 
 uninterruptedly till Darrell rise , and with the formal and superfluous 
 question , " any more wine ? " lead the way back to the library . there he 
 ensconce himself in an easy - chair , and say , " will you find a book 
 for yourself , Lionel ? " take a volume at random from the near shelf , 
 and soon seem absorb in its content . the room , make irregular by 
 baywindow , and shelf that project as in public library , abound 
 with nook and recess . to one of these Fairthorn sidle himself , and 
 become invisible . Lionel look round the shelf . no belles lettre of 
 our immediate generation be find there ; none of those author most 
 in request in circulate library and literary institute . the shelf 
 disclose no poet , no essayist , no novelist , more recent than the 
 Johnsonian age . neither in the lawyer 's library be to be find any law 
 book ; no , nor the pamphlet and parliamentary volume that should have 
 speak of the once eager politician . but there be superb copy of the 
 ancient classic . french and italian author be not want , nor such 
 of the English as have withstand the test of time . the large portion 
 of the shelf seem , however , devote to philosophical work . here 
 alone be novelty admit , the new essay on science , or the good 
 edition of old work thereon . Lionel at length make his choice , - a 
 volume of the " Faerie Queene . " Coffee be serve ; at a late hour tea . 
 the clock strike ten . Darrell lay down his book . 

 " Mr. Fairthorn , the flute ! " 

 from the recess a mutter ; and presently - the musician remain still 
 hidden - there come forth the sweetest note , - so dulcet , so plaintive ! 
 Lionel 's ear be ravish . the music suit well with the enchanted page 
 through which his fancy have be wander dreamlike , - the flute with 
 the " Faerie Queene . " as the air flow liquid on , Lionel 's eye fill 
 with tear . he do not observe that Darrell be intently watch he . 
 when the music stop , he turn aside to wipe the tear from his eye . 
 somehow or other , what with the poem , what with the flute , his thought 
 have wander far , far hence to the green bank and blue wave of the 
 Thames , - to Sophy 's charming face , to her part childish gift ! and 
 where be she now ? whither pass away , after so brief a holiday , into 
 the shadow of forlorn life ? Darrell 's bell - like voice smite his ear . 

 " Spenser ; you love he ! do you write poetry ? " " no , sir : I only feel it ! " 

 " do neither ! " say the host , abruptly . then , turn away , he light 
 his candle , murmur a quick good - night , and disappear through a 
 side - door which lead to his own room . 

 Lionel look round for Fairthorn , who now emerge ab anqulo from his 
 nook . 

 " oh , Mr. Fairthorn , how you have enchant I ! I never believe the 
 flute could have be capable of such effect ! " 

 Mr. Fairthorn 's grotesque face light up . he take off his spectacle , 
 as if the well to contemplate the face of his eulogist . " so you be 
 pleased ! really ? " he say , chuckle a strange , grim chuckle , deep in 
 his inmost self . 

 " please ! it be a cold word ! who would not be more than pleased ? " 

 " you should hear I in the open air . " 

 " let I do so - to - morrow . " 

 " my dear young sir , with all my heart . hist ! " - gaze round as if 
 haunt , - " I like you . I wish he to like you . answer all his question 
 as if you do not care how he turn you inside out . never ask he a 
 question , as if you seek to know what he do not himself confide . so 
 there be some thing , you think , in a flute , after all ? there be people 
 who prefer the fiddle . " 

 " then they never hear your flute , Mr. Fairthorn . " the musician again 
 emit his discordant chuckle , and , nod his head nervously and 
 cordially , shamble away without light a candle , and be engulf in 
 the shadow of some mysterious corner . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

  the old world and the new . 

 it be long before Lionel could sleep . what with the strange house 
 and the strange master , what with the magic flute and the musician 's 
 admonitory caution , what with tender and regretful reminiscence of 
 Sophy , his brain have enough to work on . when he sleep at last , his 
 slumber be deep and heavy , and he do not wake till gently shake by 
 the well - breed arm of Mr. Mills . " I humbly beg pardon : nine o'clock , sir , 
 and the breakfast - bell go to ring . " Lionel 's toilet be soon hurry 
 over ; Mr. Darrell and Fairthorn be talk together as he enter the 
 breakfast - room , - the same room as that in which they have din . 

 " good morning , Lionel , " say the host . " no leave - taking to - day , as you 
 threaten . I find you have make an appointment with Mr. Fairthorn , 
 and I shall place you under his care . you may like to look over the 
 old house , and make yourself " - Darrell pause " at home , " jerk out Mr. 
 Fairthorn , fill up the hiatus . Darrell turn his eye towards the 
 speaker , who evidently become much frightened , and , after look in 
 vain for a corner , sidle away to the window and poke himself behind 
 the curtain . " Mr. Fairthorn , in the capacity of my secretary , have 
 learn to find I thought , and put they in his own word , " say 
 Darrell , with a coldness almost icy . he then seat himself at the 
 breakfast - table ; Lionel follow his example , and Mr. Fairthorn , 
 courageously emerge , also take a chair and a roll . " you be a true 
 diviner , Mr. Darrell , " say Lionel ; " it be a glorious day . " 

 " but there will be shower later . the fish be at play on the surface of 
 the lake , " Darrell add , with a soften glance towards Fairthorn , who 
 be look the picture of misery . " after twelve , it will be just the 
 weather for trout to rise ; and if you fish , Mr. Fairthorn will lend you 
 a rod . he be a worthy successor of Izaak Walton , and love a companion 
 as Izaak do , but more rarely get one . " 

 " be there trout in your lake , sir ? " 

 " the lake ! you must not dream of invade that sacred water . the 
 inhabitant of rivulet and brook not within my boundary be beyond the 
 pale of Fawley civilization , to be snare and slaughter like caifre , 
 red man , or any other savage , for whom we bait with a missionary 
 and whom we impale on a bayonet . but I regard my lake as a politic 
 community , under the protection of the law , and leave its denizen 
 to devour each other , as Europeans , fish , and other cold - blooded 
 creature wisely do , in order to check the overgrowth of population . to 
 fatten one pike it take a great many minnow . naturally I support the 
 vest right of pike . I have be a lawyer . " 

 it would be in vain to describe the manner in which Mr. Darrell vent 
 this or similar remark of mock irony or sarcastic spleen . it be 
 not bitter nor sneering , but in his usual mellifluous level tone and 
 passionless tranquillity . 

 the breakfast be just over as a groom pass in front of the window 
 with a led horse . " I be go to leave you , Lionel , " say the host , " to 
 make - friend with Mr. Fairthorn , and I thus complete , accord to 
 my own original intention , the sentence which he divert astray . " he 
 pass across the hall to the open house - door , and stand by the horse , 
 stroke its neck and give some direction to the groom . Lionel 
 and Fairthorn follow to the threshold , and the beauty of the horse 
 provoke the boy 's admiration : it be a dark muzzled brown , of that 
 fine old - fashioned breed of english roadster which be now so seldom 
 see , - showy , bownecke , long - tail , stumble , reedy hybrid , bear 
 of bad barb , ill - mated , have mainly supply their place . this be , 
 indeed , a horse of great power , immense girth of loin , high shoulder , 
 broad hoof ; and such a head ! the ear , the frontal , the nostril ! you 
 seldom see a human physiognomy half so intelligent , half so expressive 
 of that high spirit and sweet generous temper , which , when unite , 
 constitute the ideal of thorough - breeding , whether in horse or man . the 
 english rider be in harmony with the english steed . darrell at this 
 moment be rest his arm lightly on the animal 's shoulder , and his 
 head still uncover . it have be say before that he be , of impose 
 presence ; the striking attribute of his person , indeed , be that of 
 unconscious grandeur ; yet , though above the ordinary height , he be not 
 very tall - five foot eleven at the utmost - and far from be very erect . 
 on the contrary , there be that habitual bend in his proud neck which 
 man who meditate much and live alone almost invariably contract . but 
 there be , to use an expression common with our old writer , that 
 " great air " about he which fill the eye , and give he the dignity 
 of elevated stature , the commanding aspect that accompany the upright 
 carriage . his figure be incline to be slender , though broad of 
 shoulder and deep of chest ; it be the figure of a young man and 
 probably little change from what it might have be at five - and - twenty . 
 a certain youthfulness still linger even on the countenance , - strange , 
 for sorrow be suppose to expedite the work of age ; and Darrell have 
 know sorrow of a kind most adapt to harrow his peculiar nature , 
 as great in its degree as ever leave man 's heart in ruin . no gray be 
 visible in the dark brown hair , that , wear short behind , still retain 
 in front the large jove - like curl . no wrinkle , save at the corner of the 
 eye , mar the pale bronze of the firm cheek ; the forehead be 
 smooth as marble , and as massive . it be that forehead which chiefly 
 contribute to the superb expression of his whole aspect . it be high 
 to a fault ; the perceptive organ , over a dark , strongly - mark , arched 
 eyebrow , powerfully develop , as they be with most eminent lawyer ; it 
 do not want for breadth at the temple ; yet , on the whole , it bespoke 
 more of intellectual vigour and dauntless will than of serene philosophy 
 or all - embrace benevolence . it be the forehead of a man form to 
 command and awe the passion and intellect of other by the strength 
 of passion in himself , rather concentre than chastise , and by an 
 intellect forceful from the weight of its mass rather than the niceness 
 of its balance . the other feature harmonize with that brow ; they be 
 of the noble order of aquiline , at once high and delicate . the lip have 
 a rare combination of exquisite refinement and inflexible resolve . the 
 eye , in repose , be cold , bright , unrevealing , with a certain absent , 
 musing , self - absorb expression , that often make the man 's word appear 
 as if speak mechanically , and assist towards that seem of listless 
 indifference to those whom he address , by which he wound vanity 
 without , perhaps , any malice prepense . but it be an eye in which the 
 pupil could suddenly expand , the hue change from gray to dark , and the 
 cold still brightness flash into vivid fire . it could not have occur 
 to any one , even to the most commonplace woman , to have describe 
 Darrell 's as a handsome face ; the expression would have seem trivial 
 and derogatory ; the word that would have occur to all , would have 
 be somewhat to this effect : " what a magnificent countenance ! what a 
 noble head ! " yet an experienced physiognomist might have note that the 
 same lineament which bespoke a virtue bespoke also its neighbouring 
 vice ; that with so much will there go stubborn obstinacy ; that with 
 that power of grasp there would be the tenacity in adherence which 
 narrow , in astringe , the intellect ; that a prejudice once conceive , 
 a passion once cherish , would resist all rational argument for 
 relinquishment . when man of this mould do relinquish prejudice or 
 passion , it be by their own impulse , their own sure conviction that what 
 they hold be worthless : then they do not yield it graciously ; they fle 
 it from they in scorn , but not a scorn that console . that which they 
 thus wrench away have " grow a live part of themselves ; " their own 
 flesh bleed ; the wound seldom or never heal . such man rarely fail 
 in the achievement of what they covet , if the god be neutral ; but , 
 adamant against the world , they be vulnerable through their affection . 
 their love be intense , but undemonstrative ; their hatred implacable , but 
 unrevengeful , - too proud to revenge , too gall to pardon . 

 there stand Guy Darrell , to whom the bar have destine its high 
 honour , to whom the senate have accord its most rapturous cheer ; and 
 the more you gaze on he as he there stand , the more perplexed became 
 the enigma , - how with a career seek with such energy , advance with 
 such success , the man have abruptly subside into a listless recluse , and 
 the career have be voluntarily resign for a home without neighbour , 
 a hearth without child . 

 " I have no idea , " say Lionel , as Darrell ride slowly away , soon lose 
 from sight amidst the thick foliage of summer tree , - " I have no idea 
 that my cousin be so young ! " 

 " oh , yes , " say Mr. Fairthorn ; " he be only a year old than I be ! " 

 " old than you ! " exclaim Lionel , star in blunt amaze at the 
 elderly - look personage beside he ; " yet true , he tell I so himself . " 

 " and I be fifty - one last birthday . " " Mr. Darrell fifty - two ! incredible ! " 

 " I do not   know why we should ever grow old , the life we lead , " observe 
 Mr. Fairthorn , readjust his spectacle . " time stand so still ! 
 Fishing , too , be very conducive to longevity . if you will follow I , we 
 will get the rod ; and the flute , - you be quite sure you would like the 
 flute ? yes ! thank you , my dear young sir . and yet there be folk who 
 prefer the fiddle ! " 

 " be not the sun a little too bright for the fly at present ; and will you 
 not , in the meanwhile , show I over the house ? " 

 " very well ; not that this house have much worth see . the other indeed 
 would have have a music - room ! but , after all , nothing like the open air 
 for the flute . this way . " 

 I spare thee , gentle reader , the minute inventory of Fawley Manor House . 
 it have nothing but its antiquity to recommend it . it have a great many 
 room , all , except those use as the dining - room and library , very 
 small , and very low , - innumerable closet , nook , - unexpected cavity , 
 as if make on purpose for the venerable game of hide - and - seek . save 
 a stately old kitchen , the office be sadly defective even for Mr. 
 Darrell 's domestic establishment , which consist but of two man and 
 four maid   the stableman not lodge in the house . drawing - room 
 properly speak that primitive mansion have none . at some remote 
 period a sort of gallery under the gable roof   above the first floor , 
 stretch from end to end of the house , might have serve for the 
 reception of guest on grand occasion ; for fragment of moulder 
 tapestry still here and there clung to the wall ; and a high 
 chimney - piece , whereon , in plaster relief , be commemorate the 
 memorable fishing party of Antony and Cleopatra , retain patch of 
 colour and gilding , which must when fresh have make the egyptian queen 
 still more appallingly hideous , and the fish at the end of Antony 's hook 
 still less resemble any creature know to ichthyologist . 

 the library have be arrange into shelf from floor to roof by Mr. 
 Darrell 's father , and subsequently , for the mere purpose of hold 
 as many volume as possible , bring out into project wing 
  college - like   by Darrell himself , without any pretension to mediaeval 
 character . with this room communicate a small reading - closet , which 
 the host reserve to himself ; and this , by a circular stair cut into the 
 massive wall , ascend first into Mr. Darrell 's sleeping - chamber , and 
 thence into a gable recess that adjoin the gallery , and which the host 
 have fit up for the purpose of scientific experiment in chemistry or 
 other branch of practical philosophy . these more private room Lionel 
 be not permit to enter . altogether the house be one of those cruel 
 tenement which it would be a sin to pull down , or even materially to 
 alter , but which it would be an hourly inconvenience for a modern 
 family to inhabit . it be out of all character with Mr. Darrell 's former 
 position in life , or with the fortune which Lionel vaguely suppose he 
 to possess , and considerably underrated . like Sir Nicholas Bacon , the 
 man have grow too large for his habitation . 

 " I do not   wonder , " say Lionel , as , their wandering over , he and 
 Fairthorn find themselves in the library , " that Mr. Darrell begin to 
 build a new house . but it would have be a great pity to pull down this 
 for it . " 

 " pull down this ! do not   hint at such an idea to Mr. Darrell . he would as 
 soon have pull down the British Monarchy ! Nay , I suspect , soon . " 

 " but the new building must surely have swallow up the old one ? " 

 " oh , no ; Mr. Darrell have a plan by which he would have enclose this 
 separately in a kind of court , with an open screen - work or cloister ; 
 and it be his intention to appropriate it entirely to mediaeval 
 antiquity , of which he have a wonderful collection . he have a notion 
 of illustrate every early reign in which his ancestor 
 flourish , - different apartment in correspondence with different 
 date . it would have be a chronicle of national manner . " 

 " but , if it be not an impertinent question , where be this collection ? in 
 London ? " 

 " hush ! hush ! I will give you a peep of some of the treasure , only do not 
 betray I . " 

 Fairthorn here , with singular rapidity , consider that he never move 
 in a straightforward direction , undulate into the open air in front 
 of the house , describe a rhomboid towards a side - buttress in the new 
 building , near to which be a postern - door ; unlock that door from a 
 key in his pocket , and , motion Lionel to follow he , enter 
 within the rib of the stony skeleton . Lionel follow in a sort of 
 supernatural awe , and beheld , with more substantial alarm , Mr. Fairthorn 
 wind up an inclined plank which lie embrace with both arm , and by 
 which he ultimately ascend to a timber joist in what should have be 
 an upper floor , only floor there be none . perch there , Fairthorn 
 glare down on Lionel through his spectacle . " dangerous , " he say 
 whisperingly ; " but one get use to everything ! if you feel afraid , 
 do not   venture ! " 

 Lionel , animate by that doubt of his courage , spring up the plank , 
 balance himself schoolboy fashion , with outstretched arm , and gain 
 the side of his guide . 

 " do not   touch I ! " exclaim Mr. Fairthorn , shrinking , " or we shall both 
 be over . now observe and imitate . " drop himself , then , carefully 
 and gradually , till he drop on the timber joist as if it be a 
 velocipede , his long leg dangle down , he with thigh and hand impel 
 himself onward till he gain the ridge of a wall , on which he deliver 
 his person , and wipe his spectacle . 

 Lionel be not long before he stand in the same place . " here we be , " 
 say Fairthorn . 

 " I do not   see the collection , " answer Lionel , first peer down 
 athwart the joist upon the rugged ground overspread with stone and 
 rubbish , then glance up through similar interstice above to the gaunt 
 rafter . 

 " here be some , - most precious , " answer Fairthorn , tap behind he . 
 " wall up , except where these board , case in iron , be nail 
 across , with a little door just big enough to creep through ; but that be 
 locked , - Chubb 's lock , and Mr. Darrell keep the key ! - treasure for 
 a palace ! no , you can not   peep through here - not a chink ; but come on a 
 little far , - mind your footing . " 

 skirt the wall , and still on the perilous ridge , Fairthorn creep on , 
 form an angle , and stop short , clap his eye to the crevice 
 of some plank nail rudely across a yawning aperture . Lionel find 
 another crevice for himself , and see , pile up in admire disorder , 
 picture , with their back turn to a desolate wall , rare cabinet , and 
 article of curious furniture , chest , box , crate , - heap pell - mell . 
 this receptacle have be roughly floor in deal , in order to support 
 its miscellaneous content , and be light from a large window   not 
 visible in front of the house , glaze in dull rough glass , with 
 ventilator . 

 " these be the heavy thing , and least costly thing , that no one could 
 well rob . the picture here be merely curious as early specimen , 
 intend for the old house , all spoil and rot ; Mr. Darrell wish 
 they to do so , I believe ! what he wish must be do ! my dear young 
 sir : a prodigious mind ; it be of granite ! " 

 " I can not understand it , " say Lionel , aghast . " the last man I should 
 have think capriciously whimsical . " 

 " Whimsical ! bless my soul ! do not   say such a word , do not , pray ! or the 
 roof will fall down upon we ! come away . you have see all you can see . 
 you must go first now ; mind that loose stone there ! " 

 nothing far be say till they be out of the building ; and Lionel 
 feel like a knight of old who have be lead into sepulchral hall by a 
 wizard . 




 CHAPTER V. 

  the annal of empire be briefly chronicle in family record 
  bring down to the present day , show that the race of man be 
  indeed " like leaf on tree , now green in youth , now wither on 
  the ground . " yet to the branch the most bare will green leaf 
  return , so long as the sap can remount to the branch from the root ; 
  but the branch which have cease to take life from the root - hang it 
  high , hang it low - be a prey to the wind and the woodman . 

 it be mid - day . the boy and his new friend be stand apart , as 
 become silent angler , on the bank of a narrow brawl rivulet , 
 run through green pasture , half a mile from the house . the sky be 
 overcast , as Darrell have predict , but the rain do not yet fall . the 
 two angler be not long before they have fill a basket with small 
 trout . then Lionel , who be by no mean fond of fishing , lay his rod on 
 the bank , and stroll across the long grass to his companion . 

 " it will rain soon , " say he . " let we take advantage of the present 
 time , and hear the flute , while we can yet enjoy the open air . no , not 
 by the margin , or you will be always look after the trout . on the 
 rise ground , see that old thorn tree ; let we go and sit under it . the 
 new building look well from it . what a pile it would have be ! I may 
 not ask you , I suppose , why it be leave uncompleted . perhaps it would 
 have cost too much , or would have be disproportionate to the estate . " 

 " to the present estate it would have be disproportione , but not to 
 the estate Mr. Darrell intend to add to it . as to cost , you do not 
 know he . he would never have undertake what he could not afford to 
 complete ; and what he once undertake , no thought of the cost would 
 have scar he from finish . prodigious mind , - granite ! and so rich ! " 
 add Fairthorn , with an air of great pride . " I ought to know ; I write 
 all his letter on money matter . how much do you think he have , without 
 count land ? " 

 " I can not guess . " 

 " nearly half a million ; in two year it will be more than half a 
 million . and he have not three hundred a year when he begin life ; for 
 Fawley be sadly mortgage . " 

 " be it possible ! could any lawyer make half a million at the bar ? " 

 " if any man could , Mr. Darrell would . when he set his mind on a thing , 
 the thing be do ; no help for it . but his fortune be not all make at 
 the bar , though a great part of it be . an old East indian bachelor of 
 the same name , but who have never be hear of hereabout till he write 
 from Calcutta to Mr. Darrell   inquire if they be any relation , and 
 Mr. Darrell refer he to the College - at - arm , which prove that they 
 come from the same stock age ago , leave he all his money . Mr. Darrell 
 be not dependent on his profession when he stand up in Parliament . 
 and since we have be here , such saving ! not that Mr. Darrell be 
 avaricious , but how can he spend money in this place ? you should have 
 see the establishment we keep in Carlton Gardens . such a cook too , - a 
 french gentleman , look like a marquis . those be happy day , and 
 proud one ! it be true that I order the dinner here , but it can not   be the 
 same thing . do you like fillet of veal ? - we have one to - day . " 

 " we use to have fillet of veal at school on Sundays . I think it good 
 then . " 

 " it make a nice mince , " say Mr. Fairthorn , with a sensual movement of 
 his lip . " one must think of dinner when one live in the country : 
 so little else to think of ! not that Mr. Darrell do , but then he be 
 granite ! " 

 " still , " say Lionel , smile , " I do not get my answer . why be the 
 house uncomplete ? and why do Mr. Darrell retire from public life ? " 

 " he take both into his head ; and when a thing once get there , it be 
 no use ask why . but , " add Fairthorn , and his innocent ugly face 
 change into an expression of earnest sadness , - " but no doubt he have 
 his reason . he have reason for all he do , only they lie far , far away 
 from what appear on the surface , - far as that rivulet lie from its 
 source ! my dear young sir , Mr. Darrell have know grief on which it do 
 not become you and I to talk . he never talk of they . the least I can 
 do for my benefactor be not to pry into his secret , nor babble they 
 out . and he be so kind , so good , never get into a passion ; but it be 
 so awful to wound he , - it give he such pain ; that be why he frighten 
 I , - frighten I horribly ; and so he will you when you come to know 
 he . prodigious mind ! - granite , - overgrown with sensitive plant . yes , a 
 little music will do we both good . " 

 Mr. Fairthorn screw his flute , an exceedingly handsome one . he 
 point out its beauty to Lionel - a present from Mr. Darrell last 
 Christmas - and then he begin . strange thing , art ! especially music . 
 out of an art , a man may be so trivial you would mistake he for an 
 imbecile , - at good a grow infant . put he into his art , and how high 
 he soar above you ! how quietly he enter into a heaven of which he have 
 become a denizen , and unlock the gate with his golden key , admit 
 you to follow , a humble reverent visitor . 

 in his art , Fairthorn be certainly a master , and the air he now play 
 be exquisitely soft and plaintive ; it accord with the clouded yet 
 quiet sky , with the lone but summer landscape , with Lionel 's melancholic 
 but not afflict train of thought . the boy could only murmur 
 " beautiful ! " when the musician cease . 

 " it be an old air , " say Fairthorn ; " I do not   think it be know . I find 
 its scale scrawl down in a copy of the ' Eikon Basilike , ' with the name 
 of ' Joannes Darrell , Esq . , Aurat , ' write under it . that , by the date , 
 be Sir John Darrell , the cavalier who fight for Charles I. , father 
 of the graceless Sir Ralph , who flourish under Charles II . both their 
 portrait be in the dining - room . " 

 " tell I something of the family ; I know so little about it , - not even 
 how the Haughtons and Darrells seem to have be so long connect . 
 I see by the portrait that the Haughton name be bear by former 
 darrell , then apparently drop , now it be bear again by my cousin . " 

 " he bear it only as a christian name . your grandfather be his sponsor . 
 but he be nevertheless the head of your family . " 

 " so he say . how ? " 

 Fairthorn gather himself up , his knee to his chin , and begin in the 
 tone of a guide who have get his lesson by heart ; though it be not long 
 before he warm into his subject . 

 " the Darrells be suppose to have get their name from a knight in the 
 reign of Edward III . , who hold the list in a joust victoriously against 
 all comer , and be call , or call himself , John the Dare - all ; or , in 
 old spelling , the Der - all . they be amongst the most powerful 
 family in the country ; their alliance be with the high 
 house , - Montfichets , Nevilles , Mowbrays ; they descend through such 
 marriage from the blood of Plantagenet king . you will find their 
 name in chronicle in the early french war . unluckily they attach 
 themselves to the fortune of Earl Warwick , the king - maker , to whose 
 blood they be ally ; their representative be kill in the fatal 
 field of Barnet ; their estate be of course confiscate ; the sole son 
 and heir of that ill - fat politician pass into the Low Countries , 
 where he serve as a soldier . his son and grandson follow the same 
 call under foreign banner . but they must have keep up the love of 
 the old land ; for in the latter part of the reign of Henry VIII . , the 
 last male Darrell return to England with some broad gold piece save 
 by himself or his exiled father , buy some land in this county , 
 in which the ancestral possession have once be large , and build the 
 present house , of a size suit to the altered fortune of a race that 
 in a former age have man castle with retainer . the baptismal name 
 of the soldier who thus partially refounde the old line in England be 
 that now bear by your cousin , Guy , - a name always favour by Fortune 
 in the family annal ; for in Elizabeth 's time , from the rank of small 
 gentry , to which their fortune alone lift they since their return to 
 their native land , the Darrells rise once more into wealth and eminence 
 under a handsome young Sir Guy , - we have his picture in black flower 
 velvet , - who marry the heiress of the Haughtons , a family that 
 have grow rich under the Tudors , and be in high favour with the 
 Maiden - Queen . this Sir Guy be befriend by Essex and knight by 
 Elizabeth herself . their old house be then abandon for the large 
 mansion of the Haughtons , which have also the advantage of be near 
 to the Court , the renew prosperity of the Darrells be of short 
 duration . the Civil Wars come on , and Sir John Darrell take the losing 
 side . he escape to France with his only son . he be say to have be 
 an accomplished , melancholy man ; and my belief be , that he compose that 
 air which you justly admire for its mournful sweetness . he turn roman 
 Catholic and die in a convent . but the son , Ralph , be bring up in 
 France with Charles II , and other gay roisterer . on the return of the 
 Stuart , Ralph run off with the daughter of the Roundhead to whom his 
 estate have be give , and , after get they back , leave his wife 
 in the country , and make love to other man 's wife in town . shocking 
 profligate ! no fruit could thrive upon such a branch . he squander all 
 he could squander , and would have leave his child beggar , but that 
 he be providentially slain in a tavern brawl for boasting of a lady 's 
 favour to her husband 's face . the husband suddenly stab he , - no 
 fair duello , for Sir Ralph be invincible with the small sword . still 
 the family fortune be much dilapidate , yet still the darrell live 
 in the fine house of the Haughtons , and leave Fawley to the owl . but Sir 
 Ralph 's son , in his old age , marry a second time , a young lady of high 
 rank , an earl 's daughter . he must have be very much in love with she , 
 despite his age , for to win her consent or her father 's he agree to 
 settle all the Haughton estate on she and the child she might bear 
 to he . the small Darrell property have already be entail on his 
 son by his first marriage . this be how the family come to split . Old 
 Darrell have child by his second wife ; the eld of those child 
 take the Haughton name and inherit the Haughton property . the son by 
 the first marriage have nothing but Fawley and the scanty domain round 
 it . you descend from the second marriage , Mr. Darrell from the first . 
 you understand now , my dear young sir ? " " yes , a little ; but I should 
 very much like to know where those fine Haughton estate be now ? " 

 " where they be now ? I can not   say . they be once in Middlesex . probably 
 much of the land , as it be sell piecemeal , fall into small allotment , 
 constantly change hand . but the last relic of the property be , I 
 know , buy on speculation by Cox the distiller ; for , when we be in 
 London , by Mr. Darrell 's desire I go to look after they , and inquire 
 if they could be repurchase . and I find that so rapid in a few year 
 have be the prosperity of this great commercial country , that if one 
 do buy they back , one would buy twelve villa , several street , two 
 square , and a paragon ! but as that symptom of national advancement , 
 though a proud thought in itself , may not have any pleasing interest 
 for you , I return to the Darrells . from the time in which the Haughton 
 estate have part from they , they settle back in their old house of 
 Fawley . but they could never again hold up their head with the nobleman 
 and great squire in the county . as much as they could do to live at all 
 upon the little patrimony ; still the reminiscence of what they have be 
 make they maintain it jealously and entail it rigidly . the eld son 
 would never have think of any profession or business ; the young 
 son generally become soldier , and be always a venturesome race , and 
 have nothing particular to make they value their existence , be no 
 less generally kill off betime . the family become thoroughly obscure , 
 slip out of place in the county , seldom rise to be even justice 
 of the peace , never contrive to marry heiress again , but only the 
 daughter of some neighbouring parson or squire as poor as themselves , 
 but always of gentle blood . oh , they be as proud as Spaniards in 
 that respect ! so from father to son , each generation grow obscurer and 
 poor ; for , entail the estate as they might , still some settlement 
 on it be necessary , and no settlement be ever bring into it ; and 
 thus entail be cut off to admit some new mortgage , till the rent - roll 
 be somewhat less than l300 a year when Mr. Darrell 's father come into 
 possession . yet somehow or other he get to college , where no Darrell have 
 be since the time of the Glorious Revolution , and be a learn man 
 and an antiquary , - a great ANTIQUARY ! you may have read his work . 
 I know there be one copy of they in the British Museum , and there be 
 another here , but that copy Mr. Darrell keep under lock and key . " 

 " I be ashamed to say I do not   even know the title of those work . " 

 " there be ' Popular ballad on the Wars of the Roses ; ' ' Darrelliana , ' 
 consist of traditional and other memorial of the Darrell family ; 
 ' inquiry into the Origin of Legends connect with Dragons ; ' ' hour 
 amongst Monumental Brasses , ' and other ingenious lucubration above the 
 taste of the vulgar ; some of they be even read at the Royal Society 
 of Antiquaries . they cost much to print and publish . but I have hear 
 my father , who be his bailiff , say that he be a pleasant man , and be 
 fond of recite old scrap of poetry , which he do with great energy ; 
 indeed , Mr. Darrell declare that it be the noticing , in his father 's 
 animate and felicitous elocution , the effect that voice , look , and 
 delivery can give to word , which make Mr. Darrell himself the fine 
 speaker he be . but I can only recollect the antiquary as a very majestic 
 gentleman , with a long pigtail - awful , rather , not so much so as his 
 son , but still awful - and so sad - looking ; you would not have recover 
 your spirit for a week if you have see he , especially when the old 
 house want repair , and he be think how he could pay for they ! " 

 " be Mr. Darrell , the present one , an only child ? " 

 " yes , and much with his father , whom he love most dearly , and to this 
 day he sigh if he have to mention his father 's name ! he have old Mr. 
 Darrell 's portrait over the chimney - piece in his own reading - room ; 
 and he have it in his own library in Carlton Gardens . our Mr. Darrell 's 
 mother be very pretty , even as I remember she : she die when he be 
 about ten year old . and she too be a relation of your , - a Haughton 
 by blood , - but perhaps you will be ashamed of she , when I say she be 
 a governess in a rich mercantile family . she have be leave an orphan . I 
 believe old Mr. Darrell   not that he be old then   marry she because 
 the Haughtons could or would do nothing for she , and because she 
 be much snub and put upon , as I be tell governess usually 
 be , - marry she because , poor as he be , he be still the head of both 
 family , and bind to do what he could for decayed scion . the first 
 governess a darrell , ever marry ; but no true Darrell would have call 
 that a mesalliance since she be still a Haughton and ' for non mutat 
 genus , ' - Chance do not change race . " 

 " but how come it that the Haughtons , my grandfather Haughton , I 
 suppose , would do nothing for his own kinswoman ? " 

 " it be not your grandfather Robert Haughton , who be a generous 
 man , - he be then a mere youngster , hide himself for debt , - but your 
 great - grandfather , who be a hard man and on the turf . he never have 
 money to give , - only money for bet . he leave the Haughton estate 
 sadly clip . but when Robert succeed , he come forward , be godfather 
 to our Mr. Darrell , insist on share the expense of send he to 
 Eton , where he become greatly distinguish ; thence to Oxford , where 
 he increase his reputation ; and would probably have do more for he , 
 only Mr. Darrell , once his foot on the ladder , want no help to climb 
 to the top . " 

 " then my grandfather , Robert , still have the Haughton estate ? their 
 last relic have not be yet transmute by Mr. Cox into square and a 
 paragon ? " 

 " no ; the grand old mansion , though much dilapidate , with its park , 
 though strip of salable timber , be still leave with a rental from 
 farm that still appertain to the residence , which would have suffice 
 a prudent man for the luxury of life , and allow a reserve fund to 
 clear off the mortgage gradually . abstinence and self - denial for one or 
 two generation would have make a property , daily rise in value as the 
 metropolis advance to its outskirt , a princely estate for a third . but 
 Robert Haughton , though not on the turf , have a grand way of living ; and 
 while Guy Darrell go into the law to make a small patrimony a large 
 fortune , your father , my dear young sir , be put into the Guards to 
 reduce a large patrimony - into Mr. Cox 's distillery . " 

 Lionel colour , but remain silent . 

 Fairthorn , who be as unconscious in his zest of narrator that he be 
 give pain as an entomologist in his zest for collect when he pin 
 a live moth in his cabinet , resume : " your father and Guy Darrell be 
 warm friend as boy and youth . Guy be the elder of the two , and 
 Charlie Haughton   I beg your pardon , he be always call Charlie 
 look up to he as to an eld brother . many be the scrape Guy get he 
 out of ; and many a pound , I believe , when Guy have some fund of his own , 
 do Guy lend to Charlie . " 

 " I be very sorry to hear that , " say Lionel , sharply . Fairthorn look 
 frightened . " I ' m afraid I have make a blunder . do not   tell Mr. Darrell . " 

 " certainly not ; I promise . but how come my father to need this aid , and 
 how come they at last to quarrel ? " 

 your father Charlie become a gay young man about town , and very much the 
 fashion . he be like you in person , only his forehead be low , and his 
 eye not so steady . Mr. Darrell study the law in chamber . when Robert 
 Haughton die , what with his debt , what with his father 's , and what 
 with Charlie 's post - obit and I o U 's , there seem small chance indeed 
 of save the estate to the Haughtons . but then Mr. Darrell look close 
 into matter , and with such skill do he settle they that he remove the 
 fear of foreclosure ; and what with increase the rental here and there , 
 and replace old mortgage by new at less interest , he contrive to 
 extract from the property an income of nine hundred pound a year to 
 Charlie   three time the income Darrell have inherit himself , 
 where before it have seem that the debt be more than the asset . 
 foresee how much the land would rise in value , he then earnestly 
 implore Charlie   who unluckily have the estate in fee - simple , as Mr. 
 Darrell have this , to sell if he please   to live on his income , and in a 
 few year a part of the property might be sell for build purpose , on 
 term that would save all the rest , with the old house in which darrell 
 and Haughtons both have once rear generation . Charlie promise , I 
 know , and I have   no doubt , my dear young sir , quite sincerely ; but all man 
 be not granite ! he take to gambling , incur debt of honour , sell the 
 farm one by one , resort to usurer , and one night , after play six 
 hour at piquet , nothing be leave for he but to sell all that remain 
 to Mr. Cox the distiller , unknown to Mr. Darrell , who be then marry 
 himself , work hard , and live quite out of news of the fashionable 
 world . then Charlie Haughton sell out of the Guards , spend what he get 
 for his commission , go into the line ; and finally , in a country town , 
 in which I do not   think he be quarter , but have go there on some 
 sporting speculation , be unwillingly detain , married - " 

 " my mother ! " say Lionel , haughtily ; " and the good of woman she be . what 
 then ? " 

 " nothing , my dear young sir , - nothing , except that Mr. Darrell never 
 forgave it . he have his prejudice : this marriage shock one of they . " 

 " prejudice against my poor mother ! I always suppose so ! I wonder why ? 
 the most simple - hearte , inoffensive , affectionate woman . " 

 " I have not a doubt of it ; but it be begin to rain . let we go home . 
 I should like some luncheon : it break the day . " 

 " tell I first why Mr. Darrell have a prejudice against my mother . I 
 do not   think that he have even see she . unaccountable caprice ! shock 
 he , too , - what a word ! tell I - I beg - I insist . " 

 " but you know , " say Fairthorn , half piteously , half snappishly , " that 
 Mrs. Haughton be the daughter of a linendraper , and her father 's money 
 get Charlie out of the county jail ; and Mr. Darrell say , ' sell even 
 your name ! ' my father hear he say it in the hall at Fawley . Mr. 
 Darrell be there during a long vacation , and your father come to see 
 he . your father fire up , and they never see each other , I believe , 
 again . " 

 Lionel remain still as if thunder - stricken . something in his mother 's 
 language and manner have at time make he suspect that she be not so 
 well bear as his father . but it be not the discovery that she be a 
 tradesman 's daughter that gall he ; it be the thought that his father 
 be buy for the altar out of the county jail ! it be those cut 
 word , " sell even your name . " his face , before very crimson , become 
 livid ; his head sink on his breast . he walk towards the old gloomy 
 house by Fairthorn 's side , as one who , for the first time in life , feel 
 on his heart the leaden weight of an hereditary shame . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

  show how sinful it be in a man who do not care for his honour 
  to beget child . 

 when Lionel see Mr. Fairthorn devote his intellectual being to the 
 content of a cold chicken - pie , he silently step out of the room and 
 slunk away into a thick copse at the farth end of the paddock . he 
 long to be alone . the rain descend , not heavily , but in penetrate 
 drizzle ; he do not feel it , or rather he feel glad that there be no 
 gaudy mocking sunlight . he sit down forlorn in the hollow of a glen 
 which the copse cover , and bury his face in his clasp hand . 

 Lionel Haughton , as the reader may have notice , be no premature 
 man , - a manly boy , but still a habitant of the twilight , dreamy , 
 shadow - land of boyhood . noble element be stir fitfully within 
 he , but their agency be crude and undeveloped . sometimes , through 
 the native acuteness of his intellect , he apprehend truth quickly 
 and truly as a man ; then , again , through the warm haze of undisciplined 
 tenderness , or the raw mist of that sensitive pride in which object , 
 small in themselves , loom large with undetected outline , he fall back 
 into the passionate dimness of a child 's reasoning . he be intensely 
 ambitious ; quixotic in the point of honour ; dauntless in peril : but 
 morbidly tremble at the very shadow of disgrace , as a foal , destine 
 to be the war - horse and trample down level steel , start in its 
 tranquil pasture at the rustling of a leaf . glowingly romantic , but not 
 inclined to vent romance in literary creation , his feeling be the 
 more high - wrought and enthusiastic because they have no outlet in poetic 
 channel . Most boy of great ability and strong passion write verse - it 
 be Nature 's relief to brain and heart at the critical turning age . Most 
 boy thus gifted do so ; a few do not , and out of those few Fate select 
 the great man of action , - those large luminous character that stamp 
 poetry on the world 's prosaic surface . Lionel have in he the pith 
 and substance of Fortune 's grand nobody , who become Fame 's abrupt 
 somebody when the chance of life throw suddenly in their way a noble 
 something , to be ardently covet and boldly win . but I repeat , as yet 
 he be a boy ; so he sit there , his hand before his face , an unreasone 
 self - torturer . he know now why this haughty Darrell have write with so 
 little tenderness and respect to his beloved mother . Darrell look 
 on she as the cause of his ignoble kinsman 's ' sale of name ; " nay , most 
 probably ascribe to she not the fond girlish love which level all 
 disparity of rank , but the vulgar cold - blooded design to exchange her 
 father 's bank - note for a marriage beyond her station . and he be the 
 debtor to this supercilious creditor , as his father have be before he . 
 his father ! till then he have be so proud of that relationship ! Mrs. 
 Haughton have not be happy with her captain ; his confirm habit of 
 wild dissipation have embitter her union , and at last wear away her 
 wifely affection . but she have tend and nurse he in his last illness 
 as the lover of her youth ; and though occasionally she hint at his 
 fault , she ever speak of he as the ornament of all society , - poor , 
 it be true , harass by unfeele creditor , but the fine of fine 
 gentleman . Lionel have never hear from she of the ancestral estate sell 
 for a gambling debt ; never from she of the county jail nor the mercenary 
 misalliance . in boyhood , before we have any cause to be proud of 
 ourselves , we be so proud of our father , if we have a decent excuse 
 for it . of his father could Lionel Haughton be proud now ? and darrell 
 be cognizant of his paternal disgrace , have taunt his father in yonder 
 old hall - for what ? - the marriage from which Lionel sprang ! the hand 
 grow tight and tight before that burning face . he do not weep , as 
 he have do in Vance 's presence at a thought much less galling . not that 
 tear would have misbecome he . shallow judge of human nature be they 
 who think that tear in themselves ever misbecome boy or even man . well 
 do the stern of roman writer place the arch distinction of humanity 
 aloft from all meaner of Heaven 's creature , in the prerogative of 
 tear ! soon mayst thou trust thy purse to a professional pickpocket 
 than give loyal friendship to the man who boast of eye to which the 
 heart never mount in dew ! only , when man weep he should be alone , - not 
 because tear be weak , but because they should be sacred . tear be 
 akin to prayer . Pharisees parade prayer ! impostor parade tear . o 
 Pegasus , Pegasus , - softly , softly , - thou hast hurry I off amidst the 
 cloud : drop I gently down - there , by the side of the motionless boy in 
 the shadowy glen . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

  Lionel Haughton , have hitherto much improve his chance of 
  fortune , decide the question , " what will he do with it ? " 

 " I have be seek you everywhere , " say a well - know voice ; and a 
 hand rest lightly on Lionel 's shoulder . the boy look up , startle , 
 but yet heavily , and see Guy Darrell , the last man on earth he could 
 have desire to see . " will you come in for a few minute ? you be 
 want . " 

 " what for ? I would rather stay here . who can want I ? " 

 Darrell , strike by the word and the sullen tone in which they be 
 utter , survey Lionel 's face for an instant , and reply in a voice 
 involuntarily more kind than usual , - 

 " some one very commonplace , but since the Picts go out of fashion , 
 very necessary to mortal the most sublime . I ought to apologize for his 
 come . you threaten to leave I yesterday because of a defect in your 
 wardrobe . Mr. Fairthorn write to my tailor to hasten hither and repair 
 it . he be here . I commend he to your custom ! do not   despise he because 
 he make for a man of my remote generation . tailor be keen observer 
 and do not grow out of date so quickly as politician . " 

 the word be say with a playful good - humour very uncommon to Mr. 
 Darrell . the intention be obviously kind and kinsmanlike . Lionel sprang 
 to his foot ; his lip curl , his eye flash , and his crest rise . 

 " no , sir ; I will not stoop to this ! I will not be clothe by your 
 charity , - your ! I will not submit to an imply taunt upon my poor 
 mother 's ignorance of the manner of a rank to which she be not bear ! 
 you say we might not like each other , and , if so , we should part 
 forever . I do not like you , and I will go ! " he turn abruptly , and 
 walk to the house - magnanimous . if Mr. Darrell have not be the most 
 singular of man , he might well have be offend . as it be , though few 
 be less accessible to surprise , he be surprised . but offend ? judge 
 for yourself . " I declare , " mutter Guy Darrell , gaze on the boy 's 
 recede figure , " I declare that I almost feel as if I could once again 
 be capable of an emotion ! I hope I be not go to like that boy ! the 
 old Darrell blood in his vein , surely . I might have speak as he do at 
 his age , but I must have have some well reason for it . what do I say 
 to justify such an explosion ? 

 " quid feci ? - ubi lapsus ? Gone , no doubt , to pack up his knapsack , and 
 take the Road to Ruin ! shall I let he go ? well for I , if I be really 
 in danger of like he ; and so be at his mercy to sting - what ? my 
 heart ! I defy he ; it be dead . no ; he shall not go thus . I be the head 
 of our joint house . house ! I wish he have a house , poor boy ! and his 
 grandfather love I . let he go ? I will beg his pardon first ; and he 
 may dine in his drawer if that will settle the matter . " 

 thus , no less magnanimous than Lionel , do this misanthropical man 
 follow his ungracious cousin . " ha ! " cry Darrell , suddenly , as , 
 approach the threshold , he see Mr. Fairthorn at the dining - room 
 window occupy in nib a pen upon an ivory thumb - stall - " I have hit 
 it ! that abominable Fairthorn have be shed its prickle ! how could 
 I trust flesh and blood to such a bramble ? I will know what it be this 
 instant ! " vain menace ! no soon do Mr. Fairthorn catch glimpse 
 of Darrell 's countenance within ten yard of the porch , than , his 
 conscience take alarm , he rush incontinent from the window , the 
 apartment , and , ere Darrell could fling open the door , be lose in some 
 lair - " nullis penetrabilis astris " - in that sponge - like and cavernous 
 abode wherewith benignant Providence have suit the locality to the 
 creature . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

  new imbroglio in that ever - recur , never - to - be - settle question , 
  " what will he do with it ? " 

 with a disappointed glare and a baffled shrug of the shoulder , Mr. 
 Darrell turn from the dining - room , and pass up the stair to 
 Lionel 's chamber , open the door quickly , and extend his hand say , 
 in that tone which have disarm the wrath of ambitious faction , and 
 even   if fame lie not   once seduce from the hostile Treasury - bench a 
 placeman 's vote , " I must have hurt your feeling , and I come to beg your 
 pardon ! " 

 but before this time Lionel 's proud heart , in which ungrateful anger 
 could not long find room , have smite he for so ill a return to 
 well - mean and not indelicate kindness . and , his wounded egotism 
 appease by its very outburst , he have call to mind Fairthorn 's 
 allusion to Darrell 's secret grief , - grief that must have be indeed 
 stormy so to have revulse the current of a life . and , despite those 
 grief , the great man have speak playfully to he , - playfully in order 
 to make light of obligation . so when Guy Darrell now extend that 
 hand , and stoop to that apology , Lionel be fairly overcome . tear , 
 before refuse , now find irresistible way . the hand he could not take , 
 but , yield to his yearning impulse , he throw his arm fairly round 
 his host 's neck , lean his young cheek upon that granite breast , and 
 sob out incoherent word of passionate repentance , honest , venerate 
 affection . Darrell 's face change , look for a moment wondrous soft ; 
 and then , as by an effort of supreme self - control , it become severely 
 placid . he do not return that embrace , but certainly he in no way 
 repel it ; nor do he trust himself to speak till the boy have 
 exhaust the force of his first feeling , and have turn to dry his 
 tear . 

 then he say , with a soothing sweetness : " Lionel Haughton , you have 
 the heart of a gentleman that can never listen to a frank apology for 
 unintentional wrong but what it spring forth to take the blame to 
 itself and return apology tenfold . enough ! a mistake no doubt , on both 
 side . More time must elapse before either can truly say that he do 
 not like the other . meanwhile , " add Darrell , with almost a laugh , - and 
 that conclude query show that even on trifle the man be bent upon 
 either force or steal his own will upon other , - " meanwhile must I 
 send away the tailor ? " I need not repeat Lionel 's answer . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

  DARRELL - mystery in his past life - what have he do with it ? 

 some day pass , each day vary little from the other . it be the 
 habit of Darrell if he go late to rest to rise early . he never allow 
 himself more than five hour sleep . a man great than Guy Darrell - Sir 
 Walter Raleigh - carve from the solid day no large a slice for 
 Morpheus . and it be this habit perhaps , yet more than temperance in 
 diet , which preserve to Darrell his remarkable youthfulness of aspect 
 and frame , so that at fifty - two he look , and really be , young than 
 many a strong man of thirty - five . for , certain it be , that on enter 
 middle life , he who would keep his brain clear , his step elastic , his 
 muscle from fleshiness , his nerve from tremor , - in a word , retain his 
 youth in spite of the register , - should beware of long slumber . nothing 
 age like laziness . the hour before breakfast Darrell devote first to 
 exercise , whatever the weather ; next to his calm scientific pursuit . at 
 ten o'clock punctually he ride out alone and seldom return till late 
 in the afternoon . then he would stroll forth with Lionel into devious 
 woodland , or lounge with he along the margin of the lake , or lie down 
 on the ted grass , call the boy 's attention to the insect populace 
 which sport out its happy life in the summer month , and treat of the 
 way and habit of each vary specie , with a quaint learning , half 
 humorous , half grave . he be a minute observer and an accomplished 
 naturalist . his range of knowledge be , indeed , amazingly large for a 
 man who have have to pass his good year in a dry and absorbing study : 
 necessarily not so profound in each section as that of a special 
 professor ; but if the science be often on the surface , the thought he 
 deduce from what he know be as often original and deep . a maxim of 
 his , which he drop out one day to Lionel in his careless manner , but 
 pointed diction , may perhaps illustrate his own practice and its result 
 " never think it enough to have solve the problem start by another 
 mind till you have deduce from it a corollary of your own . " 

 after dinner , which be not over till past eight o'clock , they always 
 adjourn to the library , Fairthorn vanish into a recess , Darrell and 
 Lionel each with his several book , then an air on the flute , and each 
 to his own room before eleven . no life could be more methodical ; yet 
 to Lionel it have an animating charm , for his interest in his host daily 
 increase , and vary his thought with perpetual occupation . Darrell , 
 on the contrary , while more kind and cordial , more cautiously on his 
 guard not to wound his young guest 's susceptibility than he have be 
 before the quarrel and its reconciliation , do not seem to feel for 
 Lionel the active interest which Lionel feel for he . he do not , as 
 most clever man be apt to do in their intercourse with youth , attempt 
 to draw he out , plumb his intellect , or guide his taste . if he be 
 at time instructive , it be because talk fall on subject on which 
 it please himself to touch , and in which he could not speak without 
 involuntarily instruct . nor do he ever allure the boy to talk of 
 his school - day , of his friend , of his predilection , his hope , his 
 future . in short , have you observe they together , you would have never 
 suppose they be connection , that one could and ought to influence 
 and direct the career of the other . you would have say the host 
 certainly like the guest , as any man would like a promising , 
 warm - hearted , high - spirit , graceful boy , under his own roof for a 
 short time , but who feel that that boy be nothing to he ; would soon 
 pass from his eye ; form friend , pursuit , aim , with which he could be 
 in no way commingle , for which he should be wholly irresponsible . there 
 be also this peculiarity in Darrell 's conversation ; if he never speak 
 of his guest 's past and future , neither do he ever do more than advert 
 in the most general term to his own . of that grand stage on which he 
 have be so brilliant an actor he impart no reminiscence ; of those 
 great man , the leader of his age , with whom he have mingle familiarly , 
 he tell no anecdote . equally silent be he as to the early step in 
 his career , the mode by which he have study , the accident of which he 
 have seize advantage , - silent there as upon the cause he have gain , or 
 the debate he have adorn . never could you have suppose that this man , 
 still in the prime of public life , have be the theme of journal and 
 the boast of party . neither do he ever , as man who talk easily at 
 their own hearth be prone to do , speak of project in the future , 
 even though the project be no vaster than the planting of a tree or the 
 alteration of a parterre , - project with which rural life so copiously 
 and so innocently teem . the past seem as if it have leave to he no 
 memory , the future as if it store for he no desire . but do the past 
 leave no memory ? why then at interval would the book slide from his 
 eye , the head sink upon the breast , and a shade of unutterable dejection 
 darken over the grand beauty of that strong stern countenance ? still 
 that dejection be not morbidly feed and encourage , for he would fling 
 it from he with a quick impatient gesture of the head , resume the 
 book resolutely , or change it for another which induce fresh train of 
 thought , or look over Lionel 's shoulder , and make some subtile comment 
 on his choice , or call on Fairthorn for the flute ; and in a few minute 
 the face be severely serene again . and be it here say , that it be only 
 in the poetry of young gentleman , or the prose of lady novelist , that a 
 man in good health and of sound intellect wear the livery of unvarying 
 gloom . however great his cause of sorrow , he do not forever parade 
 its ostentatious mourning , nor follow the hearse of his hope with 
 the long face of an undertaker . he will still have his gleam of 
 cheerfulness , his moment of good humour . the old smile will sometimes 
 light the eye , and awake the old playfulness of the lip . but what a 
 great and critical sorrow do leave behind be often far bad than the 
 sorrow itself have be . it be a change in the inner man , which strand 
 he , as Guy Darrell seem strand , upon the shoal of the Present ; 
 which the more he strive manfully to bear his burden warn he the more 
 from dwell on the past ; and the more impressively it enforce the 
 lesson of the vanity of human wish strike the more from his reckoning 
 illusive hope in the future . thus out of our threefold existence two 
 part be annihilate , - the what have be , the what shall be . we fold 
 our arm , stand upon the petty and steep cragstone , which alone loom 
 out of the Measureless Sea , and say to ourselves , look neither 
 backward nor beyond , " let we bear what be ; " and so for the moment the 
 eye can lighten and the lip can smile . 

 Lionel could no long glean from Mr. Fairthorn any stray hint upon 
 the family record . that gentleman have evidently be reprimand 
 for indiscretion , or warn against its repetition , and he become as 
 reserved and mum as if he have just emerge from the cave of Trophonius . 
 indeed he shun trust himself again alone to Lionel , and affect 
 a long arrear of correspondence on behalf of his employer , leave the lad 
 during the forenoon to solitary angling , or social intercourse with the 
 swan and the tame doe . but from some mystic concealment within door 
 would often float far into the open air the melody of that magic 
 flute ; and the boy would glide back , along the dark - red mournful wall 
 of the old house , or the futile pomp of pilastere arcade in the 
 uncompleted new one , to listen to the sound : listening , he , blissful 
 boy , forget the present ; he seize the unchallenged royalty of his 
 year . for he no rebel in the past conspire with poison to the 
 wine - cup , murder to the sleep . no desert in the future , arrest the 
 march of ambition , say , " here be sand for a pilgrim , not field for a 
 conqueror . " 




 CHAPTER X. 

  in which chapter the history quietly move on to the next . 

 thus nearly a week have go , and Lionel begin to feel perplex as to 
 the duration of his visit . should he be the first to suggest departure ? 
 Mr. Darrell rescue he from that embarrassment . on the seventh day , 
 Lionel meet his host in a lane near the house , return from his 
 habitual ride . the boy walk home by the side of the horseman , pat 
 the steed , admire its shape , and praise the beauty of another 
 saddle - horse , small and slighter , which he have see in the paddock 
 exercise by a groom . " do you ever ride that chestnut ? I think it even 
 handsomer than this . " 

 " half our preference be due to the vanity they flatter . few can ride 
 this horse ; any one , perhaps , that . " 

 " there speak the Dare - all ! " say Lionel , laugh . the host do not 
 look displeased . 

 " where no difficulty , there no pleasure , " say he in his curt laconic 
 diction . " I be in Spain two year ago . I have not an english horse 
 there , so I buy that andalusian jennet . what have serve he at need , 
 no preux chevalier would leave to the chance of ill - usage . so the 
 jennet come with I to England . you have not be much accustomed to 
 ride , I suppose ? " 

 " not much ; but my dear mother think I ought to learn . she pinch 
 for a whole year to have I teach at a riding - school during one school 
 vacation . " 

 " your mother 's relation be , I believe , well off . do they suffer she to 
 pinch ? " 

 " I do not know that she have relation live ; she never speak of they . " 

 " indeed ! " this be the first question on home matter that Darrell have 
 ever directly address to Lionel . he there drop the subject , and 
 say , after a short pause , " I be not aware that you be a horseman , or 
 I would have ask you to accompany I ; will you do so to - morrow , and 
 mount the jennet ? " 

 " oh , thank you ; I should like it so much . " 

 Darrell turn abruptly away from the bright , grateful eye . " I be only 
 sorry , " he add , look aside , " that our excursion can be but few . 
 on Friday next I shall submit to you a proposition ; if you accept it , we 
 shall part on Saturday , - like each other , I hope : speak for myself , 
 the experiment have not fail ; and on your ? " 

 " on mine ! - oh , Mr. Darrell , if I dare but tell you what recollection 
 of yourself the experiment will bequeath to I ! " 

 " do not tell I , if they imply a compliment , " answer Darrell , with 
 the low silvery laugh which so melodiously express indifference and 
 repel affection . he enter the stable - yard , dismount ; and on 
 return to Lionel , the sound of the flute steal forth , as if from the 
 eave of the gable roof . " could the pipe of Horace 's faunus be sweet 
 than that flute ? " say Darrell , 

  " ' utcunque dulci , Tyndare , fistula , 
  Valles , ' etc . 

 what a lovely ode that be ! what knowledge of town life ! what 
 susceptibility to the rural ! of all the Latins , Horace be the only one 
 with whom I could wish to have spend a week . but no ! I could not have 
 discuss the brief span of human life with lock steep in Malobathran 
 balm and wreathe with that silly myrtle . Horace and I would have 
 quarrel over the first heady bowl of Massie . we never can quarrel 
 now ! bless subject and poet - laureate of Queen Proserpine , and , I 
 dare swear , the most gentlemanlike poet she ever receive at court ; 
 henceforth his task be to uncoil the asp from the brow of Alecto , and 
 arrest the ambitious Orion from the chase after visionary lion . " 




 CHAPTER XI . 

  show that if a good face be a letter of recommendation , a good 
  heart be a letter of credit . 

 the next day they ride forth , host and guest , and that ride prove 
 an eventful crisis in the fortune of Lionel Haughton . Hitherto I have 
 elaborately dwelt on the fact that whatever the regard Darrell might 
 feel for he , it be a regard apart from that interest which accept a 
 responsibility and link to itself a fate . and even if , at moment , the 
 powerful and wealthy man have feel that interest , he have thrust it from 
 he . that he mean to be generous be indeed certain , and this he have 
 typically show in a very trite matter - of - fact way . the tailor , whose 
 visit have lead to such perturbation , have receive instruction beyond the 
 mere supply of the raiment for which he have be summon ; and a large 
 patent portmanteau , contain all that might constitute the liberal 
 outfit of a young man in the rank of gentleman , have arrive at Fawley , 
 and amazed and move Lionel , whom Darrell have by this time thoroughly 
 reconcile to the acceptance of benefit . the gift denote this : " in 
 recognize you as kinsman , I shall henceforth provide for you as 
 gentleman . " Darrell indeed meditate apply for an appointment in 
 one of the public office , the settlement of a liberal allowance , and 
 a parting shake of the hand , which should imply , " I have now behave as 
 become I : the rest belong to you . we may never meet again . there be 
 no reason why this good - by may not be forever . " 

 but in the course of that ride , Darrell 's intention change . wherefore ? 
 you will never guess ! nothing so remote as the distance between cause 
 and effect , and the cause for the effect here be - poor little Sophy . 

 the day be fresh , with a lovely breeze , as the two rider ride 
 briskly over the turf of rolling common , with the feathery bough of 
 neighbouring woodland toss joyously to and fro by the sportive summer 
 wind . the exhilarate exercise and air raise Lionel 's spirit , 
 and release his tongue from all trammel ; and when a boy be in high 
 spirit , ten to one but he grow a frank egotist , feel the teem 
 life of his individuality , and talk about himself . quite unconsciously , 
 Lionel rattle out gay anecdote of his school - day ; his quarrel with a 
 demoniacal usher ; how he run away ; what befell he ; how the doctor go 
 after , and bring he back ; how splendidly the doctor behave , - neither 
 flog nor expel he , but after patiently listen , while he 
 rebuke the pupil , dismiss the usher , to the joy of the whole academy ; 
 how he fight the head boy in the school for call the doctor a sneak ; 
 how , lick twice , he yet fight that head boy a third time , and lick 
 he ; how , when head boy himself , he have rouse the whole school into a 
 civil war , divide the boy into Cavaliers and roundhead ; how clay 
 be roll out into cannon - ball and pistol - shot , stick shape into 
 sword , the playground disturb to construct fortification ; how a 
 slovenly stout boy enact Cromwell ; how he himself be elevate into 
 Prince Rupert ; and how , reverse all history , and infamously degrade 
 Cromwell , Rupert would not consent to be beat ; and Cromwell at the 
 last , disable by an untoward blow across the knuckle , ignominiously 
 yield himself prisoner , be try by a court - martial , and sentence to 
 be shoot ! to all this rubbish do Darrell incline his patient ear , - not 
 encouraging , not interrupt , but sometimes stifle a sigh at the 
 sound of Lionel 's merry laugh , or the sight of his fair face , with 
 heighten glow on his cheek , and his long silky hair , worthy the name 
 of lovelock , blow by the wind from the open loyal feature , which 
 might well have grace the portrait of some youthful cavalier . on 
 bound the spanish jennet , on rattle the boy rider . he have leave school 
 now , in his headlong talk ; he be describe his first friendship with 
 Frank Vance , as a lodger at his mother 's ; how example fire he , and he 
 take to sketch - work and painting ; how kindly Vance give he lesson ; how 
 at one time he wish to be a painter ; how much the mere idea of such 
 a thing vex his mother , and how little she be move when he tell she 
 that Titian be of a very ancient family , and that Francis I. , archetype 
 of gentleman , visit Leonardo da Vinci 's sick - bed ; and that Henry VIII . 
 have say to a pert lord who have snub Holbein , " I can make a lord any 
 day , but I can not make a Holbein ! " how Mrs. Haughton still confound 
 all painter in the general image of the painter and the plumber who have 
 cheat she so shamefully in the renew window - sash and redecorate 
 wall , which Time and the four child of an irish family have make 
 necessary to the letting of the first floor . and these playful allusion 
 to the maternal idea be still not irreverent , but contrive so as 
 rather to prepossess Darrell in Mrs. Haughton 's favour by bring out 
 trait of a simple natural mother , too proud , perhaps , of her only son , 
 not care what she do , how she work , so that he might not lose caste 
 as a bear Haughton . Darrell understand , and nod his head approvingly . 
 " certainly , " he say , speak almost for the first time , " fame confer 
 a rank above that of gentleman and of king ; and as soon as she issue 
 her patent of nobility , it matter not a straw whether the recipient be 
 the son of a Bourbon or of a tallow - chandler . but if Fame withhold she 
 patent ; if a well - bear man paint aldermen , and be not famous   and I dare 
 say you would have be neither a titian nor a Holbein , - why , he might 
 as well be a painter and plumber , and have a well chance even of bread 
 and cheese by stand to his post as gentleman . Mrs. Haughton be 
 right , and I respect she . " 

 " quite right . if I live to the age of Methuselah , I could not paint a 
 head like Frank Vance . " 

 " and even he be not famous yet . never hear of he . " 

 " he will be famous : I be sure of it ; and if you live in London , you 
 would hear of he even now . oh , sir ! such a portrait as he paint 
 the other day ! but I must tell you all about it . " and therewith Lionel 
 plunge at once , media re , into the brief break epic of little Sophy , 
 and the eccentric infirm Belisarius for whose sake she first toil and 
 then beg ; with what artless eloquence he bring out the colour of 
 the whole story , - now its humour , now its pathos ; with what beautifying 
 sympathy he adorn the image of the little vagrant girl , with she 
 mien of gentlewoman and her simplicity of child ; the river excursion to 
 Hampton Court ; her still delight ; how annoyed he feel when Vance seem 
 ashamed of she before those fine people ; the orchard scene in which 
 he have read Darrell 's letter , that , for the time , drive she from the 
 foremost place in his thought ; the return home , the parting , her 
 wistful look back , the visit to the Cobbler 's next day ; even her 
 farewell gift , the nursery poem , with the line write on the fly - leaf , 
 he have they by heart ! Darrell , the grand advocate , feel he could not 
 have produce on a jury , with those element , the effect which that 
 boy - narrator produce on his granite self . 

 " and , oh , sir ! " cry Lionel , check his horse , and even arrest 
 Darrell 's with bold right hand - " oh , " say he , as he bring his moist 
 and plead eye in full battery upon the shaken fort to which he have 
 mine his way - " oh , sir ! you be so wise and rich and kind , do rescue 
 that poor child from the penury and hardship of such a life ! if you 
 could but have see and hear she ! she could never have be bear to it ! 
 you look away : I offend you ! I have no right to tax your benevolence 
 for other ; but , instead of shower favour upon I , so little would 
 suffice for she ! - if she be but above positive want , with that old man 
  she would not be happy without he , safe in such a cottage as you give 
 to your own peasant ! I be a man , or shall be one soon ; I can wrestle 
 with the world , and force my way somehow ; but that delicate child , a 
 village show , or a beggar on the high road ! - no mother , no brother , no 
 one but that break - down cripple , lean upon her arm as his crutch . I 
 can not bear to think of it . I be sure I shall meet she again somewhere ; 
 and when I do , may I not write to you , and will you not come to she 
 help ? do speak ; do say ' yes , ' Mr. Darrell . " 

 the rich man 's breast heave slightly ; he close his eye , but for a 
 moment . there be a short and sharp struggle with his well self , and 
 the well self conquer . 

 " let go my rein ; see , my horse put down his ear ; he may do you a 
 mischief . now canter on : you shall be satisfy . give I a moment to - to 
 unbutton my coat : it be too tight for I . " 




 CHAPTER XII . 

  Guy Darrell give way to an impulse , and quickly decide what he 
  will do with it . 

 " Lionel Haughton , " say Guy Darrell , regain his young cousin 's side , 
 and speak in a firm and measured voice , " I have to thank you for one 
 very happy minute ; the sight of a heart so fresh in the limpid purity of 
 goodness be a luxury you can not comprehend till you have come to my age ; 
 journey , like I , from Dan to Beersheba , and find all barren . heed 
 I : if you have be half - a - dozen year old , and this child for whom 
 you plead have be a fair young woman , perhaps just as innocent , just as 
 charming , - more in peril , - my benevolence would have lain as dormant 
 as a stone . a young man 's foolish sentiment for a pretty girl , - as your 
 true friend , I should have shrug my shoulder and say , ' beware ! ' have 
 I be your father , I should have take alarm and frown . I should have 
 see the sickly romance which end in dupe and deceiver . but at your 
 age , you , hearty , genial , and open - hearted boy , - you , catch but by the 
 chivalrous compassion for helpless female childhood , - oh , that you be 
 my son , - oh , that my dear father 's blood be in those knightly vein ! 
 I have a son once ! God take he ; " the strong man 's lip quiver : he 
 hurry on . " I feel there be manhood in you , when you write to fle my 
 churlish favour in my tooth ; when you would have leave my roof - tree in a 
 burst of passion which might be foolish , but be noble than the wisdom 
 of calculate submission , manhood , but only perhaps man 's pride as 
 man , - man 's heart not less cold than winter . to - day you have show 
 I something far well than pride ; that nature which constitute the 
 heroic temperament be complete by two attribute , - unflinche purpose , 
 disinterested humanity . I know not yet if you have the first ; you reveal 
 to I the second . yes ! I accept the duty you propose to I ; I will do 
 more than leave to you the chance of discover this poor child . I will 
 direct my solicitor to take the right step to do so . I will see that 
 she be safe from the ill you feel for she . Lionel , more still , I be 
 impatient till I write to Mrs. Haughton . I do she wrong . remember , I 
 have never see she . I resent in she the cause of my quarrel with your 
 father , who be once dear to I . enough of that . I dislike the tone of 
 her letter to I . I dislike it in the mother of a boy who have Darrell 
 blood ; other reason too , - let they pass . but in provide for your 
 education ; I certainly think her relation provide for her support . 
 she never ask I for help there ; and , judge of she hastily , I 
 think she would not have scruple to do so , if my help there have not 
 be forestall . you have make I understand she well ; and , at all 
 event , three - fourth of what we be in boyhood most of we owe to our 
 mother ! you be frank , fearless , affectionate , a gentleman . I respect 
 the mother who have such a son . " 

 certainly praise be rare upon Darrell 's lip ; but when he do praise , 
 he know how to do it ! and no man will ever command other who have not 
 by nature that gift ! it can not be learn . art and experience can only 
 refine its expression . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

 he who see his heir in his own child , carry his eye over hope and 
 possession lie far beyond his gravestone , view his life , even 
 here , as a period but close with a comma . he who see his heir in 
 another man 's child , see the full stop at the end of the sentence . 

 Lionel 's departure be indefinitely postpone ; nothing more be say of 
 it . meanwhile Darrell 's manner towards he undergo a marked change . 
 the previous indifference the rich kinsman have hitherto show as to the 
 boy 's past life , and the peculiarity of his intellect and character , 
 wholly vanish . he seek now , on the contrary , to plumb thoroughly the 
 more hidden depth which lurk in the nature of every human being , and 
 which , in Lionel , be the more difficult to discern from the vivacity 
 and candour which cover with so smooth and charming a surface a pride 
 tremulously sensitive , and an ambition that startle himself in the 
 hour when solitude and revery reflect upon the vision of youth the 
 giant outline of its own hope . 

 Darrell be not dissatisfied with the result of his survey ; yet often , 
 when perhaps most pleased , a shade would pass over his countenance ; and 
 have a woman who love he be by to listen , she would have hear the 
 short slight sigh which come and go too quickly for the dull sense 
 of man 's friendship to recognize it as the sound of sorrow . 

 in Darrell himself , thus insensibly alter , Lionel daily discover 
 more to charm his interest and deepen his affection . in this man 's 
 nature there be , indeed , such wondrous under - current of sweetness , 
 so suddenly gush forth , so suddenly vanish again ! and exquisite in 
 he be the trait of that sympathetic tact which the world call 
 fine breeding , but which come only from a heart at once chivalrous and 
 tender , the more bewitching in Darrell from their contrast with a manner 
 usually cold , and a bearing so stamp with masculine , self - willed , 
 haughty power . thus - day go on as if Lionel have become a very child 
 of the house . but his sojourn be in truth draw near to a close not 
 less abrupt and unexpected than the turn in his host 's humour to which 
 he owe the delay of his departure . 

 one bright afternoon , as Darrell be stand at the window of his 
 private study , Fairthorn , who have creep in on some matter of business , 
 look at his countenance long and wistfully , and then , shamble up to 
 his side , put one hand on his shoulder with a light timid touch , and , 
 point with the other to Lionel , who be lie on the grass in front 
 of the casement read the " Faerie Queene , " say , " why do you take he 
 to your heart if he do not comfort it ? " 

 Darrell wince and answer gently , " I do not know you be in the 
 room . Poor Fairthorn ; thank you ! " 

 " thank I ! - what for ? " 

 " for a kind thought . so , then , you like the boy ? " 

 " may not   I like he ? " ask Fairthorn , look rather frightened ; ' surely 
 you do ! " 

 " yes , I like he much ; I be try my good to love he . but , 
 but " - Darrell turn quickly , and the portrait of his father over 
 the mantelpiece come full upon his sight , - an impressive , a haunting 
 face , - sweet and gentle , yet with the high narrow brow and arch 
 nostril of pride , with restless melancholy eye , and an expression 
 that reveal the delicacy of intellect , but not its power . there be 
 something forlorn , but impose , in the whole effigy . as you continue 
 to look at the countenance , the mournful attraction grow upon you . truly 
 a touching and a most lovable aspect . Darrell 's eye moisten . 

 " yes , my father , it be so ! " he say softly . " all my sacrifice be in 
 vain . the race be not to be rebuild ! no grandchild of yours will succeed 
 I , - I , the last of the old line ! Fairthorn , how can I love that boy ? 
 he may be my heir , and in his vein not a drop of my father 's blood ! " 

 " but he have the blood of your father 's ancestor ; and why must you 
 think of he as your heir ? - you , who , if you would but go again into the 
 world , might yet find a fair wi - " 

 with such a stamp come Darrell 's foot upon the floor that the holy and 
 conjugal monosyllable dropping from Fairthorn 's lip be as much cut in 
 two as if a shark have snap it . unspeakably frighten , the poor man 
 sidle away , thrust himself behind a tall reading - desk , and , peer 
 aslant from that covert , whimper out , " do not , do not   now , do not   be so 
 awful ; I do not mean to offend , but I be always say something I do 
 not mean ; and really you look so young still "   coaxingly , " and , and - " 

 Darrell , the burst of rage over , have sink upon a chair , his face bow 
 over his hand , and his breast heaving as if with suppressed sob . 

 the musician forget his fear ; he spring forward , almost upsetting 
 the tall desk ; he fling himself on his knee at Darrell 's foot , and 
 exclaim in break word , " Master , master , forgive I ! Beast that I 
 be ! do look up - do smile or else beat I - kick I . " 

 Darrell 's right hand slide gently from his face , and fall into 
 Fairthorn 's clasp . 

 " hush , hush , " mutter the man of granite ; " one moment , and it will be 
 over . " 

 one moment ! that might be but a figure of speech ; yet before Lionel have 
 finish half the canto that be plunge he into fairyland , Darrell 
 be stand by he with his ordinary tranquil mien ; and Fairthorn 's 
 flute from behind the bough of a neighbouring lime - tree be breathe 
 out an air as dulcet as if careless Fauns still pip in Arcady , and 
 Grief be a far dweller on the other side of the mountain , of whom 
 shepherd , recline under summer leaf , speak as we speak of hydra 
 and unicorn , and thing in fable . 

 on , on swell the mellow , mellow , witching music ; and now the worn 
 man with his secret sorrow , and the boy with his frank glad laugh , be 
 pass away , side by side , over the turf , with its starry and golden 
 wild - flower , under the bough in yon Druid copse , from which they 
 start the ringdove , - far and far , still side by side , now out of 
 sight , as if the dense green of the summer have close around they like 
 wave . but still the flute sound on , and still they hear it , soft and 
 soft as they go . Hark ! do you not hear it - you ? 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

  there be certain event which to each man 's life be as comet to 
  the earth , seemingly strange and erratic portent ; distinct from the 
  ordinary light which guide our course and mark our season , yet 
  true to their own law , potent in their own influence . philosophy 
  speculate on their effect , and dispute upon their us ; man who 
  do not philosophize regard they as special messenger and bode of 
  evil . 

 they come out of the little park into a by - lane ; a vast tract of common 
 land , yellow with furze and undulate with swell and hollow , spread 
 in front ; to their right the dark beechwood , still beneath the weight 
 of the July noon . Lionel have be talk about the " Faerie Queene , " 
 knight - errantry , the sweet impossible dream - life that , safe from Time , 
 glide by bower and hall , through magic forest and by witch eave 
 in the world of poet - book . and Darrell listen , and the flute - note 
 mingle with the atmosphere faint and far off , like voice from that 
 world itself . 

 out then they come , this broad waste land before they ; and Lionel say 
 merrily , - 

 " but this be the very scene ! here the young knight , leave his father 's 
 hall , would have check his destri , glance wistfully now over that 
 green wild which seem so boundless , now to the ' umbrageous horror ' of 
 those breathless woodland , and question himself which way to take for 
 adventure . " 

 " yes , " say Darrell , come out from his long reserve on all that 
 concern his past life , - " yes , and the gold of the gorse - blossom 
 tempt I ; and I take the waste land . " he pause a moment , and renew : 
 " and then , when I have know city and man , and snatch romance from 
 dull matter - of - fact , then I would have do as civilization do 
 with romance itself , - I would have enclose the waste land for my own 
 aggrandizement . look , " he continue , with a sweep of the hand round the 
 width of prospect , " all that you see to the verge of the horizon , some 
 fourteen year ago , be to have be throw into the pretty paddock 
 we have just quit , and serve as park round the house I be then 
 build . vanity of human wish ! what but the several proportion of 
 their common folly distinguish the baffled squire from the arrest 
 conqueror ? Man 's characteristic cerebral organ must certainly be 
 acquisitiveness . " 

 " be it his organ of acquisitiveness that move themistocle to 
 boast that ' he could make a small state great ' ? " " well 
 remember , - ingeniously quote , " return Darrell , with the polite bend 
 of his stately head . " yes , I suspect that the coveting organ have much 
 to do with the boast . to build a name be the early dream of 
 Themistocles , if we be to accept the anecdote that make he say , ' the 
 trophy of Miltiades would not suffer he to sleep , ' to build a name , 
 or to create a fortune , be but vary application of one human 
 passion . the desire of something we have not be the first of our 
 childish remembrance : it matter not what form it take , what object it 
 long for ; still it be to acquire ! it never desert we while we live . " 

 " and yet , if I might , I should like to ask , what you now desire that you 
 do not possess ? " 

 " i - nothing ; but I speak of the living ! I be dead . only , " add Darrell , 
 with his silvery laugh , " I say , as poor Chesterfield say before I , ' it 
 be a secret : keep it . ' " 

 Lionel make no reply ; the melancholy of the word sadden he : but 
 Darrell 's manner repel the expression of sympathy or of interest ; and 
 the boy fall into conjecture , what have kill to the world this man 's 
 intellectual life ? 

 and thus silently they continue to wander on till the sound of the 
 flute have long be lose to their ear . be the musician play still ? 

 at length they come round to the other end of Fawley village , and 
 Darrell again become animate . 

 " perhaps , " say he , return to the subject of talk that have be 
 abruptly suspend , - " perhaps the love of power be at the origin of each 
 restless courtship of Fortune : yet , after all , who have power with less 
 alloy than the village thane ? with so little effort , so little thought , 
 the man in the manor - house can make man in the cottage happy here 
 below and more fit for a hereafter yonder . in leave the world I come 
 from contest and pilgrimage , like our sire the Crusaders , to reign at 
 home . " 

 as he speak , he enter one of the cottage . an old paralytic man be 
 seat by the fire , hot though the July sun be out of door ; and his 
 wife , of the same age , and almost as helpless , be read to he a 
 chapter in the Old Testament , - the fifth chapter in Genesis , contain 
 the genealogy , age , and death of the patriarch before the Flood . how 
 the face of the couple brighten when Darrell enter . " Master Guy ! " 
 say the old man , tremulously rise . the world - weary orator and lawyer 
 be still Master Guy to he . 

 " sit down , Matthew , and let , I read you a chapter . " Darrell take the 
 Holy Book , and read the Sermon on the Mount . never have Lionel hear 
 anything like that reading ; the feeling which bring out the depth of 
 the sense , the tone , sweet than the flute , which clothe the divine 
 word in music . as Darrell cease , some beauty seem go from the 
 day . he linger a few minute , talk kindly and familiarly , and then 
 turn into another cottage , where lay a sick woman . he listen to her 
 ailment , promise to send she something to do she good from his own 
 store , cheer up her spirit , and , leave she happy , turn to Lionel 
 with a glorious smile , that seem to ask , " and be there not power in 
 this ? " 

 put it be the sad peculiarity of this remarkable man that all his mood 
 be subject to rapid and seemingly unaccountable variation . it be as 
 if some great blow have fall on the mainspring of his organization , and 
 leave its original harmony break up into fragment each impressive in 
 itself , but run one into the other with an abrupt discord , as a 
 harp play upon by the wind . for , after this evident effort at 
 self - consolation or self - support in soothe or strengthen other , 
 suddenly Darrell 's head fall again upon his breast , and he walk on , up 
 the village lane , heed no long either the open door of expectant 
 cottager or the salutation of humble passer - by . " and I could have be 
 so happy here ! " he say suddenly . " can I not be so yet ? ay , perhaps , 
 when I be thoroughly old , - tie to the world but by the thread of an 
 hour . old man do seem happy ; behind they , all memory faint , save those 
 of childhood and sprightly youth ; before they , the narrow ford , and the 
 sun dawn up through the cloud on the other shore . ' t be the critical 
 descent into age in which man be surely most troubled ; grief go , 
 still rankle ; nor - strength yet in his limb , passion yet in his 
 heart - reconcile to what loom near in the prospect , - the armchair 
 and the palsied head . well ! life be a quaint puzzle . bit the most 
 incongruous join into each other , and the scheme thus gradually become 
 symmetrical and clear ; when , lo ! as the infant clap his hand and 
 cry , ' see ! see ! the puzzle be make out ! ' all the piece be sweep back 
 into the box , - black box with the gild nail . Ho ! Lionel , look 
 up ; there be our village church , and here , close at my right , the 
 churchyard ! " 

 now while Darrell and his young companion be direct their gaze to 
 the right of the village lane , towards the small gray church , - towards 
 the sacred burial - ground in which , here and there amongst humbler 
 graf , stand the monumental stone inscribe to the memory of some 
 former Darrell , for whose remain the live sod have be prefer to 
 the family vault ; while both slowly near the funeral spot , and lean , 
 silent and musing , over the rail that fence it from the animal turn 
 to graze on the sward of the surround green , - a foot - traveller , a 
 stranger in the place , loiter on the threshold of the small wayside 
 inn , about fifty yard off to the left of the lane , and look hard at 
 the still figure of the two kinsman . 

 turn then to the hostess , who be stand somewhat within the 
 threshold , a glass of brandy - and - water in her hand , the third glass that 
 stranger have call for during his half hour 's rest in the hostelry , 
 quoth the man , 

 " the tall gentleman yonder be surely your squire , be he not ? but who 
 be the short and young person ? " 

 the landlady put forth her head . 

 " oh ! that be a relation of the squire down on a visit , sir . I hear 
 coachman say that the squire be take to he hugely ; and they do think at 
 the Hall that the young gentleman will be his heir . " 

 " aha ! - indeed - his heir ! what be the lad 's name ? what relation can he be 
 to Mr. Darrell ? " 

 " I do not   know what relation exactly , sir ; but he be one of the 
 Haughtons , and they have   be kin to the Fawley folk time out of mind . " 

 " Haughton ? - aha ! thank you , ma'am . Change , if you please . " 

 the stranger toss off his dram , and stretch his hand for his change . 

 " Beg pardon , sir , but this must be forre money , " say the landlady , 
 turn a five - franc piece on her palm with suspicious curiosity . 

 " foreign ! be it possible ? " the stranger dive again into his pocket , and 
 apparently with some difficulty hunt out half - a - crown . 

 " sixpence more , if you please , sir ; three brandy , and bread - and - cheese 
 and the ale too , sir . " 

 " how stupid I be ! I think that french coin be a five shilling piece . 
 I fear I have no english money about I but this half - crown ; and I can not 
 ask you to trust I , as you do not   know I . " 

 " oh , sir , ' t be all one if you know the squire . you may be pass this 
 way again . " 

 " I shall not forget my debt when I do , you may be sure , " say the 
 stranger ; and , with a nod , he walk away in the same direction as 
 Darrell and Lionel have already take , through a turnstile by a public 
 path that , skirt the churchyard and the neighbouring parsonage , lead 
 along a cornfield to the demesne of Fawley . 

 the path be narrow , the corn rise on either side , so that two person 
 could not well walk abreast . Lionel be some pace in advance , darrell 
 walk slow . the stranger follow at a distance : once or twice he 
 quicken his pace , be if resolve to overtake Darrell ; then apparently 
 his mind misgave he , and he again fall back . 

 there be something furtive and sinister about the man . little could be 
 see of his face , for he wear a large hat of foreign make , slouch deep 
 over his brow , and his lip and jaw be conceal by a dark and full 
 mustache and beard . as much of the general outline of the countenance 
 as remain distinguishable be nevertheless decidedly handsome ; but 
 a complexion naturally rich in colour seem to have gain the heated 
 look which come with the early habit of intemperance before it fade 
 into the leaden hue of the later . 

 his dress bespoke pretension to a certain rank : but its component 
 part be strangely ill - assorted , out of date , and out of repair ; 
 pearl - colour trouser , with silk braid down their side ; brodequin 
 to match , - parisian fashion three year back , but the trouser shabby , 
 the braid discolour , the brodequin in hole . the coat - once a 
 black evening dress - coat - of a cut a year or two anterior to that of the 
 trouser ; satin facing,-cloth napless , satin stain . over all , a sort 
 of summer travelling - cloak , or rather large cape of a waterproof silk , 
 once the extreme mode with the lion of the Chaussee d'Autin whenever 
 they venture to rove to swiss canton or german spa ; but which , from 
 a certain dainty effeminacy in its shape and texture , require the 
 minute elegance in the general costume of its wearer as well as the 
 cleanly purity in itself . wear by this traveller , and well - nigh wear 
 out too , the cape become a finery mournful as a tattered pennon over a 
 wreck . 

 yet in spite of this dress , however unbecoming , shabby , obsolete , 
 a second glance could scarcely fail to note the wearer as a man 
 wonderfully well - shape , - tall , slender in the waist , long of limb , 
 but with a girth of chest that show immense power ; one of those rare 
 figure that a female eye would admire for grace , a recruiting sergeant 
 for athletic strength . 

 but still the man 's whole bearing and aspect , even apart from the 
 dismal incongruity of his attire , which give he the air of a beggared 
 spendthrift , mar the favourable effect that physical comeliness in 
 itself produce . difficult to describe how , - difficult to say why , - but 
 there be a look which a man get , and a gait which he contract when the 
 rest of mankind cut he ; and this man have that look and that gait . 

 " so , so , " mutter the stranger . " that boy his heir ? so , so . how can I 
 get to speak to he ? in his own house he would not see I : it must be as 
 now , in the open air ; but how catch he alone ? and to lurk in the 
 inn , in his own village , - perhaps for a day , - to watch an occasion ; 
 impossible ! besides , where be the money for it ? courage , courage ! " he 
 quicken his pace , push back his hat . " courage ! why not now ? now or 
 never ! " 

 while the man thus mutteringly soliloquize , Lionel have reach the gate 
 which open into the ground of Fawley , just in the rear of the little 
 lake . over the gate he swing himself lightly , and , turn back to 
 Darrell cry , " here be the doe wait to welcome you . " 

 just as Darrell , scarcely heed the exclamation , and with his musing 
 eye on the ground , approach the gate , a respectful hand open it 
 wide , a submissive head bow low , a voice artificially soft falter 
 forth word , break and , indistinct , but of which those most audible 
 be - " Pardon , I ; something to communicate , - important ; hear I . " 

 Darrell start , just as the traveller almost touch he , start , 
 recoil , as one on whose path rise a wild beast . his bended head 
 become erect , haughty , indignant , defy ; but his cheek be pale , and 
 his lip quiver . " you here ! you in England - at Fawley ! you presume to 
 accost I ! you , sir , - you ! " 

 Lionel just catch the sound of the voice as the doe have come timidly up 
 to he . he turn round sharply , and beheld Darrell 's stern , imperious 
 countenance , on which , stern and imperious though it be , a hasty glance 
 could discover , at once , a surprise that almost border upon fear . of 
 the stranger still hold the gate he see but the back , and his voice 
 he do not hear , though by the man 's gesture he be evidently reply . 
 Lionel pause a moment irresolute ; but as the man continue to speak , he 
 see Darrell 's face grow paler and paler , and in the impulse of a vague 
 alarm he hasten towards he ; but just within three foot of the spot , 
 Darrell arrest his step . 

 " go home , Lionel ; this person would speak to I in private . " then , in 
 a low tone , he say to the stranger , " close the gate , sir ; you be 
 stand upon the land of my father . if you would speak with I , this 
 way ; " and , brush through the corn , Darrell stride towards a patch 
 of waste land that adjoin the field : the man follow he , and both 
 pass from Lionel 's eye . the doe have come to the gate to greet she 
 master ; she now rest her nostril on the bar , with a look disappointed 
 and plaintive . 

 " come , " say Lionel , " come . " the doe would not stir . 

 so the boy walk on alone , not much occupy with what have just pass . 
 " Doubtless , " think he , ' some person in the neighbourhood upon country 
 business . " 

 he skirt the lake , and seat himself on a garden bench near the 
 house . what do he there think of ? - who know ? perhaps of the Great 
 World ; perhaps of little Sophy ! time flee on : the sun be recede in 
 the west when Darrell hurry past he without speak , and enter the 
 house . 

 the host do not appear at dinner , nor all that evening . Mr. Mills make 
 an excuse : Mr. Darrell do not feel very well . 

 Fairthorn have Lionel all to himself , and have within the last few 
 day reindulge in open cordiality to the young guest , he be especially 
 communicative that evening . he talk much on Darrell , and with all the 
 affection that , in spite of his fear , the poor flute - player feel for 
 his ungracious patron . he tell many anecdote of the stern man 's tender 
 kindness to all that come within its sphere . he tell also anecdote more 
 striking of the kind man 's sternness where some obstinate prejudice , 
 some rule passion , make he " granite . " 

 " Lord , my dear young sir , " say Fairthorn , " be his most bitter open 
 enemy , and fall down in the mire , the first hand to help you would be 
 Guy Darrell 's ; but be his profess friend , and betray he to the worth 
 of a straw , and never try to see his face again if you be wise , - the 
 most forgiving and the least forgiving of human being . but - " 

 the study door noiselessly open , and Darrell 's voice call out , 
 " Fairthorn , let I speak with you . " 




 CHAPTER XV . 

  every street have two side , the shady side and the sunny . when two 
  man shake hand and part , mark which of the two take the sunny 
  side : he will be the young man of the two . 

 the next morning , neither Darrell nor Fairthorn appear at breakfast ; 
 but as soon as Lionel have conclude that meal , Mr. Mills inform he , 
 with customary politeness , that Mr. Darrell wish to speak with he in 
 the study . study , across the threshold of which Lionel have never yet set 
 footstep ! he enter it now with a sentiment of mingled curiosity and 
 awe . nothing in it remarkable , save the portrait of the host 's father 
 over the mantelpiece . book strew table , chair , and floor in the 
 disorder love by habitual student . near the window be a glass bowl 
 contain gold - fish , and close by , in its cage , a singing - bird . Darrell 
 might exist without companionship in the human specie , but not without 
 something which he protect and cherish , - a bird , even a fish . 

 Darrell look really ill : his keen eye be almost dim , and the line 
 in his face seem deep . but he speak with his usual calm , passionless 
 melody of voice . 

 " yes , " he say , in answer to Lionel 's really anxious inquiry ; " I be ill . 
 idle person like I give way to illness . when I be a busy man , I never 
 do ; and then illness give way to I . my general plan be thus , if not 
 actually alter , at least hurry to their consummation soon than I 
 expect . before you come here , I tell you to come soon , or you might 
 not find I . I mean to go abroad this summer ; I shall now start at 
 once . I need the change of scene and air . you will return to London 
 to - day . " 

 " to - day ! you be not angry with I ? " 

 " angry ! boy and cousin - no ! " resume Darrell , in a tone of unusual 
 tenderness . " angry - fie ! but since the parting must be , ' t be well to 
 abridge the pain of long farewell . you must wish , too , to see your 
 mother , and thank she for rear you up so that you may step from 
 poverty into ease with a head erect . you will give to Mrs. Haughton this 
 letter : for yourself , your inclination seem to tend towards the army . 
 but before you decide on that career , I should like you to see something 
 more of the world . call to - morrow on Colonel Morley , in Curzon Street : 
 this be his address . he will receive by to - day 's post a note from I , 
 request he to advise you . follow his counsel in what belong to the 
 world . he be a man of the world , - a distant connection of mine , who 
 will be kind to you for my sake . be there more to say ? yes . it seem an 
 ungracious speech ; but I should speak it . consider yourself sure from 
 I of an independent income . never let idle sycophant lead you into 
 extravagance by tell you that you will have more . but indulge not the 
 expectation , however plausible , that you will be my heir . " 

 " Mr. Darrell - oh , sir - " 

 " Hush ! the expectation would be reasonable ; but I be a strange being . I 
 might marry again , - have heir of my own . eh , sir , - oh why not ? " Darrell 
 speak these last word almost fiercely , and fix his eye on Lionel 
 as he repeat , - " why not ? " but see that the boy 's face evince 
 no surprise , the expression of his own relaxed , and he continue 
 calmly , - " Enough ; what I have thus rudely say be kindly mean . it be 
 a treason to a young man to let he count on a fortune which at last 
 be leave away from he . now , Lionel , go ; enjoy your spring of life ! go , 
 hopeful and light - hearted . if sorrow reach you , battle with it ; if 
 error mislead you , come fearlessly to I for counsel . why , boy , what be 
 this ? - tear ? tut , tut . " 

 " it be your goodness , " falter Lionel . " I can not help it . and be there 
 nothing I can do for you in return ? " 

 " yes , much . keep your name free from stain , and your heart open to such 
 noble emotion as awaken tear like those . ah , by the by , I hear from 
 my lawyer to - day about your poor little protegee . not find yet , but he 
 seem sanguine of quick success . you shall know the moment I hear more . " 

 " you will write to I , then , sir , and I may write to you ? " 

 " as often as you please . always direct to I here . " 

 " shall you be long abroad ? " 

 Darrell 's brow meet . " I do not   know , " say he , curtly . " Adieu . " 

 he open the door as he speak . 

 Lionel look at he with wistful yearning , filial affection , through 
 his swimming eye . " God bless you , sir , " he murmur simply , and pass 
 away . 

 " that blessing should have come from I ! " say Darrell to himself , as he 
 turn back , and stand on his solitary hearth . " but they on whose head 
 I once pour a blessing , where be they , - where ? and that man 's tale , 
 revive the audacious fable which the other , and I verily believe the 
 less guilty knave of the two , seek to palm on I year ago ! stop ; let 
 I weigh well what he say . if it be true ! oh , shame , shame ! " 

 fold his arm tightly on his breast , Darrell pace the room with 
 slow , measure stride , ponder deeply . he be , indeed , seek to 
 suppress feeling , and to exercise only judgment ; and his reasoning 
 process seem at length fully to satisfy he , for his countenance 
 gradually clear , and a triumphant smile pass across it . " a 
 lie , - certainly a palpable and gross lie ; lie it must and shall be . 
 never will I accept it as truth . Father "   look full at the portrait 
 over the mantel - shelf , " Father , fear not - never - never ! " 




 BOOK III . 




 CHAPTER I. 

  Certes , the lizard be a shy and timorous creature . he run into 
  chink and cranny if you come too near to he , and shed his very 
  tail for fear , if you catch it by the tip . he have not his be in 
  good society : no one cage he , no one pet . he be an idle vagrant . 
  but when he steal through the green herbage , and bask unmoleste 
  in the sun , he crowd perhaps as much enjoyment into one summer hour 
  as a parrot , however pampered and erudite , spread over a whole 
  drawing - room life spend in say " how dye do " and " Pretty Poll . " 

 on that dull and sombre summer morning in which the grandfather and 
 grandchild depart from the friendly roof of Mr. Merle , very dull and 
 very sombre be the thought of little Sophy . she walk slowly behind 
 the gray cripple , who have need to lean so heavily on his staff , and her 
 eye have not even a smile for the golden buttercup that glitter on 
 dewy mead alongside the barren road . 

 thus have they proceed apart and silent till they have pass the second 
 milestone . there , Waife , rouse from his own revery , which be 
 perhaps yet more dreary than those of the dejected child , halt 
 abruptly , pass his hand once or twice rapidly over his forehead , and , 
 turn round to Sophy , look into her face with great kindness as she 
 come slowly to his side . 

 " you be sad , little one ? " say he . 

 " very sad , Grandy . " 

 " and displease with I ? yes , displease that I have take you suddenly 
 away from the pretty young gentleman , who be so kind to you , without 
 encourage the chance that you be to meet with he again . " 

 " it be not like you , Grandy , " answer Sophy ; and her under - lip 
 slightly pout , while the big tear swell to her eye . 

 " true , " say the vagabond ; " anything resemble common - sense be not like 
 I . but do not   you think that I do what I feel be good for you ? must I 
 not have some good cause for it , whenever I have the heart deliberately 
 to vex you ? " 

 Sophy take his hand and press it , but she could not trust herself to 
 speak , for she feel that at such effort she would have burst out into 
 hearty crying . then Waife proceed to utter many of those wise saying , 
 old as the hill , and as high above our sorrow as hill be from the 
 valley in which we walk . he say how foolish it be to unsettle the mind 
 by preposterous fancy and impossible hope . the pretty young gentleman 
 could never be anything to she , nor she to the pretty young gentleman . 
 it might be very well for the pretty young gentleman to promise to 
 correspond with she , but as soon as he return to his friend he would 
 have other thing to think of , and she would soon be forget ; while 
 she , on the contrary , would be think of he , and the Thames and the 
 butterfly , and find hard life still more irksome . of all this , and 
 much more , in the general way of consoler who set out on the principle 
 that grief be a matter of logic , do Gentleman Waife deliver himself 
 with a vigour of ratiocination which admit of no reply , and convey 
 not a particle of comfort . and feel this , that great actor - not that 
 he be act then - suddenly stop , clasp the child in his arm , and 
 murmur in broken accent , - " but if I see you thus cast down , I shall 
 have no strength leave to hobble on through the world ; and the soon I 
 lie down , and the dust be shovel over I , why , the well for you ; 
 for it seem that Heaven send you friend , and I tear you from they . " 

 and then Sophy fairly give way to her sob : she twin her little 
 arm round the old man 's neck convulsively , kiss his rough face with 
 implore pathetic fondness , and force out through her tear , " do not 
 talk so ! I have   be ungrateful and wicked . I do not   care for any one but 
 my own dear , dear Grandy . " 

 after this little scene , they both compose themselves , and feel much 
 light of heart . they pursue their journey , no long apart , but side 
 by side , and the old man lean , though very lightly , on the child 's 
 arm . but there be no immediate reaction from gloom to gayety . Waife 
 begin talk in soften undertone , and vaguely , of his own past 
 affliction ; and partial as be the reference , how vast do the old 
 man 's sorrow seem beside the child 's regret ; and yet he comment on 
 they as if rather in pity her state than grieve for his own . 

 " ah , at your age , my darling , I have not your trouble and hardship . 
 I have not to trudge these dusty road on foot with a break - down 
 good - for - nothing scatterle ; I trod rich carpet , and sleep under 
 silken curtain . I take the air in gay carriage , - I such a scapegrace ; 
 and you , little child , you so good ! all gone , all melt away from I , 
 and not able now to be sure that you will have a crust of bread this day 
 week . " 

 " oh , yes ! I shall have bread , and you too , Grandy , " cry Sophy , with 
 cheerful voice . " it be you who teach I to pray to God , and say that 
 in all your trouble God have be good to you : and he have be so good 
 to I since I pray to he ; for I have no dreadful Mrs. Crane to beat 
 I now , and say thing more hard to bear than beat ; and you have 
 take I to yourself . how I pray for that ! and I take care of you too , 
 Grandy , - do not   I ? I pray for that too ; and as to carriage , " add 
 Sophy , with superb air , " I do not   care if I be never in a carriage as 
 long as I live ; and you know I have be in a van , which be big than 
 a carriage , and I do not   like that at all . but how come people to behave 
 so ill to you , Grandy ? " 

 " I never say people behave ill to I , Sophy . " 

 " do not they take away the carpet and silk curtain , and all the fine 
 thing you have as a little boy ? " 

 " I do not   know , " reply Waife , with a puzzled look , " that people 
 actually take they away ; but they melt away . 

 " however , I have much still to be thankful for : I be so strong , and 
 have such high spirit , Sophy , and find people not behave ill to 
 I , - quite the contrary , so kind . I find no Crane   she monster   as you 
 do , my little angel . such prospect before I , if I have walk straight 
 towards they ! but I follow my own fancy , which lead I zigzag ; and now 
 that I would stray back into the high road , you see before you a man 
 whom a Justice of the Peace could send to the treadmill for presume to 
 live without a livelihood . " 

 SOPHY . - " not without a livelihood ! - the what do you call 
 it ? - independent income , - that is , the Three Pounds , Grandy ? " 

 WAIFE   admiringly . - " sensible child . that be true . yes , Heaven be very 
 good to I still . ah ! what signify fortune ? how happy I be with my 
 dear Lizzy , and yet no two person could live more from hand to mouth . " 

 SOPHY   rather jealously . - " tizzy ? " 

 WAIFE   with moistened eye , and look down . - " my wife . she be only 
 spar to I two year : such sunny year ! and how grateful I ought to be 
 that she do not live long . she be save - such - such - such shame and 
 misery ! " a long pause . 

 Waife resume , with a rush from memory , as if pluck himself from the 
 claw of a harpy , - " what be the good of look back ? a man 's go self 
 be a dead thing . it be not i - now tramp this road , with you to lean 
 upon - whom I see , when I would turn to look behind on that which I once 
 be : it be another being , defunct and bury ; and when I say to 
 myself , ' that be do so and so , ' it be like read an epitaph on 
 a tombstone . so , at last , solitary and hopeless , I come back to my own 
 land ; and I find you , - a blessing great than I have ever dare 
 to count on . and how be I to maintain you , and take you from that 
 long - nosed alligator call Crane , and put you in womanly gentle 
 hand ; for I never think then of subject you to all you have since 
 undergone with I , - I who do not know one useful thing in life by 
 which a man can turn a penny . and then , as I be all alone in a village 
 ale - house , on my way back from - it do not signify from what , or from 
 whence , but I be disappointed and despairing , Providence mercifully 
 throw in my way - Mr. Rugge , and ordain I to be of great service to 
 that ruffian , and that ruffian of great use to I . " 

 SOPHY . - " ah , how be that ? " 

 WAIFE . - " it be fair time in the village wherein I stop , and Rugge 's 
 principal actor be take off by delirium tremen , which be Latin for a 
 disease common to man who eat little and drink much . Rugge come into the 
 alehouse bemoan his loss . a bright thought strike I . once in my day 
 I have be use to act . I offer to try my chance on Mr. Rugge 's 
 stage : he catch at I , I at he . I succeed : we come to term , and my 
 little Sophy be thus take from that ringlete crocodile , and place 
 with christian female who wear cap and read their Bible . be not heaven 
 good to we , Sophy ; and to I too - I , such a scamp ? " 

 " and you do all that , - suffer all that for my sake ? " 

 " suffer , but I like it . and , besides , I must have do something ; and 
 there be reason - in short , I be quite happy ; no , not actually happy , 
 but comfortable and merry . Providence give thick hide to animal that 
 must exist in cold climate ; and to the man whom it reserve for sorrow , 
 Providence give a coarse , jovial temper . then , when by a mercy I 
 be save from what I most dislike and dread , and never would have 
 thought of but that I fancy it might be a help to you , - I mean the 
 London stage , - and have that bad accident on the railway , how do it end ? 
 oh ! in save you "   and Waife close his eye and shudder , " in save 
 your destiny from what might be much bad for you , body and soul , than 
 the bad that have happen to you with I . and so we have be throw 
 together ; and so you have support I ; and so , when we could exist 
 without Mr. Rugge , Providence get rid of he for we . and so we be now 
 walk along the high road ; and through yonder tree you can catch a 
 peep of the roof under which we be about to rest for a while ; and there 
 you will learn what I have do with the Three Pounds ! " 

 " it be not the Spotted Boy , Grandy ? " 

 " no , " say Waife , sighing ; " the Spotted Boy be a handsome income ; but 
 let we only trust in Providence , and I should not wonder if our new 
 acquisition prove a monstrous - " 

 " monstrous ! " 

 " piece of good fortune . " 




 CHAPTER II . 

  the investment reveal . 

 Gentleman Waife pass through a turnstile , down a narrow lane , and 
 reach a solitary cottage . he knock at the door ; an old peasant woman 
 open it , and drop he a civil courtesy . " indeed , sir , I be glad you 
 be come . I ' se most afeared he be dead . " 

 " dead ! " exclaim Waife . " oh , Sophy , if he should be dead ! " 

 " who ? " 

 Waife do not heed the question . " what make you think he dead ? " say 
 he , fumble in his pocket , from which he at last produce a key . " you 
 have not be disobey my strict order , and tamper with the door ? " 

 " Lor ' love ye , no , sir . but he make such a noise at fust - awful ! and now 
 he be as still as a corpse . and I do peep through the keyhole , and he 
 be stretch stark . " 

 " Hunger , perhaps , " say the Comedian ; " ' t be his way when he have be 
 keep fast much over his usual hour . follow I , Sophy . " he put aside 
 the woman , enter the sanded kitchen , ascend a stair that lead from 
 it ; and Sophy follow , stop at a door and listen : not a sound . 
 timidly he unlock the portal and creep in , when , suddenly such a 
 rush , - such a spring , and a mass of something vehement yet soft , dingy 
 yet whitish , whirl past the actor , and come pounce against Sophy , who 
 therewith utter a shriek . " stop he , stop he , for heaven 's sake , " 
 cry Waife . " shut the door below , - seize he . " Downstairs , however , 
 go the mass , and downstairs after it hobble Waife , return in a few 
 moment with the recaptured and mysterious fugitive . " there , " he cry 
 triumphantly to Sophy , who , stand against the wall with her face 
 bury in her frock , long refuse to look up , - " there , - tame as a 
 lamb , and know I . see ! " he seat himself on the floor , and Sophy , 
 hesitatingly open her eye , beheld gravely gaze at she from under a 
 profusion of shaggy lock an enormous - 




 CHAPTER III . 

  Denoumente ! 
 POODLE ! 




 CHAPTER IV . 

  Zoology in connection with history . 

 " walk to that young lady , sir , - walk , I say . " the poodle slowly rise 
 on his hind leg , and , with an aspect inexpressibly solemn , advance 
 towards Sophy , who hastily recede into the room in which the creature 
 have be confine . 

 " make a bow - no - a bow , sir ; that be right : you can shake hand another 
 time . run down , Sophy , and ask for his dinner . " 

 " yes ; that I will ; " and Sophy fly down the stair . 

 the dog , still on his hind leg , stand in the centre of the floor 
 dignified , but evidently expectant . 

 " that will do ; lie down and die . die this moment , sir . " the dog 
 stretch himself out , close his eye , and to all appearance give up 
 the ghost . " a most splendid investment , " say Waife , with enthusiasm ; 
 " and upon the whole , clog cheap . Ho ! you be not to bring up his dinner ; 
 it be not you who be to make friend with the dog ; it be my little 
 girl ; send she up ; Sophy , Sophy ! " 

 " she be fritt , sir , " say the woman , hold a plate of canine 
 comestible ; " but lauk , sir , bend he really dead ? " 

 " Sophy , Sophy " 

 " please let I stay here , Grandy , " say Sophy 's voice from the foot of 
 the stair . 

 " Nonsense ! it be sixteen hour since he have have a morsel to eat . and he 
 will never bite the hand that feed he now . come up , I say . " 

 Sophy slowly reascende , and Waife summon the poodle to life , 
 insist upon the child 's feed he . and indeed , when that act of 
 charity be perform , the dog evince his gratitude by a series of 
 unsophisticated bound and wagging of the tail , which gradually 
 remove Sophy 's apprehension , and lay the foundation for that intimate 
 friendship which be the natural relation between child and dog . 

 " and how do you come by he ? " ask Sophy ; " and be this really the - the 
 INVESTMENT ? " 

 " shut the door carefully , but see first that the woman be not listen . 
 lie down , sir , there , at the foot of the young lady . good dog ! how do 
 I come by he ? I will tell you . the first day we arrive at the village 
 which we have just leave I go into the tobacconist 's . while I be 
 buy my ounce of canaster that dog enter the shop . in his mouth be 
 a sixpence wrap in paper . he lift himself on his hind leg , and 
 lay his missive on the counter . the shopwoman - you know she , Mrs. 
 Traill - unfold the paper and read the order . ' clever dog that , sir , ' 
 say she . ' to fetch and carry ? ' say I , indifferently . ' More than that , 
 sir ; you shall see . the order be for two penn'orth of snuff . the dog 
 know he be to take back fourpence . I will give he a penny short . ' so 
 she take the sixpence and give the dog threepence out of it . the dog 
 shake his head and look gravely into her face . ' that be all you will 
 get , ' say she . the dog shake his head again , and tap his paw once 
 on the counter , as much as to say , ' I be not to be do : a penny more , 
 if you please . ' ' if you will not take that , you shall have nothing , ' say 
 Mrs. Traill , and she take back the threepence . " 

 " dear ! and what do the dog do then , - snarl or bite ? " " not so ; he know 
 he be in his right , and do not lower himself by show bad temper . 
 the dog look quietly round , see a basket which contain two or three 
 pound of candle lie in a corner for the shop boy to take to some 
 customer ; take up the basket in his mouth , and turn tail , as much as 
 to say , ' Tit for tat then . ' he understand , you see , what be call ' the 
 law of reprisal . ' ' come back this moment , ' cry Mrs. Traill . the 
 dog walk out of the shop ; then she run after he , and count the 
 fourpence before he , on which he drop the basket , pick up the 
 right change , and go off demurely . ' to whom do that poodle belong ? ' 
 say I. ' to a poor drunken man , ' say Mrs. Traill ; ' I wish it be in 
 well hand . ' ' so do I , ma'am , ' answer I ; ' do he teach it ? ' ' no , it 
 be teach by his brother , who be an old soldier , and die in his house 
 two week ago . it know a great many trick , and be quite young . it 
 might make a fortune as a show , sir . ' so I be think . I inquire the 
 owner 's address , call on he , and find he disposed to sell the dog . 
 but he ask L3 , a sum that seem out of the question then . still I 
 keep the dog in my eye ; call every day to make friend with it , and 
 ascertain its capacity . and at last , thank to you , Sophy , I buy 
 the dog ; and what be more , as soon as I have two golden sovereign to 
 show , I get he for that sum , and we have still L1 . leave   besides 
 small saving from our lose salary   to go to the completion of his 
 education , and the advertisement of his merit . I keep this a secret 
 from Merle , - from all . I would not even let the drunken owner know where 
 I take the dog to yesterday . I bring he here , where , I learn in 
 the village , there be two room to let , lock he up , and my story be 
 tell . " 

 " but why keep it such a secret ? " 

 " because I do not   want Rugge to trace we . he might do one a mischief ; 
 because I have a grand project of genteel position and high price for 
 the exhibition of that dog . and why should it be know where we come 
 from , or what we be ? and because , if the owner know where to find the 
 dog , he might decoy it back from we . luckily he have not make the dog so 
 fond of he but what , unless it be decoy , it will accustom itself to 
 we . and now I propose that we should stay a week or so here , and devote 
 ourselves exclusively to develop the native power of this gifted 
 creature . get out the dominos . " 

 " what be his name ? " 

 " ha ! that be the first consideration . what shall be his name ? " 

 " have he not one already ? " 

 " yes , - trivial and unattractive , - Mop ! in private life it might pass . 
 but in public life - give a dog a bad name and hang he . Mop , indeed ! " 

 Therewith Mop , consider himself appeal to , rise and stretch 
 himself . 

 " right , " say Gentleman Waife ; ' stretch yourself - you decidedly require 
 it . " 




 CHAPTER V. 

  Mop become a personage . - much thought be bestow on the verbal 
  dignity , without which a personage would become a mop . - the 
  importance of name be apparent in all history . - if Augustus have 
  call himself king , Rome would have rise against he as a Tarquin ; 
  so he remain a simple equestrian , and modestly call himself 
  Imperator . - Mop choose his own title in a most mysterious manner , 
  and cease to be Mop . 

 " the first noticeable defect in your name of Mop , " say Gentleman Waife , 
 " be , as you yourself denote , the want of elongation . monosyllable be 
 not impose , and in strike composition their meaning be elevate by 
 periphrasis ; that be to say , Sophy , that what before be a short truth , 
 an elegant author elaborate into a long stretch . " 

 " certainly , " say Sophy , thoughtfully ; " I do not   think the name of Mop 
 would draw ! still he be very like a mop . " 

 " for that reason the name degrade he the more , and lower he from an 
 intellectual phenomenon to a physical attribute , which be vulgar . I hope 
 that that dog will enable we to rise in the scale of be . for whereas 
 we in act could only command a threepenny audience - reserve seat a 
 shilling - he may aspire to half - crown and dress - box ; that be , if we 
 can hit on a name which inspire respect . now , although the dog be big , 
 it be not by his size that he be to become famous , or we might call he 
 Hercules or Goliath ; neither be it by his beauty , or Adonis would not 
 be unsuitable . it be by his superior sagacity and wisdom . and there I be 
 puzzle to find his prototype amongst mortal ; for , perhaps , it may be 
 my ignorance of history - " 

 " you ignorant , indeed , Grandfather ! " 

 " but consider the innumerable million who have live on the earth , 
 it be astonish how few I can call to mind who have leave behind they a 
 proverbial renown for wisdom . there be , indeed , Solomon , but he fall 
 off at the last ; and as he belong to sacred history , we must not take 
 a liberty with his name . who be there very , very wise , besides Solomon ? 
 think , Sophy , - Profane History . " 

 Sophy   after a musing pause . - " Puss in Boots . " 

 " well , he be wise ; but then he be not human ; he be a cat . ha ! 
 Socrates . shall we call he Socrates , Socrates , Socrates ? " 

 SOPHY . - " Socrates , Socrates ! " Mop yawn . 

 WAIFE . - " he do not   take to Socrates , - prosy ! " 

 SOPHY . - " ah , Mr. Merle 's book about the Brazen Head , Friar Bacon ! he 
 must have be very wise . " 

 WAIFE . - " not bad ; mysterious , but not recondite ; historical , yet 
 familiar . what do Mop say to it ? Friar , Friar , Friar Bacon , 
 sir , - Friar ! " 

 SOPHY   coaxingly . - " Friar ! " 

 Mop , evidently conceive that appeal be make to some other personage , 
 canine or human , not present , rouse up , walk to the door , smell at 
 the chink , return , shake his head , and rest on his haunch , eye 
 his two friend superciliously . 

 SOPHY . - " he do not take to that name . " 

 WAIFE . - " he have his reason for it ; and indeed there be many worthy 
 person who disapprove of anything that savour of magical practice . 
 Mop intimate that on enter public life one should beware of 
 offend the respectable prejudice of a class . " 

 Mr. Waife then , once more resort to the recess of scholastic 
 memory , pluck therefrom , somewhat by the head and shoulder , sundry 
 name reverence in a by - go age . he think of the seven wise man 
 of Greece , but could only recall the nomenclature of two out of 
 the - even , - a sad proof of the distinction between collegiate fame and 
 popular renown . he call Thales ; he call Bion . Mop make no response . 
 " wonderful intelligence ! " say Waife ; " he know that Thales and Bion 
 would not draw ! - obsolete . " 

 Mop be equally mute to Aristotle . he prick up his car at Plato , 
 perhaps because the sound be not wholly dissimilar from that of 
 Ponto , - a name of which he might have have vague reminiscence . the 
 Romans not have cultivate an original philosophy , though they 
 contrive to produce great man without it , Waife pass by that perish 
 people . he cross to China , and try Confucius . Mop have evidently 
 never hear of he . 

 " I be at the end of my list , so far as the wise man be concern , " 
 say Waife , wipe his forehead . " if Mop be to distinguish himself by 
 valour , one would find hero by the dozen , - Achilles , and Hector , and 
 Julius Caesar , and Pompey , and Bonaparte , and Alexander the great , and 
 the Duke of Marlborough . or , if he write poetry , we could fit he to a 
 hair . but wise man certainly be scarce , and when one have hit on a wise 
 man 's name it be so little known to the vulgar that it would carry no 
 more weight with it than Spot or Toby . but necessarily some name the dog 
 must have , and take to sympathetically . " 

 Sophy meanwhile have extract the dominos from Waife 's bundle , and with 
 the dominos an alphabet and a multiplication - table in print capital . 
 as the Comedian 's one eye rest upon the last , he exclaim , " but 
 after all , Mop 's great strength will probably be in arithmetic , and the 
 science of number be the root of all wisdom . besides , every man , 
 high and low , want to make a fortune , and association connect with 
 addition and multiplication be always pleasing . who , then , be the sage 
 at computation most universally know ? unquestionably Cocker ! he must 
 take to that , Cocker , Cocker "   commandingly , - " C - o - c - k - e - r "   with 
 persuasive sweetness . 

 Mop look puzzle ; he put his head first on one side , then on the 
 other . 

 SOPHY   with mellifluous endearment . - " Cocker , good Cocker ; Cocker 
 dear ! " 

 BOTH . - " Cocker , Cocker , Cocker ! " 

 excited and bewilder , Mop put up his head , and give vent to his 
 perplexity in a long and lugubrious howl , to which certainly none who 
 hear it could have desire addition or multiplication . 

 " stop this instant , sir , - stop ; I shoot you ! you be dead , - down ! " Waife 
 adjust his staff to his shoulder gun - wise ; and at the word of command , 
 " down , " Mop be on his side , stiff and lifeless . " still , " say Waife , " a 
 name connect with profound calculation would be the most appropriate ; 
 for instance , Sir Isaac - " 

 before the Comedian could get out the word Newton , Mop have spring to 
 his four foot , and , with wag tail and wriggle back , evince a 
 sense of beatified recognition . 

 " astounding ! " say Waife , rather awed . " can it be the name ? impossible . 
 Sir Isaac , Sir Isaac ! " 

 " Bow - wow ! " answer Mop , joyously . 

 " if there be any truth in the doctrine of metempsychosis , " falter 
 Gentleman Waife , " if the great Newton could have transmigrate into 
 that incomparable animal ! Newton , Newton ! " to that name Mop make 
 no obeisance , but , evidently still restless , walk round the room , 
 smell at every corner , and turn to look back with inquisitive 
 earnestness at his new master . 

 " he do not seem to catch at the name of Newton , " say Waife , try it 
 thrice again , and vainly , " and yet he seem extremely well verse in the 
 principle of gravity . Sir Isaac ! " the dog bound towards he , put his 
 paw on his shoulder , and lick his face . " just cut out those figure 
 carefully , my dear , and see if we can get he to tell we how much twice 
 ten be - I mean by address he as Sir Isaac . " 

 Sophy cut the figure from the multiplication table , and arrange they , 
 at Waife 's instruction , in a circle on the floor . " now , Sir Isaac . " 
 Mop lift a paw , and walk deliberately round the letter . " now , Sir 
 Isaac , how much be ten time two ? " Mop deliberately make his survey and 
 calculation , and , pause at twenty , stoop , and take the letter in 
 his mouth . 

 " it be not natural , " cry Sophy , much alarmed . " it must be wicked , and 
 I would rather have nothing to do with it , please . " 

 " silly child ! he be but obey my sign . he have be teach that trick 
 already under the name of Mop . the only strange thing be , that he should 
 do it also under the name of Sir Isaac , and much more cheerfully too . 
 however , whether he have be the great Newton or not , a live dog be 
 well than a dead lion . but it be clear that , in acknowledge the name 
 of Sir Isaac , he do not encourage we to take that of Newton ; and he be 
 right : for it might be think unbecoming to apply to an animal , however 
 extraordinary , who by the severity of fortune be compel to exhibit 
 his talent for a small pecuniary reward , the family name of so great a 
 philosopher . Sir Isaac , after all , be a vague appellation ; any dog have a 
 right to be Sir Isaac - Newton may be leave conjectural . let we see if 
 we can add to our arithmetical information . look at I , Sir Isaac . " Sir 
 Isaac look and grin affectionately ; and under that title learn a 
 new combination with a facility that might have relieve Sophy 's mind 
 of all superstitious belief that the philosopher be resuscitate in the 
 dog , have she know that in life that great master of calculation the 
 most abstruse could not accurately cast up a simple sum in addition . 
 nothing bring he to the end of his majestic tether like dot and carry 
 one . notable type of our human incompleteness , where man might deem our 
 study have make we most complete ! notable type , too , of that grandest 
 order of all human genius which seem to arrive at result by intuition , 
 which a child might pose by a row of figure on a slate , while it be 
 solve the law that link the star to infinity ! but revenon a nos 
 mouton , what be the astral attraction that incontestably bind the 
 reminiscence of Mop to the cognominal distinction of Sir Isaac ? I have 
 prepare a very erudite and subtle treatise upon this query , enliven 
 by quotation from the ancient mystic , - such as Iamblicus and 
 Proclus , - as well as by a copious reference to the doctrine of the more 
 modern Spiritualists , from Sir Kenelm Digby and Swedenborg , to Monsieur 
 Cahagnet and Judge Edwards . it be to be call Inquiry into the Law of 
 Affinities , by Philomopsos : when , unluckily for my treatise , I arrive 
 at the knowledge of a fact which , though it do not render the treatise 
 less curious , knock on the head the theory upon which it be base . 
 the baptismal name of the old soldier , Mop 's first proprietor and 
 early preceptor , be Isaac ; and his master be call in the homely 
 household by that christian name , the sound have enter into Mop 's 
 young and most endear association . his canine affection have do 
 much towards ripen his scholastic education . " where be Isaac ? " " call 
 Isaac ! " " Fetch Isaac his hat , " etc . still be that name when the 
 old soldier die ; but when hear again , Mop 's heart be move , and in 
 miss the old master , he feel more at home with the new . as for the 
 title , " Sir , " it be a mere expletive in his ear . such be the fact , 
 and such the deduction to be draw from it . not that it will satisfy 
 every one . I know that philosopher who deny all that they have not 
 witness , and refuse to witness what they resolve to deny , will reject 
 the story in toto ; and will prove , by reference to their own dog , 
 that a dog never recognize the name of his master , - never yet could be 
 teach arithmetic . I know also that there be mystic who will prefer 
 to believe that Mop be in direct spiritual communication with unseen 
 Isaacs , or in a state of clairvoyance , or under the influence of the 
 odic fluid . but do we ever yet find in human reason a question with 
 only one side to it ? be not truth a polygon ? have not sage arise in 
 our day to deny even the principle of gravity , for which we bad be 
 so long contentedly take the word of the great Sir Isaac ? it be that 
 blessed spirit of controversy which keep the world go ; and it be 
 that which , perhaps , explain why Mr. Waife , when his memory be fairly 
 put to it , could remember , out of the history of the myriad who have 
 occupy our planet from the date of Adam to that in which I now write , 
 so very few man whom the world will agree to call wise , and out of that 
 very few so scant a percentage with name sufficiently know to make 
 they more popularly significant of pre - eminent sagacity than if they have 
 be call - Mops . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

  the vagrant have get his dog , proceed to hunt fortune with it , 
  leave behind he a trap to catch rat . - what the trap do catch 
  be " just like his luck . " 

 Sir Isaac , to designate he by his new name , improve much upon 
 acquaintance . he be still in the ductile season of youth , and take to 
 learn as an amusement to himself . his last master , a stupid sot , 
 have not gain his affection ; and perhaps even the old soldier , though 
 gratefully remember and mourn , have not steal into his innermost 
 heart , as Waife and Sophy gently contrive to do . in short , in a very 
 few day he become perfectly accustomed and extremely attach to they . 
 when Waife have ascertain the extent of his accomplishment , and add 
 somewhat to their range in matter which cost no great trouble , he 
 apply himself to the task of compose a little drama which might 
 bring they all into more interesting play , and in which though Sophy 
 and himself be performer the dog have the premier role . and as soon 
 as this be do , and the dog 's performance thus range into methodical 
 order and sequence , he resolve to set off to a considerable town at 
 some distance , and to which Mr. Rugge be no visitor . 

 his bill at the cottage make but slight inroad into his pecuniary 
 resource ; for in the interval of leisure from his instruction to Sir 
 Isaac , Waife have perform various little service to the lone widow 
 with whom they lodge , which Mrs. Saunders   such be her name   insist 
 upon regard as money 's worth . he have repair and regulate to a 
 minute an old clock which have take no note of time for the last three 
 year ; he have mend all the break crockery by some cement of his 
 own invention , and for which she get he the material . and here his 
 ingenuity be remarkable , for when there be only a fragment to be find 
 of a cup and a fragment or two of a saucer , he unite they both into 
 some pretty form , which , if not useful , at all event look well on a 
 shelf . he bind , in smart showy paper , sundry tattere old book which 
 have belong to his landlady 's defunct husband , a Scotch gardener , and 
 which she display on a side table , under the japan tea - tray . More than 
 all , he be of service to she in her vocation ; for Mrs. Saunders eke 
 out a small pension - which she derive from the affectionate providence 
 of her Scotch husband , in insure his life in her favour - by the 
 rearing and sale of poultry ; and Waife save she the expense of a 
 carpenter by the construction of a new coop , elevate above the reach of 
 the rat , who have hitherto make sad ravage amongst the chicken ; while 
 he confide to her certain secret in the improvement of breed and the 
 cheap process of fattening , which excite her gratitude no less than 
 her wonder . " the fact be , " say Gentleman Waife , " that my life have 
 know makeshift . once , in a foreign country , I keep poultry , upon the 
 principle that the poultry should keep I . " 

 strange it be to notice such versatility of invention , such readiness 
 of resource , such familiarity with diver nook and cranny in the 
 practical experience of life , in a man now so hard put to it for a 
 livelihood . there be person , however , who might have a good stock of 
 talent , if they do not turn it all into small change . and you , reader , 
 know as well as I do , that when a sovereign or a shilling be once 
 break into , the change scatter and dispend itself in a way quite 
 unaccountable . still copper be useful in household bill ; and when 
 Waife be really at a pinch , somehow or other , by hook or by crook , he 
 scrap together intellectual halfpence enough to pay his way . 

 Mrs. Saunders grow quite fond of her lodger . Waife she regard as a 
 prodigy of genius ; Sophy be the prettiest and good of child . Sir 
 Isaac , she take for grant , be worthy of his owner . but the Comedian 
 do not confide to she his dog 's learning , nor the use to which he 
 design to put it . and in still great precaution , when he take his 
 leave , he extract from Mrs. Saunders a solemn promise that she would 
 set no one on his track in case of impertinent inquiry . 

 " you see before you , " say he , " a man who have enemy , such as rat be 
 to your chicken : chicken despise rat when raise , as yours be now , 
 above the reach of claw and tooth . some day or other I may so raise a 
 coop for that little one : I be too old for coop . meanwhile , if a rat 
 come sneak here after we , send it off the wrong way , with a flea in 
 its ear . " 

 Mrs. Saunders promise , between tear and laughter ; bless Waife , 
 kissed Sophy , pat Sir Isaac , and stand long at her threshold watch 
 the three , as the early sun light their form recede in the narrow green 
 lane , - dewdrop sparkle on the hedgerow , and the skylark spring 
 upward from the young corn . 

 then she slowly turn indoor , and her home seem very solitary . we 
 can accustom ourselves to loneliness , but we should beware of infringe 
 the custom . once admit two or three face seat at your hearthside , 
 or gaze out from your window on the laugh sun , and when they be 
 go , they carry off the glow from your grate and the sunbeam from your 
 pane . poor Mrs. Saunders ! in vain she seek to rouse herself , to put 
 the room to right , to attend to the chicken to distract her thought . 
 the one - eyed cripple , the little girl , the shaggy - faced dog , still 
 haunt she ; and when at noon she din all alone off the remnant of 
 the last night 's social supper , the very click of the renovated clock 
 seem to say , " Gone , go ; " and mutter , " ah ! gone , " she recline 
 back on her chair , and indulge herself in a good womanlike cry . from 
 this luxury she be startle by a knock at the door . " could they have 
 come back ? " no ; the door open , and a genteel young man , in a black 
 coat and white neckcloth , step in . 

 " I beg your pardon , ma'am - your name 's Saunders - sell poultry ? " 

 " at your service , sir . spring chicken ? " poor people , whatever their 
 grief , must sell their chicken , if they have any to sell . 

 " thank you , ma'am ; not at this moment . the fact be , that I call to make 
 some inquiry have not you lodger here ? " 

 lodger ! at that word the expand soul of Mrs. Saunders reclose 
 hermetically ; the last warning of Waife revibrate in her ear this 
 white neckclothed gentleman , be he not a rat ? 

 " no , sir , I ha'n't   no lodger . " 

 " but you have have some lately , eh ? a crippled elderly man and a little 
 girl . " 

 " do not   know anything about they ; leastway , " say Mrs. Saunders , 
 suddenly remember that she be tell less to deny fact than to send 
 inquirer upon wrong direction , " leastway , at this blessed time . pray , 
 sir , what make you ask ? " 

 " why , I be instruct to come down to - - - , and find out where this 
 person , one William Waife , have go . arrive yesterday , ma'am . all I 
 could hear be , that a person answer to his description leave the place 
 several day ago , and have be see by a boy , who be tend sheep , to 
 come down the lane to your house , and you be suppose to have lodger 
  you take lodger sometimes , I think , ma'am , because you have be 
 buy some trifling article of food not in your usual way of custom . 
 circumstantial evidence , ma'am : you can have no motive to conceal the 
 truth . " 

 " I should think not indeed , sir , " retort Mrs. Saunders , whom the 
 ominous word " circumstantial evidence " set doubly on her guard . " I do 
 see a gentleman such as you mention , and a pretty young lady , about ten 
 day agone , or so , and they do lodge here a night or two , but they be 
 go to - " 

 " yes , ma'am , - go where ? " 

 " Lunnon . " 

 " really - very likely . by the train or on foot ? " 

 " on foot , I s'pose . " 

 " thank you , ma'am . if you should see they again , or hear where they be , 
 oblige I by convey this card to Mr. Waife . my employer , ma'am , Mr. 
 Gotobed , Craven Street , Strand , - eminent solicitor . he have something of 
 importance to communciate to Mr. Waife . " 

 " yes , sir , - a lawyer ; I understand . " and as of all ratlike animal in 
 the world Mrs. Saunders have the ignorance to deem a lawyer be the most 
 emphatically devouring , she congratulate herself with her whole heart 
 on the white lie she have tell in favour of the intend victim . 

 the black - coat gentleman have thus obey his instruction and 
 attain his object , nod , go his way , and regain the fly which he 
 have leave at the turnstile . " back to the inn , " cry he , " quick : I must 
 be in time for the three o'clock train to London . " 

 and thus terminate the result of the great barrister 's first 
 instruction to his eminent solicitor to discover a lame man and a 
 little girl . no inquiry , on the whole , could have be more skilfully 
 conduct . Mr. Gotobed send his head clerk ; the head clerk employ the 
 policeman of the village ; get upon the right track ; come to the right 
 house ; and be altogether in the wrong , - in a manner highly creditable to 
 his research . 

 " in London , of course : all people of that kind come back to London , " 
 say Mr. Gotobed . " give I the head in writing , that I may report to 
 my distinguished client . Most satisfactory . that young man will push his 
 way , - businesslike and methodical . " 




 CHAPTER VII . 

  the cloud have its silver lining . 

 thus turn his back on the good fortune which he have so carefully 
 caution Mrs. Saunders against favour on his behalf , the vagrant be 
 now on his way to the ancient municipal town of Gatesboro ' , which , be 
 the near place of fitting opulence and population , Mr. Waife have 
 resolve to honour with the debut of Sir Isaac as soon as he have 
 appropriate to himself the service of that promising quadrupe . he 
 have consult a map of the county before quit Mr. Merle 's roof , 
 and ascertain that he could reach Gatesboro ' by a short cut for 
 foot - traveller along field and lane . he be always glad to avoid 
 the high road : doubtless for such avoidance he have good reason . 
 but prudential reason be in this instance support by vagrant 
 inclination . high road be for the prosperous . by - path and ill - luck 
 go together . but by - path have their charm , and ill - luck its pleasant 
 moment . 

 they pass then from the high road into a long succession of green 
 pasture , through which a straight public path conduct they into one 
 of those charming lane never see out of this bowery England , - a lane 
 deep sink amidst high bank with overhang oak , and quiver ash , 
 gnarl wych - elm , vivid holly and shaggy bramble , with wild convolvulus 
 and creep woodbine force sweet life through all . sometimes the 
 bank open abruptly , leave patch of green sward , and peep through 
 still sequester gate , or over moss - grow pale , into the park or 
 paddock of some rural thane . new villa or old manor - house on lawny 
 upland , knitting , as it be , together England 's feudal memory with 
 England 's freeborn hope , - the old land with its young people ; for 
 England be so old , and the English be so young ! and the gray cripple 
 and the bright - haired child often pause , and gaze upon the demesne 
 and home of owner whose lot be cast in such pleasant place . but 
 there be no grudging envy in their gaze ; perhaps because their life be 
 too remote from those grand belonging . and therefore they could enjoy 
 and possess every banquet of the eye . for at least the beauty of what we 
 see be ours for the moment , on the simple condition that we do not covet 
 the thing which give to our eye that beauty . as the measureless sky 
 and the unnumbered star be equally grant to king and to beggar ; and 
 in our wild ambition we do not sigh for a monopoly of the empyrean , 
 or the fee - simple of the planet : so the earth too , with all its fence 
 garden and embattle wall , all its landmark of stern property and 
 churlish ownership , be ours too by right of eye . our to gaze on the 
 fair possession with such delight as the gaze can give ; grudge to the 
 unseen owner his other , and , it may be , more troubled right , as little 
 as we grudge an astral proprietor his acre of light in Capricorn . 
 Benignant be the law that saith , " thou shalt not covet . " 

 when the sun be at the high our wayfarer find a shadowy nook for 
 their rest and repast . before they run a shallow limpid trout - stream ; 
 on the other side its margin , low grassy meadow , a farmhouse in the 
 distance , back by a still grove , from which rise a still church tower 
 and its still spire . behind they , a close - shaven slop lawn terminate 
 the hedgerow of the lane ; see clearly above it , with parterre of 
 flower on the sward , droop lilac and laburnum far back , and a 
 pervade fragrance from the brief - live and rich syringas . the cripple 
 have climb over a wooden rail that separate the lane from the rill , 
 and seat himself under the shade of a fantastic hollow thorn - tree . 
 Sophy , recline beside he , be gather some pale scentless violet 
 from a mound which the bramble have guard from the sun . the dog have 
 descend to the water to quench his thirst , but still stand knee - deep 
 in the shallow stream , and appear lose in philosophical contemplation 
 of a swarm of minnow , which his immersion have disturb , but which 
 now make itself again visible on the farth side of the glassy brook , 
 undulate round and round a tiny rocklet which interrupt the glide 
 of the wave , and cause they to break into a low melodious murmur . " for 
 these and all thy mercy , o Lord , make we thankful , " say the victim of 
 ill - luck , in the trite word of a pious custom . but never , perhaps , at 
 aldermanic feast be the grace more sincerely say . 

 and then he untie the bundle , which the dog , who have hitherto carry 
 it by the way , have now carefully deposit at his side . " as I live , " 
 ejaculate Waife , " Mrs. Saunders be a woman in ten thousand . see , Sophy , 
 not content with the bread and cheese to which I bid her stint her 
 beneficence , a whole chicken , - a little cake too for you , Sophy ; she have 
 not even forget the salt . Sophy , that woman deserve the handsome 
 token of our gratitude ; and we will present she with a silver teapot the 
 first moment we can afford it . " 

 his spirit exhilarate by the unexpected good cheer , the Comedian 
 give way to his naturally blithe humour ; and between every mouthful he 
 rattle or rather drolle on , now infant - like , now sage - like . he cast 
 out the ray of his liberal humour , careless where they fall , - on the 
 child , on the dog , on the fish that play beneath the wave , on the 
 cricket that chirp amidst the grass ; the woodpecker tap the tree , 
 and the cripple 's merry voice answer it in bird - like mimicry . to this 
 riot of genial babble there be a listener , of whom neither grandfather 
 nor grandchild be aware . conceal by thick brushwood a few pace 
 far on , a young angler , who might be five or six and twenty , have 
 seat himself , just before the arrival of our vagrant to those bank 
 and water , for the purpose of change an unsuccessful fly . at the 
 sound of voice , perhaps suspect an unlicensed rival , for that part 
 of the stream be preserve , - he have suspend his task , and noiselessly 
 put aside the cluster leaf to reconnoitre . the piety of Waife 's 
 simple grace seem to surprise he pleasingly , for a sweet approve 
 smile cross his lip . he continue to look and to listen . he forget 
 the fly , and a trout sail he by unheeded . but Sir Isaac , have 
 probably satisfy his speculative mind as to the natural attribute of 
 minnow , now slowly reascende the bank , and after a brief halt and a 
 sniff , walk majestically towards the hidden observer , look at he 
 with great solemnity , and utter an inquisitive bark , - a bark not 
 hostile , not menacing ; purely and dryly interrogative . thus detect , 
 the angler rise ; and Waife , whose attention be direct that way by the 
 bark , see he , call to Sir Isaac , and say politely , " there be no harm 
 in my dog , sir . " 

 the young man mutter some inaudible reply , and , lift up his rod as 
 in sign of his occupation or excuse for his vicinity , come out from 
 the intervene foliage , and step quietly to Waife 's side . Sir Isaac 
 follow he , sniff again , seem satisfied ; and seat himself on 
 his haunch , fix his attention upon the remain of the chicken which 
 lie defenceless on the grass . the new comer be evidently of the rank of 
 gentleman ; his figure be slim and graceful , his face pale , meditative , 
 refine . he would have impress you at once with the idea of what he 
 really be , - an Oxford scholar ; and you would perhaps have guess he 
 design for the ministry of the Church , if not actually in order . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

  Mr. Waife excite the admiration , and benignly pity the infirmity , 
  of an Oxford scholar . 

 " you be str - str - stranger ? " say the Oxonian , after a violent exertion 
 to express himself , cause by an impediment in his speech . 

 WAIFE . - " yes , sir , traveller . I trust we be not trespass : this be 
 not private ground , I think ? " 

 OXONIAN . - " and if - f - f - f - it be , my f - f - father would not war - n - n you 
 off - ff - f. " 

 " be it your father 's ground , then ? Sir , I beg you a thousand pardon . " 

 the apology be make in the Comedian 's grand style : it impose 
 greatly on the young scholar . Waife might have be a duke in disguise ; 
 but I will do the angler the justice to say that such discovery of rank 
 would have impress he little more in the vagrant 's favour . it have 
 be that impromptu " grace " - that thanksgive which the scholar feel 
 be for something more than the carnal food - which have first command 
 his respect and waken his interest . then that innocent careless 
 talk - part utter to dog and child , part soliloquize , part throw out 
 to the ear of the lively teem nature - have touch a somewhat kindre 
 chord in the angler 's soul ; for he be somewhat of a poet and much of a 
 soliloquist , and could confer with Nature , nor feel that impediment 
 in speech which obstruct his intercourse with man . have thus far 
 indicate that oral defect in our new acquaintance , the reader will 
 cheerfully excuse I for not enforce it over much . let it be among 
 the thing subaudita , as the sense of it give to a gifted and aspiring 
 nature , thwart in the sublime career of Preacher , an exquisite 
 mournful pain . and I no more like to raise a laugh at his infirmity 
 behind his back , than I should before his pale , powerful , melancholy 
 face ; therefore I suppress the infirmity in give the reply . 

 OXONIAN . - " on the other side the lane , where the garden slop downward , 
 be my father 's house . this ground be his property certainly , but he put 
 it to its good use , in lend it to those who so piously acknowledge 
 that Father from whom all good come . your child , I presume , sir ? " 

 " my grandchild . " 

 " she seem delicate : I hope you have not far to go ? " 

 " not very far , thank you , sir . but my little girl look more delicate 
 than she be . you be not tired , darling ? " 

 " oh , not at all ! " there be no mistaking the look of real love 
 interchange between the old man and the child ; the scholar feel much 
 interested and somewhat puzzle . 

 " who and what could they be ? so unlike foot wayfarer ! " on the other 
 hand , too , Waife take a liking to the courteous young man , and conceive 
 a sincere pity for his physical affliction . but he do not for those 
 reason depart from the discreet caution he have prescribe to himself in 
 seek new fortune and shun old peril , so he turn the subject . 

 " you be an angler , sir ? I suppose the trout in the stream run small ? " 

 " not very : a little high up I have catch they at four pound weight . " 

 WAIFE . - " there go a fine fish yonder , - see ! balance himself between 
 those weed . " 

 OXONIAN . - " poor fellow , let he be safe to - day . after all , it be a cruel 
 sport , and I should break myself of it . but it be strange that whatever 
 our love for nature we always seek some excuse for trust ourselves 
 alone to she . a gun , a rod , a sketch - book , a geologist 's hammer , an 
 entomologist 's net , a something . " 

 WAIFE . - " be it not because all our idea would run wild if not 
 concentrate on a definite pursuit ? Fortune and Nature be earnest 
 female , though popular beauty ; and they do not look upon coquettish 
 trifler in the light of genuine wooer . " 

 the Oxonian , who , in vent his previous remark , have think it likely 
 he should be above his listener 's comprehension , look surprised . what 
 pursuit , too , have this one - eyed philosopher ? 

 " you have a definite pursuit , sir ? " 

 " I - alas ! when a man moralize , it be a sign that he have know error : 
 it be because I have be a trifl that I rail against trifler . and 
 talk of that , time fly , and we must be off and away . " 

 Sophy re - tie the bundle . Sir Isaac , on whom , meanwhile , she have 
 bestow the remain of the chicken , jump up and describe a circle . 

 " I wish you success in your pursuit , whatever it be , " stutter out the 
 angler . 

 " and I no less heartily , sir , wish you success in your . " 

 " mine ! success there be beyond my power . " 

 " how , sir ? do it rest so much with other ? " 

 " no , my failure be in myself . my career should be the Church , my pursuit 
 the cure of soul , and - and - this pitiful infirmity ! how can I speak the 
 Divine Word - I - I - a stutterer ! " 

 the young man do not pause for an answer , but plunge through the 
 brushwood that bespread the bank of the rill , and his hurried path 
 could be trace by the wave of the foliage through which he force his 
 way . 

 " we all have our burden , " say Gentleman Waife , as Sir Isaac take up 
 the bundle and stalk on , placid and refresh . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

  the nomad , enter into civilized life , adopt its art , shave his 
  poodle , and put on a black coat . - hint at the process by which a 
  Cast - off exalt himself into a take - in . 

 at twilight they stop at a quiet inn within eight mile of 
 Gatesboro ' . Sophy , much tired , be glad to creep to bed . Waife sit up 
 long after she ; and , in preparation for the eventful morrow , wash 
 and shave Sir Isaac . you would not have know the dog again ; he be 
 dazzle . not Ulysses , rejuvenate by Pallas Athene , could have be 
 more change for the well . his flank reveal a skin most daintily 
 mottle ; his tail become leonine , with an imperial tuft ; his mane fall 
 in long curl like the beard of a Ninevite king ; his boot be those 
 of a courtier in the reign of Charles II . ; his eye look forth in 
 dark splendour from lock white as the drive snow . this feat perform , 
 Waife sleep the sleep of the righteous , and Sir Isaac , stretch on the 
 floor beside the bed , lick his mottled flank and shiver : " il 
 faut souffrir pour etre beau . " much marvelling , Sophy the next morning 
 behold the dog ; but , before she be up , Waife have pay the bill and be 
 wait for she on the road , impatient to start . he do not heed she 
 exclamation , half compassionate , half admire ; he be absorb in 
 thought . thus they proceed slowly on till within two mile of the 
 town , and then Waife turn aside , enter a wood , and there , with the 
 aid of Sophy , put the dog upon a deliberate rehearsal of the anticipated 
 drama . the dog be not in good spirit , but he go through his part 
 with mechanical accuracy , though slight enthusiasm . 

 " he be to be rely upon , in spite of his french origin , " say Waife . 
 " all national prejudice fade before the sense of a common interest . 
 and we shall always find more genuine solidity of character in a french 
 poodle than in an english mastiff , whenever a poodle be of use to we 
 and the mastiff be not . but oh , waste of care ! oh , sacrifice of time 
 to empty name ! oh , emblem of fashionable education ! it never strike I 
 before , - do it not , child though thou art , strike thee now , - by the 
 necessity of our drama , this animal must be a french dog ? " 

 " well , Grandfather ? " 

 " and we have give he an english name ! precious result of our own 
 scholastic training , teach at preparatory academy precisely that 
 which avail we naught when we be to face the world ! what be to be 
 do ? unlearn he his own cognoman , - teach he another name , - too late , 
 too late . we can not afford the delay . " 

 " I do not   see why he should be call any name at all . he observe your 
 sign just as well without . " 

 " if I have but discover that at the beginning . pity ! such a fine name 
 too . Sir Isaac ! vanita vanitatum ! what desire chiefly kindle the 
 ambitious ? to create a name , perhaps bequeath a title , - exalt into Sir 
 Isaacs a progeny of slop ! and , after all , it be possible   let we hope 
 it in this instance   that a sensible young dog may learn his letter and 
 shoulder his musket just as well , though all the appellation by 
 which humanity know he be condense into a pitiful monosyllable . 
 nevertheless   as you will find when you be old , people be oblige 
 in practice to renounce for themselves the application of those rule 
 which they philosophically prescribe for other . thus , while I grant 
 that a change of name for that dog be a question belong to the policy 
 of Ifs and but , commonly call the policy of Expediency , about which 
 one may differ from other and one 's own self every quarter of an hour , 
 a change of name for I belong to the policy of Must and Shall ; namely 
 the policy of Necessity , against which let no dog bark , - though I have 
 know dog howl at it ! William Waife be no more : he be dead ; he be 
 bury ; and even Juliet Araminta be the baseless fabric of a vision . " 

 Sophy raise inquiringly her blue guileless eye . 

 " you see before you a man who have use up the name of Waife , and who on 
 enter the town of Gatesboro ' become a sober , staid , and respectable 
 personage , under the appellation of Chapman . you be Miss Chapman . Rugge 
 and his exhibition ' leave not a wrack behind . ' " 

 Sophy smile , and then sigh , - the smile for her grandfather 's gay 
 spirit ; wherefore the sigh ? be it that some instinct in that fresh , 
 loyal nature revolt from the thought of these alias , which , if 
 requisite for safety , be still akin to imposture ? if so , poor child , 
 she have much yet to set right with her conscience ! all I can say be , 
 that after she have smile she sigh . and more reasonably might a reader 
 ask his author to subject a zephyr to the microscope than a female 's 
 sigh to analysis . 

 " take the dog with you , my dear , back into the lane ; I will join you in 
 a few minute . you be neatly dress , and , if not , would look so . I , in 
 this old coat , have the air of a pedler , so I will change it , and enter 
 the town of Gatesboro ' in the character of - a man whom you will soon 
 see before you . leave those thing alone , de - Isaacized Sir Isaac ! follow 
 your mistress , - go ! " 

 Sophy leave the wood , and walk on slowly towards the town , with she 
 hand pensively rest on Sir Isaac 's head . in less than ten minute 
 she be join by Waife , attire in respectable black ; his hat and shoe 
 well brush ; a new green shade to his eye ; and with his fine air of 
  Pere noble . he be now in his favourite element . he be act : 
 call it not imposture . be Lord Chatham an impostor when he drape his 
 flannel into the fold of the toga , and arrange the curl of his wig 
 so as to add more sublime effect to the majesty of his brow and the 
 terror of its nod ? and certainly , consider that Waife , after all , 
 be but a professional vagabond , consider all the turn and shift to 
 which he have be put for bread and salt , the wonder be , not that he be 
 full of stage trick and small deception , but that he have contrive to 
 retain at heart so much childish simplicity . when a man for a series of 
 year have only have his wit to live by , I say not that he be necessarily 
 a rogue , - he may be a good fellow ; but you can scarcely expect his 
 code of honour to be precisely the same as Sir Philip Sidney 's . Homer 
 express through the lip of Achilles that sublime love of truth 
 which even in those remote time be the become characteristic of a 
 gentleman and a soldier . but then , Achilles be well off during his whole 
 life , which , though distinguish , be short . on the other hand Ulysses , 
 who be sorely put to it , keep out of his property in Ithaca , and , in 
 short , live on his wit , be not the less befriended by the immaculate 
 Pallas because his wisdom savour somewhat of stage trick and sharp 
 practice . and as to convenient alias and white fib , where would have 
 be the use of his wit , if Ulysses have disdain such art , and be 
 magnanimously munch up by Polyphemus ? have thus touch on the epic 
 side of Mr. Waife 's character with the clemency due to human nature , 
 but with the caution require by the interest of society , permit he 
 to resume a " duplex course , " sanction by ancient precedent , but not 
 commend to modern imitation . 

 just as our traveller near the town , the screech of a railway whistle 
 resound towards the right , - a long train rush from the jaw of a 
 tunnel and shoot into the neighbouring station . 

 " how lucky ! " exclaim Waife ; " make haste , my dear ! " 

 be he go to take the train ? Pshaw ! he be at his journey 's end . he 
 be go to mix with the throng that would soon stream through those 
 white gate into the town ; he be go to purloin the respectable 
 appearance of a passenger by the train . and so well do he act the part 
 of a bewildered stranger just vomit forth into unfamiliar place 
 by one of those pant steam monster , - so artfully , amidst the 
 busy competition of nudging elbow , over - bear shoulder , and 
 the impedimenta of carpet - bag , portmanteau , baby in arm , and 
 shin - assail truck , do he look round , consequentially , on the qui 
 vive , turn his one eye , now on Sophy , now on Sir Isaac , and grip 
 his bundle to his breast as if he suspect all his neighbour to be 
 Thugs , condottieri , and swellmob , - that in an instant fly - man , omnibus 
 driver , cad , and porter mark he for their own . " Gatesboro ' arm , " 
 " Spread Eagle , " " Royal Hotel , " " Saracen 's head ; very comfortable , 
 centre of High Street , opposite the Town Hall , " - be shout , bawl , 
 whisper , or whine into his ear . 

 " be there an honest porter ? " ask the Comedian , piteously . an Irishman 
 present himself . " and be it meself can serve your honour ? " - " take this 
 bundle , and walk on before I to the High Street . " - " could not I take 
 the bundle , Grandfather ? the man will charge so much , " say the prudent 
 Sophy . " Hush ! you indeed ! " say the Pere Noble , as if address an 
 exile Altesse royale , - " you take a bundle - Miss - Chapman ! " 

 they soon gain the High Street . Waife examine the front of the 
 various inn which they pass by with an eye accustom to decipher the 
 physiognomy of hostelry . the Saracen 's Head please he , though 
 its imposing size daunt Sophy . he arrest the step of the porter , 
 " follow I close , " and step across the open threshold into the bar . 
 the landlady herself be there , portly and impose , with an auburn 
 toupet , a silk gown , a cameo brooch , and an ample bosom . 

 " you have a private sitting - room , ma'am ? " say the Comedian , lift his 
 hat . there be so many way of lift a hat,-for instance , the way for 
 which Louis XIV . be so renowned . but the Comedian 's way on the present 
 occasion rather resemble that of the late Duke of B - - - - , not quite 
 royal , but as near to royalty as become a subject . he add , recover 
 his head , - " and on the first floor ? " the landlady do not courtesy , but 
 she bow , emerge from the bar , and set foot on the broad stair ; then , 
 look back graciously , her eye rest on Sir Isaac , who have stalk 
 forth in advance and with expansive nostril sniff . she hesitate . 
 " your dog , sir ! shall boot take it round to the stable ? " 

 " the stable , ma'am - the stable , my dear , " turn to Sophy , with a 
 smile more ducal than the previous bow ; " what would they say at home if 
 they hear that noble animal be consign to - stable ? Ma'am , my dog be 
 my companion , and as much accustomed to drawing - room as I be myself . " 
 still the landlady pause . the dog might be accustom to drawing - room , 
 but her drawing - room be not accustomed to dog . she have just lay down 
 a new carpet . and such be the strange and erratic affinity in nature , 
 such be the incongruous concatenation in the cross - stitch of idea , 
 that there be association between dog and carpet , which , if wrongful 
 to the owner of dog , beget no unreasonable apprehension in the 
 proprietor of carpet . so there stand the landlady , and there stand the 
 dog ! and there they might be stand to this day have not the Comedian 
 dissolve the spell . " take up my effect again , " say he , turn to the 
 porter ; " doubtless they be more habituated to distinguish between dog 
 and dog at the Royal Hotel . " 

 the landlady be mollify in a moment . nor be it only the rivalry 
 that necessarily exist between the Saracen 's Head and the Royal Hotel 
 that have due weight with she . a gentleman who could not himself deign 
 to carry even that small bundle must be indeed a gentleman ! have he come 
 with a portmanteau - even with a carpet - bag - the porter 's service would 
 have be no evidence of rank ; but accustom as she be chiefly 
 to gentleman engage in commercial pursuit , it be new to her 
 experience , - a gentleman with effect so light , and hand so 
 aristocratically helpless . Herein be equally betoken the two 
 attribute of birth and wealth ; namely , the habit of command and the 
 disdain of shilling . a vague remembrance of the well - know story how a 
 man and his dog have arrive at the Granby Hotel , at Harrowgate , and 
 be send away roomless to the other and less patrician establishment , 
 because , while he have a dog , he have not a servant ; when , five minute 
 after such dismissal , come carriage and lackey and an imperious valet , 
 ask for his grace the Duke of A - - - - , who have walk on before 
 with his dog , and who , oh , everlasting thought of remorse ! have be 
 send away to bring the other establishment into fashion , - a vague 
 reminiscence of that story , I say , flash upon the landlady 's mind , and 
 she exclaim , " I only think , sir , you might prefer the stable ; of 
 course , it be as you please . this way , sir . he be a fine animal , indeed , 
 and seem mild . " 

 " you may bring up the bundle , porter , " quoth the Pere Noble . " take my 
 arm , my dear ; these step be very steep . " 

 the landlady throw open the door of a handsome sitting - room , - her 
 well : she pull down the blind to shut out the glare of the sun ; then 
 retreat to the threshold await further order . 

 " rest yourself , my dear , " say the Actor , place Sophy on a couch with 
 that tender respect for sex and childhood which so specially belong 
 to the high - bred . " the room will do , ma'am . I will let you know later 
 whether we shall require bed . as to dinner , I be not particular , - a 
 cutlet , a chicken , what you please , at seven o'clock . stay , I beg your 
 pardon for detain you , but where do the Mayor live ? " 

 " his private residence be a mile out of the town , but his counting - house 
 be just above the Town Hall , - to the right , sir . " 

 " name ? " 

 " Mr. Hartopp ! " 

 " Hartopp ! ah ! to be sure ! Hartopp . his political opinion , I think , be " 
  venture at a guess   " enlighten ? " 

 LANDLADY . - " very much so , sir . Mr. Hartopp be highly respected . " 

 WAIFE . - " the chief municipal officer of a town so thriving - fine shop 
 and much plate glass - must march with the time . I think I have hear 
 that Mr. Hartopp promote the spread of intelligence and the propagation 
 of knowledge . " 

 LANDLADY   rather puzzled . - " I dare say , sir . the Mayor take great 
 interest in the Gatesboro ' Athemeum and Literary Institute . " 

 WAIFE . - " exactly what I should have presume from his character and 
 station . I will detain you no long , ma'am "   ducal bow . the landlady 
 descend the stair . be her guest a candidate for the representation 
 of the town at the next election ? March with the time ! - spread of 
 intelligence ! all candidate she ever know have that way of express 
 themselves , - " March " and " Spread . " not an address have parliamentary 
 aspirant put forth to the freeman and elector of Gatesboro ' but 
 what " March " have be introduce by the candidate , and " Spread " be 
 suggest by the committee . still she think that her guest , upon the 
 whole , look and bow more like a member of the Upper House , - perhaps 
 one of the amiable though occasionally prosy peer who devote the tooth 
 of wisdom to the cracking of those very hard nut , " how to educate the 
 mass , " " what to do with our criminal , " and such like problem , upon 
 which already have be break so many jawbone tough as that with which 
 Samson slay the Philistines . 

 " oh , Grandfather ! " sigh Sophy , " what be you about ? we shall be 
 ruin , you , too , who be so careful not to get into debt . and what have 
 we leave to pay the people here ? " 

 " Sir Isaac ! and this ! " return the Comedian , touch his forehead . " do 
 not alarm yourself : stay here and repose ; and do not   let Sir Isaac out of 
 the room on any account ! " 

 he take off his hat , brush the nap carefully with his sleeve , replace 
 it on his head , - not jauntily aside , not like a jeune premier , but with 
 equilateral brim , and in composed fashion , like a pere noble ; then , 
 make a sign to Sir Isaac to rest quiet , he pass to the door ; there 
 he halt , and turn towards Sophy , and , meet her wistful eye , his 
 own eye moisten . " ah ! " he murmur , " heaven grant I may succeed now , 
 for if I do , then you shall indeed be a little lady ! " 

 he be go . 




 CHAPTER X. 

  show with what success Gentleman Waife assume the pleasing part 
  of friend to the enlightenment of the age and the progress of the 
  people . 

 on the landing - place , Waife encounter the irish porter , who , have 
 leave the bundle in the drawing - room , be wait patiently to be pay 
 for his trouble . 

 the Comedian survey the good - humour shrewd face , on every line of 
 which be writ the golden maxim , " take thing asy . " " I beg your pardon , 
 my friend ; I have almost forget you . have you be long in this town ? " 

 " four year , and long life to your honour ! " 

 " do you know Mr. Hartopp , the Mayor ? " 

 " be it his worship the Mayor ? sure and it be the Mayor as have make a man 
 o ' Mike Callaghan . " 

 the Comedian evince urbane curiosity to learn the history of that 
 process , and draw forth a grateful tale . four summer ago Mike have 
 resign the " first gem of the sea " in order to assist in make hay for 
 a Saxon taskmaster . 

 Mr. Hartopp , who farm largely , have employ he in that rural 
 occupation . seize by a malignant fever , Mr. Hartopp have help he 
 through it , and naturally conceive a liking for the man he help . 
 thus , as Mike become convalescent , instead of pass the poor man back 
 to his own country , which at that time give little employment to the 
 surplus of its agrarian population beyond an occasional shot at a 
 parson , - an employment , though animate , not lucrative , he exercise 
 Mike 's return strength upon a few light job in his warehouse ; 
 and finally , Mike marry imprudently the daughter of a Gatesboro ' 
 operative , Mr. Hartopp set he up in life as a professional messenger 
 and porter , patronize by the Corporation . the narrative make it evident 
 that Mr. Hartopp be a kind and worthy man , and the Comedian 's heart 
 warm towards he . 

 " an honour to our specie , this Mr. Hartopp ! " say Waife , strike his 
 staff upon the floor ; " I covet his acquaintance . would he see you if you 
 call at his counting - house ? " 

 Mike reply in the affirmative with eager pride . " Mr. Hartopp would 
 see he at once . sure , do not the Mayor know that time be money ? Mr. 
 Hartopp be not a man to keep the poor waiting . " 

 " go down and stay outside the hall door ; you shall take a note for I to 
 the Mayor . " 

 Waife then pass into the bar , and beg the favour of a sheet of 
 note - paper . the landlady seat he at her own desk , and thus write the 
 Comedian : 

  " Mr. Chapman present his compliment to the Mayor of Gatesboro ' , 
  and request the Honour of a very short interview . Mr. Chapman 's 
  deep interest in the permanent success of those literary institute 
  which be so distinguished a feature of this enlightened age , and 
  Mr. Mayor 's well - know zeal in the promotion of those invaluable 
  society , must be Mr. Chapman 's excuse for the liberty he venture 
  to take in this request . Mr. C. may add that of late he have 
  earnestly direct his attention to the good mean of extract new 
  us from those noble but undeveloped institution . 

  " Saracens Head ,   c. " 

 this epistle , duly seal and address , Waife deliver to the care of 
 Mike Callaghan ; and simultaneously he astound that functionary with no 
 less a gratuity than half a crown . cut short the fervent blessing 
 which this generous donation naturally call forth , the Comedian say , 
 with his happy combination of suavity and loftiness , " and should the 
 Mayor ask you what sort of person I be , - for I have not the honour to 
 be know to he , and there be so many adventurer about , that he might 
 reasonably expect I to be one , perhaps you can say that I do not   look 
 like a person he need be afraid to admit . you know a gentleman by sight ! 
 bring back an answer as soon as may be ; perhaps I sha'n't   stay long in 
 the town . you will find I in the High Street , look at the shop . " 

 the porter take to his leg , impatient to vent his overflowing heart 
 upon the praise of this munificent stranger . a gentleman , indeed ! Mike 
 should think so ! if Mike 's good word with the Mayor be worth money , 
 Gentleman Waife have put his half - crown out upon famous interest . 

 the Comedian stroll along the High Street , and stop before a 
 stationer 's shop , at the window of which be display a bill , entitle , 

  GATESBORO ' ATHENIEUM 
  and LITERARY INSTITUTE . 

  LECTURE on CONCHOLOGY . 

  by PROFESSOR LONG . 
  author of " research into the Natural 
  history of Limpets . " 

 Waife enter the shop , and lift his hat , - " permit I , sir , to look at 
 that hand - bill . " 

 " certainly , sir ; but the lecture be over ; you can see by the date : it 
 come off last week . we allow the bill of previous proceeding at 
 our Athenaeum to be expose at the window till the new bill be 
 prepared , - keep the whole thing alive , sir . " 

 " conchology , " say the Comedian , " be a subject which require deep 
 research , and on which a learn man may say much without fear of 
 contradiction . but how far be Gatesboro ' from the British Ocean ? " 

 " I do not   know exactly , sir , - a long way . " 

 " then , as shell be not familiar to the youthful remembrance of your 
 fellow - townsman , possibly the lecturer may have find an audience rather 
 select than numerous . " 

 " it be a very attentive audience , sir , and highly respectable : Miss 
 Grieve 's young lady '   the genteelest seminary in the town   attend . " 

 WAIFE . - " highly creditable to the young lady . but , pardon I , be your 
 Athenaeum a Mechanics ' institute ? " 

 SHOPMAN . - " it be so call at first . but , somehow or other , the mere 
 operative fall off , and it be think advisable to change the word 
 ' mechanic ' into the word ' Literary . ' Gatesboro ' be not a manufacturing 
 town , and the mechanic here do not realize the expectation of that 
 taste for abstract science on which the originator of these society 
 found their - " 

 WAIFE   insinuatingly interrupting . - " their calculation of intellectual 
 progress and their table of pecuniary return . few of these society , 
 I be tell , be really self - support : I suppose Professor Long be ! - and 
 if he reside in Gatesboro ' , and write on limpet , he be probably a man 
 of independent fortune . " 

 SHOPMAN . - " why , sir , the professor be engage from London , - five 
 guineas and his travel expense . the fund of the society could ill 
 afford such outlay ; but we have a most worthy mayor , who , assist by 
 his foreman , Mr. Williams , our treasurer , be , I may say , the life and 
 soul of the institute . " 

 " a literary man himself , your mayor ? " 

 the shopman smile . " not much in that way , sir ; but anything to 
 enlighten the working class . this be Professor Long 's great work upon 
 limpet , two vol . post octavo . the Mayor have just present it to the 
 library of the institute . I be cut the leaf when you come in . " 

 " very prudent in you , sir . if limpet be but able to read print 
 character in the English tongue , this work would have more interest 
 for they than the able investigation upon the political and social 
 history of man . but , " add the Comedian , shake his head mournfully , 
 " the human specie be not testaceous ; and what the history of man might 
 be to a limpet , the history of limpet be to a man . " so say , Mr. 
 Waife buy a sheet of cardboard and some gilt foil , relifte his hat , 
 and walk out . 

 the shopman scratch his head thoughtfully ; he glance from his window 
 at the form of the recede stranger , and mechanically resume the task 
 of cut those leaf , which , have the volume reach the shelf of 
 the library uncut , would have so remain to the crack of doom . 

 Mike Callaghan now come in sight , stride fast ; " Mr. Mayor send his 
 love - bother - o'-me - his respex ; and will be happy to see your honour . " 

 in three minute more the Comedian be seat in a little parlour 
 that adjoin Mr. Hartopp 's counting - house , - Mr. Hartopp seat 
 also , vis - a - vis . the Mayor have one of those countenance upon which 
 good - nature throw a sunshine soft than Claude ever shed upon canvas . 
 Josiah Hartopp have rise in life by little other art than that of quiet 
 kindliness . as a boy at school , he have be ever ready to do a good turn 
 to his school - fellow ; and his school - fellow at last form themselves 
 into a kind of police , for the purpose of protect Jos . Hartopp 's 
 penny and person from the fist and finger of each other . he be 
 evidently so anxious to please his master , not from fear of the rod , but 
 the desire to spare that worthy man the pain of inflict it , that 
 he have more trouble take with his education than be bestow on the 
 bright intellect that school ever rear ; and where other boy be 
 roughly flogged , Jos . Hartopp be soothingly pat on the head , and 
 tell not to be cast down , but try again . the same even - hand justice 
 return the sugar chalice to his lip in his apprenticeship to an 
 austere leather - seller , who , not bear the thought to lose sight of 
 so mild a face , raise he into partnership , and ultimately make he his 
 son - in - law and residuary legatee . then Mr. Hartopp yield to the advice 
 of friend who desire his exaltation , and from a leather - seller become 
 a tanner . hide themselves soften their asperity to that gentle 
 dealer , and melt into golden fleece . he become rich enough to hire a 
 farm for health and recreation . he know little of husbandry , but he win 
 the heart of a bailiff who might have rear a turnip from a deal table . 
 gradually the farm become his fee - simple , and the farmhouse expand 
 into a villa . wealth and honour flow in from a brimmed horn . the 
 surly man in the town would have be ashamed of say a rude thing 
 to Jos . Hartopp . if he speak in public , though he hum and haw 
 lamentably , no one be so respectfully listen to . as for the 
 parliamentary representation of the town , he could have return himself 
 for one seat and Mike Callaghan for the other , have he be so disposed . 
 but he be too full of the milk of humanity to admit into his vein a 
 drop from the gall of party . he suffer other to legislate for his 
 native land , and   except on one occasion when he have be persuade to 
 assist in canvassing , not indeed the elector of Gatesboro ' , but those 
 of a distant town in which he possess some influence , on behalf of 
 a certain eminent orator   Jos . Hartopp be only visible in politic 
 whenever Parliament be to be petition in favour of some humane 
 measure , or against a tax that would have harass the poor . 

 if anything go wrong with he in his business , the whole town combine 
 to set it right for he . be a child bear to he , Gatesboro ' rejoice as 
 a mother . do measle or scarlatina afflict his neighbourhood , the first 
 anxiety of Gatesboro ' be for Mr. Hartopp 's nursery . no one would have 
 say Mrs. Hartopp 's nursery ; and when in such a department the man 's 
 name supersede the woman 's , can more be say in proof of the tenderness 
 he excite ? in short , Jos . Hartopp be a notable instance of a truth not 
 commonly recognize ; namely , that affection be power , and that , if 
 you do make it thoroughly and unequivocally clear that you love 
 your neighbour , though it may not be quite so well as you love 
 yourself , - still , cordially and disinterestedly , you will find your 
 neighbour much well fellow than Mrs. Grundy give they credit 
 for , - but always provide that your talent be not such as to excite 
 their envy , nor your opinion such as to offend their prejudice . 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " you take an interest , you say , in literary institute , 
 and have study the subject ? " 

 the COMEDIAN . - " of late , those institute have occupy my thought 
 as represent the readiest mean of collect liberal idea into a 
 profitable focus . " 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " certainly it be a great thing to bring class together 
 in friendly union . " 

 the COMEDIAN . - " for laudable object . " 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " to cultivate their understanding . " 

 the COMEDIAN . - " to warm their heart . " 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " to give they useful knowledge . " 

 the COMEDIAN . - " and pleasurable sensation . " 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " in a word , to instruct they . " 

 the COMEDIAN . - " and to amuse . " 

 " eh ! " say the Mayor , - " amuse ! " 

 now , every one about the person of this amiable man be on the constant 
 guard to save he from the injurious effect of his own benevolence ; and 
 accordingly his foreman , hear that he be closet with a stranger , 
 take alarm , and enter on pretence of ask instruction about an 
 order for hide , in reality , to glower upon the intruder , and keep his 
 master 's hand out of imprudent pocket . 

 Mr. Hartopp , who , though not brilliant , do not want for sense , and 
 be a keener observer than be generally suppose , divine the kindly 
 intention of his assistant . " a gentleman interested in the Gatesboro ' 
 Athenaeum . my foreman , sir , - Mr. Williams , the treasurer of our 
 institute . take a chair , Williams . " 

 " you say to amuse , Mr. Chapman , but - " 

 " you do not find Professor Long on conchology amusing . " 

 " why , " say the Mayor , smile blandly , " I myself be not a man of 
 science , and therefore his lecture , though profound , be a little dry to 
 I . " 

 " must it not have be still more dry to your workman , Mr. Mayor ? " 

 " they do not attend , " say Williams . " Up - hill task we have to secure 
 the Gatesboro ' mechanic , when anything really solid be to be address 
 to their understanding . " 

 " poor thing , they be so tired at night , " say the Mayor , 
 compassionately ; " but they wish to improve themselves , and they take 
 book from the library . " 

 " novel , " quoth the stern Williams : " it will be long before they take 
 out that valuable ' history of Limpets . " 

 " if a lecture be as amusing as a novel , would not they attend it ? " 
 ask the Comedian . 

 " I suppose they would , " return Mr. Williams . " but our object be to 
 instruct ; and instruction , sir - " 

 " could be make amusing . if , for instance , the lecturer could produce a 
 live shell - fish , and , by show what kindness can do towards develop 
 intellect and affection in being without soul , - make man himself more 
 kind to his fellow - man ? " 

 Mr. Williams laugh grimly . " well , sir ! " 

 " this be what I should propose to do . " 

 " with a shell - fish ! " cry the Mayor . 

 " no , sir ; with a creature of nobler attribute , - a dog ! " 

 the listener star at each other like dumb animal as Waife 
 continue , - " by win interest for the individuality of a gifted 
 quadrupe , I should gradually create interest in the natural history of 
 its specie . I should lead the audience on to listen to comparison with 
 other member of the great family which once associate with Adam . I 
 should lay the foundation for an instructive course of natural history , 
 and from vertebrated mammifer who know but we might gradually 
 arrive at the nervous system of the molluscous division , and produce a 
 sensation by the production of a limpet ? " 

 " theoretical , " say Mr. Williams . 

 " practical , sir ; since I take it for grant that the Athenaeum , at 
 present , be rather a tax upon the rich subscriber , include Mr. 
 Mayor . " 

 " nothing to speak of , " say the mild Hartopp . Williams look towards 
 his master with unspeakable love , and groan . " nothing indeed - oh ! " 

 " these society should be wholly self - support , " say the Comedian , 
 " and inflict no pecuniary loss upon Mr. Mayor . " 

 " certainly , " say Williams , " that be the right principle . Mr. Mayor 
 should be protect . " 

 " and if I show you how to make these society self - support - " 

 " we should be very much oblige to you . " 

 " I propose , then , to give an exhibition at your room . " Mr. Williams 
 nudge the Mayor , and cough , the Comedian not appear to remark 
 cough nor nudge . 

 " of course gratuitously . I be not a professional lecturer , gentleman . " 

 Mr. Williams look charm to hear it . 

 " and when I have make my first effort successful , as I feel sure it will 
 be , I will leave it to you , gentleman , to continue my undertaking . but I 
 can not stay long here . if the day after to - morrow - " 

 " that be our ordinary soiree night , " say the Mayor . " but you say a 
 dog , sir , - dog not admitted,-eh , Williams ? " 

 MR . WILLIAMS . - " a mere by - law , which the subcommittee can suspend if 
 necessary . but would not the introduction of a live animal be less 
 dignified than - " 

 " a dead failure , " put in the Comedian , gravely . the Mayor would have 
 smile , but he be afraid of do so lest he might hurt the feeling of 
 Mr. Williams , who do not seem to take the joke . 

 " we be a purely intellectual body , " say the latter gentleman , " and a 
 dog - " 

 " a learn dog , I presume , " observe the Mayor . 

 MR . WILLIAMS   nod . - " might form a dangerous precedent for the 
 introduction of other quadruped . we might thus descend even to the 
 level of a learn pig . we be not a menagerie , Mr. - Mr. - " 

 " Chapman , " say the Mayor , urbanely . 

 " Enough , " say the Comedian , rise with his grand air ; " if I consider 
 myself at liberty , gentleman , to say who and what I be , you would 
 be sure that I be not trifle with what I consider a very grave and 
 important subject . as to suggest anything derogatory to the dignity 
 of science , and the eminent repute of the Gatesboro ' Athenaeum , it would 
 be idle to vindicate myself . these gray hair be - " 

 he do not conclude that sentence , save by a slight wave of the hand . 
 the two burgess bow reverentially , and the Comedian go on , - 

 " but when you speak of precedent , Mr. Williams , allow I to refer you to 
 precedent in point . Aristotle write to Alexander the Great for animal 
 to exhibit to the Literary Institute of Athens . at the college in Egypt 
 lecture be deliver on a dog call Anubis , as inferior , I boldly 
 assert , to that dog which I have refer to , as an Egyptian College to 
 a British Institute . the ancient Etrurians , as be show by the erudite 
 Schweighduser in that passage - you understand Greek , I presume , Mr. 
 Williams ? " 

 Mr. Williams could not say he do . 

 the COMEDIAN . - " then I will not quote that passage in Schweighauser upon 
 the molossian dog in general , and the dog of Alcibiades in particular . 
 but it prove beyond a doubt , that , in every ancient literary institute , 
 learn dog be highly estimate ; and there be even a philosophical 
 Academy call the Cynic , - that be , Doggish , or Dog - school , of which 
 diogene be the most eminent professor . he , you know , go about with a 
 lantern look for an honest man , and could not find one ! why ? because 
 the Society of Dogs have raise his standard of human honesty to an 
 impracticable height . but I weary you ; otherwise I could lecture on in 
 this way for the hour together , if you think the Gatesboro ' operative 
 prefer erudition to amusement . " 

 " a great scholar , " whisper Mr. Williams . - Aloud : " and I have   nothing to 
 say against your precedent , sir . I think you have make out that part of 
 the case . but , after all , a learn dog be not so very uncommon as to be 
 in itself the striking attraction which you appear to suppose . " 

 " it be not the mere learning of my dog of which I boast , " reply the 
 Comedian . " Dogs may be learn , and man too ; but it be the way that 
 learning be impart , whether by dog or man , for the edification of the 
 mass , in order , as Pope express himself , ' to raise the genius and 
 to mend the heart ' that alone adorn the possessor , exalt the specie , 
 interest the public , and command the respect of such judge as I see 
 before I . " the grand bow . 

 " ah ! " say Mr. Williams , hesitatingly , ' sentiment that do honour to 
 your head and heart ; and if we could , in the first instance , just see 
 the dog privately . " 

 " ' nothing easy ! " say the Comedian . " will you do I the honour to meet 
 he at tea this evening ? " 

 " rather will you not come and take tea at my house ? " say the Mayor , 
 with a shy glance towards Mr. Williams . 

 the COMEDIAN . - " you be very kind ; but my time be so occupy that I 
 have long since make it a rule to decline all private invitation out of 
 my own home . at my year , Mr. Mayor , one may be excuse for take leave 
 of society and its form ; but you be comparatively young man . I presume 
 on the authority of these gray hair , and I shall expect you this 
 evening , - say at nine o'clock . " the Actor wave his hand graciously and 
 withdraw . 

 " a scholar and a gentleman , " say Williams , emphatically . and the Mayor , 
 thus authorize to allow vent to his kindly heart , add , " a humourist , 
 and a pleasant one . perhaps he be right , and our poor operative would 
 thank we more for a little innocent amusement than for those lecture , 
 which they may be excuse for think rather dull , since even you fall 
 asleep when Professor Long get into the multilocular shell of the very 
 first class of cephalous mollusca ; and it be my belief that harmless 
 laughter have a good moral effect upon the work class , - only do not 
 spread it about that I say so , for we know excellent person of a 
 serious turn of mind whose opinion that sentiment might shock . " 




 CHAPTER XI . 

  HISTORICAL problem : " be Gentleman Waife a swindler or a man of 
  genius ? " ANSWER : " certainly a swindler , if he do not   succeed . " 
  Julius Caesar owe two million when he risk the experiment of 
  be general in Gaul . if Julius Caesar have not live to cross the 
  Rubicon and pay off his debt , what would his creditor have call 
  Julius Caesar ? 

 I need not say that Mr. Hartopp and his foreman come duly to tea , but 
 the Comedian exhibit Sir Isaac 's talent very sparingly , - just enough 
 to excite admiration without sate curiosity . Sophy , whose pretty face 
 and well - breed air be not unappreciated , be dismiss early to bed by 
 a sign from her grandfather , and the Comedian then exert his power to 
 entertain his visitor , so that even Sir Isaac be soon forget . 
 hard task , by writing , to convey a fair idea of this singular vagrant 's 
 pleasant vein . it be not so much what he say as the way of say it , 
 which give to his desultory talk the charm of humour . he have certainly 
 see an immense deal of life somehow or other ; and without appear at 
 the time to profit much by observation , without perhaps be 
 himself conscious that he do profit , there be something in the very 
  enfantillage of his loose prattle , by which , with a glance of the 
 one lustrous eye and a twist of the mobile lip , he could convey the 
 impression of an original genius play with this round world of 
 ours - toss it up , catch it again - easily as a child play with its 
 party - colour ball . his mere book - knowledge be not much to boast of , 
 though early in life he must have receive a fair education . he have a 
 smattering of the ancient classic , sufficient , perhaps , to startle 
 the unlearned . if he have not read they , he have read about they ; and at 
 various odd and end of his life he have pick up acquaintance with 
 the popular standard modern writer . but literature with he be the 
 small stripe in the party - colour ball . still it be astonishing how 
 far and wide the Comedian could spread the sand of lore that the wind 
 have drift round the door of his playful , busy intellect . where , 
 for instance , could he ever have study the nature and prospect of 
 Mechanics ' Institutes ? and yet how well he seem to understand they . 
 here , perhaps , his experience in one kind of audience help he to the 
 key to all miscellaneous assemblage . in fine , the man be an actor ; 
 and if he have think fit to act the part of Professor Long himself , he 
 would have do it to the life . 

 the two burgher have not spend so pleasant an evening for many year . 
 as the clock strike twelve , the Mayor , whose gig have be in wait a 
 whole hour to take he to his villa , rise reluctantly to depart . 

 " and , " say Williams , " the bill must be out to - morrow . what shall we 
 advertise ? " 

 " the simple the well , " say Waife ; " only pray head the performance 
 with the assurance that it be under the special patronage of his worship 
 the Mayor . " 

 the Mayor feel his breast swell as if he have receive some overwhelming 
 personal obligation . 

 " suppose it run thus , " continue the Comedian , - " illustration from 
 Domestic Life and Natural History , with live example : PART FIRST - THE 
 DOG ! " 

 " it will take , " say the Mayor : " dog be such popular animal ! " 

 " yes , " say Williams ; " and though for that very reason some might think 
 that by the ' live example of a dog ' we compromise the dignity of the 
 Institute , still the importance of Natural history - " 

 " and , " add the Comedian , " the sanctifying influence of domestic 
 life - " 

 " May , " conclude Mr. Williams , " carry off whatever may seem to the 
 high order of mind a too familiar attraction in the - dog ! " 

 " I do not fear the result , " say Waife , " provide the audience be 
 sufficiently numerous ; for that   which be an indispensable condition 
 to a fair experiment   I issue hand - bill , only where distribute by the 
 Mayor . " 

 " do not   be too sanguine . I distribute bill on behalf of Professor Long , 
 and the audience be not numerous . how ever , I will do my good . be there 
 nothing more in which I can be of use to you , Mr. Chapman ? " 

 " yes , later . " Williams take alarm , and approach the Mayor 's 
 breast - pocket protectingly . the Comedian withdraw he aside and 
 whisper , " I intend to give the Mayor a little outline of the 
 exhibition , and bring he into it , in order that his fellow - townsman may 
 signify their regard for he by a cheer ; it will please his good heart , 
 and be touch , you will see - mum ! " Williams shake the Comedian by the 
 hand , relieve , affected , and confide . 

 the visitor depart ; and the Comedian light his hand - candlestick , 
 whistle to Sir Isaac , and go to bed without one compunctious thought 
 upon the growth of his bill and the deficit in his pocket . and yet it 
 be true , as Sophy imply , that the Comedian have an honest horror of 
 incur debt . he generally think twice before he risk owe 
 even the most trifling bill ; and when the bill come in , if it leave he 
 penniless , it be pay . and , now , what reckless extravagance ! the good 
 apartment ! dinner , tea , in the first hotel of the town ! half - a - crown to 
 a porter ! that lavish mode of life renew with the dawn sun ! not a 
 care for the morrow ; and I dare not conjecture how few the shilling 
 in that purse . what aggravation , too , of guilt ! bill incur without 
 mean under a borrow name ! I do not   pretend to be a lawyer ; but it 
 look to I very much like swindle . yet the wretch sleep . but be 
 we sure that we be not shallow moralist ? do we carry into account the 
 right of genius to draw bill upon the Future ? do not the most prudent 
 general sometimes burn his ship ? do not the most upright merchant 
 sometimes take credit on the chance of his venture ? may not that 
 peaceful slumberer be morally sure that he have that argosy afloat in his 
 own head , which amply justify his use of the " Saracen 's " ? if his plan 
 should fail ? he will tell you that be impossible ! but if it should fail , 
 you say . listen ; there run a story - I do not   vouch for its truth : I tell 
 it as it be tell to I - there run a storv that in the late russian war 
 a certain naval veteran , renowned for professional daring and scientific 
 invention , be examine before some great official as to the chance 
 of take Cronstadt . " if you send I , " say the admiral , " with so many 
 ship of the line , and so many gunboat , Cronstadt of course will be 
 take . " " but , " say a prudent lord , ' suppose it should not be take ? " 
 " that be impossible : it must be take ! " " yes , " persist my lord , " you 
 think so , no doubt ; but still , if it should not be take , - what then ? " 
 " what then ? - why , there be an end of the british fleet ! " the great man 
 take alarm , and that admiral be not send . but they misconstrue the 
 meaning of his answer . he mean not to imply any considerable danger to 
 the british fleet . he mean to prove that one hypothesis be impossible 
 by the suggestion of a counter - impossibility more self - evident . " it be 
 impossible but what I shall take Cronstadt ! " " but if you do not   take 
 it ! " " it be impossible but what I shall take it ; for if I do not   take it , 
 there be an end of the british fleet ; and as it be impossible that there 
 should be an end of the british fleet , it be impossible that I should 
 not take Cronstadt ! " - Q.E.D. 




 CHAPTER XII . 

  in which everything depend on Sir Isaac 's success in discover 
  the law of attraction . 

 on the appoint evening , at eight o'clock , the great room of the 
 Gatesboro ' Athenaeum be unusually well fill . not only have the Mayor 
 exert himself to the utmost for that object , but the hand - bill itself 
 promise a rare relief from the prosiness of abstract enlightenment and 
 elevated knowledge . moreover , the stranger himself have begin to 
 excite speculation and curiosity . he be an amateur , not a cut - and - dry 
 professor . the Mayor and Mr. Williams have both spread the report 
 that there be more in he than appear on the surface ; prodigiously 
 learn , but extremely agreeable , fine manner , too ! - who could he be ? 
 be Chapman his real name ? etc . 

 the Comedian have obtain permission to arrange the room beforehand . he 
 have the raise portion of it for his stage , and he have be fortunate 
 enough to find a green curtain to be draw across it . from behind 
 this screen he now emerge and bow . the bow redouble the first 
 conventional applause . he then begin a very short address , - extremely 
 well deliver , as you may suppose , but rather in the conversational 
 than the oratorical style . he say it be his object to exhibit the 
 intelligence of that Universal Friend of Man , the Dog , in some 
 manner appropriate , not only to its sagacious instinct , but to its 
 affectionate nature , and to convey thereby the moral that talent , 
 however great , learning , however deep , be of no avail , unless render 
 serviceable to Man .   applause .   he must be pardon then , if , in order 
 to effect this object , he be compel to borrow some harmless effect 
 from the stage . in a word , his dog could represent to they the plot of 
 a little drama . and he , though he could not say that he be altogether 
 unaccustomed to public speaking   here a smile , modest , but august as 
 that of some famous parliamentary orator who make his first appearance 
 at a vestry , still wholly new to its practice in the special part he 
 have undertake , would rely on their indulgence to effort aspire to 
 no other merit than that of aid the Hero of the Piece in a familiar 
 illustration of those quality in which dog might give a lesson to 
 humanity . again he bow , and retire behind the curtain . a pause of 
 three minute ! the curtain draw up . could that be the same Mr. Chapman 
 whom the spectator beheld before they ? could three minute suffice to 
 change the sleek , respectable , prosperous - look gentleman who have just 
 address they into that image of threadbare poverty and hunger - pinch 
 dejection ? little aid from theatrical costume : the clothe seem the 
 same , only to have grow wondrous aged and rusty . the face , the figure , 
 the man , - these have undergo a transmutation beyond the art of the mere 
 stage wardrobe , be it ever so amply store , to effect . but for the patch 
 over the eye , you could not have recognize Mr. Chapman . there be , 
 indeed , about he , still , an air of dignity ; but it be the dignity of 
 woe , - a dignity , too , not of an affable civilian , but of some veteran 
 soldier . you could not mistake . though not in uniform , the melancholy 
 man must have be a warrior ! the way the coat be button across the 
 chest , the black stock tighten round the throat , the shoulder throw 
 back in the disciplined habit of a life , though the head bend forward 
 in the despondency of an eventful crisis , - all speak the decayed but not 
 ignoble hero of a hundred field . 

 there be something foreign , too , about the veteran 's air . Mr. Chapman 
 have look so thoroughly English : that tragical and meagre personage 
 look so unequivocally french . 

 not a word have the Comedian yet say ; and yet all this have the first 
 sight of he convey to the audience . there be an amazed murmur , 
 then breathless stillness ; the story rapidly unfold itself , partly by 
 word , much more by look and action . there sit a soldier who have fight 
 under Napoleon at Marengo and Austerlitz , go through the snow of 
 Muscovy , escape the fire of Waterloo , - the soldier of the Empire ! 
 wondrous ideal of a wondrous time ! and nowhere win more respect 
 and awe than in that land of the old English foe , in which with slight 
 knowledge of the beautiful in Art , there be so reverent a sympathy 
 for all that be grand in Man ! there sit the soldier , penniless and 
 friendless , there , scarcely see , recline his grandchild , weak and 
 slowly die for the want of food ; and all that the soldier possess 
 wherewith to buy bread for the day , be his cross of the Legion of 
 Honour . it be give to he by the hand of the Emperor : must he pawn or 
 sell it ? out on the pomp of decoration which we have substitute for the 
 voice of passionate nature on our fall stage ! scene so faithful to 
 the shaft of a column , - dress by which an antiquary can define a date 
 to a year ! be delusion there ? be it thus we be snatch from Thebes to 
 Athens ? no ; place a really fine actor on a deal board , and for Thebes 
 and Athens you may hang up a blanket ! why , that very cross which the 
 old soldier hold - away from his sight - in that tremulous hand , be but 
 patch up from the foil and cardboard buy at the stationer 's shop . 
 you might see it be nothing more , if you try to see . do a soul 
 present think of such minute investigation ? not one . in the actor 's hand 
 that trumpery become at once the glorious thing by which Napoleon have 
 plant the sentiment of knightly heroism in the man whom Danton would 
 have launch upon earth ruthless and bestial , as galley - slave that have 
 burst their chain . 

 the badge , work from foil and cardboard , take life and soul : it beget 
 an interest , inspire a pathos , as much as if it have be make - oh ! not 
 of gold and gem , but of flesh and blood . and the simple broken word 
 that the veteran address to it ! the scene , the field , the hope , 
 the glory it conjure up ! and now to be wrench away , - sell to supply 
 Man 's humblest , mean want , - sell - the last symbol of such a past ! 
 it be indeed " propter vitam vivendi perdere causa . " he would have 
 starve rather , - but the child ? and then the child rise up and come into 
 play . she would not suffer such a sacrifice , - she be not hungry , - she 
 be not weak ; and when her voice fail she , she look up into 
 that iron face and smile , - nothing but a smile . outcame the 
 pocket - handkerchief ! the soldier seize the cross , and turn away . it 
 shall be sell ! as he open the door , a dog enter gravely , - lick his 
 hand , approach the table , raise itself on its hind leg , survey the 
 table dolefully , shake its head , whine , come to its master , pull he 
 by the skirt , look into his face inquisitively . 

 what do all this mean ? it soon come out , and very naturally . the dog 
 belong to an old fellow - soldier , who have go to the Isle of France to 
 claim his share in the inheritance of a brother who have settle and die 
 there , and who , meanwhile , have confide it to the care of our veteran , 
 who be then in comparatively easy circumstance , since ruin by the 
 failure and fraud of a banker to whom he have intrust his all ; and his 
 small pension , include the yearly sum to which his cross entitle he , 
 have be forestall and mortgage to pay the petty debt which , rely 
 on his dividend from the banker , he have innocently incur . the dog 's 
 owner have be go for month ; his return might be daily expect . 
 meanwhile the dog be at the hearth , but the wolf at the door . now , this 
 sagacious animal have be teach to perform the duty of messenger and 
 major - domo . at state interval he apply to his master for sous , and 
 bring back the supply which the sous purchase . he now , as usual , 
 come to the table for the accustomed coin - the last sou be go , - the 
 dog 's occupation be at an end . but could not the dog be sell ? 
 impossible : it be the property of another , - a sacred deposit ; one 
 would be as bad as the fraudulent banker if one could apply to one 's own 
 necessity the property one hold in trust . these little biographical 
 particular come out in that sort of bitter and pathetic humour which 
 a study of Shakspeare , or the experience of actual life , have teach the 
 Comedian to be a natural relief to an intense sorrow . the dog meanwhile 
 aid the narrative by his by - play . still intent upon the sous , he 
 thrust his nose into his master 's pocket ; he appeal touchingly to 
 the child , and finally put back his head and vent his emotion in a 
 lugubrious and elegiacal howl . suddenly there be hear without the sound 
 of a showman 's tin trumpet ! whether the actor have get some obliging 
 person to perform on that instrument , or whether , as more likely , it be 
 but a trick of ventriloquism , we leave to conjecture . at that note , an 
 idea seem to seize the dog . he run first to his master , who be on the 
 threshold about to depart ; pull he back into the centre of the room : 
 next he run to the child , drag she towards the same spot , though 
 with great tenderness , and then , utter a joyous bark , he raise 
 himself on his hind leg and , with incomparable solemnity , perform a 
 minuet step ! the child catch the idea from the dog . be he not more 
 worth see than the puppet - show in the street ? might not people give 
 money to see he , and the old soldier still keep his cross ? to - day 
 there be a public fete in the garden yonder : that showman must be go 
 thither ; why not go too ? what ! he the old soldier , - he stoop to show off 
 a dog ! he ! he ! the dog look at he deprecatingly and stretch himself 
 on the floor - lifeless . 

 yes , that be the alternative - shall his child die too , and he be too 
 proud to save she ? ah ! and if the cross can be save also ! but pshaw ! 
 what do the dog know that people would care to see ? oh , much , much . 
 when the child be alone and sad , it would come and play with she . see 
 those old dominos ! she range they on the floor , and the dog leap up 
 and come to prove his skill . artfully , then , the Comedian have plan 
 that the dog should make some sad mistake , alternate by some 
 marvellous surprise . no , he would not do : yes , he would do . the 
 audience take it seriously , and become intensely interested in the dog 's 
 success ; so sorry for his blunder , so triumphant in his lucky hit . 
 and then the child calm the hasty irritable old man so sweetly , and 
 correct the dog so gently , and talk to the animal ; tell it how much 
 they rely on it , and produce her infant alphabet , and spelt out " Save 
 we . " the dog look at the letter meditatively , and henceforth it be 
 evident that he take more pain . well and well ; he will do , he will 
 do ! the child shall not starve , the cross shall not be sell . down drop 
 the curtain . end of Act I. 

 Act II . open with a dialogue speak off the stage . invisible dramatis 
 persona , that subsist , with airy tongue , upon the mimetic art of the 
 Comedian . you understand that there be a vehement dispute go on . the 
 dog must not be admit into a part of the garden where a more refined 
 and exclusive section of the company have hire seat , in order to 
 contemplate , without share , the rude dance or jostle promenade of 
 the promiscuous merry - maker . much hubbub , much humour ; some person 
 for the dog , some against he ; privilege and decorum here , equality and 
 fraternity there . a bonapartist colonel see the cross on the soldier 's 
 breast , and , mille tonnerre ! he settle the point . he pay for three 
 reserve seat , - one for the soldier , one for the child , and a third 
 for the dog . the veteran enter , - the child , not strong enough to have 
 push through the crowd , raise on his shoulder , Rolla - like ; the dog 
 lead by a string . he enter erect and warrior - like ; his spirit have be 
 rouse by contest ; his struggle have be crown by victory . but   and 
 here the art of the drama and the actor culminate towards the high 
 point   - but he now at once include in the list of his dramatis persona 
 the whole of his Gatesboro ' audience . they be that select company into 
 which he have thus force his way . as he see they seat before he , so 
 calm , orderly , and dignified , mauvaise honte steal over the breast 
 more accustomed to front the cannon than the battery of lady ' eye . 
 he place the child in a chair abash and humble ; he drop into a seat 
 beside she shrinkingly ; and the dog , with more self - possession and sense 
 of his own consequence , brush with his paw some imaginary dust from 
 a third chair , as in the superciliousness of the well dress , and then 
 seat himself , and look round with serene audacity . 

 the chair be skilfully place on one side of the stage , as close 
 as possible to the front row of the audience . the soldier venture a 
 furtive glance along the line , and then speak to his grandchild in 
 whisper , bated breath : " now they be there , what be they come for ? 
 to beg ? he can never have the boldness to exhibit an animal for 
 sous , - impossible ; no , no , let they slink back again and sell the 
 cross . " and the child whisper courage ; bid he look again along the 
 row ; those face seem very kind . he again lift his eye , glance 
 round , and with an extemporaneous tact that complete the illusion to 
 which the audience be already gently lend themselves , make sundry 
 complimentary comment on the different face actually before he , 
 select most felicitously . the audience , take by surprise , as some 
 fair female , or kindly burgess , familiar to their association , be thus 
 point out to their applause , become heartily genial in their 
 cheer and laughter . and the Comedian 's face , unmove by such 
 demonstration , - so shy and sad , insinuate its pathos underneath cheer 
 and laugh . you now learn through the child that a dance , on which the 
 company have be suppose to be gaze , be conclude , and that they 
 would not be displease by an interval of some other diversion . now 
 be the tune ! the dog , as if to convey a sense of the prevalent ennui , 
 yawn audibly , pat the child on the shoulder , and look up in her 
 face . " a game of dominos , " whisper the little girl . the dog gleefully 
 grin assent . timidly she steal forth the old dominos , and range they 
 on the ground ; on which she slip from her chair , the dog slip from 
 his ; they begin to play . the experiment be launch ; the soldier see 
 that the curiosity of the company be excited , that the show would 
 commence , the son follow ; and as if he at least would not openly shame 
 his service and his Emperor , he turn aside , slide his hand to his 
 breast , tear away his cross , and hide it . scarce a murmured word 
 accompany the action , the acting say all ; and a noble thrill run 
 through the audience . oh , sublime art of the mime ! 

 the Mayor sit very near where the child and dog be at play . the 
 Comedian have   as he before imply he would do   discreetly prepare that 
 gentleman for direct and personal appeal . the little girl turn she 
 blue eye innocently towards Mr. Hartopp , and say , " the dog beat I , 
 sir ; will you try what you can do ? " 

 a roar , and universal clapping of hand , amidst which the worthy 
 magistrate step on the stage . at the command of its young mistress 
 the dog make the magistrate a polite bow , and straight to the game go 
 magistrate and dog . from that time the interest become , as it be , 
 personal to all present . " will you come , sir , " say the child to a 
 young gentleman , who be strain his neck to see how the dominos 
 be play , " and observe that it be all fair ? you , too , sir ? " to Mr. 
 Williams . the Comedian stand beside the dog , whose movement he direct 
 with undetected skill , while appear only to fix his eye on the 
 ground in conscious abasement . those on the row from behind now press 
 forward ; those in advance either come on the stage , or stand up intently 
 contemplating . the Mayor be defeat , the crowd become too thick , and 
 the caress bestow on the dog seem to fatigue he . he rise and 
 retreat to a corner haughtily . " manner , sir , " say the soldier ; " it 
 be not for the like of we to be proud ; excuse he , lady and gentleman . 
 he only wish to please all , " say the child , deprecatingly . " say how 
 many would you have round we at a time , so that the rest may not be 
 prevent see you . " she spread the multiplication figure before the 
 dog ; the dog put his paw on 10 . " astonishing ! " say the Mayor . 

 " will you choose they yourself , sir ? " 

 the dog nod , walk leisurely round , keep one eye towards the one 
 eye of his master and select ten person , amongst whom be the Mayor , 
 Mr. Williams , and three pretty young lady who have be induce to 
 ascend the stage . the other be choose no less judiciously . 

 the dog be then artfully lead on from one accomplishment to another , 
 much within the ordinary range which bound the instruction of learn 
 animal . he be ask to say how many lady be on the stage : he spelt 
 three . what be their name ? " the Graces . " then he be ask who be 
 the first magistrate in the town . the dog make a bow to the Mayor . 
 " what have make that gentleman first magistrate ? " the dog look to 
 the alphabet and spelt " Worth . " " be there any person present more 
 powerful than the Mayor ? " the dog bow to the three young lady . 
 " what make they more powerful ? " the dog spelt " Beauty . " when end 
 the applause these answer receive , the dog go through the musket 
 exercise with the soldier 's staff ; and as soon as he have perform that , 
 he come to the business part of the exhibition , seize the hat which his 
 master have drop on the ground , and carry it round to each person 
 on the stage . they look at one another . " he be a poor soldier 's dog , " 
 say the child , hide her face . " no , no ; a soldier can not beg , " cry 
 the Comedian . the Mayor drop a coin in the hat ; other do the same 
 or affect to do it . the dog take the hat to his master , who wave he 
 aside . there be a pause . the dog lay the hat softly at the soldier 's 
 foot , and look up at the child beseechingly . " what , " ask she , 
 raise her head proudly - " what secure worth and defend BEAUTY ? " the 
 dog take up the staff and shoulder it . " and to what can the soldier 
 look for aid when he starve and will not beg ? " the dog seem 
 puzzle , - the suspense be awful . " good heaven , " think the Comedian , 
 " if the brute should break down after all ! - and when I take such care 
 that the word should lie undisturbed - right before his nose ! " with a 
 deep sigh the veteran start from his despondent attitude , and creep 
 along the floor as if for escape - so break - down , so crestfallen . every 
 eye be on that heartbroken face and recede figure ; and the eye of 
 that heartbroken face be on the dog , and the foot of that recede 
 figure seem to tremble , recoil , start , as it pass by the 
 alphabetical letter which still lie on the ground as last arrange . 
 " ah ! to what should he look for aid ? " repeat the grandchild , clasp 
 her little hand . the dog have now catch the cue , and put his paw first 
 upon " worth , " and then upon " BEAUTY . " 

 " worth ! " cry the lady - " Beauty ! " exclaim the Mayor . " wonderful , 
 wonderful ! " 

 " take up the hat , " say the child , and turn to the Mayor - " ah ! tell 
 he , sir , that what Worth and Beauty give to Valour in distress be not 
 alm but tribute . " 

 the word be little well than a hack claptrap ; but the sweet voice 
 glide through the assembly , and find its way into every heart . 

 " be it so ? " ask the old soldier , as his hand hoveringly pass above 
 the coin . " upon my honour it be , sir ! " say the Mayor , with serious 
 emphasis . the audience think it the good speech he have ever make in 
 his life , and cheer he till the roof ring again . " oh ! bread , bread , 
 for you , darling ! " cry the veteran , bow his head over the child , 
 and take out his cross and kiss it with passion ; " and the badge of 
 honour still for I ! " 

 while the audience be in the full depth of its emotion , and generous 
 tear in many an eye , Waife seize his moment , drop the actor , 
 and step forth to the front as the man - simple , quiet , earnest 
 man - artless man ! 

 " this be no mimic scene , lady and gentleman . it be a tale in real life 
 that stand out before you . I be here to appeal to those heart that be 
 not vainly open to human sorrow . I plead for what I have represent . 
 true , that the man who need your aid be not one of that soldiery which 
 devastate Europe . but he have fight in battle as severe , and be leave 
 by fortune to as stern a desolation . true , he be not a Frenchman ; he be 
 one of a land you will not love less than France , - it be your own . he , 
 too , have a child whom he would save from famine . he , too , have nothing 
 leave to sell or to pawn for bread , - except - oh , not this gild badge , 
 see , this be only foil and cardboard , - except , I say , the thing itself , 
 of which you respect even so poor a symbol , - nothing leave to sell or to 
 pawn but Honour ! for these I have plead this night as a showman ; for 
 these , less haughty than the Frenchman , I stretch my hand towards you 
 without shame ; for these I be a beggar . " 

 he be silent . the dog quietly take up the hat and approach the Mayor 
 again . the Mayor extract the half - crown he have previously deposit , 
 and drop into the hat two golden sovereign . who do not guess 
 the rest ? all crowded forward , - youth and age , man and woman . and most 
 ardent of all be those whose life stand most close to vicissitude , 
 most expose to beggary , most sorely try in the alternative between 
 bread and honour . not an operative there but spar his mite . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

  Omne ignotum pro magnifico . - Rumour , know nothing of his 
  antecedent , exalt Gentleman Waife into Don Magnifico . 

 the Comedian and his two coadjutor be follow to the Saracen 's Head 
 inn by a large crowd , but at respectful distance . though I know few 
 thing less pleasing than to have be decoy and entrap into an 
 unexpected demand upon one 's purse , - when one only count , too , upon 
 an agreeable evening , - and hold , therefore , in just abhorrence the 
 circulate plate which sometimes follow a public oration , homily , or 
 other eloquent appeal to british liberality ; yet , I will venture to say , 
 there be not a creature whom the Comedian have surprise into impulsive 
 beneficence who regret his action , grudge its cost , or think he 
 have pay too dear for his entertainment . all have go through a series 
 of such pleasurable emotion that all have , as it be , wish a vent for 
 their gratitude ; and when the vent be find , it become an additional 
 pleasure . but , strange to say , no one could satisfactorily explain to 
 himself these two question , - for what , and to whom have he give his 
 money ? it be not a general conjecture that the exhibitor want the 
 money for his own us . no ; despite the evidence in favour of that idea , 
 a person so respectable , so dignified , address they , too , with that 
 noble assurance to which a man who beg for himself be not morally 
 entitle , - a person thus characterize must be some high - hearted 
 philanthropist who condescend to display his power at an Institute 
 purely intellectual , perhaps on behalf of an eminent but decay author , 
 whose name , from the respect due to letter , be delicately conceal . 
 Mr. Williams , consider the hard head and most practical man in the 
 town , originate and maintain that hypothesis . probably the stranger 
 be an author himself , a great and affluent author . have not great and 
 affluent author - man who be the boast of our time and land - act , 
 yea , on a common stage , and act inimitably too , on behalf of some 
 lettered brother or literary object ? therefore in these guileless 
 mind , with all the pecuniary advantage of extreme penury and 
 forlorn position , the Comedian obtain the respect due to prosperous 
 circumstance and high renown . but there be one universal wish 
 express by all who have be present , as they take their way homeward ; 
 and that wish be to renew the pleasure they have experience , even if 
 they pay the same price for it . could not the long - close theatre be 
 re - open , and the great man be induce by philanthropic motif , and 
 an assured sum raise by voluntary subscription , to gratify the whole 
 town , as he have gratify its select intellect ? Mr. Williams , in a 
 state of charitable thaw , now softest of the soft , like most hard man 
 when once soften , suggest this idea to the Mayor . the Mayor say 
 evasively that he would think of it , and that he intend to pay his 
 respect to Mr. Chapman before he return home , that very night : it be 
 proper . Mr. Williams and many other wish to accompany his worship . 
 but the kind magistrate suggest that Mr. Chapman would be greatly 
 fatigue : that the presence of many might seem more an intrusion than a 
 compliment ; that he , the Mayor , have well go alone , and at a somewhat 
 later hour , when Mr. Chapman , though not retire to bed , might have 
 have time for rest and refreshment . this delicate consideration have its 
 weight ; and the street be thin when the Mayor 's gig stop , on its 
 way villa - ward , at the saracen 's Head . 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

  it be the interval between our first repining and our final 
  resignation , in which , both with individual and community , be to 
  be find all that make a history worth tell . Ere yet we yearn 
  for what be out of our reach , we be still in the cradle . when 
  weary out with our yearning , desire again fall asleep ; we be on 
  the deathbed . 

 Sophy   lean on her grandfather 's arm as they ascend the stair of the 
 Saracen 's Head . - " but I be so tired , Grandy : I would rather go to bed at 
 once , please ! " 

 GENTLEMAN WAIFE . - " surely you could take something to eat 
 first - something nice , - Miss Chapman ? " -   whisper close , " we can 
 live in clover now , - a phrase which mean "   aloud to the landlady , who 
 cross the landing - place above   " grill chicken and mushroom for 
 supper , ma'am ! why do not   you smile , Sopby ? oh , darling , you be ill ! " 

 " no , no , Grandy , dear ; only tired : let I go to bed . I shall be well 
 to - morrow ; I shall indeed ! " 

 Waife look fondly into her face , but his spirit be too much 
 exhilarate to allow he to notice the unusual flush upon her cheek , 
 except with admiration of the increase beauty which the heighten 
 colour give to her soft feature . 

 " well , " say he , " you be a pretty child ! - a very pretty child , and you 
 act wonderfully . you would make a fortune on the stage ; but - " 

 sophy   eagerly . - " but - no , no , never ! - not the stage ! " 

 WAIFE . - " I do not   wish you to go on the stage , as you know . a private 
 exhibition - like the one to - night , for instance - have "   thrust his 
 hand into his pocket   " much to recommend it . " 

 SOPHY   with a sigh . - " Thank Heaven ! that be over now ; and you will not be 
 in want of money for a long , long time ! dear Sir Isaac ! " 

 she begin caress Sir Isaac , who receive her attention with solemn 
 pleasure . they be now in Sophy 's room ; and Waife , after again press 
 the child in vain to take some refreshment , bestow on her his kiss and 
 blessing , and whistle " malbrook s'en va - t - en guerre " to Sir Isaac , 
 who , consider that melody an invitation to supper , lick his lip , 
 and stalk forth , rejoice , but decorous . 

 leave alone , the child breathe long and hard , press her hand to her 
 bosom , and sink wearily on the foot of the bed . there be no shutter 
 to the window , and the moonlight come in gently , steal across that 
 part of the wall and floor which the ray of the candle leave in shade . 
 the girl raise her eye slowly towards the window , - towards the glimpse 
 of the blue sky , and the slanting lustre of the moon . there be a certain 
 epoch in our childhood , when what be call the romance of sentiment 
 first make itself vaguely feel . and ever with the dawn of that 
 sentiment the moon and the star take a strange and haunt 
 fascination . few person in middle life - even though they be genuine 
 poet - feel the peculiar spell in the severe stillness and mournful 
 splendour of starry sky which impress most of we , even though no 
 poet at all , in that mystic age when Childhood nearly touch upon 
 Youth , and turn an unquiet heart to those marvellous riddle within we 
 and without , which we cease to conjecture when experience have teach we 
 that they have no solution upon this side the grave . lure by the light , 
 the child rise softly , approach the window , and , rest her upturned 
 face upon both hand , gaze long into the heaven , commune evidently 
 with herself , for her lip move and murmur indistinctly . slowly she 
 retire from the casement , and again seat herself at the foot of the 
 bed , disconsolate . and then her thought run somewhat thus , though she 
 might not have shape they exactly in the same word : " no , I can not 
 understand it . why be I content and happy before I know he ? why do 
 I see no harm , no shame in this way of life - not even on that stage with 
 those people - until he say , ' it be what he wish I have never stoop 
 to ' ? and Grandfather say our path be so different they can not cross 
 each other again . there be a path of life , then , which I can never 
 enter ; there be a path on which I must always , always walk , always , 
 always , always that path , - no escape ! never to come into that other one 
 where there be no disguise , no hiding , no false name , - never , never ! " 
 she start impatiently , and with a wild look , - " it be kill I ! " 

 then , terrify by her own impetuosity , she throw herself on the bed , 
 weep low . her heart have now go back to her grandfather ; it be 
 smite she for ingratitude to he . could there be shame or wrong in 
 what he ask , - what he do ? and be she to murmur if she aid he to 
 exist ? what be the opinion of a stranger boy compare to the approve 
 shelter love of her sole guardian and try foster friend ? and 
 could people choose their own calling and mode of life ? if one road 
 go this way , another that , and they on the one road be bear far 
 and far away from those on the other - as that idea come , consolation 
 stop , and in her noiseless weep there be a bitterness as of 
 despair . but the tear end by relieve the grief that cause they . 
 weary out of conjecture and complaint , her mind relapse into the 
 old native , childish submission . with a fervour in which there be 
 self - reproach she repeat her meek , nightly prayer , that God would 
 bless her dear grandfather , and suffer she to be his comfort and 
 support . then mechanically she undress , extinguish the candle , and 
 creep into bed . the moonlight become bold and bolder ; it advance tip 
 the floor , along the wall ; now it flood she very pillow , and seem to 
 her eye to take a holy love kindness , holy and more loving as the 
 lid droop beneath it . a vague remembrance of some tale of " guardian 
 spirit , " with which Waife have once charm her wonder , stir 
 through her lulling thought , link itself with the presence of that 
 encircle moonlight . there ! see the eyelid be closed , no tear upon 
 their fringe . see the dimple steal out as the sweet lip be part . 
 she sleep , she dream already ! where and what be the rude world of 
 wake now ? be there not guardian spirit ? deride the question if 
 thou wilt , stern man , the reasoning and self - reliant ; but thou , o fair 
 mother , who hast mark the strange happiness on the face of a child 
 that have weep itself to sleep , what sayest thou to the soft tradition , 
 which surely have its origin in the heart of the early mother ? 




 CHAPTER XV . 

  there be no man so friendless but what he can find a friend sincere 
  enough to tell he disagreeable truth . 

 meanwhile the Comedian have make himself and Sir Isaac extremely 
 comfortable . no unabstemious man by habit be Gentleman Waife . he could 
 dine on a crust , and season it with mirth ; and as for exciting drink , 
 there be a childlike innocence in his humour never know to a brain 
 that have be wash in alcohol . but on this special occasion , Waife 's 
 heart be make so bounteous by the novel sense of prosperity that it 
 compel he to treat himself . he do honour to the grill chicken to 
 which he have vainly tempt Sophy . he order half a pint of port to be 
 mull into negus . he help himself with a bow , as if himself be a 
 guest , and nod each time he take off his glass , as much as to say , 
 " your health , Mr. Waife ! " he even offer a glass of the exhilarating 
 draught to Sir Isaac , who , exceedingly offend , retreat under the 
 sofa , whence he peer forth through his deciduous ringlet , with brow 
 knit in grave rebuke . nor be it without deliberate caution - a whisker 
 first , and then a paw - that he emerge from his retreat , when a plate 
 heap with the remain of the feast be place upon the hearth - rug . 

 the supper over , and the attendant gone , the negus still leave , Waife 
 light his pipe , and , gaze on Sir Isaac , thus address that canine 
 philosopher : " illustrious member of the Quadrupedal Society of Friends 
 to Man , and , as possess those ability for practical life which 
 but few friend to man ever display in his service , promote to high 
 rank - Commissary - General of the Victualling Department , and Chancellor 
 of the Exchequer - I have the honour to inform you that a vote of 
 thank in your favour have be propose in this house , and carry 
 unanimously . " Sir Isaac , look shy , give another lick to the plate , 
 and wag his tail . " it be true that thou wert once   shall I say 
 it ?   in fault at ' Beauty and Worth , ' - thy memory desert thee ; thy 
 peroration be on the verge of a breakdown ; but ' Nemo mortalium omnibus 
 horis sapit , I as the Latin grammar philosophically expresseth 
 it . mortal the wise , not only on two leg but even upon four , 
 occasionally stumble . the great general , statesman , sage , be not he 
 who commit no blunder , but he who well repair a blunder and convert 
 it to success . this be thy merit and distinction ! it hath never be 
 mine ! I recognize thy superior genius . I place in thee unqualified 
 confidence ; and consigning thee to the arm of Morpheus , since I see 
 that panegyric act on thy nervous system as a salubrious soporific , I 
 now move that this House do resolve itself into a Committee of Ways and 
 Means for the consideration of the Budget ! " 

 Therewith , while Sir Isaac fall into a profound sleep the comedian 
 deliberately empty his pocket on the table ; and arrange gold and 
 silver before he , thrice carefully count the total , and then divide 
 it into sundry small heap . 

 " that be for the bill , " quoth he , - " Civil List ! - a large item . that be 
 for Sophy , the darling ! she shall have a teacher , and learn 
 Music , - Education Grant ; Current Expenses for the next fortnight ; 
 Miscellaneous Estimates ; tobacco , - we will call that secret - service money . 
 ah , scamp , vagrant , be not heaven kind to thee at last ? a few more such 
 night , and who know but thine old age may have other roof than the 
 workhouse ? and Sophy ? - ah , what of she ? merciful Providence , spare my 
 life till she have outgrow its us ! " a tear come to his eye ; he brush 
 it away quickly , and , recount his money , hum a joyous tune . 

 the door open ; Waife look up in surprise , sweep his hand over the 
 coin , and restore they to his pocket . the Mayor enter . 

 as Mr. Hartopp walk slowly up the room , his eye fix Waife 's ; and 
 that eye be so search , though so mild , that the Comedian feel 
 himself change colour . his gay spirit fall , - fall low and low , 
 the nearer the Mayor 's step come to he ; and when Hartopp , without 
 speaking , take his hand , - not in compliment , not in congratulation , but 
 press it as if in deep compassion , still look he full in the face , 
 with those pitying , penetrate eye , the actor experience a sort of 
 shock as if he be read through , despite all his histrionic disguise , 
 read through to his heart 's core ; and , as silent as his visitor , sink 
 back in his chair , - abash , disconcert . 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " poor man ! " 

 the COMEDIAN   rouse himself with an effort , but still 
 confused . - " down , Sir Isaac , down ! this visit , Mr. Mayor , be an honour 
 which may well take a dog by surprise ! forgive he ! " 

 MR . HARTOPP   pat Sir Isaac , who be inquisitively sniff his 
 garment , and draw a chair close to the actor , who thereon edge his 
 own chair a little away , - in vain ; for , on that movement , Mr. Hartopp 
 advance in proportion . - " your dog be a very admirable and clever 
 animal ; but in the exhibition of a learn dog there be something which 
 tend to sadden one . by what privation have he be force out of his 
 natural way ? by what fasting and severe usage have his instinct be 
 distort into trick ? hunger be a stern teacher , Mr. Chapman ; and to 
 those whom it teach , we can not always give praise unmixe with pity . " 

 the COMEDIAN   ill at ease under this allegorical tone , and surprise 
 at a quick intelligence in Mr. Hartopp than he have give that person 
 credit for . - " you speak like an oracle , Mr. Mayor ; but that dog , at 
 least , have be mildly educate and kindly use . inborn genius , sir , 
 will have its vent . Hum ! a most intelligent audience honour we 
 to - night ; and our good thank be due to you . " 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " Mr. Chapman , let we be frank with each other . I be not 
 a clever man ; perhaps a dull one . if I have set up for a clever man , 
 I should not be where I be now . hush ! no compliment . but my life have 
 bring I into frequent contact with those who suffer ; and the dull 
 of we gain a certain sharpness in the matter to which our observation 
 be habitually draw . you take I in at first , it be true . I think 
 you be a philanthropical humourist , who might have crotchet , as many 
 benevolent man , with time on their hand and money in their pocket , 
 be apt to form . but when it come to the beg hat   I ask your pardon ; 
 do not   let I offend you , when it come to the begging hat , I recognize 
 the man who want philanthropy from other , and whose crotchet be 
 to be regard in a professional point of view . Sir , I have come here 
 alone , because I alone perhaps see the case as it really be . will you 
 confide in I ? you may do it safely . to be plain , who and what be you ? " 

 the COMEDIAN   evasively . - " what do you take I for , Mr. Mayor ? what can 
 I be other than an itinerant showman , who have have resort to a harmless 
 stratagem in order to obtain an audience , and create a surprise that 
 might cover the naked audacity of the ' beg hat ' ! " 

 MR . HARTOPP   gravely . - " when a man of your ability and education be 
 reduce to such stratagem , he must have commit some great fault . 
 pray Heaven it be no bad than fault ! " 

 the COMEDIAN   bitterly . - " that be always the way with the prosperous . 
 be a man unfortunate ? they say , ' why do not   he help himself ? ' do he try 
 to help himself ? they say , ' with so much ability , why do not he help 
 himself well ? ' ability and education ! snare and springe , Mr. Mayor ! 
 Ability and education ! the two bad mantrap that a poor fellow can put 
 his foot into ! aha ! do not you say if you have set up to be clever , you 
 would not be where you now be : ' a wise saying ; I admire you for it . 
 well , well , I and my dog have amuse your townsfolk ; they have amply 
 repay we . we be public servant ; accord as we act in public - hiss 
 we or applaud . be we to submit to an inquisition into our private 
 character ? be you to ask how many mutton bone have that dog steal ? 
 how many cat have he worry ? or how many shirt have the showman in his 
 wallet ? how many debt have he leave behind he ? what be his rent - roll 
 on earth , and his account with Heaven ? go and put those question to 
 minister , philosopher , general , poet . when they have acknowledge 
 your right to put they , come to I and the other dog . " 

 MR . HARTOPP   rise and draw on his glove . - " I beg your pardon ! I 
 have do , sir . and yet I conceive an interest in you . it be because I 
 have no talent myself that I admire those who have . I feel a mournful 
 anxiety , too , for your poor little girl , - so young , so engaging . and 
 be it necessary that you should bring up that child in a course of life 
 certainly equivocal , and to female dangerous ? " 

 the Comedian lift his eye suddenly , and star hard at the face of 
 his visitor , and in that face there be so much of benevolent humanity , 
 so much sweetness contend with authoritative rebuke , that the 
 vagabond 's hardihood give way ! he strike his breast , and groan aloud . 

 MR . HARTOPP   press on the advantage he have gain . - " and have you no 
 alarm for her health ? do you not see how delicate she be ? do you not 
 see that her very talent come from her susceptibility to emotion which 
 must wear she away ? " 

 WAIFE.-"No , no ! stop , stop , stop ! you terrify I , you break my heart . 
 Man , man ! it be all for she that I toil and show and beg , - if you call 
 it beg . do you think I care what become of this batter hulk ? not 
 a straw . what be I to do ? what ! what ! you tell I to confide in you ; 
 wherefore ? how can you help I ? would you give I employment ? what be I 
 fit for ? nothing ! you could find work and bread for an irish labourer , 
 nor ask who or what he be ; but to a man who stray towards you , 
 seemingly from a sphere in which , if poverty enter , she drop a 
 courtesy , and be call ' genteel , ' you cry , ' hold , produce your 
 passport ; where be your credential , reference ? ' I have none . I have 
 slip out of the world I once move in . I can no more appeal to those 
 I know in it than if I have transmigrate from one of yon star , and 
 say , ' see there what I be once ! ' oh , but you do not think she look 
 ill ! - do you ? do you ? wretch that I be ! and I think to save she ! " 

 the old man tremble from head to foot , and his cheek be as pale as 
 ash . 

 again the good magistrate take his hand , but this time the clasp be 
 encouraging . " cheer up : where there be a will there be a way ; you 
 justify the opinion I form in your favour despite all circumstance 
 to the contrary . when I ask you to confide in I , it be not from 
 curiosity , but because I would serve you if I can . reflect on what I 
 have say . true , you can know but little of I . learn what be say of 
 I by my neighbour before you trust I far . for the rest , to - morrow 
 you will have many proposal to renew your performance . excuse I if I 
 do not actively encourage it . I will not , at least , interfere to your 
 detriment ; but - " 

 " but , " exclaim Waife , not much heed this address , " but you think 
 she look ill ? you think this be injure she ? you think I be murder 
 my grandchild , - my angel of life , my all ? " 

 " not so ; I speak too bluntly . yet still - " 

 " yes , yes , yet still - " 

 " still , if you love she so dearly , would you blunt her conscience and 
 love of truth ? be you not an impostor tonight ? would you ask she to 
 reverence and imitate and pray for an impostor ? " 

 " I never see it in that light ! " falter Waife , strike to the soul ; 
 " never , never , so help I Heaven ! " 

 " I feel sure you do not , " say the Mayor ; " you see but the sport of the 
 thing ; you take to it as a schoolboy . I have know many such man , with 
 high animal spirit like your . such man err thoughtlessly ; but do 
 they ever sin consciously , they could not keep those high spirit ! good 
 night , Mr. Chapman , I shall hear from you again . " 

 the door close on the form of the visitor ; Waife 's head sink on his 
 breast , and all the deep line upon brow and cheek stand forth , record 
 of mighty grief revive , - a countenance so alter , now its innocent 
 arch play be go , that you would not have know it . at length he rise 
 very quietly , take up the candle , and steal into Sophy 's room . shade 
 the light with careful hand , he look on her face as she sleep . 
 the smile be still upon the part lip : the child be still in the 
 fairyland of dream . but the cheek be thin than it have be week 
 ago , and the little hand that rest on the coverlet seem waste . 
 Waife take that hand noiselessly into his own ! it be hot and dry . he 
 drop it with a look of unutterable fear and anguish , and , shake his 
 head piteously ; stole back again . seat himself by the table at which 
 he have be catch count his gain , he fold his arm , and root 
 his gaze on the floor ; and there , motionless , and as if in stupefied 
 suspense of thought itself , he sit till the dawn creep over the 
 sky , - till the sun shine into the window . the dog , crouch at his 
 foot , sometimes start up and whine as to attract his notice : he 
 do not heed it . the clock strike six ; the house begin to stir . the 
 chambermaid come into the room . Waife rise and take his hat , brush 
 its nap mechanically with his sleeve . " who do you say be the good 
 here ? " he ask with a vacant smile , touch the chambermaid 's arm . 

 " Sir ! the well - what ? " 

 " the good doctor , ma'am ; none of your parish apothecary , - the good 
 physician , - Dr. Gill , - do you say Gill ? thank you ; his address , High 
 Street . close by , ma'am . " with his grand bow , - such be habit ! - Gentleman 
 Waife smile graciously , and leave the room . Sir Isaac stretch himself 
 and follow . 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

  in every civilized society there be find a race of man who retain 
  the instinct of the aboriginal cannibal , and live upon their 
  fellow - man as a natural food . these interesting but formidable 
  bipeds , have catch their victim , invariably select one part of 
  his body on which to fasten their relentless grinder . the part 
  thus select be peculiarly susceptible , Providence have make it 
  alive to the least nibble ; it be situate just above the hip - joint , 
  it be protect by a tegument of exquisite fibre , vulgarly call 
  " the BREECHES pocket . " the thoroughbred Anthropophagite usually 
  begin with his own relation and friend ; and so long as he 
  confine his voracity to the domestic circle , the law interfere 
  little , if at all , with his venerable propensity . but when he have 
  exhaust all that allow itself to be edible in the bosom of 
  private life , the man - eater fall loose on society , and take to 
  prowling , - then " Sauve qui peut ! " the law rouse themselves , put on 
  their spectacle , call for their wig and gown , and the 
  Anthropophagite turn prowler be not always sure of his dinner . it 
  be when he have arrive at this stage of development that the man- 
  eater become of importance , enter into the domain of history , and 
  occupy the thought of Moralists . 

 on the same morning in which Waife thus go forth from the saracen 's 
 Head in quest of the doctor , but at a later hour , a man , who , to judge 
 by the elaborate smartness of his attire , and the jaunty assurance of 
 his saunter , must have wander from the gay purlieus of Regent Street , 
 thread his way along the silent and desolate thoroughfare that 
 intersect the remotest district of Bloomsbury . he stop at the turn 
 into a small street still more sequester than those which lead to it , 
 and look up to the angle on the wall whereon the name of the street 
 should have be inscribe . but the wall have be lately whitewash , 
 and the whitewash have obliterate the expect epigraph . the man 
 mutter an impatient execration ; and , turn round as if to seek a 
 passenger of whom to make inquiry , beheld on the opposite side of the 
 way another man apparently engage in the same research . involuntarily 
 each cross over the road towards the other . 

 " pray , sir , " quoth the second wayfarer in that desert , " can you tell I 
 if this be a street that be call a Place , - Podden Place , Upper ? " 

 " Sir , " return the sprucer wayfarer , " it be the question I would have 
 ask of you . " 

 " strange ! " 

 " very strange indeed that more than one person can , in this busy age , 
 employ himself in discover a Podden Place ! not a soul to inquire 
 of , - not a shop that I see , not an orange - stall ! " 

 " ha ! " cry the other , in a hoarse sepulchral voice , " ha ! there be 
 a pot - boy ! boy ! boy ! boy ! I say . hold , there ! hold ! be this Podden 
 Place , - Upper ? " 

 " yes , it be , " answer the pot - boy , with a sleepy air , catch in that 
 sleepy atmosphere ; and chime his pewter against an area rail with a 
 dull clang , he chant forth " pot oho ! " with a note as dirge - like as 
 that which in the City of the Plague chant " out with the dead ! " 

 meanwhile the two wayfarer exchange bow and part ; the sprucer 
 wayfarer whether from the indulgence of a reflective mood , or from an 
 habitual indifference to thing and person not concern he , cease 
 to notice his fellow - solitary , and rather busy himself in sundry 
 little coquetry appertain to his own person . he pass his hand 
 through his hair , re - arrange the cock of his hat , look complacently 
 at his boot , which still retain the gloss of the morning 's varnish , 
 draw down his wristband , and , in a word , give sign of a man who desire 
 to make an effect , and feel that he ought to do it . so occupy be he 
 in this self - commune that when he stop at length at one of the small 
 door in the small street and lift his hand to the knocker , he 
 start to see that Wayfarer the Second be by his side . the two man 
 now examine each other briefly but deliberately . Wayfarer the First be 
 still young , - certainly handsome , but with an indescribable look about 
 the eye and lip , from which the other recoil with an instinctive 
 awe , - a hard look , a cynical look , - a sidelong , quiet , defying , 
 remorseless look . his clothe be so new of gloss that they seem put 
 on for the first time , be shape to the prevail fashion , and of a 
 taste for colour less subdued than be usual with Englishmen , yet still 
 such as a person of good mien could wear without incur the charge 
 of vulgarity , though liable to that of self - conceit . if you doubt that 
 the man be a gentleman , you would have be puzzle to guess what else 
 he could be . be it not for the look we have mention , and which 
 be perhaps not habitual , his appearance might have be call 
 prepossessing . in his figure there be the grace , in his step the 
 elasticity which come from just proportion and muscular strength . 
 in his hand he carry a supple switch - stick , slight and innocuous 
 to appearance , but weight at the handle after the fashion of a 
 life - preserver . the tone of his voice be not displease to the ear , 
 though there might be something artificial in the swell of it , - the sort 
 of tone man assume when they desire to seem more frank and off - hand 
 than belong to their nature , - a sort of rollick tone which be to the 
 voice what swagger be to , the gait . still that look ! it produce on you 
 the effect which might be create by some strange animal , not without 
 beauty , but deadly to man . Wayfarer the Second be big and burly , 
 middle - aged , large - whisker , his complexion dirty . he wear a wig , - a 
 wig evident , unmistakable , - a wig curl and rusty , - over the wig a 
 dingy white hat . his black stock fit tight round his throat , and 
 across his breast he have throw the fold of a Scotch plaid . 

 wayfarer the FIRST . - " you call here , too , - on Mrs. Crane ? " 

 wayfarer the SECOND . - " Mrs. Crane ? you too ? strange ! " 

 wayfarer the FIRST   with constrain civility . - " Sir , I call on 
 business , - private business . " 

 wayfarer the second   with candid surliness . - " so do I. " 

 wayfarer the FIRST . - " oh ! " 

 wayfarer the SECOND . - " ha ! the lock unbar ! " 

 the door open , and an old meagre woman - servant present herself . 

 wayfarer the first   gliding before the big man with a serpent 's 
 undulate celerity of movement . - " Mrs. Crane live here ? " - " yes ! " 
 " she be at home I suppose ? " - " yes ! " - " take up my card ; say I come alone , 
 not with this gentleman . " 

 Wayfarer the Second seem to have be rather put out by the manner of 
 his rival . he recede a step . 

 " you know the lady of this mansion well , sir ? " " extremely well . " 

 " ha ! then I yield you the precedence ; I yield it , sir , but 
 conditionally . you will not be long ? " 

 " not a moment long than I can help ; the land will be clear for you in 
 an hour or less . " 

 " or less , so please you , let it be or less . Servant , sir . " 

 " Sir , your : come , my Hebe , track the dancer ; that be , go up the 
 stair , and let I renew the dream of youth in the eye of Bella ! " 

 the old woman meanwhile have be turn over the card in her wither 
 palm , look from the card to the visitor 's face , and then to the card 
 again , and mumble to herself . at length she speak : 

 " you , Mr. Losely ! you ! - Jasper Losely ! how you be change ! what ha ' ye 
 do to yourself ? where be your comeliness ? where be the look that stole 
 lady ' heart ? you , Jasper Losely ! you be his goblin ! " 

 " hold your peace , old hussey ! " say the visitor , evidently annoy at 
 remark so disparaging . " I be Jasper Losely , more bronzed of cheek , more 
 iron of hand . " he raise his switch with a threatening gesture , that 
 might be in play , for the lip wear smile , or might be in earnest , 
 for the brow be bent ; and push into the passage , and shut the 
 door , say , " be your mistress up stair ? show I to her room , or - " 

 the old crone give he one angry glance , which sink frighten beneath 
 the cruel gleam of his eye , and hasten up the stair with a quicker 
 stride than her age seem to warrant , cry out , " mistress , mistress ! 
 here be Mr. Losely ! Jasper Losely himself ! " by the time the visitor have 
 reach the landing - place of the first floor , a female form have emerge 
 from a room above , a female face peer over the banister . losely 
 look up and start as he see it . a haggard face , - the face of one 
 over whose life there have pass a blight . when last see by he it have 
 possess beauty , though of a masculine rather than womanly character . 
 now of that beauty not a trace ! the cheek shrunk and hollow leave the 
 nose sharp , long , beak as a bird of prey . the hair , once glossy in 
 its ebon hue , now grizzle , harsh , neglect , hang in torture , tangle 
 mesh , - a study for an artist who would paint a fury . but the eye be 
 bright , - bright than ever ; bright now with a glare that light up the 
 whole face bend over the man . in those burn eye be there love ? 
 be there hate ? be there welcome ? be there menace ? impossible to 
 distinguish ; but at least one might perceive that there be joy . 

 " so , " say the voice from above , ' so we do meet at last , Jasper Losely ! 
 you be come ! " 

 draw a loose kind of dressing - robe more closely round she , the 
 mistress of the house now descend the stair , rapidly , flittingly , 
 with a step noiseless as a spectre 's , and , grasp losely firmly by the 
 hand , lead he into a chill , dank , sunless drawing - room , gaze into his 
 face fixedly all the while . 

 he wince and writhe . " there , there , let we sit down , my dear Mrs. 
 Crane . " 

 " and once I be call Bella . " 

 " age ago ! Basta ! all thing have their end . do take those eye of 
 your off my face ; they be always so bright ! and - really - now they be 
 perfect burning - glass ! how close it be ! peuh ! I be dead tired . may I 
 ask for a glass of water ; a drop of wine in it - or - brandy will do as 
 well . " 

 " Ho ! you have come to brandy and morning dram , eh , Jasper ? " say Mrs. 
 Crane , with a strange , dreary accent . " I , too , once try if fire could 
 burn up thought , but it do not succeed with I ; that be year ago ; 
 and - there - see the bottle be full still ! " 

 while thus speak , she have unlock a chiffonniere of the shape 
 usually find in " genteel lodging , " and take out a leathern 
 spirit - case contain four bottle , with a couple of wine - glass . this 
 case she place on the table before Mr. , Losely , and contemplate he at 
 leisure while he help himself to the raw spirit . 

 as she thus stand , an acute student of Lavater might have recognize , in 
 her harsh and wasted countenance , sign of an original nature superior 
 to that of her visitor ; on her knitted brow , a sense high in quality 
 than on his smooth low forehead ; on her straight stern lip , less cause 
 for distrust than in the false good - humour which curve his handsome 
 mouth into that smile of the fickle , which , respond to mirth but not 
 to affection , be often light and never warm . it be true that in that 
 set pressure of her lip there might be cruelty , and , still more , the 
 secretiveness which can harbour deceit ; and yet , by the nervous working 
 of that lip , when relieve from such pressure , you would judge the 
 woman to be rather by natural temperament passionate and impulsive than 
 systematically cruel or deliberately - false , - false or cruel only as some 
 predominate passion become the soul 's absolute tyrant , and adopt 
 the tyrant 's vice . above all , in those very line destructive to beauty 
 that have be plough , not by time , over her sallow cheek , there be 
 write the susceptibility to grief , to shame , to the sense of fall , 
 which be not visible in the unreflective , reckless aspect of the sleek 
 human animal before she . 

 in the room , too , there be some evidence of a cultivate taste . on 
 the wall , book - shelf , contain volume of a decorous and severe 
 literature , such as careful parent allow to studious daughter , - the 
 stately masterpiece of Fenelon and Racine ; selection approve by 
 boarding - school from Tasso , Dante , Metastasio ; amongst english author , 
 Addison , Johnson , Blair   his lecture as well as sermon ; elementary 
 work on such science as admit female neophyte into their portico , 
 if not into their penetralia , - botany , chemistry , astronomy . Prim 
 as soldier on parade stand the book , - not a gap in their 
 rank , - evidently never now displace for recreation ; well bound , yet 
 fade , dusty ; relic of a bygone life . some of they might perhaps have 
 be prize at school , or birthday gift from proud relation . there , 
 too , on the table , near the spirit - case , lie open a once handsome 
 workbox , - no silk now on the skeleton reel ; discolour , but not by 
 use , in its nest of tarnished silk sleep the golden thimble . there , too , 
 in the corner , near a music - stand pile high with musical composition 
 of various school and graduate complexity from " lesson for beginner " 
 to the most arduous gamut of a german oratorio , slunk pathetically 
 a poor lute - harp , the string long since break . there , too , by the 
 window , hang a wire bird - cage , the bird long since dead . in a word , 
 round the woman gaze on Jasper Losely , as he complacently drink his 
 brandy , group the forlorn token of an early state , - the lose golden 
 age of happy girlish study , of harmless girlish taste . 

 " Basta , eno ' , " say Mr. Losely , push aside the glass which he have 
 twice fill and twice drain , " to business . let I see the child : I 
 feel up to it now . " 

 a dark shade fall over Arabella Crane 's face , as she say , " the child ! 
 she be not here ! I have dispose of her long ago . " 

 " eh ! - dispose of she ! what do you mean ? " 

 " do you ask as if you fear I have put she out of the world ? no ! well , 
 then , - you come to England to see the child ? you miss - you love , the 
 child of that - of that - " she pause , check herself , and add in an 
 altered voice , " of that honest , high - minded gentlewoman whose memory 
 must be so dear to I , - you love that child ; very natural , Jasper . " 

 " love she ! a child I have scarcely see since she be bear ! do talk 
 common - sense . no . but have I not tell you that she ought to be money 's 
 worth to I ; ay , and she shall be yet , despite that proud man 's 
 disdainful insolence . " 

 " that proud man ! what , you have venture to address he - visit 
 he - since your return to England ? " 

 " of course . that be what bring I over . I imagine the man would 
 rejoice at what I tell he , open his pursestring , lavish blessing and 
 bank - note . and the brute would not even believe I ; all because - " 

 " because you have sell the right to be believe before . I tell you , when 
 I take the child , that you would never succeed there , that - I would 
 never encourage you in the attempt . but you have sell the future as you 
 sell your past , - too cheaply , it seem , Jasper . " 

 " too cheaply , indeed . who could ever have suppose that I should have 
 be fob off with such a pittance ? " 

 " who , indeed , Jasper ! you be make to spend fortune , and call they 
 pittance when spend , Jasper ! you should have be a prince , Jasper ; 
 such princely taste ! trinket and dress , horse and dice , and plenty 
 of lady to look and die ! such princely spirit too ! bound all return 
 for loyal sacrifice to the honour you vouchsafe in accept it ! " 

 utter this embitter irony , which nevertheless seem rather to 
 please than to offend her guest , she keep move about the room , and 
  whether from some drawer in the furniture , or from her own person , 
 Losely 's careless eye do not observe   she suddenly draw forth a 
 miniature , and , place it before he , exclaim , " ah , but you be 
 alter from those day ; see what you then be ! " 

 Losely 's gaze , thus abruptly invite , fix itself on the effigy of 
 a youth eminently handsome , and of that kind of beauty which , without 
 be effeminate , approach to the fineness and brilliancy of the 
 female countenance , - a beauty which render its possessor inconveniently 
 conspicuous , and too often , by win that ready admiration which 
 it cost no effort to obtain , withdraw the desire of applause from 
 success to be achieve by labour , and harden egotism by the excuse 
 it lend to self - esteem . it be true that this handsome face have not the 
 elevation bestow by thoughtful expression but thoughtful expression be 
 not the attribute a painter seek to give to the abstract comeliness of 
 early youth ; and it be seldom to be acquire without that constitutional 
 wear and tear which be injurious to mere physical beauty . and over the 
 whole countenance be diffuse a sunny light , the freshness of buxom 
 health , of luxuriant vigour ; so that even that arrogant vanity which 
 an acute observer might have detect as the prevail mental 
 characteristic seem but a glad exultation in the gift of benignant 
 nature . not there the look which , in the matured man gaze on the 
 bright ghost of his former self , might have daunt the timid and warn 
 the wise . " and I be like this ! true ! I remember well when it be 
 take , and no one call it flattering , " say Mr. Losely , with pathetic 
 self - condolence . " but I can not   be very much change , " he add , with a 
 half laugh . " at my age one may have a manly look , yet - " 

 " yet still be handsome , Jasper , " say Mrs. Crane . " you be so . but look 
 at I ; what be I ? " 

 " oh , a very fine woman , my dear crane , - always be . but you neglect 
 yourself : you should not do that ; keep it up to the last . well , but 
 to return to the child . you have dispose of she without my consent , 
 without let I know ? " 

 " let you know ! how many year be it since you even give I your 
 address ! never fear : she be in good hand . " 

 " Whose ? at all event I must see she . " 

 " see she ! what for ? " 

 " what for ! hang it , it be natural that , now I be in England , I should 
 at least wish to know what she be like . and I think it very strange that 
 you should send she away , and then make all these difficulty . what be 
 your object ? I do not   understand it . " 

 " my object ? what could be my object but to serve you ? at your request I 
 take , fed , rear a child , whom you could not expect I to love , at my 
 own cost . do I ever ask you for a shilling ? do I ever suffer you to 
 give I one ? never ! at last , hear no more from you , and what little I 
 hear of you make I think that , if anything happen to I   and I be 
 very ill at the time , you could only find she a burden , - at last I say , 
 the old man come to I , - you have give he my address , - and he offer 
 to take she , and I consent . she be with he . " 

 " the old man ! she be with he ! and where be he ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " Humph ; how do he live ? can he have get any money ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " do any old friend take he up ? " 

 " would he go to old friend ? " 

 Mr. losely toss off two fresh glass of brandy , one after the 
 other , and , rise , walk to and fro the room , his hand bury in his 
 pocket , and in no comfortable vein of reflection . at length he pause 
 and say , " well , upon the whole , I do not   see what I could do with the 
 girl just at present , though , of course , I ought to know where she be , 
 and with whom . tell I , Mrs. Crane , what be she like , - pretty or plain ? " 

 " I suppose the chit would be call pretty , - by some person at least . " 

 " very pretty ? handsome ? " ask losely , abruptly . " handsome or not , what 
 do it signify ? what good come of beauty ? you have beauty enough ; what 
 have you do with it ? " 

 at that question , losely draw himself up with a sudden loftiness of look 
 and gesture , which , though prompt but by offend vanity , improve the 
 expression of the countenance , and restore to it much of its early 
 character . Mrs. Crane gaze on he , startle into admiration , and it be 
 in an altered voice , half reproachful , half bitter , that she continue , 

 " and now that you be satisfied about she , have you no question to ask 
 about I ? - what I do ? how I live ? " " my dear Mrs. Crane , I know that you 
 be comfortably off , and be never of a mercenary temper . I trust you 
 be happy , and so forth : I wish I be ; thing do not   prosper with I . if 
 you could conveniently lend I a five - pound note - " 

 " you would borrow of I , Jasper ? ah ! you come to I in your trouble . 
 you shall have the money , - five pound , ten pound , what you please , but 
 you will call again for it : you need I now ; you will not utterly desert 
 I now ? " 

 " good of creature ! - never ! " he seize her hand and kiss it . she 
 withdraw it quickly from his clasp , and , glance over he from head to 
 foot , say , " but be you really in want ? - you be well - dress , Jasper ; 
 that you always be . " 

 " not always ; three day ago very much the reverse : but I have have a 
 trifling aid , and - " 

 " aid in England ? from whom ? where ? not from he whom you say you have the 
 courage to seek ? " 

 " from whom else ? have I no claim ? a miserable alm fling to I . curse 
 he ! I tell you that man 's look and language so gall I , - so gall , " 
 echo losely , shift his hold from the top of his switch to the 
 centre , and bring the murderous weight of the lead down on the palm 
 of his other hand , " that , if his eye have quit mine for a moment , I 
 think I must have brain he , and be - " 

 " Hanged ! " say Mrs. Crane . 

 " of course , hang , " return losely , resume the reckless voice and 
 manner in which there be that peculiar levity which come from hardness 
 of heart , as from the steel 's hardness come the blade 's play . " but if a 
 man do not sometimes forget consequence , there would be an end of the 
 gallow . I be glad that his eye never leave mine . " and the leaden head of 
 the switch fall with a dull dumb sound on the floor . 

 Mrs. Crane make no immediate rejoinder , but fix on her lawless visitor 
 a gaze in which there be no womanly fear   though Losely 's aspect and 
 gesture might have send a thrill through the nerve of many a hardy 
 man , but which be not without womanly compassion , her countenance 
 gradually soften more and more , as if under the influence of 
 recollection mournful but not hostile . at length she say in a low 
 voice , " Poor Jasper ! be all the vain ambition that make you so 
 false shrunk into a ferocity that find you so powerless ? would your 
 existence , after all , have be hard , poor , mean , if your faith 
 have be keep to I ? " 

 evidently dislike that turn in the conversation , but check a reply 
 which might have be rude have no vision of five pound , ten pound , 
 loom in the distance , Mr. Losely say , " Pshaw ! Bella , pshaw ! I be a 
 fool , I dare say , and a sad dog , a very sad dog ; but I have always the 
 great regard for you , and always shall ! Hillo , what be that ? a knock 
 at the door ! oh , by the by , a queer - look man , in a white hat , call 
 at the same time I do , to see you on private business , give way to I , 
 say he should come again ; may I ask who he be ? " 

 " I can not guess ; no one ever call here on business except the 
 tax - gatherer . " 

 the old woman - servant now enter . " a gentleman , ma'am ; say his name be 
 Rugge . " 

 " Rugge , - Rugge ; let I think . " 

 " I be here , Mrs. Crane , " say the manager , stride in . " you do not , 
 perhaps , call I to mind by name ; but - oho ! not go , sir ! do I intrude 
 prematurely ? " 

 " no , I have do ; good - day , my dear Mrs. Crane . " 

 " Stay , Jasper . I remember you now , Mr. Rugge ; take a chair . " 

 she whisper a few word into Losely 's ear , then turn to the manager , 
 and say aloud , " I see you at Mr. Waife 's lodging , at the time he have 
 that bad accident . " 

 " and I have the honour to accompany you home , ma'am , and - but shall I 
 speak out before this gentleman ? " 

 " certainly ; you see he be listen to you with attention . this 
 gentleman and I have no secret from each other . what have become of that 
 person ? this gentleman wish to know . " 

 LOSELY . - " yes , sir , I wish to know - particularly . " 

 rugge . - " so do I ; that be partly what I come about . you be aware , I 
 think , ma'am , that I engage he and Juliet Araminta , that is , Sophy . " 

 LOSELY . - " Sophy ? engage they , sir , - how ? " 

 rugge . - " theatrical line , sir , - Rugge 's exhibition ; he be a great actor 
 once , that fellow Waife . " 

 LOSELY . - " oh , actor ! well , sir , go on . " 

 RUGGE   who in the course of his address turn from the lady to the 
 gentleman , from the gentleman to the lady , with appropriate gesture and 
 appeal look . - " but he become a wreck , a block of a man ; lose an eye 
 and his voice too . how ever , to serve he , I take his grandchild and he 
 too . he leave I - shamefully , and run off with his grandchild , sir . 
 now , ma'am , to be plain with you , that little girl I look upon as my 
 property , - a very valuable property . she be worth a great deal to I , 
 and I have be do out of she . if you can help I to get she back , 
 article and engage say for three year , I be willing and happy , ma'am , 
 to pay something handsome , - uncommon handsome . " 

 MRS . CRANE   loftily . - " speak to that gentleman ; he may treat with you . " 

 LOSELY . - " what do you call uncommon handsome , Mr. - Mr. Tugge ? " 

 rugge . - " Rugge ! Sir ; we sha'n't   disagree , I hope , provide you have the 
 power to get Waife to bind the girl to I . " 

 LOSELY . - " I may have the power to transfer the young lady to your 
 care - young lady be a more respectful phrase than girl - and possibly to 
 dispense with Mr. Waife 's consent to such arrangement . but excuse I if 
 I say that I must know a little more of yourself , before I could promise 
 to exert such a power on your behalf . " 

 rugge . - " Sir , I shall be proud to improve our acquaintance . as to Waife , 
 the old vagabond , he have injure and affront I , sir . I do not   bear 
 malice , but I have a spirit : briton have a spirit , sir . and you will 
 remember , ma'am , that when I accompany you home , I observe that Mr. 
 Waife be a mysterious man , and have apparently know well day , and 
 that when a man be mysterious , and fall into the sear and yellow leaf , 
 ma'am , without that which should accompany old age , sir , one have a right 
 to suspect that some time or other , he have do something or other , 
 ma'am , which make he fear lest the very stone prate of his 
 whereabout , sir . and you do not deny , ma'am , that the mystery be 
 suspicious ; but you say , with uncommon good sense , that it be nothing 
 to I what Mr. Waife have once be , so long as he be of use to I 
 at that particular season . since then , sir , he have cease to be of 
 use , - cease , too , in the unhandsomest manner . and if you would , ma'am , 
 from a sense of justice , just unravel the mystery , put I in possession 
 of the secret , it might make that base man of use to I again , give I 
 a handle over he , sir , so that I might awe he into restore my 
 property , as , morally speak , Juliet Araminta most undoubtedly be . 
 that be why I call , - leave my company , to which I be a father , orphan 
 for the present . but I have miss that little girl , - that young lady , 
 sir . I call she a phenomenon , ma'am ; miss she much : it be natural , 
 sir , I appeal to you . no man can be do out of a valuable property and 
 not feel it , if he have a heart in his bosom . and if I have her back safe , 
 I should indulge ambition . I have always have ambition . the theatre at 
 York , sir , - that be my ambition ; I have it from a child , sir ; dream of 
 it three tune , ma'am . if I have back my property in that phenomenon , 
 I would go at the thing , slap - bang , take the York , and bring out the 
 phenomenon with a claw ! " 

 LOSELY   musingly . - " you say the young lady be a phenomenon , and for 
 this phenomenon you be willing to pay something handsome , - a vague 
 expression . put it into L. s. d. " 

 rugge . - " Sir , if she can be bind to I legally for three year , I would 
 give L100 . I do offer to Waife L50 , - to you , sir , L100 . " 

 Losely 's eye flash , and his hand open restlessly . " but , confound 
 it , where be she ? have you no clew ? " 

 rugge . - " no , but we can easily find one ; it be not worth my while to 
 hunt they up before I be quite sure that , if I regain my property in 
 that phenomenon , the law would protect it . " 

 MRS . CRANE   move to the door . - " well , Jasper Losely , you will sell 
 the young lady , I doubt not ; and when you have sell she , let I know . " 
 she come back and whisper , " you will not perhaps now want money from 
 I , but I shall see you again ; for , if you would find the child , you 
 will need my aid . " 

 " certainly , my dear friend , I will call again ; honour bright . " 

 Mrs. Crane here bow to the gentleman , and sweep out of the room . 

 thus leave alone , losely and Rugge look at each other with a shy and 
 yet cunning gaze , - Rugge 's hand in his trouser 's pocket , his 
 head throw back ; Losely 's hand in voluntarily expand , his head 
 bewitchingly bent forward , and a little on one side . 

 " Sir , " say Rugge , at length , " what do you say to a chop and a pint of 
 wine ? perhaps we could talk more at our ease elsewhere . I be only in 
 town for a day ; leave my company thirty mile off , - orphan , as I say 
 before . " 

 " Mr. Rugge , " say losely , " I have no desire to stay in London , or indeed 
 in England ; and the soon we can settle this matter the well . Grant 
 that we find the young lady , you provide for her board and lodge ; 
 teach she your honourable profession ; behave , of course , kindly to she . " 

 " like a father . " 

 " and give to I the sum of L100 ? " 

 " that be , if you can legally make she over to I . but , sir , may I 
 inquire by what authority you would act in this matter ? " 

 " on that head it will be easy to satisfy you ; meanwhile I accept your 
 proposal of an early dinner . let we adjourn ; be it to your house ? " 

 " I have no exact private house in London ; but I know a public 
 one , - commodious . " 

 " be it so . after you , sir . " 

 as they descend the stair , the old woman - servant stand at the street 
 door . Rugge go out first ; the woman detain losely . " do you find she 
 alter ? " 

 " Whom ? Mrs. Crane ? - why , year will tell . but you seem to have know I ; 
 I do not   remember you . " 

 " not Bridget Greggs ? " 

 " be it possible ? I leave you a middle - aged , rosy - face woman . true , I 
 recognize you now . there be a crown for you . I wish I have more to spare ! " 

 Bridget push back the silver . 

 " no ; I dare not ! take money from you , Jasper Losely ! mistress would not 
 forgive I ! " 

 losely , not unreluctantly , restore the crown to his pocket ; and , with 
 a snort rather than sigh of relief , step into open daylight . as he 
 cross the street to join Rugge , who be wait for he on the shady 
 side , he mechanically turn to look back at the house , and , at the open 
 window of an upper story , he behold again those shin eye which have 
 glare down on he from the stair . he try to smile , and wave his 
 hand feebly . the eye seem to return the smile ; and as he walk down 
 the street , arm - in - arm with the ruffian manager , slowly recover his 
 springy step , and in the gloss of the new garment that set forth 
 his still symmetrical proportion , the eye follow he watchfully , 
 steadfastly , till his form have vanish , and the dull street be once 
 more a solitude . 

 then Arabella Crane turn from the window . put her hand to her 
 heart , " how it beat ! " she mutter ; " if in love or in hate , in scorn 
 or in pity , beat once more with a human emotion . he will come again ; 
 whether for money or for woman 's wit , what care I ? - he will come . I will 
 hold , I will cling to he , no more to part ; for well for bad , as it 
 should have be once at the altar . and the child ? " she pause ; be it 
 in compunction ? " the child ! " she continue fiercely , and as if lash 
 herself into rage , " the child of that treacherous , hateful mother , - yes ! 
 I will help he to sell she back as a stage - show , - help he in all that 
 do not lift she to a state from which she may look down with disdain 
 on I . revenge on she , on that cruel house : revenge be sweet . oh ! that 
 it be revenge alone that bid I cle to he who deserve revenge 
 the most . " she close her burn eye , and sit down droopingly , rock 
 herself to and fro like one in pain . 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

  in life it be difficult to say who do you the most mischief - enemy 
  with the bad intention , or friend with the good . 

 the conference between Mr. Rugge and Mr. Losely terminate in an 
 appointment to meet , the next day , at the village in which this story 
 open . meanwhile Mr. Rugge would return to his " orphan , " and arrange 
 performance in which for some day they might dispense with a father 's 
 part . losely , on his side , undertake to devote the intervene hour to 
 consultation with a solicitor to whom Mr. Rugge recommend he as 
 to the prompt obtaining of legal power to enforce the authority he 
 assert himself to possess . he would also persuade Mrs. Crane to 
 accompany he to the village and aid in the requisite investigation ; 
 entertain a tacit but instinctive belief in the superiority of her 
 acuteness . " set a female to catch a female , " quoth Mr. Rugge . 

 on the day and in the place thus fix the three hunter open their 
 chase . they throw off at the Cobbler 's stall . they soon catch the same 
 scent which have be follow by the lawyer 's clerk . they arrive at 
 Mrs. Saunders 's ; there the two man would have be at fault like their 
 predecessor . but the female be more astute . to drop the metaphor Mrs. 
 Saunders could not stand the sharp cross - examination of one of her own 
 sex . " that woman deceive we , " say Mrs. Crane on leave the house . " 
 they have not go to London . what could they do there ? any man with a 
 few stage juggle trick can get on in country village but would be 
 lose in city . perhaps , as it seem he have get a dog , - we have find 
 out that from Mrs. Saunders , - he will make use of it for an itinerant 
 puppet - show . " 

 " Punch ! " say Mr. Rugge ; " not a doubt of it . " 

 " in that case , " observe Mrs. Crane , " they be probably not far off . let 
 we print handbill , offer a reward for their clew , and lure the old 
 man himself by an assurance that the inquiry be make in order that he 
 may learn of something to his advantage . " 

 in the course of the evening the handbill be print . the next day 
 they be post up on the wall , not only of that village , but on those 
 of the small town and hamlet for some mile round . the handbill run 
 invitingly thus , " if William Waife , who leave - on the 20th ult . , will 
 apply at the Red Lion Inn at - - - - , for X. X. , he will learn of 
 something greatly to his advantage . a reward of L5 will be give to any 
 one who will furnish information where the say William Waife and the 
 little girl who accompany he may be find . the say William Waife be 
 about sixty year of age , of middle stature , strongly build , have lose 
 one eye , and be lame of one leg . the little girl , call Sophy , be 
 twelve year old , but look young ; have blue eye and light brown hair . 
 they have with they a white french poodle dog . this bill be print by 
 the friend of the missing party . " the next day pass ; no information : 
 but on the day follow , a young gentleman of good mien , dress in 
 black , ride into the town , stop at the Red Lion Inn , and ask to 
 see X. X. the two man be out on their research ; Mrs. Crane stay at 
 home to answer inquiry . 

 the gentleman be request to dismount , and walk in . Mrs. Crane 
 receive he in the inn parlour , which swarm with fly . she stand in 
 the centre , - vigilant , grim spider of the place . 

 " I c - ca - call , " say the gentleman , stammer fearfully , in 
 con - consequence of a b - b - bill - i - ch - chance to see in my ri - ri - ri - ride 
 yesterday - on a wa - wa - wall . you - you , I - sup - sup - " 

 " be X. X. , " put in Mrs. Crane , grow impatient , " one of the friend of 
 Mr. Waife , by whom the handbill have be circulate ; it will indeed be 
 a great relief to we to know where they be , - the little girl more 
 especially . " 

 Mrs. Crane be respectably dress , - in silk iron - gray ; she have crisp 
 her flaky tress into stiff hard ringlet , that fall like long screw 
 from under a black velvet band . Mrs. Crane never wear a cap , nor could 
 you fancy she in a cap ; but the velvet band look as rigid as if 
 gum to a hoop of steel . her manner and tone of voice be those of 
 an educate person , not unused to some society above the vulgar ; and yet 
 the visitor , in whom the reader recognize the piscatorial Oxonian , 
 with whom Waife have interchange philosophy on the marge of the running 
 brooklet , draw back as she advance and speak ; and , bent on an errand of 
 kindness , he be seize with a vague misgiving . 

 MRS . CRANE   blandly . - " I fear they must be badly off . I hope they 
 be not want the necessary of life . but pray be seat , sir . " she 
 look at he again , and with more respect in her address than she 
 have before throw into it , add , with a half courtesy , as she seat 
 herself by his side , " a clergyman of the Established Church , I presume , 
 sir ? " 

 OXONIAN   stammer , as on a former occasion , respectfully omit . - " with 
 this defect , ma'am ! - but to the point . some day ago I happen to fall 
 in with an elderly person , such as be describe , with a very pretty 
 female child and a french dog . the man - gentleman , perhaps I may call 
 he , judge from his conversation - interested I much ; so do the 
 little girl . and if I could be the mean of direct real friend 
 anxious to serve they - " 

 Mrs. CRANE . - " you would indeed be a benefactor . and where be they now , 
 sir ? " 

 OXONIAN . - " that I can not positively tell you . but before I say more , 
 will you kindly satisfy my curiosity ? he be perhaps an eccentric 
 person , - this Mr. Waife ? - a little - " the Oxonian stop , and touch 
 his forehead . Mrs. Crane make no prompt reply : she be muse . unwarily 
 the scholar continue : " because , in that case , I should not like to 
 interfere . " 

 MRS . CRANE . - " quite right , sir . his own friend would not interfere with 
 his roving way , his little whim on any account . poor man , why should 
 they ? he have no property for they to covet . but it be a long story . I 
 have the care of that dear little girl from her infancy , sweet child ! " 

 OXONIAN . - " so she seem . " 

 MRS . CRANE . - " and now she have a most comfortable home provide for she ; 
 and a young girl , with good friend , ought not to be tramp about the 
 country , whatever an old man may do . you must allow that , sir ? " 

 OXONIAN . - " well , - yes , I allow that ; it occur to I . but what be the 
 man ? - the gentleman ? " 

 MRS . CRANE . - " very ' eccentric , ' as you say , and inconsiderate , perhaps , 
 as to the little girl . we will not call it insane , sir . but - be you 
 marry ? " 

 oxonian   blushing . - " no , ma'am . " 

 MRS . CRANE . - " but you have a sister , perhaps ? " 

 OXONIAN . - " yes ; I have one sister . " 

 MRS . CRANE . - " would you like your sister to be run about the country 
 in that way , - carry off from her home , kindre , and friend ? " 

 OXONIAN . - " ah ! I understand . the poor little girl be fond of the old 
 man , - a relation , grandfather perhaps ? and he have take she from her 
 home ; and though not actually insane , he be still - " 

 MRS . CRANE . - " an unsafe guide for a female child , delicately rear . 
 I rear she ; of good prospect , too . o sir , let we save the child ! 
 look - " she draw from a sidepocket in her stiff iron - gray apron a fold 
 paper ; she place it in the Oxonian 's hand ; he glance over and return 
 it . 

 " I see , ma'am . I can not hesitate after this . it be a good many mile off 
 where I meet the person whom I have no doubt that you seek ; and two or 
 three day ago my father receive a letter from a very worthy , excellent 
 man , with whom he be often bring into communication upon benevolent 
 object , - a Mr. Hartopp , the Mayor of Gatesboro ' , in which , among other 
 matter , the Mayor mention briefly that the Literary Institute of that 
 town have be much delighted by the performance of a very remarkable man 
 with one eye , about whom there seem some mystery , with a little girl 
 and a learn dog ; and I can not   help think that the man , the girl , and 
 the dog , must be those whom I see and you seek . " 

 MRS . CRANE . - " at Gatesboro ' ? be that far ? " 

 OXONIAN . - " some way ; but you can get a cross train from this village . I 
 hope that the old man will not be separate from the little girl ; they 
 seem very fond of each other . " 

 MRS . CRANE . - " no doubt of it ; very fond : it would be cruel to separate 
 they . a comfortable home for both . I do not   know , sir , if I dare offer to 
 a gentleman of your evident rank the reward , - but for the poor of your 
 parish . " 

 OXONIAN . - " oh , ma'am , our poor want for nothing : my father be rich . but 
 if you would oblige I by a line after you have find these interesting 
 person ; I be go to a distant part of the country to - morrow , - to 
 Montfort Court , in - - - -shire . " 

 MRS . CRANE . - " to Lord Montfort , the head of the noble family of Vipont ? " 

 OXONIAN . - " yes ; do you know any of the family , ma'am ? if you could refer 
 I to one of they , I should feel more satisfied as to - " 

 MRS . CRANE   hastily . - " indeed , sir , every one must know that great 
 family by name and repute . I know no more . so you be go to Lord 
 Montfort 's ! the Marchioness , they say , be very beautiful . " 

 OXONIAN . - " and good as beautiful . I have the honour to be connect both 
 with she and Lord Montfort ; they be cousin , and my grandfather be a 
 Vipont . I should have tell you my name , - Morley ; George Vipont Morley . " 

 Mrs. Crane make a profound courtesy , and , with an unmistakable smile of 
 satisfaction , say , as if half in soliloquy , " so it be to one of that 
 noble family - to a Vipont - that the dear child will owe her restoration 
 to my embrace ! bless you , sir ! " 

 " I hope I have do right , " say George Vipont Morley , as he mount his 
 horse . " I must have do right , surely ! " he say again , when he be on 
 the high road . " I fear I have not do right , " he say a third time , as 
 the face of Mrs. Crane begin to haunt he ; and when at sunset he reach 
 his home , tired out , horse and man , with an unusually long ride , and the 
 green water - bank on which he have overhear poor Waife 's simple grace and 
 joyous babble come in sight , " after all , " he say dolefully , " it be no 
 business of mine . " 

 " I mean well ; but - " his little sister run to the gate to greet he . 
 " yes , I do quite right . how should I like my sister to be rove the 
 country , and act at Literary Institutes ' with a poodle dog ? quite 
 right ; kiss I , Jane ! " 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

  let a king and a beggar converse freely together , and it be the 
  beggar 's fault if he do not say something which make the king 
  lift his hat to he . 

 the scene shift back to Gatesboro ' , the forenoon of the day succeed 
 the memorable exhibition at the Institute of that learn town . Mr. 
 Hartopp be in the little parlour behind his country - house , his hour 
 of business much break into by those intruder who deem no time 
 unseasonable for the indulgence of curiosity , the interchange 
 of thought , or the interest of general humanity and of national 
 enlightenment . the excitement produce on the previous evening by Mr. 
 Chapman , Sophy , and Sir Isaac be greatly on the increase . person who 
 have see they naturally call on the Mayor to talk over the exhibition . 
 person who have not see they , still more naturally drop in just to 
 learn what be really Mr. Mayor 's private opinion . the little parlour 
 be throng by a regular levee there be the proprietor of a dismal 
 building , still call " the Theatre , " which be seldom let except 
 at election time , when it be hire by the popular candidate for the 
 delivery of those harangue upon liberty and conscience , tyranny and 
 oppression , which furnish the staple of declamation equally to the 
 dramatist and the orator . there be also the landlord of the Royal 
 Hotel , who have lately build to his house " the City Concert - Room , " - a 
 superb apartment , but a lose speculation . there , too , be three 
 highly respectable person , of a serious turn of mind , who come to 
 suggest doubt whether an entertainment of so frivolous a nature be not 
 injurious to the morality of Gatesboro ' . besides these notable , there 
 be lounger and gossip , with no particular object except that of 
 ascertain who Mr. Chapman be by birth and parentage , and suggest 
 the expediency of a deputation , ostensibly for the purpose of ask 
 he to repeat his performance , but charge with private instruction 
 to cross - examine he as to his pedigree . the gentle Mayor keep his eye 
 fix on a mighty ledger - book , pen in hand . the attitude be a rebuke 
 on intruder , and in ordinary time would have be so consider . but 
 mildness , however majestic , be not always effective in period of civic 
 commotion . the room be animate by hubbub . you catch broken sentence 
 here and there cross each other , like the sound that have be freeze 
 in the air , and set free by a thaw , accord to the veracious narrative 
 of Baron Munchausen . 

 PLAYHOUSE PROPRIETOR . - " the theatre be the - " 

 serious GENTLEMAN . - " plausible snare by which a population , at present 
 grave and well - dispose , be decoy into become - " 

 excite ADMIRER . - " a french poodle , sir , that play at dominos like a - " 

 CREDULOUS CONJECTURER . - " benevolent philanthropist , condescend to act 
 for the benefit of some distressed brother who be - " 

 PROPRIETOR of CITY CONCERT - ROOM . - " one hundred and twenty foot long by 
 forty , Mr. Mayor ! talk of that damp theatre , sir , you might as well talk 
 of the - " 

 suddenly the door fly open , and push aside a clerk who design to 
 announce he , in burst Mr. Chapman himself . 

 he have evidently expect to find the Mayor alone , for at the sight of 
 that throng he check himself , and stand mute at the threshold . the 
 levee for a moment be no less surprised , and no less mute . but the good 
 folk soon recover themselves . to many it be a pleasure to accost 
 and congratulate the man who the night before have occasion to they 
 emotion so agreeable . cordial smile break out ; friendly hand be 
 thrust forth . brief but hearty compliment , mingle with entreaty to 
 renew the performance to a large audience , be shower round . the 
 Comedian stand hat in hand , mechanically pass his sleeve over its 
 nap , mutter half inaudibly , " you see before you a man , " and turn 
 his single eye from one face to the other , as if struggle to guess 
 what be mean , or where he be . the Mayor rise and come forward , - " my 
 dear friend , " say he , mildly , " Mr. Chapman call by appointment . 
 perhaps he may have something to say to I confidentially . " 

 the three serious gentleman , who have hitherto remain aloof , eye Mr. 
 Chapman much as three inquisitor might have eye a Jew , shake three 
 solemn head , and set the example of retreat . the last to linger be 
 the rival proprietor of the theatre and the city concert - room . each 
 whisper the strange , - one the left ear , one the right . each thrust 
 into his hand a print paper . as the door close on they the Comedian 
 let fall the paper : his arm droop to his side ; his whole frame seem 
 to collapse . Hartopp take he by the hand , and lead he gently to his 
 own armchair beside the table . the Comedian drop on the chair , still 
 without speak . 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " what be the matter ? what have happen ? " 

 WAIFE . - " she be very ill , - in a bad way ; the doctor say so , - Dr. Gill . " 

 MR . HARTOPP   feelingly . - " your little girl in a bad way ! oh , no ; 
 doctor always exaggerate in order to get more credit for the cure . not 
 that I would disparage Dr. Gill , fellow - townsman , first - rate man . still 
 ' t be the way with doctor to talk cheerfully if one be in danger , and 
 to look solemn if there be nothing to fear . " 

 WAIFE . - " do you think so : you have child of your own , sir ? - of her 
 age , too ? - eh ! eh ! " 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " yes ; I know all about child , - well , I think , than 
 Mrs. H. do . what be the complaint ? " 

 WAIFE . - " the doctor say it be low fever . " 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " cause by nervous excitement , perhaps . " 

 WAIFE   look up . - " yes : that be what he say , - nervous excitement . " 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " clever sensitive child , subject precociously to 
 emulation and emotion , be always liable to such malady . my third 
 girl , Anna Maria , fall , into a low fever , cause by nervous excitement 
 in try for school prize . " 

 WATFE . - " do she die of it , sir ? " 

 MR . HARTOPP   shudder . - " die ! no ! I remove she from school , set she 
 to take care of the poultry , forbid all french exercise , make she take 
 english exercise instead , and ride on a donkey . she be quite another 
 thing now , cheek as red as an apple , and as firm as a cricket - ball . " 

 WAIFE . - " I will keep poultry ; I will buy a donkey . oh , sir ! you do not 
 think she will go to heaven yet , and leave I here ? " 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " not if you give her rest and quiet . but no excitement , no 
 exhibition . " 

 WAIFE   empty his pocket on the table . - " will you kindly count that 
 money , sir ? do not   you think that would be enough to find she some 
 pretty lodging hereabout till she get quite strong again ? with 
 green field , - she be fond of green field and a farm - yard with 
 poultry , - though we be lodge a few day ago with a good woman who 
 keep hen , and Sophy do not seem to take to they much . a canary bird be 
 more of a companion , and - " 

 HARTOPP   interrupting . - " Ay - ay - and you ! what would you do ? " 

 WAIFE . - " why , I and the dog would go away for a little while about the 
 country . " 

 HARTOPP . - " exhibit ? " 

 WAIFE . - " that money will not last forever , and what can we do , I and the 
 dog , in order to get more for she ? " 

 hartopp   press his hand warmly . - " you be a good man , sir . I be sure 
 of it ; you can not have do thing which you should be afraid to tell 
 I . make I your confidant , and I may then find some employment fit for 
 you , and you need not separate yourself from your little girl . " 

 WAIFE . - " Separate from she ! I should only leave she for a few day at 
 a time till she get well . this money would keep she , - how long ? two 
 month ? three ? how long ? the doctor would not charge much . " 

 HARTOPP . - " you will not confide in I then ? at your age , - have you no 
 friend , - no one to speak a good word for you ? " 

 WAIFE   jerk up his head with a haughty air . - " so - so ! who talk to 
 you about I , sir ? I be speak of my innocent child . do she want a 
 good word speak for she ? Heaven have write it in her face . " 

 Hartopp persist no more ; the excellent man be sincerely grieve at 
 his visitor 's obstinate avoidance of the true question at issue ; for the 
 Mayor could have find employment for a man of Waife 's evident education 
 and talent . but such employment would entail responsibility and trust . 
 how recommend to it a man of whose life and circumstance nothing could 
 be know , - a man without a character ? and Waife interest he deeply . 
 we have all feel that there be some person towards whom we be 
 attract by a peculiar sympathy not to be explain , - a something in 
 the manner , the cut of the face , the tone of the voice . if there be 
 fifty applicant for a benefit in our gift , one of the fifty win his 
 way to our preference at first sight , though with no well right to it 
 than his fellow . we can no more say why we like the man than we can say 
 why we fall in love with a woman in whom no one else would discover 
 a charm . " there be , " say a Latin love - poet , " no why or wherefore 
 in like . " Hartopp , therefore , have take , from the first moment , to 
 Waife , - the staid , respectable , thriving man , all muffle up from head 
 to foot in the white lawn of reputation , - to the wandering , shifty , 
 tricksome scatterling , who have not seemingly secure , through the course 
 of a life border upon age , a single certificate for good conduct . on 
 his hearthstone , beside his ledger - book , stand the Mayor , look with 
 a respectful admiration that puzzle himself upon the forlorn creature , 
 who could give no reason why he should not be rather in the Gatesboro ' 
 parish stock than in its chief magistrate 's easy - chair . yet , be 
 the Mayor 's sympathetic liking and respectful admiration wholly 
 unaccountable ? run there not between one warm human heart and another 
 the electric chain of a secret understanding ? in that maim outcast , so 
 stubbornly hard to himself , so tremulously sensitive for his sick child , 
 be there not the majesty to which they who have learn that Nature have 
 her noble , reverently bow the head ! a man true to man 's grave religion 
 can no more despise a life wreck in all else , while a hallowing 
 affection stand out sublime through the rent and chink of fortune , 
 than he can profane with rude mockery a temple in ruin , - if still leave 
 there the altar . 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

  very well so far as it go . 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " I can not presume to question you far , Mr. Chapman . 
 but to one of your knowledge of the world , I need not say that your 
 silence deprive I of the power to assist yourself . we will talk no more 
 of that . " 

 WAIFE . - " thank you , gratefully , Mr. Mayor . " 

 MR . HARTOPP . - " but for the little girl , make your mind easy , - at least 
 for the present . I will place she at my farm cottage . my bailiff 's 
 wife , a kind woman , will take care of she , while you pursue your calling 
 elsewhere . as for this money , you will want it yourself ; your poor 
 little child shall cost you nothing . so that be settle . let I come up 
 and see she . I be a bit of a doctor myself . every man bl with a 
 large family , in whose house there be always some interesting case of 
 small - pox , measle , whooping - cough , scarlatina , etc . , have a good private 
 practice of his own . I be not brilliant in book - learning , Mr. Chapman . 
 but as to child 's complaint in a practical way , " add Hartopp , with 
 a glow of pride , " Mrs. H. say she would rather trust the little one to I 
 than to Dr. Gill . I will see your child , and set she up I will be bind . 
 but now I think of it , " continue Hartopp , soften more and more , " if 
 exhibit you must , why not stay at Gatesboro ' for a time ? More may be 
 make in this town than elsewhere . " 

 " no , no ; I could not have the heart to act here again without she . I 
 feel at present as if I can never again act at all ! " 

 " something else will turn up . providence be so kind to I , Mr. Mayor . " 

 Waife turn to the door . " you will come soon ? " he say anxiously . 

 the Mayor , who have be lock up his ledger and paper , reply , " I 
 will but stay to give some order ; in a quarter of an hour I shall be at 
 your hotel . " 




 CHAPTER XX . 

  Sophy hide heart and show temper . 

 the child be lie on a sofa draw near the window in her own room , and 
 on her lap be the doll Lionel have give to she . carry with she in her 
 wandering , she have never play with it ; never alter a ribbon in 
 its yellow tress ; but at least once a day she have take it forth and 
 look at it in secret . and all that morning , leave much to herself , 
 it have be her companion . she be smooth down its frock , which 
 she fancy have get ruffle , - smooth it down with a sort of fearful 
 tenderness , the doll all the while star she full in the face with 
 its blue bead eye . Waife , seat near she , be try to talk gayly ; 
 to invent fairy tale blithe with sport and fancy : but his invention 
 flag , and the fairy prose awfully . he have place the dominos 
 before Sir Isaac , but Sophy have scarcely look at they , from the 
 languid heavy eye on which the doll so stupidly fix its own . Sir 
 Isaac himself seem spiritless ; he be aware that something be wrong . 
 now and then he get up restlessly , sniff the dominos , and place a paw 
 gently , very gently , on Sophy 's knee . not be encourage , he lie down 
 again uneasily , often shift his position as if the floor be grow 
 too hard for he . thus the Mayor find the three . he approach 
 Sophy with the step of a man accustom to sick - room and ail 
 child , - step light as if shod with feel , - put his hand on her 
 shoulder , kiss her forehead , and then take the doll . Sophy start , 
 and take it back from he quickly , but without a word ; then she hide 
 it behind her pillow . the Mayor smile . " my dear child , do you think I 
 should hurt your doll ? " 

 Sophy colour and say murmuringly , " no , sir , not hurt it , but - " she 
 stop short . 

 " I have be talk to your grandpapa about you , my dear , and we both 
 wish to give you a little holiday . doll be well enough for the winter , 
 but green field and daisy chain for the summer . " 

 Sophy glance from the Mayor to her grandfather , and back again to the 
 Mayor , shake her curl from her eye , and look seriously inquisitive . 

 the Mayor , observe she quietly , steal her hand into his own , feel 
 the pulse as if merely caress the slender wrist . then he begin to 
 describe his bailiff 's cottage , with woodbine round the porch , the 
 farm - yard , the bee - hive , the pretty duck - pond with an osi island , and 
 the great China gander who have a pompous strut , which make he the droll 
 est creature possible . and Sophy should go there in a day or two , and 
 be as happy as one of the bee , but not so busy . Sophy listen very 
 earnestly , very gravely , and then slide her hand from the Mayor , 
 catch hold of her grandfather 's arm firmly , and say , " and you , 
 Grandy , - will you like it ? will not   it be dull for you , Grandy dear ? " 

 " why , my darling , " say Waife , " I and Sir Isaac will go and take a 
 stroll about the country for a few week , and - " 

 sophy   passionately . - " I think so ; I think he mean that . I try 
 not to believe it ; go away , - you ? and who be to take care of you ? who will 
 understand you ? I want care ! I ! I ! no , no , it be you , - you who want 
 care . I shall be well to - morrow , - quite well , do not   fear . he shall not 
 be send away from I ; he shall not , sir . oh , Grandfather , 
 Grandfather , how could you ? " she fling herself on his breast , cling 
 there , - cling as if infancy and age be but part of the same whole . 

 " but , " say the Mayor , " it be not as if you be go to school , my 
 dear ; you be go for a holiday . and your grandfather must leave 
 you , - must travel about ; ' tis his calling . if you fall ill and be with 
 he , think how much you would be in his way . do you know , " he add , 
 smile , " I shall begin to fear that you be selfish . " 

 " selfish ! " exclaim Waife , angrily . 

 " selfish ! " echo Sophy , with a melancholy scorn that come from a 
 sentiment so deep that mortal eye could scarce fathom it . " oh , no , sir ! 
 can you say it be for his good , not for what he suppose mine that 
 you want we to part ? the pretty cottage , and all for I ; and what for 
 he ? - tramp , tramp along the hot dusty road . do you see that he be 
 lame ? oh , Sir , I know he ; you do not . selfish ! he would have no merry 
 way that make you laugh without I ; would you , Grandy dear ? go away , 
 you be a naughty man , - go , or I shall hate you as much as that dreadful 
 Mr. Rugge . " 

 " Rugge , - who be he ? " say the Mayor , curiously , catch at any clew . 

 " Hush , my darling ! - hush ! " say Waife , fondle she on his breast . 
 " hush ! what be to be do , sir ? " 

 Hartopp make a sly sign to he to say no more before Sophy , and then 
 reply , address himself to she , " what be to be do ? nothing shall 
 be do , my dear child , that you dislike . I do not   wish to part you two . 
 do not   hate I ; lie down again ; that be a dear . there , I have smooth 
 your pillow for you . oh , here be your pretty doll again . " Sophy snatch 
 at the doll petulantly , and make what the French call a moue at the good 
 man as she suffer her grandfather to replace she on the sofa . 

 " she have a strong temper of her own , " mutter the Mayor ; ' so have Anna 
 Maria a strong temper ! " 

 now , if I be anyway master of my own pen , and could write as I 
 please , without be hurry along helter - skelter by the tyrannical 
 exaction of that " young Rapid " in buskin and chiton call " THE 
 HISTORIC MUSE , " I would break off this chapter , open my window , rest my 
 eye on the green lawn without , and indulge in a rhapsodical digression 
 upon that beautifier of the moral life which be call " Good Temper . " 
 ha ! the Historic Muse be doze . by her leave ! - softly . 




 CHAPTER XXI . 

 be an essay on temper in general , and a hazardous experiment on the 
 reader 's in particular . 

 there , the window be open ! how instinctively the eye rest upon the 
 green ! how the calm colour lur and soothe it ! but be there to the 
 green only a single hue ? see how infinite the variety of its tint ! what 
 sombre gravity in yon cedar , yon motionless pine - tree ! what lively but 
 unvarying laugh in yon glossy laurel ! do those tint charm we like the 
 play in the young leaf of the lilac , - light here , darker there , as 
 the breeze   and so slight the breeze !   stir they into checker , - into 
 ripple ? oh , sweet green , to the world what sweet temper be to man 's 
 life ! who would reduce into one dye all thy lovely variety ? who 
 exclude the dark steadfast verdure that live on through the winter day ; 
 or the mutinous caprice of the gentle , young tint that come fresh 
 through the tear of April , and will shadow with sportive tremor the 
 bloom of luxuriant June ? 

 happy the man on whose marriage - hearth temper smile kind from the eye 
 of woman ! " no deity present , " saith the heathen proverb , " where absent 
 Prudence ; " no joy long a guest where Peace be not a dweller , - peace , so 
 like Faith that they may be take for each other , and poet have clothe 
 they with the same veil . but in childhood , in early youth , expect not 
 the changeless green of the cedar . wouldst thou distinguish fine temper 
 from spiritless dulness , from cold simulation , - ask less what the temper 
 than what the disposition . 

 be the nature sweet and trustful ; be it free from the morbid self - love 
 which call itself ' sensitive feeling " and fret at imaginary offence ; 
 be the tendency to be grateful for kindness , yet take kindness meekly , 
 and accept as a benefit what the vain call a due ? from disposition thus 
 blessed , sweet temper will come forth to gladden thee , spontaneous and 
 free . quick with some , with some slow , word and look emerge out of the 
 heart . be thy first question , " be the heart itself generous and tender ? " 
 if it be so , self - control come with deepening affection . call not that 
 a good heart which , hasten to sting if a fibre be ruffle , cry , " I 
 be no hypocrite . " accept that excuse , and revenge become virtue . but 
 where the heart , if it give the offence , pine till it win back the 
 pardon ; if offend itself , bound forth to forgive , ever long to 
 soothe , ever grieve if it wind ; then be sure that its nobleness will 
 need but few trial of pain in each outbreak to refine and chastise its 
 expression . fear not then ; be but noble thyself , thou art safe ! 

 yet what in childhood be often call , rebukingly , " temper " be but the 
 cordial and puissant vitality which contain all the element that 
 make temper the sweetest at last . who amongst we , how wise soever , can 
 construe a child 's heart ? who conjecture all the spring that secretly 
 vibrate within , to a touch on the surface of feeling ? each child , but 
 especially the girl - child , would task the whole lore of a sage deep as 
 Shakspeare to distinguish those subtle emotion which we grow folk 
 have outlive . 

 " she have a strong temper , " say the Mayor , when Soppy snatch the doll 
 from his hand a second time , and pout at he , spoiled child , look 
 so divinely cross , so petulantly pretty ! and how on earth could the 
 Mayor know what association with that stupid doll make she think it 
 profane by the touch of a stranger ? be it to her eye as to his , - mere 
 waxwork and frippery ; or a symbol of holy remembrance , of gleam into 
 a fair world , of " devotion to something afar from the sphere of 
 her sorrow ? " be not the evidence of ' strong temper " the very sign of 
 affectionate depth of heart ? poor little Sophy ! hide it again , - safe out 
 of sight , close , inscrutable , unguessed , as childhood 's first treasure 
 of sentiment ever be ! 




 CHAPTER XXII . 

  the object of civilization be always to settle people one way or 
  the other , the Mayor of Gatesboro ' entertain a statesmanlike 
  ambition to settle Gentleman Waife ; no doubt a wise conception , and 
  in accordance with the genius of the Nation . every session of 
  Parliament England be employ in settle folk , whether at home or 
  at the Antipodes , who ignorantly object to be settle in her way ; in 
  short , " I will settle they , " have become a vulgar idiom , tantamount to 
  a threat of uttermost extermination or smash ; therefore the Mayor of 
  Gatesboro ' harbouring that benignant idea with reference to 
  " Gentleman Waife , " all kindly reader will exclaim , " Dii meliora ! 
  what will he do with it ? " 

 the doll once more safe behind the pillow , Sophy 's face gradually 
 soften ; she bend forward , touch the Mayor 's hand timidly , and look 
 at he with plead , penitent eye , still wet with tear , - eye that 
 say , though the lip be silent , " I will not hate you . I be ungrateful 
 and peevish ; may I beg pardon ? " 

 " I forgive you with all my heart , " cry the Mayor , interpret the 
 look aright . " and now try and compose yourself and sleep while I talk 
 with your grandpapa below . " 

 " I do not   see how it be possible that I can leave she , " say Waife , when 
 the two man have adjourn to the sitting - room . " I be sure , " quoth the 
 Mayor , seriously , " that it be the good thing for she : her pulse have much 
 nervous excitability ; she want a complete rest ; she ought not to move 
 about with you on any account . but come : though I must not know , it 
 seem , who and what you be , Mr. Chapman , I do not   think you will run off 
 with my cow ; and if you like to stay at the bailiff 's cottage for a week 
 or two with your grandchild , you shall be leave in peace , and ask no 
 question . I will own to you a weakness of mine : I value myself on be 
 seldom or never take in . I do not   think I could forgive the man who 
 do take I in . but take in I certainly shall be , if , despite all your 
 mystery , you be not as honest a fellow as ever stand upon shoe - leather ! 
 so come to the cottage . " 

 Waife be very much affect by this confide kindness ; but he shake 
 his head despondently , and that same abject , almost cringe humility 
 of mien and manner which have pain at time Lionel and Vance creep over 
 the whole man , so that he seem to cower and shrink as a Pariah before 
 a Brahmin . " no , sir ; thank you most humbly . no , sir ; that must not be . I 
 must work for my daily bread ; if what a poor vagabond like I may do can 
 be call work . I have make it a rule for year not to force myself to 
 the hearth and home of any kind man , who , not know my past , have 
 a right to suspect I . where I lodge , I pay as a lodger ; or whatever 
 favour show I spar my purse , I try to return in some useful humble 
 way . why , sir , how could I make free and easy with another man 's board 
 and roof - tree for day or week together , when I would not even come 
 to your hearthstone for a cup of tea ? " the Mayor remember , and be 
 startle . Waife hurry on . " but for my poor child I have no such 
 scruple , - no shame , no false pride . I take what you offer she 
 gratefully , - gratefully . ah , sir , she be not in her right place with I ; 
 but there be no use kick against the prick . where be I ? oh ! well , I 
 tell you what we will do , sir . I will take she to the cottage in a day 
 or two , - as soon as she be well enough to go , - and spend the day with 
 she , and deceive she , sir ! yes , deceive , cheat she , sir ! I be a cheat , a 
 player , and she will think I be go to stay with she ; and at night , when 
 she be asleep , I will creep off , I and the other dog . but I will leave a 
 letter for she : it will soothe she , and she will be patient and wait . I 
 will come back again to see she in a week , and once every week , till 
 she be well again . " 

 " and what will you do ? " 

 " I do not   know ; but , " say the actor , force a laugh , " I ' m not a man 
 likely to starve . oh , never fear , sir . " 

 so the Mayor go away , and stroll across the field to his bailiff 's 
 cottage , to prepare for the guest it would receive . " it be all very well 
 that the poor man should be away for some day , " think Mr. Hartopp . 
 " before he come again , I shall have hit on some plan to serve he ; and 
 I can learn more about he from the child in his absence , and see what 
 he be really fit for . there be a schoolmaster want in Morley 's village . 
 Old Morley write to I to recommend he one . good salary , - pretty 
 house . but it would be wrong to set over young child - recommend to a 
 respectable proprietor and his parson - a man whom I know nothing about . 
 impossible ! that will not do . if there be any place of light service 
 which do not require trust or responsibility , - but there be no such 
 place in Great Britain . suppose I be to set he up in some easy way of 
 business , - a little shop , eh ? I do not   know . what would Williams say ? 
 if , indeed , I be take in ! if the man I be thus credulously trust 
 turn out a rogue , " - the Mayor pause and actually shiver at that 
 thought , - " why then , I should be fall indeed . my wife would not let I 
 have half - a - crown in my pocket ; and I could , not walk a hundred yard 
 but Williams would be at my heel to protect I from be steal 
 by gypsy . take in by he ! no , impossible ! but if it turn out as I 
 suspect , - that , contrary to vulgar prudence , I be divine a really 
 great and good man in difficulty , aha , what a triumph I shall then 
 gain over they all ! how Williams will revere I ! " the good man laugh 
 aloud at that thought , and walk on with a prouder step . 




 CHAPTER , XXIII . 

  a pretty trifle in its way , no doubt , be the love between youth and 
  youth , - gay variety of the bauble spread the counter of the great 
  toy - shop ; but thou , courteous dame Nature , raise thine arm to yon 
  shelf , somewhat out of every - day reach , and bring I down that 
  obsolete , neglect , unconsidered thing , the love between age and 
  childhood . 

 the next day Sophy be well ; the day after , improvement be more 
 visible ; and on the third day Waife pay his bill , and conduct she to 
 the rural abode to which , credulous at last of his promise to share it 
 with she for a time , he entice her fat step . it be little more than 
 a mile beyond the suburb of the town ; and , though the walk tired 
 she , she conceal fatigue , and would not suffer he to carry she . the 
 cottage now smile out before they , - thatch gable roof , with fancy 
 barge board ; half swiss , half what be call Elizabethan ; all the fence 
 and shed round it , as only your rich trader , condescend to turn 
 farmer , construct and maintain , - shed and fence , trim and neat , as 
 if model in waxwork . the breezy air come fresh from the new haystack ; 
 from the woodbine round the porch ; from the breath of the lazy kine , 
 as they stand knee - deep in the pool , that , belt with weed and 
 broad - leave water - lily , lie calm and gleam amidst level pasture . 

 involuntarily they arrest their step , to gaze on the cheerful 
 landscape and inhale the balmy air . meanwhile the Mayor come out from 
 the cottage porch , his wife lean on his arm , and two of his young 
 child bound on before , with joyous face , give chase to a gaudy 
 butterfly which they have start from the woodbine . 

 Mrs. Hartopp have conceive a lively curiosity to see and judge for 
 herself of the object of her liege lord 's benevolent interest . she 
 share , of course , the anxiety which form the standing excitement 
 of all those who live but for one godlike purpose , that of preserve 
 Josiah Hartopp from be take in . but whenever the Mayor specially 
 wish to secure his wife 's countenance to any pet project of his 
 own , and convince she either that he be not take in , or that to be 
 discreetly take in be in this world a very popular and sure mode 
 of get up , he never fail to attain his end . that man be the 
 cunning creature ! as full of wile and stratagem in order to get his 
 own way - in benevolent object - as man who set up to be clever be for 
 selfish one . Mrs. Hartopp be certainly a good woman , but a make good 
 woman . marry to another man , I suspect that she would have be a 
 shrew . Petruchio would never have tame she , I will swear . but she , 
 poor lady , have be gradually , but completely , subdue , subjugated , 
 absolutely cow beneath the weight of her spouse 's despotic mildness ; 
 for in Hartopp there be a weight of soft quietude , of placid 
 oppression , wholly irresistible . it would have bury a Titaness under 
 a pelion of moral feather - bed . mass upon mass of downy influence 
 descend upon you , seemingly yield as it fall , enveloping , 
 overbearing , stifle you ; not present a single hard point 
 of contact ; give in as you push against it ; supply itself 
 seductively round you , soft and soft , heavy and heavy , - till , 
 I assure you , ma'am , no matter how high your natural wifely spirit , 
 you would have have it smother out of you , your last rebellious murmur 
 die languidly away under the descending fleece . 

 " so kind in you to come with I , Mary , " say Hartopp . " I could not have 
 be happy without your approval : look at the child ; something about she 
 like Mary Anne , and Mary Anne be the picture of you ! " 

 Waife advance , uncovering ; the two child , have lose trace of the 
 butterfly , have run up towards Sophy . but her shy look make themselves 
 shy , - shyness be so contagious , and they stand a little aloof , gaze at 
 she . Sir Isaac stalk direct to the Mayor , sniff at he , and wag 
 his tail . 

 Mrs. Hartopp now bent over Sophy , and acknowledge that the face be 
 singularly pretty , glance graciously towards the husband , and say , " I 
 see the likeness ! " then to Sophy , " I fear you be tired , my dear : you 
 must not overfatigue yourself ; and you must take milk fresh from the 
 cow every morning . " and now the bailiff 's wife come briskly out , a tidy , 
 fresh - colour , kind - face woman , fond of child ; the more so because 
 she have none of her own . 

 so they enter the farm - yard , Mrs. Hartopp be the chief talker ; 
 and she , have point out to Sophy the cow and the turkey , the 
 hen - coop , and the great China gander , lead she by the one hand - while 
 Sophy 's other hand clung firmly to Waife 's ' - across the little garden , 
 with its patent bee - hive , into the house , take off her bonnet , and 
 kiss she . " very like Mary Anne ! - Mary Anne , dear . " one of the two 
 child own that name approach , - snub - nosed , black - eye , with 
 cheek like peony . " this little girl , my Mary Anne , be as pale as 
 you , - over - study ; and now , my dear child , you must try and steal a 
 little of her colour . do not   you think my Mary Anne be like her papa , Mr. 
 Chapman ? " 

 " like I ! " exclaim the Mayor , whisper Waife , " image of her mother ! 
 the same intellectual look ! " 

 say the artful actor , " indeed , ma'am , the young lady have her father 's 
 mouth and eyebrow , but that acute , sensible expression be your , - quite 
 your . Sir Isaac , make a bow to the young lady , and then , sir , go 
 through the sword exercise ! " 

 the dog , put upon his trick , delight the child ; and the poor 
 actor , though his heart lie in his breast like lead , do his good to 
 repay benevolence by mirth . finally , much pleased , Mrs. Hartopp take 
 her husband 's arm to depart . the child , on be separate from Sir 
 Isaac , begin to cry . the Mayor interrupt his wife , - who , if leave to 
 herself , would have scold they into bad crying , - tell Mary Anne that 
 he rely on her strong intellect to console her brother Tom ; observe 
 to Tom that it be not like his manly nature to set an example of 
 weep to his sister ; and contrive thus to flatter their tear away in 
 a trice , and send they forward in a race to the turnstile . 

 Waife and Sophy be alone in the cottage parlour , Mrs. Gooch , the 
 bailiff 's wife , walk part of the way back with the good couple , in 
 order to show the Mayor a heifer who have lose appetite and take to 
 mop . " let we steal out into the back garden , my darling , " say Waife . 
 " I see an arbour there , where I will compose myself with a pipe , - a 
 liberty I should not like to take indoor . " they step across the 
 threshold , and gain the arbour , which stand at the extreme end of 
 the small kitchen - garden , and command a pleasant view of pasture 
 and cornfield , back by the blue outline of distant hill . Afar be 
 faintly hear the laugh of the Mayor 's happy child , now and then a 
 tinkle sheep - bell , or the tap of the woodpecker , unrepresse by the 
 hush of the Midmost summer , which still the more tuneful chorister 
 amidst their covert . Waife light his pipe , and smoke silently ; 
 Sophy , rest her head on his bosom , silent also . she be exquisitely 
 sensitive to nature : the quiet beauty of all round she be soothe a 
 spirit lately troubled , and health come steal gently back through 
 frame and through heart . at length she say softly , " we could be so 
 happy here , Grandfather ! it can not last , can it ? " 

 " it be no use in this life , my dear , " return Waife , philosophizing , 
 " no use at all disturb present happiness by ask , ' can it last ? ' 
 to - day be man 's , to - morrow his maker 's . but tell I frankly , do you 
 really dislike so much the idea of exhibit ? I do not   mean as we do in 
 Mr. Rugge 's show . I know you hate that ; but in a genteel private way , as 
 the other night . you sigh ! out with it . " 

 " I like what you like , Grandy . " 

 " that be not true . I like to smoke ; you do not . come , you do dislike 
 act ? why ? you do it so well , - wonderfully . generally speak , people 
 like what they do well . " 

 " it be not the act itself , Grandy dear , that I do not   like . when I be 
 in some part , I be carry away ; I be not myself . I be some one else ! " 

 " and the applause ? " 

 " I do not   feel it . I dare say I should miss it if it do not come ; but 
 it do not seem to I as if I be applaud . if I feel that , I should 
 stop short , and get frightened . it be as if that somebody else into whom 
 I be change be make friend with the audience ; and all my feeling 
 be for that somebody , - just as , Grandy dear , when it be over , and we two 
 be alone together , all my feeling be for you , - at least   hang she 
 head   it use to be ; but lately , somehow , I be ashamed to think how I 
 have be feel for myself more than for you . be it - be it that I be 
 grow selfish ? as Mr. Mayor say . oh , no ! now we be here , - not in 
 those noisy town , - not in the inn and on the highway ; now here , here , 
 I do feel again for you , - all for you ! " 

 " you be my little angel , you be , " say Waife , tremulously . 
 " Selfish ! you ! a good joke that ! now you see , I be not what be call 
 Demonstrative , - a long word , Sophy , which mean , that I do not   show to 
 you always how fond I be of you ; and , indeed , " he add ingenuously , " I 
 be not al way aware of it myself . I like act , - I like the applause , 
 and the light , and the excitement , and the illusion , - the make - belief 
 of the whole thing : it take I out of memory and thought ; it be a world 
 that have neither past , present , nor future , an interlude in time,-an 
 escape from space . I suppose it be the same with poet when they be 
 make verse . yes , I like all this ; and , when I think of it , I forget 
 you too much . and I never observe , Heaven forgive I ! that you be 
 pale and droop till it be point out to I . well , take away your 
 arm . let we consult ! as soon as you get quite , quite well , how shall 
 we live ? what shall we do ? you be as wise as a little woman , and such 
 a careful , prudent housekeeper ; and I be such a harumscarum old fellow , 
 without a sound idea in my head . what shall we do if we give up act 
 altogether ? " 

 " give up act altogether , when you like it so ! no , no . I will like it 
 too , Grandy . but - but - " she stop short , afraid to imply blame or to 
 give pain . 

 " but what ? let we make clean breast , one to the other ; tell truth , and 
 shame the Father of Lies . " 

 " tell truth , " say Sophy , lift up to he her pure eye with such 
 heavenly , love kindness that , if the word do imply reproof , the 
 eye steal it away . " could we but manage to tell truth off the stage , I 
 should not dislike act ! oh , Grandfather , when that kind gentleman 
 and his lady and those merry child come up and speak to we , do not   you 
 feel ready to creep into the earth ? - I do . be we tell truth ? be we 
 living truth ? one name to - day , another name to morrow ? I should not 
 mind act on a stage or in a room , for the time , but always act , 
 always , - we ourselves ' make belief ! ' Grandfather , must that be ? they 
 do not   do it ; I mean by they , all who be good and look up to and 
 respect , as - as - oh , Grandy ! Grandy ! what be I say ? I have pain 
 you . " 

 Waife indeed be strive hard to keep down emotion ; but his lip be 
 set firmly and the blood have leave they , and his hand be tremble . 

 " we must , hide ourselves , " he say in a very low voice ; " we must take 
 false name ; I - because - because of reason I can not   tell even to you ; 
 and you , because I fail to get you a proper home , where you ought to 
 be ; and there be one who , if he please , and he may please it any day , 
 could take you away from I , if he find you out ; and so - and so - " he 
 pause abruptly , look at her fearful wonder soft face , and , rise , 
 draw himself up with one of those rare outbreak of dignity which 
 elevate the whole character of his person . " but as for I , " say he , 
 " if I have lose all name ; if , while I live , I must be this wandering , 
 skulk outcast , - look above , Sophy , - look up above : there all secret 
 will be know , all heart read ; and there my good hope to find a place 
 in which I may wait your come be in what have lose I all birthright 
 here . not to exalt myself do I say this , - no ; but that you may have 
 comfort , darling , if ever hereafter you be pain by what man say to 
 you of I . " 

 as he speak , the expression of his face , at first solemn and lofty , 
 relax into melancholy submission . then pass his arm into her , and 
 lean on it as if sink once more into the broken cripple need she 
 frail support , he draw she forth from the arbour , and pace the little 
 garden slowly , painfully . at length he seem to recover himself , and 
 say in his ordinary cheerful tone , " but to the point in question , 
 suppose we have do with act and roam , and keep to one name and 
 settle somewhere like plain folk , again I ask , how shall we live ? " 

 " I have be think of that , " answer Sophy . " you remember that those 
 good Miss Burtons teach I all kind of needlework , and I know people 
 can make money by needlework . and then , Grandy dear , what can not   you do ? 
 do you forget Mrs. Saunders 's book that you bind , and her cup and 
 saucer that you mend ? so we would both work , and have a little 
 cottage and a garden , that we could take care of , and sell the herb 
 and vegetable . oh , I have think over it all , the last fortnight , a 
 hundred hundred time , only I do not dare to speak first . " 

 Waife listen very attentively . " I can make very good basket , " say 
 he , rub his chin , " famous basket   if one could hire a bit of osi 
 ground , and , as you say , there might be other fancy article I could 
 turn out prettily enough , and you could work sampler , and urn - rug , and 
 doiley , and pincushion , and so forth ; and what with a rood or two 
 of garden ground , and poultry   the Mayor say poultry be healthy for 
 child , upon my word , if we could find a safe place , and people would 
 not trouble we with their gossip , and we could save a little money for 
 you when I be - " 

 " Bees too , - honey ? " interrupt Sophy , grow more and more interested 
 and excited . 

 " yes , bee , - certainly . a cottage of that kind in a village would not be 
 above l6 a year , and L20 spend on material for fancy - work would set we 
 up . ah but furniture , bed and table , - monstrous dear ! " 

 " oh , no ! very little would do at first . " 

 " let we count the money we have leave , " say Waife , throw himself down 
 on a piece of sward that encircle a shady mulberry - tree . old man and 
 child count the money , bit by bit , gayly yet anxiously , - babble , 
 interrupt each other , - scheme upon scheme : they forget past 
 and present as much as in act play ; they be absorb in the 
 future , - innocent simple future , - innocent as the future plan by two 
 infant fresh from " Robinson Crusoe " or fairy tale . 

 " I remember , I remember , just the place for we , " cry Waife , suddenly . 
 " it be many , many , many year since I be there ; I be court my Lizzy 
 at the time , - alas ! alas . but no sad thought now ! - just the place , 
 near a large town , but in a pretty village quite retired from it . ' t be 
 there I learn to make basket . I have break my leg ; fall from a horse ; 
 nothing to do . I lodge with an old basketmaker ; he have a capital trade . 
 Rivulet at the back of his house ; reed , osier , plentiful . I see they 
 now , as I see they from my little casement while my leg be set . 
 and Lizzy use to write to I such dear letter ; my basket be all for 
 she . we have basket enough to have furnish a house with bask'ts ; could 
 have din in basket , sit in basket , sleep in basket . with a few 
 lesson I could soon recover the knack of the work . I should like to see 
 the place again ; it would be shake hand with my youth once more . none 
 who could possibly recognize I could be now live . see no one but the 
 surgeon , the basketmaker , and his wife ; all so old they must be long 
 since gather to their father . perhaps no one carry on the basket 
 trade now . I may revive it and have it all to myself ; perhaps the 
 cottage itself may be easily hire . " thus , ever disposed to be sanguine , 
 the vagabond chatter on , Sophy listen fondly , and smile up in his 
 face . " and a fine large park close by : the owner , great lord , desert 
 it then ; perhaps it be desert still . you might wander over it as if it 
 be your own , Sophy . such wonderful tree , - such green solitude ; and 
 pretty shy hare run across the vista , - stately deer too ! we will 
 make friend with the lodge - keeper , and we will call the park your , 
 Sophy ; and I shall be a genius who weave magical basket , and you shall 
 be the enchant princess conceal from all evil eye , knitting doiley 
 of pearl under leaf of emerald , and catch no sound from the world 
 of perishable life , except as the bough whisper and the bird sing . " 

 " dear I , here you be ; we think you be lose , " say the bailiff 's 
 wife ; " tea be wait for you , and there be husband , sir , come up from 
 his work ; he will be proud and glad to know you , sir , and you too , my 
 dear ; we have no child of our own . " 

 it be past eleven . Sophy , wear out , but with emotion far more 
 pleasurable than she have long know , be fast asleep . waife kneel by her 
 side , look at she . he touch her hand , so cool and soft ; all fever 
 go : he rise on tiptoe ; he bend over her forehead , - a kiss there , 
 and a tear ; he steal away , down , down the stair . at the porch be the 
 bailiff hold Sir Isaac . 

 " we will take all care of she , " say Mr. Gooch . " you will not know she again 
 when you come back . " 

 Waife press the hand of his grandchild 's host , but do not speak . 

 " you be sure you will find your way , - no , that be the wrong 
 turn , - straight onto the town . they will be sit up for you at the 
 Saracen 's Head , I suppose , of course , sir ? it seem not hospitable like , 
 your go away at the dead of night thus . but I understand you do not 
 like cry , sir , we man do not ; and your sweet little girl I dare say 
 would sob ready to break her heart if she know . fine moonlight night , 
 sir , - straight on . and I say , do not   fret about she : wife love child 
 dearly , - so do I. Good - night . " 

 on go Waife , - lamely , slowly , - Sir Isaac 's white coat gleam in the 
 moon , ghostlike . on he go , his bundle strap across his shoulder , 
 lean on his staff , along by the fold sheep and the sleep cattle . 
 but when he get into the high road , Gatesboro ' full before he , with all 
 its roof and spire , he turn his back on the town , and tramp once 
 more along the desert thoroughfare , - more slowly and more , more lamely 
 and more , till several milestone be pass ; and then he creep through 
 the gap of a hedgerow to the shelter eave of a haystack ; and under 
 that roof - tree he and Sir Isaac lie down to rest . 




 CHAPTER XXIV . 

  Laugh at foreboding of evil , but tremble after day - dream of 
  happiness . 

 Waife leave behind he at the cottage two letter , - one entrust to the 
 bailiff , with a seal bag , for Mr. Hartopp ; one for Sophy , place on a 
 chair beside her bed . 

 the first letter be as follow : - 

 " I trust , dear and honoured sir , that I shall come back safely ; and when 
 I do , I may have find perhaps a home for she , and some way of life such 
 as you would not blame . but , in case of accident , I have leave with Mr. 
 Gooch , seal up , the money we make at Gatesboro ' , after pay the inn 
 bill , doctor , etc . , and retain the mere trifle I need in case I and 
 Sir Isaac fail to support ourselves . you will kindly take care of it . I 
 should not feel safe with more money about I , an old man . 

 " I might be rob ; besides , I be careless . I never can keep money ; it 
 slip out of my hand like an eel . Heaven bless you , sir ; your kindness 
 seem like a miracle vouchsafe to I for that child 's dear sake . no 
 evil can chance to she with you ; and if I should fall ill and die , even 
 then you , who would have aid the tricksome vagrant , will not grudge 
 the save hand to the harmless child . " 

 the letter to Sophy run thus : - 

 " darling , forgive I ; I have steal away from you , but only for a few 
 day , and only in order to see if we can not gain the magic home where I 
 be to be the Genius , and you the Princess . I go forth with such a light 
 heart , Sophy dear , I shall be walk thirty mile a day , and not feel 
 an ache in the lame leg : you could not keep up with I ; you know you 
 could not . so think over the cottage and the basket - work , and practise 
 at sampler and pincushion , when it be too hot to play ; and be stout 
 and strong against I come back . that , I trust , will be this day week , 
  - -'t be but seven day ; and then we will only act fairy drama to 
 nodding tree , with linnet for the orchestra ; and even Sir Isaac shall 
 not be demean by mercenary trick , but shall employ his arithmetical 
 talent in cast up the weekly bill , and he shall never stand on his 
 hind leg except on sunny day , when he shall carry a parasol to shade 
 an enchanted princess . laugh ; darling , - let I fancy I see you laugh ; 
 but do not   fret , - do not   fancy I desert you . do try and get well , - quite , 
 quite well ; I ask it of you on my knee . " 

 the letter and the bag be take over at sunrise to Mr. Hartopp 's 
 villa . Mr. Hartopp be an early man . Sophy overslept herself : her room 
 be to the west ; the morning beam do not reach its window ; and the 
 cottage without child wake up to labour noiseless and still . so when 
 at last she shake off sleep , and toss her hair from her blue eye , 
 look round and become conscious of the strange place , she still 
 fancy the hour early . but she get up , draw the curtain from the 
 window , see the sun high in the heaven , and , ashamed of her laziness , 
 turn , and lo ! the letter on the chair ! her heart at once misgave she ; 
 the truth flash upon a reason prematurely quick in the intuition which 
 belong to the union of sensitive affection and active thought . she draw 
 a long breath , and turn deadly pale . it be some minute before she 
 could take up the letter , before she could break the seal . when she 
 do , she read on noiselessly , her tear drop over the page , without 
 effort or sob . she have no egotistical sorrow , no grief in be 
 leave alone with stranger : it be the pathos of the old man 's lonely 
 wandering , of his bereavement , of his counterfeit glee , and genuine 
 self - sacrifice ; this it be that suffuse her whole heart with 
 unutterable yearning of tenderness , gratitude , pity , veneration . but 
 when she have weep silently for some time , she kiss the letter with 
 devout passion , and turn to that Heaven to which the outcast have 
 teach she first to pray . 

 afterwards she stand still , muse a little while , and the sorrowful 
 shade gradually leave her face . yes ; she would obey he : she would not 
 fret ; she would try and get well and strong . he would feel , at the 
 distance , that she be true to his wish ; that she be fitting herself 
 to be again his companion : seven day would soon pass . Hope , that can 
 never long quit the heart of childhood , brighten over her meditation , 
 as the morning sun over a landscape that just before have lie sad amidst 
 twilight and under rain . 

 when she come downstairs , Mrs. Gooch be pleased and surprised to 
 observe the placid smile upon her face , and the quiet activity with 
 which , after the morning meal , she move about by the good woman 's 
 side assist she in her dairywork and other housewife task , talk 
 little , comprehend quickly , - compose , cheerful . 

 " I be so glad to see you do not   pine after your good grandpapa , as we 
 fear you would . " 

 " he tell I not to pine , " answer Sophy , simply , but with a quivering 
 lip . 

 when the noon deepen , and it become too warm for exercise , Sophy 
 timidly ask if Mrs. Gooch have any worsted and knitting - needle , and 
 be accommodate with those implement and material , she withdraw to 
 the arbour , and seat herself to work , - solitary and tranquil . 

 what make , perhaps , the chief strength in this poor child 's nature 
 be its intense trustfulness , - a part , perhaps , of its instinctive 
 appreciation of truth . she trust in Waife , in the future , in 
 Providence , in her own childish , not helpless , self . 

 already , as her slight finger sort the worsted and her graceful 
 taste shade their hue into blended harmony , her mind be weave , not 
 less harmoniously , the hue in the woof of dream , - the cottage home , 
 the harmless task , Waife with his pipe in the armchair under some 
 porch , cover like that one yonder , - why not ? - with fragrant woodbine , 
 and life if humble , honest , truthful , not shrink from the day , so 
 that if Lionel meet she again she should not blush , nor he be shock . 
 and if their way be so different as her grandfather say , still they 
 might cross , as they have cross before , and - the work slide from 
 her hand - the sweet lip part , smile : a picture come before her 
 eye , - her grandfather , Lionel , herself ; all three , friend , and happy ; 
 a stream , fair as the Thames have seem ; green tree all bath in 
 summer ; the boat glide by ; in that boat they three , bear softly 
 on , - away , away , - what matter whither ? - by her side the old man ; face 
 she , the boy 's bright kind eye . she start . she hear noise , - a swing 
 ing gate , footstep . she start , - she rise , - voice ; one strange to 
 she , - a man 's voice , - then the Mayor 's . a third voice , - shrill , stern ; 
 a terrible voice,-heard in infancy , associate with image of cruelty , 
 misery , woe . it could not be ! impossible ! near , nearer , come the 
 footstep . seize with the impulse of flight , she spring to the mouth 
 of the arbour . front she glare two dark , baleful eye . she 
 stand , - arrest , spellbound , as a bird fix rigid by the gaze of a 
 serpent . 

 " yes , Mr. Mayor ; all right ! it be our little girl , - our dear Sophy . this 
 way , Mr. Losely . such a pleasant surprise for you , Sophy , my love ! " say 
 Mrs. Crane . 




 BOOK IV . 




 CHAPTER I. 

  in the kindliest nature there be a certain sensitiveness , which , 
  when wound , occasion the same pain , and bequeath the same 
  resentment , as mortified vanity or gall self - love . 

 it be exactly that day week , towards the hour of five in the evening , 
 Mr. Hartopp , alone in the parlour behind his warehouse , be lock up 
 his book and ledger preparatory to the return to his villa . there be 
 a certain change in the expression of his countenance since we see 
 it last . if it be possible for Mr. Hartopp to look sullen , - sullen he 
 look ; if it be possible for the Mayor of Gatesboro ' to be crestfallen , 
 crestfallen he be . that smooth existence have surely receive some fatal 
 concussion , and have not yet recover the shock . but if you will glance 
 beyond the parlour at Mr. Williams give order in the warehouse , at 
 the warehouseman themselves , at the rough face in the tan - yard,-nay , at 
 Mike Callaghan , who have just bring a parcel from the railway , all of 
 they have evidently share in the effect of the concussion ; all of they 
 wear a look more or less sullen ; all seem crestfallen . could you carry 
 your gaze far on , could you peep into the shop in the High Street , 
 or at the lounger in the city reading - room ; could you extend the vision 
 far still , - to Mr. Hartopp 's villa , behold his wife , his 
 little one , his man - servant , and his maid - servant , more and more 
 impressively general would become the token of disturbance occasion 
 by that infamous concussion . everywhere a sullen look , - everywhere that 
 ineffable aspect of crestfallenness ! what can have happen ? be the good 
 man bankrupt ? no , rich as ever ! what can it be ? reader ! that fatal event 
 which they who love Josiah Hartopp be ever at watch to prevent , despite 
 all their vigilance , have occur ! Josiah Hartopp have be TAKEN in ! 
 other man may be occasionally take in , and no one mourn ; perhaps they 
 deserve it ! they be not especially benevolent , or they set up to 
 be specially wise . but to take in that lamb ! and it be not only the 
 Mayor 's heart that be wound , but his pride , his self - esteem , his 
 sense of dignity , be terribly humiliate . for as we know , though all 
 the world consider Mr. Hartopp the very man bear to be take in , and 
 therefore combine to protect he , yet in his secret soul Mr. Hartopp 
 consider that no man less need such protection ; that he be never 
 take in , unless he mean to be so . thus the cruelty and ingratitude of 
 the base action under which his crest be so fallen jarred on his whole 
 system . Nay , more , he could not but feel that the event would long 
 affect his personal comfort and independence ; he would be more than ever 
 under the affectionate tyranny of Mr. Williams , more than ever be an 
 object of universal surveillance and espionage . there would be one 
 thought paramount throughout Gatesboro ' . " the Mayor , God bless he ! have 
 be take in : this must not occur again , or Gatesboro ' be dishonour , 
 and Virtue indeed a name ! " Mr. Hartopp feel not only mortified but 
 subjugate , - he who have hitherto be the soft subjugator of the 
 hard . he feel not only subjugate , but indignant at the consciousness 
 of be so . he be too meekly convince of Heaven 's unerring justice 
 not to feel assured that the man who have take he in would come to a 
 tragic end . he would not have hang that man with his own hand : he be 
 too mild for vengeance . but if he have see that man hang he would 
 have say piously , " fitting retribution , " and pass on his way soothe 
 and comfort . take in ! - take in at last ! - he , Josiah Hartopp , take 
 in by a fellow with one eye ! 




 CHAPTER II . 

  the Mayor be so protect that he can not help himself . 

 a commotion without , - a kind of howl , a kind of hoot . Mr. Williams , the 
 warehouseman , the tanner , Mike Callaghan , share between they the howl 
 and the hoot . the Mayor start : be it possible ! his door be burst open , 
 and , scatter all who seek to hold he back , - scatter they to the 
 right and leave from his massive torso in rush the man who have take 
 in the Mayor , - the fellow with one eye , and with that fellow , shaggy and 
 travel - soil , the other dog ! 

 " what have you do with the charge I intrust to you ? my child ! my 
 child ! where be she ? " 

 Waife 's face be wild with the agony of his emotion , and his voice be 
 so sharply terrible that it go like a knife into the heart of the man , 
 who , thrust aside for the moment , now follow he , fearful , into the 
 room . 

 " Mr. - Mr. Chapman , sir , " falter the Mayor , strive hard to recover 
 dignity and self - possession , " I be astonish at your - your - " 

 " audacity ! " interpose Mr. Williams . 

 " my child ! my Sophy ! my child ! answer I , man ! " " Sir , " say the Mayor , 
 draw himself up , " have you not get the note which I leave at my 
 bailiff 's cottage in case you call there ? " 

 " your note ! this thing ! " say Waife , strike a crumpled paper with his 
 hand , and run his eye over its content . " you have render up , you 
 say , the child to her lawful protector ? gracious heaven ! do I trust 
 she to you , or not ? " 

 " leave the room all of you , " say the Mayor , with a sudden return of his 
 usual calm vigour . 

 " you go , - you , sir ; what the deuce do you do here ? " growl Williams 
 to the mean throng . " Out ! I stay , never fear , man , I will take care of 
 he ! " 

 the bystander surlily slunk off : but none return to their work ; they 
 stand within reach of call by the shut door . Williams tuck up his 
 coat - sleeve , clench his fist , hang his head doggedly on one side , 
 and look altogether so pugnacious and minatory that Sir Isaac , 
 who , though in a state of great excitement , have hitherto retain 
 self - control , peer at he under his curl , stiffen his back , show 
 his tooth , and growl formidably . 

 " my good Williams , leave we , " say the Mayor ; " I would be alone with 
 this person . " 

 " alone , - you ! out of the question . now you have be once take in , and 
 you own it , - it be my duty to protect you henceforth ; and I will to the 
 end of my day . " 

 the Mayor sigh heavily . " well , Williams , well ! - take a chair , and be 
 quiet . now , Mr. Chapman , so to call you still ; you have deceive I . " 

 " I ? how ? " 

 the Mayor be puzzle . " deceive I , " he say at last , " in my knowledge 
 of human nature . I think you an honest man , sir . and you be - but no 
 matter . " 

 WAIFE   impatiently . - " my child ! my child ! you have give she up 
 to - to - " 

 MAYOR . - " her own father , sir . " 

 WAIFE   echo the word as he stagger back . - " I think so ! I think 
 it ! " 

 MAYOR . - " in so do I obey the law : he have legal power to enforce his 
 demand . " the Mayor 's voice be almost apologetic in its tone ; for he be 
 affect by Waife 's anguish , and not able to silence a pang of 
 remorse . after all , he have be trust ; and he have , excusably perhaps , 
 necessarily perhaps , but still he have fail to fulfil the trust . " but , " 
 add the Mayor , as if reassure himself , " but I refuse at first to 
 give she up even to her own father ; at first insist upon wait till 
 your return ; and it be only when I be inform what you yourself be 
 that my scruple give Way . " 

 Waife remain long silent , breathe very hard , pass his hand 
 several time over his forehead ; at last he say more quietly than he 
 have yet speak , " will you tell I where they have go ? " 

 " I do not know ; and , if I do know , I would not tell you ! be they not 
 right when they say that that innocent child should not be tempt away 
 by - by - a - in short by you , sir ? " 

 " they say ! her father - say that ! - he say that ! - do he - do he say 
 it ? have he the heart ? " 

 MAYOR . - " no , I do not   think he say it . eh , Mr. Williams ? he speak little 
 to I ! " 

 MR . WILLIAMS . - " of course he would not expose that person . but the 
 woman , - the lady , I mean . " 

 WAIFE . - " Woman ! ah , yes . the bailiff 's wife say there be a woman . what 
 woman ? what be her name ? " 

 MAYOR . - " really you must excuse I . I can say no more . I have consent 
 to see you thus , because whatever you might have be , or may be , still 
 it be due to myself to explain how I come to give up the child ; and , 
 besides , you leave money with I , and that , at least , I can give to your 
 own hand . " 

 the Mayor turn to his desk , unlock it , and draw forth the bag which 
 Waife have send to he . 

 as he extend it towards the Comedian , his hand tremble , and his cheek 
 flush . for Waife 's one bright eye have in it such depth of reproach , 
 that again the Mayor 's conscience be sorely trouble ; and he would have 
 give ten time the content of that bag to have be alone with the 
 vagrant , and to have say the soothe thing he do not dare to say 
 before Williams , who sit there mute and grim , guard he from be 
 once more " take in . " " if you have confide in I at first , Mr. Chapman , " 
 he say , pathetically , " or even if now , I could aid you in an honest way 
 of life ! " 

 " aid he - now ! " say Williams , with a snort . " at it again ! you be not a 
 man : you be an angel ! " 

 " but if he be penitent , Williams . " 

 " so ! so ! so ! " murmur Waife . " thank Heaven it be not he who speak 
 against I : it be but a strange woman . oh ! " he suddenly break off with 
 a groan . " oh - but that strange woman , - who , what can she be ? and Sophy 
 with she and he . Distraction ! yes , yes , I take the money . I shall want 
 it all . Sir Isaac , pick up that bag . gentleman , good day to you ! " he 
 bow ; such a failure that bow ! nothing ducal in it ! bow and turn 
 towards the door ; then , when he gain the threshold , as if some meeker , 
 holy thought restore to he dignity of bearing , his form rise , though 
 his face soften , and stretch his right hand towards the Mayor , he 
 say , " you do but as all perhaps would have do on the evidence before 
 you . you mean to be kind to she . " 

 " if you know all , how you would repent ! I do not blame , - I forgive you . " 

 he be go : the Mayor stand transfix . even Williams feel a cold 
 comfortless thrill . " he do not look like it , " say the foreman . " cheer 
 up , sir , no wonder you be take in : who would not have be ? " 

 " Hark ! that hoot again . go , Williams , do not   let the man insult he . go , 
 do , - I shall be grateful . " 

 but before Williams get to the door , the cripple and his dog have 
 vanish ; vanish down a dark narrow alley on the opposite side of the 
 street . the rude workman have follow he to the mouth of the alley , 
 mock he . of the exact charge against the Comedian 's good name they 
 be not inform ; that knowledge be confine to the Mayor and Mr. 
 Williams . but the latter have drop such harsh expression , that bad 
 as the charge might really be , all in Mr. Hartopp 's employment probably 
 deem it bad , if possible , than it really be . and wretch indeed must 
 be the man by whom the Mayor have be confessedly take in , and whom the 
 Mayor have indignantly give up to the reproach of his own conscience . 
 but the cripple be now out of sight , lose amidst those labyrinth of 
 squalid home which , in great town , be thrust beyond view , branch 
 off abruptly behind High Streets and Market Places , so that stranger 
 pass only along the broad thoroughfare , with glitter shop and 
 gaslit causeway , exclaim , " ah here do the poor live ? " 




 CHAPTER III . 

  Ecce iterum Crispinus ! 

 it be by no calculation , but by involuntary impulse , that Waife , thus 
 escape from the harsh look and taunt murmur of the gossip round 
 the Mayor 's door , dive into those sordid devious lane . vaguely he feel 
 that a ban be upon he ; that the covering he have throw over his brand 
 of outcast be lift up ; that a sentence of expulsion from the high 
 Streets and Market Places of decorous life be pass against he . he 
 have be rob of his child , and Society , speak in the voice of the 
 Mayor of Gatesboro ' , say , " Rightly ! thou art not fit companion for the 
 innocent ! " 

 at length he find himself out of the town , beyond its straggling 
 suburb , and once more on the solitary road . he have already walk far 
 that day . he be thoroughly exhausted . he sit himself down in a dry 
 ditch by the hedgerow , and take his head between his hand , strove to 
 recollect his thought and rearrange his plan . 

 Waife have return that day to the bailiff 's cottage joyous and elated . 
 he have spend the week in travel ; partly , though not all the way , 
 on foot , to the distant village , in which he have learn in youth the 
 basketmaker 's art ! he have find the very cottage wherein he have then 
 lodge vacant and to be let . there seem a ready opening for the humble 
 but pleasant craft to which he have divert his ambition . 

 the bailiff intrust with the letting of the cottage and osi - ground 
 have , it be true , request some reference ; not , of course , as to all 
 a tenant 's antecedent , but as to the reasonable probability that the 
 tenant would be a quiet sober man , who would pay his rent and abstain 
 from poach . Waife think he might safely presume that the Mayor of 
 Gatesboro ' would not , so far as that go , object to take his past upon 
 trust , and give he a good word towards secure so harmless and obscure 
 a future . Waife have never before ask such a favour of any man ; he 
 shrink from do so now ; but for his grandchild 's sake , he would waive 
 his scruple or humble his pride . 

 thus , then , he have come back , full of elysian dream , to his Sophy , - his 
 enchant Princess . go , take away , and with the Mayor 's consent , - the 
 consent of the very man upon whom he have be rely to secure a 
 livelihood and a shelter ! little more have he learn at the cottage , for 
 Mr. and Mrs. Gooch have be caution to be as brief as possible , and 
 give he no clew to regain his lost treasure , beyond the note which 
 inform he it be with a lawful possessor . and , indeed , the worthy 
 pair be now prejudiced against the vagrant , and be rude to he . but 
 he have not tarry to cross - examine and inquire . he have rush at once 
 to the Mayor . Sophy be with one whose legal right to dispose of she 
 he could not question . but where that person would take she , where he 
 reside , what he would do with she , he have no means to conjecture . 
 Most probably   he think and guess   she would be carry abroad , be 
 already out of the country . but the woman with losely , he have not hear 
 she describe ; his guess do not turn towards Mrs. Crane : the woman 
 be evidently hostile to he ; it be the woman who have speak against 
 he , - not losely ; the woman whose tongue have poison Hartopp 's mind , 
 and turn into scorn all that admire respect which have before greet 
 the great comedian . why be that woman his enemy ? who could she be ? what 
 have she to do with Sophy ? he be half beside himself with terror . it be 
 to save she less even from losely than from such direful woman as 
 losely make his confidant and associate that Waife have take Sophy to 
 himself . as for Mrs. Crane , she have never seem a foe to he ; she have 
 cede the child to he willingly : he have no reason to believe , from the 
 way in which she have speak of Losely when he last see she , that she 
 could henceforth aid the interest or share the scheme of the man whose 
 perfidy she then denounce ; and as to Rugge , he have not appear at 
 Gatesboro ' . Mrs. Crane have prudently suggest that his presence would 
 not be propitiatory or discreet , and that all reference to he , or 
 to the contract with he , should be suppress . thus Waife be wholly 
 without one guide evidence , one groundwork for conjecture , that might 
 enable he to track the lost ; all he know be , that she have be give 
 up to a man whose whereabouts it be difficult to discover , - a vagrant , 
 of life dark and more hidden than his own . 

 but how have the hunter discover the place where he have treasure up 
 his Sophy ? how dog that retreat ? perhaps from the village in which we 
 first see he . ay , doubtless , learn from Mrs. Saunders of the dog he 
 have purchase , and the dog would have serve to direct they on his path . 
 at that thought he push away Sir Isaac , who have be rest his head 
 on the old man 's knee , - push he away angrily ; the poor dog slunk off 
 in sorrowful surprise , and whine . 

 " ungrateful wretch that I be ! " cry Waife , and he open his arm to 
 the brute , who bound forgivingly to his breast . 

 " come , come , we will go back to the village in Surrey . Tramp , tramp ! " 
 say the cripple , rouse himself . and at that moment , just as he gain 
 his foot , a friendly hand be lay on his shoulder , and a friendly voice 
 say , 

 " I have find you ! the crystal say so ! marbellous ! " 

 " Merle , " falter out the vagrant , " Merle , you here ! oh , perhaps you 
 come to tell I good news : you have see Sophy ; you know where she be ! " 

 the Cobbler shake his head . " can not   see she just at present . Crystal say 
 nout about she . but I know she be take from you - and - and - you shake 
 tremenjous ! lean on I , Mr. Waite , and call off that big animal . he be a 
 suspicate my calf and circumtittyvate they . thank ye , sir . you see 
 I be bear with sinister aspect in my Twelfth House , which appertain 
 to big animal and enemy ; and dog of that size about one 's calf 
 be - malefic ! " 

 as Merle now slowly lead the cripple , and Sir Isaac , relinquish his 
 first suspicion , walk droopingly beside they , the Cobbler begin a 
 long story , much encumber by astrological illustration and moralizing 
 comment . the substance of his narrative be thus epitomize : Rugge , in 
 pursue Waife 's track , have naturally call on Merle in company with 
 Losely and Mrs. Crane . the Cobbler have no clew to give , and no mind to 
 give it if clew he have possess . but his curiosity be rouse , he have 
 smother the inclination to dismiss the inquirer with more speed than 
 good breeding , and even refresh his slight acquaintance with Mr. Rugge 
 in so well simulate a courtesy that that gentleman , when leave behind by 
 Losely and Mrs. Crane in their journey to Gatesboro ' , condescend , 
 for want of other company , to drink tea with Mr. Merle ; and tea being 
 succeed by strong potation , he fairly unbosomed himself of his 
 hope of recover Sophy and his ambition of hire the York theatre . 

 the day afterwards Rugge go away seemingly in high spirit , and the 
 Cobbler have no doubt , from some word he let fall in pass Merle 's 
 stall towards the railway , that Sophy be recapture , and that Rugge be 
 summon to take possession of she . ascertain from the manager that 
 Losely and Mrs. Crane have go to Gatesboro ' , the Cobbler call to mind 
 that he have a sister live there , marry to a green - grocer in a very 
 small way , whom he have not see for many year ; and find his business 
 slack just then , he resolve to pay this relative a visit , with the 
 benevolent intention of look up Waife , whom he expect from Rugge 's 
 account to find there , and offer he any consolation or aid in 
 his power , should Sophy have be take from he against his will . a 
 consultation with his crystal , which show he the face of Mr. Waife 
 alone and much deject , and a horary scheme which promise success to 
 his journey , decide his movement . he have arrive at Gatesboro ' the day 
 before , have hear a confuse story about a Mr. Chapman , with his dog 
 and his child , whom the Mayor have first take up , but who afterwards , 
 in some mysterious manner , have take in the Mayor . happily , the darker 
 gossip in the High Street have not penetrate the back lane in which 
 Merle 's sister reside . there , little more be know than the fact 
 that this mysterious stranger have impose on the wisdom of Gatesboro 's 
 learn Institute and enlighten Mayor . Merle , at no loss to identify 
 Waife with Chapman , could only suppose that he have be discover to 
 be a stroll player in Rugge 's exhibition , after pretend to be 
 some much great man . such an offence the Cobbler be not dispose to 
 consider heinous . but Mr. Chapman be go from Gatesboro ' none know 
 whither ; and Merle have not yet venture to call himself on the chief 
 magistrate of the place , to inquire after a man by whom that august 
 personage have be deceive . " Howsomever , " quoth Merle , in conclusion , 
 " I be just stand at my sister 's door , with her last babby in my 
 arm , in Scrob Lane , when I see you pass by like a shot . you be go 
 while I run in to give up the babby , who be teethe , with malefic in 
 square , - go , clean out of sight . you take one turn ; I take another : 
 but you see we meet at last , as good man always do in this world or the 
 other , which be the same thing in the long run . " 

 Waife , who have listen to his friend without other interruption than an 
 occasional nod of the head or interjectional expletive , be now 
 restore to much of his constitutional mood of sanguine cheerfulness . he 
 recognize Mrs. Crane in the woman describe ; and , if surprised , he be 
 rejoice . for , much as he dislike that gentlewoman , he think Sophy 
 might be in bad female hand . without much need of sagacity , he 
 divine the gist of the truth . losely have somehow or other become 
 acquaint with Rugge , and sell Sophy to the manager . where Rugge be , 
 there would Sophy be . it could not be very difficult to find out the 
 place in which Rugge be now exhibit ; and then - ah then ! Waife 
 whistle to Sir Isaac , tap his forehead , and smile triumphantly . 
 meanwhile the Cobbler have lead he back into the suburb , with the kind 
 intention of offer he food and bed for the night at his sister 's 
 house . but Waife have already form his plan ; in London , and in London 
 alone , could he be sure to learn where Rugge be now exhibit ; in 
 London there be place at which that information could be glean 
 at once . the last train to the metropolis be not go . he would slink 
 round the town to the station : he and Sir Isaac at that hour might 
 secure place unnoticed . 

 when Merle find it be in vain to press he to stay over the night , 
 the good - hearted Cobbler accompany he to the train , and , while Waife 
 shrink into a dark corner , buy the ticket for dog and master . as he 
 be pay for these , he overhear two citizen talk of Mr. Chapman . 
 it be indeed Mr. Williams explain to a fellow - burgess just return 
 to Gatesboro ' , after a week 's absence , how and by what manner of man Mr. 
 Hartopp have be take in . at what Williams say , the Cobbler 's cheek 
 pal . when he join the Comedian his manner be greatly alter ; he 
 give the ticket without speak , but look hard into Waife 's face , 
 as the latter repay he the fare . " no , " say the Cobbler , suddenly , " I 
 do not   believe it . " 

 " believe what ? " ask Waife , startle . " that you be - " 

 the Cobbler pause , bent forward , whisper the rest of the sentence 
 close in the vagrant 's ear . Waife 's head fall on his bosom , but he make 
 no answer . 

 " speak , " cry Merle ; ' say ' t be a lie . " the poor cripple 's lip writhe , 
 but he still speak not . 

 Merle look aghast at that obstinate silence . at length , but very 
 slowly , as the warning bell summon he and Sir Isaac to their several 
 place in the train , Waife find voice . " so you too , you too desert and 
 despise I ! God 's will be do ! " he move away , - spiritless , limping , 
 hide his face as well as he could . the porter take the dog from 
 he , to thrust it into one of the box reserve for such four - footed 
 passenger . 

 Waife thus part from his last friend - I mean the dog - look after Sir 
 Isaac wistfully , and creep into a third - class carriage , in which luckily 
 there be no one else . suddenly Merle jump in , snatch his hand , and 
 press it tightly . 

 " I do not   despise , I do not   turn my back on you : whenever you and the 
 little one want a home and a friend , come to Kit Merle as before , and 
 I will bite my tongue out if I ask any more question of you ; I will ask the 
 star instead . " 

 the Cobbler have but just time to splutter out these comfort word and 
 redescend the carriage , when the train put itself into movement , and 
 the lifelike iron miracle , fume , hissing , and screeching , bear off 
 to London its motley convoy of human being , each passenger 's heart a 
 mystery to the other , all bind the same road , all wedge close within 
 the same whirling mechanism ; what a separate and distinct world in each ! 
 such be Civilization ! how like we be one to the other in the mass ! how 
 strangely dissimilar in the abstract ! 




 CHAPTER IV . 

  " if , " say a great thinker   Degerando , " Du Perfectionment Moral , " 
  chapter ix . , " on the difficulty we encounter in Self - Study "   - " if 
  one concentrate reflection too much on one 's self , one end by no 
  long see anything , or see only what one wish . by the very 
  act , as it be , of capture one 's self , the personage we believe 
  we have seize escape , disappear . nor be it only the complexity 
  of our inner being which obstruct our examination , but its 
  exceed variability . the investigator 's regard should embrace all 
  the side of the subject , and perseveringly pursue all its phase . " 

 it be the race - week in Humberston , a county town far from Gatesboro ' , 
 and in the north of England . the race last three day : the first day 
 be over ; it have be a brilliant spectacle ; the course crowd with the 
 carriage of provincial magnate , with equestrian better of note from 
 the metropolis ; blackleg in great muster ; there have be gaming - booth 
 on the ground , and gypsy tell fortune ; much champagne imbibe by 
 the well - breed , much soda - water and brandy by the vulgar . thousand and 
 ten of thousand have be lose and win : some pauper have be for the 
 time enrich ; some rich man make poor for life . horse have win fame ; 
 some of their owner lose character . din and uproar , and coarse oath , 
 and rude passion , - all have have their hour . the amateur of the high 
 class have go back to dignified country - house , as courteous host 
 or favour guest . the professional speculator of a low grade have 
 pour back into the county town , and inn and tavern be crowd . 
 drink be hotly call for at reek bar ; waiter and chambermaid pass 
 to and fro , with dish and tankard and bottle in their hand . all be 
 noise and bustle , and eat and swilling , and disputation and slang , 
 wild glee , and wilder despair , amongst those who come back from the 
 race - course to the inn in the county town . at one of these tavern , 
 neither the good nor the bad , and in a small narrow slice of a room 
 that seem rob from the landing - place , sit Mrs. Crane , in her 
 iron - gray silk gown . she be seat close by the open window , as 
 carriage , chaise , fly , cart , van , and horseman succeed each 
 other thick and fast , watch the scene with a sour , scornful look . 
 for human joy , as for human grief , she have little sympathy . life have no 
 saturnalian holiday leave for she . some memory in her past have poison 
 the well - spring of her social being . hope and object she have 
 still , but out of the wreck of the natural and healthful existence of 
 womanhood , those object and hope stand forth exaggerated , intense , as 
 be the rule passion in monomania . a bad woman be popularly say 
 to be bad than a wicked man . if so , partly because woman , be more 
 solitary , brood more unceasingly over cherish idea , whether good or 
 evil ; partly also , for the same reason that make a wicked gentleman , 
 who have lose caste and character , more irreclaimable than a wicked 
 clown , low - bear and lowbre , namely , that in proportion to the loss of 
 shame be the gain in recklessness : but principally , perhaps , because in 
 extreme wickedness there be necessarily a distortion of the reasoning 
 faculty ; and man , accustom from the cradle rather to reason than to 
 feel , have that faculty more firm against abrupt twist and lesion than 
 it be in woman ; where virtue may have leave he , logic may still linger ; 
 and he may decline to push evil to a point at which it be clear to his 
 understanding that profit vanishe and punishment rest ; while woman , 
 once abandon to ill , find sufficient charm in its mere excitement , 
 and , regardless of consequence , where the man ask , " can I ? " rave 
 out , " I will ! " thus man may be criminal through cupidity , vanity , love , 
 jealousy , fear , ambition ; rarely in civilized , that is , reason life , 
 through hate and revenge ; for hate be a profitless investment , and 
 revenge a ruinous speculation . but when woman be thoroughly deprave 
 and harden , nine time out of ten it be hatred or revenge that make 
 they so . Arabella Crane have not , however , attain to that last state 
 of wickedness , which , consistent in evil , be callous to remorse ; she 
 be not yet unsexed . in her nature be still that essence , " vary and 
 mutable , " which distinguish woman while womanhood be leave to she . and 
 now , as she sit gaze on the throng below , her haggard mind recoil 
 perhaps from the conscious shadow of the Evil Principle which , invoke 
 as an ally , remain as a destroyer . her dark front relaxed ; she move in 
 her seat uneasily . " must it be always thus ? " she mutter , - " always this 
 hell here ! even now , if in one large pardon I could include the undoer , 
 the earth , myself , and again be human , - human , even as those slight 
 trifler or coarse brawler that pass yonder ! oh , for something in 
 common with common life ! " 

 her lip close , and her eye again fall upon the crowded street . at 
 that moment three or four heavy van or wagon fill with operative or 
 labourer and their wife , come back from the race - course , obstruct 
 the way ; two outrider in satin jacket be expostulate , crack 
 their whip , and seek to clear space for an open carriage with four 
 thoroughbred impatient horse . towards that carriage every gazer 
 from the window be direct eager eye ; each foot - passenger on the 
 pavement lift his hat : evidently in that carriage some great person ! 
 like all who be at war with the world as it be , Arabella Crane abhor 
 the great , and despise the small for worship the great . but still 
 her own fierce dark eye mechanically follow those of the vulgar . the 
 carriage bear a marquess 's coronet on its panel , and be fill with 
 lady ; two other carriage bear a similar coronet , and evidently 
 belong to the same party , be in the rear . Mrs. Crane start . in 
 that first carriage , as it now slowly move under her very window , and 
 pause a minute or more till the obstruct vehicle in front be 
 marshal into order , there flash upon her eye a face radiant with 
 female beauty in its most glorious prime . amongst the crowd at that 
 moment be a blind man , add to the various discord of the street by 
 a miserable hurdy - gurdy . in the movement of the throng to get near 
 to a sight of the lady in the carriage , this poor creature be throw 
 forward ; the dog that lead he , an ugly brute , on his own account or his 
 master 's take fright , break from the string , and run under the horse ' 
 hoof , snarling . the horse become restive ; the blind man make a plunge 
 after his dog , and be all but run over . the lady in the first carriage , 
 alarm for his safety , rise up from her seat , and make her outrider 
 dismount , lead away the poor blind man , and restore to he his dog . thus 
 engage , her face shine full upon Arabella Crane ; and with that face 
 rush a tide of early memory . long , very long , since she have see 
 that face , - see it in those year when she herself , Arabella Crane , be 
 young and handsome . 

 the poor man , - who seem not to realize the idea of the danger he have 
 escape , - once more safe , the lady resume her seat ; and now that the 
 momentary animation of humane fear and womanly compassion pass from 
 her countenance , its expression alter ; it take the calm , almost the 
 coldness , of a greek statue . but with the calm there be a listless 
 melancholy which greek sculpture never give to the parian stone : stone 
 can not convey that melancholy ; it be the shadow which need for its 
 substance a living , mortal heart . 

 Crack go the whip : the horse bound on ; the equipage roll fast 
 down the street , follow by its satellite . " well ! " say a voice in the 
 street below , " I never see Lady Montfort in such beauty . ah , here come 
 my lord ! " 

 Mrs. Crane hear and look forth again . a dozen or more gentleman 
 on horseback ride slowly up the street ; which of these be Lord 
 Montfort ? - not difficult to distinguish . as the bystander lift their 
 hat to the cavalcade , the horseman generally return their salutation 
 by simply touch their own : one horseman uncover wholly . that 
 one must be the Marquess , the great man in those part , with land 
 stretch away on either side that town for mile and mile , - a 
 territory which in feudal time might have alarm a king . he , 
 the civil , must be the great . a man still young , decidedly 
 good - look , wonderfully well - dress , wonderfully well - mount , the 
 careless ease of high rank in his air and gesture . to the superficial 
 gaze , just what the great Lord of Montfort should be . look again ! in 
 that fair face be there not something that put you in mind of a 
 florid period which contain a feeble platitude ? - something in its very 
 prettiness that betray a weak nature and a sterile mind ? 

 the cavalcade pass away ; the van and the wagon again usurp the 
 thoroughfare . Arabella Crane leave the window , and approach the 
 little look - glass over the mantelpiece . she gaze upon her own 
 face bitterly ; she be compare it with the feature of the dazzle 
 marchioness . 

 the door be fling open , and Jasper Losely saunter in , whistle a 
 french air , and flap the dust from his boot with his kid glove . 

 " all right , " say he , gayly . " a famous day of it ! " 

 " you have win , " say Mrs. Crane , in a tone rather of disappointment than 
 congratulation . 

 " yes . that l100 of Rugge 's have be the making of I . " 

 " I only want a capital just to start with ! " he fling himself into a 
 chair , open his pocket - book , and scrutinize its content . " guess , " 
 say he , suddenly , " on whose horse I win these two rouleau ? Lord 
 Montfort 's ! ay , and I see my lady ! " 

 " so do I see she from this window . she do not look happy ! " 

 " not happy ! - with such an equipage , - neat turn - out I ever set eye 
 on ; not happy , indeed ! I have half a mind to ride up to her carriage and 
 advance a claim to her gratitude . " 

 " Gratitude ? oh , for your part in that miserable affair of which you tell 
 I ? " 

 " not a miserable affair for she ; but certainly I never get any good from 
 it . trouble for nothing ! Basta ! no use look back . " 

 " no use ; but who can help it ? " say Arabella Crane , sigh heavily ; 
 then , as if eager to change the subject , she add abruptly , " Mr. Rugge 
 have be here twice this morning , highly excited the child will not act . 
 he say you be bind to make she do so ! " 

 " Nonsense . that be his look - out . I see after child , indeed ! " 

 MRS . CRANE   with a visible effort . - " listen to I , Jasper Losely . I 
 have no reason to love that child , as you may suppose . but now that you 
 so desert she , I think I feel compassion for she ; and when this morning 
 I raise my hand to strike she for her stubborn spirit , and see her eye 
 unflinche , and her pale , pale , but fearless face , my arm fall to my 
 side powerless . she will not take to this life without the old man . she 
 will waste away and die . " 

 LOSELY . - " how you bother I ! be you serious ? what be I to do ? " 

 MRS . CRANE . - " you have win money you say ; revoke the contract ; pay 
 Rugge back his l100 . he be disappoint in his bargain ; he will take the 
 money . " 

 LOSELY . - " I dare say he will indeed ! no : I have win to - day , it be true , 
 but I may lose to - morrow ; and besides I be in want of so many thing : 
 when one get a little money , one have an immediate necessity for 
 more - ha ! ha ! still I would not have the child die ; and she may grow up 
 to be of use . I tell you what I will do ; if , when the race be over , I 
 find I have gain enough to afford it , I will see about buy she off . 
 but L100 be too much ! Rugge ought to take half the money , or a quarter , 
 because , if she do not   act , I suppose she do eat . " 

 odious as the man 's word be , he say they with a laugh that seem to 
 render they less revolt , - the laugh of a very handsome mouth , show 
 tooth still brilliantly white . more comely than usual that day , for he 
 be in great good - humour , it be difficult to conceive that a man with 
 so healthful and fair an exterior be really quite rotten at heart . 

 " your own young laugh , " say Arabella Crane , almost tenderly . " I know 
 not how it be , but this day I feel as if I be less old , - alter 
 though I be in face and mind . I have allow myself to pity that child ; 
 while I speak , I can pity you . yes ! pity , - when I think of what you 
 be . must you go on thus ? to what ! Jasper Losely , " she continue , 
 sharply , eagerly , clasp her hand , " hear I : I have an income , not 
 large , it be true , but assured ; you have nothing but what , as you say , 
 you may lose to - morrow ; share my income ! Fulfil your solemn promise : 
 marry I . I will forget whose daughter that girl be ; I will be a mother 
 to she . and for yourself , give I the right to feel for you again as I 
 once do , and I may find a way to raise you yet , - high than you can 
 raise yourself . I have some wit , Jasper , as you know . at the bad you 
 shall have the pastime , I the toil . in your illness I will nurse you : in 
 your joy I will intrude no share . whom else can you marry ? to whom else 
 could you confide ? who else could - " 

 she stop short as if an adder have sting she , utter a shriek of 
 rage , of pain ; for Jasper Losely , who have hitherto listen to she , 
 stupefy , astounded , here burst into a fit of merriment , in which 
 there be such undisguised contempt , such an enjoyment of the ludicrous , 
 provoke by the idea of the marriage press upon he , that the insult 
 pierce the woman to her very soul . 

 continue his laugh , despite that cry of wrathful agony it have cause , 
 Jasper rise , hold his side , and survey himself in the glass , 
 with very different feeling at the sight from those that have make his 
 companion 's gaze there a few minute before so mournful . 

 " my dear good friend , " he say , compose himself at last , and wipe 
 his eye , " excuse I , but really when you say whom else could I 
 marry - ha ! ha ! - it do seem such a capital joke ! marry you , my fair 
 crane ! no : put that idea out of your head ; we know each other too well 
 for conjugal felicity . you love I now : you always do , and always will ; 
 that be , while we be not tie to each other . woman who once love I , 
 always love I ; can not   help themselves . I be sure I do not   know why , 
 except that I be what they call a villain ! ha ! the clock strike seven : 
 I dine with a set of fellow I have pick up on the race - ground ; they 
 do not   know I , nor I they ; we shall be well acquaint after the third 
 bottle . cheer up , crane : go and scold Sophy , and make her act if you 
 can ; if not , scold Rugge into let she alone . scold somebody ; nothing 
 like it , to keep other folk quiet , and one 's self busy . Adieu ! and 
 pray , no more matrimonial solicitation : they frighten I ! Gad , " add 
 losely , as he bang the door , ' such overture would frighten Old Nick 
 himself ! " 

 do Arabella Crane hear those last word , - or have she not hear enough ? 
 if losely have turn and beheld her face , would it have startle back 
 his trivial laugh ? possibly ; but it would have cause only a momentary 
 uneasiness . if Alecto herself have rear over he her brow horrent with 
 viper , Jasper Losely would have think he have only to look handsome 
 and say coaxingly , " Alecto , my dear , " and the Fury would have pawn she 
 head - dress to pay his washing - bill . 

 after all , in the face of the grim woman he have thus so wantonly 
 incense , there be not so much menace as resolve . and that resolve be 
 yet more show in the movement of the hand than in the aspect of the 
 countenance ; those hand - lean , firm , nervous hand - slowly expand , 
 then as slowly clench , as if her own thought have take substance , and 
 she be lock it in a clasp - tightly , tightly - never to be loosen 
 till the pulse be still . 




 CHAPTER V. 

  the most submissive where they love may be the most stubborn where 
  they do not love . - Sophy be stubborn to Mr. Rugge . - that injure man 
  summon to his side Mrs. Crane , imitate the policy of those 
  potentate who would retrieve the failure of force by the success 
  of diplomacy . 

 Mr. Rugge have obtain his object . but now come the question , " what 
 will he do with it ? " question with as many head as the Hydra ; and no 
 soon do an author dispose of one head than up spring another . 

 Sophy have be buy and pay for : she be now , legally , Mr. Rugge 's 
 property . but there be a wise peer who once buy Punch : Punch become 
 his property , and be bring in triumph to his lordship 's house . to 
 my lord 's great dismay , Punch would not talk . to Rugge 's great dismay , 
 Sophy would not act . 

 render up to Jasper Losely and Mrs. Crane , they have lose not an hour 
 in remove she from Gatesboro ' and its neighbourhood . they do not , 
 however , go back to the village in which they have leave Rugge , but 
 return straight to London , and write to the manager to join they 
 there . 

 Sophy , once capture , seem stupefied : she evince no noisy passion ; 
 she make no violent resistance . when she be tell to love and obey a 
 father in Jasper Losely , she lift her eye to his face ; then turn 
 they away , and shake her head mute and credulous . that man her father ! 
 she , do not believe it . indeed , Jasper take no pain to convince she 
 of the relationship or win her attachment . he be not unkindly rough : 
 he seem wholly indifferent ; probably he be so . for the rule vice 
 of the man be in his egotism . it be not so much that he have bad 
 principle and bad feeling , as that he have no principle and no 
 feeling at all , except as they begin , continue , and end in that 
 system of centralization which not more paralyze healthful action in a 
 State than it do in the individual man . self - indulgence with he be 
 absolute . he be not without power of keen calculation , not without 
 much cunning . he could conceive a project for some gain far off in the 
 future , and concoct , for its realization , scheme subtly weave , astutely 
 guard . but he could not secure their success by any long - sustain 
 sacrifice of the caprice of one hour or the indolence of the next . 
 if it have be a great object to he for life to win Sophy 's filial 
 affection , he would not have bore himself for five minute each day 
 to gain that object . besides , he have just enough of shame to render 
 he uneasy at the sight of the child he have deliberately sell . so after 
 chuck she under the chin , and tell she to be a good girl and be 
 grateful for all that Mrs. Crane have do for she and mean still to do , 
 he consign she almost solely to that lady 's care . 

 when Rugge arrive , and Sophy be inform of her intended destination , 
 she break silence , - her colour go and come quickly , - she declare , 
 fold her arm upon her breast , that she would never act if separate 
 from her grandfather . Mrs. Crane , strike by her manner , suggest to 
 Rugge that it might be as well , now that she be legally secure to the 
 manager , to humour her wish and re - engage Waife . whatever the tale with 
 which , in order to obtain Sophy from the Mayor , she have turn that 
 worthy magistrate 's mind against the Comedian , she have not gratify 
 Mr. Rugge by a similar confidence to he . to he she say nothing which 
 might operate against renew engagement with Waife , if he be so 
 dispose . but Rugge have no faith in a child 's firmness , and he have a 
 strong spite against Waife , so he obstinately refuse . he insist , 
 however , as a peremptory condition of the bargain , that Mr. Losely and 
 Mrs. Crane should accompany he to the town to which he have transfer 
 his troupe , both in order by their presence to confirm his authority 
 over Sophy , and to sanction his claim to she , should Waife reappear 
 and dispute it . for Rugge 's profession be scarcely legitimate and 
 decidedly equivocal , his right to bring up a female child to the 
 same calling might be call into question before a magistrate , and 
 necessitate the production of her father in order to substantiate the 
 special contract . in return , the manager handsomely offer to Mr. 
 Losely and Mrs. Crane to pay their expense in the excursion , - a 
 liberality haughtily reject by Mrs. Crane for herself , though she 
 agree at her own charge to accompany losely if he decide on comply 
 with the manager 's request . losely at first raise objection , but 
 hear that there would be race in the neighbourhood , and have a 
 peculiar passion for bet and all kind of gambling , as well as an 
 ardent desire to enjoy his l100 in so fashionable a manner , he consent 
 to delay his return to the continent , and attend Arabella Crane to the 
 provincial Elis . Rugge , carry off Sophy to her fellow " orphan . " 


 and SOPHY would not ACT ! 

 in vain she be coax ; in vain she be threaten ; in vain she be 
 deprive of food ; in vain shut up in a dark hole ; in vain be the lash 
 hold over she . Rugge , tyrant though he be , do not suffer the lash to 
 fall . his self - restraint there might be humanity , - might be fear of the 
 consequence ; for the state of her health begin to alarm he . she might 
 die ; there might be an inquest . he wish now that he have take Mrs. 
 Crane 's suggestion , and re - engaged Waife . but where be Waife ? meanwhile 
 he have advertise the young Phenomenon ; placard the wall with the 
 name of Juliet Araminta ; get up the piece of the Remorseless Baron , with 
 a new rock - scene . Waife have have nothing to say in that drama , so any one 
 could act his part . 

 the first performance be announce for that night : there would be such 
 an audience ! the good seat even now pre - engaged ; first night of the 
 race - week . the clock have strike seven ; the performance begin at eight . 
 and SOPHY would not ACT ! 

 the child be seat in a space that serve for the greenroom , behind 
 the scene . the whole company have be convene to persuade or shame she 
 out of her obstinacy . the king 's lieutenant , the seductive personage of 
 the troupe , be on one knee to she , like a lover . he be accustom to 
 lover ' part , both on the stage and off it . off it , he have one favour 
 phrase , hackneyed , but effective . " you be too pretty to be so 
 cruel . " Thrice he now repeat that phrase , with a simper between each 
 repetition that might have melt a heart of stone . behind Sophy 's 
 chair , and stick calico - flower into the child 's tress , stand the 
 senior matron of the establishment , - not a bad sort of woman , - who keep 
 the dress , nurse the sick , revere Rugge , tell fortune on a pack 
 of card which she always keep in her pocket , and act occasionally 
 in part where age be no drawback and ugliness desirable , - such as 
 a witch , or duenna , or whatever in the dialogue be poetically call 
 " Hag . " indeed , Hag be the name she usually take from Rugge ; that which 
 she bear from her defunct husband be Gormerick . this lady , as she 
 braid the garland , be also bent on the soothe system , say , with 
 great sweetness , consider that her mouth be full of pin , " now , 
 deary , now , dovey , look at ooself in the glass ; we could beat oo , and 
 pinch oo , and stick pin into oo , dovey , but we will not . dovey will be 
 good , I know ; " and a great patch of rouge come on the child 's pale 
 cheek . the clown therewith , squat before she with his hand on his 
 knee , grin lustily , and shriek out , " my eye , what a beauty ! " 

 Rugge , meanwhile , one hand thrust in his bosom , contemplate the 
 diplomatic effort of his minister , and see , by Sophy 's compress 
 lip and unwinke eye , that their cajolery be unsuccessful . he 
 approach and hiss into her ear , " do not   madden I ! do not ! you will 
 act , eh ? " 

 " no , " say Sophy , suddenly rise ; and tear the wreath from her hair , 
 she set her small foot on it with force . " no , not if you kill I ! " 

 " god ! " falter Rugge . " and the sum I have pay ! I be diddle ! who have 
 go for Mrs. Crane ? " 

 " Tom , " say the clown . 

 the word be scarcely out of the clown 's mouth ere Mrs. Crane herself 
 emerge from a side scene , and , put off her bonnet , lay both hand 
 on the child 's shoulder , and look she in the face without speak . 
 the child as firmly return the gaze . give that child a martyr 's cause , 
 and in that frail body there would have be a martyr 's soul . arabella 
 Crane , not inexperienced in child , recognize a power of will 
 strong than the power of brute force , in that tranquillity of eye , the 
 spark of calm light in its tender blue , blue , pure as the sky ; light , 
 steadfast as the star . 

 " leave she to I , all of you , " say Mrs. Crane . " I will take she to 
 your private room , Mr. Rugge ; " and she lead the child away to a sort of 
 recess , room it could not be rightly call , fence round with box and 
 crate , and contain the manager 's desk and two stool . 

 " Sophy , " then say Mrs. Crane , " you say you will not act unless your 
 grandfather be with you . now , hear I . you know that I have be always 
 stern and hard with you . I never profess to love you , - nor do I. but 
 you have not find I untruthful . when I say a thing seriously , as I be 
 speak now , you may believe I . act to - night , and I will promise you 
 faithfully that I will either bring your grandfather here , or I will 
 order it so that you shall be restore to he . if you refuse , I make no 
 threat , but I shall leave this place ; and my belief be that you will be 
 your grandfather 's death . " 

 " his death ! his death ! I ! " 

 " by first die yourself . oh , you smile ; you think it would be happiness 
 to die . what matter that the old man you profess to care for be 
 break - hearted ! Brat , leave selfishness to boy : you be a girl ! 
 suffer ! " 

 " selfish ! " murmur Sophy , ' selfish ! that be say of I before . 
 Selfish ! ah , I understand . no , I ought not to wish to die : what would 
 become of he ? " she fall on her knee , and raise both her clasp 
 hand , pray inly , silently , an instant , not more . she rise . " if I do 
 act , then , - it be a promise : you will keep it . I shall see he : he shall 
 know where I be ; we shall meet ! " 

 " a promise , - sacred . I will keep it . oh , girl , how much you will love 
 some day ! how your heart will ache ! and when you be my age , look at 
 that heart , then at your glass ; perhaps you may be , within and without , 
 like I . " 

 Sophy , innocent Sophy , star , awe - stricken , but uncomprehending ; Mrs. 
 Crane lead her back passive . 

 " there , she will act . put on the wreath . trick she out . Hark ye , Mr. 
 Rugge . this be for one night . I have make condition with she : either 
 you must take back her grandfather , or - she must return to he . " 

 " and my l100 ? " 

 " in the latter case ought to be repay to you . " 

 " be I never to have the Royal York Theatre ? ambition of my life , ma'am . 
 Dreamed of it thrice ! ha ! but she will act ; and succeed . but to take 
 back the old vagabond , - a bitter pill . he shall halve it with I ! Ma'am , 
 I be your grateful - " 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 Threadbare be the simile which compare the world to a stage . Schiller , 
 less complimentary than Shakspeare , lower the illustration from a stage 
 to a puppet - show . but ever between reality and show there be a secret 
 communication , an undetected interchange , - sometimes a stern reality in 
 the heart of the ostensible actor , a fantastic stage - play in the brain 
 of the unnoticed spectator . the bandit 's child on the proscenium be 
 still poor little Sophy , in spite of garland and rouge . but that honest 
 rough - look fellow to whom , in respect for service to sovereign and 
 country , the apprentice yield way , may he not be - the crafty Comedian ? 

 TARAN - TARANTARA ! rub - a - dub - dub ! play up horn ! roll drum ! a quarter to 
 eight ; and the crowd already thick before Rugge 's Grand Exhibition , - " 
 Remorseless Baron and Bandit 's child ! Young Phenomenon , - Juliet 
 Araminta , - patronize by the Nobility in general , and expect 
 daily to be summon to perform before the Queen , - Vivat 
 Regina ! " - Ruba - dub - dub ! the company issue from the curtain , range in 
 front of the proscenuim . splendid dress . the Phenomenon ! - ' t be she ! 

 " my eye , there be a beauty ! " cry the clown . 

 the day have already grow somewhat short ; but it be not yet dusk . 
 how charmingly pretty she still be , despite that horrid paint ; but how 
 waste those poor bare snowy arm ! 

 a most doleful lugubrious dirge mingle with the drum and horn . a man 
 have force his way close by the stage , - a man with a confound crack 
 hurdy - gurdy . whine ! whine ! creak the hurdy - gurdy . " stop that ! stop that 
 mu - zeek ! " cry a delicate apprentice , clap his hand to his ear . 
 " pity a poor blind - " answer the man with the hurdygurdy . 

 " oh , you be blind , be you ? but we be not deaf . there be a penny not to 
 play . what black thing have you get there by a string ? " 

 " my dog , sir ! " 

 " deuced ugly one ; not like a dog ; more like a bear with horn ! " 

 " I say , master , " cry the clown , " here be a blind man come to see the 
 Phenomenon ! " 

 the crowd laugh ; they make way for the blind man 's black dog . they 
 suspect , from the clown 's address , that the blind man have something to 
 do with the company . 

 you never see two uglier specimen of their several specie than the 
 blind man and his black dog . he have rough red hair and a red beard , his 
 face have a sort of twist that make every feature seem crooked . his 
 eye be not bandage , but the lid be closed , and he lift they 
 up piteously as if seek for light . he do not seem , however , like a 
 common beggar : have rather the appearance of a reduce sailor . yes , 
 you would have bet ten to one he have be a sailor ; not that his dress 
 belong to that noble calling , but his build , the roll of his walk , 
 the tie of his cravat , a blue anchor tattooed on that great brown hand : 
 certainly a sailor ; a british tar ! poor man . 

 the dog be hideous enough to have be exhibit as a lusus naturae ; 
 evidently very aged , - for its face and ear be gray , the rest of it a 
 rusty reddish black ; it have immensely long ear , prick up like horn ; 
 it be a dog that must have be bring from foreign part ; it might 
 have come from Acheron , sire by Cerberus , so portentous , and   if not 
 irreverent the epithet   so infernal be its aspect , with that gray face , 
 those antlere ear , and its ineffably weird demeanour altogether . a big 
 dog , too , and evidently a strong one . all prudent folk would have 
 make way for a man lead by that dog . Whine creak the hurdy - gurdy , and 
 bow - wow all of a sudden bark the dog . Sophy stifle a cry , press she 
 hand to her breast , and such a ray of joy flash over her face that it 
 would have warm your heart for a month to have see it . 

 but do you mean to say , Mr. Author , that that british tar   gallant , 
 no doubt , but hideous   be Gentleman Waife , or that stygian animal the 
 snowy - curl Sir Isaac ? 

 upon my word , when I look at they myself , I , the Historian , be puzzle . 
 if it have not be for that bow - bow , I be sure Sophy would not have 
 suspect . Taratarantara ! walk in , lady and gentleman , walk in ; the 
 performance be about to commence ! sophy linger last . 

 " yes , sir , " say the blind man , who have be talk to the apprentice , 
 " yes , sir , " say he , loud and emphatically , as if his word have be 
 question . " the child be snow up , but luckily the window of the hut 
 be leave open : exactly at two o'clock in the morning , that dog come to 
 the window , set up a howl , and - " 

 Soppy could hear no more - lead away behind the curtain by the King 's 
 Lieutenant . but she have hear enough to stir her heart with an emotion 
 that set all the dimple round her lip into undulating play . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

  a sham carry off a reality . 

 and she do act , and how charmingly ! with what glee and what gusto ! 
 Rugge be beside himself with pride and rapture . he could hardly perform 
 his own baronial part for admiration . the audience , a far choicer 
 and more fastidious one than that in the Surrey village , be amazed , 
 enthusiastic . " I shall live to see my dream come true ! I shall have the 
 great York theatre ! " say Rugge , as he take off his wig and lay his 
 head on his pillow . " restore she for the L100 ! not for thousand ! " 

 Alas , my sweet Sophy , alas ! have not the joy that make thee perform so 
 well undone thee ? ah , hadst thou but have the wit to act horribly , and be 
 hiss ! 

 " Uprose the sun and uprose Baron Rugge . " 

 not that ordinarily he be a very early man ; but his excitement break 
 his slumber . he have take up his quarter on the ground - floor of a 
 small lodge - house close to his exhibition ; in the same house lodge 
 his senior matron , and Sophy herself . Mrs. Gormerick , be order to 
 watch the child and never lose sight of she , sleep in the same room with 
 Sophy , in the upper story of the house . the old woman serve Rugge for 
 housekeeper , make his tea , grill his chop , and for company 's sake 
 share his meal . Excitement as often sharpen the appetite as take 
 it away . Rugge have sup on hope , and he feel a craving for a more 
 substantial breakfast . accordingly , when he have dress , he thrust his 
 head into the passage , and see there the maid - of - all - work unbar 
 the street - door , bid she go upstairs and wake the Hag , that be , 
 Mrs. Gormerick . say this he extend a key ; for he ever take the 
 precaution , before retire to rest , to lock the door of the room to 
 which Sophy be consign on the outside , and guard the key till the 
 next morning . 

 the maid nod , and ascend the stair . Less time than he expect 
 pass away before Mrs. Gormerick make her appearance , her gray hair 
 streaming under her nightcap , her form indue in a loose wrapper , - she 
 very face a tragedy . 

 " power above ! what have happen ? " exclaim Rugge , prophetically . 

 " she be go , " sob Mrs. Gormerick ; and , see the lift arm and 
 clench fist of the manager , prudently faint away . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

  corollary from the problem suggest in chapter VI . and VII . 

 broad daylight , nearly nine o'clock indeed , and Jasper Losely be walk 
 back to his inn from the place at which he have din the evening before . 
 he have spend the night drinking , gambling , and though he look heated , 
 there be no sign of fatigue . nature , in waste on this man many of 
 her most glorious element of happiness , have not forget an herculean 
 constitution , - always restless and never tired , always drink and 
 never drunk . certainly it be some consolation to delicate invalid 
 that it seldom happen that the sickly be very wicked . criminal be 
 generally athletic ; constitution and conscience equally tough ; large 
 back to their head ; strong suspensorial muscle ; digestion that save 
 they from the over - fine nerve of the virtuous . the native animal must 
 be vigorous in the human being , when the moral safeguard be daringly 
 overleapt . Jasper be not alone , but with an acquaintance he have make 
 at the dinner , and whom he invite to his inn to breakfast ; they be 
 walk familiarly arm - in - arm . very unlike the brilliant losely , - a 
 young man under thirty , who seem to have wash out all the colour of 
 youth in dirty water . his eye dull , their white yellow ; his complexion 
 sodden . his form be thickset and heavy ; his feature pug , with a cross 
 of the bull - dog . in dress , a speciman of the flash style of sporting 
 man , as exhibit on the Turf , or more often perhaps in the Ring ; 
 Belcher neckcloth , with an immense pin represent a jockey at full 
 gallop ; cut - away coat , corduroy breech , and boot with top of a 
 chalky white . yet , withal , not the air and walk of a genuine bear and 
 breed sporting man , even of the vulgar order . something about he 
 which reveal the pretender . a would - be hawk with a pigeon 's liver , - a 
 would - be sportsman with a Cockney 's nurture . 

 Samuel Adolphus Poole be an orphan of respectable connection . his 
 future expectation chiefly rest on an uncle from whom , as godfather , he 
 take the loathed name of Samuel . he prefer to sign himself Adolphus ; 
 he be popularly style dolly . for his present existence he rely 
 ostensibly on his salary as an assistant in the house of a London 
 tradesman in a fashionable way of business . Mr. Latham , his employer , 
 have make a considerable fortune , less by his shop than by discount 
 the bill of his customer , or of other borrower whom the loan draw 
 into the net of the custom . Mr. Latham connive at the sporting taste 
 of Dolly Poole . dolly have often thus be enable to pick up useful 
 piece of information as to the name and repute of such denizen of the 
 sporting world as might apply to Mr. Latham for temporary accommodation . 
 dolly Poole have many sporting friend ; he have also many debt . he have 
 be a dupe , he be now a rogue ; but he want decision of character to 
 put into practice many valuable idea that his experience of dupe and 
 his development into rogue suggest to his ambition . still , however , 
 now and then , wherever a shabby trick can be safely do , he be what 
 he call " lucky . " he have conceive a prodigious admiration for Jasper 
 Losely , one cause for which will be explain in the dialogue about 
 to be record ; another cause for which be analogous to that love 
 submission with which some ill - condition brute acknowledge a master 
 in the hand that have thrash it . for at Losely 's first appearance at 
 the convivial meeting just conclude , be nettle at the imperious 
 air of superiority which that roysterer assume , mistake for 
 effeminacy Jasper 's elaborate dandyism , and not recognize in the 
 bravo 's elegant proportion the tiger - like strength of which , in truth , 
 that tiger - like suppleness should have warn he , Dolly Poole provoke 
 a quarrel , and be himself a stout fellow , nor unaccustomed to 
 athletic exercise , begin to spar ; the next moment he be at the other 
 end of the room full sprawl on the floor ; and two minute afterwards , 
 the quarrel make up by conciliate banqueter , with every bone in his 
 skin seem still to rattle , he be generously blubber out that he 
 never bear malice , and shake hand with Jasper Losely as if he have 
 find a benefactor . but now to the dialogue . 

 JASPER . - " yes , Poole , my hearty , as you say , that fellow trump my 
 good club lose I the last rubber . there be no certainty in whist , if one 
 have a spoon for a partner . " 

 POOLE . - " no certainty in every rubber , but next to certainty in the 
 long run , when a man play as well as you do , Mr. Losely . your winning 
 to - night must have be pretty large , though you have a bad partner 
 almost every hand ; pretty large , eh ? " 

 JASPER   carelessly . - " nothing to talk of , - a few pony ! " 

 POOLE . - " More than a few ; I should know . " 

 JASPER . - " why ? you do not play after the first rubber . " 

 POOLE . - " no , when I see your play on that first rubber , I cut out , and 
 bet on you ; and very grateful to you I be . still you would win more with 
 a partner who understand your game . " 

 the shrewd dolly pause a moment , and lean significantly on Jasper 's 
 arm , add , in a half whisper , " I do ; it be a french one . " 

 Jasper do not change colour , but a quick rise of the eyebrow , and a 
 slight jerk of the neck , betray some little surprise or uneasiness : 
 however , he rejoin without hesitation , " French , ay ! in France there be 
 more dash in play out trump than there be with english player . " 

 " and with a player like you , " say Poole , still in a half whisper , " more 
 trump to play out . " 

 Jasper turn round sharp and short ; the hard , cruel expression of his 
 mouth , little see of late , come back to it . Poole recoil , and his 
 bone begin again to ache . " I do not mean to offend you , Mr. Losely , 
 but to caution . " 

 " caution ! " 

 " there be two knowing cove , who , if they have not be so drunk , would 
 not have lose their money without a row , and they would have see how 
 they lose it ; they be sharper : you serve they right ; do not   be angry 
 with I . you want a partner ; so do I : you play well than I do , but I 
 play well ; you shall have two - third of our winning , and when you come 
 to town I will introduce you to a pleasant set of young fellow - green . " 

 Jasper muse a moment . " you know a thing or two , I see , Master Poole , 
 and we will discuss the whole subject after breakfast . Ar'n't   you hungry ? 
 no ! I be ! Hillo ! who be that ? " 

 his arm be seize by Mr. Rugge . " she be go , - flee , " gasp the 
 manager , breathless . " out of the lattice ; fifteen foot high ; not dash 
 to piece ; vanish . " 

 " go on and order breakfast , " say losely to Mr. Poole , who be listen 
 too inquisitively . he draw the manager away . " can not   you keep your tongue 
 in your head before stranger ? the girl be go ? " 

 " out of the lattice , and fifteen foot high ! " 

 " any sheet leave hang out of the lattice ? " 

 " sheet ! no . " 

 " ' then she do not go without help : somebody must have throw up to she 
 a rope - ladder ; nothing so easy ; do it myself score of time for the 
 descent of ' maid who love the moon , ' Mr. Rugge . but at her age there be 
 not a moon ; at least there be not a man in the moon : one must dismiss , 
 then , the idea of a rope - ladder , - too precocious . but be you quite sure 
 she be go ? not hide in some cupboard ? Sacre ! very odd . have you see 
 Mrs. Crane about it ? " 

 " yes , just come from she ; she think that villain Waife must have steal 
 she . but I want you , sir , to come with I to a magistrate . " 

 " Magistrate ! I ! why ? nonsense ; set the police to work . " 

 " your deposition that she be your lawful child , lawfully make over to 
 I , be necessary for the inquisition ; I mean police . " 

 " hang it , what a bother ! I hate magistrate , and all belong to they . 
 well , I must breakfast ! I will see to it afterwards . oblige I by not 
 call Mr. Waife a villain ; good old fellow in his way . " 

 " good ! power above ! " 

 " but if he take she off , how do he get at she ? it must have be 
 preconcerte . " 

 " ha ! true . but she have not be suffer to speak to a soul not in the 
 company , Mrs. Crane except . " 

 " perhaps at the performance last night some signal be give ? " 

 " but if Waife have be there I should have see he ; my troupe would 
 have know he : such a remarkable face ; one eye too . " 

 " well , well , do what you think well . I will call on you after breakfast ; 
 let I go now . Basta ! Basta ! " 

 losely wrench himself from the manager , and stride off to the inn ; 
 then , ere join Poole , he seek Mrs. Crane . " this go before a 
 magistrate , " say losely , " to depose that I have make over my child to 
 that blackguard showman - in this town too , after such luck as I have have 
 and where bright prospect be open on I - be most disagreeable . and 
 supposing , when we have trace Sophy , she should be really with the old 
 man ; awkward ! in short , my dear friend , my dear Bella , "   losely could be 
 very coaxing when it be worth his while   " you just manage this for 
 I . I have a fellow in the next room wait to breakfast : as soon as 
 breakfast be over I shall be off to the race - ground , and so shirk that 
 rant old bore ; you will call on he instead , and settle it somehow . " he 
 be out of the room before she could answer . 

 Mrs. Crane find it no easy matter to soothe the infuriate manager when 
 he hear losely be go to amuse himself at the race - course . nor do 
 she give herself much trouble to pacify Mr. Rugge 's anger or assist his 
 investigation . her interest in the whole affair seem over . leave thus 
 to his own device , Rugge , however , begin to institute a sharp , and 
 what promise to be an effective , investigation . he ascertain that the 
 fugitive certainly have not leave by the railway or by any of the public 
 conveyance ; he send scoot over all the neighbourhood : he enlist the 
 sympathy of the police , who confidently assure he that they have " a 
 network over the three kingdom . " Rugge 's suspicion be direct to 
 Waife : he could collect , however , no evidence to confirm they . no 
 person answer to Waife 's description have be see in the town . once , 
 indeed , Rugge be close on the right scent ; for , insist upon Waife 's 
 one eye , and his possession of a white dog , he be tell by several 
 witness that a man blind of two eye , and lead by a black dog , have be 
 close before the stage , just previous to the performance . but then the 
 clown have speak to that very man ; all the thespian company have observe 
 he ; all of they have know Waife familiarly for year ; and all depose 
 that any creature more unlike to Waife than the blind man could not 
 be turn out of Nature 's workshop . but where be that blind man ? they 
 find out the wayside inn in which he have take a lodging for the night ; 
 and there it be ascertain that he have pay for his room beforehand , 
 state that he should start for the race - course early in the morning . 
 Rugge himself set out to the racecourse to kill two bird with one 
 stone , - catch Mr. Losely , examine the blind man himself . 

 he do catch Mr. Losely , and very nearly catch something else ; for that 
 gentleman be in a ring of noisy horseman , mount on a hire hack , and 
 loud as the noisy . when Rugge come up to his stirrup , and begin his 
 harangue , losely turn his hack round with so sudden an appliance of 
 bit and spur , that the animal lash out , and its heel go within an 
 inch of the manager 's cheek - bone . before Rugge could recover , losely be 
 in a hand - gallop . but the blind man ! of course Rugge do not find he ? 
 you be mistaken : he do . the blind man be there , dog and all . the 
 manager speak to he , and do not know he from Adam . 

 nor have you or I , my venerate reader , any right whatsoever to doubt 
 whether Mr. Rugge could be so stolidly obtuse . grant that blind 
 sailor to be the veritable William Waife , William Waife be a man of 
 genius , take pain to appear an ordinary mortal . and the anecdote of 
 Munden , or of Bamfylde Moore Carew , suffice to tell we how Protean be 
 the power of transformation in a man whose genius be mimetic . but how 
 often do it happen to we , venerate reader , not to recognize a man 
 of genius , even when he take no particular pain to escape detection ! a 
 man of genius may be for ten year our next - door neighbour ; he may dine 
 in company with we twice a week ; his face may be as familiar to our 
 eye as our armchair ; his voice to our ear as the click of our 
 parlour - clock : yet we be never more astonished than when all of a 
 sudden , some bright day , it be discover that our next - door neighbour 
 be - a man of genius . do you ever hear tell of the life of a man of 
 genius but what there be numerous witness who depose to the fact , 
 that until , perfidious dissembler ! he flare up and set the Thames on 
 fire they have never see anything in he ; an odd creature , perhaps a 
 good creature , - probably a poor creature , - but a MAN of geniu ! they 
 would as soon have suspect he of be the Khann of Tartary ! Nay , 
 candid reader , be there not some of you who refuse to the last to 
 recognize the maa of genius , till he have pay his penny to Charon , and 
 his passport to immortality have be duly examine by the customhouse 
 officer of Styx ! when one half the world drag forth that same next - door 
 neighbour , place he on a pedestal , and have he cry , " Oyez ! Oyez ! 
 find a man of genius ! public property ! open to inspection ! " do not 
 the other half the world put on its spectacle , turn up its nose , and 
 cry , " that a man of genius , indeed ! pelt he ! - pelt he ! " then of course 
 there be a clatter , what the vulgar call " a shindy , " round the pedestal . 
 squeeze by his believer , shy at by his scoffer , the poor man get 
 horribly maul about , and drop from the perch in the midst of the row . 
 then they shovel he over , clap a great stone on his relic , wipe their 
 forehead , shake hand , compromise the dispute , the one half the world 
 admit that though he be a genius he be still an ordinary man ; the 
 other half allow that though he be an ordinary man he be still a 
 genius . and so on to the next pedestal with its " hic stet , " and the next 
 great stone with its " Hic jacet . " 

 the manager of the Grand Theatrical Exhibition gaze on the blind 
 sailor , and do not know he from Adam ! 




 CHAPTER IX . 

  the aboriginal man - eater , or pocket - cannibal , be susceptible of the 
  refining influence of Civilization . he decorate his lair with the 
  skin of his victim ; he adorn his person with the spoil of those 
  whom he devour . Mr. Losely , introduce to Mr. Poole 's friend , 
  dress for dinner ; and , combine elegance with appetite , eat they 
  up . 

 elate with the success which have reward his talent for pecuniary 
 speculation , and dismiss from his mind all thought of the fugitive 
 Sophy and the spoliated Rugge , Jasper Losely return to London in 
 company with his new friend , Mr. Poole . he leave Arabella Crane to 
 perform the same journey unattended ; but that grim lady , carefully 
 conceal any resentment at such want of gallantry , feel assure that 
 she should not be long in London without be honour by his visit . 

 in renew their old acquaintance , Mrs. Crane have contrive to 
 establish over Jasper that kind of influence which a vain man , full 
 of scheme that be not to be tell to all the world , but which it be 
 convenient to discuss with some confidential friend who admire himself 
 too highly not to respect his secret , mechanically yield to a woman 
 whose wit be superior to his own . 

 it be true that Jasper , on his return to the metropolis , be not 
 magnetically attract towards Podden Place ; nay , day and even week 
 elapse , and Mrs. Crane be not gladden by his presence . but she know 
 that her influence be only suspend , - not extinct . the body attract 
 be for the moment keep from the body attract by the abnormal weight 
 that have drop into its pocket . restore the body thus temporarily 
 counterpoise to its former lightness , and it would turn to Podden Place 
 as the needle to the Pole . meanwhile , oblivious of all such natural 
 law , the disloyal Jasper have fix himself as far from the reach of 
 the magnet as from Bloomsbury 's remotest verge in St. James 's animate 
 centre . the apartment he engage be showy and commodious . he add 
 largely to his wardrobe , his dressing - case , his trinket box . nor , be 
 it here observe , be Mr. Losely one of those beauish brigand who 
 wear tawdry scarf over soil linen , and paste ring upon unwashed 
 digital . to do he justice , the man , so stony - hearted to other , love 
 and cherish his own person with exquisite tenderness , lavish upon 
 it delicate attention , and give to it the very good he could afford . 
 he be no coarse debauchee , smell of bad cigar and ardent spirit . 
 cigar , indeed , be not among his vice   at bad the rare peccadillo 
 of a cigarette : spirit - drinking be ; but the monster 's digestion be 
 still so strong that he could have drink out a gin - palace , and you would 
 only have sniff the jasmine or heliotrope on the dainty cambric that 
 wipe the last drop from his lip . have his soul be a tenth part as 
 clean as the form that belie it , Jasper Losely have be a saint ! 
 his apartment secure , his appearance thus revise and embellish , 
 Jasper 's next care be an equipage in keep ; he hire a smart 
 cabriolet with a high - step horse , and , to go behind it , a groom 
 whose size have be stunt in infancy by provident parent design 
 he to earn his bread in the stable as a light - weight , and therefore 
 mingle his mother 's milk with heavy liquor . in short , Jasper Losely 
 set up to be a buck about town : in that capacity Dolly Poole introduce 
 he to several young gentleman who combine commercial vocation with 
 sporting taste ; they could not but participate in Poole 's admiring and 
 somewhat envious respect for Jasper Losely . there be indeed about the 
 vigorous miscreant a great deal of false brilliancy . deteriorate from 
 early youth though the beauty of his countenance might be , it be 
 still undeniably handsome ; and as force of muscle be beauty in itself 
 in the eye of young sporting man , so Jasper dazzle many a gracili 
 puer , who have the ambition to become an athlete , with the rare personal 
 strength which , as if in the exuberance of animal spirit , he would 
 sometimes condescend to display , by feat that astonish the curious 
 and frighten the timid , - such as bend a poker or horseshoe between 
 hand elegantly white , nor unadorned with ring , - or lift the weight 
 of Samuel dolly by the waistband , and hold he at arm 's length , with 
 a playful bet of ten to one that he could stand by the fireplace and 
 pitch the say Samuel dolly out of the open window . to know so strong a 
 man , so fine an animal , be something to boast of . then , too , if Jasper 
 have a false brilliancy , he have also a false bonhommie : it be true 
 that he be somewhat imperious , swaggering , bully ; but he be also 
 off - hand and jocund ; and as you know he , that sidelong look , that 
 defy gait   look and gait of the man whom the world cut , wear away . 
 in fact , he have get into a world which do not cut he , and his exterior 
 be improve by the atmosphere . 

 Mr. Losely profess to dislike general society . draw room be 
 insipid ; club full of old fogy . " I be for life , my boy , " say Mr. 
 Losely , 

  " ' can sorrow from the goblet flow , 
  or pain from Beauty 's eye ? ' " 

 Mr. Losely , therefore , his hat on one side , lounge into the saloon of 
 theatre , accompany by a cohort of juvenile admirer , their hat on 
 one side also , and return to the pleasantest little supper in his own 
 apartment . there " the goblet " flow ; and after the goblet , cigar for 
 some , and a rubber for all . 

 so puissant Losely 's vitality , and so blest by the star his luck , that 
 his form seem to wax strong and his purse fuller by this " life . " 
 no wonder he be all for a life of that kind ; but the slight being 
 who try to keep up with he grow thin and thin , and poor 
 and poor ; a few week make their cheek spectral and their pocket a 
 dismal void . then as some drop off from sheer inanition , other whom 
 they have decoy by their praise of " life " and its hero come into the 
 magic circle to fade and vanish in their turn . 

 in a space of time incredibly brief , not a whist - player be leave upon 
 the field : the victorious Losely have trump out the last ; some few whom 
 Nature have endow more liberally than Fortune still retain strength 
 enough to sup - if ask ; 

 " but none who come to sup remain to play . " 

 " plague on it , " say losely to Poole , as one afternoon they be 
 divide the final spoil , " your friend be mightily soon clean out : 
 could not even get up double dummy last night ; and we must hit on some 
 new plan for replenish the coffer . you have rich relation ; can not   I 
 help you to make they more useful ? " 

 say dolly Poole , who be look exceedingly bilious , and have become a 
 martyr to chronic headache , 

 " my relation be prig ! some of they give I the cold shoulder , 
 other - a great deal of jaw . but as for tin , I might as well scrape a 
 flint for it . my uncle Sam be more anxious about my sin than the other 
 codger , because he be my godfather , and responsible for my sin , I 
 suppose ; and he say he will put I in the way of be respectable . my 
 head 's splitting - " 

 " wood do split till it be season , " answer losely . " good fellow , 
 uncle Sam ! he will put you in the way of tin ; nothing else make a man 
 respectable . " 

 " yes , - so he say ; a girl with money - " 

 " a wife , - tin canister ! introduce I to she , and she shall be tie to 
 you . " 

 Samuel dolly do not appear to relish the idea of such an introduction . 
 " I have not be introduce to she myself , " say he . " but if you advise 
 I to be splice , why do not   you get splice yourself ? a handsome fellow 
 like you can be at no loss for an heiress . " 

 " Heiresses be the most horrid cheat in the world , " say losely : " there 
 be always some father , or uncle , or fusty Lord Chancellor whose consent 
 be essential , and not to be have . Heiresses in score have be over head 
 and ear in love with I . before I leave Paris , I sell their lock of 
 hair to a wig maker , - three great trunksful . honour bright . but there 
 be only two whom I could have safely allow to run away with I ; and 
 they be so closely watch , poor thing , that I be force to leave 
 they to their fate , - early graf ! do not   talk to I of heiress , dolly ; 
 I have be the victim of heiress . but a rich widow be an estimable 
 creature . against widow , if rich , I have not a word to say ; and to tell 
 you the truth , there be a widow whom I suspect I have fascinate , 
 and whose connection I have a particular private reason for deeming 
 desirable ! she have a whelp of a son , who be a spoke in my wheel : be 
 I his father - in - law , would not I be a spoke in his ? I would teach the boy 
 ' life , ' dolly . " here all trace of beauty vanish from Jasper 's face , 
 and Poole , star at he , push away his chair . " but , " continue 
 losely , regain his more usual expression of levity and boldness , " but 
 I be not yet quite sure what the widow have , besides her son , in her own 
 possession ; we shall see . meanwhile , be there - no chance of a rubber 
 to - night ? " 

 " none ; unless you will let Brown and Smith play upon tick . " 

 " Pooh ! but there be Robinson , he have an aunt he can borrow from ? " 

 " Robinson ! spit blood , with an attack of delirium tremen ! you have 
 do for he . " 

 " ' can sorrow from the goblet flow ? " ' say losely . " well , I suppose it 
 can - when a man have no coat to his stomach ; but you and I , dolly Poole , 
 have stomach thick as peajacket , and proof as gutta - percha . " 

 Poole force a ghastly smile , while losely , gayly spring up , sweep 
 his share of booty into his pocket , slap his comrade on the back , 
 and say , " then , if the mountain will not come to Mahomet , Mahomet must 
 go to the mountain ! hang whist , and up with rouge - et - noir ! I have an 
 infallible method of win ; only it require capital . you will club 
 your cash with mine , and I will play for both . Sup here to night , and 
 we will go to the Hell afterwards . " 

 Samuel dolly have the most perfect confidence in his friend 's science 
 in the art of gambling , and he do not , therefore , dissent from the 
 proposal make . Jasper give a fresh touch to his toilet , and step 
 into his cabriolet . Poole cast on he a look of envy , and crawl to his 
 lodging , - too ill for his desk , and with a strong desire to take to his 
 bed . 




 CHAPTER X. 

  " be there a heart that never love , 
  nor feel soft woman 's sigh ? " 

  if there be such a heart , it be not in the breast of a pocket- 
  cannibal . your true man - eater be usually of an amorous temperament : 
  he can be indeed sufficiently fond of a lady to eat she up . Mr. 
  losely make the acquaintance of a widow . for further particular 
  inquire within . 

 the dignified serenity of Gloucester Place , Portman Square , be agitate 
 by the intrusion of a new inhabitant . a house in that favour locality , 
 which have for several month maintain " the solemn stillness and the 
 dread repose " which appertain to dwelling that be to be let upon 
 lease , unfurnished , suddenly start into that exuberant and aggressive 
 life which irritate the nerve of its peaceful neighbour . the bill 
 have be remove from the window ; the wall have be clean down and 
 point ; the street - door repaint a lively green ; workman have go 
 in and out . the observant lady   single one   in the house opposite , 
 discover , by the help of a telescope , that the drawing - room have be 
 new paper , canary - colour ground , festoon border ; and that the 
 moulding of the shutter have be gild . Gilt shutter ! that look 
 ominous of an ostentatious and party - give tenant . then cart full 
 of furniture have stop at the door ; carpet , table , chair , bed , 
 wardrobe , - all seemingly new , and in no inelegant taste , - have be 
 disgorge into the hall . it have be notice , too , that every day a lady 
 of slight figure and genteel habiliment have come , seemingly to inspect 
 progress ; evidently the new tenant . sometimes she come alone ; sometimes 
 with a dark - eye , handsome lad , probably her son . who can she be ? what 
 be she ? what be her name ? her history ? have she a right to settle in 
 Gloucester Place , Portman Square ? the detective police of London be 
 not peculiarly vigilant ; but its defect be supply by the voluntary 
 effort of unmarried lady . the new comer be a widow ; her husband have 
 be in the army ; of good family ; but a mauvais sujet ; she have be 
 leave in straiten circumstance with an only son . it be suppose that 
 she have unexpectedly come into a fortune , on the strength of which 
 she have remove from Pimlico into Gloucester Place . at length , the 
 preparation complete , one Monday afternoon the widow , accompany 
 by her son , come to settle . the next day a footman , in genteel livery 
  brown and orange , appear at the door . then , for the rest of the 
 week , the baker and butcher call regularly . on the following Sunday , 
 the lady and her son appear at church . 

 no reader will be at a loss to discover in the new tenant of 
 no . - Gloucester Place the widow mother of Lionel Haughton . the letter 
 for that lady which Darrell have entrust to his young cousin have , in 
 complimentary and cordial language , claim the right to provide for her 
 comfortable and honourable subsistence ; and announce that henceforth 
 L800 a year would be place quarterly to her account at Mr. Darrell 's 
 banker , and that an additional sum of L1200 be already there deposit 
 in her name , in order to enable she to furnish any residence to which 
 she might be incline to remove . Mrs. Haughton therewith have remove to 
 Gloucester Place . 

 she be seat by the window in her front drawing - room , survey with 
 proud though grateful heart the elegance by which she be surround . 
 a very win countenance : lively eye , that in themselves may be 
 over - quick and petulant ; but their expression be chasten by a gentle 
 kindly mouth . and over the whole face , the attitude , the air , even 
 the dress itself , be diffuse the unmistakable simplicity of a sincere 
 natural character . no doubt Mrs. Haughton have her temper and her 
 vanity , and her little harmless feminine weakness ; but you could 
 not help feel in her presence that you be with an affectionate , 
 warm - hearted , honest , good woman . she might not have the refinement of 
 tone and manner which stamp the high - breed gentlewoman of convention ; she 
 might evince the deficiency of an imperfect third - rate education : but 
 she be save from vulgarity by a certain undefinable grace or person 
 and music of voice , - even when she say or do thing that well - breed 
 people do not say or do ; and there be an engaging intelligence in those 
 quick hazel eye that make you sure that she be sensible , even when she 
 utter what be silly . 

 Mrs. Haughton turn from the interior of the room to the open window . 
 she be on the look - out for her son , who have go to call on Colonel 
 Morley , and who ought to be return by this time . she begin to get a 
 little fidgety , somewhat cross . while thus stand and thus watchful , 
 there come thunder down the street a high - step horse , bay , with 
 white leg ; it whirl on a cabriolet , - blue , with vermilion wheel ; two 
 hand , in yellow kid glove , be just see under the hood . Mrs. Haughton 
 suddenly blush and draw in her head . too late ! the cabriolet 
 have stop ; a gentleman lean forward , take off his hat , bow 
 respectfully . " dear , dear ! " murmur Mrs. Haughton , " I do think he be 
 go to call : some people be bear to be tempt ; my temptation have 
 be immense ! he be get out ; he knock ; I can not   say , now , that I be 
 not at home , - very awkward ! I wish Lionel be here ! what do he mean , 
 neglect his own mother , and leave she a prey to tempter ? " 

 while the footman be respond to the smart knock of the visitor , 
 we will explain how Mrs. Haughton have incur that gentleman 's 
 acquaintance . in one of her walk to her new house while it be in 
 the hand of the decorator , her mind be much absorb in the 
 consideration whether her drawing - room curtain should be chintz or 
 tabouret , - just as she be cross the street , she be all but run over 
 by a gentleman 's cabriolet . the horse be hard - mouthed , go at full 
 speed . the driver pull up just in time ; but the wheel graze she 
 dress , and though she run back instinctively , yet when she be safe on 
 the pavement , the fright overpower her nerve , and she cling to the 
 street - post almost faint . two or three passer - by humanely gather 
 round she ; and the driver , look back , and mutter to himself , " not 
 bad - look ; neatly dress ; lady - like ; french shawl ; may have tin ; 
 worth while perhaps ! " gallantly descend and hasten to offer 
 apology , with a respectful hope that she be not injure . 

 Mrs. Haughton answer somewhat tartly , but be one of those 
 good - hearted woman who , apt to be rude , be extremely sorry for it 
 the moment afterwards , she wish to repair any hurt to his feeling 
 occasion by her first impulse ; and when , renew his excuse , he 
 offer his arm over the crossing , she do not like to refuse . on 
 gain the side of the way on which her house be situate , she have 
 recover sufficiently to blush for have accept such familiar 
 assistance from a perfect stranger , and somewhat to falter in return 
 thank for his politeness . 

 our gentleman , whose estimate of his attraction be not humble , 
 ascribe the blushing cheek and falter voice to the natural effect 
 produce by his appearance ; and he himself admire very much a handsome 
 bracelet on her wrist , which he deem a favourable prognostic of " tin , " 
 watch she to her door , and send his groom in the course of the evening 
 to make discreet inquiry in the neighbourhood . the result of the 
 inquiry induce he to resolve upon prosecute the acquaintance thus 
 begin . he contrive to learn the hour at which Mrs. Haughton usually 
 visit the house , and to pass by Gloucester Place at the very nick of 
 time . his bow be recognize , respectful , interrogative , - a bow that 
 ask " how much far ? " but Mrs. Haughton 's bow respondent seem to 
 declare , " not at all ! " the stranger do not venture more that day ; but 
 a day or two afterwards he come again into Gloucester Place on foot . on 
 that occasion Mrs. Haughton be with her son , and the gentleman would 
 not seem to perceive she . the next day he return ; she be then alone , 
 and just as she gain her door , he advance . " I beg you ten thousand 
 pardon , madam ; but if I be rightly inform , I have the honour to 
 address Mrs. Charles Haughton ! " 

 the lady bow in surprise . 

 " ah , madam , your lamented husband be one of my most particular 
 friend . " 

 " you do not   say so ! " cry Mrs. Haughton . and look more attentively at 
 the stranger , there be in his dress and appearance something that she 
 think very stylish ; a particular friend of Charles Haughton 's be sure 
 to be stylish , to be a man of the first water . and she love the poor 
 Captain 's memory ; her heart warm to any " particular friend of his . " 

 " yes , " resume the gentleman , note the advantage he have gain , 
 " though I be considerably his junior , we be great crony ; excuse 
 that familiar expression ; in the Hussars together - " 

 " the Captain be not in the Hussars , sir ; he be in the Guards . " 

 " of course he be ; but I be say - in the hussar , together with the 
 Guards , there be some very fine fellow ; very fine ; he be one of 
 they . I could not resist pay my respect to the widow lady of so 
 fine a fellow . I know it be a liberty , ma'am , but ' t be my way . People 
 who know I well - and I have a large acquaintance - be kind enough 
 to excuse my way . and to think that villanous horse , which I have just 
 buy out of Lord Bolton 's stud   200 guineas , ma'am , and cheap , should 
 have nearly take the life of Charles Haughton 's lovely relict ! if 
 anybody else have be drive that brute , I shudder to think what might 
 have be the consequence ; but I have a wrist of iron . strength be 
 a vulgar qualification , - very vulgar ; but when it save a lady from 
 perishing , how can one be ashamed of it ? but I be detain you . your 
 own house , Mrs. Haughton ? " 

 " yes , sir , I have just take it , but the workman have not finish . I be 
 not yet settle here . " 

 " charming situation ! my friend leave a son , I believe ? in the army 
 already ? " 

 " no , sir , but he wish it very much . " 

 " Mr. Darrell , I think , could gratify that wish . " 

 " what ! you know Mr. Darrell , that most excellent generous man . all we 
 have we owe to he . " 

 the gentleman abruptly turn aside , - wisely ; for his expression of face 
 at that praise might have startle Mrs. 

 Haughton . " yes , I know he once . he have have many a fee out of my family . 
 Goodish lawyer ; cleverish man ; and rich as a Jew . I should like to see 
 my old friend 's son , ma'am . he must be monstrous handsome with such 
 parent ! " 

 " oh , sir , very like his father . I shall be proud to present he to you . " 

 " Ma'am , I thank you . I will have the honour to call - " 

 and thus be explain how Jasper Losely have knock at Mrs. Haughton 's 
 door ; have walk up her stair ; have seat himself in her drawing - room , 
 and be now edge his chair somewhat near to she , and throw into 
 his voice and look a degree of admiration which have be sincerely 
 kindle by the aspect of her elegant apartment . 

 Jessica Haughton be not one of those woman , if such there be , who do 
 not know when a gentleman be make up to they . she know perfectly well 
 that with a very little encouragement her visitor would declare himself 
 a suitor . nor , to speak truth , be she quite insensible to his handsome 
 person , nor quite unmove by his flattery . she have her weak point , 
 and vanity be one of they . nor conceive she , poor lady , the slight 
 suspicion that Jasper Losely be not a personage whose attention 
 might flatter any woman . though lie have not even announce a name , but , 
 push aside the footman , have saunter in with as familiar an ease as 
 if he have be a first cousin ; though he have not utter a syllable that 
 could define his station , or attest his boasted friendship with the dear 
 defunct , still Mrs. Haughton implicitly believe that she be with one 
 of those gay chief of ton who have glitter round her Charlie in that 
 early morning of his life , ere he have sell out of the Guards , and 
 buy himself out of jail ; a lord , or an honourable at least ; and she 
 be even   I shudder to say   revolve in her mind whether it might 
 not be an excellent thing for her dear Lionel if she could prevail on 
 herself to procure for he the prop and guidance of a distinguished and 
 brilliant father - in - law , - rich , noble , evidently good - nature , sensible , 
 attractive . oh ! but the temptation be grow more and more IMMENSE ! 
 when suddenly the door open , and in sprang Lionel cry out , " mother 
 dear , the Colonel have come with I on purpose to - " 

 he stop short , star hard at Jasper Losely . that gentleman advance 
 a few step , extend his hand , but come to an abrupt halt on see 
 Colonel Morley 's figure now fill up the doorway . not that he fear 
 recognition : the Colonel do not know he by sight , but he know by sight 
 the Colonel . in his own young day , when loll over the rail of 
 Rotten row , he have enviously note the leader of fashion pass by , and 
 Colonel Morley have not escape his observation . Colonel Morley , indeed , 
 be one of those man who by name and repute be sure to be know to all 
 who , like Jasper Losely in his youth , would fain learn something about 
 that gaudy , babbling , and remorseless world which , like the sun , either 
 vivifie or corrupt , accord to the property of the object on 
 which it shin . strange to say , it be the mere sight of the real fine 
 gentleman that make the mock fine gentleman shrink and collapse . though 
 Jasper Losely know himself to be still call a magnificent man , - one of 
 royal Nature 's lifeguardsman ; though confident that from top to toe his 
 habiliment could defy the criticism of the strict martinet in polite 
 costume , no soon do that figure , by no mean handsome and clothe in 
 garment innocent of buckram but guilty of wrinkle , appear on the 
 threshold than Jasper Losely feel small and shabby , as if he have be 
 suddenly reduce to five foot two , and have buy his coat out of an old 
 clothesman 's bag . 

 without appear even to see Mr. Losely , the Colonel , in his turn , as 
 he glide past he towards Mrs. Haughton , have , with what be proverbially 
 call the corner of the eye , take the whole of that impostor 's superb 
 personnel into calm survey , have read he through and through , and 
 decide on these two point without the slight hesitation , - " a 
 lady - killer and a sharper . " 

 Quick as breathe have be the effect thus severally produce on Mrs. 
 Haughton 's visitor , which it have cost so many word to describe , - so 
 quick that the Colonel , without any apparent pause of dialogue , have 
 already take up the sentence Lionel leave uncompleted , and say , as he 
 bow over Mrs. Haughton 's hand , " come on purpose to claim acquaintance 
 with an old friend 's widow , a young friend 's mother . " 

 MRS . HAUGHTON . - " I be sure , Colonel Morley , I be very much flattered . 
 and you , too , know the poor dear Captain ; ' t be so pleasant to think 
 that his old friend come round we now . this gentleman , also , be a 
 particular friend of dear Charles 's . " 

 the Colonel have somewhat small eye , which move with habitual slowness . 
 he lift those eye , let they drop upon Jasper   who still stand in the 
 middle of the room , with one hand still half - extend towards Lionel , 
 and let the eye rest there while he speak , repeat , 

 " particular friend of Charles Haughton , - the only one of his particular 
 friend whom I never have the honour to see before . " 

 Jasper , who , whatever his deficiency in other virtue , certainly do 
 not lack courage , make a strong effort at self - possession , and without 
 reply to the Colonel , whose remark have not be directly address to 
 himself , say in his most rollick tone , " yes , Mrs. Haughton , 
 Charles be my particular friend , but , " lift his eyeglass , " but this 
 gentleman be , " drop the eyeglass negligently , " not in our set , 
 I suppose . " then advance to Lionel , and seize his hand , " I must 
 introduce myself , - the image of your father , I declare ! I be say to 
 Mrs. Haughton how much I should like to see you ; propose to she , just 
 as you come in , that we should go to the play together . oh , ma'am , you 
 may trust he to I safely . young man should see life ! " here Jasper 
 tip Lionel one of those know wink with which he be accustom to 
 delight and ensnare the young friend of Mr. Poole , and hurry on : " but 
 in an innocent way , ma'am , such as mother would approve . we will fix an 
 evening for it when I have the honour to call again . good morning , 
 Mrs. Haughton . your hand again , sir   to Lionel . ah , we shall be great 
 friend , I guess ! you must let I take you out in my cab ; teach you to 
 handle the ribbon , eh ? ' Gad , my old friend Charles be a whip . ha ! ha ! 
 Goodday , good - day ! " 

 not a muscle have move in the Colonel 's face during Mr. Losely 's 
 jovial monologue . but when Jasper have bow himself out , Mrs. 
 Haughton , courtesying , and ring the bell for the footman to open the 
 street - door , the man of the world   and , as a man of the world , Colonel 
 Morley be consummate   again raise those small slow eye , - this time 
 towards her face , - and drop the word , 

 " my old friend 's particular friend be - not bad looking , Mrs. Haughton ! " 

 " and so lively and pleasant , " return Mrs. Haughton , with a slight 
 rise of colour , but no other sign of embarrassment . " it may be a nice 
 acquaintance for Lionel . " 

 " Mother ! " cry that ungrateful boy , " you be not speak seriously ? I 
 think the man be odious . if he be not my father 's friend , I should say 
 he be - " 

 " what , Lionel ? " ask the Colonel , blandly , " be what ? " 

 " Snobbish , sir . " 

 " Lionel , how dare you ? " exclaim Mrs. Haughton . " what vulgar word boy 
 do pick up at school , Colonel Morley . " 

 " we must be careful that they do not pick up bad than word when they 
 leave school , my dear madam . you will forgive I , but Mr. Darrell have 
 so expressly - of course , with your permission - commend this young 
 gentleman to my responsible care and guidance ; so openly confide to I 
 his view and intention , - that perhaps you would do I the very great 
 favour not to force upon he , against his own wish , the acquaintance 
 of - that very good - look person . " 

 Mrs. Haughton pout , and keep down her rise temper . the Colonel begin 
 to awe she . 

 " by the by , " continue the man of the world , " may I inquire the name of 
 my old friend 's particular friend ? " 

 " his name ? upon my word I really do not   know it . perhaps he leave his 
 card ; ring the bell , Lionel . " 

 " you do not   know his name , yet you know he , ma'am , and would allow your 
 son to see life under his auspex ! I beg you ten thousand pardon ; but 
 even ladie the most cautious , mother the most watchful , be expose 
 to - " 

 " immense temptation , - that be - to - to - " 

 " I understand perfectly , my dear Mrs. Haughton . " 

 the footman appear . " do that gentleman leave a card ? " 

 " no , ma'am . " 

 " do not you ask his name when he enter ? " 

 " yes , ma'am , but he say he would announce himself . " when the footman 
 have withdraw , Mrs. Haughton exclaim piteously , " I have be to blame , 
 Colonel ; I see it . but Lionel will tell you how I come to know the 
 gentleman , - the gentleman who nearly run over I , Lionel , and then speak 
 so kindly about your dear father . " 

 " oh , that be the person ! - I suppose so , " cry Lionel , kiss his 
 mother , who be inclined to burst into tear . " I can explain it all now , 
 Colonel Morley . any one who say a kind word about my father warm my 
 mother 's heart to he at once ; be it not so , Mother dear ? " 

 " and long be it so , " say Colonel Morley , with grateful earnestness ; 
 " and may such be my passport to your confidence , Mrs. Haughton . Charles 
 be my old schoolfellow , - a little boy when I and Darrell be in the 
 sixth form ; and , pardon I , when I add , that if that gentleman be ever 
 Charles Haughton 's particular friend , he could scarcely have be a very 
 wise one . for unless his appearance greatly belie his year he must 
 have be little more than a boy when Charles Haughton leave Lionel 
 fatherless . " 

 here , in the delicacy of tact , see that Mrs. Haughton look ashamed 
 of the subject , and seem aware of her imprudence , the Colonel rise , 
 with a request - cheerfully grant - that Lionel might be allow to come 
 to breakfast with he the next morning . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

  a man of the world , have accept a troublesome charge , consider 
  " what he will do with it ; " and , have promptly decide , be sure , 
  first , that he could not have do well ; and , secondly , that much 
  may be say to prove that he could not have do bad . 

 reserve to a later occasion anymore detailed description of Colonel 
 Morley , it suffice for the present to say that he be a man of a very 
 fine understanding as apply to the special world in which he live . 
 though no one have a more numerous circle of friend , and though with 
 many of those friend he be on that footing of familiar intimacy which 
 Darrell 's active career once , and his rigid seclusion of late , could 
 not have establish with any idle denizen of that brilliant society 
 in which Colonel Morley move and have his being , yet to Alban Morley 's 
 heart   a heart not easily reach   no friend be so dear as Guy Darrell . 
 they have enter Eton on the same day , leave it the same day , lodge 
 while there in the same house ; and though of very different character , 
 form one of those strong , imperishable , brotherly affection which the 
 fate weave into the very woof of existence . 

 Darrell 's recommendation would have secure to any young protege Colonel 
 Morley 's gracious welcome and invaluable advice . but , both as Darrell 's 
 acknowledge kinsman and as Charles Haughton 's son , Lionel call forth 
 his kindly sentiment and obtain his most sagacious deliberation . 
 he have already see the boy several time before wait on Mrs. 
 Haughton , deeming it would please she to defer his visit until she could 
 receive he in all the glory of Gloucester Place ; and he have take 
 Lionel into high favour and deem he worthy of a conspicuous place 
 in the world . though Darrell in his letter to Colonel Morley have 
 emphatically distinguish the position of Lionel , as a favoured 
 kinsman , from that of a presumptive or even a probable heir , yet 
 the rich man have also add : " but I wish he to take rank as the 
 representative to the Haughtons ; and , whatever I may do with the bulk of 
 my fortune , I shall insure to he a liberal independence . the completion 
 of his education , the adequate allowance to he , the choice of a 
 profession , be matter in which I entreat you to act for yourself , 
 as if you be his guardian . I be leave England : I may be abroad for 
 year . " Colonel Morley , in accept the responsibility thus press 
 on he , bring to bear upon his charge subtle discrimination , as well 
 as conscientious anxiety . 

 he see that Lionel 's heart be set upon the military profession , and 
 that his power of application seem lukewarm and desultory when not 
 cheer and concentre by enthusiasm , and would , therefore , fail he if 
 direct to study which have no immediate reference to the object of 
 his ambition . the Colonel , accordingly , dismiss the idea of send 
 he for three year to a university . Alban Morley sum up his theory 
 on the collegiate ordeal in these succinct aphorism : " nothing so good 
 as a university education , nor bad than a university without its 
 education . well throw a youth at once into the wide sphere of a 
 capital - provide you there secure to his social life the ordinary 
 check of good company , the restraint impose by the presence of 
 decorous woman , and man of grave year and dignified repute - than 
 confine he to the exclusive society of youth of his own age , the 
 age of wild spirit and unreflecte imitation , unless he cle to the 
 safeguard which be find in hard reading , less by the book - knowledge it 
 bestow than by the serious and preoccupied mind which it abstract from 
 the coarser temptation . " 

 but Lionel , young in character than in year , be too boyish as yet to 
 be safely consign to those trial of tact and temper which await the 
 neophyte who enter on life through the door of a mess - room . his pride 
 be too morbid , too much on the alert for offence ; his frankness too 
 crude , his spirit too untamed by the insensible discipline of social 
 commerce . 

 Quoth the observant man of the world : " place his honour in his own 
 keeping , and he will carry it about with he on full cock , to blow off 
 a friend 's head or his own before the end of the first month . Huffy ! 
 decidedly huffy ! and of all cause that disturb regiment , and induce 
 court - martial , the commonest cause be a huffy lad ! pity ! for that 
 youngster have in he the right metal , - spirit and talent that should 
 make he a first - rate soldier . it would be time well spend that should 
 join professional study with that degree of polite culture which give 
 dignity and cure dulness . I must get he out of London , out of England ; 
 cut he off from his mother 's apron - string , and the particular friend 
 of his poor father who prowl unannounced into the widow 's drawing - room . 
 he shall go to Paris ; no well place to learn military theory , and 
 be civilized out of huffy disposition . no doubt my old friend , the 
 chevalier , who have the art strategic at his fingerend , might be induce 
 to take he en pension , direct his study , and keep he out of harm 's 
 way . I can secure to he the entree into the circle of the rigid old 
 Faubourg St. Germain , where manner be well breed , and household tie 
 most respected . besides , as I be so often at Paris myself , I shall have 
 he under my eye , and a few year there , spend in complete he as man , 
 may bring he near to that marshal 's baton which every recruit should 
 have in his eye , than if I start he at once a raw boy , unable to take 
 care of himself as an ensign , and unfit , save by mechanical routine , 
 to take care of other , should he live to buy the grade of a colonel . " 

 the plan thus promptly form Alban Morley briefly explain to Lionel 
 when the boy come to breakfast in Curzon Street ; request he to 
 obtain Mrs. Haughton 's acquiesence in that exercise of the discretionary 
 power with which he have be invest by Mr. Darrell . to lionel the 
 proposition that commend the very study to which his taste direct 
 his ambition , and place his initiation into responsible manhood among 
 scene bright to his fancy , because new to his experience , seem of 
 course the perfection of wisdom . less readily pleased be poor Mrs. 
 Haughton , when her son return to communicate the arrangement , back 
 a polite and well - word letter from the Colonel with his own more 
 artless eloquence . instantly she fly off on the wing of her " little 
 temper . " " what ! her only son take from she ; send to that horrid 
 Continent , just when she be so respectably settle ! what be the good 
 of money if she be to be part from her boy ! Mr. Darrell might take 
 the money back if he please ; she would write and tell he so . Colonel 
 Morley have no feeling ; and she be shock to think Lionel be in 
 such unnatural hand . she see very plainly that he no long care for 
 she , - a serpent 's tooth , " etc . but as soon as the burst be over , the 
 sky clear and Mrs. Haughton become penitent and sensible . then her 
 grief for Lionel 's loss be divert by preparation for his departure . 
 there be his wardrobe to see to ; a patent portmanteau to purchase and 
 to fill . and , all do , the last evening mother and son spend together , 
 though painful at the moment , it would be happiness for both hereafter 
 to recall ! their hand clasp in each other , her head lean on his 
 young shoulder , her tear kiss so soothingly away , and soft word of 
 kindly motherly counsel , sweet promise of filial performance . happy , 
 thrice happy , as an after remembrance , be the final parting between 
 hopeful son and fearful parent at the foot of that mystic bridge , 
 which start from the threshold of home , - lose in the dimness of the 
 far - oppose shore ! - bridge over which go the boy who will never 
 return but as the man . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

  the pocket - cannibal bait his woman 's trap with love - letter , and a 
  widow allure steal timidly towards it from under the weed . 

 Jasper Losely be begin to be hard up ! the infallible calculation 
 at rouge - et - noir have carry off all that capital which have accumulate 
 from the saving of the young gentleman whom dolly Poole have contribute 
 to his exchequer . Poole himself be beset by dun , and pathetically 
 observe " that he have lose three stone in weight , and that he believe 
 the calf to his leg be go to enlarge his liver . " 

 Jasper be compel to put down his cabriolet , to discharge his groom , 
 to retire from his fashionable lodging ; and just when the prospect 
 even of a dinner become dim , he bethink himself of Arabella Crane , and 
 remember that she promise he L5 , nay L10 , which be still due from 
 she . he call ; he be receive like the prodigal son . Nay , to his own 
 surprise , he find Mrs. Crane have make her house much more inviting : 
 the drawing - room be clean up ; the addition of a few easy article of 
 furniture give they quite a comfortable air . she herself have improve 
 in costume , though her favourite colour still remain iron gray . she 
 inform Jasper that she fully expect he ; that these preparation be 
 in his honour ; that she have engage a very good cook ; that she hop 
 he will dine with she when not well engage ; in short , let he feel 
 himself at home in Podden Place . 

 Jasper at first suspect a sinister design , under civility that his 
 conscience tell he be unmerite , - a design to entrap he into that 
 matrimonial alliance which he have so ungallantly scout , and from 
 which he still recoil with an abhorrence which man be not justify in 
 feeling for any connubial partner less preternaturally terrific than the 
 Witch of Endor or the Bleeding Nun ! 

 but Mrs. Crane quickly and candidly hasten to dispel his ungenerous 
 apprehension . she have give up , she say , all idea so preposterous ; 
 love and wedlock be equally out of her mind . but ill as he have 
 behave to she , she could not but feel a sincere regard for he , - a deep 
 interest in his fate . he ought still to make a brilliant marriage : do 
 that idea not occur to he ? she might help he there with her woman 's 
 wit . " in short , " say Mrs. Crane , pinch her lip , " in short , Jasper , 
 I feel for you as a mother . look on I as such ! " 

 the pure and affectionate notion wonderfully tickled and egregiously 
 delight Jasper Losely . " look on you as a mother ! I will , " say he , 
 with emphasis . " well of creature ! " and though in his own mind he have 
 not a doubt that she still adore he   not as a mother , he believe 
 it be a disinterested , devoted adoration , such as the beautiful brute 
 really have inspire more than once in his abominable life . accordingly , 
 he move into the neighbourhood of Podden Place , content himself with 
 a second - floor bedroom in a house recommend to he by Mrs. Crane , and 
 take his meal at his adopt mother 's with filial familiarity . she 
 express a desire to make Mr. Poole 's acquaintance ; Jasper hasten to 
 present that worthy . Mrs. Crane invite Samuel Dolly to dine one day , 
 to sup the next ; she lend he L3 to redeem his dress - coat from pawn , and 
 she give he medicament for the relief of his headache . 

 Samuel dolly venerate she as a most superior woman ; envy Jasper 
 such a " mother . " thus easily do Arabella Crane possess herself of the 
 existence of Jasper Losely . lightly her finger close over it , - lightly 
 as the fisherman be over the captivate trout . and whatever her 
 generosity , it be not carry to imprudence . she just give to Jasper 
 enough to bring he within her power ; she have no idea of ruin herself 
 by large supply : she conceal from he the extent of her income 
  which be in chief part derive from house - rent , the amount of her 
 saving , even the name of her banker . and if he carry off to the 
 rouge - et - noir table the coin he obtain from she , and come for more , 
 Mrs. Crane put on the look of a mother incense , - mild but awful , - and 
 scold as mother sometimes can scold . Jasper Losely begin to be 
 frighten at Mrs. Crane 's scolding . and he have not that power over 
 she which , though arrogate by a lover , be deny to an adopt son . 
 his mind , relieve from the habitual distraction of the gaming - table 
 for which the resource be want , settle with redoubled ardour on the 
 image of Mrs. Haughton . he have call at her house several time 
 since the fatal day on which he have meet there Colonel Morley , but Mrs. 
 Haughton be never at home . and as when the answer be give to he by 
 the footman , he have more than once , on cross the street , see herself 
 through the window , it be clear that his acquaintance be not 
 court . Jasper Losely , by habit , be the reverse of a pertinacious and 
 troublesome suitor ; not , Heaven know , from want of audacity , but from 
 excess of self - love . where a Lovelace so superb condescend to make 
 overture , a Clarissa so tasteless as to decline they deserve and 
 experience his contempt . besides , steadfast and prolonged pursuit of 
 any object , however important and attractive , be alien to the levity 
 and fickleness of his temper . but in this instance he have other motif 
 than those on the surface for unusual perseverance . 

 a man like Jasper Losely never repose implicit confidence in any one . 
 he be garrulous , indiscreet ; let out much that Machiavel would have 
 advise he not to disclose : but he invariably have nook and corner 
 in his mind which he keep to himself . Jasper do not confide to his 
 adopt mother his design upon his intended bride . but she know they 
 through Poole , to whom he be more frank ; and when she see he look 
 over her select and severe library , take therefrom the " Polite 
 Letter - Writer " and the " elegant extract , " Mrs. Crane divine at once 
 that Jasper Losely be meditate the effect of epistolary seduction 
 upon the widow of Gloucester Place . 

 Jasper do not write a bad love - letter in the florid style . he have at 
 his command , in especial , certain poetical quotation , the effect of 
 which repeat experience have assure he to be as potent upon the 
 female breast as the incantation or carmina of the ancient sorcery . the 
 following in particular , 

  " have I a heart for falsehood frame , 
  I neer could injure you . " 

 another , generally to be apply when confess that his career 
 have be interestingly wild , and would , if pity be deny he , be 
 pathetically short , 

  " when he who adore thee have leave but the name 
  of his fault and his folly behind . " 

 arm with these quotation , many a sentence from the " Polite 
 Letter - Writer " or the " elegant extract , " and a quire of rose - edge 
 paper , losely sit down to ovidian composition . 

 but as he approach the close of epistle the first , it occur to 
 he that a signature and address be necessary . the address be 
 not difficult . he could give Poole 's   hence his confidence to that 
 gentleman : Poole have a lodging in Bury Street , St. James 's , a 
 fashionable locality for single man . but the name require more 
 consideration . there be insuperable objection against sign his own 
 to any person who might be in communication with Mr. Darrell ; a pity , 
 for there be a good old family of the name of losely . a name of 
 aristocratic sound might indeed be readily borrow from any lordly 
 proprietor thereof without ask a formal consent . but this loan be 
 expose to danger . Mrs. Haughton might very naturally mention such name , 
 as bear by her husband 's friend , to Colonel Morley ; and Colonel Morley 
 would most probably know enough of the connection and relation of 
 any peer so honoured to say , " there be no such Greville , Cavendish , or 
 Talbot . " but Jasper Losely be not without fertility of invention and 
 readiness of resource . a grand idea , worthy of a master , and prove 
 that , if the man have not be a rogue in grain , he could have be 
 rear into a very clever politician , flash across he . he would sign 
 himself " SMITH . " nobody could say there be no such Smith ; nobody 
 could say that a Smith might not be a most respectable , fashionable , 
 highly - connect man . there be smith who be millionaire ; smith who 
 be large - acre squire ; substantial baronet ; peer of England , and 
 pillar of the State . you can no more question a man 's right to be a 
 Smith than his right to be a Briton ; and wide as the diversity of rank , 
 lineage , virtue , and genius in Britons be the diversity in Smiths . but 
 still a name so generic often affect a definitive precursor . Jasper 
 sign himself " J. COURTENAY SMITH . " he call , and leave epistle the 
 first with his own kid - gloved hand , inquire first if Mrs. Haughton 
 be at home , and , respond to in the negative this time , he ask for 
 her son . " her son be go abroad with Colonel Morley . " Jasper , though 
 sorry to lose present hold over the boy , be console at learn that 
 the Colonel be off the ground . afore sanguine of success , he glance up 
 at the window , and , sure that Mrs. Haughton be there , though he see she 
 not , lift his hat with as melancholy an expression of reproach as he 
 could throw into his face . 

 the villain could not have find a moment in Mrs. Haughton 's widow 
 life so propitious to his chance of success . in her lodging - house at 
 Pimlico , the good lady have be too incessantly occupy for that idle 
 train of revery , in which the poet assure we that Cupid find leisure 
 to whet his arrow and take his aim . have Lionel still be by her side , 
 have even Colonel Morley be in town , her affection for the one , her awe 
 of the other , would have be her safeguard . but alone in that fine new 
 house , no friend , no acquaintance as yet , no dear visit circle on 
 which to expend the desire of talk and the z for innocent excitement 
 that be natural to lady of an active mind and a nervous temperament , 
 the sudden obtrusion of a suitor so respectfully ardent , - oh , it be not 
 to be deny that the temptation be IMMENSE . 

 and when that note , so neatly fold , so elegantly seal , lie in her 
 irresolute hand , the widow could not but feel that she be still young , 
 still pretty ; and her heart fly back to the day when the linendraper 's 
 fair daughter have be the cynosure of the provincial High Street ; when 
 young officer have lounge to and fro the pavement , look in at her 
 window ; when ogle and note have alike beset she , and the dark eye of 
 the irresistible Charlie Haughton have first teach her pulse to tremble . 
 and in her hand lie the letter of Charlie Haughton 's particular friend . 
 she break the seal . she read - a declaration ! 

 five letter in five day do Jasper write . in the course of those 
 letter , he explain away the cause for suspicion which Colonel Morley 
 have so ungenerously suggest . he be no long anonymous ; he be J. 
 Courtenay Smith . he allude incidentally to the precocious age in which 
 he have become " lord of himself , that heritage of woe . " this account 
 for his friendship with a man so much his senior as the late Charlie . he 
 confess that in the vortex of dissipation his hereditary estate have 
 disappear ; but he have still a genteel independence ; and with the woman 
 of his heart , etc . he have never before know what real love be , etc . 
 " pleasure have fire his madden soul ; " " but the heart , - the heart be 
 lonely still . " he entreat only a personal interview , even though to 
 be reject , - scorn . still , when " he who adore she have leave but the 
 name , " etc . alas ! alas ! as Mrs. Haughton put down epistle the fifth , 
 she hesitate ; and the woman who hesitate in such a case , be sure , at 
 least - to write a civil answer . 

 Mrs. Haughton write but three line , - still they be civil ; and 
 concede an interview for the next day , though imply that it be but 
 for the purpose of assure Mr. J. Courtenay Smith , in person , of she 
 unalterable fidelity to the shade of his lamented friend . 

 in high glee Jasper show Mrs. Haughton 's answer to Dolly Poole , and 
 begin seriously to speculate on the probable amount of the widow 's 
 income , and the value of her movable in Gloucester Place . thence he 
 repair to Mrs. Crane ; and , embolden by the hope forever to escape 
 from her maternal tutelage , brave her scolding and ask for a couple 
 of sovereign . he be sure that he should be in luck that night . she 
 give to he the sum , and spar the scolding . but , as soon as he 
 be go , conjecture from the bravado of his manner what have really 
 occur , Mrs. Crane put on her bonnet and go out . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

  Unhappy be the man who put his trust in a woman . 

 late that evening a lady , in a black veil , knock at No . - Gloucester 
 Place , and ask to see Mrs. Haughton on urgent business . she be 
 admit . she remain but five minute . 

 the next day when , " gay as a bridegroom prance to his bride , " Jasper 
 Losely present himself at the widow 's door , the servant place in his 
 hand a packet , and inform he bluffly that Mrs. Haughton have go 
 out of town . jasper with difficulty suppress his rage , open the 
 packet , - his own letter return , with these word , " Sir , your name 
 be not Courtenay Smith . if you trouble I again , I shall apply to the 
 police . " never from female hand have Jasper Losely 's pride receive such 
 a slap on its face . he be literally stun . mechanically he hasten 
 to Arabella Crane ; and have no long any object in concealment , but , 
 on the contrary , a most urgent craving for sympathy , he pour forth his 
 indignation and wrong . no mother could be more consolatory than Mrs. 
 Crane . she soothe , she flatter , she give he an excellent dinner ; 
 after which , she make he so comfortable , what with an easy - chair and 
 complimentary converse , that , when Jasper rise late to return to his 
 lodging , he say , " after all , if I have be ugly and stupid , and of 
 a weakly constitution , I should have be of a very domestic turn of 
 mind . " 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

  no author ever draw a character consistent to human nature , but what 
  he be force to ascribe to it many inconsistency . 

 whether move by that pathetic speech of Jasper 's , or by some other 
 impulse not less feminine , Arabella Crane seem suddenly to conceive 
 the laudable and arduous design of reform that portentous sinner . she 
 have some distant relation in London , whom she very rarely troubled with 
 a visit , and who , have she want anything from they , would have shut 
 their door in her face ; but as , on the contrary , she be well off , 
 single , and might leave her money to whom she please , the distant 
 relation be always warm in manner , and prodigal in their offer of 
 service . the next day she repair to one of these kinsfolk , - a person 
 in a large way of business , - and return home with two great book in 
 white sheepskin . and when losely look in to dine , she say , in the 
 suave tone a tender mother can address to an amiable truant , " Jasper , 
 you have great ability ; at the gaming - table ability be evidently 
 useless : your forte be calculation ; you be always very quick at that . 
 I have be fortunate enough to procure you an easy piece of task - work , 
 for which you will be liberally remunerate . a friend of mine wish to 
 submit these book to a regular accountant : he suspect that a clerk 
 have cheat he ; but he can not tell how or where . you know account 
 thoroughly , - no one well , - and the pay will be ten guineas . " 

 Jasper , though his early life have render familiar and facile to he 
 the science of book - keeping and double - entry , make a grimace at the 
 revolting idea of any honest labour , however light and well pay . but 
 ten guineas be an immense temptation , and in the evening Mrs. Crane 
 coax he into the task . 

 neglect no feminine art to make the lawless nomad feel at home under 
 her roof , she have provide for his ease and comfort morocco slipper 
 and a superb dressing - robe , in material rich , in colour become . man , 
 single or marital , be accustom to connect the idea of home with 
 dressing - gown and slipper , especially if , after dinner , they apply   as 
 Jasper Losely now apply   to occupation in which the brain be active , 
 the form in repose . what achievement , literary or scientific , be ever 
 accomplish by a student strap to unyielde boot , and " cabin , 
 cribbed , confine , " in a coat that fit he like wax ? as rob in the 
 cozy garment which be consecrate to the sacred familiar Lares , the 
 relaxing , handsome ruffian sit in the quiet room , bend his still 
 regular profile over the sheepskin book , the harmless pen in that 
 strong well - shape hand , Mrs. Crane watch he with a soften 
 countenance . to bear he company , she have actively take , herself , 
 to work , - the gold thimble drag from its long repose , - mark and 
 hemming , with nimble artistic finger , new cravat for the adopt son ! 
 strange creature be woman ! ungrateful and perfidious as that sleek tiger 
 before she have often prove himself , though no man could less deserve 
 one kindly sentiment in a female heart , though she know that he care 
 nothing for she , still it be pleasing to know that he care for nobody 
 else , that he be sit in the same room ; and Arabella Crane feel 
 that , if that existence could continue , she could forget the past and 
 look content towards the future . again I say , strange creature be 
 woman ; and in this instance , creature more strange , because so grim ! but 
 as her eye soften , and her finger work , and her mind revolve scheme 
 for make that lawless wild beast an innocuous tame animal , who can 
 help feel for and with grim Arabella Crane ? 

 poor woman ! and will not the experiment succeed ? three evening do 
 Jasper losely devote to this sinless life and its peaceful occupation . 
 he complete his task ; he receive the ten guineas .   how much of that 
 fee come out of Mrs. Crane 's privy purse ?   he detect three mistake , 
 which justify suspicion of the book - keeper 's integrity . Set a thief to 
 catch a thief ! he be praise for acuteness , and promise a still light 
 employment , to be still well pay . he depart , declare that he will 
 come the next day , early than usual ; he volunteer an eulogium upon 
 work in general ; he vow that evening so happy he have not spend 
 for year ; he leave Mrs. Crane so much impressed by the hope of his 
 improvement that , if a good clergyman have find she just at that moment , 
 she might almost have be induce to pray . but 

  " Heu quotie fidem 
  Mutatosque deo flebit ! " 

 Jasper losely return not , neither to Podden place or his lodging in the 
 neighborhood . day elapse and still he come not ; even Poole do not 
 know where he have go ; even Poole have not see he ! but that worthy be 
 now lay up with a serious rheumatic fever - confine to his room and a 
 water gruel . and Jasper Losely be not the man to intrude himself on the 
 privacy of a sick chamber . Mrs. Crane , more benevolent , visit Poole 
 cheer he up - get he a nurse - write to Uncle Sam . Poole bless she . 
 he hop that Uncle Sam , move by the spectacle of the sick - bed will 
 say , " do not   let your debt fret you : I will pay they ! " whatever her 
 disappointment or resentment at Jasper 's thankless and mysterious 
 evasion , Arabella Crane be calmly confident of his return . to her 
 servant , Bridget Greggs , who be perhaps the sole person in the world 
 who entertain affection for the lone gaunt woman , and who hold Jasper 
 Losely in profound detestation , she say , with tranquil sternness , " that 
 man have cross my life , and darken it . he pass away , and leave night 
 behind he . he have dare to return . he shall never escape I again till 
 the grave yawn for one of we . " 

 " but , Lor ' love you , miss , you would not put yourself in the power of 
 such a black - hearted villing ? " 

 " in his power ! no , Bridget ; fear not , he must be in mine , soon or 
 later in mine , hand and foot . patience ! " as she be thus speak , - a 
 knock at the door ! " it be he ; I tell you so ; quick ! " 

 but it be not Jasper Losely . it be Mr. Rugge . 




 CHAPTER XV . 

  " when God will , all wind bring rain . " - Ancient Proverb . 

 the manager have not submit to the loss of his property in Sophy and 
 l100 without take much vain trouble to recover the one or the other . 
 he have visit Jasper while that gentleman lodge in St. James 's ; but 
 the moment he hint at the return of the L100 , Mr. Losely open both 
 door and window , and request the manager to make his immediate choice 
 of the two . take the more usual mode of exit , Mr. Rugge vent his 
 just indignation in a lawyer 's letter , threaten Mr. Losely with an 
 action for conspiracy and fraud . he have also more than once visit Mrs. 
 Crane , who somewhat soothe he by allow that he have be very badly 
 use , that he ought at least to be repay his money , and promise to 
 do she good to persuade Mr. Losely " to behave like a gentleman . " 
 with regard to Sophy herself , Mrs. Crane appear to feel a profound 
 indifference . in fact , the hatred which Mrs. Crane have unquestionably 
 conceive for Sophy while under her charge be much diminish by 
 Losely 's unnatural conduct towards the child . to she it be probably 
 a matter of no interest whether Sophy be in Rugge 's hand or Waife 's ; 
 enough for she that the daughter of a woman against whose memory her 
 fierce passion be enlist be , in either case , so far below 
 herself in the grade of the social ladder . 

 perhaps of the two protector for Sophy , Rugge and Waife , her spite 
 alone would have give the preference to Waife . he be on a still low 
 step of the ladder than the itinerant manager . nor , though she have so 
 mortally injure the forlorn cripple in the eye of Mr. Hartopp , have 
 she any deliberate purpose of revenge to gratify against he ! on the 
 contrary , if she view he with contempt , it be a contempt not unmixe 
 with pity . it be necessary to make to the Mayor the communication she 
 have make , or that worthy magistrate would not have surrender the child 
 intrust to he , at least until Waife 's return . and really it be a 
 kindness to the old man to save he both from an agonizing scene with 
 Jasper , and from the more public opprobrium which any resistance on 
 his part to Jasper 's authority or any altercation between the two would 
 occasion . and as her main object then be to secure Losely 's allegiance 
 to she , by prove her power to be useful to he , so Waifes and Sophys 
 and Mayors and Managers be to she but as pawn to be move and 
 sacrifice , accord to the lead strategy of her game . 

 Rugge come now , agitated and breathless , to inform Mrs. Crane that Waife 
 have be see in London . Mr. Rugge 's clown have see he , not far from 
 the Tower ; but the cripple have disappear before the clown , who be on 
 the top of an omnibus , have time to descend . " and even if he have actually 
 catch hold of Mr. Waife , " observe Mrs. Crane , " what then ? you have no 
 claim on Mr. Waife . " 

 " but the Phenomenon must be with that ravish marauder , " say Rugge . 
 " however , I have set a minister of justice - that be , ma'am , a detective 
 police - at work ; and what I now ask of you be simply this : should it be 
 necessary for Mr. Losely to appear with I before the senate - that be 
 to say , ma'am , a metropolitan police - court - in order to prove my legal 
 property in my own buy and pay for Phenomenon , will you induce that 
 bold bad man not again to return the poison chalice to my lip ? " 

 " I do not even know where Mr. Losely be ; perhaps not in London . " 

 " Ma'am , I see he last night at the theatre , - Princess 's . I be in the 
 shilling gallery . he who owe I L100 , ma'am , - he in a private box ! " 

 " ah ! you be sure ; by himself ? " 

 " with a lady , ma'am , - a lady in a shawl from Ingee . I know they shawl . 
 my father teach I to know they in early childhood , for he be an 
 ornament to british commerce , - a broker , ma'am , - pawn ! and , " continue 
 Rugge , with a wither smile , " that man in a private box , which at the 
 Princess 's cost two pound two , and with the spoil of Ingee by his 
 side , lift his eyeglass and behold I , - I in the shill gallery ! 
 and his conscience do not say , ' should we not change place if I pay 
 that gentleman L100 ? ' can such thing be , and overcome we , ma'am , like a 
 summer cloud , without our special - I put it to you , ma'am - wonder ? " 

 " oh , with a lady , be he ? " exclaim Arabella Crane , her wrath , which , 
 while the manager speak , gather fast and full , burst now into 
 word . " his lady shall know the man who sell his own child for a 
 show ; only find out where the girl be , then come here again before you 
 stir far . oh , with a lady ! go to your detective policeman , or rather 
 send he to I ; we will first discover Mr. Losely 's address . I will pay 
 all the expense . rely on my zeal , Mr. Rugge . " 

 much comfort , the manager go his way . he have not be long go 
 before Jasper himself appear . the traitor enter with a more than 
 customary bravado of manner , as if he apprehend a scolding , and be 
 prepared to face it ; but Mrs. Crane neither reproach he for his 
 prolonged absence , nor express surprise at his return . with true 
 feminine duplicity , she receive he as if nothing have happen . Jasper , 
 thus relieve , become of his own accord apologetic and explanatory ; 
 evidently he want something of Mrs. Crane . " the fact be , my dear 
 friend , " say he , sink into a chair , " that the day after I last see 
 you I happen to go to the General Post Office to see if there be 
 any letter for I . you smile : you do not   believe I . honour bright , 
 here they be ; " and Jasper take from the side pocket of his coat a 
 pocket - book , a new pocket - book , a brilliant pocket - book , fragrant 
 russian leather , delicately embossed , golden clasp , silken lining , 
 jewel pencil - case , malachite pen - knife , - an arsenal of knickknack 
 store in neat recess ; such a pocket - book as no man ever give to 
 himself . Sardanapalus would not have give that pocket - book to himself ! 
 such a pocket - book never come to you , o enviable Lotharios , save as 
 tributary keepsake from the charmer who adore you ! grimly the adopt 
 Mother eye that pocket - book . never have she see it before . grimly she 
 pinch her lip . out of this dainty volume - which would have be of 
 cumbrous size to a slim thread - paper exquisite , but scarcely bulge into 
 ripple the Atlantic expanse of Jasper Losely 's magnificent chest - the 
 monster draw forth two letter on french paper , - foreign post - mark . he 
 replace they quickly , only suffer her eye to glance at the address , 
 and continue , " Fancy ! that purse - proud Grand Turk of an infidel , though 
 he would not believe I , have be to France , - yes , actually to - - - 
 make inquiry evidently with reference to Sophy . the woman who ought 
 to have thoroughly convert he take flight , however , and miss see 
 he . confound she ! " 

 " I ought to have be there . so I have no doubt for the present the 
 Pagan remain stubborn . go on into Italy I hear ; do I , violate 
 the law of Nature , and rove about the world , with his own solitary 
 hand in his bottomless pocket , - like the wandering Jew ! but , as 
 some slight set - off in my run of ill - luck , I find at the post - office a 
 pleasanter letter than the one which bring I this news . a rich 
 elderly lady , who have no family , want to adopt a nice child ; will take 
 Sophy , - make it worth my while to let she have Sophy . ' t be convenient 
 in a thousand way to settle one 's child comfortably in a rich house ; 
 establish right , subject , of course , to cheque which would not 
 affront I , - a father ! but the first thing requisite be to catch Sophy : 
 ' t be in that I ask your help ; you be so clever . good of creature ! 
 what could I do without you ? as you say , whenever I want a friend I come 
 to you , - Bella ! " 

 Mrs. Crane survey Jasper 's face deliberately . it be strange how much 
 more readily woman read the thought of man than man detect those of 
 woman . " you know where the child be , " say she , slowly . 

 " well , I take it for grant she be with the old man ; and I have see 
 he , - see he yesterday . " 

 " go on ; you see he , - where ? " 

 " Near London Bridge . " 

 " what business could you possibly have in that direction ? ah ! I guess , 
 the railway station to Dover : you be go abroad ? " 

 " no such thing ; you be so horribly suspicious . but it be true I have 
 be to the station inquire after some luggage or parcel which a 
 friend of mine have order to be leave there ; now , do not   interrupt I . 
 at the foot of the bridge I catch a sudden glimpse of the old 
 man , - change , alter , aged , one eye lose . you have say I should not 
 know he again , but I do ; I should never have recognize his face . I 
 know he by the build of the shoulder , a certain turn of the arm , I 
 do not   know what ; one know a man familiar to one from birth without 
 see his face . oh , Bella ; I declare that I feel as soft , - as soft as 
 the silly muff who ever - " Jasper do not complete his comparison , 
 but pause a moment , breathe hard , and then break into another 
 sentence . " he be sell something in a basket , - match , boot - strap , 
 deuce know what . he ! a clever man too ! I should have like to drop into 
 that d - - d basket all the money I have about I . " 

 " why do not you ? " 

 " why ? how could I ? he would have recognize I . there would have be a 
 scene , - a row , a flare up , a mob round we , I dare say . I have no idea it 
 would so upset I ; to see he sell match too ; glad we do not meet 
 at Gatesboro ' . not even for that l100 do I think I could have face he . 
 no ; as he say when we last part , ' the world be wide enough for both . ' 
 give I some brandy ; thank you . " 

 " you do not speak to the old man ; he do not see you : but you want to 
 get back the child ; you feel sure she must be with he ; you follow he 
 home ? " 

 " I ? no ; I should have have to wait for hour . a man like I , loitering 
 about London Bridge ! I should have be too conspicuous ; he would have 
 soon catch sight of I , though I keep on his blind side . I employ a 
 ragged boy to watch and follow he , and here be the address . now , 
 will you get Sophy back for I without any trouble to I , without my 
 appear ? I would rather charge a regiment of horse - guard than bully 
 that old man . " 

 " yet you would rob he of the child , - his sole comfort ? " 

 " Bother ! " cry losely , impatiently ; " the child can be only a burden to 
 he ; well out of his way ; ' t be for the sake of that child he be sell 
 match ! it would be the great charity we could do he to set he 
 free from that child sponge on he , drag he down ; without she 
 he would find a way to shift for himself . why , he be even clever than I be ! 
 and there - there ; give he this money , but do not   say it come from I . " 

 he thrust , without counting , several sovereign - at least twelve or 
 fourteen - into Mrs. Crane 's palm ; and so powerful a charm have goodness 
 the very least , even in nature the most evil , that that unusual , 
 eccentric , inconsistent gleam of human pity in Jasper Losely 's benighted 
 soul shed its relent influence over the angry , wrathful , and 
 vindictive feeling with which Mrs. Crane the moment before regard 
 the perfidious miscreant ; and she gaze at he with a sort of melancholy 
 wonder . what ! though so little sympathize with affection that he could 
 not comprehend that he be about to rob the old man of a comfort which 
 no gold could repay ; what though so contemptuously callous to his 
 own child , - yet there in her hand lie the unmistakable token that a 
 something of humanity , compunction , compassion , still linger in the 
 breast of the greedy cynic ; and at that thought all that be soft in 
 her own human nature move towards he , indulgent , gentle . but in the 
 rapid change of the heart feminine , the very sentiment that touch 
 upon love bring back the jealousy that border upon hate . how come he 
 by so much money ? more than day ago he , the insatiate spendthrift , have 
 receive for his task - work ? and that POCKETBOOK ! 

 " you have suddenly grow rich , Jasper . " 

 for a moment he look confused , but reply as he rehelpe himself to 
 the brandy , " yes , rouge - et - noir , - luck . now , do go and see after this 
 affair , that be a dear good woman . get the child to - day if you can ; I 
 will call here in the evening . " 

 " should you take she , then , abroad at once to this worthy lady who will 
 adopt she ? if so , we shall meet , I suppose , no , more ; and I be assist 
 you to forget that I live still . " 

 " abroad , - that crotchet of yours again ! you be quite mistaken ; in 
 fact , the lady be in London . it be for her effect that I go to the 
 station . oh , do not   be jealous ; quite elderly . " 

 " jealous , my dear Jasper ! you forget . I be as your mother . one of your 
 letter , then , announce this lady 's intended arrival ; you be in 
 correspondence with this - elderly lady . " 

 " why , not exactly in correspondence . but when I leave Paris I give the 
 General Post Office as my address to a few friend in France . and this 
 lady , who take an interest in my affair   lady , whether old or young , 
 who have once know I , always do , be aware that I have expectation 
 with respect to the child . so some day ago , when I be so badly off , I 
 write a line to tell she that Sophy have be no go , and that , but for 
 a dear friend   that be you , I might be on the pave . in her answer , she 
 say she should be in London as soon as I receive her letter ; and give 
 I an address here at which to learn where to find she when arrive , - a 
 good old soul , but strange to London . I have be very busy , help she 
 to find a house , recommend tradesman , and so forth . she like style , 
 and can afford it . a pleasant house enough , but our quiet evening here 
 spoil I for anything else . now get on your bonnet , and let I see you 
 off . " 

 " on one condition , my dear Jasper , - that you stay here till I return . " 

 Jasper make a wry face . but , as it be near dinner - time and he never 
 want for appetite , he at length agree to employ the interval of her 
 absence in discuss a meal , which experience have tell he Mrs. Crane 's 
 new cook would , not unskilfully , though hastily , prepare . Mrs. Crane 
 leave he to order the dinner , and put on her shawl and bonnet . but , 
 gain her own room , she ring for Bridget Greggs , and when that 
 confidential servant appear , she say , " in the side pocket of Mr. 
 Losely 's coat there be a pocket - BOOK ; in it there be some letter which 
 I must see . I shall appear to go out ; leave the street - door ajar , that I 
 may slip in again unobserved . you will serve dinner as soon as possible . 
 and when Mr. Losely , as usual , exchange his coat for the dressing - gown , 
 contrive to take out that pocket - book unobserve by he . bring it to I 
 here , in this room : you can as easily replace it afterwards . a moment 
 will suffice to my purpose . " 

 Bridget nod , and understand . Jasper , stand by the window , see Mrs. 
 Crane leave the house , walk briskly . he then throw himself on the 
 sofa , and begin to doze : the doze deepen , and become sleep . Bridget , 
 enter to lay the cloth , so find he . she approach on tiptoe , 
 sniff the perfume of the pocket - book , see its gild corner peep 
 forth from its lair . she hesitate ; she tremble ; she be in mortal fear 
 of that truculent slumberer ; but sleep lessen the awe thief feel 
 or hero inspire . she have take the pocketbook ; she have flee with the 
 booty ; she be in Mrs. Crane 's apartment not five minute after Mrs. 
 Crane have regain its threshold . 

 rapidly the jealous woman ransack the pocket - book ; start to see , 
 elegantly work with gold thread , in the lining , the word , " SOUVIENS 
 TOI DE TA GABRIELLE ; " no other letter , save the two , of which Jasper 
 have vouchsafe to she but the glimpse . over these she hurry she 
 glitter eye ; and when she restore they to their place , and give 
 back the book to Bridget , who stand by breathless and listening , lest 
 Jasper should awake , her face be colourless , and a kind of shudder 
 seem to come over she . leave alone , she rest her face on , her hand , 
 her lip move as if in self - commune . then noiselessly she glide down 
 the stair , regain the street , and hurry fast upon her way . 

 Bridget be not in time to restore the book to Jasper 's pocket , for when 
 she re - enter he be turn round and stretch himself between 
 sleep and wake . but she drop the book skilfully on the floor , close 
 beside the sofa : it would seem to he , on wake , to have fall out of 
 the pocket in the natural movement of sleep . 

 and , in fact , when he rise , dinner now on the table , he pick up the 
 pocket - book without suspicion . but it be lucky that Bridget have not 
 wait for the opportunity suggest by her mistress . for when Jasper 
 put on the dressing - gown , he observe that his coat want brushing ; 
 and , in give it to the servant for that purpose , he use the 
 precaution of take out the pocket - book , and place it in some other 
 receptacle of his dress . 

 Mrs. Crane return in less than two hour , - return with a 
 disappoint look , which at once prepare Jasper for the intelligence 
 that the bird to be entrap have fly . 

 " they go away this afternoon , " say Mrs. Crane , toss Jasper 's 
 sovereign on the table as if they burn her finger . " but leave the 
 fugitive to I . I will find they . " 

 Jasper relieve his angry mind by a series of guilty but meaningless 
 expletive ; and then , see no further use to which Mrs. Crane 's wish 
 could be apply at present , finish the remainder of her brandy , and 
 wish her good - night , with a promise to call again , but without any 
 intimation of his own address . as soon as he be go , Mrs. Crane once 
 more summon Bridget . 

 " you tell I last week that your brother - in - law , Simpson , wish to go 
 to America , that he have the offer of employment there , but that he could 
 not afford the fare of the voyage . I promise I would help he if it be 
 a service to you . " 

 " you be a hangel , miss ! " exclaim Bridget , drop a low 
 courtesy , - so low that it seem as if she be go on her knee . " and 
 may you have your desert in the next blessed world , where there be no 
 black - hearted villing . " 

 " enough , enough , " say Mrs. Crane , recoil perhaps from that grateful 
 benediction . " you have be faithful to I , as none else have ever be ; 
 but this time I do not serve you in return so much as I mean to do . the 
 service be reciprocal , if your brother - in - law will do I a favour . he 
 take with he his daughter , a mere child . Bridget , let they enter 
 their name on the steam - vessel as William and Sophy Waife ; they can , of 
 course , resume their own name when the voyage be over . there be the fare 
 for they , and something more . Pooh , no thank . I can spare the money . 
 see your brother - in - law the first thing in the morning ; and remember 
 that they go by the next vessel , which sail from Liverpool on 
 Thursday . " 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

  those poor pocket - cannibal , how society do persecute they ! even 
  a menial servant would give warning if disturb at his meal . but 
  your man - eater be the meek of creature ; he will never give 
  warning , and - not often take it . 

 whatever the source that have supply Jasper Losely with the money from 
 which he have so generously extract the sovereign intend to console 
 Waife for the loss of Sophy , that source either dry up or become 
 wholly inadequate to his want ; for elasticity be the felicitous 
 peculiarity of Mr. Losely 's want . they accommodate themselves to the 
 state of his finance with mathematical precision , always require 
 exactly five time the amount of the mean place at his disposal . from 
 a shilling to a million , multiply his want by five time the total 
 of his mean , and you arrive at a just conclusion . Jasper call upon 
 Poole , who be slowly recover , but unable to leave his room ; and 
 find that gentleman in a more melancholy state of mind than usual , 
 occasion by Uncle Sam 's brutal declaration that " if responsible for 
 his godson 's sin he be not responsible for his debt , " and that he 
 really think " the good thing Samuel dolly could do , be to go to 
 prison for a short time and get whitewash , " Jasper begin to lament his 
 own hard fate : " and just when one of the fine woman in Paris have come 
 here on purpose to see I , " say the lady - killer , - " a lady who keep she 
 carriage , dolly ! would have introduce you , if you have be well enough 
 to go out . one can not   be always borrow of she . I wish one could . 
 there 's mother Crane would sell her gown off her back for I ; but ' Gad , 
 sir , she snub , and positively frighten I . besides , she lay trap 
 to demean I ; set I to work like a clerk ! - not that I would hurt your 
 feeling , dolly : if you be a clerk , or something of that sort , you be 
 a gentleman at heart . well , then , we be both do up and clean out ; 
 and my decide opinion be , that nothing be leave but a bold stroke . " 

 " I have no objection to bold stroke , but I do not   see any ; and Uncle 
 Sam 's bold stroke of the Fleet prison be not at all to my taste . " 

 " fleet prison ! fleet fiddlestick ! no . you have never be in Russia . 
 why should we not go there both ? my Paris friend , Madame Caumartin , be 
 go to Italy , but her plan be change , and she be now all for St. 
 Petersburg . she will wait a few day for you to get well . we will all go 
 together and enjoy ourselves . the Russians dote upon whist . we shall get 
 into their swell set and live like prince . " Therewith Jasper launch 
 forth on the text of russian existence in such glow term that dolly 
 Poole shut his ache eye and fancy himself sledge down the Neva , 
 cover with fur ; a countess wait for he at dinner , and count in 
 dozen ready to offer bet to a fabulous amount that Jasper Losely lose 
 the rubber . 

 have lift his friend into this region of aerial castle , Jasper 
 then , descend into the practical world , wind up with the mournful 
 fact that one could not get to St. Petersburg , nor when there into swell 
 set , without have some little capital on hand . 

 " I tell you what we will do . Madame Caumartin live in prime style . get 
 old Latham , your employer , to discount her bill at three month ' date 
 for l500 , and we will be all off in a crack . " Poole shake his head . " Old 
 Latham be too know a file for that . a foreigner ! he would want security . " 

 " I will be security . " 

 dolly shake his head a second time , still more emphatically than the 
 first . 

 " but you say he do discount paper , - get rich on it ? " 

 " yes , get rich on ' it , which he might not do if he discount the paper 
 you propose . no offence . " 

 " oh , no offence among friend ! you have take he bill which he have 
 discount ? " 

 " yes , - good paper . " 

 " any paper sign by good name be good paper . we can sign good name if 
 we know their handwriting . " 

 dolly start , and turn white . knave he be , - cheat at card , blackleg 
 on the turf , - but forgery ! that crime be new to he . the very notion 
 of it bring on a return of fever ; and while Jasper be increase his 
 malady by argue with his apprehension , luckily for Poole , Uncle Sam 
 come in . Uncle Sam , a sagacious old tradesman , no soon clap eye on 
 the brilliant losely than he conceive for he a distrustful repugnance , 
 similar to that with which an experienced gander may regard a fox in 
 colloquy with its gosling . he have already learn enough of his godson 's 
 way and choose society to be assure that Samuel dolly have indulge 
 in very anti - commercial taste , and be sadly contaminate by very 
 anti - commercial friend . he feel persuade that Dolly 's sole chance 
 of redemption be in work on his mind while his body be still 
 suffering , so that Poole might , on recovery , break with all former 
 association . on see Jasper in the dress of an exquisite , with the 
 thrws of a prize - fighter , Uncle Sam see the stalwart incarnation of 
 all the sin which a godfather have vow that a godson should renounce . 
 accordingly , he make himself so disagreeable that losely , in great 
 disgust , take a hasty departure . and Uncle Sam , as he help the nurse 
 to plunge dolly into his bed , have the brutality to tell his nephew , in 
 very plain term , that if ever he find that Brummagem gent in Poole 's 
 room again , Poole would never again see the colour of Uncle Sam 's 
 money . dolly begin to blubber , the good man relent pat he on 
 the back , and say , " but as soon as you be well , I will carry you with 
 I to my country - box , and keep you out of harm 's way till I find you a 
 wife , who will comb your head for you ; " at which cheer prospect Poole 
 blubber more dolefully than before . on retire to his own lodging in 
 the Gloucester Coffee - house , Uncle Sam , to make all sure , give positive 
 order to Poole 's landlady , who respect in Uncle Sam the man who 
 might pay what Poole owe to she , on no account to let in any of Dolly 's 
 profligate friend , but especially the chap he have find there ; add , 
 " ' t be as much as my nephew 's life be worth ; and , what be more to the 
 purpose , as much as your bill be . " accordingly , when Jasper present 
 himself at Poole 's door again that very evening , the landlady apprise 
 he of her order ; and , proof to his insinuate remonstrance , close 
 the door in his face . but a french chronicler have record that when 
 Henry IV . be besiege Paris , though not a loaf of bread could enter 
 the wall , love - letter pass between city and camp as easily as if 
 there have be no siege at all . and do not Mercury preside over 
 money as well as love ? Jasper , spur on by Madame Caumartin , who be 
 exceedingly anxious to exchange London for St. Petersburg as soon as 
 possible , maintain a close and frequent correspondence with Poole 
 by the agency of the nurse , who luckily be not above be bribe by 
 shilling . Poole continue to reject the villany propose by 
 Jasper ; but , in course of the correspondence , he throw out rather 
 incoherently - for his mind begin somewhat to wander - a scheme equally 
 flagitious , which Jasper , aid perhaps by Madame Caumartin 's yet 
 keener wit , catch up , and quickly reduce to deliberate method . Old Mr. 
 Latham , amongst the bill he discount , keep those of such more bashful 
 customer as stipulate that their resort to temporary accommodation 
 should be maintain a profound secret in his own safe . amongst these 
 bill Poole know that there be one for l1,000 give by a young nobleman 
 of immense estate , but so entail that he could neither sell nor 
 mortgage , and , therefore , often in need of a few hundred for pocket 
 money . the nobleman 's name stand high . his fortune be universally 
 know ; his honour unimpeachable . a bill of his any one would cash at 
 sight . could Poole but obtain that bill ! it have , he believe , only a 
 few week yet to run . Jasper or Madame Caumartin might get it discount 
 even by Lord - - - - 's own banker ; and if that be too bold , by any 
 professional bill - broker , and all three be off before a suspicion could 
 arise . but to get at that safe , a false key might be necessary . Poole 
 suggest a waxen impression of the lock . Jasper send he a readier 
 contrivance , - a queer - look tool , that look an instrument of 
 torture . all now necessary be for Poole to recover sufficiently to 
 return to business , and to get rid of Uncle Sam by a promise to run 
 down to the country the moment Poole have conscientiously clear some 
 necessary arrear of work . while this correspondence go on , Jasper 
 losely shun Mrs. Crane , and take his meal and spend his leisure 
 hour with Madame Caumartin . he need no dressing - gown and slipper to 
 feel himself at home there . Madame Canmartin have really take a showy 
 house in a genteel street . her own appearance be eminently what the 
 french call distingue ; dress to perfection from head to foot ; 
 neat and finish as an epigram ; her face in shape like a thoroughbred 
 cobra - capella , - low smooth frontal widening at the summit , chin tapering 
 but jaw strong , tooth marvellously white , small , and with point sharp 
 as those in the maw of the fish call the " Sea Devil ; " eye like 
 dark emerald , of which the pupil , when she be angry or when she be 
 scheme , retreat upward towards the temple , emit a luminous 
 green ray that shoot through space like the gleam that escape from a 
 dark - lantern ; complexion superlatively feminine   call it not pale but 
 white , as if she live on blanched almond , peach - stone , and arsenic ; 
 hand so fine and so bloodless , with finger so pointedly taper there 
 seem sting at their tip ; manner of one who have range all rank of 
 society from high to low , and dupe the most wary in each of they . 
 do she please it , a crown prince might have think her youth must have 
 pass in the chamber of porphyry ! do she please it , an old soldier 
 would have swear the creature have be a vivandiere , - in age , perhaps , 
 border on forty . she look young , but have she be a hundred and 
 twenty , she could not have be more wicked . ah , happy indeed for 
 Sophy , if it be to save her youth from ever be foster in elegant 
 boudoir by those bloodless hand , that the crippled vagabond have bear 
 she away from Arabella 's less cruel unkindness ; well far even Rugge 's 
 village stage ; well far stealthy by - lane , feign name , and the 
 erudite trick of Sir Isaac ! 

 but still it be due even to Jasper to state here that , in Losely 's 
 recent design to transfer Sophy from Mr. Waife 's care to that of Madame 
 Caumartin , the Sharper harbour no idea of a villany so execrable as 
 the character of the Parisienne lead the jealous Arabella to suspect . his 
 real object in get the child at that time once more into his 
 power be   whatever its nature   harmless compare with the mild of 
 Arabella 's dark doubt . but still if Sophy have be regain , and the 
 object , on regain she , foil   as it probably would have be , what 
 then might have become of she , - lost , perhaps , forever , to Waife , - in a 
 foreign land and under such guardianship ? grave question , which Jasper 
 Losely , who exercise so little foresight in the paramount question , 
 namely , what some day or other would become of himself ? be not likely 
 to rack his brain by conjecture ! 

 meanwhile Mrs. Crane be vigilant . the detective police - officer send to 
 she by Mr. Rugge could not give she the information which Rugge 
 desire , and which she do not long need . she give the detective some 
 information respect Madame Caumartin . one day towards the evening she 
 be surprise by a visit from Uncle Sam . he call ostensibly to thank 
 she for her kindness to his godson and nephew ; and to beg she not to 
 be offend if he have be rude to Mr. Losely , who , he understand from 
 dolly , be a particular friend of her . " you see , ma'am , Samuel dolly 
 be a weak young man , and easily lead astray ; but , luckily for himself , 
 he have no money and no stomach . so he may repent in time ; and if I could 
 find a wife to manage he , he have not a bad head for the main chance , 
 and may become a practical man . repeatedly I have tell he he should go 
 to prison , but that be only to frighten he ; fact be , I want to get he 
 safe down into the country , and he do not   take to that . so I be force to 
 say , ' my box , home - brew and south - down , Samuel Dolly , or a Lunnon 
 jail and debtor ' allowance . ' must give a young man his choice , my dear 
 lady . " 

 Mrs. Crane observe that what he say be extremely sensible , Uncle Sam 
 warm in his confidence . 

 " and I think I have he , till I find Mr. Losely in his sick - room ; but 
 ever since that day , I do not   know how it be , the lad have have something 
 on his mind , which I do not   half like , - cracky , I think , my dear 
 lady , - cracky . I suspect that old nurse pass letter . I tax she with 
 it , and she immediately want to take her Bible - oath , and smell of gin , 
 two thing which , take together , look guilty . " 

 " but , " say Mrs. Crane , grow much interested , " if Mr. Losely and Mr. 
 Poole do correspond , what then ? " 

 " that be what I want to know , ma'am . excuse I ; I do not   wish to disparage 
 Mr. Losely , - a dash gent , and nothing bad , I dare say . but certain 
 sure I be that he have put into Samuel Dolly 's head something which have 
 crack it ! there be the lad now up and dress , when he ought to be 
 in bed , and swear he will go to old Latham 's to - morrow , and that 
 long arrear of work be on his conscience ! never hear he talk of 
 conscience before : that look guilty ! and it do not frighten he any 
 long when I say he shall go to prison for his debt ; and he be very 
 anxious to get I out of Lunnon ; and when I throw in a word about Mr. 
 losely   slyly , my good lady , - just to see its effect , he grow as white 
 as that paper ; and then he begin strut and swell , and say that 
 Mr. Losely would be a great man , and he should be a great man , and that 
 he do not care for my money ; he could get as much money as he like . 
 that look guilty , my dear lady . and oh , " cry Uncle Sam , clasp his 
 hand , " I do fear that he be think of something bad than he have ever 
 do before , and his brain can not   stand it . and , ma'am , he have a great 
 respect for you ; and you have   a friendship for Mr. Losely . now , just 
 suppose that Mr. Losely should have be think of what your flash 
 sporting gent call a harmless spree , and my sister 's son should , be 
 cracky , construe into something criminal . oh , Mrs. Crane , do go and see 
 Mr. Losely , and tell he that Samuel dolly be not safe , - be not safe ! " 

 " much well that I should go to your nephew , " say Mrs. Crane ; " and 
 with your leave I will do so at once . let I see he alone . where shall 
 I find you afterwards ? " 

 " at the Gloucester Coffee - house . oh , my dear lady , how can I thank 
 you enough ? the boy can be nothing to you ; but to I , he be my sister 's 
 son , - the blackguard ! " 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

  " Dices laborante in uno 
  Penelopen vitreamque circen . " - HORAT . 

 Mrs. Crane find Poole in his little sitting - room , hang round with 
 print of opera - dancer , prize - fighter , race - horse , and the dog Billy . 
 Samuel dolly be in full dress . his cheek , usually so pale , seem much 
 flushed . he be evidently in a state of high excitement , bow extremely 
 low to Mrs. Crane , call she Countess , ask if she have be lately on 
 the Continent and if she know Madame Caumartin , and whether the nobility 
 at St. Petersburg be jolly , or stick - up fellow , who give themselves 
 air , - not wait for her answer . in fact his mind be unquestionably 
 disorder . 

 Arabella Crane abruptly lay her hand on his shoulder . " you be go to 
 the gallow , " she say suddenly . " down on your knee , and tell I all , 
 and I will keep your secret , and save you ; lie , and you be lose ! " 

 Poole burst into tear , and drop on his knee as he be tell . 

 in ten minute Mrs. Crane know all that she care to know , possess 
 herself of Losely 's letter , and , leave Poole less light - head 
 and more light - hearted , she hasten to Uncle Sam at the Gloucester 
 Coffee - house . " take your nephew , out of town this evening , and do not 
 let he from your sight for the next six month . Hark you , he will 
 never be a good man ; but you may save he from the hulk . do so . take my 
 advice . " she be go before Uncle Sam could answer . she next proceed 
 to the private house of the detective with whom she have before 
 confer ; this time less to give than to receive information . not half 
 an hour after her interview with he , Arabella Crane stand in the street 
 wherein be place the showy house of Madame Caumartin . the lamp in 
 the street be now light ; the street , even at day a quiet one , be 
 comparatively deserted . all the window in the Frenchwoman 's house be 
 close with shutter and curtain , except on the drawing - room floor . 
 from those the light within stream over a balcony fill with gay 
 plant ; one of the casement be partially open . and now and then , where 
 the watcher stand , she could just catch the glimpse of a pass form 
 behind the muslin drapery , or hear the sound of some loud laugh . 
 in her dark - gray dress and still dark mantle , Arabella Crane stand 
 motionless , her eye fix on those window . the rare foot - passenger who 
 brush by she turn involuntarily to glance at the countenance of one 
 so still , and then as involuntarily to survey the house to which that 
 countenance be lift . no such observer so incurious as not to hazard 
 conjecture what evil to that house be bode by the dark lurid eye that 
 watch it with so fix a menace . thus she remain , sometimes , indeed , 
 move from her post , as a sentry move from his , slowly pace a few 
 step to and fro , return to the same place , and again motionless ; 
 thus she remain for hour . evening deepen into night ; night grow 
 near to dawn : she be still there in that street , and still her eye 
 be on that house . at length the door open noiselessly ; a tall man 
 trip forth with a gay light step , and hum the tune of a gay 
 French chanson . as he come straight towards the spot where Arabella 
 Crane be at watch , from her dark mantle stretch forth her long arm 
 and lean hand and seize he . he start and recognize she . 

 " you here ! " he exclaim , " you ! - at such an hour , - you ! " 

 " ay , Jasper Losely , here to warn you . to - morrow the officer of justice 
 will be in that accurse house . to - morrow that woman - not for her bad 
 crime , they elude the law , but for her least by which the law hunt 
 her down - will be a prisoner , - no , you shall not return to warn she as I 
 warn you "   for Jasper here break away , and retreat some step towards 
 the house ; " or , if you do , share her fate . I cast you off . " 

 " what do you mean ? " say Jasper , halting , till with slow step she 
 regain his side . " speak more plainly : if poor Madame Caumartin have get 
 into a scrape , which I do not   think likely , what have I to do with it ? " 

 " the woman you call Caumartin flee from Paris to escape its tribunal . 
 she have be track ; the french government have claim she - ho ! - you 
 smile . this do not touch you ? " 

 " certainly not . " 

 " but there be charge against she from english tradesman ; and if it 
 be prove that you know she in her proper name , - the infamous Gabrielle 
 Desmarets ; if it be prove that you have pass off the french billet 
 de banque that she stole ; if you be her accomplice in obtain good 
 under her false name ; if you , enrich by her robbery , be aid and 
 abet she as a swindler here , - though you may be safe from the french 
 law , will you be safe from the English ? you may be innocent , Jasper 
 losely ; if so , fear nothing . you may be guilty : if so , hide , or follow 
 I ! " 

 Jasper pause . his first impulse be to trust implicitly to Mrs. Crane , 
 and lose not a moment in profit by such counsel of concealment or 
 flight as an intelligence so superior to his own could suggest . but 
 suddenly remember that Poole have undertake to get the bill for 
 L1,000 by the next day , - that if flight be necessary , there be yet 
 a chance of flight with booty , - his constitutional hardihood , and the 
 grasp cupidity by which it be accompany , make he resolve at least 
 to hazard the delay of a few hour . and , after all , might not Mrs. Crane 
 exaggerate ? be not this the counsel of a jealous woman ? " pray , " say 
 he , move on , and fix quick keen eye on she as she walk by his 
 side , " pray , how do you learn all these particular ? " 

 " from a detective policeman employ to discover Sophy . in conferring 
 with he , the name of Jasper Losely as her legal protector be of 
 course state ; that name be already couple with the name of the false 
 Caumartin . thus , indirectly , the child you would have consign to that 
 woman save you from share that woman 's ignominy and doom . " 

 " Stuff ! " say Jasper , stubbornly , though he wince at her word : " I 
 do not , on reflection , see that anything can be prove against I . I be 
 not bind to know why a lady change her name , nor how she come by her 
 money . and as to her credit with tradesman , - nothing to speak of : most 
 of what she have get be pay for ; what be not pay for be less than the 
 worth of her good . Pooh ! I be not so easily frightened ; much oblige 
 to you all the same . go home now ; ' t be horridly late . good - night , or 
 rather good - morning . " 

 " Jasper , mark I , if you see that woman again ; if you attempt to save 
 or screen she , - I shall know , and you lose in I your last friend , last 
 hope , last plank in a devouring sea ! " 

 these word be so solemnly utter that they thrill the heart of 
 the reckless man . " I have no wish to screen or save she , " he say , with 
 selfish sincerity . " and after what you have say I would as soon enter 
 a fireship as that house . but let I have some hour to consider what be 
 good to be do . " 

 " yes , consider - I shall expect you to - morrow . " 

 he go his way up the twilight street towards a new lodging he have 
 hire not far from the showy house . she draw her mantle close round her 
 gaunt figure , and , take the opposite direction , thread thoroughfare 
 yet lonely , till she gain the door , and be welcome back by the 
 faithful Bridget . 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

  Hope , tell a flattering tale to Mr. Rugge . he be undeceive by a 
  solicitor ; and leave to mourn ; but in turn , though unconsciously , Mr. 
  Rugge deceive the solicitor , and the solicitor deceive his 
  client , - which be 6s . 8d . in the solicitor 's pocket . 

 the next morning Arabella Crane be scarcely dressed before Mr. Rugge 
 knock at her door . on the previous day the detective have inform he 
 that William and Sophy Waife be discover to have sail for America . 
 Frantic , the unhappy manager hurry away to the steam - packet office , 
 and be favour by an inspection of the book , which confirm the 
 hateful tiding . as if in mockery of his bereaved and defrauded state , 
 on return home he find a polite note from Mr. Gotobed , request 
 he to call at the office of that eminent solicitor , with reference to 
 a young actress , name Sophy Waife , and hint " that the visit might 
 prove to his advantage ! " dream for a wild moment that Mr. Losely , 
 conscience - stricken , might through his solicitor pay back his l100 , he 
 rush incontinent to Mr. Gotobed 's office , and be at once admit 
 into the presence of that stately practitioner . 

 " I beg your pardon , sir , " say Mr. Gotobed , with formal politeness , 
 " but I hear a day or two ago accidentally from my head clerk , who 
 have learn it also accidentally from a sporting friend , that you be 
 exhibit at Humberston , during the race - week , a young actress , name 
 on the play - bill   here be one   ' Juliet Araminta , ' and whom , as I be 
 inform , you have previously exhibit in Surrey and elsewhere ; but she 
 be suppose to have relinquish that early engagement , and leave 
 your stage with her grandfather , William Waife . I be instruct by 
 a distinguished client , who be wealthy , and who from motif of mere 
 benevolence interest himself in the say William and Sophy Waife , to 
 discover their residence . please , therefore , to render up the child to 
 my charge , apprise I also of the address of her grandfather , if he 
 be not with you ; and without wait for further instruction from my 
 client , who be abroad , I will venture to say that any sacrifice in the 
 loss of your juvenile actress will be most liberally compensate . " 

 " Sir , " cry the miserable and imprudent Rugge , " I pay L100 for that 
 fiendish child , - a three year ' engagement , - and I have be rob . 
 restore I the l100 , and I will tell you where she be , and her vile 
 grandfather also . " 

 at hear so bad a character lavish upon object recommend to his 
 client 's disinterested charity , the wary solicitor draw in his pecuniary 
 horn . 

 " Mr. Rugge , " say he , " I understand from your word that you can not 
 place the child Sophy , alias Juliet Araminta , in my hand . you ask L100 
 to inform I where she be . have you a lawful claim on she ? " 

 " certainly , sir : she be my property . " 

 " then it be quite clear that though you may know where she be , you 
 can not get at her yourself , and can not , therefore , place she in my 
 hand . perhaps she be - in Heaven ! " 

 " confound she , sir ! no - in America ! or on the sea to it . " 

 " be you sure ? " 

 " I have just come from the steam - packet office , and see the name in 
 their book . William and Sophy Waife sail from Liverpool last Thursday 
 week . " 

 " and they form an engagement with you , receive your money ; break the 
 one , abscond with the other . bad character indeed ! " 

 " Bad ! you may well say that , - a set of swindle scoundrel , the whole 
 kit and kin . and the ingratitude ! " continue Rugge ; " I be more than 
 a father to that child "   he begin to whimper ; " I have a babe of my own 
 once ; die of convulsion in teethe . I think that child would have 
 supply its place , and I dream of the York Theatre ; but " - here 
 his voice be lose in the fold of a marvellously dirty red 
 pocket - handkerchief . 

 Mr. Gotobed have now , however , learn all that he care to learn , and 
 not be a soft - hearted man   first - rate solicitor rarely be , here 
 pull out his watch , and say , 

 " Sir , you have be very ill - treat , I perceive . I must wish you 
 good - day ; I have an engagement in the City . I can not help you back to 
 your l100 , but accept this trifle   a l5 note   for your loss of time in 
 call "   ring the bell violently . " door , - show out this gentleman . " 

 that evening Mr. Gotobed write at length to Guy Darrell , inform he 
 that , after great pain and prolonged research , he have be so fortunate 
 as to ascertain that the stroll player and the little girl whom 
 Mr. Darrell have so benevolently request he to look up be very bad 
 character , and have leave the country for the United States , as happily 
 for England bad character be will not to do . 

 that letter reach Guy Darrell when he be far away , amidst the forlorn 
 pomp of some old italian city , and Lionel 's tale of the little girl not 
 very fresh in his gloomy thought . naturally , he suppose that the boy 
 have be dupe by a pretty face and his own inexperienced kindly heart . 
 and so , and so , - why , so end all the effort of man who entrust to 
 other the troublesome execution of humane intention ! the scale of 
 earthly justice be poise in their quivering equilibrium , not by huge 
 hundred - weight , but by infinitesimal grain , need the most wary 
 caution , the most considerate patience , the most delicate touch , to 
 arrange or readjust . few of our error , national or individual , come 
 from the design to be unjust ; most of they from sloth , or incapacity to 
 grapple with the difficulty of be just . sin of commission may not , 
 perhaps , shock the retrospect of conscience . large and obtrusive to 
 view we have confess , mourn , repent , possibly atone they . sin of 
 omission so veil amidst our hourly emotion , blent , confused , unseen , 
 in the conventional routine of existence , - alas ! could these suddenly 
 emerge from their shadow , group together in serrie mass and accuse 
 order , - alas , alas ! would not the good of we then start in dismay , and 
 would not the proud humble himself at the Throne of Mercy ? 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

  Joy , nevertheless , do return to Mr. Rugge : and hope now inflict 
  herself on Mrs. Crane ; a very fine - look hope too , - six foot one , 
  - strong as Achilles , and as fleet of foot ! 

 Buy we have leave Mr. Rugge at Mrs. Crane 's door ; admit he . he burst 
 into her drawing - room wipe his brow . " Ma'am , they be off to America ! " 

 " so I have hear . you be fairly entitled to the return of your money - " 

 " entitle , of course , but - " 

 " there it be ; restore to I the contract for the child 's service . " 

 Rugge gaze on a roll of bank - note , and could scarcely believe his 
 eye . he dart forth his hand , - the note recede like the dagger 
 in Macbeth . " first the contract , " say Mrs. Crane . Rugge draw out his 
 greasy pocket - book , and extract the worthless engagement . 

 " henceforth , then , " say Mrs. Crane , " you have no right to complain ; and 
 whether or not the girl ever again fall in your way , your claim over her 
 cease . " 

 " the god be praise ! it do , ma'am , I have have quite enough of she . 
 but you be every inch a lady , and allow I to add that I put you on my 
 free list for life . " 

 Rugge go , Arabella Crane summon Bridget to her presence . 

 " Lor ' , miss , " cry Bridget , impulsively , " who would think you would be up all 
 night rake ! I have not see you look so well this many a year . " 

 " ah , " say Arabella Crane , " I will tell you why . I have do what for 
 many a year I never think I should do again , - a good action . that 
 child , - that Sophy , - do you remember how cruelly I use she ? " 

 " oh , miss , do not   go for to blame yourself ; you feed she , you clothe 
 she , when her own father , the villing , send she away from hisself to 
 you , - you of all people , you . how could you be caress and fawn on 
 his child , - their child ? " 

 Mrs. Crane hang her head gloomily . " what be past be past . I have live 
 to save that child , and a curse seem lift from my soul . now listen . 
 I shall leave London - England - probably this evening . you will keep 
 this house ; it will be ready for I any moment I return . the agent who 
 collect my house - rent will give you money as you want it . Stint not 
 yourself , Bridget . I have be save and save and save for dreary 
 year , - nothing else to interest I , and I be rich than I seem . " 

 " but where be you go , miss ? " say Bridget , slowly recover from 
 the stupefaction occasion by her mistress 's announcement . 

 " I do not   know ; I do not   care . " 

 " oh , gracious star ! be it with that dreadful Jasper Losely ? - it be , it 
 be . you be craze , you be bewitch , miss ! " 

 " possibly I be craze , - possibly bewitch ; but I take that man 's life 
 to mine as a penance for all the evil mine have ever know ; and a day or 
 two since I should have say , with rage and shame , ' I can not help it ; I 
 loathe myself that I can care what become of he . ' now , without rage , 
 without shame , I say , ' the man whom I once so love shall not die on a 
 gibbet if I can help it ' and , please Heaven , help it I will . " 

 the grim woman fold her arm on her breast , and raise her head to 
 its full height , there be in her face and air a stern gloomy grandeur , 
 which could not have be see without a mixed sensation of compassion 
 and awe . 

 " go now , Bridget ; I have say all . he will be here soon : he will come ; 
 he must come ; he have no choice ; and then - and then - " she close her 
 eye , bow her head , and shiver . 

 Arabella Crane be , as usual , right in her prediction . before noon 
 Jasper come , - come , not with his jocund swagger , but with that sidelong 
 sinister look - of the man whom the world cut - triumphantly restore 
 to its former place in his visage . Madame Caumartin have be arrest ; 
 Poole have go into the country with Uncle Sam ; Jasper have see a 
 police - officer at the door of his own lodging . he slunk away from the 
 fashionable thoroughfare , slunk to the recess of Podden Place , slunk 
 into Arabella Crane 's prim drawing - room , and say sullenly , " all be up ; 
 here I be ! " 

 three day afterwards , in a quiet street in a quiet town of 
 Belgium , - wherein a sharper , strive to live by his profession , would 
 soon become a skeleton , - in a commodious airy apartment , look upon 
 a magnificent street , the reverse of noisy , Jasper Losely sit secure , 
 innocuous , and profoundly miserable . in another house , the window 
 of which - face those of Jasper 's sitting - room , from an upper 
 story - command so good a view therein that it place he under 
 a surveillance akin to that design by Mr. Bentham 's reformatory 
 Panopticon , sit Arabella Crane . whatever her real feeling towards 
 Jasper Losely   and what those feeling be no virile pen can presume 
 authoritatively to define ; for live there ever a man who thoroughly 
 understand a woman ? , or whatever in early life might have be their 
 reciprocated vow of eternal love , - not only from the day that Jasper , 
 on his return to his native shore , present himself in Podden Place , 
 have their intimacy be restrict to the austere bond of friendship , 
 but after Jasper have so rudely decline the hand which now feed he , 
 Arabella Crane have probably perceive that her sole chance of retain 
 intellectual power over his lawless being necessitate the utter 
 relinquishment of every hope or project that could expose she again to 
 his contempt . suit appearance to reality , the decorum of a separate 
 house be essential to the maintenance of that authority with which 
 the rigid nature of their intercourse invest she . the additional cost 
 strain her pecuniary resource , but she save in her own accommodation 
 in order to leave Jasper no cause to complain of any stinting in his . 
 there , then , she sit by her window , herself unseen , eye he in his 
 opposite solitude , accept for her own life a barren sacrifice , but 
 a jealous sentinel on his . meditate as she sit and as she eye 
 he , - meditate what employment she could invent , with the bribe of 
 emolument to be pay furtively by she , for those strong hand that 
 could have fell an ox , but be nerveless in turn an honest penny , 
 and for that restless mind hunger for occupation , and with the 
 digestion of an ostrich for dice and debauch , riot and fraud , but queasy 
 as an exhausted dyspeptic at the reception of one innocent amusement , 
 one honourable toil . but while that woman still scheme how to rescue 
 from hulk or halter that execrable man , who shall say that he be 
 without a chance ? a chance he have : what will he do with it ? 




 BOOK V. 




 CHAPTER I. 

  Envy will be a science when it learn the use of the microscope . 

 when leave fall and flower fade , great people be find in their 
 country - seat . look ! - that be Montfort Court , - a place of regal 
 magnificence , so far as extent of pile and amplitude of domain could 
 satisfy the pride of ownership , or inspire the visitor with the respect 
 due to wealth and power . an artist could have make nothing of it . the 
 Sumptuous everywhere ; the Picturesque nowhere . the house be build 
 in the reign of George I. , when first commence that horror of the 
 beautiful , as something in bad taste , which , agreeably to our natural 
 love of progress , progressively advanced through the reign of 
 succeed george . an enormous fafade , in dull brown brick ; two wing 
 and a centre , with double flight of step to the hall - door from the 
 carriage - sweep . no tree allow to grow too near the house ; in front , a 
 stately flat with stone balustrades . but wherever the eye turn , 
 there be nothing to be see but park , mile upon mile of park ; not 
 a cornfield in sight , not a roof - tree , not a spire , only those lata 
 silentia , - still width of turf , and , somewhat thinly scattered and 
 afar , those grove of giant tree . the whole prospect so vast and 
 so monotonous that it never tempt you to take a walk . no 
 close - neighbour poetic thicket into which to plunge , uncertain 
 whither you would emerge ; no devious stream to follow . the very deer , 
 fat and heavy , seem bored by pasture it would take they a week to 
 traverse . People of moderate wish and modest fortune never envy 
 Montfort Court : they admire it ; they be proud to say they have see 
 it . but never do they say - 

  " oh , that for I some home like this would smile ! " 

 not so , very , very great people ! - they rather coveted than admire . 
 those oak tree so large , yet so undecayed ; that park , eighteen mile at 
 least in circumference ; that solid palace which , without inconvenience , 
 could entertain and stow away a king and his whole court ; in short , 
 all that evidence of a princely territory and a weighty rent - roll make 
 english duke respectfully envious , and foreign potentate gratifyingly 
 jealous . 

 but turn from the front . open the gate in that stone balustrade . 
 come southward to the garden side of the house . Lady Montfort 's 
 flower - garden . yes ; not so dull ! - flower , even autumnal flower , 
 enliven any sward . still , on so large a scale , and so little relief ; 
 so little mystery about those broad gravel - walk ; not a winding 
 alley anywhere . oh , for a vulgar summer - house ; for some alcove , all 
 honeysuckle and ivy ! but the dahlia be splendid ! very true ; only , 
 dahlia , at the good , be such uninteresting prosy thing . what poet 
 ever write upon a dahlia ! surely Lady Montfort might have introduce 
 a little more taste here , show a little more fancy ! Lady Montfort ! 
 I should like to see my lord 's face if Lady Montfort take any such 
 liberty . but there be Lady Montfort walk slowly along that broad , 
 broad , broad gravel - walk ; those splendid dahlia , on either side , in 
 their set parterre . there she walk , in full evidence from all those 
 sixty remorseless window on the garden front , each window exactly like 
 the other . there she walk , look wistfully to the far end   ' t be 
 a long way off , where , happily , there be a wicket that carry a 
 persevere pedestrian out of sight of the sixty window into shady 
 walk , towards the bank of that immense piece of water , two mile from 
 the house . my lord have not return from his moor in Scotland ; my lady 
 be alone . no company in the house : it be like say , " no acquaintance 
 in a city . " but the retinue be full . though she din alone she might , 
 have she please , have have almost as many servant to gaze upon she as 
 there be window now star at her lonely walk with their glassy 
 spectral eye . 

 just as Lady Montfort gain the wicket she be overtake by a visitor , 
 walk fast from the gravel sweep by the front door , where he have 
 dismount , where he have catch sight of she : any one so dismounting 
 might have catch sight of she ; could not help it . garden so fine be 
 make on purpose for fine person walk in they to be see . 

 " ah , Lady Montfort , " say the visitor , stammer painfully , " I be so 
 glad to find you at home . " 

 " at home , George ! " say the lady , extend her hand ; " where else be it 
 likely that I should be find ? but how pale you be ! what have happen ? " 

 she seat herself on a bench , under a cedar - tree , just without the 
 wicket ; and George Morley , our old friend the Oxonian , seat himself by 
 her side familiarly , but with a certain reverence . Lady Montfort be 
 a few year old than himself , his cousin : he have know she from his 
 childhood . 

 " what have happen ! " he repeat ; " nothing new . I have just come from 
 visit the good bishop . " 

 " he do not hesitate to ordain you ? " " no ; but I shall never ask he to 
 do so . " 

 " my dear cousin , be you not over - scrupulous ? you would be an ornament 
 to the Church , sufficient in all else to justify your compulsory 
 omission of one duty , which a curate could perform for you . " 

 Morley shake his head sadly . " one duty omit ! " say he . " but be it not 
 that duty which distinguish the priest from the layman ? and how far 
 extend that duty ? whereever there need a voice to speak the word , - not 
 in the pulpit only , but at the hearth , by the sick - bed , - there should 
 be the Pastor ! no : I can not , I ought not , I dare not ! Incompetent as the 
 labourer , how can I be worthy of the hire ? " it take he long to bring 
 out these word : his emotion increase his infirmity . Lady Montfort 
 listen with an exquisite respect visible in her compassion , and pause 
 long before she answer . 

 George Morley be the young son of a country gentleman , with a good 
 estate settle upon the eld son . George 's father have be an intimate 
 friend of his kinsman , the Marquess of Montfort   predecessor and 
 grandsire of the present lord ; and the marquess have , as he think , 
 amply provide for George in undertake to secure to he , when of 
 fitting age , the living of Humberston , the most lucrative preferment 
 in his gift . the living have be hold for the last fifteen year by an 
 incumbent , now very old , upon the honourable understanding that it be 
 to be resign in favour of George , should George take order . the young 
 man , from his early childhood thus destine to the Church , devote to 
 the prospect of that profession all his study , all his thought . not 
 till he be sixteen do his infirmity of speech make itself seriously 
 perceptible : and then elocution master undertake to cure it ; they 
 fail . but George 's mind continue in the direction towards which it 
 have be so systematically biased . enter Oxford , he become absorb 
 in its academical shade . amidst his book he almost forget the 
 impediment of his speech . Shy , taciturn , and solitary , he mix too 
 little with other to have it much bring before his own notice . he 
 carry off prize ; he take high honour . on leave the University , 
 a profound theologian , an enthusiastic Churchman , fill with the 
 most earnest sense of the pastor 's solemn calling , - he be thus 
 complimentarily accost by the Archimandrite of his college , " what a 
 pity you can not go into the Church ! " 

 " can not ; but I be go into the Church . " 

 " you ! be it possible ? but , perhaps , you be sure of a living - " 

 " yes , - Humberston . " 

 " an immense living , but a very large population . certainly it be in the 
 bishop 's own discretionary power to ordain you , and for all the duty 
 you can keep a curate . " but the Don stop short , and take snuff . 

 that " but " say as plainly as word could say , " it may be a good thing 
 for you ; but be it fair for the Church ? " 

 so George Morley at least think that " but " imply . 

 his conscience take alarm . he be a thoroughly noble - hearted man , likely 
 to be the more tender of conscience where tempt by worldly interest . 
 with that living he be rich , without it very poor . but to give up a 
 calling , to the idea of which he have attach himself with all the force 
 of a powerful and zealous nature , be to give up the whole scheme and 
 dream of his existence . he remain irresolute for some time ; at last he 
 write to the present Lord Montfort , intimate his doubt , and relieve 
 the Marquess from the engagement which his lordship 's predecessor have 
 make . the present Marquess be not a man capable of understand such 
 scruple . but , luckily perhaps for George and for the Church , the large 
 affair of the great House of Montfort be not administer by the 
 Marquess . the parliamentary influence , the ecclesiastical preferment , 
 together with the practical direction of minor agent to the vast and 
 complicated estate attach to the title , be at that time under 
 the direction of Mr. Carr Vipont , a powerful member of Parliament , and 
 husband to that Lady Selina whose condescension have so disturb 
 the nerve of Frank Vance the artist . Mr. Carr Vipont govern this 
 vice - royalty accord to the rule and tradition by which the House of 
 Montfort have become great and prosperous . for not only every state , but 
 every great seignorial House have its hereditary maxim of policy , - not 
 less the House of Montfort than the House of Hapsburg . now the House of 
 Montfort make it a rule that all admit to be member of the family 
 should help each other ; that the head of the House should never , if it 
 could be avoid , suffer any of its branch to decay and wither into 
 poverty . the House of Montfort also hold it a duty to foster and make 
 the most of every specie of talent that could swell the influence or 
 adorn the annal of the family . have rank , have wealth , it seek 
 also to secure intellect , and to knit together into solid union , 
 throughout all ramification of kinship and cousinhood , each variety 
 of repute and power that could root the ancient tree more firmly in the 
 land . agreeably to this traditional policy , Mr. Carr Vipont not only 
 desire that a Vipont Morley should not lose a very good thing , but that 
 a very good thing should not lose a Vipont Morley of high academical 
 distinction,-a Vipont Morley who might be a bishop . he therefore draw 
 up an admirable letter , which the Marquess sign , - that the Marquess 
 should take the trouble of copy it be out of the question , - wherein 
 Lord Montfort be make to express great admiration of the disinterested 
 delicacy of sentiment , which prove George Vipont Morley to be still 
 more fitted to the cure of soul ; and , place room at Montfort Court 
 at his service   the Marquess not be himself there at the moment , 
 suggest that George should talk the matter over with the present 
 incumbent of Humberston   that town be not many mile distant from 
 Montfort Court , who , though he have no impediment in his speech , still 
 never himself preach nor read prayer , owe to an affection of the 
 trachea , and who be , nevertheless , a most efficient clergy man . George 
 Morley , therefore , have go down to Montfort Court some month ago , just 
 after his interview with Mrs. Crane . he have then accept an invitation 
 to spend a week or two with the Rev. Mr. Allsop , the Rector of 
 Humberston ; a clergyman of the old school , a fair scholar , a perfect 
 gentleman , a man of the high honour , good - nature , charitable , but 
 who take pastoral duty much more easily than good clergyman of the new 
 school - be they high or low - be disposed to do . Mr. Allsop , who be then 
 in his eightieth year , a bachelor with a very good fortune of his own , 
 be perfectly willing to fulfil the engagement on which he hold 
 his living , and render it up to George ; but he be touch by the 
 earnestness with which George assure he that at all event he would 
 not consent to displace the venerable incumbent from a tenure he have so 
 long and honourably hold , and would wait till the living be vacate in 
 the ordinary course of nature . Mr. Allsop conceive a warm affection for 
 the young scholar . he have a grand - niece stay with he on a visit , who 
 less openly , but not less warmly , share that affection ; and with she 
 George Morley fall shyly and timorously in love . with that living he 
 would be rich enough to marry ; without it , no . without it he have nothing 
 but a fellowship , which matrimony would forfeit , and the scanty portion 
 of a country squire 's young son . the young lady herself be dowerless , 
 for Allsop 's fortune be so settle that no share of it would come 
 to his grand - niece , - another reason for conscience to gulp down that 
 unhappy impediment of speech . certainly , during this visit , Morley 's 
 scruple relax ; but when he return home they come back with great 
 force than ever , - with great force , because he feel that now not 
 only a spiritual ambition , but a human love be a casuist in favour of 
 self - interest . he have return on a visit to Humberston Rectory about 
 a week previous to the date of this chapter ; the niece be not there . 
 sternly he have force himself to examine a little more closely into the 
 condition of the flock which   if he accept the charge   he would have 
 to guide , and the duty that devolve upon a chief pastor in a populous 
 trading town . he become appalled . Humberston , like most town under the 
 political influence of a great House , be rent by party , - one party , 
 who succeed in return one of the two member for Parliament , all 
 for the House of Montfort ; the other party , who return also their 
 member , all against it . by one half the town , whatever come from 
 Montfort Court be sure to be regard with a most malignant and 
 distorted vision . meanwhile , though Mr. Allsop be popular with 
 the high class and with such of the extreme poor as his charity 
 relieve , his pastoral influence generally be a dead letter . his 
 curate , who preach for he - a good young man , but extremely dull - be 
 not one of those preacher who fill a church . tradesman want an excuse 
 to stay away or choose another place of worship ; and they contrive to 
 hear some passage in the sermon - over which , while the curate mumble , 
 they habitually sleep - that they declare to be " Puseyite . " the church 
 become deserted ; and about the same time a very eloquent Dissenting 
 minister appear at Humberston , and even profess Church folk go 
 to hear he . George Morley , alas ! perceive that at Humberston , if the 
 Church there be to hold her own , a powerful and popular preacher 
 be essentially require . his mind be now make up . at Carr Vipont 's 
 suggestion the bishop of the diocese , be then at his palace , have send 
 to see he ; and , while grant the force of his scruple , have yet say , 
 " mine be the main responsibility . but if you ask I to ordain you , I 
 will do so without hesitation ; for if the Church want preacher , 
 it also want deep scholar and virtuous pastor . " fresh from this 
 interview , George Morley come to announce to Lady Montfort that his 
 resolve be unshaken . she , I have say , pause long before she answer . 
 " George , " she begin at last , in a voice so touchingly sweet that its 
 very sound be balm to a wound spirit , " I must not argue with you : I 
 bow before the grandeur of your motif , and I will not say that you 
 be not right . one thing I do feel , that if you thus sacrifice your 
 inclination and interest from scruple so pure and holy , you will 
 never be to be pity ; you will never know regret . poor or rich , single 
 or wed , a soul that so seek to reflect heaven will be serene and 
 bless . " thus she continue to address he for some time , he all the 
 while inexpressibly soothe and comfort ; then gradually she insinuate 
 hope even of a worldly and temporal kind , - literature be leave to 
 he , - the scholar 's pen , if not the preacher 's voice . in literature he 
 might make a career that would lead on to fortune . there be place 
 also in the public service to which a defect in speech be no obstacle . 
 she know his secret , modest attachment ; she allude to it just enough to 
 encourage constancy and rebuke despair . as she cease , his admiring and 
 grateful consciousness of his cousin 's rare quality change the tide 
 of his emotion towards she from himself , and he exclaim with an 
 earnestness that almost wholly subdue his stutter , 

 " what a counsellor you be ! what a soother ! if Montfort be but less 
 prosperous or more ambitious , what a treasure , either to console or to 
 sustain , in a mind like your ! " 

 as those word be say , you might have see at once why Lady Montfort 
 be call haughty and reserve . her lip seem suddenly to snatch back 
 its sweet smile ; her dark eye , before so purely , softly friend - like , 
 become coldly distant ; the tone of her voice be not the same as she 
 answer , - 

 " Lord Montfort value I , as it be , far beyond my merit : far , " she 
 add with a different intonation , gravely mournful . 

 " forgive I ; I have displease you . I do not mean it . Heaven forbid 
 that I should presume either to disparage Lord Montfort - or - or to - " 
 he stop short , save the hiatus by a convenient stammer . " only , " he 
 continue , after a pause , " only forgive I this once . Recollect I be 
 a little boy when you be a young lady , and I have pelt you with 
 snowball , and call you ' Caroline ' . " Lady Montfort suppress a sigh , 
 and give the young scholar back her gracious smile , but not a smile that 
 would have permit he to call she " Caroline " again . she remain , 
 indeed , a little more distant than usual during the rest of their 
 interview , which be not much prolong ; for Morley feel annoyed with 
 himself that he have so indiscreetly offend she , and seize an excuse 
 to escape . " by the by , " say he , " I have a letter from Mr. Carr Vipont , 
 ask I to give he a sketch for a Gothic bridge to the water yonder . 
 I will , with your leave , walk down and look at the propose site . only 
 do say that you forgive I . " 

 " forgive you , cousin George , oh , yes ! one word only : it be true you be 
 a child still when I fancy I be a woman , and you have a right to talk 
 to I upon all thing , except those that relate to I and Lord Montfort ; 
 unless , indeed , " she add with a bewitching half laugh , " unless you 
 ever see cause to scold I , there . good - by , my cousin , and in turn 
 forgive I , if I be so petulant . the Caroline you pelt with snowball 
 be always a wayward , impulsive creature , quick to take offence , to 
 misunderstand , and - to repent . " 

 back into the broad , broad gravel - walk , walk , more slowly than before , 
 Lady Montfort . again the sixty ghastly window star at she with all 
 their eye ; back from the gravelwalk , through a side - door into the 
 pompous solitude of the stately house ; across long chamber , where the 
 mirror reflect her form , and the huge chair , in their flaunting 
 damask and flare gold , stand stiff on desolate floor ; into her own 
 private room , - neither large nor splendid that ; plain chintz , quiet 
 book shelf . she need not have be the Marchioness of Montfort to 
 inhabit a room as pleasant and as luxurious . and the room that she 
 could only have own as marchioness , what be those worth to her 
 happiness ? I know not . " nothing , " fine lady will perhaps answer . 
 yet those same fine lady will contrive to dispose their daughter to 
 answer , " All . " in her own room Lady Montfort sink on her chair ; wearily , 
 wearily she look at the clock ; wearily at the book on the shelf , at 
 the harp near the window . then she lean her face on her hand , and that 
 face be so sad , and so humbly sad , that you would have wonder how any 
 one could call Lady Montfort proud . 

 " Treasure ! I ! I ! worthless , fickle , credulous fool ! I ! I ! " 

 the groom of the chamber enter with the letter by the afternoon 
 post . that great house contrive to worry itself with two post a day . a 
 royal command to Windsor - 

 " I shall be more alone in a court than here , " murmur Lady Montfort . 




 CHAPTER II . 

  truly saith the proverb , " much corn lie under the straw that be not 
  see . " 

 meanwhile George Morley follow the long shady walk , - very handsome 
 walk , full of prize rose and rare exotic , artificially wind 
 too , - walk so well keep that it take thirty - four man to keep it , - noble 
 walk , tiresome walk , till it bring he to the great piece of water , 
 which , perhaps , four time in the year be visit by the great folk 
 in the Great House . and be thus out of the immediate patronage of 
 fashion , the great piece of water really look natural , companionable , 
 refresh : you begin to breathe ; to unbutton your waistcoat , loosen 
 your neckcloth , quote Chaucer , if you could recollect he , or Cowper , or 
 Shakspeare , or Thomson 's " season ; " in short , any scrap of verse that 
 come into your head , - as your foot grow joyously entangle with fern ; as 
 the tree group forest - like before and round you ; tree which there , 
 be out of sight , be allow to grow too old to be worth five 
 shilling a piece , moss - grow , hollow - trunke , some pollard , - tree 
 invaluable ! ha , the hare ! how she scud ! see , the deer marching down to 
 the water side . what grove of bulrush ! island of water - lily ! and to 
 throw a Gothic bridge there , bring a great gravel road over the bridge ! 
 oh , shame , shame ! 

 so would have say the scholar , for he have a true sentiment for Nature , 
 if the bridge have not clean go out of his head . wander alone , he 
 come at last to the most umbrageous and sequester bank of the wide 
 water , close round on every side by brushwood , or still , patriarchal 
 tree . suddenly he arrest his step ; an idea strike he , - one of 
 those old , whimsical , grotesque idea which often when we be alone come 
 across we , even in our quiet or most anxious mood . be his infirmity 
 really incurable ? elocution master have say certainly not ; but they have 
 do he no good . yet have not the great orator the world ever know a 
 defect in utterance ? he , too , demosthene , have , no doubt , pay fee to 
 elocution master , the good in Athens , where elocution master must have 
 study their art ad unguem , and the defect have baffle they . but do 
 demosthene despair ? no , he resolve to cure himself , - how ? be it 
 not one of his method to fill his mouth with pebble , and practise , 
 manfully to the roar sea ? George Morley have never try the effect of 
 pebble . be there any virtue in they ? why not try ? no sea there , it be 
 true ; but a sea be only useful as represent the noise of a stormy 
 democratic audience . to represent a peaceful congregation that still 
 sheet of water would do as well . pebble there be in plenty just by 
 that gravelly cove , near which a young pike lie sun his green 
 back . half in jest , half in earnest , the scholar pick up a handful of 
 pebble , wipe they from sand and mould , insert they between his tooth 
 cautiously , and , look round to assure himself that none be by , 
 begin an extempore discourse . so interested do he become in that 
 classical experiment , that he might have torture the air and astonish 
 the magpie   three of whom from a neighbouring thicket listen 
 perfectly spell - bind   for more than half an hour , when seize with 
 shame at the ludicrous impotence of his exertion , with despair that so 
 wretche a barrier should stand between his mind and its expression , he 
 fling away the pebble , and sink on the ground , he fairly weep , weep 
 like a baffled child . 

 the fact be , that Morley have really the temperament of an orator ; he 
 have the orator 's gift in warmth of passion , rush of thought , logical 
 arrangement ; there be in he the genius of a great preacher . he feel 
 it , - he know it ; and in that despair which only genius know when some 
 pitiful cause obstruct its energy and strike down its power , make 
 a confidant of Solitude he weep loud and freely . 

 " do not despond , sir , I undertake to cure you , " say a voice behind . 

 George start up in confusion ; a man , elderly , but fresh and vigorous , 
 stand beside he , in a light fustian jacket , a blue apron , and with 
 rush in his hand , which he continue to plait together nimbly and 
 deftly as he bow to the startled scholar . 

 " I be in the shade of the thicket yonder , sir ; pardon I , I could not 
 help hear you . " 

 the Oxonian rub his eye , and star at the man with a vague 
 impression that he have see he before ; - when ? where ? 

 " you can cure I , " he stutter out ; " what of ? - the folly of try to 
 speak in public ? thank you , I be cure . " 

 " Nay , sir , you see before you a man who can make you a very good 
 speaker . your voice be naturally fine . I repeat , I can cure a defect 
 which be not in the organ , but in the management ! " 

 " you can ! you - who and what be you ? " 

 " a basketmaker , sir ; I hope for your custom . " " surely this be not the 
 first time I have see you ? " 

 " true , you once kindly suffer I to borrow a resting - place on your 
 father 's land . one good turn deserve another . " 

 at that moment Sir Isaac peer through the bramble , and restore 
 to his original whiteness , and relieve from his false , horn ear , 
 march gravely towards the water , sniff at the scholar , slightly 
 wag his tail , and bury himself amongst the reed in search of a 
 water - rat he have therein disturb a week before , and always expect to 
 find again . 

 the sight of the dog immediately clear up the cloud in the scholar 's 
 memory ; but with recognition come back a keen curiosity and a sharp pang 
 of remorse . 

 " and your little girl ? " he ask , look down abash . 

 " well than she be when we last meet . providence be so kind to we . " 

 Poor Waife ! he never guess that to the person he thus reveal himself 
 he owe the grief for Sophy 's abduction . he divine no reason for the 
 scholar 's flush cheek and embarrassed manner . 

 " yes , sir , we have just settle in this neighbourhood . I have a pretty 
 cottage yonder at the outskirt of the village , and near the park pale . 
 I recognize you at once ; and as I hear you just now , I call to mind 
 that when we meet before , you say your calling should be the Church , 
 be it not for your difficulty in utterance ; and I say to myself , ' no 
 bad thing those pebble , if his utterance be thick , which be it not ; ' 
 and I have not a doubt , sir , that the true fault of demosthene , whom I 
 presume you be imitate , be that he speak through his nose . " 

 " eh ! " say the scholar , " through his nose ? I never know that ? - and I - " 

 " and you be try to speak without lung ; that be without air in they . 
 you do not   smoke , I presume ? " 

 " no ; certainly not . " 

 " you must learn ; speak between each slow puff of your pipe . all you want 
 be time , - time to quiet the nerve , time to think , time to breathe . the 
 moment you begin to stammer , stop , fill the lung thus , then try again ! 
 it be only a clever man who can learn to write , - that be , to compose ; 
 but any fool can be teach to speak . courage ! " 

 " if you really can teach I , " cry the learn man , forget all 
 self - reproach for his betrayal of Waife to Mrs. Crane in the absorbing 
 interest of the hope that spring up within he , " if you can teach I ; if 
 I can but con - con - con - conq - " 

 " slowly , slowly , breath and time ; take a whiff from my pipe ; that be 
 right . yes , you can conquer the impediment . " 

 " then I will be the good friend to you that man ever have . there be my 
 hand on it . " 

 " I take it , but I ask leave to change the party in the contract . 
 I do not   want a friend : I do not   deserve one . you will be a friend to my 
 little girl instead ; and if ever I ask you to help I in aught for her 
 welfare and happiness - " 

 " I will help , heart and soul ! slight indeed any service to she or to 
 you compare with such service to I . free this wretched tongue from its 
 stammer , and thought and zeal will not stammer whenever you say , ' keep 
 your promise . ' I be so glad your little girl be still with you . " 

 Waife look surprised , " be still with I ! - why not ? " the scholar bit 
 his tongue . that be not the moment to confess ; it might destroy all 
 Waife 's confidence in he . he would do so later . " when shall I begin my 
 lesson ? " 

 " now , if you like . but have you a book in your pocket ? " 

 " I always have . " 

 " not greek , I hope , sir ? " 

 " no , a volume of Barrow 's sermon . Lord Chatham recommend those 
 sermon to his great son as a study for eloquence . " 

 " good ! will you lend I the volume , sir ? and now for it . listen to I ; 
 one sentence at a time ; draw your breath when I do . " 

 the three magpie prick up their ear again , and , as they listen , 
 marvel much . 




 CHAPTER III . 

  could we know by what strange circumstance a man 's genius become 
  prepared for practical success , we should discover that the most 
  serviceable item in his education be never enter in the bill 
  which his father pay for it . 

 at the end of the very first lesson George Morley see that all the 
 elocution master to whose skill he have be consign be blunderer 
 in comparison with the basketmaker . 

 Waife do not puzzle he with scientific theory . all that the great 
 comedian require of he be to observe and to imitate . observation , 
 imitation , lo ! the groundwork of all art ! the primal element of all 
 genius ! not there , indeed to halt , but there ever to commence . what 
 remain to carry on the intellect to mastery ? two step , - to reflect , 
 to reproduce . observation , imitation , reflection , reproduction . in these 
 stand a mind complete and consummate , fit to cope with all labour , 
 achieve all success . 

 at the end of the first lesson George Morley feel that his cure be 
 possible . make an appointment for the next day at the same place , he 
 come thither stealthily and so on day by day . at the end of a week he 
 feel that the cure be nearly certain ; at the end of a month the cure 
 be self - evident . he should live to preach the Word . true , that he 
 practise incessantly in private . not a moment in his wake hour that 
 the one thought , one object , be absent from his mind ! true , that with 
 all his patience , all his toil , the obstacle be yet serious , might 
 never be entirely overcome . nervous hurry , rapidity of action , vehemence 
 of feeling , bring back , might at unguarded moment always bring back , 
 the gasp breath , the empty lung , the struggle utterance . but the 
 relapse , rarer and rarer now with each trial , would be at last scarce 
 a drawback . " Nay , " quoth Waife , " instead of a drawback , become but an 
 orator , and you will convert a defect into a beauty . " 

 thus justly sanguine of the accomplishment of his life 's choose object , 
 the scholar 's gratitude to Waife be unspeakable . and see the man 
 daily at last in his own cottage , - Sophy 's health restore to her 
 cheek , smile to her lip , and cheer at her light fancy - work beside 
 her grandsire 's elbow - chair , with fairy legend instill perhaps 
 golden truth , - see Waife thus , the scholar mingle with gratitude a 
 strange tenderness of respect . he know nought of the vagrant 's past , his 
 reason might admit that in a position of life so at variance with 
 the gift natural and acquire of the singular basketmaker , there be 
 something mysterious and suspicious . but he blush to think that he have 
 ever ascribe to a flawed or wander intellect the eccentricity of 
 glorious Humour , - abet an attempt to separate an old age so innocent 
 and genial from a childhood so foster and so foster . and sure I be 
 that if the whole world have rise up to point the finger of scorn at the 
 one - eyed cripple , George Morley - the well - bear gentleman , the refine 
 scholar , the spotless churchman - would have give he his arm to lean 
 upon , and walk by his side unashamed . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

  to judge human character rightly , a man may sometimes have very 
  small experience , provide he have a very large heart . 

 Numa Pimpilius do not more conceal from notice the lesson he receive 
 from Egeria than do George Morley those which he receive from the 
 basketmaker . natural , indeed , must be his wish for secrecy ; pretty story 
 it would be for Humberston , its future rector learn how to preach a 
 sermon from an old basketmaker ! but he have a nobler and more imperious 
 motive for discretion : his honour be engage to it . Waife exact a 
 promise that he would regard the intercourse between they as strictly 
 private and confidential . 

 " it be for my sake I ask this , " say Waife , frankly , " though I might say 
 it be for your ; " the Oxonian promise , and be bind . Fortunately Lady 
 Montfort quit the great house the very day after George have first 
 encounter the basketmaker , and write word that she should not return 
 to it for some week , George be at liberty to avail himself of her 
 lord 's general invitation to make use of Montfort Court as his lodging 
 when in the neighbourhood ; which the propriety of the world would not 
 have allow he to do while Lady Montfort be there without either host 
 or female guest . accordingly , he take up his abode in a corner of 
 the vast palace , and be easily enable , when he please , to traverse 
 unobserve the solitude of the park , gain the waterside , or stroll 
 thence through the thick copse lead to Waife 's cottage , which 
 border the park pale , solitary , sequester , beyond sight of the 
 neighbouring village . the great house all to himself , George be bring 
 in contact with no one to whom , in unguarded moment , he could even 
 have let out a hint of his new acquaintance , except the clergyman of 
 the parish , a worthy man , who live in strict retirement upon a scanty 
 stipend . for the Marquess be the lay impropriator ; the living be 
 therefore but a very poor vicarage , below the acceptance of a Vipont or 
 a Vipont 's tutor , sure to go to a worthy man force to live in strict 
 retirement . George see too little of this clergyman , either to let 
 out secret or pick up information . from he , however , George do 
 incidentally learn that Waife have some month previously visit the 
 village , and propose to the bailiff to take the cottage and osi land , 
 which he now rent ; that he represent himself as have know an old 
 basketmaker who have dwell there many year ago , and as have learn 
 the basket craft of that long deceased operative . as he offer a high 
 rent than the bailiff could elsewhere obtain , and as the bailiff be 
 desirous to get credit with Mr. Carr Vipont for improve the property , 
 by revive thereon an art which have fall into desuetude , the bargain 
 be strike , provide the candidate , be a stranger to the place , could 
 furnish the bailiff with any satisfactory reference . Waife have go 
 away , say he should shortly return with the requisite testimonial . in 
 fact , poor man , as we know , he be then count on a good word from 
 Mr. Hartopp . he have not , however , return for some month . the 
 cottage , have be meanwhile want for the temporary occupation of an 
 under - gamekeeper , while his own be under repair , fortunately remain 
 unlet . Waife , on return , accompany by his little girl , have refer 
 the bailiff to a respectable house - agent and collector of street rent 
 in Bloomsbury , who write word that a lady , then abroad , have authorize 
 he , as the agent employ in the management of a house property from 
 which much of her income be derive , not only to state that Waife be a 
 very intelligent man , likely to do well whatever he undertake , but also 
 to guarantee , if require , the punctual payment of the rent for any 
 holding of which he become the occupier . on this the agreement be 
 conclude , the basketmaker instal . in the immediate neighbourhood 
 there be no custom for basket - work , but Waife 's performance be so 
 neat , and some so elegant and fanciful , that he have no difficulty 
 in contracting with a large tradesman   not at Humberston , but a more 
 distant and yet more thriving town about twenty mile off   for as much 
 of such work as he could supply . each week the carrier take his good 
 and bring back the payment ; the profit amply suffice for Waife 's 
 and Sophy 's daily bread , with even more than the surplus set aside for 
 the rent . for the rest , the basketmaker 's cottage be at the farth 
 outskirt of the straggle village inhabit by a labour peasantry , 
 his way of life be not much know nor much inquire into . he seem a 
 harmless , hard - work man ; never see at the beer - house ; always see 
 with his neatly - dress little grandchild in his quiet corner at church 
 on Sundays ; a civil , well - behave man too ; who touch his hat to the 
 bailiff and take it off to the vicar . 

 an idea prevail that the basketmaker have spend much of his life in 
 foreign country , favour partly by a sobriety of habit which be 
 not altogether national , partly by something in his appearance , which , 
 without be above his lowly calling , do not seem quite in keeping 
 with it , - outlandish in short , - but principally by the fact that he have 
 receive since his arrival two letter with a foreign postmark . the idea 
 befriend the old man , - allow it to be infer that he have probably 
 outlive the friend he have formerly leave behind he in England , and , 
 on his return , be sufficiently fatigue with his ramble to drop 
 content in any corner of his native soil wherein he could find a quiet 
 home , and earn by light toil a decent livelihood . 

 George , though naturally curious to know what have be the result of his 
 communication to Mrs. Crane , - whether it have lead to Waife 's discovery or 
 cause he annoyance , - have hitherto , however , shrink from touch upon 
 a topic which subject himself to an awkward confession of officious 
 intermeddling , and to which any indirect allusion might appear an 
 indelicate attempt to pry into painful family affair . but one day 
 he receive a letter from his father which disturb he greatly , and 
 induce he to break ground and speak to his preceptor frankly . in 
 this letter , the eld Mr. Morley mention incidentally , amongst other 
 scrap of local news , that he have see Mr. Hartopp , who be rather out 
 of sort , his good heart not have recover the shock of have be 
 abominably " take in " by an impostor for whom he have conceive a great 
 fancy , and to whose discovery George himself have providentially lead   the 
 father refer here to what George have tell he of his first meeting 
 with Waife , and his visit to Mrs. Crane ; the impostor , it seem , from 
 what Mr. Hartopp let fall , not be a little queer in the head , as 
 George have be lead to surmise , but a very bad character . " in fact , " 
 add the eld Morley , " a character so bad that Mr. Hartopp be too 
 glad to give up to her lawful protector the child , whom the man appear 
 to have abduct ; and I suspect , from what Hartopp say , though he do 
 not like to own that he be take in to so gross a degree , that he 
 have be actually introduce to his fellow - townsfolk and confer 
 familiarly with a regular jail - bird , - perhaps a burglar . how lucky for 
 that poor , soft - headed , excellent Jos Hartopp , whom it be positively as 
 inhuman to take in as it would be to defraud a bear natural , that 
 the lady you see arrive in time to expose the snare lay for his 
 benevolent credulity . but for that , Jos might have take the fellow into 
 his own house   just like he ! , and be rob by this time , perhaps 
 murder , - Heaven know ! " 

 incredulous and indignant , and long to be empower to vindicate his 
 friend 's fair name , George seize his hat , and stride quick along the 
 path towards the basketmaker 's cottage . as he gain the water - side , 
 he perceive Waife himself , seat on a mossy bank , under a gnarl 
 fantastic thorntree , watch a deer as it come to drink , and whistle 
 a soft mellow tune , - the tune of an old english border - song . the deer 
 lift his antler from the water , and turn his large bright eye 
 towards the opposite bank , whence the note come , listening and wistful . 
 as George 's step crush the wild thyme , which the thorn - tree shadow , 
 " hush ! " say Waife , " and mark how the rude musical sound can affect 
 the brute creation . " he resume the whistle , - a clear , louder , 
 wilder tune , - that of a lively hunting - song . the deer turn quickly 
 round , - uneasy , restless , toss its antler , and bound through the 
 fern . Waife again change the key of his primitive music , - a melancholy 
 belliny note , like the belling itself of a melancholy hart , but more 
 modulate into sweetness . the deer arrest its flight , and , lure by 
 the mimic sound , return towards the water - side , slowly and statelily . 

 " I do not   think the story of Orpheus charming the brute be a fable ; do 
 you , sir ? " say Waife . " the rabbit about here know I already ; and , if 
 I have but a fiddle , I would undertake to make friend with that reserve 
 and unsocial water - rat , on whom Sir Isaac in vain endeavour at 
 present to force his acquaintance . Man commit a great mistake in not 
 cultivate more intimate and amicable relation with the other branch 
 of earth 's great family . few of they not more amusing than we be ; 
 naturally , for they have not our care . and such variety of character 
 too , where you would least expect it ! " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " very true . cowper notice marked difference of 
 character in his favourite hare . " 

 WAIFE . - " Hares ! I be sure that there be not two house - fly on a 
 window - pane , two minnow in that water , that would not present to 
 we interesting point of contrast as to temper and disposition . 
 if house - fly and minnow could but coin money , or set up a 
 manufacture , - contrive something , in short , to buy or sell attractive to 
 anglo - Saxon enterprise and intelligence , - of course we should soon have 
 diplomatic relation with they ; and our despatch and newspaper would 
 instruct we to a t in the character and propensity of their lead 
 personage . but , where man have no pecuniary nor ambitious interest 
 at stake in his commerce with any class of his fellow - creature , his 
 information about they be extremely confused and superficial . the good 
 naturalist be mere generalizer , and think they have do a vast deal 
 when they classify a specie . what should we know about mankind if 
 we have only a naturalist 's definition of man ? we only know mankind by 
 knock classification on the head , and study each man as a class in 
 himself . Compare Buffon and Shakspeare ! alas , sir ! can we never have a 
 Shakspeare for house - fly and minnow ? " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " with all respect for minnow and house - fly , if 
 we find another Shakspeare , he might be well employ , like his 
 predecessor , in select individuality from the classification of 
 man . " 

 WAIFE . - " be yourself a man , you think so : a housefly might be of a 
 different opinion . but permit I , at least , to doubt whether such an 
 investigator would be well employ in reference to his own happiness , 
 though I grant that he would be so in reference to your intellectual 
 amusement and social interest . poor Shakspeare ! how much he must have 
 suffer ! " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " you mean that he must have be rack by the passion 
 he describe , - bruise by collision with the heart he dissect . that be 
 not necessary to genius . the judge on his bench , sum up evidence and 
 charge the jury , have no need to have share the temptation or be 
 privy to the act of the prisoner at the bar . yet how consummate may be 
 his analysis ! " 

 " no , " cry Waife , roughly . " no ! your illustration destroy your 
 argument . the judge know nothing of the prisoner . there be the 
 circumstance ; there be the law . by these he generalize , by these 
 he judge , - right or wrong . but of the individual at the bar , of the 
 world - the tremendous world - within that individual heart , I repeat , he 
 know nothing . do he know , law and circumstance might vanish , human 
 justice would be paralyze . Ho , there ! place that swart - visage , 
 ill - look foreigner in the dock , and let counsel open the case ; 
 hear the witness depose ! oh , horrible wretch ! a murderer ! unmanly 
 murderer ! - a defenceless woman smother by caitiff hand ! hang he up ! 
 hang he up ! ' softly , ' whisper the poet , and lift the veil from the 
 assassin 's heart . ' lo ! it be Othello the Moor ! ' what jury now dare find 
 that criminal guilty ? what judge now put on the black cap ? who now say , 
 ' hang he up ! hang he up ! " 

 with such lifelike force do the comedian vent this passionate outburst 
 that he thrill his listener with an awe akin to that which the 
 convict Moor gather round himself at the close of the sublime drama . 
 even Sir Isaac be startle ; and leave his hopeless pursuit of the 
 water - rat , utter a low bark , come to his master , and look into his 
 face with solemn curiosity . 

 WAIFE   relapse into colloquial accent . - " why do we sympathize with 
 those above we more than with those below ? why with the sorrow of a 
 king rather than those of a beggar ? why do Sir Isaac sympathize with 
 I more than   let that water - rat vex he ever so much   I can possibly 
 sympathize with he ? whatever be the cause , see at least , Mr. Morley , 
 one reason why a poor creature like myself find it well employment 
 to cultivate the intimacy of brute than to prosecute the study of man . 
 among man , all be too high to sympathize with I ; but I have know 
 two friend who never injure nor betray . Sir Isaac be one ; Wamba be 
 another . Wamba , sir , the native of a remote district of the globe   two 
 friend civilized Europe be not large enough to afford any one man , 
 Wamba , sir , be less gifted by nature , less refine by education , than 
 Sir Isaac ; but he be a safe and trustworthy companion : Wamba , sir , 
 be - an opossum . " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " alas , my dear Mr. Waife , I fear that man must have 
 behave very ill to you . " 

 WAIFE . - " I have no right to complain . I have behave very ill to myself . 
 when a man be his own enemy , he be very unreasonable if he expect other 
 man to be his benefactor . " 

 GEORGE MORLEY   with emotion . - " listen , I have a confession to make to 
 you . I fear I have do you an injury , where , officiously , I mean to 
 do a kindness . " the scholar hurry on to narrate the particular of his 
 visit to Mrs. Crane . on conclude the recital , he add , " when again 
 I meet you here , and learn that your Sophy be with you , I feel 
 inexpressibly relieve . it be clear then , I think , that your 
 grandchild have be leave to your care unmoleste , either that you have 
 prove not to be the person of whom the party be in search , or 
 family affair have be so explain and reconcile that my interference 
 have occasion you no harm . but to - day I have a letter from my father 
 which disquiet I much . it seem that the person in question do visit 
 Gatesboro ' , and have malign you to Mr. Hartopp . understand I , I ask 
 for no confidence which you may be unwilling to give ; but if you will 
 arm I with the power to vindicate your character from aspersion which 
 I need not your assurance to hold unjust and false , I will not rest till 
 that task be triumphantly accomplish . " 

 WAIFE   in a tone calm but dejected . - " I thank you with all my heart . 
 but there be nothing to be do . I be glad that the subject do not 
 start up between we until such little service as I could render you , Mr. 
 Morley , be pretty well over . it would have be a pity if you have be 
 compel to drop all communication with a man of attainted character , 
 before you have learn how to manage the power that will enable you 
 hereafter to exhort sinner bad than I have be . hush , sir ! you feel 
 that , at least now , I be an inoffensive old man , labour for a humble 
 livelihood . you will not repeat here what you may have hear , or yet 
 hear , to the discredit of my former life . you will not send I and my 
 grandchild forth from our obscure refuge to confront a world with which 
 we have no strength to cope . and , believe this , it only remain for I 
 to say , Fare - you - well , sir . " 

 " I should deserve to lose spe - spe - speech altogether , " cry the Oxonian , 
 gasp and stammer fearfully as he catch Waife firmly by the arm , 
 " if I suffer - suff - suff - suff - " 

 " one , two ! take time , sir ! " say the Comedian , softly . and with a sweet 
 patience he reseat himself on the bank . the Oxonian throw himself at 
 length by the outcast 's side ; and , with the noble tenderness of a nature 
 as chivalrously Christian as Heaven ever give to priest , he rest his 
 fold hand upon Waife 's shoulder , and look he full and close in 
 the face , say thus , slowly , deliberately , not a stammer , " you do not 
 guess what you have do for I ; you have secure to I a home and a 
 career ; the wife of whom I must otherwise have despair ; the Divine 
 Vocation on which all my earthly hope be set , and which I be on 
 the eve of renouncing : do not think these be obligation which can 
 be lightly shake off . if there be circumstance which forbid I to 
 disabuse other of impression which wrong you , imagine not that their 
 false notion will affect my own gratitude , - my own respect for you ! " 

 " Nay , sir ! they ought ; they must . perhaps not your exaggerated gratitude 
 for a service which you should not , however , measure by its effect 
 on yourself , but by the slightness of the trouble it give to I ; not 
 perhaps your gratitude , but your respect , yes . " 

 " I tell you no ! do you fancy that I can not judge of a man 's nature 
 without call on he to trust I with all the secret - all the error , 
 if you will - of his past life ? will not the calling to which I may now 
 hold myself destine give I power and commandment to absolve all those 
 who truly repent and unfeignedly believe ? oh , Mr. Waife ! if in early 
 day you have sin , do you not repent ? and how often , in many a lovely 
 gentle sentence drop unawares from your lip , have I have cause 
 to know that you unfeignedly believe ! be I now clothe with sacred 
 authority , could I not absolve you as a priest ? think you that , in the 
 meanwhile , I dare judge you as a man ? I , - Life 's new recruit , guard 
 hitherto from temptation by careful parent and favour fortune , - I 
 presume to judge , and judge harshly , the gray - haired veteran , weary by 
 the march , wound in the battle ! " 

 " you be a noble - hearted human being , " say Waife , greatly affect . 
 " and , mark my word , a mantle of charity so large you will live to 
 wear as a robe of honour . but hear I , sir ! Mr. Hartopp also be a 
 man infinitely charitable , benevolent , kindly , and , through all his 
 simplicity , acutely shrewd ; Mr. Hartopp , on hear what be say 
 against I , deem I unfit to retain my grandchild , resign the trust 
 I have confide to he , and would have give I alm , no doubt , have I 
 ask they , but not his hand . take your hand , sir , from my shoulder , 
 lest the touch sully you . " 

 George do take his hand from the vagrant 's shoulder , but it be 
 to grasp the hand that waive they off and struggle to escape the 
 pressure . " you be innocent ! you be innocent ! forgive I that I 
 speak to you of repentance as if you have be guilty . I feel you be 
 innocent , - feel it by my own heart . you turn away . I defy you to say 
 that you be guilty of what have be lay to your charge , of what have 
 darken your good name , of what Mr. Hartopp believe to your prejudice . 
 look I in the face and say , ' I be not innocent ; I have not be 
 belie . " ' 

 Waife remain voiceless , motionless . 

 the young man , in whose nature lie yet unprove all those grand 
 quality of heart , without which never be there a grand orator , a 
 grand preacher , - quality which grasp the result of argument , and 
 arrive at the end of elaborate reasoning by sudden impulse , - here 
 release Waife 's hand , rise to his foot , and , face Waife , as the old 
 man sit with face avert , eye downcast , breast heaving , say loftily , 

 " forget that I may soon be the christian minister whose duty bow 
 his ear to the lip of Shame and Guilt ; whose hand , when it point 
 to Heaven , no mortal touch can sully ; whose sublime post be by the 
 sinner 's side . look on I but as man and gentleman . see , I now extend 
 this hand to you . if , as man and gentleman , you have do that which , 
 could all heart be read , all secret know , human judgment reverse by 
 divine omniscience , forbid you to take this hand , - then reject it , go 
 hence : we part ! but if no such act be on your conscience , however 
 you submit to its imputation , - then , in the name of Truth , as man and 
 gentleman to man and gentleman , I command you to take this right hand , 
 and , in the name of that Honour which bear no paltering , I forbid you 
 to disobey . " 

 the vagabond rise , like the Dead at the spell of a Magician , - take , as 
 if irresistibly , the hand hold out to he . and the scholar , overjoyed , 
 fall on his breast , embrace he as a son . 

 " you know , " say George , in tremble accent , " that the hand you have 
 take will never betray , never desert ; but be it - be it really powerless 
 to raise and to restore you to your place ? " 

 " Powerless amongst your kind for that indeed , " answer Waife , in 
 accent still more tremulous . " all the king of the earth be not strong 
 enough to raise a name that have once be trample into the mire . learn 
 that it be not only impossible for I to clear myself , but that it be 
 equally impossible for I to confide to mortal be a single plea in 
 defence if I be innocent , in extenuation if I be guilty . and say 
 this , and entreat you to hold it more merciful to condemn than to 
 question I , - for question be torture , - I can not reject your pity ; but 
 it would be mockery to offer I respect ! " 

 " what ! not respect the fortitude which calumny can not crush ? would that 
 fortitude be possible if you be not calm in the knowledge that 
 no false witness can mislead the Eternal Judge ? respect you ! 
 yes , - because I have see you happy in despite of man , and therefore I 
 know that the cloud around you be not the frown of Heaven . " 

 " oh , " cry Waife , the tear roll down his cheek , " and not an hour 
 ago I be jest at human friendship , vent graceless spleen on my 
 fellow - man ! and now - now - ah , sir ! providence be so kind to I ! and , " 
 say he , brush away his tear , as the old arch smile begin to play 
 round the corner of his mouth , " and kind to I in the very quarter in 
 which unkindness have so sorely smite I . true , you direct towards I 
 the woman who take from I my grandchild , who destroy I in the esteem 
 of good Mr. Hartopp . well , you see , I have my sweet Sophy back again ; we 
 be in the home of all other I most long for ; and that woman , yes , I 
 can , at least , thus far , confide to you my secret , so that you may not 
 blame yourself for send she to Gatesboro ' , - that very woman know of 
 my shelter ; furnish I with the very reference necessary to obtain it ; 
 have free my grandchild from a loathsome bondage , which I could not have 
 legally resist ; and should new persecution chase we will watch and 
 warn and help we . and if you ask I how this change in she be effect ; 
 how , when we have abandon all hope of green field , and deem that 
 only in the crowd of a city we could escape those who pursue we when 
 discover there , though I fancy myself an adept in disguise , and the 
 child and the dog be never see out of the four garret wall in which 
 I hide they , - if you ask I , I say , to explain how that very woman be 
 suddenly convert from a remorseless foe into a save guardian , I can 
 only answer ' by no wit , no device , no persuasive art of mine . providence 
 soften her heart , and make it kind , just at a moment when no other 
 agency on earth could have rescue we from - from - " 

 " say no more : I guess ! the paper this woman show I be a legal form 
 authorize your poor little Sophy to be give up to the care of a 
 father . I guess ! of that father you would not speak ill to I ; yet from 
 that father you would save your grandchild . say no more . and yon quiet 
 home , your humble employment , really content you ? " 

 " oh , if such a life can but last ! Sophy be so well , so cheerful , so 
 happy . do not you bear she sing the other day ? she never use 
 to sing ! but we have not be here a week when song break out from 
 she , - untaught , as from a bird . but if any ill report of I travel 
 hither from Gatesboro ' or elsewhere , we should be send away , and the 
 bird would be mute in my thorn - tree : Sophy would sing no more . " 

 " do not fear that slander shall drive you hence . Lady Montfort , you 
 know , be my cousin , but you know not - few do - how thoroughly generous 
 and gentle - hearted she be . I will speak of you to she , - oh ! do not look 
 alarmed . she will take my word when I tell she , ' that be a good man ; ' 
 and if she ask more , it will be enough to say , ' those who have know 
 well day be loth to speak to stranger of the past . ' " 

 " I thank you earnestly , sincerely , " say Waife , brighten up . " one 
 favour more : if you see in the formal document show to you , or retain 
 on your memory , the name of - of the person authorize to claim Sophy as 
 his child , you will not mention it to Lady Montfort . I be hot sure 
 if ever she hear that name , but she may have do so , and - and - " he 
 pause a moment , and seem to muse ; then go on , not conclude his 
 sentence . " you be so good to I , Mr. Morley , that I wish to confide in 
 you as far as I can . now , you see , I be already an old man , and my chief 
 object be to raise up a friend for Sophy when I be gone , - a friend in 
 her own sex , sir . oh , you can not guess how I long , how I yearn , to view 
 that child under the holy foster eye of a woman . perhaps if Lady 
 Montfort see my pretty Sophy she might take a fancy to she . oh , if 
 she do ! if she do ! and Sophy , " add Waife , proudly , " have a right to 
 respect . she be not like I , - any hovel be good enough for I ; but for 
 she ! do you know that I conceive that hope , that the hope help to 
 lead I back here when , month ago , I be at Humberston , intent upon 
 rescue Sophy ; and see - though , " observe Waife , with a sly twitch of 
 the muscle round his mouth , " I have no right at that precise moment 
 to be see anything - Lady Montfort 's humane fear for a blind old 
 impostor , who be try to save his dog - a black dog , sir , who have dye 
 his hair - from her carriage wheel . and the hope become strong still , 
 when , the first Sunday I attend yon village church , I again see that 
 fair - wondrously fair - face at the far end , - fair as moonlight and as 
 melancholy . strange it be , sir , that I - naturally a boisterous , mirthful 
 man , and now a shy , skulk fugitive - feel more attract , more allure 
 towards a countenance , in proportion as I read there the trace of 
 sadness . I feel less abased by my own nothingness , more emboldened to 
 approach and say , ' not so far apart from I : thou too hast suffer . ' 
 why be this ? " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " ' the fool hath say in his heart that there be no God ; ' 
 but the fool hath not say in his heart that there be no sorrow , - pithy 
 and most profound sentence ; intimate the irrefragable claim that bind 
 man to the Father . and when the chain tighten , the child be close 
 draw together . but to your wish : I will remember it . and when my cousin 
 return , she shall see your Sophy . " 




 CHAPTER V. 

  Mr. Waife , be by nature unlucky , consider that , in proportion as 
  fortune bring he good luck , nature convert it into bad . he 
  suffer Mr. George Morley to go away in his debt , and Sophy fear 
  that he will be dull in consequence . 

 George Morley , a few week after the conversation last record , take 
 his departure from Montfort Court , prepare , without a scruple , to 
 present himself for ordination to the friendly bishop . from Waife he 
 derive more than the cure of a disable infirmity ; he receive those 
 hint which , to a man who have the natural temperament of an orator , so 
 rarely unite with that of the scholar , expedite the mastery of the art 
 that make the fleeting human voice an abide , imperishable power . the 
 grateful teacher exhaust all his lore upon the pupil whose genius he 
 have free , whose heart have subdue himself . before leave , George be 
 much perplex how to offer to Waife any other remuneration than that 
 which , in Waife 's estimate , have already overpay all the benefit he have 
 receive ; namely , unquestione friendship and pledge protection . 
 it need scarcely be say that George think the man to whom he owe 
 fortune and happiness be entitle to something beyond that moral 
 recompense . but he find , at the first delicate hint , that Waife would 
 not hear of money , though the ex - Comedian do not affect any very 
 quixotic notion on that practical subject . " to tell you the truth , sir , 
 I have rather a superstition against have more money in my hand than 
 I know what to do with . it have always bring I bad luck . and what 
 be very hard , - the bad luck stay , but the money go . there be that 
 splendid sum I make at Gatesboro ' . you should have see I count it 
 over . I could not have have a prouder or more swell heart if I have 
 be , that great man Mr. Elwes the miser . and what bad luck it bring 
 I , and how it all fritter itself away ! nothing to show for it but a 
 silk ladder and an old hurdy - gurdy , and I sell they at half price . then 
 when I have the accident , which cost I this eye , the railway people 
 behave so generously , give I l120 , - think of that ! and before three 
 day the money be all go ! " 

 " how be that ? " say George , half - amuse , half - pain , - ' steal 
 perhaps ? " 

 " not so , " answer Waife , somewhat gloomily , " but restore . a poor dear 
 old man , who think very ill of I , and I do not   wonder at it , - be 
 reduce from great wealth to great poverty . while I be lay up , my 
 landlady read a newspaper to I , and in that newspaper be an account 
 of his reverse and destitution . but I be accountable to he for the 
 balance of an old debt , and that , with the doctor 's bill , quite cover 
 my l120 . I hope he do not think quite so ill of I now . but the money 
 bring good luck to he , rather than to I . well , sir , if you be 
 now to give I money , I should be on the look - out for some mournful 
 calamity . gold be not natural to I . some day , however , by and by , when 
 you be induct into your living , and have become a renowned preacher , 
 and have plenty to spare , with an idea that you will feel more 
 comfortable in your mind if you have do something royal for the 
 basketmaker , I will ask you to help I to make up a sum , which I be 
 try by degree to save , - an enormous sum , almost as much as I pay 
 away from my railway compensation : I owe it to the lady who lend it to 
 release Sophy from an engagement which I - certainly without any remorse 
 of conscience - make the child break . " 

 " oh , yes ! what be the amount ? let I at least repay that debt . " 

 " not yet . the lady can wait ; and she would be pleased to wait , because 
 she deserve to wait : it would be unkind to she to pay it off at 
 once . but in the meanwhile if you could send I a few good book for 
 Sophy , - instructive , yet not very , very dry,-and a french dictionary , 
 I can teach she French when the winter day close in . you see I be not 
 above be pay , sir . but , Mr. Morley , there be a great favour you can 
 do I . " 

 " what be it ? speak . " 

 " cautiously refrain from do I a great disservice ! you be go back 
 to your friend and relation . never speak of I to they . never describe 
 I and my odd way . name not the lady , nor - nor - nor - the man who 
 claim Sophy . 

 " your friend might not hurt I ; other might . talk travel . the hare be 
 not long in its form when it have a friend in a hound that give tongue . 
 promise what I ask . promise it as ' man and gentleman . ' " 

 " certainly . yet I have one relation to whom I should like , with your 
 permission , to speak of you , with whom I could wish you acquaint . he 
 be so thorough a man of the world , that he might suggest some method 
 to clear your good name , which you yourself would approve . my uncle , 
 Colonel Morley - " 

 " on no account ! " cry Waife , almost fiercely , and he evince so much 
 anger and uneasiness that it be long before George could pacify he by 
 the most earnest assurance that his secret should be inviolably keep , 
 and his injunction faithfully obey . no man of the world consult how 
 to force he back to the world of man that he flee from ! no colonel to 
 scan he with martinet eye , and hint how to pipeclay a tarnish ! Waife 's 
 apprehension gradually allay and his confidence restore , one fine 
 morning George take leave of his eccentric benefactor . 

 Waife and Sophy stand gaze after he from their garden - gate , the 
 cripple lean lightly on the child 's arm . she look with anxious 
 fondness into the old man 's thoughtful face , and clung to he more 
 closely as she look . 

 " will you not be dull , poor Grandy ? will you not miss he ? " 

 " a little at first , " say Waife , rouse himself . " education be a great 
 thing . an educated mind , provide that it do we no mischief , - which 
 be not always the case , - can not be withdraw from our existence without 
 leave a blank behind . Sophy , we must seriously set to work and educate 
 ourselves ! " 

 " we will , Grandy dear , " say Sophy , with decision ; and a few minute 
 afterwards , " if I can become very , very clever , you will not pine so 
 much after that gentleman , - will you , Grandy ? " 




 CHAPTER VI . 

  be a chapter that come to an untimely end . 

 Winter be far advanced when Montfort Court be again brighten by the 
 presence of its lady . a polite letter from Mr. Carr Vipont have reach 
 she before leave Windsor , suggest how much it would be for the 
 advantage of the Vipont interest if she would consent to visit for a 
 month or two the seat in Ireland , which have be too long neglect , 
 and at which my lord would join she on his departure from his Highland 
 moor . so to Ireland go Lady Montfort . my lord do not join she there ; 
 but Mr. Carr Vipont deem it desirable for the Vipont interest that 
 the wed pair should reunite at Montfort Court , where all the Vipont 
 family be invite to witness their felicity or mitigate their ennui . 

 but before proceed another stage in this history , it become a just 
 tribute of respect to the great House of Vipont to pause and place 
 its past record and present grandeur in full display before the 
 reverential reader . the House of Vipont ! - what be I about ? the House of 
 Vipont require a chapter to itself . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

  the House of Vipont , - " Majora canamus . " 

 the House of Vipont ! look back through age , it seem as if the 
 House of Vipont be one continuous living idiosyncrasy , have in its 
 progressive development a connected unity of thought and action , so that 
 through all the change of its outward form it have be move and guide 
 by the same single spirit , - " Le roi est mort ; vive le roi ! " - a Vipont 
 dy ; live the Vipont ! despite its high - sound Norman name , the House 
 of Vipont be no House at all for some generation after the Conquest . 
 the first Vipont who emerge from the obscurity of time be a rude 
 soldier of Gascon origin , in the reign of Henry II . , - one of the 
 thousand fighting - man who sail from Milford Haven with the stout Earl 
 of Pembroke , on that strange expedition which end in the conquest of 
 Ireland . this gallant man obtain large grant of land in that fertile 
 island ; some Mac or some O ' - - - vanished , and the House of Vipont rise . 

 during the reign of Richard I. , the House of Vipont , though recall to 
 England   leave its irish acquisition in charge of a fierce cadet , who 
 serve as middleman , excuse itself from the Crusade , and , by marriage 
 with a rich goldsmith 's daughter , be enable to lend money to those 
 who indulge in that exciting but costly pilgrimage . in the reign 
 of John , the House of Vipont foreclose its mortgage on land thus 
 pledge , and become possessed of a very fair property in England , as 
 well as its fief in the sister isle . 

 the House of Vipont take no part in the troublesome politic of that 
 day . discreetly obscure , it attend to its own fortune , and feel small 
 interest in Magna Charta . during the reign of the Plantagenet Edwards , 
 who be great encourager of mercantile adventure , the House of Vipont , 
 shun Crecy , Bannockburn , and such profitless brawl , intermarry 
 with London trader , and get many a good thing out of the Genoese . in 
 the reign of Henry IV . the House of Vipont reap the benefit of its 
 past forbearance and modesty . now , for the first time , the vipont 
 appear as belt knight ; they have armorial bearing ; they be 
 lancasterian to the backbone ; they be exceedingly indignant against 
 heretic ; they burn the Lollards ; they have place in the household of 
 Queen Joan , who be call a witch , - but a witch be a very good friend 
 when she wield a sceptre instead of a broomstick . and in proof of its 
 grow importance , the House of Vipont marry a daughter of the then 
 mighty House of Darrell . in the reign of Henry V. , during the invasion 
 of France , the House of Vipont - be afraid of the dysentery which 
 carry off more brave fellow than the field of Agincourt - contrive to 
 be a minor . the Wars of the Roses puzzle the House of Vipont sadly . but 
 it go through that perilous ordeal with singular tact and success . 
 the manner in which it change side , each change safe , and most change 
 lucrative , be beyond all praise . 

 on the whole , it prefer the Yorkists ; it be impossible to be 
 actively lancasterian with Henry VI . of Lancaster always in prison . and 
 thus , at the death of Edward IV . , the House of Vipont be Baron Vipont 
 of Vipont , with twenty manor . Richard III . count on the House of 
 Vipont , when he leave London to meet Richmond at Bosworth : he 
 count without his host . the House of Vipont become again intensely 
 Lancasterian , and be amongst the first to crowd round the litter in 
 which Henry VII . enter the metropolis . in that reign it marry a 
 relation of Empson 's , do the great House of Vipont ! and as noble of 
 eld date have become scarce and poor , Henry VII . be pleased to make 
 the House of Vipont an Earl , - the Earl of Montfort . in the reign of 
 Henry VIII . , instead of burn Lollards , the House of Vipont be all 
 for the Reformation : it obtain the land of two priory and one 
 abbey . gorge with that spoil , the House of Vipont , like an anaconda in 
 the process of digestion , sleep long . but no , it sleep not . though it 
 keep itself still as a mouse during the reign of Bloody Queen Mary   only 
 let it be know at Court that the House of Vipont have strong papal 
 leaning ; though during the reign of Elizabeth and James it make 
 no noise , the House of Vipont be silently inflate its lung and 
 improve its constitution . Slept , indeed ! it be wide awake . then it 
 be that it begin systematically its grand policy of alliance ; then be 
 it sedulously graft its olive branch on the stem of those fruitful 
 New Houses that have spring up with the Tudors ; then , alive to the spirit 
 of the day , provident of the want of the morrow , over the length 
 and breadth of the land it wove the interlace network of useful 
 cousinhood ! then , too , it begin to build palace , to enclose park ; it 
 travel , too , a little , do the House of Vipont ! it visit Italy ; it 
 conceive a taste : a very elegant House become the House of Vipont ! 
 and in James 's reign , for the first time , the House of Vipont get the 
 Garter . the Civil Wars break out : England be rent asunder . peer and 
 knight take part with one side or the other . the House of Vipont be 
 again perplexed . certainly at the commencement it , be all for King 
 Charles . but when King Charles take to fighting , the House of Vipont 
 shake its sagacious head , and go about , like Lord Falkland , sighing , 
 " peace , peace ! " finally , it remember its neglect estate in Ireland : 
 its duty call it thither . to Ireland it go , discreetly sad , and , 
 marry a kinswoman of Lord Fauconberg , - the connection least expose 
 to Fortune 's caprice of all the alliance form by the Lord Protector 's 
 family , - it be safe when Cromwell visit Ireland ; and no less safe 
 when Charles II . be restore to England . during the reign of the merry 
 monarch the House of Vipont be a courtier , marry a beauty , get the 
 Garter again , and , for the first time , become the fashion . fashion 
 begin to be a power . in the reign of James II . the House of Vipont again 
 contrive to be a minor , who come of age just in time to take the oath 
 of fealty to William and Mary . in case of accident , the House of Vipont 
 keep on friendly term with the exile stuart , but it write no letter , 
 and get into no scrape . it be not , however , till the Government , under 
 Sir Robert Walpole , establish the constitutional and parliamentary 
 system which characterize modern freedom , that the puissance 
 accumulate through successive century by the House of Vipont become 
 pre - eminently visible . by that time its land be vast ; its wealth 
 enormous ; its parliamentary influence , as " a Great House , " be a part of 
 the British Constitution . at this period , the House of Vipont find it 
 convenient to rend itself into two grand division , - the peer 's branch 
 and the commoner 's . the House of Commons have become so important that it 
 be necessary for the House of Vipont to be represent there by a great 
 commoner . thus arise the family of Carr Vipont . that division , owe 
 to a marriage settlement favour a young son by the heiress of the 
 Carrs , carry off a good slice from the estate of the earldom : uno 
 averso , non deficit alter ; the earldom mourn , but replace the loss 
 by two wealthy wedlock of its own ; and have long since see cause to 
 rejoice that its power in the Upper Chamber be strengthen by such aid 
 in the low . for , thank to its parliamentary influence , and the aid 
 of the great commoner , in the reign of George III . the House of Vipont 
 become a Marquess . from that time to the present day , the House of 
 Vipont have go on prospering and progressive . it be to the aristocracy 
 what the " Times " newspaper be to the press . the same quick sympathy 
 with public feeling , the same unity of tone and purpose , the same 
 adaptability , and something of the same lofty tone of superiority to the 
 petty interest of party . it may be concede that the House of Vipont 
 be less brilliant than the " Times " newspaper , but eloquence and wit , 
 necessary to the duration of a newspaper , be not necessary to that of 
 the House of Vipont . have they be so , it would have have they . 

 the head of the House of Vipont rarely condescend to take office . with 
 a rent - roll loosely estimate at about l170,000 a year , it be beneath 
 a man to take from the public a paltry five or six thousand a year , and 
 undergo all the undignified abuse of popular assembly , and " a ribald 
 press . " but it be a matter of course that the House of Vipont should 
 be represent in any Cabinet that a constitutional monarch could be 
 advise to form . since the time of Walpole , a Vipont be always in the 
 service of his country , except in those rare instance when the country 
 be infamously misgovern . the cadet of the House , or the senior 
 member of the great commoner 's branch of it , sacrifice their ease to 
 fulfil that duty . the Montfort marquess in general be content 
 with situation of honour in the household , as of Lord Steward , Lord 
 Chamberlain , or Master of the Horse , etc . , - not onerous dignity ; and 
 even these they only deign to accept on those special occasion when 
 danger threaten the star of Brunswick , and the sense of its exalt 
 station forbid the House of Vipont to leave its country in the dark . 

 great Houses like that of Vipont assist the work of civilization by the 
 law of their existence . they be sure to have a spirited and wealthy 
 tenantry , to whom , if but for the sake of that popular character which 
 double political influence , they be liberal and kindly landlord . 
 under their sway fen and sand become fertile ; agricultural experiment 
 be test on a large scale ; cattle and sheep improve in breed ; national 
 capital augment , and , spring beneath the ploughshare , circulate 
 indirectly to speed the ship and animate the loom . have there be no 
 Woburn , no Holkham , no Montfort Court , England would be the poor by 
 many a million . our great Houses tend also to the refinement of national 
 taste ; they have their show place , their picture gallery , their 
 beautiful ground . the humblest drawing - room owe an elegance or 
 comfort , the small garden a flower or esculent , to the importation 
 which luxury borrow from abroad , or the invention it stimulate at 
 home , for the original benefit of great house . have a fair share of 
 such merit , in common with other great house , the House of Vipont be 
 not without good quality peculiar to itself . precisely because it 
 be the most egotistical of house , fill with the sense of its own 
 identity , and guide by the instinct of its own conservation , it be 
 a very civil , good - natured House , - courteous , generous , hospitable ; a 
 House   I mean the head of it , not of course all its subordinate member , 
 include even the august Lady Selina   that could bow graciously and 
 shake hand with you . even if you have no vote yourself , you might have 
 a cousin who have a vote . and once admit into the family , the House 
 adopt you ; you have only to marry one of its remotest relation and the 
 House send you a wedding present ; and at every general election , invite 
 you to rally round your connection , - the Marquess . therefore , next 
 only to the Established Church , the House of Vipont be that british 
 institution the root of which be the most widely spread . 

 now the Viponts have for long generation be an energetic race . 
 whatever their defect , they have exhibit shrewdness and vigour . the 
 late Marquess   grandfather to the present   have be perhaps the able 
  that be , do most for the House of Vipont   of they all . of a grandiose 
 and superb mode of living ; of a majestic deportment ; of princely 
 manner ; of a remarkable talent for the management of all business , 
 whether private or public ; a perfect enthusiast for the House of Vipont , 
 and aid by a marchioness in all respect worthy of he , - he might be 
 say to be the culminate flower of the venerable stem . but the 
 present lord , succeed to the title as a mere child , be a melancholy 
 contrast , not only to his grandsire , but to the general character of his 
 progenitor . before his time , every Head of the House have do something 
 for it ; even the most frivolous have contribute one have collect the 
 picture , another the statue , a third the medal , a fourth have amass 
 the famous Vipont library ; while other have at least married heiress , 
 or augment , through ducal line , the splendour of the interminable 
 cousinhood . the present Marquess be literally nil . the pith of the 
 Viponts be not in he . he look well ; he dress well : if life be 
 only the dumb show of a tableau , he would have be a paragon of a 
 Marquess . but he be like the watch we give to little child , with 
 a pretty gilt dial - plate , and no work in they . he be thoroughly inert ; 
 there be no wind he up : he could not manage his property ; he could 
 not answer his letter , - very few of they could he even read through . 
 politic do not interest he , nor literature , nor field - sport . he 
 shoot , it be true , but mechanically ; wonder , perhaps , why he do 
 shoot . he attend race , because the House of Vipont keep a racing 
 stud . he bet on his own horse , but if they lose show no vexation . 
 admirer   no Marquess of Montfort could be wholly without they 
 say , " what fine temper ! what good breeding ! " it be nothing but 
 constitutional apathy . no one could call he a bad man : he be not a 
 profligate , an oppressor , a miser , a spendthrift ; he would not have 
 take the trouble to be a bad man on any account . those who behold his 
 character at a distance would have call he an exemplary man . the 
 more conspicuous duty of his station - subscription , charity , the 
 maintenance of grand establishment , the encouragement of the fine 
 art - be virtue admirably perform for he by other . but the phlegm 
 or nullity of his being be not , after all , so complete as I have make 
 it , perhaps , appear . he have one susceptibility which be more common with 
 woman than with man , - the susceptibility to pique . his amour propre 
 be unforgive : pique that , and he could do a rash thing , a foolish 
 thing , a spiteful thing ; pique that , and , prodigious ! the watch go ! he 
 have a root pique against his marchioness . apparently he have conceive 
 this pique from the very first . he show it passively by supreme 
 neglect ; he show it actively by remove she from all the sphere 
 of power which naturally fall to the wife when the husband shun the 
 detail of business . evidently he have a dread lest any one should say , 
 " Lady Montfort influence my lord . " accordingly , not only the management 
 of his estate fall to Carr Vipont , but even of his garden , his 
 household , his domestic arrangement . it be Carr Vipont or Lady Selina 
 who say to Lady Montfort , " give a ball ; " " you should ask so and so to 
 dinner ; " " montfort be much hurt to see the old lawn at the Twickenham 
 villa break up by those new bosquet . true , it be settle on you as a 
 jointure - house , but for that very reason montfort be sensitive , " etc . 
 in fact , they be virtually as separate , my lord and my lady , as if 
 legally disunite , and as if Carr Vipont and Lady Selina be trustee 
 or intermediary in any polite approach to each other . but , on the 
 other hand , it be fair to say that where Lady Montfort 's sphere of 
 action do not interfere with her husband 's plan , habit , liking , 
 disliking , jealous apprehension that she should be suppose to 
 have any ascendency over what exclusively belong to himself as Roi 
 faineant of the Viponts , she be leave free as air . no attempt at 
 masculine control or conjugal advice . at her disposal be wealth without 
 stint , every luxury the soft could desire , every gewgaw the vain could 
 covet . have her pin - money , which in itself be the revenue of an ordinary 
 peeress , fail to satisfy she want ; have she grow tired of wear the 
 family diamond , and covet new gem from Golconda , - a single word to 
 Carr Vipont or Lady Selina would have be answer by a carte blanche 
 on the Bank of England . but Lady Montfort have the misfortune not to be 
 extravagant in her taste . strange to say , in the world Lord Montfort 's 
 marriage be call a love - match ; he have marry a portionless girl , 
 daughter to one of his poor and obscurest cousin , against the 
 uniform policy of the House of Vipont , which do all it could for poor 
 cousin except marry they to its chief . but Lady Montfort 's conduct 
 in these try circumstance be admirable and rare . few affront can 
 humiliate we unless we resent they - and in vain . Lady Montfort have 
 that exquisite dignity which give to submission the grace of cheerful 
 acquiescence . that in the gay world flatterer should gather round a 
 young wife so eminently beautiful , and so wholly leave by her husband 
 to her own guidance , be inevitable . but at the very first insinuate 
 compliment or pathetic condolence , Lady Montfort , so meek in her 
 household , be haughty enough to have daunt Lovelace . she be thus 
 very early feel to be beyond temptation , and the bold pass on , nor 
 presume to tempt . she be unpopular ; call " proud and freezing ; " she 
 do not extend the influence of " the House ; " she do not confirm its 
 fashion , - fashion which necessitate social ease , and which no rank , no 
 wealth , no virtue , can of themselves suffice to give . and this failure 
 on her part be a great offence in the eye of the House of Vipont . " she 
 do absolutely nothing for we , " say Lady Selina ; but Lady Selina in 
 her heart be well pleased that to she in reality thus fall , almost 
 without a rival , the female representation , in the great world , of the 
 Vipont honour . Lady Selina be fashion itself . 

 Lady Montfort 's social peculiarity be in the eagerness with which she 
 seek the society of person who enjoy a reputation for superior 
 intellect , whether statesman , lawyer , author , philosopher , artist . 
 intellectual intercourse seem as if it be her native atmosphere , 
 from which she be habitually banish , to which she return with an 
 instinctive yearning and a new zest of life ; yet be she call , even 
 here , nor seemingly without justice , capricious and unsteady in her 
 liking . these clever personage , after a little while , all seem to 
 disappoint her expectation of they ; she seek the acquaintance of 
 each with cordial earnestness ; slide from the acquaintance with weary 
 languor , - never , after all , less alone than when alone . 

 and so wondrous lovely ! nothing so rare as beauty of the high type : 
 genius and beauty , indeed , be both rare ; genius , which be the beauty 
 of the mind,-beauty , which be the gen ius of the body . but , of the two , 
 beauty be the rarer . all of we can count on our finger some forty 
 or fifty person of undoubted and illustrious genius , include those 
 famous in action , letter , art . but can any of we remember to have see 
 more than four or five specimen of first - rate ideal beauty ? Whosoever 
 have see Lady Montfort would have rank she amongst such four or five 
 in his recollection . there be in her face that lustrous dazzle to which 
 the latin poet , perhaps , refer when he speak of the - 

  " nitor 
  Splendentis Pario marmore purius ... 
  Et voltus , niminm lubricus adspici , " 

 and which an english poet , with the less sensuous but more spiritual 
 imagination of northern genius , have describe in line that an English 
 reader may be pleased to see rescue from oblivion , - 

  " her face be like the milky way I ' the sky , 
  a meeting of gentle light without a name . " 
   suckle 

 the eye so purely bright , the exquisite harmony of colour between 
 the dark   not too dark   hair and the ivory of the skin ; such sweet 
 radiance in the lip when it break into a smile . and it be say that in 
 her maiden day , before Caroline Lyndsay become Marchioness of Montfort , 
 that smile be the most joyous thing imaginable . Absurd now ; you would 
 not think it , but that stately lady have be a wild , fanciful girl , with 
 the merry laugh and the quick tear , fill the air round she 
 with April sunshine . certainly , no being ever yet live the life 
 nature intend they to live , nor have fair play for heart and mind , who 
 contrive , by hook or by crook , to marry the wrong person ! 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

  the interior of the great house . - the British Constitution at home 
  in a family party . 

 Great be the family gathering that Christmas - tide at Montfort Court . 
 Thither flock the cousin of the House in all degree and of various 
 rank . from duke , who have nothing leave to wish for that king and 
 cousinhood can give , to briefless barrister and aspire cornet , of 
 equally good blood with the duke , - the superb family unite its motley 
 scion . such reunion be frequent : they belong to the hereditary 
 policy of the House of Vipont . on this occasion the muster of the 
 clan be more significant than usual ; there be a " crisis " in the 
 constitutional history of the british empire . a new Government have be 
 suddenly form within the last six week , which certainly portend 
 some direful blow on our ancient institution ; for the House of Vipont 
 have not be consult in its arrangement , and be wholly unrepresented 
 in the Ministry , even by a lordship of the Treasury . Carr Vipont have 
 therefore summon the patriotic and resentful kindre . 

 it be an hour or so after the conclusion of dinner . the gentleman have 
 join the lady in the state suite , a suite which the last Marquess 
 have rearrange and redecorate in his old age , during the long illness 
 that finally conduct he to his ancestor . during his early year 
 that princely Marquess have desert Montfort Court for a seat nearer 
 to London , and therefore much more easily fill with that brilliant 
 society of which he have be long the ornament and centre , - railway not 
 then exist for the annihilation of time and space , and a journey to a 
 northern county four day with posthorse make the invitation even 
 of a Marquess of Montfort unallure to languid beauty and gouty 
 minister . but near the end of his worldly career , this long 
 neglect of the dwelling identify with his hereditary title smote the 
 conscience of the illustrious sinner . and other occupation begin 
 to pall , his lordship , accompany and cheer by a chaplain , who have 
 a fine taste in the decorative art , come resolutely to Montfort Court ; 
 and there , surround with architect and gilder and upholsterer , 
 redeem his error ; and , soothe by the reflection of the palace 
 provide for his successor , add to his vault - a coffin . 

 the suite expand before the eye . you be in the grand drawing - room , 
 copy from that of Versailles . that be the picture , full length , of 
 the late Marquess in his robe ; its pendant be the late Marchioness , 
 his wife . that table of malachite be a present from the Russian Emperor 
 Alexander ; that vase of Sevres which rest on it be make for Marie 
 Antoinette , - see her portrait enamel in its centre . through the open 
 door at the far end your eye lose itself in a vista of other pompous 
 chamber , - the music - room , the statue hall , the orangery ; other room 
 there be appertain to the suite , a ballroom fit for Babylon , a 
 library that might have adorn Alexandria , - but they be not light , 
 nor require , on this occasion ; it be strictly a family party , sixty 
 guest and no more . 

 in the drawing - room three whist - table carry off the more elderly and 
 grave . the piano , in the music - room , attract a young group . Lady 
 Selina Vipont 's eld daughter , Honoria , a young lady not yet bring 
 out , but about to be bring out the next season , be thread a 
 wonderfully intricate german piece , 

  " link'd sweetness , long draw out , " 

 with variation . her science be consummate . no pain have be spar 
 on her education ; elaborately accomplish , she be form to be the 
 sympathizing spouse of a wealthy statesman . Lady Montfort be seat by 
 an elderly duchess , who be good - natured and a great talker ; near she be 
 seat two middle - aged gentleman , who have be converse with she till 
 the duchess , have cut in , turn dialogue into monologue . 

 the elder of these two gentleman be Mr. Carr Vipont , bald , with clip 
 parliamentary whisker ; value himself on a likeness to canning , but 
 with a portlier presence ; look a large - acred man . Carr Vipont have about 
 L40,000 a year ; have often refuse office for himself , while take care 
 that other Viponts should have it ; be a great authority in committee 
 business and the rule of the House of Commons ; speak very seldom , and 
 at no great length , never argue , merely state his opinion , carry 
 great weight with he , and as he vote vote fifteen other member of 
 the House of Vipont , besides admire satellite . he can therefore 
 turn division , and have decide the fate of cabinet . a pleasant man , 
 a little consequential , but the reverse of haughty , - unctuously 
 overbearing . the other gentleman , to whom he be listen , be our old 
 acquaintance Colonel Alban Vipont Morley , Darrell 's friend , George 's 
 uncle , - a man of importance , not inferior , indeed , to that of his 
 kinsman Carr ; an authority in clubroom , an oracle in drawing - room , a 
 first - rate man of the beau monde . Alban Morley , a young brother , have 
 enter the Guards young ; retire young also from the Guards with the 
 rank of Colonel , and on receipt of a legacy from an old aunt , which , 
 with the interest derive from the sum at which he sell his commission , 
 allow he a clear income of L1,000 a year . this modest income suffice 
 for all his want , fine gentleman though he be . he have refuse to go 
 into Parliament , - refuse a high place in a public department . single 
 himself , he show his respect for wedlock by the interest he take in 
 the marriage of other people ; just as Earl Warwick , too wise to set 
 up for a king , gratify his passion for royalty by become the 
 king - maker . the Colonel be exceedingly accomplish , a very fair 
 scholar , know most modern language . in paint an amateur , in music a 
 connoisseur ; witty at time , and with wit of a high quality , but thrifty 
 in the expenditure of it ; too wise to be know as a wit . manly too , a 
 daring rider , who have win many a fox 's brush ; a famous deer - stalker , 
 and one of the few english gentleman who still keep up the noble art of 
 fencing , - twice a week to be see , foil in hand , against all comer in 
 Angelo 's room . thin , well - shape , - not handsome , my dear young lady , 
 far from it , but with an air so thoroughbred that , have you see he in 
 the day when the opera - house have a crushroom and a fop ' alley , - see 
 he in either of those resort , surround by elaborate dandy and 
 showy beauty - man , dandy and beauty - man would have seem to 
 you secondrate and vulgar ; and the eye , fascinate by that quiet 
 form , - plain in manner , plain in dress , plain in feature , - you would 
 have say , " how very distinguished it be to be so plain ! " know the 
 great world from the core to the cuticle , and on that knowledge basing 
 authority and position , Colonel Morley be not calculate , not cunning , 
 not suspicious , - his sagacity the more quick because its movement be 
 straightforward ; intimate with the great , but seek , not seek ; 
 not a flatterer nor a parasite , but when his advice be ask   even if 
 advice necessitate reproof   give it with military candour : in fine , 
 a man of such social reputation as render he an ornament and prop 
 to the House of Vipont ; and with unsuspected depth of intelligence and 
 feeling , which lie in the low strata of his knowledge of this world 
 to witness of some other one , and justify Darrell in commend a 
 boy like Lionel Haughton to the Colonel 's friendly care and admonitory 
 counsel . the Colonel , like other man , have his weakness , if weakness it 
 can be call : he believe that the House of Vipont be not merely 
 the corinthian capital , but the embattle keep - not merely the dulce 
 decus , but the praesidium columenque rerum - of the british monarchy . 
 he do not boast of his connection with the House ; he do not provoke 
 your spleen by enlarge on its manifold virtue ; he would often have 
 his harmless jest against its member , or even against its pretension : 
 but such seeming evidence of forbearance or candour be cunning 
 device to mitigate envy . his devotion to the House be not obtrusive : 
 it be profound . he love the House of Vipont for the sake of England : 
 he love England for the sake of the House of Vipont . have it be 
 possible , by some tremendous reversal of the ordinary law of nature , to 
 dissociate the cause of England from the cause of the House of Vipont , 
 the Colonel would have say , " save at least the Ark of the Constitution ! 
 and rally round the old House ! " 

 the Colonel have none of Guy Darrell 's infirmity of family pride ; he 
 care not a rush for mere pedigree , - much too liberal and enlighten 
 for such obsolete prejudice . no ! he know the world too well not to be 
 quite aware that old family and long pedigree be of no use to a man if 
 he have not some money or some merit . but it be of use to a man to be 
 a cousin of the House of Vipont , though without any money , without 
 any merit at all . it be of use to be part and parcel of a british 
 institution ; it be of use to have a legitimate indefeasible right to 
 share in the administration and patronage of an empire , on which   to use 
 a novel illustration   " the sun never set . " you might want nothing 
 for yourself ; the Colonel and the Marquess equally want nothing for 
 themselves but man be not to be a selfish egotist ! Man have cousin : his 
 cousin may want something . demosthene denounce , in word that inflame 
 every manly breast , the ancient Greek who do not love his POLIS 
 or State , even though he take nothing from it but barren honour , and 
 contribute towards it - a great many disagreeable taxis . as the POLIS to 
 the Greek , be the House of Vipont to Alban Vipont Morley . it be the 
 most beautiful , touch affection imaginable ! whenever the House be in 
 difficulty , whenever it be threaten by a CRISIS , the Colonel be by 
 its side , spar no pain , neglect no mean , to get the Ark of the 
 Constitution back into smooth water . that duty do , he retire again 
 into private life , and scorn all other reward than the still whisper 
 of applaud conscience . 

 " yes , " say Alban Morley , whose voice , though low and subdue in tone , 
 be extremely distinct , with a perfect enunciation . " yes , it be quite 
 true , my nephew have take order , - his defect in speech , if not quite 
 remove , have cease to be any obstacle , even to eloquence ; an occasional 
 stammer may be effective , - it increase interest , and when the right 
 word come , there be the charm of surprise in it . I do not doubt that 
 George will be a very distinguished clergyman . " 

 MR . CARR VIPONT . - " we want one ; the House want a very distinguished 
 clergyman : we have none at this moment , - not a bishop , not even a dean ! 
 all mere parish parson , and among they not one we could push . very odd , 
 with more than forty living too . but the Viponts seldom take to the 
 Church kindly : George must be push . the more I think of it , the more 
 we want a bishop : a bishop would be useful in the present CRISIS . " 
  look round the room proudly , and soften his voice , " a numerous 
 gathering , Morley ! this demonstration will strike terror in Downing 
 Street , eh ! the old House stand firm , - never be a family so united : 
 all here , I think , - that is , all worth naming , - all , except Sir 
 James , whom montfort choose to dislike , and George - and George come 
 to - morrow . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " you forget the most eminent of all our 
 connection , - the one who could indeed strike terror into Downing 
 Street , be his voice to be hear again ! " 

 CARR vipont . - " whom do you mean ? ah , I know ! Guy Darrell . his wife be a 
 Vipont ; and he be not here . but he have long since cease to communicate 
 with any of we ; the only connection that ever fall away from the House 
 of Vipont , especially in a CRISIS like the present . Singular man ! for 
 all the use he be to we , he might as well be dead ! but he have a fine 
 fortune : what will he do with it ? " 

 the duchess . - " my dear Lady Montfort , you have hurt yourself with that 
 paper cutter . " 

 LADY montfort . - " no , indeed . hush ! we be disturb Mr. Carr Vipont ! " 

 the Duchess , in awe of Carr Vipont , sink her voice , and gabble on , 
 whisperously . 

 CARR vipont   resume the subject . - " a very fine fortune : what will he 
 do with it ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " I do not   know ; but I have a letter from he some month 
 ago . " 

 CARR vipont . - " you have , and never tell I ! " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " of no importance to you , my dear Carr . his letter 
 merely introduce to I a charming young fellow , - a kinsman of his own 
  no Vipont , - Lionel Haughton , son of poor Charlie Haughton , whom you 
 may remember . " 

 CARR vipont . - " yes , a handsome scamp ; go to the dog . so Darrell take 
 up Charlie 's son : what ! as his heir ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " in his letter to I he anticipate that question in 
 the negative . " 

 CARR vipont . - " have Darrell any near kinsman ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " not that I know of . " 

 CARR vipont . - " perhaps he will select one of his wife 's family for his 
 heir , - a Vipont ; I should not wonder . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY   dryly . - " I should . but why may not Darrell marry again ? 
 I always think he would ; I think so still . " 

 CARR vipont   glance towards his own daughter Honoria . - " well , a wife 
 well choose might restore he to society , and to we . Pity , indeed , that 
 so great an intellect should be suspend , - a voice so eloquent hush . 
 you be right ; in this CRISIS , Guy Darrell once more in the House of 
 Commons , we should have all we require , - an orator , a debater ! very odd , 
 but at this moment we have no speaker , - we the Viponts ! " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " Yourself ! " 

 CARR vipont . - " you be too kind . I can speak on occasion ; but 
 regularly , no . too much drudgery ; not young enough to take to it now . 
 so you think Darrell will marry again ? a remarkably fine - look fellow 
 when I last see he : not old yet ; I dare say well preserve . I wish I 
 have think of ask he here - Montfort ! "   Lord Montfort , with one 
 or two male friend , be pass by towards a billiard - room , open 
 through a side - door from the regular suite   " Montfort ! only think , we 
 forget to invite Guy Darrell . be it too late before our party break 
 up ? " 

 LORD MONTFORT   sullenly . - " I do not   choose Guy Darrell to be invite to 
 my house . " 

 Carr Vipont be literally stun by a reply so contumacious . Lord 
 Montfort demur at what Carr Vipont suggest ? he could not believe his 
 sens . 

 " not choose , my dear Montfort ! you be joke . a monstrous clever 
 fellow , Guy Darrell , and at this CRISIS - " 

 " I hate clever fellow ; no such bore ! " say Lord Montfort , break 
 from the caress clasp of Carr Vipont , and stalk away . 

 " spare your regret , my dear Carr , " say Colonel Morley . " darrell be 
 not in England : I rather believe he be in Verona . " Therewith the Colonel 
 saunter towards the group gather round the piano . a little time 
 afterwards Lady Montfort escape from the Duchess , and , mingling 
 courteously with her lively guest , find herself close to Colonel 
 Morley . " will you give I my revenge at chess ? " she ask , with her rare 
 smile . the Colonel be charm . as they sit down and range their man , 
 Lady Montfort remark carelessly , 

 " I overheard you say you have lately receive a letter from Mr. Darrell . 
 do he write as if well , - cheerful ? you remember that I be much with 
 his daughter , much in his house , when I be a child . he be ever most 
 kind to I . " Lady Montfort 's voice here falter . 

 " he write with no reference to himself , his health , or his spirit . but 
 his young kinsman describe he to I as in good health , - wonderfully 
 young - look for his year . but cheerful , - no ! darrell and I enter 
 the world together ; we be friend as much as a man so busy and so 
 eminent as he could be friend with a man like myself , indolent by habit 
 and obscure out of Mayfair . I know his nature ; we both know something of 
 his family sorrow . he can not be happy ! impossible ! - alone , childless , 
 seclude . poor Darrell , abroad now ; in Verona , too ! - the dull place ! 
 in mourn still for Romeo and Juliet ! ' t be your turn to move . in his 
 letter Darrell talk of go on to Greece , Asia , penetrate into the 
 depth of Africa , - the wild scheme ! Dear County Guy , as we call 
 he at Eton ! what a career his might have be ! do not   let we talk of 
 he , it make I mournful . like Goethe , I avoid painful subject upon 
 principle . " 

 LADY montfort . - " no ; we will not talk of he . no ; I take the Queen 's 
 pawn . no , we will not talk of he ! no ! " the game proceed ; the Colonel 
 be within three move of checkmate his adversary . forget the 
 resolution come to , he say , as she pause , and seem despondently 
 meditate a hopeless defence , 

 " pray , my fair cousin , what make montfort dislike my old friend 
 Darrell ? " 

 " dislike ! do he ! I do not   know . vanquish again , Colonel Morley ! " 
 she rise ; and as he restore the chessman to their box , she lean 
 thoughtfully over the table . 

 " this young kinsman , will he not be a comfort to Mr. Darrell ? " 

 " he would be a comfort and a pride to a father ; but to Darrell , so 
 distant a kinsman , - comfort ! - why and how ? darrell will provide for he , 
 that be all . a very gentlemanlike young man ; go to Paris by my advice ; 
 want polish and knowledge of life . when he come back he must enter 
 society : I have put his name up at White 's ; may I introduce he to you ? " 

 Lady Montfort hesitate , and , after a pause , say , almost rudely , " no . " 

 she leave the Colonel , slightly shrug his shoulder , and pass into 
 the billiard - room with a quick step . some lady be already there 
 look at the player . Lord Montfort be chalk his cue . Lady 
 Montfort walk straight up to he : her colour be heighten ; her lip 
 be quiver ; she place her hand on his shoulder with a wife - like 
 boldness . it seem as if she have come there to seek he from an impulse 
 of affection . she ask with a hurried flutter kindness of voice , 
 if he have be successful , and call he by his christian name . 
 Lord Montfort 's countenance , before merely apathetic , now assume an 
 expression of extreme distaste . " come to teach I to make a cannon , I 
 suppose ! " he say mutteringly , and turn from she , contemplate the 
 ball and miss the cannon . 

 " rather in my way , Lady Montfort , " say he then , and , retire to a 
 corner , say no more . 

 Lady Montfort 's countenance become still more flushed . she linger a 
 moment , return to the drawing - room , and for the rest of the evening 
 be unusually animate , gracious , fascinating . as she retire with her 
 lady guest for the night she look round , see Colonel Morley , and hold 
 out her hand to he . 

 " your nephew come here to - morrow , " say she , " my old play - fellow ; 
 impossible quite to forget old friend ; good night . " 




 CHAPTER IX . 

  " Les extreme se touchent . " 

 the next day the gentleman be disperse out of door , a large shooting 
 party . those who do not shoot , walk forth to inspect the racing stud 
 or the model farm . the lady have take their walk ; some be in 
 their own room , some in the reception - room , at work , or reading , or 
 listen to the piano , - Honoria Carr Vipont again perform . Lady 
 Montfort be absent ; Lady Selina kindly supply the hostess 's place . 
 Lady Selina be embroider , with great skill and taste , a pair of 
 slipper for her eld boy , who be just enter at Oxford , have leave 
 Eton with a reputation of be the neat dresser , and not the bad 
 cricketer , of that renowned educational institute . it be a mistake 
 to suppose that fine lady be not sometimes very fond mother and 
 affectionate wife . Lady Selina , beyond her family circle , be trivial , 
 unsympathizing , cold - hearted , supercilious by temperament , never kind 
 but through policy , artificial as clock work . but in her own home , 
 to her husband , her child , Lady Selina be a very good sort of 
 woman , - devotedly attach to Carr Vipont , exaggerate his talent , 
 think he the first man in England , careful of his honour , zealous 
 for his interest , soothe in his care , tender in his ailment ; to 
 her girl prudent and watchful , to her boy indulgent and caressing ; 
 minutely attentive to the education of the first , accord to her 
 high - breed idea of education , - and they really be ' superior " girl , 
 with much instruction and well - balance mind , - less authoritative with 
 the last , because boy be not under her immediate control , her sense 
 of responsibility allow she to display more fondness and less dignity 
 in her intercourse with they than with young lady who must learn 
 from her example , as well as her precept , the patrician decorum which 
 become the smooth result of impulse restrained and emotion check : 
 boy might make a noise in the world , girl should make none . Lady 
 Selina , then , be work the slipper for her absent son , her heart 
 be full of he at that moment . she be describe his character and 
 expatiating on his promise to two or three attentive listener , all 
 interested , as be themselves of the Vipont blood , in the probable 
 destiny of the heir to the Carr Viponts . 

 " in short , " say Lady Selina , wind up , " as soon as Reginald be of 
 age we shall get he into Parliament . Carr have always lament that he 
 himself be not break into office early ; Reginald must be . nothing so 
 requisite for public man as early training ; make they practical , and 
 not too sensitive to what those horrid newspaper man say . that be 
 Pitt 's great advantage . Reginald have ambition ; he should have occupation 
 to keep he out of mischief . it be an anxious thing for a mother , when a 
 son be good - looking : such danger of his be spoil by the woman . yes , 
 my dear , it be a small foot , very small , - his father 's foot . " 

 " if Lord Montfort should have no family , " say a somewhat distant and 
 subaltern Vipont , whisperingly and hesitate , " do not the title - " 

 " no , my dear , " interrupt Lady Selina ; " no , the title do not come 
 to we . it be a melancholy thought , but the marquisate , in that case , be 
 extinct . no other heir - male from Gilbert , the first marquess . Carr say 
 there be even likely to be some dispute about the earldom . the Barony , 
 of course , be safe ; go with the irish estate , and most of the 
 English ; and go   do not   you know ?   to Sir James Vipont , the last person 
 who ought to have it ; the quiet , stupidest creature ; not bring 
 up to the sort of thing , - a mere gentleman - farmer on a small estate in 
 Devonshire . " 

 " he be not here ? " 

 " no . Lord Montfort do not like he . very natural . nobody like his 
 heir , if not his own child ; and some people do not   even like their own 
 eld son ! shocking ; but so it be . montfort be the kind , most 
 tractable be that ever be , except where he take a dislike . he 
 dislike two or three people very much . " 

 " true ; how he do dislike poor Mrs. Lyndsay ! " say one of the listener , 
 smile . 

 " Mrs. Lyndsay , yes , - dear Lady Montfort 's mother . I can not   say I pity 
 she , though I be sorry for Lady Montfort . how Mrs. Lyndsay ever take in 
 montfort for Caroline I can not   conceive ! how she have the face to think of 
 it ! he , a mere youth at the time ! kept secret from all his family , even 
 from his grandmother , - the dark transaction . I do not   wonder that he 
 never forgave it . " 

 FIRST LISTENER . - " Caroline have beauty enough to - " 

 LADY SELINA   interrupting . - " Beauty , of course : no one can deny that . 
 but not at all suit to such a position , not bring up to the sort of 
 thing . poor Montfort ! he should have marry a different kind of woman 
 altogether , - a woman like his grandmother , the last Lady Montfort . 
 Caroline do nothing for the House , - nothing ; have not even a 
 child , - most unfortunate affair . " 

 SECOND LISTENER . - " Mrs. Lyndsay be very poor , be not she ? Caroline , I 
 suppose , have no opportunity of form those taste and habit which be 
 necessary for - for - " 

 LADY SELINA   help the listener . - " for such a position and such a 
 fortune . you be quite right , my dear . People bring up in one way 
 can not accommodate themselves to another ; and it be odd , but I have 
 observe that people bring up poor can accommodate themselves less to 
 be very rich than people bring up rich can accommodate themselves 
 to be very poor . as Carr say , in his pointed way , ' it be easy to 
 stoop than to climb . ' yes ; Mrs. Lyndsay be , you know , a daughter of 
 Seymour Vipont , who be for so many year in the Administration , with a 
 fair income from his salary , and nothing out of it . she marry one 
 of the Scotch Lyndsays , - good family , of course , with a very moderate 
 property . she be leave a widow young , with an only child , Caroline . come 
 to town with a small jointure . the late Lady Montfort be very kind 
 to she . so be we all ; take she up ; pretty woman ; pretty manner ; 
 worldly , - oh , very ! I do not   like worldly people . well , but all of a 
 sudden a dreadful thing happen . the heir - at - law dispute the jointure , 
 deny that Lyndsay have any right to make settlement on the Scotch 
 property ; very complicated business . but , luckily for she , Vipont 
 Crooke 's daughter , her cousin and intimate friend , have marry Darrell , 
 the famous Darrell , who be then at the bar . it be very useful to have 
 cousin marry to clever people . he be interested in her case , take 
 it up . I believe it do not come on in the court in which Darrell 
 practise . but he arrange all the evidence , inspect the brief , spend 
 a great deal of his own money in get up the case ; and in fact he 
 gain her cause , though he could not be her counsel . People do say 
 that she be so grateful that after his wife 's death she have set she 
 heart on become Mrs. Darrell the second . but Darrell be then quite 
 wrap up in politic , - the last man to fall in love , and only 
 look bored when woman fall in love with he , which a good many do . 
 Grand - look creature , my dear , and quite the rage for a year or two . 
 however , Mrs. Lyndsay all of a sudden go off to Paris , and there 
 Montfort see Caroline , and be catch . Mrs. Lyndsay , no doubt , 
 calculate on live with her daughter , have the run of Montfort House 
 in town and Montfort Court in the country . but Montfort be deep than 
 people think for . no , he never forgave she . she be never ask here ; 
 take it to heart , go to Rome , and die . " 

 at this moment the door open , and George Morley , now the Rev. George 
 Morley , enter , just arrive to join his cousin . 

 some know he , some do not . Lady Selina , who make it a point to know 
 all the cousin , rise graciously , put aside the slipper , and give he 
 two finger . she be astonish to find he not nearly so shy as he use 
 to be : wonderfully improve ; at his ease , cheerful , animate . the 
 man now be in his right place , and follow hope on the bent of 
 inclination . few man be shy when in their right place . he ask 
 after Lady Montfort . she be in her own small sitting - room , 
 write letter , - letter that Carr Vipont have entreat she to 
 write , - correspondence useful to the House of Vipont . before long , 
 however , a servant enter , to say that Lady Montfort would be 
 very happy to see Mr. Morley . George follow the servant into 
 that unpretende sitting - room , with its simple chintz and quiet 
 bookshelf , - room that would not have be too fine for a cottage . 




 CHAPTER X. 

  in every life , go it fast , go it slow , there be critical pausing- 
  place . when the journey be renew the face of the country be 
  change . 

 how well she suit that simple room ; herself so simply dressed , her 
 marvellous beauty so exquisitely subdue ! she look at home there , as 
 if all of home that the house could give be there collect . 

 she have finish and seal the momentous letter , and have come , with a 
 sense of relief , from the table at the farther end of the room , on which 
 those letter , ceremonious and conventional , have be write , - come to 
 the window , which , though mid - winter , be open , and the redbreast , with 
 whom she have make friend , hop boldly almost within reach , look at 
 she with bright eye and head curiously aslant . by the window a single 
 chair , and a small reading - desk , with the book lie open . the short 
 day be not far from its close , but there be ample light still in the 
 sky , and a serene if chilly stillness in the air without . 

 though expect the relation she have just summon to her presence , I 
 fear she have half forget he . she be stand by the window deep in 
 revery as he enter , so deep that she start when his voice strike she 
 ear and he stand before she . she recover herself quickly , however , 
 and say with even more than her ordinary kindliness of tone and manner 
 towards the scholar , " I be so glad to see and congratulate you . " 

 " and I so glad to receive your congratulation , " answer the scholar in 
 smooth , slow voice , without a stutter . 

 " but , George , how be this ? " ask Lady Montfort . " bring that chair , 
 sit down here , and tell I all about it . you write I word you be 
 cure , - at least sufficiently to re move your noble scruple . you 
 do not say how . your uncle tell I , by patient will and resolute 
 practice . " 

 " under good guidance . but I be go to confide to you a secret , if you 
 will promise to keep it . " 

 " oh , you may trust I : I have no female friend . " 

 the clergyman smile , and speak at once of the lesson he have receive 
 from the basketmaker . 

 " I have his permission , " he say in conclusion , " to confide the service 
 he render I , the intimacy that have spring up between we , but to you 
 alone , - not a word to your guest . when you have once see he , you will 
 understand why an eccentric man , who have know well day , would shrink 
 from the impertinent curiosity of idle customer . content with his 
 humble livelihood , he ask but liberty and repose . " 

 " that I already comprehend , " say Lady Montfort , half sigh , half 
 smile . " but my curiosity shall not molest he , and when I visit the 
 village , I will pass by his cottage . " 

 " Nay , my dear Lady Montfort , that would be to refuse the favour I be 
 about to ask , which be that you would come with I to that very cottage . 
 it would so please he . " 

 " please he ! why ? " 

 " because this poor man have a young female grandchild , and he be so 
 anxious that you should see and be kind to she , and because , too , he 
 seem most anxious to remain in his present residence . the cottage , of 
 course , belong to Lord Montfort , and be let to he by the bailiff , and 
 if you deign to feel interest in he , his tenure be safe . " 

 Lady Montfort look down , and colour . she think , perhaps , how false 
 a security her protection , and how slight an influence her interest 
 would be ; but she do not say so . George go on ; and so eloquently , 
 and so touchingly do he describe both grandsire and grandchild , so 
 skilfully do he intimate the mystery which hang over they , that Lady 
 Montfort become much move by his narrative ; and willingly promise to 
 accompany he across the park to the basketmaker 's cottage the first 
 opportunity . but when one have sixty guest in one 's house , one have 
 to wait for an opportunity to escape from they unremarked . and the 
 opportunity , in fact , do not come for many day ; not till the party 
 break up , save one or two dowager she - cousin who " give no trouble , " and 
 one or two bachelor he - cousin whom my lord retain to consummate the 
 slaughter of pheasant , and play at billiard in the dreary interval 
 between sunset and dinner , dinner and bedtime . 

 then one cheerful frosty noon George Morley and his fair cousin walk 
 boldly en evidence , before the pry ghostly window , across the 
 broad gravel walk ; gain the secluded shrubbery , the solitary deep 
 of park - land ; skirt the wide sheet of water , and , pass through 
 a private wicket in the pal , suddenly come upon the patch of 
 osier - ground and humble garden , which be back by the basketmaker 's 
 cottage . 

 as they enter those lowly precinct a child 's laugh be bear to their 
 ear , - a child 's silvery , musical , mirthful laugh ; it be long since the 
 great lady have hear a laugh like that , - a happy child 's natural laugh . 
 she pause and listen with a strange pleasure . " yes , " whisper George 
 Morley , ' stop - and hush ! there they be . " 

 Waife be seat on the stump of a tree , material for his handicraft 
 lie beside neglect . Sophy be stand before he , - he raise his 
 finger as if in reproof , and strive hard to frown . as the intruder 
 listen , they overhear that he be strive to teach she the rudiment 
 of french dialogue , and she be laugh merrily at her own blunder , 
 and at the solemn affectation of the shock schoolmaster . Lady Montfort 
 note with no unnatural surprise the purity of idiom and of accent with 
 which this singular basketmaker be unconsciously display his perfect 
 knowledge of a language which the well - educate english gentleman of 
 that generation , nay , even of this , rarely speak with accuracy and 
 elegance . but her attention be divert immediately from the teacher to 
 the face of the sweet pupil . woman have a quick appreciation of beauty 
 in their own sex ; and woman who be themselves beautiful , not the 
 least . Irresistibly Lady Montfort feel attract towards that innocent 
 countenance so lively in its mirth , and yet so softly gay . Sir Isaac , 
 who have hitherto lain perdu , watch the movement of a thrush amidst 
 a holly - bush , now start up with a bark . Waife rise ; Sophy turn half 
 in flight . the visitor approach . 

 here slowly , lingeringly , let fall the curtain . in the frank license 
 of narrative , year will have roll away ere the curtain rise again . 
 event that may influence a life often date from moment the most 
 serene , from thing that appear as trivial and unnoticeable as the great 
 lady 's visit to the basketmaker 's cottage . which of those life 
 will that visit influence hereafter , - the woman 's , the child 's , the 
 vagrant 's ? whose ? probably little that pass now would aid conjecture , 
 or be a visible link in the chain of destiny . a few desultory question ; 
 a few guard answer ; a look or so , a musical syllable or two , 
 exchange between the lady and the child ; a basket buy , or a promise 
 to call again . nothing worth the telling . be it then untold . view only 
 the scene itself as the curtain drop reluctantly . the rustic cottage , 
 its garden - door open , and open its old - fashioned lattice casement . you 
 can see how neat and cleanly , how eloquent of healthful poverty , how 
 remote from squalid penury , the whitewashed wall , the homely furniture 
 within . creeper lately train around the doorway ; Christmas holly , 
 with berry red against the window - pane ; the bee - hive yonder ; a 
 starling , too , outside the threshold , in its wicker cage ; in the 
 background   all the rest of the neighbouring hamlet out of sight , the 
 church spire taper away into the clear blue wintry sky . all have an 
 air of repose , of safety . close beside you be the Presence of HOME ; that 
 ineffable , shelter , love Presence , which amidst solitude murmur 
 " not solitary , " - a Presence unvouchsafe to the great lady in the palace 
 she have leave . and the lady herself ? she be rest on the rude gnarl 
 root - stump from which the vagrant have rise ; she have draw Sophy towards 
 she ; she have take the child 's hand ; she be speak now , now listen ; 
 and on her face kindness look like happiness . perhaps she be happy 
 that moment . and Waife ? he be turn aside his weatherbeaten mobile 
 countenance with his hand anxiously tremble upon the young scholar 's 
 arm . the scholar whisper , " be you satisfied with I ? " and Waife 
 answer in a voice as low but more break , " God reward you ! oh , joy ! if 
 my pretty one have find at last a woman friend ! " poor vagabond , he have 
 now a calm asylum , a fixed humble livelihood ; more than that , he have 
 just achieve an object fondly cherish . his past life , - alas ! what have 
 he do with it ? his actual life , break fragment though it be , be 
 at rest now . but still the everlasting question , - mock terrible 
 question , with its phrasing of farce and its enigma of tragical 
 sense , - " what will he do with it ? " do with what ? the all that remain to 
 he , the all he hold ! the all which man himself , betwixt Free - will and 
 Pre - decree , be permit to do . ask not the vagrant alone : ask each of 
 the four there assemble on that fly bridge call the Moment . time 
 before thee , - what wilt thou do with it ? ask thyself ! ask the wise ! 
 out of effort to answer that question , what dream - school have rise , 
 never wholly to perish , - the science of seer on the Chaldee 's 
 Pur - Tor , or in the rock - cave of Delphi , gasp after and grasp at by 
 horn - hand mechanic to - day in their lane and alley . to the heart of 
 the populace sink down the blurred relic of what once be the law of 
 the secret sage , hieroglyphical tatter which the credulous vulgar 
 attempt to interpret . " what will he do with it ? " ask Merle and his 
 Crystal ! but the curtain descend ! yet a moment , there they be , - age 
 and childhood , - poverty , wealth , station , vagabondage ; the preacher 's 
 sacred learning and august ambition ; fancy of dawn reason ; hope 
 of intellect mature ; memory of existence wreck ; household sorrow ; 
 untold regret ; elegy and epic in low , close , human sigh , to which 
 Poetry never yet give voice : all for the moment personify there 
 before you , - a glimpse for the guess , no more . lower and low fall the 
 curtain ! all be blank ! 




 BOOK VI . 




 CHAPTER I. 

  Etchings of Hyde Park in the month of June , which , if this history 
  escape those villain the trunk - maker , may be of inestimable value 
  to unborn antiquarian . - character , long absent , reappear and give 
  some account of themselves . 

 five year have pass away since this history open . it be the month 
 of June once more , - June , which clothe our London in all its glory , 
 fill its languid ballroom with living flower , and its stony causeway 
 with human butterfly . it be about the hour of six P.M. the lounge in 
 Hyde Park be crowd ; along the road that skirt the serpentine crawl 
 the carriage one after the other ; congregate by the rail the lazy 
 looker - on , - lazy in attitude , but with active eye , and tongue 
 sharpen on the whetstone of scandal , - the scaliger of club window 
 air their vocabulary in the Park . slowly saunter on foot idler 
 of all degree in the hierarchy of London idlesse : dandy of 
 establish - fame ; youthful tiro in their first season . yonder in the 
 Ride , form less inanimate seem condemn to active exercise ; young 
 lady do penance in a canter ; old beaux at hard labour in a 
 trot . sometimes , by a more thoughtful brow , a still brisker pace , you 
 recognize a busy member of the Imperial Parliament , who , advise by 
 physician to be as much on horseback as possible , snatch an hour or 
 so in the interval between the close of his Committee and the interest 
 of the Debate , and shirk the opening speech of a well - know bore . among 
 such truant lawgiver   grief it be to say it   may be see that once 
 model member , Sir Gregory Stollhead . grim dyspepsia seize on he at 
 last , " relaxation from his duty " become the adequate punishment for 
 all his sin . Solitary he rid , and commune with himself , yawn at 
 every second . upon chair beneficently locate under the tree towards 
 the north side of the walk be intersperse small knot and coterie 
 in repose . there you might see the Ladies Prymme , still the lady 
 Prymme , - Janet and Wilhelmina ; Janet have grow fat , Wilhelmina thin . but 
 thin or fat , they be no less prymme . they do not lack male attendant ; 
 they be girl of high fashion , with whom young man think it a 
 distinction to be see talk ; of high principle , too , and high 
 pretension   unhappily for themselves , they be co - heiress , by whom 
 young man under the rank of earl need not fear to be artfully entrap 
 into " honourable intention . " they coquet majestically , but they 
 never flirt ; they exact devotion , but they do not ask in each victim a 
 sacrifice on the horn of the altar ; they will never give their hand 
 where they do not give their heart ; and be ever afraid that they 
 be court for their money , they will never give their heart save to 
 wooer who have much more money than themselves . many young man stop to 
 do pass homage to the Ladies Prymme : some linger to converse ; safe 
 young man , - they be all young son . far on , Lady Frost and Mr. 
 Crampe , the wit , sit amicably side by side , peck at each other with 
 sarcastic beak ; occasionally desist , in order to fasten nip and 
 claw upon that common enemy , the pass friend ! the Slowes , a numerous 
 family , but taciturn , sit by themselves ; bow to much , accost rarely . 

 note that man of good presence , somewhere about thirty , or a year or two 
 more , who , recognize by most of the lounger , seem not at home in the 
 lounge . he have pass by the various coterie just describe , make his 
 obeisance to the Ladies Prymme , receive an icy epigram from Lady Frost , 
 and a laconic sneer from Mr. Crampe , and exchange silent bow with 
 seven silent Slowes . he have wander on , look high in the air , but 
 still look for some one not in the air , and evidently disappoint in 
 his search , come to a full stop at length , take off his hat , wipe 
 his brow , utter a petulant " Prr - r - pshaw ! " and see , a little in 
 the background , the chairless shade of a thin , emaciated , dusty tree , 
 thither he retire , and seat himself with as little care whether there 
 to seat himself be the right thing in the right place , as if in the 
 honeysuckle arbour of a village inn . " it serve I right , " say he to 
 himself : " a precocious villain burst in upon I , break my day , make 
 an appointment to meet I here , in these very walk , ten minute before 
 six ; decoy I with the promise of a dinner at Putney , - room look on 
 the river and fried flounder . I have the credulity to yield : I derange 
 my habit ; I leave my cool studio ; I put off my easy blouse ; I imprison 
 my freeborn throat in a cravat invent by the Thugs ; the dog - day 
 be at hand , and I walk rashly over scorch pavement in a black 
 frock - coat and a brimless hat ; I annihilate 3s . 6d . in a pair of kid 
 glove ; I arrive at this haunt of spleen ; I run the gauntlet of frost , 
 Slowes , and prymme : and my traitor fail I ! half - past six , - not a sign 
 of he ! and the dinner at Putney , - fry flounder ? dream ! patience , 
 five minute more ; if then he come not , breach for life between he and 
 I ! ah , voila ! there he come , the laggard ! but how those fine folk be 
 catch at he ! have he ask they also to dinner at Putney , and do they 
 care for fried flounder ? " 

 the soliloquist 's eye be on a young man , much young than himself , who 
 be thread the motley crowd with a light quick step , but be compel 
 to stop at each moment to interchange a word of welcome , a shake of the 
 hand . evidently he have already a large acquaintance ; evidently he be 
 popular , on good term with the world and himself . what free grace 
 in his bearing ! what gay good - humour in his smile ! power above ! Lady 
 Wilhelmina surely blush as she return his bow . he have pass Lady 
 Frost unblighte ; the Slowes evince emotion , at least the female Slowes , 
 as he shoot by they with that slide bow . he look from side to side , 
 with the rapid glance of an eye in which light seem all dance and 
 sparkle : he see the soliloquist under the meagre tree ; the pace 
 quicken , the lip part half laugh . 

 " do not   scold , Vance . I be late , I know ; but I do not make allowance for 
 interception . " 

 " body o ' me , interception ! for an absentee just arrive in London , you 
 seem to have no lack of friend . " 

 " friend make in Paris and find again here at every corner , like 
 pleasant surprise , - but no friend so welcome and dear as Frank Vance . " 

 " sensible of the honour , o Lionello the Magnificent . verily you be bon 
 prince ! the Houses of Valois and of Medici be always kind to artist . 
 but whither would you lead I ? back into that treadmill ? thank you , 
 humbly ; no . " 

 " a crowd in fine clothe be of all mob the dull . I can look 
 undismaye on the many - head monster , wild and rampant ; but when the 
 many - head monster buy its hat in Bond Street , and have an eyeglass 
 at each of its inquisitive eye , I confess I take fright . besides , it be 
 near seven o'clock ; Putney not visible , and the flounder not fry ! " 

 " my cab be wait yonder ; we must walk to it : we can keep on the turf , 
 and avoid the throng . but tell I honestly , Vance , do you really dislike 
 to mix in crowd ; you , with your fame , dislike the eye that turn 
 back to look again , and the lip that respectfully murmur , ' vance the 
 Painter ' ? ah , I always say you would be a great painter , - and in five 
 short year you have soar high . " 

 " Pooh ! " answer Vance , indifferently . " nothing be pure and 
 unadulterate in London use ; not cream , nor cayenne pepper ; least of 
 all Fame , - mix up with the most deleterious ingredient . fame ! do you 
 read the ' Times ' critique on my picture in the present exhibition ? fame 
 indeed change the subject . nothing so good as flounder . Ho ! be that 
 your cab ? superb ! car fit for the ' grecian youth of talent rare , ' in 
 Mr. Enfield 's ' Speaker ; ' horse that seem conjure out of the Elgin 
 Marbles . be he quiet ? " 

 " not very ; but trust to my driving . you may well admire the 
 horse , - present from Darrell , choose by Colonel Morley . " when the young 
 man have settle themselves into the vehicle , Lionel dismiss his groom , 
 and , touch his horse , the animal trot out briskly . 

 " Frank , " say Lionel , shake his dark curl with a petulant gravity , 
 " your cynical definition be unworthy that masculine beard . you despise 
 fame ! what sheer affectation ! 

  " ' Pulverem Olympicum 
  Collegisse juvat ; metaque fervidi 
  Evitata rotis - - - ' " 

 " take care , " cry Vance ; " we shall be over . " for Lionel , grow 
 excited , tease the horse with his whip ; and the horse bolting , take the 
 cab within an inch of a water - cart . 

 " Fame , fame ! " cry Lionel , unheede the interruption . " what would 
 I not give to have and to hold it for an hour ? " " hold an eel , less 
 slippery ; a scorpion , less stinging ! but - " add Vance , observe his 
 companion 's heighten colour - " but , " he add seriously , and with an 
 honest compunction , " I forgot , you be a soldier , you follow the career 
 of arm ! never heed what be say on the subject by a querulous painter ! 
 the desire of fame may be folly in civilian : in soldier it be wisdom . 
 Twin - bear with the martial sense of honour , it cheer the march ; it 
 warm the bivouac ; it give music to the whir of the bullet , the roar 
 of the ball ; it plant hope in the thick of peril ; knit rival with the 
 bond of brother ; comfort the survivor when the brother fall ; take 
 from war its grim aspect of carnage ; and from homicide itself extract 
 lesson that strengthen the safeguard to humanity , and perpetuate life 
 to nation . right : pant for fame ; you be a soldier ! " 

 this be one of those burst of high sentiment from Vance , which , as 
 they be very rare with he , have the dramatic effect of surprise . 
 Lionel listen to he with a thrilling delight . he could not answer : 
 he be too move . the artist resume , as the cabriolet now clear the 
 Park , and roll safely and rapidly along the road . " I suppose , during 
 the five year you have spend abroad complete your general education , 
 you have make little study , or none , of what specially appertain to the 
 profession you have so recently choose . " 

 " you be mistaken there , my dear Vance . if a man 's heart be set on 
 a thing , he be always study it . the book I love well , and most 
 ponder over , be such as , if they do not administer lesson , 
 suggest hint that might turn to lesson hereafter . in social 
 intercourse , I never be so pleased as when I could fasten myself to 
 some practical veteran , - question and cross - examine he . one pick up 
 more idea in conversation than from book ; at least I do . besides , 
 my idea of a soldier who be to succeed some day be not that of a mere 
 mechanician - at - arm . see how accomplished most great captain have be . 
 what observer of mankind ! what diplomatist ! what reasoner ! what man 
 of action , because man to whom reflection have be habitual before they 
 act ! how many store of idea must have go to the judgment which 
 hazard the sortie or decide on the retreat ! " 

 " gently , gently ! " cry Vance . " we shall be into that omnibus ! give I 
 the whip , - do ; there , a little more to the left , - so . yes ; I be glad to 
 see such enthusiasm in your profession : ' t be half the battle . Hazlitt 
 say a capital thing , ' the ' prentice who do not consider the Lord 
 Mayor in his gilt coach the great man in the world will live to be 
 hang ! ' " 

 " Pish ! " say Lionel , catch at the whip . 

 VANCE   hold it back . - " no . I apologize . I retract the Lord Mayor : 
 comparison be odious . I agree with you , nothing like leather . I mean 
 nothing like a really great soldier , - Hannibal , and so forth . Cherish 
 that conviction , my friend : meanwhile , respect human life ; there be 
 another omnibus ! " 

 the danger past , the artist think it prudent to divert the 
 conversation into some channel less exciting . 

 " Mr. Darrell , of course , consent to your choice of a profession ? " 

 " consent ! approve , encourage . write I such a beautiful letter ! what 
 a comprehensive intelligence that man have ! " 

 " necessarily ; since he agree with you . where be he now ? " 

 " I have no notion : it be some month since I hear from he . he be then 
 at Malta , on his return from Asia Minor . " 

 " so ! you have never see he since he bid you farewell at his old 
 Manor - house ? " 

 " never . he have not , I believe , be in England . " 

 " nor in Paris , where you seem to have chiefly reside . " 

 " nor in Paris . ah , Vance , could I but be of some comfort to he . now 
 that I be old , I think I understand in he much that perplex I as 
 a boy when we part . darrell be one of those man who require a 
 home . between the great world and solitude , he need the intermediate 
 filling - up which the life domestic alone supply : a wife to realize the 
 sweet word helpmate ; child , with whose future he could knit his 
 own toil and his ancestral remembrance . that intermediate space 
 annihilate , the great world and the solitude be leave , each frown on 
 the other . " 

 " my dear Lionel , you must have live with very clever people : you be 
 talk far above your year . " 

 " be I ? true ; I have live , if not with very clever people , with people 
 far above my year . that be a secret I learn from Colonel Morley , 
 to whom I must present you , - the subtle intellect under the quiet 
 manner . once he say to I , ' would you throughout life be up to the 
 height of your century , - always in the prime of man 's reason , without 
 crudeness and without decline , - live habitually while young with person 
 old , and when old with person young , than yourself . ' " 

 " shrewdly say indeed . I felicitate you on the evident result of the 
 maxim . and so Darrell have no home , - no wife and no child ? " 

 " he have long be a widower ; he lose his only son in boyhood , and his 
 daughter - do you never hear ? " 

 " no , what ? " 

 " marry so ill - a runaway match - and die many year since , without 
 issue . " 

 " poor man ! it be these affliction , then , that sour his life , and 
 make he the hermit or the wanderer ? " 

 " there , " say Lionel , " I be puzzle ; for I find that , even after his 
 son 's death and his daughter 's unhappy marriage and estrangement from 
 he , he be still in Parliament and in full activity of career . but 
 certainly he do not long keep it up . it might have be an effort to 
 which , strong as he be , he feel himself unequal ; or , might he have 
 know some fresh disappointment , some new sorrow , which the world never 
 guess ? what I have say as to his family affliction the world know . 
 but I think he will marry again . that idea seem strong in his own mind 
 when we part ; he bring it out bluntly , roughly . Colonel Morley be 
 convince that he will marry , if but for the sake of an heir . " 

 VANCE . - " and if so , my poor Lionel , you be oust of - " 

 lionel   quickly interrupt . - " hush ! do not say , my dear Vance , do not 
 you say - you ! - one of those low , mean thing which , if say to I even 
 by man for whom I have no esteem , make my ear tingle and my cheek 
 blush . when I think of what Darrell have already do for I , - I who 
 have no claim on he , - it seem to I as if I must hate the man who 
 insinuate , ' fear lest your benefactor find a smile at his own hearth , a 
 child of his own blood ; for you may be rich at his death in proportion 
 as his life be desolate . ' " 

 VANCE . - " you be a fine young fellow , and I beg your pardon . take care 
 of that milestone : thank you . but I suspect that at least two - third of 
 those friendly hand that detain you on the way to I be stretch 
 out less to Lionel Haughton , a subaltern in the Guards , than to Mr. 
 Darrell 's heir presumptive . " 

 LIONEL . - " that think sometimes gall I , but it do I good ; for it 
 goad on my desire to make myself some one whom the most worldly would 
 not disdain to know for his own sake . oh for active service ! oh for a 
 sharp campaign ! oh for fair trial how far a man in earnest can grapple 
 Fortune to his breast with his own strong hand ! you have do so , 
 Vance ; you have but your genius and your painter 's brush . I have no 
 genius ; but I have a resolve , and resolve be perhaps as sure of its 
 end as genius . Genius and Resolve have three grand element in 
 common , - Patience , Hope , and Concentration . " 

 Vance , more and more surprised , look hard at Lionel without speak . 
 five year of that critical age , from seventeen to twenty - two , spend in 
 the great capital of Europe ; keep from its more dangerous vice partly 
 by a proud sense of personal dignity , partly by a temperament which , 
 regard love as an ideal for all tender and sublime emotion , recoil 
 from low profligacy as be to love what the Yahoo of the mocking 
 satirist be to man ; absorb much by the brooding ambition that take 
 youth out of the frivolous present into the serious future , and seek 
 companionship , not with contemporary idler , but with the high and 
 mature intellect that the free commonwealth of good society bring 
 within his reach : five year so spend have develop a boy , nursing noble 
 dream , into a man fit for noble action , - retain fresh youth in 
 its enthusiasm , its elevation of sentiment , its daring , its energy , and 
 divine credulity in its own unexhausted resource ; but borrow from 
 maturity compactness and solidity of idea , - the link between speculation 
 and practice , the power to impress on other a sense of the superiority 
 which have be self - elaborate by unconscious culture . 

 " so ! " say Vance , after a prolonged pause , " I do not   know whether I have 
 resolve or genius ; but certainly if I have make my way to some small 
 reputation , patience , hope , and concentration of purpose must have the 
 credit of it ; and prudence , too , which you have forget to name , and 
 certainly do not   evince as a charioteer . I hope , my dear fellow , you be 
 not extravagant ? no doubt , eh ? - why do you laugh ? " 

 " the question be so like you , Frank , - thrifty as ever . " 

 " do you think I could have paint with a calm mind if I know that at my 
 door there be a dun whom I could not pay ? art need serenity ; and if an 
 artist begin his career with as few shirt to his back as I have , he must 
 place economy amongst the rule of perspective . " 

 Lionel laugh again , and make some comment on economy which be 
 certainly , if smart , rather flippant , and tend not only to lower the 
 favourable estimate of his intellectual improvement which Vance have 
 just form , but seriously disquiet the kindly artist . Vance know the 
 world , - know the peculiar temptation to which a young man in Lionel 's 
 position would be expose , - know that contempt for economy belong to 
 that school of Peripatetics which reserve its last lesson for finish 
 disciple in the sacred walk of the Queen 's Bench . 

 however , that be no auspicious moment for didactic warning . 

 " here we be ! " cry Lionel , - " Putney Bridge . " 

 they reach the little inn by the river - side , and while dinner be 
 get ready they hire a boat . Vance take the oar . 

 VANCE . - " not so pretty here as by those green quiet bank along which we 
 glide , at moonlight , five year ago . " 

 LIONEL . - " ah , no ! and that innocent , charming child , whose portrait you 
 take , - you have never hear of she since ? " 

 VANCE . - " never ! how should I ? have you ? " 

 lionel . - " only what Darrell repeat to I . his lawyer have ascertain 
 that she and her grandfather have go to America . Darrell gently imply 
 that , from what he learn of they , they scarcely merit the interest I 
 feel in their fate . but we be not deceive , be we , Vance ? " 

 vance - " No ; the little girl - what be her name ? Sukey ? Sally ? Sophy , 
 true - Sophy have something about she extremely prepossessing , besides she 
 pretty face ; and , in spite of that horrid cotton print , I shall never 
 forget it . " 

 lionel - " her face ! nor I. I see it still before I ! " 

 vance - " her cotton print ! I see it still before I ! but I must not be 
 ungrateful . would you believe it , - that little portrait , which cost I 
 three pound , have make , I do not   say my fortune , but my fashion ? " 

 lionel - " how ! you have the heart to sell it ? " 

 VANCE . - " no ; I keep it as a study for young female head - ' with 
 variation , ' as they say in music . it be by my female head that I 
 become the fashion ; every order I have contain the condition , ' but be 
 sure , one of your sweet female head , Mr. Vance . ' my female head be 
 as necessary to my canvas as a white horse to Wouvermans ' . well , that 
 child , who cost I three pound , be the original of they all . commencing 
 as a Titania , she have be in turn a ' psyche , ' a ' Beatrice - Cenci , ' 
 a ' Minna , ' ' a portrait of a Nobleman 's daughter , ' ' Burns 's Mary in 
 Heaven , ' ' the Young Gleaner , ' and ' Sabrina Fair , ' in Milton 's ' Comus . ' 
 I have lead that child through all history , sacred and profane . I have 
 paint she in all costume   her own cotton print except . my female 
 head be my glory ; even the ' Times ' critic allow that ! ' Mr. Vance , 
 there , be inimitable ! a type of childlike grace peculiarly his own , ' 
 etc . I will lend you the article . " 

 LIONEL . - " and shall we never again see the original darling Sophy ? you 
 will laugh , Vance , but I have be heartproof against all young lady . 
 if ever I marry , my wife must have Sophy 's eye ! in America ! " 

 VANCE . - " let we hope by this time happily married to a Yankee ! yankee 
 marry girl in their teen , and do not   ask for dowry . marry to a 
 Yankee ! not a doubt of it ! a Yankee who thaw , whittle , and keep a 
 ' store ' ! " 

 LIONEL . - " Monster ! hold your tongue . a propos of marriage , why be you 
 still single ? " 

 VANCE . - " because I have no wish to be double up ! moreover , man be like 
 a napkin , the more neatly the housewife double he , the more carefully 
 she lay he on the shelf . neither can a man once double know how often 
 he may be double . not only his wife fold he in two , but every child 
 quarter he into a new double , till what be a wide and handsome 
 substance , large enough for anything in reason , dwindle into a pitiful 
 square that will not cover one platter , - all pucker and crease , 
 small and small with every double , with every double a new crease . 
 then , my friend , come the washing - bill ! and , besides all the hurt 
 one receive in the mangle , consider the hourly wear and tear of the 
 linen - press ! in short , Shakspeare vindicate the single life , and 
 depict the double in the famous line , which be no doubt intend to be 
 allegorical of marriage , 

  " ' double , double , toil and trouble . ' 

 besides , no single man can be fairly call poor . what double man can 
 with certainty be call rich ? a single man can lodge in a garret , and 
 dine on a herring : nobody know ; nobody care . let he marry , and he 
 invite the world to witness where he lodge , and how he din . the 
 first necessary a wife demand be the most ruinous , the most indefinite 
 superfluity ; it be gentility accord to what her neighbour call 
 genteel . gentility commence with the honeymoon ; it be its shadow , and 
 lengthen as the moon decline . when the honey be all go , your bride 
 say , ' we can have our tea without sugar when quite alone , love ; but , 
 in case gentility drop in , here be a bill for silver sugar - tong ! ' that be 
 why I be single . " 

 " economy again , Vance . " 

 " Prudence , - dignity , " answer Vance , seriously ; and sink into a 
 revery that seem gloomy , he shoot back to shore . 




 CHAPTER II . 

  Mr. Vance explain how he come to grind colour and save half - pence . 
  - a sudden announcement . 

 the meal be over ; the table have be spread by a window that look 
 upon the river . the moon be up : the young man ask for no other 
 light ; conversation between they - often shift , often pause - have 
 gradually become grave , as it usually do with two companion in youth ; 
 while yet long vista in the Future stretch before they deep in shadow , 
 and they fall into confide talk on what they wish , - what they fear ; 
 make visionary map in that limitless Obscure . 

 " there be so much power in faith , " say Lionel , " even when faith be 
 apply but to thing human and earthly , that let a man be but firmly 
 persuade that he be bear to do , some day , what at the moment seem 
 impossible , and it be fifty to one but what he do it before he die . 
 surely , when you be a child at school , you feel convinced that there 
 be something in your fate distinct from that of the other boy , whom 
 the master might call quite as clever , - feel that faith in yourself 
 which make you sure that you would be one day what you be . " 

 " well , I suppose so ; but vague aspiration and self - conceit must be 
 bind together by some practical necessity - perhaps a very homely and 
 a very vulgar one - or they scatter and evaporate . one would think that 
 rich people in high life ought to do more than poor folk in humble 
 life . More pain be take with their education ; they have more leisure 
 for follow the bent of their genius : yet it be the poor folk , often 
 half self - educate , and with pinched belly , that do three - fourth of 
 the world 's grand labour . poverty be the keen stimulant ; and poverty 
 make I say , not ' I will do , ' but ' I must . ' " 

 " you know real poverty in childhood , Frank ? " 

 " real poverty , cover over with sham affluence . my father be Genteel 
 Poverty , and my mother be poor gentility . the sham affluence go when 
 my father die . the real poverty then come out in all its ugliness . I 
 be take from a genteel school , at which , long afterwards , I 
 genteelly pay the bill ; and I have to support my mother somehow or 
 other , - somehow or other I succeed . alas , I fear not genteelly ! but 
 before I lose she , which I do in a few year , she have some comfort 
 which be not appearance ; and she kindly allow , dear soul , that 
 gentility and sham do not go well together . oh , beware of debt , 
 Lionello mio ; and never call that economy meanness which be but the 
 safeguard from mean degradation . " 

 " I understand you at last , Vance ; shake hand : I know why you be 
 save . " 

 " habit now , " answer Vance , repress praise of himself , as usual . 
 " but I remember so well when twopence be a sum to be respect that 
 to this day I would rather put it by than spend it . all our idea - like 
 orange - plant - spread out in proportion to the size of the box which 
 imprison the root . then I have a sister . " Vance pause a moment , as 
 if in pain , but go on with seem carelessness , lean over the 
 window - sill , and turn his face from his friend . " I have a sister old 
 than myself , handsome , gentle . " 

 " I be so proud of she ! foolish girl ! my love be not enough for she . 
 foolish girl ! she could not wait to see what I might live to do for she . 
 she marry - oh ! so genteelly ! - a young man , very well bear , who have 
 woo she before my father die . he have the villany to remain constant 
 when she have not a farthing , and he be dependent on distant relation , 
 and his own domain in Parnassus . the wretch be a poet ! so they 
 marry . they spend their honeymoon genteelly , I dare say . his relation 
 cut he . Parnassus pay no rent . he go abroad . such heart - rend 
 letter from she . they be destitute . how I work ! how I rag ! but 
 how could I maintain she and her husband too , mere child that I be ? no 
 matter . they be dead now , both ; all dead for whose sake I first ground 
 colour and save halfpence . and Frank Vance be a stingy , selfish 
 bachelor . never revive this dull subject again , or I shall borrow a 
 crown from you and cut you dead . Waiter , ho ! - the bill . I will just go 
 round to the stable , and see the horse put to . " 

 as the friend re - enter London , Vance say , " set I down anywhere in 
 Piccadilly ; I will walk home . you , I suppose , of course , be stay 
 with your mother in Gloucester Place ? " 

 " no , " say Lionel , rather embarrassed ; " Colonel Morley , who act for I 
 as if he be my guardian , take a lodging for I in Chesterfield Street , 
 Mayfair . my hour , I fear , would ill suit my dear mother . only in 
 town two day ; and , thank to Morley , my table be already cover with 
 invitation . " 

 " yet you give I one day , generous friend ! " 

 " you the second day , my mother the first . but there be three ball 
 before I to - night . come home with I , and smoke your cigar while I 
 dress . " 

 " no ; but I will at least light my cigar in your hall , prodigal ! " 

 Lionel now stop at his lodging . the groom , who serve he also as 
 valet , be in wait at the door . " a note for you , sir , from Colonel 
 Morley , - just come . " Lionel hastily open it , and read , 

  MY DEAR HAUGHTON , - Mr. Darrell have suddenly arrive in London . keep 
  yourself free all to - morrow , when , no doubt , he will see you . I be 
  hurry off to he . 

  your in haste , A. V. M. 




 CHAPTER III . 

  once more Guy Darrell . 

 Guy Darrell be alone : a lofty room in a large house on the first 
 floor , - his own house in Carlton Gardens , which he have occupy 
 during his brief and brilliant parliamentary career ; since then , leave 
 contemptuously to the care of a house agent , to be let by year or by 
 season , it have know various tenant of an opulence and station suitable 
 to its space and site . dinner and concert , rout and ball , have 
 assemble the friend and jade the spirit of many a gracious host 
 and smile hostess . the tenure of one of these temporary occupant have 
 recently expire ; and , ere the agent have find another , the long absent 
 owner drop down into its silence hall as from the cloud , without 
 other establishment than his old servant Mills and the woman in charge 
 of the house . there , as in a caravansery , the traveller take his rest , 
 stately and desolate . nothing so comfortless as one of those large 
 London house all to one 's self . in long row against the wall stand 
 the empty fauteuil . spectral from the gild ceiling hang lightless 
 chandelier . - the furniture , pompous , but wear by use and fade by time , 
 seem memento of depart revel . when you return to your house in 
 the country - no matter how long the absence , no matter how decay by 
 neglect the friendly chamber may be , if it have only be desert 
 in the meanwhile   not let to new race , who , by their own shifting 
 dynasty , have supplant the rightful lord , and half - efface his 
 memorial   - the wall may still greet you forgivingly , the character of 
 Home be still there . you take up again the thread of association which 
 have , be suspend , not snap . but it be otherwise with a house in 
 city , especially in our fast - live London , where few house descend 
 from father to son , - where the title - deed be rarely more than those of 
 a purchase lease for a term of year , after which your property quit 
 you . a house in London , which your father never enter , in which no 
 elbow - chair , no old - fashioned work - table , recall to you the kind smile 
 of a mother ; a house that you have leave as you leave an inn , let to 
 people whose name you scarce know , with as little respect for your 
 family record as you have for theirs , - when you return after a long 
 interval of year to a house like that , you stand , as stand Darrell , a 
 forlorn stranger under your own roof - tree . what care he for those who 
 have last gather round those hearth with their chill steely grate , 
 whose form have recline on those formal couch , whose foot have wear 
 away the gloss from those costly carpet ? history in the life of many 
 might be record within those wall . " lover there have breathe their 
 first vow ; bridal feast have be hold ; babe have crow in the arm of 
 proud young mother ; politician there have be raise into minister ; 
 minister there have fall back into independent member ; " through those 
 door corps have be bear forth to relentless vault . for these race 
 and their record what care the owner ? their writing be not on the 
 wall . sponge out , as from a slate , their reckoning with Time ; leave 
 dim , here and there , some chance scratch of his own , blurred and bygone . 
 lean against the mantelpiece , Darrell gaze round the room with a 
 vague wistful look , as if seek to conjure up association that 
 might link the present hour to that past life which have slip away 
 elsewhere ; and his profile , reflect on the mirror behind , pale and 
 mournful , seem like that ghost of himself which his memory silently 
 evoke . 

 the man be but little alter externally since we see he last , however 
 inly change since he last stand on those unwelcoming floor ; the form 
 still retain the same vigour and symmetry , - the same unspeakable 
 dignity of mien and bearing ; the same thoughtful bend of the proud 
 neck , - so distinct , in its elastic rebound , from the stoop of debility 
 or age , thick as ever the rich mass of dark - brown hair , though , when in 
 the impatience of some painful thought his hand sweep the loose curl 
 from his forehead , the silver thread might now be see shoot here 
 and there , - vanish almost as soon as see . no , whatever the baptismal 
 register may say to the contrary , that man be not old , - not even 
 elderly ; in the deep of that clear gray eye light may be calm , but 
 in calm it be vivid ; not a ray , send from brain or from heart , be yet 
 flicker down . on the whole , however , there be less composure than of 
 old in his mien and bearing ; less of that resignation which seem to 
 say , " I have do with the substance of life . " still there be gloom , 
 but it be more broken and restless . evidently that human breast be 
 again admit , or force itself to court , human hope , human object . 
 return to the substance of life , their movement be see in the 
 shadow which , when they wrap we round at remoter distance , seem to 
 lose their trouble as they gain their width . he break from his musing 
 attitude with an abrupt angry movement , as if shake off thought 
 which displease he , and gather his arm tightly to his breast , in 
 a gesture peculiar to himself , walk to and fro the room , murmur 
 inaudibly . the door open ; he turn quickly , and with an evident sense 
 of relief , for his face brighten . " Alban , my dear Alban ! " 

 " Darrell ! old friend ! old school - friend ! dear , dear Guy Darrell ! " the 
 two Englishmen stand , hand tightly clasped in each other , in true 
 english greeting , their eye moisten with remembrance that carry 
 they back to boyhood . 

 Alban be the first to recover self - possession ; and , when the friend 
 have seat themselves , he survey Darrell 's countenance deliberately , 
 and say , " so little change ! - wonderful ! what be your secret ? " 

 " suspense from life , - hibernating . but you beat I ; you have be 
 spend life , yet seem as rich in it as when we part . " 

 " no ; I begin to decry the present and laud the past ; to read with 
 glass , to decide from prejudice , to recoil from change , to find sense 
 in twaddle , to know the value of health from the fear to lose it ; to 
 feel an interest in rheumatism , an awe of bronchitis ; to tell anecdote , 
 and to wear flannel . to you in strict confidence I disclose the truth : I 
 be no long twenty - five . you laugh ; this be civilized talk : do it not 
 refresh you after the gibberish you must have chatter in Asia Minor ? " 

 Darrell might have answer in the affirmative with truth . what man , 
 after long year of solitude , be not refresh by talk , however trivial , 
 that recall to he the gay time of the world he remember in his 
 young day , - and recall it to he on the lip of a friend in youth ! but 
 Darrell say nothing ; only he settle himself in his chair with a 
 more cheerful ease , and incline his relax brow with a nod of 
 encouragement or assent . 

 Colonel Morley continue . " but when do you arrive ? whence ? how long do 
 you stay here ? what be your plan ? " 

 DARRELL . - " Caesar could not be more laconic . when arrive ? this evening . 
 whence ? Ouzelford . how long do I stay ? uncertain . what be my plan ? let 
 we discuss they . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " with all my heart . you have plan , then ? - a good sign . 
 animal in hibernation form none . " 

 DARRELL   put aside the light on the table , so as to leave , his face 
 in shade , and look towards the floor as he speak . - " for the last 
 five year I have struggle hard to renew interest in mankind , reconnect 
 myself with common life and its healthful object . between Fawley 
 and London I desire to form a magnetic medium . I take rather a vast 
 one , - nearly all the rest of the known world . I have visit both 
 Americas , either end . all Asia have I ransack , and pierce as far 
 into Africa as traveller ever go in search of timbuctoo . but I have 
 sojourn also , at long interval , at least they seem long to I , - in 
 the gay capital of Europe   Paris except ; mixed , too , with the 
 gayest ; hire palace , fill they with guest ; feast and hear music . 
 ' Guy Darrell , ' say I , ' shake off the rust of year : thou hadst no youth 
 while young , - be young now . a holiday may restore thee to wholesome 
 work , as a holiday restore the weary school - boy . ' " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " I comprehend ; the experiment succeed ? " 

 DARRELL . - " I do not   know : not yet ; but it may . I be here , and I intend 
 to stay . I would not go to a hotel for a single day , lest my resolution 
 should fail I . I have throw myself into this castle of care without 
 even a garrison . I hope to hold it . help I to man it . in a word , and 
 without metaphor , I be here with the design of re - enter London life . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " I be so glad . hearty congratulation ! how rejoice 
 all the Viponts will be ! another ' CRISIS ' be at hand . you have see the 
 newspaper regularly , of course : the state of the country interest you . 
 you say that you come from Ouzelford , the town you once represent . I 
 guess you will re - enter Parliament ; you have but to say the word . " 

 DARRELL . - " Parliament ! no . I receive , while abroad , so earnest a 
 request from my old constituent to lay the foundation - stone of a new 
 Town - Hall , in which they be much interested ; and my obligation to they 
 have be so great that I could not refuse . I write to fix the day as 
 soon as I have resolve to return to England , make a condition that I 
 should be spar the infliction of a public dinner , and land just in 
 time to keep my appointment ; reach Ouzelford early this morning , go 
 through the ceremony , make a short speech , come on at once to London , 
 not venture to diverge to Fawley   which be not very far from 
 Ouzelford , lest , once there again , I should not have strength to leave 
 it ; and here I be . " Darrell pause , then repeat , in brisk emphatic 
 tone , " Parliament ? no . labour ? no . fellow - man , I be about to confess 
 to you : I would snatch back some day of youth , - a wintry likeness of 
 youth , well than none . old friend , let we amuse ourselves ! when I 
 be work hard , hard , hard ! it be you who would say : ' come forth , be 
 amuse , ' - you ! happy butterfly that you be ! now , I say to you , ' show 
 I this flaunt town that you know so well ; initiate I into the joy 
 of polite pleasure , social commune , 

  " ' Dulce mihi furere est amico . " 

 you have amusement , - let I share they . ' " 

 " faith , " quoth the Colonel , cross his leg , " you come late in the 
 day ! amusement cease to amuse at last . I have try all , and begin to 
 be tired . I have have my holiday , exhaust its sport ; and you , come 
 from book and desk fresh into the playground , say , ' football and 
 leapfrog . ' alas ! my poor friend , why do not you come soon ? " 

 DARRELL . - " one word , one question . you have make EASE a philosophy and a 
 system ; no man ever do so with more felicitous grace : nor , in follow 
 pleasure , have you part company with conscience and shame . a fine 
 gentleman ever , in honour as in elegance . well , be you satisfied with 
 your choice of life ? be you happy ? " 

 " Happy ! who be ? satisfy , perhaps . " 

 " be there any one you envy , - whose choice , other than your own , you 
 would prefer ? " 

 " certainly . " 

 " who ? " 

 " you . " 

 " I ! " say Darrell , open his eye with unaffected amaze . " I ! envy I ! 
 prefer my choice ! " 

 COLONEL MORLEY   peevishly . - " without doubt . you have have gratify 
 ambition , a great career . envy you ! who would not ? your own object in 
 life fulfil : you covet distinction , - you win it ; fortune , - your 
 wealth be immense ; the restoration of your name and lineage from 
 obscurity and humiliation , - be not name and lineage again write in 
 the Libro d'oro ? what king would not hail you as his counsellor ? what 
 senate not open its rank to admit you as a chief ? what house , though 
 the haughty in the land , would not accept your alliance ? and withal , 
 you stand before I stalwart and unbowe , young blood still in your 
 vein . ungrateful man , who would not change lot with Guy Darrell ? fame , 
 fortune , health , and , not to flatter you , a form and presence that 
 would be remark , though you stand in that black frock by the side of a 
 monarch in his coronation robe . " 

 DARRELL . - " you have turn my question against myself with a kindliness 
 of intention that make I forgive your belief in my vanity . pass 
 on , - or rather pass back ; you say you have try all in life that 
 distract or sweeten . not so , lone bachelor ; you have not try 
 wedlock . have not that be your mistake ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " answer for yourself . you have try it . " the word 
 be scarce out of his mouth ere he repent the retort ; for Darrell 
 start as if sting to the quick ; and his brow , before serene , his 
 lip , before playful , grow , the one darkly trouble , the other tightly 
 compress . " pardon I , " falter out the friend . 

 DARRELL . - " oh , yes ! I bring it on myself . what stuff we have be 
 talk ! tell I the news , not political , any other . but first , your 
 report of young Haughton . cordial thank for all your kindness to he . 
 you write I word that he be much improve , - most likeable ; you add , 
 that at Paris he become the rage , that in London you be sure he will 
 be extremely popular . be it so , if for his own sake . be you quite sure 
 that it be not for the expectation which I come here to disperse ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " much for himself , I be certain ; a little , perhaps , 
 because - whatever he think , and I say to the contrary - people see no 
 other heir to your property - " 

 " I understand , " interrupt Darrell , quickly . " but he do not nurse 
 those expectation ? he will not be disappoint ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " verily I believe that , apart from his love for you and 
 a delicacy of sentiment that would recoil from plant hope of wealth 
 in the graf of benefactor , Lionel Haughton would prefer carve his 
 own fortune to all the ingot hew out of California by another 's hand 
 and bequeath by another 's will . " 

 DARRELL . - " I be heartily glad to hear and to trust you . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " I gather from what you say that you be here with the 
 intention to - to - " 

 " Marry again , " say Darrell , firmly . " right . I be . " 

 " I always feel sure you would marry again . be the lady here too ? " 

 " what lady ? " 

 " the lady you have choose . " 

 " Tush ! I have choose none . I come here to choose ; and in this I 
 ask advice from your experience . I would marry again ! I ! at my age ! 
 ridiculous ! but so it be . you know all the mother and marriageable 
 daughter that London - arida nutrix - rear for nuptial altar : where , 
 amongst they , shall I , Guy Darrell , the man whom you think so enviable , 
 find the safe helpmate , whose love he may reward with munificent 
 jointure , to whose child he may bequeath the name that have now no 
 successor , and the wealth he have no heart to spend ? " 

 Colonel Morley - who , as we know , be by habit a matchmaker , and like the 
 vocation - assume a placid but cogitative mien , rub his brow gently , 
 and say in his soft , well - breed accent , " you would not marry a mere 
 girl ? some one of suitable age . I know several most superior young 
 woman on the other side of thirty , Wilhelmina Prymme , for instance , or 
 Janet - " 

 DARRELL . - " old maid . no ! decidedly no ! " 

 COLONEL MORLEY   suspiciously . - " but you would not risk the peace 
 of your old age with a girl of eighteen , or else I do know a very 
 accomplished , well - bring - up girl ; just eighteen , who - " 

 DARRELL . - " re - enter life by the side of Eighteen ! be I a madman ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " neither old maid nor young maid ; the choice become 
 narrow . you would prefer a widow . ha ! I have think of one ; a prize , 
 indeed , could you but win she , the widow of - " 

 DARRELL . - " Ephesus ! - bah ! suggest no widow to I . a widow , with her 
 affection bury in the grave ! " 

 MORLEY . - " not necessarily . and in this case - " 

 DARRELL   interrupting , and with warmth . - " in every case I tell you : no 
 widow shall doff her weed for I . do she love the first man ? Fickle 
 be the woman who can love twice . do she not love he ? why do she marry 
 he ? perhaps she sell herself to a rent - roll ? shall she sell herself 
 again to I for a jointure ? Heaven forbid ! talk not of widow . no dainty 
 so flavourless as a heart warm up again . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " neither maid , be they old or young , nor widow . 
 possibly you want an angel . London be not the place for angel . " 

 DARRELL . - " I grant that the choice seem involve in perplexity . how 
 can it be otherwise if one 's self be perplexed ? and yet , Alban , I 
 be serious ; and I do not presume to be so exact as my word have 
 imply . I ask not fortune , nor rank beyond gentle blood , nor youth nor 
 beauty nor accomplishment nor fashion , but I do ask one thing , and one 
 thing only . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " what be that ? you have leave nothing worth the having 
 to ask for . " 

 DARRELL . - " nothing ! I have leave all ! I ask some one whom I can love ; 
 love well than all the world , - not the mariage de convenance , not 
 the mariage de raison , but the mariage d'amour . all other marriage , 
 with vow of love so solemn , with intimacy of commune so close , - all 
 other marriage , in my eye , be an act falsehood , a varnish sin . ah , 
 if I have think so always ! but away regret and repentance ! the future 
 alone be now before I ! Alban Morley ! I would sign away all I have in 
 the world   save the old house at Fawley , ay , and after signing , cut 
 off to boot this right hand , could I but once fall in love ; love , and 
 be love again , as any two of Heaven 's simple human creature may 
 love each other while life be fresh ! strange ! strange ! look out into 
 the world ; mark the man of our year who shall be most court , most 
 adulate , or admire . give he all the attribute of power , wealth , 
 royalty , genius , fame . see all the young generation bow before he 
 with hope or awe : his word can make their fortune ; at his smile a 
 reputation dawn . well ; now let that man say to the young , ' room amongst 
 yourself : all that win I this homage I would lay at the foot of 
 Beauty . I enter the list of love , ' and straightway his power vanishe , 
 the poor booby of twenty - four can jostle he aside ; before , the 
 object of reverence , he be now the butt of ridicule . the instant he ask 
 right to win the heart of a woman , a boy whom in all else he could rule 
 as a lackey cry , ' Off , Graybeard , that realm at least be mine ! ' " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " this be but eloquent extravagance , even if your 
 beard be gray . man old than you , and with half your pretension , 
 even of outward form , have carry away heart from boy like Adonis . 
 only choose well : that be the difficulty ; if it be not difficult , who 
 would be a bachelor ? " 

 DARRELL . - " guide my choice . pilot I to the haven . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " Accepted ! but you must remount a suitable 
 establishment ; reopen your way to the great world , and penetrate those 
 sacred recess where await spinster weave the fatal web . leave all 
 to I . let Mills   I see you have he still   call on I to - morrow about 
 your menage . you will give dinner , of course ? " 

 DARRELL . - " oh , of course ; must I dine at they myself ? " 

 Morley laugh softly , and take up his hat . 

 " so soon ! " cry Darrell . " if I fatigue you already , what chance shall I 
 have with new friend ? " 

 " so soon ! it be past eleven . and it be you who must be fatigue . " 

 " no such good luck ; be I fatigued , I might hope to sleep . I will walk 
 back with you . leave I not alone in this room , - alone in the jaw of a 
 fish ; swallow up by a creature whose blood be cold . " 

 " you have something still to say to I , " say Alban , when they be in 
 the open air : " I detect it in your manner ; what be it ? " 

 " I know not . but you have tell I no news ; these street be grow 
 strange to I . who live now in yonder house ? once the dweller be my 
 friend . " 

 " in that house , - oh , new people ! I forget their name , - but rich ; in a 
 year or two , with luck , they may be exclusives , and forget my name . in 
 the other house , Carr Vipont still . " 

 " Vipont ; those dear vipont ! what of they all ? crawl they , ste they , 
 bask they in the sun , or be they in anxious process of a change of 
 skin ? " 

 " hush ! my dear friend : no satire on your own connection ; nothing so 
 injudicious . I be a Vipont , too , and all for the family maxim , ' vipont 
 with Vipont , and come what may ! ' " 

 " I stand rebuke . but I be no Vipont . I marry , it be true , into their 
 house , and they marry , age ago , into mine ; but no drop in the blood 
 of time - server flow through the vein of the last childless Darrell . 
 Pardon . I allow the merit of the Vipont race ; no family more excite my 
 respectful interest . what of their birth , death , and marriage ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " as to the birth , Carr have just welcome the birth of 
 a grandson ; the first - bear of his eld son   who marry last year a 
 daughter of the Duke of Halifax , - a promising young man , a Lord in the 
 Admiralty . Carr have a second son in the Hussars ; have just purchase his 
 step : the other boy be still at school . he have three daughter too , 
 fine girl , admirably bring up ; indeed , now I think of it , the eld , 
 Honoria , might suit you , highly accomplish ; well read ; interest 
 herself in politic ; a great admirer of intellect ; of a very serious 
 turn of mind too . " 

 DARRELL . - " a female politician with a serious turn of mind , - a farthe 
 rushlight in a London fog ! hasten on to subject less gloomy . whose 
 funeral achievement be that yonder ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " the late Lord Niton 's , father to Lady Montfort . " 

 DARRELL . - " Lady Montfort ! her father be a lyndsay , and die before the 
 Flood . a deluge , at least , have go over I and my world since I look 
 on the face of his widow . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " I speak of the present Lord Montfort 's wife , - the 
 Earl 's . you of the poor Marquess 's , the last Marquess ; the marquisate 
 be extinct . surely , whatever your wandering , you must have hear of the 
 death of the last Marquess of Montfort ? " 

 " yes , I hear of that , " answer Darrell , in a somewhat husky and 
 muttered voice . " so he be dead , the young man ! what kill he ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " a violent attack of croup , - quite sudden . he be 
 stay at Carr 's at the time . I suspect that Carr make he talk ! a 
 thing he be not accustomed to do . derange his system altogether . but 
 do not   let we revive painful subject . " 

 DARRELL . - " be she with he at the time ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " Lady Montfort ? no ; they be very seldom together . " 

 DARRELL . - " she be not marry again yet ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " no , but still young and so beautiful she will have 
 many offer . I know those who be wait to propose . montfort have be 
 only dead eighteen month ; die just before young Carr 's marriage . 
 his widow live , in complete seclusion , at her jointure - house near 
 Twickenham . she have only see even I once since her loss . " 

 DARRELL . - " when be that ? " 

 MORLEY . - " about six or seven month ago ; she ask after you with much 
 interest . " 

 DARRELL . - " after I ! " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " to be sure . do not   I remember how constantly she and 
 her mother be at your house ? be it strange that she should ask after 
 you ? you ought to know she well , - the most affectionate , grateful 
 character . " 

 DARRELL . - " I dare say . but at the time you refer to , I be too occupy 
 to acquire much accurate knowledge of a young lady 's character . I should 
 have know her mother 's character well , yet I mistook even that . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " Mrs. Lyndsay 's character you might well 
 mistake , - charming but artificial : Lady Montfort be natural . indeed , if 
 you have not that illiberal prejudice against widow , she be the very 
 person I be about to suggest to you . " 

 DARRELL . - " a fashionable beauty ! and young enough to be my daughter . 
 such be human friendship ! so the marquisate be extinct , and Sir James 
 Vipont , whom I remember in the House of Commons - respectable man , 
 great authority on cattle , timid , and always say , ' do you read that 
 article in to - day 's paper ? ' - have the estate and the earldom ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " yes . there be some fear of a dispute succession , but 
 Sir James make his claim very clear . between you and I , the change have 
 be a serious affliction to the Viponts . the late lord be not wise , 
 but on state occasion he look his part , - tre grand seigneur , - and 
 Carr manage the family influence with admirable tact . the present lord 
 have the habit of a yeoman ; his wife share his taste . he have take the 
 management not only of the property , but of its influence , out of Carr 's 
 hand , and will make a sad mess of it , for he be an impracticable , 
 obsolete politician . he will never keep the family together , impossible , 
 a sad thing . I remember how our last muster , five year ago next 
 Christmas , strike terror into Lord 's Cabinet ; the mere report of it in 
 the newspaper set all people talk and think . the result be that , 
 two week after , proper overture be make to Carr : he consent to 
 assist the minister ; and the country be save ! now , thank to this 
 stupid new earl , in eighteen month we have lose ground which it take at 
 least a century and a half to gain . our vote be divide ; our influence 
 fritter away ; Montfort House be shut up ; and Carr , grow quite thin , 
 say that in the come ' CRISIS ' a Cabinet will not only be form , but 
 will also last - last time enough for irreparable mischief - without a 
 single Vipont in office . " 

 thus Colonel Morley continue in mournful strain , Darrell silent by his 
 side , till the Colonel reach his own door . there , while apply 
 his latch - key to the lock , Alban 's mind return from the peril that 
 threaten the House of Vipont and the Star of Brunswick to the petty 
 claim of private friendship . but even these last be now blend with 
 those grander interest , due care for which every true patriot of the 
 House of Vipont imbibe with his mother 's milk . 

 " your appearance in town , my dear Darrell , be most opportune . it will be 
 an object with the whole family to make the most of you at this come 
 ' CRISIS ; ' I say come , for I believe it must come . your name be still 
 freshly remember ; your position great for have be out of all 
 the scrape of the party the last sixteen or seventeen year : your house 
 should be the nucleus of new combination . do not   forget to send Mills 
 to I ; I will engage your chef and your house - steward to - morrow . I know 
 just the man to suit you . your intention to marry too , just at this 
 moment , be most seasonable ; it will increase the family interest . I may 
 give out that you intend to marry ? " 

 " oh , certainly cry it at Charing Cross . " 

 " a club - room will do as well . I beg ten thousand pardon ; but people 
 will talk about money whenever they talk about marriage . I should not 
 like to exaggerate your fortune : I know it must be very large , and all 
 at your own disposal , eh ? " 

 " every shilling . " 

 " you must have save a great deal since you retire into private life ? " 

 " take that for grant . Dick Fairthorn receive my rent , and look to 
 my various investment ; and I accept he as an indisputable authority 
 when I say that , what with the rental of land I purchase in my poor 
 boy 's lifetime and the interest on my much more lucrative moneyed 
 capital , you may safely whisper to all lady likely to feel interest 
 in that diffusion of knowledge , ' thirty - five thousand a year , and an old 
 fool . ' " 

 " I certainly shall not say an old fool , for I be the same age as 
 yourself ; and if I have thirty - five thousand pound a year , I would marry 
 too . " 

 " you would ! old fool ! " say Darrell , turn away . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

  reveal glimpse of Guy Darrell 's past in his envy prime . dig 
  but deep enough , and under all earth run water , under all life run 
  grief . 

 alone in the street , the vivacity which have characterize Darrell 's 
 countenance as well as his word , while with his old school friend , 
 change as suddenly and as completely into pensive abstract gloom 
 as if he have be act a part , and with the exit the acting cease . 
 disinclined to return yet to the solitude of his home , he walk on at 
 first mechanically , in the restless desire of movement , he care not 
 whither . but as , thus chance - lead , he find himself in the centre of that 
 long straight thoroughfare which connect what once be the separate 
 village of Tyburn and Holborn , something in the desultory link of 
 revery suggest an object to his devious foot . he have but to follow 
 that street to his right hand , to gain in a quarter of an hour a sight 
 of the humble dwelling - house in which he have first settle down , after 
 his early marriage , to the arid labour of the bar . he would go , now 
 that , wealthy and renowned , he be revisit the long - desert focus of 
 english energy , and contemplate the obscure abode in which his power 
 have be first concentrate on the pursuit of renown and wealth . who 
 among my reader that may have rise on the glitter steep   " ah , who 
 can tell how hard it be to climb ! "    have not be similarly attract 
 towards the roof at the craggy foot of the ascent , under which golden 
 dream refresh his strain sinew ? 

    ' ah , who can tell how hard it be to climb 
  the steep where Fame 's proud temple shin afar ? BEATTIE . 

 somewhat quicken his step , now that a bourne be assign to they , 
 the man grow old in year , but , unhappily for himself , too tenacious 
 of youth in its grand discontent and keen susceptibility to pain , 
 strode noiselessly on , under the gaslight , under the star ; gaslight 
 primly marshal at equidistance ; star that seem to the naked eye 
 dot over space without symmetry or method : man 's order , near and 
 finite , be so distinct ; the Maker 's order remote , infinite , be so beyond 
 man 's comprehension even of what be order ! 

 Darrell pause hesitating . he have now gain a spot in which improvement 
 have alter the landmark . the superb broad thoroughfare continue where 
 once it have vanish abrupt in a labyrinth of court and alley . but 
 the way be not hard to find . he turn a little towards the left , 
 recognizing , with admire interest , in the gay , white , would - be grecian 
 edifice , with its french grille , bronze , gild , the transform 
 Museum , in the still library of which he have sometimes snatch 
 a brief and ghostly respite from book of law . onwards yet through 
 lifeless Bloomsbury , not so far towards the last bound of Atlas as the 
 desolation of Podden Place , but the solitude deepening as he pass . 
 there it be , a quiet street indeed ! not a soul on its gloomy pavement , 
 not even a policeman 's soul . Nought stir save a stealthy , 
 profligate , good - for - nothing cat , flit fine through yon area bar . 
 down that street have he come , I trove , with a livelier , quick step 
 the day when , by the strange good - luck which have uniformly attend his 
 worldly career of honour , he have be suddenly call upon to supply 
 the place of an absent senior , and in almost his early brief the 
 Courts of Westminster have recognize a master , come , I trove , with a 
 lively step , knock at that very door whereat he be halt now ; 
 enter the room where the young wife sit , and at sight of her querulous 
 peevish face , and at sound of her unsympathize languid voice , flee 
 into his cupboard - like back parlour , and mutter " Courage ! courage ! " to 
 endure the home he have enter longing for a voice which should invite 
 and respond to a cry of joy . 

 how close up , dumb , and blind look the small mean house , with its 
 small mean door , its small mean rayless window ! yet a fame have be 
 bear there ! who be the resident now ? bury in slumber , have they 
 any " golden dream " ? work therein any struggle brain , to which the 
 prosperous man might whisper " courage ! " or beat , there , any troubled 
 heart to which faithful woman should murmur " Joy " ? who know ? London 
 be a wondrous poem , but each page of it be write in a different 
 language , - no lexicon yet compose for any . 

 back through the street , under the gaslight , under the star , go Guy 
 Darrell , more slow and more thoughtful . do the comparison between what 
 he have be , what he be , the mean home just revisit , the stately home 
 to which he would return , suggest thought of natural pride ? it would 
 not seem so ; no pride in those close - shut lip , in that melancholy 
 stoop . 

 he come into a quiet square , - still Bloomsbury , - and right before 
 he be a large respectable mansion , almost as large as that one in 
 courtlier quarter to which he loiteringly delay the lone return . 
 there , too , have be for a time the dwelling which be call his home ; 
 there , when gold be roll in like a tide , distinction win , position 
 assure ; there , not yet in Parliament , but foremost at the bar , - already 
 press by constituency , already woo by minister ; there , still 
 young - o lucky of lawyer ! - there have he move his household god . 
 fit residence for a Prince of the Gown ! be it when live there that you 
 would envy the prosperous man ? yes , the moment his step quit that 
 door ; but envy he when he enter its threshold ? - nay , envy rather that 
 roofless Savoyard who have creep under yonder portico , asleep with his 
 ragged arm round the cage of his stupid dormice ! there , in that great 
 barren drawing - room , sit a 

  " pale and elegant Aspasia . " 

 well , but the wife 's face be not querulous now . look again , - anxious , 
 fearful , secret , sly . oh ! that fine lady , a Vipont Crooke , be not 
 content to be wife to the wealthy , great Mr. Darrell . what want she ? 
 that he should be spouse to the fashionable fine Mrs. Darrell ? pride in 
 he ! not a jot of it ; such pride be unchristian . be he proud of she , 
 as a christian husband ought to be of so elegant a wife , would he still 
 be in Bloomsbury ? envy he ! the high gentleman , so true to his blood , 
 all gall and blister by the moral vulgarity of a tuft - hunting , 
 toad - eat mimic of the Lady Selinas . envy he ! well , why not ? all 
 woman have their foible . wise husband must bear and forbear . be that 
 all ? wherefore , then , be her aspect so furtive , wherefore on his a wild , 
 vigilant sternness ? Tut , what so bring into coveted fashion a fair lady 
 exile to Bloomsbury as the marked adoration of a lord , not her own , 
 who give law to St. James 's ! untempte by passion , cold as ice to 
 affection ; if thaw to the gush of a sentiment secretly prefer the 
 husband she choose , woo , and win to idler less gifted even in outward 
 attraction , - all this , yet seek , coquet for , the eclat of 
 dishonour ! to elope ? oh , no , too wary for that , but to be gaze at and 
 talk of as the fair Mrs. Darrell , to whom the Lovelace of London be 
 so fondly devote . walk in , haughty son of the Dare - all . dar thou ask 
 who have just leave thy house ? dar thou ask what and whence be the note 
 that sly hand have secrete ? dar thou ? - perhaps yes : what then ? canst 
 thou lock up thy wife ? canst thou poniard the Lovelace ? lock up the air ! 
 poniard all whose light word in St. James 's can bring into fashion the 
 matron of Bloomsbury ! go , lawyer , go , study brief , and be parchment . 

 agony , agony , shoot again through Guy Darrell 's breast as he look 
 on that large , most respectable house , and remember his hourly 
 campaign against disgrace ! he have triumph . death fight for he : on 
 the very brink of the last scandal , a cold , catch at some Vipont 's 
 ball , become fever ; and so from that door the Black Horses bear away 
 the Bloomsbury Dame , ere she be yet - the fashion ! happy in grief the 
 widower who may , with confide hand , ransack the lost wife 's harmless 
 desk , sure that no thought conceal from he in life will rise accuse 
 from the treasured paper . but that pale proud mourner , hurry the eye 
 over sweet - scented billet ; compel , in very justice to the dead , to 
 convince himself that the mother of his child be corrupt only 
 at heart , - that the black Horses have come to the door in time , - and , 
 wretchedly console by that niggardly conviction , fling into the 
 flame the last flimsy tatter on which his honour   rock - like in his 
 own keeping   have be flutter to and fro in the charge of a vain 
 treacherous fool , - envy you that mourner ? no ! not even in his release . 
 memory be not nail down in the velvet coffin ; and to great loyal 
 nature less bitter be the memory of the lost when hallow by tender 
 sadness than when couple with scorn and shame . 

 the wife be dead . dead , too , long year ago , the Lothario ! the world have 
 forget they ; they fade out of this very record when ye turn the page ; 
 no influence , no bearing have they on such future event as may mark 
 what yet rest of life to Guy Darrell . but as he there stand and gaze 
 into space , the two form be before his eye as distinct as if live 
 still . slowly , slowly he gaze they down : the false smile flicker away 
 from their feeble lineament ; woe and terror on their aspect , - they 
 sink , they shrivel , they dissolve ! 




 CHAPTER V. 

  the wreck cast back from Charybdis . 

  Souviens - toi de to Gabrielle . 

 Guy Darrell turn hurriedly from the large house in the great square , 
 and , more and more absorb in revery , he wander out of his direct way 
 homeward , clear and broad though it be , and do not rouse himself till 
 he feel , as it be , that the air have grow dark ; and look vaguely 
 round , he see that he have stray into a dim maze of lane and 
 passage . he pause under one of the rare lamp - post , gather up his 
 recollection of the London he have so long quit , and doubtful for a 
 moment or two which turn to take . just then , up from an alley front 
 he at right angle , come suddenly , warily , a tall , sinewy , ill - bode 
 tatterdemalion figure , and , see Darrell 's face under the lamp , halt 
 abrupt at the mouth of the narrow passage from which it have emerge , - a 
 dark form fill up the dark aperture . do that ragged wayfarer 
 recognize a foe by the imperfect ray of the lamplight ? or be he a mere 
 vulgar footpad , who be doubt whether he should spring upon a prey ? 
 hostile his look , his gesture , the sudden cower down of the strong 
 frame as if for a bind ; but still he be irresolute . what awe he ? what 
 awe the tiger , who would obey his blood - instinct without fear , in his 
 rush on the Negro , the Hindoo ; but who halt and hesitate at the sight 
 of the white man , the lordly son of Europe ? Darrell 's eye be turn 
 towards the dark passage , towards the dark figure , - carelessly , neither 
 recognize nor fear nor defying , - carelessly , as at any harmless 
 object in crowded street and at broad day . but while that eye be on 
 he , the tatterdemalion halt ; and indeed , whatever his hostility , 
 or whatever his daring , the sight of Darrell take he by so sudden 
 a surprise that he could not at once re - collect his thought , and 
 determine how to approach the quiet unconscious man , who , in reach of 
 his spring , front his overwhelming physical strength with the habitual 
 air of dignified command . his first impulse be that of violence ; his 
 second impulse curb the first . but Darrell now turn quickly , and 
 walk straight on ; the figure quit the mouth of the passage , and 
 follow with a long and noiseless stride . it have nearly gain Darrell . 
 with what intent ? a fierce one , perhaps , - for the man 's face be 
 sinister , and his state evidently desperate , - when there emerge 
 unexpectedly from an ugly look court or cul - de - sac , just between 
 Darrell and his pursuer , a slim , long - back , button - up , weazel - face 
 policeman . the policeman eye the tatterdemalion instinctively , then 
 turn his glance towards the solitary defenceless gentleman in advance , 
 and walk on , keep himself between the two . the tatterdemalion 
 stifle an impatient curse . be his purpose force , be it only 
 supplication , be it colloquy of any kind , impossible to fulfil it while 
 that policeman be there . true that in his powerful hand he could have 
 clutch that slim , long - back officer , and break he in two as a 
 willow - wand . but that officer be the Personation of Law , and can stalk 
 through a legion of tatterdemalion as a ferret may glide through a barn 
 full of rat . the prowler feel he be suspect . unknown as yet to the 
 London police , he have no desire to invite their scrutiny . he cross 
 the way ; he fall back ; he follow from afar . the policeman may yet 
 turn away before the safe street of the metropolis be gain . no ; the 
 curse Incarnation of Law , with eye in its slim back , continue its 
 slow stride at the heel of the unsuspicious Darrell . the more solitary 
 defile be already pass , - now that dim lane , with its dead wall on 
 one side . by the dead wall skulk the prowler ; on the other side still 
 walk the Law . now - alas for the prowler ! - shine out the throughfare , 
 no long dim nor deserted , - Leicester Square , the Haymarket , Pall Mall , 
 Carlton Gardens ; Darrell be at his door . the policeman turn sharply 
 round . there , at the corner near the learn Club - house , halt the 
 tatterdemalion . towards the tatterdemalion the policeman now advance 
 quickly . the tatterdemalion be quick still ; flee like a guilty 
 thought . 

 back , back , back into that maze of passage and court , back to the 
 mouth of that black alley . there he halt again . look at he . he have 
 arrive in London but that very night , after an absence of more than 
 four year . he have arrive from the sea - side on foot ; see , his shoe be 
 wear into hole . he have not yet find a shelter for the night . he have 
 be direct towards that quarter , throng with adventurer , native 
 and foreign , for a shelter , safe , if squalid . it be somewhere near that 
 court at the mouth of which he stand . he look round : the policeman 
 be baffle ; the coast clear . he steal forth , and pause under the same 
 gaslight as that under which Guy Darrell have pause before , - under the 
 same gaslight , under the same star . from some recess in his rag he 
 draw forth a large , distaine , distend pocket - book , - last relic 
 of sprucer day , - leather of dainty morocco , once elaborately 
 tool , patent spring , fairy lock , fit receptacle for bank - note , 
  billet - doux , memoranda of debt of honour , or pleasurable 
 engagement . now how worn , tarnished , greasy , rascallion - like , the 
 costly bauble ! fill with what motley , unlovable content : stale 
 pawn - ticket of foreign mont de piete , pledge never henceforth to 
 be redeem ; scrawl by villanous hand in thievish hierolgyphic ; ugly 
 implement replace the malachite penknife , the golden toothpick , the 
 jewel pencil - case , once so neatly set within their satin lappet . 
 ugly implement , indeed , - a file , a gimlet , load dice . Pell - mell , with 
 such more hideous and recent content , dishonour evidence of gaudy 
 summer life , - lock of lady ' hair , love - note treasure mechanically , 
 not from amorous sentiment , but perhaps from some vague idea that they 
 might be of use if those who give the lock or write the note should 
 be raise in fortune , and could buy back the memorial of shame . Diving 
 amidst these miscellaneous document and treasure , the prowler 's hand 
 rest on some old letter , in clerk - like fair calligraphy , tie round 
 with a dirty string , and on they , in another and fresher writing , a 
 scrap that contain an address , - " Samuel Adolphus Poole , Esq . , Alhambra 
 Villa , Regent 's Park . " " to - morrow , Nix my dolly ; to - morrow , " mutter 
 the tatterdemalion ; " but to - night , - plague on it , where be the other 
 blackguard 's direction ? ah , here ! " and he extract from the thievish 
 scrawl a peculiarly thievish - look hieroglyph . now , as he lift it 
 up to read by the gaslight , survey he well . do you not know he ? be 
 it possible ? what ! the brilliant sharper ! the ruffian exquisite ! Jasper 
 losely ! can it be ? once before , in the field of Fawley , we behold he 
 out at elbow , seedy , shabby , ragged . but then it be the decay of a 
 foppish spendthrift , - clothe distaine , ill - assorted , yet , still of 
 fine cloth ; shoe in hole , yet still pearl - colour brodequin . but 
 now it be the decay of no foppish spendthrift : the rag be not of fine 
 cloth ; the tattered shoe be not the brodequin . the man have fall far 
 below the politer grade of knavery , in which the sharp affect the 
 beau . and the countenance , as we last see it , if it have lose much of its 
 early beauty , be still incontestably handsome . what with vigour and 
 health and animal spirit , then on the aspect still linger light ; 
 now from corruption the light itself be go . in that herculean 
 constitution excess of all kind have at length force its ravage , and 
 the ravage be visible in the ruin face . the once sparkling eye be 
 dull and bloodshot . the colour of the cheek , once clear and vivid , to 
 which fiery drink have only send the blood in a warm glow , be now 
 of a leaden dulness , relieve but by broken streak of angry red , like 
 gleam of flame struggle through gather smoke . the profile , once 
 sharp and delicate like Apollo 's , be now confuse in its swollen 
 outline ; a few year more , and it would be gross as that of 
 Silenus , - the nostril , distend with incipient carbuncle , which 
 betray the gnawing fang that alcohol fasten into the liver . evil 
 passion have destroy the outline of the once beautiful lip , arch 
 as a Cupid 's bow . the sidelong , lower , villanous expression which have 
 formerly be but occasional be now habitual and heighten . it be the 
 look of the bison before it gore . it be true , however , that even yet on 
 the countenance there linger the trace of that lavish favour bestow 
 on it by nature . an artist would still have say , " how handsome that 
 ragamuffin must have be ! " and true be it , also , that there be yet 
 that about the bearing of the man which contrast his squalor , and 
 seem to say that he have not be bear to wear rag and loiter at 
 midnight amongst the haunt of thief . Nay , I be not sure that you 
 would have be as incredulous now , if tell that the wild outlaw before 
 you have some claim by birth or by nurture to the rank of gentleman , as 
 you would had you see the gay spendthrift in his gaudy day . for then he 
 seem below , and now he seem above , the grade in which he take place . 
 and all this make his aspect yet more sinister , and the impression that 
 he be dangerous yet more profound . muscular strength often remain to 
 a powerful frame long after the constitution be undermine , and Jasper 
 Losely 's frame be still that of a formidable athlete ; nay , its strength 
 be yet more apparent now that the shoulder and limb have increase 
 in bulk than when it be half - disguised in the lissome symmetry of 
 exquisite proportion , - less active , less supple , less capable of 
 endurance , but with more crush weight in its rush or its blow . it be 
 the figure in which brute force seem so to predominate that in a savage 
 state it would have wear a crown , - the figure which secure command and 
 authority in all society where force alone give the law . thus , under 
 the gaslight and under the star , stand the terrible animal , - a strong 
 man imbrute ; " SOUVIENS - TOI DE TA GABRIELLE . " there , still uneffaced , 
 though the gold thread be all tarnished and ragged , be the ominous 
 word on the silk of the she - devil 's love - token ! but Jasper have now 
 inspect the direction on the paper he hold to the lamp - light , and , 
 satisfy himself that he be in the right quarter , restore the paper 
 to the bulky distend pocket - book and walk sullenly on towards the 
 court from which have emerge the policeman who have cross his prowling 
 chase . 

 " it be the most infernal shame , " say losely between his grind tooth , 
 " that I should be drive to these wretched den for a lodging , while 
 that man , who ought to feel bound to maintain I , should be roll in 
 wealth , and cotton up in a palace . but he shall fork out . Sophy must 
 be hunt up . I will clothe she in rag like these . she shall sit at 
 his street - door . I will shame the miserly hunk . but how track the girl ? 
 have I no other hold over he ? can I send dolly Poole to he ? how addle 
 my brain be ! - want of food , want of sleep . be this the place ? peuh ! - " 

 thus murmur , he now reach the arch of the court , and be swallow 
 up in its gloom . a few stride and he come into a square open space only 
 light by the sky . a house , large than the rest , which be of the 
 mean order , stand somewhat back , occupy nearly one side of the 
 quadrangle , - old , dingy , dilapidate . at the door of this house stand 
 another man , apply his latch - key to the lock . as losely approach , 
 the man turn quickly , half in fear , half in menace , - a small , very 
 thin , impish - look man , with peculiarly restless feature that seem 
 try to run away from his face . thin as he be , he look all skin and 
 no bone , a goblin of a man whom it would not astonish you to hear could 
 creep through a keyhole , seem still more shadowy and impalpable by 
 his slight , thin , sable dress , not of cloth , but a sort of stuff like 
 alpaca . nor be that dress ragged , nor , as see but in starlight , do it 
 look worn or shabby ; still you have but to glance at the creature to feel 
 that it be a child in the same family of Night as the ragged felon that 
 tower by its side . the two outlaws star at each other . " Cutts ! " 
 say losely , in the old rollick voice , but in a hoarser , rougher key , 
 " Cutts , my boy , here I be ; welcome I ! 

 " what ? General Jas . ! " return Cutts , in a tone which be not without 
 a certain respectful awe , and then proceed to pour out a series of 
 question in a mysterious language , which may be thus translate and 
 abridge : " how long have you be in England ? how have it fare with you ? 
 you seem very badly off ; come here to hide ? nothing very bad , I hope ? 
 what be it ? " 

 Jasper answer in the same language , though with less practise mastery 
 of it , and with that constitutional levity which , whatever the time 
 or circumstance , occasionally give a strange sort of wit , or queer , 
 uncanny , devil - I - care vein of drollery , to his mode of expression . 

 " three month of the bad luck man ever have ; a row with the 
 gen - d'armes , - long story : three of our pal seize ; affair of the 
 galley for they , I suspect   french frog can not   seize I ! ; fricasseed 
 one or two of they ; break away , cross the country , reach the coast ; 
 find an honest smuggler ; land off Sussex with a few other keg 
 of brandy ; remember you , preserve the address you give I , and 
 condescend to this rat - hole for a night or so . let I in ; knock up 
 somebody , break open the larder . I want to eat , I be famish ; I should 
 have eat you by this time , only there be nothing on your bone . " 

 the little man open the door , - a passage black as Erebus . " give I 
 your hand , General . " Jasper be lead through the pitchy gloom for a few 
 yard ; then the guide find a gas - cock , and the place break suddenly 
 into light : a dirty narrow staircase on one side ; face it a sort of 
 lobby , in which an open door show a long sand parlour , like that 
 in public house ; several table , bench , the wall whitewash , but 
 adorn with sundry ingenious design make by charcoal or the smoked 
 end of clay - pipe ; a strong smell of stale tobacco and of gin and rum . 
 another gaslight , swing from the centre of the ceiling , spring into 
 light as Cutts touch the tap - cock . 

 " wait here , " say the guide . " I will go and get you some supper . " 

 " and some brandy , " say Jasper . 

 " of course . " 

 the bravo throw himself at length on one of the table , and , close 
 his eye , moan . his vast strength have become acquainted with physical 
 pain . in its stout knot and fibre , ache and sharp twinge , the 
 dragon - tooth of which have be sow year ago in revel or brawl , which 
 then seem to bring but innocuous joy and easy triumph , now begin to 
 gnaw and grind . but when Cutts reappear with coarse viand and the 
 brandy bottle , Jasper shake off the sense of pain , as do a wounded 
 wild beast that can still devour ; and after regale fast and 
 ravenously , he empty half the bottle at a draught , and feel himself 
 restore and fresh . 

 " shall you fle yourself amongst the swell fellow who hold their 
 club here , General ? " ask Cutts ; " ' tis a bad trade ; every year it get 
 bad . or have you not some high game in your eye ? " 

 " I have high game in my eye . one bird I mark down this very night . 
 but that may be slow work , and uncertain . I have in this pocket - book a 
 bank to draw upon meanwhile . " 

 " how ? forge french billet de banque ? dangerous . " 

 " Pooh ! well than that , - letter which prove theft against a 
 respectable rich man . " 

 " ah , you expect hush - money ? " 

 " exactly so . I have good friend in London . " 

 " among they , I suppose , that affectionate ' adopt mother , ' who would 
 have keep you in such order . " 

 " thousand thunder ! I hope not . I be not a superstitious man , but I 
 fear that woman as if she be a witch , and I believe she be one . you 
 remember black Jean , whom we call Sansculotte . he would have fill a 
 churchyard with his own brat for a five - franc piece ; but he would not 
 have cross a churchyard alone at night for a thousand nap . well , that 
 woman to I be what a churchyard be to black Jean . no : if she be in 
 London , I have but to go to her house and say , ' food , shelter , money ; ' 
 and I would rather ask Jack Ketch for a rope . " 

 " how do you account for it , General ? she do not beat you ; she be not 
 your wife . I have see many a stout fellow , who would stand fire without 
 blink , show the white feather at a scold 's tongue . but then he must 
 be splice to she - " 

 " Cutts , that Griffin do not scold : she preach . she want to make I 
 spoony , Cutts : she talk of my young day , Cutts ; she want to blight I 
 into what she call an honest man , Cutts , - the virtuous dodge ! she snub 
 and cow I , and frighten I out of my wit , Cutts ; for I do believe 
 that the witch be determined to have I , body and soul , and to marry I 
 some day in spite of myself , Cutts ; and if ever you see I about to be 
 clutch in those horrible paw , poison I with ratsbane , or knock I on 
 the head , Cutts . " 

 the little man laugh a little laugh , sharp and eldrich , at the strange 
 cowardice of the stalwart dare - devil . but Jasper do not echo the laugh . 

 " hush ! " he say timidly , " and let I have a bed , if you can ; I have not 
 sleep in one for a week , and my nerve be shaky . " 

 the imp light a candle - end at the gas - lamp , and conduct losely up 
 the stair to his own sleeping - room , which be less comfortless than 
 might be suppose . he resign his bed to the wanderer , who fling 
 himself on it , rag and all . but sleep be no more at his command than 
 it be at a king 's . 

 " why the - - do you talk of that witch ? " he cry peevishly to Cutts , 
 who be compose himself to rest on the floor . " I swear I fancy I feel 
 she sit on my chest like a nightmare . " 

 he turn with a vehemence which shake the wall , and wrap the 
 coverlet round he , plunge his head into its fold . strange though it 
 seem to the novice in human nature , to Jasper Losely the woman who 
 have so long live but for one object - namely , to save he from the 
 gibbet - be as his evil genius , his haunt fiend . he have conceive 
 a profound terror of she from the moment he perceive that she be 
 resolutely bent upon make he honest . he have break from her year 
 ago , flee , resume his evil course , hide himself from she , - in vain . 
 wherever he go , there go she . he might baffle the police , not she . 
 Hunger have often force he to accept her aid . as soon as he receive 
 it , he hide from she again , bury himself deeply and deep in the mud , 
 like a persecute tench . he associate her idea with all the ill - luck 
 that have befall he . several time some villanous scheme on which he 
 have count to make his fortune have be baffle in the most mysterious 
 way ; and just when baffle , and there seem no choice but to cut his 
 own throat or some one else 's , up turn grim Arabella Crane , in the 
 iron - gray gown , and with the iron - gray ringlet , - hatefully , awfully 
 beneficent , - offer food , shelter , gold , - and some demoniacal , 
 honourable work . often have he be in imminent peril from watchful law 
 or treacherous accomplice . she have warn and save he , as she have 
 save he from the fell Gabrielle Desmarets , who , unable to bear 
 the sentence of penal servitude , after a long process , defend with 
 astonishing skill and enlist the romantic sympathy of young France , 
 have contrive to escape into another world by mean of a subtle poison 
 conceal about her distinguee person , and which she have prepare 
 year ago with her own bloodless hand , and no doubt scientifically 
 test its effect on other . the cobra di capella be go at last ! 
 " Souviens - toi de ta Gabrielle , " o Jasper Losely ! but why Arabella 
 Crane should thus continue to watch over he whom she no long 
 profess to love , how she should thus have acquire the gift of 
 ubiquity and the power to save he , Jasper Losely could not conjecture . 
 the whole thing seem to he weird and supernatural . Most truly do he 
 say that she have cow he . he have often long to strangle she ; when 
 absent from she , have often resolve upon that act of gratitude . the 
 moment he come in sight of her stern , haggard face , her pierce lurid 
 eye ; the moment he hear she slow , dry voice in some such sentence as 
 these : " again you come to I in your trouble , and ever shall . be I not 
 still as your mother , but with a wife 's fidelity , till death we do part ? 
 there be the portrait of what you be : look at it , Jasper . now turn to 
 the glass : see what you be . think of the fate of Gabrielle Desmarets ! 
 but for I , what , long since , have be your own ? but I will save you : 
 I have swear it . you shall be wax in these hand at last , " - the moment 
 that voice thus claim and insist on redeem he , the ruffian feel 
 a cold shudder , his courage ooze , he could no more have nerve his arm 
 against she than a Thug would have lift his against the dire goddess 
 of his murderous superstition . Jasper could not resist a belief that the 
 life of this dreadful protectress be , somehow or other , make essential 
 to his ; that , be she to die , he should perish in some ghastly and 
 preternatural expiation . but for the last few month he have , at length , 
 escape from she ; diving so low , so deep into the mud , that even her 
 net could not mesh he . hence , perhaps , the imminence of the peril from 
 which he have so narrowly escape , hence the utterness of his present 
 destitution . but man , however vile , whatever his peril , whatever his 
 destitution , be bear free , and love liberty . liberty to go to Satan 
 in his own way be to Jasper Losely a supreme blessing compare to 
 that benignant compassionate espionage , with its relentless eye and 
 restrain hand . Alas and alas ! deem not this perversity unnatural 
 in that headstrong self - destroyer ! how many be there whom not a 
 grim , hard - feature Arabella Crane , but the long - suffering , divine , 
 omniscient , gentle Providence itself , seek to warn , to aid , to save ; 
 and be shun , and loathe , and flee from , as if it be an evil 
 genius ! how many be there who fear nothing so much as the be make 
 good in spite of themselves ? - how many ? who can count they ? 




 CHAPTER VI . 

  the public man need but one patron ; namely , the LUCKY moment . 

 " at his house in Carlton Gardens , Guy Darrell , Esq . , for the season . " 

 simple insertion in the pompous list of Fashionable Arrivals ! the name 
 of a plain commoner embed in the amber which glitter with so many 
 coronet and star ! yet such be England , with all its veneration for 
 title , that the eye of the public pass indifferently over the rest 
 of that chronicle of illustrious " whereabout , " to rest with interest , 
 curiosity , speculation , on the unemblazoned name which but a day before 
 have seem slip out of date , - obsolete as that of an actor who 
 figure no more in play - bill . unquestionably the sensation excite 
 be due , in much , to the " ambiguous voice " which Colonel Morley have 
 disseminate throughout the genial atmosphere of club - room . " arrive 
 in London for the season ! " - he , the orator , once so famous , long so 
 forget , who have be out of the London world for the space of 
 more than half a generation . " why now ? why for the season ? " Quoth the 
 Colonel , " he be still in the prime of life as a public man , and - a 
 CRISIS be at hand ! " 

 but that which give weight and significance to Alban Morley 's hint 
 be the report in the newspaper of Guy Darrell 's visit to his old 
 constituent , and of the short speech he have address to they , to which 
 he have so slightly refer in his conversation with Alban . true , the 
 speech be short : true , it touch but little on pass topic of 
 political interest ; rather allude , with modesty and terseness , to 
 the contest and victory of a former day . but still , in the few word 
 there be the swell of the old clarion , the wind of the Paladin 's horn 
 which wake fontarabian echo . 

 it be astonish how capricious , how sudden , be the change in value 
 of a public man . all depend upon whether the public want , or believe 
 they want , the man ; and that be a question upon which the public do not 
 know their own mind a week before ; nor do they always keep in the same 
 mind , when make up , for a week together . if they do not want a man ; 
 if he do not hit the taste , nor respond to the exigency of the 
 time , - whatever his eloquence , his ability , his virtue , they push 
 he aside or cry he down . be he want ? do the mirror of the moment 
 reflect his image ? - that mirror be an intense magnifier - his proportion 
 swell ; they become gigantic . at that moment the public want some man ; 
 and the instant the hint be give , " why not Guy Darrell ? " Guy Darrell 
 be seize upon as the man want . it be one of those time in our 
 parliamentary history when the public be out of temper with all 
 party ; when recognize leader have contrive to damage themselves ; 
 when a Cabinet be shake , and the public neither care to destroy nor to 
 keep it , - a time too , when the country seem in some danger , and 
 when , mere man of business hold unequal to the emergency , whatever name 
 suggest association of vigour , eloquence , genius rise to a premium 
 above its market price in time of tranquillity and tape . without effort 
 of his own , by the mere force of the undercurrent , Guy Darrell be 
 throw up from oblivion into note . he could not form a Cabinet , 
 certainly not ; but he might help to bring a Cabinet together , reconcile 
 jarring element , adjust dispute question , take in such government 
 some high place , influence its council , and delight a public weary 
 of the oratory of the day with the eloquence of a former race . for the 
 public be ever a laudator temporis acti , and whatever the author or 
 the orator immediately before it , be those author and orator Homers 
 and Ciceros , would still shake a disparage head , and talk of these 
 degenerate day as Homer himself talk age before Leonidas stand 
 in the pass of Thermopylae , or Miltiades rout asian armament at 
 Marathon . Guy Darrell belong to a former race . the father of those 
 young member rise now into fame have quote to their son his pithy 
 sentence , his vivid image ; and add , as Fox add when quote Burke , 
 " but you should have hear and see the man ! " 

 hear and see the man ! but there he be again ! come up as from a 
 grave , - come up to the public just when such a man be want . want 
 how ? want where ? oh , somehow and somewhere ! there he be ! make the 
 most of he . the house in Carlton Gardens be prepare , the establishment 
 mount . Thither flock all the Viponts , nor they alone ; all the chief 
 of all party , nor they alone ; all the notability of our grand 
 metropolis . Guy Darrell might be startle at his own position ; but he 
 comprehend its nature , and it do not discompose his nerve . he know 
 public life well enough to be aware how much the popular favour be the 
 creature of an accident . by chance he have nick the time ; have he thus 
 come to town the season before , he might have continue obscure , a man 
 like Guy Darrell not be want then . whether with or without 
 design , his bearing confirm and extend the effect produce by his 
 reappearance . gracious , but modestly reserve , he speak little , listen 
 beautifully . many of the question which agitate all around he have 
 grow up into importance since his day of action ; nor in his retirement 
 have he trace their progressive development , with their changeful 
 effect upon man and party . but a man who have once go deeply into 
 practical politic might sleep in the Cave of Trophonius for twenty 
 year , and find , on wake , very little to learn . Darrell regain the 
 level of the day , and seize upon all the strong point on which man 
 be divide , with the rapidity of a prompt and comprehensive intellect , 
 his judgment perhaps the clear from the freshness of long repose and 
 the composure of dispassionate survey . when partisan wrangle as to 
 what should have be do , Darrell be silent ; when they ask what 
 should be do , out come one of his terse sentence , and a knot be 
 cut . meanwhile it be true this man , round whom expectation group and 
 rumour buzz , be in neither House of Parliament ; but that be rather a 
 delay to his energy than a detriment to his consequence . 

 important constituency , anticipate a vacancy , be already on the 
 look - out for he ; a small constituency , in the interim , Carr Vipont 
 undertake to procure he any day . there be always a Vipont ready to 
 accept something , even the Chiltern Hundreds . but Darrell , not without 
 reason , demur at re - enter the House of Commons after an absence of 
 seventeen year . he have leave it with one of those rare reputation 
 which no wise man like rashly to imperil . the Viponts sigh . he would 
 certainly be more useful in the Commons than the Lords , but still in the 
 Lords he would be of great use . they would want a debating lord , perhaps 
 a lord acquaint with law in the come CRISIS , - if he prefer the 
 peerage ? darrell demur still . the man 's modesty be insufferable ; his 
 style of speak might not suit that august assembly : and as to law , 
 he could never now be a law lord ; he should be but a ci - devant advocate , 
 affect the part of a judicial amateur . 

 in short , without decline to re - enter public life , seem , on the 
 contrary , to resume all his interest in it , Darrell contrive with 
 admirable dexterity to elude for the present all overture press upon 
 he , and even to convince his admirer , not only of his wisdom , but 
 of his patriotism in that reticence . for certainly he thus manage to 
 exercise a very considerable influence : his advice be more seek , 
 his suggestion more heed , and his power in reconcile certain rival 
 jealousy be perhaps great than would have be the case if he 
 have actually enter either House of Parliament , and throw himself 
 exclusively into the rank , not only of one party , but of one section of 
 a party . nevertheless , such suspense could not last very long ; he must 
 decide at all event before the next session . once he be see in 
 the arena of his old triumph , on the bench devote to stranger 
 distinguish by the Speaker 's order . there , recognize by the old 
 member , eagerly gaze at by the young , Guy Darrell listen calmly , 
 throughout a long field - night , to voice that must have rouse from 
 forget graf kindling and glorious memory ; voice of those 
 veteran now - by whose side he have once struggle for some cause which 
 he have then , in the necessary exaggeration of all honest enthusiasm , 
 identify with a nation 's life - blood . voice , too of the old 
 antagonist over whose routed argument he have march triumphant amidst 
 applause that the next day ring again through England from side to 
 side . Hark ! the very man with whom , in the old battle - day , he have be 
 the most habitually pit , be speak now ! his tone be embarrassed , 
 his argument confuse . do he know who listen yonder ? old member 
 think so , - smile ; whisper each other , and glance significantly where 
 Darrell sit . 

 sit , as become he , tranquil , respectful , intent , seemingly , perhaps 
 really , unconscious of the sensation he excite . what an eye for an 
 orator ! how like the eye in a portrait ; it seem to fix on each other 
 eye that seek it , - steady , fascinating . Yon distant member , behind the 
 Speaker 's chair , at the far distance , feel the light of that eye travel 
 towards they . how lofty and massive , among all those row of human 
 head , seem that forehead , bend slightly down , with the dark strong 
 line of the weighty eyebrow ! but what be pass within that secret 
 mind ? be there mournfulness in the retrospect ? be there eagerness to 
 renew the strife ? be that interest in the hour 's debate feign or real ? 
 impossible for he who gaze upon that face to say . and that eye would 
 have seem to the gazer to read himself through and through to the 
 heart 's core , long ere the gazer could hazard a single guess as to the 
 thought beneath that marble forehead , - as to the emotion within the 
 heart over which , in old senatorial fashion , the arm be fold with 
 so conventional an ease . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

  Darrell and Lionel . 

 Darrell have receive Lionel with some evident embarrassment , which soon 
 yield to affectionate warmth . he take to the young man whose fortune 
 he have so improve ; he feel that with the improved fortune the young 
 man 's whole being be improve : assure position , early commune with the 
 good social circle , in which the equality of fashion smooth away all 
 disparity in rank , have soften in Lionel much of the wayward and 
 morbid irritability of his boyish pride ; but the high spirit , the 
 generous love of independence , the scorn of mercenary calculation , be 
 strong as ever ; these be in the grain of his nature . in common with 
 all who in youth aspire to be one day note from the " undistinguishable 
 many , " Lionel have form to himself a certain ideal standard , above the 
 ordinary level of what the world be content to call honest , or esteem 
 clever . he admit into his estimate of life the heroic element , not 
 undesirable even in the most practical point of view , for the world be 
 so in the habit of decrying ; of disbelieve in high motif and pure 
 emotion ; of daguerreotype itself with all its ugly wrinkle , 
 strip of the true bloom that brighten , of the true expression that 
 redeem , those defect which it invite the sun to limn , that we shall 
 never judge human nature aright , if we do not set out in life with our 
 gaze on its fair beauty , and our belief in its latent good . in a 
 word we should begin with the Heroic , if we would learn the Human . but 
 though to himself Lionel thus secretly prescribe a certain superiority 
 of type , to be sedulously aim at , even if never actually attain , 
 he be wholly without pedantry and arrogance towards his own 
 contemporary . from this he be save not only by good - nature , animal 
 spirit , frank hardihood , but by the very affluence of idea which 
 animate his tongue , colour his language , and whether to young or 
 old , wise or dull , make his conversation racy and original . he be a 
 delightful companion ; and if he have take much instruction from those 
 old and wise than himself , he so bath that instruction in the fresh 
 fountain of his own lively intelligence , so warm it at his own 
 beat impulsive heart , that he could make an old man 's gleaning from 
 experience seem a young man 's guess into truth . fault he have , of 
 course , - chiefly the fault common at his age ; amongst they , perhaps , 
 the most dangerous be , - firstly , carelessness in money matter ; 
 secondly , a distaste for advice in which prudence be visibly 
 predominant . his taste be not in reality extravagant : but money 
 slip through his hand , leave little to show for it ; and when 
 his quarterly allowance become due , ample though it be , - too ample , 
 perhaps , - debt wholly forget start up to seize hold of it . and 
 debt as yet be manageable be not regard with sufficient horror . 
 pay or put aside , as the case might be , they be merely look upon as 
 bore . youth be in danger till it learn to look upon they as fury . for 
 advice , he take it with pleasure , when clothe with elegance and art , 
 when it address ambition , when it exalt the loftier virtue . but 
 advice , practical and prosy , go in at one ear and out at the other . in 
 fact , with many talent , he have yet no adequate ballast of common - sense ; 
 and if ever he get enough to steady his bark through life 's try 
 voyage , the necessity of so much dull weight must be forcibly stricken 
 home less to his reason than his imagination or his heart . but if , 
 somehow or other , he get it not , I will not insure his vessel . 

 I know not if Lionel Haughton have genius ; he never assume that he have : 
 but he have something more like genius than that prototype , RESOLVE , of 
 which he boast to the artist . he have YOUTH , - real youth , - youth of 
 mind , youth of heart , youth of soul . Lithe and supple as he move before 
 you , with the eye to which light or dew spring at once from a nature 
 vibrate to every lofty , every tender thought , he seem more than 
 young , - the incarnation of youth . 

 Darrell take to he at once . amidst all the engagement crowd on 
 the important man , he contrive to see Lionel daily . and what may seem 
 strange , Guy Darrell feel more at home with Lionel Haughton than with 
 any of his own contemporary , - than even with Alban Morley . to the 
 last , indeed , he open speech with less reserve of certain portion of 
 the past , or of certain project in the future . but still , even there , 
 he adopt a tone of half - playful , half - mournful satire , which might be 
 in itself disguise . Alban Morley , with all his good quality , be a man 
 of the world ; as a man of the world , Guy Darrell talk to he . but it 
 be only a very small part of Guy Darrell the Man , of which the world 
 could say " mine . " 

 to Lionel he let out , as if involuntarily , the more amiable , tender , 
 poetic attribute of his vary , complex , uncomprehended character ; 
 not professedly confide , but not take pain to conceal . hear what 
 worldling would call " Sentiment " in Lionel , he seem to glide softly 
 down to Lionel 's own year and talk ' sentiment " in return . after all , 
 this skilled lawyer , this noted politician , have a great dash of the boy 
 still in he . Reader , do you ever meet a really clever man who have not ? 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

  Saith a very homely proverb   pardon its vulgarity , " you can not make 
  a silk purse out of a sow 's ear . " but a sow 's ear be a much fine 
  work of art than a silk purse ; and grand , indeed , the mechanician 
  who could make a sow 's ear out of a silk purse , or conjure into 
  creature of flesh and blood the sarcenet and tulle of a London 
  drawing - room . 

 " Mamma , " ask Honoria Carr Vipont , " what sort of a person be Mrs. 
 Darrell ? " 

 " she be not in our set , my dear , " answer Lady Selina . " the Vipont 
 crooke be just one of those connection with which , though of course 
 one be civil to all connection , one be more or less intimate accord 
 as they take after the Viponts or after the crooke . poor woman ! she 
 die just before Mr. Darrell enter Parliament and appear in society . 
 but I should say she be not an agreeable person . not nice , " add 
 Lady Selina , after a pause , and convey a world of meaning in that 
 conventional monosyllable . 

 " I suppose she be very accomplished , very clever ? " 

 " quite the reverse , my dear . Mr. Darrell be exceedingly young when he 
 marry , scarcely of age . she be not the sort of woman to suit he . " 

 " but at least she must have be very much attach to he , very proud 
 of he ? " 

 Lady Selina glance aside from her work , and observe her daughter 's 
 face , which evince an animation not usual to a young lady of a breeding 
 so lofty , and a mind so well discipline . 

 " I do not   think , " say Lady Selina , " that she be proud of he . she would 
 have be proud of his station , or rather of that to which his fame and 
 fortune would have raise she , have she live to enjoy it . but for a few 
 year after her marriage they be very poor ; and though his rise at 
 the bar be sudden and brilliant , he be long wholly absorb in his 
 profession , and live in Bloomsbury . Mrs. Darrell be not proud of that . 
 the Crookes be generally fine , give themselves air , marry into great 
 house if they can : but we can not   naturalize they ; they always remain 
 Crookes , - useful connection , very ! Carr say we have not a more 
 useful , - but third - rate , my dear . all the crooke be bad wife , because 
 they be never satisfied with their own home , but be always try 
 to get into great people 's home . not very long before she die , Mrs. 
 Darrell take her friend and relation , Mrs. Lyndsay , to live with she . I 
 suspect it be not from affection , or any great consideration for Mrs. 
 Lyndsay 's circumstance   which be indeed those of actual destitution , 
 till - thank to Mr. Darrell - she win her lawsuit , but simply because 
 she look to Mrs. Lyndsay to get she into our set . Mrs. Lyndsay be a 
 great favourite with all of we , charming manner , - perfectly correct , 
 too , - thorough Vipont , thorough gentlewoman , but artful ! oh , so artful ! 
 she humour poor Mrs. Darrell 's absurd vanity ; but she take care not to 
 injure herself . of course , Darrell 's wife , and a vipont - though only a 
 Vipont Crooke - have free passport into the outskirt of good society , the 
 great party , and so forth . but there it stop ; even I should have 
 be compromise if I have admit into our set a woman who be bent 
 on compromise herself . handsome , in a bad style , not the Vipont 
  tournure ; and not only silly and flirt , but   we be alone , keep the 
 secret   decidedly vulgar , my dear . " 

 " you amaze I ! how such a man - " Honoria stop , colour up to the 
 temple . 

 " clever man , " say Lady Selina , " as a general rule , do choose the oddest 
 wife ! the cleverer a man be , the more easily , I do believe , a woman can 
 take he in . however , to do Mr. Darrell justice , he have be take in 
 only once . after Mrs. Darrell 's death , Mrs. Lyndsay , I suspect , try 
 her chance , but fail . of course , she would not actually stay in the 
 same house with a widower who be then young , and who have only to get 
 rid of a wife to whom one be force to be shy in order to be receive 
 into our set with open arm , and , in short , to be of the very good 
 monde . Mr. Darrell come into Parliament immensely rich   a legacy from an 
 old East Indian , besides his own professional saving ; take the house 
 he have now , close by we . Mrs. Lyndsay be oblige to retire to a cottage 
 at Fulham . but as she profess to be a second mother to poor Matilda 
 Darrell , she contrive to be very much at Carlton Gardens ; her daughter 
 Caroline be nearly always there , profit by Matilda 's master ; and 
 I do think that Mrs. Lyndsay would have catch Darrell , but your papa 
 say ' no , ' and he be right , as he always be . nevertheless , Mrs. Lyndsay 
 would have be an excellent wife to a public man : so popular ; know the 
 world so well ; never make enemy till she make an enemy of poor dear 
 Montfort , but that be natural . by the by , I must write to Caroline . 
 sweet creature ! but how absurd , shut herself up as if she be 
 fret for montfort ! that be so like her mother , - heartless , but full 
 of propriety . " 

 here Carr Vipont and Colonel Morley enter the room . " we have just 
 leave Darrell , " say Carr ; " he will dine here to - day , to meet our cousin 
 Alban . I have ask his cousin , young Haughton , and - and , your cousin , 
 Selina   a small party of cousin ; so lucky to find Darrell disengage . " 

 " I venture to promise , " say the Colonel , address Honoria in an 
 under voice , " that Darrell should hear you play Beethoven . " 

 HONORIA . - " be Mr. Darrell so fond of music , then ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " one would not have think it . he keep a secretary 
 at Fawley who play the flute . there be something very interesting about 
 Darrell . I wish you could hear his idea on marriage and domestic life : 
 more freshness of heart than in the young man one meet nowadays . it may 
 be prejudice ; but it seem to I that the young fellow of the present 
 race , if more sober and staid than we be , be sadly want in 
 character and spirit , - no warm blood in their vein . but I should not 
 talk thus to a demoiselle who have all those young fellow at her foot . " 

 " oh , " say Lady Selina , overhearing , and with a half laugh , " Honoria 
 think much as you do : she find the young man so insipid ; all like one 
 another , - the same set phrase . " 

 " the same stereotyped idea , " add Honoria , move away with a gesture 
 of calm disdain . 

 " a very superior mind her , " whisper the Colonel to Carr Vipont . 
 " she will never marry a fool . " 

 Guy Darrell be very pleasant at " the small family dinnerparty . " Carr 
 be always popular in his manner ; the true old House of Commons manner , 
 which be very like that of a gentleman - like public school . Lady Selina , 
 as have be say before , in her own family circle be natural and 
 genial . Young Carr , there , without his wife , more pretentious than his 
 father , - be a Lord of the Admiralty , - feel a certain awe of Darrell , 
 and speak little , which be much to his own credit and to the general 
 conviviality . the other member of the symposium , besides Lady Selina , 
 Honoria , and a young sister , be but Darrell , Lionel , and Lady 
 Selina 's two cousin ; elderly peer , - one with the garter , the other 
 in the Cabinet , - jovial man who have be wild fellow once in the same 
 mess - room , and still joke at each other whenever they meet as they meet 
 now . Lionel , who remember Vance 's description of Lady Selina , and who 
 have since hear she speak of in society as a female despot who carry 
 to perfection the art by which despot flourish , with majesty to 
 impose , and caress to deceive - an Aurungzebe in petticoat - be sadly 
 at a loss to reconcile such portraiture with the good - humour , motherly 
 woman who talk to he of her home , her husband , her child , with 
 open fondness and become pride , and who , far from be so formidably 
 clever as the world cruelly give out , seem to Lionel rather below 
 par in her understanding ; strike from her talk its kindliness , and the 
 residue be very like twaddle . after dinner , various member of the 
 Vipont family drop in , - ask impromptu by Carr or by Lady Selina , 
 in hasty three - cornered note , to take that occasion of renew their 
 acquaintance with their distinguished connection . by some accident , 
 amongst those invite there be but few young single lady ; and , 
 by some other accident , those few be all plain . Honoria Vipont be 
 unequivocally the belle of the room . it could not but be observe that 
 Darrell seem strike with she , - talk with she more than with any 
 other lady ; and when she go to the piano , and play that great air 
 of Beethoven 's , in which music seem to have get into a knot that only 
 finger the most artful can unravel , Darrell remain in his seat aloof 
 and alone , listen no doubt with ravished attention . but just as the 
 air end , and Honoria turn round to look for he , he be go . 

 Lionel do not linger long after he . the gay young man go thence to 
 one of those vast crowd which seem convene for a practical parody of 
 Mr. Bentham 's famous proposition , - contrive the small happiness for 
 the great number . 

 it be a very good house , belong to a very great person . Colonel 
 Morley have procure an invitation for Lionel , and say , " go ; you should 
 be see there . " Colonel Morley have pass the age of grow into 
 society : no such care for the morrow could add a cubit to his 
 conventional stature . one amongst a group of other young man by the 
 doorway , Lionel beheld Darrell , who have arrive before he , listen to 
 a very handsome young lady , with an attention quite as earnest as that 
 which have gratify the superior mind of the well - educate Honoria , - a 
 very handsome young lady certainly , but not with a superior mind , nor 
 suppose hitherto to have find young gentleman " insipid . " Doubtless she 
 would henceforth do so . a few minute after Darrell be listen 
 again ; this time to another young lady , generally call " fast . " if his 
 attention to she be not mark , her to he be . she rattle on to 
 he volubly , laugh , pretty hoyden , at her own sally , and seem 
 at last so to fascinate he by her gay spirit that he sit down by her 
 side ; and the playful smile on his lip - lip that have learn to be 
 so gravely firm - show that he could enter still into the mirth of 
 childhood ; for surely to the time - wear man the fast young lady must have 
 seem but a giddy child . Lionel be amuse . could this be the austere 
 recluse whom he have leave in the shade of Fawley ? Guy Darrell , at his 
 year , with his dignified repute , the object of so many nod , and beck , 
 and wreathe smile , - could he descend to be that most frivolous of 
 character , a male coquet ? be he in earnest ? be his vanity dupe ? 
 look again , Lionel see in his kinsman 's face a sudden return of the 
 sad despondent expression which have move his own young pity in the 
 solitude of Fawley . but in a moment the man rouse himself : the sad 
 expression be go . have the girl 's merry laugh again chase it away ? 
 but Lionel 's attention be now draw from Darrell himself to the 
 observation murmur round he , of which Darrell be the theme . 

 " yes , he be bent on marry again ! I have it from Alban Morley : immense 
 fortune ; and so young - look , any girl might fall in love with such 
 eye and forehead ; besides , what a jointure he could settle ! ... do look 
 at that girl , Flora Vyvyan , try to make a fool of he . she can not 
 appreciate that kind of man , and she would not be catch by his money ; 
 do not want it .... I wonder she be not afraid of he . he be certainly 
 quiz she .... the man think she pretty ; I do not .... they say he be to 
 return to Parliament , and have a place in the Cabinet . ... no ! he have no 
 child live : very natural he should marry again . ... a nephew ! - you 
 be quite mistaken . Young Haughton be no nephew : a very distant 
 connection ; could not expect to be the heir .... it be give out , 
 though , at Paris . the Duchess think so , and so do Lady Jane . they will 
 not be so civil to young Haughton now .... hush - " 

 Lionel , wish to hear no more , glide by , and penetrate far into 
 the throng . and then , as he proceed , with those last word on his 
 ear , the consciousness come upon he that his position have undergo a 
 change . difficult to define it ; to an ordinary bystander people would 
 have seem to welcome he cordially as ever . the gradation of respect 
 in polite society be so exquisitely delicate , that it seem only by a 
 sort of magnetism that one know from day to day whether one have rise 
 or decline . a man have lose high office , patronage , power , never perhaps 
 to regain they . People do not   turn their back on he ; their smile be 
 as gracious , their hand as flatteringly extend . but that man would 
 be dull as a rhinoceros if he do not feel - as every one who accost he 
 feel - that he have descend in the ladder . so with all else . lose even 
 your fortune , it be not the next day in a London drawing - room that your 
 friend look as if you be go to ask they for five pound . wait a 
 year or so for that . but if they have just hear you be ruin , you 
 will feel that they have hear it , let they bow ever so courteously , 
 smile ever so kindly . Lionel at Paris , in the last year or so , have be 
 more than fashionable : he have be the fashion , - court , run after , 
 pet , quote , imitate . that evening he feel as an author may feel who 
 have be the rage , and without fault of his own be so no more . the ray 
 that have gild he have go back to the orb that lent . and they who 
 be most genial still to Lionel Haughton be those who still most 
 respected thirty - five thousand pound a year - in Guy Darrell ! 

 Lionel be angry with himself that he feel gall . but in his wounded 
 pride there be no mercenary regret , - only that sort of sickness which 
 come to youth when the hollowness of worldly life be first make clear 
 to it . from the face round he there fall that glamour by which the 
  amour propre be hold captive in large assembly , where the amour 
 propre be flatter . " magnificent , intelligent audience , " think the 
 applaud actor . " delightful party , " murmur the worship beauty . 
 Glamour ! glamour ! let the audience yawn while the actor mouth ; let 
 the party neglect the beauty to adore another , and straightway the 
 " magnificent audience " be an " ignorant public , " and the " delightful 
 party " a " heartless world . " 




 CHAPTER IX . 

  escape from a London drawing - room , flesh once more tingle and 
  blood flow . - Guy Darrell explain to Lionel Haughton why he hold 
  it a duty to be an old fool . 

 Lionel Haughton glide through the disenchanted room , and breathe a 
 long breath of relief when he find himself in the friendless street . 

 as he walk slow and thoughtful on , he suddenly feel a hand upon his 
 shoulder , turn , and see Darrell . 

 " give I your arm , my dear Lionel ; I be tired out . what a lovely night ! 
 what sweet scorn in the eye of those star that we have neglect for 
 yon flare light . " 

 LIONEL . - " be it scorn ? be it pity ? be it but serene indifference ? " 

 DARRELL . - " as we ourselves interpret : if scorn be present in our own 
 heart , it will be see in the disc of Jupiter . Man , egotist though he 
 be , exact sympathy from all the universe . joyous , he say to the sun , 
 ' life - giver , rejoice with I . ' grieve , he say to the moon , ' pensive 
 one , thou sharest my sorrow . ' hope for fame ; a star be its promise ! 

 " mourn for the dead ; a star be the land of reunion ! say to earth , ' I 
 have do with thee ; ' to Time , ' thou hast nought to bestow ; ' and all 
 space cry aloud , ' the earth be a speck , thine inheritance infinity . 
 Time melt while thou sighest . the discontent of a mortal be the 
 instinct that prove thee immortal . ' thus construe Nature , Nature be 
 our companion , our consoler . benign as the playmate , she lend herself 
 to our shift humour . serious as the teacher , she respond to the 
 steady inquiry of reason . mystic and hallow as the priestess , she 
 keep alive by dim oracle that spiritual yearning within we , in which , 
 from savage to sage , - through all dream , through all creed , - thrill 
 the sense of a link with divinity . never , therefore , while confer 
 with nature , be Man wholly alone , nor be she a single companion with 
 uniform shape . ever new , ever various , she can pass from gay to severe , 
 from fancy to science , - quick as thought pass from the dance of a 
 leaf , from the tint of a rainbow , to the theory of motion , the problem 
 of light . but lose nature , forget or dismiss she , make companion , by 
 hundred , of man who ignore she , and I will not say with the poet , 
 ' this be solitude . ' but in the commune , what stale monotony , what weary 
 sameness ! " 

 thus Darrell continue to weave together sentence with sentence , the 
 intermediate connection of meaning often so subtle that when put down on 
 paper it require effort to discern it . but it be his peculiar gift to 
 make clear when speak what in writing would seem obscure . look , manner , 
 each delicate accent in a voice wonderfully distinct in its unrivalled 
 melody , all so aid the sense of mere word that it be scarcely 
 extravagant to say he might have talk an unknown language , and a 
 listener would have understand . but , understand or not , those sweet 
 intonation it be such delight to hear that any one with nerve alive 
 to music would have murmur , " talk on forever . " and in this gift 
 lie one main secret of the man 's strange influence over all who come 
 familiarly into his intercourse ; so that if Darrell have ever bestow 
 confidential intimacy on any one not by some antagonistic idiosyncrasy 
 steel against its charm , and that intimacy have be withdraw , a void 
 never to be refill must have be leave in the life thus rob . 

 stop at his door , as Lionel , rapt by the music , have forget the 
 pain of the revery so bewitchingly break , Darrell detain the hand 
 hold out to he , and say , " no , not yet ; I have something to say to you : 
 come in ; let I say it now . " 

 Lionel bow his head , and in surprised conjecture follow his kinsman 
 up the lofty stair into the same comfortless stately room that have be 
 already describe . when the servant close the door , Darrell sink into 
 a chair . fix his eye upon Lionel with almost parental kindness , and 
 motion his young cousin to sit by his side , close , he thus begin , 

 " Lionel , before I be your age I be marry ; I be a father . I 
 be lonely and childless now . my life have be mould by a solemn 
 obligation which so few could comprehend that I scarce know a man live 
 beside yourself to whom I would frankly confide it . pride of family be a 
 common infirmity , - often petulant with the poor , often insolent with the 
 rich ; but rarely , perhaps , out of that pride do man construct a positive 
 binding duty , which at all self - sacrifice should influence the practical 
 choice of life . as a child , before my judgment could discern how much of 
 vain superstition may lurk in our reverence for the dead , my whole heart 
 be engage in a passionate dream , which my wake existence become 
 vow to realize . my father ! - my lip quiver , my eye moisten as I 
 recall he , even now , - my father ! - I love he so intensely ! - the love 
 of childhood , how fearfully strong it be ! all in he be so gentle , 
 yet so sensitive , - chivalry without its armour . I be his constant 
 companion : he speak to I unreservedly , as a poet to his muse . I weep at 
 his sorrow ; I chafe at his humiliation . he talk of ancestor as he 
 think of they ; to he they be being like the old Lares , - not dead 
 in graf , but image ever present on household hearth . doubtless he 
 exaggerate their worth , as their old importance . obscure , indeed , in 
 the annal of empire , their deed and their power , their decline and 
 fall . not so think he ; they be to his eye the moon - track in the 
 ocean of history , - light on the wave over which they have gleam , - all 
 the ocean elsewhere dark ! with he think I ; as my father speak , his 
 child believe . but what to the eye of the world be this inheritor of 
 a vaunted name ? - a threadbare , slight , rustic pedant ; no station in 
 the very province in which moulder away the last lowly dwelling - place 
 of his line , - by lineage high above most noble , in position below most 
 yeoman . he have learn ; he have genius : but the study to which they 
 be devote only serve yet more to impoverish his scanty mean , and 
 lead rather to ridicule than to honour . not a day but what I see on his 
 soft feature the smart of a fresh sting , the gnawing of a new care . 
 thus , as a boy , feel in myself a strength inspire by affection , 
 I come to he one day as he sit grieve , and kneel to he , say , 
 ' Father , courage yet a little while ; I shall soon be a man , and I swear 
 to devote myself as man to revive the old fading race so prize by you ; 
 to rebuild the House that , by you so loved , be lofty in my eye than 
 all the heraldry of king . ' and my father 's face brighten , and his 
 voice bless I ; and I rise up - ambitious ! " Darrell pause , heave a 
 short , quick sigh , and then rapidly continue , 

 " I be fortunate at the University . that be a day when chief of party 
 look for recruit amongst young man who have give the proof and win 
 the first - fruit of emulation and assiduity ; for statesmanship then be 
 deem an art which , like that of war , need early discipline . I have 
 scarcely leave college when I be offer a seat in Parliament by the 
 head of the Viponts , an old Lord Montfort . I be dazzle but for one 
 moment ; I decline the next . the fallen House of Darrell need wealth ; 
 and parliamentary success , in its high honour , often require 
 wealth , - never give it . it chance that I have a college acquaintance 
 with a young man name Vipont Crooke . his grandfather , one of the 
 numberless vipont , have be compel to add the name of Crooke to his 
 own , on succeed to the property of some rich uncle , who be one of 
 the numberless crooke . I go with this college acquaintance to visit 
 the old Lord Montfort , at his villa near London , and thence to the 
 country - house of the Vipont Crookes . I stay at the last two or three 
 week . while there , I receive a letter from the eld Fairthorn , my 
 father 's bailiff , entreat I to come immediately to Fawley , hint 
 at some great calamity . on take leave of my friend and his family , 
 something in the manner of his sister startle and pain I , - an 
 evident confusion , a burst of tear , - I know not what . I have never 
 seek to win her affection . I have an ideal of the woman I could 
 love , - it do not resemble she . on reach Fawley , conceive the shock 
 that await I . my father be like one heart - stricken . the principal 
 mortgagee be about to foreclose , - Fawley about to pass forever from the 
 race of the Darrells . I see that the day my father be drive from the 
 old house would be his last on earth . what mean to save he ? - how 
 raise the pitiful sum - but a few thousand - by which to release from the 
 spoiler 's gripe those barren acre which all the land of the Seymour or 
 the Gower could never replace in my poor father 's eye ? my sole income 
 be a college fellowship , adequate to all my want , but useless for sale 
 or loan . I spend the night in vain consultation with Fairthorn . there 
 seem not a hope . next morning come a letter from young Vipont Crooke . 
 it be manly and frank , though somewhat coarse . with the consent of 
 his parent he offer I his sister 's hand , and a dowry of L10,000 . 
 he hint , in excuse for his bluntness , that , perhaps from motif of 
 delicacy , if I feel a preference for his sister , I might not deem myself 
 rich enough to propose , and - but it matter not what else he say . you 
 foresee the rest . my father 's life could be save from despair ; his 
 beloved home be his shelter to the last . that dowry would more than 
 cover the paltry debt upon the land . I give myself not an hour to 
 pause . I hasten back to the house to which fate have lead I . but , " 
 say Darrell , proudly , " do not think I be base enough , even with such 
 excuse , to deceive the young lady . I tell she what be true ; that I 
 could not profess to she the love paint by romance - writer and poet ; 
 but that I love no other , and that if she deign to accept my hand , I 
 should studiously consult her happiness and gratefully confide to her my 
 own . " 

 " I say also , what be true , that if she marry I , ours must be for 
 some year a life of privation and struggle ; that even the interest of 
 her fortune must be devoted to my father while he live , though every 
 shilling of its capital would be settle on herself and her child . 
 how I bless she when she accept I , despite my candour ! - how 
 earnestly I pray that I might love and cherish and requite she ! " 
 Darrell pause , in evident suffering . " and , thank Heaven ! I have nothing 
 on that score wherewith to reproach myself ; and the strength of that 
 memory enable I to bear and forbear more than otherwise would have 
 be possible to my quick spirit and my man 's heart . my dear father ! his 
 death be happy : his home be save ; he never know at what sacrifice to 
 his son ! he be gladden by the first honours my youth achieve . he 
 be resign to my choice of a profession , which , though contrary to his 
 antique prejudice , that allow to the representative of the Darrells 
 no profession but the sword , still promise the wealth which would 
 secure his name from perish . he be credulous of my future , as if 
 I have utter not a vow , but a prediction . he have bless my union , 
 without foresee its sorrow . he have embrace my first - bear , - true , it 
 be a girl , but it be one link onward from ancestor to posterity . and 
 almost his last word be these : ' you will restore the race ; you will 
 revive the name ! and my son 's child will visit the antiquary 's grave , 
 and learn gratitude to he for all that his idle lesson teach to your 
 healthier vigour . ' and I answer , ' Father , your line shall not perish 
 from the land ; and when I be rich and great , and lordship spread 
 far round the lowly hall that your life ennoble , I will say to your 
 grandchild , ' honour ye and your son 's son , while a Darrell yet 
 tread the earth , honour he to whom I owe every thought which nerve I 
 to toil for what you who come after I may enjoy . ' 

 " and so the old man , whose life have be so smileless , die smile . " 

 by this time Lionel have steal Darrell 's hand into his own - his heart 
 swell with childlike tenderness , and the tear roll down his 
 cheek . 

 Darrell gently kiss his young kinsman 's forehead , and , extricate 
 himself from Lionel 's clasp , pace the room , and speak on while pace 
 it . 

 " I make , then , a promise ; it be not keep . no child of mine survive to 
 be teach reverence to my father 's grave . my wed life be not happy : 
 its record need no word . of two child bear to I , both be go . my 
 son go first . I have throw my life 's life into he , - a boy of energy , 
 of noble promise . ' t be for he I begin to build that baffle fabric , 
 ' sepulchri immemor . ' for he I buy , acre on acre , all the land within 
 reach of fawley,-land twelve mile distant . I have mean to fill up the 
 intervene space , to buy out a mushroom earl whose wood and cornfield 
 lie between . I be scheme the purchase , scrawl on the county map , 
 when they bring the news that the boy I have just take back to school 
 be dead , - drown bathing on a calm summer eve . no , Lionel . I must go 
 on . that grief I have wrestle with , - conquer . I be widow then . a 
 daughter still leave , - the first - bear , whom my father have bl on his 
 death - bed . I transfer all my love , all my hope , to she . I have no 
 vain preference for male heir . be a race less pure that run on through 
 the female line ? well , my son 's death be merciful compare to - " again 
 Darrell stop , again hurry on . " enough ! all be forgive in the 
 grave ! I be then still in the noon of man 's life , free to form new 
 tie . another grief that I can not tell you ; it be not all conquer 
 yet . and by that grief the last verdure of existence be so blighted 
 that - that - in short , I have no heart for nuptial altar , for the social 
 world . year go by . each year I say , ' next year the wound will be 
 heal ; I have time yet . ' now age be near , the grave not far ; now , if 
 ever , I must fulfil the promise that cheer my father 's death - bed . 
 nor do that duty comprise all my motif . if I would regain healthful 
 thought , manly action , for my remain year , I must feel that one 
 haunt memory be exorcise and forever lay at rest . it can be so 
 only , - whatever my risk of new care , whatever the folly of the hazard 
 at my age , - be so only by - by - " once more Darrell pause , fix his 
 eye steadily on Lionel , and , open his arm , cry out , " forgive I , 
 my noble Lionel , that I be not content with an heir like you ; and do 
 not you mock at the old man who dream that woman may love he yet , and 
 that his own child may inherit his father 's home . " 

 Lionel spring to the breast that open to he ; and if Darrell have 
 plan how good to remove from the young man 's mind forever the 
 possibility of one selfish pang , no craft could have attain his object 
 like that touching confidence before which the disparity between youth 
 and age literally vanish . and , both make equal , both elevate alike , 
 verily I know not which at the moment feel the elder or the young ! two 
 noble heart , intermingle in one emotion , be set free from all time 
 save the present : par each with each , they meet as brother twin - bear . 




 BOOK VII . 




 CHAPTER I. 

  vignette for the next BOOK of BEAUTY . 

 " I quite agree with you , Alban ; Honoria Vipont be a very superior young 
 lady . " 

 " I know you would think so ! " cry the Colonel , with more warmth than 
 usual to he . 

 " many year since , " resume Darrell , with reflective air , " I read Miss 
 Edgeworth 's novel ; and in converse with Miss Honoria Vipont , methink 
 I confer with one of Miss Edgeworth 's heroine - so rational , so prudent , 
 so well - behave - so free from silly romantic notion - so replete with 
 solid information , moral philosophy and natural history - so sure to 
 regulate her watch and her heart to the precise moment , for the one 
 to strike , and the other to throb - and to marry at last a respectable 
 steady husband , whom she will win with dignity , and would lose with 
 decorum ! a very superior girl indeed . " 

   " darrell speak - not the author . Darrell be unjust to the more 
  exquisite female character of a Novelist , admirable for strength of 
  sense , correctness of delineation , terseness of narrative , and 
  lucidity of style - nor less admirable for the unexaggerated nobleness 
  of sentiment by which some of her heroine be notably 
  distinguish . 

 " though your description of Miss Vipont be satirical , " say Alban 
 Morley , smile , in spite of some irritation , " yet I will accept it as 
 panegyric ; for it convey , unintentionally , a just idea of the quality 
 that make an intelligent companion and a safe wife . and those be the 
 quality we must look to , if we marry at our age . we be no long 
 boy , " add the Colonel sententiously . 

 DARRELL . - " alas , no ! I wish we be . but the truth of your remark 
 be indisputable . ah , look ! be not that a face which might make an 
 octogenarian forget that he be not a boy ? - what regular feature ! - and 
 what a blush ! " 

 the friend be rid in the park ; and as Darrell speak , he bow to 
 a young lady , who , with one or two other , pass rapidly by in a 
 barouche . it be that very handsome young lady to whom Lionel have see 
 he listen so attentively in the great crowd , for which Carr Vipont 's 
 family party have be desert . 

 " yes ; Lady Adela be one of the lovely girl in London , " say the 
 Colonel , who have also lift his hat as the barouche whirl by - " and 
 amiable too : I have know she ever since she be bear . her father and I 
 be great friend - an excellent man but stingy . I have much difficulty in 
 arrange the eld girl 's marriage with Lord Bolton , and be a trustee 
 in the settlement . if you feel a preference for Lady Adela , though I 
 do not   think she would suit you so well as Miss Vipont , I will answer 
 for her father 's encouragement and her consent . ' tis no drawback to you , 
 though it be to most of her admirer , when I add , ' there be nothing with 
 she ! ' " 

 " and nothing in she ! which be bad , " say Darrell . 

 " still , it be pleasant to gaze on a beautiful landscape , even though the 
 soil be barren . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " that depend upon whether you be merely the artistic 
 spectator of the landscape , or the disappointed proprietor of the soil . " 

 " Admirable ! " say Darrell ; " you have dispose of Lady Adela . so ho ! so 
 ho ! " Darrell 's horse   his old high - nettled horse , freshly send to he 
 from Fawley , and in spite of the five year that have add to its age , 
 of spirit make frisky by long repose   here put down its ear lash 
 out - and indulge in a bind which would have unseat many a London 
 rider . a young Amazon , follow hard by some two or three young 
 gentleman and their groom , shoot by , swift and reckless as a hero 
 at Balaclava . but with equal suddenness , as she catch sight of 
 Darrell - whose hand and voice have already soothe the excited nerve of 
 his steed - the Amazon wheel round and gain his side . throw up her 
 veil , she reveal a face so prettily arch , so perversely gay - with 
 eye of radiant hazel , and fair lock half loosen from their 
 formal braid - that it would have beguile resentment from the most 
 insensible - reconcile to danger the most timid . and yet there be 
 really a grace of humility in the apology she tender for her 
 discourtesy and thoughtlessness . as the girl rein her light palfrey by 
 Darrell 's side - turning from the young companion who have now join she , 
 their hackney in a foam - and devote to his ear all her lively overflow 
 of happy spirit , not untempere by a certain deference , but still 
 apparently free from dissimulation - Daxrell 's grand face light up - his 
 mellow laugh , unrestrained , though low , echo her sportive tone ; her 
 youth , her joyousness be irresistibly contagious . Alban Morley watch 
 observant , while interchange talk with her attendant comrade , young 
 man of high ton , but who belong to that jeunesse doree with which 
 the surface of life patrician be fret over - young man with few idea , 
 few duty - but with plenty of leisure - plenty of health - plenty of 
 money in their pocket - plenty of debt to their tradesman - dare at 
 Melton - scheme at T'attersall 's - pride to maiden aunt - plague to 
 thrifty father - fickle lover , but solid match - in brief , fast 
 liver , who get through their youth betime , and who , for the most part , 
 be middle - aged before they be thirty - tame by wedlock - sober by the 
 responsibility that come with the care of property and the dignity 
 of rank - undergo abrupt metamorphosis into chairman of quarter session , 
 county member , or decorous peer ; - their idea enrich as their duty 
 grow - their opinion , once loose as willow to the wind , stiffen into 
 the palisade of fence propriety - valuable , busy man , change as Henry 
 V. , when come into the care of state , he say to the Chief Justice , 
 " there be my hand ; " and to Sir John Falstaff , 

  " I know thee not , old roan ; 
  fall to thy prayer ! " 

 but meanwhile the elite of this jeunesse doree glitter round Flora 
 Vyvyan : not a regular beauty like Lady Adela - not a fine girl like 
 Miss Vipont , but such a light , faultless figure - such a pretty radiant 
 face - more womanly for affection to be manlike - Hebe ape Thalestris . 
 Flora , too , be an heiress - an only child - spoilt , wilful - not at all 
 accomplish -   my belief be that accomplishment be think great bore 
 by the jeunesse doree   - no accomplishment except horsemanship , with a 
 slight knack at billiard , and the capacity to take three whiff from a 
 spanish cigarette . that last be adorable - four offer have be advance 
 to her hand on that merit alone . -   N.B. young lady do themselves no 
 good with the jeunesse doree , which , in our time , be a lover that 
 rather smoke than ' sigh , like furnace , " by advertise their horror 
 of cigar .   you would suppose that Flora Vyvyan must be coarse - vulgar 
 perhaps ; not at all ; she be pignaute - original ; and do the oddest 
 thing with the air and look of the high breeding . fairy can not 
 be vulgar , no matter what they do ; they may take the strange 
 liberty - pinch the maid - turn the house topsy - turvy ; but they be 
 ever the darling of grace and poetry . Flora Vyvyan be a fairy . not 
 peculiarly intellectual herself , she have a veneration for intellect ; 
 those fast young man be the last person likely to fascinate that fast 
 young lady . woman be so perverse ; they always prefer the very people 
 you would least suspect - the antithesis to themselves . yet be it 
 possible that Flora Vyvyan can have carry her crotchet to 
 so extravagant a degree as to have design the conquest of 
 Guy Darrell - ten year old than her own father ? she , too , an 
 heiress - certainly not mercenary ; she who have already refuse well 
 worldly match than Darrell himself be - young man , handsome man , 
 with coronet on the margin of their note - paper and the panel of their 
 brougham ! the idea seem preposterous ; nevertheless , Alban Morley , a 
 shrewd observer , conceive that idea , and tremble for his friend . 

 at last the young lady and her satellite shoot off , and the Colonel say 
 cautiously , " Miss Vyvyan be - alarming . " 

 DARRELL . - " alarming ! the epithet require construe . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " the sort of girl who might make a man of our year 
 really and literally an old fool ! " 

 DARRELL . - " old fool such a man must be if girl of any sort be 
 permit to make he a great fool than he be before . but I think 
 that , with those pretty hand rest on one 's arm - chair , or that sunny 
 face shin into one 's study window , one might be a very happy old 
 fool - and that be the most one can expect ! " 

 COLONEL MORLEY   check an anxious groan . - " I be afraid , my poor 
 friend , you be far go already . no wonder Honoria Vipont fail to 
 be appreciate . but Lady Selina have a maxim - the truth of which my 
 experience attest - ' the moment it come to woman , the most sensible man 
 be the ' - " 

 " old fool ! " put in Darrell . " if Mark Antony make such a goose of 
 himself for that paint harridan Cleopatra , what would he have do 
 for a bloom Juliet ! youth and high spirit ! alas ! why be these to 
 be unsuitable companion for we , as we reach that climax in time and 
 sorrow - when to the one we be grow the most indulgent , and of the 
 other have the most need ? Alban , that girl , if her heart be really 
 win - her wild nature wisely master , gently guide - would make a true , 
 prudent , loving , admirable wife - " 

 " Heavens ! " cry Alban Morley . 

 " to such a husband , " pursue Darrell , unheede the ejaculation , 
 " as - Lionel Haughton . what say you ? " " Lionel - oh , I have no objection 
 at all to that ; but he be too young yet to think of marriage - a mere boy . 
 besides , if you yourself marry , Lionel could scarcely aspire to a girl 
 of Miss Vyvyan 's birth and fortune . " 

 " Ho , not aspire ! that boy at least shall not have to woo in vain from 
 the want of fortune . the day I marry - if ever that day come - I settle on 
 Lionel Haughton and his heir five thousand a - year ; and if , with gentle 
 blood , youth , good look , and a heart of gold , that fortune do not 
 allow he to aspire to any girl whose hand he covet , I can double 
 it , and still be rich enough to buy a superior companion in Honoria 
 Vipont - " 

 MORLEY . - " do not   say buy - " 

 DARRELL . - " ay , and still be young enough to catch a butterfly in Lady 
 Adela - still be bold enough to chain a panther in Flora Vyvyan . let 
 the world know - your world in each nook of its gaudy auction - mart - that 
 lione : Haughton be no pauper cousin - no penniless fortune - hunter . I wish 
 that world to be kind to he while he be yet young , and can enjoy it . 
 ah , Morley , Pleasure , like punishment , hobble after we , pede claudo . 
 what would have delight we yesterday do not catch we up till 
 to - morrow , and yesterday 's pleasure be not the morrow 's . a pennyworth 
 of sugar - plum would have make our eye sparkle when we be scrawling 
 pot - hook at a preparatory school , but no one give we sugar - plum 
 then . now every day at dessert France heap before we her daintiest 
 sugar - plum in gilt bonbonniere . do you ever covet they ? I never do . 
 let Lionel have his sugar - plum in time . and as we talk , there he come . 
 Lionel , how be you ? " 

 " I resign you to Lionel 's charge now , " say the Colonel , glance at his 
 watch . " I have an engagement - trouble some . two silly friend of mine 
 have be quarrel - high word - in an age when duel be out of the 
 question . I have promise to meet another man , and draw up the form for 
 a mutual apology . high word be so stupid nowadays . no option but to 
 swallow they up again if they be as high as steeple . Adieu for the 
 present . we meet to - night at Lady Dulcett 's concert ? " 

 " yes , " say Darrell . " I promise Miss Vyvyan to be there , and keep she 
 from disturb the congregation . you Lionel , will come with I . " 

 LIONELL   embarrass . - " no ; you must excuse I . I have long be 
 engage elsewhere . " 

 " that be a pity , " say the Colonel , gravely . " Lady Dulcett 's conceit be 
 just one of the place where a young man should be see . " Colonel Morley 
 wave his hand with his usual languid elegance , and his hack canter 
 off with he , stately as a charger , easy as a rock - horse . 

 " unalterable man , " say Darrell , as his eye follow the horseman 's 
 recede figure . " ' through all the mutation on Time 's dusty 
 high - road - stable as a milestone . just what Alban Morley be as a 
 school - boy he be now ; and if mortal span be extend to the age of 
 the patriarch , just what Alban Morley be now , Alban Morley would be a 
 thousand year hence . I do not   mean externally , of course ; wrinkle will 
 come - cheek will fade . but these be trifle : man 's body be a garment , 
 as Socrates say before I , and every seven year , accord to the 
 physiologist , man have a new suit , fibre and cuticle , from top to toe . 
 the interior be that wear the clothe be the same in Alban Morley . 
 have he love , hat , rejoice , suffer ? where be the sign ? not one . at 
 school , as in life , do nothing , but decidedly somebody - respect 
 by small boy , pet by big boy - an authority with all . never get 
 honours - arm and arm with those who do ; never in scrape - advise 
 those who be ; imperturbable , immovable , calm above mortal care as an 
 epicurean deity . what can wealth give that he have not get ? in the house 
 of the rich he choose his room . talk of ambition , talk of power - he 
 have their reward without an effort . true prime minister of all 
 the realm he care for ; good society have not a vote against he - he 
 transact its affair , he know its secret - he yield its patronage . 
 ever request to do a favour - no loan great enough to do he one . 
 Incorruptible , yet verse to a fraction in each man 's price ; impeccable , 
 yet confidant in each man 's foible ; smooth as silk , hard as adamant ; 
 impossible to wound , vex , annoy he - but not insensible ; thoroughly 
 kind . dear , dear Alban ! nature never polish a fine gentleman out of a 
 solider block of man ! " Darrell 's voice quiver a little as he complete 
 in earnest affection the sketch begin in playful irony , and then with a 
 sudden change of thought , he resume lightly : 

 " but I wish you to do I a favour , Lionel . aid I to repair a fault in 
 good breeding , of which Alban Morley would never have be guilty . I 
 have be several day in London , and not yet call on your mother . 
 will you accompany I now to her house and present I ? " 

 " thank you , thank you ; you will make she so proud and happy ; but may I 
 ride on and prepare she for your visit ? " 

 " certainly ; her address be - " 

 " Gloucester Place , no . - . " 

 " I will meet you there in half an hour . " 




 CHAPTER II . 

  " let observation , with expansive view , 
  survey mankind from China to Peru , " 

  - and OBSERVATION will EVERYWHERE FIND , INDISPENSABLE to the 
  HAPPINESS of woman , a visit ACQUAINTANCE . 

 Lionel know that Mrs. Haughton would that day need more than usual 
 forewarning of a visit from Mr. Darrell . for the evening of that day 
 Mrs. Haughton propose " to give a party . " when Mrs. Haughton give a 
 party , it be a serious affair . a notable and bustling housewife , she 
 attend herself to each preparatory detail . it be to assist at this 
 party that Lionel have resign Lady Dulcett 's concert . the young man , 
 reluctantly acquiesce in the arrangement by which Alban Morley have 
 engage he a lodging of his own , seldom or never let a day pass 
 without gratify his mother 's proud heart by an hour or two spend in 
 Gloucester Place , often to the forfeiture of a pleasant ride , or other 
 tempting excursion , with gay comrade . difficult in London life , and at 
 the full of its season , to devote an hour or two to visit , apart from 
 the track chalk out by one 's very mode of existence - difficult to 
 cut off an hour so as not to cut up a day . and Mrs. Haughton be 
 exact - nice in her choice as to the exact slice in the day . she take 
 the prime of the joint . she like her neighbour to see the handsome , 
 elegant young man dismount from his charger or descend from his 
 cabriolet , just at the witching hour when Gloucester Place be full . 
 do he go to a levee , he must be sure to come to she before he change 
 his dress , that she and Gloucester Place might admire he in uniform . 
 be he go to dine at some very great house , he must take she in his 
 way   though no street could be more out of his way , that she might be 
 enable to say in the party to which she herself repair " there be a 
 great dinner at Lord So - and - so 's to - day ; my son call on I before he 
 go there . if he have be disengage , I should have ask permission to 
 bring he here . " 

 not that Mrs. Haughton honestly design , nor even wish to draw the 
 young man from the dazzle vortex of high life into her own little 
 current of dissipation . she be much too proud of Lionel to think that 
 her friend be grand enough for he to honour their house by his 
 presence . she have in this , too , a lively recollection of her lose 
 Captain 's doctrinal view of the great world 's creed . the Captain have 
 flourish in the time when Impertinence , instal by Brummell , though 
 her influence be wan , still school her oligarch , and maintain 
 the etiquette of her court ; and even when his misalliance and his 
 debt have cast he out of his native sphere , he lose not all the 
 original brightness of an exclusive . in moment of connubial confidence , 
 when own his past error , and trace to his sympathise Jessie the 
 cause of his decline , he would say : " ' tis not a man 's birth , nor his 
 fortune , that give he his place in society - it depend on his conduct , 
 Jessie . he must not be see bow to snob , nor should his enemy 
 track he to the haunt of vulgarian . I date my fall in life to dining 
 with a horrid man who lend I L100 , and live in Upper Baker Street . his 
 wife take my arm from a place they call a drawing - room   the Captain as 
 he speak be on a fourth floor , to share some unknown food which 
 they call a dinner   the Captain at that moment would have welcome 
 a rasher . the woman go about blabbing - the thing get wind - for 
 the first time my character receive a soil . what be a man without 
 character ! and character once sully , Jessie , man become reckless . 
 teach my boy to beware of the first false step - no association 
 with parvenus . do not   cry , Jessie - I do not   mean that he be to cut 
 your - relation be quite different from other people - nothing so low 
 as cut relation . I continue , for instance , to visit Guy Darrell , 
 though he live at the back of Holborn , and I actually see he once in 
 brown beaver glove . but he be a relation . I have even din at his 
 house , and meet odd people there - people who live also at the back of 
 Holborn . but he do not ask I to go to their house , and if he have , I 
 must have cut he . " by reminiscence of this kind of talk , Lionel be 
 save from any design of Mrs. Haughton 's to attract his orbit into the 
 circle within which she herself move . he must come to the party she 
 give - illumine or awe odd people there . that be a proper tribute to 
 maternal pride . but have they ask he to their party , she would have 
 be the first to resent such a liberty . 

 Lionel find Mrs. Haughton in great bustle . a gardener 's cart be before 
 the street door . man be bring in a grove of evergreen , intend to 
 border the staircase , and make its exiguous ascent still more difficult . 
 the refreshment be already lay out in the dining - room . Mrs. 
 Haughton , with scissor in hand , be cut flower to fill the 
 eperyne , but dart to and fro , like a dragonfly , from the dining - room 
 to the hall , from the flower to the evergreen . 

 " dear I , Lionel , be that you ? just tell I , you who go to all 
 those grandee , whether the ratafia - cake should be opposite to 
 the sponge - cake , or whether they would not go well - thus - at 
 cross - corner ? " 

 " my dear mother , I never observe - I do not   know . but make haste - take off 
 that apron - have those door shut come upstairs . Mr. Darrell will be here 
 very shortly . I have ride on to prepare you . " 

 " Mr. Darrell - to - day - how could you let he come ? oh , Lionel , how 
 thoughtless you be ! you should have some respect for your mother - I be 
 your mother , sir . " 

 " yes , my own dear mother - do not   scold - I could not help it . he be so 
 engage , so seek after ; if I have put he off to - day , he might never 
 have come , and - " 

 " never have come ! who be Mr. Darrell , to give himself such air ? - only a 
 lawyer after all , " say Mrs. Haughton , with majesty . 

 " oh , mother , that speech be not like you . he be our benefactor - our - " 

 " do not , do not   say very more - I be very wrong - quite wicked - only 
 my temper , Lionel dear . good Mr. Darrell ! I shall be so happy to see 
 he - see he , too , in this house that I owe to he - see he by your 
 side ! I think I shall fall down on my knee to he . " 

 and her eye begin to stream . 

 Lionel kiss the tear away fondly . " that be my own mother now 
 indeed - now I be proud of you , mother ; and how well you look ! I be proud 
 of that too . " 

 " look well - I be not fit to be see , this figure - though perhaps an 
 elderly quiet gentleman like good Mr. Darrell do not notice lady 
 much . John , John , make haste with those plant . gracious I ! you have 
 get your coat off ! - put it on - I expect a gentleman - I be at home , in the 
 front drawing - room - no - that be all set out - the back drawing - room , John . 
 send Susan to I . Lionel , do just look at the supper - table ; and what be 
 to be do with the flower , and - " 

 the rest of Mrs. Haughton 's voice , owe to the rapidity of her ascent , 
 which affect the distinctness of her utterance , be lose in air . she 
 vanish at culminate point - within her chamber . 



 CHAPTER III . 

  MRS . HAUGHTON AT HOME to GUY DARRELL . 

 thank to Lionel 's activity , the hall be disencumber - the plant 
 hastily stow away - the parlour close on the festive preparation - and 
 the footman in his livery wait at the door - when Mr. Darrell arrive . 
 Lionel himself come out and welcome his benefactor 's footstep across 
 the threshold of the home which the generous man have provide for the 
 widow . 

 if Lionel have some secret misgiving as to the result of this interview , 
 they be soon and most happily dispel . for , at the sight of Guy 
 Darrell lean so affectionately on her son 's arm , Mrs. Haughton 
 mechanically give herself up to the impulse of her own warm , grateful , 
 true woman 's heart . and she bind forward , her seizure of Darrell 's 
 hand - her first fervent blessing - she after word , simple but eloquent 
 with feeling - make that heart so transparent , that Darrell look it 
 through with respectful eye . 

 Mrs. Haughton be still a pretty woman , and with much of that delicacy 
 of form and outline which constitute the gentility of person . she have a 
 sweet voice too , except when angry . her defect of education , of temper , 
 or of conventional polish , be not discernible in the overflow of 
 natural emotion . Darrell have come resolve to be release if possible . 
 pleased he be , much more than he have expect . he even inly accept 
 for the deceased Captain excuse which he have never before admit to 
 himself . the linen - draper 's daughter be no coarse presume dowdy , and 
 in her candid rush of gratitude there be not that underbred servility 
 which Darrell have think perceptible in her epistolary composition . 
 there be elegance too , void both of gaudy ostentation and penurious 
 thrift , in the furniture and arrangement of the room . the income he 
 give to she be not spend with slatternly waste or on tawdry gewgaw . 
 to lady in general , Darrell 's manner be extremely attractive - not the 
 less win because of a certain shyness which , imply respect for 
 those he address , and a modest undervaluing of his own merit , convey 
 compliment and soothe self - love . and to that lady in especial such 
 gentle shyness be the happy good - breeding . 

 in short , all go off without a hitch , till , as Darrell be take 
 leave , Mrs. Haughton be remind by some evil genius of her evening 
 party , and her very gratitude , long for some opportunity to requite 
 obligation , prompt she to invite the kind man to whom the facility 
 of give party be justly due . she have never realise to herself , 
 despite all that Lionel could say , the idea of Darrell 's station in the 
 world - a lawyer who have spend his youth at the back of Holborn , whom the 
 stylish Captain have deem it a condescension not to cut , might indeed 
 become very rich ; but he could never be the fashion . " poor man , " she 
 think , " he must be very lonely . he be not , like Lionel , a young 
 dancing man . a quiet little party , with people of his own early rank and 
 habit , would be more in his way than those grand place to which Lionel 
 go . I can but ask he - I ought to ask he . what would he say if I do 
 not ask he ? black ingratitude indeed , if he be not ask ! " all these 
 idea rush through her mind in a breath , and as she clasp Darrell 's 
 extended hand in both her own , she say : " I have a little party 
 to - night ! " - and pause . darrell remain mute , and Lionel not 
 suspect what be to ensue , she continue : " there may be some good 
 music - young friend of mine - sing charmingly - Italians ! " 

 Darrell bow . Lionel begin to shudder . 

 " and if I might presume to think it would amuse you , Mr. Darrell , oh , I 
 should be so happy to see you ! - so happy ! " 

 " would you ? " say Darrell , briefly . " then I should be a churl if I do 
 not come . Lionel will escort I . of course you expect he too ? " 

 " yes , indeed . though he have so many fine place to go to - and it can not   be 
 exactly what he be use to - yet he be such a dear good boy that he give 
 up all to gratify his mother . " 

 Lionel , in agony , turn an unfilial back , and look steadily out of 
 the window ; but Darrell , far too august to take offence where none be 
 mean , only smile at the imply reference to Lionel 's superior demand 
 in the fashionable world , and reply , without even a touch of his 
 accustomed irony : " and to gratify his mother be a pleasure I thank you 
 for invite I to share with he . " 

 more and more at her ease , and charm with have obey her hospitable 
 impulse , Mrs. Haughton , follow Darrell to the landing - place , add : 

 " and if you like to play a quiet rubber - " 

 " I never touch card - I abhor the very name of they , ma'am , " interrupt 
 Darrell , somewhat less gracious in his tone . 

 he mount his horse ; and Lionel , break from Mrs. Haughton , who be 
 assure he that Mr. Darrell be not at all what she expect , but 
 really quite the gentleman - nay , a much grander gentleman than even 
 Colonel Morley - regain his kinsman 's side , look abash and 
 discomfit . Darrell , with the kindness which his fine quick intellect 
 enable he so felicitously to apply , hasten to relieve the young 
 guardsman 's mind . 

 " I like your mother much - very much , " say he , in his most melodious 
 accent . " good boy ! I see now why you give up Lady Dulcett . go and take 
 a canter by yourself , or with young friend , and be sure you call on 
 I so that we may be both at Mrs. Haughton 's by ten o'clock . I can go 
 later to the concert if I feel inclined . " 

 he wave his hand , wheel his horse , and trot off towards the fair 
 suburban lane that still proffer to the denizen of London glimpse of 
 rural field , and shadow from quiet hedgerow . he wish to be 
 alone ; the sight of Mrs. Haughton have revive recollection of bygone 
 day - memory link memory in painful chain - gay talk with his young 
 schoolfellow - that wild Charlie , now in his grave - his own laborious 
 youth , resolute aspiring , secret sorrow - and the strong man feel 
 the want of the solitary self - commune , without which self - conquest be 
 unattainable . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

  MRS . HAUGHTON AT HOME MISCELLANEOUSLY . little party be USEFUL in 
  bring PEOPLE together . one never knows WHOM one may MEET . 

 great kingdom grow out of small beginning . Mrs. Haughton 's social 
 circle be describe from a humble centre . on come into possession 
 of her easy income and her house in Gloucester Place , she be naturally 
 seize with the desire of an appropriate " visit acquaintance . " the 
 accomplishment of that desire have be defer awhile by the excitement 
 of Lionel 's departure for Paris , and the IMMENSE TEMPTATION to which the 
 attention of the spurious Mr. Courtenay Smith have expose her widow 
 solitude : but no soon have she recover from the shame and anger with 
 which she have discard that showy impostor , happily in time , than the 
 desire become the more keen ; because the good lady feel that with a mind 
 so active and restless as her , a visit acquaintance might be her 
 well preservative from that sense of loneliness which dispose widow to 
 lend the incautious ear to adventurous wooer . after her experience of 
 her own weakness in listen to a sharper , and with a shudder at her 
 escape , Mrs. Haughton make a firm resolve never to give her beloved son 
 a father - in - law . no , she would distract her thought - she would have a 
 visit ACQUAINTANCE . she commence by single out such family as 
 at various time have be her genteelest lodger - now lodge elsewhere . 
 she inform they by polite note of her accession of consequence and 
 fortune , which she be sure they would be happy to hear ; and these 
 note , leave with the card of " Mrs. Haughton , Gloucester Place , " 
 necessarily produce respondent note and correspondent card . 
 Gloucester Place then prepare itself for a party . the ci - devant lodger 
 urbanely attend the summon . in their turn they give party . Mrs. 
 Haughton be invite . from each such party she bear back a new draught 
 into her ' social circle . " thus , long before the end of five year , Mrs. 
 Haughton have attain her object . she have a " visit ACQUAINTANCE ! " it 
 be true that she be not particular ; so that there be a new somebody at 
 whose house a card could be leave , or a morning call achieve - who could 
 help to fill her room , or whose room she could contribute to fill in 
 turn . she be content . she be no tuft - hunter . she do not care for 
 title . she have no vision of a column in the Morning Post . she want , 
 kind lady , only a vent for the exuberance of her social instinct ; and 
 be proud , she rather like acquaintance who look up to , instead 
 of look down on she . thus Gloucester Place be invade by tribe not 
 congenial to its natural civilised atmosphere . hengist and Horsas , 
 from remote anglo - saxon district , cross the intervene channel , and 
 insult the british nationality of that salubrious district . to most of 
 such immigrator , Mrs. Haughton , of Gloucester Place , be a personage 
 of the high distinction . a few other of prouder status in the world , 
 though they own to themselves that there be a sad mixture at Mrs. 
 Haughton 's house , still , once seduce there , come again - be person 
 who , however independent in fortune or gentle by blood , have but a small 
 " visit acquaintance " in town ; fresh from economical colonisation on 
 the continent or from distant province in these three kingdom . Mrs. 
 Haughton 's room be well light . there be music for some , whist for 
 other ; tea , ice , cake , and a crowd for all . 

 at ten o'clock - the room already nearly fill , and Mrs. Haughton , as 
 she stand at the door , anticipate with joy that happy hour when the 
 staircase would become inaccessible - the head attendant , send with the 
 ice from the neighbouring confectioner , announce in a loud voice : " Mr. 
 Haughton - Mr. Darrell . " 

 at that latter name a sensation thrill the assembly - the name so much 
 in every one 's mouth at that period , nor least in the mouth of the 
 great middle class , on whom - though the polite may call they " a sad 
 mixture , " cabinet depend - could not fail to be familiar to the ear 
 of Mrs. Haughton 's " visit acquaintance . " the interval between his 
 announcement and his ascent from the hall to the drawing - room be busily 
 fill up by murmur question to the smile hostess : " Darrell ! what ! 
 the Darrell ! Guy Darrell ! great man of the day ! a connection of 
 your ? bless I , you do not   say so ? " Mrs. Haughton begin to feel nervous . 
 be Lionel right ? could the man who have only be a lawyer at the back 
 of Holborn really be , now , such a very , very great man - great man of 
 the day ? nonsense ! 

 " Ma'am , " say one pale , puff - cheek , flat - nosed gentleman , in a very 
 large white waistcoat , who be wait by her side till a vacancy in 
 one of the two whist - table should occur . " Ma'am , I be an enthusiastic 
 admirer of Mr. Darrell . you say he be a connection of your ? present I 
 to he . " 

 Mrs. Haughton nod flutteringly , for , as the gentleman close his 
 request , and tap a large gold snuff - box , Darrell stand before 
 her - Lionel close at his side , look positively sheepish . the great 
 man say a few civil word , and be glide into the room to make way 
 for the press behind he , when he of the white waistcoat , touch Mrs. 
 Haughton 's arm , and star Darrell full in the face , say , very loud : 
 " in these anxious time , public man dispense with ceremony . I crave an 
 introduction to Mr. Darrell . " thus press , poor Mrs. Haughton , without 
 look up , mutter out : " Mr. Adolphus Poole - Mr. Darrell , " and turn 
 to welcome fresh comer . 

 " Mr. Darrell , " say Mr. Poole , bow to the ground , " this be an 
 honour . " 

 Darrell give the speaker one glance of his keen eye , and think to 
 himself : " if I be still at the bar I should be sorry to hold a brief 
 for that fellow . " however , he return the bow formally , and , bow 
 again at the close of a highly complimentary address with which 
 Mr. Poole follow up his opening sentence , express himself " much 
 flattered , " and think he have escape ; but wherever he go through 
 the crowd , Mr. Poole contrive to follow he , and claim his notice by 
 remark on the affair of the day - the weather - the fund - the crop . 
 at length Darrell perceive , sit aloof in a corner , an excellent man 
 whom indeed it surprise he to see in a London drawing - room , but who , 
 many year ago , when Darrell be canvass the enlightened constituency 
 of Ouzelford , have be on a visit to the chairman of his committee - an 
 influential trader - and have connection in the town - and , be a 
 very high character , have do he good service in the canvass . darrell 
 rarely forget a face , and never a service . at any time he would have 
 be glad to see the worthy man once more , but at that time he be 
 grateful indeed . 

 " excuse I , " he say bluntly to Mr. Poole , " but I see an old friend . " he 
 move on , and thick as the crowd have become , it make way , with respect 
 as to royalty for the distinguished orator . the buzz of admiration as 
 he pass - louder than in drawing - room more refined - would have have 
 sweet music than Grisi 's most artful quaver to a vainer man - nay , once 
 on a time to he . but - sugar plum come too late ! he gain the corner , 
 and rouse the solitary sitter . 

 " my dear Mr. Hartopp , do you not remember I - Guy Darrell ? " 

 " Mr. Darrell ! " cry the ex - mayor of Gatesboro ' , rise , " who could 
 think that you would remember I ? " 

 " what ! not remember those ten stubborn voter , on whom , all and singly , 
 I have lavish my power of argument in vain ? you come , and with the 
 brief word , ' John - Ned - Dick - oblige I - vote for Darrell ! ' the man 
 be convince - the vote win . that be what I call eloquence " -   sotto 
 voce - " confound that fellow ! still after I ! " aside to Hartopp   - " oh ! 
 may I ask who be that Mr. What's - his - name - there - in the white 
 waistcoat ? " 

 " Poole , " answer Hartopp . " who be he , sir ? a speculative man . he be 
 connect with a new company - I be tell it answer . Williams   that be my 
 foreman - a very long head he have too   have take share in the Company , 
 and want I to do the same , but ' tis not in my way . and Mr. Poole may 
 be a very honest man , but he do not impress I with that idea . I have 
 grow careless ; I know I be liable to be take in - I be so once - and 
 therefore I avoid ' company ' upon principle - especially when they 
 promise thirty per cent . , and work copper mine - Mr. Poole have a copper 
 mine . " 

 " and deal in brass - you may see it in his face ! but you be not in 
 town for good , Mr. Hartopp ? if I remember right , you be settle at 
 Gatesboro ' when we last meet . " 

 " and so I be still - or rather in the neighbourhood . I be gradually 
 retire from business , and grow more and more fond of farming . but I 
 have a family , and we live in enlightened time , when child require a 
 fine education than their parent have . Mrs. Hartopp think my daughter 
 Anna Maria be in need of some ' finish lesson ' - very fond of the 
 harp be Anna Maria - and so we have take a house in London for six 
 week . that be Mrs. Hartopp yonder , with the bird on her head - bird of 
 paradise , I believe ; Williams say bird of that kind never rest . that 
 bird be an exception - it have rest on Mrs. Hartopp 's head for hour 
 together , every evening since we have be in town . " 

 " significant of your connubial felicity , Mr. Hartopp . " 

 " may it be so of Anna Maria ' s. she be to be marry when her education 
 be finish - marry , by the by , to a son of your old friend Jessop , of 
 Ouzelford ; and between you and I , Mr. Darrell , that be the reason why 
 I consent to come to town . do not suppose that I would have a 
 daughter finish unless there be a husband at hand who undertake to be 
 responsible for the result . " 

 " you retain your wisdom , Mr. Hartopp ; and I feel sure that not even your 
 fair partner could have bring you up to London unless you have decide 
 on the expediency of come . do you remember that I tell you the day you 
 so admirably settle a dispute in our committee - room , ' it be well you 
 be not bear a king , for you would have be an irresistible tyrant ' ? " 

 " hush ! hush ! " whisper Hartopp , in great alarm , " if Mrs. H. should 
 hear you ! what an observer you be , sir . I think I be a judge of 
 character - but I be once deceive . I dare say you never be . " 

 " you mistake , " answer Darrell , wincing , " you deceive ! how ? " 

 " oh , a long story , sir . it be an elderly man - the most agreeable , 
 interesting companion - a vagabond nevertheless - and such a pretty 
 bewitch little girl with he , his grandchild . I think he might have 
 be a wild harumscarum chap in his day , but that he have a true sense of 
 honour " -   Darrell , wholly uninterested in this narrative , suppress a 
 yawn , and wonder when it would end . 

 " only think , sir , just as I be say to myself , ' I know character - I 
 never be take in , ' down come a smart fellow - the man 's own son - and 
 tell I - or rather he suffer a lady who come with he to tell 
 I - that this charming old gentleman of high sense of honour be a 
 return convict - be transport for rob his employer . " 

 Pale , breathless , Darrell listen , not unheede now . " what be the 
 name of - of - " 

 " the convict ? he call himself Chapman , but the son 's name be 
 losely - Jasper . " 

 " ah ! " falter Darrell , recoil . " and you speak of a little girl ? " 

 " Jasper Losely 's daughter ; he come after she with a magistrate 's 
 warrant . the old miscreant have carry she off , - to teach she his own 
 swindle way , I suppose . " 

 " luckily she be then in my charge . I give she back to her father , and 
 the very respectable - look lady he bring with he . some relation , I 
 presume . " 

 " what be her name , do you remember ? " 

 " Crane . " 

 " Crane ! - crane ! " mutter Darrell , as if try in vain to tax his 
 memory with that name . " so he say the child be his daughter - be you 
 sure ? " 

 " oh , of course he say so , and the lady too . but can you be acquaint 
 with their , sir ? " 

 " I ? - no ! stranger to I , except by repute . Liars - infamous liar ! but 
 have the accomplice quarrel - I mean the son and father - that the 
 father should be expose and denounce by the son ? " 

 " I conclude so . I never see they again . but you believe the father 
 really be , then , a felon , a convict - no excuse for he - no extenuating 
 circumstance ? there be something in that man , Mr. Darrell , that make 
 one love he - positively love he ; and when I have to tell he that I have 
 give up the child he trust to my charge , and see his grief , I feel a 
 criminal myself . " 

 Darrell say nothing , but the character of his face be entirely 
 alter - stern , hard , relentless - the face of an inexorable judge . 
 Hartopp , lift his eye suddenly to that countenance , recoil in awe . 

 " you think I be a criminal ! " he say , piteously . 

 " I think we be both talk too much , Mr. Hartopp , of a gang of 
 miserable swindler , and I advise you to dismiss the whole remembrance 
 of intercourse with any of they from your honest breast , and never to 
 repeat to other ear the tale you have pour into mine . man of honour 
 should crush down the very thought that approach they to knave . " 

 thus say , Darrell move off with abrupt rudeness , and pass quickly 
 back through the crowd , scarcely notice Mrs. Haughton by a retreating 
 nod , nor heed Lionel at all , but hurry down the stair . he be 
 impatiently search for his cloak in the back parlour , when a voice 
 behind say : " let I assist you , sir - do : " and turn round with 
 petulant quickness , he behold again Mr. Adolphus Poole . it require an 
 habitual intercourse with equal to give perfect and invariable control 
 of temper to a man of irritable nerve and frank character ; and though , 
 where Daxrell really like , he have much sweet forbearance , and where 
 he be indifferent much stately courtesy , yet , when he be offend , he 
 could be extremely uncivil . " Sir , " he cry almost stamp his foot , 
 " your importunity annoy I I request you to cease they . " 

 " oh , I ask your pardon , " say Mr. Poole , with an angry growl . " I have 
 no need to force myself on any man . but I beg you to believe that if I 
 presume to seek your acquaintance , it be to do you a service sir - yes , 
 a private service , sir . " he lower his voice into a whisper , and lay 
 his finger on his nose : " there be one Jasper Losely , sir - eh ? oh , sir , 
 I be no mischief - maker . I respect family secret . perhaps I might be of 
 use , perhaps not . " 

 " certainly not to I , sir , " say Darrell , fling the cloak he have now 
 find across his shoulder , and stride from the house . when he enter 
 his carriage , the footman stand wait for order . Darrell be long in 
 give they . " anywhere for half an hour - to St. Paul 's , then home . " but 
 on return from this objectless plunge into the City , Darrell pull 
 the check - string : " to Belgrave Square - Lady Dulcett 's . " 

 the concert be half over ; but Flora Vyvyan have still guard , as she 
 have promise , a seat beside herself for Darrell , by lend it for the 
 present to one of her obedient vassal . her face brighten as she see 
 Darrell enter and approach . the vassal surrender the chair . Darrell 
 appear to be in the high spirit ; and I firmly believe that he be 
 strive to the utmost in his power - what ? to make himself agreeable to 
 Flora Vyvyan ? no ; to make Flora Vyvyan agreeable to himself . the man do 
 not presume that a fair young lady could be in love with he ; perhaps he 
 believe that , at his year , to be impossible . but he ask what seem 
 much easy , and be much hard - he ask to be himself in love . 




 CHAPTER V. 

  it be assert by those learned MEN who have devote their life to 
  the study of the manner and HABIT of INSECT SOCIETY , that when a 
  spider have lose its last web , have exhaust all the GLUTINOUS 
  matter wherewith to spin another , it still . protract its INNOCENT 
  EXISTENCE , by obtrude its NIPPERS on some LESS WARLIKE but MORE 
  RESPECTABLE SPIDER , POSSESSED of a convenient home and an AIRY 
  LARDER . OBSERVANT MORALISTS have NOTICED the same peculiarity in 
  the maneater , or pocket - CANNIBAL . 

 Eleven o'clock , A.M. , Samuel Adolphus Poole , Esq . , be in his 
 parlour , - the house one of those new dwelling which yearly spring up 
 north of the Regent 's Park , - dwelling that , attest the eccentricity 
 of the national character , task the fancy of the architect and the 
 gravity of the beholder - each tenement so torture into contrast with 
 the other , that , on one little rood of ground , all age seem blend , 
 and all race encamp . no . 1 be an egyptian tomb ! - pharaoh may repose 
 there ! no . 2 be a swiss chalet - William Tell may be shoot in its 
 garden ! Lo ! the severity of doric column - Sparta be before you ! 
 behold that Gothic porch - you be rapt to the Norman day ! ha ! those 
 Elizabethan mullion - Sidney and Raleigh , rise again ! Ho ! the trellis 
 of China - come forth , Confucius , and Commissioner Yeh ! pass a few 
 pace , we be in the land of the Zegri and Abencerrage : 

  ' Land of the dark - eyed maid and dusky Moor . ' 

 Mr. Poole 's house be call Alhambra Villa ! moorish 
 verandah - plate - glass window , with cuspe head and mahogany sash - a 
 garden behind , a small one in front - stair ascend to the doorway 
 under a saracenic portico , between two pedestalle lion that resemble 
 poodle - the whole new and lustrous - in semblance stone , in substance 
 stucco - crack in the stucco denote ' settlement . " but the house be 
 let for ninety - nine year - relet again on a running lease of seven , 
 fourteen , and twenty - one - the builder be not answerable for duration , 
 nor the original lessee for repair . take it altogether , than 
 Alhambra Villa masonry could devise no well type of modern taste and 
 metropolitan speculation . 

 Mr. Poole , since we see he between four and five year ago , have enter 
 the matrimonial state . he have marry a lady of some money , and become a 
 reform man . he have eschew the turf , relinquish belcher neckcloth 
 and Newmarket coat - drop his old - bachelor acquaintance . when a man 
 marrie and reform , especially when marriage and reform be 
 accompany with increase income , and settle respectably in Alhambra 
 Villa - relation , before estranged , tender kindly overture : the world , 
 before austere , become indulgent . it be so with Poole - no long 
 dolly . grant that in early life he have fall into bad way , and , 
 among equivocal associate , have be lead on by that taste for sporting 
 which be a manly though a perilous characteristic of the true - bear 
 Englishman ; he who love horse be liable to come in contact with 
 blackleg ; the racer be a noble animal ; but it be his misfortune that 
 the well his breed the bad his company : - grant that , in the 
 stable , Adolphus Samuel Poole have pick up some wild oats - he have sow 
 they now . bygone be bygone . he have make a very prudent marriage . 
 Mrs. Poole be a sensible woman - have render he domestic , and would 
 keep he straight ! his uncle Samuel , a most worthy man , have find he 
 that sensible woman , and , have find she , have pay his nephew 's debt , 
 and add a round sum to the lady 's fortune , have see that the whole 
 be so tightly settle on wife and child that Poole have the tender 
 satisfaction of know that , happen what might to himself , those dear 
 one be safe ; nay , that if , in the revers of fortune , he should be 
 compel by persecute creditor to fly his native shore , law could 
 not impair the competence it have settle upon Mrs. Poole , nor destroy 
 her blessed privilege to share that competence with a beloved spouse . 
 Insolvency itself , thus protect by a marriage settlement , realise the 
 sublime security of VIRTUE immortalise by the roman muse : 

  - " Repulse nescia sordidae , 
  Intaminatis fulget honoribus ; 
  Nec sumit ant ponit secure 
  Arbitrio popularis aurae . " 

 Mr. Poole be an active man in the parish vestry - he be a sound 
 politician - he subscribe to public charity - he attend public 
 dinner he have vote in half a dozen public institution - he talk 
 of the public interest , and call himself a public man . he choose his 
 associate amongst gentleman in business - speculative , it be true , 
 but steady . a joint - stock company be set up ; he obtain an official 
 station at its board , couple with a salary - not large , indeed , but 
 still a salary . 

 " the money , " say Adolphus Samuel Poole , " be not my object ; but I like 
 to have something to do . " I can not say how he do something , but no 
 doubt somebody be do . 

 Mr. Poole be in his parlour , read letter and sort paper , before 
 he depart to his office in the West End . Mrs. Poole enter , lead 
 an infant who have not yet learn to walk alone , and denote , by an 
 interesting enlargement of shape , a kindly design to bless that infant , 
 at no distant period , with a brother or sister , as the case might be . 

 " come and kiss Pa , Johnny , " say she to the infant . " Mrs. Poole , I be 
 busy , " growl Pa. 

 " Pa 's busy - work hard for little Johnny . Johnny will be well for it 
 some day , " say Mrs. Poole , toss the infant half up to the ceiling , 
 in compensation for the loss of the paternal kiss . 

 " Mrs. Poole , what do you want ? " 

 " may I hire Jones 's brougham for two hour to - day , to pay visit ? there 
 be a great many card we ought to leave ; be there any place where I 
 should leave a card for you , lovey - any person of consequence you be 
 introduce to at Mrs. Haughton 's last night ? that great man they be 
 all talk about , to whom you seem to take such a fancy , Samuel , 
 duck - " 

 " do get out ! that man insult I , I tell you . " 

 " insulted you ! no ; you never tell I . " 

 " I do tell you last night come home . " 

 " dear I , I think you mean that Mr. Hartopp . " 

 " well , he almost insult I , too . Mrs. Poole , you be stupid and 
 disagreeable . be that all you have to say ? " 

 " Pa 's cross , johnny dear ! poor Pa ! - people have vex Pa , 
 Johnny - naughty people . we must go or we shall vex he too . " 

 such heavenly sweetness on the part of a forbear wife would have 
 soften Tamburlane . Poole 's sullen brow relaxed . if woman know how to 
 treat man , not a husband , unhenpecked , would be find from Indos to the 
 Pole . 

 and Poole , for all his surly demeanour , be as completely govern by 
 that angel as a bear by his keeper . 

 " well , Mrs. Poole , excuse I . I own I be out of sort to - day - give I 
 little Johnny - there   kiss the infant ; who in return make a dig at 
 Pa 's left eye , and begin to cry on find that he have not succeed 
 in dig it out   - take the brougham . Hush , Johnny - hush - and you 
 may leave a card for I at Mr. Peckham 's , Harley Street . my eye smart 
 horribly ; that baby will gouge I one of these day . " 

 Mrs. Poole have succeed in still the infant , and confess that 
 Johnny 's finger be extremely strong for his age - but , add that 
 baby will catch at whatever be very bright and beautiful , such as 
 gold and jewel and Mr. Poole 's eye , administer to the wound orb 
 so soothe a lotion of pity and admiration that Poole growl out quite 
 mildly : " Nonsense , blarney - by the by , I do not say this morning that 
 you should not have the rosewood chiffoniere ! " 

 " no , you say you could not afford it , duck ; and when Pa say he can not 
 afford it , Pa must be the judge - must not he , Johnny dear ? " 

 " but perhaps I can afford it . yes , you may have it yes , I say , you shall 
 have it . do not   forget to leave that card on Peckham - he be a moneyed man . 
 there be a ring at the bell . who be it ? run and see . " 

 Mrs. Poole obey with great activity , consider her interesting 
 condition . she come back in half a minute . " oh , my Adolphus - I oh , 
 my Samuel ! it be that dreadful - look man who be here the other 
 evening - stay with you so long . I do not   like his look at all . pray 
 do not   be at home . " 

 " I must , " say Poole , turn a shade paler , if that be possible . 
 " stop - do not   let that girl go to the door ; and you - leave I . " he 
 snatch his hat and glove , and put aside the parlour - maid , who 
 have emerge from the shade below in order to answer the " ring , " walk 
 hastily down the small garden . 

 Jasper Losely be station at the little gate . Jasper be no long in 
 rag , but he be coarsely clothe - clothe as if he have resign all pretence 
 to please a lady 's eye , or to impose upon a West - end tradesman - a check 
 shirt - a rough pea - jacket , his hand bury in its pocket . 

 Poole start with well - simulate surprise . " what , you ! I be just go 
 to my office - in a great hurry at present . " 

 " hurry or not , I must and will speak to you , " say Jasper , doggedly . 

 " what now ? then , step in ; - only remember I can not   give you more than 
 five minute . " 

 the rude visitor follow Poole into the back parlour , and close the 
 door after he . 

 lean his arm over a chair , his hat still on his head , losely fix 
 his fierce eye on his old friend , and say in a low , set , deterinine 
 voice : " now , mark I , Dolly Poole , if you think to shirk my business , or 
 throw I over , you will find yourself in Queer Street . have you call on 
 Guy Darrell , and put my case to he , or have you not ? " 

 " I meet Mr. Darrell only last night , at a very genteel party . "   Poole 
 deem it prudent not to say by WHOM that genteel party be give , for 
 it will be remember that Poole have be Jasper 's confidant in that 
 adventurer 's former design upon Mrs. Haughton ; and if Jasper know 
 that Poole have make her acquaintance , might he not insist upon Poole 's 
 reintroduce he as a visit acquaintance ?   " a very genteel party , " 
 repeat Poole . " I make a point of be present to Mr. Darrell , and 
 very polite he be at first . " 

 " curse his politeness - get to the point . " 

 " I sound my way very carefully , as you may suppose ; and when I have 
 get he into friendly chat , you understand , I begin ; ah ! my poor losely , 
 nothing to be do there - he fly off in a tangent - as much as desire 
 I to mind my own business , and hold my tongue ; and upon my life , I 
 do not   think there be a chance for you in that quarter . " 

 " very well - we shall see . next , have you take any step to find out the 
 girl , my daughter ? " 

 " I have , I assure you . but you give I so slight a clue . be you quite 
 sure she be not in America after all ? " 

 " I have tell you before that that story about America be all bosh ! a 
 stratagem of the old gentleman 's to deceive I . poor old man , " continue 
 Jasper , in a tone that positively betray feeling , " I do not   wonder that 
 he dread and fly I ; yet I would not hurt he more than I have do , 
 even to be as well off as you be - blink at I from your mahogany 
 perch like a pet owl with its crop full of mouse . and if I would take the 
 girl from he , it be for her own good . for if Darrell could be get to 
 make a provision on she , and , through she , on myself , why , of course 
 the old man should share the benefit of it . and now that these infernal 
 pain often keep I awake half the night , I can not   always shut out the 
 idea of that old man wander about the world , and die in a ditch . 
 and that runaway girl - to whom , I dare swear , he would give away his 
 last crumb of bread - ought to be an annuity to we both : Basta , basta ! as 
 to the american story - I have a friend at Paris , who go to America on 
 a speculation ; I ask he to inquire about this Willaim Waife and his 
 granddaughter Sophy , who be say to have sail for New York nearly 
 five year ago , and he see the very person - settle in New York - no 
 long under the name of Waife , but their true name of Simpson , and get 
 out from the man that they have be induce to take their passage from 
 England in the name of Waife , at the request of a person whom the mail 
 would not - give up , but to whom he say he be under obligation . perhaps 
 the old gentleman have do the fellow a kind turn in early life . the 
 description of this soi - disant Waife and his grandchild settle the 
 matter - wholly unlike those I seek ; so that there be every reason to 
 suppose they must still be in England , and it be your business to find 
 they . continue your search - quicken your wit - let I be well please 
 with your success when I call again this day week - and meanwhile four 
 pound , if you please - as much more as you like . " 

 " why , I give you four pound the other day , besides six pound for 
 clothe ; it can not   be go . " 

 " every penny . " 

 " dear , dear ! can not   you maintain yourself anyhow ? can not   you get any one 
 to play at card ? four pound ! why , with your talent for whist , four 
 pound be a capital ! " 

 " whom can I play with ! whom can I herd with ? cracksman and pickpocket . 
 fit I out ; ask I to your own house ; invite your own friend ; make up a 
 rubber , and you will then see what I can do with four pound ; and may go 
 share if you like , as we use to do . " 

 " do not   talk so loud . losely , you know very well that what you ask be 
 impossible . I have   turn over a new leaf . " 

 " but I have   still get your handwriting on the old leaf . " 

 " what be the good of these stupid threat ? if you really want to do I 
 a mischief , where could you go to , and who would believe you ? " 

 " I fancy your wife would . I will try . Hillo - " 

 " stop - stop - stop . no row here , sir . no scandal . hold your tongue , or 
 I will send for the police . " 

 " do ! nothing I should like well . I be tired out . I want to tell my own 
 story at the Old Bailey , and have my revenge upon you , upon Darrell , 
 upon all . send for the police . " 

 losely throw himself at length on the sofa -   new morocco with spring 
 cushion   - and fold his arm . 

 " you could only give I five minute - they be go , I fear . I be more 
 liberal . I give you your own time to consider . I do not   care if I stay to 
 dine ; I dare say Mrs. Poole will excuse my dress . " 

 " losely , you be such a - fellow ! if I do give you the four pound you 
 ask , will you promise to shift for yourself somehow , and molest I no 
 more ? " 

 " certainly not . I shall come once every week for the same sum . I can not 
 live upon less - until - " 

 " until what ? " 

 " until either you get Mr. Darrell to settle on I a suitable provision ; 
 or until you place I in possession of my daughter , and I can then be in 
 a well condition to treat with he myself ; for if I would make a claim 
 on account of the girl , I must produce the girl , or he may say she be 
 dead . besides , if she be as pretty as she be when a child , the very 
 sight of she might move he more than all my talk . " 

 " and if I succeed in do anything with Mr. Darrell , or discover 
 your daughter , you will give up all such letter and document of mine 
 as you say you possess ? " 

 " ' say I possess ! ' I have show they to you in this pocket - book , dolly 
 Poole - your own proposition to rob old Latham 's safe . " 

 Poole eye the book , which the ruffian take out and tap . have the 
 ruffian be a slighter man , Poole would have be a braver one . as it 
 be - he eye and groan . " turn against one 's own crony ! so unhandsome , 
 so unlike what I think you be . " 

 " it be you who would turn against I . but stick to Darrell or find I my 
 daughter , and help she and I to get justice out of he ; and you 
 shall not only have back these letter , but I will pay you 
 handsomely - handsomely , Dolly Poole . Zooks , sir - I be fall , but I be 
 always a gentleman . " 

 Therewith losely give a vehement slap to his hat , which , crush by the 
 stroke , improve his general appearance into an aspect so outrageously 
 raffish , that but for the expression of his countenance the contrast 
 between the boast and the man would have be ludicrous even to Mr. 
 Poole . the countenance be too dark to permit laughter . in the dress , 
 but the ruin of fortune - in the face , the ruin of man . Poole heave a 
 deep sigh , and extend four sovereign . 

 losely rise and take they carelessly . " this day week , " he say - shake 
 himself - and go his way . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

  fresh TOUCHES to the three vignette for the BOOK of BEAUTY . 

 week pass - the London season be begin - Darrell have decide 
 nothing - the prestige of his position be undiminishe , - in politic , 
 perhaps high . he have succeed in reconcile some great man ; he have 
 strengthen - it might be save - a jarring cabinet . in all this he have 
 show admirable knowledge of mankind , and prove that time and disuse 
 have not lessen his power of perception . in his matrimonial design , 
 Darrell seem more bent than ever upon the hazard - irresolute as 
 ever on the choice of a partner . still the choice appear to be 
 circumscribe to the fair three who have be subject to Colonel 
 Morley 's speculative criticism - Lady Adela , Miss Vipont , Flora Vyvyan . 
 much pro and con might be say in respect to each . Lady Adela be so 
 handsome that it be a pleasure to look at she ; and that be much when 
 one see the handsome face every day , - provide the pleasure do 
 not wear off . she have the reputation of a very good temper ; and the 
 expression of her countenance confirm it . there , panegyric stop ; 
 but detraction do not commence . what remain be inoffensive 
 commonplace . she have no salient attribute , and no rule passion . 
 certainly she would never have waste a thought on Mr. Darrell , nor have 
 discover a single merit in he , if he have not be quote as a very 
 rich man of high character in search of a wife , and if her father have 
 not say to she : " Adela , Mr. Darrell have be greatly strike with your 
 appearance - he tell I so . he be not young , but he be still a very fine 
 look man , and you be twenty - seven . ' tis a great distinction to be 
 notice by a person of his year and position , than by a pack of silly 
 young fellow , who think more of their own pretty face than they would 
 ever do of your . " 

 " if you do not mind a little disparity of year , he would make you a 
 happy wife ; and , in the course of nature , a widow , not too old to enjoy 
 liberty , and with a jointure that might entitle you to a still well 
 match . " 

 Darrell thus put into Lady Adela 's head , he remain there , and become 
 an idee fixe . view in the light of a probable husband , he be 
 elevate into an " interesting man . " she would have receive his 
 address with gentle complacency ; and , be more the creature of habit 
 than impulse , would no doubt , in the intimacy of connubial life , have 
 bl he , or any other admire husband , with a reasonable modicum of 
 languid affection . nevertheless , Lady Adela be an unconscious impostor ; 
 for , owe to a mild softness of eye and a susceptibility to blush , 
 a victim ensnare by her beauty would be apt to give her credit for a 
 nature far more accessible to the romance of the tender passion than , 
 happily perhaps for her own peace of mind , she possess ; and might 
 flatter himself that he have produce a sensation which give that 
 softness to the eye and that damask to the blush . 

 Honoria Vipont would have be a choice far more creditable to the good 
 sense of so mature a wooer . few well specimen of a young lady bring 
 up to become an accomplished woman of the world . she have sufficient 
 instruction to be the companion of an ambitious man - solid judgment to 
 fit she for his occasional adviser . she could preside with dignity over 
 a stately household - receive with grace distinguish guest . fit 
 to administer an ample fortune , ample fortune be necessary to the 
 development of her excellent quality . if a man of Darrell 's age be 
 bold enough to marry a young wife , a safe wife amongst the young 
 lady of London he could scarcely find ; for though Honoria be only 
 three - and - twenty , she be as staid , as sensible , and as remote from all 
 girlish frivolity , as if she have be eight - and - thirty . certainly have 
 Guy Darrell be of her own year , his fortune unmade , his fame to 
 win , a lawyer reside at the back of Holborn , or a pretty squire in 
 the petty demesne of Fawley , he would have have no charm in the eye of 
 Honoria Vipont . disparity of year be in this case no drawback but his 
 advantage , since to that disparity Darrell owe the establish name and 
 the eminent station which make Honoria think she elevate her own self 
 in prefer he . it be but justice to she to distinguish here between 
 a woman 's veneration for the attribute of respect which a man gather 
 round he , and the more vulgar sentiment which sink the man altogether , 
 except as the necessary fixture to be take in with general valuation . 
 it be not fair to ask if a girl who entertain a preference for one of 
 our toil , stirring , ambitious sex , who may be double her age or 
 have a snub nose , but who look dignified and impose on a pedestal 
 of state , whether she would like he as much if strip of all his 
 accessory , and leave unredeemed to his baptismal register or unbecoming 
 nose . just as well ask a girl in love with a young Lothario if she would 
 like he as much if he have be ugly and crooked . the high name of the 
 one man be as much a part of he as good look be to the other . thus , 
 though it be say of Madame de la Valliere that she love Louis XIV : 
 for himself and not for his regal grandeur , be there a woman in the 
 world , however disintereste , who believe that Madame de la Valliere 
 would have like Louis XIV . as much if Louis XIV . have be Mr. John 
 Jones ; Honoria would not have bestow her hand on a brainless , 
 worthless nobleman , whatever his rank or wealth . she be above that sort 
 of ambition ; but neither would she have marry the well - look and 
 worthy John Jones who ever bear that british appellation , if he have 
 not occupy the social position which bring the merit of a Jones 
 within range of the eyeglass of a Vipont . 

 many girl in the nursery say to their juvenile confidant , " I will 
 marry the man I love . " Honoria have ever say , " I will only marry the man 
 I respect . " thus it be her respect for Guy Darrell that make her honour 
 he by her preference . she appreciate his intellect - she fall in love 
 with the reputation which the intellect have acquire . and Darrell might 
 certainly choose bad . his cool reason incline he much to Honoria . 
 when Alban Morley argue in her favour , he have no escape from 
 acquiescence , except in the turn and double of his ironical humour . 
 but his heart be a rebel to his reason ; and , between you and I , 
 Honoria be exactly one of those young woman by whom a man of grave 
 year ought to be attract , and by whom , somehow or other , he never be ; 
 I suspect , because the old we grow the more we love youthfulness of 
 character . when Alcides , have go through all the fatigue of life , 
 take a bride in Olympus , he ought to have select Minerva , but he choose 
 Hebe . 

 will Darrell find his Hebe in Flora Vyvyan ? Alban Morley become more and 
 more alarmed by the apprehension . he be shrewd enough to recognise in 
 she the girl of all other form to glad the eye and plague the heart 
 of a grave and reverend seigneur . and it might well not only flatter the 
 vanity , but beguile the judgment , of a man who fear his hand would be 
 accept only for the sake of his money , that Flora just at this moment 
 refuse the great match in the kingdom , young Lord Vipont , son of 
 the new Earl of Montfort , a young man of good sense , high character , 
 well - look as man go - heir to estate almost royal ; a young man whom 
 no girl on earth be justify in refuse . but would the whimsical 
 creature accept Darrell ? be she not merely make sport of he , and if , 
 catch by her art , he , sage and eld , solemnly offer homage and 
 hand to that belle dedaigneuse who have just doom to despair a comely 
 young magnet with five time his fortune , would she not hasten to make 
 hirer the ridicule of London . 

 Darrell have perhaps his secret reason for think otherwise , but 
 he do not confide they even to Alban Morley . this much only will the 
 narrator , more candid , say to the reader : if out of the three whom his 
 thought flutter round , Guy Darrell wish to select the one who would 
 love he well - love he with the whole fresh unreasone heart of a girl 
 whose childish forwardness spring from childlike innocence , let he dare 
 the hazard of refusal and of ridicule ; let he say to Flora Vyvyan , in 
 the pathos of his sweet deep voice : " come and be the spoiled darling of 
 my gladdened age ; let my life , ere it sink into night , be rejoice by 
 the bloom and fresh breeze of the morning . " 

 but to say it he must wish it ; he himself must love - love with all 
 the lavish indulgence , all the knightly tenderness , all the grateful 
 sympathise joy in the youth of the beloved , when youth for the lover 
 be no more , which alone can realise what we sometimes see , though loth 
 to own it - congenial union with unequal year . if Darrell feel not that 
 love , woe to he , woe and thrice shame if he allure to his hearth one 
 who might indeed be a Hebe to the spouse who give up to she his whole 
 heart in return for her ; but to the spouse who have no heart to give , 
 or give but the chip of it , the Hebe indignant would be bad than 
 Erinnys ! 

 all thing consider , then , they who wish well to Guy Darrell 
 must range with Alban Morley in favour of Miss Honoria Vipont . she , 
 proffer affectionate respect - darrell respond by rational esteem . 
 so , perhaps , Darrell himself think , for whenever Miss Vipont be 
 name he become more taciturn , more absorb in reflection , and sigh 
 heavily , like a man who slowly make up his mind to a decision , wise , 
 but not tempting . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

  contain MUCH of that information which the WISEST MEN in the 
  world could not give , but which the AUTHOR CAN . 

 " Darrell , " say Colonel Morley , " you remember my nephew George as a 
 boy ? he be now the rector of Humberston ; married - a very nice sort of 
 woman - suit he Humberston be a fine living ; but his talent be waste 
 there . he preach for the first time in London last year , and make a 
 considerable sensation . this year he have be much out of town . he have 
 no church here as yet . 

 " I hope to get he one . Carr be determined that he shall be a Bishop . 
 meanwhile he preach at - Chapel tomorrow ; come and hear he with I , 
 and then tell I frankly - be he eloquent or not ? " 

 Darrell have a prejudice against fashionable preacher ; but to please 
 Colonel Morley he go to hear George . he be agreeably surprise by 
 the pulpit oratory of the young divine . it have that rare combination of 
 impassione earnestness with subdue tone , and decorous gesture , which 
 suit the ideal of ecclesiastical eloquence conceive by an educate 
 English Churchman 

  " Strong without rage , without o'erflowe full . " 

 occasionally the old defect in utterance be discernible ; there be 
 a gasp as for breath , or a prolong dwelling upon certain syllable , 
 which , occur in the most animate passage , and apparently evince 
 the preacher 's struggle with emotion , rather serve to heighten the 
 sympathy of the audience . but , for the most part , the original stammer 
 be replace by a felicitous pause , the pause as of a thoughtful 
 reasoner or a solemn monitor knitting idea , that come too quick , into 
 method , or chasten impulse into discipline zeal . the mind of the 
 preacher , thus not only free from trammel , but armed for victory , come 
 forth with that power which be peculiar to an original intellect - the 
 power which suggest more than it demonstrate . he do not so much 
 preach to his audience as wind himself through unexpected way into the 
 heart of the audience ; and they who hear suddenly find their heart 
 preach to themselves . he take for his text : " cast down , but not 
 destroy ; " and out of this text he frame a discourse full of true 
 Gospel tenderness , which seem to raise up comfort as the saving , 
 against despair as the evil , principle of mortal life . the congregation 
 be what be call " brilliant " - statesman , and peer , and great author , 
 and fine lady - people whom the inconsiderate believe to stand little 
 in need of comfort , and never to be subject to despair . in many an 
 intent or droop farce in that brilliant congregation might be read 
 a very different tale . but of all present there be no one whom the 
 discourse so move as a woman who , chance to pass that way , have 
 follow the throng into the Chapel , and with difficulty obtain a seat 
 at the far end ; a woman who have not be within the wall of a chapel 
 or church for long year - a grim woman , in iron grey . there she sate 
 unnoticed , in her remote corner ; and before the preacher have do , she 
 face be hide behind her clasp hand , and she be weep such tear 
 as she have not weep since childhood . 

 on leave church , Darrell say little more to the Colonel than this : 
 " your nephew take I by surprise . the Church want such man . he will 
 have a grand career , if life be spar to he . " then he sink into a 
 reverie , from which he break abruptly : " your nephew be , at school with 
 my boy . have my son live , what have be his career ? " 

 the Colonel , never encourage painful subject , make no rejoinder . 

 " bring George to see I to - morrow . I shrink from ask it before : I 
 think the sight of he would too much revive old sorrow ; but I feel I 
 should accustom myself to face every memory . bring he . " 

 the next day the Colonel take George to Darrell 's ; but George have be 
 pre - engaged till late at noon , and Darrell be just leave home , and at 
 his street door , when the uncle and nephew come . they respect his time 
 too much to accept his offer to come in , but walk beside he for a few 
 minute , as he bestow upon George those compliment which be sweet to 
 the ear of rise man from the lip of those who have rise . 

 " I remember you , George , as a boy , " say Darrell , " and thank you then 
 for good advice to a schoolfellow , who be lose to your counsel now . " he 
 falter an instant , but go on firmly : " you have then a slight defect 
 in utterance , which , I understand from your uncle , increase as you 
 grow old ; so that I never anticipate for you the fame that you be 
 achieve . orator fit - you must have be admirably teach . in the 
 management of your voice , in the excellence of your delivery , I see 
 that you be one of the few who deem that the Divine Word should not 
 be unworthily utter . the debater on beer bill may be excuse from 
 study the orator 's effect ; but all that enforce , dignify , adorn , 
 make the become study of he who strive by eloquence to people 
 heaven ; whose task it be to adjure the thoughtless , animate the languid , 
 soften the callous , humble the proud , alarm the guilty , comfort the 
 sorrowful , call back to the fold the lost . be the culture to be slovenly 
 where the glebe be so fertile ? the only field leave in modern time for 
 the ancient orator 's sublime conception , but laborious training , be the 
 Preacher 's . and I own , George , that I envy the master who skille to 
 the Preacher 's art an intellect like your . " 

 " master , " say the Colonel . " I think all those elocution master 
 fail with you , George . you cure and teach yourself . do not you ? no ! 
 why , then , who be your teacher ? " 

 George look very much embarrassed , and , attempt to answer , begin 
 horribly to stutter . 

 Darrell , conceive that a preacher whose fame be not yet confirm 
 might reasonably dislike to confess those obligation to elaborate 
 study , which , if know , might detract from his effect or expose he to 
 ridicule , hasten to change the subject . " you have be to the country , 
 I hear , George ; at your living , I suppose ? " 

 " no . I have not be there very lately ; travel about . " 

 " have you see Lady Montfort since your return ? " ask the Colonel . 

 " I only return on Saturday night . I go to Lady Montfort 's at 
 Twickenham , this evening . " 

 " she have a delightful retreat , " say the Colonel . " but if she wish 
 to avoid admiration , she should not make the bank of the river her 
 favourite haunt . I know some romantic admirer , who , when she re - appear 
 in the world , may be rival aspirant , and who have much take to row 
 since Lady Montfort have retire to Twickenham . they catch a glimpse of 
 she , and return to boast of it . but they report that there be a young 
 lady see walk with she an extremely pretty one - who be she ? People 
 ask I - as if I know everything . " 

 " a companion , I suppose , " say George , more and more confused . " but , 
 pardon I , I must leave you now . good - bye , uncle . good day , Mr. 
 Darrell . " 

 Darrell do not seem to observe George take leave , but walk on , his 
 hat over his brow , lose in one of his frequent fit of abstracted 
 gloom . 

 " if my nephew be not marry , " say the Colonel , " I should regard his 
 embarrassment with much suspicion - embarrassed at every point , from his 
 travel about the country to the question of a young lady at Twickenham . 
 I wonder who that young lady can be - not one of the Viponts , or I 
 should have hear . be there any young lady on the Lyndsay side ? - eh , 
 Darrell ? " 

 " what do I care ? - your head run on young lady , " answer Darrell , 
 with peevish vivacity , as he stop abruptly at Carr Vipont 's door . 

 " and your foot do not seem to run from they , " say the Colonel ; and , 
 with an ironical salute , walk away , while the expand portal 
 engulf his friend . 

 as he saunter up St. James 's Street , nod towards the thronged 
 window of its various club , the Colonel suddenly encounter Lionel , 
 and , take the young gentleman 's arm , say : " if you be not very much 
 occupy , will you waste half an hour on I ? - I be go homeward . " 

 Lionel readily assent , and the Colonel continue " be you in want 
 of your cabriolet to - day , or can you lend it to I ? I have ask a 
 Frenchman , who bring I a letter of introduction , to dine at the 
 nearest restaurant 's to which one can ask a Frenchman . I need not 
 say that be Greenwich : and if I take he in a cabriolet , he would not 
 suspect that he be take five mile out of town . " 

 " alas , my dear Colonel , I have just sell my cabriolet . " what ! 
 old - fashioned already ! - true , it have be build three month . 
 perhaps the horse , too , have become an antique in some other 
 collection - silent - um ! - cabriolet and horse both sell ? " 

 " both , " say Lionel , shamefully . 

 " nothing surprise I that man can do , " say the Colonel ; " or I should 
 be surprised . when , act on Darrell 's general instruction for your 
 outfit , I buy that horse , I flatter myself that I have choose well . 
 but rare be good horse - rarer still a good judge of they ; I suppose I 
 be cheat , and the brute prove a screw . " 

 " the fine cab - horse in London , my dear Colonel , and every one know 
 how proud I be of he . but I want money , and have nothing else that 
 would bring the sum I require . oh , Colonel Morley , do hear I ? " 

 " certainly , I be not deaf , nor be St. James 's Street . when a man say , 
 ' I have part with my horse because I want money , ' I advise he to 
 say it in a whisper . " 

 " I have be imprudent , at least unlucky , and I must pay the penalty . a 
 friend of mine - that be , not exactly a friend , but an acquaintance - whom 
 I see every day - one of my own set - ask I to sign my name at Paris 
 to a bill at three month ' date , as his security . he give I his honour 
 that I should hear no more of it - he would be sure to take up the bill 
 when due - a man whom I suppose to be as well off as myself ! you will 
 allow that I could scarcely refuse - at all event , I do not . the bill 
 become due two day ago ; my friend do not pay it , and indeed say 
 he can not , and the holder of the bill call on I . he be very 
 civil - offer to renew it - press I to take my time ,   c. ; but I do 
 not like his manner : and as to my friend , I find that , instead of be 
 well off , as I suppose , he be hard up , and that I be not the first he 
 have get into the same scrape - not intend it , I be sure . he be really 
 a very good fellow , and , if I want security , would be it to - morrow to 
 any amount . " 

 " I have   no doubt of it - to any amount ! " say the Colonel . 

 " so I think it well to conclude the matter at once . I have save 
 nothing from my allowance , munificent as it be . I could not have the 
 face to ask Mr. Darrell to remunerate I for my own imprudence . I should 
 not like to borrow from my mother - I know it would be inconvenient to 
 she . 

 " I sell both horse and cabriolet this morning . I have just be get 
 the cheque cash when I meet you . I intend to take the money myself to 
 the bill - holder . I have just the sum - l200 . " 

 " the horse alone be worth that , " say the Colonel , with a faint sigh - 
 " not to be replace . France and Russia have the pick of our stable . 
 however , if it be sell , it be sell - talk no more of it . I hate painful 
 subject . you do right not to renew the bill - it be open an account 
 with Ruin ; and though I avoid preach on money matter , or , indeed , 
 any other   preaching be my nephew 's vocation , not mine , yet allow I to 
 extract from you a solemn promise never again to sign bill , nor to draw 
 they . be to your friend what you please except security for he . oreste 
 never ask Pylades to help he to borrow at fifty per cent . promise 
 I - your word of honour as a gentleman ! do you hesitate ? " 

 " my dear Colonel , " say Lionel frankly , " I do hesitate . I might promise 
 not to sign a money - lender 's bill on my own account , though really 
 I think you take rather an exaggerated view of what be , after all , a 
 common occurrence - " 

 " do I ? " say the Colonel meekly . " I be sorry to hear it . I det 
 exaggeration . go on . you might promise not to ruin yourself - but you 
 object to promise not to help in the ruin of your friend . " 

 " that be exquisite irony , Colonel , " say Lionel , pique ; " but it do not 
 deal with the difficulty , which be simply this : when a man whom you call 
 friend - whom you walk with , ride with , dine with almost every day , say 
 to you ' I be in immediate want of a few hundred - I do not   ask you to 
 lend they to I , perhaps you can not   - but assist I to borrow - trust to my 
 honour that the debt shall not fall on you , - why , then , it seem as if 
 to refuse the favour be to tell the man you call friend that you doubt 
 his honour ; and though I have be catch once in that way , I feel that 
 I must be catch very often before I should have the moral courage to 
 say ' no ! ' do not   ask I , then to promise - be satisfied with my assurance 
 that , in future at least , I will be more cautious , and if the loss fall 
 on I , why , the bad that can happen be to do again what I do now . " 

 " Nay , you would not perhaps have another horse and cab to sell . in that 
 case , you would do the reverse of what you do now - you would renew the 
 bill - the debt would run on like a snowball - in a year or two you would 
 owe , not hundred , but thousand . but come in - here we be at my door . " 

 the Colonel enter his drawing - room . a miracle of exquisite neatness 
 the room be - rather effeminate , perhaps , in its attribute ; but that 
 be no sign of the Colonel 's taste , but of his popularity with the 
 lady . all those pretty thing be their gift . the tapestry on 
 the chair their work - the Sevres on the console - the clock on 
 the mantel - shelf - the inkstand , paper - cutter , taper - stand on the 
 writing - table - their birthday present . even the white woolly maltese 
 dog that spring from the rug to welcome he - even the flower in the 
 jardiniere - even the tasteful cottage - piano , and the very music - stand 
 beside it - and the card - tray , pile high with invitation , - be 
 contribution from the forgiving sex to the unrequite bachelor . 

 survey his apartment with a complacent air , the Colonel sink into his 
 easy fauteuil , and draw off his glove leisurely say - 

 " no man have more friend than I have - never do I lose one - never do 
 I sign a bill . your father pursue a different policy - he sign many 
 bill - and lose many friend . " Lionel , much distressed , look down , 
 and evidently desire to have do with the subject . not so the Colonel . 
 that shrewd man , though he do not preach , have a way all his own , which 
 be perhaps quite as effective as any sermon by a fashionable layman can 
 be to an impatient youth . 

 " yes , " resume the Colonel , " it be the old story . one always begin by 
 be security to a friend . the discredit of the thing be familiarise 
 to one 's mind by the false show of generous confidence in another . their 
 what you have do for a friend , a friend should do for you ; - a hundred 
 or two would be useful now - you be sure to repay it in three month . to 
 Youth the Future seem safe as the Bank of England , and distant as the 
 peak of Himalaya . you pledge your honour that in three month you will 
 release your friend . the three month expire . to release the one friend , 
 you catch hold of another - the bill be renew , premium and interest 
 throw into the next pay - day - soon the account multiplie , and with it 
 the honour dwindle - your name circulate from hand to hand on the back 
 of doubtful paper - your name , which , in all money transaction , should 
 grow high and high each year you live , fall down every month 
 like the share in a swindle speculation . you begin by what you call 
 trust a friend , that is , aid he to self - destruction - buy he 
 arsenic to clear his complexion - you end by drag all near you into 
 your own abyss , as a drown man would clutch at his own brother . 
 Lionel Haughton , the sad expression I ever see in your father 's face 
 be when - when - but you shall hear the story - " 

 " no , sir ; spare I . since you so insist on it , I will give the 
 promise - it be enough ; and my father - " 

 " be as honourable as you when he first sign his name to a friend 's 
 bill ; and , perhaps , promise to do so no more as reluctantly as you do . 
 you have well let I say on ; if I stop now , you will forget all about 
 it by this day twelve - month ; if I go on , you will never forget . there 
 be other example besides your father ; I be about to name one . " 

 Lionel resign himself to the operation , throw his handkerchief over 
 his face as if he have take chloroform . " when I be young , " resume the 
 Colonel , " I chance to make acquaintance with a man of infinite whim and 
 humour ; fascinating as Darrell himself , though in a very different way . 
 we call he willy - you know the kind of man one call by his Christian 
 name , cordially abbreviate - that kind of man seem never to be quite 
 grow up ; and , therefore , never rise in life . I never know a man call 
 Willy after the age of thirty , who do not come to a melancholy end ! 
 Willy be the natural son of a rich , helter - skelter , cleverish , maddish , 
 stylish , raffish , four - in - hand Baronet , by a celebrated french actress . 
 the title be extinct now , and so , I believe , be that genus of stylish , 
 raffish , four - in - hand Baronet - Sir Julian Losely - " 

 " losely ! " echo Lionel . " yes ; do you know the name ? " 

 " I never hear it till yesterday . I want to tell you what I do hear 
 then - but after your story - go on . " 

 " Sir Julian Losely   Willy 's father   live with the french lady as his 
 wife , and rear Willy in his house , with as much pride and fondness as 
 if he intend he for his heir . the poor boy , I suspect , get but little 
 regular education ; though of course , he speak his french mother 's 
 tongue like a native ; and , thank also perhaps to his mother , he have an 
 extraordinary talent for mimicry and act . his father be passionately 
 fond of private theatrical , and Willy have early practice in that line . 
 I once see he act Falstaff in a country house , and I doubt if Quin 
 could have act it well . well , when Willy be still a mere boy , 
 he lose his mother , the actress . Sir Julian marry - have a legitimate 
 daughter - die intestate - and the daughter , of course , have the personal 
 property , which be not much ; the heir - at - law get the land , and poor 
 Willy nothing . but Willy be an universal favourite with his father 's 
 old friend - wild fellow like Sir Julian himself amongst they 
 there be two cousin , with large country - house , sporting - man , and 
 bachelor . they share Willy between they , and quarrel which 
 should have the most of he . so he grow up to be man , with no settle 
 provision , but always welcome , not only to the two cousin , but at 
 every house in which , like Milton 's lark , ' he come to startle the 
 dull night ' - the most amusing companion ! - a famous shot - a capital 
 horseman - know the way of all animal , fish , and bird ; I verily 
 believe he could have coax a pug - dog to point , and an owl to sing . 
 Void of all malice , up to all fun . imagine how much people would court , 
 and how little they would do for , a Willy of that sort . do I bore you ? " 

 " on the contrary , I be greatly interested . " 

 " one thing a Willy , if a Willy could be wise , ought to do for 
 himself - keep single . a wed Willy be in a false position . my Willy 
 wed - for love too - an amiable girl , I believe   I never see she ; it 
 be long afterwards that I know Willy   - but as poor as himself . the 
 friend and relative then say : ' this be serious : something - must 
 be do for Willy . ' it be easy to say , ' something must be do , ' and 
 monstrous difficult to do it . while the relation be consult , his 
 half - sister , the Baronet 's lawful daughter , die , unmarried ; and though 
 she have ignore he in life , leave he L2,000 . ' I have hit it now , ' cry 
 one of the cousin ; ' willy be fond of a country life . I will let he 
 have a farm on a nominal rent , his L2,000 will stock it ; and his farm , 
 which be surround by wood , will be a capital hunting - meet . as long as 
 I live , Willy shall be mount . ' 

 " Willy take the farm , and astonish his friend by attend to it . it 
 be just begin to answer when his wife die , leave he only one 
 child - a boy ; and her death make he so melancholy that he could no 
 long attend to his farm . he throw it up , invest the proceed as a 
 capital , and live on the interest as a gentleman at large . he travel 
 over Europe for some time - chiefly on foot - come back , have recover 
 his spirit - resume his old desultory purposeless life at different 
 country - house , and at one of those house I and Charles Haughton meet 
 he . here I pause , to state that willy losely at that time impress 
 I with the idea that he be a thoroughly honest man . though he be 
 certainly no formalist - though he have live with wild set of convivial 
 scapegrace - though , out of sheer high spirit , he would now and then 
 make conventional Proprieties laugh at their own long face ; yet , I 
 should have say that Bayard himself - and Bayard be no saint - could not 
 have be more incapable of a disloyal , rascally , shabby action . Nay , in 
 the plain matter of integrity , his idea might be call refine , almost 
 quixotic . if ask to give or to lend , Willy 's hand be in his pocket in 
 an instant ; but though throw among rich man - careless as himself - Willy 
 never put his hand into their pocket , never borrow , never owe . he 
 would accept hospitality - make frank use of your table , your horse , 
 your dog - but your money , no ! he repay all he take from a host by 
 render himself the pleasant guest that host ever entertain . poor 
 Willy ! I think I see his quaint smile brim over with sly sport ! the 
 sound of his voice be like a cry of ' o - half - holiday ' in a schoolroom . 
 he dishonest ! I should as soon have suspect the noonday sun of be a 
 dark lantern ! I remember , when he and I be walk home from wild - duck 
 shooting in advance of our companion , a short conversation between we 
 that touch I greatly , for it show that , under all his levity , there 
 be sound sense and right feeling . I ask he about his son , then a 
 boy at school : ' why , as it be the Christmas vacation , he have refuse 
 our host 's suggestion to let the lad come down there ? ' ' ah , ' say 
 he , ' do not   fancy that I will lead my son to grow up a scatterbrained 
 good - for - nought like his father . his society be the joy of my life ; 
 whenever I have enough in my pocket to afford myself that joy , I go 
 and hire a quiet lodge close by his school , to have he with I from 
 Saturday till Monday all to myself - where he never hear wild fellow 
 call I " willy , " and ask I to mimic . I have hop to have spend this 
 vacation with he in that way , but his school bill be high than 
 usual , and after pay it , I have not a guinea to spare - oblige to come 
 here where they lodge and feed I for nothing ; the boy 's uncle on the 
 mother 's side - respectable man in business - kindly take he home for 
 the holiday ; but do not ask I , because his wife - and I do not   blame 
 she - think I be too wild for a City clerk 's sober household . ' 

 " I ask Willy losely what he mean to do with his son , and hint that 
 I might get the boy a commission in the army without purchase . 

 " ' no , ' say Willy . ' I know what it be to set up for a gentleman on the 
 capital of a beggar . it be to be a shuttlecock between discontent and 
 temptation . I would not have my lose wife 's son waste his life as I have 
 do . he would be more spoiled , too , than I have be . the handsome 
 boy you ever see - and bold as a lion . once in that set '   pointing over 
 his shoulder towards some of our sporting comrade , whose loud laughter 
 every now and then reach our ear   - ' once in that set , he would never 
 be out of it - fit for nothing . I swear to his mother on her death - bed 
 that I would bring he up to avoid my error - that he should be no 
 hanger - on and lead - captain ! swore to she that he should be rear 
 accord to his real station - the station of his mother 's kin -   I 
 have no station   - and if I can but see he an honest british 
 trader - respectable , upright , equal to the high - because no rich 
 man 's dependant , and no poor man 's jest - my ambition will be satisfied . 
 and now you understand , sir , why my boy be not here . ' you would say a 
 father who speak thus have a man 's honest stuff in he . eh , Lionel ! " 

 " yes , and a true gentleman 's heart , too ! " 

 " so I think ; yet I fancy I know the world ! after that conversation , 
 I quit our host 's roof , and only once or twice afterwards , at 
 country - house , meet William Losely again . to say truth , his chief 
 patron and friend be not exactly in my set . but your father 
 continue to see Willy pretty often . they take a great fancy to each 
 other . Charlie , you know , be jovial - fond of private theatrical , too ; 
 in short , they become great ally . some year after , as ill - luck would 
 have it , Charles Haughton , while sell off his Middlesex property , be 
 in immediate want of L1,200 . he could get it on a bill , but not without 
 security . his bill be already rather down in the market , and he have 
 already exhaust most of the friend whose security be esteem by 
 accommodator any well than his own . in an evil hour he have learn 
 that poor Willy have just l1,500 out upon mortgage ; and the money - lender , 
 who be lawyer for the property on which the mortgage be , know it too . 
 it be on the interest of this l1,500 that willy live , have spend 
 the rest of his little capital in settle his son as a clerk in a 
 first - rate commercial house . Charles Haughton go down to shoot at the 
 house where Willy be a guest - shot with he - drink with he - talk with 
 he - prove to he , no doubt , that long before the three month be 
 over the Middlesex property would be sell ; the bill take up , willy 
 might trust to his Honour . willy do trust . like you , my dear Lionel , he 
 have not moral courage to say ' no . ' your father , I be certain , mean to 
 repay he ; your father never in cold blood mean to defraud any human 
 being ; but - your father gamble ! a debt of honour at piquet precede the 
 claim of a bill - discounter . the L1,200 be forestall - your father be 
 penniless . the money - lender come upon Willy . sure that Charles Haughton 
 would yet redeem his promise , willy renew the bill another three 
 month on usurious term ; those month over , he come to town to find 
 your father hide between four wall , unable to stir out for fear of 
 arrest . Willy have no option but to pay the money ; and when your father 
 know that it be so pay , and that the usury have swallow up the whole 
 of Willy 's little capital , then , I say , I see upon Charles Haughton 's 
 once radiant face the sad expression I ever see on mortal man 's . and 
 sure I be that all the joy your father ever know as a man of pleasure 
 be not worth the agony and remorse of that moment . I respect your 
 emotion , Lionel , but you begin as your father begin ; and if I have not 
 tell you this story , you might have end as your father end . " 

 Lionel 's face remain cover , and it be only by choke gasp that he 
 interrupt - the Colonel 's narrative . " certainly , " resume Alban Morley , 
 in a reflective tone " certainly that villain - I mean William Losely , 
 for villain he afterwards prove to be - have the sweetest , most forgiving 
 temper ! he might have go about to his kinsman and friend denounce 
 Charles Haughton , and say by what solemn promise he have be undo . 
 but no ! such a story just at that moment would have crush Charles 
 Haughton 's last chance of ever hold up his head again , and Charles 
 tell I   for it be through Charles that I know the tale   that Willy 's 
 parting word to he be ' do not fret , Charles - after all , my boy be 
 now settle in life , and I be a cat with nine life , and should fall on 
 my leg if throw out of a garret window . do not   fret . ' so he keep the 
 secret , and tell the money - lender to hold his tongue . poor Willy ! I 
 never ask a rich friend to lend I money but once in my life . it be 
 then I go to Guy Darrell , who be in full practice , and say to he : 
 ' lend I one thousand pound . I may never repay you . ' ' five thousand 
 pound , if you like it , ' say he . ' one will do . ' 

 " I take the money and send it to Willy . alas ! he return it , write 
 word that ' Providence have be very kind to he ; he have just be 
 appoint to a capital place , with a magnificent salary . ' the cat have 
 fall on its leg . he bid I comfort Haughton with that news . the 
 money go back into Darrell 's pocket , and perhaps wander thence 
 to Charles Haughton 's creditor . now for the appointment . at the 
 country - house to which Willy have return destitute , he have meet 
 a stranger   no relation , who say to he : ' you live with these 
 people - shoot their game - break in their horse - see to their farm - and 
 they give you nothing ! you be no long very young - you should lay by 
 your little income , and add to it . live with I and I will give you l300 
 a - year . I be part with my steward - take his place , but be my friend . ' 
 William Losely of course close with the proposition . this gentleman , 
 whose name be Gunston , I have know slightly in former time -   people 
 say I know everybody   - a soured , bilious , melancholy , indolent , 
 misanthropical old bachelor . with a splendid place universally admire , 
 and a large estate universally envy , he live much alone , ruminate 
 on the bitterness of life and the nothingness of worldly blessing . 
 Meeting Willy at the country - house to which , by some predestine 
 relaxation of misanthropy , he have be decoy - for the first time for 
 year Mr. Gunston be hear to laugh . he say to himself , ' here be a 
 man who actually amuse I . ' William Losely contrive to give the 
 misanthrope a new zest of existence ; and when he find that business 
 could be make pleasant , the rich man conceive an interest in his own 
 house , garden , property . for the sake of William 's merry companionship , 
 he would even ride over his farm , and actually carry a gun . 
 meanwhile , the property , I be tell , be really well manage . ah ! that 
 fellow Willy be a bear genius , and could have manage everybody 's 
 affair except his own . I hear of all this with pleasure -   people say I 
 hear everything   - when one day a sporting man seize I by the button 
 at Tattersall 's - ' do you know the news ? will losely be in prison on a 
 charge ; of rob his employer . ' " 

 " rob ! incredible ! " exclaim Lionel . 

 " my dear Lionel , it be after hear that news that I establish as 
 invariable my grand maxim , Nil admirari - never to be astonish at 
 anything ! " 

 " but of course he be innocent ? " 

 " on the contrary , he confess , - be commit ; plead guilty , and 
 be transport ! People who know Willy say that Gunston ought to have 
 decline to drag he before a magistrate , or , at the subsequent trial , 
 have abstain from give evidence against he ; that Willy have be 
 till then a faithful steward ; the whole proceed of the estate lead 
 pass through his hand ; he might , in transaction for timber , have 
 cheat undetected to twice the amount of the alleged robbery ; it must 
 have be a momentary aberration of reason ; the rich man should have let 
 he off . but I side with the rich man . his last belief in his specie 
 be annihilate . he must have be inexorable . he could never be amuse , 
 never be interested again . he be inexorable and - vindictive . " 

 " but what be the fact ? - what be the evidence ? " 

 " very little come out on the trial ; because , in plead guilty , the 
 court have merely to consider the evidence which have suffice to commit 
 he . the trial be scarcely notice in the London paper . William Losely 
 be not like a man know about town . his fame be confine to those who 
 resort to old - fashioned country - house , chiefly single man , for the 
 sake of sport . but stay . I feel such an interest in the case , that I 
 make an abstract or praecis , not only of all that appear , but all 
 that I could learn of its lead circumstance . ' tis a habit of mine , 
 whenever any of my acquaintance embroil themselves with the Crown - " 
 the Colonel rise , unlock a small glaze bookcase , select from the 
 content a MS . volume , reseat himself , turn the page , find the 
 place seek , and read from it , resume his narrative . " one evening 
 Mr. Gunston come to William Losely 's private apartment . losely have two 
 or three room appropriate to himself in one side of the house ; which 
 be build in a quadrangle round a courtyard . when losely open his door 
 to Mr. Gunston 's knock , it strike Mr. Gunston that his manner seem 
 confuse . after some talk on general subject , losely say that he have 
 occasion to go to London next morning for a few day on private business 
 of his own . this annoy Mr. Gunston . he observe that Losely 's absence 
 just then would be inconvenient . he remind he that a tradesman , 
 who live at a distance , be come over the next day to be pay for a 
 vinery he have lately erect , and on the charge for which there be a 
 dispute . could not losely at least stay to settle it ? losely reply , 
 ' that he have already , by correspondence , adjust the dispute , have 
 suggest deduction which the tradesman have agree to , and that Mr. 
 Gunston would only have to give a cheque for the balance - viz . L270 . ' 
 Thereon Mr. Gunston remark : ' if you be not in the habit of pay my 
 bill for I out of what you receive , you would know that I seldom give 
 cheque . I certainly shall not give one now , for I have the money in the 
 house . ' losely observe ' that be a bad habit of yours keep large 
 sum in your own house . you may be rob . ' Gunston answer ' safe 
 than lodge large sum in a country bank . country bank break . my 
 grandfather lose L1,000 by the failure of a country bank ; and my father , 
 therefore , always take his payment in cash , remit they to London 
 from time to time as he go thither himself . I do the same , and I have 
 never be rob of a farthing that I know of . who would rob a great 
 house like this , full of manservant ? ' - ' that be true , ' say losely ; ' so 
 if you be sure you have as much by you , you will pay the bill and have 
 do with it . I shall be back before spark the builder come to be 
 pay for the new barn to the home farm - that will be l600 ; but I shall be 
 take money for timber next week . he can be pay out of that . " 

 GUNSTON . - ' no . I will pay Sparks , too , out of what I have in my bureau ; 
 and the timber - merchant can pay his debt into my London banker 's . ' 

 LOSELY . - ' do you mean that you have enough for both these bill actually 
 in the house ? ' 

 GUNSTON . - ' certainly , in the bureau in my study . I do not   know how much 
 I have   get . it may be L1,500 - it may be L1,700 . I have not count ; I 
 be such a bad man of business ; but I be sure it be more than L1,400 . ' 
 losely make some jocular observation to the effect that if Gunston 
 never keep an account of what he have , he could never tell whether he 
 be rob , and , therefore , never would be rob ; since , accord to 
 Othello , 

  ' he that be rob , not want what be steal , 
  let he not know it , and he be not rob at all . ' 

 " after that , losely become absent in manner , and seem impatient to get 
 rid of Mr. Gunston , hint that he have the labour - book to look over , 
 and some order to write out for the bailiff , and that he should start 
 early the next morning . " 

 here the Colonel look up from his MS . , and say episodically : " perhaps 
 you will fancy that these dialogue be invent by I after the fashion 
 of the ancient historian ? not so . I give you the report of what pass , 
 as Gunston repeat it verbatim ; and I suspect that his memory be 
 pretty accurate . well   here Alban return to his MS .   Gunston leave 
 Willy , and go into his own study , where he take tea by himself . when 
 his valet bring it in , he tell the man that Mr. Losely be go to 
 town early the next morning , and order the servant to see himself that 
 coffee be serve to Mr. Losely before he go . the servant observe 
 ' that Mr. Losely have seem much out of sort lately , and that it be 
 perhaps some unpleasant affair connect with the gentleman who have come 
 to see he two day before . ' Gunston have not hear of such a visit . 

 " losely have not mention it . when the servant retire , Gunston , 
 think over Losely 's quotation respect his money , resolve to 
 ascertain what he have in his bureau . he open it , examine the drawer , 
 and find , stow away in different place at different time , a large 
 sum than he have suppose - gold and note to the amount of L1,975 , of 
 which nearly l300 be in sovereign . he smooth the note carefully ; 
 and , for want of other occupation , and with a view of show losely 
 that he could profit by a hint , he enter the number of the note in 
 his pocketbook , place they all together in one drawer with the gold , 
 relocke his bureau , and go shortly afterwards to bed . the next day 
  losely have go in the morning   the tradesman come to be pay for 
 the vinery . Gunston go to his bureau , take out his note , and find 
 l250 be go . he could hardly believe his sens . have he make a 
 mistake in counting ? no . there be his pocket book , the miss note 
 enter duly therein . then he re - re - count the sovereign ; 142 be 
 go of they - nearly l400 in all thus abstract . he refuse at first to 
 admit suspicion of losely ; but , on interrogate his servant , the valet 
 deposed , that he be disturb about two o'clock in the morning by the 
 bark of the house - dog , which be let loose of a night within the front 
 courtyard of the house . not apprehend robber , but fear the dog 
 might also disturb his master , he get out of his window   be on the 
 ground - flour   to pacify the animal ; that he then see , in the opposite 
 angle of the building , a light move along the casement of the passage 
 between Losely 's room and Mr. Gunston 's study . surprised at this , at 
 such an hour , he approach that part of the building and see the 
 light very faintly through the chink in the shutter of the study . the 
 passage window have no shutter , be old - fashioned stone mullion . he 
 wait by the wall a few minute , when the light again reappear in 
 the passage ; and he see a figure in a cloak , which , be in a peculiar 
 colour , he recognise at once as Losely 's , pass rapidly along ; but 
 before the figure have get half through the passage , the light be 
 extinguish , and the servant could see no more . but so positive be 
 he , from his recognition of the cloak , that the man be losely , that he 
 cease to feel alarm or surprise , thinking , on reflection , that losely , 
 sit up later than usual to transact business before his departure , 
 might have go into his employer 's study for any book or paper which he 
 might have leave there . the dog begin bark again , and seem anxious 
 to get out of the courtyard to which he be confine ; but the servant 
 gradually appease he - go to bed , and somewhat overslept himself . 
 when he awake , he hasten to take the coffee into Losely 's room , but 
 losely be go . here there be another suspicious circumstance . it have 
 be a question how the bureau have be open , the key be safe in 
 Gunston 's possession , and there be no sign of force . the lock be one 
 of those rude old - fashioned one which be very easily pick , but to 
 which a modern key do not readily fit . in the passage there be find 
 a long nail crook at the end ; and that nail , the superintendent of the 
 police   who have be summon   have the wit to apply to the lock of 
 the bureau , and it unlock and re - lock it easily . it be clear that 
 whoever have so shape the nail could not have use such an instrument 
 for the first time , and must be a practised picklock . that , one would 
 suppose at first , might exonerate losely ; but he be so clever a fellow 
 at all mechanical contrivance that , couple with the place of finding , 
 the nail make greatly against he ; and still more so when some nail 
 precisely similar be find on the chimney - piece of an inner room in 
 his apartment , a room between that in which he have receive Guarston and 
 his bed - chamber , and use by he both as study and workshop . the nail , 
 indeed , which be very long and narrow , with a gothic ornamental head , 
 be at once recognise by the carpenter on the estate as have be 
 make accord to Losely 's direction , for a garden bench to be place 
 in Gunston 's favourite walk , Gunston have remark , some day before , 
 that he should like a seat there , and losely have undertake to make 
 one from a design by Pugin . still loth to believe in Losely 's guilt , 
 Gunston go to London with the police superintendent , the valet , and 
 the neighbouring attorney . they have no difficulty in find losely ; 
 he be at his son 's lodging in the City , near the commercial house in 
 which the son be a clerk . on be tell of the robbery , he seem at 
 first unaffectedly surprised , evince no fear . he be ask whether he 
 have go into the study about two o'clock in the morning . he say , ' no ; 
 why should I ? ' the valet exclaim : ' but I see you - I know you by that 
 old grey cloak , with the red lining . why , there it be now - on that 
 chair yonder . I will swear it be the same . ' losely then begin to tremble 
 visibly , and grow extremely pale . a question be next put to he as to 
 the nail , but he secure quite stupefied , mutter : ' Good heaven ! 
 the cloak - you mean to say you see that cloak ? ' they search his 
 person - find on he some sovereign , silver , and one bank - note for 
 five pound . the number on that bank - note correspond with a number in 
 Gunston 's pocket - book . he be ask to say where he get that five - pound 
 note . he refuse to answer . Gunston say : ' it be one of the note steal 
 from I ! ' losely cry fiercely : ' take care what you say . how do you 
 know ? ' Gunston reply : ' I take an account of the number of my note 
 on leave your room . here be the memorandum in my pocket - book - see - ' 
 losely look , and fall back as if shot . losely 's brother - in - law be 
 in the room at the time , and he exclaim , ' oh , William ! you can not   be 
 guilty . you be the honest fellow in the world . there must be some 
 mistake , gentleman . where do you get the note , William - say ? ' 

 " losely make no answer , but seem lose in thought or stupefaction . ' I 
 will go for your son , William - perhaps he may help to explain . ' losely 
 then seem to wake up . ' my son ! what ! would you expose I before my 
 son ? he be go into the country , as you know . what have he to do with 
 it ? I take the note - there - I have confess . - have do with it , ' - or 
 word to that effect . 

 " nothing more of importance , " say the Colonel , turn over the leaf 
 of his MS . , " except to account for the crime . and here we come back 
 to the money - lender . you remember the valet say that a gentleman have 
 call on losely two day before the robbery . this prove to be the 
 identical bill - discounter to whom losely have pay away his fortune . this 
 person depose that losely have write to he some day before , state 
 that he want to borrow two or three hundred pound , which he could 
 repay by instalment out of his salary . what would be the term ? the 
 money - lender , have occasion to be in the neighbourhood , call to 
 discuss the matter in person , and to ask if Losely could not get some 
 other person to join in security - suggest his brother - in - law . losely 
 reply that it be a favour he would never ask of any one ; that his 
 brother - in - law have no pecuniary mean beyond his salary as a senior 
 clerk ; and , suppose that he   losely   lose his place , which he might 
 any day , if Gunston be displeased with he - how then could he be 
 sure that his debt would not fall on the security ? upon which the 
 money - lender remark that the precarious nature of his income be the 
 very reason why a security be want . and losely answer , ' ay ; but you 
 know that you incur that risk , and charge accordingly . between I and 
 you the debt and the hazard be mere matter of business , but between 
 I and my security it would be a matter of honour . ' finally the 
 money - lender agree to find the sum require , though ask very high 
 term . losely say he would consider , and let he know . there the 
 conversation end . but Gunston inquire ' if losely have ever have 
 dealing with the money - lender before , and for what purpose it be 
 likely he would leant the money now ; ' and the money - lender answer 
 ' that probably losely have some sporting or gaming speculation on the 
 sly , for that it be to pay a gambling debt that he have join Captain 
 Haughton in a bill for L1,200 . ' and Gunston afterwards tell a friend 
 of mine that this it be that decide he to appear as a witness at the 
 trial ; and you will observe that if Gunston have keep away there would 
 have be no evidence sufficient to insure conviction . but Gunston 
 consider that the man who could gamble away his whole fortune must 
 be incorrigible , and that losely , have conceal from he that he have 
 become destitute by such transaction , must have be more than a mere 
 security in a joint bill with Captain Haughton . 

 " Gunston could never have understand such an inconsistency in human 
 nature , that the same man who break open his bureau should have become 
 responsible to the amount of his fortune for a debt of which he have not 
 share the discredit , and still less that such a man should , in case 
 he have be so generously imprudent , have conceal his loss out of 
 delicate tenderness for the character of the man to whom he owe his 
 ruin . therefore , in short , Gunston look on his dishonest steward not 
 as a man tempt by a sudden impulse in some moment of distress , at 
 which a previous life be belie , but as a confirm , dissimulate 
 sharper , to whom public justice allow no mercy . and thus , Lionel , 
 William Losely be prosecute , try , and sentence to seven year ' 
 transportation . by plead guilty , the term be probably make short 
 than it otherwise would have be . " 

 Lionel continue too agitated for word . the Colonel , not seem to 
 heed his emotion , again run his eye over the MS . 

 " I observe here that there be some query enter as to the evidence 
 against losely . the solicitor whom , when I hear of his arrest , I 
 engage and send down to the place on his behalf - " 

 " you do ! Heaven reward you ! " sob out Lionel . " but my father ? - where 
 be he ? " 

 " then ? - in his grave . " 

 Lionel breathe a deep sigh , as of thankfulness . 

 " the lawyer , I say - a sharp fellow - be of opinion that if losely have 
 refuse to plead guilty , he could have get he off in spite of his first 
 confession - turn the suspicion against some one else . in the passage 
 where the nail be pick up there be a door into the park . that 
 door be find unbolted in the inside the next morning : a thief might 
 therefore have thus enter and pass at once into the study . the nail 
 be discover close by the door ; the thief might have drop it on 
 put out his light , which , by the valet 's account , he must have do 
 when he be near the door in question , and require the light no more . 
 another circumstance in Losely 's favour : just outside the door , near a 
 laurel - bush , be find the fag - end of one of those small rose - colour 
 wax - light which be often place in Lucifer - match box . if this have 
 be use by the thief , it would seem as if , extinguish the light 
 before he step into the air , he very naturally jerk away the morsel 
 of taper leave , when , in the next moment , he be out of the house . but 
 losely would not have go out of the house ; nor be he , nor any one 
 about the premise , ever know to make use of that kind of taper , which 
 would rather appertain to the fashionable fopperie of a London dandy . 
 you will have observe , too , the valet have not see the thief 's face . 
 his testimony rest solely on the colour of a cloak , which , on 
 cross - examination ; might have go for nothing . the dog have bark 
 before the light be see . it be not the light that make he bark . he 
 wish to get out of the courtyard ; that look as if there be some 
 stranger in the ground beyond . follow up this clue , the lawyer 
 ascertain that a strange man have be see in the park towards the 
 grey of the evening , walk up in the direction of the house . and here 
 come the strong point . at the railway station , about five mile from 
 Mr. Gunston 's , a strange man have arrive just in time to take his place 
 in the night - train from the north towards London , stop there at 
 four o'clock in the morning . the station - master remember the stranger 
 buy the ticket , but do not remark his appearance . the porter do , 
 however , so far notice he as he hurry into a first - class carriage , 
 that he say afterwards to the stationmaster : ' why , that gentleman have 
 a grey cloak just like Mr. Losely 's . if he have not be thin and 
 tall , I should have think it be Mr. Losely . ' well , losely go to 
 the same station the next morning , take an early train , go thither 
 on foot , with his carpet - bag in his hand ; and both the porter and 
 station - master declare that he have no cloak on he at the time ; and as 
 he get into a second - class carriage , the porter even say to he : " Tis 
 a sharp morning , sir ; I be afraid you will be cold . ' furthermore , as to the 
 purpose for which losely have wish to borrow of the money - lender , 
 his brother - in - law state that Losely 's son have be extravagant , have 
 contract debt , and be even hide from his creditor in a county 
 town , at which William Losely have stop for a few hour on his way to 
 London . he know the young man 's employer have write kindly to losely 
 several day before , lament the son 's extravagance ; intimate that 
 unless his debt be discharge he must lose the situation , in which 
 otherwise he might soon rise to competence , for that he be quick and 
 sharp ; and that it be impossible not to feel indulgent towards he , 
 he be so lively and so good - look . the trader add that he would 
 forbear to dismiss the young man as long as he could . it be on the 
 receipt of that letter that losely have enter into communication with 
 the money - lender , whom he have come to town to seek , and to whose house 
 he be actually go at the very hour of Gunston 's arrival . but why 
 borrow of the money - lender , if he have just steal more money than he have 
 any need to borrow ? 

 " the most damning fact against losely , by the discovery in his possession 
 of the l5 note , of which Mr. Gunston depose to have take the number , 
 be certainly hard to get over ; still an ingenious lawyer might have 
 throw doubt on Gunstun 's testimony - a man confessedly so careless might 
 have mistake the number ,   c. the lawyer go , with these hint for 
 defence , to see losely himself in prison ; but losely decline his 
 help - become very angry - say that he would rather suffer death itself 
 than have suspicion transfer to some innocent man ; and that , as to 
 the cloak , it have be inside his carpet - bag . so you see , bad as he be , 
 there be something inconsistently honourable leave in he still . poor 
 Willy ! he would not even subpoena any of his old friend as to his 
 general character . but even if he have , what could the Court do since 
 he plead guilty ? and now dismiss that subject , it begin to pain I 
 extremely . you be to speak to I about some one of the same name when 
 my story be conclude . what be it ? " 

 " I be so confused , " falter Lionel , still quiver with emotion , " that 
 I can scarcely answer you - scarcely recollect myself . but - but - while 
 you be describe this poor William Losely , his talent for mimicry and 
 acting , I could not help think that I have see he . " Lionel proceed 
 to speak of Gentleman Waife . " can that be the man ? " 

 Alban shake his head incredulously . he think it so like a romantic 
 youth to detect imaginary resemblance . 

 " no , " say he , " my dear boy . my William Losely could never become a 
 stroll - player in a village fair . besides , I have good reason to 
 believe that Willy be well off ; probably make money in the colony by 
 some lucky hit for when do you say you see your stroller ? five year 
 ago ? well , not very long before that date - perhaps a year or two - less 
 than two year , I be sure - this eccentric rascal send Mr. Gunston , the 
 man who have transport he , L100 ! Gunston , you must know , feel more 
 than ever bored and hippe when he lose Willy , try to divert himself 
 by become director in some railway company . the company prove a 
 bubble ; all turn their indignation on the one rich man who could pay 
 where other cheat . Gunston be ruin - purse and character - flee to 
 Calais ; and there , less than seven year ago , when in great distress , 
 he receive from poor Willy a kind , affectionate , forgiving letter , and 
 L100 . I have this from Gunston 's near relation , to whom he tell it , 
 cry like a child . Willy give no address ! but it be clear that at the 
 time he must have be too well off to turn mountebank at your miserable 
 exhibition . poor , dear , rascally , infamous , big - hearted Willy , " burst 
 out the Colonel . " I wish to heaven he have only rob I ! " 

 " Sir , " say Lionel , " rely upon it , that man you describe never rob 
 any one - ' tis impossible . " 

 " no - very possible ! - human nature , " say Alban Morley . " and , after all , 
 he really owe Gunston that L100 . for , out of the sum steal , Gunston 
 receive anonymously , even before the trial , all the miss note , 
 minus about that L100 ; and Willy , therefore , owe Gunston the money , but 
 not , perhaps , that kind , forgiving letter . pass on - quick - the 
 subject be bad than the gout . you have hear before the name of 
 losely - possibly . there be many member of the old Baronet 's family ; 
 but when or where do you hear it ? " 

 " I will tell you ; the man who hold the bill   ah , the word sicken I 
 remind I when he call that I have see he at my mother 's house - a 
 chance acquaintance of hers - profess great regard for I - great 
 admiration for Mr. Darrell - and then surprise I by ask if I have 
 never hear Mr. Darrell speak of Mr. Jasper Losely . " 

 " Jasper ! " say the Colonel ; " Jasper ! - well , go on . " " when I answer , 
 ' no , ' Mr. Poole   that be his name   shake his head , and mutter : ' a sad 
 affair - very bad business - I could do Mr. Darrell a great service if he 
 would let I ; ' and then go on talk what seem to I impertinent 
 gibberish about ' family exposure ' and ' poverty make man desperate , ' 
 and ' well compromise matter ; ' and finally wound up by beg I , ' if 
 I love Mr. Darrell , and wish to guard he from very great annoyance 
 and suffering , to persuade he to give Mr. Poole an interview . ' then he 
 talk about his own character in the City , and so forth , and entreat 
 I ' not to think of pay he till quite convenient ; that he would keep 
 the bill in his desk ; nobody should know of it ; too happy to do I a 
 favour ' - lay his card on the table , and go away . tell I , should I 
 say anything to Mr. Darrell about this or not ? " 

 " certainly not , till I have see Mr. Poole myself . you have the money to 
 pay he about you ? give it to I , with Mr. Poole 's address ; I will call , 
 and settle the matter . just ring the bell . "   to the servant enter 
 " order my horse round . " then , when they be again alone , turn 
 to Lionel , abruptly lay one hand on leis shoulder , with the other 
 grasp his hand warmly , cordially : " young man , " say Alban Morley , " I 
 love you - I be interested in you - who would not be ? I have go through 
 this story ; put myself positively to pain - which I hate - solely for your 
 good . you see what usury and money - lender bring man to . look I in the 
 face ! do you feel now that you would have the ' moral courage ' you before 
 doubt of ? have you do with such thing for ever ? " 

 " for ever , so help I Heaven ! the lesson have be cruel , but I do thank 
 and bless you for it . " 

 " I know you would . mark this ! never treat money affair with 
 levity - MONEY be CHARACTER ! stop . I have bar a father 's fault to a 
 son . it be necessary - or even in his grave those fault might have 
 revive in you . now , I add this , if Charles Haughton - like you , 
 handsome , high - spirit , favour by man , spoil by woman - if Charles 
 Haughton , on enter life , could have see , in the mirror I have hold 
 up to you , the consequence of pledge the morrow to pay for to - day , 
 Charles Haughton would have be shock as you be , cure as you will 
 be . humble by your own first error , be lenient to all his . take up his 
 life where I first know it : when his heart be loyal , his lip truthful . 
 raze out the interval ; imagine that he give birth to you in order to 
 replace the leaf of existence we thus blot out and tear away . in every 
 error avoid say , ' thus the father warn the son ; ' in every honourable 
 action , or hard self - sacrifice , say , ' thus the son pay a father 's 
 debt . ' " 

 Lionel , clasp his hand together , raise his eye stream with 
 tear , as if utter inly a vow to Heaven . the Colonel bow his 
 soldier - crest with religious reverence , and glide from the room 
 noiselessly . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

  be but one of the considerate pause in a long journey , 
  CHARITABLY AFFORDED to the READER . 

 Colonel Morley find Mr. Poole at home , just return from his office ; 
 he stay with that gentleman nearly an hour , and then go straight 
 to Darrell . as the time appoint to meet the french acquaintance , who 
 depend on his hospitality for a dinner , be now nearly arrive , 
 Alban 's conference with his english friend be necessarily brief 
 and hurry , though long enough to confirm one fact in Mr. Poole 's 
 statement , which have be unknown to the Colonel before that day , and 
 the admission of which inflict on Guy Darrell a pang as sharp as ever 
 wrench confession from the lip of a prisoner in the cell of the 
 Inquisition . on return from Greenwich , and deposit his Frenchman 
 in some melancholy theatre , time enough for that resentful foreigner 
 to witness theft and murder commit upon an injure countryman 's 
 vaudeville , Alban hasten again to Carlton Gardens . he find Darrell 
 alone , pace his floor to and fro , in the habit he have acquire in 
 early life , perhaps when meditate some complicated law case , or 
 wrestle with himself against some secret sorrow . there be man of 
 quick nerve who require a certain action of the body for the well 
 composure of the mind ; Darrell be one of they . 

 during these restless movement , alternate by abrupt pause , equally 
 inharmonious to the supreme quiet which characterise his listener 's 
 taste and habit , the haughty gentleman disburden himself of at least 
 one of the secret which he have hitherto guard from his early friend . 
 but as that secret connect itself with the history of a Person about 
 whom it be well that the reader should now learn more than be know 
 to Darrell himself , we will assume our privilege to be ourselves the 
 narrator , and at the cost of such dramatic vivacity as may belong to 
 dialogue , but with the gain to the reader of clear insight into those 
 portion of the past which the occasion permit we to reveal - we will 
 weave into something like method the more imperfect and desultory 
 communication by which Guy Darrell add to Alban Morley 's distasteful 
 catalogue of painful subject . the reader will allow , perhaps , that we 
 thus evince a desire to gratify his curiosity , when we state that of 
 Arabella Crane Darrell speak but in one brief and angry sentence , and 
 that not by the name in which the reader as yet alone know she ; and 
 it be with the antecedent of Arabella Crane that our explanation will 
 tranquilly commence . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

  GRIM ARABELLA CRANE . 

 once on a time there live a merchant name Fossett , a widower with 
 three child , of whom a daughter , Arabella , be by some year the 
 eld . he be much respect , deem a warm man , and a safe - attend 
 diligently to his business - suffer no partner , no foreman , to dictate 
 or intermeddle - like his comfort , but make no pretence to fashion . his 
 villa be at Clapham , not a showy but a solid edifice , with lodge , lawn , 
 and garden chiefly notable for what be technically call glass - viz . 
 a range of glass - house on the most improved principle , the heavy 
 pine , the early strawberry . " I be no judge of flower , " quoth Mr. 
 Fossett , meekly . " give I a plain lawn , provide it be close - shaven . but 
 I say to my gardener : ' force be my hobby - a cucumber with my fish all 
 the year round ! ' " yet do not suppose Mr Fossett ostentatious - quite the 
 reverse . he would no more ruin himself for the sake of dazzle other , 
 than he would for the sake of serve they . he like a warm house , 
 spacious room , good living , old wine , for their inherent merit : he 
 care not to parade they to public envy . when he din alone , or with 
 a single favour guess , the good Lafitte , the old sherry ! - when 
 extend the rite of miscellaneous hospitality to neighbour , 
 relation , or other slight acquaintance - for Lafitte , Julien ; and 
 for sherry , Cape ! - thus not provoke vanity , nor court notice , Mr. 
 Fossett be without an enemy , and seem without a care . Formal be his 
 manner , formal his household , formal even the stout cob that bear he 
 from Cheapside to Clapham , from Claphain to Cheapside . that cob could 
 not even prick up its ear if it wish to shy - its ear be crop , 
 so be its mane and its tail . 

 Arabella early give promise of beauty , and more than ordinary power of 
 intellect and character . her father be stow on her every advantage 
 of education . she be send to a select boarding - school of the high 
 reputation ; the strict discipline , the good master , the long 
 bill . at the age of seventeen she have become the show pupil of the 
 seminary . friend wonder somewhat why the prim merchant take such 
 pain to lavish on his daughter the worldly accomplishment which seem 
 to give he no pleasure , and of which he never speak with pride . but 
 certainly , if she be so clever - first - rate musician , exquisite artist , 
 accomplished linguist , " it be very nice in old Fossett to bear it 
 so meekly , never cry she up , nor show she off to less fortunate 
 parent - very nice in he - good sense - greatness of mind . " 

 " Arabella , " say the worthy man one day , a little time after his eld 
 daughter have leave school for good ; " Arabella , " say he , " Mrs. - - - - , " 
 name the head teacher in that famous school , " pay you a very high 
 compliment in a letter I receive from she this morning . she say it be 
 a pity you be not a poor man 's daughter - that you be so steady and so 
 clever that you could make a fortune for yourself as a teacher . " 

 Arabella at that age could smile gaily , and gaily she smile at the 
 notion convey in the compliment . 

 " no one can guess , " resume the father , twirl his thumb and speak 
 rather through his nose ; " the up and down in this mortal sphere of 
 trial , ' specially in the mercantile community . if ever , when I be dead 
 and go , adversity should come upon you , you will gratefully remember 
 that I have give you the good of education , and take care of your 
 little brother and sister , who be both - stupid ! " 

 these doleful word do not make much impression on Arabella , utter as 
 they be in a handsome drawing - room , open on the neat - shaven lawn 
 it take three gardener to shave , with a glitter side - view of those 
 gallery of glass in which strawberry be ripe at Christmas , 
 and cucumber never fail to fish . time - go on . Arabella be now 
 twenty - three - a very fine girl , with a decide manner - much occupy by 
 her music , her drawing , her book , and her fancy . fancy - for , like 
 most girl with very active head and idle heart , she have a vague 
 yearning for some excitement beyond the monotonous routine of a young 
 lady 's life ; and the latent force of her nature incline she to admire 
 whatever be out of the beat track - whatever be wild and daring . 
 she have receive two or three offer from young gentleman in the same 
 mercantile community as that which surround her father in this sphere 
 of trial . but they do not please she ; and she believe her father when 
 he say that they only court she under the idea that he would come 
 down with something handsome ; " whereas , " say the merchant , " I hope you 
 will marry an honest man , who will like you for yourself ; and wait for 
 your fortune till my will be read . as King William say to his son , in 
 the history of England , ' I do not   mean to strip till I go to bed . ' " 

 one night , at a ball in Clapham , Arabella see the man who be destine 
 to exercise so baleful an influence over her existence . Jasper Losely 
 have be bring to this ball by a young fellow - clerk in the same 
 commercial house as himself ; and then in all the bloom of that 
 conspicuous beauty , to which the miniature Arabella have place before 
 his eye so many year afterwards do but feeble justice , it may well 
 be conceive that he concentre on himself the admire gaze of the 
 assembly . Jasper be young than Arabella ; but , what with the height of 
 his stature and the self - confidence of his air , he look four or five 
 and twenty . certainly , in so far as the distance from childhood may be 
 estimate by the loss of innocence , Jasper might have be any age ! he 
 be tell that old Fossett 's daughter would have a very fine fortune ; 
 that she be a strong - minded young lady , who govern her father , and 
 would choose for herself ; and accordingly he devote himself to Arabella 
 the whole of the evening . the effect produce on the mind of this 
 ill - fat woman by her dazzle admirer be as sudden as it prove to 
 be last . there be a strange charm in the very contrast between his 
 rattle audacity and the bashful formality of the swain who have 
 hitherto woo she as if she frighten they . even his good look 
 fascinate she less than that vital energy and power about the lawless 
 brute , which to she seem the element of heroic character , though 
 but the attribute of riotous spirit , magnificent formation , flattered 
 vanity , and imperious egotism . she be a bird gaze spell - bind on 
 a gay young boa - constrictor , dart from bough to bough , sun its 
 brilliant hue , and show off all its beauty , just before it take the 
 bird for its breakfast . 

 when they part that night , their intimacy have so far advanced 
 that arrangement have be make for its continuance . Arabella have 
 an instinctive foreboding that her father would be less charmed than 
 herself with Jasper Losely ; that , if Jasper be present to he , 
 he would possibly forbid she farth acquaintance with a young clerk , 
 however superb his outward appearance . she take the first false step . 
 she have a maiden aunt by the mother 's side , who live in Bloomsbury , 
 give and go to small party , to which Jasper could easily get 
 introduce . she arrange to pay a visit for some week to this aunt , who 
 be then very civil to she , accept with mark kindness seasonable 
 present of strawberry , pine , spring chicken , and so forth , and 
 offering in turn , whenever it be convenient , a spare room , and whatever 
 amusement a round of small party , and the innocent flirtation 
 incidental thereto , could bestow . Arabella say nothing to her father 
 about Jasper Losely , and to her aunt 's she go . Arabella see Jasper 
 very often ; they become engaged to each other , exchange vow and 
 love - token , lock of hair ,   c. Jasper , already much trouble by dun , 
 become naturally ardent to insure his felicity and Arabella 's suppose 
 fortune . arabella at last summon courage , and speak to her father . to 
 her delighted surprise , Mr. Fossett , after some moralising , more on 
 the uncertainty of life in general than her clandestine proceeding 
 in particular , agree to see Mr. Jasper Losely , and ask he down to 
 dinner . after dinner , over ' a bottle of Lafitte , in an exceedingly plain 
 but exceedingly weighty silver jug , which make Jasper 's mouth water   I 
 mean the jug , Mr. Fossett , commence with that somewhat coarse though 
 royal saying of William the Conqueror , with which he have before edify 
 his daughter , assure Jasper that he give his full consent to the young 
 gentleman 's nuptial with Arabella , provide Jasper or his relation 
 would maintain she in a plain respectable way , and wait for her fortune 
 till his   Fossett 's   will be read . what that fortune would be , Mr. 
 Fossett decline even to hint . Jasper go away very much cool . still 
 the engagement remain in force ; the nuptial be tacitly defer . 
 Jasper and his relation maintain a wife ! preposterous idea ! it would 
 take a clan of relation and a Zenana of wife to maintain in that state 
 to which he deem himself entitle - Jasper himself ! but just as he be 
 meditate the possibility of a compromise with old Fossett , by which 
 he would agree to wait till the will be read for contingent advantage , 
 provide Fossett , in his turn , would agree in the mean while to afford 
 lodging and board , with a trifle for pocket - money , to Arabella and 
 himself , in the Clapham villa , which , though not partial to rural 
 scenery , Jasper prefer , on the whole , to a second floor in the 
 City , - old Fossett fall ill , take to his bed ; be unable to attend to 
 his business , some one else attend to it ; and the consequence 
 be , that the house stop payment , and be discover to have be 
 insolvent for the last ten year . not a discreditable bankruptcy . there 
 might perhaps be seven shilling in the pound ultimately pay , and not 
 more than forty family irretrievably ruin . Old Fossett , safe in 
 his bed , bear the affliction with philosophical composure ; observe 
 to Arabella that he have always warn she of the up and down in this 
 sphere of trial ; refer again with pride to her first - rate education ; 
 commend again to her care Tom and Biddy ; and , declare that he die 
 in charity with all man , resign himself to the last slumber . 

 Arabella at first seek a refuge with her maiden aunt . but that lady , 
 though not hit in pocket by her brother - in - law 's failure , be more 
 vehement against his memory than his most injure creditor - not only 
 that she deem herself unjustly defraud of the pine , strawberry , 
 and spring chicken , by which she have be enable to give small party 
 at small cost , though with ample show , but that she be rob of the 
 consequence she have hitherto derive from the suppose expectation of 
 her niece . in short , her welcome be so hostile , and her condolence 
 so cut , that Arabella quit her door with a solemn determination 
 never again to enter it . 

 and now the nobler quality of the bankrupt 's daughter rise at once 
 into play . leave penniless , she resolve by her own exertion to support 
 and to rear her young brother and sister . the great school to which she 
 have be the ornament willingly receive she as a teacher , until some 
 more advantageous place in a private family , and with a salary worthy of 
 her talent and accomplishment , could be find . 

 her intercourse with Jasper become necessarily suspend . she have the 
 generosity to write , offer to release he from his engagement . Jasper 
 consider himself fully release without that letter ; but he deem 
 it neither gallant nor discreet to say so . arabella might obtain 
 a situation with large salary than she could possibly need , the 
 superfluity whereof Jasper might undertake to invest . her aunt have 
 evidently something to leave , though she might have nothing to give . 
 in fine , Arabella , if not rich enough for a wife , might be often rich 
 enough for a friend at need ; and so long as he be engaged to she for 
 life , it must be not more her pleasure than her duty to assist he 
 to live . besides , independently of these prudential though not ardent 
 motif for declare unalterable fidelity to troth , Jasper at that 
 time really do entertain what he call love for the handsome young 
 woman - flatter that one of attainment so superior to all the girl 
 he have ever know should be so proud even less of his affection for 
 she than her own affection for himself . thus the engagement 
 last - interview none - letter frequent . Arabella work hard , look 
 to the future ; Jasper work as little as possible , and be very much 
 bore by the present . 

 unhappily , as it turn out , so great a sympathy , not only amongst the 
 teacher , but amongst her old schoolfellow , be feel for Arabella 's 
 reverse ; her character for steadiness , as well as talent , stand so high , 
 and there be something so creditable in her resolution to maintain 
 her orphan brother and sister , that an effort be make to procure she 
 a livelihood much more lucrative , and more independent , than she could 
 obtain either in a school or a family . why not take a small house of 
 her own , live there with her fellow - orphan , and give lesson out by the 
 hour ? several family at once agree so to engage she , and an income 
 adequate to all her want be assure . Arabella adopt this plan . she 
 take the house ; Bridget Greggs , the nurse of her infancy , become her 
 servant , and soon to that house , stealthily in the shade of evening , 
 glide Jasper Losely . she could not struggle against his influence - have 
 not the heart to refuse his visit - he be so poor - in such scrape - and 
 profess himself to be so unhappy . there now become some one else 
 to toil for , besides the little brother and sister . but what be 
 Arabella 's gain to a man who already gamble ? new affliction smite 
 she . a contagious fever break out in the neighborhood ; her little 
 brother catch it ; her little sister sicken the next day ; in less 
 than a week two small coffin be bear from her door by the Black 
 Horses - bear to that plot of sunny turf in the pretty suburban 
 cemetery , buy with the last earning make for the little one by the 
 mother - like sister : - motherless lone survivor ! what ! no friend on earth , 
 no soother but that direful Jasper ! alas ! the truly dangerous Venus be 
 not that Erycina round whom circle Jest and Laughter . sorrow , and that 
 sense of solitude which make we welcome a footstep as a child leave in 
 the haunt dark welcome the entrance of light , weaken the outwork 
 of female virtue more than all the vain levity of mirth , or the 
 flattery which follow the path of Beauty through the crowd . alas , and 
 alas ! let the tale hurry on ! 

 Jasper Losely have still more solemnly swear to marry his adore 
 Arabella . but when ? when they be rich enough . she feel as if 
 her spirit be go - as if she could work no more . she be no weak 
 commonplace girl , whom love can console for shame . she have be rigidly 
 bring up ; her sense of female rectitude be keen ; her remorse be 
 noiseless , but it be stern . harassment of a more vulgar nature beset 
 she : she have forestall her source of income ; she have contract debt 
 for Jasper 's sake ; - in vain : her purse be empty , yet his no fuller . 
 his creditor press he ; he tell she that he must hide . one winter 's 
 day he thus depart ; she see he no more for a year . she hear , a few 
 day after he leave she , of his father 's crime and committal . Jasper be 
 send abroad by his maternal uncle , at his father 's prayer ; send to a 
 commercial house in France , in which the uncle obtain he a situation . 
 in fact , the young man have be despatch to France under another name , 
 in order to save he from the obloquy which his father have bring upon 
 his own . 

 soon come William Losely 's trial and sentence . Arabella feel the 
 disgrace acutely - feel how it would affect the audacious insolent 
 Jasper ; do not wonder that he forbear to write to she . she conceive 
 he bow by shame , but she be buoy up by her conviction that they 
 should meet again . for good or for ill , she hold herself bind to he 
 for life . but meanwhile the debt she have incur on his account come 
 upon she . she be force to dispose of her house ; and at this time Mrs. 
 Lyndsay , look out for some first - rate superior governess for Matilda 
 Darrell , be urge by all mean to try and secure for that post Arabella 
 Fossett . the high testimonial from the school at which she have be 
 rear , from the most eminent professional master , from the family 
 at which she have recently teach , be all bring to bear upon Mr. 
 Darrell , he authorise Mrs. Lyndsay to propose such a salary as could 
 not fail to secure a teacher of such rare qualification . and thus 
 Arabella become governess to Miss Darrell . 

 there be a kind of young lady of whom her near relation will say , " I 
 can not   make that girl out . " Matilda Darrell be that kind of young lady . 
 she talk very little ; she move very noiselessly ; she seem to regard 
 herself as a secret which she have solemnly swear not to let out . she 
 have be steep in slyness from her early infancy by a sly mother . 
 Mrs. Darrell be a woman who have always something to conceal . there be 
 always some note to be thrust out of sight ; some visit not to be speak 
 of ; something or other which Matilda be not on any account to mention 
 to Papa . 

 when Mrs. Darrell die , Matilda be still a child , but she still 
 continue to view her father as a person against whom prudence demand 
 she to be constantly on her guard . it be not that she be exactly 
 afraid of he - he be very gentle to she , as he be to all child ; but 
 his loyal nature be antipathetic to hers . she have no sympathy with he . 
 how confide her thought to he ? she have an instinctive knowledge that 
 those thought be not such as could harmonise with his . yet , though 
 taciturn , uncaressing , undemonstrative , she appear mild and docile . 
 her reserve be ascribe to constitutional timidity . timid to a degree 
 she usually seem ; yet , when you think you have solve the enigma , she 
 say or do something so coolly determine , that you be force again 
 to exclaim , " I can not   make that girl out ! " she be not quick at her 
 lesson . you have settle in your mind that she be dull , when , by a 
 chance remark , you be startled to find that she be very sharp ; keenly 
 observant , when you have fancy her fast asleep . she have seem , since 
 her mother 's death , more fond of Mrs. Lyndsay and Caroline than of any 
 other human being - always appear sullen or out of spirit when 
 they be absent ; yet she confide to they no more than she do to 
 her father . you would suppose from this description that Matilda 
 could inspire no liking in those with whom she live . not so ; her very 
 secretiveness have a sort of attraction - a puzzle always create some 
 interest . then her face , though neither handsome nor pretty , have in it 
 a treacherous softness - a subdue , depressed expression . a kind observer 
 could not but say with an indulgent pity ; " there must be a good deal of 
 heart in that girl , if one could but - make she out . " 

 she appear to take at once to Arabella , more than she have take to 
 Mrs. Lyndsay , or even to Caroline , with whom she have be bring up as 
 a sister , but who , then joyous and quick and innocently fearless - with 
 her soul in her eye and her heart on her lip - have no charm for 
 Matilda , because there she see no secret to penetrate , and she she have 
 no object in deceive . 

 but this stranger , of accomplishment so rare , of character so decide , 
 with a settle gloom on her lip , a gather care on her brow - there be 
 some one to study , and some one with whom she feel a sympathy ; for she 
 detect at once that Arabella be also a secret . 

 at first , Arabella , absorb in her own reflection , give to Matilda 
 but the mechanical attention which a professional teacher bestow on an 
 ordinary pupil . but an interest in Matilda spring up in her breast , in 
 proportion as she conceive a venerate gratitude for Darrell . he be 
 aware of the pomp and circumstance which have surround she early 
 year ; he respect the creditable energy with which she have devote 
 her talent to the support of the young child throw upon her care ; 
 compassionate her bereavement of those little fellow - orphan for 
 whom toil have be render sweet ; and he strove , by a kindness of 
 forethought and a delicacy of attention , which be the more prized in 
 a man so eminent and so preoccupied , to make she forget that she be a 
 salaried teacher - to place she saliently , and as a matter of course , in 
 the position of a gentlewoman , guest , and friend . recognise in her 
 a certain vigour and force of intellect apart from her mere 
 accomplishment , he would flatter her scholastic pride , by refer to 
 her memory in some question of reading , or consult her judgment 
 on some point of critical taste . she , in return , be touch by his 
 chivalrous kindness to the depth of a nature that , though already 
 seriously injure by its unhappy contact with a soul like Jasper 's , 
 retain that capacity of gratitude , the loss of which be humanity 's 
 last deprivation . nor this alone : Arabella be startle by the intellect 
 and character of Darrell into that kind of homage which a woman , who have 
 hitherto meet but her own intellectual inferior , render to the first 
 distinguished personage in whom she recognise , half with humility and 
 half with awe , an understanding and a culture to which her own reason be 
 but the flimsy glass - house , and her own knowledge but the force exotic . 

 Arabella , thus rouse from her first listlessness , seek to requite 
 Darrell 's kindness by exert every energy to render his insipid 
 daughter an accomplished woman . so far as mere ornamental education 
 extend , the teacher be more successful than , with all her experience , 
 her skill , and her zeal , she have presume to anticipate . Matilda , 
 without ear , or taste , or love for music , become a very fair mechanical 
 musician . without one artistic predisposition , she achieve the science 
 of perspective - she attain even to the mixture of colour - she fill 
 a portfolio with drawing which no young lady need have be ashamed to 
 see circle round a drawing - room . she carry Matilda 's thin mind to 
 the farth bind it could have reach without snap , through 
 an elegant range of select history and harmless feminine 
 classic - through Gallic dialogue - through tuscan theme - through 
 Teuton verb - yea , across the invade bound of astonished Science into 
 the Elementary Ologies . and all this be do , Matilda Darrell be 
 exactly the same creature that she be before . in all that relate to 
 character , to inclination , to heart , even that consummate teacher could 
 give no intelligible answer , when Mrs. Lyndsay in her soft accent 
  and no accent ever be soft   sigh : " poor dear Matilda ! can you 
 make she out , Miss Fossett ? " Miss Fossett could not make she out . but , 
 after the most attentive study , Miss Fossett have inly decide that there 
 be nothing to make out - that , like many other very nice girl , Matilda 
 Darrell be a harmless nullity , what you call " a Miss " white deal or 
 willow , to which Miss Fossett have do all in the way of increase 
 its value as ornamental furniture , when she have veneer it over with 
 rosewood or satinwood , enrich its edge with ormolu , and strew its 
 surface with nicknack and album . but Arabella firmly believe Matilda 
 Darrell to be a quiet , honest , good sort of " Miss , " on the whole - very 
 fond of she , Arabella . the teacher have be several month in Darrell 's 
 family , when Caroline Lyndsay , who have be almost domesticate with 
 Matilda   share the lesson bestow on the latter , whether by Miss 
 Fossett or visit master , be take away by Mrs. Lyndsay on a visit 
 to the old Marchioness of Montfort . Matilda , who be to come out the 
 next year , be thus almost exclusively with Arabella , who redouble all 
 her pain to veneer the white deal , and protect with ormolu its feeble 
 edge - so that , when it " come out , " all should admire that thoroughly 
 fashionable piece of furniture . it be the habit of Miss Fossett and her 
 pupil to take a morning walk in the quiet retreat of the Green 
 Park ; and one morning , as they be thus stroll , nursery - maid and 
 child , and elderly folk who be order to take early exercise , 
 undulating round their unsuspecting way , - suddenly , right upon their 
 path   unlooked - for as the wolf that startle Horace in the Sabine 
 wood , but infinitely more deadly than that runaway animal , come Jasper 
 Losely ! Arabella utter a faint scream . she could not resist - have no 
 thought of resist - the impulse to bind forward - lie her hand on his 
 arm . she be too agitated to perceive whether his predominant feeling 
 be surprise or rapture . a few hurried word be exchange , while 
 Matilda Darrell give one sidelong glance towards the handsome stranger , 
 and walk quietly by they . on his part , Jasper say that he have 
 just return to London - that he have abandon for ever all idea of 
 a commercial life - that his father 's misfortune   he give that gentle 
 appellation to the incident of penal transportation   have sever he 
 from all former friend , tie , habit - that he have drop the name of 
 losely for ever - entreat Arabella not to betray it - his name now be 
 Hammond - his " prospect , " he say , " fair than they have ever be . " 
 under the name of Hammond , as an independent gentleman , he have make 
 friend more powerful than he could ever have make under the name of 
 losely as a city clerk . he blush to think he have ever be a city 
 clerk . no doubt he should get into some Government office ; and then , oh 
 then , with assured income and a certainty to rise , he might claim the 
 long - for hand of the " good of creature . " 

 on Arabella 's part , she hastily explain her present position . she 
 be governess to Miss Darrell - that be Miss Darrell . Arabella must not 
 leave she walk on by herself - she would write to he . address 
 be exchange - Jasper give a very neat card - " Mr. Hammond , no . - , Duke 
 Street , St. James 's . " 

 Arabella , with a beat heart , hasten to join her friend . at the 
 rapid glance she have take of her perfidious lover , she think he , if 
 possible , improve . his dress , always study , be more to the fashion 
 of polished society , more simply correct - his air more decide . 
 altogether he look prosperous , and his manner have never be more 
 seductive , in its mixture of easy self - confidence and hypocritical 
 coaxing . in fact , Jasper have not be long in the french commercial 
 house - to which he have be send out of the way while his father 's trial 
 be proceed and the shame of it fresh - before certain license of 
 conduct have result in his dismissal . but , meanwhile , he have make many 
 friend amongst young man of his own age - those loose wild viveur who , 
 without do anything the law can punish as dishonest , contrive for 
 a few fast year to live very showily on their wit . in that strange 
 social fermentation which still prevail in a country where an 
 aristocracy of birth , exceedingly impoverished , and exceedingly numerous 
 so far as the right to prefix a De to the name , or to stamp a coronet 
 on the card , can constitute an aristocrat - be diffuse amongst 
 an ambitious , adventurous , restless , and not inelegant young 
 democracy - each cement with the other by that fiction of law call 
 egalite ; in that yet unsettled and struggle society in which so much 
 of the old have be irretrievably destroy , and so little of the 
 new have be solidly construct - there be much great variety , 
 infinitely more subtle grade and distinction , in the region of life 
 which lie between respectability and disgrace , than can be find in a 
 country like ours . the french novel and drama may apply less a mirror 
 than a magnifying - glass to the being that move through that region . but 
 still those french novel and drama do not unfaithfully represent 
 the classification of which they exaggerate the type . those 
 strange combination , into one tableau , of student and grisette ; 
 opera - dancer , author , viscount , swindler , romantic lorette , 
 gambler on the Bourse , whose pedigree date from the crusade ; 
 impostor , take title from village in which their grandsire might 
 have be saddler - and if detect , the detection but a matter of 
 laugh ; delicate woman live like lawless man ; man make trade out 
 of love , like dissolute woman , yet with point of honour so nice , that , 
 doubt their truth or their courage , and - piff ! you be in Charon 's 
 boat , - humanity in every civilised land may present single specimen , 
 more or less , answer to each thus describe . but where , save in 
 France , find they all , if not precisely in the same salon , yet so 
 cross each other to and fro as to constitute a social phase , and give 
 colour to a literature of unquestionable genius ? and where , over orgy 
 so miscellaneously Berecynthian , an atmosphere so elegantly Horatian ? 
 and where can coarseness so vanish into polished expression as in that 
 diamond - like language - all terseness and sparkle - which , as friendly 
 to wit in its airy prose , as hostile to passion in its torrent of 
 cloud - wrack of poetry , seem invent by the Grace out of spite to the 
 Muse ? 

 into circle such as those of which the dim outline be here so 
 imperfectly sketch , Jasper losely niche himself , as le bel Anglais . 
  pleasant representative of the english nation !   not that those circle 
 be to have the sole credit of his corruption . no ! justice be justice ! 
 stand we up for our native land ! Le bel Anglais enter those circle 
 a much great knave than most of those whom he find there . but 
 there , at least , he learn to set a yet high value on his youth , and 
 strength , and comeliness - on his readiness of resource - on the reckless 
 audacity that browbeat timid and some even valiant man - on the six 
 foot one of faultless symmetry that captivate foolish , and some even 
 sensible woman . gaming be , however , his vice by predilection . a month 
 before Arabella meet he , he have have a rare run of luck . on the strength 
 of it he have resolve to return to London , and   wholly oblivious of the 
 good of creature till she have thus startle he   hunt out and swoop off 
 with an heiress . three french friend accompany he . each have the same 
 object . each believe that London swarm with heiress . they be all 
 three fine - look man . one be a Count , - at least he say so . but proud 
 of his rank ? - not a bit of it : all for liberty   no man more likely to 
 lose it   - all for fraternity   no man you would less love as a brother . 
 and as for egalite ! - the son of a shoemaker who be homme de 
 lettre , and write in a journal , insert a jest on the Count 's 
 courtship . " all man be equal before the pistol , " say the Count ; and 
 know that in that respect he be equal to most , have practise at 
  poupee from the age of fourteen , he call out the son of Crispin and 
 shoot he through the lung . another of Jasper 's travel friend be 
 an enfant die peuple - boasted that he be a foundling . he make verse 
 of lugubrious strain , and teach Jasper how to shuffle at whist . the 
 third , like Jasper , have be design for trade ; and , like Jasper , 
 he have a soul above it . in politic he be a communist - in talk 
 Philanthropist . he be the clever man of they all , and be now at the 
 galley . the fate of his two compatriot - more obscure it be not my duty 
 to discover . in that peculiar walk of life Jasper be as much as I can 
 possibly manage . 

 it need not be say that Jasper carefully abstain from remind his 
 old city friend of his existence . it be his object and his hope to 
 drop all identity with that son of a convict who have be send out of 
 the way to escape humiliation . in this resolve he be the more confirm 
 because he have no old city friend out of whom anything could be well 
 get . his poor uncle , who alone of his relation in England have be 
 privy to his change of name , be dead ; his end hasten by grief for 
 William Losely 's disgrace , and the bad report he have receive from 
 France of the conduct of William Losely 's son . that uncle have leave , in 
 circumstance too straiten to admit the waste of a shilling , a widow 
 of very rigid opinion ; who , if ever by some miraculous turn in the 
 wheel of fortune she could have become rich enough to slay a fat 
 calf , would never have give the shin - bone of it to a prodigal like 
 Jasper , even have he be her own penitent son , instead of a graceless 
 step - nephew . therefore , as all civilisation proceed westward , Jasper 
 turn his face from the east ; and have no more idea of recrosse Temple 
 Bar in search of fortune , friend , or kindre , than a modern Welshman 
 would dream of a pilgrimage to asian shore to re - embrace those distant 
 relative whom Hu Gadarn leave behind he countless century ago , when 
 that mythical chief conduct his faithful Cymrians over the Hazy Sea to 
 this happy island of Honey . 

   Mel Ynnys - Isle of Honey . one of the poetic name give to England 
  in the language of the ancient Britons . 

 two day after his rencontre with Arabella in the Green Park , the 
  soi - disant Hammond have , in the interim , learn that Darrell be 
 immensely rich , and that Matilda be his only survive child , do not 
 fail to find himself in the Green Park again - and again - and again ! 

 Arabella , of course , feel how wrong it be to allow he to accost she , 
 and walk by one side of she while Miss Darrell be on the other . but she 
 feel , also , as if it would be much more wrong to slip out and meet he 
 alone . not for world would she again have place herself in such peril . 
 to refuse to meet he at all ? - she have not strength enough for that ! her 
 joy at see he be so immense . and nothing could be more respectful 
 than Jasper 's manner and conversation . whatever of warm and more 
 impassione sentiment be exchange between they pass in note . Jasper 
 have suggest to Arabella to represent he to Matilda as some near 
 relation . but Arabella refuse all such disguise . her sole claim to 
 self - respect be in consider he solemnly engage to she - the man she 
 be to marry . 

 and , after the second time they thus meet , she say to Matilda , who have 
 not question she by a word - by a look : " I be to be married to that 
 gentleman before my father die ; we be to be marry as soon as we have 
 something to live upon . " 

 Matilda make some commonplace but kindly rejoinder . and thus she become 
 raise into Arabella 's confidence , so far as that confidence could be 
 give , without betray Jasper 's real name or one dark memory in 
 herself . Luxury , indeed , it be to Arabella to find , at last , some one 
 to whom she could speak of that betrothal in which her whole future be 
 invest - of that affection which be her heart 's sheet - anchor - of that 
 home , humble it might be and far off , but to which Time rarely fail 
 to bring the Two , if never weary of the trust to become as one . talk 
 thus , Arabella forget the relationship of pupil and teacher ; it be as 
 woman to woman - girl to girl - friend to friend . Matilda seem touch 
 by the confidence - flatter to possess at last another 's secret . 
 Arabella be a little chafed that she do not seem to admire Jasper as 
 much as Arabella think the whole world must admire . Matilda excuse 
 herself . " she have scarcely notice Mr. Hammond . yes : she have no doubt 
 he would be consider handsome ; but she own , though it might be bad 
 taste , that she prefer a pale complexion , with auburn hair ; " and then 
 she sigh and look away , as if she have , in the course of her secret 
 life , encounter some fatal pale complexion , with never - to - be - forget 
 auburn hair . not a word be say by either Matilda or Arabella as to 
 conceal from Mr. Darrell these meeting with Mr. Hammond . perhaps 
 Arabella could not stoop to ask that secrecy ; but there be no necessity 
 to ask ; Matilda be always too rejoice to have something to conceal . 

 now , in these interview , Jasper scarcely ever address himself to 
 Matilda ; not twenty speak word could have pass between they ; yet , 
 in the very third interview , Matilda 's sly finger have close on a sly 
 note . and from that day , in each interview , Arabella walk in the 
 centre , Jasper on one side , Matilda the other - behind Arabella 's 
 back - pass the sly finger and the sly note , which Matilda receive 
 and answer . not more than twelve or fourteen time be even this 
 interchange effect . Darrell be about to move to Fawley . all such 
 meeting would be now suspend . two or three morning before that 
 fix for leave London , Matilda 's room be find vacant . she be go . 
 Arabella be the first to discover her flight , the first to learn its 
 cause . Matilda have leave on her writing - table a letter for Miss 
 Fossett . it be very short , very quietly express , and it rest she 
 justification on a note from Jasper , which she enclose - a note in which 
 that gallant hero , ridicule the idea that he could ever have be in 
 love with Arabella , declare that he would destroy himself if Matilda 
 refuse to fly . she need not fear such angelic confidence in he . no ! 
 even 

  have he a heart for falsehood frame , 
  he ne'er could injure she . " 

 stifle each noisier cry - but pant - gasp - literally half out of 
 her mind , Arabella rush into Darrell 's study . he , unsuspecting man , 
 calmly bend over his dull book , be startle by her apparition . few 
 minute suffice to tell he all that it concern he to learn . few 
 brief question , few passionate answer , bring he to the very bad . 

 who , and what , be this Mr. Hammond ? Heaven of heaven ! the son of 
 William Losely - of a transport felon ! 

 Arabella exult in a reply which give she a moment 's triumph over 
 the rival who have filch from her such a prize . rouse from his first 
 misery and sense of abasement in this discovery , Darrell 's wrath be 
 naturally pour , not on the fugitive child , but on the frontless woman , 
 who , buoy up by her own rage and sense of wrong , face he , and do 
 not cower . she , the faithless governess , have present to her pupil this 
 convict 's son in another name ; she own it - she have trepan into the 
 snare of so vile a fortune - hunter an ignorant child : she might feign 
 amaze - act remorse - she must have be the man 's accomplice . Stung , 
 amidst all the bewilderment of her anguish , by this charge , which , at 
 least , she do not deserve , Arabella tear from her bosom Jasper 's recent 
 letter to herself - letter all devotion and passion - place they 
 before Darrell , and bid he read . nothing think she then of name and 
 fame - nothing but of her wrong and of her woe . compare to herself , 
 Matilda seem the perfidious criminal - she the injure victim . darrell 
 but glance over the letter ; they be sign " your love husband . " 

 " what be this ? " he exclaim ; " be you married to the man ? " 

 " yes , " cry Arabella , " in the eye of Heaven ! " 

 to Darrell 's penetration there be no mistaking the significance of 
 those word and that look ; and his wrath redouble . anger in he , when 
 once rouse , be terrible ; he have small need of word to vent it . 
 his eye wither , his gesture appal . conscious but of one burn 
 firebrand in brain and heart - of a sense that youth , joy , and hope be 
 for ever go , that the world could never be the same again - Arabella 
 leave the house , her character lose , her talent useless , her very 
 mean of existence stop . who henceforth would take she to teach ? who 
 henceforth place their child under her charge ? 

 she shrink into a gloomy lodging - she - shut herself up alone with her 
 despair . strange though it may seem , her anger against Jasper be slight 
 as compare with the in tensity of her hate to Matilda . and stranger 
 still it may seem , that as her thought recover from their first 
 chaos , she feel more embitter against the world , more crush by a 
 sense of shame , and yet gall by a no less keen sense of injustice , in 
 recall the scorn with which Darrell have reject all excuse for 
 her conduct in the misery it have occasion she , than she do by the 
 consciousness of her own lamentable error . as in Darrell 's esteem there 
 be something that , to those who could appreciate it , seem invaluable , 
 so in his contempt to those who have cherish that esteem there be a 
 weight of ignominy , as if a judge have pronounce a sentence that outlaw 
 the rest of life . 

 Arabella have not much leave out of her munificent salary . what she have 
 hitherto lay by have pass to Jasper - defraying , perhaps , the very cost 
 of his flight with her treacherous rival . when her money be go , she 
 pawn the poor relic of her innocent happy girlhood , which she have 
 be permit to take from her father 's home , and have bear with she 
 wherever she go , like household god , the prize - book , the lute , the 
 costly work - box , the very bird - cage , all which the reader will remember 
 to have see in her later life , the book never open - the lute break , 
 the bird long , long , long vanish from the cage ! never do she think 
 she should redeem those pledge from that Golgotha , which take , rarely 
 to give back , so many hallowed token of the Dreamland call " well 
 day , " - the trinket wear at the first ball , the ring that be give 
 with the early love - vow - yea , even the very bell and coral that 
 please the infant in his dainty cradle , and the very Bible in which 
 the lip , that now bargain for sixpence more , read to some grey - haire 
 father on his bed of death ! 

 soon the sum thus miserably raise be as miserably dole away . with a 
 sullen apathy the woman contemplate famine . she would make no effort to 
 live - appeal to no relation , no friend . it be a kind of vengeance she 
 take on other , to let herself drift on to death . she have retreat from 
 lodge to lodge , each obscurer , more desolate than the other . now , 
 she could no long pay rent for the humblest room ; now , she be tell 
 to go forth - whither ? she know not - care not - take her way towards 
 the River , as by that instinct which , when the mind be disease , tend 
 towards self - destruction , scarce less involuntarily than it turn , 
 in health , towards self - preservation . just as she pass under the 
 lamp - light at the foot of Westminster Bridge , a man look at she , and 
 seize her arm . she raise her head with a chilly , melancholy scorn , as 
 if she have receive an insult - as if she fear that the man know the 
 stain upon her name , and dream , in his folly , that the dread of death 
 might cause she to sin again . 

 " do you not know I ? " say the man ; " more strange that I should 
 recognise you ! dear , dear , and what a dress ! - how you be alter ! poor 
 thing ! " 

 at the word " poor thing " Arabella burst into tear ; and in those tear 
 the heavy cloud on her brain seem to melt away . 

 " I have be inquire , seek for you everywhere , Miss , " resume 
 the man . " surely , you know I now ! your poor aunt 's lawyer ! she be no 
 more - die last week . she have leave you all she have in the world ; and a 
 very pretty income it be , too , for a single lady . " 

 thus it be that we find Arabella instal in the dreary comfort 
 of Podden Place . " she exchange , " she say , " in honour to her aunt 's 
 memory , her own name for that of Crane , which her aunt have bear - her 
 own mother 's maiden name . " she assume , though still so young , that 
 title of " Mrs. " which spinster , grow venerable , moodily adopt when 
 they desire all mankind to know that henceforth they relinquish the 
 vanity of tender miss - that , become mistress of themselves , they 
 defy and spit upon our worthless sex , which , whatever its repentance , 
 be warn that it repent in vain . Most of her aunt 's property be in 
 house , in various district of Bloombury . Arabella move from one to 
 the other of these tenement , till she settle for good into the dull 
 of all . to make it dull yet , by contrast with the past , the Golgotha 
 for once give up its bury treasure - break lute , birdless cage ! 

 somewhere about two year after Matilda 's death , Arabella happen to 
 be in the office of the agent who collect her house - rent , when a 
 well - dress man enter , and , lean over the counter , say : " there 
 be an advertisement in to - day 's Times about a lady who offer a home , 
 education , and so forth , to any little motherless girl ; term moderate , 
 as say lady love child for their own sake . advertiser refer to 
 your office for particular - give they ! " 

 the agent turn to his book ; and Arabella turn towards the inquirer . 
 " for whose child do you want a home , Jasper Losely ? " 

 Jasper start . " Arabella ! good of creature ! and can you deign to speak 
 to such a vil - - " 

 " Hush - let we walk . never mind the advertisement of a stranger . I may 
 find a home for a motherless child - a home that will cost you nothing . " 

 she draw he into the street . " but can this be the child of - of - Matilda 
 Darrell ? " - 

 " Bella ! " reply , in coax accent , that most execrable of 
 lady - killers , " can I trust you ? - can you be my friend in spite of my 
 have be such a very sad dog ? but money - what can one do without 
 money in this world ? ' have I a heart for falsehood frame , it would ne'er 
 have injure you ' - if I have not be so cursedly hard up ! and indeed , 
 now , if you would but condescend to forgive and forget , perhaps some day 
 or other we may be Darby and Joan - only , you see , just at this moment 
 I be really not worthy of such a Joan . you know , of course , that I be a 
 widower - not inconsolable . " 

 " yes ; I read of Mrs. Hammond 's death in an old newspaper . " 

 " and you do not read of her baby 's death , too - some week afterwards ? " ' 

 " no ; it be seldom that I see a newspaper . be the infant dead ? " 

 " Hum - you shall hear . " and Jasper enter into a recital , to which 
 Arabella listen with attentive interest . at the close she offer to 
 take , herself , the child for whom Jasper seek a home . she inform 
 he of her change of name and address . the wretch promise to call that 
 evening with the infant ; but he send the infant , and do not call . 
 nor do he present himself again to her eye , until , several year 
 afterwards , those eye so luridly welcome he to Podden Place . but 
 though he do not even condescend to write to she in the mean while , it 
 be probable that Arabella contrive to learn more of his habit and 
 mode of life at Paris than she intimate when they once more meet face to 
 face . 

 and now the reader know more than Alban Morley , or Guy Darrell , perhaps 
 ever will know , of the grim woman in iron - grey , 




 CHAPTER X. 

  " Sweet be the us of Adversity , 
  which , like the toad , ugly and venomous , 
  bear yet a precious jewel in its head . " 

  MOST person will agree that the TOAD be UGLY and VENOMOUS , but few 
  indeed be the person who can BOAST of have ACTUALLY discover 
  that " precious jewel in its head , " which the poet assures US be 
  place there . but CALAMITY may be classed in two great division - 
  1st , the affliction , which no prudence can avert ; 2nd , the 
  MISFORTUNES , which MEN take all possible pains to bring upon 
  themselves . affliction of the first class MAY but CALL forth OUR 
  VIRTUES , and result in our ultimate good . SUCH be the ADVERSITY 
  which may give US the JEWEL . but to get at the jewel we must kill 
  the TOAD . MISFORTUNES of the second class but TOO often increase 
  the errors or the vices by which they be create . SUCH be the 
  ADVERSITY which be all TOAD and no JEWEL . if you choose to BREED 
  and FATTEN your OWN TOADS , the increase of the venom absorbs every 
  BIT of the JEWEL . 

 never do I know a man who be an habitual gambler , otherwise than 
 notably inaccurate in his calculation of probability in the ordinary 
 affair of life . be it that such a man have become so chronic a drunkard 
 of hope , that he see double every chance in his favour ? 

 Jasper Losely have count upon two thing as matter of course . 

 1st . Darrell 's speedy reconciliation with his only child . 2nd . that 
 Darrell 's only child must of necessity be Darrell 's heiress . 

 in both these expectation the gambler be deceive . Darrell do not 
 even answer the letter that Matilda address to he from France , to 
 the shore of which Jasper have bear she , and where he have hasten 
 to make she his wife under the assumed name of Hammond , but his true 
 christian name of Jasper . 

 in the disreputable marriage Matilda have make , all the bad part of 
 her character seem suddenly reveal to her father 's eye , and he see 
 what he have hitherto seek not to see , the true child of a worthless 
 mother . a mere mesalliance , if palliate by long or familiar 
 acquaintance with the object , however it might have gall he , his 
 heart might have pardon ; but here , without even a struggle of duty , 
 without the ordinary coyness of maiden pride , to be win with so scanty 
 a wooing , by a man who she know be betroth to another - the 
 dissimulation , the perfidy , the combined effrontery and meanness of the 
 whole transaction , leave no force in Darrell 's eye to the common place 
 excuse of experience and youth . Darrell would not have be Darrell if 
 he could have take back to his home or his heart a daughter so old in 
 deceit , so experienced in thought that dishonour . 

 Darrell 's silence , however , little sadden the heartless bride , and 
 little dismay the sanguine bridegroom . both think that pardon and 
 plenty be but the affair of time a little more or little less . but 
 their fund rapidly diminish ; it become necessary to recruit they . one 
 can not   live in hotel entirely upon hope . leave his bride for a while 
 in a pleasant provincial town , not many hour distant from Paris , Jasper 
 return to London , intent upon see Darrell himself ; and , should the 
 father - in - law still defer article of peace , Jasper believe that he 
 could have no trouble in raise a present supply upon such an El Dorado 
 of future expectation . darrell at once consent to see Jasper , not at 
 his own house , but at his solicitor 's . smother all oppose disgust , 
 the proud gentleman deem this condescension essential to the clear and 
 definite understanding of those resolve upon which depend the worldly 
 station and prospect of the wed pair . 

 when Jasper be show into Mr. Gotobed 's office , Darrell be alone , 
 stand near the hearth , and by a single quiet gesture repel that 
 tender rush towards his breast which Jasper have elaborately prepare ; 
 and thus for the first time the two man see each other , darrell 
 perhaps yet more resentfully mortified while recognise those personal 
 advantage in the showy profligate which have render a daughter of his 
 house so facile a conquest : jasper   who have choose to believe that a 
 father - in - law so eminent must necessarily be old and broken   shock 
 into the most disagreeable surprise by the sight of a man still young , 
 under forty , with a countenance , a port , a presence , that in any 
 assemblage would have attract the general gaze from his own brilliant 
 self , and look altogether as unfavourable an object , whether for 
 pathos or for post - obit , as unlikely to breathe out a blessing or to 
 give up the ghost , as the bad brute of a father - in - law could possibly 
 be . nor be Darrell 's word more comforting than his aspect . 

 " Sir , I have consent to see you , partly that you may learn from my own 
 lip once for all that I admit no man 's right to enter my family without 
 my consent , and that consent you will never receive ; and partly that , 
 thus know each other by sight , each may know the man it become 
 he most to avoid . the lady who be now your wife be entitle by my 
 marriage - settlement to the reversion of a small fortune at my death ; 
 nothing more from I be she likely to inherit . as I have no desire that 
 she to whom I once give the name of daughter should be dependent wholly 
 on yourself for bread , my solicitor will inform you on what condition 
 I be willing , during my life , to pay the interest of the sum which will 
 pass to your wife at my death . Sir , I return to your hand the letter 
 that lady have address to I , and which , it be easy to perceive , be 
 write at your dictation . no letter from she will I answer . across my 
 threshold her foot will never pass . thus , sir , conclude all possible 
 intercourse between you and myself ; what rest be between you and that 
 gentleman . " 

 Darrell have open a side - door in speak the last word - point 
 towards the respectable form of Mr. Gotobed stand tall beside his 
 tall desk - and , before Jasper could put in a word , the father - in - law be 
 go . 

 with become brevity , Mr. Gotobed make Jasper fully aware that not only 
 all , Mr. Darrell 's funded or personal property be entirely at his own 
 disposal - that not only the large landed estate he have purchase   and 
 which Jasper have vaguely deem inherit and in strict entail   be in 
 the same condition - condition enviable to the proprietor , odious to 
 the bridegroom of the proprietor 's sole daughter ; but that even the 
 fee - simple of the poor Fawley Manor House and land be vest in 
 Darrell , encumber only by the portion of L10,000 which the late Mrs. 
 Darrell have bring to her husband , and which be settle , at the death 
 of herself and Darrell , on the child of the marriage . 

 in the absence of marriage - settlement between Jasper and Matilda , that 
 sum at Darrell 's death be liable to be claim by Jasper , in right of 
 his wife , so as to leave no certainty that provision would remain for 
 the support of his wife and family ; and the contingent reversion might , 
 in the mean time , be so deal with as to bring eventual poverty on they 
 all . 

 " Sir , " say the lawyer , " I will be quite frank with you . it be my wish , 
 act for Mr. Darrell , so to settle this sum of L10,000 on your wife , 
 and any child she may bear you , as to place it out of your power to 
 anticipate or dispose of it , even with Mrs. Hammond 's consent . if you 
 part with that power , not at present a valuable one , you be entitle to 
 compensation . I be prepared to make that compensation liberal . perhaps 
 you would prefer communicate with I through your own solicitor . but 
 I should tell you , that the term be more likely to be advantageous to 
 you in proportion as negotiation be confine to we two . it might , for 
 instance , be expedient to tell your solicitor that your true name   I beg 
 you a thousand pardon   be not Hammond . that be a secret which , the more 
 you can keep it to yourself , the well I think it will be for you . we 
 have no wish to blab it out . " 

 Jasper , by this time , have somewhat recover the first shock of 
 displeasure and disappointment ; and with that quickness which so 
 erratically dart through a mind that contrive to be dull when 
 anything honest be address to its apprehension , he instantly divine 
 that his real name of Losely be worth something . he have no idea of 
 reusing - be , indeed , at that time anxious altogether to ignore and 
 eschew it ; but he have a right to it , and a man 's right be not to be 
 resign for nothing . accordingly , he say with some asperity : " I shall 
 resume my family name whenever I choose it . if Mr. Darrell do not 
 like his daughter to be call Mrs. Jasper Losely - or all the malignant 
 tittle - tattle which my poor father 's unfortunate trial might provoke - he 
 must , at least , ask I as a favour to retain the name I have temporarily 
 adopt - a name in my family , sir . a losely marry a Hammond , I forget 
 when - generation ago - you will see it in the Baronetage . my grandfather , 
 Sir Julian , be not a crack lawyer , but he be a baronet of as good 
 birth as any in the country ; and my father , sir " -   Jasper 's voice 
 tremble   " my father , " he repeat , fiercely strike his clench hand 
 on the table , " be a gentleman every inch of his body ; and I will pitch 
 any man out of the window who say a word to the contrary ! " 

 " Sir , " say Mr. Gotobed , shrink towards the bell pull , " I think , on 
 the whole , I have well see your solicitor . " 

 Jasper cool down at that suggestion ; and , with a slight apology for 
 natural excitement , beg to know what Mr. Gotobed wish to propose . 
 to make an end of this part of the story , after two or three interview , 
 in which the two negotiator learn to understand each other , a 
 settlement be legally complete , by which the sum of L10,000 be 
 inalienably settle on Matilda , and her child by her marriage with 
 Jasper ; in case he survive she , the interest be to be his for life - in 
 case she die childless , the capital would devolve to himself at 
 Darrell 's decease . meanwhile , Darrell agree to pay L500 a year , as the 
 interest of the L10,000 at five per cent . , to Jasper Hammond , or his 
 order , provide always that Jasper and his wife continue to reside 
 together , and fix that residence abroad . 

 by a private verbal arrangement , not even commit to writing , to 
 this sum be add another l200 a year , wholly at Darrell 's option and 
 discretion . it be clearly comprehend that these word mean so long 
 as Mr. Hammond keep his own secret , and so long , too , as he forbore , 
 directly or indirectly , to molest , or even to address , the person at 
 whose pleasure it be hold . on the whole , the condition to Jasper be 
 sufficiently favourable : he come into an income immeasurably beyond 
 his right to believe that he should ever enjoy ; and sufficient - well 
 manage - for even a fair share of the elegancie as well as comfort of 
 life , to a young couple bl in each other 's love , and remote from the 
 horrible taxis and emulous gentility of this opulent England , where 
 out of fear to be think too poor nobody be ever too rich . 

 Matilda write no more to Darrell . but some month afterwards he 
 receive an extremely well - express note in French , the writer whereof 
 represent herself as a french lady , who have very lately see Madame 
 Hammondwho be now in London , but for a few day , and have something to 
 communicate , of such importance as to justify the liberty she take in 
 request he to honour she with a visit . after some little hesitation , 
 Darrell call on this lady . though Matilda have forfeit his affection , 
 he could not contemplate her probable fate without painful anxiety . 
 perhaps Jasper have ill - use she - perhaps she have need of shelter 
 elsewhere . though that shelter could not again be under a father 's 
 roof - and though Darrell would have take no step to separate she 
 from the husband she have choose , still , in secret , he would have feel 
 comparative relief and ease have she herself seek to divide her fate 
 from one whose path downwards in dishonour his penetration instinctively 
 divine . with an idea that some communication might be make to he , to 
 which he might reply that Matilda , if compel to quit her husband , 
 should never want the home and subsistence of a gentlewoman , he repair 
 to the house   a handsome house in a quiet street   temporarily occupy 
 by the french lady . a tall chasseur , in full costume , open the door - a 
 page usher he into the drawing - room . he see a lady - young - and 
 with all the grace of a Parisieune in her manner - who , after some 
 exquisitely - turn phrase of excuse , show he   as a testimonial 
 of the intimacy between herself and Madame Hammond   a letter she have 
 receive from Matilda , in a very heart - break , filial strain , full 
 of profession of penitence - of a passionate desire for her father 's 
 forgiveness - but far from complain of Jasper , or hint at the idea 
 of desert a spouse with whom , but for the haunt remembrance of a 
 beloved parent , her lot would be bl indeed . whatever of pathos be 
 deficient in the letter , the french lady supply by such apparent fine 
 feeling , and by so many touch little trait of Matilda 's remorse , 
 that Darrell 's heart be soften in spite of his reason . he go away , 
 however , say very little , and intend to call no more . but 
 another note come . the french lady have receive a letter from a mutual 
 friend - " Matilda , " she fear , " be dangerously ill . " this take he 
 again to the house , and the poor french lady seem so agitated by the 
 news she have hear - and yet so desirous not to exaggerate nor alarm he 
 needlessly , that Darrell suspect his daughter be really die , and 
 become nervously anxious himself for the next report . thus , about three 
 or four visit in all necessarily follow the first one . then Darrell 
 abruptly close the intercourse , and could not be induce to call again . 
 not that he for an instant suspect that this amiable lady , who speak 
 so becomingly , and whose manner be so high - breed , be other than the 
 well - bear Baroness she call herself , and look to be , but partly 
 because , in the last interview , the charming Parisienne have appear a 
 little to forget Matilda 's alarming illness , in a not forward but still 
 coquettish desire to centre his attention more upon herself ; and the 
 moment she do so , he take a dislike to she which he have not before 
 conceive ; and partly because his feeling have recover the first 
 effect which the vision of a penitent , pin , die daughter could not 
 fail to produce , his experience of Matilda 's duplicity and falsehood 
 make he discredit the penitence , the pining , and the dying . the 
 Baroness might not wilfully be deceive he - Matilda might be wilfully 
 deceive the Baroness . to the next note , therefore , despatch to he 
 by the feeling and elegant foreigner , he reply but by a dry excuse - a 
 stately hint , that family matter could never be satisfactorily 
 discuss except in family council , and that if her friend 's grief or 
 illness be really in any way occasion by a belief in the pain her 
 choice of life might have inflict on himself , it might comfort she to 
 know that that pain have subside , and that his wish for her health and 
 happiness be not less sincere , because henceforth he could neither 
 watch over the one nor administer to the other . to this note , after a 
 day or two , the Baroness reply by a letter so beautifully word , I 
 doubt whether Madame de Sevigne could have write in purer French , or 
 Madame de Steel with a fine felicity of phrase . strip of the grace 
 of diction , the substance be but small : " anxiety for a friend so 
 beloved - so unhappy - more pitied even than before , now that the Baroness 
 have be enable to see how fondly a daughter must idolise a father in 
 the man whom the nation revere ! -   here two line devote to compliment 
 personal   - compel by that anxiety to quit even soon than she have 
 first intend the metropolis of that noble Country , "   c. -   here four 
 line devote to compliment national   - and then proceed through some 
 charming sentence about patriot altar and domestic hearth , the writer 
 suddenly check herself - " would intrude no more on time sublimely 
 dedicate to the Human Race - and conclude with the assurance of 
 sentiment the most distinguee . " little think Darrell that this 
 complimentary stranger , whom he never again beheld , would exercise an 
 influence over that portion of his destiny which then seem to he most 
 secure from evil ; towards which , then , he look for the balm to every 
 wound - the compensation to every loss ! 

 Darrell hear no more of Matilda , till , not long afterwards , her death 
 be announce to he . she have die from exhaustion shortly after give 
 birth to a female child . the news come upon he at a moment ; when , 
 from other cause -   the explanation of which , form no part of his 
 confidence to Alban , it will be convenient to reserve   - his mind be 
 in a state of great affliction and disorder - when he have already bury 
 himself in the solitude of Fawley - ambition resign and the world 
 renounce - and the intelligence sadden and shock he more than 
 it might have do some month before . if , at that moment of utter 
 bereavement , Matilda 's child have be bring to he - give up to he to 
 rear - would he have reject it ? would he have forget that it be a 
 felon 's grandchild ? 

 I dare not say . but his pride be not put to such a trial . one day he 
 receive a packet from Mr. Gotobed , enclose the formal certificate of 
 the infant 's death , which have be present to he by Jasper , who have 
 arrive in London for that melancholy purpose , with which he combine a 
 pecuniary proposition . by the death of Matilda and her only child , the 
 sum of L10,000 absolutely revert to Jasper in the event of Darrell 's 
 decease . as the interest meanwhile be continue to Jasper , that widow 
 mourner suggest " that it would be a great boon to himself and no 
 disadvantage to Darrell if the principal be make over to he at 
 once . he have be bring up originally to commerce . he have abjure all 
 thought of resume such vocation during his wife 's lifetime , out of 
 that consideration for her family and ancient birth which motive 
 of delicacy impose . now that the connection with Mr. Darrell be 
 dissolve , it might be rather a relief than otherwise to that gentleman 
 to know that a son - in - law so displease to he be finally settle , 
 not only in a foreign land , but in a social sphere in which his very 
 existence would soon be ignore by all who could remind Mr. Darrell 
 that his daughter have once a husband . an occasion that might never 
 occur again now present itself . a trading firm at Paris , opulent , but 
 unostentatiously quiet in its mercantile transaction , would accept he 
 as a partner could he bring to it the additional capital of L10,000 . " 
 not without dignity do Jasper add , " that since his connection have be 
 so unhappily distasteful to Mr. Darrell , and since the very payment , 
 each quarter , of the interest on the sum in question must in itself 
 keep alive the unwelcome remembrance of that connection , he have the less 
 scruple in make a proposition which would enable the eminent personage 
 who so disdain his alliance to get rid of he altogether . " Darrell 
 close at once with Jasper 's proposal , please to cut off from his life 
 each tie that could henceforth link it to Jasper 's , nor displease to 
 relieve his hereditary acre from every shilling of the marriage portion 
 which be impose on it as a debt , and associate with memory of 
 unmingled bitterness . accordingly , Mr. Gotobed , take care first 
 to ascertain that the certificate as to the poor child 's death be 
 genuine , accept Jasper 's final release of all claim on Mr. Darrell 's 
 estate . there still , however , remain the L200 a year which Jasper have 
 receive during Matilda 's life , on the tacit condition of remain Mr. 
 Hammond , and not personally address Mr. Darrell . Jasper inquire 
 " if that annuity be to continue ? " Mr. Gotobed refer the inquiry to 
 Darrell , observe that the object for which this extra allowance have 
 be make be render nugatory by the death of Mrs. Hammond and her 
 child ; since Jasper henceforth could have neither power nor pretext to 
 molest Mr. Darrell , and that it could signify but little what name might 
 in future be bear by one whose connection with the Darrell family be 
 wholly dissolve . Darrell impatiently reply , " that nothing have be 
 say as to the withdrawal of the say allowance in case Jasper become 
 a widower , he remain equally entitle , in point of honour , to receive 
 that allowance , or an adequate equivalent . " 

 this answer be intimate to Jasper , that gentleman observe " that it 
 be no more than he have expect from Mr. Darrell 's sense of honour , " 
 and apparently quite satisfied , carry himself and his L10,000 back 
 to Paris . not long after , however , he write to Mr. Gotobed that " Mr. 
 Darrell have allude to an equivalent for the L200 a year allow to 
 he , evidently imply that it be as disagreeable to Mr. Darrell to 
 see that sum enter quarterly in his banker 's book , as it have be 
 to see there the quarterly interest of the L10,000 , so Jasper might be 
 excuse in own that he should prefer an equivalent . the commercial 
 firm to which he be about to attach himself require a somewhat large 
 capital on his part than he have anticipate ,   c. ,   c. without presume 
 to dictate any definite sum , he would observe that L1,500 or even L1000 
 would be of more avail to his view and object in life than an annuity 
 of l200 a year , which , be hold only at will , be not susceptible of 
 a temporary loan . " Darrell , wrap in thought wholly remote from 
 recollection of Jasper , chafe at be thus recall to the sense of 
 that person 's existence write back to the solicitor who transmit 
 to he this message , " that an annuity hold on his word be not to be 
 calculate by Mr. Hammond 's notion of its value . that the L200 a year 
 should therefore be place on the same footing as the l500 a year that 
 have be allow on a capital of L10,000 ; that accordingly it might be 
 hold to represent a principal of L4,000 , for which he enclose a cheque , 
 beg Mr. Gotobed not only to make Mr. Hammond fully understand that 
 there end all possible account or communication between they , but 
 never again to trouble he with any matter whatsoever in reference to 
 affair that be thus finally conclude . " Jasper , receive the L4,000 , 
 leave Darrell and Gotobed in peace till the following year . he then 
 address to Gotobed an exceedingly plausible , business - like letter . 
 " the firm he have enter , in the silk trade , be in the most flourishing 
 state - an opportunity occur to purchase a magnificent mulberry 
 plantation in Provence , with all requisite magnannerie ,   c. , which 
 would yield an immense increase of profit . that if , to insure he a 
 share in this lucrative purchase , Mr. Darrell could accommodate he 
 for a year with a loan of L2,000 or L3,000 , he sanguinely calculate on 
 attain so high a position in the commercial world as , though it 
 could not render the recollection of his alliance more obtrusive to Mr. 
 Darrell , would render it less humiliating . " 

 Mr. Gotobed , in obedience to the peremptory instruction he have receive 
 from his client , do not refer this letter to Darrell , but have 
 occasion at that time to visit Paris on other business , he resolve 
  without call on Mr. Hammond   to institute there some private 
 inquiry - into that rise trader 's prospect and status . he find , on 
 arrival at Paris , these inquiry difficult . no one in either the beau 
 monde or in the haut commerce seem to know anything about this Mr. 
 Jasper Hammond . a few fashionable english roue remember to have 
 see , once or twice during Matilda 's life , and shortly after her 
 decease , a very fine - look man shoot meteoric across some equivocal 
  salon , or lounge in the Champs Elysees , or dining at the Cafe de 
 Paris ; but of late that meteor have vanish . Mr. Gotobed , then anxiously 
 employ a commissioner to gain some information of Mr. Hammond 's 
 firm at the private residence from which Jasper address his letter , 
 ascertain that in that private residence Jasper do not reside . he 
 pay the porter to receive occasional letter , for which he call 
 or send ; and the porter , who be evidently a faithful and discreet 
 functionary , declare his belief that Monsieur Hammond lodge in the 
 house in which he transact business , though where be the house or 
 what be the business , the porter observe , with well - breed imply 
 rebuke , " Monsieur Hammond be too reserved to communicate , he himself 
 too incurious to inquire . " at length , Mr. Gotobed 's business , which be , 
 in fact , a commission from a distressed father to extricate an imprudent 
 son , a mere boy , from some unhappy association , have bring he into 
 the necessity of see person who belong neither to the beau monde 
 nor to the haut commerce , he glean from they the information he 
 desire . Mr. Hammond live in the very heart of a certain circle in 
 Paris , which but few englishman ever penetrate . in that circle Mr. 
 Hammond have , on receive his late wife 's dowry , become the partner in a 
 private gambling hell ; in that hell have be engulf all the monie he 
 have receive - a hell that ought to have prosper with he , if he could 
 have economise his villanous gain . his senior partner in that firm 
 retire into the country with a fine fortune - no doubt the very owner of 
 those mulberry plantation which be now on sale ! but Jasper scatter 
 napoleon fast than any croupier could rake they away . and Jasper 's 
 natural talent for convert solid gold into thin air have be assist 
 by a lady who , in the course of her amiable life , have assist many 
 rich man than Jasper to lodging in St. Pelagie , or cell in the 
  Maison des Fous . with that lady he have become acquaint during the 
 lifetime of his wife , and it be suppose that Matilda 's discovery of 
 this liaison have contribute perhaps to the illness which close in her 
 decease ; the name of that lady be Gabrielle Desinarets . she might 
 still be see daily at the Bois de Boulogne , nightly at opera - house 
 or theatre ; she have apartment in the Chaussee d'Antin far from 
 inaccessible to Mr. Gotobed , if he covet the honour of her 
 acquaintance . but Jasper be less before an admire world . he be 
 suppose now to be connect with another gambling - house of low grade 
 than the last , in which he have contrive to break his own bank and 
 plunder his own till . it be suppose also that he remain good friend 
 with Mademoiselle Desmarets ; but if he visit she at her house , he 
 be never to be see there . in fact , his temper be so uncertain , his 
 courage so dauntless , his strength so prodigious , that gentleman who 
 do not wish to be throw out of the window , or hurl down a staircase , 
 shun any salon or boudoir in which they have a chance to encounter 
 he . Mademoiselle Desmarets have thus be condemn to the painful 
 choice between his society and that of nobody else , or that of anybody 
 else with the rigid privation of his . not be a turtle - dove , she have 
 choose the latter alternative . it be believe , nevertheless , that if 
 Gabrielle Desmarets have know the weakness of a kind sentiment , it be 
 for this turbulent lady - killer ; and that , with a liberality she have 
 never exhibit in any other instance , when she could no long help he 
 to squander , she would still , at a pinch , help he to live ; though , of 
 course , in such a reverse of the normal law of her being , Mademoiselle 
 Desmarets set those bound on her own generosity which she would not 
 have impose upon his , and have say with a sigh : " I could forgive he if 
 he beat I and beggar my friend ! but to beat my friend and to beggar 
 I , - that be not the kind of love which make the world go round ! " 

 scandalise to the last nerve of his respectable system by the 
 information thus glean , Mr. Gotobed return to London . More letter 
 from Jasper - become urgent , and at last even insolent - Mr. Gotobed 
 worry into a reply , write back shortly " that he could not even 
 communicate such application to Mr. Darrell , and that he must 
 peremptorily decline all further intercourse , epistolary or personal , 
 with Mr. Hammond . " 

 Darrell , on return from one of the occasional ramble on the 
 Continent , " remote , unfriended , melancholy , " by which he break the 
 monotony of his Fawley life , find a letter from Jasper , not fawn , 
 but abrupt , address to himself , complain of Mr. Gotobed 's improper 
 tone , request pecuniary assistance , and intimate that he could in 
 return communicate to Mr. Darrell an intelligence that would give he 
 more joy than all his wealth could purchase . Darrell enclose that 
 note to Mr. Gotobed ; Mr. Gotobed come down to Fawley to make those 
 revelation of Jasper 's mode of life which be too delicate - or too 
 much the reverse of delicate - to commit to paper . great as Darrell 's 
 disgust at the memory of Jasper have hitherto be , it may well be 
 ' conceive how much more bitter become that memory now . no answer be , 
 of course , vouchsafe to Jasper , who , after another extremely forcible 
 appeal for money , and equally enigmatical boast of the pleasurable 
 information it be in his power to bestow , relapse into sullen silence . 

 one day , somewhat more than five year after Matilda 's death , Darrell , 
 come in from his musing walk , find a stranger wait for he . 
 this stranger be William Losely , return from penal exile ; and while 
 Darrell , on hear this announcement , stand mute with haughty wonder 
 that such a visitor could cross the threshold of his father 's house , 
 the convict begin what seem to darrell a story equally audacious 
 and incomprehensible - the infant Matilda have bear to Jasper , and the 
 certificate of whose death have be so ceremoniously produce and so 
 prudently attest , live still ! send out to nurse as soon as bear , the 
 nurse have in her charge another babe , and this last be the child who 
 have die and be bury as Matilda Hammond 's . the elder losely go 
 on to stammer out a hope that his son be not at the time aware of the 
 fraudulent exchange , but have be deceive by the nurse - that it have not 
 be a premeditated imposture of his own to obtain his wife 's fortune . 

 when Darrell come to this part of his story , Alban Morley 's face grow 
 more seriously interested . " stop ! " he say ; " William losely assure you 
 of his own conviction that this strange tale be true . what proof do 
 he volunteer ? " 

 " proof ! death , man , do you think that at such moment I be but a 
 bloodless lawyer , to question and cross examine ? I could but bid the 
 impostor leave the house which his foot pollute . " 

 Alban heave a sigh , and murmur , too low for Darrell to overhear , 
 " Poor Willy ! " then aloud : " but , my dear friend , bear with I one moment . 
 suppose that , by the art of this diabolical Jasper , the exchange really 
 have be effect , and a child to your ancient line live still , would 
 it not be a solace , a comfort - " 

 " Comfort ! " cry Darrell , " comfort in the perpetuation of infamy ! the 
 line I promise my father to restore to its rank in the land , to be 
 renew in the grandchild of a felon ! - in the child of the yet 
 viler sharp of a hell ! you , gentleman and soldier , call that 
 thought - ' comfort ! ' o Alban ! - out on you ! Fie ! fie ! no ! - leave such a 
 thought to the lip of a William Losely ! he indeed , clasp his 
 hand , falter forth some such word ; he seem to count on my forlorn 
 privation of kith and kindre - no heir to my wealth - no representative 
 of my race - would I deprive myself of - ay - your very word - of a 
 solace - a comfort ! he ask I , at least , to inquire . " 

 " and you answer ? " 

 " answer so as to quell and crush in the bud all hope in the success 
 of so flagrant a falsehold - answer : ' why inquire ? know that , even if 
 your tale be true , I have no heir , no representative , no descendant 
 in the child of Jasper - the grandchild of William - Losely . I can at least 
 leave my wealth to the son of Charles Haughton . true , Charles Haughton 
 be a spendthrift , a gamester ; but he be neither a professional cheat 
 nor a convict felon . ' " 

 " you say that - oh , Darrell ! " 

 the Colonel check himself . but for Charles Haughton , the spendthrift 
 and gamester , would William Losely have be the convict felon ? 
 he check that thought , and hurry on : " and how do William losely 
 reply ? " 

 " he make no reply - he skulk away without a word . " Darrell then 
 proceed to relate the interview which Jasper have force on he at 
 Fawley during Lionel 's visit there - on Jasper 's part an attempt to tell 
 the same tale as William have tell - on Darrell 's part , the same scornful 
 refusal to hear it out . " and , " add Darrell , " the man , find it thus 
 impossible to dupe my reason , have the inconceivable meanness to apply to 
 I for alm . I could not well show the disdain in which I hold himself 
 and his story than in recognise his plea as a mendicant . I throw my 
 purse at his foot , and so leave he . 

 " but , " continue Darrell , his brow grow dark and dark - " but wild 
 and monstrous as the story be , still the idea that it might be true - a 
 supposition which derive its sole strength from the character of Jasper 
 Losely - from the interest he have in the suppose death of a child 
 that alone stand between himself and the money he long to grasp - an 
 interest which cease when the money itself be go , or rather change 
 into the counter - interest of prove a life that , he think , would 
 re - establish a hold on I - still , I say , an idea that the story might 
 be true would force itself on my fear , and if so , though my resolution 
 never to acknowledge the child of Jasper Losely as a representative , or 
 even as a daughter , of my house , would of course be immovable - yet 
 it would become my duty to see that her infancy be shelter , her 
 childhood rear , her youth guard , her existence amply provide for . " 

 " right - your plain duty , " say Alban bluntly . " intricate sometimes be 
 the obligation impose on we as gentleman ; ' noblesse oblige ' be a 
 motto which involve puzzle for a casuist ; but our duty as man be 
 plain - the idea very properly haunt you - and - " 

 " and I hasten to exorcise the spectre . I leave England - I go to the 
 french town in which poor Matilda die - I could not , of course , make 
 formal or avowed inquiry of a nature to raise into importance the very 
 conspiracy   if conspiracy there be   which threaten I . but I see 
 the physician who have attend both my daughter and her child - I seek 
 those who have see they both when living - see they both when dead . 
 the doubt on my mind be dispel - not a pretext leave for my own 
 self - torment . the only person needful in evidence whom I fail to see 
 be the nurse to whom the infant have be send . she live in a village 
 some mile from the town - I call at her house - she be out . I leave 
 word I should call the next day - I do so - she have abscond . I might , 
 doubtless , have trace she , but to what end if she be merely Jasper 's 
 minion and tool ? do not she very flight prove her guilt and her terror ? 
 indirectly I inquire into her antecedent and character . the inquiry 
 open a field of conjecture , from which I hasten to turn my eye . 
 this woman have a sister who have be in the service of Gabrielle 
 Desmarets , and Gabrielle Desmarets have be in the neighbourhood during 
 my poor daughter 's life - time , and just after my daughter 's death . and 
 the nurse have have two infant under her charge ; the nurse have remove 
 with one of they to Paris - and Gabrielle Desmarets live in Paris - and , 
 o Alban , if there be really in flesh and life a child by Jasper Losely , 
 to be force upon my purse or my pity - be it his child , not by the 
 ill - fat Matilda , but by the vile woman for whom Matilda , even in the 
 first year of wedlock , be desert ? conceive how credulity itself 
 would shrink appal from the horrible snare ! - I to acknowledge , adopt , 
 proclaim as the last of the Darrells , the adulterous offspring of a 
 Jasper Losely and a Gabrielle Desmarets ! - or , when I be in my grave , 
 some claim advance upon the sum settle by my marriage article on 
 Matilda 's issue , and which , if a child survive , could not have be 
 legally transfer to its father - a claim with witness suborn - a 
 claim that might be fraudulently establish - a claim that would 
 leave the representative - not indeed of my land and wealth , but , more 
 precious far , of my lineage and blood - in - in the person of - of - " 

 Darrell pause , almost stifle , and become so pale that Alban start 
 from his seat in alarm . 

 " it be nothing , " resume Darrell , faintly , " and , ill or well , I must 
 finish this subject now , so that we need not reopen it . " 

 " I remain abroad , as you know , for some year . during that time two 
 or three letter from Jasper Losely be forward to I ; the late in 
 date more insolent than all precede one . it contain demand as if 
 they be right , and insinuate threat of public exposure , reflect 
 on myself and my pride : ' he be my son - in - law after all , and if he come 
 to disgrace , the world should know the tie . ' enough . this be all I 
 know until the man who now , it seem , thrust himself forward as 
 Jasper Losely 's friend or agent , speak to I the other night at Mrs. 
 Haughton 's . that man you have see , and you say that he - " 

 " Represents Jasper 's poverty as extreme ; his temper unscrupulous and 
 desperate ; that he be capable of any amount of scandal or violence . it 
 seem that though at Paris he have   Poole believe   still preserve the 
 name of Hammond , yet that in England he have resume that of losely ; 
 and seem by Poole 's date of the time at which he , Poole , make Jasper 's 
 acquaintance , to have do so after his baffle attempt on you 
 at Fawley - whether in so do he intimate the commencement of 
 hostility , or whether , as be more likely , the sharp find it 
 convenient to have one name in one country , and one in another , ' tis 
 useless to inquire ; enough that the identity between the Hammond 
 who marry poor Matilda , and the Jasper losely whose father be 
 transport , that unscrupulous rogue have no long any care to conceal . 
 it be true that the revelation of this identity would now be of slight 
 moment to a man of the world - as thick - skinned as myself , for instance ; 
 but to you it would be disagreeable - there be no deny that - and 
 therefore , in short , when Mr. Poole advise a compromise , by which 
 Jasper could be secure from want and yourself from annoyance , I be of 
 the same opinion as Mr. Poole be . " 

 " you be ? " 

 " certainly . my dear Darrell , if in your secret heart there be something 
 so gall in the thought that the man who have marry your daughter , 
 though without your consent , be not merely the commonplace adventurer 
 whom the world suppose , but the son of that poor dear - I mean 
 that rascal who be transport , Jasper , too , himself a cheat and a 
 sharp - if this gall you so , that you have conceal the true fact 
 from myself , your old friend , till this day - if it have cost you even 
 now so sharp a pang to divulge the true name of that Mr. Hammond , whom 
 our society never see , whom even gossip have forget in connection 
 with yourself - how intolerable would be your suffering to have this man 
 watch for you in the street , some wretched girl in his hand , and 
 cry out , ' a penny for your son - in - law and your grandchild ! ' Pardon 
 I - I must be blunt . you can give he to the police - send he to the 
 treadmill . do that mend the matter ? or , bad still , suppose the 
 man commit some crime that fill all the newspaper with his life and 
 adventure , include of course his runaway marriage with the famous Guy 
 Darrell 's heiress - no one would blame you , no one respect you less ; but 
 do not tell I that you would not be glad to save your daughter 's name 
 from be couple with such a miscreant 's at the price of half your 
 fortune . " 

 " Alban ' " say Darrell , gloomily , " you can say nothing on this score that 
 have not be consider by myself . but the man have so place the matter , 
 that honour itself forbid I to bargain with he for the price of my 
 name . so long as he threaten , I can not buy off a threat ; so long as he 
 persist in a story by which he would establish a claim on I on behalf 
 of a child whom I have every motive as well as every reason to disown 
 as inherit my blood - whatever I bestow on himself would seem like 
 hush - money to suppress that claim . " 

 " of course - I understand , and entirely agree with you . but if the man 
 retract all threat , confess his imposture in respect to this pretended 
 offspring , and consent to retire for life to a distant colony , upon an 
 annuity that may suffice for his want , but leave no surplus beyond , to 
 render more glare his vice , or more effective his power of evil ; if 
 this could be arrange between Mr. Poole and myself , I think that your 
 peace might be permanently secure without the slight sacrifice of 
 honour . will you leave the matter in my hand on this assurance - that 
 I will not give this person a farthing except on the condition I have 
 premise ? " 

 " on these condition , yes , and most gratefully , " say Darrell . " do 
 what you will ; but one favour more : never again speak to I   unless 
 absolutely compel   in reference to this dark portion of my inner 
 life . " 

 Alban press his friend 's hand , and both be silent for some moment . 
 then say the Colonel , with an attempt at cheerfulness : " darrell , more 
 than ever now do I see that the new house at Fawley , so long suspend , 
 must be finish . Marry again you must ! - you can never banish old 
 remembrance unless you can supplant they by fresh hope . " 

 " I feel it - I know it , " cry Darrell , passionately . and oh ! if one 
 remembrance could be wrench away ! but it shall - it shall ! " 

 " ah ! " think Alban - " the remembrance of his former conjugal life ! - a 
 remembrance which might well make the young and the bold Benedict 
 shrink from the hazard of a similar experiment . " 

 in proportion to the delicacy , the earnestness , the depth of a man 's 
 nature , will there be a something in his character which no male friend 
 can conceive , and a something in the secret of his life which no male 
 friend can ever conjecture . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

  our old FRIEND the pocket - cannibal evince unexpected patriotism and 
  PHILOSOPHICAL moderation , content with a steak off his OWN 
  SUCCULENT FRIEND in the AIRS of his own native SKY . 

 Colonel Morley have a second interview with Mr. Poole . it need not 
 Alban 's knowledge of the world to discover that Poole be no partial 
 friend to Jasper Losely ; that , for some reason or other , Poole be no 
 less anxious than the Colonel to get that formidable client , whose cause 
 he so warmly advocate , pension and pack off into the region most 
 remote from Great Britain in which a spirit hitherto so restless might 
 consent to settle . and although Mr. Poole have evidently take offence 
 at Mr. Darrell 's discourteous rebuff of his amiable intention , yet 
 no grudge against Darrell furnish a motive for conduct equal to his 
 christian desire that Darrell 's peace should be purchase by Losely 's 
 perpetual exile . accordingly , Colonel Morley take leave , with a 
 well - place confidence in Poole 's determination to do all in his power 
 to induce Jasper to listen to reason . the Colonel have hop to learn 
 something from Poole of the eld Losely 's present residence and 
 resource . Poole , as we know , could give he there no information . the 
 Colonel also fail to ascertain any particular relative to that 
 female pretender on whose behalf Jasper found his principal claim to 
 Darrell 's aid . and so great be Poole 's embarrassment in reply to all 
 question on that score - where be the young person ? with whom have she 
 live ? what be she like ? could the Colonel see she , and hear her own 
 tale ? - that Alban entertain a strong suspicion that no such girl be 
 in existence ; that she be a pure fiction and myth ; or that , if Jasper 
 be compel to produce some petticoate fair , she would be an artful 
 baggage hire for the occasion . 

 Poole wait Jasper 's next visit with impatience and sanguine delight . 
 he have not a doubt that the ruffian would cheerfully consent to allow 
 that , on further inquiry , he find he have be deceive in his belief of 
 Sophy 's parentage , and that there be nothing in England so peculiarly 
 sacred to his heart , but what he might consent to breathe the free air 
 of columbian sky , or even to share the shepherd 's harmless life 
 amidst the pasture of auriferous Australia ! but , to Poole 's ineffable 
 consternation , Jasper declare sullenly that he would not consent to 
 expatriate himself merely for the sake of living . 

 " I be not so young as I be , " say the bravo ; " I do not   speak of year , 
 but feel . I have not the same energy ; once I have high spirit - they 
 be break ; once I have hope - I have none : I be not up to exertion ; I 
 have get into lazy habit . to go into new scene , form new plan , live 
 in a horrid raw new world , everybody round I bustle and push - no ! 
 that may suit your thin dapper light Hop - o'-my - thumb ! look at I ! see 
 how I have increase in weight the last five year - all solid bone and 
 muscle . I defy any four drayman to move I an inch if I be not in the 
 mind to it ; and to be blow off to the antipode as if I be the down 
 of a pestilent thistle , I be not in the mind for that , dolly Poole ! " 

 " Hum ! " say Poole , try to smile . " this be funny talk . you always 
 be a funny fellow . but I be quite sure , from Colonel Morley 's decide 
 manner , that you can get nothing from Darrell if you choose to remain in 
 England . " 

 " well , when I have nothing else leave , I may go to Darrell myself , and 
 have that matter out with he . at present I be not up to it . dolly , 
 do not   bore ! " and the bravo , open a jaw strong enough for any 
 carnivorous animal , yawn - yawn much as a bored tiger do in the 
 face of a philosophical student of savage manner in the Zoological 
 Gardens . 

 " Bore ! " say Poole , astounded and recoil from that expand jaw . 
 " but I should have think no subject could bore you less than the 
 consideration of how you be to live ? " 

 " why , dolly , I have learn to be easily content , and you see at 
 present I live upon you . " 

 " yes , " groan Poole , " but that can not   go on for ever ; and , besides , you 
 promise that you would leave I in peace as soon as I have get Darrell 
 to provide for you . " 

 " so I will . Zounds , sir , do you doubt my word ? so I will . but I do not 
 call exile ' a provision ' - Basta ! I understand from you that Colonel 
 Morley offer to restore the niggardly l200 a year Darrell formerly 
 allow to I , to be pay monthly or weekly , through some agent in Van 
 Diemen 's land , or some such uncomfortable half - way house to Eternity , 
 that be not even in the Atlas when I study geography at school . but 
 l200 a year be exactly my income in England , pay weekly too , by your 
 agreeable self , with whom it be a pleasure to talk over old time . 
 therefore that proposal be out of the question . tell Colonel Morley , 
 with my compliment , that if he will double the sum , and leave I to 
 spend it where I please , I scorn haggle , and say ' do . ' and as to the 
 girl , since I can not find she   which , on penalty of be thresh to 
 a mummy , you will take care not to let out , I would agree to leave Mr. 
 Darrell free to disown she . but be you such a dolt as not to see that I 
 put the ace of trump on my adversary 's pitiful deuce , if I depose 
 that my own child be not my own child , when all I get for it be what 
 I equally get out of you , with my ace of trump still in my hand ? 
 Basta ! - I say again Basta ! it be evidently an object to Darrell to get 
 rid of all fear that Sophy should ever pounce upon he tooth and claw : 
 if he be so convinced that she be not his daughter 's child , why make 
 a point of my saying that I tell he a fib , when I say she be ? 
 evidently , too , he be afraid of my power to harass and annoy he ; or 
 why make it a point that I shall only nibble his cheese in a trap at the 
 world 's end , star at by bushman , and wombat , and rattlesnake , and 
 alligator , and other american citizen or british settler ! l200 a 
 year , and my wife 's father a millionaire ! the offer be an insult . ponder 
 this : put on the screw ; make they come to term which I can do they the 
 honour to accept ; meanwhile , I will trouble you for my four sovereign . " 

 Poole have the chagrin to report to the Colonel , Jasper 's refusal of the 
 term propose , and to state the counter - proposition he be commission 
 to make . Alban be at first surprised , not conjecture the mean of 
 supply , in his native land , which Jasper have secure in the coffer 
 of Poole himself . on sound the unhappy negotiator as to Jasper 's 
 reason , he surmise , however , one part of the truth - viz . , that Jasper 
 build hope of well term precisely on the fact that term have be 
 offer to he at all ; and this induce Alban almost to regret that he 
 have make any such overture , and to believe that Darrell 's repugnance to 
 open the door of conciliation a single inch to so sturdy a mendicant be 
 more worldly - wise than Alban have originally suppose . yet partly , even 
 for Darrell 's own security and peace , from that persuasion of his own 
 power of management which a consummate man of the world be apt to 
 entertain , and partly from a strong curiosity to see the audacious soil 
 of that poor dear rascal Willy , and examine himself into the fact he 
 assert , and the object he aim at , Alban bade Poole inform Jasper 
 that Colonel Morley would be quite willing to convince he , in a 
 personal interview , of the impossibility of accede to the proposition 
 Jasper have make ; and that he should be still more willing to see the 
 young person whom Jasper assert to be the child of his marriage . 

 Jasper , after a moment 's moody deliberation , decline to meet Colonel 
 Morley , actuate to some extent in that refusal by the sensitive vanity 
 which once have give he delight , and now only give he pain . meet 
 thus - alter , fall , imbrute - the fine gentleman whose calm eye 
 have quell he in the widow 's drawing - room in his day of comparative 
 splendour - that in itself be distasteful to the degenerated bravo . but 
 he feel as if he should be at more disadvantage in point of argument 
 with a cool and wary representative of Darrell 's interest , than he 
 should be even with Darrell himself . and unable to produce the child 
 whom he arrogate the right to obtrude , he should be but expose to a 
 fire of cross - question without a shot in his own locker . accordingly 
 he decline , point - blank , to see Colonel Morley ; and declare that the 
 term he himself have propose be the low he would accept . " tell 
 Colonel Morley , however , that if negotiation fail , I shall not fail , 
 soon or later , to argue my view of the point in dispute with my kind 
 father - in - law , and in person . " 

 " yes , hang it ! " cry Poole , exasperate ; " go and see Darrell yourself . 
 he be easily find . " 

 " ay , " answer Jasper , with the hard look of his downcast sidelong 
 eye - " Ay ; some day or other it may come to that . I would rather not , if 
 possible . I might not keep my temper . it be not merely a matter of money 
 between we , if we two meet . there be affront to efface . banish his 
 house like a mangy dog - treat by a jackanape lawyer like the dirt 
 in the kennel ! the Loselys , I suspect , would have look down on the 
 darrell fifty year ago ; and what if my father be bear out of wedlock , 
 be the blood not the same ? do the breed dwindle down for want of a 
 gold ring and priest ? look at I . no ; not what I now be ; not even as 
 you see I five year ago ; but as I leapt into youth ! be I bear to cast 
 sum and nib pen as a City clerk ? aha , my poor father , you be wrong 
 there ! blood will out ! mad devil , indeed , be a racer in a citizen 's gig ! 
 Spavined , and wind - gall , and foundered - let the brute go at last to 
 the knocker ; but by his eye , and his pluck , and his bone , the brute 
 show the stock that he come from ! " 

 dolly open his eye and - blink . never in his gaudy day have Jasper 
 half so openly reveal what , perhaps , have be always a sore in his 
 pride ; and his outburst now may possibly aid the reader to a subtler 
 comprehension of the arrogance , and levity , and egotism , which 
 accompany his insensibility to honour , and have convert his very 
 claim to the blood of a gentleman into an excuse for a cynic 's disdain 
 of the very virtue for which a gentleman be most desirous of obtain 
 credit . but by a very ordinary process in the human mind , as Jasper have 
 fall low and low into the lee and dreg of fortune , his pride have 
 more prominently emerge from the group of the other and gaudy vice , 
 by which , in health and high spirit , it have be push aside and 
 outshone . 

 " Humph ! " say Poole , after a pause . " if Darrell be as uncivil to you as 
 he be to I , I do not   wonder that you owe he a grudge . but even if you 
 do lose temper in see he , it might rather do good than not . you can 
 make yourself cursedly unpleasant if you choose it ; and perhaps you will 
 have a well chance of get your own term if they see you can bite 
 as well as bark ! Set at Darrell , and worry he ; it be not fair to worry 
 nobody but I ! " 

 " dolly , do not   bluster ! if I could stand at his door , or stop he in the 
 street , with the girl in my hand , your advice would be judicious . 
 the world would not care for a row between a rich man and a penniless 
 son - in - law . but an interesting young lady , who call he grandfather , 
 and fall at his knee , - he could not send she to hard labour ; and if 
 he do not believe in her birth , let the thing but just get into the 
 newspaper , and there be plenty who will : and I should be in a very 
 different position for treat . ' tis just because , if I meet darrell 
 again , I do not   wish that again it should be all bark and no bite , that 
 I postpone the interview . all your own laziness - exert yourself and find 
 the girl . " 

 " but I can not   find the girl , and you know it . and I tell you what , Mr. 
 Losely , Colonel Morley , who be a very shrewd man , do not believe in 
 the girl 's existence . " 

 " do not he ! I begin to doubt it myself . but , at all event , you can not 
 doubt of mine , and I be grateful for your ; and since you have give I 
 the trouble of come here to no purpose , I may as well take the next 
 week 's pay in advance - four sovereign if you please , Dolly Poole . " 




 CHAPTER XII . 

  another HALT - change of horse - and a turn on the road . 

 Colonel Morley , on learn that Jasper decline a personal conference 
 with himself , and that the proposal of an interview with Jasper 's 
 allege daughter be equally scout or put aside , become still more 
 confirm in his belief that Jasper have not yet be blest with a 
 daughter sufficiently artful to produce . and please to think that the 
 sharp be thus unprovide with a means of annoyance , which , skilfully 
 manage , might have be seriously harass ; and convince that when 
 Jasper find no farth notice take of he , he himself ' would be 
 compel to petition for the term he now reject , the Colonel dryly 
 inform Poole " that his interference be at an end ; that if Mr. Losely , 
 either through himself , or through Mr. Poole , or any one else , presume 
 to address Mr. Darrell direct , the offer previously make would be 
 peremptorily and irrevocably withdraw . I myself , " add the Colonel , 
 ' shall be go abroad very shortly for the rest of the summer ; and 
 should Mr. Losely , in the mean while , think well of a proposal which 
 secure he from want , I refer he to Mr. Darrell 's solicitor . to that 
 proposal , accord to your account of his destitution , he must come 
 soon or later ; and I be glad to see that he have in yourself so 
 judicious an adviser " - a compliment which by no mean console the 
 miserable Poole . 

 in the brief word , Alban inform Darrell of his persuasion that 
 Jasper be not only without evidence to support a daughter 's claim , 
 but that the daughter herself be still in that part of Virgil 's Hades 
 appropriate to soul that have not yet appear upon the upper earth ; 
 and that Jasper himself , although hold back , as might be naturally 
 expect , in the hope of condition more to his taste , have only to be 
 leave quietly to his own meditation in order to recognise the advantage 
 of emigration . another l100 a - year or so , it be true , he might bargain 
 for , and such a demand might be worth concede . but , on the whole , 
 Alban congratulate Darrell upon the probability of hear very little 
 more of the son - in - law , and no more at all of the son - in - law 's daughter . 

 Darrell make no comment nor reply . a grateful look , a warm pressure of 
 the hand , and , when the subject be change , a clear brow and livelier 
 smile , thank the English Alban well than all word . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

  COLONEL MORLEY show that it be not without reason that he enjoy 
  his reputation of know something about EVERYBODY . 

 " well meet , " say Darrell , the day after Alban have convey to he the 
 comforting assurance which have take one thorn from his side - disperse 
 one cloud in his evening sky . " well meet , " say Darrell , encounter the 
 Colonel a few pace from his own door . " pray walk with I as far as the 
 New Road . I have promise Lionel to visit the studio of an artist friend 
 of his , in whom he choose to find a Raffaele , and in whom I suppose , 
 at the price of truth , I shall be urbanely compel to compliment a 
 dauber . " 

 " do you speak of Frank Vance ? " 

 " the same . " 

 " you could not visit a worthy man , nor compliment a more promising 
 artist . vance be one of the few who unite gusto and patience , fancy and 
 brushwork . his female head , in especial , be exquisite , though they 
 be all , I confess , too much like one another . the man himself be a 
 thoroughly fine fellow . he have be much make of in good society , and 
 remain unspoiled . you will find his manner rather off - hand , the reverse 
 of shy ; partly , perhaps , because he have in himself the racy freshness 
 and boldness which he give to his colour ; partly , perhaps , also , 
 because he have in his art the self - esteem that patricians take from 
 their pedigree , and shake a duke by the hand to prevent the duke 
 hold out to he a finger . " 

 " good , " say Darrell , with his rare , manly laugh . " be shy myself , I 
 like man who meet one half - way . I see that we shall be at our ease with 
 each other . " 

 " and perhaps still more ' when I tell you that he be connect with 
 an old Eton friend of ours , and derive no great benefit from that 
 connection ; you remember poor Sidney Branthwaite ? " 

 " to be sure . he and I be great friend at Eton somewhat in the same 
 position of pride and poverty . of all the boy in the school we two 
 have the least pocket - money . poor Branthwaite ! I lose sight of he 
 afterwards . he go into the Church , get only a curacy , and die young . " 

 " and leave a son , poor than himself , who marry Frank Vance 's sister . " 

 " you do not   say so . the Branthwaites be of good old family ; what be Mr. 
 Vance 's ? " 

 " respectable enough . Vance 's father be one of those clever man who have 
 too many string to their bow . he , too , be a painter ; but he be also 
 a man of letter , in a sort of a way - have a share in a journal , in which 
 he write Criticisms on the Fine Arts . a musical composer , too . 

 " rather a fine gentleman , I suspect , with a wife who be rather a fine 
 lady . their house be much frequent by artist and literary man : old 
 Vance , in short , be hospitable - his wife extravagant . believe that 
 posterity would do that justice to his picture which his contemporary 
 refuse , Vance leave to his family no other provision . after sell his 
 picture and pay his debt , there be just enough leave to bury he . 
 fortunately , Sir - - - - , the great painter of that day , have already 
 conceive a liking to Frank Vance - then a mere boy - who have show genius 
 from an infant , as all true artist do . Sir - - - - take he into his 
 studio and give he lesson . it would have be unlike Sir - - - - , who 
 be open - hearted but close - fisted , to give anything else . but the boy 
 contrive to support his mother and sister . that fellow , who be now as 
 arrogant a stickler for the dignity of art as you or my Lord Chancellor 
 may be for that of the bar , stoop then to deal clandestinely with 
 fancy shop , and imitate Watteau on fan . I have two hand - screen that 
 he paint for a shop in Rathbone Place . I suppose he may have get 
 ten shilling for they , and now any admirer of Frank 's would give l100 
 apiece for they . " 

 " that be the true soul in which genius lodge , and out of which fire 
 spring , " cry Darrell cordially . " give I the fire that lurk in 
 the flint , and answer by light the stroke of the hard steel . I be glad 
 Lionel have win a friend in such a man . Sidney Branthwaite 's son marry 
 Vance 's sister - after Vance have win reputation ? " 

 " no ; while Vance be still a boy . Young Arthur Branthwaite be an 
 orphan . if he have any live relation , they be too poor to assist 
 he . he write poetry much praise by the critic   they deserve to be 
 hang , those critic !   - scribble , I suppose , in old Vance 's journal ; 
 see Mary Vance a little before her father die ; fall in love with she ; 
 and on the strength of a volume of verse , in which the critic all 
 solemnly depose to his surpass rich - of imagination , rush to the 
 altar , and sacrifice a wife to the Muses ! those villanous critic 
 will have a dark account to render in the next world ! Poor Arthur 
 Branthwaite ! for the sake of our old friend , his father , I buy a 
 copy of his little volume . little as the volume be , I could not read it 
 through . " 

 " what ! - below contempt ? " 

 " on the contrary , above comprehension ! all poetry praise by critic 
 now - a - day be as hard to understand as a hieroglyphic . I own a weakness 
 for Pope and common sense . I could keep up with our age as far as Byron ; 
 after he I be throw out . however , Arthur be declare by the critic 
 to be a great improvement on Byron - more ' poetical in form ' - more 
 ' aesthetically artistic ' - more ' objective ' or ' subjective '   I be sure I 
 forget which ; but it be one or the other , nonsensical , and not english 
 in his view of man and nature . very possibly . all I know be - I buy 
 the poem , but could not read they ; the critic read they , but do not 
 buy . all that Frank Vance could make by paint hand - screen and fan 
 and album - scrap , he send , I believe , to the poor poet ; but I fear it 
 do not suffice . Arthur , I suspect , must have be publish another 
 volume on his own account . I see a Monody on something or other , 
 by Arthur Branthwaite , advertise , and no doubt Frank 's fan and 
 hand - screen must have melt into the printer 's bill . but the Monody 
 never appear : the poet die , his young wife too . Frank Vance remain 
 a bachelor , and sneer at gentility - abhor poet - be insult if 
 you promise posthumous fame - get the good price he can for his 
 picture - and be proud to be think a miser . here we be at his door . " 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

  ROMANTIC LOVE PATHOLOGICALLY REGARDED BY FRANK VANCE and ALBAN 
  MORLEY . 

 Vance be before his easel , Lionel look over his shoulder . never be 
 darrell more genial than he be that day to Frank Vance . the two man 
 take to each other at once , and talk as familiarly as if the retire 
 lawyer and the rise painter be old fellow - traveller along the same 
 road of life . Darrell be really an exquisite judge of art , and his 
 praise be the more gratifying because discriminate . of course he give 
 the due meed of panegyric to the female head , by which the artist have 
 become so renowned . Lionel take his kinsman aside , and , with a mournful 
 expression of face , show he the portrait by which , all those vary 
 ideal have be suggest - the portrait of Sophy as Titania . 

 " and that be Lionel , " say the artist , point to the rough outline of 
 Bottom . 

 " Pish ! " say Lionel , angrily . then turn to darrell : " this be the 
 Sophy we have fail to find , sir - be it not a lovely face ? " 

 " it be indeed , " say Darrell . " but that nameless refinement in 
 expression - that arch yet tender elegance in the simple , watchful 
 attitude - these , Mr. Vance , must be your addition to the original . " 

 " no , I assure you , sir , " say Lionel : " besides that elegance , that 
 refinement , there be a delicacy in the look and air of that child to 
 which Vance fail to do justice . own it , Frank . " 

 " reassure yourself , Mr. Darrell , " say Vance , " of any fear which 
 Lionel 's enthusiasm might excite . he tell I that Titania be in 
 America ; yet , after all , I would rather he see she again - no cure for 
 love at first sight like a second sight of the beloved object after a 
 long absence . " 

 DARRELL   somewhat gravely . - " a hazardous remedy - it might kill , if it 
 do not cure . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " I suspect , from Vance 's manner , that he have test its 
 efficacy on his own person . " 

 LIONEL . - " no , mon Colonel - I will answer for Vance . he in love ! never . " 

 vance colour - give a touch to the nose of a roman senator in the 
 famous classical picture which he be then paint for a merchant at 
 Manchester - and make no reply . Darrell look at the artist with a sharp 
 and search glance . 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " then all the more credit to Vance for his intuitive 
 perception of philosophical truth . suppose , my dear Lionel , that we 
 light , one idle day , on a beautiful novel , a glow romance - suppose 
 that , by chance , we be tear from the book in the middle of the 
 interest - we remain under the spell of the illusion - we recall the 
 scene - we try to guess what should have be the sequel - we think that 
 no romance ever be so captivating , simply because we be not allow 
 to conclude it . well , if , some year afterwards , the romance fall again 
 in our way , and we open at the page where we leave off , we cry , in the 
 maturity of our sober judgment , ' mawkish stuff ! - be this the same thing 
 that I once think so beautiful ? - how one 's taste do alter ! ' " 

 DARRELL . - " do it not depend on the age in which one begin the 
 romance ? " 

 lionel . - " rather , let I think , sir , upon the real depth of the 
 interest - the true beauty of the - " 

 VANCE   interrupting . - " Heroine ? - not at all , Lionel . I once fall in 
 love - incredible as it may seem to you - nine year ago last January . I 
 be too poor then to aspire to any young lady 's hand - therefore I do 
 not tell my love , but ' let concealment , ' et cetera , et cetera . she 
 go away with her mamma to complete her education on the continent . I 
 remain ' patience on a monument . ' she be always before my eye - the 
 slender , shyest creature just eighteen . I never have an idea that 
 she could grow any old , less slender , or less shy . well , four year 
 afterwards   just before we make our excursion into Surrey , Lionel , she 
 return to England , still unmarried . I go to a party at which I know 
 she be to be - see she , and be cure . " 

 " bad case of small - pox , or what ? " ask the Colonel , smile . 

 vance - " Nay ; everybody say she be extremely improved - that be the 
 mischief - she have improve herself out of my fancy . I have be faithful 
 as wax to one settle impression , and when I see a fine , full - form , 
 young Frenchified lady , quite at her ease , arm with eyeglass and 
 bouquet and bustle , away go my dream of the slim blushing maiden . 
 the Colonel be quite right , Lionel ; the romance once suspend , ' tis 
 a haunt remembrance till throw again in our way , but complete 
 disillusion if we try to renew it ; though I swear that in my case the 
 interest be deep , and the heroine improve in her beauty . so with you 
 and that dear little creature . see she again , and you will tease , I no 
 more to give you that portrait of Titania at watch over Bottom 's soft 
 slumber . all a Midsummer Night 's Dream , Lionel . Titania fade back into 
 the arm of Oberon , and would not be Titania if you could make her - Mrs. 
 Bottom . " 




 CHAPTER XV . 

  even COLONEL MORLEY ,   know EVERYBODY and everything , be puzzled 
  when it come to the plain question - " what will he do with it ? " 

 " I be delighted with Vance , " say Darrell , when he and the Colonel be 
 again walk arm - in - arm . " his be not one of those meagre intellect 
 which have nothing to spare out of the professional line . he have humour . 
 humour - strength 's rich superfluity . " 

 " I like your definition , " say the Colonel . " and humour in Vance , though 
 fantastic , be not without subtlety . there be much real kindness in his 
 obvious design to quiz Lionel out of that silly enthusiasm for - " 

 " for a pretty child , rear up to be a stroll player , " interrupt 
 Darrell . " do not   call it silly enthusiasm . I call it chivalrous 
 compassion . be it other than compassion , it would not be 
 enthusiasm - it would be degradation . but do you believe , then , that 
 Vance 's confession of first love , and its cure , be but a whimsical 
 invention ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " not so . many a grave truth be speak jestingly . I 
 have no doubt that , allow for the pardonable exaggeration of a 
  raconteur , Vance be narrate an episode in his own life . " 

 DARRELL . - " do you think that a grown man , who have ever really feel love , 
 can make a jest of it , and to mere acquaintance ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " yes ; if he be so thoroughly cure , that he have make a 
 jest of it to himself . and the more lightly he speak of it , perhaps 
 the more solemnly at one time he feel it . Levity be his revenge on the 
 passion that fool he . " 

 DARRELL . - " you be evidently an experienced philosopher in the lore of 
 such folly . ' consulta insapientis sapientiae . ' yet I can scarcely 
 believe that you have ever be in love . " 

 " yes , I have , " say the Colonel bluntly , " and very often ! everybody 
 at my age have - except yourself . so like a man 's observation , that , " 
 continue the Colonel with much tartness . " no man ever think another 
 man capable of a profound and romantic sentiment ! " 

 DARRELL . - " true ; I own my shallow fault , and beg you ten thousand 
 pardon . so then you really believe , from your own experience , that 
 there be much in Vance 's theory and your own very happy illustration ? 
 could we , after many year , turn back to the romance at the page at 
 which we leave off , we should - " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " not care a straw to read on ! certainly , half the 
 peculiar charm of a person beloved must be ascribe to locality and 
 circumstance . " 

 DARRELL . - " I do not   quite understand you . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " then , as you like my former illustration , I will 
 explain myself by another one more homely . in a room to which you be 
 accustomed there be a piece of furniture , or an ornament , which so 
 exactly suit the place that you say : ' the prettiest thing I ever see ! ' 
 you go away - you return - the piece of furniture or the ornament have be 
 move into another room . you see it there , and you say : ' bless I , 
 be that the thing I so much admire ! ' the strange room do not suit 
 it - lose its old association and accessory , it have lose its charm . 
 so it be with human being - see in one place , the place would be 
 nothing without they ; see in another , the place without they would be 
 all the well ! " 

 DARRELL   musingly   - " there be some puzzle in life which resemble the 
 riddle a child ask you to solve . your imagination can not descend low 
 enough for the right guess . yet , when you be tell , you be oblige to 
 say , ' how clever ! ' man live to learn . " 

 " since you have arrive at that conviction , " reply Colonel Morley , 
 amuse by his friend 's gravity , " I hope that you will rest satisfied 
 with the experience of Vance and myself ; and that if you have a mind 
 to propose to one of the young lady whose merit we have already 
 discuss , you will not deem it necessary to try what effect a prolonged 
 absence might produce on your good resolution . " 

 " no ! " say Darrell , with sudden animation . " before three day be over 
 my mind shall be make up . " " Bravo ! - as to whom of the three you would 
 ask in marriage ? " 

 " or as to the idea of ever marry again . Adieu , I be go to knock at 
 that door . " 

 " Mr. Vyvyan 's ! ah , be it so , indeed ? verily , you be a true Dare - all . " 

 " do not be alarm . I go afterwards to an exhibition with Lady Adela , 
 and I dine with the Carr Viponts . my choice be not yet make , and my hand 
 still free . " 

 " his hand still free ! " mutter the Colonel , pursue his walk alone . 
 " yes - but three day hence - o - what will he do with it ? " 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

  GUY DARRELL 's decision . 

 Guy Darrell return home from Carr Vipont 's dinner at a late hour . 
 on his table be a note from Lady Adela 's father , cordially invite 
 Darrell to pass the next week at his country - house ; London be now 
 empty fast . on the table too be a parcel , contain a book which 
 Darrell have lend to Miss Vyvyan some week ago , and a note from herself . 
 in call at her father 's house that morning , he have learn that Mr. 
 Vyvyan have suddenly resolve to take she into Switzerland , with the view 
 of pass the next winter in Italy . the room be fill with lounger 
 of both sex . Darrell have stay but a short time . the leave - taking have 
 be somewhat formal - Flora unusually silent . he open her note , and 
 read the first line listlessly ; those that follow , with a change 
 cheek and an earnest eye . he lay down the note very gently , again take 
 it up and reperuse . then he hold it to the candle , and it drop 
 from his hand in tinder . " the innocent child , " murmur he , with a soft 
 paternal tenderness ; ' she know not what she write . " he begin to pace 
 the room with his habitual restlessness when in solitary thought - often 
 stop - often sigh heavily . at length his face clear - his lip 
 become firmly set . he summon his favourite servant . " mill , " say he , 
 " I shall leave town on horseback as soon as the sun rise . put what I 
 may require for a day or two into the saddle - bag . possibly , however I 
 may be back by dinner - time . call I at five o'clock , and then go round 
 to the stable . I shall require no groom to attend I . " 

 the next morning , while the street be desert , no house as yet 
 astir , but the sun bright , the air fresh , Guy Darrell ride from his 
 door . he do not return the same day , nor the next , nor at all . but , 
 late in the evening of the second day , his horse , reek hot and 
 evidently hard - ridden , stop at the porch of Fawley Manor - House ; and 
 Darrell fling himself from the saddle , and into Fairthorn 's arm . " back 
 again - back again - and to leave no more ! " say he , look round ; " spe 
 et Fortuna valete ! " 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

  a MAN 'S LETTER - UNSATISFACTORY and PROVOKING as a MAN 's letter 
  always ARE . 

 guy darrell to COLONEL MORLEY . 

 Fawley Manor - House , August 11 , 18 - . I have decide , my dear Alban . I 
 do not take three day to do so , though the third day may be just over 
 ere you learn my decision . I shall never marry again : I abandon that 
 last dream of decline year . my object in return to the London 
 world be to try whether I could not find , amongst the fairest and 
 most attractive woman that the world produce - at least to an English 
 eye - some one who could inspire I with that singleness of affection 
 which could alone justify the hope that I might win in return a wife 's 
 esteem and a contented home . that object be now finally relinquish , 
 and with it all idea of resume the life of city . I might have 
 re - enter a political career , have I first secure to myself a mind 
 sufficiently serene and healthful for duty that need the concentration 
 of thought and desire . such a state of mind I can not secure . I have 
 strive for it ; I be baffle . it be say that politic be a jealous 
 mistress - that they require the whole man . the saying be not invariably 
 true in the application it commonly receive - that is , a politician 
 may have some other employment of intellect , which rather enlarge his 
 power than distract their political us . successful politician have 
 unite with great parliamentary toil and triumph legal occupation or 
 learn study . but politic do require that the heart should be free , 
 and at peace from all more absorbing private anxiety - from the gnawing 
 of a memory or a care , which dull ambition and paralyse energy . in 
 this sense politic do require the whole man . if I return to politic 
 now , I should fail to they , and they to I . I feel that the brief 
 interval between I and the grave have need of repose : I find that repose 
 here . I have therefore give the necessary order to dismiss the pompous 
 retinue which I leave behind I , and instruct my agent to sell my 
 London house for whatever it may fetch . I be unwilling to sell it 
 before - unwilling to abandon the hope , however faint , that I might 
 yet regain strength for action . but the very struggle to obtain such 
 strength leave I exhausted more . 

 you may believe that it be not without a pang , less of pride than of 
 remorse , that I resign unfulfilled the object towards which all my 
 early life be so resolutely shape . the house I promise my father 
 to re - found dy to dust in my grave . to my father 's blood no heir to my 
 wealth can trace . yet it be a consolation to think that Lionel Haughton 
 be one on whom my father would have smile approvingly . at my death , 
 therefore , at least the old name will not die ; Lionel Haughton will take 
 and be worthy to bear it . strange weakness of mine , you will say ; but I 
 can not endure the thought that the old name should be quite blot out 
 of the land . I trust that Lionel may early form a suitable and happy 
 marriage . sure that he will not choose ignobly , I impose no fetter on 
 his choice . 

 one word only on that hateful subject , confide so tardily to your 
 friendship , leave so thankfully to your discretion . now that I have once 
 more bury myself in Fawley , it be very unlikely that the man it pain 
 I to name will seek I here . if he do , he can not molest I as if 
 I be in the London world . continue , then , I pray you , to leave he 
 alone . and , in adopt your own shrewd belief , that after all there be 
 no such child as he pretend to claim , my mind become tranquillise on 
 all that part of my private grief . 

 Farewell , old school - friend ! here , so far as I can foretell - here , where 
 my life begin , it return , when Heaven please , to close . here I could 
 not ask you to visit I : what be rest to I would be loss of time to 
 you . but in my late and vain attempt to re - enter that existence in which 
 you have calmly and wisely gather round yourself , " all that should 
 accompany old age - honour , love , obedience , troop of friend " - nothing 
 so repay the effort - nothing now so pleasantly remain to 
 recollection - as the brief renewal of that easy commune which man like 
 I never know , save with those whose laughter bring back to they a gale 
 from the old playground . " Vive , vale ; " I will not add , " Sis memor 
 mei . " so many my obligation to your kindness , that you will be force 
 to remember I whenever you recall the not " painful subject " of early 
 friendship and lasting gratitude . recall only those when remind of GUY 
 DARRELL . 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

  no COINAGE in circulation SO fluctuate in value as the worth of a 
  MARRIAGEABLE MAN . 

 Colonel Morley be not surprised   that , we know , he could not be , by any 
 fresh experience of human waywardness and caprice , but much disturb 
 and much vex by the unexpected nature of Darrell 's communication . 
 scheme for Darrell 's future lead become plan of his own . talk with his 
 old school - fellow have , within the last three month , enter into the 
 pleasure of his age . Darrell 's abrupt and final renunciation of this 
 social world make at once a void in the business of Alban 's mind , and in 
 the affection of Alban 's heart . and no adequate reason assign for 
 so sudden a flight and so morbid a resolve ! some tormenting 
 remembrance - some rankle grief - distinct from those of which Alban be 
 cognisant , from those in which he have be consult , be imply , but 
 by vague and general hint . but what be the remembrance or the grief , 
 Alban Morley , who know everything , be quite persuade that Darrell 
 would never suffer he to know . could it be in any way connect with 
 those three young lady to whom Darrell 's attention have be so 
 perversely impartial ? the Colonel do not fail to observe that to those 
 young lady Darrell 's letter make no allusion . be it not possible 
 that he have really feel for one of they a deep sentiment than a man 
 advanced in year ever like to own even to his near friend - hazard 
 a proposal , and meet with a rebuff ? if so , Alban conjecture the 
 female culprit by whom the sentiment have be inspire , and the rebuff 
 administer . " that mischievous kitten , Flora Vyvyan , " growl the 
 Colonel . " I always feel that she have the claw of a tigress under her 
  patte de velour ! " rouse by this suspicion , he sally forth to call 
 on the Vyvyans . Mr. Vyvyan , a widower , one of those quiet gentleman - like 
 man who sit much in the drawing - room and like receive morning 
 visitor , be at home to he . " so Darrell have leave town for the season , " 
 say the Colonel , push straight to the point . 

 " yes , " say Mr. Vyvyan . " I have a note from he this morning to say he 
 have renounce all hope of - " 

 " what ? " cry the Colonel . 

 " join we in Switzerland . I be so sorry . Flora still more sorry . she 
 be accustomed to have her own way , and she have set her heart on hear 
 Darrell read ' manfred ' in sight of the Jungfrau ! " 

 " um ! " say the Colonel . " what might be sport to she might be death to 
 he . a man at his age be not too old to fall in love with a young lady 
 of her . but he be too old not to be extremely ridiculous to such a 
 young lady if he do . " 

 " Colonel Morley - Fie ! " cry an angry voice behind he . Flora have 
 enter the room unobserve . her face be much flushed , and her eyelid 
 look as if tear have lately swell beneath they , and be swell 
 still . 

 " what have I say to merit your rebuke ? " ask the Colonel composedly . 

 " say ! couple the thought of ridicule with the name of Mr. Darrell ! " 

 " take care , Morley , " say Mr. Vyvyan , laugh . " Flora be positively 
 superstitious in her respect for Guy Darrell ; and you can not offend she 
 more than by imply that he be mortal . Nay , child , it be very natural . 
 quite apart from his fame , there be something in that man 's familiar 
 talk , or rather , perhaps , in the very sound of his voice , which make 
 most other society seem flat and insipid . 

 " I feel it myself . and when Flora 's young admirer flutter and babble 
 round she - just after Darrell have quit his chair beside she - they 
 seem very poor company . I be sure , Flora , " continue Vyvyan kindly , 
 " that the mere acquaintance of such a man have do you much good ; and 
 I be now in great hope that , whenever you marry , it will be a man of 
 sense . " 

 " um ! " again say the Colonel , eye Flora aslant , but with much 
 attention . " how I wish , for my friend 's sake , that he be of an age 
 which inspire Miss Vyvyan with less - veneration . " 

 Flora turn she back on the Colonel , look out of the window , and her 
 small foot beat the ground with nervous irritation . 

 " it be give out that Darrell intend to marry again , " say Mr. 
 Vyvyan . " a man of that sort require a very superior highly - educate 
 woman ; and if Miss Carr Vipont have be a little more of his age she 
 would have just suit he . but I be patriot enough to hope that he will 
 remain single , and have no wife but his country , like Mr. Pitt . " the 
 Colonel have now satisfy his curiosity , and assure himself that 
 Darrell be , there at least , no reject suitor , rise and approach 
 Flora to make peace and to take leave . as he hold out his hand , he be 
 strike with the change in a countenance usually so gay in its aspect - it 
 speak of more than dejection , it betray distress ; when she take his 
 hand , she retain it , and look into his eye wistfully ; evidently 
 there be something on her mind which she wish to express and do not 
 know how . at length she say in a whisper : " you be Mr. Darrell 's most 
 intimate friend ; I have hear he say so ; shall you see he soon ? " 

 " I fear not ; but why ? " 

 " why ? you , his friend ; do you not perceive that he be not happy ? I , a 
 mere stranger , see it at the first . you should cheer and comfort he ; 
 you have that right - it be a noble privilege . " 

 " my dear young lady , " say the Colonel , touch , " you have a well 
 heart than I think for . it be true Darrell be not a happy man ; but can 
 you give I any message that might cheer he more than an old bachelor 's 
 commonplace exhortation to take heart , forget the rain of yesterday , 
 and hope for some gleam of sun on the morrow ? " 

 " no , " say Flora , sadly , " it would be a presumption indeed in I , to 
 affect the consoler 's part ; but " -   her lip quiver   - " but if I may 
 judge by his letter , I may never see he again . " 

 " his letter ! he have write to you , then , as well as to your father ? " 

 " yes , " say Flora , confused and colouring , " a few line in answer to 
 a silly note of mine ; yes , tell he that I shall never forget his kind 
 counsel , his delicate , indulgent construction of - of - in short , tell 
 he my father be right , and that I shall be well and wiser all my life 
 for the few short week in which I have know Guy Darrell . " 

 " what secret be you two whisper there ? " ask Mr. Vyvyan from his 
 easy - chair . 

 " ask she ten year hence , " say the Colonel , as he retreat to the 
 door . " the fair leaf in the flower be the last that the bud will 
 disclose . " 

 from Mr. Vyvyan the Colonel go to Lord - - - 's . his lordship have also 
 hear from Darrell that morning ; Darrell decline the invitation to 
  - - Hall ; business at Fawley . Lady Adela have bear the disappointment 
 with her wonte serenity of temper , and have go out shopping . Darrell 
 have certainly not offer his hand in that quarter ; have he do 
 so - whether refuse or accept - all person yet leave in London would 
 have hear the news . thence the Colonel repair to Carr Vipont 's . Lady 
 Selina be at home and exceedingly cross . Carr have be astonish by a 
 letter from Mr. Darrell , date Fawley - leave town for the season without 
 even call to take leave - a most eccentric man . she fear his 
 head be a little touch - that he know it , but do not like to own 
 it - perhaps the doctor have tell he he must keep quiet , and not excite 
 himself with politic . " I have think , " say Lady Selina , " that he 
 might have feel a grow attachment for Honoria ; and consider the 
 disparity of year , and that Honoria certainly might marry any one , 
 he be too proud to incur the risk of refusal . but I will tell you 
 in confidence , as a relation and dear friend , that Honoria have a 
 very superior mind , and might have overlook the mere age : congenial 
 taste - you understand . but on think it all over , I begin to doubt 
 whether that be the true reason for his run away in this wild sort 
 of manner . my maid tell I that his house - steward call to say that 
 the establishment be to be break up . that look as if he have resign 
 London for good ; just , too , when , Carr say , the CRISIS , so long put 
 off , be sure to burst on we . I be quite sick of clever man - one never 
 know how to trust they ; if they be not dishonest they be eccentric ! I 
 have just be tell Honoria that clever man be , after all , the most 
 tiresome husband . well , what make you so silent ? what do you say ? why 
 do not   you speak ? " 

 " I be slowly recover from my shock , " say the Colonel . " so Darrell 
 shirk the CRISIS , and have not even hint a preference for Honoria , 
 the very girl in all London that would have make he a safe , rational 
 companion . I tell he so , and he never deny it . but it be a comfort to 
 think he be no loss . old monster ! " 

 " Nay , " say Lady Selina , mollify by so much sympathy , " I do not   say he 
 be no loss . honestly speak - between ourselves - I think he be a very 
 great loss . an alliance between he and Honoria would have unite all 
 the vipont influence . Lord Montfort have the great confidence in 
 Darrell ; and if this CRISIS come , it be absolutely necessary for the 
 Vipont interest that it should find somebody who can speak . really , my 
 dear Colonel Morley , you , who have such an influence over this very odd 
 man , should exert it now . one must not be over - nice in time of CRISIS ; 
 the country be at stake , Cousin Alban . " 

 " I will do my good , " say the Colonel ; " I be quite aware that an 
 alliance which would secure Darrell 's talent to the House of Vipont , 
 and the House of Vipont to Darrell 's talent , would - but ' tis no 
 use talk , we must not sacrifice Honoria even on the altar of her 
 country 's interest ! " 

 " Sacrifice ! nonsense ! the man be not young certainly , but then what a 
 grand creature , and so clever . " 

 " Clever - yes ! but that be your very objection to he five minute ago . " 

 " I forget the CRISIS . - one do not   want clever man every day , but there 
 be day when one do want they ! " 

 " I envy you that aphorism . but from what you now imply , I fear that 
 Honoria may have allow her thought to settle upon what may never take 
 place ; and if so , she may fret . " 

 " Fret ! a daughter of mine fret ! - and of all my daughter , Honoria ! a 
 girl of the well - discipline mind ! fret ! what a word ! - vulgar ! " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " so it be ; I blush for it ; but let we understand each 
 other . if Darrell propose for Honoria , you think , ambition apart , she 
 would esteem he sufficiently for a decide preference . " 

 LADY SELINA , - " if that be his doubt , re - assure he . he be shy - man of 
 genius be ; Honoria would esteem he ! till he have actually propose it 
 would compromise she to say more even to you . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " and if that be not the doubt , and if I ascertain that 
 Darrell have no idea of propose , Honoria would - " 

 LADY SELINA . - " despise he . ah , I see by your countenance that you think 
 I should prepare she . be it so , frankly ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " frankly , then . I think Guy Darrell , like many other 
 man , have be so long in make up his mind to marry again that he have 
 lose the right moment , and will never find it . " 

 Lady Selina smell at her vinaigrette , and reply in her soft , 
 affectedest , civil , and crushing manner : " POOR - DEAR - OLD MAN ! " 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

  MAN be not permit , with ULTIMATE IMPUNITY , to EXASPERATE the 
  envy and insult the misery of those around HIM , BY a SYSTEMATIC 
  PERSEVERANCE in WILFUL - CELIBACY . in VAIN MAY he scheme , in the 
  marriage of injure friend , to PROVIDE ARM - CHAIRS , and foot - STOOLS , 
  and prattling baby for the luxurious delectation of his INDOLENT 
  AGE . the AVENGING EUMENIDES   be themselves ancient virgin 
  NEGLECTED   shall humble his insolence , BAFFLE his project , and 
  condemn his decline year to the HORRORS of SOLITUDE , - RARELY even 
  waken his SOUL to the GRACE of REPENTANCE . 

 the Colonel , before return home , drop into the Clubs , and 
 take care to give to Darrell 's sudden disappearance a plausible and 
 commonplace construction . the season be just over . Darrell have go to 
 the country . the town establishment be break up , because the house 
 in Carlton Gardens be to be sell . Darrell do not like the 
 situation - find the air relax - Park Lane or Grosvenor Square be 
 on high ground . besides , the staircase be bad for a house of such 
 pretension - not suit to large party . next season Darrell might be 
 in a position when he would have to give large party ,   c. ,   c. as no 
 one be inclined to suppose that a man will retire from public life just 
 when he have a chance of office , so the Clubs take Alban Morley 's remark 
 unsuspiciously , and generally agree that Darrell show great tact in 
 absent himself from town during the transition state of politic that 
 always precede a CRISIS , and that it be quite clear that he calculate 
 on play a great part when the CRISIS be over , by find his house 
 have grow too small for he . thus pave the way to Darrell 's easy 
 return to the world , should he repent of his retreat   a chance which 
 Alban by no mean dismiss from his reckoning , the Colonel return 
 home to find his nephew George await he there . the scholarly 
 clergyman have ensconce himself in the back drawing - room , fit up as 
 a library , and be make free with the book . " what have you there , 
 George ? " ask the Colonel , after shake he by the hand . " you seem 
 quite absorb in its content , and would not have notice my presence 
 but for Gyp 's bark . " 

 " a volume of poem I never chance to meet before , full of true genius . " 

 " bless I , poor Arthur Branthwaite 's poem . and you be positively 
 read those - not induce to do so by respect for his father ? could you 
 make head or tail of they ? " 

 " there be a class of poetry which displease middle age by the very 
 attribute which render it charming to the young ; for each generation 
 have a youth with idiosyncrasy peculiar to itself , and a peculiar 
 poetry by which those idiosyncrasy be express . " 

 here George be begin to grow metaphysical , and somewhat german , 
 when his uncle 's face assume an expression which can only be compare 
 to that of a man who dread a very severe and long operation . George 
 humanely hasten to relieve his mind . 

 " but I will not bore you at present . " 

 " thank you , " say the Colonel , brighten up . 

 " perhaps you will lend I the book . I be go down to Lady Montfort 's 
 by - and - by , and I can read it by the way . " 

 " yes , I will lend it to you till next season . let I have it again then , 
 to put on the table when Frank Vance come to breakfast with I . the 
 poet be his brother - in - law ; and though , for that reason , poet and 
 poetry be a sore subject with Frank , yet the last time he breakfast 
 here , I feel , by the shake of his hand in parting , that he feel please 
 by a mark of respect to all that be leave of poor Arthur Branthwaite . so 
 you be go to Lady Montfort ? ask she why she chit I ! " 

 " my dear uncle ! you know how seclude her life be at present ; but she 
 have charge I to assure you of her unalterable regard for you ; and 
 whenever her health and spirit be somewhat more recovered , I have 
 no doubt that she will ask you to give she the occasion to make that 
 assurance in person . " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " can her health and spirit continue so long affect 
 by grief for the loss of that distant acquaintance whom the law call 
 her husband ? " 

 GEORGE . - " she be very far from well , and her spirit be certainly much 
 break . and now , uncle , for the little favour I come to ask . since you 
 present I to Mr. Darrell , he kindly send I two or three invitation 
 to dinner , which my frequent absence from town would not allow I to 
 accept . I ought to call on he ; and , as I feel ashamed not to have do 
 so before , I wish you would accompany I to his house . one happy word 
 from you would save I a relapse into stutter . when I want to apologise 
 I always stutter . " 

 " darrell have leave town , " say the Colonel , roughly , " you have miss an 
 opportunity that will never occur again . the most charming companion ; an 
 intellect so manly , yet so sweet ! I shall never find such another . " and 
 for the first time in thirty year a tear stole to Alban Morley 's eye . 

 GEORGE . - " when do he leave town ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " three day ago . " 

 GEORGE . - " three day ago ! and for the continent again ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " no ; for the Hermitage , George . I have such a letter 
 from he ! you know how many year he have be absent from the world . 
 when , this year , he re - appear , he and I grow more intimate than we have 
 ever be since we have leave school ; for though the same capital hold we 
 before , he be then too occupy for much familiarity with an idle man 
 like I . but just when I be intertwine what be leave of my life with 
 the bright thread of his , he snap the web asunder : he quit this 
 London world again ; say he will return to it no more . " 

 GEORGE . - " yet I do hear that he propose to renew his parliamentary 
 career ; nay , that he be about to form a second marriage , with Honoria 
 Vipont ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY . - " mere gossip - not true . no , he will never marry again . 
 three day ago I think it certain that he would - certain that I should 
 find for my old age a nook in his home - the easy chair in his social 
 circle ; that my daily newspaper would have a fresh interest , in the 
 praise of his name or the report of his speech ; that I should walk 
 proudly into White 's , sure to hear there of Guy Darrell ; that I should 
 keep from misanthropical rust my dry knowledge of life , plan 
 shrewd panegyric to he of a young happy wife , need all his 
 indulgence - panegyric to she of the high - minded sensitive man , claim 
 tender respect and delicate soothe ; - that thus , day by day , I should 
 have make more pleasant the home in which I should have plant myself , 
 and find in his child boy to lecture and girl to spoil . do not   be 
 jealous , George . I like your wife , I love your little one , and you 
 will inherit all I have to leave . but to an old bachelor , who would keep 
 young to the last , there be no place so sunny as the hearth of an 
 old school - friend . but my house of card be blow down - talk of it no 
 more - ' tis a painful subject . you meet Lionel Haughton here the last time 
 you call - how do you like he ! " 

 " very much indeed . " 

 " well , then , since you can not call on Darrell , call on he . " 

 GEORGE   with animation . - " it be just what I mean to do - what be his 
 address ? " 

 COLONEL MORLEY - " there be his card - take it . he be here last night 
 to inquire if I know where Darrell have go , though no one in his 
 household , nor I either , suspect till this morning that Darrell have 
 leave town for good . you will find Lionel at home , for I send he word I 
 would call . but really I be not up to it now . tell he from I that Mr. 
 Darrell will not return to Carlton Gardens this season , and be go to 
 Fawley . at present Lionel need not know more - you understand ? and now , 
 my dear George , good day . " 




 CHAPTER XX . 

  each generation have its own CRITICAL canon in POETRY as well as in 
  POLITICAL CREEDS , FINANCIAL SYSTEMS , or WHATEVER other changeable 
  matter of TASTE be call " settle question " and " fix opinion . " 

 George , muse much over all that his uncle have say respect Darrell , 
 take his way to Lionel 's lodging . the young man receive he with the 
 cordial greeting due from Darrell 's kinsman to Colonel Morley 's nephew , 
 but temper by the respect no less due to the distinction and the 
 calling of the eloquent preacher . 

 Lionel be perceptibly affect by learn that Darrell have thus 
 suddenly return to the gloomy beech - wood of Fawley ; and he evince 
 his anxious interest in his benefactor with so much spontaneous 
 tenderness of feel that George , as if in sympathy , warm into the 
 same theme . " I can well conceive , " say he , " your affection for Mr. 
 Darrell . I remember , when I be a boy , how powerfully he impress I , 
 though I see but little of he . he be then in the zenith of his career , 
 and have but few moment to give to a boy like I ; but the ring of his 
 voice and the flash of his eye send I back to school , dream of fame 
 and intent on prize . I spend part of one Easter vacation at his house 
 in town ; he bid his son , who be my schoolfellow , invite I . " 

 LIONEL . - " you know his son ? how Mr. Darrell have feel that loss ! " 

 GEORGE . - " Heaven often veil its most provident mercy in what to man 
 seem its stern infliction . that poor boy must have change his 
 whole nature , if his life have not , to a father like Mr. Darrell , 
 occasion grief sharp than his death . " 

 LIONEL . - " you amaze I . Mr. Darrell speak of he as a boy of great 
 promise . " 

 GEORGE . - " he have that kind of energy which to a father convey the idea 
 of promise , and which might deceive those old than himself - a fine 
 bright - eye , bold - tongue boy , with just enough awe of his father to 
 bridle his bad quality before he . " 

 LIONEL . - " what be those ? " 

 GEORGE . - " Headstrong arrogance - relentless cruelty . he have a pride which 
 would have sham his father out of pride , have Guy Darrell detect its 
 nature - purse pride ! I remember his father say to I with a half - laugh : 
 ' my boy must not be gall and mortify as I be every hour at 
 school - clothe patch and pocket empty . ' and so , out of mistaken 
 kindness , Mr. Darrell run into the opposite extreme , and the son be 
 proud , not of his father 's fame , but of his father 's money , and withal 
 not generous , nor exactly extravagant , but use money as power - power 
 that allow he to insult an equal or to buy a slave . in a word , his 
 nickname at school be ' Sir Giles Overreach . ' his death be the result 
 of his strange passion for torment other . he have a fag who could 
 not swim , and who have the great terror of the water ; and it be while 
 drive this child into the river out of his depth that cramp seize 
 himself , and he be drown . yes , when I think what that boy would 
 have be as a man , succeed to Darrell 's wealth - and have darrell 
 persevere   as he would , perhaps , if the boy have live   in his public 
 career - to the rank and title he would probably have acquire and 
 bequeath - again , I say , in man 's affliction be often Heaven 's mercy . " 

 Lionel listen aghast . George continue : " would that I could speak as 
 plainly to Mr. Darrell himself ! for we find constantly in the world that 
 there be no error that mislead we like the error that be half a truth 
 wrench from the other half ; and nowhere be such an error so common as 
 when man apply it to the judgment of some event in his own life , and 
 separate calamity from consolation . " 

 LIONEL . - " true ; but who could have the heart to tell a mourning father 
 that his dead son be worthless ? " 

 GEORGE . - " alas ! my young friend , the preacher must sometimes harden his 
 own heart if he would strike home to another 's soul . but I be not sure 
 that Mr. Darrell would need so cruel a kindness . I believe that his 
 clear intellect must have divine some portion of his son 's nature 
 which enable he to bear the loss with fortitude . and he do bear it 
 bravely . but now , Mr. Haughton , if you have the rest of the day free , 
 I be about to make you an unceremonious proposition for its disposal . a 
 lady who know Mr. Darrell when she be very young have - a strong desire 
 to form your acquaintance . she reside on the bank of the Thames , a 
 little above Twickenham . I have promise to call on she this evening . 
 shall we dine together at Richmond ? and afterwards we can take a boat to 
 her villa . " 

 Lionel at once accept , think so little of the lady that he do not 
 even ask her name . he be pleased to have a companion with whom he could 
 talk of Darrell . he ask but delay to write a few line of affectionate 
 inquiry to his kinsman at Fawley , and , while he write , George take out 
 Arthur Branthwaite 's poem , and resume their perusal . Lionel have 
 seal his letter , George extend the book to he . " here be some 
 remarkable poem by a brother - in - law of that remarkable artist , Frank 
 Vance . " 

 " Frank Vance ! true , he have a brother - in - law a poet . I admire Frank so 
 much ; and , though he profess to sneer at poetry , he be so associate 
 in my mind with poetical image that I be prepossess beforehand in 
 favour of all that bring he , despite himself , in connection with 
 poetry . " 

 " tell I then , " say George , point out a passage in the volume , " what 
 you think of these line . my good uncle would call they gibberish . I be 
 not sure that I can construe they ; but when I be your age , I think I 
 could - what say you ? " 

 Lionel glance . " Exquisite indeed ! - nothing can be clear - they express 
 exactly a sentiment in myself that I could never explain . " 

 " just so , " say George , laugh . " Youth have a sentiment that it can not 
 explain , and the sentiment be express in a form of poetry that middle 
 age can not construe . it be true that poetry of the grand order interest 
 equally all age ; but the world ever throw out a poetry not of the 
 grandest ; not mean to be durable - not mean to be universal , but 
 follow the shift and change of human sentiment , and just like those 
 pretty sundial form by flower , which bloom to tell the hour , open 
 their bud to tell it , and , tell it , fade themselves from time . " 

 not listen to the critic , Lionel continue to read the poem , 
 exclaim , " how exquisite ! - how true ! " 




 CHAPTER XXI . 

  in LIFE , as in ART , the BEAUTIFUL move in CURVES . 

 they have din . - George Morley take the oar , and the boat cut 
 through the dance of wave flush by the golden sunset . beautiful 
 river ! which might furnish the english tale - teller with legend wild 
 as those cull on shore lick by Hydaspes , and sweet as those which 
 Cephisus ever blend with the song of nightingale and the breath of 
 violet ! but what true english poet ever name thee , o Father Thames , 
 without a melodious tribute ? and what child ever while away summer 
 noon along thy grassy bank , nor hallow thy remembrance among the 
 fairy day of life ? 

 Silently Lionel bent over the side of the gliding boat ; his mind carry 
 back to the same soft stream five year ago . how vast a space in his 
 short existence those five year seem to fill ! and how distant from 
 the young man , rich in the attribute of wealth , arm with each 
 weapon of distinction , seem the hour when the boy have groan aloud , 
 " ' Fortune be so far , Fame so impossible ! ' " far and far yet than 
 his present worldly station from his past seem the image that have 
 first call forth in his breast the dreamy sentiment , which the 
 sternest of we in after life never , utterly forget . passion rage and 
 vanish , and when all their storm be go , yea , it may be , at the verge 
 of the very grave , we look back and see like a star the female face , 
 even though it be a child 's , that first set we vaguely wonder at the 
 charm in a human presence , at the void in a smile withdraw ! how many of 
 we could recall a Beatrice through the gap of ruin hope , see , as by 
 the Florentine , on the earth a guileless infant , in the heaven a spirit 
 glorify ! yes - Laura be an affectation - Beatrice a reality ! 

 George 's voice break somewhat distastefully on Lionel 's reverie . " we 
 near our destination , and you have not ask I even the name of the 
 lady to whom you be to render homage . it be Lady Montfort , widow to the 
 last Marquess . you have no doubt hear Mr. Darrell speak of she ? " 

 " never Mr. Darrell - Colonel Morley often . and in the world I have hear 
 she cite as perhaps the handsome , and certainly the haughty , woman 
 in England . " 

 " never hear Mr. Darrell mention she ! that be strange indeed , " say 
 George Morley , catch at Lionel 's first word , and unnotice his 
 after comment . " she be much in his house as a child , share in his 
 daughter 's education . " 

 " perhaps for that very reason he shun her name . never but once do 
 I hear he allude to his daughter ; nor can I wonder at that , if it be 
 true , as I have be tell by people who seem to know very little of the 
 particular , that , while yet scarcely out of the nursery , she flee from 
 his house with some low adventurer - a Mr. Hammond - die abroad the first 
 year of that unhappy marriage . " 

 " yes , that be the correct outline of the story ; and , as you guess , it 
 explain why Mr. Darrell avoid mention of one , whom he associate 
 with his daughter 's name ; though , if you desire a theme dear to Lady 
 Montfort , you can select none that more interest her grateful heart 
 than praise of the man who save her mother from penury , and secure to 
 herself the accomplishment and instruction which have be her chief 
 solace . " 

 " chief solace ! be she not happy with Lord Montfort ? what sort of man 
 be he ? " 

 " I owe to Lord Montfort the living I hold , and I can remember the good 
 quality alone of a benefactor . if Lady Montfort be not happy with 
 he , it be just to both to say that she never complain . but there be 
 much in Lady Montfort 's character which the Marquess apparently fail 
 to appreciate ; at all event , they have little in common , and what be 
 call Lady Montfort 's haughtiness be perhaps but the dignity with 
 which a woman of grand nature check the pity that would debase she - the 
 admiration that would sully - guard her own beauty , and protect she 
 husband 's name . here we be . will you stay for a few minute in the 
 boat , while I go to prepare Lady Montfort for your visit ? " 

 George leapt ashore , and Lionel remain under the covert of mighty 
 willow that dip their leaf into the wave . look through the 
 green interstice of the foliage , he see at the far end of the lawn , 
 on a curve bank by which the glitter tide shoot oblique , a simple 
 arbour - an arbour like that from which he have look upon summer star 
 five year ago - not so densely cover with the honeysuckle ; still the 
 honeysuckle , recently train there , be fast creep up the side ; 
 and through the trelli of the woodwork and the leaf of the flower 
 shrub , he just catch a glimpse of some form within - the white robe of 
 a female form in a slow gentle movement - tend perhaps the flower that 
 wreathe the arbour . now it be still , now it stir again ; now it be 
 suddenly lose to view . have the inmate leave the arbour ? be the inmate 
 Lady Montfort ? George Morley 's step have not pass in that direction . 




 CHAPTER XXII . 

  a QUIET SCENE - an unquiet heart . 

 meanwhile , not far from the willow - bank which shelter Lionel , but 
 far enough to be out of her sight and beyond her hearing , George Morley 
 find Lady Montfort seat alone . it be a spot on which Milton might 
 have place the lady in " Comus " - a circle of the smooth sward , ring 
 everywhere   except at one opening which leave the glassy river in 
 full view   with thick bosk of dark evergreen and shrub of lively 
 verdure ; oak and chest nut backing and overhang all . flower , too , 
 raise on rustic tier and stage ; a tiny fountain , shoot up from a 
 basin star with the water - lily ; a rustic table , on which lie hook 
 and the implement of woman 's graceful work ; so that the place have the 
 home - look of a chamber , and speak that intense love of the out - door 
 life which abound in our old poet from Chaucer down to the day when 
 minstrel , polish into wit , take to Will 's Coffee - house , and the lark 
 come no more to bid bard 

  " good morrow 
  from his watch - tower in the sky . " 

 but long since , thank Heaven we have again get back the english poetry 
 which chime to the babble of the water , and the riot of the bird ; and 
 just as that poetry be the fresh which the out - door life have the most 
 nourish , so I believe that there be no surer sign of the rich vitality 
 which find its racy joy in source the most innocent , than the 
 childlike taste for that same out - door life . whether you take from 
 fortune the palace or the cottage , add to your chamber a hall in the 
 court of Nature . let the earth but give you room to stand on ; well , 
 look up - be it nothing to have for your roof - tree - Heaven ? 

 Caroline Montfort   be her title drop   be change since we last 
 see she . the beauty be not less in degree , but it have gain in one 
 attribute , lose in another ; it command less , it touch more . still in 
 deep mourning , the sombre dress throw a pale shade over the cheek . the 
 eye , more sink beneath the brow , appear large , soft . there be 
 that expression of fatigue which either accompany impaired health or 
 succeed to mental struggle and disquietude . but the coldness or pride 
 of mien which be peculiar to Caroline as a wife be go - as if in 
 widowhood it be no long need . a something like humility prevail 
 over the look and the bearing which have be so tranquilly majestic . 
 as at the approach of her cousin she start from her seat , there be 
 a nervous tremor in her eagerness ; a rush of colour to the cheek ; an 
 anxious quivering of the lip ; a flutter in the tone of the sweet low 
 voice : " well , George . " 

 " Mr. Darrell be not in London ; he go to Fawley three day ago ; at 
 least he be there now . I have this from my uncle , to whom he write ; and 
 whom his departure have vex and sadden . " 

 " three day ago ! it must have be he , then ! I be not deceive , " 
 murmur Caroline , and her eye wander mound . 

 " there be no truth in the report you hear that he be to marry Honoria 
 Vipont . my uncle think he will never marry again , and imply that he 
 have resume his solitary life at Fawley with a resolve to quit it no 
 more . " 

 Lady Montfort listen silently , bend her face over the fountain , 
 and drop amidst its playful spray the leaf of a rose which she have 
 abstractedly pluck as George be speak . 

 " I have , therefore , fulfil your commission so far , " renew George 
 Morley . " I have ascertain that Mr. Darrell be alive , and doubtless 
 well ; so that it could not have be his ghost that startle you amidst 
 yonder thicket . but I have do more : I have forestall the wish you 
 express to become acquainted with young Haughton ; and your object in 
 postpone the accomplishment of that wish while Mr. Darrell himself be 
 in town have cease with Mr. Darrell 's departure , I have venture to 
 bring the young man with I . he be in the boat yonder . will you receive 
 he ? or - but , my dear cousin , be you not too unwell today ? what be the 
 matter ? oh , I can easily make an excuse for you to Haughton . I will run 
 and do so . " 

 " no , George , no . I be as well as usual . I will see Mr. Haughton . all 
 that you have hear of he , and have tell I , interest I so much in 
 his favour ; and besides - " she do not finish the sentence ; but lead away 
 by some other thought , ask , " have you no news of our miss friend ? " 

 " none as yet ; but in a few day I shall renew my search . now , then , I 
 will go for Haughton . " 

 " do so ; and George , when you have present he to I , will you kindly 
 join that dear anxious child yonder ! 

 " she be in the new arbour , or near it - her favourite spot . you must 
 sustain her spirit , and give her hope . you can not guess how eagerly 
 she look forward to your visit , and how gratefully she rely on your 
 exertion . " 

 George shake his head half despondingly , and say briefly , " my 
 exertion have establish no claim to her gratitude as yet , " go 
 quickly back for Lionel . 




 CHAPTER XXIII . 

  something on an OLD subject , which have never be say before 

 although Lionel be prepared to see a very handsome woman in Lady 
 Montfort , the beauty of her countenance take he by surprise . no 
 preparation by the eulogy of description can lessen the effect that 
 the first sight of a beautiful object produce upon a mind to which 
 refinement of idea give an accurate and quick comprehension of beauty . 
 be it a work of art , a scene in nature , or , rare of all , a human face 
 divine , a beauty never before beheld strike we with hidden pleasure , 
 like a burst of light . and it be a pleasure that elevate ; the 
 imagination feel itself rich by a new idea of excellence ; for not 
 only be real beauty wholly original , have no prototype , but its 
 immediate influence be spiritual . it may seem strange - I appeal to every 
 observant artist if the assertion be not true - but the first sight of 
 the most perfect order of female beauty , rather than court , rebuke 
 and strike back , every gross instinct that would alloy admiration . 
 there must be some meanness and blemish in the beauty which the 
 sensualist no soon behold than he covet . in the high incarnation 
 of the abstract idea which run through all our notion of moral good 
 and celestial purity - even if the moment the eye see the heart love 
 the image - the love have in it something of the reverence which it be 
 say the charm of Virtue would produce could her form be make visible ; 
 nor could mere human love obtrude itself till the sweet awe of the 
 first effect have be familiarise away . and I apprehend that it be this 
 exalt or etherealise attribute of beauty to which all poet , all 
 writer who would poetise the reality of life , have unconsciously 
 render homage , in the rank to which they elevate what , strip of 
 such attribute , would be but a gaudy idol of paint clay . if , from the 
 lofty epic to the trite novel , a heroine be often little more than 
 a name to which we be call upon to bow , as to a symbol represent 
 beauty , and if we ourselves   be we ever so indifferent in our common 
 life to fair face   feel that , in art at least , imagination need an 
 image of the Beautiful - if , in a word , both poet and reader here would 
 not be leave excuseless , it be because in our inmost heart there be a 
 sentiment which link the ideal of beauty with the Supersensual . wouldst 
 thou , for instance , form some vague conception of the shape wear by a 
 pure soul release ? wouldst thou give to it the likeness of an ugly 
 hag ? or wouldst thou not ransack all thy remembrance and conception of 
 form most beauteous to clothe the holy image ? do so : now bring it thus 
 rob with the rich grace before thy mind 's eye . well , seest thou 
 now the excuse for poet in the rank they give to BEAUTY ? seest thou now 
 how high from the realm of the sens soar the mysterious Archetype ? 
 without the idea of beauty , couldst thou conceive a form in which to 
 clothe a soul that have enter heaven ? 




 CHAPTER XXIV . 

  AGREEABLE surprise be the perquisite of youth . 

 if the beauty of Lady Montfort 's countenance take Lionel by surprise , 
 still more might he wonder at the win kindness of her address - a 
 kindness of look , manner , voice , which seem to welcome he not as 
 a chance acquaintance but as a new - find relation . the first few 
 sentence , in give they a subject of common interest , introduce into 
 their converse a sort of confide household familiarity . for Lionel , 
 ascribe Lady Montfort 's gracious reception to her early recollection 
 of his kinsman , begin at once to speak of Guy Darrell ; and in a little 
 time they be walk over the turf , or through the wind alley 
 of the garden , link talk to the same theme , she by question , he by 
 answer - he , charm to expatiate - she , please to listen - and like 
 each other more and more , as she recognise in all he say a bright 
 young heart , overflow with grateful and proud affection , and as 
 he feel instinctively that he be with one who sympathise in his 
 enthusiasm - one who have know the great man in his busy day , ere the 
 rush of his career have pause , whose childhood have lend a smile to the 
 great man 's home before childhood and smile have leave it . 

 as they thus converse , Lionel now and then , in the turn of their walk , 
 catch a glimpse of George Morley in the distance , walk also side 
 by side with some young companion , and ever as he catch that glimpse a 
 strange restless curiosity shoot across his mind , and distract it even 
 from praise of Guy Darrell . who could that be with George ? be it a 
 relation of Lady Montfort 's ? the figure be not in mourning ; its shape 
 seem slight and youthful - now it pass by that acacia tree , - stand 
 for a moment apart and distinct from George 's shadow , but its own 
 outline dim in the deepening twilight - now it have pass on , lose 
 amongst the laurel . 

 a turn in the walk bring Lionel and Lady Montfort before the window 
 of the house , which be not large for the rank of the owner , but 
 commodious , with no pretence to architectural beauty - dark - red brick , a 
 century and a half old - irregular ; jut forth here , recede there , 
 so as to produce that depth of light and shadow which lend a certain 
 picturesque charm even to the least ornate building - a charm to 
 which the Gothic architecture owe half its beauty . Jessamine , 
 rose , wooodbine , ivy , train up the angle and between the window . 
 altogether the house have that air of HOME which have be want to the 
 regal formality of Moutfort Court . one of the window , raise above 
 the ground by a short wind stair , stand open . light have just be 
 bring into the room within , and Lionel 's eye be catch by the gleam . 
 Lady Montfort turn up the stair , and Lionel follow she into the 
 apartment . a harp stand at one corner - not far from it a piano 
 and music - stand . on one of the table there be the implement of 
 drawing - a sketch in water - colour half finish . 

 " our work - room , " say Lady Montfort , with a warm cheerful smile , and yet 
 Lionel could see that tear be in her eye - " mine and my dear pupil 's . 
 yes , that harp be her . be he still fond of music - I mean Mr. Darrell ? " 

 " yes , though he do not care for it in crowd ; but he can listen for 
 hour to Fairthorn 's flute . you remember Mr. Fairthorn ? " 

 " ay , I remember he , " answer Lady Montfort softly . " Mr. Darrell then 
 like his music , still ? " 

 Lionel here utter an exclamation of more than surprise . he have turn 
 to examine the water - colour sketch - a rustic inn , a honeysuckle arbour , 
 a river in front ; a boat yonder - just begin . 

 " I know the spot ! " he cry . " do you make the sketch of it ? " 

 " I ? no ; it be her - my pupil 's - my adopt child 's . " Lionel 's dark eye 
 turn to Lady Montfort 's wistfully , inquiringly ; they ask what his 
 lip could not presume to ask . " your adopt child - what be she ? - who ? " 

 as if answer to the eye , Lady Montfort say : " wait here a moment ; I 
 will go for she . " 

 she leave he , descend the stair into the garden , join George Morley 
 and his companion ; take aside the former , whisper he , then draw 
 the arm of the latter within her own , lead she back into the room , while 
 George Morley remain in the garden , throw himself on a bench , and 
 gaze on the star as they now come forth , fast and frequent , though 
 one by one . 




 CHAPTER XXV . 

  " Quem Fors dierum cunque dabit 
  Lucro appone . " - HORAT . 

 Lionel stand , expectant , in the centre of the room , and as the two 
 female form enter , the light be full upon their face . that 
 young face - it be she - it be she , the unforgotten - the long - lost . 
 instinctively , as if no year have roll between - as if she be still 
 the little child , he the boy who have covet such a sister - he spring 
 forward and open his arm , and as suddenly halt , drop the 
 arm to , his side , blushing , confused , abash . she ! that vagrant 
 child ! - she ! that form so elegant - that great peeress 's pupil - adopt 
 daughter , she the poor wander Sophy ! she ! - impossible ! 

 but her eye , at first downcast , be now fix on he . she , too , 
 start - not forward , but in recoil ; she , too , raise her arm , not to 
 open , but to press they to her breast ; and she , too , as suddenly check 
 an impulse , and stand , like he , blushing , confused , abash . 

 " yes , " say Caroline Montfort , draw Sophy nearer to her breast , " yes , 
 you will both forgive I for the surprise . yes , you do see before you , 
 grow up to become the pride of those who cherish she , that Sophy who - " 

 " Sophy ! " cry Lionel advancing ; " it be so , then ! I know you be no 
 stroller 's grandchild . " 

 Sophy draw up : " I be , I be his grandchild , and as proud to be so as I 
 be then . " 

 " Pardon I , pardon I ; I mean to say that he too be not what he 
 seem . you forgive I , " extend his hand , and Sophy 's soft hand fall 
 into his forgivingly . 

 " but he live ? be well ? be here ? be - " Sophy burst into tear , and Lady 
 Montfort make a sign to Lionel to go into the garden , and leave they . 
 reluctantly and dizzily , as one in a dream , he obey , leave the 
 vagrant 's grandchild to be soothe in the foster arm of she whom , 
 an hour or two ago , he know but by the title of her rank and the 
 reputation of her pride . 

 it be not many minute before Lady Montfort rejoin he . 

 " you touch unaware , " say she , " upon the poor child 's most anxious 
 cause of sorrow . her grandfather ; for whom her affection be so 
 sensitively keen , have disappear . I will speak of that later ; and if 
 you wish , you shall be take into our consultation . but - " she pause , 
 look into his face - open , loyal face , face of gentleman - with heart of 
 man in its eye , soul of man on its brow ; face form to look up to the 
 star which now light it - and lay her hand lightly on his shoulder , 
 resume with hesitate voice : " but I feel like a culprit in ask 
 you what , nevertheless , I must ask , as an imperative condition , if 
 your visit here be to be renew - if your intimacy here be to be 
 establish . and unless you comply with that condition , come no more ; we 
 can not confide in each other . " 

 " oh , Lady Montfort , impose any condition . I promise beforehand . " 

 " not beforehand . the condition be this : inviolable secrecy . you will 
 not mention to any one your visit here ; your introduction to I ; your 
 discovery of the stroller 's grandchild in my adopt daughter . " 

 " not to Mr. Darrell ? " 

 " to he least of all ; but this I add , it be for Mr. Darrell 's sake that 
 I insist on such concealment ; and I trust the concealment will not be 
 long protract . " 

 " for Mr. Darrell 's sake ? " 

 " for the sake of his happiness , " cry Lady Montfort , clasp her 
 hand . " my debt to he be large far than your ; and in thus appeal 
 to you , I scheme to pay back a part of it . do you trust I ? " 

 " I do , I do . " 

 and from that evening Lionel Haughton become the constant visitor in 
 that house . 

 two or three day afterwards Colonel Morley , quit England for a 
 german Spa at which he annually recruit himself for a few week , 
 relieve Lionel from the embarrassment of any question which that 
 shrewd observer might otherwise have address to he . London itself be 
 now empty . Lionel find a quiet lodging in the vicinity of Twickenham . 
 and when his foot pass along the shady lane through yon wicket gate 
 into that region of turf and flower , he feel as might have feel that 
 famous Minstrel of Ercildoun , when , bless with the privilege to enter 
 Fairyland at will , the Rhymer steal to the grassy hillside , and murmur 
 the spell that unlock the gate of Oberon , 




 BOOK VIII . 




 CHAPTER I. 

  " a little fire burn up a great deal of CORN . " - OLD PROVERB . 

 Guy Darrell resume the thread of solitary life at Fawley with a calm 
 which be deep in its gloom than it have be before . the experiment of 
 return to the social world have fail . the resolution which have induce 
 the experiment be finally renounce . five year near to death , 
 and the last hope that have flit across the narrow passage to the 
 grave , fall like a faithless torch from his own hand , and trodden out 
 by his own foot . 

 it be peculiarly in the nature of Darrell to connect his object with 
 posterity - to regard eminence in the Present but as a beacon - height from 
 which to pass on to the Future the name he have take from the Past . all 
 his early ambition , sacrifice pleasure to toil , have place its goal 
 at a distance , remote from the huzzas of bystander ; and Ambition halt 
 now , baffled and despairing . Childless , his line would perish with 
 himself - himself , who have so vaunted its restoration in the land ! his 
 genius be childless also - it would leave behind it no offspring of the 
 brain . by toil he have amass ample wealth ; by talent he have achieve a 
 splendid reputation . but the reputation be as perishable as the wealth . 
 let a half - century pass over his tomb , and nothing would be leave to 
 speak of the successful lawyer the applaud orator , save traditional 
 anecdote , a laudatory notice in contemporaneous memoir - perhaps , at 
 most , quotation of eloquent sentence lavish on forget case 
 and obsolete debate - shred and fragment of a great intellect , which 
 another half - century would sink without a bubble into the depth of 
 Time . he have enact no law - he have administer no state - he have 
 compose no book . like the figure on a clock , which adorn the case 
 and have no connection with the movement , he , so prominent an ornament 
 to time , have no part in its work . remove , the eye would miss he for 
 a while ; but a nation 's literature or history be the same , whether 
 with he or without . some with a tithe of his ability have the luck to 
 fasten their name to thing that endure ; they have be responsible for 
 measure they do not not invent , and which , for good or evil , influence 
 long generation . they have write volume out of which a couplet of 
 verse , a period in prose , may cling to the rock of age , as a shell 
 that survive a deluge . but the orator , whose effect be immediate - who 
 enthrall his audience in proportion as he nick the hour - who , be he 
 speak like Burke what , apart from the subject - matter , closet student 
 would praise , must , like Burke , thin his audience , and exchange present 
 oratorical success for ultimate intellectual renown - a man , in short , 
 whose oratory be emphatically that of the debater be , like an actor , 
 reward with a loud applause and a complete oblivion . Waife on the 
 village stage might win applause no less loud , follow by oblivion not 
 more complete . 

 Darrell be not blind to the brevity of his fame . in his previous 
 seclusion he have be resign to that conviction - now it sadden he . 
 then , unconfesse by himself , the idea that he might yet reappear in 
 active life , and do something which the world would not willingly let 
 die , have soften the face of that tranquil Nature from which he must 
 soon now pass out of reach and sight . on the tree of Time he be a leaf 
 already sear upon the bough - not an inscription grave into the rind . 

 ever slow to yield to weak regret - ever seek to combat his own 
 enemy within - Darrell say to himself one night , while Fairthorn 's 
 flute be breathe an air of romance through the melancholy wall : " be 
 it too late yet to employ this still busy brain upon work that will 
 live when I be dust , and make posterity supply the heir that fail to my 
 house ? " 

 he shut himself up with immortal author - he meditate on the choice of 
 a theme ; his knowledge be wide , his taste refine ; - word ! - he could 
 not want word ! why should he not write ? alas ; why indeed ? - he who have 
 never be a writer in his youth , can no more be a writer in his age 
 than he can be a painter - a musician . what ! not write a book ! oh , 
 yes - as he may paint a picture or set a song . but a writer , in the 
 emphatic sense of the word - a writer as Darrell be an orator - oh , 
 no ! and , least of all , will he be a writer if he have be an orator 
 by impulse and habit - an orator too happily gifted to require , and 
 too laboriously occupy to resort to , the tedious aid of written 
 preparation - an orator as modern life form orator - not , of course , an 
 orator like those of the classic world , who elaborate sentence 
 before delivery , and who , after delivery , polish each extemporaneous 
 interlude into rhetorical exactitude and musical perfection . and how 
 narrow the range of composition to a man burden already by a grave 
 reputation ! he can not have the self - abandonment - he can not venture the 
 headlong charge - with which youth fling the rein to genius , and dash 
 into the rank of Fame . few and austere his theme - fastidious and 
 hesitate his taste . restrict be the movement of he who walk 
 for the first time into the Forum of Letters with the purple hem on his 
 senatorial toga . Guy Darrell , at his age , enter among author as 
 a novice ! - he , the great lawyer , to whom attorney would have send no 
 brief have he be suspect of coquet with a muse , - he , the great 
 orator who have electrify audience in proportion to the sudden effect 
 which distinguish oral inspiration from write eloquence - he achieve 
 now , in an art which his whole life have neglect , any success 
 commensurate to his contemporaneous repute ; - how unlikely ! but a success 
 which should outlive that repute , win the " everlasting inheritance " 
 which could alone have nerve he to adequate effort - how impossible ! 
 he could not himself comprehend why , never at a loss for language 
 felicitously opposite or richly ornate when it have but to flow from his 
 thought to his tongue , nor want ease , even eloquence , in epistolary 
 correspondence confidentially familiar - he should find word fail idea , 
 and idea fail word , the moment his pen become a wand that conjure up 
 the Ghost of the dread Public ! the more copious his thought , the more 
 embarrass their selection ; the more exquisite his perception of 
 excellence in other , the more timidly frigid his effort at faultless 
 style . it would be the same with the most skilful author , if the Ghost 
 of the Public have not long since cease to haunt he . while he write , 
 the true author 's solitude be absolute or people at his will . but 
 take an audience from an orator , what be he ? he command the living 
 public - the Ghost of the Public awe himself . 

 " surely once , " sigh Darrell , as he give his blurred page to the 
 flame - ' surely once I have some pittance of the author 's talent , and 
 have spend it upon lawsuit ! " 

 the author 's talent , no doubt , Guy Darrell once have - the author 's 
 temperament never . what be the author 's temperament ? too long a task to 
 define . but without it a man may write a clever book , a useful book , a 
 book that may live a year , ten year , fifty year . he will not stand 
 out to distant age a representative of the age that rather live in 
 he than he in it . the author 's temperament be that which make he an 
 integral , earnest , original unity , distinct from all before and all 
 that may succeed he . and as a Father of the Church have say that 
 the consciousness of individual being be the sign of immortality , 
 not grant to the inferior creature - so it be in this individual 
 temperament one and indivisible , and in the intense conviction of it , 
 more than in all the work it may throw off , that the author become 
 immortal . Nay , his work may perish like those of Orpheus or Pythagoras ; 
 but he himself , in his name , in the footprint of his being , remain , 
 like Orpheus or Pythagoras , undestroyed , indestructible . 

 resign literature , the Solitary return to Science . there he be 
 more at home . he have cultivate science , in his dazzle academical 
 career , with ardour and success ; he have renew the study , on his first 
 retirement to Fawley , as a distraction from torment memory or 
 unextin guishe passion . he now for the first time regard the 
 absorbing abstruse occupation as a possible source of fame . to be one in 
 the starry procession of those son of light who have solve a new law 
 in the statute - book of heaven ! surely a grand ambition , not unbecoming 
 to his year and station , and pleasant in its labour to a man who love 
 Nature 's outward scenery with poetic passion , and have study her inward 
 mystery with a sage 's minute research . science need not the author 's 
 art - she reject its gracess - he recoil with a shudder from its 
 fancy . but Science require in the mind of the discoverer a limpid 
 calm . the lightning that reveal Diespiter must flash in serene sky . 
 no cloud store that thunder 

  " Quo bruta tellus , et vaga flumina , 
  Quo Styx , et invisi horrida Taenari 
  sede , Atlanteusque finis 
  Concutitur ! " 

 so long as you take science only as a distraction , science will not lead 
 you to discovery . and from some cause or other , Guy Darrell be more 
 unquiet and perturb in his present than in his past seclusion . 
 Science this time fail even to distract . in the midst of august 
 meditation - of close experiment - some haunt angry thought from the 
 far world pass with rude shadow between Intellect and Truth - the heart 
 eclipse the mind . the fact be , that Darrell 's genius be essentially 
 form for Action . his be the true orator 's temperament , with the 
 quality that belong to it - the grasp of affair - the comprehension 
 of man and state - the constructive , administrative faculty . in 
 such career , and in such career alone , could he have develop all his 
 power , and achieve an imperishable name . gradually as science lose its 
 interest , he retreat from all his former occupation , and would wander 
 for long hour over the wild unpopulated landscape round he . as if it 
 be his object to fatigue the body , and in that fatigue tire out 
 the restless brain , he would make his gun the excuse for ramble from 
 sunrise to twilight over the manor he have purchase year ago , lie 
 many mile off from Fawley . there be time when a man who have pass 
 his life in cultivate his mind find that the more he can make the 
 physical existence predominate , the more he can lower himself to the 
 rude vigour of the gamekeeper , or his day - labourer - why , the more he can 
 harden his nerve to support the weight of his reflection . 

 in these ramble he be not always alone . Fairthorn contrive to 
 insinuate himself much more than formerly into his master 's habitual 
 companionship . the faithful fellow have miss Darrell so sorely in that 
 long unbroken absence of five year , that on recover he , Fairthorn 
 seem resolve to make up for lost time . depart from his own habit , 
 he would , therefore , lie in wait for Guy Darrell - creep out of a 
 bramble or bush , like a familiar sprite ; and be no long to be awe 
 away by a curt syllable or a contract brow . and Darrell , at first 
 submit reluctantly , and out of compassionate kindness to the 
 flute - player 's obtrusive society , become by degree to welcome and relax 
 in it . Fairthorn know the great secret of his life . to Fairthorn alone 
 on all earth could he speak with out reserve of one name and of one 
 sorrow . speak to Fairthorn be like talk to himself , or to his 
 pointer , or to his favourite doe , upon which last he bestow a new 
 collar , with an inscription that imply more of the true cause that have 
 drive he a second time to the shade of Fawley than he would have let 
 out to Alban Morley or even to Lionel Haughton . Alban be too old for 
 that confidence - Lionel much too young . but the Musician , like art 
 itself , be of no age ; and if ever the gloomy master unbent his outward 
 moodiness and secret spleen in any approach to gaiety , it be in a 
 sort of saturnine playfulness to this grotesque , grown - up infant . they 
 cheer each other , and they tease each other . stalk side by side 
 over the ridge fallow , Darrell would sometimes pour forth his whole 
 soul , as a poet do to his muse ; and at Fairthorn 's abrupt interruption 
 or rejoinder , turn round on he with fierce objurgation or withering 
 sarcasm , or what the flute - player abhor more than all else , a 
 truculent quotation from Horace , which drive fairthorn away into some 
 vanish covert or hollow , out of which Darrell have to entice he , sure 
 that , in return , Fairthorn would take a sly occasion to send into his 
 side a vindictive prickle . but as the two come home in the starlight , 
 the dog dead beat and poor Fairthorn too , - ten to one but what the 
 musician be lean all his weight on his master 's nervous arm , and 
 Darrell be look with tender kindness in the face of the someone leave 
 to lean upon he still . 

 one evening , as they be sit together in the library , the two 
 hermit , each in his corner , and after a long silence , the flute - player 
 say abruptly 

 " I have be think - " 

 " think ! " quoth Darrell , with his mechanical irony ; " I be sorry for 
 you . try not to do so again . " 

 FAIRTHORN . - " your poor dear father - " 

 DARRELL   wincing , startle , and expectant of a prickle . - " Eh ? my 
 father - " 

 FAIRTHORN . - " be a great antiquary . how it would have please he could 
 he have leave a fine collection of antiquity as an heirloom to the 
 nation ! - his name thus preserve for age , and connect with the 
 study of his life . there be the Elgin Marbles . the parson be talk 
 to I yesterday of a new Vernon Gallery ; why not in the British Museum 
 an everlasting Darrell room ? plenty to stock it moulder yonder in the 
 chamber which you will never finish . " 

 " my dear Dick , " say Darrell , start up , " give I your hand . what a 
 brilliant thought ! I could do nothing else to preserve my dear father 's 
 name . Eureka ! you be right . set the carpenter at work to - morrow . 
 remove the board ; open the chamber ; we will inspect their store , and 
 select what would worthily furnish ' a Darrell Room . ' Perish Guy Darrell 
 the lawyer ! Philip Darrell the antiquary at least shall live ! " 

 it be marvellous with what charm Fairthorn 's lucky idea seize upon 
 Darrell 's mind . the whole of the next day he spend in the forlorn 
 skeleton of the unfinished mansion slowly decay beside his small and 
 homely dwelling . the picture , many of which be the rare original 
 in early flemish and italian art , be dust with tender care , and hung 
 from hasty nail upon the bare ghastly wall . delicate ivory carving , 
 work by the matchless hand of Cellini - early Florentine bronze , 
 priceless specimen of Raffaele ware and venetian glass - the precious 
 trifle , in short , which the collector of mediaeval curiosity amasse 
 for his heir to disperse amongst the palace of king and the cabinet 
 of nation - be drag again to unfamiliar light . the invade 
 sepulchral building seem a very pompeii of the Cinque Cento . 
 to examine , arrange , methodise , select for national purpose , such 
 miscellaneous treasure would be the work of week . for easy access , 
 Darrell cause a slight hasty passage to be throw over the gap between 
 the two edifice . it run from the room nick into the gable of the old 
 house , which , originally fit up for scientific study , now become 
 his habitual apartment , into the large of the uncompleted chamber 
 which have be design for the grand reception - gallery of the new 
 building . into the pompous gallery thus make contiguous to his monk - like 
 cell , he gradually gather the choice specimen of his collection . 
 the damp be expel by fire on grateless hearthstone ; sunshine 
 admit from window now for the first time exchange board for 
 glass ; rough iron sconce , make at the near forge , be thrust into 
 the wall , and sometimes light at night - Darrell and Fairthorn walking 
 arm - in - arm along the unpolished floor , in company with Holbein 's 
 Nobles , Perugino 's virgin . some of that highbred company displace 
 and banish the next day , as repeat inspection make the taste 
 more rigidly exclusive . Darrell have find object , amusement , 
 occupation - frivolous if compare with those lens , and glass , and 
 algebraical scrawl which have once while lonely hour in the attic - room 
 hard by ; but not frivolous even to the judgment of the austere sage , 
 if that sage have not reason away his heart . for here it be not 
 Darrell 's taste that be delighted ; it be Darrell 's heart that , ever 
 hungry , have find food . his heart be connect those long - neglect 
 memorial of an ambition baffle and relinquish - here with a nation , 
 there with his father 's grave ! how his eye sparkle ! how his lip 
 smile ! nobody would have guess it - none of we know each other ; least 
 of all do we know the interior being of those whom we estimate by public 
 repute ; - but what a world of simple , fond affection lie coil and 
 waste in that proud man 's solitary breast ! 




 CHAPTER II . 

  the learned COMPUTE that seven hundred and seven MILLIONS of 
  million of vibration have penetrate the eye before the eye can 
  DISTINGUISH the tint of a violet . what philosophy can calculate 
  the vibration of the heart before it can distinguish the COLOURS of 
  LOVE ? 

 while Guy Darrell thus pass his hour within the unfinished fragment 
 of a dwelling build for posterity , and amongst the still relic of 
 remote generation , Love and Youth be weave their warm eternal idyll 
 on the sunny lawn by the gliding river . 

 there they be , Love and Youth , Lionel and Sophy , in the arbour round 
 which her slight hand have twin the honeysuckle , fond imitation of 
 that bower endear by the memory of her early holiday - she seat 
 coyly , he on the ground at her foot , as when Titania have watch his 
 sleep . he have be read to she , the book have fall from his hand . 
 what book ? that volume of poem so unintelligibly obscure to all but the 
 dream young , who be so unintelligibly obscure to themselves . but to 
 the merit of those poem , I doubt if even George do justice . it be not 
 true , I believe , that they be not durable . some day or other , when all 
 the jargon so feelingly denounce by Colonel Morley about " esthetic , " 
 and " objective , " and ' subjective , " have go to its long home , some 
 critic who can write English will probably bring that poor little volume 
 fairly before the public ; and , with all its manifold fault , it will 
 take a place in the affection , not of one single generation of the 
 young , but - everlaste , ever - dream , ever - grow youth . but you and 
 I , reader , have no other interest in these poem , except this - that 
 they be write by the brother - in - law of that whimsical , miserly Frank 
 Vance , who perhaps , but for such a brother - in - law , would never have go 
 through the labour by which he have cultivate the genius that achieve 
 his fame ; and if he have not cultivate that genius , he might never 
 have know Lionel ; and if he have never know Lionel , Lionel might never 
 perhaps have go to the Surrey village , in which he see the Phenomenon : 
 and , to push far still that voltaireian philosophy of ifs - if either 
 Lionel or Frank Vance have not be so intimately associate in the mind 
 of Sophy and Lionel with the golden holiday on the beautiful river , 
 Sophy and Lionel might not have think so much of those poem ; and if 
 they have not think so much of those poem , there might not have be 
 between they that link of poetry without which the love of two young 
 people be a sentiment , always very pretty it be true , but much too 
 commonplace to deserve special commemoration in a work so uncommonly 
 long as this be likely to be . and thus it be clear that Frank Vance be 
 not a superfluous and episodical personage amongst the character of 
 this history , but , however indirectly , still essentially , one of those 
 being without whom the author must have give a very different answer 
 to the question , " what will he do with it ? " 

 return we to Lionel and Sophy . the poem have bring their heart 
 nearer and nearer together . and when the book fall from Lionel 's hand , 
 Sophy know that his eye be on her face , and her own eye look away . 
 and the silence be so deep and so sweet ! neither have yet say to the 
 other a word of love . and in that silence both feel that they love and 
 be belove . sophy ! how childlike she look still ! how little she be 
 change ! - except that the soft blue eye be far more pensive , and that 
 her merry laugh be now never hear . in that luxurious home , foster 
 with the tender care by its charming owner , the romance of her 
 childhood realise , and Lionel by her side , she miss the old crippled 
 vagrant . and therefore it be that her merry laugh be no long hear ! 
 " ah ! " say Lionel , softly break the pause at length , " do not turn 
 your eye from I , or I shall think that there be tear in they ! " 
 Sophy 's breast heave , but her eye be avert still . Lionel rise 
 gently , and come to the other side of her quiet form . " Fie ! there be 
 tear , and you would hide they from I . ungrateful ! " 

 Sophy look at he now with candid , inexpressible , guileless affection 
 in those swimming eye , and say with touching sweetness : " ungrateful ! 
 should I not be so if I be gay and happy ? " 

 and in self - reproach for not be sufficiently unhappy while that young 
 consoler be by her side , she too rise , leave the arbour , and look 
 wistfully along the river . George Morley be expect ; he might bring 
 tiding of the absent . and now while Lionel , rejoin she , exert all 
 his eloquence to allay her anxiety and encourage her hope , and while 
 they thus , in that divinest stage of love , ere the tongue repeat 
 what the eye have tell , glide along - here in sunlight by linger 
 flower - there in shadow under mournful willow , whose leaf be ever 
 the late to fall , let we explain by what link of circumstance Sophy 
 become the great lady 's guest , and Waife once more a homeless wanderer . 




 CHAPTER III . 

  comprise many NEEDFUL explanation illustrative of wise SAWS ; as 
  for EXAMPLE , " he that hath an ILL name be HALF HANGED . " " he that 
  HATH be BITTEN by a serpent be afraid of a ROPE . " " he that look 
  for a STAR puts out his candles ; " and , " when GOD will , all wind 
  bring RAIN . " 

 the reader have be already make aware how , by an impulse of womanhood 
 and humanity , Arabella Crane have be convert from a persecuting into 
 a tutelary agent in the destiny of Waife and Sophy . that evolution 
 in her moral be date from the evening on which she have seek the 
 cripple 's retreat , to warn he of Jasper 's design . we have see by 
 what stratagem she have make it appear that Waife and his grandchild have 
 sail beyond the reach of molestation ; with what liberality she have 
 advance the money that free Sophy from the manager 's claim ; and how 
 considerately she have empower her agent to give the reference which 
 secure to Waife the asylum in which we last behold he . in a few stern 
 sentence she have acquaint Waife with her fearless inflexible resolve 
 to associate her fate henceforth with the life of his lawless son ; and , 
 by render abortive all his evil project of plunder , to compel he 
 at last to depend upon she for an existence neither unsafe nor sordid , 
 provide only that it be not dishonest . the moment that she reveal 
 that design , Waife 's trust in she be win . his own heart enable he to 
 comprehend the effect produce upon a character otherwise unamiable and 
 rugge , by the grandeur of self - immolation and the absorption of one 
 devoted heroic thought . in the strength and bitterness of passion which 
 thus pledge her existence to redeem another 's , he obtain the key to 
 her vehement and jealous nature ; see why she have be so cruel to the 
 child of a rival ; why she have conceive compassion for that child in 
 proportion as the father 's unnatural indifference have quench the anger 
 of her own self - love ; and , above all , why , as the idea of reclaim and 
 appropriating solely to herself the man who , for good or for evil , have 
 grow into the all - predominant object of her life , gain more and 
 more the mastery over her mind , it expel the less and the baser 
 passion , and the old mean revenge against an infant fade away before 
 the light of that awakening conscience which be often rekindle from 
 ash by the spark of a single well and worthy thought . and in the 
 resolute design to reclaim Jasper Losely , Arabella come at once to a 
 ground in common with his father , with his child . oh what , too , would 
 the old man owe to she , what would be his gratitude , his joy , if she not 
 only guard his spotless Sophy , but save from the bottomless abyss 
 his guilty son ! thus when Arabella Crane have , nearly five year before , 
 seek Waife 's discover hiding - place , near the old bloodstaine 
 Tower , mutual interest and sympathy have form between they a bond 
 of alliance not the less strong because rather tacitly acknowledge than 
 openly express . Arabella have write to Waife from the continent , for 
 the first half - year pretty often , and somewhat sanguinely , as to the 
 chance of Losely 's ultimate reformation . then the interval of silence 
 become gradually more prolonged , and the letter more brief . but still , 
 whether from the wish not unnecessarily to pain the old man , or , as 
 would be more natural to her character , which , even in its good aspect , 
 be not gentle , from a proud dislike to confess failure , she say 
 nothing of the evil course which Jasper have renew . evidently she be 
 always near he . evidently , by some mean or another , his life , furtive 
 and dark , be ever under the glare of her watchful eye . 

 meanwhile Sophy have be present to Caroline Montfort . as Waife have so 
 fondly anticipate , the lone childless lady have take with kindness and 
 interest to the fair motherless child . leave to herself often for month 
 together in the grand forlorn house , Caroline soon find an object to 
 her pensive walk in the basket - maker 's cottage . Sophy 's charming face 
 and charming way steal more and more into affection which be deny 
 all nourishment at home . she enter into Waife 's desire to improve , by 
 education , so exquisite a nature ; and , familiarity grow by degree , 
 Sophy be at length coax up to the great house ; and during the hour 
 which Waife devote to his ramble   for even in his settle industry 
 he could not conquer his vagrant taste , but would weave his reed or 
 osier as he saunter through solitude of turf or wood , become the 
 docile delighted pupil in the simple chintz room which Lady Montfort have 
 reclaim from the desert of her surround palace . Lady Montfort be 
 not of a curious turn of mind ; profoundly indifferent even to the gossip 
 of drawing - room , she have no rankling desire to know the secret 
 of village hearthstone . little acquainted even with the great 
 world - scarcely at all with any world below that in which she have she 
 be , save as she approach humble sorrow by delicate charity - the 
 contrast between Waife 's calling and his conversation rouse in her no 
 vigilant suspicion . a man of some education , and bear in a rank that 
 touch upon the order of gentleman , but of no practical or professional 
 culture - with whimsical taste - with rove eccentric habit - have , in 
 the course of life , pick up much harmless wisdom , but , perhaps from 
 want of worldly prudence , fail of fortune . content with an obscure 
 retreat and a humble livelihood , he might naturally be loth to confide 
 to other the painful history of a descent in life . he might have 
 relation in a high sphere , whom the confession would shame ; he might 
 be silent in the manly pride which shrink from alm and pity and a tale 
 of fall . Nay , grant the bad - grant that Waife have suffer in repute 
 as well as fortune - grant that his character have be tarnish by some 
 plausible circumstantial evidence which he could not explain away 
 to the satisfaction of friend or the acquittal of a short - sight 
 world - have there not be , be there not always , many innocent man 
 similarly afflict ? and who could hear Waife talk , or look on his arch 
 smile , and not feel that he be innocent ? so , at least , think Caroline 
 Montfort . naturally ; for if , in her essentially woman - like character , 
 there be one all - pervading and all - predominant attribute , it be PITY . 
 Lead Fate place she under circumstance fit to ripen into genial 
 development all her exquisite force of soul , her true post in this life 
 would have be that of the SOOTHER . what a child to some grief - wear 
 father ! what a wife to some toil , aspiring , sensitive man of genius ! 
 what a mother to some suffering child ! it seem as if it be necessary 
 to she to have something to compassionate and foster . she be sad when 
 there be no one to comfort ; but her smile be like a sunbeam from Eden 
 when it chance on a sorrow it could brighten away . out of this very 
 sympathy come her fault - fault of reasoning and judgment . prudent in 
 her own chilling path through what the world call temptation , because 
 so ineffably pure - because , to Fashion 's light tempter , her very 
 thought be as closed , as 

  " under the glassy , cool , translucent wave , " 

 be the ear of Sabrina to the comrade of Comus , - yet place before her 
 some gentle scheme that seem fraught with a blessing for other , 
 and straightway her fancy embrace it , prudence fade - she see not the 
 obstacle , weigh not the chance against it . charity to she do not 
 come alone , but with its sister twin , Hope and Faith . 

 thus , benignly for the old man and the fair child , year roll on till 
 Lord Montfort 's sudden death , and his widow be call upon to exchange 
 Montfort Court   which pass to the new heir   for the distant jointure 
 House of Twickenham . by this time she have grow so attach to Sophy , 
 and Sophy so gratefully fond of she , that she propose to Waife to take 
 his sweet grandchild as her permanent companion , complete her education , 
 and assure her future . this have be the old man 's cherish day - dream ; 
 but he have not contemplate its realisation until he himself be in 
 the grave . he turn pale , he stagger , when the proposal which would 
 separate he from his grandchild be first bring before he . but he 
 recover ere Lady Montfort could be aware of the acuteness of the pang 
 she inflict , and accept the generous offer with warm protestation 
 of joy and gratitude . but Sophy ! sophy consent to leave her grandfather 
 afar and age in his solitary cottage ! little do either of they know 
 Sophy , with her soft heart and determined soul , if they suppose such 
 egotism possible in she . Waife insist - Waife be angry - Waife be 
 authoritative - Waife be implore - Waife be pathetic - all in vain ! 
 but to close every argument , the girl go boldly to Lady Montfort , 
 and say : " if I leave he , his heart would break - never ask it . " Lady 
 Montfort kiss Sophy tenderly as mother ever kiss a child for some 
 sweet love trait of a noble nature , and say simply " but he shall not 
 be leave - he shall come too . " 

 she offer Waife room in her Twickenham house - she wish to collect 
 book - he should be librarian . the old man shiver and refuse - refuse 
 firmly . he have make a vow not to be a guest in any house . finally , 
 the matter be compromise ; Waife would remove to the neighbourhood of 
 Twickenham ; there hire a cottage ; there ply his art ; and Sophy , live 
 with he , should spend part of each day with Lady Montfort as now . 

 so it be resolve . Waife consent to occupy a small house on the verge 
 of the ground belong to the jointure villa , on the condition of 
 pay rent for it . and George Morley insist on the privilege of 
 prepare that house for his old teacher 's reception , leave it simple 
 and rustic to outward appearance , but fit its pleasant chamber with 
 all that his knowledge of the old man 's taste and habit suggest 
 for comfort or humble luxury ; a room for Sophy , hang with the prettiest 
 paper , all butterfly and flower , command a view of the river . 
 Waife , despite his proud scruple , could not refuse such gift from a 
 man whose fortune and career have be secure by his artful lesson . 
 indeed , he have already permit George to assist , though not largely , 
 his own effort to repay the l100 advance by Mrs. Crane . the year 
 he have devote to a craft which his ingenuity make lucrative , have just 
 enable the basketmaker , with his pupil 's aid , to clear off that debt 
 by instalment . he have the satisfaction of think that it be his 
 industry that have replace the sum to which his grandchild owe she 
 release from the execrable Rugge . 

 Lady Montfort 's departure   which precede Waife 's by some week   be 
 more mourn by the poor in her immediate neighbourhood than by the 
 wealthy family who compose what a province call its society ; and 
 the gloom which that event cast over the little village round the kingly 
 mansion be increase when Waife and his grandchild leave . 

 for the last three year , embolden by Lady Montfort 's protection , 
 and the conviction that he be no long pursue or spy , the old 
 man relax his early reserved and secluded habit . constitutionally 
 sociable , he have make acquaintance with his humbler neighbour ; lounge 
 by their cottage paling in his ramble down the lane ; divert their 
 child with Sir Isaac 's trick , or regale they with nut and apple 
 from his little orchard ; give to the more diligent labourer many 
 a valuable hint how to eke out the daily wage with garden produce , or 
 bee , or poultry ; doctored farmer 's cow ; and even win the heart of the 
 stud - groom by a mysterious sedative ball , which have reduce to serene 
 docility a highly nervous and hitherto unmanageable four - year - old . 
 Sophy have be no less popular . no one grudge she the favour of Lady 
 Montfort - no one wonder at it . they be love and honour . perhaps 
 the happy year Waife have know since his young wife leave the earth 
 be pass in the hamlet which he fancy her shade haunted ; for be 
 it not there - there , in that cottage - there , in sight of those green 
 osier , that her first modest virgin reply to his letter of love and 
 hope that soothe his confinement and animate he - till then little 
 fond of sedentary toil - to the very industry which , learn in sport , 
 now give subsistence , and secure a home . to that home persecution have 
 not come - gossip have not pry into its calm seclusion - even chance , 
 when threaten disclosure , have seem to pass by innocuous . for 
 once - a year or so before he leave - an incident have occur which 
 alarm he at the time , but lead to no annoying result . the bank of 
 the great sheet of water in Montfort Park be occasionally make the 
 scene of rural picnic by the family of neighbour farmer or 
 tradesman . one day Waife , while carelessly fashion his basket on his 
 favourite spot , be recognise , on the opposite margin , by a party of 
 such holiday - maker to whom he himself have pay no attention . he be 
 tell the next day by the landlady of the village inn , the main chimney 
 of which he have undertake to cure of smoking , that a " lady " in the 
 picnic symposium of the day before have ask many question about he 
 and his grandchild , and have seem pleased to hear they be both so 
 comfortably settle . the " lady " have be accompany by another " lady , " 
 and by two or three young gentleman . they have arrive in a " buss , " which 
 they have hire for the occasion . they have come from Humberston the 
 day after those famous race which annually fill Humberston with 
 stranger - the time of year in which Rugge 's grand theatrical exhibition 
 delight that ancient town . from the description of the two lady 
 Waife suspect that they belong to Rugge 's company . 

 but they have not claim Waife as a ci - devant comrade ; they have not 
 speak of Sophy as the Phenomenon or the Fugitive . no molestation 
 follow this event ; and , after all , the Remorseless Baron have no long 
 any claim to the Persecuted Bandit or to Juliet Araminta . 

 but the ex - comedian be go from the osier - the hamlet . he be in his 
 new retreat by the lordly river - within an hour of the smoke and roar of 
 tumultuous London . he try to look cheerful and happy , but his repose 
 be troubled - his heart be anxious . ever since Sophy , on his account , 
 refuse the offer which would have transfer she , not for a few daily 
 hour , but for habitual life , from a basketmaker 's roof to all the 
 elegancie and refinement of a sphere in which , if free from he , 
 her charm and virtue might win she some such alliance as seem 
 impossible , while he be thus drag she down to his own level , - ever 
 since that day the old man have say to himself , " I live too long . " while 
 Sophy be by his side he appear busy at his work and merry in his 
 humour ; the moment she leave he for Lady Montfort 's house , the work 
 drop from his hand , and he sink into moody thought . 

 Waife have write to Mrs. Crane   her address then be at Paris   on 
 remove to Twickenhain , and beg she to warn he should Jasper 
 meditate a return to England , by a letter direct to he at the General 
 Post - office , London . despite his later trust in Mrs. Crane , he do not 
 deem it safe to confide to her Lady Montfort 's offer to Sophy , or the 
 affectionate nature of that lady 's intimacy with the girl now grow into 
 womanhood . with that insight into the human heart , which be in he not 
 so habitually clear and steadfast as to be always useful , but at time 
 singularly if erratically lucid , he could not feel assured that Arabella 
 Crane 's ancient hate to Sophy   which , lessen in proportion to the 
 girl 's destitution , have only cease when the stern woman feel , with a 
 sentiment border on revenge , that it be to she that Sophy owe an 
 asylum obscure and humble   might not revive , if she learn that 
 the child of a detest rival be raise above the necessity of her 
 protection , and bring within view of that station so much lofty than 
 her own , from which she have once rejoice to know that the offspring of 
 a marriage which have darken her life be exclude . for indeed it have 
 be only on Waife 's promise that he would not repeat the attempt that 
 have prove so abortive , to enforce Sophy 's claim on Guy Darrell , that 
 Arabella Crane have in the first instance resign the child to his care . 
 his care - his - an attainted outcast ! as long as Arabella Crane could see 
 in Sophy but an object of compassion , she might haughtily protect she ; 
 but , could Sophy become an object of envy , would that protection last ? 
 no , he do not venture to confide in Mrs. Crane far than to say 
 that he and Sophy have remove from Montfort village to the vicinity of 
 London . time enough to say more when Mrs. Crane return to England ; and 
 then , not by letter , but in personal interview . 

 once a month the old man go to London to inquire at the General 
 Post - office for any communication his correspondent might there address 
 to he . only once , however , have he hear from Mrs. Crane since the 
 announcement of his migration , and her note of reply be extremely 
 brief , until in the fatal month of June , when Guy Darrell and Jasper 
 Losely have alike return , and on the same day , to the metropolis ; 
 and then the old man receive from she a letter which occasion he 
 profound alarm . it apprise he not only that his terrible son be in 
 England - in London ; but that Jasper have discover that the person 
 embark for America be not the veritable Waife and Sophy whose name 
 they have assume . Mrs. Crane end with these ominous word : " it be 
 right to say now that he have descend deeply and deep . could you 
 see he , you would wonder that I neither abandon he nor my resolve . 
 he hat I bad than the gibbet . to I and not to the gibbet he shall 
 pass - fit punishment to both . I be in London , not in my old house , 
 but near he . his confidant be my hireling . his life and his project 
 be clear to my eye - clear as if he dwelt in glass . Sophy be now of 
 an age in which , be she place in the care of some person whose 
 respectability could not be impunge , she could not be legally force 
 away against her will ; but if under your roof , those whom Jasper have 
 induce to institute a search , that he have no means to institute very 
 actively himself , might make statement which   as you be already aware 
 might persuade other , though well - meaning , to assist he in separate 
 she from you . he might publicly face even a police - court , if he thus 
 hop to shame the rich man into buy off an intolerable scandal . 
 he might , in the first instance , and more probably , decoy she into 
 his power through stealth ; and what might become of she before she 
 be recover ? separate yourself from she for a time . it be you , 
 notwithstanding your art of disguise , that can be the more easily 
 track . she , now almost a woman , will have grow out of recognition . 
 place she in some secure asylum until , at least , you hear from I 
 again . " 

 Waife read and re - read this epistle   to which there be no direction 
 that enable he to reply   in the private room of a little coffee - house 
 to which he have retire from the gaze and pressure of the street . the 
 determination he have long brood over now begin to take shape - to be 
 hurry on to prompt decision . on recover his first shock , he form 
 and mature his plan . that same evening he see Lady Montfort . he feel 
 that the time have come when , for Sophy 's sake , he must lift the veil 
 from the obloquy on his own name . to guard against the same concession 
 to Jasper 's authority that have betray she at Gatesboro ' , it be 
 necessary that he should explain the mystery of Sophy 's parentage and 
 position to Lady Montfort , and go through the anguish of denounce his 
 own son as the last person to whose hand she should be consign . he 
 approach this subject not only with a sense of profound humiliation , 
 but with no unreasonable fear lest Lady Montfort might at once decline 
 a charge which would possibly subject her retirement to a harass 
 invasion . but , to his surprise as well as relief , no soon have he name 
 Sophy 's parentage than Lady Montfort evince emotion of a joy which 
 cast into the shade all more painful or discreditable association . 
 " henceforth , believe I , " she say , " your Sophy shall be my own child , 
 my own treasured darling ! - no humble companion - my equal as well as my 
 charge . fear not that any one shall tear she from I . you be right 
 in think that my roof should be her home - that she should have the 
 rearing and the station which she be entitle as well as fit to 
 adorn . but you must not part from she . I have listen to your tale ; 
 my experience of you supply the defence you suppress - it reverse the 
 judgment which have asperse you . and more ardently than before , I 
 press on you a refuge in the home that will shelter your grandchild . " 
 noble - hearted woman ! and nobler for her ignorance of the practical 
 world , in the proposal which would have blister with scorch blush 
 the cheek of that personification of all " Solemn Plausibilities , " the 
 House of Vipont ! Gentleman Waife be not scamp enough to profit by 
 the ignorance which spring from generous virtue . but , repress all 
 argument , and appear to acquiesce in the possibility of such an 
 arrangement , he leave her benevolent delight unsaddened - and before the 
 morning he be go . go in stealth , and by the starlight , as he have 
 go year ago from the bailiff 's cottage - go , for Sophy , in wake , to 
 find , as she have find before , farewell line , that commend hope and 
 forbade grief . " it be , " he write , " for both their sake that he have 
 set out on a tour of pleasant adventure . he need it ; he have feel his 
 spirit droop of late in so humdrum and settle a life . and there 
 be danger abroad - danger that his brief absence would remove . he have 
 confide all his secret to Lady Montfort ; she must look on that kind 
 lady as her sole guardian till he return - as return he surely would ; and 
 then they would live happy ever afterwards as in fairy tale . he should 
 never forgive she if she be silly enough to fret for he . he should 
 not be alone ; Sir Isaac would take care of he . he be not without 
 plenty of money - saving of several month ; if he want more , he would 
 apply to George Morley . he would write to she occasionally ; but she must 
 not expect frequent letter ; he might be away for month - what do that 
 signify ? he be old enough to take care of himself ; she be no long a 
 child to cry her eye out if she lose a senseless toy , or a stupid old 
 cripple . she be a young lady , and he expect to find she a famous 
 scholar when he return . " and so , with all flourish and bravado , and 
 suppress every attempt at pathos , the old man go his way , and 
 Sophy , hurry to Lady Montfort 's , weeping , distract , implore she 
 to send in all direction to discover and bring back the fugitive , be 
 there detain a captive guest . but Waife leave a letter also for Lady 
 Montfort , caution and adjure she , as she value Sophy 's safety from 
 the scandal of Jasper 's claim , not to make any imprudent attempt to 
 discover he . such attempt would only create the very publicity from the 
 chance of which he be seek to escape . the necessity of this caution 
 be so obvious that Lady Montfort could only send she most confidential 
 servant to inquire guardedly in the neighbourhood , until she have 
 summon George Morley from Humberston , and take he into counsel . 
 Waife have permit she to relate to he , on strict promise of secrecy , 
 the tale he have confide to she . George enter with the deep 
 sympathy into Sophy 's distress ; but he make she comprehend the 
 indiscretion and peril of any noisy research . he promise that he 
 himself would spare no pain to ascertain the old man 's hiding - place , 
 and see , at least , if he could not be persuade either to return or 
 suffer she to join he , that he be not leave destitute and comfortless . 
 nor be this an idle promise . George , though his inquiry be 
 unceasing , cripple by the restraint impose on they , be so acute in 
 divining , and so active in follow up each clue to the wanderer 's 
 artful doubling , that more than once he have actually come upon the 
 track , and find the very spot where Waife or Sir Isaac have be see a 
 few day before . still , up to the day on which Morley have last report 
 progress , the ingenious ex - actor , fertile in all resource of stratagem 
 and disguise , have baffle his research . at first , however , Waife have 
 greatly relieve the mind of these anxious friend , and cheer even 
 Sophy 's heavy heart , by letter , gay though brief . these letter have , 
 by their postmark , lead to his trace , he have state , in apparent anger , 
 that reason for discontinue they . and for the last six week no 
 line from he have be receive . in fact , the old man , on resolve 
 to consummate his self - abnegation , strove more and more to wean his 
 grandchild 's thought from his image . he deem it so essential to her 
 whole future that , now she have find a home in so secure and so elevated 
 a sphere , she should gradually accustom herself to a new rank of life , 
 from which he be an everlasting exile ; should lose all trace of 
 his very being ; efface a connection that , cease to protect , could 
 henceforth only harm and dishonour she , - that he try , as it be , 
 to blot himself out of the world which now smile on she . he do not 
 underrate her grief in its first freshness ; he know that , could she 
 learn where he be , all else would be forget - she would insist on 
 fly to he . but he continually murmur to himself : " youth be ever 
 proverbially short of memory ; its sorrow poignant , but not endure ; 
 now the wound be already scar over - they will not reopen if they 
 be leave to heal . " 

 he have , at first , think of hide somewhere not so far but that once 
 a - week , or once a - month , he might have steal into the ground , look 
 at the house that hold she - left , perhaps , in her walk some little 
 token of himself . but , on reflection , he feel that that luxury would be 
 too imprudent , and it cease to tempt he in proportion as he reason 
 himself into the stern wisdom of avoid all that could revive she 
 grief for he . at the commencement of this tale , in the outline give 
 of that grand melodrama in which Juliet Araminta play the part of 
 the Bandit 's child , her effort to decoy pursuit from the lair of the 
 persecute Mime be liken to the art of the skylark to lure eye and 
 hand from the nest of his young . more appropriate that illustration now 
 to the parent - bird than then to the fledgling . far and far from 
 the nest in which all his love be centre flee the old man . what if 
 Jasper do discover he now ; that very discovery would mislead the 
 pursuit from Sophy . most improbable that losely would ever guess that 
 they could become separate ; still more improbable , unless Waife , 
 imprudently lurk near her home , guide conjecture , that losely should 
 dream of seek under the roof of the lofty peeress the child that have 
 flee from Mr. Rugge . 

 poor old man ! his heart be break ; but his soul be so brightly 
 comfort that there , where many , many long mile off , I see 
 he stand , desolate and patient , in the corner of yon crowd 
 market - place , hold Sir Isaac by slacken string with listless 
 hand - Sir Isaac unshorn , travel - stain , draggle , with droop head 
 and melancholy eye - yea , as I see he there , jostle by the crowd , to 
 whom , now and then , point to that huge pannier on his arm , fill 
 with some homely pedlar ware , he mechanically mutter , " Buy " - yea , I 
 say , verily , as I see he thus , I can not draw near in pity - I see what 
 the crowd do not - the shadow of an angel 's wing over his grey head ; 
 and I stand reverentially aloof , with bated breath and bended knee . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

  a woman TOO often reason from her heart - hence two - thirds of her 
  mistakes and her trouble . a man of geniu , TOO , often reason from 
  his HEART - WENCE , also , two - third of his trouble and mistakes . 
  WHEREFORE , between woman and genius there be a SYMPATHETIC AFFINITY ; 
  each have some INTUITIVE comprehension of the secrets of the OTHER , 
  and the MORE FEMININE the woman , the MORE EXQUISITE the geniu , the 
  MORE SUBTLE the intelligence between the TWO . but note well that 
  this TACIT understand become OBSCURED , if HUMAN love PASS across 
  its relation . shakespeare interpret aright the MOST INTRICATE 
  RIDDLES in WOMAN . a woman be the first to interpret aright the ART 
  that be latent in SHAKESPEARE . but do ANNE HATHAWAY and 
  SHAKESPEARE understand each other ? 

 unobserve by the two young people , Lady Montfort sate watch they as 
 they move along the river bank . she be seat where Lionel have first 
 see she - in the kind of grassy chamber that have be win from the 
 foliage and the sward , close round with interlaced autumnal branch , 
 save where it open towards the water . if ever woman 's brain can 
 conceive and plot a scheme thoroughly pure from one ungentle , selfish 
 thread in its web , in such a scheme have Caroline Montfort bring 
 together those two fair young nature . and yet they be not uppermost 
 in her thought as she now gaze on they ; nor be it wholly for they 
 that her eye be fill with tear at once sweet , yet profoundly 
 mournful - holy , and yet intensely human . 

 woman love to think themselves uncomprehende - nor often without reason 
 in that foible ; for man , howsoever sagacious , rarely do entirely 
 comprehend woman , howsoever simple . and in this her sex have the 
 advantage over ours . our heart be bare to their eye , even though they 
 can never know what have be our life . but we may see every action 
 of their life , guard and circumscribe in conventional form , while 
 their heart will have many mystery to which we can never have the 
 key . but , in more than the ordinary sense of the word , Caroline Montfort 
 never have be a woman uncomprehende . nor even in her own sex do she 
 possess one confidante . only the outward leaf of that beautiful flower 
 open to the sunlight . the leaf round the core be gather fold 
 upon fold closely as when life itself be in the bud . 

 as all the year of her wed existence her heart have be deny the 
 natural household vent , so by some strange and unaccountable chance she 
 intellect also seem restrained and pen from its proper freedom and 
 play . during those barren year , she have read - she have ponder - she have 
 enjoy a commune with those whose mind instruct other , and still 
 her own intelligence , which in early youth have be characterise by 
 singular vivacity and brightness , and which Time have enrich with every 
 womanly accomplishment , seem chilled and objectless . it be not enough 
 that a mind should be cultured - it should have movement as well as 
 culture . Caroline Montfort 's lie quiescent like a beautiful form 
 spellbound to repose , but not to sleep . look on she once , as he stand 
 amongst a crowd whom her beauty dazzle , a poet say abruptly : " be my 
 guess not a sacrilege to one so spotless and so haughty , I should say 
 that I have hit on the solution of an enigma that long perplex I ; 
 and in the core of that queen of the lily , could we strip the leaf 
 fold round it , we should find remorse . " 

 Lady Montfort start ; the shadow of another form than her own fall 
 upon the sward . George Morley stand behind she , his finger on his lip . 
 " hush , " he say in a whisper , ' see , Sophy be look for I up the river . 
 I know she would be - I steal this way on purpose - for I would speak to 
 you before I face her question . " 

 " what be the matter ? you alarm I , " say Lady Montfort , on gain a 
 part of the ground more remote from the river , to which George have 
 silently lead the way . 

 " Nay , my dear cousin , there be less cause for alarm than for anxious 
 deliberation , and that upon more matter than those which directly 
 relate to our poor fugitive . you know that I long shrunk from enlist 
 the police in aid of our search . I be too sensible of the pain and 
 offence which such an application would occasion Waife -   let we continue 
 so to call he   - and the discovery of it might even induce he to put 
 himself beyond our reach , and quit England . but his prolonged silence , 
 and my fear lest some illness or mishap might have befall he , 
 together with my serious apprehension of the effect which unrelieve 
 anxiety might produce on Sophy 's health , make I resolve to waive former 
 scruple . since I last see you I have apply to one of the high 
 police - officer accustom to confidential investigation of a similar 
 nature . the next day he come to tell I that he have learn that a 
 friend of his , who have be formerly a distinguished agent in the 
 detective police , have be engage for month in track a person whom 
 he conjecture to be the same as the one whom I have commission he 
 to discover , and with somewhat less caution and delicacy than I have 
 enjoin . the fugitive 's real name have be give to this ex - agent - the 
 cause for search , that he have abduct and be conceal his 
 granddaughter from her father . it be easy for I to perceive why this 
 novel search have hitherto fail , no suspicion be entertain that 
 Waife have separate himself from Sophy , and the inquiry be therefore 
 rather direct towards the grandchild than the grandfather . but that 
 inquiry have altogether cease of late , and for this terrible reason - a 
 different section of the police have fix its eye upon the father on 
 whose behalf the search have be institute . this Jasper Losely   ah ! 
 our poor friend might well shudder to think Sophy should fall into 
 his hand !   haunt the resort of the most lawless and formidable 
 desperado of London . he appear to be a kind of authority amongst 
 they ; but there be no evidence that as yet he have commit himself to 
 any participation in their habitual course . he live profusely , for a 
 person in such society   regale daredevil whom he awe by a strength 
 and courage which be describe as extraordinary , but with out any 
 visible mean . it seem that the ex - agent , who have be thus previously 
 employ in Jasper Losely 's name , have be engage , not by Jasper 
 himself , but by a person in very respectable circumstance , whose name 
 I have ascertain to be Poole . and the ex - agent deem it right to 
 acquaint this Mr. Poole with Jasper 's evil character and ambiguous mode 
 of life , and to intimate to his employer that it might not be prudent to 
 hold any connection with such a man , and still less proper to assist 
 in restore a young girl to his care . on this Mr. Poole become so much 
 agitated , and express himself so incoherently as to his relation with 
 Jasper , that the ex - agent conceive suspicion against Poole himself , 
 and report the whole circumstance to one of the chief of the former 
 service , through whom they reach the very man whom I myself be 
 employ . but this ex - agent , who have , after his last interview with 
 Poole , decline all further interference , have since then , through a 
 correspondent in a country town , whom he have employ at the first , 
 obtain a clue to my dear old friend 's wandering , more recent , and 
 I think more hopeful , than any I have yet discover . you will remember 
 that when question Sophy as to any friend in her former life to whom 
 it be probable Waife might have address himself , she could think of 
 no one so probable as a cobbler name Merle , with whom he and she have 
 once lodge , and of whom he have often speak to she with much gratitude 
 as have put he in the way of recover herself , and have show 
 he a peculiar trustful kindness on that occasion . but you will remember 
 also that I could not find this Merle ; he have leave the village , near 
 this very place , in which he have spend the great part of his life - his 
 humble trade have be neglect in consequence of some strange 
 superstitious occupation in which , as he have grow old , he have become 
 more and more absorbed . he have fall into poverty , his effect have be 
 sell off ; he have go away no one know whither . well , the ex - agent , who 
 have also be direct to this Merle by his employer , have , through his 
 correspondent , ascertain that the cobbler be live at Norwich , where 
 he pass under the name of the Wise Man , and where he be in perpetual 
 danger of be send to the house of correction as an impostor , deal 
 in astrology , crystal - seeing , and such silly or nefarious practice . 
 very odd , indeed , and very melancholy , too , " quoth the scholar , lift 
 up his hand and eye , " that a man so gifted as our poor friend should 
 ever have cultivate an acquaintance with a cobbler who deal in the 
 Black Art ! " 

 " Sophy have talk to I much about that cobbler , " say Lady Montfort , 
 with her sweet half - smile . " it be under his roof that she first see 
 Lionel Haughton . but though the poor man may be an ignorant enthusiast , 
 he be certainly , by her account , too kind and simple - hearted to be a 
 designing impostor . " 

 GEORGE . - " possibly . but to go on with my story : a few week ago , an 
 elderly lame man , accompany by a dog , who be evidently poor dear Sir 
 Isaac , lodge two day with Merle at Norwich . on hear this , I myself 
 go yesterday to Norwich , see and talk to Merle , and through this 
 man I hope , more easily , delicately , and expeditiously than by any 
 other mean , to achieve our object . he evidently can assist we , and , 
 as evidently , Waife have not tell he that he be fly from Sophy and 
 friend , but from enemy and persecutor . for Merle , who be impervious 
 to bribe , and who at first be churlish and rude , become soften as my 
 honest affection for the fugitive grow clear to he , and still more when 
 I tell he how wretched Sophy be at her grandfather 's disappearance , 
 and that she might fret herself into a decline . and we part with this 
 promise on his side , that if I would bring down to he either Sophy 
 herself   which be out of the question   or a line from she , which , in 
 refer to any circumstance while under his roof that could only be 
 know to she and himself , should convince he that the letter be from 
 her hand , assure he that it be for Waife 's benefit and at her prayer 
 that he should bestir himself in search for her grandfather , and that 
 he might implicitly trust to I , he would do all he could to help we . so 
 far , then , so good . but I have now more to say , and that be in reference 
 to Sophy herself . while we be track her grandfather , the peril to 
 she be not lessen . never be that peril thoroughly bring before 
 my eye until I have hear actually from the police agent the dreadful 
 character and association of the man who can claim she in a father 
 name . Waife , it be true , have tell you that his son be profligate , 
 spendthrift , lawless - seek she , not from natural affection , but as 
 an instrument to be use , roughly and coarsely , for the purpose of 
 extort money from Mr. Darrell . but this stop far short of the 
 terrible reality . imagine the effect on her nerve , so depressed as they 
 now be , nay , on her very life , should this audacious miscreant force 
 himself here and say , ' come with I , you be my child . ' and be we quite 
 sure that out of some refining nobleness of conscience she might not 
 imagine it her duty to obey , and to follow he ? the more abject and 
 friendless his condition , the more she might deem it her duty to be by 
 his side . I have study she from her childhood . she be capable of 
 any error in judgment , if it be make to appear a martyr 's devoted 
 self - sacrifice . you may well shudder , my dear cousin . but grant that she 
 be sway by we and by the argument that so to act would betray 
 and kill her beloved grandfather , still , in resist this ruffian 's 
 paternal authority , what violent and painful scene might ensue ! what 
 dreadful publicity to be attach for ever to her name ! nor be this all . 
 Grant that her father do not discover she , but that he be lead by 
 his associate into some criminal offence , and suffer by the law - her 
 relationship , both to he from whom you would guard she , and to he 
 whose hearth you have so tenderly rear she to grace , suddenly drag 
 to day - would not the shame kill she ? and in that disclosure how keen 
 would be the anguish of Darrell ! " 

 " oh , heaven ! " cry Caroline Montfort , white as ash and wring she 
 hand , " you freeze I with terror . but this man can not be so fallen as 
 you describe . I have see he - speak with he in his youth - hop then 
 to assist in a task of conciliation , pardon . nothing about he then 
 forebode so fearful a corruption . he might be vain , extravagant , 
 selfish , false - ah , yes ! he be false indeed ! but still the ruffian 
 you paint , band with common criminal , can not be the same as the gay , 
 dainty , perfume , fair - faced adventurer with whom my ill - fat playmate 
 flee her father 's house . you shake your head - what be it you advise ? " 

 " to expedite your own project - to make at once the resolute attempt to 
 secure to this poor child she good , her most rightful protector - to let 
 whatever can be do to guard she from danger or reclaim her father from 
 course to which despair may be drive he - to let , I say , all this 
 be do by the person whose interest in do it effectively be so 
 paramount - whose ability to judge of and decide on the wise mean 
 be so immeasurably superior to all that lie within our own limit 
 experience of life . " 

 " but you forget that our friend tell I that he have appeal to - to 
 Mr. Darrell on his return to England : that Mr. Darrell have peremptorily 
 refuse to credit the claim ; and have sternly say that , even if Sophy 's 
 birth could be prove , he would not place under his father 's roof the 
 grandchild of William Losely . " 

 " true ; and yet you hop reasonably enough to succeed where he , poor 
 outcast , have fail . " 

 " yes , yes ; I do hope that Sophy - her manner form , her education 
 complete - all her natural exquisite grace so cultured and refine , as 
 to justify pride in the proud kindre - I do so hope that she should 
 be bring , as it be by accident , under his notice ; that she would 
 interest and charm he ; and that the claim , when make , might thus be 
 welcome with delight . Mr. Darrell 's abrupt return to a seclusion so 
 rigid forbid the opportunity that ought easily have be find or make 
 if he have remain in London . but suddenly , violently to renew a 
 claim that such a man have reject , before he have ever see that dear 
 child - before his heart and his taste plead for she - who would dare to 
 do it ? or , if so daring , who could hope success ? " 

 " my dear Lady Montfort , my noble cousin , with repute as spotless as the 
 ermine of your robe - who but you ? " 

 " who but I ? any one . Mr. Darrell would not even read through a letter 
 address to he by I . " 

 George star with astonishment . Caroline 's face be downcast - her 
 attitude that of profound humiliate dejection . 

 " incredible ! " say he at length . " I have always suspect , and so indeed 
 have my uncle , that Darrell have some cause of complaint against your 
 mother . perhaps he might have suppose that she have not sufficiently 
 watch over his daughter , or have not sufficiently inquire into the 
 character of the governess whom she recommend to he ; and that this 
 have lead to an estrangement between Darrell and your mother , which could 
 not fail to extend somewhat to yourself . but such misunderstanding can 
 surely now be easily remove . talk of his not read a letter address 
 to he by you ! why , do I not remember , when I be on a visit to my 
 schoolfellow , his son , what influence you , a mere child yourself , have 
 over that grave , busy man , then in the height of his career - how you 
 alone could run without awe into his study - how you alone have the 
 privilege to arrange his book , sort his paper - so that we two boy 
 look on you with a solemn respect , as the depositary of all his state 
 secret - how vainly you try to decoy that poor timid Matilda , his 
 daughter , into a share of your own audacity ! - be not all this true ? " 

 " oh yes , yes - old day go for ever ! " 

 " do I not remember how you promise that , before I go back to school , 
 I should hear Darrell read aloud - how you bring the volume of Milton 
 to he in the evening - how he say , ' no , to - morrow night ; I must now 
 go to the House of Commons ' - how I marvel to hear you answer boldly , 
 ' to - morrow night George will have leave we , and I have promise that he 
 shall hear you read ' - and how , look at you under those dark brow 
 with serious softness , he say : ' right : promise once give , must 
 be keep . but be it not rash to promise in another 's name ? ' - and you 
 answer , half gently , half pettishly , ' as if you could fail I ! ' he 
 take the book without another word , and read . what read it be too ! 
 and do you not remember another time , how - " 

 LADY montfort   interrupt with nervous impatience . - " ay , ay - I need 
 no reminding of all - all ! Kindest , noblest , gentle friend to a giddy , 
 heedless child , unable to appreciate the blessing . but now , George , I 
 dare not , I can not write to Mr. Darrell . " 

 George muse a moment , and conjecture that Lady Montfort have , in 
 the inconsiderate impulsive season of youth , aid in the clandestine 
 marriage of Darrell 's daughter , and have become thus associate in his 
 mind with the affliction that have embitter his existence . be this 
 so , certainly she would not be the fit , intercessor on behalf of 
 Sophy . his thought then turn to his uncle , Darrell 's early friend , 
 not suspect that Colonel Morley be actually the person whom Darrell 
 have already appoint his adviser and representative in all transaction 
 that might concern the very party under discussion . but just as he 
 be about to suggest the expediency of writing to Alban to return to 
 England , and take he into confidence and consultation , Lady Montfort 
 resume , in a calm voice and with a less troubled countenance : 

 " who should be the pleader for one whose claim , if acknowledge , would 
 affect his own fortune , but Lionel Haughton ? - hold ! - look where yonder 
 they come into sight - there by the gap in the evergreen . may we not 
 hope that Providence , bring those two beautiful life together , give 
 a solution to the difficulty which thwart our action and embarrass our 
 judgment ? I conceive and plan a blissful romance the first moment 
 I gather fran Sophy 's artless confidence the effect that have be 
 produce on her whole train of thought and feeling by the first meeting 
 with Lionel in her childhood ; by his brotherly , chivalrous kindness , 
 and , above all , by the chance word he let fall , which discontent she 
 with a life of shift and disguise , and reveal to she the instinct of 
 her own holy truthful nature . an alliance between Lionel Haughton 
 and Sophy seem to I the happy possible event that could befall 
 Guy Darrell . the two branch of his family united - a painful household 
 secret confine to the circle of his own kindre - grant Sophy 's 
 claim never perfectly clear up , but subject to a tormenting 
 doubt - her future equally assure - her possible right equally 
 establish - Darrell 's conscience and pride reconcile to each other . 
 and how , even but as wife to his young kinsman , he would learn to love 
 one so exquisitely endearing ! "   Lady Montfort pause a moment , and then 
 resume .   " when I hear that Mr. Darrell be about to marry again , my 
 project be necessarily arrest . " 

 " certainly , " say George , " if he form new tie , Sophy would be less 
 an object in his existence , whether or not he recognise her birth . the 
 alliance between she and Lionel would lose many of its advantage ; and 
 any address to he on Sophy 's behalf would become yet more ungraciously 
 receive . " 

 LADY montfort . - " in that case I have resolve to adopt Sophy as my 
 own child ; lie by from my abundant income an ample dowry for she ; and 
 whether Mr. Darrell ever know it or not , at least I should have the 
 secret joy to think that I be save he from the risk of remorse 
 hereafter - should she be , as we believe , his daughter 's child , and have 
 be throw upon the world destitute ; - yes , the secret joy of feel 
 that I be shelter , foster as a mother , one whose rightful home 
 might be with he who in my childhood shelter , foster I ! " 

 GEORGE   much affected . - " how , in proportion as we know you , the beauty 
 which you veil from the world outshine that which you can not prevent 
 the world from see ! but you must not let this grateful enthusiasm 
 blind your well judgment . you think these young person be begin 
 to be really attach to each other . then it be the more necessary that 
 no time should be lose in learn how Mr. Darrell would regard such a 
 marriage . I do not feel so assured of his consent as you appear to do . 
 at all event , this should be ascertain before their happiness 
 be seriously involve . I agree with you that Lionel be the good 
 intermediator to plead for Sophy ; and his very generosity in urge she 
 prior claim to a fortune that might otherwise pass to he be likely to 
 have weight with a man so generous himself as Guy Darrell be hold to be . 
 but do Lionel yet know all ? have you yet venture to confide to he , 
 or even to Sophy herself , the nature of her claim on the man who so 
 proudly deny it ? " 

 " no - I deem it due to Sophy 's pride of sex to imply to she that she 
 would , in fortune and in social position , be entitle to equality with 
 those whom she might meet here . and that be true , if only as the child 
 whom I adopt and enrich . I have not say more . and only since Lionel have 
 appear have she ever seem interested in anything that relate to 
 her parentage . from the recollection of her father she naturally 
 shrink - she never mention his name . but two day ago she do ask 
 timidly , and with great change of countenance , if it be through her 
 mother that she be entitle to a rank high than she have hitherto 
 know ; and when I answer ' yes , ' she sigh , and say ' but my dear 
 grandfather never speak to I of she ; he never even see my mother . ' " 

 GEORGE . - " and you , I suspect , do not much like to talk of that mother . I 
 have gather from you , unawares to yourself , that she be not a person 
 you could highly praise ; and to I , as a boy , she seem , with all her 
 timidity , wayward and deceitful . " 

 LADY montfort . - " alas ! how bitterly she must have suffer - and how 
 young she be ! but you be right ; I can not speak to Sophy of her mother , 
 the subject be connect with so much sorrow . but I tell she ' that 
 she should know all soon , ' and she say , with a sweet and melancholy 
 patience , ' when my poor grandfather will be by to hear ; I can wait . ' " 

 GEORGE . - " but be Lionel , with his quick intellect and busy imagination , 
 equally patient ? do he not guess at the truth ? you have tell he that 
 you do meditate a project which affect Guy Darrell , and require his 
 promise not to divulge to Darrell his visit in this house . " 

 LADY montfort - " he know that Sophy 's paternal grandfather be William 
 Losely . from your uncle he hear William Losely 's story , and - " 

 GEORGE . - " my uncle Alban ? " 

 LADY MOSTFORT . - " yes ; the Colonel be well acquainted with the elder 
 losely in former day , and speak of he to Lionel with great affection . 
 it seem that Lionel 's father know he also , and thoughtlessly involve 
 he in his own pecuniary difficulty . Lionel be not long a visitor 
 here before he ask I abruptly if Mr. Waife 's real name be not 
 losely . I be oblige to own it , beg he not at present to question 
 I far . he say then , with much emotion , that he have an hereditary 
 debt to discharge to William Losely , and that he be the last person who 
 ought to relinquish belief in the old man 's innocence of the crime 
 for which the law have condemn he , or to judge he harshly if the 
 innocence be not substantiate . you remember with what eagerness he 
 join in your search , until you positively forbid his interposition , 
 fear that should our poor friend hear of inquiry institute by one 
 whom he could not recognise as a friend , and might possibly consider 
 an emissary of his son 's , he would take yet great pain to conceal 
 himself . but from the moment that Lionel learn that Sophy 's 
 grandfather be William Losely , his manner to Sophy become yet more 
 tenderly respectful . he have a glorious nature , that young man ! but do 
 your uncle never speak to you of William Losely ? " 

 " no . I be not surprised at that . my uncle Alban avoid ' painful 
 subject . ' I be only surprised that he should have revive a painful 
 subject in talk to Lionel . but I now understand why , when Waife first 
 hear my name , he seem affect , and why he so specially enjoin 
 I never to mention or describe he to my friend and relation . then 
 Lionel know Losely 's story , but not his son 's connection with Darrell ? " 

 " certainly not . he know but what be generally say in the world , that 
 Darrell 's daughter elope with a Mr. Hammond , a man of inferior birth , 
 and die abroad , leave but one child , who be also dead . still Lionel 
 do suspect , - my very injunction of secrecy must make he more than 
 suspect , that the Loselys be somehow or other mix up with Darrell 's 
 family history . hush ! I hear his voice yonder - they approach . " 

 " my dear cousin , let it be settle between we , then , that you frankly 
 and without delay communicate to Lionel the whole truth , so far as it be 
 know to we , and put it to he how good and most touchingly to move Mr. 
 Darrell towards she , of whom we hold he to be the natural protector . I 
 will write to my uncle to return to England that he may assist we in the 
 same good work . meanwhile , I shall have only good tiding to communicate 
 to Sophy in my new hope to discover her grandfather through Merle . " 

 here , as the sun be set , Lionel and Sophy come in sight , - above 
 their head , the western cloud bath in gold and purple . Sophy , 
 perceive George , bound forwards , and reach his side , breathless . 




 CHAPTER V. 

  LIONEL haughton have lose his heart , it be no long a question of 
  what he will do with it . but what will be do with it be a very 
  GRAVE QUESTION indeed . 

 Lionel forestall Lady Montfort in the delicate and embarrassing 
 subject which her cousin have urge she to open . for while George , 
 lead away Sophy , inform she of his journey to Norwich , and his 
 interview with Merle , Lionel draw . Lady Montfort into the house , and 
 with much agitation , and in abrupt hurried accent , implore she to 
 withdraw the promise which forbid he to inform his benefactor how and 
 where his time have be spend of late . he burst forth with a declaration 
 of that love with which Sophy have inspire he , and which Lady Montfort 
 could not be but prepare to hear . " nothing , " say he , " but a respect 
 for her more than filial anxiety at this moment could have keep my 
 heart thus long silent . but that heart be so deeply pledge - so utterly 
 her - that it have grow an ingratitude , a disrespect - to my generous 
 kinsman , to conceal from he any long the feeling which must colour 
 my whole future existence . nor can I say to she , ' can you return my 
 affection ? - will you listen to my vow ? - will you accept they at the 
 altar ? ' - until I have win , as I be sure to win , the approve consent of 
 my more than father . " 

 " you feel sure to win that consent , in spite of the stain on her 
 grandfather 's name ? " 

 " when Darrell learn that , but for my poor father 's fault , that name 
 might be spotless now ! - yes ! I be not Mr. Darrell 's son - the transmitter 
 of his line . I believe yet that he will form new tie . by my mother 's 
 side I have no ancestor to boast of ; and you have own to I that 
 Sophy 's mother be of gentle birth . Alban Morley tell I , when I last 
 see he , that Darrell wish I to marry , and leave I free to choose 
 my bride . yes ; I have no doubt of Mr. Darrell 's consent . my dear mother 
 will welcome to her heart the prize so coveted by mine ; and Charles 
 Haughton 's son will have a place at his hearth for the old age of 
 William Losely . withdraw your interdict at once , dearest Lady Montfort , 
 and confide to I all that you have hitherto leave unexplained , but have 
 promise to reveal when the time come . the time have come . " 

 " it have come , " say Lady Montfort , solemnly ; " and Heaven grant that it 
 may bear the blessed result which be in my thought when I take Sophy 
 as my own adopt daughter , and hail in yourself the reconciler of 
 conflict circumstance . not under this roof should you woo William 
 Losely 's grandchild . doubly be you bind to ask Guy Darrell 's consent 
 and blessing . at his hearth woo your Sophy - at his hand ask a bride in 
 his daughter 's child . " 

 and to her wonder listener , Caroline Montford tell her ground for 
 the belief that connect the last of the Darrells with the convict 's 
 grandchild . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

  CREDULOUS crystal - seer , young lover , and GRAVE wise MEN - ALL in 
  the same category . 

 George Morley set out the next day for Norwich , in which antique city , 
 ever since the ' dane people it , some wizard or witch , star - reader , or 
 crystal - seer ' have enjoy a mysterious renown , perpetuate thus through 
 all change in our land 's social progress the long line of Vala and 
 Saga , who come with the Raven and Valkyr from scandinavian pine shore . 
 Merle 's reserve vanish on the perusal of Sophy 's letter to he . he 
 inform George that Waife declare he have plenty of money , and have even 
 force a loan upon Merle ; but that he like an active , wander life ; 
 it keep he from think , and that a pedlar 's pack would give he a 
 license for vagrancy , and a budget to defray its expense ; that Merle 
 have be consult by he in the choice of light popular ware , and as 
 to the route he might find the most free from compete rival . Merle 
 willingly agree to accompany George in quest of the wanderer , whom , 
 by the help of his crystal , he seem calmly sure he could track and 
 discover . accordingly , they both set out in the somewhat devious and 
 desultory road which Merle , who have some old acquaintance amongst the 
 ancient profession of hawker , have advise Waife to take . but Merle , 
 unhappily confide more in his crystal than Waife 's steady adherence 
 to the chart prescribe , lead the Oxford scholar the life of a 
 will - of - the - wisp ; zigzag , and shoot to and fro , here and there , till , 
 just when George have lose all patience , Merle chance to see , not in 
 the crystal , a pelerine on the neck of a farmer 's daughter , which he 
 be morally certain he have himself select for Waife 's pannier . and 
 the girl state in reply to his inquiry that her father have buy that 
 pelerine as a present for she , not many day before , of a pedlar in a 
 neighbouring town , to the market of which the farmer resort weekly , 
 Merle cast an horary scheme , and find the Third House   of short 
 journey   in favourable aspect to the Seventh House   contain the 
 object desire , and in conjunction with the Eleventh House   friend , 
 he gravely inform the scholar that their toil be at an end , and 
 that the Hour and the Man be at hand . not over - sanguine , George 
 consign himself and the seer to an early train , and reach the 
 famous town of Oazelford , whither , when the chronological order of our 
 narrative   which we have so far somewhat forestalled   will permit , we 
 shall conduct the inquisitive reader . 

 Meanwhile Lionel , subscribe without a murmur to Lady Montfort 's 
 injunction to see Sophy no more till Darrell have be confer with 
 and his consent won , return to his lodging in London , sanguine of 
 success , and flush with joy . his intention be to set out at once to 
 Fawley ; but on reach town he find there a few line from Dairell 
 himself , in reply to a long and affectionate letter which Lionel 
 have write a few day before ask permission to visit the old 
 manor - house ; for amidst all his absorb love for Sophy , the image of 
 his lonely benefactor in that gloomy hermitage often rise before he . 
 in these line , Darrell , not unkindly , but very peremptorily , decline 
 Lionel 's overture . 

 " in truth , my dear young kinsman , " write the recluse - " in truth I 
 be , with slowness , and with frequent relapse , labour through 
 convalescence from a moral fever . my nerve be yet unstrung . I be as 
 one to whom be prescribe the most complete repose ; - the visit , even 
 of friend the dearest , forbid as a perilous excitement . the sight of 
 you - of any one from the great world - but especially of one whose 
 rich vitality of youth and hope affront and mock my own fatigued 
 exhaustion , would but irritate , unsettle , torture I . when I be quite 
 well I will ask you to come . I shall enjoy your visit . till then , on no 
 account , and on no pretext , let my morbid ear catch the sound of your 
 footfall on my quiet floor . write to I often , but tell I nothing 
 of the news and gossip of the world . tell I only of yourself , your 
 study , your thought , your sentiment , your wish . nor forget my 
 injunction . Marry young , marry for love ; let no ambition of power , no 
 greed of gold , ever mislead you into give to your life a companion 
 who be not the half of your soul . choose with the heart of a man ; I know 
 that you will choose with the self - esteem of a gentleman ; and be assure 
 beforehand of the sympathy and sanction of your ' churlish but LOVING 
 KINSMAN . ' " 

 after this letter , Lionel feel that , at all event , he could not at once 
 proceed to the old manor - house in defiance of its owner 's prohibition . 
 he write briefly , entreat Darrell to forgive he if he persist 
 in the prayer to be receive at Fawley , state that his desire for a 
 personal interview be now suddenly become special and urgent ; that it 
 not only concern himself , but affect his benefactor . by return 
 of post Darrell reply with curt frigidity , repeat , with even 
 sternness , his refusal to receive Lionel , but profess himself ready 
 to attend to all that his kinsman might address to he by letter . " if it 
 be as you state , " write Darrell , with his habitual irony , " a matter 
 that relate to myself , I claim , as a lawyer for my own affair - the 
 precaution I once enjoin to my client - a write brief should always 
 precede a personal consultation . " 

 in fact , the proud man suspect that Lionel have be directly or 
 indirectly address on behalf of Jasper Losely ; and certainly that 
 be the last subject on which he would have grant an interview to 
 his young kinsman . Lionel , however ; be not perhaps sorry to be thus 
 compel to trust to write his own and Sophy 's cause . Darrell be 
 one of those man whose presence inspire a certain awe - one of those 
 man whom we feel , upon great occasion , less embarrassed to address by 
 letter than in person . Lionel 's pen move rapidly - his whole heart and 
 soul suffuse with feeling - ; and , rush over the page , he remind 
 Darrell of the day when he have tell to the rich man the tale of the 
 lovely wandering child , and how , out of his sympathy for that child , 
 Darrell 's approve , foster tenderness to himself have grow . thus 
 indirectly to her forlorn condition have he owe the rise in his own 
 fortune . he go through the story of William Losely as he have gather 
 it from Alban Morley , and touch pathetically on his own father 's share 
 in that dark history . if William Losely really be hurry into crime by 
 the tempting necessity for a comparatively trifling sum , but for Charles 
 Haughton would the necessity have arise ? eloquently then the lover 
 united grandfather and grandchild in one touching picture - their love 
 for each other , their dependence on each other . he enlarge on Sophy 's 
 charming , unselfish , simple , noble character ; he tell how he have again 
 find she ; he dwell on the refining accomplishment she owe to Lady 
 Montfort 's care . how come she with Lady Montfort ? why have Lady Montfort 
 cherish , adopt she ? because Lady Montfort tell he how much her own 
 childhood have owe to Darrell ; because , should Sophy be , as allege , the 
 offspring of his daughter , the heiress of his line , Caroline Montfort 
 rejoice to guard she from danger , save she from poverty , and ultimately 
 thus to fit she to be not only acknowledge with delight , but with 
 pride . why have he be enjoin not to divulge to Darrell that he have 
 again find , and under Lady Montfort 's roof , the child whom , while yet 
 unconscious of her claim , Darrell himself have vainly seek to find , 
 and benevolently design to succour ? because Lady Montfort wish to 
 fulfil her task - complete Sophy 's education , interrupt by grief for 
 her miss grandfather , and obtain indeed , when William Losely again 
 return , some proof   if such exist   to corroborate the assertion 
 of Sophy 's parentage . " and , " add Lionel , " Lady Montfort seem to fear 
 that she have give you some cause of displeasure - what I know not , but 
 which might have induce you to disapprove of the acquaintance I have 
 begin with she . be that as it may , would you could hear the reverence 
 with which she ever allude to your worth - the gratitude with which she 
 attest her mother 's and her own early obligation to your intellect 
 and heart ! " finally , Lionel weave all his thread of recital into the 
 confession of the deep love into which his romantic memory of Sophy 's 
 wandering childhood have be ripen by the sight of her graceful , 
 cultured youth . " Grant , " he say , " that her father 's tale be false - and 
 no doubt you have sufficient reason to discredit it - still , if 
 you can not love she as your daughter 's child , receive , know she , I 
 implore - let her love and revere you - as my wife ! leave I to protect 
 she from a lawless father - leave I to redeem , by some deed of loyalty 
 and honour , any stain that her grandsire 's sentence may seem to fix upon 
 our union . oh ! if ambitious before , how ambitious I should be now - to 
 efface for her sake , as for mine , her grandsire 's shame , my father 's 
 error ! but if , on the other hand , she should , on the requisite 
 inquiry , be prove to descend from your ancestry - your father 's blood 
 in her pure vein - I know , alas ! then that I should have no right to 
 aspire to such nuptial . who would even think of her descent from a 
 William Losely ? who would not be too proud to remember only her descent 
 from you ? all spot would vanish in the splendour of your renown ; the 
 high in the land would court her alliance . and I be but the pensioner 
 of your bounty , and only on my father 's side of gentle origin . but 
 still I think you would not reject I - you would place the future to 
 my credit ; and I would wait , wait patiently , till I have win such a 
 soldier 's name as would entitle I to mate with a daughter of the 
 Darrells . " 

 sheet upon sheet the young eloquence flow on - seeking , with an art of 
 which the writer be unconscious , all the argument and point of 
 view which might be the most captivating to the superb pride or to 
 the exquisite tenderness which seem to lionel the rule element of 
 Darrell 's character . 

 he have not to wait long for a reply . at the first glance of the address 
 on its cover , his mind misgave he ; the hope that bad hitherto elate 
 his spirit yield to abrupt foreboding . Darrell 's handwriting be 
 habitually in harmony with the intonation of his voice - singularly 
 clear , form with a peculiar and original elegance , yet with the 
 undulating ease of a natural , candid , impulsive character . and that 
 decorous care in such mere trifle as the very sealing of a letter , 
 which , neglect by muse poet and abstracted author , be observable 
 in man of high public station , be in Guy Darrell significant of the 
 patrician dignity that impart a certain stateliness to his most 
 ordinary action . 

 but in the letter which lie in Lionel 's hand the writer be scarcely 
 recognisable - the direction blur , the character dash off from a 
 pen fierce yet tremulous ; the seal a great blotch of wax ; the device 
 of the heron , with its soar motto , indistinct and mangle , as if the 
 stamp instrument have be pluck wrathfully away before the wax have 
 cool . and when Lionel open the letter , the handwriting within be 
 yet more indicative of mental disorder . the very ink look menacing 
 and angry - blacker as the pen have be forcibly drive into the page . 
 " unhappy boy ! " begin the ominous epistle , " be it through you that the 
 false and detest woman who have wither up the noon - day of my life 
 seek to dishonour its blighted close ? talk not to I of Lady Montfort 's 
 gratitude and reverence ! talk not to I of her amiable , tender , 
 holy aim , to obtrude upon my childless house the grand - daughter of a 
 convict felon ! show she these line , and ask she by what knowledge of 
 my nature she can assume that ignominy to my name would be a blessing to 
 my hearth ? ask she , indeed , how she can dare to force herself still upon 
 my thought - dare to imagine she can lay I under obligation - dare 
 to think she can be something still in my forlorn existence ! Lionel 
 Haughton , I command you in the name of all the dead whom we can claim 
 as ancestor in common , to tear from your heart , as you would tear a 
 thought of disgrace , this image which have bewitch your reason . my 
 daughter , thank Heaven , leave no pledge of an execrable union . but a 
 girl who have be bring up by a thief - a girl whom a wretch so lose 
 to honour as Jasper losely seek to make an instrument of fraud to 
 my harassment and disgrace , be her virtue and beauty what they may , 
 I could not , without intolerable anguish , contemplate as the wife of 
 Lionel Haughton . but receive she as your wife ! 

 " admit she within these wall ! never , never ; I scorn to threaten you 
 with loss of favour , loss of fortune . marry she if you will . you shall 
 have an ample income secure to you . but from that moment our life be 
 separate - our relation cease . you will never again see nor address I . 
 but oh , Lionel , can you - can you inflict upon I this crown sorrow ? 
 can you , for the sake of a girl of whom you have see but little , or 
 in the Quixotism of atonement for your father 's fault , complete the 
 ingratitude I have experience from those who owe I most ? I can not 
 think it . I rejoice that you write - do not urge this suit in person . 
 I should not have be able to control my passion ; we might have part 
 foe . as it be , I restrain myself with difficulty ! that woman , that 
 child , associate thus to tear from I the last affection leave to my 
 ruin heart . no ! you will not be so cruel ! send this , I command you , 
 to Lady Montfort . see again neither she nor the impostor she have be 
 cherish for my disgrace . this letter will be your excuse to break off 
 with both - with both . GUY DARRELL . " 

 Lionel be stun . not for several hour could he recover 
 self - possession enough to analyse his own emotion , or discern the sole 
 course that lie before he . after such a letter from such a benefactor , 
 no option be leave to he . Sophy must be resign ; but the sacrifice 
 crush he to the earth - crush the very manhood out of he . he throw 
 himself on the floor , sob - sobbing as if body and soul be tear , 
 each from each , in convulsive spasm . 

 but send this letter to Lady Montfort ? a letter so wholly at variance 
 with Darrell 's dignity of character - a letter in which rage seem 
 lash to unreasone frenzy . such bitter language of hate and scorn , 
 and even insult to a woman , and to the very woman who have seem to 
 Lionel so reverently to cherish the writer 's name - so tenderly to scheme 
 for the writer 's happiness ! could he obey a command that seem to lower 
 darrell even more than it could humble she to whom it be send ? 

 yet disobey ! what but the letter itself could explain ? ah - and be there 
 not some strange misunderstanding with respect to Lady Montfort , which 
 the letter itself , and nothing but the letter , would enable she to 
 dispel ; and if dispel , might not Darrell 's whole mind undergo a 
 change ? a flash of joy suddenly break on his agitated , tempestuous 
 thought . he force himself again to read those blot impetuous line . 
 evidently - evidently , while write to Lionel - the subject Sophy - the 
 man 's wrathful heart have be address itself to neither . a suspicion 
 seize he ; with that suspicion , hope . he would send the letter , and 
 with but few word from himself - word that reveal his immense despair 
 at the thought of relinquish Sophy - intimate his belief that Darrell 
 here be , from some error of judgment which Lionel could not comprehend , 
 avenge himself on Lady Montfort ; and close with his prayer to she , 
 if so , to forgive line colour by hasty passion , and , for the sake of 
 all , not to disdain that self - vindication which might perhaps yet soften 
 a nature possess of such depth of sweetness as that which appear 
 now so cruel and so bitter . he would not yet despond - not yet commission 
 she to give his last farewell to Sophy . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

  the MAN - EATER continue to take his QUIET steak out of DOLLY POOLE ; 
  and be in turn subject to the ANATOMICAL knife of the DISSECTING 
  AUTHOR . two trap be lay for HIM - ONE by his FELLOW MAN - EATERS - 
  one by that DEADLY PERSECUTRIX , the woman who try to save HIM in 
  spite of all he can do to be HANGED . 

 meanwhile the unhappy Adolphus Poole have be the reluctant but 
 unfailing source from which Jasper Losely have weekly draw the 
 supply to his worthless and workless existence . never be a man more 
 constrainedly benevolent , and less recompense for pecuniary sacrifice 
 by applaud conscience , than the doomed inhabitant of Alhambra Villa . 
 in the utter failure of his attempt to discover Sophy , or to induce 
 Jasper to accept Colonel Morley 's proposal , he see this parasitical 
 monster fix upon his entrail , like the vulture on those of the 
 classic sufferer in mythological tale . Jasper , indeed , have accommodate 
 himself to this regular and unlaborious mode of gain " sa pauvre 
 vie . " to call once a week upon his old acquaintance , frighten he with 
 a few threat , or force a deathlike smile from agonising lip by a 
 few villanous joke , carry off his four sovereign , and enjoy himself 
 thereon till pay - day duly return , be a condition of thing that 
 Jasper do not greatly care to improve ; and truly have he say to Poole 
 that his early energy have leave he . as a sensualist of Jasper 's stamp 
 grow old and fall low , indolence gradually usurp the place once 
 occupy by vanity or ambition . Jasper be bitterly aware that his old 
 comeliness be go ; that never more could he ensnare a maiden 's heart 
 or a widow 's gold . and when this truth be fully bring home to he , 
 it make a strange revolution in all his habit . he care no long for 
 dress and gewgaw - seek rather to hide himself than to parade . in the 
 neglect of the person he have once so idolise - in the coarse roughness 
 which now characterise his exterior - there be that sullen despair 
 which the vain only know when what have make they dainty and jocund be 
 go for ever . the human mind , in deteriorate , fit itself to the 
 sphere into which it decline . Jasper would not now , if he could , have 
 drive a cabriolet down St. James 's Street . he have take more and more 
 to the vice of drinking as the excitement of gambling be withdraw from 
 he . for how gamble with those who have nothing to lose , and to whom he 
 himself would have be pigeon , not hawk ? and as he find that , on 
 what he thus draw regularly from Dolly Poole , he could command all 
 the comfort that his embrute taste now desire , so an odd kind of 
 prudence for the first time in his life come with what he choose to 
 consider " a settle income . " he mix with ruffian in their nightly 
 orgy ; treat they to cheap potation ; swagger , bully , boast , 
 but share in no project of theirs which might bring into jeopardy the 
 life which Dolly Poole render so comfortable and secure . his energy , 
 once so restless , be lull , partly by habitual intoxication , partly 
 by the physical pain which have nestle themselves into his robust 
 fibre , effort of an immense and still tenacious vitality to throw 
 off disease repugnant to its native magnificence of health . the fine 
 constitution be those which , when once seriously impair , occasion 
 the dire pain ; but they also enable the sufferer to bear pain that 
 would soon wear away the delicate . and Jasper bear his pain stoutly , 
 though at time they so exasperate his temper , that woe then to any of 
 his comrade whose want of caution or respect give he the occasion 
 to seek relief in wrath ! his hand be as heavy , his arm as stalwart 
 as ever . George Morley have be rightly inform . even by burglar and 
 cut - throat , whose danger he shun , while fearlessly he join 
 their circle , Jasper Losely be regard with terror . to be the awe of 
 reckless man , as he have be the admiration of foolish woman , this be 
 delight to his vanity , the last delight that be leave to it . but he thus 
 provoke a danger to which his arrogance be blind . his boon companion 
 begin to grow tired of he . he have be welcome to their resort on the 
 strength of the catchword or passport which confederate at Paris have 
 communicate to he , and of the reputation for great daring and small 
 scruple which he take from Cutts , who be of high caste amongst 
 their mysterious tribe , and who every now and then flit over the 
 Continent , safe and accurse as the Wandering Jew . but when they find 
 that this Achilles of the Greeks would only talk big , and employ his 
 wit on his private exchequer and his thews against themselves , they 
 begin not only to tire of his imperious manner , but to doubt his 
 fidelity to the cause . and , all of a sudden , Cutts , who have at first 
 extoll Jasper as one likely to be a valuable acquisition to the Family 
 of Night , alter his tone , and insinuate that the bravo be not to be 
 trust ; that his reckless temper and incautious talk when drunk would 
 unfit he for a safe accomplice in any skilful project of plunder ; 
 and that he be so unscrupulous , and have so little sympathy with their 
 class , that he might be quite capable of play spy or turn king 's 
 evidence ; that , in short , it would be well to rid themselves of his 
 domineering presence . still there be that physical power in this 
 lazy Hercules - still , if the do - nought , he be so fiercely the 
 Dreadnought - that they do not dare , despite the advantage of number , 
 openly to brave and defy he . no one would bell the cat - and such a cat ! 
 they begin to lay plot to get rid of he through the law . nothing could 
 be easy to such know adept in guilt than to transfer to his charge 
 any deed of violence one of their own gang have commit - heap damning 
 circumstance round he - privily apprise justice - falsely swear away his 
 life . in short , the man be in their way as a wasp that have blunder 
 into an ant ' nest ; and , while frighten at the size of the intruder , 
 these honest ant be resolve to get he out of their citadel alive or 
 dead . probable it be that Jasper Losely would meet with his desert at 
 last for an offence of which he be as innocent as a babe unborn . 

 it be at this juncture that we be re - admit to the presence of 
 Arabella Crane . 

 she be stand by a window on the upper floor of a house situate in 
 a narrow street . the blind be let down , but she have draw it a little 
 aside , and be look out . by the fireside be seat a thin , vague , 
 gnome - like figure , perch comfortless on the edge of a rush - bottom 
 chair , with its shadowy knee draw up till they nearly touch its 
 shadowy chin . there be something about the outline of this figure 
 so indefinite and unsubstantial , that you might have take it for an 
 optical illusion , a spectral apparition on the point of vanish . this 
 thing be , however , possess of voice , and be speak in a low but 
 distinct hiss whisper . as the whisper end , Arabella Crane , without 
 turn her face , speak , also under her breath . 

 " you be sure that , so long as losely draw this weekly stipend from 
 the man whom he have in his power , he will persist in the same course of 
 life . can you not warn he of the danger ? " 

 " Peach against pal ! I dare not . no trust he . " 

 " he would come down , mad with brandy , make an infernal row , seize two or 
 three by the throat , dash their head against each other , blab , bully , 
 and a knife would be out , and a weasand or two cut , and a carcase or so 
 drop into the Thames - mine certainly - his perhaps . " 

 " you say you can keep back this plot against he for two or three day ? " 

 " for two day - yes . I should be glad to save General Jas . he have the 
 bone of a fine fellow , and if he have not destroy himself by brandy , 
 he might have be at the top of the tree - in the profession . but he be 
 fit for nothing now . " 

 " ah ! and you say the brandy be kill he ? " 

 " no , he will not be kill by brandy , if he continue to drink it among 
 the same jolly set . " 

 " and if he be leave without the money to spend amongst these terrible 
 companion , he would no long resort to their meeting ? you be right 
 there . the same vanity that make he pleased to be the great man 
 in that society would make he shrink from come amongst they as a 
 beggar . " 

 " and if he have not the wherewithal to pay the weekly subscription , there 
 would be an excuse to shut the door in his face . all these fellow wish 
 to do be to get rid of he ; and if by fair mean , there would be no 
 necessity to resort to foul . the only danger would be that from which 
 you have so often save he . in despair , would he not commit some 
 violent rash action - a street robbery , or something of the kind ? he have 
 courage for any violence , but no long the cool head to plan a scheme 
 which would not be detect . you see I can prevent my pal join in 
 such risk as he may propose , or let he   if he be to ask it   into 
 an adventure of their own , for they know that I be a safe adviser ; they 
 respect I ; the law have never be able to lay hold of I ; and when I 
 say to they , ' that fellow drink , blab , and boast , and would bring we 
 all into trouble , ' they will have nothing to do with he ; but I can not 
 prevent his do what he please out of his own muddle head , and with 
 his own reckless hand . " 

 " but you will keep in his confidence , and let I know till that he 
 propose ! " 

 " yes . " 

 " and meanwhile , he must come to I . and this time I have more hope than 
 ever , since his health give way , and he be weary of crime itself . Mr. 
 Cutts , come near - softly . look - nay , nay , he can not see you from below , 
 and you be screen by the blind . look , I say , where he sit . " 

 she point to a room on the ground - floor in the opposite house , where 
 might be dimly see a dull red fire in a sordid grate , and a man 's form , 
 the head pillow upon arm that rest on a small table . on the table a 
 glass , a bottle . 

 " it be thus that his morning pass , " say Arabella Crane , with a wild 
 bitter pity in the tone of her voice . " look , I say , be he formidable 
 now ? can you fear he ? " 

 " very much indeed , " mutter Cutts . " he be only stupefy , and he can 
 shake off a doze as quickly as a bulldog do when a rat be let into his 
 kennel . " 

 " Mr. Cutts , you tell I that he constantly carry about he the same 
 old pocket - book which he say contain his fortune ; in other word , the 
 paper that frighten his victim into give he the money which be now 
 the cause of his danger . there be surely no pocket you can not pick or 
 get pick , Mr. Cutts ? fifty pound for that book in three hour . " 

 " fifty pound be not enough ; the man he sponge on would give more to 
 have those paper in his power . " 

 " possibly ; but losely have not be dolt enough to trust you sufficiently 
 to enable you to know how to commence negotiation . even if the man 's 
 name and address be amongst those paper , you could not make use of the 
 knowledge without bring Jasper himself upon you ; and even if Jasper 
 be out of the way , you would not have the same hold over his victim ; 
 you know not the circumstance ; you could make no story out of some 
 incoherent rambling letter ; and the man , who , I can tell you , be by 
 nature a bully , and strong , compare with any other man but Jasper , 
 would seize you by the collar ; and you would be lucky if you get out of 
 his house with no other loss than the letter , and no other gain but a 
 break bone . Pooh ! you know all that , or you would have steal the book , 
 and make use of it before . fifty pound for that book in three hour ; 
 and if Jasper Losely be safe and alive six month hence , fifty pound 
 more , Mr. Cutts . see ! he stir not must be fast asleep . now be the 
 moment . " 

 " what , in his own room ! " say Cutts with contempt . " why , he would know 
 who do it ; and where should I be to - morrow ? no - in the street ; any one 
 have a right to pick a pocket in the Queen 's highway . in three hour you 
 shall have the book . " 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

  MERCURY be the PATRON deity of MERCANTILE SPECULATORS , as well as of 
  CRACK - BRAINED poet ; indeed , he be much MORE FAVOURABLE , MORE A 
  FRIEND at a PINCH , to the former class of his proteges than he be to 
  the latter . 

  " poolum per hoste mercurius celer , 
  Denso paventem sustulit aere . " 

 Poole be sit with his wife after dinner . he have make a good 
 speculation that day ; little Johnny would be all the well for it a few 
 year hence , and some other man 's little Johnnys all the bad - but each 
 for himself in this world ! Poole be therefore bask in the light of 
 his gentle helpmate 's approve smile . he have take all extra glass of 
 a venerable port - wine , which have pass to his cellar from the bin of 
 Uncle Sam . commercial prosperity without , conjugal felicity within , the 
 wall of Alhambra Villa ; surely Adolphus Poole be an enviable man ! do 
 he look so ? the ghost of what he be but a few month ago ! his cheek 
 have fall in ; his clothe hang on he like bag ; there be a worried , 
 haggard look in his eye , a nervous twitch in his lip , and every now 
 and then he look at the handsome parisian clock on the chimneypiece , 
 and then shift his posture , snub his connubial angel , who ask " what 
 ail he ? " refill his glass , and stare on the fire , see strange 
 shape in the mobile aspect of the coal . 

 to - morrow bring back this weekly spectre ! to - morrow Jasper Losely , 
 punctual to the stroke of eleven , return to remind he of that past 
 which , if reveal , will blast the future . and reveal it might be any 
 hour despite the bribe for silence which he must pay with his own hand , 
 under his own roof . would he trust another with the secret of that 
 payment ? - horror ! would he visit losely at his own lodging , and pay he 
 there ? - murder ! would he appoint he somewhere in the street - run the 
 chance of be see with such a friend ? respectability confabulating 
 with offal ? - disgrace ! and Jasper have on the last two or three visit 
 be peculiarly disagreeable . he have talk loud . Poole fear that his 
 wife might have her ear at the keyhole . Jasper have see the parlour - maid 
 in the passage as he go out , and catch she round the waist . the 
 parlour - maid have complain to Mrs. Poole , and say she would leave if 
 so insult by such an ugly blackguard . alas ! what the poor lady - killer 
 have come to ! Mrs. Poole have grow more and more inquisitive and 
 troublesome on the subject of such extraordinary visit ; and now , as she 
 husband stir the fire - have rouse her secret ire by his previous 
 unmanly snubbing , and Mrs. Poole be one of those incomparable wife 
 who have a perfect command of temper , who never reply to angry word at 
 the moment , and who always , with exquisite calm and self - possession , pay 
 off every angry word by an amiable sting at a right moment - Mrs. Poole , 
 I say , thus softly say : 

 " sammy , duck , we know what make oo so cross ; but it shall not   vex oo long , 
 Sammy . that dreadful man come to - morrow . he always come the same day 
 of the week . " 

 " hold your tongue , Mrs. Poole . " 

 " yes , Sammy , dear , I will hold my tongue . but Sammy shall not   be impose upon 
 by mendicant ; for I know he be a mendicant - one of those sharper or 
 blackleg who take oo in , poor innocent Sam , in oo wild bachelor day , 
 and oo good heart can not   bear to see he in distress ; but there must be 
 an end to all thing . " 

 " Mrs. Poole - Mrs. Poole - will you stop your fool 's jaw or not ? " 

 " my poor dear hubby , " say the angel , squeeze out a mild tear , " oo 
 will be in good hand to advise oo ; for I have   be and tell Pa ! " 

 " you have , " falter Poole , " tell your father - you have ! " and the 
 expression of his face become so ghastly that Mrs. Poole grow seriously 
 terrify . she have long feel that there be something very suspicious in 
 her husband 's submission to the insolence of so rude a visitor . but she 
 know that he be not brave ; the man might intimidate he by threat of 
 personal violence . the man might probably be some poor relation , or 
 some one whom Poole have ruin , either in bygone discreditable sporting 
 ' day , or in recent respectable mercantile speculation . but at that 
 ghastly look a glimpse of the real truth break upon she ; and she stand 
 speechless and appal . at this moment there be a loud ring at the 
 street - door bell . Poole gather himself up , and stagger out of the 
 room into the passage . 

 his wife remain without motion ; for the first time she conceive a 
 fear of her husband . presently she hear a harsh female voice in the 
 hall , and then a joyous exclamation from Poole himself . recover by 
 these unexpected sound , she go mechanically forth into the passage , 
 just in time to see the hem of a dark - grey dress disappear within 
 Poole 's study , while Poole , who have open the study - door , and be 
 bow - in the iron - grey dress obsequiously , turn his eye towards his 
 wife , and stride towards she for a moment , whisper , " go up - stair 
 and stir not , " in a tone so unlike his usual gruff accent of command , 
 that it cow she out of the profound contempt with which she habitually 
 receive , while smilingly obeying , his marital authority . 

 Poole , vanish into his study , carefully close his door , and would 
 have catch his lady visitor by both her hand ; but she waive he back , 
 and , decline a seat , remain sternly erect . 

 " Mr. Poole , I have but a few word to say . the letter which give 
 Jasper Losely the power to extort money from you be no long in his 
 possession ; they be in mine . you need fear he no more - you will fee 
 he no more . " 

 " oh ! " cry Poole , fall on his knee , " the blessing of a father of a 
 family - a babe not six week bear - be on your bless , blessed head ! " 

 " get up , and do not   talk nonsense . I do not give you these paper at 
 present , nor burn they . instead of be in the power of a muddle , 
 irresolute drunkard , you be in the power of a vigilant , clear - brain 
 woman . you be in my power , and you will act as I tell you . " 

 " you can ask nothing wrong , I be sure , " say Poole , his grateful 
 enthusiasm much abate . " command I ; but the paper can be of no use to 
 you ; I will pay for they handsomely . " 

 " be silent and listen . I retain these paper - first , because Jasper 
 Losely must not know that they ever pass to my hand ; secondly , 
 because you must inflict no injury on losely himself . betray I to he , 
 or try to render himself up to the law , and the document will be use 
 against you ruthlessly . Obey , and you have nothing to fear , and nothing 
 to pay . when Jasper Losely call on you tomorrow , ask he to show you 
 the letter . he can not ; he will make excuse . decline peremptorily , 
 but not insultingly   his temper be fierce , to pay he far . he 
 will perhaps charge you with have hire some one to purloin his 
 pocket - book ; let he think it . stop - your window here open on the 
 ground - a garden without : - ah ! have three of the police in that garden , 
 in sight of the window . point to they if he threaten you ; summon they to 
 your aid , or pass out to they , if he actually attempt violence . but when 
 he have leave the house , you must urge no charge against he ; he must be 
 let off unscathed . you can be at no loss for excuse in this mercy ; 
 a friend of former time - needy , unfortunate , whom habit of 
 drink madden for the moment - necessary to eject he - inhuman to 
 prosecute - any story you please . the next day you can , if you choose , 
 leave London for a short time ; I advise it . but his tooth will be draw ; 
 he will most probably never trouble you again . I know his character . 
 there , I have do ; open the door , sir . " 




 CHAPTER IX . 

  the wreck and the life - BOAT in a FOG . 

 the next day , a little after noon , Jasper Losely , come back from 
 Alhambra Villa - furious , desperate , know not where to turn for bread , 
 or on whom to pour his rage - beheld suddenly , in a quiet , half - build 
 street , which lead from the suburb to the New Road , Arabella Crane 
 stand right in his path . she have emerge from one of the many 
 straight intersect road which characterise that crude nebula of 
 a future city ; and the woman and the man meet thus face to face ; not 
 another passer - by visible in the thoroughfare ; - at a distance the dozing 
 hack cab - stand ; round and about they carcase of brick and mortar - some 
 with gaunt scaffolding fix into their rib , and all look yet more 
 weird in their raw struggle into shape through the live haze of a 
 yellow fog . 

 losely , see Arabella thus plant in his way , recoil ; and the 
 superstition in which he have long associate her image with baffle 
 scheme and perilous hour send the wrathful blood back through his 
 vein so quickly that he hear his heart beat ! 

 MRS . CRANE . - " so ! you see we can not help meeting , Jasper dear , do what 
 you will to shun I . " 

 LOSELY . - " I - I - you always startle I so ! - you be in town , then ? - to 
 stay ? - your old quarter ? " 

 MRS . CRANE . - " why ask ? you can not wish to know where I be - you would 
 not call . but how fare it ? - what do you do ? - how do you live ? you look 
 ill - Poor Jasper . " 

 LOSELY   fiercely . - " hang your pity , and give I some money . " 

 MRS . CRANE   calmly lay her lean hand on the arm which be dart 
 forward more in menace than entreaty , and actually terrify the 
 Gladiator as she link that deadly arm into her own . - " I say you 
 would always find I when at the bad of your trouble . and so , Jasper , 
 it shall be till this right hand of yours be powerless as the clay at 
 our foot . walk - walk ; you be not afraid of I ? - walk on , tell I all . 
 where have you just be ? " 

 Jasper , therewith remind of his wrong , pour out a volley of abuse 
 on Poole , communicate to Mrs. Crane the whole story of his claim 
 on that gentleman - the loss of the pocket - book filch from he , and 
 Poole 's knowledge that he be thus disarm . 

 " and the coward , " say he , grind his tooth , " get out of his 
 window - and three policeman in his garden . he must have bribe a 
 pickpocket - low knave that he be . but I shall find out - and then - " 

 " and then , Jasper , how will you be well off ? - the letter be go ; 
 and Poole have you in his power if you threaten he again . now , hark 
 you ; you do not murder the Italian who be find stab in the field 
 yonder a week ago ; l100 reward for the murderer ? " 

 " I - no . how coldly you ask ! I have hit hard in fair fight ; 
 murder - never . if ever I take to that , I shall begin with Poole . " 

 " but I tell you , Jasper , that you be suspect of that murder ; that you 
 will be accuse of that murder ; and if I have not thus fortunately meet 
 you , for that murder you would be try and hang . " 

 " be you serious ? who could accuse I ? " 

 " those who know that you be not guilty - those who could make you appear 
 so - the villain with whom you horde , and drink and brawl ! have I ever 
 be wrong in my warning yet ? " 

 " this be too horrible , " falter losely , think not of the conspiracy 
 against his life , but of her prescience in detect it . " it must be 
 witchcraft , and nothing else . how could you learn what you tell I ? " 

 " that be my affair ; enough for you that I be right . go no more to those 
 black haunt ; they be even now full of snare and pitfall for you . 
 Leave London , and you be safe . trust to I . " 

 " and where shall I go ? " 

 " look you , Jasper ; you have wear out this old world no refuge for you 
 but the new . Whither go your father , thither go you . consent , and 
 you shall not want . you can not discover Sophy . you have fail in all 
 attempt on Darrell 's purse . but agree to sail to Australasia , and 
 I will engage to you an income large than you say you extort from 
 Poole , to be spend in those safe shore . " 

 " and you will go with I , I suppose , " say losely , with ungracious 
 sullenness . 

 " go with you , as you please . be where you be - yes . " the ruffian bound 
 with rage and loathing . 

 " Woman , cross I no more , or I shall be goad into - " 

 " into kill I - you dare not ! meet my eye if you can - you dare not ! 
 harm I , yea a hair of my head , and your moment be number ! - your 
 doom seal . be we two together in a desert - not a human eye to see the 
 deed - not a human ear to receive my groan , and still I should stand by 
 your side unharmed . I , who have return the wrong receive from you , 
 by vigilant , untire benefit - I , who have save you from so many 
 enemy , and so many danger - I , who , now when all the rest of earth 
 shun you - when all other resource fail - I , who now say to you , ' share my 
 income , but be honest ! ' I receive injury from that hand . no ; the guilt 
 would be too unnatural - Heaven would not permit it . try , and your arm 
 will fall palsy by your side ! " 

 Jasper 's bloodshot eye drop beneath the woman 's fixed and scorch 
 gaze , and his lip , white and tremulous , refuse to breathe the fierce 
 curse into which his brutal nature concentrate its fear and its 
 hate . he walk on in gloomy silence ; but some word she have let fall 
 suggest a last resort to his own daring . 

 she have urge he to quit the old world for the new , but that have be 
 the very proposition convey to he from Darrell . if that proposition , 
 so repugnant to the indolence that have grow over he , must be embrace , 
 well at least sail forth alone , his own master , than be the dependent 
 slave of this abhor and persecute benefactress . his despair give 
 he the determination he have hitherto lack . he would seek Darrell 
 himself , and make the good compromise he could . this resolve pass 
 into his mind as he stalk on through the yellow fog , and his nerve 
 recover from their irritation , and his thought regain something of 
 their ancient craft as the idea of escape from Mrs. Crane 's vigilance 
 and charity assume a definite shape . 

 " well , " say he at length , dissimulate his repugnance , and with an 
 effort at his old half - coax , half - rollick tone , " you certainly 
 be the good of creature ; and , as you say , 

  ' have I a heart for falsehood frame , I ne'er could injure you , ' 

 ungrateful dog though I may seem , and very likely am . I own I have a 
 horror of Australasia - such a long sea - voyage ! new scene no long 
 attract I ; I be no long young , though I ought to be ; but if you 
 insist on it , and will really condescend to accompany I in spite of all 
 my sin to you , why , I can make up my mind . and as to honesty , ask those 
 infernal rascal , who , you say , would swear away my life , and they 
 will tell you that I have be as innocent as a lamb since my return to 
 England ; and that be my guilt in their villanous eye . as long as that 
 infamous Poole give I enough for my humble want , I be a reform man . 
 I wish to keep reform . very little suffice for I now . as you say , 
 Australasia may be the good place for I . when shall we go ? " 

 " be you serious ? " 

 " to be sure . " 

 " then I will inquire the day on which the vessel sail . you can call on 
 I at my own old home , and all shall be arrange . oh , Jasper Losely , do 
 not avoid this last chance of escape from the peril that gather round 
 you . " 

 " no ; I be sick of life - of all thing except repose . arabella , I suffer 
 horrible pain . " 

 he groan , for he speak truly . at that moment the gnaw of the monster 
 anguish , which fasten on the nerve like a wolf 's tooth , be so keen 
 that he long to swell his groan into a roar . the old fable of Hercules 
 in the poison tunic be surely invent by some skilled physiologist , 
 to denote the truth that it be only in the strong frame that pain 
 can be push into its extreme torture . the heart of the grim woman 
 be instantly and thoroughly soften . she pause ; she make he lean 
 on her arm ; she wipe the drop from his brow ; she address he in the 
 most soothing tone of pity . the spasm pass away suddenly as it do 
 in neuralgic agony , and with it any gratitude or any remorse in the 
 breast of the sufferer . 

 " yes , " he say , " I will call on you ; but meanwhile I be without a 
 farthing . oh , do not fear that if you help I now , I should again shun 
 you . I have no other resource leave ; nor have I now the spirit I once 
 have . I no long now laugh at fatigue and danger . " 

 " but will you swear by all that you yet hold sacred - if , alas ! there be 
 aught which be sacred to you - that you will not again seek the company 
 of those man who be conspire to entrap you into the hangman 's hand ? " 

 " seek they again , the ungrateful cowardly blackguard ! no , no ; I promise 
 you that - solemnly ; it be medical aid that I want ; it be rest , I tell 
 you - rest , rest , rest . " Arabella Crane draw forth her purse . " take what 
 you will , " say she gently . Jasper , whether from the desire to deceive 
 she , or because her alm be so really distasteful to his strange kind 
 of pride that he stint to bare necessity the appeal to they , content 
 himself with the third or fourth of the sovereign that the purse 
 contain , and after a few word of thank and promise , he leave she 
 side , and soon vanish in the fog that grow dark and dark as the 
 night - like wintry day deepen over the silence thoroughfare . 

 the woman go her way through the mist , hopeful - through the mist 
 go the man , hopeful also . recruit himself by slight food and strong 
 drink at a tavern on his road , he stalk on to Darrell 's house in 
 Carlton Gardens ; and , learn there that Darrell be at Fawley , 
 hasten to the station from which start the train to the town near 
 to the old Manor - house ; reach that town safely , and there rest for 
 the night . 




 BOOK IX . 




 CHAPTER I. 

  the SECRET which GUY darrell do not CONFIDE TO ALBAN MORLEY . 

 it be a serene noonday in that melancholy interlude of the season when 
 autumn have really cease - winter not yet visibly begin . the same hire 
 vehicle which have bear Lionel to Fawley more than five year ago , 
 stop at the gate of the wild umbrageous grass - land that surround 
 the antique Manor - house . it have be engage , from the near 
 railway - station on the London road , by a lady , with a female companion 
 who seem her servant . the driver dismount , open the door of the 
 vehicle , and the lady bid he wait there till her return , and say 
 a few word to her companion , descend , and , draw her cloak round 
 she , walk on alone towards the Manor - house . at first her step be 
 firm , and her pace quick . she be still under the excitement of the 
 resolve in which the journey from her home have be suddenly conceive 
 and promptly accomplish . but as the path wound on through the 
 stillness of venerable grove , her courage begin to fail she . her foot 
 loiter , her eye wander round vaguely , timidly . the scene be 
 not new to she . as she gaze , rushingly gather over her sorrowful 
 shrink mind memory of sportive happy summer day , spend in 
 childhood amidst those turf and shade - memory , more agitate , of the 
 last visit   childhood then ripen into bloom youth   to the ancient 
 dwelling which , yet conceal from view by the swell of the undulating 
 ground and the yellow bough of the giant tree , betray its site by 
 the smoke rise thin and dim against the limpid atmosphere . she bend 
 down her head , close her eye as if to shut out less the face of the 
 landscape than the image that rise ghost - like up to people it , and 
 sigh heavily , heavily . now , hard by , rouse from its bed amongst the 
 fern , the doe that Darrell have taine into companionship have watch 
 with curiosity this strange intruder on its solitary range . but at 
 the sound of that heavy sigh , the creature , emboldened , leave its 
 halting - place , and steal close to the saddened woman , touch her very 
 dress . Doubtless , as Darrell 's companion in his most musing hour , the 
 doe be familiarise to the sound of sigh , and associate the sound 
 with its gentle notion of humanity . 

 the lady , start , raise her droop lid , and meet those soft dark 
 eye , dark and soft as her own . round the animal 's neck there be a 
 simple collar , with a silver plate , fresh and new , evidently place 
 there recently ; and as the creature thrust forward its head , as if for 
 the caress of a wonte hand , the lady read the inscription . the word 
 be in italian , and may be construe thus : " female , yet not faithless ; 
 foster , yet not ungrateful . " as she read , her heart so swell , and 
 her resolve so desert she , that she turn as if she have receive a 
 sentence of dismissal , and go back some hasty pace . the doe follow 
 she till she pause again , and then it go slowly down a narrow path to 
 the left , which lead to the bank of the little lake . 

 the lady have now recover herself . " it be a duty , and it must be do , " 
 she mutter , and let clown the veil she have raise on enter the 
 demesne , she hurry on , not retrace her step in the same path , but 
 take that into which the doe have stricken , perhaps in the confused 
 mistake of a mind absorb and absent - perhaps in revive recollection 
 of the locality , for the way thus to the house be short than by 
 the weed - grow carriage - road . the lake come in view , serene and glassy ; 
 half - leafless woodland reflect far upon its quiet water ; the doe 
 halt , lift its head , and sniff the air , and , somewhat quicken 
 its pace , vanish behind one of the hillock clothe with brushwood , 
 that give so primitive and forest - like a character to the old ground . 
 advance still , there now , - at her right hand , grow out of the 
 landscape the noble turret of the unfinished pile ; and , close at she 
 left , under a gnarl fantastic thorn - tree , the still lake at his foot 
 reflect his stiller shadow , recline Guy Darrell , the doe nestle at 
 his side . 

 so unexpected this sight - he , whom she come to seek yet fear to see , 
 so close upon her way - the lady utter a faint but sharp cry , and 
 Darrell spring to his foot . she stand before he , veil , mantle , 
 bend as a suppliant . 

 " Avaunt ! " he falter wildly . " be this a spirit my own black solitude 
 conjure up - or be it a delusion , a dream ? it be I - I ! - the Caroline 
 dear to you once , if detest now ! forgive I ! not for myself I come . " 
 she fling back her veil - her eye pleadingly seek his . 

 " so , " say Darrell , gather his arm round his breast in the gesture 
 peculiar to he when seek either to calm a more turbulent movement , 
 or to confirm a sterner resolution of his heart - ' so ! caroline , 
 Marchioness of Montfort , we be then fat to meet face to face at last ! 
 I understand - Lionel Haughton send , or show to you , my letter ? " 

 " oh ! Mr. Darrell , how could you have the heart to write in such term of 
 one who - " 

 " one who have take the heart from my bosom and trample it into the 
 mire . true , fribble will say , ' Fie ! the vocabulary of fine gentleman 
 have no harsh term for woman . ' gallant , to whom love be pastime , leave 
 or be leave with elegant sorrow and courtly bow . Madam , I be never 
 such airy gallant . I be but a man unhappily in earnest - a man who place 
 in those hand his life of life - who say to you , while yet in his 
 prime , ' there be my future , take it , till it vanish out of earth ! you 
 have make that life substanceless as a ghost - that future barren as the 
 grave . and when you dare force yourself again upon my way , and would 
 dictate law to my very hearth - if I speak as a man what plain man must 
 feel - ' oh ! Mr. Darrell , ' say your injure ladyship , ' how can you have 
 the heart ? ' woman ! be you not false as the false ? falsehood have no 
 dignity to awe rebuke - falsehood no privilege of sex . " 

 " darrell - darrell - darrell - spare I , spare I ! I have be so 
 punish - I be so miserable ! " 

 " you ! - punish ! - what ! you sell yourself to youth , and sleek look , 
 and grand title , and the flattery of a world ; and your rose - leaf be 
 crumple in the gorgeous marriage - bed . adequate punishment ! - a crumpled 
 rose - leaf ! true , the man be a - but why should I speak ill of he ? 
 it be he who be punish , if , accept his rank , you recognise in 
 himself a nothingness that you could neither love nor honour . false and 
 ungrateful alike to the man you choose - to the man you forsook ! and now 
 you have bury one , and you have scheme to degrade the other . " 

 " Degrade ! - oh ! it be that charge which have sting I to the quick . all 
 the other I deserve . but that charge ! listen - you shall listen . " 

 " I stand here resign to do so . say all you will now , for it be the 
 last time on earth I lend my ear to your voice . " 

 " be it so - the last time . " she pause to recover speech , collect 
 thought , gain strength ; and strange though it may seem to those who 
 have never love , amidst all her grief and humiliation there be a 
 fearful delight in that presence from which she have be exile since 
 her youth - nay , delight unaccountable to herself , even in that rough , 
 vehement , bitter tempest of reproach , for an instinct tell she that 
 there would have be no hatred in the language have no love be 
 linger in the soul . 

 " speak , " say Darrell gently , soften , despite himself , by her evident 
 struggle to control emotion . 

 twice she begin - twice voice fail she . at last her word come forth 
 audibly . she begin with her plea for Lionel and Sophy , and gather 
 boldness by her zeal on their behalf . she proceed to vindicate she 
 own motif - to acquit herself of his harsh charge . she scheme for his 
 degradation ! she have be too carry away by her desire to promote 
 his happiness - to guard he from the possibility of a self - reproach . 
 at first he listen to she with haughty calmness ; merely say , in 
 reference to Sophy and Lionel , " I have nothing to add or to alter in the 
 resolution I have communicate to Lionel . " but when she thus insensibly 
 mingle their cause with her own , his impatience break out . " my 
 happiness ? oh ! well have you prove the sincerity with which you scheme 
 for that ! save I from self - reproach - I ! have Lady Montfort so wholly 
 forget that she be once Caroline Lyndsay that she can assume the 
 part of a warn angel against the terror of self - reproach ? " 

 " ah ! " she murmur faintly , " can you suppose , however fickle and 
 thankless I may seem to you - " 

 " seem ! " he repeat . 

 " seem ! " she say again , but meekly - ' seem , and seem justly ; - yet can 
 you suppose that when I become free to utter my remorse - to speak of 
 gratitude , of reverence - I be insincere ? Darrell , Darrell , you can not 
 think so ! that letter which reach you abroad nearly a year ago , in 
 which I lay my pride of woman at your foot , as I lie it now in come 
 here - that letter , in which I ask if it be impossible for you to 
 pardon , too late for I to atone - be write on my knee . it be the 
 outburst of my very heart . Nay , nay , hear I out . do not imagine that 
 I would again obtrude a hope so contemptuously crush ! "   a deep blush 
 come over her cheek .   " I blame you not , nor , let I say it , do your 
 severity bring that shame which I might have justly feel have I so 
 write to any man on earth but you - you , so reverenced from my infancy , 
 that - " 

 " ay , " interrupt Darrell fiercely , " ay , do not fear that I should 
 misconceive you ; you would not so have address the young , the fair , 
 the happy . no ! you , proud beauty , with host , no doubt , of supplicate 
 wooer , would have thrust that hand into the flame before it write to a 
 young man , love as the young be love , what without shame it write to 
 the old man , reverence as the old be reverence ! but my heart be not 
 old , and your boasted reverence be a mocking insult . your letter , tear 
 to piece , be return to you without a word - insult for insult ! you 
 feel no shame that I should so rudely reject your pity . why should you ? 
 reject pity be not reject love . the man be not less old because he 
 be not reconcile to age . " 

 this construction of her tender penitence - this explanation of his 
 bitter scorn - take Caroline Montfort wholly by surprise . from what 
 writhe agony of lacerated self - love come that pride which be but 
 self - depreciation ? it be a glimpse into the deep rent of his charred 
 and desolate being which increase at once her yearn affection and 
 her passionate despair . vainly she try to utter the feeling that 
 crowd upon she ! - vainly , vainly ! woman can murmur , " I have injure 
 you - forgive ! " when she can not exclaim , " you disdain I , but love ! " 
 vainly , vainly her bosom heave and her lip move under the awe of his 
 flash eye and the grandeur of his indignant frown . 

 " ah ! " he resume , pursue his own thought with a sombre intensity of 
 passion that render he almost unconscious of her presence - " ah ! 
 I say to myself , ' oh , she believe that she have be so mourn and 
 miss that my soul would spring back to her false smile ; that I could 
 be so base a slave to my sens as to pardon the traitress because she 
 face be fair enough to haunt my dream . she dupe herself ; she be no 
 necessity to my existence - I have wrench it from her power year , long 
 year ago ! I will show she , since again she deign to remember I , that 
 I be not so old as to be grateful for the leaving of a heart . 

 " I will love another - I will be belove . she shall not say with secret 
 triumph , ' the old man dot in reject I ' " 

 " Darrell , Darrel - unju - cruel kill I rather than talk thus ! " 

 he heed not her cry . his word roll on in that wonderful , vary 
 music which , whether in tenderness or in wrath , give to his voice a 
 magical power - fascinating , hushing , overmaster human soul . 

 " but - you have the triumph ; see , I be still alone ! I seek the world of 
 the young - the marriage mart of the beautiful once more . alas ! if my eye 
 be capture for a moment , it be by something that remind I of you . 
 I see a faultless face , radiant with its virgin blush ; move to it , 
 I draw near - sigh , turn away ; it be not you ! I hear the silvery 
 laugh of a life fresh as an April morn . ' Hark ! ' I say , ' be not that 
 the sweet mirth - note at which all my care be dispel ? listening , 
 I forget my weight of year . why ? because listen , I remember you . 
 ' Heed not the treacherous blush and the beguiling laugh , ' whisper 
 Prudence . ' seek in congenial mind a calm companion to thine own . ' mind ! 
 o frigid pedantry ! mind ! - have not yours be a volume open to my eye ; 
 in every page , methought , some lovely poet - truth never reveal to human 
 sense before ! no ; you have kill to I all womanhood ! woo another ! - we d 
 another ! ' hush , ' I say , ' it shall be . eighteen year since we 
 part - see she not , she remain eternally the same ! see she 
 again , the very change that time must have bring will cure . I see 
 you - all the past rush back in that steal moment . I flee - never more 
 to dream that I can shake off the curse of memory - blent with each drop 
 of my blood - weave with each tissue - throb in each nerve - bone of my 
 bone , and flesh of my flesh - poison - root from which every thought bud 
 to wither - the curse to have love and to have trust you ! " 

 " Merciful Heaven ! can I bear this ? " cry Caroline , clasp her hand 
 to her bosom . " and be my sin so great - be it so unpardonable ? oh , if in 
 a heart so noble , in a nature so great , mine be the unspeakable honour 
 to inspire an affection thus endure , must it be only - only - as a 
 curse ! why can I not repair the past ? you have not cease to love I . 
 call it hate - it be love still ! and now , no barrier between our life , 
 can I never , never again - never , now that I know I be less unworthy of 
 you by the very anguish I feel to have so sting you - can I never again 
 be the Caroline of old ? " 

 " ha , ha ! " burst forth the unrelenting man , with a bitter laugh - ' see the 
 real coarseness of a woman 's nature under all its fine - spin frippery ! 
 behold these delicate creature , that we scarcely dare to woo ! how 
 little they even comprehend the idolatry they inspire ! the Caroline of 
 old ! Lo , the virgin whose hand we touch with knightly homage , whose 
 first bashful kiss be hallowed as the gate of paradise , desert 
 us - sell herself at the altar - sanctifie there her very infidelity to 
 we ; and when year have pass , and a death have restore her freedom , 
 she come to we as if she have never pillow her head on another 's 
 bosom , and say ' can I not again be the Caroline of old ? ' we man be 
 too rude to forgive the faithless . where be the Caroline I love ? 
 you - be - my Lady Montfort ! look round . on these turf , you , then a 
 child , play beside my child . they be dead , but less dead to I 
 than you . never dream I then that a creature so fair would be other 
 than a child to my grave and matured existence . then , if I glance 
 towards your future , I feel no pang to picture you grow to 
 womanhood - another 's bride . my hearth have for year be widow , I have 
 no thought of second nuptial . my son would live to enjoy my wealth , and 
 realise my cherish dream - my son be snatch from I ! who alone 
 have the power to comfort ? - who alone have the courage to steal into the 
 darken room where I sate mourning ? sure that in her voice there would 
 be consolation , and the sight of her sympathise tear would chide 
 away the bitterness of mine ? - who but the Caroline of old ! ah , you be 
 weep now . but Lady Montfort 's tear have no talisman to I ! you be 
 then still a child - as a child , my soothe angel . a year or so more my 
 daughter , to whom all my pride of House - all my hope of race , have be 
 consign - she whose happiness I value so much more than my ambition , 
 that I have refuse her hand to your young Lord of Montfort - puppet 
 that , strip of the millinery of title , be not worthy to replace a 
 doll ! - my daughter , I fold she one night in my arm , - I implore she 
 to confide in I if ever she nurse a hope that I could far - know a 
 grief that I could banish ; and she promise - and she bend her forehead 
 to my blessing - and before daybreak she have flee with a man whose very 
 touch be dishonour and pollution , and be lose to I for ever .... then , 
 when I come hither to vent at my father 's grave the indignant grief I 
 suffer not the world to see , you and your mother   she who profess 
 for I such loyal friendship , such ineffaceable gratitude , you two 
 come kindly to share my solitude - and then , then you be a child no 
 more ! - and a sun that have never gild my life brighten out of the face 
 of the Caroline of old ! " he pause a moment , heed not her bitter 
 weeping ; he be rapt from the present hour itself by the excess of that 
 anguish which be to woe what ecstasy be to joy - sweep along by the flood 
 of thought that have be pen within his breast through the solitary 
 day and haunted night , which have make the long transition state from 
 his manhood 's noon to its gathering eve . and in that pause there come 
 from afar off a melodious , melancholy strain - softly , softly bear 
 over the cold blue water - softly , softly through the sere autumnal 
 leaf - the music of the magic flute ! 

 " Hark ! " he say , " do you not remember ? look to that beech - tree yonder ! 
 Summer clothe it then ! do you not remember ! as under that tree we 
 stand - that same , same note come , musical as now , undulate with rise 
 and fall - come , as if to interpret , by a voice from fairyland , the 
 beating of my own mysterious heart . you have be plead for pardon to 
 one less ungrateful - less perfidious - than my comforter prove herself . 
 I have listen to you , wonder why anger and wrong seem banish 
 from the world ; and I murmur , in answer , without conscious thought 
 of myself : ' happy the man whose fault your bright charity will 
 admonish - whose grief your tenderness will chase away ! but when , year 
 hence , child be bear to yourself , spare I the one who shall most 
 resemble you , to replace the daughter whom I can only sincerely pardon 
 when something else can spring up to my desolate being - something that 
 I can cherish without the memory of falsehood and the dread of shame . ' 
 yes , as I cease , come that music ; and as it thrill through the summer 
 air , I turn and meet your eye - turn and see you blush - turn 
 and hear some faint faltering word drown the music with diviner 
 sweetness ; and suddenly I know , as by a revelation , that the child I have 
 foster have grow the woman I love . my own soul be lay bare to I 
 by the flash of hope . over the universe rush light and colour ! oh , the 
 Caroline of old ! what wonder that she become so fatally , so unspeakably 
 belove ! as some man in ancient story , banish from his native land , be 
 tell by an oracle to seek a happy isle in undiscovered sea - freights 
 with his all a single bark - collect on his wandering altar the last 
 ember of his abandon hearth - place beside it his exile household 
 god ; so all that my life have leave to I , hallowing and hallow , I 
 store in you .... I tear myself from the old native soil , the old hardy 
 sky . through time 's wide ocean I see but the promise golden isle . 
 fable , fable ! - lie oracle ! - sink vessel ! - visionary isle ! and life 
 to I have till then be so utterly without love ! - have pass in such 
 hard labour , without a holyday of romance - all the fountain of the 
 unknown passion seal till the spell strike the rock , and every wave , 
 every drop sparkle fresh to a single star . yet my boyhood , like other 
 man 's , have dream of its Ideal . there at last that Ideal , come to life , 
 bloom before I ; there , under those beech - tree - the Caroline of old . 
 o wretched woman , now weep at my side , well may you weep ! never can 
 earth give you back such love as you lose in mine . " 

 " I know it , I know it - fool that I be - miserable fool ! " 

 " ay , but comfort yourself - wilder and sad folly in myself ! your 
 mother be right . ' the vain child , ' she say , ' know not her own heart . 
 she be new to the world - have see none of her own year . for your 
 sake , as for her , I must insist on the experiment of absence . a 
 year 's ordeal - see if she be then of the same mind . ' I marvel at her 
 coldness ; proudly I submit to her seasoning ; fearlessly I confide 
 the result to you . ah ! how radiant be your smile , when , in the parting 
 hour , I say , ' summer and you will return again ! ' in vain , on pretence 
 that the experiment should be complete , do your mother carry you 
 abroad , and exact from we both the solemn promise that not even a letter 
 should pass between we - that our troth , make thus conditional , should 
 be a secret to all - in vain , if mean to torture I with doubt . in my 
 creed , a doubt be itself a treason . how lovely grow the stern face of 
 Ambition ! - how Fame seem as a messenger from I to you ! in the sound 
 of applause I say ' they can not shut out the air that will carry that 
 sound to her ear ! all that I can win from honour shall be my marriage 
 gift to my queenly bride . ' see that arrest pile - begin at my son 's 
 birth , stop awhile at his death , recommence on a stately plan 
 when I think of your footstep on its floor - your shadow on its wall . 
 stop now forever ! architect can build a palace ; can they build 
 a home ? but you - you - you , all the while - your smile on another 's 
 suit - your thought on another 's hearth ! " 

 " not so ! - not so ! your image never forsook I . I be giddy , thoughtless , 
 dazzle , entangle ; and I tell you in the letter you return to 
 I - tell you that I have be deceive ! " 

 " patience - patience ! deceive ! do you imagine that I do not see all that 
 pass as in a magician 's glass ? Caroline Montfort , you never love 
 I ; you never know what love be . throw suddenly into the gay world , 
 intoxicate by the effect of your own beauty , my sombre figure gradually 
 fade dim - pale ghost indeed in the atmosphere of flower and lustre , 
 rank with the breath of flatterer . then come my lord the Marquess - a 
 cousin privileged to familiar intimacy to visit at will , to ride with 
 you , dance with you , sit side by side with you in quiet corner of 
 throng ball - room , to call you ' caroline . ' Tut , tut - they be only 
 cousin , and cousin be as brother and sister in the affectionate 
 House of Vipont ; and gossip talk , and young lady envy - fine match 
 in all England be the pretty - faced Lord of Montfort ! and your mother , 
 who have say , ' wait a year ' to Guy Darrell , must have dream of the 
 cousin , and scheme for his coronet , when she say it . and I be unseen , 
 and I must not write ; and the absent be always in the wrong - when 
 cousin be present ! and I hear your mother speak of I - hear the soft 
 sound of her damaging praise . ' another long speech from your clever 
 admirer ! do not   fancy he fret ; that kind of man think of nothing but 
 blue - book and politic . ' and your cousin propose , and you say with a 
 sigh , ' no ; I be bind to Guy Darrell ' ; and your mother say to my Lord , 
 ' wait , and still come - as a cousin ! ' and then , day by day , the sweet 
 Mrs. Lyndsay drop into your ear the hint that shall poison your heart . 
 some fable be dress to malign I ; and you cry , " tis not true ; prove 
 it true , or I still keep my faith to Guy Darrell . ' then come the kind 
 compact - ' if the story be false , my cousin must go . ' ' and if it be true , 
 you will be my own duteous child . alas ! your poor cousin be break his 
 heart . a lawyer of forty have a heart make of parchment ! ' aha ! you be 
 entangle , and of course deceive ! your letter do not explain what be 
 the tale tell to you . I care not a rush what it be . it be enough for I 
 to know that , if you have love I , you would have love I the more for 
 every tale that belie I . so the tale be credit , because a relief to 
 credit it . so the compact be keep - so the whole bargain hurry over 
 in elegant privacy - place of barter , an ambassador 's chapel . bauble for 
 bauble - a jilt 's faith for a mannikin 's coronet . four day before the 
 year of trial expire , ' only four day more ! ' I exclaim , drunk with 
 rapture . the journal lie before I . three column to Guy Darrell 's 
 speech last night ; a column more to its effect on a senate , on an 
 empire ; and two line - two little line - to the sentence that strike Guy 
 Darrell out of the world of man ! ' marriage in high life . - marquess 
 of Montfort - Caroline Lyndsay . ' and the sun do not fall from heaven ! 
 Vulgarest of end to the tritest of romance ! in the gay world these 
 thing happen every day . young lady be privileged to give hope to 
 one man - their hand to another . ' be the sin so unpardonable ? ' you ask , 
 with ingenuous simplicity . Lady Montfort , that depend ! reflect ! what 
 be my life before I put it into your keeping ? Barren of happiness , I 
 grant - sadden , solitary - to myself a thing of small value . but what 
 be that life to other ? - a thing full of warm beneficence , of active 
 us , of hardy power fit to noble end ! in paralyse that life 
 as it be to other , there may be sin wider and dark than the mere 
 infidelity to love . and now do you dare to ask , ' can I again be the 
 Caroline of old ' ? " 

 " I ask nothing - not even pardon , " say the miserable woman . " I might say 
 something to show where you misjudge I - something that might palliate ; 
 but no , let it be . " her accent be so drearily hopeless that Darrell 
 abruptly withdraw his eye from her face , as if fearful that the sight 
 of her woe might weaken his resolve . she have turn mechanically 
 back . they walk on in gloomy silence side by side , away now from the 
 lake - back under the barbed thorn - tree - back by the moss - grow crag - back 
 by the hollow trunk , and over the fallen leaf of tree , that have 
 defy the storm of century , to drop , perhaps , brittle and sapless , 
 some quiet day when every wind be lull . 

 the flute have cease its music ; the air have grow cold and pierce ; the 
 little park be soon traverse ; the gate come in sight , and the humble 
 vehicle without it . then , involuntarily , both stop ; and on each there 
 come at once the consciousness that they be about to part - part , never 
 perhaps in this world to meet again ; and , with all that have be say , 
 so much unspoken - their heart so full of what , alas ! their lip could 
 not speak . 

 " Lady Montfort , " at length say Darrell . at the sound of her name she 
 shiver . 

 " I have address you rudely - harshly - " 

 " no - no - " 

 " but that be the last exercise of a right which I now resign for ever . 
 I speak to she who have once be Caroline Lyndsay ; some gentle word 
 be due to the widow of Lord Montfort . whatever the wrong you have 
 inflict on I - wrong inexpiable - I recognise no less in your general 
 nature quality that would render you , to one whom you really love , 
 and have never deceive , the blessing I have once hop you would prove to 
 I . " 

 she shake her head impatiently , piteously . 

 " I know that in an ill - assorted union , and amidst all the temptation 
 to which flatter beauty be expose , your conduct have be without 
 reproach . forget the old man whose thought should now be on his grave . " 

 " hush , hush - have human mercy ! " 

 " I withdraw and repent my injustice to your motif in the protection 
 you have give to the poor girl whom Lionel would we d ; I thank you 
 for that protection , - though I refuse consent to my kinsman 's prayer . 
 whatever her birth , I must be glad to know that she whom Lionel so love 
 be safe from a wretch like losely . More - one word more - wait - it be 
 hard for I to say it - be happy ! I can not pardon , but I can bless you . 
 farewell for ever ! " more overpoweringly crush by his tenderness than 
 his wrath , before Caroline could recover the vehemence of her sob , 
 he have cease - he be go - lose in the close gloom of a neighbouring 
 thicket , his hurried headlong path betray by the rustle of mournful 
 bough swing back with their wither leaf . 




 CHAPTER II . 

 RETROSPECT . 

  there be a PLACE AT which three ROADS MEET , sacred to that 
  MYSTERIOUS GODDESS call DIANA ON EARTH , LUNA , or the MOON , in 
  HEAVEN , or HECATE in the INFERNAL region . at this PLACE PAUSE THE 
  virgin permit to take their choice of the three roads . few give 
  their preference to that which be VOWED to the GODDESS in her name 
  of diana : that ROAD , COLD and BARREN , be CLOTHED by no ROSES and 
  MYRTLES . rose and myrtles veil the entrance to both the other , 
  and in both the other HYMEN have MUCH the same GAY - look temples . 
  but which of those two LEADS to the celestial LUNA , or which of they 
  conduct to the INFERNAL HECATE , not one NYMPH in FIFTY DIVINES . if 
  THY HEART should misgive THEE , O NYMPH ! - IF , THOUGH CLOUD VEIL the 
  PATH to the MOON , and sunshine GILD that to PALE HECATETHINE 
  instinct recoils from the SUNSHINE , while THOU DAREST not adventure 
  the CLOUD - THOU HAST still a choice LEFT - THOU HAST still the SAFE 
  road of diana . HECATE , o NYMPH , be the goddess of ghost . if THOU 
  takest her PATH , look not back , for the ghost be behind THEE ... 

 when we slowly recover from the tumult and passion of some violent 
 distress , a peculiar stillness fall upon the mind , and the atmosphere 
 around it become in that stillness appallingly clear . we know not , 
 while wrestle with our woe , the extent of its ravage . as a land the 
 day after a flood , as a field the day after a battle , be the sight 
 of our own sorrow , when we no long have to steer its raging , but to 
 endure the destruction it have make . distinct before Caroline Montfort 's 
 vision stretch the waste of her misery - the Past , the Present , the 
 Future , all seem to blend in one single Desolation . a strange thing it 
 be how all time will converge itself , as it be , into the burning - glass 
 of a moment ! there run a popular superstition that it be thus , in the 
 instant of death ; that our whole existence crowd itself on the glazing 
 eye - a panorama of all we have do on earth just as the soul restore 
 to the earth its garment . certe , there be hour in our being , long 
 before the last and dread one , when this phenomenon come to warn 
 we that , if memory be always active , time would be never go . 
 Rose before this woman - who , whatever the justice of Darrell 's bitter 
 reproach , have a nature lovely enough to justify his anguish at her 
 loss - the image of herself at that turning point of life , when the 
 morning mist be dim on our way , yet when a path choose be a fate 
 decide . yes ; she have excuse , not urge to the judge who sentence , nor 
 estimate to their full extent by the stern equity with which , amidst 
 suffering and wrath , he have desire to weigh her cause . 

 Caroline 's mother , Mrs. Lindsay , be one of those parent who acquire 
 an extraordinary influence over their child by the union of caress 
 manner with obstinate resolve . she never lose control of her temper 
 nor hold on her object . a slight , delicate , languid creature too , who 
 would be sure to go into a consumption if unkindly cross . with much 
 strong common sense , much knowledge of human nature , egotistical , 
 worldly , scheming , heartless , but withal so pleasing , so gentle , so 
 bewitchingly despotic , that it be like live with an electrobiologist , 
 who unnerve you by a look to knock you down with a feather . in only one 
 great purpose of her life have Mrs. Lyndsay fail . when Darrell , rich 
 by the reward of his profession and the bequest of his namesake , have 
 enter Parliament , and rise into that repute which confer solid and 
 brilliant station , Mrs. Lyndsay conceive the idea of appropriating to 
 herself his honour and his wealth by a second hyman . have so long 
 be domesticate in his house during the life of Mrs. Darrell , an 
 intimacy as of near relation have be establish between they . her 
 soft manner attach to she his child ; and after Mrs. Darrell 's 
 death render it necessary that she should find a home of her own , she 
 have an excuse , in Matilda 's affection for she and for Caroline , to be 
 more frequently before Darrell 's eye , and consult by he yet more 
 frequently , than when actually a resident in his house . to her Darrell 
 confide the proposal which have be make to he by the old Marchioness 
 of Montfort , for an alliance between her young grandson and his sole 
 survive child . wealthy as be the House of Vipont , it be amongst 
 its traditional maxim that wealth waste if not perpetually recruit . 
 every third generation , at farth , it be the duty of that house to 
 marry an heiress . Darrell 's daughter , just seventeen , not yet bring 
 out , would be an heiress , if he please to make she so , second to 
 none whom the research of the Marchioness have detect within the 
 drawing - room and nursery of the three kingdom . the proposal of the 
 venerable peeress be at first very naturally gratify to Darrell . it 
 be an euthanasia for the old knightly race to die into a House that 
 be an institution in the empire , and revive phoenix - like in a line of 
 peer , who might perpetuate the name of the heiress whose quartering 
 they would annex to their own , and sign themselves " Darrell Montfort . " 
 say Darrell inly , " on the whole , such a marriage would have please 
 my poor father . " it do not please Mrs. Lyndsay . the bulk of Darrell 's 
 fortune thus settle away , he himself would be a very different match 
 for Mrs. Lyndsay ; nor be it to her convenience that Matilda should be 
 thus hastily dispose of , and the strong link of connection between 
 Fulham and Carlton Gardens sever . Mrs. Lyndsay have one golden rule , 
 which I respectfully point out to lady who covet popularity and power : 
 she never speak ill of any one whom she wish to injure . she do not , 
 therefore , speak ill of the Marquess to Darrell , but she so praise he 
 that her praise alarm . she ought to know the young peer well ; she be 
 a good deal with the Marchioness , who like her pretty manner . till 
 then , Darrell have only notice this green Head of the Viponts as a 
 neat - look head , too modest to open its lip . but he now examine the 
 Head with anxious deliberation , and find it of the poor possible 
 kind of wood , with a heart to match , Guy Darrell have the audacity to 
 reject , though with great courtesy , the idea of graft the last plant 
 of his line on a stem so pithless . though , like man who be at once very 
 affectionate and very busy , he see few fault in his child , or indeed 
 in any one he really love , till the fault be force on he , he could 
 not but be aware that Matilda 's sole chance of become a happy and safe 
 wife be in unite herself with such a husband as would at once win her 
 confidence and command her respect . he tremble when he think of she 
 as the wife of a man whose rank would expose she to all fashionable 
 temptation , and whose character would leave she without a guide or 
 protector . 

 the Marquess , who obey his grandmother from habit , and who have 
 lethargically sanction her proposal to Darrell , evince the lively 
 emotion he have ever yet betray when he learn that his hand be 
 reject . and if it be possible for he to carry so small a sentiment 
 aspique into so large a passion as hate , from that moment he aggrandise 
 his nature into hatred . he would have give half his land to have 
 spit Guy Darrell . Mrs. Lyndsay take care to be at hand to console he , 
 and the Marchioness be grateful to she for take that trouble some 
 task upon herself . and in the course of their conversation Mrs. Lyndsay 
 contrive to drop into his mind the egg of a project which she take a 
 later occasion to hatch under her plume of down . " there be but one 
 kind of wife , my dear Montfort , who could increase your importance : you 
 should marry a beauty ; next to royalty rank beauty . " the Head nod , 
 and seem to ruminate for some moment , and then apropos des botte , 
 it let fall this mysterious monosyllable , " Shoes . " by what process of 
 ratiocination the Head have thus arrive at the foot , it be not for I to 
 conjecture . all I know be that , from that moment , Mrs. Lyndsay bestow 
 as much thought upon Caroline 's chaussure as if , like Cinderella , 
 Caroline 's whole destiny in this world hang upon her slipper . with the 
 feeling and the scheme that have be thus intimate , this sensible 
 lady 's mortification may well be conceive when she be startle by 
 Darrell 's proposal , not to herself , but to her daughter . her egotism be 
 profoundly shocked , her worldliness cruelly thwart . with Guy Darrell 
 for her own spouse , the Marquess of Montfort for her daughter 's , Mrs. 
 Lyndsay would have be indeed a considerable personage in the world . 
 but to lose Darrell for herself , and the Marquess altogether - the idea 
 be intolerable ! yet , since to have refuse at once for her portionless 
 daughter a man in so high a position , and to whom her own obligation 
 be so great , be impossible , she adopt a policy , admirable for the 
 craft of its conception and the dexterity of its execution . in exact 
 the condition of a year 's delay , she make her motif appear so loftily 
 disinterested , so magnanimously friendly ! she could never forgive 
 herself if he - he - the great , the good of man , be again render 
 unhappy in marriage by her imprudence   her , who owe to he her 
 all !   - yes , imprudent indeed , to have throw right in his way a pretty 
 coquettish girl   " for Caroline be coquettish , Mr. Darrell ; most girl so 
 pretty be at that silly age " . in short , she carry her point against 
 all the eloquence Darrell could employ , and cover her design by the 
 semblance of the most delicate scruple , and the sacrifice of worldly 
 advantage to the prudence which belong to high principle and 
 affectionate caution . 

 and what be Caroline 's real sentiment for Guy Darrell ? she understand 
 they - now on look back . she see herself as she be then - as she have 
 stand under the beech - tree , when the heavenly pity that be at the core 
 of her nature - when the venerate , grateful affection that have grow 
 with her growth make she yearn to be a solace and a joy to that grand 
 and solitary life . love he ! oh certainly she love he , devotedly , 
 fondly ; but it be with the love of a child . she have not awaken then 
 to the love of woman . remove from his presence , suddenly throw into 
 the great world - yes , Darrell have sketch the picture with a stern , but 
 not altogether an untruthful hand . he have not , however , fairly estimate 
 the inevitable influence which a mother such as Mrs. Lyndsay would 
 exercise over a girl so wholly inexperienced - so guileless , so 
 unsuspecting , and so filially devoted . he could not appreciate - no man 
 can - the mightiness of female cunning . he could not see how mesh upon 
 mesh the soft Mrs. Lyndsay   pretty woman with pretty manner   wove her 
 web round the " cousin , " until Caroline , who at first have think of the 
 silent fair - haired young man only as the Head of her House , please 
 with attention that keep aloof admirer of whom she think Guy Darrell 
 might be more reasonably jealous , be appal to hear her mother 
 tell she that she be either the most heartless of coquette , or poor 
 Montfort be the most ill - use of man . but at this time Jasper Losely , 
 under his name of Hammond , bring his wife from the french town at 
 which they have be reside , since their marriage , to see Mrs. 
 Lyndsay and Caroline at Paris , and implore their influence to obtain a 
 reconciliation with her father . Matilda soon learn from Mrs. Lyndsay , 
 who affect the most enchanting candour , the nature of the engagement 
 between Caroline and Darrell . she communicate the information to 
 Jasper , who view it with very natural alarm . by reconciliation with 
 Guy Darrell , Jasper understand something solid and practical - not a mere 
 sentimental pardon , add to that paltry stipend of l700 a - year which 
 he have just obtain - but the restoration to all her right and 
 expectancy of the heiress he have suppose himself to marry . he have 
 by no mean relinquish the belief that soon or later Darrell would 
 listen to the Voice of Nature , and settle all his fortune on his only 
 child . but then for the Voice of Nature to have fair play , it be clear 
 that there should be no other child to plead for . and if Darrell be 
 to marry again and to have son , what a dreadful dilemma it would be for 
 the Voice of Nature ! Jasper be not long in discover that Caroline 's 
 engagement be not less unwelcome to Mrs. Lyndsay than to himself , 
 and that she be disposed to connive at any mean by which it might 
 be annul . Matilda be first employ to weaken the bond it be so 
 desirable to sever . Matilda do not reproach , but she weep . she be sure 
 now that she should he an outcast - her child beggar . Mrs. Lyndsay 
 work up this complaint with adroitest skill . be Caroline sure that 
 it be not most dishonourable - most treacherous - to rob her own early 
 friend of the patrimony that would otherwise return to Matilda 
 with Darrell 's pardon ? this idea become exquisitely painful to the 
 high - spirited Caroline , but it could not counterpoise the conviction of 
 the great pain she should occasion to the breast that so confide in 
 her faith , if that faith be break . step by step the intrigue against 
 the absent one proceed . Mrs. Lyndsay thoroughly understand the art 
 of insinuate doubt . Guy Darrell , a man of the world , a cold - blooded 
 lawyer , a busy politician , he break his heart for a girl ! no , it be 
 only the young , and especially the young when not remarkably clever , who 
 break their heart for such trifle . montfort , indeed - there be a man 
 whose heart could be break ! - whose happiness could be blast ! dear 
 Guy Darrell have be only move , in his proposal , by generosity . 
 " something , my dear child , in your own artless word and manner , that 
 make he fancy he have win your affection unknown to yourself ! - an idea 
 that he be bind as a gentleman to speak out ! just like he . he have 
 that spirit of chivalry . but my belief be , that he be quite aware by 
 this time how foolish such a marriage would be , and would thank you 
 heartily if , at the year 's end , he find himself free , and you happily 
 dispose of elsewhere , "   c. ,   c. the drama advance . Mrs. Lyndsay 
 evince decide pulmonary symptom . her hectic cough return ; she could 
 not sleep ; her day be number - a secret grief . Caroline implore 
 frankness , and , clasp to her mother 's bosom , and compassionately 
 bedew with tear , those hint be drop into her ear which , though 
 so word as to show the most indulgent forbearance to Darrell , and 
 rather as if in compassion for his weakness than in abhorrence of his 
 perfidy , make Caroline start with the indignation of revolted purity and 
 outraged pride . " be this true , all would be indeed at an end between 
 we ! but it be not true . let it be prove . " 

 " but , my dear , dear child , I could not stir in a matter so delicate . 
 I could not aid in break off a marriage so much to your worldly 
 advantage , unless you could promise that , in reject Mr. Darrell , you 
 would accept your cousin . in my wretched state of health , the anxious 
 thought of leave you in the world literally penniless would kill I at 
 once . " 

 " oh , if Guy Darrell be false   but that be impossible ! do with I all 
 you will ; to obey and please you would be the only comfort leave to I . " 

 thus be all prepared for the final denouement . Mrs. Lyndsay have not 
 go so far without a reliance on the mean to accomplish her object , 
 and for these mean she have stoop to be indebted to the more practical 
 villany of Matilda 's husband . 

 Jasper , in this visit to Paris , have first form the connection which 
 complete the wickedness of his perverted nature , with that dark 
 adventuress who have flit shadow - like through part of this varying 
 narrative . Gabrielle Desmarets be then in her youth , notorious only for 
 the ruin she have inflict on admire victim , and the superb luxury 
 with which she riot on their plunder . captivate by the personal 
 advantage for which Jasper then be preeminently conspicuous , she 
 willingly associate her fortune with his own . Gabrielle be one of 
 those incarnation of evil which no city but Paris can accomplish 
 with the same epicurean refinement , and vitiate into the same cynical 
 corruption . she be exceedingly witty , sharply astute , capable of act 
 any part , carry out any plot ; and when it please she to simulate the 
 decorous and immaculate gentlewoman , she might have deceive the most 
 experienced roue . Jasper present this Artiste to his unsuspecting 
 wife as a widow of rank , who be about to visit London , and who might be 
 enable to see Mr. Darrell , and intercede on their behalf . Matilda fall 
 readily into the snare ; the Frenchwoman go to London , with assume 
 name and title , and with servant completely in her confidence . and such 
  as the reader know already   be that eloquent baroness who have 
 plead to Darrell the cause of his penitent daughter ! no doubt the wily 
 Parisienne have calculate on the effect of her art and her charm , to 
 decoy he into at least a pass forgetfulness of his faith to another . 
 but if she could not succeed there , it might equally achieve the object 
 in view to obtain the credit of that success . accordingly , she write to 
 one of her friend at Paris letter state that she have find a very 
 rich admirer in a celebrated english statesman , to whom she be indebte 
 for her establishment ,   c. ; and allude , in very witty and satirical 
 term , to his matrimonial engagement with the young english beauty at 
 Paris , who be then create such a sensation - an engagement of 
 which she represent her admirer to be heartily sick , and extremely 
 repentant . without mention name , her description be unmistakable . 
 Jasper , of course , present to Mrs. Lyndsay those letter   which , he 
 say , the person to whom they be address have communicate to one of 
 her own gay friend , and suggest that their evidence against Darrell 
 would be complete in Miss Lyndsay 's eye if some one , whose veracity 
 Caroline could not dispute , could corroborate the assertion of the 
 letter ; it would be quite enough to do so if Mr. Darrell be even 
 see enter or leave the house of a person whose mode of life be 
 so notorious . Mrs. Lyndsay , who , with her consummate craft , save she 
 dignity by affected blindness to the artifice at which she connive , 
 declare that , in a matter of inquiry which involve the private 
 character of a man so eminent , and to whom she owe so much , she would 
 not trust his name to the gossip of other . she herself would go to 
 London . she know that odious , but too fascinating , Gabrielle by 
 sight   as every one do who go to the opera or drive in the Bois de 
 Boulogne . Jasper undertake that the Parisienne should show herself at 
 her balcony at a certain day at a certain hour , and that at that hour 
 Darrell should call and be admit ; and Mrs. Lyndsay allow that that 
 evidence would suffice . sensible of the power over Caroline that she 
 would derive if , with her habit of languor and her delicate health , she 
 could say that she have undertake such a journey to be convince with 
 her own eye of a charge which , if true , would influence her daughter 's 
 conduct and destiny - Mrs. Lyndsay do go to London - do see Gabrielle 
 Desmarets at her balcony - do see Darrell enter the house ; and on her 
 return to Paris do , arm with this testimony , and with the letter 
 that lead to it , so work upon her daughter 's mind , that the next day the 
 Marquess of Montfort be accept . but the year of Darrell 's probation 
 be nearly expire ; all delay would be dangerous - all explanation would 
 be fatal , and must be forestall . nor could a long courtship be 
 keep secret ; Darrell might hear of it , and come over at once ; and the 
 Marquess 's ambitious kinsfolk would not fail to interfere if the news of 
 his intended marriage with a portionless cousin reach their ear . Lord 
 Montfort , who be awe by Carr , and extremely afraid of his grandmother , 
 be not less anxious for secrecy and expedition than Mrs. Lyndsay 
 herself . 

 thus , then , Mrs. Lyndsay triumph , and while her daughter be still 
 under the influence of an excitement which cloud her judgment , and 
 sting she into rashness of action as an escape from the torment of 
 reflection - thus be solemnise Caroline 's unhappy and splendid 
 nuptial . the Marquess hire a villa in the delightful precinct of 
 Fontainebleau for his honeymoon ; that moon be still young when the 
 Marquess say to himself , " I do not   find that it produce honey . " when he 
 have first be attract towards Caroline , she be all life and joy - too 
 much of a child to pine for Darrell 's absence , while credulously 
 confident of their future union - her spirit naturally wild and lively , 
 and the world , open at her foot , so novel and so brilliant . this 
 fresh gaiety have amuse the Marquess - he feel cheat when he find it 
 go . Caroline might be gentle , docile , submissive ; but those 
 virtue , though of high quality than glad animal spirit , be not so 
 entertaining . his own exceed sterility of mind and feeling be not 
 apparent till in the tete - a - tete of conjugal life . a good - look 
 young man , with a thoroughbred air , who rid well , dance well , and 
 hold his tongue , may , in all mixed society , pass for a shy youth of 
 sensitive genius ! but when he be your companion for life , and all to 
 yourself , and you find that , when he do talk , he have neither an idea 
 nor a sentiment - alas ! alas for you , young bride , if you have ever know 
 the charm of intellect , or the sweetness of sympathy . but it be not for 
 Caroline to complain ; struggle against her own weight of sorrow , she 
 have no immediate perception of her companion 's vapidity . it be he , 
 poor man , who complain . he just detect enough of her superiority of 
 intelligence to suspect that he be humiliate , while sure that he be 
 bored . an incident convert his grow indifference into permanent 
 dislike not many day after their marriage . 

 Lord Montfort , saunter into Caroline 's room , find she insensible 
 on the floor - an open letter by her side . summon she maid to her 
 assistance , he take the marital privilege of read the letter which 
 have apparently cause her swoon . it be from Matilda , and write in 
 a state of maddened excitement . Matilda have little enough of what be 
 call heart ; but she have an intense selfishness , which , in point of 
 suffering , supply the place of a heart . it be not because she could 
 not feel for the wrong of another that she could not feel anguish for 
 her own . Arabella be avenge . the cold - blooded snake that have sting 
 she meet the fang of the cobra - capella . Matilda have learn from some 
 anonymous correspondent   probably a rival of Gabrielle 's   of Jasper 's 
 liaison with that adventuress . but half recover from her confinement , 
 she have rise from her bed - hurry to Paris   for the pleasure of which 
 her husband have leave she   - see this wretche Gabrielle - recognise in 
 she the false baroness to whom Jasper have present she - to whom , by 
 Jasper 's dictation , she have write such affectionate letter - whom she 
 have employ to plead her cause to her father ; - see Gabrielle - see 
 she at her own luxurious apartment , Jasper at home there - burst into 
 vehement wrath - rouse up the cobra - capella ; and on declare she would 
 separate from her husband , go back to her father , tell her wrong , 
 appeal to his mercy , Gabrielle calmly reply : " do so , and I will take 
 care that your father shall know that your plea for his pardon through 
 Madame la Baronne be a scheme to blacken his name , and to frustrate 
 his marriage . do not think that he will suppose you do not connive at 
 a project so sly ; he must know you too well , pretty innocent . " no match 
 for Gabrielle Desmarets , Matilda fling from the house , leave Jasper 
 whistle an air from Figaro ; return alone to the french town from 
 which she now write to Caroline , pour out her wrong , and , without 
 seeming sensible that Caroline have be wrong too , express her fear 
 that her father might believe she an accomplice in Jasper 's plot , and 
 refuse she the mean to live apart from the wretch ; upon whom she heap 
 every epithet that just indignation could suggest to a feeble mind . the 
 latter part of the letter , blur and blot , be incoherent , almost 
 raving . in fact Matilda be then seize by the mortal illness which 
 hurry she to her grave . to the Marquess much of this letter be 
 extremely uninteresting - much of it quite incomprehensible . he could not 
 see why it should so overpoweringly affect his wife . only those passage 
 which denounce a scheme to frustrate some marriage meditate by Mr. 
 Darrell make he somewhat uneasy , and appear to he to demand an 
 explanation . but Caroline , in the anguish to which she awaken , 
 forestall his inquiry . to she but two thought be present - how she 
 have wrong Darrell - how ungrateful and faithless she must seem to he ; 
 and in the impulse of her remorse , and in the childlike candour of her 
 soul , artlessly , ingenuously , she pour out her feeling to the husband 
 she have take as counsellor and guide , as if seek to guard all her 
 sorrow for the past from a sentiment that might render she less loyal 
 to the responsibility which link her future to another 's . a man of 
 sense would have hail in so noble a confidence   however it might have 
 pain he for the time   a guarantee for the happiness and security of 
 his whole existence . he would have see how distinct from that ardent 
 love which in Caroline 's new relation of life would have border upon 
 guilt and be cautious as guilt against disclose its secret , be the 
 infantine , venerate affection she have feel for a man so far remove 
 from she by year and the development of intellect - an affection which 
 a young husband , trust with every thought , every feeling , might 
 reasonably hope to eclipse . a little forbearance , a little of delicate 
 and generous tenderness , at that moment , would have secure to Lord 
 Montfort the warm devotion of a grateful heart , in which the grief that 
 overflow be not for the irreplaceable loss of an early lover , but 
 the repentant shame for wrong and treachery to a confide friend . 

 but it be in vain to ask from any man that which be not in he ! Lord 
 Montfort listen with sullen , stolid displeasure . that Caroline should 
 feel the slight pain at any cause which have cancel her engagement 
 to that odious Darrell , and have raise she to the rank of his 
 Marchioness , be a crime in his eye never to be expiate . he 
 consider , not without reason , that Mrs. Lyndsay have shamefully 
 deceive he ; and fully believe that she have be an accomplice with 
 Jasper in that artifice which he be quite gentleman enough to consider 
 place those who have plan it out of the pale of his acquaintance . and 
 when Caroline , who have be weep too vehemently to read her lord 's 
 countenance , come to a close , Lord Montfort take up his hat and say : " I 
 beg never to hear again of this lawyer and his very disreputable family 
 connection . as you say , you and your mother have behave very ill to 
 he ; but you do not   seem to understand that you have behave much bad 
 to I . as to condescend to write to he , and enter into explanation 
 how you come to be Lady Montfort , it would be so lower to I that I 
 would never forgive it - never . I would just as soon that you run away 
 at once ; - soon . as for Mrs. Lyndsay , I shall forbid she enter my 
 house . when you have do crying , order your thing to be pack up . I 
 shall return to England to - morrow . " 

 that be perhaps the long speech Lord Montfort ever address to his 
 wife ; perhaps it be also the rude . from that time he regard she 
 as some Spaniard of ancient day might regard a guest on whom he be 
 compel to bestow the right of hospitality - to whom he give a seat at 
 his board , a chair at his hearth , but for whom he entertain a profound 
 aversion , and keep at invincible distance , with all the ceremony of 
 dignified dislike . once only during her wed life Caroline again see 
 Darrell . it be immediately on her return to England , and little more 
 than a month after her marriage . it be the day on which Parliament have 
 be prorogue preparatory to its dissolution - the last Parliament of 
 which Guy Darrell be a member . Lady Montfort 's carriage be detain in 
 the throng with which the ceremonial have fill the street , and Darrell 
 pass it on horseback . it be but one look in that one moment ; and the 
 look never cease to haunt she - a look of such stern disdain , but also 
 of such deep despair . no language can exaggerate the eloquence which 
 there be in a human countenance , when a great and tortured spirit speak 
 out from it accusingly to a soul that comprehend . the crushed heart , 
 the ravage existence , be bar before she in that glance , as clearly 
 as to a wanderer through the night be the rent of the precipice in the 
 flash of the lightning . so they encounter - so , without a word , they 
 part . to he that moment decide the flight from active life to which 
 his hopeless thought have of late be woo the jade , weary man . in 
 safety to his very conscience , he would not risk the certainty thus 
 to encounter one whom it convulse his whole be to remember be 
 another 's wife . in that high and narrow sphere of the great London 
 world to which Guy Darrell 's political distinction condemn his social 
 life , it be impossible but that he should be bring frequently into 
 collision with Lord Montfort , the Head of a House with which Darrell 
 himself be connect - the most powerful patrician of the party of which 
 Darrell be so conspicuous a chief . could he escape Lady Montfort 's 
 presence , her name at least would be continually in his ear . from that 
 fatal beauty he could no more hide than from the sun . 

 this thought , and the terror it occasion he , complete his resolve on 
 the instant . the next day he be in the grove of Fawley , and amazed 
 the world by date from that retreat a farewell address to his 
 constituent . a few day after , the news of his daughter 's death 
 reach he ; and as that event become know it account to many for his 
 retirement for a while from public life . 

 but to Caroline Montfort , and to she alone , the secret of a career 
 blast , a fame renounce , be unmistakably reveal . for a time she be 
 torture , in every society she enter , by speculation and gossip which 
 bring before she the memory of his genius , the accuse sound of his 
 name . but he who withdraw from the world , the world soon forget ; and 
 by degree Darrell become as little speak of as the dead . 

 Mrs. Lyndsay have never , during her scheme on Lord Montfort , abandon 
 her own original design on Darrell . and when , to her infinite amaze and 
 mortification , Lord Montfort , before the first month of his marriage 
 expire , take care , in the few possible word , to dispel her dream of 
 govern the House , and reside in the house of Vipont , as the lawful 
 agent during the life - long minority to which she have condemn both the 
 submissive Caroline and the lethargic Marquess , she hasten by letter 
 to exculpate herself to Darrell - lay , of course , all the blame on 
 Caroline . alas ! have not she always warn he that Caroline be not 
 worthy of he ? - he , the great , the good of man ,   c. ,   c. Darrell 
 reply by a single cut of his trenchant sarcasm - sarcasm which shore 
 through her cushion of down and her veil of gauze like the sword of 
 Saladin . the old Marchioness turn she back upon Mrs. Lyndsay . Lady 
 Selina be crushingly civil . the pretty woman with pretty manner , no 
 well off for all the misery she have occasion , go to Rome , catch 
 cold , and have no one to nurse she as Caroline have do , fall at 
 last into a real consumption , and fade out of the world elegantly and 
 spitefully , as fade a rose that still leave its thorn behind it . 

 Caroline 's nature grow develop and exalt by the responsibility she 
 have accept , and by the purity of her grief . she submit , as a just 
 retribution , to the solitude and humiliation of her wed lot ; she 
 earnestly , virtuously strove to banish from her heart every sentiment 
 that could recall to her more of Darrell than the remorse of have 
 darken a life that have be to her childhood so benignant , and to her 
 youth so confide . as we have see she , at the mention of Darrell 's 
 name - at the allusion to his grief - fly to the side of her ungenial 
 lord , though he be to she but as the owner of the name she bear , - so it 
 be the save impulse of a delicate , watchful conscience that keep she 
 as honest in thought as she be irreproachable in conduct . but vainly , 
 in summon her intellect to the relief of her heart - vainly have she 
 seek to find in the world friendship , companionship , that might 
 eclipse the memory of the mind so lofty in its antique mould - so tender 
 in its depth of unsuspected sweetness - which have be withdraw 
 from her existence before she could fully comprehend its rarity , or 
 appreciate its worth . 

 at last she become free once more ; and then she have dare thoroughly to 
 examine into her own heart , and into the nature of that hold which 
 the image of Darrell still retain on its remembrance . and precisely 
 because she be convince that she have succeed in preserve her old 
 childish affection for he free from the growth into that warm love 
 which would have be guilt if so encouraged , she feel the more free to 
 volunteer the atonement which might permit she to dedicate herself to 
 his remain year . thus , one day , after a conversation with Alban 
 Morley , in which Alban have speak of Darrell as the friend , almost the 
 virtual guardian , of her infancy ; and , allude to a few line just 
 receive from he , bring vividly before Caroline the picture of 
 Darrell 's melancholy wandering and blighted life , - thus have she , on the 
 impulse of the moment , write the letter which have reach Darrell at 
 Malta . in it she refer but indirectly to the deceit that have be 
 practise on herself - far too delicate to retail a scandal which she 
 feel to be an insult to his dignity , in which , too , the deceive 
 party be his daughter 's husband and her own mother . no doubt every 
 true woman can understand why she thus write to Darrell , and every true 
 man can equally comprehend why that letter fail in its object , and 
 be return to she in scorn . Hers be the yearning of meek , passionless 
 affection , and his the rebuke of sensitive , embitter indignant love . 

 but now , as all her past , with its interior life , glide before she , by 
 a grief the most intolerable she have yet know , the woman become aware 
 that it be no long penitence for the injure friend - it be despair 
 for the lover she have lose . in that stormy interview , out of all the 
 confused and struggle element of her life - long self - reproach , 
 LOVE - the love of woman - have flash suddenly , luminously , as the love 
 of youth at first sight . strange - but the very disparity of year seem 
 go ! she , the matured , sorrowful woman , be so much near to the man , 
 still young in heart and little change in person , than the gay girl 
 of seventeen have be to the grave friend of forty ! strange , but those 
 vehement reproach have waken emotion deeply in the core of the wild 
 mortal breast than all that early chivalrous homage which have exalt 
 she into the ideal of dream poet . strange , strange , strange ! but 
 where there be nothing strange , there - be there ever love ? 

 and with this revelation of her own altered heart , come the clear 
 and fresher insight into the nature and character of the man she 
 love . Hitherto she have recognise but his virtue - now she behold his 
 failing ! behold they as if virtue , love he more ; and , love he , 
 more despaired . she recognise that all - pervade indomitable pride , 
 which , interweave with his sense of honour , become relentless as it be 
 unrevengeful . she comprehend now that , the more he love she , the 
 less he would forgive ; and , recall the unexpected gentleness of his 
 farewell word , she feel that in his promise blessing lie the sentence 
 that annihilate every hope . 




 CHAPTER III . 

  whatever the number of a man 's friend , there will be times in his 
  life when he have one TOO FEW ; but if he have only one ENEMY , he be 
  lucky indeed if he have not one TOO many . 

 a cold night ; sharp frost ; winter set in . the shutter be closed , the 
 curtain draw , the fire burn clear , and the light be softly shade 
 in Alban Morley 's drawing - room . 

 the old bachelor be at home again . he have return that day ; send 
 to Lionel to come to he ; and Lionel have already tell he what have 
 transpire in his absence - from the identification of Waife with William 
 Losely , to Lady Montfort 's visit to Fawley , which have take place two 
 day before , and of which she have inform Lionel by a few hasty line , 
 state her inability to soften Mr. Darrell 's objection to the alliance 
 between Lionel and Sophy ; severely blame herself that those objection 
 have not more forcibly present themselves to her own mind , and 
 conclude with expression of sympathy , and appeal to fortitude , in 
 which , however brief , the exquisite kindness of her nature so diffuse 
 its charm , that the soft word soothe insensibly , like those sound 
 which in Nature itself do soothe we we know not why . 

 the poor Colonel find himself in the midst of painful subject . though 
 he have no very keen sympathy for the sorrow of lover , and no credulous 
 faith in everlasting attachment , Lionel 's portraiture of the young 
 girl , who form so mysterious a link between the two man who , in 
 vary way , have touch the fine spring in his own heart , compel 
 a compassionate and chivalrous interest , and he be deeply impressed by 
 the quiet of Lionel 's dejection . the young man utter no complaint of 
 the inflexibility with which Darrell have destroy his elysium . he bow 
 to the will with which it be in vain to argue , and which it would have 
 be a criminal ingratitude to defy . but his youth seem wither up ; 
 down - eyed and listless , he sink into that stupor of despondency which so 
 drearily simulate the calm of resignation . 

 " I have but one wish now , " say he , " and that be to change at once into 
 some regiment on active service . I do not talk of court danger 
 and seek death . that would be either a senseless commonplace , or a 
 threat , as it be , to Heaven ! but I need some vehemence of action - some 
 positive and irresistible call upon honour or duty that may force I 
 to contend against this strange heaviness that settle down on my whole 
 life . therefore , I entreat you so to arrange for I , and break it to Mr. 
 Darrell in such term as may not needlessly pain he by the obtrusion 
 of my suffering . for , while I know he well enough to be convince that 
 nothing could move he from resolve in which he have entrench , as in a 
 citadel , his pride or his creed of honour , I be sure that he would take 
 into his own heart all the grief which those resolve occasion to 
 another 's . " 

 " you do he justice there , " cry Alban ; " you be a noble fellow to 
 understand he so well ! Sir , you have in you the stuff that make 
 english gentleman such generous soldier . " 

 " action , action , action , " exclaim Lionel . " Strife , strife ! no other 
 chance of cure . rest be so crush , solitude so dismal . " 

 lo ! how contrast the effect of a similar cause of grief at different 
 stage of life ! chase the first day - dream of our youth , and we cry , 
 " action - Strife ! " in that cry , unconsciously to ourselves , HOPE speak 
 and proffer world of emotion not yet exhaust . disperse the last 
 golden illusion in which the image of happiness cheat our experienced 
 manhood , and HOPE be silent ; she have no more world to offer - unless , 
 indeed , she drop her earthly attribute , change she less solemn name , 
 and float far out of sight as " faith ! " 

 Alban make no immediate reply to Lionel ; but , seat himself more 
 comfortably in his chair - plant his foot still more at ease upon his 
 fender - the kindly Man of the World silently revolve all the possible 
 mean by which Darrell might yet be soften and Lionel render happy . 
 his reflection dismay he . " be there ever such untoward luck , " he 
 say at last , and peevishly , " that out of the whole world you should 
 fall in love with the very girl against whom Darrell 's feeling 
  prejudice if you please   must be mail in adamant ! convince , and 
 apparently with every reason , that she be not his daughter 's child , but , 
 however innocently , an impostor , how can he receive she as his young 
 kinsman 's bride ? how can we expect it ? " 

 " but , " say Lionel , " if , on farth investigation , she prove to be his 
 daughter 's child - the sole survive representative of his line and 
 name ? " 

 " his name ! no ! of the name of Losely - the name of that turbulent 
 sharper , who may yet die on the gibbet - of that poor , dear , lovable 
 rascal Willy , who be goose enough to get himself transport for 
 robbery ! - a felon 's grandchild the representative of Darrell 's line ! 
 but how on earth come Lady Montfort to favour so wild a project , and 
 encourage you to share in it ? - she who ought to have know Darrell 
 well ? " 

 " alas ! she see but Sophy 's exquisite , simple virtue , and inborn grace ; 
 and , believe her claim to Darrell 's lineage , Lady Montfort think 
 but of the joy and bless one so good and so loving might bring to 
 his joyless hearth . she be not think of morbid pride and mouldering 
 ancestor , but of soothe charity and love tie . and Lady Montfort , 
 I now suspect , in her scheme for our happiness - for Darrell 's - have an 
 interest which involve her own ! " 

 " her own ! " 

 " yes ; I see it all now . " 

 " see what ? you puzzle I . " 

 " I tell you that Darrell , in his letter to I , write with great 
 bitterness of Lady Montfort . " 

 " very natural that he should . who would not resent such interference ? " 

 " listen . I tell you that , at his own command , I send to she that letter ; 
 that she , on receive it , go herself to Fawley , to plead our cause . I 
 be sanguine of the result . " 

 " why ? " 

 " because he who be in love have a wondrous intuition into all the 
 mystery of love in other ; and when I read Darrell 's letter I feel 
 sure that he have once love - love still , perhaps - the woman he so 
 vehemently reproach . " 

 " ha ! " say the Man of the World , intimate with Guy Darrell from his 
 school - day - " ha ! be it possible ! and they say that I know everything ! 
 you be sanguine , - I understand . yes , if your belief be true - if 
 there be some old attachment that could be revive - some old 
 misunderstanding explain away - stop ; let I think . true , true - it be 
 just after her marriage that he flee from the world . ah , my dear Lionel ; 
 light , light ! light dawn on I ! not without reason be you sanguine . 
 your hand , my dear boy ; I see hope for you at last . for if the sole 
 reason that prevent Darrell contract a second marriage be the 
 unconquered memory of a woman like Lady Montfort   where , indeed , she 
 equal in beauty , in disposition so akin to his own ideal of womanly 
 excellence ?   - and if she too have some correspondent sentiment for he , 
 why then , indeed , you might lose all chance of be Darrell 's sole 
 heir ; your Sophy might forfeit the hateful claim to be the sole scion 
 on his ancient tree ; but it be precisely by those loss that Lionel 
 Haughton might gain the bride he covet ; and if this girl prove to be 
 what these Loselys affirm , that very marriage , which be now so repugnant 
 to Darrell , ought to insure his blessing . be he himself to marry 
 again - have he rightful representative and heir in his own son - he 
 should rejoice in the nuptial that secure to his daughter 's child so 
 honourable a name and so tender a protector . and as for inheritance , 
 you have not be rear to expect it ; you have never count on it . 
 you would receive a fortune sufficiently ample to restore your ancestral 
 station ; your career will add honour to fortune . yes , yes ; that be the 
 sole way out of all these difficulty . Darrell must marry again ; Lady 
 Montfort must be his wife . Lionel shall be free to choose she whom Lady 
 Montfort approve - be friend - no matter what her birth ; and I - I - Alban 
 Morley - shall have an arm - chair by two smile hearth . " 

 at this moment there be hear a violent ring at the bell , a loud knock 
 at the street door ; and presently , follow close on the servant , and 
 push he aside as he ask what name to announce , a woman , severely 
 dress in irongrey , with a strongly - mark and haggard countenance , 
 hurry into the room , and , stride right up to Alban Morley , as he 
 rise from his seat , grasp his arm , and whisper into his ear , " Lose 
 not a minute - come with I instantly - as you value the safety , perhaps 
 the life of Guy Darrell ! " 

 " Guy Darrell ! " exclaim Lionel , overhear she , despite the undertone 
 of her voice . 

 " who be you ? " she say , turn fiercely ; " be you one of his family ? " 

 " his kinsman - almost his adopt son - Mr. Lionel Haughton , " say the 
 Colonel . " but pardon I , madam - who be you ? " 

 " do you not remember I ? yet you be so often in Darrell 's house that 
 you must have see my face , as you have learn from your friend how 
 little cause I have to care for he or his . look again ; I be that 
 Arabella Fossett who - " 

 " ah , I remember now ; but - " 

 " but I tell you that Darrell be in danger , and this night . take money ; 
 to be in time you must hire a special train . take arm , though to be 
 use only in self - defence . take your servant if he be brave . this young 
 kinsman - let he come too . there be only one man to resist ; but that 
 man , " she say , with a wild kind of pride , " would have the strength and 
 courage of ten be his cause not that which may make the strong man 
 weak , and the bold man craven . it be not a matter for the officer of 
 justice , for law , for scandal ; the service be to be do in 
 secret , by friend , by kinsman ; for the danger that threaten 
 darrell - stoop - stoop , Colonel Morley - close in your ear " ; and into his 
 ear she hiss , " for the danger that threaten Darrell in his house this 
 night be from the man whose name his daughter bore . that be why I come 
 to you . to you I need not say , ' spare his life - Jasper Losely 's 
 life . ' Jasper Losely 's death as a midnight robber would be Darrell 's 
 intolerable shame . quick , quick , quick ! - come , come ! " 




 BOOK X. 




 CHAPTER I. 

 BRUTE - FORCE . 

 we leave Jasper Losely rest for the night at the small town near 
 Fawley . the next morning he walk on to the old Manor - house . it be the 
 same morning in which Lady Montfort have hold her painful interview with 
 Darrell ; and just when losely near the gate that lead into the small 
 park , he see she re - enter the hire vehicle in wait for she . as the 
 carriage rapidly drive past the miscreant , Lady Montfort look forth 
 from the window to snatch a last look at the scene still so clear to 
 she , through eye blind by despair tear . Jasper thus catch sight 
 of her countenance , and recognise she , though she do not even notice 
 he . surprised at the sight , he halt by the paling . what could have 
 bring Lady Montfort there ? could the intimacy his fraud have break off 
 so many year ago be renew ? if so , why the extreme sadness on the face 
 of which he have catch but a hurried , rapid glance ? be that as it might , 
 it be no long of the interest to he it have once be ; and after 
 ponder on the circumstance a minute or two , he advance to the gate . 
 but while his hand be on the latch , he again pause ; how should he 
 obtain admission to Darrell ? - how announce himself ? if in his own name , 
 would not exclusion be certain ? - if as a stranger on business , would 
 Darrell be sure to receive he ? as he be thus cogitate , his ear , 
 which , with all his other organ of sense , be constitutionally fine as 
 a savage 's , catch sound of a faint rustle among the bough of a thick 
 copse which cover a part of the little park , terminate at its pale . 
 the rustle come near and nearer ; the branch be rudely displace ; 
 and in a few moment more Guy Darrell himself come out from the copse , 
 close by the gate , and open it quickly , stand face to face with his 
 abhorrent son - in - law . Jasper be startle , but the opportunity be 
 not to be lose . " Mr. Darrell , " he say , " I come here again to see you ; 
 vouchsafe I , this time , a calm hearing . " so change be losely , so 
 absorb in his own emotion Darrell , that the word do not at once 
 waken up remembrance . " another time , " say Darrell , hastily move on 
 into the road ; " I be not at leisure now . " " pardon I , now , " say losely , 
 unconsciously bring himself back to the tone and bearing of his 
 early and more civilised year . " you do not remember I , sir ; no 
 wonder . but my name be Jasper Losely . " 

 Darrell halt ; then , as if spellbound , look fixedly at the 
 broad - shoulder burly frame before he , case in its coarse pea - jacket , 
 and in that rude form , and that defeature , bloated face , detect , 
 though with strong effort , the wreck of the masculine beauty which have 
 ensnare his deceitful daughter . Jasper could not have select a more 
 unpropitious moment for his cause . Darrell be still too much under the 
 influence of recent excitement and immense sorrow for that supremacy of 
 prudence over passion which could alone have make he a willing listener 
 to overture from Jasper Losely . and about the man whose connection 
 with himself be a thought of such bitter shame , there be now so 
 unmistakably the air of settled degradation , that all Darrell 's 
 instinct of gentleman be revolt - just at the very time , too , when 
 his pride have be most chafe and assail by the obtrusion of all that 
 render most gall to he the very name of Jasper Losely . what ! 
 be it that man 's asserted child whom Lionel Haughton desire as 
 a wife ? - be the alliance with that man to be thus renew and 
 strengthen ? - that man have another claim to he and his in right of 
 parentage to the bride of his near kinsman ? what ! be it that man 's 
 child whom he be ask to recognise as of his own flesh and blood ? - the 
 last representative of his line ? that man ! - that ! a flash shot from 
 his bright eye , deepen its grey into dark ; and , turn on his heel , 
 Darrell say , through his compress lip - 

 " you have hear , sir , I believe , through Colonel Morley , that only on 
 condition of your permanent settlement in one of our distant colony , 
 or America if you prefer it , would I consent to assist you . I be of the 
 same mind still . I can not parley with you myself . Colonel Morley be 
 abroad , I believe . I refer you to my solicitor ; you have see he year 
 ago ; you know his address . no more , sir . " 

 " this will not do , Mr. Darrell , " say losely , doggedly ; and , plant 
 himself right before Darrell 's way , " I have come here on purpose to have 
 all difference out with you , face to face - and I will - " 

 " you will ! " say Darrell , pale with haughty anger , and with the impulse 
 of his passion , his hand clench . in the bravery of his nature , and 
 the warmth of a temper constitutionally quick , he think nothing of the 
 strength and bulk of the insolent obtruder - nothing of the peril of odd 
 so unequal in a personal encounter . but the dignity which pervade all 
 his habit , and often supply to he the place of discretion , come , 
 happily for himself , to his aid now . he strike a man whom he so 
 despise ! - he raise that man to his own level by the honour of a blow 
 from his hand ! impossible ! " you will ! " he say . " well , be it so . be you 
 come again to tell I that a child of my daughter live , and that you 
 win my daughter 's fortune by a deliberate lie ? " 

 " I be not come to speak of that girl , but of myself . I say that I have 
 a claim on you , Mr. Darrell ; I say that turn and twist the truth as you 
 will , you be still my father - in - law , and that it be intolerable that I 
 should be want bread , or drive into actual robbery , while my wife 's 
 father be a man of countless wealth , and have no heir except - but I 
 will not now urge that child 's cause ; I be content to abandon it if so 
 obnoxious to you . do you wish I to cut a throat , and to be hang , 
 and all the world to hear the last die speech and confession of Guy 
 Darrell 's son - in - law ? answer I , sir ? " 

 " I answer you briefly and plainly . it be simply because I would not have 
 that last disgrace on Guy Darrell 's name that I offer you a subsistence 
 in land where you will be less expose to those temptation which 
 induce you to invest the sum that , by your own tale , have be obtain 
 from I on false pretence , in the sink of a Paris gambling house . a 
 subsistence that , if it do not pamp vice , at least place you beyond 
 the necessity of crime , be at your option . choose it or reject it as you 
 will . " 

 " look you , Mr. Darrell , " say Jasper , whose temper be fast give way 
 beneath the cold and gall scorn with which he be thus cast aside , 
 " I be in a state so desperate , that , rather than starve , I may take what 
 you so contemptuously fle to - your daughter 's husband ; but - " 

 " Knave ! " cry Darrell , interrupt he , " do you again and again urge 
 it as a claim upon I , that you decoy from her home , under a false 
 name , my only child ; that she die in a foreign land - break - hearted , if 
 I have rightly hear be that a claim upon your dupe victim 's father ? " 

 " it seem so , since your pride be compel to own that the world would 
 deem it one , if the jail chaplain take down the last word of your 
 son - in - law ! but , basta , basta ! hear I out , and spare hard name ; for 
 the blood be mount into my brain , and I may become dangerous . have any 
 other man eye , and scoff , and rail at I as you have do , he 
 would be lie dead and dumb as this stone at my foot ; but you - be my 
 father - in - law ! now , I care not to bargain with you what be the precise 
 amount of my stipend if I obey your wish , and settle miserably in one 
 of those raw , comfortless corner into which they who burthen this Old 
 World be thrust out of sight . I would rather live my time out in this 
 country - live it out in peace and for half what you may agree to give in 
 transport I . if you be to do anything for I , you have well do 
 it so as to make I content on easy term to your own pocket , rather 
 than to leave I dissatisfied , and willing to annoy you , which I could 
 do somehow or other , even on the far side of the Herring Pond . I might 
 keep to the letter of a bargain , live in Melbourne or Sydney , and take 
 your money , and yet molest and trouble you by deputy . that girl , for 
 instance - your grandchild ; well , well , disown she if you please ; but 
 if I find out where she be , which I own I have not do yet , I might 
 contrive to render she the plague of your life , even though I be in 
 Australia . " 

 " ay , " say Darrell , murmur - " ay , ay ; but " -   suddenly gather 
 himself up   - " no ! man , if she be my grandchild , your own child , could 
 you talk of she thus ? make she the object of so base a traffic , and such 
 miserable threat ? wicked though you be , this be against nature ! even 
 in nature 's wickedness - even in the son of a felon , and in the sharper 
 of a hell . Pooh ! I despise your malice . I will listen to you no long . 
 out of my path . " 

 " no ! " 

 " no ? " 

 " no , Guy Darrell , I have not yet do ; you shall hear my term , and 
 accept they - a moderate sum down ; say a few hundred , and two hundred 
 a - year to spend in London as I will - but out of your beat , out of your 
 sight and hearing . grant this , and I will never cross you again - never 
 attempt to find , and , if I find by chance , never claim as my child by 
 your daughter that wander girl . I will never shame you by name our 
 connection . I will not offend the law , nor die by the hangman ; yet I 
 shall not live long , for I suffer much , and I drink hard . " 

 the last word be speak gloomily , not altogether without a strange 
 dreary pathos . and amidst all his just scorn and anger , the large human 
 heart of Guy Darrell be for the moment touch . he be silent - his mind 
 hesitate ; would it not be well - would it not be just as safe to his 
 own peace , and to that of the poor child , whom , no matter what her 
 parentage , Darrell could not but desire to free from the claim set up 
 by so bold a ruffian , to gratify losely 's wish , and let he remain 
 in England , upon an allowance that would suffice for his subsistence ? 
 Unluckily for Jasper , it be while this doubt pass through Darrell 's 
 relent mind , that the miscreant , who be shrewd enough to see that 
 he have gain ground , but too coarse of apprehension to ascribe 
 his advantage to its right cause , think to strengthen his case by 
 additional argument . " you see , sir , " resume Jasper , in almost familiar 
 accent , " that there be no dog so toothless but what he can bite , and 
 no dog so savage but what , if you give he plenty to eat , he will serve 
 you . " 

 Darrell look up , and his brow darken . 

 Jasper continue : " I have hint how I might plague you ; perhaps , on the 
 other hand , I might do you a good turn with that handsome lady who drive 
 from your park - gate as I come up . ah ! you be once to have be marry 
 to she . I read in the newspaper that she have become a widow ; you may 
 marry she yet . there be a story against you once ; her mother make use 
 of it , and break off an old engagement . I can set that story right . " 

 " you can , " say Darrell , with that exceed calmness which come from 
 exceeding wrath ; " and perhaps , sir , that story , whatever it might be , 
 you invent . no dog so toothless as not to bite - eh , sir ? " 

 " well , " return Jasper , mistake Darrell 's composure , " at that time 
 certainly it seem my interest that you should not marry again ; but 
  basta ! basta ! enough of bygone . if I bit once , I will serve now . 
 come , sir , you be a man of the world , let we close the bargain . " 

 all Darrell 's soul be now up in arm . what , then ! this infamous wretch 
 be the author of the tale by which the woman he have love , as woman 
 never be love before , have excuse her breach of faith , and be 
 lose to he forever ? and he learn this , while yet fresh from her 
 presence - fresh from the agonising conviction that his heart love 
 still , but could not pardon . with a spring so sudden that it take losely 
 utterly by surprise , he leap on the bravo , swing aside that huge bulk 
 which Jasper have boast four drayman could not stir against its will , 
 clear his way ; and turn back before losely have recover his amaze , 
 cry out : " execrable villain ! I revoke every offer to aid a life 
 that have exist but to darken and desolate those it be permit to 
 approach . starve or rob ! perish miserably ! and if I pour not on your 
 head my parting curse , it be only because I know that man have no right 
 to curse ; and cast you back on your own evil self be the sole revenge 
 which my belief in Heaven permit I . " 

 thus say , Darrell stride on - swiftly , but not as one who fly . Jasper 
 make three long bound , and be almost at his side , when he be startle 
 by the explosion of a gun . a pheasant fall dead on the road , and 
 Darrell 's gamekeeper , gun in hand , come through a gap in the hedge 
 opposite the park - pale , and , see his master close before he , 
 approach to apologise for the suddenness of the shot . 

 whatever Losely 's intention in hastening after Darrell , he have no option 
 now but to relinquish it , and drop back . the village itself be not many 
 hundred yard distant ; and , after all , what good in violence , except the 
 gratified rage of the moment ? violence would not give to Jasper Losely 
 the income that have just be within his grasp , and have so unexpectedly 
 elude it . he remain , therefore , in the lane , stand still , and 
 see Darrell turn quietly into his park through another gate close to 
 the Manor - house . the gamekeeper , meanwhile , pick up his bird , reload 
 his gun , and eye Jasper suspiciously askant . the baffled gladiator at 
 length turn and walk slowly back to the town he have leave . it 
 be late in the afternoon when he once more gain his corner in the 
 coffee - room of his commercial inn ; and , to his annoyance , the room be 
 crowded - it be market - day . farmer , their business over , come in and 
 out in quick succession ; those who do not dine at the ordinary 
 take their hasty snack , or stirrup - cup , while their horse be be 
 saddle ; other to look at the newspaper , or exchange a word on the 
 state of market and the nation . Jasper , wearied and sullen , have to 
 wait for the refreshment he order , and meanwhile fall into a sort of 
 half - doze , as be not now unusual in he in the interval between food 
 and mischief . from this creep torpor he be suddenly rouse by the 
 sound of Darrell 's name . three farmer stand close beside he , their 
 back to the fire , be tenant to Darrell - two of they on the land 
 that Darrell have purchase in the year of his territorial ambition ; the 
 third reside in the hamlet of Fawley , and rent the large portion of 
 the comparatively barren acre to which the old patrimonial estate be 
 circumscribe . these farmer be talk of their squire 's return to 
 the county - of his sequester mode of life - of his peculiar habit - of 
 the great unfinished house which be leave to rot . the Fawley tenant then 
 say that it might not , be leave to rot after all , and that the village 
 workman have be lately employ , and still be , in get some of the 
 room into rough order ; and then he speak of the long gallery in which 
 the squire have be arrange his fine picture , and how he have run up 
 a passage between that gallery and his own room , and how he would 
 spend hour at day , and night too , in that awful long room as lone as a 
 churchyard ; and that Mr. Mills have say that his master now live almost 
 entirely either in that gallery or in the room in the roof of the old 
 house - quite cut off , as you might say , except from the eye of those 
 dead picture , or the rat , which have grow so excited at have their 
 quarter in the new building invade , that if you peep in at the 
 window in moonlit night you might see they in dozen , sit on their 
 haunch , as if hold council , or peer at the curious old thing 
 which lie beside the crate out of which they have be take . then the 
 rustic gossip go on to talk of the rent - day which be at hand - of the 
 audit feast , which , accord to immemorial custom , be give at the 
 old Manor - house on that same rent - day - suppose that Mr. Fairthorn would 
 preside - that the squire himself would not appear - make some incidental 
 observation on their respective rent and wheat - crop - remark that 
 they should have a good moonlight for their ride back from the audit 
 feast - caution each other , laugh , not to drink too much of Mr. 
 Fairthorn 's punch - and finally go their way , leave on the mind of 
 Jasper Losely - who , lean his scheming head on his powerful hand , have 
 appear in dull sleep all the while - these two fact : 1st , that on 
 the third day from that which be then decline , sum amounting to 
 thousand would find their way into Fawley Manor - house ; and , 2ndly , that 
 a communication exist between the unfinished , uninhabited building , 
 and Darrell 's own solitary chamber . as soon as he have fortify himself 
 by food and drink , Jasper rise , pay for his refreshment and walk 
 forth . Noiseless and rapid , skirt the hedgerow by the lane that lead 
 to Fawley , and scarcely distinguishable under their shadow , the human 
 wild - beast strided on in scent of its quarry . it be night when Jasper 
 once more reach the moss - grow pale round the demesne of the old 
 Manor - house . in a few minute he be stand under the black shadow 
 of the buttress to the unfinished pile . his object be not , then , 
 to assault , but to reconnoitre . he prowl round the irregular 
 wall , guide in his survey , now and then , faintly by the 
 star - more constantly and clearly by the light from the contiguous 
 Manor - house - especially the light from that high chamber in the gable , 
 close by which run the thin framework of wood which link the two 
 building of stone , just as any frail scheme link together the past 
 which man have not enjoy , with the Future he will not complete . Jasper 
 come to a large bay unglazed window , its sill but a few foot from the 
 ground , from which the board , nail across the mullion , have be 
 remove by the workman whom Darrell have employ on the interior , 
 and be replace but by a loose tarpaulin . pull aside this slight 
 obstacle , Jasper have no difficulty in enter through the wide mullion 
 into the dreary edifice . find himself in profound darkness , he have 
 recourse to a lucifer - box which he have about he , and the waste of a 
 dozen match suffice he to examine the ground . he be in a space 
 intend by the architect for the principal staircase ; a tall ladder , 
 use by the recent workman , be still leave stand against the wall , 
 the top of it rest on a landing - place opposite a doorway , that , from 
 the richness of its half - finished architrave , obviously lead to what 
 have be design for the state apartment ; between the pediment be 
 a slight temporary door of rough deal plank . satisfy with his 
 reconnoitre , losely quit the skeleton pile , and retrace his step 
 to the inn he have leave . his musing by the way suggest to he the 
 expediency , nay , the necessity , of an accomplice . implement might 
 be need - disguise would be require - swift horse for flight to be 
 hire - and , should the robbery succeed , the bulk of the spoil would be 
 no doubt in bank - note , which it would need some other hand than his own 
 to dispose of , either at the bank next morning at the early hour , 
 or by transmission abroad . for help in all this jasper know no one to 
 compare to Cutts ; nor do he suspect his old ally of any share in the 
 conspiracy against he , of which he have be warn by Mrs. Crane . 
 Resolving , therefore , to admit that long - try friend into his 
 confidence , and a share of the spoil , he quicken his pace , arrive at 
 the railway - station in time for a late train to London , and , disdainful 
 of the danger by which he be threaten in return to any of the haunt 
 of his late associate , gain the dark court wherein he have effect a 
 lodgment on the night of his return to London , and rouse Cutts from his 
 slumber with tale of an enterprise so promising , that the small man 
 begin to recover his ancient admiration for the genius to which he have 
 bow at Paris , but which have fall into his contempt in London . 

 Mr. Cutts hold a very peculiar position in that section of the great 
 world to which he belong . he possess the advantage of an education 
 superior to that of the generality of his companion , have be 
 originally a clerk to an Old Bailey attorney , and have since 
 that early day accomplish his natural shrewdness by a variety of 
 speculative enterprise both at home and abroad . in these adventure he 
 have not only contrive to make money , but , what be very rare with the 
 foe of law , to save it . be a bachelor , he be at small expense , 
 but besides his bachelor 's lodging in the dark court , he have an 
 establishment in the heart of the City , near the Thames , which be 
 intrust to the care of a maiden sister , as covetous and as crafty as 
 himself . at this establishment , ostensibly a pawnbroker 's , be receive 
 the good which Cutts know at his residence in the court be to be 
 sell a bargain , have be obtain for nothing . it be chiefly by this 
 business that the man enrich himself . but his net be one that take in 
 fish of all kind . he be a general adviser to the invader of law . if 
 he share in the scheme he advise , they be so sure to be successful , 
 that he enjoy the high reputation for luck . it be but seldom that 
 he do actively share in those scheme - lucky in what he shun as in 
 what he perform . he have make no untruthful boast to Mrs. Crane of the 
 skill with which he have keep himself out of the fang of justice . with a 
 certain portion of the police he be indeed rather a favourite ; for be 
 anything mysteriously " lose , " for which the owner would give a reward 
 equal to its value in legal market , Cutts be the man who would get it 
 back . of violence he have a wholesome dislike ; not that he do not admire 
 force in other - not that he be physically a coward - but that caution 
 be his predominant characteristic . he employ force when require - set 
 a just value on it - would plan a burglary , and dispose of the spoil ; 
 but it be only where the prize be great and the danger small , that he 
 lend his hand to the work that his brain approve . when losely propose 
 to he the robbery of a lone country - house , in which Jasper , make 
 light of all peril , bring prominently forward the image of some 
 thousand of pound in gold and note , guard by an elderly gentleman , 
 and to be approach with ease through an uninhabited building - Cutts 
 think it well worth personal investigation . nor do he consider 
 himself bind , by his general engagement to Mrs. Crane , to lose the 
 chance of a sum so immeasurably great than he could expect to obtain 
 from she by reveal the plot and take measure to frustrate it . 
 Cutts be a most faithful and intelligent agent when he be properly 
 pay , and have prove himself so to Mrs. Crane on various occasion . but 
 then , to be pay properly mean a gain great in serve than he could 
 get in not serve . Hitherto it have be extremely lucrative to obey 
 Mrs. Crane in save Jasper from crime and danger . in this instance the 
 lucre seem all the other way . accordingly , the next morning , have 
 fill a saddle - bag with sundry necessary , such as file , picklock , 
 mask - to which he add a choice selection of political tract and 
 newspaper - he and Jasper set out on two hire but strong and fleet 
 hackney to the neighbourhood of Fawley . they put up at a town on the 
 other side of the Manor - house from that by which Jasper have approach 
 it , and at about the same distance . after bait their steed , they 
 proceed to Fawley by the silent guide of a finger - post , gain the 
 vicinity of the park , and Cutts , dismounting , flit across the turf , 
 and plunge himself into the hollow of the unfinished mansion while 
 Jasper take charge of the horse in a corner of the woode lane . 
 Cutts , please by the survey of the forlorn interior , venture , in the 
 stillness that reign around , to mount the ladder , to apply a picklock 
 to the door above , and , open this with ease , creep into the long 
 gallery , its wall cover with picture . through the crevice in 
 another door at the extreme end gleam a faint light . Cutts apply his 
 eye to the chink and keyhole , and see that the light come from a room 
 on the other side the narrow passage which connect the new house with 
 the old . the door of that room be open , candle be on the table , and 
 beside the table Cutts could distinguish the outline of a man ' s form 
 seat - doubtless the owner ; but the form do not seem " elderly . " if 
 inferior to Jasper 's in physical power , it still be that of vigorous 
 and unbroken manhood . Cutts do not like the appearance of that 
 form , and he retreat to outer air with some misgiving . however , on 
 rejoin losely , he say : " as yet thing look promising - place still as 
 death - only one door lock , and that the common country lock , which a 
 schoolboy might pick with his knife . " 

 " or a crooked nail , " say Jasper . 

 " ay , no well picklock in good hand . but there be other thing 
 besides lock to think of . " 

 Cutts then hurry on to suggest that it be just the hour when some 
 of the workman employ on the premise might be find in the Fawley 
 public - house ; that he should ride on , dismount there , and take his 
 chance of pick up detail of useful information as to locality and 
 household . he should represent himself as a commercial traveller on 
 his road to the town they have quit ; he should take out his cheap 
 newspaper and tract ; he should talk politic - all workman love 
 politic , especially the politic of cheap newspaper and tract . he 
 would rejoin Losely in an hour or so . 

 the bravo wait - his horse graze - the moon come forth , steal 
 through the tree , bring into fantastic light the melancholy old 
 dwelling - house - the yet more melancholy new pile . Jasper be not , as we 
 have see , without certain superstitious fancy , and they have grow 
 on he more of late as his brain have become chronically heated and his 
 nerve relax by pain . he begin to feel the awe of the silence and the 
 moonlight ; and some vague remembrance of early guiltless day - of a 
 father 's genial love - of joyous sensation in the priceless possession 
 of youth and vigour - of the admire smile and cordial hand which his 
 beauty , his daring , and high spirit have attract towards he - of the 
 all that he have be , mix with the consciousness of what he be , and 
 an uneasy conjecture of the probable depth of the final fall - come dimly 
 over his thought , and seem like the whisper of remorse . but it be 
 rarely that man continue to lay blame on himself ; and Jasper hasten 
 to do , as many a well person do without a blush for his folly - viz . , 
 shift upon the innocent shoulder of fellow - man , or on the hazy outline 
 of that clouded form which ancient school and modern plagiarist call 
 sometimes " circumstance , " sometimes " Chance , " sometimes " Fate , " all the 
 guilt due to his own wilful abuse of irrevocable hour . 

 with this consolatory creed come , of necessity - the devil 's grand 
 luxury , revenge . say to yourself , " for what I suffer I condemn another 
 man , or I accuse the Arch - Invisible , be it a destiny , be it a maker ! " 
 and the logical sequel be to add evil to evil , folly to folly - to retort 
 on the man who so wrong , or on the Arch - invisible who so afflict you . 
 of all our passion , be not revenge the one into which enter with the 
 most z a devil ? for what be a devil ? - a be whose sole work on 
 earth be some revenge on God ! 

 Jasper Losely be not by temperament vindictive ; he be irascible , as 
 the vain be - combative , aggressive , turbulent , by the impulse of animal 
 spirit ; but the premeditation of vengeance be foreign to a levity and 
 egotism which abjure the self - sacrifice that be equally necessary to 
 hatred as to love . but Guy Darrell have force into his moral system a 
 passion not native to it . Jasper have expect so much from his marriage 
 with the great man 's daughter - count so thoroughly on her power to 
 obtain pardon and confer wealth - and his disappointment have be so 
 keen - be accompany with such mortification - that he regard the man 
 whom he have most injure as the man who have most injure he . but 
 not till now do his angry feeling assume the shape of a definite 
 vengeance . so long as there be a chance that he could extort from 
 darrell the money that be the essential necessary to his life , he 
 check his thought whenever they suggest a profitless gratification 
 of rage . but now that Darrell have so scornfully and so inexorably 
 spurn all concession - now that nothing be to be wring from he except 
 by force - force and vengeance come together in his project . and yet 
 even in the daring outrage he be meditate , murder itself do not 
 stand out as a thought accept - no ; what please his wild and turbid 
 imagination be the idea of humiliating by terror the man who have 
 humble he . to penetrate into the home of this haughty scorner - to 
 confront he in his own chamber at the dead of night , man to man , force 
 to force ; to say to he , " none now can deliver you from I - I come no 
 more as a suppliant - I command you to accept my term " ; to gloat over 
 the fear which , the strong man feel assure , would bow the rich man 
 to beg for mercy at his foot ; - this be the picture which Jasper Losely 
 conjure up ; and even the spoil to be win by violence smile on he less 
 than the grand position which the violence itself would bestow . be not 
 nine murder out of ten fashion thus from conception into deed ? " oh 
 that my enemy be but before I face to face - none to part we ! " say 
 the vindictive dreamer . well , and what then ? there , his imagination 
 halt - there he drop the sable curtain ; he go not on to say , " why , 
 then another murder will be add to the long catalogue from Cain . " 
 he palter with his deadly wish , and mutter , perhaps , at most , " why , 
 then - come what may ! " 

 losely continue to gaze on the pale wall gleam through the wintry 
 bough , as the moon rise high and high . and now out break the 
 light from Darrell 's lofty casement , and losely smile fiercely , and 
 muttered - hark ! the very word - " and then ! come what may ! " 

 Hoofs be now hear on the hard road , and Jasper be join by his 
 accomplice . 

 " well ! " say Jasper . 

 " Mount ! " return Cutts ; " I have much to say as we ride . " 

 " this will not do , " resume Cutts , as they speed fast down the lane ; 
 " why , you never tell I all the drawback . there be no less than four 
 man in the house - two servant besides the master and his secretary ; and 
 one of those servant , the butler or valet , have firearm , and know how 
 to use they . " 

 " Pshaw ! " say Jasper scoffingly ; " be that all ? be I not a match for 
 four ? " 

 " no , it be not all ; you tell I the master of the house be a retire 
 elderly man , and you mention his name . but you never tell I that your 
 Mr. Darrell be the famous lawyer and Parliament man - a man about whom 
 the newspaper have be write the last six month . " 

 " what do that signify ? " 

 " signify ! just this , that there will be ten time more row about the 
 affair you propose than there would be if it concern only a stupid 
 old country squire , and therefore ten time as much danger . besides , 
 on principle I do not   like to have anything to do with lawyer - a 
 cantankerous , spiteful set of fellow . and this Guy Darrell ! why , 
 General Jas . , I have see the man . he cross - examine I once when I be 
 a witness on a case of fraud , and turn I inside out with as much ease 
 as if I have be an old pincushion stuff with bran . I think I see his 
 eye now , and I would as lief have a loaded pistol at my head as that eye 
 again fix on mine . " 

 " Pooh ! you have bring a mask ; and , besides , you need not see he ; I 
 can face he alone . " 

 " no , no ; there might be murder ! I never mix myself with thing of that 
 kind , on principle ; your plan will not do . there might be a much safe 
 chance of more swag in a very different sort of scheme . I hear that the 
 picture in that ghostly long room I creep through be worth a mint 
 of money . now , picture of great value be well know , and there be 
 collector abroad who would pay almost any price for some picture , and 
 never ask where they come from ; hide they for some year perhaps , and 
 not bring they forth till any tale that would hurt we have die away . 
 this would be safe , I say . if the picture be small , no one in the 
 old house need be disturb . I can learn from some of the trade what 
 picture Darrell really have that would fetch a high price , and then look 
 out for customer abroad . this will take a little time , but be worth 
 wait for . " 

 " I will not wait , " say Jasper , fiercely ; " and you be a coward . I have 
 resolve that to - morrow night I will be in that man 's room , and that man 
 shall be on his knee before I . " 

 Cutts turn sharply round on his saddle , and by the aid of the 
 moonlight survey Losely 's countenance . " oh , I see , " he say , " there 
 be more than robbery in your mind . you have some feeling of hate - of 
 vengeance ; the man have injure you ? " 

 " he have treat I as if I be a dog , " say Jasper ; " and a dog can 
 bite . " 

 Cutts muse a few moment . " I have hear you talk at time about some 
 rich relation or connection on whom you have claim ; Darrell be the man , 
 I suppose ? " 

 " he be ; and hark ye , Cutts , if you try to balk I here , I will wring 
 your neck off . and since I have tell you so much , I will tell you this 
 much more - that I do not   think there be the danger you count on ; for 
 I do not   mean to take Darrell 's blood , and I believe he would not take 
 mine . " 

 " but there may be a struggle - and then ? " 

 " ay , if so , and then - man to man , " reply Jasper , mutteringly . 

 nothing more be say , but both spur on their horse to a quicker 
 pace . the spark flash from the hoof . now through the moonlight , now 
 under shade of the bough , scour on the rider - Losely 's broad chest 
 and marked countenance , once beautiful , now fearful , formidably define 
 even under the shadow - his comrade 's unsubstantial figure and goblin 
 feature flit vague even under the moonlight . 

 the town they have leave come in sight , and by this time Cutts have 
 resolve on the course his prudence suggest to he . the discovery 
 that , in the propose enterprise , losely have a personal feeling of 
 revenge to satisfy have suffice to decide the accomplice peremptorily to 
 have nothing to do with the affair . it be his rule to abstain from all 
 transaction in which fierce passion be engage . and the quarrel 
 between relation or connection be especially those which his 
 experience of human nature tell he bring risk upon all intermeddler . 
 but he see that Jasper be desperate ; that the rage of the bravo might 
 be easily turn on himself ; and therefore , since it be no use to 
 argue , it would be discreet to dissimulate . accordingly , when they 
 reach their inn , and be seat over their brandy - and - water , Cutts 
 resume the conversation , appear gradually to yield to Jasper 's 
 reasoning , concert with he the whole plan for the next night 's 
 operation , and take care meanwhile to pass the brandy . the day have 
 scarcely break before Cutts be off , with his bag of implement and 
 tract . he would have fain carry off also both the horse ; but the 
 ostler , surly at be knock up at so early an hour , might not have 
 surrender the one ride by Jasper , without Jasper 's own order to 
 do so . Cutts , however , bid the ostler be sure and tell the gentleman , 
 before go away , that he , Cutts , strongly advise he " to have nothing 
 to do with the bullock . " 

 Cutts , on arrive in London , go straight to Mrs. Crane 's old lodging 
 opposite to Jasper 's . but she have now remove to Podden Place , and leave 
 no address . on reach his own home , Cutts , however , find a note from 
 she , state that she should be at her old lodging that evening , if 
 he would call at half - past nine o'clock ; for , indeed , she have be 
 expect Jasper 's promise visit - have learn that he have leave his 
 lodging , and be naturally anxious to learn from Cutts what have become 
 of he . when Cutts call at the appoint hour and tell his story , 
 Arabella Crane immediately recognise all the danger which her informant 
 have so prudently shun . nor be she comfort by Cutts 's assurance 
 that Jasper , on find himself desert , would have no option but to 
 abandon , or at least postpone , an enterprise that , undertake singly , 
 would be too rash even for his reckless temerity . as it have become the 
 object of her life to save losely from justice , so she now shrunk from 
 denouncing to justice his meditated crime ; and the idea of recur to 
 Colonel Morley happily flash upon she . 

 have thus explain to the reader these antecedent in the narrative , 
 we return to Jasper . he do not rise till late at noon ; and as he be 
 generally somewhat stupefied on rise by the drink he have take the 
 night before , and by the congested brain which the heaviness of such 
 sleep produce , he could not at first believe that Cutts have altogether 
 abandon the enterprise - rather think that , with his habitual 
 wariness , that Ulysses of the Profession have go forth to collect 
 further information in the neighbourhood of the propose scene of 
 action . he be not fully undeceived in this belief till somewhat late 
 in the day , when , stroll into the stable - yard , the ostler , conclude 
 from the gentleman 's goodly thews and size that he be a north - country 
 grazier , deliver Cutts 's allegorical caution against the bullock . 

 thus abandon , Jasper 's desperate project only acquire a still more 
 concentrated purpose and a ruder simplicity of action . his original 
 idea , on first conceive the plan of robbery , have be to enter into 
 Darrell 's presence disguise and mask . even , however , before Cutts 
 desert he ; the mere hope of plunder have become subordinate to 
 the desire of a personal triumph ; and now that Cutts have leave he to 
 himself , and carry away the mean of disguise , Jasper feel rather 
 pleased than otherwise at the thought that his design should have none 
 of the characteristic of a vulgar burglary . no mask now ; his front 
 should be as open as his demand . Cutts 's report of the facility of 
 penetrate into Darrell 's very room also lessen the us of an 
 accomplice . and in the remodification of his first hasty plan of common 
 place midnight stealthy robbery , he would no long even require an 
 assistant to dispose of the plunder he might gain . 

 Darrell should now yield to his exaction , as a garrison surprise 
 accept the term of its conqueror . there would be no flight , no hiding , 
 no fear of note stop at bank . he would march out , hand on haunch , 
 with those immunity of booty that belong to the honour of war . 
 please his self - conceit with so gallant a view of his meditate 
 exploit , Jasper saunter at dark into the town , buy a few long 
 narrow nail and a small hammer , and return to his room , by the aid 
 of the fire , the tong , and the hammer , he fashion these nail , 
 with an ease and quickness which show an expert practitioner , into 
 instrument that would readily move the ward of any common country - make 
 lock . he do not care for weapon . he trust at need to his own 
 powerful hand . it be no long , too , the affair of a robber unknown , 
 unguessed , who might have to fight his way out of an alarmed household . 
 it be but the visit which he , Jasper Losely , Esquire , think fit 
 to pay , however unceremoniously and unseasonably , to the house of a 
 father - in - law ! at the bad , should he fail in find Darrell , or 
 secure an unwitnessed interview - should he , instead , alarm the 
 household , it would be a proof of the integrity of his intention that 
 he have no weapon save those which nature bestow on the wild man as the 
 mighty of her wild beast . at night he mount his horse , but go 
 out of his way , keep the high - road for an hour or two , in order to 
 allow ample time for the farmer to have quit the rent - feast , and the 
 old Manor - house to be hush in sleep . at last , when he judge the coast 
 clear and the hour ripe , he wind back into the lane towards Fawley ; 
 and when the spire of its hamlet - church come in sight through the 
 frosty starlit air , he dismount - lead the horse into one of the thick 
 beech - wood that make the prevail characteristic of the wild country 
 round that sequester dwelling - place - fasten the animal to a tree , 
 and stalk towards the park - pale on foot . lightly , as a wolf enter 
 a sheepfold , he swing himself over the moss - grow fence ; he gain the 
 buttress of the great raw pile ; high and clear above , from Darrell 's 
 chamber , stream the light ; all the rest of the old house be close 
 and dark , bury no doubt in slumber . 

 he be now in the hollow of the skeleton pile ; he mount the ladder ; 
 the lock of the door before he yield to his rude implement but artful 
 hand . he be in the long gallery ; the moonlight come broad and clear 
 through the large casement . what wealth of art be on the wall ! but how 
 profitless to the robber 's greed . there , through the very hall which 
 the master have build in the day of his ambition , say to himself , 
 " these be for far posterity , " the step of violence , it may be of 
 Murder , take its stealthy way to the room of the childless man ! through 
 the uncompleted pile , towards the uncompleted life , stride the terrible 
 step . 

 the last door yield noiselessly . the small wooden corridor , narrow 
 as the drawbridge which in ancient fortress be swing between the 
 commandant 's room in the topmost story and some oppose wall , be before 
 he . and Darrell 's own door be half open ; light on the table - log 
 burn bright on the hearth . Cautiously losely look through the 
 aperture . Darrell be not there ; the place be solitary ; but the 
 opposite door be open also . losely 's fine ear catch the sound of a 
 slight movement of a footstep in the room just below , to which that 
 opposite door admit . in an instant the robber glide within the 
 chamber - closed and lock the door by which he have enter , retain 
 the key about his person . the next stride bring he to the hearth . 
 beside it hang the bell - rope common in old - fashioned house . losely 
 look round ; on the table , by the writing implement , lie a pen - knife . 
 in another moment the rope be cut , high out of Darrell 's reach , and 
 fling aside . the hearth , be adapt but for logwood fire , furnish 
 not those implement in which , at a moment of need , the owner may find 
 an available weapon - only a slight pair of brass wood - pincer , and a 
 shovel equally frail . such as they be , however , Jasper quietly remove 
 and hide they behind a heavy old bureau . step be now hear mount 
 the stair that lead into the chamber ; losely shrink back into the recess 
 beside the mantelpiece . Darrell enter , with a book in his hand , for 
 which he have indeed quit his chamber - a volume contain the last 
 Act of Parliament relate to Public Trusts , which have be send to he 
 by his solicitor ; for he be create a deed of trust , to insure to 
 the nation the Darrell antiquity , in the name of his father , the 
 antiquarian . 

 Darrell advance to the writing - table , which stand in the centre of the 
 room ; lay down the book , and sigh - the short , quick , impatient sigh 
 which have become one of his peculiar habit . the robber steal from the 
 recess , and , glide round to the door by which Darrell have enter , 
 while the back of the master be still towards he , set fast the lock , 
 and appropriate the key as he have do at the door which have admit 
 himself . though the noise in that operation be but slight , it rouse 
 darrell from his abstract thought . he turn quickly , and at the same 
 moment losely advance towards he . 

 at once Darrell comprehend his danger . his rapid glance take in 
 all the precaution by which the intruder proclaim his lawless 
 purpose - the closed door , the bell rope cut off . there , between those 
 four secret wall , must pass the interview between himself and the 
 desperado . he be unarmed , but he be not daunt . it be but man to 
 man . losely have for he his vast physical strength , his penury , despair , 
 and vindictive purpose . Darrell have in his favour the intellect which 
 give presence of mind ; the energy of nerve , which be no more to be see 
 in the sinew and bone than the fluid which fell can be see in the jar 
 and the wire ; and that superb kind of pride , which , if terror be feel , 
 make its action impossible , because a disgrace , and bravery a matter of 
 course , simply because it be honour . 

 as the bravo approach , by a calm and slight movement Darrell draw to 
 the other side of the table , place that obstacle between himself 
 and losely , and , extend his arm , say : " hold , sir ; I forbid you 
 to advance another step . you be here , no matter how , to re - urge your 
 claim on I . be seat ; I will listen to you . " 

 Darrell 's composure take losely so by surprise that mechanically he 
 obey the command thus tranquilly lay upon he , and sink into a 
 chair - face Darrell with a sinister under - look from his sullen brow . 
 " ah ! " he say , " you will listen to I now ; but my term have rise . " 

 Darrell , who have also seat himself , make no answer ; but his face be 
 resolute and his eye watchful . the ruffian resume , in a gruffer tone : 
 " my term have rise , Mr. Darrell . " 

 " have they , sir ? and why ? " 

 " why ! because no one can come to your aid here ; because here you can not 
 escape ; because here you be in my power ! " 

 " rather , sir , I listen to you because here you be under my roof - tree ; 
 and it be you who be in my power ! " 

 " your ! look round ; the door be lock on you . perhaps you think 
 your shout , your cry might bring aid to you . attempt it - raise your 
 voice - and I strangle you with these hand . " 

 " if I do not raise my voice , it be , first , because I should be ashamed 
 of myself if I require aid against one man ; and , secondly , because I 
 would not expose to my dependent a would - be assassin in he whom my 
 lose child call husband . Hush , sir , hush , or your own voice will alarm 
 those who sleep below . and now , what be it you ask ? be plain , sir , and 
 be brief . " 

 " well , if you like to take matter coolly , I have no objection . these 
 be my term . you have receive large sum this day ; those sum be in 
 your house , probably in that bureau ; and your life be at my will . " 

 " you ask the monie pay for rent to - day . true , they be in the house ; 
 but they be not in my apartment . they be receive by another ; they 
 be keep by another . in vain , through the winding and passage of this 
 old house , would you seek to find the room in which he store they . in 
 do so you will pass by the door of a servant who sleep so lightly 
 that the chance be that he will hear you ; he be arm with a 
 blunderbuss , and with pistol . you say to I , ' your money or your life . ' 
 I say to you , in reply , ' neither : attempt to seize the money , and your 
 own life be lose . " 

 " Miser ! I do not   believe that sum so large be not in your own keeping . 
 and even if they be not , you shall show I where they be ; you shall 
 lead I through those winding and passage of which you so tenderly 
 warn I , my hand on your throat . and if servant wake , or danger 
 threaten I , it be you who shall save I , or die ! ha ! you do not fear 
 I - eh , Mr. Darrell ! " and losely rise . 

 " I do not fear you , " reply Darrell , still seat . " I can not conceive 
 that you be here with no other design than a profitless murder . you be 
 here , you say , to make term ; it will be time enough to see whose life 
 be endanger when all your proposition have be state . as yet 
 you have only suggest a robbery , to which you ask I to assist you . 
 impossible ! Grant even that you be able to murder I , you would be 
 just as far off from your booty . and yet you say your term have rise ! 
 to I they seem fall to nothing ! have you anything else to say ? " 

 the calmness of Darrell , so supremely display in this irony , begin to 
 tell upon the ruffian - the magnetism of the great man 's eye and voice , 
 and steadfast courage , gradually gain power over the wild , inferior 
 animal . try to recover his constitutional audacity , Jasper say , with 
 a tone of the old rollick voice : " well , Mr. Darrell , it be all one to 
 I how I wring from you , in your own house , what you refuse I when I 
 be a suppliant on the road . fair mean be pleasanter than foul . I be a 
 gentleman - the grandson of Sir Julian Losely , of Losely Hall ; I be your 
 son - in - law ; and I be starve . this must not be ; write I a cheque . " 

 Darrell dip his pen in the ink , and draw the paper towards he . 

 " Oho ! you do not   fear I , eh ? this be not do from fear , mind - all out 
 of pure love and compassion , my kind father - in - law . you will write I a 
 cheque for five thousand pound - come , I be moderate - your life be worth 
 a precious deal more than that . hand I the cheque - I will trust to your 
 honour to give I no trouble in cash it , and bid you good - night - my 
 father - in - law . " 

 as losely cease with a mocking laugh , Darrell spring up quickly , throw 
 open the small casement which be within his reach , and fling from it 
 the paper on which he have be write , and which he wrapt round the 
 heavy armorial seal that lie on the table . 

 losely bound towards he . " what mean that ? what have you do ? " 

 " save your life and mine , Jasper Losely , " say Darrell , solemnly , and 
 catch the arm that be raise against he . " we be now upon equal 
 term . " 

 " I understand , " growl the tiger , as the slaver gather to his 
 lip - " you think by that paper to summon some one to your aid . " 

 " not so - that paper be useless while I live . look forth - the moonlight 
 be on the roof below - can you see where that paper have fall ? on the 
 ledge of a parapet that your foot could not reach . it face the window 
 of a room in which one of my household sleep ; it will meet his eye in 
 the morning when the shutter be unbarred ; and on that paper be 
 writ these word : ' if I be this night murder , the murderer be Jasper 
 Losely , ' and the paper be sign by my name . back , sir - would you doom 
 yourself to the gibbet ? " 

 Darrell release the dread arm he have arrest , and losely star at 
 he , amazed , bewildered . 

 Darrell resume : " and now I tell you plainly that I can accede to 
 no term put to I thus . I can sign my hand to no order that you may 
 dictate , because that would be to sign myself a coward - and my name be 
 Darrell ! " 

 " down on your knee , proud man - sign you shall , and on your knee ! I 
 care not now for gold - I care not now a rush for my life . I come here to 
 humble the man who from first to last have so scornfully humble I . - and 
 I will , I will ! on your knee - on your knee ! " 

 the robber fling himself forward ; but Darrell , whose eye have never 
 quit the foe , be prepare for and elude the rush . losely , miss 
 his object , lose his balance , strike against the edge of the table which 
 partially interpose between himself and his prey , and be only save 
 from fall by the close neighbourhood of the wall , on which he come 
 with a shock that for the moment well - nigh stun he . meanwhile 
 Darrell have gain the hearth , and snatch from it a large log 
 half - burning . Jasper , recover himself , dash the long matted hair 
 from his eye , and , see undismaye the formidable weapon with which 
 he be menace , cower for a second and deadly spring . 

 " stay , stay , stay , parricide and madman ! " cry Darrell , his eye 
 flash bright than the brand . " it be not my life I plead for - it be 
 your . remember , if I fall by your hand , no hope and no refuge be leave 
 to you ! in the name of my dead child , and under the eye of avenge 
 Heaven , I strike down the fury that blind you , and I scare back your 
 soul from the abyss ! " 

 so ineffably grand be the man 's look and gesture - so full of sonorous 
 terror the swell of his matchless all - conquer voice , that losely , in 
 his midmost rage , stand awed and spellbound . his breast heave , his eye 
 fall , his frame collapse , even his very tongue seem to cleave to the 
 parch roof of his mouth . whether the effect so suddenly produce might 
 have continue , or whether the startled miscreant might not have 
 lash himself into renew wrath and inexpiable crime , pass out of 
 conjecture . at that instant simultaneously be hear hurried footstep 
 in the corridor without , violent blow on the door , and voice 
 exclaim , " open , open ! - Darrell , Darrell ! " - while the bell at the 
 portal of the old house ring fast and shrill . 

 " Ho - be it so ? " growl losely , recover himself at those unwelcome 
 sound . " but do not think that I will be catch thus , like a rat in a 
 trap . no - I will - " 

 " Hist ! " interrupt Darrell , drop the brand , and advance quickly 
 on the ruffian - " Hist ! - let no one know that my daughter 's husband come 
 here with a felon 's purpose . sit down - down I say ; it be for my house 's 
 honour that you should be safe . " and suddenly place both hand on 
 Losely 's broad shoulder , he force he into a seat . during these few 
 hurry word , the stroke at the door and the shout without have be 
 continue , and the door shake on its yielding hinge . 

 " the key - the key ! " whisper Darrell . 

 but the bravo be stupefy by the suddenness with which his rage 
 have be cow , his design baffle , his position change from the 
 man dictate law and threaten life , to the man protect by his 
 intend victim . and he be so slow in even comprehend the meaning of 
 Darrell 's order , that Darrell have scarcely snatch the key less from 
 his hand than from the pouch to which he at last mechanically point , 
 when the door be burst open , and Lionel Haughton , Alban Morley , and 
 the Colonel 's servant be in the room . not one of they , at the first 
 glance , perceive the inmate of the chamber , who be at the right of 
 their entrance , by the angle of the wall and in shadow . but out come 
 Darrell 's calm voice : 

 " Alban ! Lionel ! - welcome always ; but what bring you hither at such an 
 hour , with such clamour ? armed too ! " 

 the three man stand petrify . there sate , peaceably enough , a large 
 dark form , its hand on its knee , its head bend down , so that the 
 feature be not , distinguishable ; and over the chair in which this 
 bend figure be thus confusedly gather up leant Guy Darrell , with 
 quiet ease - no trace of fear nor of past danger in his face , which , 
 though very pale , be serene , with a slight smile on the firm lip . 

 " well , " mutter Alban Morley , slowly lower his pistol - " well , I be 
 surprised ! - yes , for the first time in twenty year , I and surprised ! " 

 " surprised perhaps to find I at this hour still up , and with a person 
 upon business - the door lock . however , mutual explanation later . of 
 course you stay here to night . my business with this - this visitor , be 
 now over . Lionel , open that door - here be the key . - Sir " -   he touch 
 losely by the shoulder , and whisper in his ear , " rise and speak 
 not , "   -   aloud   " Sir , I need not detain you long . allow I to show you 
 the way out of this ramble old house . " 

 Jasper rise like one half asleep , and , still bend his form and hiding 
 his face , follow Darrell down the private stair , through the study , 
 the library , into the hall , the Colonel 's servant light the way ; and 
 Lionel and Morley , still too amazed for word , bring up the rear . the 
 servant draw the heavy bolt from the front door ; and now the household 
 have catch alarm . mill first appear with the blunderbuss , then the 
 footman , then Fairthorn . 

 " stand back , there ! " cry Darrell , and he open the door himself to 
 losely . " Sir , " say he then , as they stand in the moonlight , " mark that 
 I tell you truly - you be in my power ; and if the event of this night 
 can lead you to acknowledge a watchful providence , and recall with a 
 shudder the crime from which you have be save , why , then , I too , out 
 of gratitude to Heaven , may think of mean by which to free other from 
 the peril of your despair . " 

 losely make no answer , but slunk off with a fast , furtive stride , 
 hasten out of the moonlit sward into the gloom of the leafless tree . 




 CHAPTER II . 

  if the LION ever wear the FOX 's HIDE , still he wear it as the LION . 

 when Darrell be alone with Lionel and Alban Morley , the calm with which 
 he have before startle they vanish . he pour out his thank with deep 
 emotion . " forgive I ; not in the presence of a servant could I say , ' you 
 have save I from an unnatural strife , and my daughter 's husband from 
 a murderer 's end . ' but by what wondrous mercy do you learn my danger ? 
 be you send to my aid ? " 

 Alban briefly explain . " you may judge , " he say in conclusion , " how 
 great be our anxiety , when , follow the instruction of our guide , 
 while our driver ring his alarum at the front portal , we make our 
 entrance into yon rib of stone , find the door already open , and 
 fear we might be too late . but , meanwhile , the poor woman wait 
 without in the carriage that bring we from the station . I must go and 
 relieve her mind . " 

 " and bring she hither , " cry Darrell , " to receive my gratitude . stay , 
 Alban ; while you leave I with she , you will speak aside to Mills ; tell 
 he that you hear there be an attempt to be make on the house , and 
 come to frustrate it , but that your fear be exaggerated ; the man be 
 more a half - insane mendicant than a robber . be sure , at least , that his 
 identity with losely be not surmise , and bid Mills treat the affair 
 lightly . public man be expose , you know , to assault from crackbraine 
 enthusiast ; or stay - I once be a lawyer , and "   continue Darrell , 
 whose irony have become so integral an attribute of his mind as to be 
 proof against all trial   " there be man so out of their wit as to fancy 
 a lawyer have ruin they ! Lionel , tell poor Dick Fairthorn to come to 
 I . " when the musician enter , Darrell whisper to he : " go back to 
 your room - open your casement - step out on to the parapet - you will see 
 something white ; it be a scrap of paper wrap round my old armorial 
 seal . bring it to I just as it be , Dick . that poor young Lionel , we 
 must keep he here a day or two ; mind , no prickle for he , Dick . " 




 CHAPTER III . 

  ARABELLA CRANE versus GUY DARRELL ; or , WOMAN versus LAWYER . in the 
  COURTS , LAWYER would WIN ; but in a private PARLOUR , foot to foot , 
  and TONGUE TO TONGUE , LAWYER have not a CHANCE . 

 Arabella Crane enter the room : Darrell hesitate - the remembrance 
 attach to she be so painful and repugnant . but do he not now owe to 
 she perhaps his very life ? he pass his hand rapidly over his brow , 
 as if to sweep away all early recollection , and , advance quickly , 
 extend that hand to she . the stern woman shake her head , and reject 
 the proffered greeting . 

 " you owe I no thank , " she say , in her harsh , ungracious accent ; " I 
 seek to save not you , but he . " 

 " how ! " say Darrell , startle ; " you feel no resentment against the man 
 who injure and betray you ? " 

 " what my feeling may be towards he be not for you to conjecture ; man 
 could not conjecture they ; I be woman . what they once be I might 
 blush for ; what they be now , I could own without shame . but you , Mr. 
 Darrell , - you , in the hour of my uttermost anguish , when all my future 
 be lay desolate , and the world lie crush at my foot - you - man , 
 chivalrous man ! - you have for I no human compassion - you thrust I in 
 scorn from your door - you see in my woe nothing but my error - you send 
 I forth , strip of reputation , brand by your contempt , to famine or 
 to suicide . and you wonder that I feel less resentment against he who 
 wrong I than against you , who , know I wrong , only disdain 
 my grief . the answer be plain - the scorn of the man she only reverence 
 leaf to a woman no memory to mitigate its bitterness and gall . the 
 wrong inflict by the man she love may leave , what they have leave to 
 I , an undying sense of a past existence - radiant , joyous , hopeful ; of 
 a time when the earth seem cover with blossom , just ready to burst 
 into bloom ; when the sky through their haze take the rose - hue as the 
 sun seem about to rise . the memory that I once be happy , at least 
 then , I owe to he who injure and betray I . to you , when happiness 
 be lose to I forever , what do I owe ? tell I . " 

 strike by her word , more by her impressive manner , though not 
 recognise the plea by which the defendant thus raise herself into the 
 accuser , Darrell answer gently " Pardon I ; this be no moment to revive 
 recollection of anger on my part ; but reflect , I entreat you , and you 
 will feel that I be not too harsh . in the same position any other man 
 would not have be less severe . " 

 " any other man ! " she exclaim ; " ay , possibly ! but would the scorn of 
 any other man so have crush self - esteem ? the injury of the wicked 
 do not sour we against the good ; but the scoff of the good leave we 
 malignant against virtue itself . any other man ! tut ! Genius be bind to 
 be indulgent . it should know human error so well - have , with its large 
 luminous force , such error itself when it deign to be human , that , 
 where other may scorn , genius should only pity . " she pause a moment , 
 and then slowly resume . " and pity be my due . have you , or have any one 
 lofty as yourself in reputed honour , but say to I , ' Thou hast sin , 
 thou must suffer ; but sin itself need compassion , and compassion 
 forbid thee to despair , ' why , then , I might have be gentle to the 
 thing of earth , and less steel against the influence of Heaven than 
 I have be . that be all no matter now . Mr. Darrell , I would not part 
 from you with angry and bitter sentiment . Colonel Morley tell I that 
 you have not only let the man , whom we need not name , go free , but that 
 you have guard the secret of his design . for this I thank you . I 
 thank you , because what be leave of that blasted and deform existence I 
 have take into mine . and I would save that man from his own device 
 as I would save my soul from its own temptation . be you large - hearted 
 enough to comprehend I ? look in my face - you have see his ; all earthly 
 love be erase and blot out of both . " 

 Guy Darrell bow his head in respect that partook of awe . 

 " you , too , " say the grim woman , after a pause , and approach he 
 nearer - " you , too , have love , I be tell , and you , too , be forsake . " 

 he recoil and - shudder . 

 " what be leave to your heart of its ancient folly ? I should like to know ! 
 I be curious to learn if there be a man who can feel as woman ! have you 
 only resentment ? have you only disdain ? have you only vengeance ? have 
 you pity ? or have you the jealous absorbing desire , survive the 
 affection from which it sprang , that still the life wrench from you 
 shall owe , despite itself , a melancholy allegiance to your own ? " 

 Darrell impatiently wave his hand to forbid further question ; and it 
 need all his sense of the service this woman have just render he to 
 repress his haughty displeasure at so close an approach to his torturing 
 secret . 

 Arabella 's dark bright eye rest on his knitted brow , for a moment , 
 wistfully , musingly . then she say : " I see ! man 's inflexible pride - no 
 pardon there ! but own , at least , that you have suffer . " 

 " suffer ! " groan Darrell involuntarily , and press his hand to his 
 heart . 

 " you have ! - and you own it ! fellow - sufferer , I have no more anger 
 against you . neither should pity , but let each respect the other . a few 
 word more , - this child ! " 

 " ay - ay - this child ! you will be truthful . you will not seek to deceive 
 I - you know that she - she - claim by that assassin , rear by his 
 convict father - she be no daughter of my line ! " 

 " what ! would it then be no joy to know that your line do not close with 
 yourself - that your child might - " 

 " Cease , madam , cease - it matter not to a man nor to a race when it 
 perish , so that it perish at last with honour . who would have either 
 himself or his lineage live on into a day when the escutcheon be blot 
 and the name disgrace ? no ; if that be Matilda 's child , tell I , and I 
 will bear , as man may do , the last calamity which the will of Heaven may 
 inflict . if , as I have all reason to think , the tale be an imposture , 
 speak and give I the sole comfort to which I would cling amidst the 
 ruin of all other hope . " 

 " verily , " say Arabella , with a kind of musing wonder in the tone of she 
 soften voice ; " verily , have a man 's heart the same throb and fibre as a 
 woman 's ? have I a child like that blue - eyed wanderer with the frail form 
 need protection , and the brave spirit that ennoble softness , what 
 would be my pride ! my bliss ! talk of shame - disgrace ! fie - fie - the more 
 the evil of other darken one so innocent , the more cause to love and 
 shelter she . but - I - be childless ! shall I tell you that the offence 
 which lie heavy on my conscience have be my cruelty to that girl ? 
 she be give an infant to my care . I see in she the daughter of that 
 false , false , mean , deceive friend , who have take my confidence , and 
 buy , with her suppose heritage , the man swear by all oath to I . I 
 see in she , too , your descendant , your rightful heiress . I rejoice in 
 a revenge on your daughter and yourself . think not I would have foist 
 she on your notice ! no . I would have keep she without culture , without 
 consciousness of a high lot ; and when I give she up to her grandsire , 
 the convict , it be a triumph to think that Matilda 's child would be 
 an outcast . terrible thought ! but I be mad then . but that poor convict 
 whom you , in your worldly arrogance , so loftily despise - he take to his 
 breast what be fling away as a worthless weed . and if the flower keep 
 the promise of the bud , never flower so fair bloomed from your vaunted 
 stem ! and yet you would bless I if I say , ' pass on , childless man ; she 
 be nothing to you ! ' " 

 " Madam , let we not argue . as you yourself justly imply , man 's heart 
 and woman 's must each know throb that never be , and never should be , 
 familiar to the other . I repeat my question , and again I implore your 
 answer . " 

 " I can not answer for certain ; and I be fearful of answer at all , lest 
 on a point so important I should mislead you . Matilda 's child ? Jasper 
 affirm it to I . his father believe he - I believe he . I never have 
 the shadow of a doubt till - " 

 " till what ? for Heaven 's sake speak . " 

 " till about five year ago , or somewhat more , I see a letter from 
 Gabrielle Desmarets , and - " 

 " ah ! which make you suspect , as I do , that the child be Gabrielle 
 Desmaret 's daughter . " 

 Arabella rear her crest as a serpent before it strike . " Gabrielle 's 
 daughter ! you think so . her child that I shelter ! her child for whom 
 I have just plead to you ! her ! " she suddenly become silent . evidently 
 that idea have never before strike she ; evidently it now shock she ; 
 evidently something be pass through her mind which do not allow 
 that idea to be dismiss . as Darrell be about to address she , she 
 exclaim abruptly : " no ! say no more now . you may hear from I again 
 should I learn what may decide at least this doubt one way or the other . 
 Farewell , sir . " 

 " not yet . permit I to remind you that you have save the life of a man 
 whose wealth be immense . " 

 " Mr. Darrell , my wealth in relation to my want be perhaps immense as 
 your , for I do not spend what I possess . " 

 " but this unhappy outlaw , whom you would save from himself , can 
 henceforth be to you but a burthen and a charge . after what have pass 
 to - night , I do tremble to think that penury may whisper other house to 
 rob , other life to menace . let I , then , place at your disposal , to be 
 employ in such mode as you deem the good , a sum that may suffice to 
 secure an object which we have in common . " 

 " no , Mr. Darrell , " say Arabella , fiercely ; " whatever he be , never with 
 my consent shall Jasper Losely be beholden to you for alm . if money can 
 save he from shame and a dreadful death , that money shall be mine . I 
 have say it . and , hark you , Mr. Darrell , what be repentance without 
 atonement ? I say not that I repent ; but I do know that I seek to atone . " 

 the iron - grey robe flutter an instant , and then vanish from the 
 room . 

 when Alban Morley return to the library , he see Darrell at the far 
 corner of the room , on his knee . well might Guy Darrell thank Heaven 
 for the mercy vouchsafe to he that night . life preserve ? be that 
 all ? might life yet be better and gladden ? be there aught in the 
 grim woman 's word that might bequeath thought which reflection would 
 ripen into influence over action ? - aught that might suggest the case 
 in which , not ignobly , Pity might subjugate Scorn ? in the royal abode of 
 that Soul , do Pride only fortify Honour ? - be it but the mild king , not 
 the imperial despot ? would it blind , as its rival , the Reason ? would it 
 chain , as a rebel , the heart ? would it man the dominion , that might 
 be serene , by the treasure it waste - by the war it provoke ? 
 self - knowledge ! self - knowledge ! from Heaven , indeed , descend the 
 precept , " know thyself . " that truth be tell to we by the old heathen 
 oracle . but what old heathen oracle have tell we how to know ? 




 CHAPTER IV . 

  the MAN - EATER humiliate . he encounter an old acquaintance in a 
  TRAVELLER , who , like SHAKESPEARE 's JAQUES , be " a MELANCHOLY fellow " ; 
  who also , LIKE JAQUES , HATH " great reason to be bad " ; and WHO , still 
  like JAQUES , be " full of MATTER . " 

 Jasper Losely ride slowly on through the clear frosty night ; not back to 
 the country town which he have leave on his hateful errand , nor into the 
 broad road to London . with a strange desire to avoid the haunt of man , 
 he select - at each choice of way in the many path branch right and 
 leave , between waste and woodland - the lane that seem the narrow 
 and the dim . it be not remorse that gnaw he , neither be it mere 
 mercenary disappointment , nor even the pang of baffle vengeance - it 
 be the profound humiliation of diseased self - love - the conviction that , 
 with all his brute power , he have be powerless in the very time and 
 scene in which he have picture to himself so complete a triumph . even 
 the quiet with which he have escape be a mortifying recollection . 
 capture itself would have be preferable , if capture have be precede 
 by brawl and strife - the exhibition of his hardihood and prowess . 
 gloomily bend over his horse 's neck , he curse himself as fool and 
 coward . what would he have have ! - a new crime on his soul ? perhaps he 
 would have answer , " anything rather than this humiliating failure . " he 
 do not rack his brain with conjecture if Cutts have betray he , 
 or by what other mode assistance have be send in such time of need to 
 Darrell . nor do he feel that hunger for vengeance , whether on Darrell 
 or on his accomplice   should that accomplice have play the traitor , 
 which might have be expect from his characteristic ferocity . on 
 the contrary , the thought of violence and its excitement have in it 
 a sickness as of shame . darrell at that hour might have ride by he 
 scathless . Cutts might have jeer and say , " I blab your secret , and 
 send the aid that foil it " ; and losely would have continue to hang 
 his head , nor lift the herculean hand that lie nerveless on the 
 horse 's mane . be it not commonly so in all reaction from excitement in 
 which self - love have be keenly gall ? do not vanity enter into the 
 lust of crime as into the desire of fame ? 

 at sunrise losely find himself on the high - road into which a labyrinth 
 of lane have lead he , and opposite to a milestone , by which he learn 
 that he have be long turn his back on the metropolis , and that he 
 be about ten mile distant from the provincial city of Ouzelford . by 
 this time his horse be knock up , and his own chronic pain begin to 
 make themselves acutely feel ; so that , when , a little far on , he 
 come to a wayside inn , he be glad to halt ; and after a strong drain , 
 which have the effect of an opiate , he betake himself to bed , and sleep 
 till the noon be far advanced . 

 when losely come down - stair , the common room of the inn be occupy by 
 a meeting of the trustee of the highroad ; and , on demand breakfast , 
 he be show into a small sand parlour adjoining the kitchen . two 
 other occupant - a man and a woman - be there already , seat at a 
 table by the fireside , over a pint of half - and - half . losely , warm 
 himself at the hearth , scarcely notice these humble reveller by a 
 glance . and they , after a displeased stare at the stalwart frame which 
 obscure the cheering glow they have hitherto monopolise , resume a 
 muttered conversation ; of which , as well as of the vile modicum that 
 refresh their lip , the man take the lion 's share . shabbily forlorn 
 be that man 's habiliment - turn and re - turn , patch , darn , 
 weather - stain , grease - stain - but still retain that kind of 
 mouldy , grandiose , bastard gentility , which imply that the wearer have 
 know well day ; and , in the downward progress of fortune when they 
 once fall , may probably know still bad . 

 the woman be some year old than her companion , and still more 
 forlornly shabby . her garment seem literally compose of particle of 
 dust glue together , while her face might have insure her condemnation 
 as a witch before any honest jury in the reign of King James the First . 
 his breakfast , and the brandy - bottle that flank the loaf , be now 
 place before losely ; and , as distastefully he force himself to eat , 
 his eye once more glanced towards , and this time rest on , the shabby 
 man , in the sort of interest with which one knave out of elbow 
 regard another . as Jasper thus look , gradually there steal on he 
 a reminiscence of those coarse large feature - that rusty disreputable 
 wig . the recognition , however , be not mutual ; and presently , after a 
 whisper interchange between the man and the woman , the latter rise , 
 and approach losely , drop a curtsey , and say , in a weird , under 
 voice : " Stranger ! luck 's in store for you . tell your fortune ! " as she 
 speak , from some dust - hole in her garment she produce a pack of card , 
 on whose half - obliterate face seem incrust the dirt of age . 
 thrust these antiquity under Jasper 's nose , she add , " wish and 
 cut . " 

 " Yshaw , " say Jasper , who , though sufficiently superstitious in some 
 matter and in regard to some person , be not so completely under the 
 influence of that imaginative infirmity as to take the creature before 
 he for a sibyl . " get away ; you turn my stomach . your card smell ; so do 
 you ! " 

 " forgive she , worthy sir , " say the man , lean forward . " the hag 
 may be unsavoury , but she be wise . the Three Sisters who accost the 
 Scottish Thane , sir   Macbeth - you have see it on the stage ?   be not 
 savoury . withered , and wild in their attire , sir , but they know a thing 
 or two ! she see luck in your face . cross her hand and give it vent ! " 

 " Fiddledee , " say the irreverent losely . " take she off , or I shall scald 
 she , " and he seize the kettle . 

 the hag retreat grumble ; and losely , soon despatch his meal , 
 place his foot ' on the hob , and begin to meditate what course to adopt 
 for a temporary subsistence . he have break into the last pound leave 
 of the money which he have extract from Mrs. Crane 's purse some day 
 before . he recoil with terror from the thought of return to town 
 and place himself at her mercy . yet what option have he ? while thus 
 musing , he turn impatiently round , and see that the shabby man and the 
 dusty hag be engage in an amicable game of ecarte , with those very 
 card which have so offend his olfactory organ . at that sight the 
 old instinct of the gambler struggle back ; and , raise himself up , he 
 look over the card of the player . the miserable wretch be , of 
 course , play for nothing ; and losely see at a glance that the man 
 be , nevertheless , try to cheat the woman ! positively he take that 
 man into more respect ; and that man , notice the interest with which 
 losely survey the game , look up , and say : 

 " while the time , sir ? what say you ? a game or two ? I can stake my 
 pistoles - that be , sir , so far as a fourpenny bit go . if ignorant of 
 this french game , sir , cribbage or all four ? " 

 " no , " say losely , mournfully ; " there be nothing to be get out of you ; 
 otherwise " - he stop and sigh . " but I have see you under other 
 circumstance . what have become of your Theatrical exhibition ? gamble it 
 away ? yet , from what I see of your play , I think you ought not to have 
 lose , Mr. Rugge . " 

 the ex - manager start . 

 " what ! you know I before the storm ? - before the lightning strike I , 
 as I may say , sir - and fall into difficulty , I became - a wreck ? you 
 know I ? - not of the Company ? - a spectator ? " 

 " as you say - a spectator . you have once in your employ an actor - clever 
 old fellow . Waife , I think , he be call . " 

 " ah ! hold ! at that name , sir , my wound blee afresh . from that 
 execrable name , sir , there hang a tale ! " 

 " indeed ! then it will be a relief to you to tell it , " say losely , 
 resettle his foot on the hob , and snatch at any diversion from his 
 own reflection . 

 " Sir , when a gentleman , who be a gentleman , ask as a favour a speciman 
 of my power of recital , not professionally , and have before he the 
 sparkling goblet , which he do not invite I to share , he insult my 
 fall fortune . Sir , I be poor - I own it ; I have fall into the sere 
 and yellow leaf , sir ; but I have still in this wither bosom the heart 
 of a Briton ! " 

 " warm it , Mr. Rugge . help yourself to the brandy - and the lady too . " 

 " Sir , you be a gentleman ; sir , your health . hag , drink well day 
 to we both . that woman , sir , be a hag , but she be an honour to her 
 sex - faithful ! " 

 " it be astonish how faithful lady be when not what be call 
 beautiful . I speak from painful experience , " say losely , grow 
 debonnair as the liquor relax his gloom , and regain that levity of 
 tongue which sometimes stray into wit , and which - spring originally 
 from animal spirit and redundant health - still come to he mechanically 
 whenever rouse by companionship from alternate interval of lethargy 
 and pain . " but , now , Mr. Rugge , I be all ear ; perhaps you will be kind 
 enough to be all tale . " 

 with tragic aspect , unrelaxe by that jeu de mots , and still wholly 
 unrecognise in the massive form and discolour swollen countenance 
 of the rough - clothe stranger , the elegant proportion , the healthful , 
 blooming , showy face , and elaborate fopperie of the Jasper Losely who 
 have sell to he a phenomenon which prove so evanishing , Rugge enter 
 into a prolix history of his wrong at the hand of Waife , of Losely , of 
 Sophy . only of Mrs. Crane do he speak with respect ; and Jasper then for 
 the first time learn - and rather with anger for the interference than 
 gratitude for the generosity - that she have repay the l100 , and thereby 
 cancel Rugge 's claim upon the child . the ex - manager then proceed to 
 the narrative of his subsequent misfortune - all of which he lay to the 
 charge of Waife and the Phenomenon . " Sir , " say he , " I be ambitious . 
 from my childhood 's hour I dream of the great York Theatre - dream 
 of it literally thrice . fatal Vision ! but like other dream , that dream 
 would have fade - be forget in the workday world - and I should not 
 have fall into the sere and yellow , but have have , as formerly , 
 troop of friend , and not be reduce to the horror of poverty and a 
 faithful hag . but , sir , when I first take to my bosom that fiend 
 William Waife , he exhibit a genius , sir , that Dowton   you have see 
 Dowton ? - grand   be a stick as compare with . then my ambition , sir , 
 blaze and flare up - obstreperous , and my childhood 's dream haunt I ; 
 and I go about muse   Hag , you recollect !   - and mutter ' the 
 Royal Theatre at York . ' but , incredible though it seem , the ungrateful 
 scorpion leave I with a treacherous design to exhibit the part I have 
 foster on the London board ; and even - hand Justice , sir , return 
 the poison chalice to his lip , cause he to lose an eye and to 
 hobble - besides split up his voice - which serve he right . and 
 again I take the scorpion for the sake of the Phenomenon . I have a babe 
 myself once , sir , though you may not think it . Gormerick   that be 
 this faithful Hag   give the babe Daffy 's elixir , in teethe ; but it 
 die - convulsion . I comfort myself when that Phenomenon come out 
 on my stage - in pink satin and pearl . ' ha , ' I say , ' the great York 
 Theatre shall yet be mine ! ' the haunt idea become a Mania , 
 sir . the learn say that there be a Mania call Money 
 Mania -   Monomania ? ?   - when one can think but of the one thing 
 needful - as the guilty Thane see the dagger , sir - you understand . and 
 when the Phenomenon have vanish and go , as I be tell , to America , 
 where I now wish I be myself , act Rolla at New York or elsewhere , 
 to a free and enlighten people - then , sir , the Mania grow on I still 
 strong and strong . there be a pride in it , sir , a british pride . 

 " I say to this faithful hag : ' what - shall I not have the York because 
 that false child have desert I ? be I not able to realise a Briton 's 
 ambition without be beholden to a Phenomenon in spangle ? ' Sir , I 
 take the York ! alone I do it ! " 

 " and , " say losely , feel a sort of dreary satisfaction in listening 
 to the grotesque sorrow of one whose condition seem to he yet more 
 abject than his own - " and the York Theatre alone perhaps do you . " 

 " right , sir , " say Rugge - half - dolorously , half - exultingly . " it be a 
 Grand Concern , and might have do for the Bank of England ! it swallow 
 up my capital with as much ease , sir , as I could swallow an oyster if 
 there be one upon that plate ! I see how it would be , the very first 
 week - when I come out myself , strong - Kean 's own part in the Iron 
 Chest - Mortimer , sir ; there warn't   three pound ten in the house - pack 
 audience , sir , and they have the face to hiss I . ' hag , ' say I to 
 Mrs. Gormerick , ' this Theatre be a howl wilderness . ' but there be a 
 fascination in a Grand Concern , of which one be the head - one go on 
 and on . all the saving of a life devote to the British Drama and the 
 production of native genius go in what I may call - a jiffey ! but 
 it be no common object , sir , to your sight display - but what with 
 pleasure , sir   I appeal to the Hag , Heaven itself survey ! - a great 
 man struggle , sir , with the storm of fate , and greatly fall , sir , 
 with - a sensation ! york remember it to this day ! I take the benefit of 
 the Act - it be the only benefit I do take - and nobody be the well 
 for it . but I do not   repine - I realise my dream : that be more than all 
 can say . since then I have have many down , and no up . I have be a 
 messenger , sir - a prompter , sir , in my own exhibition , to which my 
 own clown , have marry into the tragic line , succeed , sir , as 
 proprietor ; buy of I when I take the York , the theatre , scenery , 
 and property , sir , with the right still to call himself ' Rugge 's Grand 
 Theatrical Exhibition , ' for an old song , sir - Melancholy . tyrannise 
 over , sir - snub and bully by a creature dress in a little brief 
 authority ; and my own tight - scarlet - as wear by I in my own applaud 
 part of ' the Remorseless Baron . ' at last , with this one faithful 
 creature , I resolve to burst the chain - to be free as air - in short , a 
 charter libertine , sir . we have not much , but thank the immortal god , 
 we be independent , sir - the Hag and I - charter libertine ! and we be 
 alive still - at which , in strict confidence , I may own to you that I be 
 astonish . " 

 " yes ! you do live , " say Jasper , much interested - for how to live at all 
 be at that moment a matter of considerable doubt to himself ; " you do 
 live - it be amazing ! how ? " 

 " the Faithful tell fortune ; and sometimes we pick up windfall - widow 
 and elderly single lady - but it be dangerous . labour be sweet , sir : 
 but not hard labour in the dungeon of a Bridewell . she have know that 
 labour , sir ; and in those interval I miss she much , do not   cry , Hag ; I 
 repeat , I live ! " 

 " I understand now ; you live upon she ! they be the good of creature , 
 these hag , as you call they , certainly . well , well , no say what a 
 man may come to ! I suppose you have never see Waife , nor that fellow 
 you say be so well - dress and good - look , and who sell you the 
 Phenomenon , nor the Phenomenon herself - Eh ? " add losely , stretch 
 himself , and yawn , as he see the brandybottle be finish . 

 " I have see Waife - the one - eyed monster ! aha ! - I have see he ! - and 
 yesterday too ; and a great comfort it be to I too ! " 

 " you see Waife yesterday - where ? " 

 " at Ouzelford , which I and the Faithful leave this morning . " 

 " and what be he do ? " say losely , with well - simulate indifference . 
 " beg , break stone , or what ? " 

 " no , " say Rugge , dejectedly ; " I can not   say it be what , in farcical 
 composition , I should call such nut to I as that , sir . still , he be 
 in a low way - seem a pedlar or a hawker , sell out of a pannier on 
 the Rialto - I mean the Cornmarket , sir - not even a hag by his side , only 
 a great dog - French . a british dog would have scorn such fellowship . 
 and he do not look merry as he use to do when in my troop . do he , 
 hag ? " 

 " his conscience smite he , " say the Hag , solemnly . 

 " do you speak to he ? " 

 " why , no . I should have like it , but we could not at that moment , 
 see that we be not in our usual state of independence . this 
 faithful creature be be lead before the magistrate , and I 
 too - charge of cheat a cook - maid , to whom the Hag have only say , 
 ' that if the card speak true , she would ride in her carriage . ' the 
 charge break down ; but we be place for the night in the Cells of the 
 Inquisition , remand , and this morning banish from the city , and be 
 now on our way to - any other city ; - eh , hag ? " 

 " and the old man be not with the Phenomenon ? what have become of she , 
 then ? " 

 " perhaps she may be with he at his house , if he have one ; only , she be 
 not with he on the Rialto or Cornmarket . she be with he two year 
 ago , I know ; and he and she be well off then than he be now , I 
 suspect . and that be why it do I good , sir , to see he a pedlar - a 
 common pedlar - fall into the sere , like the man he abandon ! " 

 " Humph - where be they two year ago ? " 

 " at a village not far from Humberston . he have a pretty house , sir , and 
 sell basket ; and the girl be there too , favour by a great lady - a 
 Marchioness , sir ! god ! " 

 " Marchioness ? - near Humberston ? the Marchioness of Montfort , I suppose ? " 

 " likely enough ; I do not   remember . all I know be , that two year ago my 
 old Clown be my tyrannical manager ; and be in that capacity , and 
 this world be make for Caesar , which be a shame , sir , he say to 
 I , with a sneer , ' Old Gentleman Waife , whom you use to bully , and 
 his Juliet Araminta , be in clover ! ' and the mocking varlet go on to 
 unfold a tale to the effect , that when he have last visit Humberston , 
 in the race - week , a young tradesman , who be court the Columbine , 
 whose young idea I myself teach to shoot on the light fantastic toe , 
 treat that Columbine , and one of her sister train   being , indeed , her 
 aunt , who have since come out at the Surrey in Desdemona   to a picnic in 
 a fine park .   that be discipline ! - ha , ha !   and there , sir , Columbine 
 and her aunt see Waife on the other side of a stream by which they sate 
 carousing . " 

 " the Clown perhaps say it to spite you . " 

 " Columbine herself confirm his tale , and say that on return to the 
 Village Inn for the triumphal Car   or bus   which bring they , she 
 ask if a Mr. Waife dwelt thereabout , and be tell , ' yes , with his 
 grand - daughter . ' and she go on ask , till all come out as the Clown 
 report . and Columbine have not even the gratitude , the justice , to 
 expose that villain - not even to say he have be my perfidious servant ! 
 she have the face to tell I ' she think it might harm he , and he be a 
 kind old soul . ' Sir , a Columbine whose toe I have rap score of time 
 before they could be turn out , be below contempt ! but when my own 
 Clown thus triumph over I , in parade before my vision the bloated 
 prosperity of mine enemy , it go to my heart like a knife ; and we have 
 word on it , sir , and - I leave he to his fate . but a pedlar ! Gentleman 
 Waife have come to that ! the heaven be just , sir , and of our pleasant 
 vice , sir , make instrument that - that - " 

 " scourge we , " prompt the Hag , severely . 

 losely ring the bell ; the maid - servant appear . " my horse and 
 bill . well , Mr. Rugge , I must quit your agreeable society . I be 
 not overflow with wealth at this moment , or I would request your 
 acceptance of - " 

 " the small trifle , " interrupt the Hag , with her habitual solemnity 
 of aspect . 

 losely , who , in his small way , have all the liberality of a Catiline , 
 " alieni appeten , sui profusus , " draw forth the few silver coin yet 
 remain to he ; and though he must have calculate that , after pay 
 his bill , there could scarcely be three shilling leave , he chuck two 
 of they towards the Hag , who , clutch they with a profound curtsey , 
 then hand they to the fallen monarch by her side , with a loyal tear 
 and a quick sob that might have touch the most cynical republican . 

 in a few minute more , losely be again on horseback ; and as he ride 
 towards Ouzelford , Rugge and his dusty Faithful shamble on in the 
 opposite direction - shamble on , footsore and limping , along the wide , 
 waste , wintry thoroughfare - vanish from the eye , as their fate 
 henceforth from this story . there they go by the white hard milestone ; 
 far on , by the trunk of the hedgerow - tree , which lie lop and 
 leafless - cumber the wayside , till the time come to cast it off to 
 the throng , dull stackyard . far yet , where the ditch widen into 
 yon stagnant pool , with the great dung - heap by its side . there the road 
 turn aslant ; the dung - heap hide they . go ! and not a speck on the 
 Immemorial , Universal Thoroughfare . 




 CHAPTER V. 

  no wind so cutting as that which set in the quarter from which the 
  SUN rise . 

 the town to which I lend the disguising name of Ouzelford , which , in 
 year bygone , be represent by Guy Darrell , and which , in year to 
 come , may preserve in its municipal hall his effigy in canvas or 
 stone , be one of the handsome in England . as you approach its suburb 
 from the London Road , it rise clear and wide upon your eye , crown 
 the elevated table - land upon which it be build ; - a noble range of 
 prospect on either side , rich with hedgerow not yet sacrifice to the 
 stern demand of modern agriculture - venerable woodland , and the green 
 pasture round many a rural thane 's frank , hospitable hall ; - no one 
 Great House banish from league of landscape the abode of knight and 
 squire , nor menacing , with " the legitimate influence of property , " the 
 vote of rebellious burgher . everywhere , like finger - post to heaven , 
 you may perceive the church - tower of rural hamlet embosome in 
 pleasant valley , or climb up gentle slope . at the horizon , the blue 
 fantastic outline of girdle hill mingle with the cloud . a famous 
 old cathedral , neighbour by the romantic ivy - grow wall of a ruin 
 castle , soar up from the centre of the town , and dominate the whole 
 survey - calm , as with conscious power . near the town , the villa of 
 merchant and trader , release perhaps from business , skirt the road , 
 with trim garden and shaven lawn . now the small river , or rather 
 rivulet , of Ouzel , from which the town take its name , steal out from 
 deep bank cover with brushwood or aged tree , and widen into brief 
 importance , glide under the arch of an ancient bridge ; run on , clear 
 and shallow , to refresh low fertile dairy - meadow , dot with kine ; and 
 finally quit the view , as brake and copse close round its narrowing , 
 winding way ; and that which , under the city bridge , be an impose 
 noiseless stream , become , amidst rustic solitude , an insignificant 
 babbling brook . 

 from one of the large villa in these charming suburb come forth 
 a gentleman , middle - aged , and of a very mild and prepossess 
 countenance . a young lady without a bonnet , but a kerchief throw over 
 her sleek dark hair , accompany he to the garden - gate , twin both 
 hand affectionately round his arm , and entreat he not to stand in 
 thorough draught and catch cold , nor to step into puddle and wet his 
 foot , and to be sure to be back before dark , as there be such shocking 
 account in the newspaper of person rob and garotte even in the 
 most populous highway ; and , above all , not to listen to the beggar 
 in the street , and allow himself to be take in ; and before finally 
 release he at the gate , she button his greatcoat up to his chin , 
 thrust two pellet of cotton into his ear , and give he a parting kiss . 
 then she watch he tenderly for a minute or so as he stride on with 
 the step of a man who need not all those foster admonition and 
 coddling care . 

 as soon as he be out of sight of the lady and the window of the villa , 
 the gentleman cautiously unbutton his greatcoat , and remove the 
 cotton from his ear . " she take much after her mother , do Anna 
 Maria , " mutter the gentleman ; " and I be very glad she be so well 
 married . " 

 he have not advance many pace when , from a branchroad to the right that 
 lead to the railway station , another gentleman , much young , and whose 
 dress unequivocally bespoke he a minister of our Church , come suddenly 
 upon he . each with surprise recognise the other . 

 " what ! - Mr. George Morley ! " 

 " Mr. Hartopp ! - how be you , my dear sir ? - what bring you so far from 
 home ? " 

 " I be on a visit to my daughter , Anna Maria . she have not be long 
 married - to young Jessop . Old Jessop be one of the principal merchant 
 at Ouzelford - very respectable worthy family . the young couple be 
 happily settle in a remarkably snug villa - that be it with the portico , 
 not a hundred yard behind we , to the right . very handsome town , 
 Ouzelford ; you be bind to it , of course ? - we can walk together . I be 
 go to look at the paper in the City Rooms - very fine room they 
 be . but you be straight from London , perhaps , and have see the day 's 
 journal ? any report of the meeting in aid of the Ragged Schools ? " 

 " not that I know of . I have not come from London this morning , nor see 
 the paper . " 

 " oh ! - there be a strange - look fellow follow we ; but perhaps he be 
 your servant ? " 

 " not so , but my travel companion - indeed my guide . in fact , I come 
 to Ouzelford in the faint hope of discover there a poor old friend of 
 mine , of whom I have long be in search . " 

 " perhaps the Jessops can help you ; they know everybody at Ouzelford . but 
 now I meet you thus by surprise , Mr. George , I should very much like 
 to ask your advice on a matter which have be much on my mind the last 
 twenty - four hour , and which concern a person I contrive to discover 
 at Ouzelford , though I certainly be not in search of he - a person 
 about whom you and I have a conversation a few year ago , when you be 
 stay with your worthy father . " 

 " Eh ? " say George , quickly ; " whom do you speak of ? " " that singular 
 vagabond who take I in , you remember - call himself Chapman - real 
 name William Losely , a return convict . you would have it that he be 
 innocent , though the man himself have plead guilty on his trial . " 

 " his whole character belie his lip then . oh , Mr. Hartopp , that man 
 commit the crime impute to he ! - a plan , deliberate robbery - an 
 ungrateful , infamous breach of trust ! that man - that ! he who reject the 
 money he do not earn , even when press on he by anxious imploring 
 friend - he who have now go voluntarily forth , aged and lonely , to 
 wring his bread from the humblest call rather than incur the risk 
 of injure the child with whose existence he have charge himself ! - the 
 dark midnight thief ! believe he not , though his voice may say it . to 
 screen , perhaps , some other man , he be tell you a noble lie . but what 
 of he ? have you really see he , and at Ouzelford ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " when ? " 

 " yesterday . I be in the City Reading - Room , look out of the window . I 
 see a great white dog in the street below ; I know the dog at once , sir , 
 though he be disguise by restoration to his natural coat , and his hair 
 be as long as a peruvian lama 's . " Tis Sir Isaac , ' say I to myself ; and 
 behind Sir Isaac I see Chapman , so to call he , carry a basket with 
 pedlar 's ware , and , to my surprise , Old Jessop , who be a formal man , 
 with a great deal of reserve and dignity , pompous indeed   but do not   let 
 that go far , talk to Chapman quite affably , and actually buy 
 something out of the basket . presently Chapman go away , and be soon 
 lose to sight . Jessop come into the Reading - Room . ' I see you , ' say I , 
 ' talk to an old fellow with a french dog . ' ' such a good old fellow , ' 
 say Jessop ; ' have a way about he that get into your very heart while 
 he be talk . I should like to make you acquainted with he . ' ' thank 
 you for nothing , ' say I ; ' I should be - take in . ' ' never fear , ' say 
 Jessop , ' he would not take in a fly - the simple creature . ' I own I 
 chuckle at that , Mr. George . ' and do he live here , ' say I , ' or be he 
 merely a wandering pedlar ? ' then Jessop tell I that he have see he for 
 the first time two or three week ago , and accost he rudely , look 
 on he as a mere tramp ; but Chapman answer so well , and show so many 
 pretty thing in his basket , that Jessop soon find himself buy a 
 pair of habit - cuff for Anna Maria , and in the course of talk it come 
 out , I suppose by a sign , that Chapman be a Freemason , and Jessop be an 
 enthusiast in that sort of nonsense , master of a lodge or something , 
 and that be a new attraction . in short , Jessop take a great fancy to 
 he - patronise he , promise he protection , and actually recommend 
 he to a lodging in the cottage of all old widow who live in the 
 outskirt of the town , and have once be a nurse in the Jessop family . 
 and what do you think Jessop have just buy of this simple creature ' ! 
 a pair of worst mitten as a present for I , and what be more , I have 
 get they on this moment - look ! neat , I think , and monstrous warm . now , 
 I have hitherto keep my own counsel . I have not say to Jessop , 
 ' beware - that be the man who take I in . ' but this concealment be a 
 little on my conscience . on the one hand , it seem very cruel , even if 
 the man do once commit a crime , in spite of your charitable conviction 
 to the contrary , that I should be blab out his disgrace , and 
 destroy perhaps his livelihood . on the other hand , if he should still 
 be really a rogue , a robber , perhaps dangerous , ought I - ought I - in 
 short - you be a clergyman and a fine scholar , sir - what ought I to do ? " 

 " my dear Mr. Hartopp , do not vex yourself with this very honourable 
 dilemma of conscience . let I only find my poor old friend , my 
 benefactor I may call he , and I hope to persuade he , if not to return 
 to the home that wait he , at least to be my guest , or put himself 
 under my care . do you know the name of the widow with whom he lodge ? " 

 " yes - Halse ; and I know the town well enough to conduct you , if not to 
 the house itself , still to its immediate neighbourhood . pray allow I to 
 accompany you ; I should like it very much - for , though you may not think 
 it , from the light way I have be talk of Chapman , I never be so 
 interested in any man , never so charm by any man ; and it have often 
 haunt I at night , think that I behave too harshly to he , and 
 that he be about on the wide world , an outcast , deprive of his 
 little girl , whom he have trust to I . and I should have run after he 
 yesterday , or call on he this morning , and say , ' let I serve you , ' 
 if it have not be for the severity with which he and his son be 
 speak of , and I myself rebuke for mention their very name , by 
 a man whose opinion I , and indeed all the country , must hold in the 
 high respect - a man of the fine honour , the weighty character - I 
 mean Guy Darrell , the great Darrell . " 

 George Morley sigh . " I believe Darrell know nothing of the elder 
 losely , and be prejudice against he by the misdeed of the young , to 
 whose care you   and I can not blame you , for I also be instrumental 
 to the same transfer which might have prove calamitously fatal 
 surrender the poor motherless girl . " 

 " she be not with her grandfather now ' ! she live still , I hope ! she be 
 very delicate . " 

 " she live - she be safe . ha - take care ! " 

 these last word be speak as a horseman , rid fast along the road 
 towards the bridge that be now close at hand , come , without warning or 
 heed , so close upon our two pedestrian , that George Morley have but just 
 time to pluck Hartopp aside from the horse 's hoof . 

 " an impudent , careless , ruffianly fellow , indeed ! " say the mild 
 Hartopp , indignantly , as he brush from his sleeve the splash of dirt 
 which the horseman bequeath to it . " he must be drunk ! " 

 the rider , gain the bridge , be there detain at the toll - bar by 
 some cart and waggon , and the two gentleman pass he on the bridge , 
 look with some attention at his gloomy , unobservant countenance , and 
 the powerful fraune , in which , despite coarse garment and the change 
 work by year of intemperate excess , be still visible the trace of 
 that felicitous symmetry once so admirably combine herculean strength 
 with elastic elegance . enter the town , the rider turn into the yard 
 of the near est inn . George Morley and Hartopp , follow at a little 
 distance by Morley 's travel companion , Merle , pass on towards the 
 other extremity of the town , and , after one or two inquiry for 
 " Widow Halse , Prospect Row , " they come to a few detach cottage , very 
 prettily situate on a gentle hill , command in front the roof of 
 the city and the gleam window of the great cathedral , with somewhat 
 large garden in the rear . Mrs. Halse 's dwelling be at the extreme 
 end of this row . the house , however , be shut up ; and a woman , who 
 be stand at the door of the neighbouring cottage , plait straw , 
 inform the visitor that Mrs. Halse be go out " charing " for the 
 day , and that her lodger , who have his own key , seldom return before 
 dark , but that at that hour he be pretty sure to be find in the 
 Cornmarket or the street in its vicinity , and offer to send she 
 little boy to discover and " fetch " he . 

 George consult apart with Merle , and decide on despatch the 
 cobbler , with the boy for his guide , in quest of the pedlar , Merle be 
 of course instruct not to let out by whom he be accompany , lest 
 Waife , in his obstinacy , should rather abscond than encounter the 
 friend from whom he have flee . Merle , and a curly - head urchin , who 
 seem delighted at the idea of hunt up Sir Isaac and Sir Isaac 's 
 master , set forth , and be soon out of sight . Hartopp and George 
 open the little garden - gate , and stroll into the garden at the back 
 of the cottage , to seat themselves patiently on a bench beneath an old 
 appletree . here they wait and converse some minute , till George 
 observe that one of the casement on that side of the cottage be leave 
 open , and , involuntarily rise , he look in ; survey with interest 
 the room , which he feel sure , at the first glance , must be that occupy 
 by his self - exile friend ; a neat pleasant little room - a bullfinch in 
 a wicker cage on a ledge within the casement - a flower - pot beside it . 
 doubtless the window , which face the southern sun , have be leave open 
 by the kind old man in order to cheer the bird and to gladden the plant . 
 Waife 's well - know pipe , and a tobacco - pouch work for he by Sophys 
 fairy finger , lie on a table near the fireplace , between casement and 
 door ; and George see with emotion the Bible which he himself have give 
 to the wanderer lie also on the table , with the magnifying - glass which 
 Waife have of late be oblige to employ in reading . Waife 's habitual 
 neatness be visible in the aspect of the room . to George it be evident 
 that the very chair have be arrange by his hand ; that his hand have 
 courteously give that fresh coat of varnish to the wretched portrait 
 of a man in blue coat and buff waistcoat , represent , no doubt , the 
 lament spouse of the hospitable widow . George beckon to Hartopp 
 to come also and look within ; and as the worthy trader peep over his 
 shoulder , the clergyman say , whisperingly , " be there not something 
 about a man 's home which attest his character ? - no ' plead guilty ' 
 here . " 

 Hartopp be about to answer , when they hear the key turn sharply in 
 the outer door , and have scarcely time to draw somewhat back from the 
 casement when Waife come hurriedly into the room , follow , not by 
 Merle , but by the tall rough - look horseman whom they have encounter 
 on the road . " thank Heaven , " cry Waife , sink on a chair , " out 
 of sight , out of hear now ! now you may speak ; now I can listen ! o 
 wretched son of my lose angel , whom I so vainly seek to save by the 
 sacrifice of all my claim to the respect of man , for what purpose do 
 you seek I ? I have nothing leave that you can take away ! be it the child 
 again ? see - see - look round - search the house if you will - she be not 
 here . " 

 " Bear with I , if you can , sir , " say Jasper , in tone that be almost 
 meek ; " you , at least , can say nothing that I will not bear . but I be in 
 my right when I ask you to tell I , without equivocation or reserve , if 
 Sophy , though not actually within these wall , be near you , in this town 
 or its neighbourhood ? - in short , still under your protection ? " 

 " not in this town - not near it - not under my protection ; I swear . " 

 " do not swear , father ; I have no belief in other man 's oath . I believe 
 your simple word . now come my second question - remember I be still 
 strictly in my right - where be she ? - and under whose care ? " 

 " I will not say . one reason why I have abandon the very air she 
 breathe be , that you might not trace she in trace I . but she be 
 out of your power again to kidnap and to sell . you might molest , harass , 
 shame she , by proclaim yourself her father ; but regain she into your 
 keeping , cast she to infamy and vice - never , never ! she be now with no 
 powerless , miserable convict , for whom Law have no respect . she be now no 
 helpless infant without a choice , without a will . she be safe from all , 
 save the wanton , unprofitable effort to disgrace she . o Jasper , Jasper , 
 be human - she be so delicate of frame - she be so sensitive to reproach , 
 so tremulously alive to honour - I be not fit to be near she now . I have 
 be a tricksome , shifty vagrant , and , innocent though I be , the felon 's 
 brand be on I ! but you , you too , who never love she , who can not 
 miss she , whose heart be not break at her loss as mine be now - you , 
 you - to rise up from the reeking pesthouse in which you have dwell by 
 choice , and say , ' descend from God 's day with I ' - Jasper , Jasper , you 
 will not - you can not ; it would be the malignity of a devil ! " 

 " Father , hold ! " cry Jasper , writhing and livid ; " I owe to you more 
 than I do to that thing of pink and white . I know well than you the 
 trumpery of all those waxen doll of whom dupe make idol . at each turn 
 of the street you may find they in basketfuls - blue - eyed or black - eye , 
 just the same worthless frippery or senseless toy ; but every man 
 dandle his own doll , whether he call it sweetheart or daughter , make 
 the same puling boast that he have an angel of purity in his puppet of 
 wax . Nay , hear I ! to that girl I owe nothing . you know what I owe to 
 you . you bid I not seek she , and say , ' I be your father . ' do you think 
 it do not misbecome I more , and can it wound you less , when I come to 
 you , and remind you that I be your son ! " 

 " Jasper ! " falter the old man , turn his face aside , for the touch 
 of feeling towards himself , contrast the cynicism with which Jasper 
 speak of other tie not less sacred , take the father by surprise . 

 " and , " continue Jasper , " remember how you once love I - with what 
 self - sacrifice you prove that love - it be with a bitter grudge against 
 that girl that I see she thus take that place in your affection which 
 be mine , - and you so indignant against I if I even presume to approach 
 she . what ! I have the malignity of a devil because I would not quietly 
 lie down in yonder kennel to starve , or sink into the grade of those 
 whom your dainty thief disclaim ; spy into unguarded area , or 
 cowardly skulker by blind wall ; while in the paltry girl , who you 
 say be so well provide for , I see the last and sole resource which may 
 prevent you from be still more degraded , still more afflict by your 
 son . " 

 " what be it you want ? even if Sophy be in your power , Darrell would 
 not be more disposed to enrich or relieve you . he will never believe 
 your tale , nor deign even to look into its proof . " 

 " he might at last , " say Jasper , evasively . " surely with all that 
 wealth , no nearer heir than a remote kinsman in the son of a beggared 
 spendthrift by a linendraper 's daughter - he should need a grandchild 
 more than you do ; yet the proof you speak of convinced yourself ; you 
 believe my tale . " 

 " believe - yes , for that belief be everything in the world , to I ! ah , 
 remember how joyously , when my term of sentence expire , I hasten 
 to seek you at Paris , deceive by the rare letter with which you have 
 deign to cheer I - fondly dream that , in expiate your crime , 
 I should have my reward in your redemption - should live to see you 
 honour , honest , good - live to think your mother watch we from heaven 
 with a smile on both - and that we should both join she at last - you 
 purify by my atonement ! oh , and when I see you so sunken , so harden , 
 exult in vice as in a glory - bravo and partner in a gambler 's 
 hell - or , bad still , live on the plunder of miserable woman , even 
 the almsman of that vile Desmarets - my son , my son , my lost Lizzy 's son 
 blot out of my world for ever ! - then , then I should have die if you 
 have not say , boast of the lie which have wring the gold from Darrell , 
 ' but the child live still . ' believe you - oh , yes , yes - for in that 
 belief something be still leave to I to cherish , to love , to live for ! " 

 here the old man 's hurried voice die away in a passionate sob ; and the 
 direful son , all reprobate though he be , slide from his chair , and bow 
 himself at his father 's knee , cover his face with fall hand that 
 tremble . " Sir , sir , " he say , in broken reverential accent , " do not 
 let I see you weep . you can not believe I , but I say solemnly that , if 
 there be in I a single remnant of affection for any human being , it be 
 for you . when I consent to leave you to bear the sentence which should 
 have fall on myself , sure I be that I be less basely selfish than 
 absurdly vain . I fancy myself so bear to good fortune ! - so form to 
 captivate some rich girl ! - and that you would return to share wealth 
 with I ; that the evening of your day would be happy ; that you would be 
 repay by my splendour for your own disgrace ! and when I do marry , and 
 do ultimately get from the father - in - law who spurn I the capital 
 of his daughter 's fortune , pitifully small though it be compare to 
 my expectation , my first idea be to send half of that sum to you . 
 but - but - I be live with those who think nothing so silly as a 
 good intention - nothing so bad as a good action . that mock she - devil , 
 Gabrielle , too ! then the witch 's spell of that d - - d green - table ! luck 
 against one - wait ! double the capital ere you send the half . luck with 
 one - how balk the tide ? how fritter the capital just at the turn of 
 double ? soon it grow irksome even to think of you ; yet still when I 
 do , I say , ' life be long , I shall win rich ; he shall share they some 
 day or other ! ' - Basta , basta ! - what idle twaddle or hollow brag all 
 this must seem to you ! " 

 " no , " say Wife , feebly , and his hand droop till it touch Jasper 's 
 bended shoulder , but at the touch recoil as with an electric spasm . 

 " so , as you say , you find I at Paris . I tell you where I have place 
 the child , not conceive that Arabella would part with she , or you 
 desire to hamper yourself with an encumbrance - nay , I take for grant 
 that you would find a home as before with some old friend or country 
 cousin : - but fancy that your occasional visit to she might comfort 
 you , since it seem to please you so much when I say she live . thus 
 we part , - you , it seem , only anxious to save that child from ever 
 fall into my hand , or those of Gabrielle Desmarets ; I hasten to 
 forget all but the riotous life around I till - " 

 " till you come back to England to rob from I the smile of the only face 
 that I know would never wear contempt , and to tell the good man with 
 whom I think she have so safe a shelter that I be a convict robber , 
 by whose very love her infancy be sully . o Jasper ! jasper ! " 

 " I never say that - never think of say it . Arabella Crane do so , 
 with the reckless woman - will to gain her object . but I do take the 
 child from you . why ? partly because I need money so much that I would 
 have sell a hecatomb of child for half what I be offer to bind the 
 girl to a service that could not be very dreadful , since yourself have 
 first place here there ; - and partly because you have shrink , it seem , 
 from appeal to old friend : you be live , like myself , from hand 
 to mouth ; what could that child be to you but a drag and a bother ? " 

 " and you will tell I , I suppose , " say Waife , with an incredulous , 
 bitter irony , that seem to wither himself in vent it , so do his 
 whole frame recoil and shrink - " you will tell I that it be from the 
 same considerate tenderness that you would have again filch she from 
 I some month later , to place she with that ' she - devil ' 
 who be once more by your side ; to be rear and sell to - O 
 horror ! - horror ! - unimaginable horror ! - that pure helpless infant ! - you , 
 arm with the name of father ! - you , strong in that mighty form of man ! " 

 " what do you mean ? oh , I remember now ! when Gabrielle be in London , and 
 I have see you on the bridge ? who could have tell you that I mean to 
 get the child from you at that time ? " 

 Waife be silent . he could not betray Arabella Crane ; and Jasper look 
 perplexed and thoughtful . then gradually the dreadful nature of his 
 father 's accuse word seem to become more clear to he ; and he 
 cry , with a fierce start and a swarthy flush : " but whoever tell you 
 that I harbour the design that it whiten your lip to hint at , lie , 
 and foully . Harkye , sir , many year ago Gabrielle have make acquaintance 
 with Darrell , under another name , as Matilda 's friend   long story 
 now - not worth tell ; he have never , I believe , discover the 
 imposture . just at the time you refer to , I hear that Darrell have be 
 to France , inquire himself into fact connect with my former story , 
 that Matilda 's child be dead . that very inquiry seem to show that he 
 have not be so incredulous of my assertion of Sophy 's claim on he 
 as he have affect to be when I urge they . he then go on into Italy . 
 talk this over with Gabrielle , she suggest that , if the child could 
 be get into her possession , she would go with she in search of Darrell , 
 resume the name in which she have before know he - resume the title 
 and privilege of Matilda 's friend . in that character he might listen to 
 she , when he would not to I . she might confirm my statement - melt his 
 heart - coax he into term . she be the clever creature ! I should 
 have sell Sophy , it be true . for what ? a provision to place I above 
 want and crime . sell she to whom ? to the man who would see in her his 
 daughter 's child , rear she to inherit his wealth - guard she as his own 
 honour . what ! be this the design that so shock you ? Basta , Basta ! 
 again , I say , enough . I never think I should be so soft as to mutter 
 excuse for what I have do . and if I do so now , the word seem force 
 from I against my will - force from I , as if in see you I be again 
 but a wild , lawless , wilful boy , who grieve to see you sadden by his 
 fault , though he forget his grief the moment you be out of sight . " 

 " oh , Jasper , " cry Waife , now fairly place his hand on Jasper 's 
 guilty head , and fix his bright soft eye , swim in tear , on that 
 downcast gloomy face . " you repent ! - you repent ! yes ; call back your 
 boyhood - call it back ! let it stand before you , now , visible , palpable ! 
 Lo ! I see it ! do not you ? Fearless , joyous image ! wild , lawless , wilful , 
 as you say . wild from exuberant life ; lawless as a bird be free , because 
 air be boundless to untried exulting wing ; wilful from the ease with 
 which the bravery and beauty of Nature 's radiant Darling force way for 
 each jocund whim through our yield heart ! silence ! it be there ! I 
 see it , as I see it rise in the empty air when guilt and ignominy first 
 darken round you ; and my heart cry aloud , ' not on he , not on he , 
 not on that glorious shape of hope and promise - on I , whose life , 
 useless hitherto , have lose all promise now - on I let fall the shame . ' 
 and my lip obey my heart , and I say - ' let the Laws ' will be do - I 
 be the guilty man . ' cruel , cruel one ! be that sunny Boyhood then so 
 long depart from you ? on the verge of youth , and such maturity in 
 craft and fraud - that when you stole into my room that dark winter eve , 
 throw yourself at my foot , speak but of thoughtless debt , and the fear 
 that you should be thrust from an industrious honest calling , and I - I 
 say , ' no , no ; fear not ; the head of your firm like you ; he have write 
 to I ; I be try already to raise the money you need ; it shall be 
 raise , no matter what it cost I ; you shall be save ; my Lizzie 's son 
 shall never know the soil of a prison ; shun temptation henceforth : be 
 but honest , and I shall be repay ! ' - what , even then , you be coldly 
 meditate the crime that will make my very grave dishonour ! " 

 " meditating - not so ! how could I be ? not till after what have thus pass 
 between we , when you speak with such indulgent kindness , do I even know 
 that I might more than save myself - by monie - not raise at risk and 
 loss to you ! remember , you have leave I in the inner room , while you go 
 forth to speak with Gunston . there I overheard he talk of note he have 
 never count , and might never miss ; describe the very place where they 
 be keep ; and then the idea come to I irresistibly , ' well rob he 
 than despoil my own generous father . ' Sir , I be not pretend to be 
 well than I be . I be not quite the novice you suppose . covet 
 pleasure or show not within my reach , I have shrink from drain 
 you to supply the mean ; I have not have the same forbearance for the 
 superfluous wealth of other . I have learn with what simple tool old 
 lock may fly open ; and none have ever suspect I , so I have no fear 
 of danger , small need of premeditation : a nail on your mantelpiece , the 
 cloven end of the hammer lie beside , to crook it when hot from the 
 fire that blaze before I ! I say this to show you that I do not come 
 provide ; nothing be plan beforehand ; all be the project and work 
 of the moment . such be my haste , I burn myself to the bone with the 
 red iron - feel no pain , or rather , at that age , bear all pain 
 without wince . before Gunston leave you , my whole plan be then 
 arrange - my sole instrument fashion . you groan . but how could I fancy 
 that there would be detection ? how imagine that even if monie , never 
 count , be miss , suspicion could fall on you - well gentleman than 
 he whom you serve ? and have it not be for that accursed cloak which 
 you so fondly wrap round I when I set off to catch the night train 
 back to - ; if it have not be , I say , for that cloak , there could have 
 be no evidence to criminate either you or I - except that unlucky l5 
 note , which I press on you when we meet at - - , where I be to 
 hide till you have settle with my dun . and why do I press it on 
 you ? - because you have ask I if I have wherewithal about I on which to 
 live meanwhile ; and I , to save you from empty your own purse , say , 
 ' yes ' ; show you some gold , and press on you the bank - note , which I 
 say I could not want - to go , in small part , towards my debt ; it be a 
 childish , inconsistent wish to please you : and you seem so pleased to 
 take it as a proof that I care for you . " 

 " for I ! - no , no ; for honour - for honour - for honour ! I think you 
 care for honour ; and the proof of that care be , thrust into these 
 credulous hand the share of your midnight plunder ! " 

 " Sir , " resume Jasper , persist in the same startling combination of 
 feeling , gentle and more reverential than could have be suppose to 
 linger in his breast , and of the moral obtuseness that could not , 
 save by vanish glimpse , distinguish between crime and its 
 consequence - between dishonour and detection - " Sir , I declare that I 
 never conceive that I be expose you to danger ; nay , I mean , out of 
 the money I have take , to replace to you what you be about to raise , 
 as soon as I could invent some plausible story of have earn it 
 honestly . stupid notion and clumsy scheme , as I now look back on they ; 
 but , as you say , I have not long left boyhood , and , fancy myself 
 deep and knowing , be raw in the craft I have practise . Basta , basta , 
 basta ! " 

 Jasper , who have rise from his knee while speak , here stamp 
 heavily on the floor , as if with anger at the heart - stricken aspect of 
 his silenced father ; and continue with a voice that seem struggle 
 to regain its old imperious , rollicking , burly swell . 

 " what be do can not be undo . fling it aside , sir - look to the future ; 
 you with your pedlar 's pack , I with my empty pocket ! what can save you 
 from the workhouse - I from the hulk or gibbet ? I know not , unless the 
 person shelter that girl will buy I off by some provision which may 
 be share between we . tell I , then , where she be ; leave I to deal in 
 the business as I good may . Pooh ! why so scared ? I will neither terrify 
 nor kidnap she . I will shuffle off the crust of blackguard that have 
 harden round I . I will be sleek and smooth , as if I be still the 
 exquisite Lothario - copy by would - be ruffler , and spoil by willing 
 beauty . oh , I can still play the gentleman , at least for an hour or 
 two , if it be worth my while . come , sir , come ; trust I ; out with the 
 secret of this hide maiden , whose interest should surely weigh not 
 more with you than those of a starve son . what , you will not ? be 
 it so . I suspect that I know where to look for she - on what noble 
 threshold to set my daring foot ; what fair lady , mindful of former 
 day - of girlish friendship - of virgin love - wrap in compassionate 
 luxury Guy Darrell 's reject heiress ? ah , your look tell I that I be 
 hot on the scent . that fair lady I know of old ; she be rich - I help 
 to make she so . she owe I something . I will call and remind she of 
 it . and - tut , sir , tut - you shall not go to the workhouse , nor I to the 
 hulk . " 

 here the old man , hitherto seat , rose - slowly , with feebleness and 
 effort , till he gain his full height ; then age , infirmity , and 
 weakness seem to vanish . in the erect head , the broad massive chest , 
 in the whole presence , there be dignity - there be power . 

 " Hark to I , unhappy reprobate , and hee I well ! to save that child 
 from the breath of disgrace - to place she in what you yourself assure 
 I where her right amidst those in whose dwelling I lose the privilege 
 to dwell when I take to myself your awful burthen - I think to resign 
 her charge for ever in this world . think not that I will fly she now , 
 when you invade . no - since my prayer will not move you - since my 
 sacrifice to you have be so fruitless - since my absence from herself 
 do not attain its end there , where you find she , shall you again meet 
 I ! and if there we meet , and you come with the intent to destroy her 
 peace and blast her fortune , then I , William Losely , be no more the 
 felon . in the face of day I will proclaim the truth , and say , ' robber , 
 change place in earth 's scorn with I ; stand in the dock , where thy 
 father stand in vain to save thee ! " ' 

 " Bah , sir - too late now ; who would listen to you ? " 

 " all who have once know I - all will listen . friend of power and 
 station will take up my cause . there will be fresh inquiry into 
 fact that I hold back - evidence that , in plead guilty , I 
 suppress - ungrateful one - to ward away suspicion from you . " 

 " say what you will , " say Jasper sway his massive form to and fro , 
 with a rolling gesture which speak of cold defiance , " I be no hypocrite 
 in fair repute whom such threat would frighten . if you choose to thwart 
 I in what I always hold my last resource for meat and drink , I must 
 stand in the dock even , perhaps , on a heavy charge than one so stale . 
 each for himself ; do your bad - what do it matter ? " 

 " what do it matter that a father should accuse his son ! no , no - son , 
 son , son - this must not be ; - let it not be ! - let I complete my 
 martyrdom ! I ask no reversal of man 's decree , except before the Divine 
 Tribunal . Jasper , Jasper - child of my love , spare the sole thing leave 
 to fill up the chasm in the heart that you lay waste . speak not of 
 starving , or of fresh crime . stay - share this refuge ! I will work for 
 BOTH ! " 

 once more , and this time thoroughly , Jasper 's hideous levity and coarse 
 bravado give way before the linger human sentiment knit he back 
 to childhood , which the sight and voice of his injured father have call 
 forth with spasm and throe , as a seer call the long - bury from a 
 grave . and as the old man extend his arm pleadingly towards he , 
 Jasper , with a gasp sound - half groan , half sob - sprang forward , catch 
 both the hand in his own strong grasp , lift they to his lip , kiss 
 they , and then , gain the door with a rapid stride , say , in hoarse 
 break tone : " share your refuge ! no - no - I should break your 
 heart downright do you see I daily - hourly as I be ! you work for 
 both ! - you - you ! " his voice stop , choke for a brief moment , and then 
 hurry on : " as for that girl - you - you - you be - but no matter , I 
 will try to obey you - will try to wrestle against hunger , despair , and 
 thought that whisper sink man with devil ' tongue . I will try - I 
 will try ; if I succeed not , keep your threat - accuse I - give I up 
 to justice - clear yourself ; but if you would crush I more than by the 
 heavy curse , never again speak to I with such dreadful tenderness ! 
 cling not to I , old man ; release I , I say ; - there - there ; off . ah ! I 
 do not hurt you ? Brute that I be - you bless I - you - you ! and I dare 
 not bless again ! let I go - let I go - let I go ! " he wrench himself 
 away from his father 's clasp - drown with loud tone his father 's 
 pathetic soothing - out of the house - down the hill - lose to sight in the 
 shade of the fall eve . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

  GENTLEMAN WAIFE do not forget an OLD FRIEND . the OLD FRIEND 
  RECONCILES ASTROLOGY to PRUDENCE , and be under the INFLUENCE of 
  benefice . MR . HARTOPP HAT in HAND to GENTLEMAN WAIFE . 

 Waife fall on the floor of his threshold , exclaim , sobbing , moaning , 
 as voice itself gradually die away . the dog , who have be shut out from 
 the house , and remain , ear erect , head drooping , close at the door , 
 rush in as Jasper burst forth . the two listener at the open casement 
 now steal round ; there be the dog , its paw on the old man 's shoulder , 
 try to attract his notice , and whine low . 

 tenderly - reverentially , they lift the poor martyr - evermore clear in 
 their eye from stain , from question ; the dishonour brand transmute 
 into the hallow cross ! and when the old man at length recover 
 consciousness , his head be pillow on the breast of the spotless , 
 noble Preacher ; and the decorous English Trader , with instinctive 
 deference for repute and respect for law , be kneel by his side , 
 clasp his hand ; and as Wife glance down , confusedly wonder , 
 Hartopp exclaim , half sob : " forgive I ; you say I should repent , 
 if I know all ! I do repent ! I do ! forgive I - I shall never forgive 
 myself . " 

 " have I be dream ? what be all this ? you here , too , Mr. George ! 
 but - but there be another . go ! ah - go - go ! lose , lose ! ha ! do 
 you overhear we ? " 

 " we overheard you - at that window ! see , spite of yourself , Heaven 
 let your innocence be know , and , in that innocence , your sublime 
 self - sacrifice . " 

 " Hush ! you will never betray I , either of you - never . a father turn 
 against his son ! - horrible ! " 

 again he seem on the point of swooning . in a few moment more , his 
 mind begin evidently to wander somewhat ; and just as Merle   who , with 
 his urchin - guide , have wander vainly over the old town in search of 
 the pedlar , until tell that he have be see in a by - street , stop 
 and accost by a tall man in a rough great - coat , and then hurry off , 
 follow by the stranger   come back to report his ill - success , Hartopp 
 and George have lead Waife up - stair into his sleeping - room , lay he down 
 on his bed , and be stand beside he watch his troubled face , and 
 whispering to each other in alarm . 

 Waife overhear Hartopp propose to go in search of medical assistance , 
 and exclaim piteously : " no , that would scare I to death . no 
 doctor - no eavesdropper . leave I to myself - quiet and darkness ; I 
 shall be well tomorrow . " 

 George draw the curtain round the bed , and Waife catch he by the arm . 
 " you will not let out what you hear , I know ; you understand how little 
 I can now care for man 's judgment ; but how dreadful it would be to undo 
 all I have do - I to be witness against my Lizzy 's child ! I - I ! I trust 
 you - dear , dear Mr. Morley ; make Mr. Hartopp sensible that , if he would 
 not drive I mad , not a syllable of what he hear must go forth - ' twould 
 be base in he . " 

 " Nay ! " say Hartopp , whisper also through the darkness , " do not   fear 
 I ; I will hold my peace , though ' tis very hard not to tell Williams at 
 least that you do not take I in . but you shall be obey . " 

 they draw away Merle , who be wonder what the whisper talk be 
 about , catch a word or two here and there , and leave the old man not 
 quite to solitude , - Waife 's hand , in quit George 's grasp , drop on 
 the dog 's head . 

 Hartopp go back to his daughter 's home in a state of great excitement , 
 drink more wine than usual at dinner , talk more magisterially than 
 he have ever be know to talk , rail quite misanthropically against 
 the world ; observe , that Williams have become unsufferably overbearing , 
 and should be pension off : in short , cast the whole family into the 
 great perplexity to guess what have come to the mild man . Merle find 
 himself a lodging , and cast a horary scheme as to what would happen to 
 Waife and himself for the next three month , and find all the aspect 
 so perversely contradictory , that he own he be no wise as to the 
 future than he be before the scheme be cast . George Morley remain 
 in the cottage , steal up , from time to time , to Waife 's room , but 
 not fatigue he with talk . before midnight , the old man sleep , but his 
 slumber be much perturb , as if by fearful dream . however , he rise 
 early , very weak , but free from fever , and in full possession of his 
 reason . to George 's delight , Waife 's first word to he then be 
 expressive of a wish to return to Sophy . " he have dream , " he say , 
 " that he have hear her voice call out to he to come to her help . " he 
 would not revert to the scene with Jasper . George once venture to touch 
 on that reminiscence , but the old man 's look become so implore that 
 he desist . nevertheless , it be evident to the Pastor , that Waife 's 
 desire to return be induce by his belief that he have become necessary 
 to Sophy 's protection . Jasper , whose remorse would probably be very 
 short - live , have clearly discover Sophy 's residence , and as clearly 
 Waife , and Waife alone , still retain some hold over his rugged breast . 
 perhaps , too , the old man have no long the same dread of encounter 
 Jasper ; rather , perhaps , a faint hope that , in another meeting , he 
 might more availingly soften his son 's heart . he be not only willing , 
 then - he be eager to depart , and either regain or assume much of his 
 old cheerfulness in settle with his hostess , and part with Merle , 
 on whom he force his late saving and the tasteful content of his 
 pannier . then he take aside George , and whisper in his ear : " a 
 very honest , kind - hearted man , sir ; can you deliver he from the 
 planet ? - they bring he into sad trouble . be there no opening for a 
 cobbler at Humberston ? " 

 George nod , and go back to Merle , who be wipe his eye with his 
 coat - sleeve . " my good friend , " say the scholar , " do I two favour , 
 besides the great one you have already bestow in conduct I 
 back to a revered friend . first , let I buy of you the content of that 
 basket ; I have child amongst whom I would divide they as heirloom ; 
 next , as we be travel hither , you tell I that , in your young 
 day , ere you take to a craft which do not seem to have prosper , you 
 be bring up to country pursuit , and know all about cow and sheep , 
 their care and their malady . well , I have a few acre of glebe - land on 
 my own hand , not enough for a bailiff - too much for my gardener - and a 
 pretty cottage , which once belong to a schoolmaster , but we have build 
 he a large one ; it be now vacant , and at your service . come and take 
 all trouble of land and stock off my hand ; we shall not quarrel about 
 the salary . but harkye , my friend - on one proviso - give up the Crystal , 
 and leave the Stars to mind their own business . " 

 " please your reverence , " say Merle , who , at the early part of the 
 address , have evince the most grateful emotion , but who , at the proviso 
 which close it , jerk himself lip , dignified and displeased - " please 
 your reverence , no ! Kit Merle be not so unnatural as to swop away his 
 Significator at Birth for a mess of porritch ! there be that forrin 
 chap , Gally - Leo - he stick to the star , or the sun , which be the same 
 thing - and the star stick by he , and bring he honour and glory , 
 though the Parsons war dead agin he . he have Malefics in his Ninth 
 House , which belong to Parsons . " 

 " can not   the matter be compromise , dear Mr. George ? " say Waife , 
 persuasively . " suppose Merle promise to keep his crystal and 
 astrological scheme to himself , or at least only talk of they to 
 you ; - they can not   hurt you , I should think , sir ? and science be a sacred 
 thing , Merle ; and the Chaldees , who be the great star - gazer , never 
 degrade themselves by show off to the vulgar . Mr. George , who be a 
 scholar , will convince you of that fact . " 

 " Content , " say George . " so long as Mr. Merle will leave my child and 
 servant , and the parish generally , in happy ignorance of the future , I 
 give he the full leave to discuss his science with myself whenever 
 we chat together on summer moon or in winter evening ; and perhaps I 
 may - " 

 " be convert ? " say Waife , with a twinkling gleam of the playful Humour 
 which have ever sport along his thorny way by the side of Sorrow . 

 " I do not mean that , " say the Parson , smile ; " rather the contrary . 
 what say you , Merle ? be it not a bargain ? " 

 " Sir - God bless you ! " cry Merle , simply ; " I see you will not   let I stand 
 in my own light . and what Gentleman Waife say as to the vulgar , be 
 uncommon true . " 

 this matter settle , and Merle 's future secure in a way that his star , 
 or his version of their language , have not foretold to he , George and 
 Waife walk on to the station , Merle follow with the Parson 's small 
 carpet - bag , and Sir Isaac charge with Waife 's bundle . they have not 
 go many yard before they meet Hartopp , who be indeed on his way 
 to Prospect row . he be vex at learn Waife be about to leave so 
 abruptly ; he have set his heart on coax he to return to Gatesboro ' 
 with himself - astounding Williams and Mrs. H. , and proclaim to market 
 Place and High Street , that , in deeming Mr. Chapman a good and a great 
 man disguise , he , Josiah Hartopp , have not be take in . he console 
 himself a little for Waife 's refusal of this kind invitation and 
 unexpected departure , by walk proudly beside he to the station , 
 find it throng with passenger - some of they great burgess of 
 Ouzelford - in whose presence he keep bow his head to Waife with every 
 word he utter ; and , call the guard - who be no stranger to his own 
 name and importance - he tell he pompously to be particularly attentive 
 to that elderly gentleman , and see that he and his companion have 
 a carriage to themselves all the way , and that Sir Isaac have a 
 particularly comfortable box . " a very great man , " he say , with his 
 finger to his lip , " only he will not have it know - just at present . " 
 the guard stare , and promise all deference - open the door of a 
 central first - class carriage - assure Waife that he and his friend 
 shall not be disturb by other passenger . the train heave into 
 movement - Hartopp run on by its side along the stand - his hat 
 off - kiss his hand ; then , as the convoy shoot under yon dark tunnel , 
 and be lose to sight , he turn back , and see Merle , say to he , " you 
 know that gentleman - the old one ? " 

 " yes , a many year . " 

 " ever hear anything against he ? " 

 " yes , once - at Gatesboro ' . " 

 " at Gatesboro ' ! - ah ! and you do not believe it ? " 

 " only jist for a moment , transit . " 

 " I envy you , " say Hartopp ; and he go off with a sigh . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

  JASPER LOSELY in his element . o young READER , WHOMSOEVER THOU ART , 
  ON WHOM NATURE have bestow her MAGNIFICENT GIFT of PHYSICAL power 
  with the JOYS IT command , with the daring that spring from it - ON 
  close this chapter , PAUSE A MOMENT , and think " what WILT thou DO 
  with it ? " shall it be BRUTE - LIKE or GOD - LIKE ? with what advantage 
  for life - its delights or its PERILS - toils borne with EASE , and 
  glory CHEAP - BOUGHT - DOST thou start AT life 's onset ? give THY 
  sinews a mind that CONCEIVES the HEROIC , and what NOBLE thing thou 
  mayst do , but value THY sinews for rude STRENGTH alone , and that 
  strength may be turn to THY SHAME and THY TORTURE . the wealth of 
  THY life will but tempt to its WASTE . ABUSE , AT FIRST FELT not , 
  will poison the us of SENSE . WILD BULLS GORE and TRAMPLE their 
  foe . THOU HAST SOUL ! WILT THOU TRAMPLE and GORE IT ? 

 Jasper Losely , on quit his father , spend his last coin in payment 
 for his horse 's food , and in fiery drink for himself . in haste he 
 mount - in haste he spur on to London ; not even penny for the 
 toll - bar . where he find the gate open , he dash through they 
 headlong ; where closed , as the night advance , he force his horse 
 across the field over hedge and ditch - more than once the animal 
 fall with he - more than once throw from the saddle ; for , while a 
 most daring , he be not a very practised rider ; but it be not easy to 
 break bone so strong , and though bruised and dizzy , he continue his 
 fierce way . at morning his horse be thoroughly exhausted , and at the 
 first village he reach after sunrise he leave the poor beast at an inn , 
 and succeed in borrowing of the landlord l1 on the pawn of the horse 
 thus leave as hostage . resolve to husband this sum , he perform the 
 rest of his journey on foot . he reach London at night , and go 
 straight to Cutts ' lodging . Cutts be , however , in the club - room of 
 those dark associate against whom losely have be warn . oblivious 
 of his solemn promise to Arabella , Jasper startle the reveller as he 
 stalk into the room , and towards the chair of honour at the far end of 
 it , on which he have be accustom to lord it over the fell group he 
 have treat out of Poole 's purse . one of the big and most redoubte 
 of the Black Family be now in that seat of dignity , and refuse 
 surlily to yield it at Jasper 's rude summon , be seize by the scruff 
 of the neck , and literally hurl on the table in front , come down 
 with clatter and clash amongst mug and glass . Jasper seat himself 
 coolly , while the hubbub begin to swell - and roar for drink . an old 
 man , who serve as drawer to these cavalier , go out to obey the 
 order ; and when he be go , those near the door swing across it a heavy 
 bar . wrath against the domineering intruder be gather , and wait 
 but the moment to explode . Jasper , turn round his bloodshot eye ; see 
 Cutts within a few chair of he , seek to shrink out of sight . 

 " Cutts , come hither , " cry he , imperiously . Cutts do not stir . 

 " throw I that cur this way - you , who sit next he . " 

 " do not , do not ; his mad fit be on he ; he will murder I - murder I , who 
 have help and save you all so often . stand by I . " 

 " we will , " say both his neighbour , the one groping for his case - knife , 
 the other for his revolver . 

 " do you fear I should lop your ear , dog , " cry Jasper , for shrink 
 from my side with your tail between your leg ! Pooh ! I scorn to waste 
 force on a thing so small . after all , I be glad you leave I ; I do not 
 want you . you will find your horse at an inn in the village of - - - . 
 I will pay for its hire whenever we meet again . meanwhile , find another 
 master - I discharge you . Mille tonnerre ! why do that weasel - face 
 snail not bring I the brandy ! by your leave , " - and he appropriate to 
 himself the brimming glass of his next neighbour . thus refresh , he 
 glance round through the reek of tobacco smoke ; see the man he have 
 dislodge , and who , rather amazed than stunned by his fall , have keep 
 silence on rise , and be now ominously interchange muttered word 
 with two of his comrade , who be also on their leg . Jasper turn 
 from he contemptuously ; - with increase contempt in his hard fierce 
 sneer , note the lower frown on either side the Pandemonium ; and it 
 be only with an angry flash from his eye that he mark , on close 
 his survey , the bar drop across the door , and two form , knife in 
 hand , station at the threshold . 

 " aha ! my jolly companion , " say he then , " you do right to bar the 
 door . prudent family can not   settle their quarrel too snugly amongst 
 themselves . I be come here on purpose to give you all a proper scolding , 
 and if some of you do not   hang your head for shame before I have do , 
 you will die more game than I think for , whenever you come to the last 
 drop . " 

 he rise as he thus speak , fold his sinewy arm across his wide chest . 
 Most of the man have rise too - some , however , remain seat ; there 
 might be eighteen or twenty in all . every eye be fix on he , and many 
 a hand be on a deadly weapon . 

 " Scum of the earth ! " burst forth Jasper , with voice like a roll of 
 thunder , " I stoop to come amongst you - I share amongst you my money . 
 be any one of you too poor to pay up his club fee - to buy a draught 
 of Forgetfulness - I say , ' brother , take ! ' do brawl break out in your 
 jollity - be knife draw - a throat in danger - this right band strike 
 down the uproar , crush back the coward murder . if I do not join in 
 your roguery , it be because they be sneak and pitiful . I come 
 as your Patron , not as your Pal ; I do not meddle with your secret - do 
 not touch your plunder . I owe you nothing . Offal that you be ! to I 
 you owe drink , and meat , and good fellowship . I give you mirth , and 
 I give you Law ; and in return ye lay a plot amongst you to get rid 
 of I ; - how , ye white - livere scoundrel ? Oho ! not by those fist , and 
 knife , and bludgeon . all your pigeon breast club together have not 
 manhood for that . but to palm off upon I some dastardly deed of your 
 own ; by snare and scrap of false evidence - false oath , too , no 
 doubt - to smuggle I off to the hangman . that be your precious 
 contrivance . once again I be here ; but this once only . what for ? - why , 
 to laugh at , and spit at , and spurn you . and if one man amongst you have 
 in he an ounce of man 's blood , let he show I the traitor who plan 
 that pitiful project , and be they a dozen , they shall carry the mark of 
 this hand till their carcass go to the surgeon 's scalpel . " 

 he cease . though each be now hustle the other towards he , and the 
 whole pack of miscreant be close up , like hound round a wild boar 
 at bay , the only one who give audible tongue be that thin splinter of 
 life call Cutts ! 

 " look you , General Jas . , it be all a mistake your ever come here . 
 you be a fine fellow once , particularly in the french way of do 
 business - large prize and lot of row . that do not   suit we ; we be quiet 
 Englishmen . you brag of beat and bully the gentleman who admit you 
 amongst they , and of not share their plan or risk ; but that sort of 
 thing be quite out of order - no precedent for it . how do we know that 
 you be not a spy , or could not be make one , since you say you owe we 
 nothing , and hold we in such scorn ? truth be , we be all sick of you . 
 you say you only come this once : very well , you have spin your yarn - now 
 go . that be all we want ; go in peace , and never trouble we again . 
 gentleman , I move that General Jas . be expel this club , and request 
 to withdraw . " 

 " I second it , " say the man whom Jasper have fling on the table . 

 " those who be in favour of the resolution , hold up their 
 hand ; - all - carry unanimously . General Jas . be expel . " 

 " expel I ! " say Jasper , who in the mean while , sway to and fro his 
 brawny bulk , have clear the space round he , and stand rest his 
 hand on the heavy armchair from which he have rise . 

 a hostile and simultaneous movement of the group bring four or five of 
 the foremost on he . up rise the chair on which Jasper have lean - up it 
 rise in his right hand , and two of the assailant fall as fall an ox to 
 the butcher 's blow . with his left hand he wrench a knife from a third 
 of the foe , and thus armed with blade and buckler , he spring on the 
 table , tower over all . before he be the man with the revolver , 
 a genteeler outlaw than the rest - ticket - of - leave man , who have be 
 transport for forgery . " shall I shoot he ? " whisper this knave to 
 Cutts . Cutts draw back the hesitate arm . " no ; the noise ! bludgeon 
 safe . " pounce , as Cutts whisper - pounce as a hawk on its quarry , 
 dart Jasper 's swoop on the Forger , and the next moment , fling the 
 chair in the face of those who be now swarm up the table , Jasper 
 be arm with the revolver , which he have clutch from its startled 
 owner , and its six barrel threaten death , right and left , beside and 
 before and around he , as he turn from face to face . instantly there 
 fall a hush - instantly the assault pause . every one feel that there 
 no faltering would make the hand tremble or the ball swerve . whereever 
 Jasper turn the foe recoil . he laugh with audacious mockery as he 
 survey the recreant . 

 " down with your arm , each of you - down that knife , down that bludgeon . 
 that be well . down your - there ; your - yours . what , all down ! pile they 
 here on the table at my foot . dog , what do you fear?-death . the first 
 who refuse die . " 

 Mute and servile as a repentant Legion to a Caesar 's order , the knave 
 pile their weapon . 

 " Unbar the door , you two . you , orator Cutts , go in front ; light a 
 candle - open the street - door . so - so - so . who will treat I with a parting 
 cup - to your health ? thank you , sir . fall back there ; stand back - along 
 the wall - each of you . line my way . Ho , ho ! - you harm I - you daunt 
 I - you - you ! stop - I have a resolution to propose . hear it , and cheer . 
 ' that this meeting rescind the resolution for the expulsion of General 
 Jasper , and entreat he humbly to remain , the pride and ornament of the 
 club ! ' those who be for that resolution , hold up their hand - as many 
 as be against it , theirs . carry unanimously . gentleman , I thank 
 you - proud day of my life - but I will see you hang first ; and till 
 that sight divert I , - gentleman , your health . " 

 descend from his eminence , he pass slowly down the room unscathed , 
 unmenaced , and , with a low mocking bow at the threshold , stride along 
 the passage to the streetdoor . there , see Cutts with the light in his 
 hand , he uncocke the pistol , strike off the cap , and give it 
 to his quondam associate , say : " return that to its owner , with my 
 compliment . one word - speak truth , and fear nothing . do you send help 
 to Darrell ? " " no ; I swear it . " 

 " I be sorry for it . I should like to have owe so trusty a friend that 
 one favour . go back to your pal . understand now why I scorn to work 
 with such rotten tool . " 

 " a wonderful fellow , indeed ! " mutter Cutts , as his eye follow the 
 recede form of the triumphant bravo . " all London might look to itself , 
 if he have more solid brain , and less liquid fire in they . " 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

  JASPER LOSELY sleep under the PORTICO from which falsehood be 
  BORNE by black horse . he forget a promise , REWEAVES a scheme , 
  visit a RIVER - SIDE , and a door close on the STRONG MAN and the 
  GRIM WOMAN . 

 Jasper , have satisfy the wild yearning of his wound vanity . he have 
 vindicate his claim to hardihood and address , which it seem to he 
 he have forfeit in his interview with Darrell . with crest erect and a 
 positive sense of elation , of animal joy that predominate over hunger , 
 fatigue , remorse , he stride on - he know not whither . he would not go 
 back to his former lodging ; they be too familiarly know to the 
 set which he have just fling from he , with a vague resolve to abjure 
 henceforth all accomplice , and trust to himself alone . the hour be 
 now late - the street desert - the air bitingly cold . must he at last 
 resign himself to the loathe dictation of Arabella Cram ? well , he 
 now prefer even that to humble himself to Darrell , after what have 
 pass . Darrell 's parting word have certainly imply that he would 
 not be as obdurate to entreaty as he have show himself to threat . but 
 Jasper be in no humour to entreat . mechanically he continue to stride 
 on towards the solitary district in which Arabella hold her home ; but 
 the night be now so far advanced that he shrink from disturb the 
 grim woman at that hour - almost as respectfully afraid of her dark eye 
 and stern voice as the outlaws he have quit be of his own crushing 
 hand and level pistol . so find himself in one of the large square 
 of Bloomsbury , he gather himself up under the shelter porch of 
 a spacious mansion , unconscious that it be the very residence which 
 Darrell have once occupy , and that from that portico the Black Horses 
 have bear away the mother of his wife . in a few minute he be fast 
 asleep - sleep with such heavy deathlike soundness , that the policeman 
 pass he on his beat , after one or two vain attempt to rouse he , 
 be seize with a rare compassion , and suffer the weary outcast to 
 slumber on . 

 when Jasper wake at last in the grey dawn , he feel a strange numbness 
 in his limb ; it be even with difficulty that he could lift himself up . 
 this sensation gradually wear off , be follow by a quick tingling 
 down the arm to the tip of the finger . a gloomy noise rang in his 
 ear , like the boom of funeral church - bell ; and the pavement seem 
 to be slide from under he . little heed these symptom , which he 
 ascribe to cold and want of food , and rather agreeably surprised not 
 to feel the gnaw of his accustomed pain , Jasper now betook himself to 
 Podden Place . the house be still unclose ; and it be not till Jasper 's 
 knock have be pretty often repeat , that the bolt be withdraw from 
 the door , and Bridgett Greggs appear . " oh , it be you , Mr. Losely , " 
 she say , with much sullenness , but with no apparent surprise . " mistress 
 think you would come while she be away , and I be to get you the 
 bedroom you have , over the stationer 's , six year ago , if you like it . 
 you be to take your meal here , and have the good of everything ; that be 
 mistress 's order . " 

 " oh , Mrs. Crane be out of town , " say Jasper , much relieved ; " where have 
 she go ? " 

 " I do not   know . " 

 " when will she be back ? " 

 " in a few day ; so she tell I . will you walk in , and have breakfast ? 
 Mistress say there be to be always plenty in the house - you might come 
 any moment . please scrape your foot . " 

 Jasper heavily mount into the drawing - room , and impatiently await 
 the substantial refreshment , which be soon place before he . the 
 room look unaltered , as if he have leave it but the day before - the 
 prim book - shelves - the empty birdcage - the break lute - the patent 
 easy - chair - the footstool - the sofa , which have be add to the 
 original furniture for his express comfort , in the day when he be 
 first adopt as a son - nay , on the hearth - rug the very slipper , on the 
 back of the chair the very dressing - gown , graciously wear by he while 
 yet the fairness of his form justify his fond respect for it . 

 for that day he be content with the negative luxury of complete 
 repose ; the more so as , in every attempt to move , he feel the same 
 numbness of limb as that with which he have wake , accompany by a kind 
 of painful weight at the back of the head , and at the junction which the 
 great seat of intelligence form at the spine with the great mainspring 
 of force ; and , withal , a reluctance to stir , and a more than usual 
 inclination to doze . but the next day , though these unpleasant 
 sensation continue , his impatience of thought and hate of solitude 
 make he anxious to go forth and seek some distraction . no distraction 
 leave to he but the gaming - table - no companion but fellow - victim in 
 that suck whirlpool . well , he know a low gaming - house , open all day 
 as all night . wish to add somewhat to the miserable remain of the 
 l1 borrow on the horse , that make all his capital , he ask Bridgett , 
 indifferently , to oblige he with two or three sovereign ; if she have 
 they not , she might borrow they in the neighbourhood till her mistress 
 return . Bridgett answer , with ill - simulate glee , that her mistress 
 have give positive order that Mr. Losely be to have everything he 
 call for , except - money . jasper colour with wrath and shame ; but 
 he say no more - whistle - take his hat - go out - repair to the 
 gaming - house - lose his last shilling , and return moodily to dine in 
 Podden Place . the austerity of the room , the loneliness of the evening , 
 begin now to inspire he with unmitigated disgust , which be add in 
 fresh account to his old score of repugnance for the absent Arabella . 
 the affront put upon he in the order which Bridgett have so faithfully 
 repeat make he yet more distastefully contemplate the dire necessity 
 of fall under the rigid despotism of this determined guardian : it be 
 like go back to a preparatory school , to be mulct of pocket - money , 
 and set in a dark corner ! but what other resource ? none but appeal to 
 Darrell - still more intolerable ; except - he pause in his cogitation , 
 shake his head , mutter " no , no . " but that " except " would 
 return ! - except to forget his father 's prayer and his own 
 promise - except to hunt out Sophy , and extract from the generosity , 
 compassion , or fear of her protectress , some such condition as he would 
 have wring from Darrell . he have no doubt now that the girl be with Lady 
 Montfort ; he feel that , if she really love Sophy , and be shelter 
 she in tender recollection , whether of Matilda or of Darrell himself , he 
 might much more easily work on the delicate nerve of a woman , shrink 
 from all noise and scandal , than he could on the stubborn pride of his 
 resolute father - in - law . perhaps it be on account of Sophy - perhaps to 
 plead for she - that Lady Montfort have go to Fawley ; perhaps the grief 
 visible on that lady 's countenance , as he catch so hasty a glimpse 
 of it , might be occasion by the failure of her mission . if so , there 
 might be now some breach or dissension between she and Darrell , which 
 might render the Marchioness still more accessible to his demand . as 
 for his father - if Jasper play his card well and luckily , his father 
 might never know of his disobedience ; he might coax or frighten Lady 
 Montfort into secresy . it might be quite unnecessary for he even to see 
 Sophy ; if she catch sight of he , she would surely no more recognise 
 his altered feature than Rugge have do . these thought gather on he 
 strong and strong all the evening , and grow into resolve with the 
 next morning . he sally out after breakfast - the same numbness ; but 
 he walk it off . easy enough to find the address of the Marchioness of 
 Montfort . he ask it boldly of the porter at the well - know house of 
 the present Lord , and , on learn it , proceed at once to Richmond - on 
 foot , and thence to the small , scatter hamlet immediately contiguous 
 to Lady Montfort 's villa . here he find two or three idle boatman 
 lounge near the river - side ; and enter into conversation with they 
 about their craft , which be sufficiently familiar to he , for he have 
 ply the strong oar on that tide in the holiday of his youth , he 
 proceed to inquiry , which be readily and unsuspectingly answer . 
 " yes , there be a young lady with Lady Montfort ; they do not know her 
 name . they have see she often in the lawn - see she too , at church . she 
 be very pretty ; yes , she have blue eye and fair hair . " of his father 
 he only hear that " there have be an old gentleman such as he 
 describe - lame , and with one eye - who have live some month ago in a 
 cottage on Lady Montfort 's ground . they hear he have go away . he 
 have make basket - they do not know if for sale ; if so , perhaps for a 
 charity . they suppose he be a gentleman , for they hear he be some 
 relation to the young lady . but Lady Montfort 's head coachman live 
 in the village , and could , no doubt , give he all the information he 
 require . " Jasper be too wary to call on the coachman ; he have learn 
 enough for the present . have he prosecute his research far , he 
 might only have expose himself to question , and to the chance of his 
 inquiry be repeat to Lady Montfort by one of her servant , and 
 thus set she on her guard ; for no doubt his father have caution 
 she against he . it never occur to he that the old man could already 
 have return ; and those to whom he confine his interrogatory be 
 quite ignorant of the fact . Jasper have no intention to intrude himself 
 that day on Lady Montfort . his self - love shrank from present himself 
 to a lady of such rank , and to whom he have be once present on equal 
 term , as the bridegroom of her friend and the confidential visitor to 
 her mother , in habiliment that bespoke so utter a fall . well , too , on 
 all account , to appear something of a gentleman ; more likely to excite 
 pity for suffering - less likely to suggest excuse for rebut his 
 claim , and show he to the door . Nay , indeed , so dressed , in that 
 villanous pea - jacket , and with all other habiliment to match , would any 
 servant admit he ? - could he get into Lady Montfort 's presence ? he must 
 go back - wait for Mrs. Crane 's return . doubtless she would hail his 
 wish - half a reform in itself - to castoff the outward sign of an 
 accept degradation . 

 accordingly he go back to town in much well spirit , and so absorb 
 in his hope , that , when he arrive at Podden Place , he do not 
 observe that , from some obliquity of vision , or want of the normal 
 correspondence between will and muscle , his hand twice miss the 
 knocker - wander first above , then below it ; and that , when actually 
 in his clasp , he do not feel the solid iron : the sense of touch seem 
 suspend . Bridgett appear . " mistress be come back , and will see you . " 

 Jasper do not look charm ; he wince , but screw up his courage , and 
 mount the stair - slowly - heavily . form the landing - place above glare 
 down the dark shin eye that have almost quail his bold spirit 
 nearly six year before ; and almost in the same word as then , a voice 
 as exulting , but less stern , say : " so you come at last to I , Jasper 
 losely - you be come . " rapidly - flittingly , with a step noiseless as a 
 spectre 's , Arabella Crane descend the stair ; but she do not , as when 
 he first seek that house in the year before , grasp his hand or 
 gaze into his face . rather , it be with a shrink avoidance of his 
 touch - with something like a shudder - that she glide by he into the 
 open drawing - room , beckon he to follow . he halt a moment ; he feel 
 a longing to retreat - to fly the house ; his superstitious awe of she 
 very benefit come back to he more strongly than ever . but her help at 
 the moment be necessary to his very hope to escape all future need of 
 she , and , though with a vague foreboding of unconjecturable evil , he 
 step into the room , and the door close on both . 




 BOOK XI . 




 CHAPTER I. 

  " the course of true love never do RUN SMOOTH ! " may it not be 
  because where there be no obstacles , there be no test to the 
  truth of love ? where the course be SMOOTH , the STREAM be crowded 
  with PLEASURE - BOATS . where the wave SWELLS , and the shoal 
  THREATEN , and the SKY LOWERS , the PLEASURE - BOATS have go back INTO 
  HARBOUR . ship fit for ROUGH weather be those BUILT and store 
  for long voyage . 

 I pass over the joyous meeting between Waife and Sophy . I pass over 
 George 's account to his fair cousin of the scene he and Hartopp have 
 witness , in which Waife 's innocence have be manifest and his 
 reason for accept the penalty of guilt have be explain . the 
 first few agitated day follow Waife 's return have roll away . he be 
 resettle in the cottage from which he have flee ; he refuse , as before , 
 to take up his abode at Lady Montfort 's house . but Sophy have be almost 
 constantly his companion , and Lady Montfort herself have spend hour with 
 he each day - sometimes in his rustic parlour , sometimes in the small 
 garden - plot round his cottage , to which his ramble be confine . George 
 have go back to his home and duty at Humberston , promise very soon 
 to revisit his old friend , and discuss future plan . 

 the scholar , though with a sharp pang , concede to Waife that all 
 attempt publicly to clear his good name at the cost of reverse the 
 sacrifice he have make must be forbear , could not , however , be induce 
 to pledge himself to unconditional silence . George feel that there be 
 at least some other to whom the knowledge of Waife 's innocence be 
 imperatively due . 

 Waife be seat by his open window . it be noon ; there be sunshine in the 
 pale blue skies - an unusual softness in the wintry air . his Bible lie 
 on the table beside he . he have just set his mark in the page , and 
 reverently close the book . he be alone . Lady Montfort - who , since she 
 return from Fawley , have be suffer from a kind of hectic fever , 
 accompany by a languor that make even the walk to Waife 's cottage 
 a fatigue , which the sweetness of her kindly nature enable she to 
 overcome , and would not permit she to confess - have be so much bad 
 that morning as to be unable to leave her room . Sophy have go to see 
 she . Waife be now lean his face upon his hand , and that face be 
 sad and more disquieted than it lead be , perhaps , in all his 
 wandering . his darling Sophy be evidently unhappy . her sorrow have not 
 be visible during the first two or three day of his return , chase 
 away by the joy of see he - the excitement of tender reproach and 
 question - of tear that seem as joyous as the silvery laugh which 
 respond to the gaiety that sport round the depth of feeling with 
 which he himself behold she once more clinging to his side , or seat , 
 with upward love eye , on the footstool by his knee . even at the 
 first look , however , he have find she alter ; her cheek be thin , 
 her colour pal . that might be from fret for he . she would be 
 herself again , now that her tender anxiety be relieve . but she do not 
 become herself again . the arch and playful Sophy he have leave be go , 
 as if never to return . he mark that her step , once so bounding , have 
 become slow and spiritless . often when she sit near he , seemingly 
 reading or at her work , he notice that her eye be not on the 
 page - that the work stop abruptly in listless hand ; and then he 
 would hear her sigh - a heavy but short impatient sigh ! no mistaking that 
 sigh by those who have study grief ; whether in maid or man , in young 
 or old , in the gentle Sophy , so new to life , or in the haughty Darrell , 
 weary of the world , and shrink from its honour , that sigh have the 
 same character , a like symptom of a malady in common ; the same effort 
 to free the heart from an oppressive load ; the same token of a sharp 
 and rankle remembrance lodge deep in that fine nerve - work of be , 
 which no anodyne can reach - a pain that come without apparent cause , 
 and be seek to be expel without conscious effort . 

 the old man fear at first that she might , by some mean or other , 
 in his absence , have become apprise of the brand on his own name , the 
 verdict that have blacken his repute , the sentence that have hurl he 
 from his native sphere ; or that , as her reason have insensibly mature , 
 she herself , reflect on all the mystery that surround he - his 
 incognito , his hiding , the incongruity between his social grade and 
 his education or bearing , and his repeat acknowledgment that there 
 be charge against he which compel he to concealment , and from 
 which he could not be clear on earth ; that she , reflect on all 
 these evidence to his disfavour , have either secretly admit into her 
 breast a conviction of his guilt , or that , as she grow up to woman , she 
 have feel , through he , the disgrace entail upon herself . or if such 
 be not the cause of her sadness , have she learn more of her father 's 
 evil course ; have an emissary of Jasper 's work upon her sensibility 
 or her fear ? no , that could not be the case , since whatever the ground 
 upon which Jasper have conjecture that Sophy be with Lady Montfort , 
 the accuracy of his conjecture have evidently be doubt by Jasper 
 himself ; or why so earnestly have question Waife ? have she learn 
 that she be the grandchild and natural heiress of a man wealthy and 
 renowne - a chief amongst the chief of England - who reject she with 
 disdain ? be she pin for her true position ? or mortify by the 
 contempt of a kinsman , whose rank so contrast the vagrancy of the 
 grandsire by whom alone she be acknowledge ? 

 torment by these doubt , he be unable to solve they by such guard 
 and delicate question as he address to Sophy herself . for she , when 
 he falteringly ask what ail his darling , would start , brighten up 
 for the moment , answer , " nothing , now that he have come back " ; kiss his 
 forehead , play with Sir Isaac , and then manage furtively to glide away . 

 but the day before that in which we now see he alone , he have ask she 
 abruptly , " if , during his absence , any one besides George Morley have 
 visit at Lady Montfort 's - any one whom she have see ? " and Sophy 's 
 cheek have as suddenly become crimson , then deadly pale ; and first she 
 say " no , " and then " yes " ; and after a pause , look away from he , she 
 add : " the young gentleman who - who help we to buy Sir Isaac , he have 
 visit Lady Montfort - relate to some dear friend of her . " 

 " what , the painter ! " 

 " no - the other , with the dark eye . " 

 " Haughton ! " say Waife , with an expression of great pain in his face . 

 " yes - Mr. Haughton ; but he have not be here a long , long time . he will 
 not come again , I believe . " 

 her voice quiver , despite herself , at the last word , and she begin 
 to bustle about the room - fill Waife 's pipe , thrust it into his hand 
 with a laugh , the false mirth of which go to his very heart , and then 
 step from the open window into the little garden , and begin to sing 
 one of Waife 's favourite simple old border song ; but before she get 
 through the first line , the song cease , and she be be as lose to 
 sight as a ringdove , whose note come and go so quickly amongst the 
 impenetrable covert . 

 but Waife have hear enough to justify profound alarm for Sophy 's 
 peace of mind , and to waken in his own heart some of its most painful 
 association . the reader , who know the wrong inflict on William 
 Losely by Lionel Haughton 's father - a wrong which lead to all poor 
 Willy 's subsequent misfortune - may conceive that the very name of 
 Haughton be wound to his ear ; and when , in his brief , sole , and 
 bitter interview with Darrell , the latter have drop out that Lionel 
 Haughton , however distant of kin , would be a more grateful heir than 
 the grandchild of a convict felon - if Willy 's sweet nature could have 
 admit a momentary hate , it would have be for the thus vaunted son 
 of the man who have strip he of the modest all which would perhaps 
 have save his own child from the robber 's guilt , and himself from the 
 robber 's doom . long since , therefore , the reader will have comprehend 
 why , when Waife come to meet Sophy at the riverside , and learn at 
 the inn on its margin that the name of her young companion be Lionel 
 Haughton - why , I say , he have so morosely part from the boy , and so 
 imperiously bade Sophy dismiss all thought of meet " the pretty young 
 gentleman " again . 

 and now again this very Lionel Haughton to have steal into the retreat 
 in which poor Waife have deem he leave his treasure so secure ! be it 
 for this he have flee from she ? do he return to find her youth blight , 
 her affection rob from he , by the son of Charles Haughton ? the 
 father have despoil his manhood of independence ; must it be the son who 
 despoil his age of its only solace ? Grant even that Lionel be 
 worthy of Sophy - grant that she have be loyally woo - must not that 
 attachment be fruitless - be fatal ? if Lionel be really now adopt by 
 Darrell , Waife know human nature too well to believe that Darrell would 
 complacently hear Lionel ask a wife in she whose claim to his lineage 
 have so gall and incense he . it be while plunge in these torturing 
 reflection that Lady Montfort   not many minute after Sophy 's song 
 have cease and her form vanish   have come to visit he , and he at 
 once accost she with agitated inquiry : " when have Mr. Haughton 
 first present himself ? - how often have he see Sophy ? - what have pass 
 between they ? - do not Lady Montfort see that his darling 's heart be 
 break ? " 

 but he stop as suddenly as he have rush into his thorny maze of 
 question ; for , look imploringly into Caroline Montfort 's face , he 
 see there more settle sign of a break heart than Sophy have yet 
 betray , despite her paleness and her sigh . Sad , indeed , the change 
 in her countenance since he have leave the place month ago , though Waife , 
 absorb in Sophy , have not much remark it till now , when seek 
 to read therein secret that concern his darling 's welfare . Lady 
 Montfort 's beauty be so perfect in that rare harmony of feature which 
 poet , before Byron , have compare to music , that sorrow could no more 
 mar the effect of that beauty on the eye , than pathos can mar the effect 
 of the music that admit it on the ear . but the change in her face 
 seem that of a sorrow which have lose all earthly hope . Waife , 
 therefore , check question that take the tone of reproach , and 
 involuntarily murmur " Pardon . " 

 then Caroline Montfort tell he all the tender project she have 
 conceive for his grandchild 's happiness - how , find Lionel 
 so disinterested and noble , she have imagine she see in he the 
 providential agent to place Sophy in the position to which Waife have 
 desire to raise she ; Lionel , to share with she the heritage of which he 
 might otherwise despoil she - both to become the united source of joy and 
 of pride to the childless man who now favour the one to exclude the 
 other . nor in these scheme have the absent wanderer be forget . no ; 
 could Sophy 's virtue once be recognise by Darrell , and her alleged 
 birth acknowledge by he - could the guardian , who , in foster 
 those virtue to bloom by Darrell 's hearth , have lay under the deep 
 obligation one who , if unforgive to treachery , be grateful for 
 the humblest service - could that guardian justify the belief in his 
 innocence which George Morley have ever entertain , and , as it now 
 prove , with reason - then where on all earth a man like Guy Darrell to 
 vindicate William Losely 's attainted honour , or from whom William 
 Losely might accept cherish friendship and independent ease , with so 
 indisputable a right to both ! such have be the picture that the fond 
 and sanguine imagination of Caroline Montfort have draw from generous 
 hope , and colour with tender fancy . but alas for such castle in the 
 air ! all have fail . she have only herself to blame . instead of secure 
 Sophys welfare , she have endanger Sophy 's happiness . they whom she 
 have desire to unite be irrevocably separate . bitterly she accuse 
 herself - her error in rely so much on Lionel 's influence with 
 Darrell - on her own early remembrance of Darrell 's affectionate nature 
 and singular sympathy with the young - and thus suffer Lionel and 
 Sophy to grow familiar with each other 's win character , and carry 
 on childlike romance into mature sentiment . she speak , though briefly , 
 of her visit to Darrell , and its ill success - of the few letter that 
 have pass since then between herself and Lionel , in which it be 
 settle that he should seek no parting interview with Sophy . he have 
 declare to Sophy no formal suit - they have exchange no lover ' vow . it 
 would be , therefore , but a dishonourable cruelty to she to say , " I come 
 to tell you that I love you , and that we must part for ever . " and how 
 avow the reason - that reason that would humble she to the dust ? Lionel 
 be forbid to we d with one whom Jasper losely call daughter , and 
 whom the guardian she so venerate believe to be his grandchild . all 
 of comfort that Lady Montfort could suggest be , that Sophy be so 
 young that she would conquer what might be but a girl 's romantic 
 sentiment - or , if a more serious attachment , one that no troth have 
 cement - for a person she might not see again for year ; Lionel be 
 negotiate exchange into a regiment on active service . " meanwhile , " 
 say Lady Montfort , " I shall never we d again . I shall make it know that 
 I look on your Sophy as the child of my adoption . if I do not live to 
 save sufficient for she out of an income that be more than thrice what 
 I require , I have instruct my lawyer to insure my life for her 
 provision ; it will be ample . many a wooer , captivate as Lionel , and 
 free from the scruple that fetter his choice , will be proud to kneel 
 at the foot of one so lovely . this rank of mine , which have never yet 
 bestow on I a joy , now become of value , since it will give dignity 
 to - to Matilda 's child , and - and to - " Lady Montfort sob . 

 Waife listen respectfully , and for the time be comfort . certainly , 
 in his own heart he be glad that Lionel Haughton be permanently 
 separate from Sophy . there be scarcely a man on earth , of fair station 
 and repute , to whom he would have surrender Sophy with so keen a pang 
 as to Charles Haughton 's son . 

 the poor young lover ! all the star seem against they ! be it not 
 enough that Guy Darrell should be so obdurate ! must the mild William 
 Losely be also a malefic in their horoscope ? 

 but when , that same evening , the old man more observantly than ever 
 watch his grandchild , his comfort vanish - misgiving come over 
 he - he feel assure that the fatal shaft have be break in the wound , 
 and that the heart be bleed inly . 

 true ; not without prophetic insight have Arabella Crane say to the 
 pining , but resolute , quiet child , behind the scene of Mr. Rugge 's 
 show , " how much you will love one day . " all that night Waife lie awake 
 pondering - revolve - exhausting that wondrous fertility of resource 
 which teem in his inventive brain . in vain ! 

 and now -   the day after this conversation with Lady Montfort , whose 
 illness grieve , but do not surprise he   - now , as he sit and think , 
 and gaze abstractedly into that far , pale , winter sky - now , the old man 
 be still scheme how to reconcile a human love heart to the eternal 
 loss of that affection which have so many perishable counterfeit , but 
 which , when true in all its element - complete in all its varied wealth 
 of feeling , be never to be forget and never to be replace . 




 CHAPTER II . 

 an offering to the MANES . 

 three side of Waife 's cottage be within Lady Montfort 's ground ; the 
 fourth side , with its more public , entrance , border the lane . now , 
 as he thus sate , he be startle by a low timid ring at the door which 
 open on the lane . who could it be ? - not Jasper ! he begin to tremble . 
 the ring be repeat . one woman - servant compose all his establishment . 
 he hear she open the door - hear a low voice ; it seem a soft , 
 fresh , young voice . his room - door open , and the woman , who of course 
 know the visitor by sight and name , have often remark he on the 
 ground with Lady Montfort and Sophy , say , in a cheerful tone , as if 
 bring good news , " Mr. Lionel Haughton . " 

 Scarcely be the door close - scarcely the young man in the room , 
 before , with all his delightful , passionate frankness , Lionel have 
 clasp Waife 's reluctant hand in both his own , and , with tear in his 
 eye , and choke in his voice , be pour forth sentence so loosely 
 knit together that they seem almost incoherent ; now a burst of 
 congratulation - now a falter of condolence - now word that seem to 
 supplicate as for pardon to an offence of his own - rapid transition 
 from enthusiasm to pity , from joy to grief - variable , with the stormy 
 April of a young , fresh , hearty nature . 

 take so wholly by surprise , Waife , in vain attempt to appear cold 
 and distant , and only very vaguely comprehend what the unwelcome 
 visitor so confusedly express , at last find voice to interrupt the 
 jet and gush of Lionel 's impetuous emotion , and say as drily as he 
 could : " I be really at a loss to conceive the cause of what appear to 
 be mean as congratulation to I and reproach to yourself , Mr. - , Mr. 
 Haugh - ; " his lip could not complete the distasteful name . 

 " my name shock you - no wonder , " say Lionel , deeply mortify , 
 and bow down his head as he gently drop the old man 's hand . 
 " reproach to myself ! - ah , sir , I be here as Charles Haughton 's son ! " 

 " what ! " exclaim Waife , " you know ? how could you know that Charles 
 Haughton - " 

 lionel   interrupting . - " I know . his own lip confess his shame to 
 have so injure you . " 

 WAIFE . - " confess to whom ? " 

 lionel . - " to Alban Morley . relieve I , my father 's remorse be bitter ; 
 it die not in his grave , it live in I . I have so long to meet with 
 William Losely . " 

 Waife seat himself in silence , shade his face with one hand while 
 with the other he make a slight gesture , as if to discourage or rebuke 
 farther allusion to ancient wrong . Lionel , in quick accent , but more 
 connected meaning , go on - 

 " I have just come from Mr. Darrell , where I and Colonel Morley   here 
 Lionel 's countenance be darkly trouble   have be stay some day . 
 two day ago I receive this letter from George Morley , forward to I 
 from London . it say - let I read it : ' you will rejoice to learn that 
 our dear Waife ' - pardon that name . " 

 " I have no other - go on . " 

 " ' be once more with his grandchild . ' "   here Lionel sigh heavily - sigh 
 like Sophy 's .   " ' you will rejoice yet more to learn that it have please 
 Heaven to allow I and another witness , who , some year ago , have be 
 mislead into condemn Waife , to be enable to bear incontrovertible 
 testimony to the complete innocence of my beloved friend ; nay , more - I 
 say to you most solemnly , that in all which appear to attest guilt , 
 there have be a virtue , which , if know to Mr. Darrell , would make he 
 bow in reverence to that old man . tell Mr. Darrell so from I ; and 
 add , that in say it , I express my conviction of his own admire 
 sympathy - for all that be noble and heroic . ' " 

 " too much - this be too , too much , " stammer out Waife , restlessly 
 turn away ; " but - but , you be fold up the letter . that be all ? - he 
 do not say more ? he do not mention any one else ? - eh ? - eh ? " 

 " no , sir ; that be all . " 

 " thank Heaven ! he be an honourable man ! yet he have say more than he 
 ought - much more than he can prove , or than I - " he break off , and 
 abruptly ask - " how do Mr. Darrell take these assertion ? with an 
 incredulous laugh - eh ? - ' why , the old rogue have plead guilty ! ' " 

 " Sir , Alban Morley be there to speak of the William Losely whom he have 
 know ; to explain , from fact which he have collect at the time , 
 of what nature be the evidence not bring forward . the motive that 
 induce you to plead guilty I have long guess ; it flash in an instant 
 on Guy Darrell ; it be not mere guess with he ! you ask I what he 
 say ? this : ' grand nature ! George be right ! and I do bow my head in 
 reverence ! ' " 

 " he say that ? - Guy Darrell ? on your honour , he say that ? " 

 " can you doubt it ? be he not a gentleman ? " Waife be fairly overcome . 

 " but , sir , " resume Lionel , " I must not conceal from you , that though 
 George 's letter and Alban Morley 's communication suffice to satisfy 
 Darrell , without further question , your old friend be naturally anxious 
 to learn a more full account , in the hope of legally substantiate your 
 innocence . he therefore despatch by the telegraph a request to his 
 nephew to come at once to Fawley . George arrive there yesterday . do not 
 blame he , sir , that we share his secret . " 

 " you do ? good heaven ! and that lawyer will be barbarous enough 
 to - but no - he have an interest in not accuse of midnight robbery 
 his daughter 's husband ; Jasper 's secret be safe with he . and Colonel 
 Morley - surely his cruel nephew will not suffer he to make I - I , with 
 one foot in the grave - a witness against my Lizzy 's son ! " 

 " Colonel Morley , at Darrell 's suggestion , come with I to London ; and if 
 he do not accompany I to you , it be because he be even now busy in 
 find out your son , not to undo , but to complete the purpose of your 
 self - sacrifice . ' all other consideration , ' say Guy Darrell , ' must be 
 merge in this one thought - that such a father shall not have be in 
 vain a martyr . ' Colonel Morley be empower to treat with your son 
 on any term ; but on this condition , that the rest of his life shall 
 inflict no far pain , no far fear on you . this be the sole use to 
 which , without your consent , we have presume to put the secret we have 
 learn . do you pardon George now ? " 

 Waife 's lip murmur inaudibly , but his face grow very bright ; and as 
 it be raise upwards , Lionel 's ear catch the whisper of a name - it be 
 not Jasper , it be " Lizzy . " 

 " ah ! why , " say Lionel , sadly , and after a short pause , " why be I not 
 permit to be the one to attest your innocence - to clear your name ? 
 I , who owe to you so vast an hereditary debt ! and now - dear , dear Mr. 
 losely - " 

 " hush ! Waife ! - call I Waife still ! - and always . " 

 " Willingly ! it be the name by which I have accustom myself to love 
 you . now , listen to I . I be dishonour until at least the mere 
 pecuniary debt , due to you from my father , be pay . Hist ! Hist ! - Alban 
 Morley say so - Darrell say so . Darrell say , ' he can not own I as 
 kinsman till that debt be cancel . ' darrell lend I the mean to do 
 it ; he would share his kinsman 's ignominy if he do not . before I could 
 venture even to come hither , the sum due to you from my father be 
 repay . I hasten to town yesterday evening - see Mr. Darrell 's lawyer . 
 I have take a great liberty - I have invest this sum already in the 
 purchase of an annuity for you . Mr. Darrell 's lawyer have a client 
 who be in immediate want of the sum due to you ; and , not wish 
 permanently to burthen his estate by mortgage , would give a large 
 interest by way of annuity than the public office would ; excellent 
 land security . the lawyer say it would be a pity to let the 
 opportunity slip , so I venture to act for you . it be all settle this 
 morning . the particular be on this paper , which I will leave with you . 
 of course the sum due to you be not exactly the same as that which 
 my father borrow before I be bear . there be the interest - compound 
 interest ; nothing more . I do not   understand such matter ; Darrell 's 
 lawyer make the calculation - it must be right . " 

 Waife have take the paper , glance at its content , drop it in 
 confusion , amaze . those hundred lent , swell into all those thousand 
 return ! and all methodically compute - tersely - arithmetically - down 
 to fraction . so that every farthing seem , and indeed be , his lawful 
 due . and that sum invest in an annuity of L500 a year - income which , 
 to poor Gentleman Waife , seem a prince 's revenue ! 

 " it be quite a business - like computation , I tell you , sir ; all do by 
 a lawyer . it be indeed , " cry Lionel , dismay at Waife 's look and 
 gesture . " compound interest will run up to what seem a large amount 
 at first ; every child know that . you can not   deny Cocker and calculate 
 table , and that sort of thing . William Losely , you can not leave an 
 eternal load of disgrace on the head of Charles Haughton 's son . " 

 " poor Charlie Haughton , " murmur Waife . " and I be feel bitter 
 against his memory - bitter against his son . how Heaven love to teach 
 we the injustice that dwell in anger ! but - but - this can not be . I thank 
 Mr. Darrell humbly - I can not take his money . " 

 " it be not his money - it be mine ; he only advance it to I . it cost 
 he really nothing , for he deduct the l500 a year from the allowance 
 he make I . and I do not   want such an absurd allowance as I have before 
 go out of the Guards into the line - I mean to be a soldier in good 
 earnest . too much pocket - money spoil a soldier - only get one into 
 scrape . Alban Morley say the same . Darrell , too , say , ' right ; no gold 
 could buy a luxury - like the payment of a father 's debt ! ' you can not 
 grudge I that luxury - you dare not - why ? because you be an honest 
 man . " 

 " softly , softly , softly , " say Waife . " let I look at you . do not   talk of 
 money now - do not   let we think of money ! what a look of your father ! 
 ' tis he , ' tis he whom I see before I . Charlie 's sweet bright playful 
 eye - that might have turn aside from the path of duty - a sheriff 's 
 officer ! ah ! and Charlie 's happy laugh , too , at the slight joke ! but 
 this be not Charlie 's - it be all your own   touching , with gentle finger , 
 Lionel 's broad truthful brow . poor Charlie , he be grieve - you be 
 right - I remember . " 

 " Sir , " say Lionel , who be now on one knee by Waife 's chair - ' sir , I 
 have never yet ask man for his blessing - not even Guy Darrell . will 
 you put your hand on my head ? and oh ! that in the mystic world beyond 
 we , some angel may tell Charles Haughton that William Losely have bless 
 his son ! " 

 solemnly , but with profound humility - one hand on the Bible beside he , 
 one on the young soldier 's bended head - William Losely bless Charles 
 Haughton 's son - and ; have do so , involuntarily his arm open , and 
 blessing be follow by embrace . 




 CHAPTER III . 

  nothing SO OBSTINATE as a young MAN 's HOPE ; nothing so eloquent as A 
  LOVER 's TONGUE . 

 Hitherto there have be no reference to Sophy . not Sophy 's lover , but 
 Charles Haughton 's son have kneel to Waife and receive the old man 's 
 blessing . but Waife could not be long forgetful of his darling - nor 
 his anxiety on her account . the expression in his vary face change 
 suddenly . not half an hour before , Lionel Haughton be the last man in 
 the world to whom willingly he would have consign his grandchild . now , 
 of all man in the world Lionel Haughton would have be his choice . he 
 sigh heavily ; he comprehend , by his own change feeling , how tender 
 and profound an affection Lionel Haughton might inspire in a heart so 
 fresh as Sophy 's , and so tenacious of the impression it receive . 
 but they be separate forever ; she ought not even again to see he . 
 uneasily Waife glance towards the open window - rise involuntarily , 
 close it , and draw down the blind . 

 " you must go now , young gentleman , " say he , almost churlishly . 

 the quick lover 's sense in Lionel divine why the blind Avas draw , and 
 the dismissal so abruptly give . 

 " give I your address , " say Waife ; " I will write about - that paper . 
 do not   now stay long - pray - pray . " 

 " do not fear , sir . I be not linger here with the wish to see - she ! " 

 Waife look down . 

 " before I ask the servant to announce I I take the precaution to 
 learn that you be alone . but a few word more - hear they patiently . 
 have you any proof that should satisfy Mr. Darrell 's reason that your 
 Sophy be his daughter 's child ? " 

 " I have Jasper 's assurance that she be ; and the copy of the nurse 's 
 attestation to the same effect . they satisfy I . I would not have 
 ask Mr. Darrell to be as easily content ; I could but have ask he 
 to inquire , and satisfy himself . but he would not even hear I . " 

 " he will hear you now , and with respect . " 

 " he will ! " cry Waife , joyously . " and if he should inquire and if Sophy 
 should prove to be , as I have ever believe , his daughter 's child , would 
 he not ' own , and receive , and cherish she ? " 

 " alas , sir , do not let I pain you ; but that be not my hope . if , indeed , 
 it should prove that your son deceive you - that Sophy be no way 
 relate to he - if she should be the child of peasant , but of honest 
 peasant - why , sir , that be my hope , my last hope - for then I would 
 kneel once more at your foot , and implore your permission to win she 
 affection and ask her hand . " 

 " what ! Mr. Darrell would consent to your union with the child of 
 peasant , and not with his own grandchild ? " 

 " Sir , sir , you rack I to the heart ; but if you know all , you would not 
 wonder to hear I say , ' I dare not ask Mr. Darrell to bless my union 
 with the daughter of Jasper Losely . ' " 

 Waife suppress a groan , and begin to pace the room with disorder 
 step , 

 " but , " resume Lionel , " go to Fawley yourself . seek Darrell ; compare the 
 reason for your belief with his for reject it . at this moment his 
 pride be more subdued than I have ever know it . he will go calmly into 
 the investigation of fact ; the truth will become clear . Sir - dear , dear 
 sir - I be not without a hope . " 

 " a hope that the child I have so cherished should be nothing in the 
 world to I ! " 

 " - nothing to you ! be memory such a shadow ? - be affection such a 
 weathercock ? have the love between you and Sophy be only the instinct 
 of kindre blood ? have it not be hallow by all that make Age and 
 Childhood so pure a blessing to each other , root in trial bear 
 together ? be you not the first who teach she in wandering , in 
 privation , to see a Mother in Nature , and pray to a Father which be in 
 Heaven ? would all this be blot out of your soul , if she be not the 
 child of that son whom it chill you to remember ? Sir , if there be 
 no tie to replace the mere bond of kindre , why have you take such 
 vigilant pain to separate a child from he whom you believe to be her 
 father ? " 

 Waife stand motionless and voiceless . this passionate appeal strike he 
 forcibly . 

 " and , sir , " add Lionel , in a low , sad tone - " can I ask you , whose 
 later life have be one sublime self - sacrifice , whether you would rather 
 that you might call Sophy grandchild , and know she wretched , than know 
 she but as the infant angel whom Heaven send to your side when bereave 
 and desolate , and know also that she be happy ? oh , William Losely , pray 
 with I that Sophy may not be your grandchild . her home will not be 
 less your home - her attachment will not less replace to you your lost 
 son - and on your knee her child may learn to lisp the same prayer 
 that you teach to she . go to Darrell - go - go ! and take I with you ! " 

 " I will - I will , " exclaim Waife ; and snatch at his hat and staff : 
 " come - come ! but Sophy should not learn that you have be here - that 
 I have go away with you ; it might set her thinking , dream , 
 hop - all to end in great sorrow . " he bustle out of the room 
 to caution the old woman , and to write a few hasty line to Sophy 
 herself - assure she , on his most solemn honour , that he be not now 
 fly from she to resume his vagrant life - that , without fail , please 
 Heaven , he would return that night or the next day . 

 in a few minute he reopen the room - door , beckon silently to 
 Lionel , and then steal into the quiet lane with quick step . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

  GUY DARRELL 's views in the invitation to WAIFE . 

 Lionel have but inadequately represent , for he could but imperfectly 
 comprehend , the profound impression make upon Guy Darrell by George 
 Morley 's disclosure . himself so capable of self - sacrifice , Darrell be 
 the man above all other to regard with an admiring reverence , which 
 partook of awe , a self - immolation that seem almost above humanity - to 
 he who set so lofty an estimate on good name and fair repute . he have 
 not only willingly permit , but even urge Lionel to repair to Waife 
 and persuade the old man to come to Fawley . with Waife he be prepare 
 to enter into the full discussion of Sophy 's alleged parentage . but 
 apart even from consideration that touch a cause of perplexity which 
 disquiet himself , Darrell be eager to see and to show homage to the 
 sufferer , in whom he recognise a hero 's dignity . and if he have send 
 by Lionel no letter from himself to Waife , it be only because , in 
 the exquisite delicacy of feeling that belong to he , when his good 
 emotion be arouse , he feel it just that the whole merit and the 
 whole delight of reparation to the wrong of William Losely should , 
 without direct interposition of his own , be leave exclusively to Charles 
 Haughton 's son . thus far it will be acknowledge that Guy Darrell be 
 not one of those man who , once warm to magnanimous impulse , be cool 
 by a thrifty prudence when action grow out of the impulse . Guy 
 Darrell could not be generous by drachin and scruple . not apt to say , 
 " I apologise , " - slow to say , " I repent " ; very - very - very slow indeed to 
 say , " I forgive " ; yet let he once say , " I repent , " " I apologise , " or " I 
 forgive , " and it be say with his whole heart and soul . 

 but it must not be suppose that , in authorise Lionel to undertake 
 the embassy to Waife , or in the anticipation of what might pass between 
 Waife and himself should the former consent to revisit the old house 
 from which he have be so scornfully drive , Darrell have alter , or 
 dream of altering , one iota of his resolve against a Union between 
 Lionel and Sophy . true , Lionel have induce he to say - 

 " could it be indisputably prove that no drop of Jasper Losely 's blood 
 be in this girl 's vein - that she be the lawful child of honest 
 parent , however humble - my right to stand between she and yourself 
 would cease . " but a lawyer 's experience be less credulous than a lover 's 
 hope . and to Darrell 's judgment it be wholly improbable that any honest 
 parent , however humble , should have yield their child to a knave 
 like Jasper , while it be so probable that his own persuasion be well 
 found , and that she be Jasper 's daughter , though not Matilda 's . 

 the winter evening have close , George and Darrell be converse in 
 the library ; the theme , of course , be Waife ; and Darrell listen with 
 vivid interest to George 's graphic account of the old man 's gentle 
 playful humour - with its vague desultory undercurrent of poetic fancy 
 or subtle wisdom . but when George turn to speak of Sophy 's endearing , 
 lovely nature , and , though cautiously , to intimate an appeal on her 
 behalf to Darrell 's sense of duty , or susceptibility to kindly 
 emotion , the proud man 's brow be come knit , and his stately air evince 
 displeasure . fortunately , just at a moment when further word might 
 have lead to a permanent coldness between man so disposed to esteem each 
 other , they hear the sound of wheel on the frosty ground - the shrill 
 bell at the porch - door . 




 CHAPTER V. 

  the VAGABOND receive in THE MANOR - HOUSE AT FAWLEY . 

 very lamely , very feebly , decline Lionel 's arm , and lean heavily on 
 his crutch - stick , Waife cross the threshold of the Manor - house . George 
 spring forward to welcome he . the old man look on the preacher 's face 
 with a kind of wandering uncertainty in his eye , and George see that 
 his cheek be very much flushed . he limp on through the hall , still 
 lean on his staff , George and Lionel at either side . a pace or two , 
 and there stand Darrell ! do he , the host , not spre forward to offer 
 an arm , to extend a hand ? no ; such greeting in Darrell would have be 
 but vulgar courtesy . as the old man 's eye rest on he , the superb 
 gentleman bow low - bowed as we bow to king ! 

 they enter the library . Darrell make a sign to George and Lionel . they 
 understand the sign , and leave visitor and host alone . 

 Lionel draw George into the quaint old dining - hall . " I be very uneasy 
 about our dear friend , " he say , in agitated accent . " I fear that 
 I have have too little consideration for his year and his sensitive 
 nature , and that , what with the excitement of the conversation that 
 pass between we and the fatigue of the journey , his nerve have 
 break down . we be not half - way on the road , and as we have the 
 railway - carriage to ourselves , I be talk to he with imprudent 
 earnestness , when he begin to tremble all over , and go into an 
 hysterical paroxysm of mingled tear and laughter . I wish to stop at 
 the next station , but he be not long recover , and insist on come 
 on . still , as we approach Fawley , after mutter to himself , as far 
 as I could catch his word , incoherently , he sink into a heavy state 
 of lethargy or stupor , rest his head on my shoulder . it be with 
 difficulty I rouse he when he enter the park . " 

 " poor old man , " say George feelingly ; " no doubt the quick succession 
 of emotion through which he have lately pass have overcome he for the 
 time . but the bad be now pass . his interview with Darrell must cheer 
 his heart and soothe his spirit ; and that interview over , we must give 
 he all repose and nursing . but tell I what pass between you - if he 
 be very indignant that I could not suffer man like you and my uncle 
 Alban and Guy Darrell to believe he a picklock and a thief . " 

 Lionel begin his narrative , but have not proceed far in it before 
 Darrell 's voice be hear shout loud , and the library bell ring 
 violently . 

 they hurry into the library , and Lionel 's fear be verify . Waife 
 be in strong convulsion ; and as these gradually cease , and he rest 
 without struggle , half on the floor , half in Darrell 's arm , he be 
 evidently unconscious of all around he . his eye be open , but fix in 
 a glassy stare . the servant throng into the room ; one be 
 despatch instantly to summon the near medical practitioner . " help 
 I - George - Lionel , " say Darrell , " to bear he up - stair . mill , light 
 we . " when they reach the landing - place , Mills ask , " which room , 
 sir ? " Darrell hesitate an instant , then his grey eye light into its dark 
 fire . " my father 's room - he shall rest on my father 's bed . " 

 when the surgeon arrive , he declare Waife to be in imminent 
 danger - pressure on the brain . he prescribe prompt and vigorous 
 remedy , which have indeed before the surgeon 's arrival suggest 
 themselves to , and be partly commence by , Darrell , who have go 
 through too many variety of experience to be unverse in the rudiment 
 of leechcraft . " if I be in my guest 's state , " ask Darrell of the 
 practitioner , " what would you do ? " 

 " telegraph instantly for Dr. F - - - . " 

 " Lionel - you hear ? take my own horse - he will carry you like the wind . 
 off to - - - - ; it be the near telegraph station . " 

 Darrell do not stir from Waife 's bedside all that anxious eight . Dr. 
 F - - - arrive at morning . he approve of all that have be do , but 
 nevertheless alter the treatment ; and after stay some hour , say 
 to Darrell : " I be compel to leave you for the present , nor could I 
 be of use in staying . I have give all the aid in my power to nature - we 
 must leave the rest to nature herself . that fever - those fierce throe 
 and spasm - be but Nature 's effort to cast off the grasp of the enemy 
 we do not see . it now depend on what degree of rallying power be leave 
 to the patient . fortunately his frame be robust , yet not plethoric . do 
 you know his habit ? " 

 " I know , " answer George - " most temperate , most innocent . " 

 " then , with constant care , minute attention to my direction , he may 
 recover . " 

 " if care and attention can save my guest 's life , he shall not die , " say 
 Darrell . 

 the physician look at the speaker 's pale face and compress lip . 
 " but , Mr. Darrell , I must not have you on my hand too . you must not be 
 out of your bed again tonight . " 

 " certainly not , " say George . " I shall watch alone . " 

 " no , " cry Lionel , " that be my post too . " 

 " Pooh ! " say Darrell ; " young man so far from Death be not such watchful 
 sentinel against his stroke as man of my year , who have see he in 
 all aspect ; and , moreover , base indeed in the host who desert his own 
 guest 's sick - chamber . fear not for I , doctor ; no man need sleep less 
 than I do . " 

 Dr. F - - - slide his hand on Darrell 's pulse . " irregular - quick ; but 
 what vitality ! what power ! - a young man 's pulse . Mr. Darrell , many year 
 for your country 's service be yet in these lusty beat . " 

 Darrell breathe his chronic sigh , and turn back to Waife 's bedside , 
 say to the doctor , " when will you come again ? " 

 " the day after to - morrow . " 

 when the doctor return , Waife be out of immediate danger . nature , 
 fortify by the " temperate , innocent habit " which husband up her 
 power , have dislodge , at least for a time , her enemy ; but the attack 
 be follow by extreme debility . it be clear that for day , perhaps 
 even week to come , the vagrant must remain a prisoner under Darrell 's 
 roof - tree . 

 Lionel have be too mindful of Sophy 's anxiety to neglect writing to 
 Lady Montfort the day after Waife 's seizure . but he could not find the 
 heart to state the old man 's danger ; and with the sanguine tendency of 
 his young nature , even when at the bad he cling to belief in the good . 
 he refrain from any separate and private communication of Waife 's 
 state to Lady Montfort , lest the sadness it would not fail to occasion 
 she should be perceptible to Sophy , and lead she to divine the cause . so 
 he content himself with say that Waife have accompany he to Mr. 
 Darrell 's , and would be detain there , treat with all kindness and 
 honour , for some day . 

 Sophy 's mind be relieve by this intelligence , but it fill she with 
 wonder and conjecture . that Waife , who have so pertinaciously refuse 
 to break bread as a guest under any man 's roof - tree , should be for day 
 receive the hospitality of Lionel Haughton 's wealthy and powerful 
 kinsman , be indeed mysterious . but whatever bring Waife and Lionel 
 thus in confidential intercourse could not but renew yet more vividly 
 the hope she have be endeavour of late to stifle . and combine 
 together many desultory remembrance of word escape unawares from 
 Lionel , from Lady Montfort , from Waife himself , the truth   of which her 
 native acuteness have before admit glimpse   grow almost clear to she . 
 be not Mr. Darrell that relation to her lost mother upon whom she have 
 claim not hitherto concede ? Lionel and Waife both with that relation 
 now ! surely the cloud that have rest on her future be admit the 
 sun through their opening rent - and she blush as she catch its ray . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

  INDIVIDUAL concession be LIKE POLITICAL ; when you once BEGIN , 
  there be no saying where you will stop . 

 Waife 's first word on recover consciousness be give to thought 
 of Sophy . he have promise she to return , at farth , the next day ; she 
 would be so uneasy he must get up - he must go at once . when he find his 
 strength would not suffer he to rise , he shed tear . it be only very 
 gradually and at interval that he become acquainted with the length 
 and severity of his attack , or fully sensible that he be in 
 Darrell 's house ; that that form , of which he have retain vague dreamy 
 reminiscence , hang over his pillow , wipe his brow , and soothe 
 he with the sweetest tone of the sweet human voice - that that form , 
 so genial , so brotherlike , be the man who have once command he not to 
 sully with his presence a stainless home . 

 all that have pass within the last few day be finally make clear to 
 he in a short , unwitnessed , touching conversation with his host ; after 
 which , however , he become gradually bad ; his mind remain clear , but 
 extremely deject ; his bodily strength evidently sink . Dr. F - - - 
 be again summon in haste . that great physician be , as every great 
 physician should be , a profound philosopher , though with a familiar ease 
 of manner , and a light off - hand vein of talk , which make the 
 philosophy less sensible to the taste than any other ingredient in his 
 pharmacopoeia . turn everybody else out of the room , he examine his 
 patient alone - sound the old man 's vital organ , with ear and with 
 stethoscope - talk to he now on his feeling , now on the news of the 
 day , and then step out to Darrell . 

 " something on the heart , my dear sir ; I can not   get at it ; perhaps you 
 can . take off that something , and the spring will react , and my patient 
 will soon recover . all about he sound as a rock - but the heart ; that 
 have be horribly worried ; something worry it now . his heart may be 
 see in his eye . watch his eye ; it be miss some face it be accustom 
 to see . " 

 Darrell change colour . he steal back into Waife 's room , and take the 
 old man 's hand . Waife return the pressure , and say : " I be just 
 pray for you - and - and - I be sink fast . do not let I die , sir , 
 without wish poor Sophy a last good - bye ! " 

 Darrell pass back to the landing - place where George and Lionel be 
 stand , while Dr. F - - - - be snatch a hasty refreshment in the 
 library before his return to town . Darrell lay his hand on Lionel 's 
 shoulder . " Lionel , you must go back to London with Dr. F - - - - . I 
 can not keep you here long . I want your room . " 

 " Sir , " say Lionel , aghast , " while Waife be still so ill ! you can not be 
 thus unkind . " 

 " inconsiderate egotist ! would you deprive the old man of a presence 
 dearer to he than your ? George , you will go too , but you will return . 
 you tell I , yesterday , that your wife be in London for a few day ; 
 entreat she to accompany you hither ; entreat she to bring with her the 
 poor young lady whom my guest pine to see at his bedside - the face that 
 his eye miss . " 




 CHAPTER VII . 

  SOPHY , DARRELL , and the FLUTE - PLAYER . DARRELL . PREPARES a surprise 
  for WAIFE . 

 Sophy be come . she have cross that inexorable threshold . she be a guest 
 in the house which reject she as a daughter . she have be there some 
 day . Waife revive at the first sight of her tender face . he have leave 
 his bed ; can move for some hour a day into an adjoining chamber , which 
 have be hastily arrange for his private sitting - room ; and can walk its 
 floor with a step that grow daily firm in the delight of lean on 
 Sophy 's arm . 

 since the girl 's arrival , Darrell have relax his watch over the 
 patient . he never now enter his guest 's apartment without previous 
 notice ; and , by that incommunicable instinct which pass in household 
 between one silent breast and another , as by a law equally strong to 
 attract or repel - here draw together , there keep apart - though 
 no rule in either case have be lay down ; - by virtue , I say , of that 
 strange intelligence , Sophy be not in the old man 's room when Darrell 
 enter . rarely in the twenty - four hour do the host and the fair young 
 guest encounter . but Darrell be a quick and keen observer . he have see 
 enough of Sophy to be sensible of her charm - to penetrate into her 
 simple natural loveliness of character - to feel a deep interest in 
 she , and a still deep pity for Lionel . seclude himself as much as 
 possible in his private room , or in his leafless wood , his revery 
 increase in gloom . nothing unbend his moody brow like Fairthorn 's flute 
 or Fairthorn 's familiar converse . 

 it have be say before that Fairthorn know his secret . Fairthorn have 
 idolise Caroline Lyndsay . Fairthorn be the only be in the world to 
 when Guy Darrell could speak of Caroline Lyndsay - to whom he could own 
 the unconquerable but unforgiving love which have twice drive he from 
 the social world . even to Fairthorn , of course , all could not be tell . 
 Darrell could not speak of the letter he have receive at Malta , nor of 
 Caroline 's visit to he at Fawley ; for to do so , even to Fairthorn , be 
 like a treason to the dignity of the Beloved . and Guy Darrell might rail 
 at her inconstancy - her heartlessness ; but to boast that she have lower 
 herself by the proffer that be dictate by repentance , Guy Darrell 
 could not do that ; - he be a gentleman . still there be much leave to 
 say . he could own that he think she would now accept his hand ; and 
 when Fairthorn look happy at that thought , and hint at excuse for 
 her former fickleness , it be a great relief to Darrell to fly into a 
 rage ; but if the flute - player meanly turn round and become himself 
 caroline 's accuser , then poor Fairthorn be indeed frightened ; for 
 Darrell 's tremble lip or melancholy manner overwhelm the assailant 
 with self - reproach , and send he sidelong into one of his hidden 
 covert . 

 but at this moment Fairthorn be a support to he under other 
 trial - Fairthorn , who respect as he do , as no one else ever can , 
 the sanctity of the Darrell line - who would shrink like himself from the 
 thought that the daughter of Jasper Losely , and in all probability not 
 a daughter of Matilda Darrell , should ever be mistress of that ancestral 
 hall , lowly and obscure and moulder though it be - and that the child 
 of a sharper , a thief , a midnight assassin , should carry on the lineage 
 of knight and warrior in whose stainless scutcheon , on many a Gothic 
 tomb or over the portal of ruined castle , be impale the heraldry of 
 bride spring from the loin of Lion king ! darrell , then , do full 
 justice to all Sophy 's beauty and grace , purity and goodness , be more 
 and more torture by the conviction that she could never be wife to the 
 man on whom , for want of all nearer kindre , would devolve the heritage 
 of the Darrell name . 

 on the other hand , Sophy 's feeling towards her host be almost equally 
 painful and embitter . the tenderness and reverence that he have show 
 to her beloved grandfather , the affect gratitude with which Waife 
 speak of he , necessarily deepen her prepossession in his favour as 
 Lionel 's kinsman ; and though she see he so sparingly , still , when 
 they do meet , she have no right to complain of his manner . it might be 
 distant , taciturn ; but it be gentle , courteous - the manner which might 
 be expect , in a host of seclude habit , to a young guest from 
 whose sympathy he be remove by year , but to whose comfort he be 
 unobtrusively considerate - whose wish be delicately forestall . yet 
 be this all that her imagination have dare to picture on enter those 
 grey wall ? where be the evidence of the relationship of which she have 
 dream ? - where a single sign that she be more in that house than a 
 mere guest ? - where , alas ! a token that even Lionel have name she to his 
 kinsman , and that for Lionel 's sake that kinsman bid she welcome ? 
 and Lionel too - go the very day before she arrive ! that she learn 
 incidentally from the servant who show she into the room . go , and 
 not address a line to herself , though but to condole with she on her 
 grandfather 's illness , or congratulate she that the illness have spar 
 the life ! she feel wounded to the very core . as Waife 's progressive 
 restoration allow her thought more to revert to so many cause for 
 pain and perplexity , the mystery of all connect with her own and 
 Waife 's sojourn under that roof baffle she at tempt at conjecture . the 
 old man do not volunteer explanation . timidly she question he ; but 
 his nerve yet be so unstrung , and her question so evidently 
 harass he , that she only once make that attempt to satisfy her own 
 bewilderment , and smile as if content when he say , after a long 
 pause : " patience yet , my child ; let I get a little strong . you see 
 Mr. Darrell will not suffer I to talk with he on matter that must be 
 discuss with he before I go ; and then - and then - Patience till then , 
 Sophhy . " 

 neither George nor his wife give she any clue to the inquiry that 
 preyed upon her mind . the latter , a kind , excellent woman , meekly 
 devoted to her husband , either be , or affect to be , in ignorance 
 of the cause that have lead . Waife to Fawley , save very generally that 
 Darrell have once wrong he by an err judgment , and have hasten to 
 efface that wrong . and then she kiss Sophy fondly , and tell she that 
 bright day be in store for the old man and herself . George say 
 with more authority - the authority of the priest : " ask no question . 
 Time , that solve all riddle , be hurry on , and Heaven direct its 
 movement . " 

 her very heart be shut up , except where it could gush forth - nor even 
 then with full tide - in letter to Lady Montfort . Caroline have hear 
 from George 's wife , with intense emotion , that Sophy be summon to 
 Darrell 's house , the gravity of Waife 's illness be considerately 
 suppress . Lady Montfort could but suppose that Darrell 's conviction 
 have be shake - his resolution soften ; that he seek an excuse to 
 see Sophy , and judge of her himself . under this impression , in 
 parting with her young charge , Caroline beseech Sophy to write to she 
 constantly and frankly . Sophy feel all inexpressible relief in 
 this correspondence . but Lady Montfort in her reply be not 
 more communicative than Waife or the Morleys ; only she seem more 
 thoughtfully anxious that Sophy should devote her self to the task 
 of propitiate her host 's affection . she urge she to try and break 
 through his reserve - see more of he ; as if that be possible ! and her 
 letter be more fill with question about Darrell than even with 
 admonition and soothing to Sophy . the letter that arrive at Fawley 
 be bring in a bag , which Darrell open ; but Sophy notice that it 
 be with a peculiar compression of lip , and a marked change of colour , 
 that he have notice the handwriting on Lady Montfort 's first letter to 
 she , and that after that first time her letter be not enclose in the 
 bag , but come apart , and be never again give to she by her host . 

 thus pass day in which Sophy 's time be spend chiefly in Waife 's 
 sick - room . but now he be regain strength hourly . to his sitting - room 
 come George frequently to relieve Sophy 's watch . there , once a day , 
 come Guy Darrell , and what then pass between the two man none 
 witness . in these hour Waife insist upon Sophy 's go forth for 
 air and exercise . she be glad to steal out alone - steal down by the bank 
 of the calm lake , or into the gloom of the mournful wood . here she not 
 unfrequently encounter Fairthorn , who , have take more than ever to 
 the flute , be drive more than ever to outdoor ramble , for he have be 
 caution not to indulge in his melodious resource within door lest he 
 disturb the patient . 

 Fairthorn and Sophy thus make acquaintance , distant and shy at first on 
 both side ; but it gradually become more frank and cordial . Fairthorn 
 have an object not altogether friendly in encourage this intimacy . he 
 think , poor man , that he should be enable to extract from Sophy some 
 revelation of her early life , which would elucidate , not in favour of 
 her asserted claim , the mystery that hang upon her parentage . but have 
 Dick Fairthorn be the astutest of diplomatist , in this hope he would 
 have be equally disappointed . Sophy have nothing to communicate . she 
 ingenuousness utterly baffle the poor flute - player . out of an innocent , 
 unconscious kind of spite , on cease to pry into Sophy 's descent , he 
 begin to enlarge upon the dignity of Darrell 's . he inflict on her the 
 long - wind genealogical memoir , the recital of which have , on a previous 
 occasion , so nearly drive Lionel Haughton from Fawley . he take she 
 to see the antiquary 's grave ; he speak to she , as they stand there , 
 of Darrell 's ambitious boyhood - his arid , laborious manhood - his 
 determination to restore the fall line - the very vow he have make to 
 the father he have so pityingly revere . he seek to impress on her the 
 consciousness that she be the guest of one who belong to a race with 
 whom spotless honour be the all in all ; and who have go through life 
 with bitter sorrow , but reverence that race , and vindicate that 
 honour ; Fairthorn 's eye would tremble - his eye flash on she while he 
 talk . she , poor child , could not divine why ; but she feel that he be 
 angry with she - speak at she . in fact , Fairthorn 's prickly tongue be 
 on the barbed point of exclaim : " and how dare you foist yourself into 
 this unsullied lineage - how dare you think that the dead would not turn 
 in their graf , ere they would make room in the vault of the Darrells 
 for the daughter of a Jasper Losely ! " but though she could not conceive 
 the musician 's covert meaning in these heraldic discourse , Sophy , with 
 a justness of discrimination that must have be intuitive , separate 
 from the more fantastic declamation of the grotesque genealogist 
 that which be genuine and pathetic in the single image of the last 
 descendant in a long and gradually fall race , lift it up once more 
 into power and note on toil shoulder , and stand on the verge of 
 age , with the melancholy consciousness that the effort be successful 
 only for his fleeting life ; that , with all his gold , with all his fame , 
 the hope which have achieve alike the gold and the fame be a lie 
 mockery , and that name and race would perish with himself , when the 
 earth yawn for he beside the antiquary 's grave . 

 and these recital make she conceive a more soft and tender interest 
 in Guy Darrell than she have before admit ; they account for the 
 mournfulness on his brow ; they lessen her involuntary awe of that 
 stateliness of bear which before have only chill she as the evidence 
 of pride . 

 while Fairthorn and Sophy thus mature acquaintance , Darrell and Waife 
 be draw close and close to each other . certainly no one would be 
 predispose to suspect any congeniality of taste , intellect , experience , 
 or emotion , between two man whose life have be so widely different - in 
 whose fault or merit the ordinary observer would have see nothing but 
 antagonism and contrast . unquestionably their character be strikingly 
 dissimilar , yet there be that in each which the other recognise as 
 familiar to his own nature . each have be the victim of his heart ; each 
 have pass over the ploughshare of self - sacrifice . Darrell have offer 
 up his youth - Waife his age ; darrell to a Father and the unrequiting 
 Dead - Waife to a Son whose life have become his terror . to one man , name 
 have be an idol ; to the other , NAME have be a weed cast away into the 
 mire . to the one man , unjoyous , evanescent glory - to the other , a shame 
 that have be bear with a sportive cheerfulness , dash into sorrow 
 only when the world 's contumely threaten to despoil Affection of its 
 food . but there be something akin in their joint experience of earthly 
 vanity ; - so little solace in worldly honour to the triumphant 
 orator - so little of misery to the vagrant Mime while his conscience 
 mutely appeal to Heaven from the verdict of his kind . and as beneath 
 all the levity and whim of the man rear and nurture , and fit by 
 his characteristic tendency , to view life through its humour , not 
 through its passion , there still run a deep undercurrent of grave and 
 earnest intellect and feeling - so too , amidst the severer and stately 
 texture of the once ambitious , laborious mind , which have conduct 
 Darrell to renown - amidst all that gather - up intensity of passion , 
 which admit no comedy into Sorrow , and see in Love but the aspect of 
 fate - amidst all this lofty seriousness of soul , there be yet a vivid 
 capacity of enjoyment - those fine sensibility to the pleasurable 
 sun - ray of life , which be constitutional to all geniu , no matter how 
 grave its vocation . true , affliction at last may dull they , as it dull 
 all else that we take from Nature when she equip we for life . yet , 
 in the mind of Darrell , affliction have shatter the thing most gravely 
 coveted , even more than it have mar its perceptive acknowledgment of 
 the sympathy between fancy that move to smile , and thought that 
 bequeath solemn lesson , or melt to no idle tear . have Darrell be 
 place amidst the circumstance that make happy the home of earnest 
 man , Darrell would have be mirthful ; have Waife be place amongst the 
 circumstance that concentrate talent , and hedge round life with train 
 thickset and belt laurel , Waife would have be grave . 

 it be not in the early conference that take place in Waife 's 
 apartment that the subject which have lead the old man to Fawley be 
 bring into discussion . when Waife have seek to introduce it - when , 
 after Sophy 's arrival , he have look wistfully into Darrell 's face , 
 strive to read there the impression she have create , and , unable to 
 discover , have begin , with tremulous accent , to reopen the cause that 
 weigh on he - Darrell stop he at once . " Hush - not yet ; remember 
 that it be in the very moment you first broach this sorrowful topic , 
 on arrive here , and perceive how different the point of view from 
 which we two must regard it , that your nerve give way - your illness 
 rush on you . wait , not only till you be strong , but till we know 
 each other well . this subject be one that it become we to treat 
 with all the strength of our reason - with all the calm which either can 
 impose upon the feeling that ruffle judgment . at present , talk we of 
 all matter except that , which I promise you shall be fairly discuss 
 at last . " 

 Darrell find , however , that his most effective diversion from the 
 subject connect with Sophy be through another channel in the old 
 man 's affection , hope , and fear . George Morley , in repeat the 
 conversation he have overhear between Waife and Jasper , have naturally , 
 while clear the father , somewhat soften the bravado and cynicism 
 of the son 's language , and more than somewhat brighten the touch of 
 natural feeling by which the bravado and cynicism have be alternate . 
 and Darrell have sufficient magnanimity to conquer the repugnance with 
 which he approach a name associate with so many dark and hateful 
 memory , and , avoid as much as possible distinct reference to 
 Jasper 's past life , to court a consultation on the chance of save 
 from the bad the life that yet remain . with whom else , indeed , than 
 Jasper 's father could Darrell so properly and so unreservedly discuss a 
 matter in which their interest and their fear be in common ? - as though 
 he be render some compensation to Waife for the disappointment he 
 would experience when Sophy 's claim come to be discuss - if he could 
 assist in relieve the old man 's mind as to the ultimate fate of the 
 son for whom he have make so grand a sacrifice , Darrell speak to Waife 
 somewhat in detail of the view with which he have instruct Colonel 
 Morley to find out and to treat with Jasper . he hear from the Colonel 
 almost daily . Alban have not yet discover Jasper , nor even succeed 
 in trace Mrs. Crane ! but an account of Jasper 's farewell visit to 
 that den of thief , from which he have issue safe and triumphant , 
 have reach the ear of a detective employ by the Colonel , and on 
 tolerably good term with Cutts ; and it be no small comfort to know 
 that Jasper have finally break with those miscreant comrade , and 
 have never again be see in their haunt . as Arabella have introduce 
 herself to Alban by her former name , and neither he nor Darrell be 
 acquaint with that she now bear , and as no question on the subject 
 could be put to Waife during the early stage of his illness , so it 
 be several day before the Colonel have succeed in trace she out as 
 Mrs. Crane of Podden Place - a discovery effect by a distant relation 
 to whom he have be refer at the famous school of which Arabella 
 have be the pride , and who be no doubt the owner of those sheepskin 
 account - book by which the poor grim woman have once vainly seek to 
 bribe Jasper into honest work . but the house in Podden Place be shut 
 up - not a soul in charge of it . the house immediately adjoin it be 
 tenantless . the Colonel learn , however , from a female servant in 
 an opposite house , that several day ago she have see a tall , 
 powerful - look man enter Mrs. Crane 's street - door ; that she have not 
 see he quit it ; and that some evening afterwards , as this servant 
 be close up the house in which she serve , she have remark a large 
 private carriage drive away from Mrs. Crane 's door ; that it be too 
 dark to see who be in the carriage , but she have notice a woman whom 
 she feel fully sure be Mrs. Crane 's servant , Bridgett Greggs , on the 
 box beside the coachman . 

 Alban have be to the agent employ by Mrs. Crane in the letting of her 
 house , but have not there gain any information . the Colonel believe 
 that Mrs. Crane have succeed in remove Jasper from London - have , 
 perhaps , accompany he abroad . if with she , at all event for the 
 present he be safe from the sting of want , and with one who have swear 
 to save he from his own guilty self . if , however , still in England , 
 Alban have no doubt , soon or later , to hunt he up . 

 upon the whole , this conjectural information , though unsatisfactory , 
 allay much anxiety . Darrell make the most of it in his representation 
 to Waife . and the old man , as we know , be one not hard to comfort , 
 never quarrel irrevocably with Hope . 

 and now Waife be rapidly recover . Darrell , after spend the great 
 part of several day , intent upon a kind of study from which he have be 
 estranged for many year , take to frequent absence for the whole 
 day ; go up to London by the early train , come back by the 
 late . George Morley also go to London for a few hour . darrell , 
 on return , do not allude to the business which take he to the 
 metropolis ; neither do George , but the latter seem unusually animate 
 and excited . at length , after one of these excursion , so foreign to his 
 habit , he and George enter together the old man 's apartment not long 
 before the early hour at which the convalescent retire to rest . Sophy 
 be seat on the footstool at Waife 's knee , read the Bible to he , 
 his hand rest lightly on her bended head . the sight touch both 
 George and Darrell ; but darrell of the two be the more affected . what 
 young , pure voice shall read to HIM the Book of Hope in the evening of 
 lonely age ? Sophy start in some confusion , and as , in quit the 
 room , she pass by Darrell , he take her hand gently , and scan she 
 feature more deliberately , more earnestly than he have ever yet seem 
 to do ; then he sigh , and drop the hand , murmur , " pardon I . " 
 be he seek to read in that fair face some likeness to the Darrell 
 lineament ? if he have find it , what then ? but when Sophy be go , 
 Darrell come straight to Waife with a cheerful brow - with a kindling 
 eye . 

 " William Losely , " say he . 

 " Waife , if you please , sir , " interrupt the old man . " William Losely , " 
 repeat Darrell , " justice seek to repair , so far as , alas ! it now 
 can , the wrong inflict on the name of William Losely . your old friend 
 Alban Morley supply I with the note he have make in the matter of 
 your trial , I arrange the evidence they furnish . the Secretary for 
 the Home Department be one of my most intimate political friend - a man 
 of humanity - of sense . I place that evidence before he . I , George , and 
 Mr. Hartopp , see he after he have peruse it - " 

 " my - son - Lizzy 's son ! " 

 " his secret will be keep . the question be not who commit the act 
 for which you suffer , but whether you be clearly , incontestably , 
 innocent of the act , and , in plead guilty , do but sublimely bear the 
 penalty of another . there will be no new trial - there be none who would 
 prosecute . I bring back to you the Queen 's free pardon under the Great 
 Seal . I should explain to you that this form of the royal grace be so 
 rarely give that it need all the strength and affect circumstance 
 of your peculiar case to justify the Home Secretary in listening , not 
 only to the interest I could bring to bear in your favour , but to his 
 own humane inclination . the pardon under the Great Seal differ from an 
 ordinary pardon . it purge the blood from the taint of felony - it remit 
 all the civil disability which the mere expiry of a penal sentence 
 do not remove . in short , as applicable to your case , it become 
 virtually a complete and formal attestation of your innocence . Alban 
 Morley will take care to apprise those of your old friend who may yet 
 survive , of that revocation of unjust obloquy , which this royal deed 
 imply - Alban Morley , who would turn his back on the high noble in 
 Britain if but guilty of some jockey trick on the turf ! live henceforth 
 openly , and in broad daylight if you please ; and trust to we three - the 
 Soldier , the Lawyer , the Churchman - to give to this paper that value 
 which your Sovereign 's adviser intend it to receive . " 

 " your hand now , dear old friend ! " cry George . " you remember I 
 command you once to take mine as man and gentleman - as man and 
 gentleman , now honour I with your . " 

 " be it possible ? " falter Waife , one hand in George 's , the 
 other extend in implore appeal to Darrell - " be it possible ? I 
 vindicate - I clear - and yet no felon 's dock for Jasper ! - the son not 
 criminate by the father 's acquittal ! tell I that ! again - again ! " 

 " it be so , believe I . all that rest be to force on that son , if 
 he have a human heart , the conviction that he will be bad than a 
 parricide if he will not save himself . " 

 " and he will - he shall . oh , that I could but get at he ! " exclaim the 
 preacher . 

 " and now , " say Darrell - " now , George , leave we ; for now , upon equal 
 term , we two father can discuss family difference . " 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

  SOPHY 's claim EXAMINED and CANVASSED . 

 " I take this moment , " say Darrell , when leave alone with Waife -   ah , 
 reader , let we keep to that familiar name to the last !   - " I take 
 this moment , " say Darrell , " the first moment in which you can feel 
 thoroughly assure that no prejudice against yourself cloud my judgment 
 in reference to she whom you believe to be your grandchild , to commence , 
 and I trust to conclude forever , the subject which twice bring you 
 within these wall . on the night of your recent arrival here , you 
 give this copy of a french woman 's declaration , to the effect that two 
 infant have be place out with she to nurse ; that one of they be my 
 poor daughter 's infant , who be about to be take away from she ; that 
 the other be confide to she by its parent , a french lady , whom she 
 speak of as a very liberal and distinguished person , but whose name be 
 not state in the paper . " 

 WAIFE . - " the confession describe that lady as an artiste ; distinguish 
 artiste be the expression - viz . , a professional person - a painter - an 
 actress - a singer - or - " 

 DARRELL   drily . - " an opera - dancer ! I understand the french word 
 perfectly . and I presume the name be not mention in the document , from 
 motif of delicacy ; the child of a distinguished french artiste be 
 not necessarily bear in wedlock . but this lady be very grateful to 
 the nurse for the care show to her infant , who be very sickly ; and 
 promise to take the nurse , and the nurse 's husband also , into her 
 service . the nurse state that she herself be very poor ; that the 
 lady 's offer appear to she like a permanent provision ; that the life 
 of this artiste 's infant be of the utmost value to she - the life of my 
 poor daughter 's child of comparative insignificance . but the infant of 
 the artiste die , and the nurse 's husband put it into his wife 's head to 
 tell your son   then a widower , and who have see so little of his child 
 as to be easily deceive , that it be his infant who die . the nurse 
 shortly afterwards remove to Paris , take with she to the artiste 's 
 house the child who in reality be my daughter 's . " 

 " it seem very probable , do it not - do it not ? " say the ex - comedian 
 eagerly . 

 " it seem to I , " reply the ex - lawyer , " very probable that a witness , 
 enter into court with the confession of one villanous falsehood , 
 would have little scruple to tell another . but I proceed . this rich and 
 liberal artiste die ; the nurse 's conscience then suddenly awaken - she 
 see Mr. Hammond - she inform he of the fraud she have practise . a lady 
 of rank , who have know Matilda , and have see both the infant when both 
 be live under the nurse 's charge , and observe they more attentively 
 than your son have do - corroborate the woman 's story , state that the 
 artiste 's child have dark eye instead of blue ; that the artiste herself 
 be never deceive - but , have take a great fancy to the spurious 
 infant , be willing to receive and cherish it as her own ; and that she 
 know several person who will depose that they hear the artiste say 
 that the child be not her own . on this evidence your son take to 
 himself this child - and this child be your Sophy - and you wish I to 
 acknowledge she as my daughter 's offspring . do not look I so earnestly 
 in the face , my dear and respected guest . it be when you read in my 
 face what my lip shrink from utter that your emotion overcome your 
 strength , and your very mind desert you . now , be firm . your Sophy 
 have no need of I - she be under your charge , and your name be clear . 
 she have find a friend - a protectress - in her own sex . Lady Montfort 's 
 rank give to she a position in the world as high as I could offer ; and 
 as to mere pecuniary provision for she , make your mind easy - it shall be 
 secure . but bear with I when I add , resolutely and calmly , that this 
 nurse 's attestation be to I a gross and poor attempt at imposture 
 than I have anticipate ; and I be amazed that a man of your ability 
 should have be content to accept it . " 

 " oh , Mr. Darrell , do not   say so ! it be such a blessing to think , when 
 my son be lose to I , that I might fill up the void in my heart with 
 an innocent , love child . do not   talk of my ability . if you , whose 
 ability none can question - if you have long and yearn for such a 
 comforter - if you have wish - if you wish now this tale to be true , 
 you would have believe it too ; you would believe it now - you would 
 indeed . two man look so differently at the same story - one deeply 
 interested that it should be true - one determine , if possible , to find 
 it false . be it not so ? " 

 Darrell smile slightly , but could not be induce to assent even to so 
 general a proposition . he feel as if he be pit against a counsel 
 who would take advantage of every concession . 

 Waife continue . " and whatever seem most improbable in this confession , 
 be render probable at once - if - if - we may assume that my unhappy son , 
 tempt by the desire to - to - " 

 " spare yourself - I understand - if your son wish to obtain his wife 's 
 fortune , and therefore connive at the exchange of the infant , and be 
 therefore , too , enable always to corroborate the story of the exchange 
 whenever it suit he to reclaim the infant , I grant this - and I 
 grant that the conjecture be sufficiently plausible to justify you in 
 attach to it much weight . we will allow that it be his interest at 
 one time to represent his child , though live , as no more ; but you must 
 allow also that he would have deem it his interest later , to fasten 
 upon I , as my daughter 's , a child to whom she never give birth . here we 
 entangle ourselves in a controversy without datum , without fact . let we 
 close it . believe what you please . why should I shake conviction that 
 render you happy ? be equally forbear with I . I do full justice to 
 your Sophy 's charming quality . in herself , the proud parent might 
 rejoice to own she ; but I can not acknowledge she to be the daughter of 
 Matilda Darrell . and the story that assure you she be your grandchild , 
 still more convince I that she be not mine ! " 

 " but be not thus inflexible , I implore you ; - you can be so kind , so 
 gentle ; - she would be such a blessing to you - later - perhaps - when I 
 be dead . I be plead for your sake - I owe you so much ! I should repay 
 you , if I could but induce you to inquire - and if inquiry should prove 
 that I be right . " 

 " I have inquire sufficiently . " 

 " ' then I will go and find out the nurse . I will question she . I will - " 

 " hold . be persuade ! Hug your belief ! inquire no far ! " 

 " why - why ? " 

 Darrell be mute . 

 Waife pass and repasse his hand over his brow , and then cry 
 suddenly : " but if I could prove she not to be my grandchild , then she 
 might be happy ! - then - then - ah , sir , young Haughton tell I that if 
 she be but the daughter of honest parent - no child of Jasper 's , no 
 grandchild of mine - then you might not be too proud to bless she at 
 least as his bride ! and , sir , the poor child love the young man . how 
 could she help it ? and , at her age , life without hope be either very 
 short , or very , very long ! let I inquire ! I should be happy even to 
 know that she be not my grandchild . I should not love she less ; and 
 then she would have other to love she when I be go to Lizzy ! " 

 Darrell be deeply move . to he there be something in this 
 old man - ever forget himself , ever so hurried on by his 
 heart - something , I say , in this old man , before which Darrell feel his 
 intellect subdue and his pride silence and abash . 

 " yes , sir , " say Waife , musingly , ' so let it be . I be well now . I will 
 go to France to - morrow . " 

 Darrell nerve his courage . he have wish to spare Waife the pain which 
 his own persuasion cause to himself . well now to be frank . he 
 lay his hand on Waife 's shoulder , and look he in the face , say 
 solemnly : " I entreat you not ! do you suppose that I would not resume 
 inquiry in person , nor pause till the truth be make amply clear , if I 
 have not strong reason to prefer doubt to certainty ? " 

 " what do you mean , sir ? " 

 " there be a woman whose career be , I believe , at this moment revive 
 into fresh notoriety as the heroine of some drama on the stage of 
 Paris - a woman who , when year pal her fame and reft she spoil , as a 
 courtesan renowne for the fool she have beggar , for the young heart 
 she have corrupt , seek plunder still by crime , to which law be less 
 lenient ; charge with swindling , with fraud , with forgery , and at last 
 more than suspect as a practised poisoner , she escape by suicide the 
 judgment of human tribunal . " 

 " I know of whom you speak - that dreadful Gabrielle Desmarets , but for 
 whom my sacrifice to Jasper 's future might not have be in vain ! it be 
 to save Sophy from the chance of Jasper 's ever place she within reach 
 of that woman 's example that I take she away . " 

 " be it not , then , well to forbear ask who be your Sophy 's 
 parent , than to learn from inquiry that she be indeed your grandchild , 
 and that her mother be Gabrielle Desmarets ? " 

 Waife utter a cry like a shriek , and then sate voiceless and aghast . 
 at last he exclaim : " I be certain it be not so ! do you ever see that 
 woman ? " 

 " never that I know of ; but George tell I that he hear your son state 
 to you that she have make acquaintance with I under another name , and if 
 there be a design to employ she in confirmation of his tale - if he be 
 then speak truth to you , doubtless this be the lady of rank refer 
 to in the nurse 's confession - doubtless this be the woman once palm 
 upon I as Matilda 's confidante . in that case I have see she . what 
 then ? " 

 " Mother be not write on her face ! she could never have be a mother . 
 oh , you may smile , sir ; but all my life I have be a reader of the 
 human face ; and there be in the aspect of some woman the barrenness as 
 of stone - no mother 's throb in their bosom - no mother 's kiss on their 
 lip . " 

 " I be a poor reader of woman 's face , " say Darrell ; " but she must be 
 very unlike woman in general , who allow you to know she a bit well if 
 you stand read her face till doomsday . besides , at the time you see 
 Gabrielle Desmarets , her mode of life have perhaps give to she an aspect 
 not originally in her countenance . and I can only answer your poetic 
 conceit by a poetic illustration - Niobe turn to stone ; but she have a 
 great many daughter before she petrify . pardon I , if I would turn 
 off by a jest a thought that I see would shock you , as myself , if 
 gravely encourage . encourage it not . let we suppose it only a chance 
 that inquiry might confirm this conjecture ; but let we shun that chance . 
 meanwhile , if inquiry be to be make , one more likely than either of we 
 to get at the truth have promise to make it , and soon or later we may 
 learn from she the result - I mean that ill - fat Arabella Fossett , whom 
 you know as Crane . " 

 Waife be silent ; but he keep turn in his hand , almost 
 disconsolately , the document which assoil he from the felon 's taint , 
 and say at length , as Darrell be about to leave , " and this thing be of 
 no use to she , then ? " 

 Darrell come back to the old man 's chair , and say softly : " friend , do 
 not fancy that the young have only one path to happiness . you grieve 
 that I can not consent to Lionel 's marriage with your Sophy . dismiss from 
 your mind the desire for the impossible . gently wean from hers what be 
 but a girl 's first fancy . " 

 " it be a girl 's first love . " 

 " and if it be , " say Darrell , calmly , " no complaint more sure to yield 
 to change of air . I have know a girl as affectionate , as pure , as full 
 of all womanly virtue , as your Sophy   and I can give she no high 
 praise   - love more deeply than Lionel can love ; profess , doubtless 
 at the time believe , that she also love for life ; betroth too ; 
 faith solemnise by promise ; yet in less than a year she be another 's 
 wife . change of air , change of heart ! I do not underrate the effect 
 which a young man , so win as Lionel , would naturally produce on the 
 fancy or the feeling of a girl , who as yet , too , have see no other ; 
 but impression in youth be character in the sand . grave they ever 
 so deeply , the tide roll over they ; and when the ebb show the surface 
 again , the character be go , for the sand be shift . courage ! Lady 
 Montfort will present to her other with form as fair as Lionel 's , and 
 as elegantly dress . with so much in her own favour , there be young 
 patricians enough who will care not a rush what her birth ; - young 
 lords - Lady Montfort know well how fascinating young lord can be ! 
 Courage ! before a year be out , you will find new character write on 
 the sand . " 

 " you do not   know Sophy , sir , " say Waife , simply ; " and I see you be 
 resolve not to know she . but you say Arabella Crane be to inquire ; 
 and should the inquiry prove that she be no child of Gabrielle 
 Desmarets - that she be either your own grandchild or not mine - that - " 

 " let I interrupt you . if there be a thing in the world that be cruel 
 and treacherous , it be a false hope ! crush out of every longing think 
 the belief that this poor girl can prove to be one whom , with my 
 consent , my kinsman can woo to be his wife . Lionel Haughton be the sole 
 kinsman leave to whom I can bequeath this roof - tree - these acre hallow 
 to I because associate with my early lesson in honour and with the 
 dream which direct my life . he must take with the heritage the name 
 it represent . in his child , that name of Darrell can alone live 
 still in the land . I say to you , that even be my daughter now in 
 existence , she would not succeed I - she would not inherit nor 
 transmit that name . why ? - not because I be incapable of a Christian 's 
 forgiveness , but because I be not capable of a gentleman 's treason 
 to his ancestor and himself ; - because Matilda Darrell be false and 
 perfidious ; because she be dead to honour , and therefore her birthright 
 to a heritage of honour be irrevocably forfeit . and since you compel 
 I to speak rudely , while in you I revere a man above the power of law 
 to degrade - while , could we pass a generation , and Sophy be your child 
 by your Lizzy , I should proudly welcome an alliance that make you and I 
 as brother - yet I can not contemplate - it be beyond my power - I can not 
 contemplate the picture of Jasper Losely 's daughter , even by my own 
 child , the Mistress in my father 's home - the bearer of my father 's name . 
 ' tis in vain to argue . grant I the slave of a prejudice - grant these 
 idea to be antiquate bigotry - I be too old to change . I ask from 
 other no sacrifice which I have not bear . and whatever be Lionel 's 
 grief at my resolve , grief will be my companion long after he have 
 forget that he mourn . " 




 CHAPTER IX . 

  POOR SOPHY ! 

 the next morning Mills , in give Sophy a letter from Lady Montfort , 
 give she also one for Waife , and she recognise Lionel Haughton 's 
 handwriting on the address . she go straight to Waife 's sitting - room , 
 for the old man have now resume his early habit , and be up and 
 dress . she place the letter in his hand without a word , and stand 
 by his side while he open it , with a certain still firmness in the 
 expression of her face , as if she be make up her mind to some great 
 effort . the letter be ostensibly one of congratulation . Lionel have see 
 Darrell the day before , after the latter have leave the Home Secretary 's 
 office , and have learn that all which Justice could do to repair the 
 wrong inflict have be do . here Lionel 's word , though brief , be 
 cordial , and almost joyous ; but then come a few sentence steep in 
 gloom . there be an allusion , vague and delicate in itself , to the 
 eventful conversation with Waife in reference to Sophy - a sombre , 
 solemn farewell convey to she and to hope - a passionate prayer for her 
 happiness - and then an abrupt wrench , as it be , away from a subject 
 too intolerably painful to prolong - an intimation that he have succeed 
 in exchange into a regiment very shortly to be send into active 
 service ; that he should set out the next day to join that regiment in 
 a distant part of the country ; and that he trust , should his life 
 be spar by war , that it would be many year before he should revisit 
 England . the sense of the letter be the more affecting in what be 
 conceal than in what be express . evidently Lionel desire to convey 
 to Waife , and leave it to he to inform Sophy , that she be henceforth 
 to regard the writer as vanish out of her existence - depart , as 
 irrevocably as depart the Dead . 

 while Waife be read , he have turn himself aside from Sophy ; he have 
 rise - he have go to the deep recess of the old mullioned window , half 
 screen himself beside the curtain . noiselessly , Sophy follow ; and 
 when he have close the letter , she lay her hand on his arm , and say 
 very quietly : " Grandfather , may I read that letter ? " 

 Waife be startle , and reply on the instant , " no , my dear . " 

 " it be well that I should , " say she , with the same quiet firmness ; 
 and then see the distress in his face , she add , with her more 
 accustomed sweet docility , yet with a forlorn droop of the head : " but as 
 you please , grandfather . " 

 Waife hesitate an instant . be she not right ? - would it not be well 
 to show the letter ? after all , she must confront the fact that Lionel 
 could be nothing to her henceforth ; and would not Lionel 's own word 
 wound she less than all Waife could say ? so he put the letter into her 
 hand , and sate down , watch her countenance . 

 at the open sentence of congratulation , she look up inquiringly . 
 poor man , he have not speak to she of what at another time it would have 
 be such joy to speak ; and he now , in answer to her look , say almost 
 sadly : " only about I , Sophy ; what do that matter ? " but before the 
 girl read , a line far , she smile on he , and tenderly kiss his 
 furrow brow . 

 " do not   read on , Sophy , " say he quickly . she shake her head and resume . 
 his eye still upon her face , he mark it change as the sense of the 
 letter grow upon she , till , as , without a word , with scarce a visible 
 heave of the bosom , she lay the letter on his knee , the change have 
 become so complete , that it seem as if another stand in her place . in 
 very young and sensitive person , especially female   though I have 
 see it even in our hard sex , a great and sudden shock or revulsion of 
 feeling reveal itself thus in the almost preternatural alteration of 
 the countenance . it be not a mere paleness - a skin - deep loss of colour : 
 it be as if the whole bloom of youth have rush away ; hollow never 
 discernible before appear in the cheek that be so round and smooth ; the 
 muscle fall as in mortal illness ; a havoc , as of year , seem to have 
 be work in a moment ; flame itself do not so suddenly ravage - so 
 suddenly alter - leave behind it so ineffable an air of desolation and 
 ruin . Waife spring forward and clasp she to his breast . 

 " you will bear it , Sophy ! the bad be over now . Fortitude , my 
 child ! - fortitude ! the human heart be wonderfully sustain when it 
 be not the conscience that weigh it down - grief , that we think at the 
 moment must kill we , wear themselves away . I speak the truth , for I too 
 have suffer ! " 

 " poor grandfather ! " say Sophy , gently ; and she say no more . but when 
 he would have continue to speak comfort , or exhort to patience , she 
 press his hand tightly , and lay her finger on her lip . he be hush 
 in an instant . 

 presently she begin to move about the room , busy herself , as usual , 
 in those slight , scarce perceptible arrangement by which she love to 
 think that she minister to the old man 's simple comfort . she place 
 the armchair in his favourite nook by the window , and before it the 
 footstool for the poor lame foot ; and draw the table near the chair , 
 and look over the book that George have select for his perusal from 
 Darrell 's library ; and choose the volume in which she see his mark , 
 to place near to his hand , and tenderly clear the mist from his 
 reading - glass ; and remove one or two withered or ailing snowdrop from 
 the little winter nosegay she have gather for he the day before - he 
 watch she all the time , silent as herself , not dare , indeed , to 
 speak , lest his heart should overflow . 

 these little task of love over , she come towards he a few pace , and 
 say : " please , dear grandfather , tell I all about what have happen to 
 yourself , which should make we glad - that be , by - and - by ; but nothing 
 as to the rest of that letter . I will just think over it by myself ; but 
 never let we talk of it , grandy dear , never more - never more . " 




 CHAPTER X. 

  TREES that , like the POPLAR , LIFT UPWARD all their boughs , give no 
  shade and no SHELTER , whatever their height . TREES the most 
  LOVINGLY SHELTER and shade US , when , like the willow , the high 
  SOAR their summit , the lowlier DROOP their BOUGHS . 

 usually when Sophy leave Waife in the morning , she would wander out into 
 the ground , and he could see her pass before his window ; or she would 
 look into the library , which be almost exclusively give up to the 
 Morleys , and he could hear her tread on the old creaking stair . but 
 now she have steal into her own room , which communicate with his 
 sitting - room - a small lobby alone intervene - and there she remain so 
 long that he grow uneasy . he creep softly to her door and listen . he 
 have a fineness of hear almost equal to his son 's ; but he could not 
 hear a sob - not a breath . at length he softly open the door and look 
 in with caution . 

 the girl be seat at the foot of the bed , quite still - her eye fix 
 on the ground , and her finger to her lip , just as she have place it 
 there when implore silence ; so still , it might be even slumber . all 
 who have grieve respect grief . Waife do not like to approach she ; but 
 he say , from his stand at the threshold : " the sun be quite bright now , 
 Sophy ; go out for a little while , darling . " 

 she do not look round , she do not stir ; but she answer with 
 readiness , " yes , presently . " 

 so he close the door and leave she . an hour pass away ; he look in 
 again ; there she be still - in the same place , in the same attitude . 

 " Sophy , dear , it be time to take your walk ; go - Mrs. Morley be in front , 
 before my window . I have call to she to wait for you . " 

 " yes - presently , " answer Sophy , and she do not move . 

 Waife be seriously alarmed . he pause a moment - then go back to his 
 room - take his hat and his staff - come back . 

 " Sophy , I should like to hobble out and breathe the air ; it will do I 
 good . will you give I your arm ? I be still very weak . " 

 Sophy now start - shake back her fair curl - rose - put on her bonnet , and 
 in less than a minute be by the old man 's side . draw his arm fondly 
 into her , they descend the stair ; they be in the garden ; Mrs. Morley 
 come to meet they - then George . Wife exert himself to talk - to be 
 gay - to protect Sophy 's abstract silence by his own active , desultory , 
 erratic humour . twice or thrice , as he lean on Sophy 's arm , she draw 
 it still near to she , and press it tenderly . she understand - she 
 thank he . Hark ! from some undiscovered hiding - place near the 
 water - Fairthorn 's flute ! the music fill the landscape as with a living 
 presence ; the swan pause upon the still lake - the tame doe steal 
 through yonder leafless tree ; and now , musing and slow , from the same 
 desolate covert , come the doe 's master . the music spell they all . Guy 
 Darrell see his guest where they have halt by the stone sun - dial . 
 he advance - join they - congratulate Waife on his first walk as a 
 convalescent . he quote Gray 's well - know verse applicable to that 
 event , and when , in that voice sweet as the flute itself , he come to 
 the line :   " see the wretch who long have tost , "   c. - GRAY . 

  " the common sun , the air , the sky , 
  to he be open paradise " 

 Sophy , as if suddenly strike with remorse at the thought that she , 
 and she alone , be mar that open paradise to the old man in his 
 escape from the sick - room to " the sun , the air , the sky , " abruptly 
 raise her look from the ground , and turn they full upon her 
 guardian 's face , with an attempt at gladness in her quivering smile , 
 which , whatever its effect on Waife , go straight to the innermost 
 heart of Guy Darrell . on the instant he recognise , as by intuitive 
 sympathy , the anguish from which that smile struggle forth - know that 
 Sophy have now learn that grief which lie deep within himself - that 
 grief which make a sick chamber of the whole external world , and which 
 greet no more , in the common boon of Nature , the opening Paradise of 
 recover Hope ! his eye linger on her face as its smile wan , and 
 perceive that change which have so startled Waife . involuntarily he 
 move to her side - involuntarily draw her arm within his own - she thus 
 support the one who cherish - support by the one who disown she . 
 Guy Darrell might be stern in resolve which afflict other , as he be 
 stern in afflict himself ; but for other he have at least compassion . 

 Poor Waife , with nature so different , mark Darrell 's movement , and , 
 ever ready to seize on comfort , say inly : " he relent . I will not go 
 to - morrow as I have intend . Sophy must win her way ; who can resist 
 she ? " 

 talk languish - the wintry sun begin to slope - the air grow keen - Waife 
 be lead in - the Morleys go up into his room to keep he company - Sophy 
 escape back to her own . Darrell continue his walk , plunge deep into 
 his maze of beechwood , follow by the doe . the swan dip their neck 
 amongst the water - weed ; the flute have cease , and drearily still be the 
 grey horizon , see through the skeleton boughs - see behind the ragged 
 sky - line of shaft and parapet in the skeleton palace . 

 Darrell do not visit Waife 's room that day ; he conclude that Waife 
 and Sophy would wish to be much alone ; he dread renewal of the only 
 subject on which he have no cheer word to say . Sophy 's smile , Sophy 's 
 face haunt he . in vain he repeat to himself : " tut , it will soon 
 pass - only a girl 's first fancy . " 

 but Sophy do not come back to Waife 's room when the Morleys have leave 
 it : Waife creep into her room as before , and , as before , there she sit 
 still as if in slumber . she come in , however , of her own accord , to 
 assist , as usual , in the meal which he take apart in his room help 
 he - help herself , but eat nothing . she talk , however , almost gaily ; 
 hop he will be well enough to leave the next day ; wonder whether 
 Sir Isaac have miss they very much ; read to he Lady Montfort 's 
 affectionate letter to herself ; and when dinner be over , and Waife 's 
 chair draw to the fireside , she take her old habitual place on 
 the stool beside he , and say : " now , dear grandfather - all about 
 yourself - what happy thing have chance to you ? " 

 alas ! poor Waife have but little heart to speak ; but he force himself ; 
 what he have to say may do good to she . 

 " you know that , on my own account , I have reason for secresy - change of 
 name . I shun all those whom I have ever know in former day ; could 
 take no calling in life by which I might be recognise ; deem it a 
 bless mercy of Providence that when , not able to resist offer that 
 would have enable I to provide for you as I never otherwise could , I 
 assent to hazard an engagement at a London theatre - trust for my 
 incognito to an actor 's art of disguise - come the accident which , of 
 itself , annihilate the temptation into which I have suffer myself to 
 be lead . for , ah , child ! have it be know who and what be the William 
 Waife whose stage - mime trick move harmless mirth , or tear as 
 pleasant , the audience would have rise , not to applaud , but hoot , 
 ' Off , off , ' from both world - the Mimic as the real ! well , have I be 
 dishonest , you - you alone feel that I could not have dare to take 
 you , guiltless infant , by the hand . you remember that , on my return 
 to Rugge 's wandering theatre , bring you with I , I exaggerate the 
 effect of my accident - affect to have lose voice - stipulate to be 
 spar appear on his stage . that be not the mere pride of manhood 
 shrink from the display of physical affliction . no . in the first 
 village that we arrive at , I recognise an old friend , and I see that , 
 in spite of time , and the accident that have disfigure I , he recognise 
 I , and turn away his face , as if in loathing . an old friend , 
 Sophy - an old friend ! oh , it pierce I to the heart ; and I resolve , 
 from that day , to escape from Rugge 's stage ; and I consent till the 
 mean of escape , and some less dependent mode of livelihood , be find , 
 to live on thy earning , child ; for if I be discover by other old 
 friend , and they speak out , my disgrace would reflect on you ; and 
 well to accept support , from you than that ! alas ! appearance be so 
 strong against I , I never deem they could be clear away , even from 
 the sight of my near friend . but Providence , you know , have be so 
 kind to we hitherto ; and so Providence will be kind to we again , Sophy . 
 and now , the very man I think most hard to I - this very Guy Darrell , 
 under whose roof we be - have be the man to make those whose opinion 
 I most value know that I be not dishonest ; and Providence have raise a 
 witness on my behalf in that very Mr. Hartopp , who judge I   and any 
 one else might have do the same   too bad to be fit company for you ! 
 and that be why I be congratulate ; and , oh , Sophy , though I have bear 
 it as Heaven do enable we to bear what of ourselves we could not , and 
 though one learn to shrug a patient shoulder under the obloquy which 
 may be heap on we by that crowd of mere stranger to we and to each 
 other , which be call ' the world , ' yet to slink out of sight from a 
 friend , as one more to be shun than a foe - to take like a coward the 
 lashing of Scorn - to wince , one raw sore , from the kindness of Pity - to 
 feel that in life the sole end of each shift and contrivance be to slip 
 the view - hallo , into a grave without epitaph , by path as stealthy and 
 sly as the poor hunted fox , when his last chance - and sole one - be , by 
 winding and doubling , to run under the earth ; to know that it would be 
 an ungrateful imposture to take chair at the board - at the hearth , of 
 the man who , unknowe your secret , say , ' friend , be social ' ; accept 
 not a crust that one do not pay for , lest one feel a swindler to the 
 kind fellow - creature whose equal we must not be ! - all this - all this , 
 Sophy , do at time chafe and gall more than I ought to have let it do , 
 consider that there be one who see it all , and would - do not   cry , 
 Sophy ; it be all over now . " 

 " not cry ! oh , it do I so much good . " 

 " all over now ! I be under this roof - without shame or scruple ; and if 
 Guy Darrell , know all my past , have prove my innocence in the eye 
 of those whom alone I care for , I feel as if I have the right to stand 
 before any crowd of man erect and shameless - a man once more with Men ! 
 oh , darling ! let I but see thy old happy smile again ! the happy 
 smile of the young be the sunshine of the old . be patient - be firm ; 
 Providence be so very kind , Sophy . " 




 CHAPTER XI . 

  WAIFE EXACTS from GEORGE MORLEY the FULFILMENT of one of those 
  promise which MEAN nothing or everything . 

 the next day George Morley visit Waife 's room early than usual . 
 Waife have send for he . Sophy be seat by her grandfather - his hand in 
 her . she have be exert herself to the utmost to talk cheerfully - to 
 shake from her aspect every cloud of sorrow . but still that CHANGE be 
 there - more marked than even on the previous day . a few hour of intense 
 struggle , a single night wholly without sleep , will tell on the face 
 of early youth . not till we , hard veteran , have go through such 
 struggle as life permit not to the slight responsibility of new 
 recruit - not till sleepless night have grow to we familiar will 
 Thought seem to take , as it be , strength , not exhaustion , from 
 unrelaxe exercise - nourish the brain , sustain the form by its own 
 untiring , fleshless , spiritual immortality ; not till many a winter have 
 strip the leaf ; not till deep , and far out of sight , spread the 
 root that support the stem - will the beat of the east wind leave no 
 sign on the rind . 

 George have not , indeed , so notice , the day before , the kind of 
 wither blight that have pass over the girl 's countenance ; but he do 
 now - when she meet his eye more steadfastly , and have resume something of 
 the open genial infantine grace of manner which constitute her peculiar 
 charm , and which it be difficult to associate with deep grief than 
 those of childhood . 

 " you must scold my grandfather , " she say . " he choose to fancy that 
 he be not well enough yet to leave ; and I be sure that he be , and will 
 recover more quickly at home than here . " 

 " Pooh ! " say Waife ; " you young thing suppose we old folk can be as 
 brisk as yourself ; but if I be to be scold , leave Mr. George unawe 
 by your presence , and go out , my dear , while the sun last : I know by 
 the way of that blackbird that the day will be overcast by noon . " 

 as soon as they be alone , George say abruptly : " your Sophy be look 
 very ill , and if you be well enough to leave , it might be well 
 for she to move from this gloomy house . Movement itself be a great 
 restorative , " add George , with emphasis . 

 " you see , then , that she look ill - very ill , " say Waife deliberately ; 
 " and there be that in your manner which tell I you guess the cause . " 

 " I do guess it from the glimpse which I catch of Lionel 's face after he 
 have be closet a short time with Mr. Darrell at my uncle 's house two 
 day ago . I guess it also from a letter I have receive from my uncle . " 

 " you guess right - very right , " say Waife , still with the same serious , 
 tranquil manner . " I show she this letter from young Haughton . read 
 it . " George hurry his eye over the letter , and return it silently . 
 Waife proceed : 

 " I be frightened yesterday by the strange composure she show . in 
 her face alone could be read what she suffer . we talk last night . 
 I speak of myself - of my old sorrow - in order to give her strength to 
 support her ; and the girl have a heroic nature , Mr. George - and she be 
 resolve to conquer or to die . but she will not conquer . " George begin 
 the usual strain of a console in such trial . Waife stop he . " all 
 that you can say , Mr. George , I know beforehand ; and she will need no 
 exhortation to prayer and to fortitude . I steal from my room when it be 
 almost dawn . I see a light under the door of her chamber . I just look 
 in - softly - unperceived . she have not go to bed . she be by the open 
 window - star die out of the sky - kneeling on the floor , her face 
 bury in her hand . she have pray . in her soul , at this moment , be 
 sure that she be pray now . she will devote herself to I - she will be 
 cheerful - you will hear her laugh , Mr. George ; but she will not conquer 
 in this world ; long before the new year be out , she will be look 
 down upon our grief with her bright smile ; but we shall not see she , Mr. 
 George . do not think this be an old man 's foolish terror ; I know sorrow 
 as physicians know disease ; it have its mortal symptom . hush ! hear I 
 out . I have one hope - it be in you . " 

 " in I ? " 

 " yes . do you remember that you say , if I could succeed in opening to 
 your intellect its fair career , you would be the good friend to I man 
 ever have ? and I say , ' agree , but change the party in the contract ; 
 befriend my Sophy instead of I , and if ever I ask you , help I in aught 
 for her welfare and happiness ; ' and you say , ' with heart and soul . ' 
 that be the bargain , Mr. George . now you have all that you then 
 despair of ; you have the dignity of your sacred calling - you have the 
 eloquence of the preacher . I can not cope with Mr. Darrell - you can . he 
 have a heart - it can be soften ; he have a soul - it can be free from the 
 wither that tether it down ; he have the virtue you can appeal to ; and 
 he have the pride which you , as a christian minister , have the right to 
 prove to be a sin . I can not argue with he ; I can not reprove the man to 
 whom I owe so much . all rank of man and of mind should be equal to you , 
 the pastor , the divine . you minister of the gospel address yourself 
 unabashed to the poor , the humble , the uninstructed . do Heaven give you 
 power and commandment over these alone ? go , preacher ! go ! speak with the 
 same authority to the great , to the haughty , to the wise ! " the old man 's 
 look and gesture be sublime . 

 the Preacher feel a thrill vibrate from his ear to his heart ; but his 
 reason be less affected than his heart . he shake his head mournfully . 
 the task thus assign to he be beyond the limit which custom 
 prescribe to the priest of the English Church ; - dictation to a man not 
 even of his own flock , upon the close affair of that man 's private 
 hearth and home ! our society allow no such privilege ; and our society 
 be right . 

 Waife , watch his countenance , see at once what be pass in his 
 mind , and resume , as if answer George 's own thought : 

 " ay , if you be but the commonplace priest ! but , you be something 
 more ; you be the priest specially endow for all special purpose of 
 good . you have the mind to reason - the tongue to persuade - the majestic 
 earnestness of impassioned zeal . nor be you here the priest alone ; you 
 be here the friend , the confidant , of all for whom you may exert your 
 power . oh , George Morley , I be a poor ignorant blunderer when presume 
 to exhort you as Christian minister ; but in your own word - I address 
 you as man and gentleman , you declare that ' think and zeal should not 
 stammer whenever I say , keep your promise . ' I say it now - keep faith to 
 the child you swear to I to befriend ! " 

 " I will go - and at once , " say George , rise . " but be not sanguine . 
 I see not a chance of success . a man so superior to myself in year , 
 station , ability , repute ! " 

 " where would be Christianity , " say Waife , " if the early preacher 
 have raise such question ? there be a soldier 's courage - be there not a 
 priest 's ? " 

 George make no answer , but , with abstracted eye , gather brow , and 
 slow , meditative step , quit the room , and seek Guy Darrell . 




 BOOK XII . 




 CHAPTER I. 

  the MAN of the world shows MORE indifference to the thing and 
  DOCTRINES of the world than might be suppose . - but he vindicate 
  his character , which might otherwise be jeopardised , by THE 
  ADROITNESS with which , have resolve to ROAST CHESTNUTS in the 
  ASHES of another MAN 'S HEARTH , he handle they when hottest by the 
  PROXY of a - CAT 'S PAW . 

 in the letter which George tell Waife he have receive from his uncle , 
 George have an excuse for the delicate and arduous mission he undertake , 
 which he do not confide to the old man , lest it should convey more 
 hope than its nature justify . in this letter , Alban relate , with a 
 degree of feeling that he rarely manifest , his farewell conversation 
 with Lionel , who have just depart to join his new regiment . the poor 
 young man have buoy himself up with delighted expectation of the 
 result of Sophy 's prolonged residence under Darrell 's roof ; he have 
 persuade his reason that when Darrell have be thus enable to see and 
 judge of she for himself , he would be irresistibly attract towards 
 she ; that Innocence , like truth , would be mighty and prevail ; Darrell 
 be engage in the attempt to clear William Losely 's name and blood from 
 the taint of felony ; - Alban be commission to negotiate with Jasper 
 Losely on any term that would remove all chance of future disgrace 
 from that quarter . oh yes ! to poor Lionel 's eye obstacle vanish - the 
 future become clear . and thus , when , after tell he of his final 
 interview with the Minister , Darrell say , " I trust that , in bring 
 to William Losely this intelligence , I shall at least soften his 
 disappointment , when I make it thoroughly clear to he how impossible it 
 be that his Sophy can ever be more to I - to we - than a stranger whose 
 virtue create an interest in her welfare " - Lionel be stun as by a 
 blow . scarcely could he murmur : 

  " you have see she - and your resolve remain the same . " 

 " can you doubt it ? " answer Darrell , as if in surprise . " the resolve 
 may now give I pain on my account , as before it give I pain on your . 
 but if not move by your pain , can I be move by mine ? that would be a 
 baseness . " the Colonel , in depict Lionel 's state of mind after 
 the young soldier have write his farewell to Waife , and previous to 
 quit London , express very gloomy foreboding . " I do not say , " 
 write he , " that Lionel will guiltily seek death in the field , nor do 
 death there come more to those who seek than to those who shun it ; 
 but he will go upon a service expose to more than ordinary suffering , 
 privation , and disease - without that rallying power of hope - that will , 
 and Desire to Live , which constitute the true stamina of Youth . and 
 I have always set a black mark upon those who go into war joyless and 
 despondent . send a young fellow to the camp with his spirit break , his 
 heart heavy as a lump of lead , and the first of those epidemic , which 
 thin rank more than the cannon , say to itself , ' there be a man 
 for I ! ' any doctor will tell you that , even at home , the gay and 
 light - hearted walk safe through the pestilence , which settle on the 
 moping as malaria settle on a marsh . Confound Guy Darrell 's ancestor , 
 they have spoil Queen Victoria as good a young soldier as ever wear 
 a sword by his side ! six month ago , and how blithely Lionel Haughton 
 look forth to the future ! - all laurel ! - no cypress ! and now I feel as 
 if I have shake hand with a victim sacrifice by Superstition to 
 the tomb of the dead . I can not blame darrell : I dare say in the same 
 position I might do the same . but no ; on second thought , I should not . 
 if Darrell do not choose to marry and have son of his own , he have no 
 right to load a poor boy with benefit , and say : ' there be but one way 
 to prove your gratitude ; remember my ancestor , and be miserable for the 
 rest of your day ! ' Darrell , forsooth , intend to leave to Lionel the 
 transmission of the old Darrell name ; and the old Darrell name must 
 not be tarnish by the marriage on which Lionel have unluckily set his 
 heart ! I respect the old name ; but it be not like the House of Vipont - a 
 British Institution . and if some democratical cholera , which do not 
 care a rush for old name , carry off Lionel , what become of the old 
 name then ? Lionel be not Darrell 's son ; Lionel need not perforce take 
 the old name . let the young man live as Lionel Haughton , and the old 
 name die with Guy Darrell ! 

 " as to the poor girl 's birth and parentage , I believe we shall never 
 know they . I quite agree with Darrell that it will be wise never to 
 inquire . but I dismiss , as farfetched and improbable , his supposition 
 that she be Gabrielle Desmaret 's daughter . to I it be infinitely more 
 likely , either that the deposition of the nurse , which poor Willy give 
 to Darrell , and which Darrell show to I , be true   only that Jasper 
 be connive at the temporary suspension of his child 's existence while 
 it suit his purpose   - or that , at the bad , this mysterious young 
 lady be the daughter of the artiste . in the former supposition , as I 
 have say over and over again , a marriage between Lionel and Sophy 
 be precisely that which darrell should desire ; in the latter case , of 
 course , if Lionel be the head of the House of Vipont , the idea of such 
 an union would be inadmissible . but Lionel , entre nous , be the son of 
 a ruin spendthrift by a linen - draper 's daughter . and Darrell have but 
 to give the handsome young couple five or six thousand a year , and I 
 know the world well enough to know that the world will trouble itself 
 very little about their pedigree . and really Lionel should be leave 
 wholly free to choose whether he prefer a girl whom he love with his 
 whole heart , five or six thousand a year , happiness , and the chance of 
 honour in a glorious profession to which he will then look with 
 glad spirit - or a life - long misery , with the right , after Darrell 's 
 death - that I hope will not be these thirty year - to bear the name of 
 Darrell instead of Haughton ; which , if I be the last of the Haughtons , 
 and have any family pride - as , thank Heaven I have not - would be a 
 painful exchange to I ; and dearly buy by the addition of some 
 additional thousand a year , when I have grow perhaps as little dispose 
 to spend they as Guy Darrell himself be . but , after all , there be one 
 I compassionate even more than young Haughton . my morning rid of late 
 have be much in the direction of Twickenham , visit our fair cousin 
 Lady Montfort . I go first to lecture she for let these young 
 people see so much of each other . but my anger melt into admiration 
 and sympathy when I find with what tender , exquisite , matchless 
 friendship she have be all the while scheme for Darrell 's happiness ; 
 and with what remorse she now contemplate the sorrow which a friendship 
 so grateful , and a belief so natural , have innocently occasion . that 
 remorse be wear she to death . Dr. F - - - , who attend poor dear 
 Willy , be also attend she ; and he tell I privately that his 
 skill be in vain - that her case baffle he ; and he have very serious 
 apprehension . darrell owe some consideration to such a friend . and to 
 think that here be life permanently embitter , if not risk , by the 
 ruthless obstinacy of the well - hearted man I ever meet ! now , though I 
 have already intimate my opinion to Darrell with a candour due to the 
 old and dearest of my friend , yet I have never , of course , in the 
 letter I have write to he or the talk we have have together , speak 
 out so plainly as I do in writing to you . and have thus write , 
 without awe of his grey eye and dark brow , I have half as mind to add 
 ' seize he in a happy moment and show he this letter . ' yes , I give you 
 full leave ; show it to he if you think it would avail . if not , throw 
 it into the fire , and - pray Heaven for those whom we poor mortal can not 
 serve . " 

 on the envelope Alban have add these word : " but of course , before 
 show the enclosed , you will prepare Darrell 's mind to weigh its 
 content . " and probably it be in that curt and simple injunction that 
 the subtle man of the world evince the astuteness of which not a trace 
 be apparent in the body of his letter . 

 Though Alban 's communication have much excite his nephew , yet George have 
 not judge it discreet to avail himself of the permission to show it 
 to Darrell . it seem to he that the pride of his host would take much 
 more offence at its transmission through the hand of a third person 
 than at the frank tone of its reasoning and suggestion . and George 
 have determine to re - enclose it to the Colonel , urge he to forward it 
 himself to Darrell just as it be , with but a brief line to say , " that , 
 on reflection , Alban submit direct to his old school - fellow the 
 reasoning and apprehension which he have so unreservedly pour forth 
 in a letter commence without the intention at which the writer arrive 
 at the close . " but now that the preacher have undertake the duty of an 
 advocate , the letter become his brief . 

 George pass through the library , through the study , up the narrow 
 stair that finally conduct to the same lofty cell in which Darrell 
 have confront the midnight robber who claim a child in Sophy . with a 
 nervous hand George knock at the door . 

 unaccustomed to any intrusion on the part of guest or household in that 
 solitary retreat , somewhat sharply , as if in anger , Darrell 's voice 
 answer the knock . 

 " who be there ? " 

 " George Morley . " 

 Darrell open the door . 




 CHAPTER II . 

  " a good ARCHER be not know by his arrows , but his aim . " " a good 
  MAN be no MORE to be feared than a sheep . " " a good surgeon must 
  have an EAGLE 's EYE , a LION 's heart , and a lady 's hand . " " a good 
  tongue be a good weapon . " and despite those SUGGESTIVE or 
  ENCOURAGING PROVERBS , GEORGE MORLEY have UNDERTAKEN something so 
  opposed to all proverbial philosophy that it become a grave 
  question what he will do with it . 

 " I come , " say George , " to ask you one of the great favour a man can 
 confer upon another ; it will take some little time to explain . be you 
 at leisure ? " 

 Darrell 's brow relaxed . 

 " seat yourself in comfort , my dear George . if it be in my power to serve 
 or to gratify Alban Morley 's nephew , it be I who receive a favour . " 
 Darrell think to himself - " the young man be ambitious - I may aid in 
 his path towards a see ! " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " first let I say that I would consult your intellect 
 on a matter which habitually attract and engage mine - that old vexed 
 question of the origin and use of Evil , not only in the physical , but 
 the moral world ; it involve problem over which I would ponder for 
 hour as a boy - on which I write essay as a schoolman - on which I 
 perpetually collect illustration to fortify my view as a theologian . " 

 " he be write a book , " think Darrell , enviously ; " and a book on such 
 a subject will last he all his life . happy man ! " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " the Pastor , you know , be frequently consult by the 
 suffering and oppress ; frequently call upon to answer that question 
 in which the scepticism of the humble and the ignorant ordinarily 
 begin : ' why be I suffer ? why be I oppress ? be this the justice of 
 Providence ? have the Great Father that benign pity , that watchful care 
 for his child , which you preacher tell we ? ' ever intent on deduce 
 example from the life to which the clue have become apparent , must 
 be the Priest who have to reason with affliction cause by no apparent 
 fault ; and where , judge by the Canons of Human justice , cloud and 
 darkness obscure the Divine - still to ' vindicate the way of God to 
 man . ' " 

 DARRELL . - " a philosophy that precede , and will outlive , all other 
 school . it be twin - bear with the world itself . go on ; though the theme 
 be inexhaustible , its interest never flag . " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " have it strike you , Mr. Darrell , that few life have 
 ever pass under your survey ; in which the inexpressible tenderness of 
 the Omniscient have be more visibly clear than in that of your guest , 
 William Losely ? " 

 DARRELL   surprise . - " clear ? to I , I confess that if ever there be 
 an instance in which the divine tenderness , the Divine justice , which I 
 can never presume to doubt , be yet undiscernible to my bounded vision , 
 it be in the instance of the very life you refer to . I see a man of 
 admirable virtue - of a childlike simplicity of character , which make 
 he almost unconscious of the grandeur of his own soul - involve by 
 a sublime self - sacrifice - by a virtue , not by a fault - in the most 
 dreadful of human calamity - ignominious degradation ; - hurl in the 
 midday of life from the sphere of honest man - a felon 's brand on his 
 name - a vagrant in his age ; justice at last , but tardy and niggard , and 
 give he but little joy when it arrive ; because , ever think only 
 of other , his heart be wrap in a child whom he can not make happy in 
 the way in which his hope have be set ! - George - no , your illustration 
 might be turn by a sceptic into an argument against you . " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " not unless the sceptic refuse the elementary 
 starting - ground from which you and I may reason ; not if it be grant 
 that man have a soul , which it be the object of this life to enrich 
 and develop for another . we know from my uncle what William Losely be 
 before this calamity befell he - a genial boon - companion - a careless , 
 frank , ' good fellow ' - all the virtue you now praise in he dormant , 
 unguesse even by himself . suddenly come CALAMITY ! - suddenly arise the 
 SOUL ! degradation of name , and with it dignity of nature ! how poor , how 
 slight , how insignificant William Losely the hanger - on of rural Thanes 
 compare with that William Waife whose entrance into this house , 
 you - despite that felon 's brand when you know it be the martyr 's 
 glory , - greet with noble reverence ; whom , when the mind itself be 
 stricken down - only the soul leave to the wreck of the body - you tend 
 with such pious care as he lie on - your father 's bed ! and do you , who 
 hold Nobleness in such honour - do you , of all man , tell I that you 
 can not recognise that celestial tenderness which ennoble a Spirit for 
 all eternity ? " 

 " George , you be right , " cry Darrell ; " and I be a blockhead and 
 blunderer , as man always be when he mistake a speck in his telescope 
 for a blotch in the sun of a system . " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " but more difficult it be to recognise the mysterious 
 agency of Heavenly Love when no great worldly adversity force we 
 to pause and question . let Fortune strike down a victim , and even the 
 heathen cry , ' this be the hand of God ! ' but where Fortune bring no 
 vicissitude ; where her wheel run smooth , drop wealth or honour 
 as it roll - where affliction centre its work within the secret , 
 unreveale heart - there , even the wise man may not readily perceive 
 by what mean Heaven be admonish , force , or woo he near to 
 itself . I take the case of a man in whom Heaven acknowledge a favour 
 son . I assume his outward life crown with success , his mind store 
 with opulent gift , his nature endow with lofty virtue ; what an heir 
 to train through the brief school of earth for due place in the age 
 that roll on for ever ! but this man have a parasite weed in each bed of 
 a soul rich in flower ; - weed and flower intertwine , stem with 
 stem - their fibre unite even deep down to the root . 

 " can you not conceive with what untiring vigilant care Heaven will seek 
 to disentangle the flower from the weed ? - how   let I drop inadequate 
 metaphor   - how Heaven will select for its warning chastisement that 
 very error which the man have so blent with his virtue that he hold it 
 a virtue itself ? - how , gradually , slowly , pertinaciously , it will gather 
 this beautiful nature all to itself - insist on a sacrifice it will 
 ask from no other ? to complete the true nature of poor William Losely , 
 Heaven ordain the sacrifice of worldly repute ; to complete the true 
 nature of Guy Darrell , God ordain he the sacrifice of PRIDE ! " 

 Darrell start - half rise ; his eye flash - his cheek pal ; but he 
 remain silent . 

 " I have approach the favour I supplicate , " resume George , draw a 
 deep breath , as of relief . " great favour man can scarcely bestow 
 upon his fellow . I entreat you to believe that I respect , and love , 
 and honour you sufficiently to be for a while so lift up into your 
 friendship that I may claim the privilege , without which friendship 
 be but a form ; - just as no freedom be more obnoxious than intrusion 
 on confidence withhold , so no favour , I repeat , more precious than the 
 confidence which a man of worth vouchsafe to he who invite it with no 
 claim but the loyalty of his motif . " 

 say Darrell , soften , but with stateliness : " all human life be as 
 separate circle ; they may touch at one point in friendly approach , but , 
 even where they touch , each round itself from off the other . with this 
 hint I be content to ask at what point in my circle you would touch ? " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " I thank you gratefully ; I accept your illustration . 
 the point be touch ; I need no other . " he pause a moment , as if 
 concentrate all his thought , and then say , with musing accent : 
 " yes , I accept your illustration ; I will even strengthen the force of 
 the truth imply in it by a more homely illustration of my own . there 
 be small skeleton abridgment of history which we give to child . 
 in such a year a king be crown - a battle be fight ; there be 
 some great disaster , or some great triumph . of the true progress and 
 development of the nation whose record be thus epitomise - of the 
 complicated cause which lead to these salient event - of the animate , 
 varied multitudinous life which have be hurry on from epoch to 
 epoch , the abridgment tell nothing . it be so with the life of each 
 individual man : the life as it stand before we be but a sterile 
 epitome - hide from our sight the emotion which be the People of the 
 Heart . in such a year occur a visible something - a gain - a loss - a 
 success - a disappointment ; the People of the heart crown or depose 
 a king . this be all we know ; and the most voluminous biography 
 ever write must still be a meagre abridgment of all that really 
 individualised and form a man . I ask not your confidence in a single 
 detail or fact in your existence which lie beyond my sight . far from I 
 so curious an insolence ; but I do ask you this : reflect on your past 
 life as a whole , have not your chief sorrow have a common idiosyncrasy ? 
 have they not be strangely direct towards the frustration of some 
 one single object - cherish by your early hope , and , as if in 
 defiance of fate , resolutely clung to even now ? " 

 " it be true , " mutter Darrell . " you do not offend I ; go on ! " 

 " and have not these sorrow , in frustrate your object , often assume , 
 too , a certain uniformity in the weapon they use , in the quarter they 
 harass or invade , almost as if it be a strategic policy that guide 
 they where they could most pain , or humble , or eject a FOE that they 
 be order to storm ? degrade you they could not ; such be not their 
 mission . Heaven leave you intact a kingliness of nature - a loftiness of 
 spirit , unabase by assault level not against yourself , but your 
 pride ; your personal dignity , though singularly sensitive , though 
 bitterly gall , stand proof . what might lower less man , lower 
 not you ; Heaven leave you that dignity , for it belong alike to your 
 intellect and your virtue - but suffer it to be a source of your 
 anguish . why ? because , not content with adorn your virtue , it 
 be cover the fault against which be direct the sorrow . you 
 frown - forgive I . " 

 " you do not transgress , unless it be as a flatterer ! if I frown , it 
 be unconsciously - the sign of thought , not anger . pause ! - my mind have 
 leave you for a moment ; it be look into the past . " 

 the past ! - be it not true ? that home to whose porch come in time the 
 Black Horses , in time just to save from the last bad dishonour , but 
 not save from year rack by each pang that can harrow man 's dignity 
 in each daily assault on the fort of man 's pride ; the sly treacherous 
 daughter - her terrible marriage - the man whose disgrace she have link 
 to her blood , and whose life be still insult and threat to his own . 
 true , what a war upon Pride ! and even in that secret and fatal love 
 which have be of all his grief the most influential and enduring , have 
 his pride be less bitterly wound , and that pride less enthroned in 
 his being , would his grief have be so relentless , his attempt at 
 its conquest so vain ? and then , even now - what be it say , " I can 
 bless ? " - holy LOVE ! what be it say , " but not pardon " ? - stern PRIDE ! 
 and so onto these last revolution of sterile life . be he not miserable 
 in Lionel 's and Sophy 's misery ? forlorn in that Citadel of Pride - close 
 round and invest with sorrow - and the last hope that have flee to the 
 fortress , slay in defence of its outwork . with hand shade his face , 
 Darrell remain some minute silent . at last he raise his head , and 
 his eye be steadfast , his lip firm . 

 " George Morley , " say he , " I acknowledge much justice in the censure you 
 have convey , with so artful a delicacy that , if it fail to reform , it 
 can not displease , and leave much to be seriously revolve in solitary 
 self - commune . but though I may own that pride be not make for man , and 
 that in the blindness of human judgment I may often have confound 
 pride with duty , and suffer for the mistake , yet that one prevail 
 object of my life , which with so startling a truth you say it have 
 please Heaven to frustrate , I can not hold an error in itself . you have 
 learn enough from your uncle , see enough of I yourself , to know what 
 that object have be . you be scholar enough to concede to I that it 
 be no ignoble homage which either nation or person render to the 
 ancestral Dead - that homage be an instinct in all but vulgar and sordid 
 nature . have a man no ancestry of his own - rightly and justly , if 
 himself of worth , he appropriate to his lineage all the hero , and 
 bard , and patriot of his fatherland ! a free citizen have ancestor 
 in all the glorious chief that have adorn the State , on the sole 
 condition that he shall revere their tomb and guard their memory as 
 a son ! and thus , whenever they who speak trumpet - tongue to grand 
 democracy would rouse some quail generation to heroic deed or 
 sacrifice , they appeal in the name of Ancestors , and call upon the 
 living to be worthy of the dead ! that which be so laudable - nay , so 
 necessary a sentiment in the mass , can not be a fault that anger Heaven 
 in the man . like all high sentiment , it may compel harsh and rugged 
 duty ; it may need the stern suppression of many a gentle impulse - of 
 many a pleasing wish . but we must regard it in its merit and consistency 
 as a whole . and if , my eloquent and subtle friend , all you have hitherto 
 say be design but to wind into plea for the same cause that I have 
 already decide against the advocate in my own heart which side with 
 Lionel 's generous love and yon fair girl 's ingenuous and touching grace , 
 let we break up the court ; the judge have no choice but the law which 
 imperiously govern his judgment . " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " I have not hitherto presume to apply to particular 
 case the general argument you so indulgently allow I to urge in 
 favour of my theory , that in the world of the human heart , when closely 
 examine , there be the same harmony of design as in the external 
 universe ; that in Fault and in Sorrow be the axiom , and problem , and 
 postulate of a science . bear with I a little long if I still pursue 
 the same course of reasoning . I shall not have the arrogance to argue a 
 special instance - to say , ' this you should do , this you should not do . ' 
 all I would ask be , leave to proffer a few more suggestion to your own 
 large and candid experience . " 

 say Darrell , irresistibly allure on , but with a tinge of his grave 
 irony : " you have the true genius of the pulpit , and I concede to you its 
 right . I will listen with the wish to profit - the more susceptible of 
 conviction because free from the necessity to reply . " 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " you vindicate the object which have be the main 
 ambition of your life . you say ' not an ignoble object . ' truly ! ignoble 
 object be not for you . the question be , be there not object nobler , 
 which should have attain high value , and lead to large result in 
 the soul which Providence assign to you ; be not the proper place of 
 the object you vindicate that of an auxiliary - a subordinate , rather 
 than that of the all - direct , self - suffice leader and autocrat 
 of such various power of mind ? I picture you to myself - a lone , 
 bold - hearted boy - in this ancient hall , amidst these primitive 
 landscape , in which old association be so little disturb by the 
 modern - in which the wild turf of waste land , vanish deep into maze 
 of solemn wood , lend the scene to dream of go day - bring adventure 
 and Knighthood , and all the poetical colour of Old , to unite the homage 
 due to the ancestral dead with the future ambition of life ; - image full 
 of interest and of pathos - a friendless child of a race more beloved 
 for its decay , look dauntless on to poverty and toil , with that 
 conviction of power which be bear of collect purpose and earnest will ; 
 and record his secret vow that singlehande he will undo the work 
 of destroy age , and restore his line to its place of honour in the 
 land ! " 

 George pause , and tear stand in Darrell 's eye . 

 " yes , " resume the scholar - " yes , for the child , for the youth , for 
 the man in his first dare stride into the Action of Life , that object 
 command our respectful sympathy . 

 " but wait a few year . have that object expand ? have it lead on into 
 object embrace humanity ? remain it alone and sterile in the bosom of 
 successful genius ? or be it prolific and fruitful of grander design - of 
 more widespreading us ? make genius successful , and all man have the 
 right to say , ' brother , help we ! ' what ! no other object still but to 
 build up a house ! - to recover a line ! what be grand at one stage of an 
 onward career , be narrow and small at another ! ambition limit to the 
 rise of a family ! 

 " can our sympathy still hallow that ? no ! in Guy Darrell 
 successful - that ambition be treason to earth ! mankind be his family 
 now ! THEREFORE Heaven thwart the object which oppose its own end 
 in create you ! THERFORE childles you stand on your desolate hearth ! 
 THEREFORE , lo ! side by side - yon uncompleted pile - your own uncompleted 
 life ! " 

 Darrell sit dumb . - he be appal ! 

 GEORGE MORLEY . - " have not that object stint your very intellect ? have it 
 not , while baffle in its own centre aim - have it not rob you of the 
 glory which youth crave , and which manhood might have win ? Idolater 
 to the creed of an Ancestor 's name , have your own name that hold on the 
 grateful respect of the Future , which man ever give to that genius whose 
 object be knit with mankind ? suddenly , in the zenith of life , amidst 
 cheer , not of genuine renown , - cheer loud and brief as a mob 's 
 hurrah - calamity , all of which I know not , nor conjecture , interrupt 
 your career ; - and when your own life - long object be arrest , or rather 
 when it be snatch from your eye , your genius renounce all us . fame , 
 ever - during , be before you still , have your object be those for which 
 genius be give . you muse . Heaven permit these rude word to strike 
 home ! Guy Darrell , it be not too late ! Heaven 's warning be always in 
 time . reflect , with the one narrow object be foster and feed the one 
 master failing of Pride . to we as Christians , or as reasoner , it be not 
 in this world that every duty be to find its special meed ; yet by that 
 same mystical law which make Science of Sorrow , reward be but often 
 the normal effect of duty sublimely fulfil . out of your pride and 
 your one - cherish object , have there grow happiness ? have the success 
 which be not deny you achieve the link with posterity that your 
 hand , if not fetter , would long since have forge ? grant that Heaven 
 say ' stubborn child , yield at last to the warning vouchsafe to thee 
 by my love ! from a son so favour and strong I exact the most difficult 
 offering ! Thou hast sacrifice much , but for end not prescribe in my 
 law ; sacrifice now to I the thing thou most clingest to - Pride . I make 
 the pang I demand purposely bitter . I twine round the offering I ask the 
 fibre that bleed in relaxing . what to other man would be no duty , be 
 duty to thee , because it entail a triumphant self - conquest , and pay 
 to Humanity the arrear of just due long neglect . ' grant the hard 
 sacrifice make ; I must think Heaven have end for your joy even here , 
 when it ask you to part with the cause of your sorrow ; - I must think 
 that your evening of life may have sunshine deny to its noon . but with 
 God be no bargain . a virtue , the most arduous because it must trample 
 down what your life have exalt as virtue , be before you ; distasteful , 
 austere , repellant . the most invite argument in its favour be , that 
 it proffer no bribe ; man would acquit you in reject it ; judge by 
 our world 's ordinary rule , man would be right in acquit you . but if 
 on reflection you say in your heart of heart , ' this be a virtue , ' you 
 will follow its noiseless path up to the smile of God ! " 

 the preacher cease . 

 Darrell breathe a long sigh , rise slowly , take George 's hand , press 
 it warmly in both his own , and turn quickly and silently away . he 
 pause in the deep recess where the gleam of the wintry sun shoot through 
 the small casement , aslant and pale on the massive wall : open the 
 lattice he look forth on the old hereditary tree - on the Gothic 
 church - tower - on the dark evergreen that belt his father 's tomb . 
 again he sigh , but this time the sigh have a haughty sound in its 
 abrupt impatience ; and George feel that word write must remain to 
 strengthen and confirm the effect of word speak . he have at least 
 obey his uncle 's wise injunction - he have prepare Darrell 's mind to 
 weigh the content of a letter , which , give in the first instance , 
 would perhaps have render Darrell 's resolution not less stubborn , by 
 increase the pain to himself which the resolution already inflict . 

 Darrell turn and look towards George , as if in surprise to see he 
 still linger there . 

 " I have now but to place before you this letter from my uncle to myself ; 
 it enter into those detail which it would have ill become I specially 
 to discuss . remember , I entreat you , in read it , that it be write 
 by your old friend - by a man who have no dull discrimination in the 
 perplexity of life or the nicety of honour . " 

 Darrell bow his head in assent , and take the letter . George be about 
 to leave the room . 

 " stay , " say Darrell , " ' tis good to have but one interview - one 
 conversation on the subject which have be just enforce on I ; and 
 the letter may need a comment or a message to your uncle . " he stand 
 hesitating , with the letter open in his hand ; and , fix his keen eye 
 on George 's pale and powerful countenance , say : " how be it that , with 
 an experience of mankind which you will pardon I for assume to be 
 limited , you yet read so wondrously the complicated human heart ? " 

 " if I really have that gift , " say George , " I will answer your question 
 by another : be it through experience that we learn to read the human 
 heart - or be it through sympathy ? if it be experience , what become of 
 the Poet ? if the Poet be bear , not make , be it not because he be bear to 
 sympathise with what he have never experience ? " 

 " I see ! there be bear preacher ! " 

 Darrell reseat himself , and begin Alban 's letter . he be evidently 
 move by the Colonel 's account of Lionel 's grief , mutter to himself , 
 " poor boy ! - but he be brave - he be young . " when he come to Alban 's 
 foreboding on the effect of dejection upon the stamina of life , he 
 press his hand quickly against his breast as if he have receive a 
 shock ! he muse a while before he resume his task ; then he read rapidly 
 and silently till his face flush , and he repeat in a hollow tone , 
 inexpressibly mournful : " let the young man live , and the old name die 
 with Guy Darrell . ay , ay ! see how the world side with Youth ! what 
 matter all else so that Youth have its toy ! " again his eye hurry on 
 impatiently till he come to the passage devote to Lady Montfort ; then 
 George see that the paper tremble violently in his hand and that his 
 very lip grow white . " ' serious apprehension , ' " he mutter . " I owe 
 ' consideration to such a friend . ' this man be without a heart ! " 

 he clench the paper in his hand without read far . " leave I 
 this letter , George ; I will give an answer to that and to you before 
 night . " he catch up his hat as he speak , pass into the lifeless 
 picture - gallery , and so out into the open air . George , dubious and 
 anxious , gain the solitude of his own room , and lock the door . 




 CHAPTER III . 

  AT last the great question by torture be fairly apply to GUY 
  DARRELL . 

 what will he do with it ? what will Guy Darrell do with the thought 
 that weigh on his brain , rankle in his heart , perplex his dubious 
 conscience ? what will he do with the Law which have govern his past 
 life ? what will he do with that shadow of a name which , alike in 
 swarm crowd or in lonely burial - place , have spell his eye and 
 lure his step as a beckoning ghost ? what will he do with the PRIDE from 
 which the mask have be so rudely tear ? what will he do with idol so 
 long revere ? be they idol , or be they but symbol and image of holy 
 truth ? what will he do with the torturing problem , on the solution of 
 which depend the honour due to consecrated ash , and the right due to 
 beat heart ? there , restless he go , the arrow of that question in 
 his side - now through the broad waste land - now through the dim wood , 
 pause oft with short quick sigh , with hand sweep across his brow as 
 if to clear away a cloud ; - now snatch from our sight by the evergreen 
 round the tomb in that still churchyard - now emerge slow , with 
 melancholy eye fix on the old roof - tree ! what will he do with it ? the 
 Question of Questions , in which all futurity be open , have he on its 
 rack . what will he do with it ? let we see . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

  Immunis aram si tetigit manu , 
  Non sumptuosa blandior hostia , 
  Mollivit aversa Penates , 
  Farre pio et saliente mica . - HORAT . 

 it be the grey of the evening . Fairthorn be saunter somewhat sullenly 
 along the bank of the lake . he have miss , the last three day , his 
 walk with Sophy - miss the pleasing excitement of talk at she , and 
 of the family in whose obsolete glory he consider her very interest 
 an obtrusive impertinence . he have miss , too , his more habitual and 
 less irritate conversation with Darrell . in short , altogether he be 
 put out , and he vent his spleen on the swan , who follow he along the 
 wave as he walk along the margin , intimate either their affection for 
 himself , or their anticipation of the bread - crumb associate with his 
 image - by the amiable note , half snort and half grunt , to which change 
 of time or climate have reduce the vocal accomplishment of those 
 classical bird , so pathetically melodious in the age of Moschus and on 
 the bank of Cayster . 

 " not a crumb , you unprincipled beggar , " growl the musician . " you 
 imagine that mankind be to have no other thought but that of supply 
 you with luxury ! and if you be ask , in a competitive examination , 
 to define ME , your benefactor , you would say : ' a thing very low in the 
 scale of creation , without wing or even feather , but which providence 
 endow with a peculiar instinct for afford nutritious and palatable 
 addition to the ordinary aliment of Swans ! ' ay , you may grunt ; I wish I 
 have you - in a pie ! " 

 slowly , out through the gap between yon grey crag and the thorn - tree , 
 pace the doe , halt to drink just where the faint star of eve shoot 
 its gleam along the wave . the musician forget the swan and quicken 
 his pace , expect to meet the doe 's wonte companion . he be not 
 disappointed . he come on Guy Darrell where the twilight shadow fall 
 darkest between the grey crag and the thorn - tree . 

 " Dear Fellow Hermit , " say Darrell , almost gaily , yet with more than 
 usual affection in his greeting and voice , " you find I just when I want 
 you . I be as one whose eye have be strain by a violent conflict 
 of colour , and your quiet presence be like the relief of a return to 
 green . I have news for you , Fairthorn . you , who know more of my secret 
 than any other man , shall be the first to learn a decision that must 
 bind you and I more together - but not in these scene , Dick . 

  ' Ibimus - ibimus ! 
  - - - - - - - - - - Supremum 
  Carpere iter , comite , parati ! ' " 

 " what do you mean , sir ? " ask Fairthorn . " my mind always misgive I 
 when I hear you quote Horace . some reflection about the certainty of 
 death , or other disagreeable subject , be sure to follow ! " 

 " death ! no , Dick - not now . marriage - bell and joy , Dick ! we shall have a 
 wedding ! " 

 " what ! you will marry at last ! and it must be that beautiful Caroline 
 Lyndsay ! it must - it must ! you can never love another ! you know it , my 
 dear , dear master . I shall see you , then , happy before I die . " 

 " tut , foolish old friend ! " say Darrell , lean his aria tenderly on 
 Fairthorn 's shoulder , and walk on slowly towards the house . " how 
 often must I tell you that no marriage - bell can ring for I ! " 

 " but you have tell I , too , that you go to Twickenham to steal a sight 
 of she again ; and that it be the sight of she that make you resolve to 
 we d no one else . and when I have rail against she for fickleness , have 
 you not nearly frighten I out of my wit , as if no one might rail 
 against she but yourself ? and now she be free - and do you not grant 
 that she would not refuse your hand , and would be true and faithful 
 henceforth ? and yet you insist on be - granite . " 

 " no , Dick , not granite ; I wish I be . " 

 " Granite and pride , " persist Dick , courageously . " if one chip a bit 
 off the granite , one only break one 's spade against the pride . " 

 " Pride - you too ! " mutter Darrell , mournfully ; then aloud : " no , it be 
 not pride now , whatever it might have be even yesterday . but I 
 would rather be rack by all the torture that pious inquisitor ever 
 invent out of compassion for obstinate heretic , than condemn the 
 woman I have so fatally love to a penance the misery of which she 
 can not foresee . she would accept I ? - certainly ! why ! because she think 
 she owe I reparation - because she pity I . and my heart tell I 
 that I might become cruel , and mean , and vindictive , if I be to live 
 day by day with one who create in I , while my life be at noon , a love 
 never know in its morn , and to feel that that love 's sole return be 
 the pity vouchsafe to the nightfall of my age . no ; if she pity , 
 but do not love I , when , eighteen year ago , we part under yonder 
 beech - tree , I should be a dotard to dream that woman 's pity mellow into 
 love as our lock become grey , and Youth turn our vow into ridicule . 
 it be not pride that speak here ; it be rather humility , Dick . but we 
 must not now talk of old age and bygone . youth and marriage - bell , 
 Dick ! know that , I have be for hour ponder how to reconcile with 
 my old - fashioned notion dear Lionel 's happiness . we must think of the 
 living as well as the dead , Dick . I have solve the problem . I be happy , 
 and so shall the young folk be . " 

 " you do not   mean to say that you will consent to - " 

 " yes , to Lionel 's marriage with that beautiful girl , whose parentage 
 we never will ask . great man be their own ancestor ; why not sometimes 
 fair woman ? enough - I consent ! I shall of course secure to my kinsman 
 and his bride an ample fortune . Lionel will have time for his honeymoon 
 before he depart for the war . he will fight with good heart now , Dick . 
 young folk of the present day can not bear up against sorrow , as they 
 be train to do in mine . and that amiable lady who have so much pity 
 for I have , of course , still more pity for a charming young couple for 
 whose marriage she scheme , in order to give I a home , Dick . and rather 
 than she should pine and fall ill , and - no matter ; all shall be settle 
 as it should be for the happiness of the living . but something else must 
 be settle ; we must think of the dead as well as the living ; and this 
 name of Darrell shall be bury with I in the grave beside my father 's . 
 Lionel Haughton will keep to his own name . live the Haughtons ! perish , 
 but with no blot on their shield - perish the Darrells ! why , what be 
 that ? Tears , Dick ? Pooh ! - be a man ! and I want all your strength ; for 
 you , too , must have a share in the sacrifice . what follow be not the 
 dictate of pride , if I can read myself aright . no ; it be the final 
 completion and surrender of the object on which so much of my life have 
 be waste - but a surrender that satisfy my crotchet of honour . 
 at all event , if it be pride in disguise , it will demand no victim in 
 other ; you and I may have a sharp pang - we must bear it , Dick . " 

 " what on earth be come now ? " say Dick , dolefully . 

 " the due to the dead , Richara Fairthorn . this nook of fair England , 
 in which I learn from the dead to love honour - this poor domain of 
 Fawley - shall go in bequest to the College at which I be rear . " 

 " Sir ! " 

 " it will serve for a fellowship or two to honest , bravehearte young 
 scholar . it will be thus , while english institution may last , devote 
 to Learning and Honour . it may sustain for mankind some ambition more 
 generous than mine , it appear , ever be - settle thus , not in mine , but 
 my dear father 's name , like the Darrell Museum . these be my due to the 
 dead , Dick ! and the old house thus become useless . the new house be 
 ever a folly . they must go down , both , as soon as the young folk be 
 married ; - not a stone stand on stone ! the ploughshare shall pass over 
 their site ! and this task I order you to see do . I have not strength . 
 you will then hasten to join I at Sorrento , that corner of earth on 
 which Horace wish to breathe his last sigh . 

  ' Ille to mecum locus et beatae 
  Postulant arce - ibi - tu ' " 

 " do not , sir , do not . Horace again ! it be too much . " Fairthorn be 
 choke ; but as if the idea present to he be really too monstrous 
 for belief , he clutch at Darrell with so uncertain and vehement a hand 
 that he almost catch he by the throat , and sob out , " you must be 
 joke . " 

 " seriously and solemnly , Richara Fairthorn , " say Darrell , gently 
 disentangle the finger that threaten he with strangulation , 
 ' seriously and solemnly I have utter to you my deliberate purpose . I 
 implore you , in the name of our life - long friendship , to face this pain 
 as I do - resolutely , cheerfully . I implore you to execute to the letter 
 the instruction I shall leave with you on quit England , which I 
 shall do the day Lionel be marry ; and then , dear old friend , calm 
 day , clear conscience : - in clime where whole race have pass 
 away - proud city themselves sink in graf - where our petty grief for 
 a squirearch 's lost house we shall both grow ashamed to indulge - there 
 we will moralise , rail against vain dream and idle pride , cultivate 
 vine and orange tree , with Horace - nay , nay , Dick - with the FLUTE ! " 




 CHAPTER V. 

  MORE bounteous RUN river when the ice that locked their flow melt 
  into their water . and when fine NATURES RELENT , their kindness be 
  swelled by the THAW . 

 Darrell escape into the house ; Fairthorn sink upon the ground , and 
 resign himself for some minute to unmanly lamentation . suddenly he 
 start up ; a thought come into his brain - a hope into his breast . he 
 make a caper - launch himself into a precipitate zig - zag - gain the 
 hall - door - plunge into his own mysterious hiding - place - and in less than 
 an hour re - emerge , a letter in his hand , with which he have just time 
 to catch the postman , as that functionary be stride off from the back 
 yard with the official bag . 

 this exploit perform , Fairthorn shamble into his chair at the 
 dinner - table , as George Morley conclude the grace which precede the 
 meal that in Fairthorn 's estimation usually make the grand event of the 
 pass day . but the poor man 's appetite be go . as Sophy din with 
 Waife , the Morleys alone share , with host and secretary , the melancholy 
 entertainment . George be no less silent than Fairthorn ; Darrell 's 
 manner perplex he . Mrs. Morley , not admit into her husband 's 
 confidence in secret that concern other , though in all his own he 
 be to her conjugal sight pellucidior vitro , be the chief talker ; 
 and be the good woman in the world , ever wish to say something 
 pleasant , she fall to praise the dear old family picture that scowl 
 at she from the wall , and inform Fairthorn that she have make great 
 progress with her sketch of the old house as see from the lake , and be 
 in doubt whether she should introduce in the foreground some figure of 
 the olden time , as in Nash 's view of Baronial Mansions . but not a 
 word could she coax out of Fairthorn ; and when she turn to appeal to 
 Darrell , the host suddenly address to George a question as to the 
 text and authority by which the Papal Church defend its doctrine 
 of Purgatory . that entail a long and , no doubt , erudite reply , which 
 last not only through the rest of the dinner , but till Mrs. Motley , 
 edify by the discourse , and delight to notice the undeviating 
 attention which Darrell pay to her distinguished spouse , take advantage 
 of the first full stop , and retire . Fairthorn finish his bottle of 
 port , and , far from convinced that there be no purgatory , but incline 
 to advance the novel heresy that Purgatory sometimes commence on this 
 side the grave - slink away , and be see no more that night ; neither 
 be his flute hear . 

 then Darrell rise and say : " I shall go up - stair to our sick friend for 
 a few minute ; may I find you here when I come back ? your visit to he 
 can follow mine . " 

 on enter Waife 's room , Darrell go straight forward towards Sophy , 
 and cut off her retreat . 

 " fair guest , " say he , with a grace and tenderness of manner which , 
 when he please it , could be ineffably bewitch - " teach I some art 
 by which in future rather to detain than to scare away the presence 
 in which a dull age than mine could still recognise the charm 
 that subdue the young . " he lead she back gently to the seat she have 
 desert - place himself next to she - address a few cordial query to 
 Waife about his health and comfort - and then say : " you must not leave 
 I for some day yet . I have write by this post to my kinsman , Lionel 
 Haughton . I have refuse to be his ambassador at a court in which , by 
 all the law of nation , he be bind to submit himself to his conqueror . 
 I can not even hope that he may escape with his freedom . no ! chain 
 for life ! Thrice happy , indeed , if that be the merciful sentence you 
 inflict . " 

 he raise Sophy 's hand to his lip as he end , and before she could 
 even quite comprehend the meaning of his word - so be she startle , 
 confused , incredulous of such sudden change in fate - the door have close 
 on Darrell , and Waife have clasp she to his breast , murmur , " be not 
 Providence kind ? " 

 Darrell rejoin the scholar . " George , " say he , " be kind enough to tell 
 Alban that you show I his letter . be kind enough also to write to 
 Lady Montfort , and say that I gratefully acknowledge her wish to repair 
 to I those loss which have leave I to face age and the grave alone . 
 tell she that her old friend   you remember , George , I know she as a 
 child   see in that wish the same sweet goodness of heart which soothe 
 he when his son die and his daughter flee . add that her wish be 
 gratify . to that marriage in which she compassionately foresaw the 
 good solace leave to my bereaved and baffled existence - to that marriage 
 I give my consent . " 

 " you do ! oh , Mr. Darrell , how I honour you ! " 

 " Nay , I no more deserve honour for consent than I should have 
 deserve contempt if I have continue to refuse . to do what I deem 
 right be not more my wish now than it be twelve hour ago . to what so 
 sudden a change of resolve , in one who change resolve very rarely , 
 may be due , whether to Lady Montfort , to Alban , or to that metaphysical 
 skill with which you wound into my reason , and compel I to review 
 all its judgment , I do not attempt to determine ; yet I think I have 
 no option but the course I have take . no ; it be fair to yourself to give 
 you the chief credit ; you make I desire , you make I resolve , to find 
 an option - I have find one . and now pay your visit where mine have 
 be just pay . it will be three day , I suppose , before Lionel , have 
 join his new regiment at       , can be here . and then it will be 
 week yet , I believe , before his regiment sail ; and I be all for short 
 courtship . " 




 CHAPTER VI . 

  FAIRTHORN frightens SOPHY . SIR ISAAC be invite by DARRELL , and 
  form one of a family CIRCLE . 

 such a sweet voice in singing break out from yon leafless beech ! 
 Waife hear it at noon from his window . Hark ! Sophy have find song once 
 more . 

 she be seat on a garden bench , look across the lake towards the 
 gloomy old Manor - house and the tall spectre palace beside it . Mrs. 
 Morley be also on the bench , hard at work on her sketch ; Fairthorn 
 prowl through the thicket behind , wander restless , and wretche , 
 and wrathful beyond all word to describe . he hear that voice singing ; 
 he stop short , perfectly rabid with indignation . " singing , " he 
 mutter , ' sing in triumph , and glower at the very House she 
 doom to destruction . bad than Nero strike his lyre amidst the 
 conflagration of Rome ! " by - and - by Sophy , who somehow or other can not 
 sit long in any place , and tire that day of any companion , wander 
 away from the lake and come right upon Fairthorn . hailing , in her 
 unutterable secret bliss , the musician who have so often join she 
 ramble in the day of unuttered secret sadness , she spring towards he , 
 with welcome and mirth in a face that would have lure Diogenes out of 
 his tub . fairthorn recoil sidelong , growl forth , " do not   - you have 
 well not ! " - grin the most savage grin , show all his tooth like a 
 wolf ; and as she stand , mute with wonder , perhaps with fright , he slunk 
 edgeway off , as if aware of his own murderous inclination , turn 
 his head more than once , and shake it at she ; then , with the wonte 
 mystery which envelop his exit , he be go ! vanish behind a crag , 
 or amidst a bush , or into a hole - Heaven know ; but , like the lady in 
 the Siege of Corinth , who warn the renegade Alp of his approach 
 end , he be " go . " 

 twice again that day Sophy encounter the enraged musician ; each time 
 the same menacing aspect and weird disappearance . 

 " be Mr. Fairthorn ever a little - odd ? " ask Sophy timidly of George 
 Morley . 

 " always , " answer George , dryly . 

 Sophy feel relieve at that reply . whatever be habitual in a man 's 
 manner , however unpleasant , be seldom formidable . still Sophy could not 
 help say : " I wish poor Sir Isaac be here ! " 

 " do you ? " say a soft voice behind she ; " and pray , who be Sir Isaac ? " 

 the speaker be Darrell , who have come forth with the resolute intent to 
 see more of Sophy , and make himself as amiably social as he could . Guy 
 Darrell could never be kind by half . 

 " Sir Isaac be the wonderful dog you have hear I describe , " reply 
 George . 

 " would he hurt my doe if he come here ? " ask Darrell . 

 " oh , no ! " cry Sophy ; " he never hurt anything . he once find a wounded 
 hare , and he bring it in his mouth to we so tenderly , and seem so 
 anxious that we should cure it , which grandfather do , and the hare 
 would sometimes hurt he , but he never hurt the hare . " 

 say George sonorously : 

  " Ingenuas didicisse fideliter arte 
  emollit more , nec sinit esse feros . " 

 Darrell draw Sophy 's arm into his own . " will you walk back to the lake 
 with I , " say he , " and help I to feed the swan ? George , send your 
 servant express for Sir Isaac . I be impatient to make his acquaintance . " 

 Sophy 's hand involuntarily press Darrell 's arm . she look up into his 
 face with innocent , joyous gratitude ; feel at once , and as by magic , 
 that her awe of he be go . 

 Darrell and Sophy ramble thus together for more than an hour . he seek 
 to draw out her mind , unaware to herself ; he succeed . he be strike 
 with a certain simple poetry of thought which pervade her idea - not 
 artificial sentimentality , but a natural tendency to detect in all life 
 a something of delicate or beautiful which lie hide from the ordinary 
 sense . he find , thank to Lady Montfort , that , though far from learn , 
 she be more acquainted with literature than he have suppose . and 
 sometimes he change colour , or breathe his short quick sigh , when he 
 recognise her familiarity with passage in his favourite author which 
 he himself have commend , or read aloud , to the Caroline of old . 

 the next day Waife , who seem now recover as by enchantment , walk 
 forth with George , Darrell again with Sophy . Sir Isaac arrive - immense 
 joy ; the doe butt Sir Isaac , who retreating , stand on his hind leg , 
 and , have possess himself of Waife 's crutch , present fire ; the doe 
 in her turn retreat ; - half an hour afterwards doe and dog be friend . 

 Waife be induce , without much persuasion , to join the rest of the party 
 at dinner . in the evening , all   Fairthorn except   draw round the fire . 
 Waife be entreat by George to read a scene or two out of Shakespeare . 
 he select the latter portion of " King Lear . " Darrell , who never be a 
 playgoer , and who , to his shame be it say , have look very little into 
 Shakespeare since he leave college , be wonderstruck . he himself read 
 beautifully - all great orator , I suppose , do ; but his talent be not 
 mimetic - not imitative ; he could never have be an actor - never throw 
 himself into existence wholly alien or repugnant to his own . Grave or 
 gay , stern or kind , Guy Darrell , though often vary , be always Guy 
 Darrell . 

 but when Waife be once in that magical world of art , Waife be 
 go - nothing leave of he ; - the part live as if there be no actor to 
 it ; - it be the Fool - it be Lear . 

 for the first time Darrell feel what a grand creature a grand actor 
 really be - what a luminous , unconscious critic bring out beauty of 
 which no commentator ever dream ! when the reading be over , talk 
 still flow ; the gloomy old hearth know the charm of a home circle . all 
 start incredulous when the clock strike one . just as Sophy be pass 
 to the door , out from behind the window curtain glare a vindictive , 
 spiteful eye . Fairthorn make a move at she , which ' tis a pity Waife do 
 not see - it would have be a study for Caliban . she utter a little 
 scream . 

 " what be the matter ? " cry the host . 

 " nothing , " say she quickly - far too generous to betray the hostile 
 oddity of the musician . " Sir Isaac be in my way - that be all . " 

 " another evening we must have Fairthorn 's flute , " say Darrell . " what a 
 pity he be not here to - night ! - he would have enjoy such reading - no 
 one more . " 

 say Mrs. Morley , " he be here once or twice during the evening ; but he 
 vanish ! " 

 " vanish seem his forte , " say George . 

 Darrell look annoyed . it be his peculiarity to resent any jest , 
 however slight , against an absent friend ; and at that moment his heart 
 be perhaps more warm towards Dick Fairthorn than to any man live . 
 if he have not determine to be as amiable and mild towards his guest 
 as his nature would permit , probably George might have have the flip of 
 a sarcasm which would have tingle for a month . but as it be , Darrell 
 content himself with say gravely : 

 " no , George ; Fairthorn 's foible be vanish ; his forte be fidelity . if 
 my fortune be to vanish , Fairthorn would never disappear ; and that be 
 more than I would say if I be a king , and Fairthorn - a Bishop ! " 

 after that extraordinary figure of speech , " good - night " be somewhat 
 hastily exchange ; and Fairthorn be leave ; behind the curtain with 
 feeling towards all his master 's guest as little , it be to be hop , 
 like those of a Christian Bishop towards his fellow - creature , as they 
 possibly could be . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

  " Domus et placen Uxor . " 

  FAIRTHORN find nothing placens in the uxor , to WHOM DOMUS be 
  indebted for its destruction . 

 another day ! Lionel be expect to arrive an hour or two after noon . 
 Darrell be in his room - his will once more before he . he have draw up a 
 rough copy of the codicil by which Fawley be to pass away , and the name 
 of Darrell be consign to the care of grateful Learning , link with 
 prize and fellowship ; - a public property - lose for ever to private 
 representative of its sepulchre bearer . preparation for departure 
 from the doom dwelling - house have begin . there be large box on the 
 floor ; and favourite volume - chiefly in science or classic - lie pile 
 beside they for selection . 

 what be really at the bottom of Guy Darrell 's heart ? do he feel 
 reconcile to his decision ? be the virtue of his new self - sacrifice 
 in itself a console reward ? be that cordial urbanity , that cheerful 
 kindness , by which he have be yet more endear himself to his guest , 
 sincere or assume ? as he throw aside his pen , and lean his cheek 
 on his hand , the expression of his countenance may perhaps well answer 
 those question . it have more unmingled melancholy than be habitual to 
 it before , even when in his gloomiest mood ; but it be a melancholy much 
 more soft and subdue ; it be the melancholy of resignation - that of a 
 man who have cease a long struggle - pay his offering to the appeased 
 Nemesis , in cast into the sea the thing that have be to he the 
 dearest . 

 but in resignation , when complete , there be always a strange relief . 
 despite that melancholy , Darrell be less unhappy than he have be for 
 year . he feel as if a suspense have pass - a load be lift from 
 his breast . after all , he have secure , to the good of his judgment , the 
 happiness of the living , and , in relinquish the object to which his 
 own life have be vainly devoted , and immolate the pride attach to 
 it , he have yet , to use his own word , pay his " due to the dead . " no 
 descendant from a Jasper Losely and a Gabrielle Desmarets will sit as 
 mistress of the house in which Loyalty and Honour have garner , with 
 the wreck of fortune , the memory of knightly fame - nor perpetuate the 
 name of Darrell through child whose blood have a source in the sink of 
 infamy and fraud . nor be this consolation that of a culpable pride ; it 
 be buy by the abdication of a pride that have oppose its prejudice 
 to live worth - to live happiness . Sophy would not be punish for 
 sin not her own - Lionel not bar from a prize that earth never 
 might replace . what matter to they a mouldering , old , desolate 
 manor - house - a few hundred of pitiful acre ? their child would not 
 be less bloom if their holiday summer - noon be not shade by those 
 darksome tree - nor less lively of wit if their school theme be 
 sign in the name , not of Darrell , but Haughton . 

 a slight nervous knock at the door . Darrell have summon Fairthorn ; 
 Fairthorn enter . darrell take up a paper ; it contain minute 
 instruction as to the demolition of the two building . the material 
 of the new pile may be dispose of , sell , cart away - anyhow , anywhere . 
 those of the old house be sacred - not a brick to be carry from the 
 precinct around it . no ; from foundation to roof , all to be piously 
 remove - to receive formal interment deep in the still bosom of the 
 little lake , and the lake to be fill up and turf over . the picture 
 and antiquity select for the Darrell Museum be , of course , to be 
 carefully transport to London - warehouse safely till the gift from 
 owner to nation be legally ratify . the picture and article of less 
 value will be send to an auction . but when it come to the old family 
 portrait in the Manorhouse , the old homely furniture , familiarise 
 to sight and use and love from infancy , Darrell be at a loss ; his 
 invention fail . that question be reserve for further consideration . 

 " and why , " say Fairthorn , bluntly and coarsely , urge at least 
 reprieve ; " why , if it must be , not wait till you be no more ? why must 
 the old house be bury before you be ? " 

 " because , " answer Darrell , ' such an order , leave by will , would seem 
 a reproach to my heir ; it would wound Lionel to the quick . do in my 
 lifetime , and just after I have give my blessing on his marriage , I can 
 suggest a thousand reason for an old man 's whim ; and my manner alone 
 will dispel all idea of a covert affront to his charming innocent 
 bride . " 

 " I wish she be hang , with all my heart , " mutter Fairthorn , " come 
 here to do such astonishing mischief ! but , sir , I can not   obey you ; 
 ' tis no use talk . you must get some one else . Parson Morley will do 
 it - with pleasure too , no doubt ; or that hobble old man whom I suspect 
 to be a conjurer . who know but what he may get knock on the head as 
 he be look on with his wicked one eye ; and then there will be an end 
 of he , too , which would be a great satisfaction ! " 

 " Pshaw , my dear Dick ; there be no one else I can ask but you . the Parson 
 would argue ; I have   have enough of his arguing ; and the old man be the 
 last whom my own arguing could deceive . Fiat justitia . " 

 " do not , sir , do not ; you be break my heart - ' tis a shame , sir , " 
 sob the poor faithful rebel . 

 " well , Dick , then I must see it do myself ; and you shall go on first 
 to Sorrento , and hire some villa to suit we . I do not   see why Lionel 
 should not be marry next week ; then the house will be clear . 
 and - yes - it be cowardly in I to shrink . mine be the task . shame on I 
 to yield it to another . go back to thy flute , Dick . 

  ' Neque tibia 
  Euterpe cohibet , nec Polyhymnia 
  Lesboum refugit tendere barbiton ! ' " 

 at that last remorseless shaft from the Horatian quiver , " venenatis 
 gravida sagittis , " Fairthorn could stand ground no long ; there be a 
 shamble - a plunge - and once more the man be vanish . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

  the FLUTE - PLAYER show how LITTLE music HATH power to SOOTHE the 
  SAVAGE BREAST - of a musician . 

 Fairthorn find himself on the very spot in which , more than five year 
 ago , Lionel , sting by Fairthorn 's own incontinent prickle , have be 
 discover by Darrell . there he throw himself on the ground , as the boy 
 have do ; there , like the boy , he brood moodily , bitterly - sore with 
 the world and himself . to that letter , write on the day that Darrell 
 have so shock he , and on which letter he have count as a last 
 forlorn - hope , no answer have be give . in an hour or so , Lionel would 
 arrive ; those hateful nuptial , doom Fawley as the nuptial of Paris 
 and Helen have doom Troy , would be finally arrange . in another week 
 the work of demolition would commence . he never mean to leave Darrell 
 to superintend that work . no ; grumble and refuse as he might till the 
 last moment , he know well enough that , when it come to the point , he , 
 Richard Fairthorn , must endure any torture that could save Guy Darrell 
 from a pang . a voice come sing low through the grove - the patter 
 of foot on the crisp leaf . he look up ; Sir Isaac be scrutinise he 
 gravely - behind Sir Isaac , Darrell 's own doe , lead patiently by Sophy , 
 yes , lend its faithless neck to that female criminal 's destroy 
 hand . he could not bear that sight , which add insult to injury . he 
 scramble up - dart a kick at Sir Isaac - snatch the doe from the 
 girl 's hand , and look she in the face   she - not Sophy , but the doe 
 with a reproach that , if the brute have not be lose to all sense of 
 shame , would have cut she to the heart ; then , turn to Sophy , he say : 
 " no , Miss ! I rear this creature - feed it with my own hand , Miss. I 
 give it up to Guy Darrell , Miss ; and you shall not   steal this from he , 
 whatever else you may do , Miss. " 

 SOPHY . - " indeed , Mr. Fairthorn , it be for Mr. Darrell 's sake that I 
 wish to make friend with the doe - as you would with poor Sir Isaac , 
 if you would but try and like I - a little , only a very little , Mr. 
 Fairthorn . " 

 FAIRTHORN . - " do not ! " 

 SOPHY . - " do not   what ? I be so sorry to see I have annoy you somehow . 
 you have not be the same person to I the last two or three day . tell 
 I what I have do wrong ; scold I , but make it up . " 

 FAIRTHORN . - " do not   holdout your hand to I ! do not   be smile in my face ! 
 I do not   choose it ! get out of my sight ! you be stand between I and 
 the old house - rob I even of my last look at the home which you - " 

 SOPHY . - " which I - what ? " 

 FAIRTHORN . - " do not , I say , do not   - do not   tempt I . you have well not ask 
 question - that be all . I shall tell you the truth ; I know I shall ; my 
 tongue be itch to tell it . please to walk on . " 

 despite the grotesque manner and astounding rudeness of the 
 flute - player , his distress of mind be so evident - there be something 
 so genuine and earnest at the bottom of his ludicrous anger - that Sopby 
 begin to feel a vague presentiment of evil . that she be the mysterious 
 cause of some great suffering to this strange enemy , whom she have 
 unconsciously provoke , be clear ; and she say , therefore , with more 
 gravity than she have before evince : 

 " Mr. Fairthorn , tell I how I have incur your displeasure , I entreat 
 you to do so ; no matter how painful the truth may be , it be due to we 
 both not to conceal it . " 

 a ray of hope dart through Fairthorn 's enraged and bewildered mind . he 
 look to the right - he look to the left ; no one near . release his 
 hold on the doe , he make a sidelong dart towards Sophy , and say : " hush ; 
 do you really care what become of Mr. Darrell ? " 

 " to be sure I do . " 

 " you would not wish he to die break - hearted in a foreign land - that 
 old house level to the ground and bury in the lake ? eh , Miss - eh ? " 

 " how can you ask I such question ? " say Sophy , faintly . " do speak 
 plainly , and at once . " 

 " well , I will , Miss. I believe you be a good young lady , after all - and 
 do not   wish really to bring disgrace upon all who want to keep you in the 
 dark , and - " 

 " Disgrace ! " interrupt Sopby ; and her pure spirit rise , and the soft 
 blue eye flash a ray like a shooting - star . 

 " no , I be sure you would not like it ; and some time or other you could 
 not help know , and you would be very sorry for it . and that boy 
 Lionel , who be as proud as Guy Darrell himself when I see he last 
  prouder indeed   - that he should be so ungrateful to his benefactor ! 
 and , indeed , the day may come when he may turn round on you , or on the 
 lame old gentleman , and say he have be disgrace . should not wonder at 
 all ! young folk when they be sweet - hearte only talk about rose and 
 angel , and such - like ; but when husband and wife fall out , as they 
 always do soon or later , they do not   mince their word then , and they 
 just take the sharp thing that they can find at their tongue 's end . 
 so you may depend on it , my dear Miss , that some day or other that young 
 Haughton will say , ' that you lose he the old Manor - house and the old 
 Darrell name , ' and have be his disgrace ; that be the very word , Miss ; I 
 have hear husband and wife say it to each other over and over again . " 

 SOPHY . - " oh , Mr. Fairthorn ! Mr. Fairthorn ! these horrid word can not be 
 mean for I . I will go to Mr. Darrell - I will ask he how I can be a 
 dis - " her lip could not force out the word . 

 FAIRTHORN . - " ay ; go to Mr. Darrell , if you please . he will deny it all ; 
 he will never speak to I again . I do not   care - I be reckless . but it be 
 not the less true that you make he an exile because you may make I a 
 beggar . " 

 SOPHY   wring her hand . - " have you no mercy , Mr. Fairthorn ? will you 
 not explain ? " 

 FAIRTHORN . - " yes , if you will promise to keep it secret at least for the 
 next six month - anything for breathing - time . " 

 SOPHY   impatiently . - " I promise , I promise ; speak , speak . " 

 and then Fairthorn do speak ! he do speak of Jasper Losely - his 
 character - his debasement - even of his midnight visit to her host 's 
 chamber . he do speak of the child fraudulently seek to be thrust 
 on Darrell - of Darrell 's just indignation and loathing . the man be 
 merciless ; though he have not an idea of the anguish he be inflict , 
 he be vent his own anguish . all the mystery of her past life become 
 clear at once to the unhappy girl - all that have be keep from she 
 by protect love . all her vague conjecture now become a dreadful 
 certainty ; - explain now why Lionel have flee she - why he have write 
 that letter , over the content of which she have ponder , with she 
 finger on her lip , as if to hush her own sigh - all , all ! she marry 
 Lionel now ! impossible ! she bring disgrace upon he in return for 
 such generous , magnanimous affection ! she drive his benefactor , her 
 grandsire 's vindicator , from his own hearth ! she - she - that Sophy who , 
 as a mere infant , have recoil from the thought of playful subterfuge 
 and tampering with plain honest truth ! she rise before Fairthorn have 
 do ; indeed , the tormentor , leave to himself , would not have cease till 
 nightfall . 

 " fear not , Mr. Fairthorn , " she say , resolutely ; " Mr. Darrell will be 
 no exile ! his house will not be destroy . Lionel Haughton shall not we d 
 the child of disgrace ! fear not , sir ; all be safe ! " 

 she shed not a tear ; nor be there writ on her countenance that CHANGE , 
 speak of blighted hope , which have pass over it at her young lover 's 
 melancholy farewell . no , now she be support - now there be a virtue 
 by the side of a sorrow - now love be to shelter and save the beloved 
 from disgrace - from disgrace ! at that thought , disgrace fall harmless 
 from herself , as the rain from the plume of a bird . she pass on , her 
 cheek glowing , her form erect . 

 by the porch - door she meet Waife and the Morleys . with a kind of wild 
 impetuosity she seize the old man 's arm , and draw it fondly , clingingly 
 within her own . henceforth they two be to be , as in year go by , all 
 in all to each other . George Morley eye her countenance in thoughtful 
 surprise . Mrs. Morley , bent as usual on say something seasonably 
 kind , burst into an eulogium on her brilliant colour . so they pass on 
 towards the garden side of the house . Wheels - the tramp of hoof , 
 full gallop ; and George Morley , look up , exclaim : " ha ! here come 
 Lionel ! and see , Darrell be hasten out to welcome he ! " 




 CHAPTER IX . 

  the letter on which RICHARD FAIRTHORN relied for the defeat of the 
  CONSPIRACY against FAWLEY MANOR - HOUSE . bad aspect for house . the 
  HOUSE of vipont be THREATENED . a physician attempts to MEDICINE to 
  a MIND diseased . a strange COMMUNICATION , which hurry the reader 
  ONTO the next chapter . 

 it have be say that Fairthorn have commit to a certain letter 
 his last desperate hope that something might yet save Fawley from 
 demolition , and himself and his master from an exile 's home in that 
 smile nook of earth to which Horace invite Septimius , as unite 
 the advantage of a mild climate , excellent mutton , capital wine ; and 
 afford to Septimius the prospective privilege of sprinkle a tear 
 over the cinder of his poetical friend while the cinder be yet warm ; 
 inducement which have no charm at all to Fairthorn , who be quite 
 satisfied with the Fawley southdown - hold in just horror all 
 wishy - washy light wine - and have no desire to see Darrell reduce to a 
 cinder for the pleasure of sprinkling that cinder with a tear . 

 the letter in question be address to Lady Montfort . unscrupulously 
 violate the sacred confidence of his master , the treacherous wretch , 
 after accuse she , in language little more consistent with the respect 
 due to the fair sex than that which he have address to Sophy , of all 
 the desolation that the perfidious nuptial of Caroline Lyndsay have 
 bring upon Guy Darrell , declare that the least Lady Montfort could do 
 to repair the wrong inflict by Caroline Lyndsay , be - not to pity his 
 master ! - that her pity be kill he . he repeat , with some grotesque 
 comment of his own , but on the whole not inaccurately , what Darrell 
 have say to he on the subject of her pity . he then inform she of 
 Darrell 's consent to Lionel 's marriage with Sophy ; in which criminal 
 espousal it be clear , from Darrell 's word , that Lady Montfort have have 
 some nefarious share . in the most lugubrious colour he bring before 
 she the consequence of that marriage - the extinguished name , the 
 demolish dwelling - place , the renunciation of native soil itself . he 
 call upon she , by all that be sacred , to contrive some mean to undo 
 the terrible mischief she have originally occasion , and have recently 
 help to complete . his epistle end by an attempt to conciliate and 
 coax . he revive the image of that wild Caroline Lyndsay , to whom he 
 have never refuse a favour ; whose early sum he have assist to cast 
 up - to whose young idea he have communicate the elementary principle 
 of the musical gamut - to whom he have play on his flute , winter eve 
 and summer noon , by the hour together ; that Caroline Lyndsay , who when 
 a mere child , have lead Guy Darrell where she will , as by a thread of 
 silk . ah , how Fairthorn have leap for joy when , eighteen year ago , he 
 have think that Caroline Lyndsay be to be the sunshine and delight of 
 the house to which she have live to bring the cloud and the grief ! and 
 by all these memory , Fairthorn conjure she either to break off the 
 marriage she have evidently help to bring about , or , fail that , to 
 convince Guy Darrell that he be not the object of her remorseful and 
 affectionate compassion . 

 Caroline be almost beside herself at the receipt of this letter . the 
 picture of Guy Darrell efface his very life from his native land , 
 and destroy the last memorial of his birthright and his home - the 
 conviction of the influence she still retain over his bleak and 
 solitary existence - the experience she have already acquire that the 
 influence fail where she have so fondly hop it might begin to repair 
 and to bless , all overpower she with emotion of yearn tenderness 
 and unmitigated despair . what could she do ? she could not offer herself , 
 again to be reject . she could not write again , to force her penitence 
 upon the man who , while acknowledge his love to be unconquere , have 
 so resolutely refuse to see , in the woman who have once deceive his 
 trust - the Caroline of old ! alas , if he be but under the delusion that 
 her pity be the substitute and not the companion of love , how could she 
 undeceive he ? how say - how write - " accept I , for I love you . " caroline 
 Montfort have no pride of rank , but she have pride of sex ; that pride have 
 be call forth , encouraged , strengthen , throughout all the year 
 of her wed life . for Guy Darrell 's sake , and to he alone , that pride 
 she have cast away - trample upon ; such humility be due to he . but when 
 the humility have be once in vain , could it be repeat - would it 
 not be debasement ? in the first experiment she have but to bow to his 
 reproach - in a second experiment she might have but to endure his 
 contempt . yet how , with her sweet , earnest , affectionate nature - how she 
 long for one more interview - one more explanation ! if chance could but 
 bring it about ; if she have but a pretext - a fair reason , apart from any 
 interest of her own , to be in his presence once more ! but in a few day 
 he would have leave England forever - his heart yet more hardened in its 
 resolve by the last sacrifice to what it have so sternly recognise to 
 be a due to other . never to see he more - never to know how much 
 in that sacrifice he be suffer now - would perhaps suffer more 
 hereafter , in the reaction that follow all strain upon purpose - and yet 
 not a word of comfort from she - she who feel bear to be his comforter . 

 but this marriage , that cost he so much , must that be ? could she dare , 
 even for his sake , to stand between two such fair young life as those 
 of Lionel and Sophy - confide to they what Fairthorn have declare - appeal 
 to their generosity ? she shrink from inflict such intolerable sorrow . 
 could it be her duty ? in her inability to solve this last problem , 
 she bethink herself of Alban Morley ; here , at least , he might give 
 advice - offer suggestion . she send to his house entreat he to call . 
 her messenger be some hour before he find the Colonel , and then 
 bring back but a few hasty line - " impossible to call that day . the 
 CRISIS have come at last ! the Country , the House of Vipont , the British 
 Empire , be tremble in the balance . the Colonel be engage every 
 moment for the next twelve hour . he have the Earl of Montfort , who be 
 intractable and stupid beyond conception , to see and talk over ; Carr 
 Vipont be hard at work on the material for the new Cabinet - Alban 
 be help Carr Vipont . if the House of Vipont fail England at this 
 moment , it would not be a CRISIS , but a crash ! the Colonel hop to 
 arrange an interview with Lady Montfort for a minute or two the next 
 day . but perhaps she would excuse he from a journey to Twickenham , and 
 drive into town to see he ; if not at home , he would leave word where he 
 be to be find . " 

 by the beard of Jupiter Capitolinus , there be often revolution in the 
 heart of woman , during which she be callous to a Crisis , and have not 
 even a fear for a crash ! 

 the next day come George 's letter to Caroline , with the gentle message 
 from Darrell ; and when Dr. F - - - , whose apprehension for the state 
 of her health Colonel Morley have by no mean exaggerated , call in the 
 afternoon to see the effect of his last prescription , he find she in 
 such utter prostration of nerve and spirit , that he resolve to 
 hazard a dose not much know to great lady - viz . three grain of 
 plain - speak , with a minim of frightening . 

 " my dear lady , " say he , " yours be a case in which physician can be of 
 very little use . there be something on the mind which my prescription 
 fail to reach ; worry of some sort - decidedly worry . and unless you 
 yourself can either cure that , or will make head against it , worry , 
 my dear Lady Montfort , will end not in consumption - you be too finely 
 form to let worry eat hole in the lung - no ; but in a confirm 
 aneurism of the heart , and the first sudden shock might then be 
 immediately fatal . the heart be a noble organ - bear a great deal - but 
 still its endurance have limit . heart - complaint be more common than 
 they be ; - over - education and over - civilisation , I suspect . very young 
 people be not so subject to they ; they have flurry , not worry - a very 
 different thing . a good chronic silent grief of some year stand , 
 that get worried into acute inflammation at the age when feel be no 
 long fancy , throw out a heart - disease which sometimes kill without 
 warning , or sometimes , if the grief be remove , will rather prolong than 
 shorten life , by induce a prudent avoidance of worry in future . there 
 be that worthy old gentleman who be take so ill at Fawley , and about 
 whom you be so anxious : in his case there have certainly be chronic 
 grief ; then come acute worry , and the heart could not get through its 
 duty . fifty year ago doctor would have cry ' apoplexy ! ' - nowadays 
 we know that the heart save the head . well , he be more easy in his 
 mind the last time I see he , and thank to his temperance , and his 
 constitutional dislike to self - indulgence in worry , he may jog on to 
 eighty , in spite of the stethoscope ! excess in the moral emotion give 
 heart - disease ; abuse of the physical power , paralysis ; both more common 
 than they be - the first for your gentle sex , the second for our rough 
 one . both , too , lie in wait for their victim at the entrance in middle 
 life . I have a very fine case of paralysis now ; a man build up by nature 
 to live to a hundred - never see such a splendid formation - such bone and 
 such muscle . I would have give Van Amburgh the two good of his lion , 
 and my man would have do for all three in five minute . all the bad 
 for he , my dear lady - all the bad for he . his strength lead he on 
 to abuse the main fountain of life , and out jump avenge Paralysis 
 and fell he to earth with a blow . ' tis your Hercules that paralysis 
 love ; she despise the weak invalid , who prudently shim all excess . 
 and so , my dear lady , that assassin call Aneurism lie in wait for the 
 heart that abuse their own force of emotion ; spar heart that , less 
 vital , be thrifty in waste and supply . but you be not listen to 
 one ! and yet my patient may not be quite unknown to your ladyship ; for 
 in happen to mention the other day , to the lady who attend to and 
 nurse he , that I could not call this morning , as I have a visit to pay 
 to Lady Montfort at Twickenham , she become very anxious about you , and 
 write this note , which she beg I to give you . she seem very much 
 attach to my patient - not his wife nor his sister . she interest 
 I ; - capital nurse - cleverish woman too . oh ! here be the note . " 

 Caroline , who have give but little heed to this recital , listlessly 
 receive the note - scarcely look at the address - and be about to put 
 it aside , when the good doctor , who be intent upon rouse she by any 
 mean , say : " no , my dear lady , I promise that I would see you read the 
 note ; besides , I be the most curious of man , and die to know a little 
 more who and what be the writer . " 

 Caroline break the seal and read as follow : " if Lady Montfort remember 
 Arabella Fossett , and will call at Clare Cottage , Vale of Health , 
 Hampstead , at her ladyship 's early leisure , and ask for Mrs. Crane , 
 some information , not perhaps important to Lady Montfort , but very 
 important to Mr. Darrell , will be give . " 

 Lady Montfort startle the doctor by the alertness with which she spring 
 to her foot and ring the bell . 

 " what be it ? " ask he . 

 " the carriage immediately , " cry Lady Montfort as the servant enter . 

 " ah ! you be go to see the poor lady , Mrs. Crane , eh ? well , it be a 
 charming drive , and just what I should have recommend . any exertion 
 will do you good . allow I ; why , your pulse be already fifty per cent . 
 well . pray what relation be Mrs. Crane to my patient ? " 

 " I really do not   know ; pray excuse I , my dear Dr. F - - - - . " 

 " certainly ; go while the day be fine . wrap up ; - a close carriage , 
 mind ; - and I will look in to - morrow . " 




 CHAPTER X. 

  wherein be insinuate the HIGHEST compliment to woman ever pay to 
  her sex by the AUTHOR of this work . 

 Lady Montfort have arrive at Clare Cottage . she be show by Bridget 
 Greggs into a small room upon the first floor ; fold - door to some 
 other room closely shut - evidence of sickness in the house ; - phial on 
 the chimneypiece - a tray with a broth - basin on the table - a saucepan on 
 the hob - the sofa one of those that serve as a bed , which sleep little 
 visit , for one who may watch through the night over some helpless 
 sufferer - a woman 's shawl throw carelessly over its hard narrow 
 bolster ; - all , in short , betray that pathetic untidiness and 
 discomfort which say that a despot be in the house to whose will order 
 and form be subordinate ; - the imperious Tyranny of Disease establish 
 itself in a life that , within those four wall , have a value not to be 
 measure by its worth to the world beyond . the more feeble and helpless 
 the sufferer , the more sovereign the despotism - the more submissive the 
 servitude . 

 in a minute or two one of the folding - door silently open and as 
 silently closed , admit into Lady Montfort 's presence a grim woman in 
 iron grey . 

 Caroline could not , at the first glance , recognise that Arabella 
 Fossett , of whose handsome , if somewhat too strongly define and sombre 
 countenance , she have retain a faithful reminiscence . but Arabella have 
 still the same imposing manner which have often repress the gay spirit 
 of her young pupil ; and as she now motion the great lady to a seat , 
 and place herself beside , an awed recollection of the schoolroom bow 
 Caroline 's lovely head in mute respect . 

 MRS . CRANE . - " you too be change since I see you last , - that be more 
 than five year ago , but you be not less beautiful . you can still be 
 love ; - you would not scare away the man whom you might desire to save . 
 Sorrow have its partiality . do you know that I have a cause to be 
 grateful to you , without any merit of your own . in a very dark moment 
 of my life - only vindictive and evil passion crowd on I - your face 
 come across my sight . Goodness seem there so beautiful - and , in 
 this face , Evil look so haggard ! do not interrupt I . I have but 
 few minute to spare you . yes ; at the sight of that face , gentle 
 recollection rise up . you have ever be kind to I ; and truthful , 
 Caroline Lyndsay - truthful . other thought come at the beam of that 
 face , as other thought come when a strain of unexpected music remind 
 we of former day . I can not tell how , but from that moment a something 
 more like womanhood , than I have know for year , enter into my heart . 
 within that same hour I be sorely try gall to the quick of my soul . 
 have I not see you before , I might have dream of nothing but a stern 
 and dire revenge . and a purpose of revenge I do form . but it be not to 
 destroy - it be to save ! I resolve that the man who laugh to scorn the 
 idea of vow due to I - vow to bind life to life - should yet soon or 
 later be as firmly mine as if he have keep his troth ; that my troth at 
 least should be keep to he , as if it have be utter at the altar . 

 " Hush , do you hear a moan ? - no ! he lie yonder , Caroline Lyndsay - mine , 
 indeed , till the grave we do part . these hand have close over he , and 
 he rest in their clasp , helpless as an infant . " Involuntarily Caroline 
 recoil . but look into that careworn face , there be in it so wild a 
 mixture of melancholy tenderness , with a resolved and fierce expression 
 of triumph , that , more impressed by the tenderness than by the triumph , 
 the woman sympathise with the woman ; and Caroline again draw near , 
 near than before , and in her deep soft eye pity alone be see . into 
 those eye arabella look , as if spellbound , and the dark and sterner 
 expression in her own face gradually relax and flee , and only the 
 melancholy tenderness be leave behind . she resume : 

 " I say to Guy Darrell that I would learn , if possible , whether the poor 
 child whom I ill - use in my most wicked day , and whom you , it seem , 
 have so benignly shelter , be the daughter of Matilda - or , as he 
 believe , of a yet more hateful mother . long ago I have conceive a 
 suspicion that there be some ground to doubt poor Jasper 's assertion , 
 for I have chance to see two letter address to he - one from 
 that Gabrielle Desinarets whose influence over his life have be so 
 baleful - in which she speak of some guilty plunder with which she be 
 come to London , and invite he again to join his fortune with her 
 own . oh , but the cold , bloodless villany of the tone ! - the ease with 
 which crime for a gibbet be treat as topic for wit ! " Arabella 
 stop - the same shudder come over she as when she have conclude the 
 epistle abstract from the dainty pocketbook . " but in the letter be 
 also allusion to Sophy , to another attempt on Darrell to be make 
 by Gabrielle herself . nothing very clear ; but a doubt do suggest 
 itself - ' be she write to he about his own child ? ' the other letter 
 be from the french nurse with whom Sophy have be place as an infant . 
 it relate to inquiry in person , and a visit to her own house , which 
 Mr. Darrell have recently make ; that letter also seem to imply some 
 deception , though but by a few dubious word . at that time the chief 
 effect of the suspicion these letter cause be but to make I more 
 bent on repair to Sophy my cruelty to her childhood . what if I have 
 be cruel to an infant who , after all , be not the daughter of that 
 false , false Matilda Darrell ! I keep in my memory the french nurse 's 
 address . I think that when in France I might seek and question she . 
 but I live only for one absorbing end . Sophy be not then in danger ; 
 and even my suspicion as to her birth die away . pass on : - Guy Darrell ! 
 ah , Lady Montfort ! his life have be embitter like mine ; but he be 
 man , and could bear it well . he have know , himself , the misery of 
 break faith , of betray affection , which he could pity so little when 
 its blight fall on I ; but you have excuse for desertion - you yourself 
 be deceive ; and I pardon he , for he pardon Jasper , and we be 
 fellow - sufferer . you weep ! pardon my rudeness . I do not mean to pain 
 you . try and listen calmly - I must hurry on . on leave Mr. Darrell I 
 cross to France . I see the nurse ; I have ascertain the truth ; here 
 be the proof in this packet . I come back - I see Jasper Losely . he be 
 on the eve of seek you , whom he have already so wrong - of claim 
 the child , or rather of extort money for the renunciation of a claim 
 to one whom you have adopt . I tell he how vainly he have hitherto 
 seek to fly from I . one by one I recite the guilty scheme in which 
 I have baffle his purpose - all the danger from which I have rescue his 
 life . I command he to forbear the project he have then commence . 
 I tell he I would frustrate that project as I have frustrate other . 
 alas , alas ! why be this tongue so harsh ? - why do this face so belie 
 the idea of human kindness ? I do but enrage and madden he ; he feel but 
 the reckless impulse to destroy the life that then stand between himself 
 and the object to which he have pledge his own self - destruction . I 
 think I should die by his hand . I do not quail . ah ! the ghastly 
 change that come over his face - the one glance of amaze and 
 superstitious horror ; his arm obey he not ; his strength , his limb , 
 forsook he ; he fall at my foot - one side of he stricken dead ! Hist ! 
 that be his voice - pardon I ! " and Arabella flit from the room , 
 leave the door ajar . 

 a feeble voice , like the treble of an infirm old man , come painfully to 
 Caroline 's ear . 

 " I want to turn ; help I . why be I leave alone ? it be cruel to leave I 
 so - cruel ! " 

 in the soft tone to which that harsh voice could be tune , the grim 
 woman apologise and soothe . 

 " you give I leave , Jasper dear . you say it would be a relief to you to 
 have her pardon as well as theirs . " 

 " whose pardon ? " ask the voice querulously . 

 " Caroline Lyndsay 's - Lady Montfort 's . " 

 " nonsense ! what do I ever do against she ? oh - ah ! I remember now . do not 
 let I have it over again . yes - she pardon I , I suppose ! get I my 
 broth , and do not   be long ! " 

 Arabella come back , close the door ; and while she busy herself with 
 that precious saucepan on the hob - to which the Marchioness of Montfort 
 have become a very secondary object - she say , look towards Caroline 
 from under her iron - grey ringlet : 

 " you hear - he miss I ! he can not   bear I out of his sight now - I , I ! 
 you hear ! " 

 Meekly Lady Montfort advance , bring in her hand the tray with the 
 broth - basin . 

 " yes , I hear ! I must not keep you ; but let I help while I stay . " 

 so the broth be pour forth and prepare , and with it Arabella 
 disappear . she return in a few minute , beckon to Caroline , and 
 say in a low voice : 

 " come in - say you forgive he ! oh , you need not fear he ; a babe could 
 not fear he now ! " 

 Caroline follow Arabella into the sick - room . no untidiness there ; all 
 so carefully , thoughtfully arrange . a pleasant room , too - with window 
 look full on the sunny side of the Vale of Health ; the hearth 
 so cheerily clear , sweep so clean - the very ash out of sight ; 
 flower - costly exotic - on the table , on the mantelpiece ; the 
 couch draw towards the window ; and on that couch , in the gay rich 
 dressing - gown of former day , warm coverlet heap on the foot , 
 snow - white pillow prop the head , lie what at first seem a vague , 
 undistinguishable mass - lay what , as the step advance , and the eye 
 become more accurately search , grow into Jasper Losely . 

 yes , there , too weak indeed for a babe to fear , lie all that be leave 
 of the Strong Man ! no enemy but himself have bring he thus 
 low - spendthrift , and swindler , and robber of his own priceless 
 treasure - Health and Strength - those grand rent - roll of joy which 
 Nature have make his inheritance . as a tree that be crumble to dust 
 under the gnarl of its bark seem , the moment ere it fall , proof 
 against time and the temp , so , within all decay , stand that image 
 of strength - so , air scarcely stirring , it fall . " and the pitcher be 
 break at the fountain ; and the wheel be break at the cistern ; vanity 
 of vanity , saith the Preacher . " 

 Jasper turn his dull eye towards Caroline , as she come softly to 
 his side , and look at she with a piteous gaze . the stroke that have 
 shatter the form have spar the face ; and illness and compulsory 
 abstinence from habitual stimulant have take from the aspect much 
 of the coarseness - whether of shape or colour - that of late year have 
 disfigure its outline - and supply the delicacy which end with youth 
 by the delicacy that come with the approach of death . so that , in no 
 small degree , the beauty which have be to he so fatal a gift , be once 
 more visible - the feature grow again distinct , as wanness succeed 
 to the hue of intemperance , and emaciation to the bloated cheek and 
 swollen muscle . the goddess whose boon adorn the outward shell of the 
 human spirit come back to her favourite 's death - couch as she have come to 
 the cradle - not now as the Venus Erycina , goddess of Smile and Jest , but 
 as the warning Venus Libitina , the goddess of Doom and the Funeral . 

 " I be a very poor creature , " say Jasper , after a pause . " I can not   rise - I 
 can not   move without help . very strange supernatural ! she always say that 
 if I raise my hand against she , it would fall palsy ! " he turn his 
 eye towards Arabella with a glare of angry terror . " she be a witch ! " 
 he say , and bury his face in the pillow . tear roll down the grim 
 woman 's cheek . 

 LADY MONTFORT . - " she be rather your good minister spirit . do not be 
 unkind to she . over she you have more power now than you have when you 
 be well and strong . she live but to serve you ; command she gently . " 

 Jasper be not proof against that sweet voice . with difficulty he 
 wrench himself round , and again look long at Caroline Montfort , as 
 if the sight do he good ; then he make a sign to Arabella , who fly to 
 his side and raise he . 

 " I have be a sad dog , " he say , with a mournful attempt at the old 
 rollick tone - " a very sad dog - in short , a villain ! but all lady be 
 indulgent to villain in fact , prefer they ! never know a lady who could 
 endure ' a good young man ' - never ! so I be sure you will forgive I , 
 miss - ma'am . who be this lady ? when it come to forgiveness , there be 
 so many of they ! oh , I remember now - your ladyship will forgive I - ' tis 
 all down in black and white what I have   do - Belles have it . you see this 
 hand - I can write with this hand - this be not paralyse . 

 " this be not the hand I try to raise against she . but basta , basta ! 
 where be I ? my poor head ! I know what it be to have a head now ! - ache , 
 ache ! - boom , boom - weight , weight - heavy as a church bell - hollow as 
 a church bell - noisy as a church bell ! Brandy ! give I brandy , you 
 witch ! - I mean Bella , good Bella , give I brandy ! " 

 " not yet , Jasper dear . you be to have it every third hour ; it be not 
 time yet , dear ; you must attend to the doctor , and try to get 
 well and recover your strength . you remember I tell you how kind Lady 
 Montfort have be to your father , and you wish to see and thank she . " 

 " my father - my poor , poor father ! you have   be kind to he ! bless you , 
 bless you ! and you will see he ? I want his pardon before I die . do not 
 forget , and - and - " 

 " Poor Sophy ! " say Mrs. Crane . 

 " ah yes ! but she be well off now , you tell I . I can not   think I have 
 injure she . and really girl and woman be intend to be a little 
 useful to one . Basta , basta . " ' 

 " Mr. Darrell - " 

 " yes , yes , yes ! I forgive he , or he forgive I ; settle it as you like . 
 but my father 's pardon , Lady Montfort , you will get I that ! " 

 " I will , I will . " 

 he look at she again , and smile . Arabella gently let his head fall 
 back upon the pillow . 

 " throw a handkerchief over my face , " he say feebly , " and leave I ; 
 but be in call ; I feel sleepy . " his eye close ; he seem asleep even 
 before they steal from the room . 

 " you will bring his father to he ? " say Arabella , when she and Lady 
 Montfort be again alone . " in this packet be Jasper 's confession of 
 the robbery for which that poor old man suffer . I never know of that 
 before . but you see how mild he be now ! - how his heart be change ; it 
 be indeed change more than he show ; only you have see he at the 
 bad - his mind wander a little to - day ; it do sometimes . I have a 
 favour to ask of you . I once hear a preacher , not many month ago ; 
 he affect I as no preacher ever do before . I be tell that he be 
 Colonel Morley 's nephew . will you ask Colonel Morley to persuade he to 
 come to Jasper ? " 

 " my cousin , George Morley ! he shall come , I promise you ; so shall your 
 poor patient 's forgiving father . be there more I can do ? " 

 " no . explain to Mr. Darrell the reason why I have so long delay 
 send to he the communication which he will find in the packet I 
 have give to you , and which you will first open , read the content 
 yourself - a part of they , at least , in Jasper 's attestation of his 
 stratagem to break off your marriage with Mr. Darrell , may yet be 
 of some value to you - you have well also show the paper to Colonel 
 Morley - he may complete the task . I have mean , on return to England , 
 or before see Mr. Darrell , to make the inquiry which you will see 
 be still necessary . but then come this terrible affliction ! I have be 
 able to think of nothing else but Jasper ; - terrible to quit the house 
 which contain he for an hour ; only , when Dr. F. tell I that he be 
 attend you , that you be ill and suffering , I resolve to add to 
 this packet Jasper 's own confession . ah , and he give it so readily , and 
 go yesterday through the fatigue of write with such good heart . I 
 tell you that there be a change within he - there be there be . well , 
 well - I resolve to give you the packet to transmit to Mr. Darrell , 
 for somehow or other I connect your illness with your visit to he at 
 Fawley ! " 

 " my visit to Mr. Darrell ! " 

 " Jasper see you as your carriage drive from the park gate , not very many 
 day since . ah , you change colour ! you have wrong that man ; repair the 
 wrong ; you have the power ! " 

 " alas ! no , " murmur Caroline , " I have not the power . " 

 " Pooh ! - he love you still . you be not one of those whom man forget . " 

 Caroline be silent , but involuntarily she lower her veil . in an 
 instant the acute sense of the grim woman detect the truth . 

 " ah ! pride - pride in both , " she say . " I understand - I dare not blame 
 he here . but you - you be the injurer ; you have no right to pride ; you 
 will see he again . " 

 " no - never - never ! " falter Caroline , with accent scarcely audible 
 under her veil . 

 Arabella be silent for a moment , and Lady Montfort rise hastily to 
 depart . 

 " you will see he again , I tell you ; " and Arabella then follow she to 
 the door : 

 " stay ; do you think he will die ? " 

 " good heaven ! Mr. Darrell ? " 

 " no , no - Jasper Losely ! " 

 " I hope not . what do Dr. F. say ? " 

 " he will not tell I . but it be not the paralysis alone ; he might 
 recover from that - so young still . there be other symptom ; that 
 dreadful habit of stimulant ! he sink if he have they not - they hasten 
 death if he have . but - but - but - he be mine , and mine only , to the 
 GRAVE - now ! " 




 CHAPTER XI . 

  the CRISIS - PUBLIC and private . 

 Lady Montfort 's carriage stop at Colonel Morley 's door just as Carr 
 Vipont be come out . Carr , catch sight of she , bustle up to the 
 carriage window . 

 " my dear Lady Montfort ! - not see you for an age ! what time we live 
 in ! how suddenly the CRISIS have come upon we ! sad loss in poor dear 
 Montfort ; no wonder you mourn for he ! have his failing , true - who be 
 not mortal ? - but always vote right ; always to be rely on in time 
 of CRISIS ! but this crotchety fellow , who have so unluckily , for all but 
 himself , walk into that property , be the loose fish ! and what be 
 a House divide against itself ? never be the Constitution in such 
 peril ! - I say it deliberately ! - and here be the Head of the vipont 
 humming and haae , and ask whether Guy Darrell will join the 
 Cabinet . and if Guy Darrell will not , we have no more chance of the 
 Montfort interest than if we be Peep - o'-day Boys . but excuse I ; I 
 must be off ; every moment be precious in time of CRISIS . think , if we 
 can not   form a Cabinet by to - morrow night - only think what may happen ; the 
 other fellow will come in , and then - the DELUGE ! " 

 Carr be go to find mop and Dame Partingtons to stave off the deluge . 
 Colonel Morley have obey Lady Montfort 's summon , and have enter the 
 carriage . before she can speak , however , he have rush into the subject 
 of which he himself be full . " only think - I know it would be so when the 
 moment come ; all depend upon Guy Darrell ; Montfort , who seem always 
 in a fright lest a newspaper should fall on his head and crush he , say 
 that if Darrell , whom he choose to favour just because the newspaper 
 do , decline to join , the newspaper will say the CRISIS be a job ! 
 Fancy ! - a job - the CRISIS ! Lord Mowbray de l'Arco and Sir Josiah Snodge , 
 who be both necessary to a united government , but who unluckily det 
 each other , refuse to sit in the same Cabinet , unless Darrell sit 
 between - to save they , I suppose , from the fate of the cat of Kilkenny . 
 Sir John Cautly , our crack county member , declare that if Darrell do 
 not come in , ' tis because the CRISIS be go too far ! Harry Bold , our 
 most popular speaker , say , if Darrell stay out , ' tis a sign that the 
 CRISIS be a retrograde movement ! in short , without Darrell the 
 CRISIS will be a failure , and the House of Vipont smash - Lady 
 Montfort - smash ! I send a telegram   oh , that I should live to see such 
 a word introduce into the english language ! - but , as Carr say , what 
 time these be !   to Fawley this morning , entreat Guy to come up to 
 town at once . he answer by a line from Horace , which mean , ' that he 
 will see I shot first . ' I must go down to he ; only wait to know 
 the result of certain negotiation as to measure . I have but one hope . 
 there be a measure which Darrell always privately advocate - which 
 he thoroughly understand - which , place in his hand , would be 
 triumphantly carry ; one of those measure , Lady Montfort , which , if 
 defective , shipwreck a government ; if frame as Guy Darrell could frame 
 it , immortalise the minister who concoct and carry they . this be all 
 that Darrell need to complete his fame and career . this be at length an 
 occasion to secure a durable name in the history of his country ; let 
 he reject it , and I shall tell he frankly that his life have be but 
 a brilliant failure . since he have not a seat in Parliament , and usage 
 require the actual possession of that qualification for a seat in the 
 Cabinet , we must lose his voice in the Commons . but we can arrange that ; 
 for if Darrell will but join the government , and go - to the Lords , 
 Sir Josiah Snodge , who have a great deal of voice and a great deal of 
 jealousy , will join too - head the Vipont interest in the Commons - and 
 speak to the country - speak every night - and all night , too , if 
 require . yes ; Darrell must take the peerage - devote himself for a year 
 or two to this great measure - to the consolidation of his fame - to the 
 redemption of the House of Vipont - and to the Salvation of the empire ; 
 and then , if he please , ' solve senescentem ' - that is , he may retire from 
 harness , and browse upon laurel for the rest of his day ! " 

 Colonel Morley deliver himself of this long address without 
 interruption from a listener interested in every word that relate to 
 Guy Darrell , and in every hope that could reunite he to the healthful 
 activity of life . 

 it be now Lady Montfort 's turn to speak ; though , after subject so 
 momentous as the Crisis and its speculative consequence , private 
 affair , relate to a poor little girl like Sophy - nay , the mere 
 private affair of Darrell himself , seem a pitiful bathos . Lady 
 Montfort , however , after a few word of womanly comment upon the only 
 part of the Colonel 's discourse which touch her heart , hasten on to 
 describe her interview with Arabella , and the melaneboly condition of 
 Darrell 's once formidable son - in - law . for that last , the Colonel evince 
 no more compassionate feeling than any true Englishman , at the time I be 
 writing , would demonstrate for a murderous Sepoy tie to the mouth of a 
 cannon . 

 " a very good riddance , " say the Colonel , dryly . " great relief to 
 Darrell , and to every one else whom that monster torment and prey 
 on ; and with his life will vanish the only remain obstacle in 
 right poor Willy 's good name . I hope to live to collect , from all 
 part of the country , Willy 's old friend and give they a supper , at 
 which I suppose I must not get drunk ; though I should rather like it , 
 than not ! but I interrupt you ! go on . " 

 Lady Montfort proceed to state the substance of the paper she have 
 peruse in reference to the mystery which have be the cause of so much 
 disquietude and bitterness . 

 the Colonel stretch out his hand eagerly for the document - thus 
 quote . he hurry his eye rapidly over the content of the first paper 
 he light on , and then say , pull out his watch : " well , I have half an 
 hour yet to spare in discuss these matter with you - may I order your 
 coachman to drive round the Regent 's Park ? - well than keep it thus 
 at my door , with four old maid for opposite neighbour . " the order be 
 give , and the Colonel again return to the paper . suddenly he look 
 up - look full into Lady Montfort 's face , with a thoughtful , search 
 gaze , which make her drop her own eye ! and she see that he have be 
 read Jasper 's confession , relate to his device for break off 
 her engagement to Darrell , which in her hurry and excitement she have 
 neglect to abstract from the other document . " oh , not that paper - you 
 be not to read that , " she cry , quickly cover the writing with her 
 hand . 

 " too late , my dear cousin . I have read it . all be now clear . Lionel be 
 right ; and I be right too , in my conviction , though Darrell put so 
 coolly aside my question when I be last at Fawley . I be justify 
 now in all the pain I take to secure Lionel 's marriage - in the cunning 
 cruelty of my letter to George ! Know , Lady Montfort , that if Lionel 
 have sacrifice his happiness to respect for Guy 's ancestor - worship , Guy 
 Darrell would have hold himself bind in honour never to marry again . he 
 tell I so - tell I he should be a cheat if he take any step to rob one 
 from whom he have exact such an offering - of the name , and the heritage , 
 for which the offering have be make . and I then resolve that County 
 Guy should not thus irrevocably shut the door on his own happiness ! Lady 
 Montfort , you know that this man love you - as , verily , I believe , never 
 other man in our cold century love woman ; - through desertion - through 
 change - amidst grief - amidst resentment - despite pride ; - dead to all 
 other love - shrink from all other tie - on , constant on - carrying in 
 the depth of his soul to the verge of age , secret and lock up , the 
 hopeless passion of his manhood . do you not see that it be through you , 
 and you alone , that Guy Darrell have for seventeen year be lose to the 
 country he be intend to serve and to adorn ? do you not feel that 
 if he now reject this last opportunity to redeem year so waste , and 
 achieve a fame that may indeed link his Ancestral Name to the honour of 
 Posterity , you , and you alone , be the cause ? " 

 " Alas - alas - but what can I do ? " 

 " do ! - ay , true . the poor fellow be old now ; you can not care for 
 he ! - you still young , and so unluckily beautiful ! - you , for whom young 
 prince might vie . true ; you can have no feeling for Guy Darrell , except 
 pity ! " 

 " Pity ! I hate the word ! " cry Lady Montfort , with as much petulance as 
 if she have still be the wayward lively Caroline of old . 

 again the Man of the World direct toward her face his shrewd eye , and 
 drop out , " see he ! " 

 " but I have see he . you remember I go to plead for Lionel and 
 Sophy - in vain ! " 

 " not in vain . George write I word that he have inform you of 
 Darrell 's consent to their marriage . and I be much mistaken if his 
 great consolation in the pang that consent must have cost he be not 
 the thought that it relieve you from the sorrow and remorse his refusal 
 have occasion to you . ah ! there be but one person who can restore 
 Darrell to the world - and that be yourself ! " 

 Lady Montfort shake her head drearily . 

 " if I have but an excuse - with dignity - with self - respect - to - to - ! ' 

 " an excuse ! you have an absolute necessity to communicate with Darrell . 
 you have to give he these document - to explain how you come by they . 
 Sophy be with he ; you be bind to see she on a subject of such vital 
 importance to herself . scruple of prudery ! you , Caroline Lyndsay , 
 the friend of his daughter - you whose childhood be rear in his very 
 house - you whose mother owe to he such obligation - you to scruple 
 in be the first to acquaint he with information affect he so 
 nearly ! and why , forsooth ? because , age ago , your hand be , it seem , 
 engage to he , and you be deceive by false appearance , like a silly 
 young girl as you be . " 

 again Lady Montfort shake her head drearily - drearily . " well , " say the 
 Colonel , change his tone , " I will grant that those former tie can not 
 be renew now . the man now be as old as the hill , and you have no right 
 to expect that he would have suffer so much at be very naturally 
 jilt for a handsome young Marquess . " 

 " Cease , sir , cease , " cry Caroline , angrily . the Colonel coolly 
 persist . 

 " I see now that such nuptial be out of the question . but have the world 
 come to such a pass that one can never at any age have a friend in a 
 lady unless she marry he ? Scruple to accompany I - I your cousin - I 
 your near survive relation - in order to take back the young lady 
 you have virtually adopt ! - scruple to trust yourself for half an hour 
 to that tumbledown old Fawley ! be you afraid that the gossip will 
 say you , the Marchioness of Montfort , be run after a gloomy old 
 widower , and scheme to be mistress of a mansion more like a ghosttrap 
 than a residence for civilised being ? or be you afraid that Guy 
 Darrell will be fool and fop enough to think you be come to force on 
 he your hand ? Pooh , pooh ! such scruple would be in place if you be a 
 portionless forward girl , or if he be a conceited young puppy , or 
 even a suspicious old roue . but Guy Darrell - a man of his station , his 
 character , his year ! and you , cousin Caroline , what be you ? surely , 
 lift above all such pitiful crotchet by a rank amongst the lofty 
 gentlewoman of England ; ample fortune , a beauty that in itself be 
 rank and wealth ; and , above all , a character that have pass with such 
 venerate purity through an ordeal in which every eye seek a spot , 
 every ear invite a scandal . but as you will . all I say be , that 
 Darrell 's future may be in your hand ; that after to - morrow , the 
 occasion to give at least noble occupation and lasting renown to a mind 
 that be devour itself and stifle its genius , may be irrevocably 
 lose ; and that I do believe , if you say to - morrow to Guy Daxrell , ' you 
 refuse to hear I when I plead for what you think a disgrace 
 to your name , and yet even that you at last concede to the voice of 
 affection as if of duty - now hear I when I plead by the side of 
 your old friend on behalf of your honour , and in the name of your 
 forefather , ' - if you say that , he be win to his country . you will have 
 repair a wrong ; and , pray , will you have compromise your dignity ? " 

 Caroline have recoil into the corner of the carriage , her mantle close 
 down round her breast , her veil lower ; but no shelter garb or veil 
 could conceal her agitation . 

 the Colonel pull the check - string . " nothing so natural ; you be the 
 widow of the Head of the House of Vipont . you be , or ought to be , 
 deeply interested in its fate . an awful CRISIS , long expect , have 
 occur . the House tremble . a connection of that House can render it 
 an invaluable service ; that connection be the man at whose hearth your 
 childhood be rear ; and you go with I - I , who be know to be move 
 heaven and earth for every vote that the House can secure , to canvass 
 this waver connection for his support and assistance . nothing , I say , 
 so natural ; and yet you scruple to serve the House of Vipont - to 
 save your country ! you may well be agitate . I leave you to your own 
 reflection . my time run short ; I will get out here . trust I with 
 these document . I will see to the rest of this long painful subject . I 
 will send a special report to you this evening , and you will reply by a 
 single line to the prayer I have venture to address to you . " 




 CHAPTER XII . and last . 

  in which the AUTHOR ENDEAVOURS , to the best of his ABILITY , to give 
  A final reply to the question , " what will he do with it ? " 

 SCENE - the bank of the lake at Fawley . George be lend his arm to 
 Waife ; Mrs. Morley , seat on her camp - stool at the opposite side of the 
 water , be put the last touch to her sketch of the Manor - house ; Sir 
 Isaac , recline , be gravely contemplate the swan ; the doe , bend 
 over he , occasionally nibble his ear ; Fairthorn have uncomfortably 
 edge himself into an angle of the building , between two buttress , and 
 be watch , with malignant eye , two young form , at a distance , as they 
 move slowly yonder , side by side , yet apart , now lose , now emerge , 
 through the gap between melancholy leafless tree . darrell , have 
 just quit Waife and George , to whose slow pace he can ill time his 
 impatient step , wonder why Lionel , whom , on arrive , he have , with 
 brief cordial word , refer to Sophy for his fate , have take more than 
 an hour to ask a simple question , to which the reply may be pretty well 
 know beforehand . he advance towards those melancholy tree . suddenly 
 one young form leave the other - come with rapid stride through the 
 wither fern . Pale as death , Lionel seize Guy Darrell 's hand with 
 convulsive grasp , and say : " I must leave you , sir ; God bless you ! all 
 be over . I be the blind fool - she refuse I . " 

 " refuse you ! - impossible ! for what reason ? " 

 " she can not love I well enough to marry , " answer Lionel with a 
 quivering lip , and an attempt at that irony in which all extreme 
 anguish , at least in our haughty sex , delight to seek refuge or 
 disguise . " like I as a friend , a brother , and so forth , but - nothing 
 more . all a mistake , sir - all , except your marvellous kindness to I - to 
 she - for which Heaven ever bless you . " 

 " yes , all a mistake of your own , foolish boy , " say Darrell , tenderly ; 
 and , turn sharp , he see Sophy hasten by , quickly and firmly , with 
 her eye look straightward - on into space . he throw himself in her 
 path . 

 " tell this dull kinsman of mine that ' faint heart never win fair lady . ' 
 you do not mean seriously , deliberately to reject a heart that will 
 never be faint with a mean fear than that of lose you ? " 

 Poor Sophy ! she keep her blue eye still on the cold grey space , and 
 answer by some scarce audible word - word which in every age girl 
 intend to say no seem to learn as bird learn their song ; no one 
 know who teach they , but they be ever to the same tune . " sensible of 
 the honour " - " grateful " - " some one more worthy , "   c. ,   c. 

 Darrell check this embarrassed jargon . " my question , young lady , be 
 solemn ; it involve the destiny of two life . do you mean to say that 
 you do not love Lionel Haughton well enough to give he your hand , and 
 return the true faith which be pledge with his own ? " 

 " yes , " say Lionel , who have gain the side of his kinsman , " yes , that 
 be it . o Sophy - Ay or no ? " 

 " no ! " fall from her pale , firm lip - and in a moment more she be 
 at Waife 's side , and have draw he away from George . " Grandfather , 
 grandfather ! - home , home ; let we go home at once , or I shall die ! " 

 Darrell have keep his keen sight upon her movement - upon her 
 countenance . he see her gesture - her look - as she now cling to her 
 grandfather . the blue eye be not now coldly fix on level air , but 
 raise upward as for strength from above . the young face be sublime with 
 its woe , and with its resolve . 

 " noble child , " mutter Darrell , " I think I see into her heart . if so , 
 poor Lionel , indeed ! my pride have yield , hers never will ! " 

 Lionel , meanwhile , keep beat his foot on the ground , and check 
 indignantly the tear that seek to gather to his eye . Darrell throw 
 his arm round the young man 's shoulder , and lead he gently , slowly away , 
 by the barbed thorn - tree - on by the moss - grow crag . 

 Waife , meanwhile , be bend his ear to Sophy 's lip . the detestable 
 Fairthorn emerge from between the buttress , and shamble up to 
 George , thirst to hear his hope confirm , and turn his face back 
 to smile congratulation , on the gloomy old house that he think he have 
 save from the lake . 

 Sophy have at last convince Waife that his sens do not deceive he , 
 nor hers wander . she have say , " o grandfather , let we ever henceforth 
 be all in all to each other . you be not ashamed of I - I be so proud 
 of you . but there be other akin to I , grandfather , whom we will not 
 mention ; and you would be ashamed of I if I bring disgrace on one who 
 would confide to I his name , his honour ; and should I be as proud of 
 you , if you ask I to do it ? " 

 at these word , Waife understand all , and he have not an argument in 
 reply ; and he suffer Sophy to lead he towards the house . yes , they 
 will go hence - yes , there shall be no scheme of marriage ! they have 
 nearly reach the door , when the door itself open violently , and a 
 man rush forth catch Sophy in his arm , and kiss her forehead , 
 her cheek , with a heartiness that it be well Lionel do not witness ! 
 Speechless and breathless with resentment , Sophy struggle , and in vain , 
 when Waife , seize the man by the collar , swing he away with a " how 
 dare you , sir , " that be echo back from the hillock - summon 
 Sir Isaac at full gallop from the lake - scar Fairthorn back to his 
 buttress - rouse Mrs. Morley from her sketch , and , smite the ear of 
 Lionel and Darrell , hurry they , mechanically as it be , to the very 
 spot from which that thunder - roll have peal . 

 " how dare I ? " say the man , resettle the flow of his disorder 
 coat - " how dare I kiss my own niece ? - my own sister 's orphan child ? 
 Venerable Bandit , I have a much well right than you have . oh , my dear 
 injure Sophy , to think that I be ashamed of your poor cotton print - to 
 think that to your pretty face I have be owe fame and fortune - and 
 you , you wander over the world - child of the sister of whose beauty 
 I be so proud - of she for whom , alas , in vain ! I paint Watteaus and 
 Greuzes upon screen and fan ! " again he clasp she to his breast ; and 
 Waife this time stand mute , and Sophy passive - for the man 's tear be 
 rain upon her face , and wash away every blush of shame as to the 
 kiss they hallow . 

 " but where be my old friend William Losely ? - where be Willy ? " say 
 another voice , as a tall , thin personage step out from the hall , and 
 look poor Waife unconsciously in the face . 

 " Alban Morley ! " falter Waife , " you be but little change ! " 

 the Colonel look again , and in the elderly , lame , one - eye , 
 sober - looking man , recognise the wild jovial Willy , who have tame the 
 most unruly filly , take the most frantic leap , carol forth the 
 blithe song - madcap , good - fellow , frolicsome , childlike darling of gay 
 and grave , young and old ! 

  " ' Eheu , fugace , Postume , Postume , 
  Labuntur anni , ' " 

 say the Colonel , insensibly imbibe one of those horatian particle 
 that be ever float in that classic atmosphere - to Darrell 
 medicinal , to fairthorn morbific . " year slide away , Willy , mutely as 
 bird skim through air ; but when friend meet with friend after absence , 
 each see the print of their crow ' foot on the face of the other . but 
 we be not too old yet , Willy , for many a meet at the fireside ! nothing 
 else in our stud , we can still mount our hobby ; and thoroughbred 
 hobby contrive to be in at the death . 

 " but you be wait to learn by what title and name this strange lay 
 claim to so peerless a niece . know then ah , here come Darrell . Guy 
 Darrell , in this young lady you will welcome the grandchild of Sidney 
 Branthwaite , our old Eton school friend , a gentleman of as good blood as 
 any in the land ! " 

 " none well , " cry Fairthorn , who have sidle himself into the group ; 
 " there be a note on the Branthwaite genealogy , sir , in your father 's 
 great work upon ' Monumental Brasses . ' " 

 " permit I to conclude , Mr. Fairthorn , " resume the Colonel ; " Monumental 
 Brasses be painful subject . yes , Darrell , - yes , Lionel ; this fair 
 creature , whom Lady Montfort might well desire to adopt , be the daughter 
 of Arthur Branthwaite , by marriage with the sister of Frank Vance , whose 
 name I shrewdly suspect nation will prize , and whose work prince will 
 hoard , when many a long genealogy , all blazon in azure and or , will 
 have leave not a scrap for the moth . " 

 " ah ! " murmur Lionel , " be it not I , Sophy , who teach you to love your 
 father 's genius ! do you not remember how , as we bent over his volume , it 
 seem to translate to we our own feeling ? - to draw we nearer together ? 
 he be speak to we from his grave . " 

 Sophy make no answer ; her face be hide on the breast of the old man , 
 to whom she still clung close and close . 

 " be it so ? be it certain ? be there no doubt that she be the child of 
 these honour parent ? " ask Waife , tremulously . 

 " none , " answer Alban ; " we bring with us proof that will clear up all 
 my story . " 

 the old man bow his head over Sophy 's fair lock for a moment ; then 
 raise it , serene and dignified : " you be mine for a moment yet , Sophy , " 
 say he . 

 " your as ever - more fondly , gratefully than ever , " cry Sophy . 

 " there be but one man to whom I can willingly yield you . Son of Charles 
 Haughton , take my treasure . " 

 " I consent to that , " cry Vance , " though I be put aside like a 
 Remorseless Baron . and , Lionello mio , if Frank Vance be a miser , so much 
 the well for his niece . " 

 " but , " falter Lionel . 

 " oh , falter not . look into those eye ; read that blush now . she look 
 coy , not reluctant . she bend before he - adorn as for love , by 
 all her native grace . Air seem brighten by her bloom . no more the 
 Outlaw - child of Ignominy and Fraud , but the Starry Daughter of POETRY 
 and ART ! Lo , where they glide away under the leafless , melancholy tree . 
 Leafless and melancholy ! no ! Verdure and blossom and the smile of spring 
 be upon every bough ! " 

 " I suppose , " say Alban , " it will not now break Lionel 's heart to learn 
 that not an hour before I leave London , I hear from a friend at the 
 Horse Guards that it have be resolve to substitute the regiment for 
 Lionel 's ; and it will be for some time yet , I suspect , that he must 
 submit to be in gloriously happy . come this way , George , a word in your 
 ear . " and Alban , draw his nephew aside , tell he of Jasper 's state , 
 and of Arabella 's request . " not a word to - day on these mournful topic , 
 to poor Willy . to - day let nothing add to his pain to have lose a 
 grandchild , or dim his consolation in the happiness and security 
 his Sophy gain in that loss . but to - morrow you will go and see the 
 stricken - down sinner , and prepare the father for the bad . I make a 
 point of see Dr. F. last night . he give Jasper but a few week . he 
 compare he to a mountain , not merely shatter by an earthquake , but 
 burn out by its own inward fire . " 

 " a few week only , " sigh George . " well , Time , that seem everything 
 to man , have not even an existence in the sight of God . to that old man 
 I owe the power of speech to argue , to exhort , and to comfort ; - he be 
 train I to kneel by the deathbed of his son ! " 

 " you believe , " ask the Man of the World , " in the efficacy of a 
 deathbe repentance , when a sinner have sin till the power of sin 
 be go ? " 

 " I believe , " reply the Preacher , " that in health there be nothing 
 so unsafe as trust in a deathbed repentance ; I believe that on the 
 deathbe , it can not be unsafe to repent ! " 

 Alban look thoughtful , and George turn to rejoin Waife , to whom 
 Vance be narrate the discovery of Sophy 's parentage ; while Fairthorn , 
 as he listen , draw his flute from his pocket , and begin screw it , 
 impatient to vent in delicate music what he never could have set into 
 word for his blunder , untunable tongue . the Colonel join Darrell , 
 and hasten to unfold more fully the story which Vance be recite to 
 Waife . 

 Brief as it can , be the explanation due to the reader . Vance 's sister 
 have die in childbirth . the poor young poet , unfit to cope with 
 penury , his sensitive nature combine with a frame that could feebly 
 resist the strain of exhaust emotion , disappoint in fame , 
 despairing of fortune , dependent for bread on his wife 's boyish brother , 
 and harass by petty debt in a foreign land , have be fast pin 
 away , even before an affliction to which all the rest seem as nought . 
 with that affliction he break down at once , and die a few day after 
 his wife , leave an infant not a week old . a french female singer , of 
 some repute in the theatre , and make a provincial tour , be lodge 
 in the same house as the young couple . she have that compassionate heart 
 which be more common than prudence or very strict principle with the 
 tribe who desert the prosaic true world for the light sparkle false 
 one . she have assist the young couple , in their later day , with purse 
 and kind office ; have be present at the birth of the infant - the death 
 of the mother ; and have promise Arthur Branthwaite that she would 
 take care of his child , until she could safely convey it to his wife 's 
 relation , while he weep to own that they , poor as himself , must regard 
 such a charge as a burthen . 

 the singer write to apprise Mrs. Vance of the death of her daughter and 
 son - in - law , and the birth of the infant whom she undertake shortly to 
 send to England . but the babe , whom meanwhile she take to herself , get 
 hold of her affection ; with that yearning for child which make 
 so remarkable and almost uniform a characteristic of french woman   if 
 themselves childles   in the wandering bohemian class that separate 
 they from the ordinary household affection , never dead in the heart 
 of woman till womanhood itself be dead , the singer clung to the orphan 
 little one to whom she be for the moment render the care of a 
 mother . she could not bear to part with it ; she resolve to adopt it as 
 her own . the knowledge of Mrs. Vance 's circumstance - the idea that the 
 orphan , to herself a blessing , would be an unwelcome encumbrance to its 
 own relation - remove every scruple from a mind unaccustomed to suffer 
 reflection to stand in the way of an impulse . she write word to Mrs. 
 Vance that the child be dead . she trust that her letter would 
 suffice , without other evidence , to relation so poor , and who could 
 have no suspicion of any interest to deceive they . her trust be 
 well found . Mrs. Vance and the boy Frank , whose full confidence and 
 gratitude have be already secure to their correspondent for her kind 
 office to the young parent , accept , without a demur or a question , 
 the news that the infant be no more . the singer move on to the next 
 town at which she be professionally engage . the infant , hitherto 
 bring up by hand , become ail . the medical adviser call in 
 recommend the natural food , and find , in a village close by , the 
 nurse to whom a little time before Jasper Losely have consign his own 
 daughter . the latter die ; the nurse then remove to Paris to reside 
 with the singer , who have obtain a lucrative appointment at one of the 
 metropolitan theatre . in less than two year the singer herself fall 
 a victim to a prevail epidemic . she have live without thought of the 
 morrow ; her debt exceed her mean ; her effect be sell . the nurse , 
 who have meanwhile become a widow , come for advice and refuge to her 
 sister , who be in the service of Gabrielle Desmarets . Gabrielle , be 
 naturally appeal to , see the infant , hear the story , look into 
 the statement which , by way of confession , the singer have draw up , and 
 sign , in a notary 's presence , before she die ; look into the letter 
 from Mrs. Vance , and the schoolboy scrawl from Frank , both to the 
 singer and to the child 's parent , which the actress have carefully 
 preserve ; convince herself of the poverty and obscurity of the 
 infant 's natural guardian and next of kin ; and say to Jasper , who be 
 just dissipate the fortune hand over to he as survivor of his wife 
 and child : " there be what , if well - manage , may retain your hold on a 
 rich father - in - law when all else have fail . you have but to say 
 that this infant be his grandchild ; the nurse we can easily bribe , 
 or persuade to confirm the tale . I , whom he already know as that 
 respectable baroness , your Matilda 's friend , can give to the story some 
 probable touch . the lone childless man must rejoice to think that 
 a tie be leave to he . the infant be exquisitely pretty ; her face will 
 plead for she . his heart will favour the idea too much to make he very 
 rigorous in his investigation . take the infant . Doubtless in your own 
 country you can find some one to rear it at little or no expense , until 
 the time come for appeal to your father - in - law when no other claim on 
 his purse remain . " 

 Jasper assent with the insouciant docility by which he always 
 acknowledge Gabrielle 's astuter intellect . he see the nurse ; it be 
 clear that she have nothing to gain by take the child to 
 english relation so poor . they might refuse to believe she , and 
 certainly - could not reward . to rid herself of the infant , and obtain 
 the mean to return to her native village with a few hundred franc in 
 her purse , there be no promise she be not willing to make , no story 
 she be too honest to tell , no paper she be too timid to sign . 
 Jasper be go to London on some adventure of his own . he take the 
 infant - chance on Arabella - the reader know the rest . the indifference 
 ever manifest by Jasper to a child not his own - the hardness with 
 which he have contemplate and plan his father 's separation from one 
 whom he have impose by false pretext on the old man 's love , and whom 
 he only regard as an alien encumbrance upon the scanty mean of 
 her delude protector - the fitful and desultory mode in which , when 
  contrary to the reasoning which Gabrielle have base upon a very large 
 experience of the credulity of human nature in general , but in utter 
 ignorance of the nature peculiar to Darrell   his first attempt 
 at imposition have be so scornfully resist by his indignant 
 father - in - law , he have play fast and loose with a means of extortion 
 which , though loth to abandon , he know would not bear any strict 
 investigation ; - all this be now clear to the reader . and the reader will 
 also comprehend why , partly from fear that his father might betray he , 
 partly from a compassionate unwillingness to deprive the old man of a 
 belief in which William Losely say he have find such solace , Jasper , in 
 his last interview with his father , shrink from say , " but she be not 
 your grandchild ! " the idea of recur to the true relation of the 
 child naturally never enter into Jasper 's brain . he consider they to 
 be as poor as himself . they buy from he the child of parent whore they 
 have evidently , by their letter , tax themselves to the utmost , and in 
 vain , to save from absolute want ! so wild seem the notion , that he have 
 long since forget that relation so useless exist . fortunately the 
 nurse have preserve the write statement of the singer - the letter 
 by Mrs. Vance and Frank - the certificate of the infant 's birth and 
 baptism - some poor relic of Sophy 's ill - fat parent - manuscript of 
 Arthur 's poem - baby - cap with initial and armorial crest , wrought , 
 before her confinement , by the young wife - all of which have be 
 consign by the singer to the nurse , and which the nurse willingly 
 dispose of to Mrs. Crane , with her own formal deposition of the fact , 
 confirm by her sister , Gabrielle 's old confidential - attendant , and 
 who , more favoured than her mistress , be live peaceably in the rural 
 scene of her early innocence , upon the interest of the gain she have 
 save in no innocent service - confirm yet more by reference to many 
 whose testimonial could trace , step by step , the child 's record from 
 its birth to its transfer to Jasper , and by the brief but distinct 
 avowal , in tremulous line , writ by Jasper himself . as a skein cross 
 and tangle , when the last knot be loosen , slip suddenly free , so 
 this long bewilder mystery now become clear as a commonplace ! what 
 year of suffer Darrell might have be save have he himself see and 
 examine the nurse - have his inquiry be less bound by the fear of 
 his pride - have the great lawyer not have himself for a client ! 

 Darrell silently return to Alban Morley the paper over which he have 
 cast his eye as they walk slowly to and fro the slop bank of the 
 lake . 

 " it be well , " say he , glance fondly , as Fairthorn have glance before 
 he , towards the old House , now free from doom , and permit to last 
 its time . " it be well , " he repeat , look away towards that part of 
 the landscape where he could just catch a glimpse of Sophy 's light form 
 beyond the barbed thorn - tree ; " it be well , " he repeat thrice with a 
 sigh . " poor human nature ! Alban , can you conceive it ? I , who once so 
 dread that that poor child should prove to be of my blood , now , in 
 know that she be not , feel a void , a loss ! to Lionel I be so distant 
 a kinsman ! - to his wife , to his child , what can I be ? a rich old 
 man ; the soon he be in his grave the well . a few tear , and then 
 the will ! but , as your nephew say , ' this life be but a school ; ' the 
 new - comer in the last form think the head - boy just leave so old ! and 
 to we , look back , it seem but the same yesterday whether we be the 
 last comer or the head - boy . " 

 " I think , " say Alban , plaintively , " that , for a short time at least , 
 I have do with ' painful subject . ' you revel in they ! County Guy , you 
 have not leave school yet ; leave it with credit ; win the good prize . " and 
 Alban plunge at once into the CRISIS . he grow eloquent ; the Party , the 
 Country , the Great Measure to be intrust to Darrell , if he would 
 but undertake it as a member of the Cabinet ; the Peerage , the House of 
 Vipont , and immortal glory ! - eloquent as Ulysses harangue the son of 
 Peleus in Troilus and Cressida . 

 Darrell listen coldly ; only while Alban dwelt on " the measure , " 
 in which , when it be yet too unripe for practical statesman , he have 
 attach his faith as a thinker , the orator 's eye flash with young 
 fire . a great truth be eternally clear to a great heart that have once 
 nourish its germ and foresee its fruit . but when Alban quit that 
 part of his theme , all the rest seem wearisome to his listener . they 
 have now wind their walk to the opposite side of the lake , and pause 
 near the thick beech - tree , hallow and sadden by such secret 
 association to the mournful owner . 

 " no , my dear Alban , " say Darrell , " I can not summon up sufficient youth 
 and freshness of spirit to re - enter the turbulent arena I have leave . ah ! 
 look yonder where Lionel and Sophy move ! give I , I do not say Lionel 's 
 year , but Lionel 's wealth of hope , and I might still have a wish for 
 fame and a voice for England ; but it be a subtle truth , that when a man 
 miss a home , a link between his country and himself be go . vulgar 
 ambition may exist - the selfish desire of power ; they be never very 
 strong in I , and now less strong than the desire of rest ; but that 
 beautiful , genial , glorious union of all the affection of social 
 citizen , which begin at the hearth and widen round the land , be not 
 for the hermit 's cell . " 

 Alban be about to give up the argument in irritable despair , when 
 happen to turn his eye towards the farth depth of the beech - grove , 
 he catch a glimpse - no matter what of ; but quicken his step in the 
 direction to which his glance have wander , he seat himself on 
 the gnarl root of a tree that seem the monarch of the wood , 
 widespreade as that under which Tityrus recline of old ; and there , 
 out of sight of the group on the opposite bank of the lake - there , as 
 if he have seek the gloomiest and most secret spot for what he have 
 yet to say , he let fall , in the most distinct yet languid tone of his 
 thoroughbred , cultured enunciation : " I have a message to you from Lady 
 Montfort . restless man , do come near , and stand still . I be tired to 
 death . " Darrell approach , and , lean against the trunk of the giant 
 tree , say , with fold arm and compress lip : 

 " a message from Lady Montfort ! " 

 " yes . I should have tell you , by - the - by , that it be she who , be 
 a woman , of course succeed where I , be a man , despite incredible 
 pain and trouble , signally fail , discover Arabella Fossett , alias 
 Crane , and obtain from she the document which free your life forever 
 from a haunting and torture fear . I urge she to accompany I hither , 
 and place the document herself in your hand . she refuse ; you be not 
 worth so much trouble , my dear Guy . I request she at least to suffer 
 I to show to you a paper contain Jasper Losely 's confession of a 
 conspiracy to poison her mind against you some year ago - a conspiracy 
 so villianously ingenious that it would have completely exonerate any 
 delicate and proud young girl from the charge of fickleness in yield 
 to an impulse of pique and despair . but Lady Montfort do not wish to be 
 exonerate ; your good opinion have cease to be of the slight value to 
 she . but to come to the point . she bid I tell you that , if you persist 
 in shelter yourself in a hermit 's cell from the fear of meet 
 she - if she be so dangerous to your peace - you may dismiss such absurd 
 apprehension . she be go abroad , and between you and I , my dear 
 fellow , I have not a doubt that she will marry again before six month 
 be out . I speak of your suffering ; she tell I she have not the 
 small compassion for they . " 

 " Alban Morley , you presume to talk thus of I ? " cry Darrell , livid 
 with rage . 

 " Strike , but hear I . it be true you would not own , when I be last at 
 Fawley , that she be the cause of your secluded life , of your blighted 
 career ; but I know well . however , let I go on before you strangle 
 I . Lady Montfort 's former feeling of friendship for you be evidently 
 quite change ; and she charge I to add , that she really hop that you 
 would exert your good sense and pride   of which Heaven know you have 
 plenty   to eradicate an absurd and romantic sentiment , so displease to 
 she , and so - " 

 " it be false ! it be false ! what have I do to you , Colonel Morley , that 
 you should slander I thus ? I send you message of taunt and insult , Mr. 
 Darrell ! you can not believe it - you can not ! " 

 Caroline Montfort stand between the two , as if she have drop from 
 heaven . 

 a smile , half in triumph , half in irony , curve the lip of the fine 
 gentleman . it fade instantly as his eye turn from the face of the 
 earnest woman to that of the earnest man . Alban Morley involuntarily 
 bow his head , murmur some word unheard , and pass from the place 
 unheeded . 

 not by concert nor premeditation be Caroline Montfort on that spot ; she 
 have consent to accompany her cousin to Fawley , but before reach the 
 park gate her courage fail she ; she would remain within the carriage ; 
 the Colonel , want in London as soon as possible , whatever the result 
 of his political mission to Darrell , could not stay long at Fawley ; she 
 would return with he . Vance 's presence and impatient desire to embrace 
 his niece do not allow the Colonel an occasion for argument and parley . 
 chafe at this fresh experience of the capricious uncertainty of woman , 
 he have walk on with Vance to the Manor - house . leave alone , Caroline 
 could not endure the stillness and inaction which increase the tumult 
 of her thought ; she would at least have one more look - it might be the 
 last - at the scene in which her childhood have sport - her youth know 
 its first happy dream . but a few yard across those circumscribe 
 demesne , on through those shadowy serrie grove , and she should steal 
 unperceive in view of the house , the beloved lake , perhaps even once 
 more catch a pass glimpse of the owner . she resolve , she glide 
 on ; she gain the beech - grove , when , by the abrupt wind of the bank , 
 Darrell and Alban come suddenly on the very spot . the flutter of 
 her robe , as she turn to retreat , catch Alban 's eye ; the reader 
 comprehend with what wily intent , conceive on the moment , that 
 unscrupulous schemer shape the word which chain her footstep , and 
 then sting she on to self - disclosure . tremble and blushing , she now 
 stand before the startled man - he startle out of every other sentiment 
 and feeling than that of ineffable , exquisite delight to be once more in 
 her presence ; she , after her first passionate outburst , hasten on , in 
 confuse break word , to explain that she be there but by accident - by 
 chance ; confusion grow deep and deep - how explain the motive that 
 have charm her step to the spot ? 

 suddenly from the opposite bank come the music of the magic flute , and 
 her voice as suddenly stop and fail she . 

 " again - again , " say Darrell , dreamily . " the same music ! the same air ! 
 and this the same place on which we two stand together when I first 
 dare to say , ' I love ! ' look ! we be under the very tree ! look ! there 
 be the date I carve on the bark when you be go , but have leave Hope 
 behind . ah , Caroline , why can I not now resign myself to age ? why be 
 youth , while I speak , rush back into my heart , into my soul ? why 
 can not I say , ' gratefully I accept your tender friendship ; let the past 
 be forget ; through what rest to I of the future while on earth , be 
 to I as a child . I can not - I can not ! go ! " 

 she draw near to he , gently , timidly . " even that , Darrell , - even 
 that ; something in your life - let I be something still ! " 

 " ah , " he say with melancholy bitterness , " you deceive I no long now ! 
 you own that , when here we stand last and exchange our troth , you in 
 the blossom , and I in the prime , of life - you own that it be no woman 's 
 love , deaf to all calumny , proof to all craft that could wrong the 
 absent ; no woman 's love , warm as the heart , undye as the soul , that 
 you pledge I then ? " 

 " Darrell , it be not - though then I think it be . " 

 " ay , ay , " he continue with a smile , as if of triumph in his own pang , 
 ' so that truth be confess at last ! and when , once more free , you write 
 to I the letter I return , rent in fragment , to your hand - or when , 
 forgive my rude outrage and fierce reproach , you speak to I so gently 
 yonder , a few week since , in these lonely shade , then what be your 
 sentiment , your motif ? be they not those of a long - suppress and 
 kind remorse ? of a charity akin to that which bind rich to poor , bow 
 happiness to suffering ? - some memory of gratitude - nay , perhaps of 
 childlike affection ? - all amiable , all generous , all steep in that 
 sweetness of nature to which I unconsciously render justice in the 
 anguish I endure in lose you ; but do not tell I that even then you 
 be under the influence of woman 's love . " 

 " Darrell , I be not . " 

 " you own it , and you suffer I to see you again ! trifl and cruel one , 
 be it but to enjoy the sense of your undiminished , unalterable power ? " 

 " alas , Darrell ! alas ! why be I here ? - why so yearning , yet so afraid to 
 come ? why do my heart fail when these tree rise in sight against the 
 sky ? - why , why - why be it draw hither by the spell I could not resist ? 
 Alas , Darrell , alas ! I be a woman now - and - and this - " 

 she lower her veil , and turn away ; her lip could not utter the 
 word , because the word be not pity , not remorse , not remembrance , 
 not even affection ; and the woman love now too well to subject to the 
 hazard of rejection - LOVE ! 

 " stay , oh stay ! " cry Darrell . " oh that I could dare to ask you to 
 complete the sentence ! I know - I know by the mysterious sympathy of my 
 own soul , that you could never deceive I more ! be it - be it - " 

 his lip falter too ; but her hand be clasp in his ; her head be 
 recline upon his breast ; the veil be withdraw from the sweet downcast 
 face ; and softly on her ear steal the murmured word , " again and now , 
 till the grave - oh , by this hallow kiss , again - the Caroline of old ! " 

 Fuller and full , spread , wave after wave , throughout the air , till 
 it seem interfuse and commingle with the breath which the listener 
 breathe , the flute 's mellow gush stream along . the sun slop in peace 
 towards the west ; not a cloud in those sky , clear see through yon 
 bough strip of leaf , and render more vivid the evergreen of the 
 arbute and laurel . 

 Lionel and Sophy be now seat on yon moss - grow trunk , on either side 
 the old grey - haired man , as if agree for a while even to forget each . 
 other , that they may make he feel how fondly he be remember . Sophy be 
 rest both her hand on the old man 's shoulder , look into his face , 
 and murmur in his ear with voice like the coo of a happy dove . 
 ah , fear not , Sophy ; he be happy too - he who never think of himself . 
 look - the playful smile round his arch lip ; look - now he be show 
 off Sir Isaac to Vance ; with austere solemnity the dog go through his 
 trick ; and Vance , with hand stroke his chin , be moralise on all 
 that might have befall have he grudge his three pound to that famous 
 INVESTMENT . 

 behind that group , shadow by the Thorn - tree , stand the PREACHER , 
 thoughtful and grave , foresee the grief that must come to the old man 
 with the morrow , when he will learn that a guilty son near his end , and 
 will hasten to comfort Jasper 's last day with pardon . but the Preacher 
 look not down to the death - couch alone ; on and high over death look 
 the Preacher ! by what word Heavenly Mercy may lend to his lip shall he 
 steal away , yet in time , to the soul of the dying , and justify murmur 
 of hope to the elm of a life so dark with the shade of its past ? and 
 to he , to the Preacher , they who survive - the two mourner will come 
 in their freshness of sorrow ! he , the old man ? Nay , to he there will be 
 comfort . his spirit Heaven 's kindness have temper to trial ; and , alas 
 for that son , what could father hope more than a death free from shame , 
 and a chance yet vouchsafe for repentance ? but she , the grim , iron - grey 
 woman ? the Preacher 's interest , I know , will soon centre on she : - and 
 balm may yet drop on thy wound , thou poor , grim , iron - grey , love 
 woman . 

 Lo ! that traitor , the flute - player , over whom fall the deep grateful 
 shade from the eave of the roof - tree reprieve ; though unconscious as 
 yet of that happy change in the lot of the master which , ere long , 
 may complete   and haply for son spring in truth from the blood of the 
 Darrell   yon skeleton pile , and consummate , for end nobler far , the 
 plan of a grand life imperfect ; - though as yet the musician nor know 
 nor conjecture the joy that his infamous treason to Sophy so little 
 deserve ; yet , as if by those fine perception of sense impress 
 ere they happen , by change of pleasure and of pain , which art so 
 mysteriously give to the mind from which music be bear , his air , of 
 themselves , float in joy : like a bird at the coming of spring , it be 
 gladness that make he melodious . 

 and Alban Morley , seemingly intent upon the sketch which his amiable 
 niece - in - law submit to his critical taste ere she venture to show it 
 to Vance , be look from under his brow towards the grove , out from 
 which , tower over all its dark brother , soar the old trysting 
 beech - tree , and to himself he be say : " ten to one that the old House 
 of Vipont now weather the CRISIS ; and a thousand to one that I find at 
 last my armchair at the hearth of my schoolfriend , Guy Darrell ! " 

 and the lake be as smooth as glass ; and the swan , hearken the music , 
 rest still , with white breast against the grass of the margin ; and 
 the doe , where she stand , her fore - foot in the water , lift her head 
 wistfully , with nostril distend , and wonder soft eye that be 
 miss the master . now full on the beech - grove shin the westering 
 sun ; out from the gloomy beech - grove into the golden sunlight - they 
 come , they come - Man and the Helpmate , two life re - betrothed - two soul 
 re - united . be it evermore ! amen . 
