"MY NOVEL . " 

 by Edward Bulwer - Lytton 




 BOOK first . 




 initial CHAPTER 

  - show how MY novel come to be WRITTEN . 


 Scene , the hall in UNCLE ROLAND 'S tower ; time , night ; season , winter . 


 MR . CAXTON be seat before a great geographical globe , which he be 
 turn round leisurely , and " for his own recreation , " as , accord to 
 Sir Thomas Browne , a philosopher should turn round the orb of which that 
 globe profess to be the representation and effigy . my mother have 
 just adorn a very small frock with a very smart braid , be hold 
 it out at arm 's length , the more to admire the effect . Blanche , though 
 lean both hand on my mother 's shoulder , be not regard the frock , 
 but glance towards PISISTRATUS , who , seat near the fire , lean back 
 in the chair , and his head bend over his breast , seem in a very bad 
 humour . Uncle Roland , who have become a great novel - reader , be deep in 
 the mystery of some fascinating Third volume . Mr. Squills have bring 
 the " Times " in his pocket for his own special profit and delectation , 
 and be now bend his brow over " the state of the money market , " in 
 great doubt whether railway share can possibly fall low , - for Mr. 
 Squills , happy man ! have large saving , and do not know what to do with 
 his money , or , to use his own phrase , " how to buy in at the cheap in 
 order to sell out at the dearest . " 

 MR . CAXTON   musingly . - " it must have be a monstrous long journey . it 
 would be somewhere hereabouts , I take it , that they would split off . " 

 MY mother   mechanically , and in order to show Austin that she pay he 
 the compliment of attend to his remark . - " who split off , my dear ? " 

 " bless I , Kitty , " say my father , in great admiration , " you ask 
 just the question which it be most difficult to answer . an ingenious 
 speculator on race contend that the Danes , whose descendant make the 
 chief part of our northern population   and indeed , if his hypothesis 
 could be correct , we must suppose all the ancient worshipper of Odin , 
 be of the same origin as the Etrurians . and why , Kitty , - I just ask 
 you , why ? " 

 my mother shake her head thoughtfully , and turn the frock to the other 
 side of the light . 

 " because , forsooth , " cry my father , explode , - " because the Etrurians 
 call their god the ' AEsar , ' and the Scandinavians call theirs the 
 ' AEsir , ' or ' Aser ' ! and where do you think this adventurous scholar put 
 their cradle ? " 

 " Cradle ! " say my mother , dreamily , " it must be in the nursery . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " exactly , - in the nursery of the human race , just here , " 
 and my father point to the globe ; " bound , you see , by the river 
 Halys , and in that region which , take its name from Ees , or as   a 
 word designate light or fire , have be immemorially call Asia . now , 
 Kitty , from Ees , or as , our ethnological speculator would derive not 
 only Asia , the land , but AEsar , or Aser , its primitive inhabitant . 
 hence he suppose the origin of the Etrurians and the Scandinavians . but 
 if we give he so much , we must give he more , and deduce from the same 
 origin the Es of the Celt and the Ized of the Persian , and - what will 
 be of more use to he , I dare say , poor man , than all the rest put 
 together - the aes of the Romans , - that is , the God of copper - money - a 
 very powerful household god he be to this day ! " 

 my mother look musingly at her frock , as if she be take my 
 father 's proposition into serious consideration . 

 " so perhaps , " resume my father , " and not unconformably with sacred 
 record , from one great parent horde come all those various tribe , 
 carry with they the name of their beloved Asia ; and whether they 
 wander north , south , or west , exalt their own emphatic designation 
 of ' child of the Land of Light ' into the title of god . and to think " 
  add Mr. Caxton pathetically , gaze upon that speck on the globe on 
 which his forefinger rest , - " to think how little they change for 
 the well when they get to the Don , or entangle their raft amidst the 
 iceberg of the Baltic , - so comfortably off as they be here , if they 
 could but have stay quiet . " 

 " and why the deuce could not they ? " ask Mr. Squills . " pressure of 
 population , and not enough to live upon , I suppose , " say my father . 

 pisistratu   sulkily . - " More probably they do away with the Corn Laws , 
 sir . " 

 " Papae ! " quoth my father , " that throw a new light on the subject . " 

 PISISTRATUS   full of his grievance , and not care three straw about 
 the origin of the Scandinavians . - " I know that if we be to lose l500 
 every year on a farm which we hold rent - free , and which the good judge 
 allow to be a perfect model for the whole country , we have well make 
 haste and turn AEsir , or Aser , or whatever you call they , and fix a 
 settlement on the property of other nation , otherwise , I suspect , our 
 probable settlement will be on the parish . " 

 MR . SQUILLS   who , it must be remember , be an enthusiastic 
 free - trader . " you have only get to put more capital on the land . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " well , Mr. Squills , as you think so well of that 
 investment , put your capital on it . I promise that you shall have every 
 shilling of profit . " 

 MR . SQUILLS   hastily retreat behind the " Times "   - " I do not   think 
 the great Western can fall any lower , though it be hazardous ; I can but 
 venture a few hundred - " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " on our land , Squills ? - thank you . " 

 MR . SQUILLS . - " no , no , - anything but that ; on the great Western . " 

 Pisistratus relax into gloom . Blanche steal up coaxingly , and get 
 snub for her pain . 

 a pause . 

 MR . CAXTON . - " there be two golden rule of life ; one relate to the 
 mind , and the other to the pocket . the first be , if our thought get 
 into a low , nervous , aguish condition , we should make they change the 
 air ; the second be comprise in the proverb , ' it be good to have two 
 string to one 's bow . ' therefore , Pisistratus , I tell you what you must 
 do , - write a book ! " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " write a book ! against the abolition of the Corn Laws ? 
 Faith , sir , the mischief 's do ! it take a much well pen than mine to 
 write down an act of parliament . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " I only say , ' write a book . ' all the rest be the addition 
 of your own headlong imagination . " 

 PISISTRATUS   with the recollection of the Great Book rise before 
 he . - " indeed , sir , I should think that that would just finish we ! " 

 MR . CAXTON   not seem to heed the interruption . - " a book that will 
 sell ; a book that will prop up the fall of price ; a book that will 
 distract your mind from its dismal apprehension , and restore your 
 affection to your specie and your hope in the ultimate triumph of 
 sound principle - by the sight of a favourable balance at the end of 
 the yearly account . it be astonish what a difference that little 
 circumstance make in our view of thing in general . I remember 
 when the bank in which Squills have incautiously leave L1000 break , one 
 remarkably healthy year , that he become a great alarmist , and say that 
 the country be on the verge of ruin ; whereas you see now , when , thank 
 to a long succession of sickly season , he have a surplus capital to risk 
 in the great Western , he be firmly persuade that England be never in 
 so prosperous a condition . " 

 MR . SQUILLS   rather sullenly . - " Pooh , pooh . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " write a book , my son , - write a book . need I tell you that 
 Money or Moneta , accord to Hyginus , be the mother of the Muses ? 
 write a book . " 

 BLANCHE and my mother   in full chorus . - " o yes , Sisty , a book ! a book ! 
 you must write a book . " 

 " I be sure , " quoth my Uncle Roland , slam down the volume he have just 
 conclude , " he could write a devilish deal well book than this ; and 
 how I come to read such trash night after night be more than I could 
 possibly explain to the satisfaction of any intelligent jury , if I be 
 put into a witness - box , and examine in the mild manner by my own 
 counsel . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " you see that Roland tell we exactly what sort of a book 
 it shall be . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " Trash , sir ? " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " no , - that be , not necessarily trash ; but a book of that 
 class which , whether trash or not , people can not   help read . novel 
 have become a necessity of the age . you must write a novel . " 

 PISISTRATUS   flatter , but dubious .-"a novel ! but every subject on 
 which novel can be write be preoccupy . there be novel of low 
 life , novel of high life , military novel , naval novel , novel 
 philosophical , novel religious , novel historical , novel descriptive 
 of India , the Colonies , Ancient Rome , and the egyptian pyramid . from 
 what bird , wild eagle , or barn - door fowl , can I 

  " ' pluck one unwearied plume from Fancy 's wing ? ' " 

 MR . CAXTON   after a little thought . - " you remember the story which 
 trevanion   I beg his pardon , Lord Ulswater   tell we the other night ? 
 that give you something of the romance of real life for your plot , put 
 you chiefly among scene with which you be familiar , and furnish you 
 with character which have be very sparingly deal with since the time 
 of Fielding . you can give we the country Squire , as you remember he 
 in your youth ; it be a speciman of a race worth preserve , the old 
 idiosyncrasy of which be rapidly die off , as the railway bring 
 Norfolk and Yorkshire within easy reach of the manner of London . you 
 can give we the old - fashioned Parson , as in all essential he may yet be 
 find - but before you have to drag he out of the great tractarian bog ; 
 and , for the rest , I really think that while , as I be tell , many popular 
 writer be do their good , especially in France , and perhaps a little 
 in England , to set class against class , and pick up every stone in the 
 kennel to shy at a gentleman with a good coat on his back , something 
 useful might be do by a few good - humour sketch of those innocent 
 criminal a little well off than their neighbour , whom , however we 
 dislike they , I take it for grant we shall have to endure , in one 
 shape or another , as long as civilization exist ; and they seem , on the 
 whole , as good in their present shape as we be likely to get , shake the 
 dice - box of society how we will . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " very well say , sir ; but this rural country gentleman 
 life be not so new as you think . there be Washington Irving - " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " Charming ; but rather the manner of the last century than 
 this . you may as well cite Addison and Sir Roger de Coverley . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " ' tremaine ' and ' De Vere . ' " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " nothing can be more graceful , nor more unlike what I mean . 
 the Pales and Terminus I wish you to put up in the field be familiar 
 image , that you may cut out of an oak tree , - not beautiful marble 
 statue , on porphyry pedestal , twenty foot high . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " Miss Austen ; Mrs. Gore , in her masterpiece of ' Mrs. 
 Armytage ; ' Mrs. Marsh , too ; and then   for scottish manner   Miss 
 Ferrier ! " 

 MR . CAXTON   grow cross . - " oh , if you can not treat on bucolic but 
 what you must hear some Virgil or other cry ' stop thief , ' you deserve 
 to be toss by one of your own ' short - horn . ' "   still more 
 contemptuously   - " I be sure I do not   know why we spend so much money 
 on send our son to school to learn Latin , when that Anachronism 
 of your , Mrs. Caxton , can not   even construe a line and a half of 
 Phaedrus , - Phaedrus , Mrs. Caxton , a book which be in Latin what Goody 
 two - shoe be in the vernacular ! " 

 MRS . CAXTON   alarmed and indignant . - " Fie ! Austin I I be sure you can 
 construe Phaedrus , dear ! " 

 Pisistratus prudently preserve silence . 

 MR . CAXTON . - " I will try he - 

  " ' Sua cuique quum sit animi cogitatio 
  Colurque proprius . ' 

 " what do that mean ? " 

 pisistratits   smile   - " that every man have some colour matter within 
 he , to give his own tinge to - " 

 " his own novel , " interrupt my father . " Contentus peragis ! " 

 during the latter part of this dialogue , Blanche have sew together three 
 quire of the good Bath paper , and she now place they on a little table 
 before I , with her own inkstand and steel pen . 

 my mother put her finger to her lip , and say , " hush ! " my father 
 return to the cradle of the AEsas ; Captain Roland lean his cheek on 
 his hand , and gaze abstractedly on the fire ; Mr. Squills fall into a 
 placid doze ; and , after three sigh that would have melt a heart of 
 stone , I rush into - MY novel . 




 CHAPTER II . 

 " there have never be occasion to use they since I have   be in the 
 parish , " say Parson Dale . 

 " what do that prove ? " quoth the squire , sharply , and look the 
 parson full in the face . 

 " prove ! " repeat Mr. Dale , with a smile of benign , yet too conscious 
 superiority , " what do experience prove ? " 

 " that your forefather be great blockhead , and that their descendant 
 be not a whit the wiser . " 

 " squire , " reply the parson , " although that be a melancholy conclusion , 
 yet if you mean it to apply universally , and not to the family of the 
 Dales in particular ; it be not one which my candour as a reasoner , and 
 my humility as a mortal , will permit I to challenge . " 

 " I defy you , " say Mr. Hazeldean , triumphantly . " but to stick to the 
 subject   which it be monstrous hard to do when one talk with a parson , 
 I only just ask you to look yonder , and tell I on your conscience - I 
 do not   even say as a parson , but as a parishioner - whether you ever see a 
 more disreputable spectacle ? " 

 while he speak , the squire , lean heavily on the parson 's left 
 shoulder , extend his cane in a line parallel with the right eye of 
 that disputatious ecclesiastic , so that he might guide the organ of 
 sight to the object he have thus unflatteringly describe . 

 " I confess , " say the parson , " that , regard by the eye of the sens , 
 it be a thing that in its good day have small pretension to beauty , and 
 be not elevate into the picturesque even by neglect and decay . but , my 
 friend , regard by the eye of the inner man , - of the rural philosopher 
 and parochial legislator , - I say it be by neglect and decay that it 
 be render a very pleasing feature in what I may call ' the moral 
 topography of a parish . ' " 

 the squire look at the parson as if he could have beat he ; and , 
 indeed , regard the object in dispute not only with the eye of the 
 outer man , but the eye of law and order , the eye of a country gentleman 
 and a justice of the peace , the spectacle be scandalously disreputable . 
 it be moss - grown ; it be worm - eat ; it be break right in the middle ; 
 through its four socketless eye , neighbour by the nettle , peer 
 the thistle , - the thistle ! a forest of thistle ! - and , to complete the 
 degradation of the whole , those thistle have attract the donkey of 
 an itinerant tinker ; and the irreverent animal be in the very act of 
 take his luncheon out of the eye and jaw of - THE PARISH stock . 

 the squire look as if he could have beat the parson ; but as he be 
 not without some slight command of temper , and a substitute be luckily 
 at hand , he gulp down his resentment , and make a rush - at the donkey ! 

 now the donkey be hamper by a rope to its fore - foot , to the which be 
 attach a billet of wood , call technically " a clog , " so that it have 
 no fair chance of escape from the assault its sacrilegious luncheon have 
 justly provoke . but the ass turn round with unusual nimbleness at 
 the first stroke of the cane , the squire catch his foot in the rope , 
 and go head over heel among the thistle . the donkey gravely bend 
 down , and thrice smell or sniff its prostrate foe ; then , have 
 convince itself that it have nothing furth to apprehend for the 
 present , and very willing to make the good of the reprieve , accord 
 to the poetical admonition , " gather your rosebud while you may , " it 
 crop a thistle in full bloom , close to the ear of the squire , - so 
 close , indeed , that the parson think the ear be go ; and with the 
 more probability , inasmuch as the squire , feel the warm breath of the 
 creature , bellow out with all the force of lung accustom to give a 
 View - hallo ! 

 " bless I , be it go ? " say the parson , thrust his person between 
 the ass and the squire . 

 " Zounds and the devil ! " cry the squire , rub himself , as he rise to 
 his foot . 

 " hush ! " say the parson , gently . " what a horrible oath ! " 

 " horrible oath ! if you have my nankeen on , " say the squire , still 
 rub himself , " and have fall into a thicket of thistle , with a 
 donkey 's tooth within an inch of your ear - " 

 " it be not go , then ? " interrupt the parson . 

 " no , - that be , I think not , " say the squire , dubiously ; and he clap 
 his hand to the organ in question . " no ! it be not go ! " 

 " thank Heaven ! " say the good clergyman , kindly . " Hum , " growl the 
 squire , who be now once more engage in rub himself . " thank Heaven 
 indeed , when I be as full of thorn as a porcupine ! I should just like 
 to know what use thistle be in the world . " 

 " for donkey to eat , if you will let they , squire , " answer the parson . 

 " Ugh , you beast ! " cry Mr. Hazeldean , all his wrath reawaken , whether 
 by the reference to the donkey specie , or his inability to reply to 
 the parson , or perhaps by some sudden prick too sharp for 
 humanity - especially humanity in nankeen - to endure without kick . 
 " Ugh , you beast ! " he exclaim , shake his cane at the donkey , which , 
 at the interposition of the parson , have respectfully recoil a few 
 pace , and now stand switch its thin tail , and try vainly to lift 
 one of its fore - leg - for the fly tease it . 

 " poor thing ! " say the parson , pityingly . " see , it have a raw place on 
 the shoulder , and the fly have find out the sore . " 

 " I be devilish glad to hear it , " say the squire , vindictively . 

 " Fie , fie ! " 

 " it be very well to say ' Fie , fie . ' it be not you who fall among the 
 thistle . what be the man about now , I wonder ? " 

 the parson have walk towards a chestnut - tree that stand on the village 
 green ; he break off a bough , return to the donkey , whisk away the 
 fly , and then tenderly place the broad leaf over the sore , as a 
 protection from the swarm . the donkey turn round its head , and look 
 at he with mild wonder . 

 " I would bet a shilling , " say the parson , softly , " that this be the 
 first act of kindness thou hast meet with this many a day . and slight 
 enough it be , Heaven know . " 

 with that the parson put his hand into his pocket , and draw out an 
 apple . it be a fine large rose - cheek apple , one of the last winter 's 
 store from the celebrated tree in the parsonage garden , and he be 
 take it as a present to a little boy in the village who have notably 
 distinguish himself in the Sunday - school . " Nay , in common justice , 
 Lenny Fairfield should have the preference , " mutter the parson . the 
 ass prick up one of its ear , and advance its head timidly . " but 
 Lenny Fairfield would be as much pleased with twopence ; and what could 
 twopence do to thee ? " the ass 's nose now touch the apple . " take it , 
 in the name of Charity , " quoth the parson ; " justice be accustomed to be 
 serve last ; " and the ass take the apple . " how have you the heart ! " say 
 the parson , point to the squire 's cane . 

 the ass stop munch , and look askant at the squire . " Pooh ! eat 
 on ; he will not beat thee now . " 

 " no , " say the squire , apologetically . " but after all , he be not an 
 ass of the parish ; he be a vagrant , and he ought to be pound . but the 
 pound be in as bad a state as the stock , thank to your new - fashion 
 doctrine . " 

 " New - fashioned ! " cry the parson , almost indignantly , for he have a 
 great disdain of new fashion . " they be as old as Christianity ; nay , 
 as old as Paradise , which you will observe be derive from a Greek , 
 or rather a persian word , and mean something more than ' garden , ' 
 correspond "   pursue the parson , rather pedantically   " with the 
 latin - vivarium , - namely , grove or park full of innocent dumb creature . 
 depend on it , donkey be allow to eat thistle there . " 

 " very possibly , " say the squire , dryly . " but Hazeldeau , though a 
 very pretty village , be not Paradise . the stock shall be mend 
 to - morrow , - ay , and the pound too , and the next donkey find trespassing 
 shall go into it , as sure as my name 's Hazeldean . " 

 " then , " say the parson , gravely , " I can only hope that the next parish 
 may not follow your example ; or that you and I may never be catch 
 stray . " 




 CHAPTER III . 

 Parson Dale and Squire Hazeldean part company ; the latter to inspect 
 his sheep , the former to visit some of his parishioner , include Lenny 
 Fairfield , whom the donkey have defraud of his apple . 

 Lenny Fairfield be sure to be in the way , for his mother rent a 
 few acre of grass - land from the squire , and it be now hay - time . and 
 Leonard , commonly call Lenny , be an only son , and his mother a widow . 
 the cottage stand apart , and somewhat remote , in one of the many nook 
 of the long , green village lane . and a thoroughly english cottage it 
 be , three century old at least ; with wall of rubble let into oak 
 frame , and duly whitewash every summer , a thatched roof , small pane 
 of glass , an old doorway raise from the ground by two step . there be 
 about this little dwelling all the homely rustic elegance which 
 peasant life admit of ; a honeysuckle be train over the door ; a few 
 flower - pot be place on the window - sill ; the small plot of ground 
 in front of the house be keep with great neatness , and even taste ; some 
 large rough stone on either side the little path have be form 
 into a sort of rockwork , with creeper that be now in flower ; and the 
 potato - ground be screen from the eye by sweet pea and lupine . simple 
 elegance , all this , it be true ; but how well it speak for peasant and 
 landlord , when you see that the peasant be fond of his home , and have 
 some spare time and heart to bestow upon mere embellishment ! such 
 a peasant be sure to be a bad customer to the alehouse , and a safe 
 neighbour to the squire 's preserve . all honour and praise to he , 
 except a small tax upon both , which be due to the landlord ! 

 such sight be as pleasant to the parson as the most beautiful 
 landscape of Italy can be to the dilettante . he pause a moment at the 
 wicket to look around he , and distend his nostril voluptuously to 
 inhale the smell of the sweet pea , mix with that of the new - mow hay 
 in the field behind , which a slight breeze bore to he . he then 
 move on , carefully scrap his shoe , clean and well - polished as they 
 be , - for Mr. Dale be rather a beau in his own clerical way , - on the 
 scraper without the door , and lift the latch . 

 your virtuoso look with artistical delight on the figure of some nymph 
 paint on an etruscan vase , engage in pour out the juice of the 
 grape from her classic urn . and the parson feel as harmless , if not as 
 elegant a pleasure , in contemplate Widow Fairfield brim high a 
 glitter can , which she design for the refreshment of the thirsty 
 haymaker . 

 Mrs. Fairfield be a middle - aged , tidy woman , with that alert precision 
 of movement which seem to come from an active , orderly mind ; and as she 
 now turn her head briskly at the sound of the parson 's footstep , she 
 show a countenance prepossessing though not handsome , - a countenance 
 from which a pleasant , hearty smile , break forth at that moment , 
 efface some line that , in repose , speak " of sorrow , but of sorrow 
 past ; " and her cheek , pale than be common to the complexion even of 
 the fair sex , when bear and breed amidst a rural population , might have 
 favour the guess that the early part of her life have be spend in 
 the languid air and " within - door " occupation of a town . 

 " never mind I , " say the parson , as Mrs. Fairfield drop her quick 
 courtesy , and smooth her apron ; " if you be go into the hayfield , I 
 will go with you ; I have something to say to Lenny , - an excellent boy . " 

 WIDOW . - " well , sir , and you be kind to say it , - but so he be . " 

 parson . - " he read uncommonly well , he write tolerably ; he be the good 
 lad in the whole school at his Catechism and in the Bible lesson ; and I 
 assure you , when I see his face at church , look up so attentively , I 
 fancy that I shall read my sermon all the well for such a listener ! " 

 widow   wipe her eye with the corner of her apron . - " ' Deed , sir , when 
 my poor Mark die , I never think I could have live on as I have do . 
 but that boy be so kind and good , that when I look at he sit there 
 in dear Mark 's chair , and remember how Mark love he , and all he use 
 to say to I about he , I feel somehow or other as if my good man smile 
 on I , and would rather I be not with he yet , till the lad have grow 
 up , and do not want I any more . " 

 parson   look away , and after a pause . - " you never hear anything of 
 the old folk at Lansmere ? " 

 " ' Deed , sir , sin ' poor Mark die , they han't   notice I nor the boy ; 
 but , " add the widow , with all a peasant 's pride , " it be not   that I 
 want their money ; only it be hard to feel strange like to one 's own 
 father and mother ! " 

 parson . - " you must excuse they . your father , Mr. Avenel , be never quite 
 the same man after that sad event which - but you be weep , my friend , 
 pardon I ; your mother be a little proud ; but so be you , though in 
 another way . " 

 WIDOW . - " I proud ! Lord love ye , sir , I have not a bit o ' pride in I ! 
 and that be the reason they always look down on I . " 

 parson . - " your parent must be well off ; and I shall apply to they in a 
 year or two on behalf of Lenny , for they promise I to provide for he 
 when he grow up , as they ought . " 

 WIDOW   with flash eye . - " I be sure , sir , I hope you will do no such 
 thing ; for I would not have Lenny beholden to they as have never give 
 he a kind word sin ' he be bear ! " 

 the parson smile gravely , and shake his head at poor Mrs. Fairfield 's 
 hasty confutation of her own self - acquittal from the charge of pride ; 
 but he see that it be not the time or moment for effectual peace - making 
 in the most irritable of all rancour , - namely , that nourish against 
 one 's near relation . he therefore drop the subject , and say , 
 " well , time enough to think of Lenny 's future prospect ; meanwhile we 
 be forget the haymaker . come . " 

 the widow open the back door , which lead across a little apple orchard 
 into the field . 

 parson . - " you have a pleasant place here ; and I see that my friend Lenny 
 should be in no want of apple . I have bring he one , but I have give 
 it away on the road . " 

 WIDOW . - " oh , sir , it be not the deed , - it be the will ; as I feel 
 when the squire , God bless he ! take two pound off the rent the year 
 he - that be , Mark - die . " 

 parson . - " if Lenny continue to be such a help to you , it will not be 
 long before the squire may put the two pound on again . " 

 " yes , sir , " say the widow , simply ; " I hope he will . " 

 " silly woman ! " mutter the parson . " that be not exactly what the 
 schoolmistress would have say . you do not   read nor write , Mrs. 
 Fairfield ; yet you express yourself with great propriety . " 

 " you know Mark be a schollard , sir , like my poor , poor sister ; and 
 though I be a sad stupid girl afore I marry , I try to take after 
 he when we come together . " 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 they be now in the hayfield , and a boy of about sixteen , but , like 
 most country lad , to appearance much young than he be , look up 
 from his rake , with lively blue eye beam forth under a profusion of 
 brown curly hair . 

 Leonard Fairfield be indeed a very handsome boy , - not so stout nor so 
 ruddy as one would choose for the ideal of rustic beauty , nor yet so 
 delicate in limb and keen in expression as be those child of city , 
 in whom the mind be cultivate at the expense of the body ; but still 
 he have the health of the country in his cheek , and be not without the 
 grace of the city in his compact figure and easy movement . there be 
 in his physiognomy something interesting from its peculiar character of 
 innocence and simplicity . you could see that he have be bring up by 
 a woman , and much apart from familiar contact with other child ; and 
 such intelligence as be yet develop in he be not ripen by the 
 joke and cuff of his coeval , but foster by decorous lecturing from 
 his elder , and good - little - boy maxim in good - little - boy book . 

 parson . - " come hither , Lenny . you know the benefit of school , I see : it 
 can teach you nothing well than to be a support to your mother . " 

 LENNY   look down sheepishly , and with a heighten glow over his 
 face . - " please , sir , that may come one of these day . " 

 parson . - " that be right , Lenny . let I see ! why , you must be nearly a 
 man . how old be you ? " 

 Lenny look up inquiringly at his mother . 

 parson . - " you ought to know , Lenny : speak for yourself . hold your 
 tongue , Mrs. Fairfield . " 

 LENNY   twirl his hat , and in great perplexity . - " well , and there be 
 Flop , neighbour Dutton 's old sheep - dog . he be very old now . " 

 parson . - " I be not ask Flop 's age , but your own . " 

 LENNY . - " ' Deed , sir , I have hear say as how Flop and I be pup 
 together . that is , I - I - " 

 for the parson be laugh , and so be Mrs. Fairfield ; and the haymaker , 
 who have stand still to listen , be laugh too . and poor Lenny have 
 quite lose his head , and look as if he would like to cry . 

 parson   pat the curly lock , encouragingly . - " never mind ; it be not 
 so badly answer , after all . and how old be Flop ? " 

 LENNY . - " why , he must be fifteen year and more .. " 

 parson . - " how old , then , be you ? " 

 LENNY   look up , with a beam of intelligence . - " fifteen year and 
 more . " 

 Widow sigh and nod her head . 

 " that be what we call put two and two together , " say the parson . 
 " or , in other word , " and here he raise his eye majestically towards 
 the haymaker - " in other word , thank to his love for his book , 
 simple as he stand here , Lenny Fairfield have show himself capable of 
 INDUCTIVE RATIOCINATION . " 

 at those word , deliver ore rotundo , the haymaker cease laugh ; 
 for even in lay matter they hold the parson to be an oracle , and word 
 so long must have a great deal in they . Lenny draw up his head proudly . 

 " you be very fond of Flop , I suppose ? " 

 " ' deed he be , " say the widow , " and of all poor dumb creature . " 

 " very good . suppose , my lad , that you have a fine apple , and that you meet 
 a friend who want it more than you , what would you do with it ? " 

 " please you , sir , I would give he half of it . " 

 the parson 's face fall . " not the whole , Lenny ? " 

 Lenny consider . " if he be a friend , sir , he would not like I to give 
 he all . " 

 " upon my word , Master Leonard , you speak so well that I must e'en 
 tell the truth . I bring you an apple , as a prize for good conduct in 
 school . but I meet by the way a poor donkey , and some one beat he for 
 eat a thistle , so I think I would make it up by give he the 
 apple . ought I only to have give he the half ? " 

 Lenny 's innocent face become all smile ; his interest be arouse . " and 
 do the donkey like the apple ? " 

 " very much , " say the parson , fumble in his pocket ; but think of 
 Leonard Fairfield 's year and understanding , and moreover observe , in 
 the pride of his heart , that there be many spectator to his deed , 
 he think the meditate twopence not sufficient , and he generously 
 produce a silver sixpence . 

 " there , my man , that will pay for the half apple which you would have 
 keep for yourself . " the parson again pat the curly lock , and after 
 a hearty word or two with the other haymaker , and a friendly " good - day " 
 to Mrs. Fairfield , strike into a path that lead towards his own glebe . 

 he have just cross the stile , when he hear hasty but timorous foot 
 behind he . he turn , and see his friend Lenny . 

 LENNY   half - cry , and hold out the sixpence . - " indeed , sir , I 
 would rather not . I would have give all to the Neddy . " 

 parson . - " why , then , my man , you have a still great right to the 
 sixpence . " 

 LENNY . - " no , sir ; 'cause you only give it to make up for the half apple . 
 and if I have give the whole , as I ought to have do , why , I should 
 have have no right to the sixpence . please , sir , do not   be offend ; do 
 take it back , will you ? " 

 the parson hesitate . and the boy thrust the sixpence into his hand , as 
 the ass have poke its nose there before in quest of the apple . 

 " I see , " say Parson Dale , soliloquize , " that if one do not   give 
 Justice the first place at the table , all the other Virtues eat up her 
 share . " 

 indeed , the case be perplexing . charity , like a forward , impudent 
 baggage as she be , always thrust herself in the way , and take other 
 people 's apple to make her own little pie , have defraud Lenny of his 
 due ; and now Susceptibility , who look like a shy , blush - face , awkward 
 Virtue in her teen - but who , nevertheless , be always engage in 
 pick the pocket of her sister - try to filch from he his lawful 
 recompense . the case be perplexing ; for the parson hold susceptibility 
 in great honour , despite her hypocritical trick , and do not like to 
 give she a slap in the face , which might frighten she away forever . so 
 Mr. Dale stand irresolute , glance from the sixpence to Lenny , and from 
 Lenny to the sixpence . 

 " Buon giorno , good - day to you , " say a voice behind , in an accent 
 slightly but unmistakably foreign , and a strange - look figure 
 present itself at the stile . 

 imagine a tall and exceedingly meagre man , dress in a rusty suit of 
 black , - the pantaloon tight at the calf and ankle , and there form a 
 loose gaiter over thick shoe , buckle high at the instep ; an old cloak , 
 line with red , be throw over one shoulder , though the day be sultry ; 
 a quaint , red , outlandish umbrella , with a carve brass handle , be 
 thrust under one arm , though the sky be cloudless : a profusion of raven 
 hair , in wave curl that seem as fine as silk , escape from the 
 side of a straw hat of prodigious brim ; a complexion sallow and 
 swarthy , and feature which , though not without considerable beauty 
 to the eye of the artist , be not only unlike what we fair , well - feed , 
 neat - face Englishmen be will not to consider comely , but exceedingly like 
 what we be disposed to regard as awful and satanic , - to wit , a long 
 hooked nose , sunken cheek , black eye , whose pierce brilliancy take 
 something wizard - like and mystical from the large spectacle through 
 which they shine ; a mouth round which play an ironical smile , and in 
 which a physiognomist would have remark singular shrewdness , and 
 some closeness , complete the picture . imagine this figure , grotesque , 
 peregrinate , and to the eye of a peasant certainly diabolical ; then 
 perch it on the stile in the midst of those green english field , and 
 in sight of that primitive english village ; there let it sit straddle , 
 its long leg dangle down , a short german pipe emit cloud from 
 one corner of those sardonic lip , its dark eye glare through the 
 spectacle full upon the parson , yet askant upon Lenny Fairfield . Lenny 
 Fairfield look exceedingly frightened . 

 " upon my word , Dr. Riccabocca , " say Mr. Dale , smile , " you come in 
 good time to solve a very nice question in casuistry ; " and herewith the 
 parson explain the case , and put the question , " Ought Lenny Fairfield 
 to have the sixpence , or ought he not ? " 

 " Cospetto ! " say the doctor , " if the hen would but hold her tongue , 
 nobody would know that she have lay an egg . " 




 CHAPTER V. 

 " grant , " say the parson ; " but what follow ? the saying be good , but I 
 do not   see the application . " 

 " a thousand pardon ! " reply Dr. Riccabocca , with all the urbanity of 
 an italian ; " but it seem to I that if you have give the sixpence to 
 the fanciullo , that is , to this good little boy , without tell he the 
 story about the donkey , you would never have put he and yourself into 
 this awkward dilemma . " 

 " but , my dear sir , " whisper the parson , mildly , as he incline his 
 lip to the doctor 's ear , " I should then have lose the opportunity of 
 inculcate a moral lesson - you understand ? " 

 Dr. Riccabocca shrug his shoulder , restore his pipe to his mouth , 
 and take a long whiff . it be a whiff eloquent , though cynical , - a whiff 
 peculiar to your philosophical smoker , a whiff that imply the most 
 absolute but the most placid incredulity as to the effect of the 
 parson 's moral lesson . 

 " still you have not give we your decision , " say the parson , after a 
 pause . 

 the doctor withdraw the pipe . " Cospetto ! " say he , - " he who scrub the 
 head of an ass waste his soap . " 

 " if you scrub mine fifty time over with those enigmatical proverb 
 of your , " say the parson , testily , " you would not make it any the 
 wiser . " 

 " my good sir , " say the doctor , bow low from his perch on the stile , 
 " I never presume to say that there be more ass than one in the 
 story ; but I think that I could not well explain my meaning , which 
 be simply this , - you scrub the ass 's head , and therefore you must 
 lose the soap . let the fanciullo have the sixpence ; and a great sum it 
 be , too , for a little boy , who may spend it all as pocketmoney ! " 

 " there , Lenny , you hear ? " say the parson , stretch out the sixpence . 
 but Lenny retreat , and cast on the umpire a look of great aversion and 
 disgust . 

 " please , Master Dale , " say he , obstinately , " I would rather not . 

 " it be a matter of feeling , you see , " say the parson , turn to the 
 umpire ; " and I believe the boy be right . " 

 " if it be a matter of feeling , " reply Dr. Riccabocca , " there be no 
 more to be say on it . when feel come in at the door , Reason have 
 nothing to do but to jump out of the window . " 

 " go , my good boy , " say the parson , pocket the coin ; " but , stop ! give 
 I your hand first . there - I understand you ; - good - by ! " 

 Lenny 's eye glisten as the parson shake he by the hand , and , not 
 trust himself to speak , he walk off sturdily . the parson wipe his 
 forehead , and sit himself down on the stile beside the italian . the view 
 before they be lovely , and both enjoy it   though not equally   enough 
 to be silent for some moment . on the other side the lane , see between 
 gap in the old oak and chestnut that hang over the mossgrown pale of 
 Hazeldean Park , rise gentle , verdant slope , dot with sheep and herd 
 of deer . a stately avenue stretch far away to the left , and end at 
 the right hand within a few yard of a ha - ha that divide the park from 
 a level sward of tableland , gay with shrub and flower - pot , relieve by 
 the shade of two mighty cedar . and on this platform , only see in part , 
 stand the squire 's old - fashioned house , red - brick , with stone mullion , 
 gable - end , and quaint chimney - pot . on this side the road , immediately 
 face the two gentleman , cottage after cottage whitely emerge from 
 the curve in the lane , while , beyond , the ground decline give an 
 extensive prospect of wood and cornfield , spire and farm . behind , 
 from a belt of lilac and evergreen , you catch a peep of the 
 parsonage - house , back by woodland , and a little noisy rill run in 
 front . the bird be still in the hedgerow , - only   as if from the very 
 heart of the most distant wood , there come now and then the mellow 
 note of the cuckoo . 

 " verily , " say Mr. Dale , softly , " my lot have fall on a goodly 
 heritage . " 

 the italian twitch his cloak over he , and sigh almost inaudibly . 
 perhaps he think of his own Summer Land , and feel that , amidst all 
 that fresh verdure of the North , there be no heritage for the stranger . 

 however , before the parson could notice the sigh or conjecture the 
 cause , Dr. Riccabocca 's thin lip take an expression almost malignant . 

 " per Bacco ! " say he ; " in every country I observe that the rook settle 
 where the tree be the fine . I be sure that , when Noah first land 
 on Ararat , he must have find some gentleman in black already settle in 
 the pleasantest part of the mountain , and wait for his tenth of the 
 cattle as they come out of the Ark. " 

 the parson fix his meek eye on the philosopher , and there be in they 
 something so deprecate rather than reproachful that Dr. Riccabocca 
 turn away his face , and refill his pipe . Dr. Riccabocca abhor 
 priest ; but though Parson Dale be emphatically a parson , he seem at 
 that moment so little of what Dr. Riccabocca understand by a priest 
 that the Italian 's heart smite he for his irreverent jest on the 
 cloth . luckily at this moment there be a diversion to that untoward 
 commencement of conversation in the appearance of no less a personage 
 than the donkey himself - I mean the donkey who eat the apple . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 the tinker be a stout , swarthy fellow , jovial and musical withal , for 
 he be sing a stave as he flourish his staff , and at the end of 
 each refrain down come the staff on the quarter of the donkey . the 
 tinker go behind and sing , the donkey go before and be thwack . 

 " yours be a droll country , " quoth Dr. Riccabocca ; " in mine , it be not 
 the ass that walk first in the procession that get the blow . " 

 the parson jump from the stile , and look over the hedge that 
 divide the field from the road - " gently , gently , " say he ; " the sound 
 of the stick spoil the singing ! oh , Mr. Sprott , Mr. Sprott ! a good man 
 be merciful to his beast . " 

 the donkey seem to recognize the voice of its friend , for it stop 
 short , prick one ear wistfully , and look up . the tinker touch his 
 hat , and look up too . " Lord bless your reverence ! he do not mind 
 it , - he like it . I vould not hurt thee ; would I , Neddy ? " 

 the donkey shake his head and shiver ; perhaps a fly have settle on the 
 sore , which the chestnut leave no long protect . 

 " I be sure you do not mean to hurt he , Sprott , " say the parson , 
 more politely I fear than honestly , - for he have see enough of that 
 cross - grained thing call the human heart , even in the little world of 
 a country parish , to know that it require management and coax 
 and flattering , to interfere successfully between a man and his own 
 donkey , - " I be sure you do not mean to hurt he ; but he have already get 
 a sore on his shoulder as big as my hand , poor thing ! " 

 " Lord love ' un ! yes ; that be do a playing with the manger the day I 
 give ' un oats ! " say the tinker . 

 Dr. Riccabocca adjust his spectacle , and survey the ass . the ass 
 prick up his other ear , and survey Dr. Riccabocca . in that mutual 
 survey of physical qualification , each be regard accord to the 
 average symmetry of its specie , it may be doubt whether the advantage 
 be on the side of the philosopher . 

 the parson have a great notion of the wisdom of his friend in all matter 
 not purely ecclesiastical . 

 " say a good word for the donkey ! " whisper he . 

 " Sir , " say the doctor , address Mr. Sprott , with a respectful 
 salutation , " there be a great kettle at my house - the Casino - which want 
 soldering : can you recommend I a tinker ? " 

 " why , that be all in my line , " say Sprott ; " and there ben't   a tinker in 
 the county that I vould recommend like myself , tho'f I say it . " 

 " you jest , good sir , " say the doctor , smile pleasantly . " a man who 
 can not   mend a hole in his own donkey can never demean himself by patch 
 up my great kettle . " 

 " Lord , sir ! " say the tinker , archly , " if I have know that poor Neddy 
 have have two sitch friend in court , I would have see he vas a gintleman , 
 and treat he as sitch . " 

 " Corpo di Bacco ! " quoth the doctor , " though that jest 's not new , I think 
 the tinker come very well out of it . " 

 " true ; but the donkey ! " say the parson ; " I have   a great mind to buy it . " 

 " permit I to tell you an anecdote in point , " say Dr. Riccabocca . 

 " well ? " say the parson , interrogatively . 

 " once on a time , " pursue Riccabocca , " the Emperor Adrian , go to the 
 public bath , see an old soldier , who have serve under he , rub his 
 back against the marble wall . the emperor , who be a wise , and therefore 
 a curious , inquisitive man , send for the soldier , and ask he why he 
 resort to that sort of friction . ' because , ' answer the veteran , ' I 
 be too poor to have slave to rub I down . ' the emperor be touch , and 
 give he slave and money . the next day , when Adrian go to the bath , 
 all the old man in the city be to be see rub themselves against 
 the marble as hard as they could . the emperor send for they , and ask 
 they the same question which he have put to the soldier ; the cunning old 
 rogue , of course , make the same answer . ' friend , ' say Adrian , ' since 
 there be so many of you , you will just rub one another ! ' Mr. Dale , if 
 you do not   want to have all the donkey in the county with hole in their 
 shoulder , you have well not buy the tinker 's ! " 

 " it be the hard thing in the world to do the least bit of good , " 
 groan the parson , as he break a twig off the hedge nervously , snap 
 it in two , and fling away the fragment : one of they hit the donkey on 
 the nose . if the ass could have speak Latin he would have say , " Et tu , 
 Brute ! " as it be , he hang down his ear , and walk on . 

 " Gee hup , " say the tinker , and he follow the ass . then stop , he 
 look over his shoulder , and see that the parson 's eye be gaze 
 mournfully on his protege , " never fear , your reverence , " cry the 
 tinker , kindly , " I will not spite ' un . " 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 " Four , o'clock , " cry the parson , look at his watch ; " half an hour 
 after dinner - time , and Mrs. Dale particularly beg I to be punctual , 
 because of the fine trout the squire send we . will you venture on what 
 our homely language call ' pot - luck , ' Doctor ? " 

 now Riccabocca be a professed philosopher , and value himself on his 
 penetration into the motif of human conduct . and when the parson thus 
 invite he to pot - luck , he smile with a kind of lofty complacency ; for 
 Mrs. Dale enjoy the reputation of have what her friend style 
 " her little temper . " and , as well - breed lady rarely indulge " little 
 temper " in the presence of a third person not of the family , so Dr. 
 Riccabocca instantly conclude that he be invite to stand between the 
 pot and the luck ! nevertheless - as he be fond of trout , and a much 
 more good - natured man than he ought to have be accord to his 
 principle - he accept the hospitality ; but he do so with a sly look 
 from over his spectacle , which bring a blush into the guilty cheek 
 of the parson . certainly Riccabocca have for once guess right in his 
 estimate of human motif . 

 the two walk on , cross a little bridge that span the rill , and 
 enter the parsonage lawn . two dog , that seem to have sit on watch 
 for their master , spring towards he , barking ; and the sound draw the 
 notice of Mrs. Dale , who , with parasol in hand , sally out from the 
 sash window which open on the lawn . now , o reader ! I know that , in 
 thy secret heart , thou art chuckle over the want of knowledge in the 
 sacred arcana of the domestic hearth betray by the author ; thou art 
 say to thyself , " a pretty way to conciliate ' little temper ' indeed , 
 to add to the offence of spoil the fish the crime of bring an 
 unexpected friend to eat it . Pot - luck , quotha , when the pot be boil 
 over this half hour ! " 

 but , to thy utter shame and confusion , o reader ! learn that both the 
 author and Parson Dale know very well what they be about . 

 Dr. Riccabocca be the special favourite of Mrs. Dale , and the only 
 person in the whole county who never put she out , by drop in . in 
 fact , strange though it may seem at first glance , Dr. Riccabocca have 
 that mysterious something about he , which we of his own sex can so 
 little comprehend , but which always propitiate the other . he owe this , 
 in part , to his own profound but hypocritical policy ; for he look upon 
 woman as the natural enemy to man , against whom it be necessary to be 
 always on the guard ; whom it be prudent to disarm by every specie of 
 fawn servility and abject complaisance . he owe it also , in part , to 
 the compassionate and heavenly nature of the angel whom his thought 
 thus villanously traduce - for woman like one whom they can pity without 
 despise ; and there be something in Signor Riccabocca 's poverty , 
 in his loneliness , in his exile , whether voluntary or compel , that 
 excited pity ; while , despite his threadbare coat , the red umbrella , and 
 the wild hair , he have , especially when address lady , that air 
 of gentleman and cavalier , which be or be more innate in an educate 
 Italian , of whatever rank , than perhaps in the high aristocracy of 
 any other country in Europe . for , though I grant that nothing be more 
 exquisite than the politeness of your french marquis of the old regime , 
 nothing more frankly gracious than the cordial address of a high - breed 
 english gentleman , nothing more kindly prepossess than the genial 
 good - nature of some patriarchal German , who will condescend to forget 
 his sixteen quartering in the pleasure of do you a favour , - yet 
 these specimen of the suavity of their several nation be rare ; 
 whereas blandness and polish be common attribute with your italian . 
 they seem to have be immemorially hand down to he , from ancestor 
 emulate the urbanity of Caesar , and refine by the grace of Horace . 

 " Dr. Riccabocca consent to dine with we , " cry the parson , hastily . 

 " if Madame permit ? " say the Italian , bow over the hand extend to 
 he , which , however , he forbear to take , see it be already full of 
 the watch . 

 " I be only sorry that the trout must be quite spoil , " begin Mrs. Dale , 
 plaintively . 

 " it be not the trout one think of when one dine with Mrs. Dale , " say 
 the infamous dissimulator . 

 " but I see James come to say that dinner be ready , " observe the 
 parson . 

 " he say that three - quarter of an hour ago , Charles dear , " retort 
 Mrs. Dale , take the arm of Dr. Riccabocca . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 while the parson and his wife be entertain their guest , I propose to 
 regale the reader with a small treatise a propos of that " Charles dear , " 
 murmur by Mrs. Dale , - a treatise expressly write for the benefit of 
 the Domestic Circle . 

 it be an old jest that there be not a word in the language that convey 
 so little endearment as the word " dear . " but though the saying itself , 
 like most truth , be trite and hackneye , no little novelty remain 
 to the search of the inquirer into the variety of inimical import 
 comprehend in that malign monosyllable . for instance , I submit to 
 the experienced that the degree of hostility it betray be in much 
 proportion to its collocation in the sentence . when , gliding 
 indirectly through the rest of the period , it take its stand at the 
 close , as in that " Charles dear " of Mrs. Dale , it have spill so much of 
 its natural bitterness by the way that it assume even a smile , " amara 
 lento temperet risu . " sometimes the smile be plaintive , sometimes arch . 
 for example : - 

  Plaintive .   " I know very well that whatever I do be wrong , Charles 
 dear . " 

 " Nay , I be very glad you amuse yourself so much without I , Charles 
 dear . " 

 " not quite so loud ! if you have but my poor head , Charles dear , " etc . 

  Arch .   " if you could spill the ink anywhere but on the good tablecloth , 
 Charles dear ! " 

 " but though you must always have your own way , you be not quite 
 faultless , own , Charles dear , " etc . 

 when the enemy stop in the middle of the sentence , its venom be 
 naturally less exhausted . for example : - 

 " really , I must say , Charles dear , that you be the most fidgety 
 person , " etc . 

 " and if the house bill be so high last week , Charles dear , I should 
 just like to know whose fault it be - that be all . " 

 " but you know , Charles dear , that you care no more for I and the 
 child than - " etc . 

 but if the fatal word spring up , in its primitive freshness , at the head 
 of the sentence , bow your head to the storm . it then assume the majesty 
 of " my " before it ; it be generally more than simple objurgation , - it 
 preface a sermon . my candour oblige I to confess that this be the 
 mode in which the hateful monosyllable be more usually employ by the 
 marital part of the one flesh ; and have something about it of the 
 odious assumption of the petruchian paterfamilia - the head of the 
 family - bode , not perhaps " peace and love , and quiet life , " but 
 certainly " awful rule and right supremacy . " for example : - 

 " my dear Jane , I wish you would just put by that everlasting crochet , 
 and listen to I for a few moment , " etc . " my dear Jane , I wish you 
 would understand I for once ; do not   think I be angry , - no , but I be 
 hurt ! you must consider , " etc . 

 " my dear Jane , I do not   know if it be your intention to ruin I ; but I 
 only wish you would do as all other woman do who care three straw for 
 their husband 's property , " etc . 

 " my dear Jane , I wish you to understand that I be the last person in 
 the world to be jealous ; but I will be d - -d if that puppy , Captain 
 Prettyman , " etc . 

 now , few so carefully cultivate the connubial garden , as to feel much 
 surprise at the occasional sting of a homely nettle or two ; but who 
 ever expect , before enter that garden , to find himself prick and 
 lacerate by an insidious exotical " dear , " which he have be teach to 
 believe only live in a hothouse , along with myrtle and other tender 
 and sensitive shrub which poet appropriate to Venus ? nevertheless 
 Parson Dale , be a patient man , and a pattern to all husband , would 
 have find no fault with his garden , though there have not be a single 
 speciman of " dear , " - whether the dear humili or the dear superba ; the 
 dear pallida , rubra , or nigra ; the dear suavis or the dear horrida , - no , 
 not a single " dear " in the whole horticulture of matrimony , which Mrs. 
 Dale have not bring to perfection . but this be far from be the 
 case ; Mrs. Dale , live much in retirement , be unaware of the modern 
 improvement , in variety of colour and sharpness of prickle , which have 
 reward the persevere skill of our female florist . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 in the cool of the evening Dr. Riccabocca walk home across the field . 
 Mr. and Mrs. Dale have accompany he half - way , and as they now turn 
 back to the parsonage , they look behind to catch a glimpse of the 
 tall , outlandish figure , wind slowly through the path amidst the 
 wave of the green corn . 

 " poor man ! " say Mrs. Dale , feelingly ; " and the button be off his 
 wristband ! what a pity he have nobody to take care of he ! he seem very 
 domestic . do not   you think , Charles , it would be a great blessing if we 
 could get he a good wife ? " 

 " um , " say the parson ; " I doubt if he value the married state as he 
 ought . " 

 " what do you mean , Charles ? I never see a man more polite to lady in 
 my life . " 

 " yes , but - " 

 " but what ? you be always so mysterious , Charles dear . " 

 " mysterious ! no , Carry ; but if you could hear what the doctor say of 
 the lady sometimes . " 

 " ay , when you man get together , my dear . I know what that mean - pretty 
 thing you say of we ! but you be all alike ; you know you be , love ! " 

 " I be sure , " say the parson , simply , " that I have good cause to speak 
 well of the sex - when I think of you and my poor mother . " 

 Mrs. Dale , who , with all her " temper , " be an excellent woman , and 
 love her husband with the whole of her quick little heart , be touch . 
 she press his hand , and do not call he dear all the way home . 

 meanwhile the Italian pass the field , and come upon the high road 
 about two mile from Hazeldean . on one side stand an old - fashioned 
 solitary inn , such as english inn use to be before they become 
 railway hotel , - square , solid , old - fashioned , look so hospitable 
 and comfortable , with their great sign swing from some elm - tree in 
 front , and the long row of stable stand a little back , with a chaise 
 or two in the yard , and the jolly landlord talk of the crop to some 
 stout farmer , whose rough pony halt of itself at the well - know door . 
 opposite this inn , on the other side of the road , stand the habitation 
 of Dr. Riecabocca . 

 a few year before the date of these annal , the stage - coach on its way 
 to London from a seaport town stop at the inn , as be its wo not , for a 
 good hour , that its passenger might dine like Christian Englishmen - not 
 gulp down a basin of scald soup , like everlaste heathen Yankees , 
 with that cursed railway - whistle shrieking like a fiend in their ear ! 
 it be the good dining - place on the whole road , for the trout in the 
 neighbouring rill be famous , and so be the mutton which come from 
 Hazeldean Park . 

 from the outside of the coach have descend two passenger , who , alone 
 insensible to the attraction of mutton and trout , refuse to dine , - two 
 melancholy - look foreigner , of whom one be Signor Riccabocca , 
 much the same as we see he now , only that the black suit be less 
 threadbare , the tall form less meagre , and he do not then wear 
 spectacle ; and the other be his servant . " they would walk about 
 while the coach stop . " now the Italian 's eye have be catch by 
 a mouldering , dismantled house on the other side the road , which 
 nevertheless be well situate ; half - way up a green hill , with its 
 aspect due south , a little cascade fall down artificial rockwork , a 
 terrace with a balustrade , and a few broken urn and statue before 
 its ionic portico , while on the roadside stand a board , with 
 character already half effaced , imply that the house be " to be let 
 unfurnished , with or without land . " 

 the abode that look so cheerless , and which have so evidently hang long 
 on hand , be the property of Squire Hazeldean . it have be build by his 
 grandfather on the female side , - a country gentleman who have actually 
 be in Italy   a journey rare enough to boast of in those day , and 
 who , on his return home , have attempt a miniature imitation of an 
 italian villa . he leave an only daughter and sole heiress , who marry 
 Squire Hazeldean 's father ; and since that time , the house , abandon 
 by its proprietor for the large residence of the Hazeldeans , have 
 be uninhabited and neglect . several tenant , indeed , have offer 
 themselves ; but your true country squire be slow in admit upon his 
 own property a rival neighbour . some want shooting . " that , " say the 
 Hazeldeans , who be great sportsman and strict preserver , " be quite 
 out of the question . " other be fine folk from London . " London 
 servant , " say the Hazeldeans , who be moral and prudent people , 
 " would corrupt their own , and bring London price . " other , again , 
 be retire manufacturer , at whom the Hazeldeans turn up their 
 agricultural nose . in short , some be too grand , and other too 
 vulgar . some be refuse because they be know so well : " friend be 
 good at a distance , " say the Hazeldeans ; other because they be not 
 know at all : " no good come of stranger , " say the Hazeldeans . and 
 finally , as the house fall more and more into decay , no one would 
 take it unless it be put into thorough repair : " as if one be make of 
 money ! " say the Hazeldeans . in short , there stand the house unoccupied 
 and ruinous ; and there , on its terrace , stand the two forlorn Italians , 
 survey it with a smile at each other , as for the first time since 
 they set foot in England , they recognize , in dilapidated pilaster and 
 broken statue , in a weed - grow terrace and the remain of an orangery , 
 something that remind they of the land they have leave behind . 

 on return to the inn , Dr. Riccabocca take the occasion to learn from 
 the innkeeper   who be indeed a tenant of the squire   such particular 
 as he could collect ; and a few day afterwards Mr. Hazeldean receive 
 a letter from a solicitor of repute in London , state that a very 
 respectable foreign gentleman have commission he to treat for Clump 
 Lodge , otherwise call the " Casino ; " that the say gentleman do not 
 shoot , live in great seclusion , and , have no family , do not 
 care about the repair of the place , provide only it be make 
 weather - proof , - if the omission of more expensive reparation could 
 render the rent suitable to his finance , which be very limited . 
 the offer come at a fortunate moment , when the steward have just be 
 represent to the squire the necessity of do something to keep the 
 Casino from fall into positive ruin , and the squire be curse the 
 fate which have put the casino into an entail - so that he could not pull 
 it down for the building material . Mr. Hazeldean therefore catch at 
 the proposal even as a fair lady , who have refuse the good offer in the 
 kingdom , catch , at last , at some batter old captain on half - pay , 
 and reply that , as for rent , if the solicitor 's client be a quiet , 
 respectable man , he do not care for that , but that the gentleman might 
 have it for the first year rent - free , on condition of pay the taxis , 
 and put the place a little in order . if they suit each other , they 
 could then come to term . ten day subsequently to this gracious reply , 
 Signor Riccabocca and his servant arrive ; and , before the year 's end , 
 the squire be so content with his tenant that he give he a running 
 lease of seven , fourteen , or twenty - one year , at a rent merely nominal , 
 on condition that Signor Riccabocca would put and maintain the place in 
 repair , bar the roof and fence , which the squire generously renew 
 at his own expense . it be astonishing , by little and little , what a 
 pretty place the Italian have make of it , and , what be more astonishing , 
 how little it have cost he . he have , indeed , paint the wall of the 
 hall , staircase , and the room appropriate to himself , with his own 
 hand . his servant have do the great part of the upholstery . the two 
 between they have get the garden into order . 

 the Italians seem to have take a joint love to the place , and to deck 
 it as they would have do some favourite chapel to their Madonna . 

 it be long before the native reconcile themselves to the odd way 
 of the foreign settler . the first thing that offend they be the 
 exceed smallness of the household bill . three day out of the seven , 
 indeed , both man and master din on nothing else but the vegetable in 
 the garden , and the fish in the neighbouring rill ; when no trout 
 could be catch they fry the minnow   and certainly , even in the good 
 stream , minnow be more frequently catch than trout . the next thing 
 which anger the native quite as much , especially the female part of 
 the neighbourhood , be the very sparing employment the two he creature 
 give to the sex usually deem so indispensable in household matter . at 
 first , indeed , they have no woman - servant at all . but this create 
 such horror that Parson Dale venture a hint upon the matter , which 
 Riccabocca take in very good part ; and an old woman be forthwith 
 engage after some bargaining - at three shilling a week - to wash and 
 scrub as much as she like during the daytime . she always return 
 to her own cottage to sleep . the man - servant , who be style in the 
 neighbourhood " Jackeymo , " do all else for his master , - smooth his 
 room , dust his paper , prepare his coffee , cook his dinner , brush 
 his clothe , and clean his pipe , of which Riccabocca have a large 
 collection . but however close a man 's character , it generally creep out 
 in driblet ; and on many little occasion the Italian have show act of 
 kindness , and , on some more rare occasion , even of generosity , 
 which have serve to silence his calumniator , and by degree he have 
 establish a very fair reputation , - suspect , it be true , of be a 
 little inclined to the Black Art , and of a strange inclination to starve 
 Jackeymo and himself , in other respect harmless enough . 

 Signor Riccabocca have become very intimate , as we have see , at the 
 Parsonage . but not so at the Hall . for though the squire be incline 
 to be very friendly to all his neighbour , he be , like most country 
 gentleman , rather easily huff . Riccabocca have , with great politeness , 
 still with great obstinacy , refuse Mr. Hazeldean 's early invitation 
 to dinner ; and when the squire find that the Italian rarely decline 
 to dine at the Parsonage , he be offend in one of his weak 
 point , - namely , his pride in the hospitality of Hazeldean Hall , - and he 
 cease altogether invitation so churlishly reject . nevertheless , as 
 it be impossible for the squire , however huffed , to bear malice , he now 
 and then remind Riccabocca of his existence by present of game , and 
 would have call on he more often than he do , but that Riccabocca 
 receive he with such excessive politeness that the blunt country 
 gentleman feel shy and put out , and use to say that " to call on 
 Rickeybockey be as bad as go to Court . " 

 but we have leave Dr. Riccabocca on the high road . by this time he have 
 ascend a narrow path that wind by the side of the cascade , he have 
 pass a trelli - work cover with vine , from which Jackeymo have 
 positively succeed in make what he call wine , - a liquid , indeed , 
 that if the cholera have be popularly know in those day , would have 
 sour the mild member of the Board of Health ; for Squire Hazeldean , 
 though a robust man who daily carry off his bottle of port with 
 impunity , have once rashly taste it , do not recover the effect till 
 he have have a bill from the apothecary as long as his own arm . pass 
 this trelli , Dr. Riccabocca enter upon the terrace , with its stone 
 pavement as smooth and trim as hand could make it . here , on neat 
 stand , all his favourite flower be arrange ; here four orange tree 
 be in full blossom ; here a kind of summer - house , or belvidere , build 
 by Jackeymo and himself , make his choose morning room from May till 
 October ; and from this belvidere there be as beautiful an expanse of 
 prospect as if our English Nature have hospitably spread on her green 
 board all that she have to offer as a banquet to the exile . 

 a man without his coat , which be throw over the balustrade , be 
 employ in water the flower , - a man with movement so mechanical , 
 with a face so rigidly grave in its tawny hue , that he seem like an 
 automaton make out of mahogany . 

 " Giacomo , " say Dr. Riccabocca , softly . 

 the automaton stop its hand , and turn its head . 

 " Put by the watering - pot , and come hither , " continue Riccabocca , in 
 italian ; and , move towards the balustrade , he lean over it . Mr. 
 Mitford , the historian , call Jean Jacques " John James . " follow that 
 illustrious example , Giacomo shall be anglify into Jackeymo . Jackeymo 
 come to the balustrade also , and stand a little behind his master . 
 " Friend , " say Riccabocca , " enterprise have not always succeed with 
 we . do not   you think , after all , it be tempt our evil star to rent 
 those field from the landlord ? " Jackeymo cross himself , and make some 
 strange movement with a little coral charm which he wear set in a ring 
 on his finger . 

 " if the Madonna send we luck , and we could hire a lad cheap ? " say 
 Jackeymo , doubtfully . 

 " Piu vale un presente che dui futuri , " -   " a bird in the hand be worth 
 two in the bush . "   - say Riccabocca . 

 " Chi non fa quando pub , non pub , fare quando vuole , " -   " he who will not 
 when he may , when he will it shall have nay . "   - answer Jackeymo , as 
 sententiously as his master . " and the Padrone should think in time that 
 he must lay by for the dower of the poor signorina . " 

 Riccabocca sigh , and make no reply . 

 " she must be that high now ! " say Jackeymo , put his hand on some 
 imaginary line a little above the balustrade . Riccabocca 's eye , raise 
 over the spectacle , follow the hand . 

 " if the Padrone could but see she here - " 

 " I think I do , " mutter the Italian . 

 " he would never let she go from his side till she go to a husband 's , " 
 continue Jackeymo . 

 " but this climate , - she could never stand it , " say Riccabocca , draw 
 his cloak round he , as a north wind take he in the rear . 

 " the orange tree blossom even here with care , " say Jackeymo , turn 
 back to draw down an awning where the orange tree face the north . 
 " see ! " he add , as he return with a sprig in full bud . 

 Dr. Riccabocca bend over the blossom , and then place it in his bosom . 

 " the other one should be there too , " say Jackeymo . 

 " to die - as this do already ! " answer Riccabocca . " say no more . " 

 Jackeymo shrug his shoulder ; and then , glance at his master , draw 
 his hand over his eye . 

 there be a pause . Jackeymo be the first to break it . " but , whether 
 here or there , beauty without money be the orange tree without shelter . 
 if a lad could be get cheap , I would hire the land , and trust for the 
 crop to the Madonna . " 

 " I think I know of such a lad , " say Riccabocca , recover himself , 
 and with his sardonic smile once more lurk about the corner of his 
 mouth , - " a lad make for we . " 

 " Diavolo ! " 

 " no , not the Diavolo ! friend , I have this day see a boy who - refuse 
 sixpence ! " 

 " Cosa stupenda ! " exclaim Jackeymo , open his eye , and let fall 
 the watering - pot . 

 " it be true , my friend . " 

 " take he , Padrone , in Heaven 's name , and the field will grow gold . " 

 " I will think of it , for it must require management to catch such a 
 boy , " say Riccabocca . " meanwhile , light a candle in the parlour , and 
 bring from my bedroom that great folio of Machiavelli . " 




 CHAPTER x. 

 in my next chapter I shall present Squire Hazeldean in patriarchal 
 state , - not exactly under the fig - tree he have plant , but before the 
 stock he have reconstruct , - Squire Hazeldean and his family on the 
 village green ! the canvas be all ready for the colour . 

 but in this chapter I must so far afford a glimpse into antecedent as 
 to let the reader know that there be one member of the family whom he 
 be not likely to meet at present , if ever , on the village green at 
 Hazeldean . 

 our squire lose his father two year after his birth ; his mother 
 be very handsome - and so be her jointure ; she marry again at the 
 expiration of her year of mourning ; the object of her second choice be 
 Colonel Egerton . 

 in every generation of Englishmen   at least since the lively reign of 
 Charles II .   there be a few whom some elegant Genius skim off from 
 the milk of human nature , and reserve for the cream of society . Colonel 
 Egerton be one of these terque quaterque beati , and dwelt apart on 
 a top shelf in that delicate porcelain dish - not bestow upon vulgar 
 buttermilk - which person of fashion call the great World . Mighty be 
 the marvel of Pall Mall , and profound be the pity of Park Lane , 
 when this supereminent personage condescend to lower himself into a 
 husband . but Colonel Egerton be not a mere gaudy butterfly ; he have the 
 provident instinct ascribe to the bee . Youth have pass from he , and 
 carry off much solid property in its flight ; he see that a time be 
 fast come when a home , with a partner who could help to maintain it , 
 would be conducive to his comfort , and an occasional hum - drum evening 
 by the fireside beneficial to his health . in the midst of one season at 
 Brighton , to which gay place he have accompany the Prince of Wales , 
 he see a widow , who , though in the weed of mourning , do not appear 
 inconsolable . her person please his taste ; the account of her jointure 
 satisfy his understanding ; he contrive an introduction , and bring 
 a brief wooing to a happy close . the late Mr. Hazeldean have so far 
 anticipate the chance of the young widow 's second espousal , that , in 
 case of that event , he transfer , by his testamentary disposition , 
 the guardianship of his infant heir from the mother to two squire whom 
 he have name his executor . this circumstance combine with her new tie 
 somewhat to alienate Mrs. Hazeldean from the pledge of her former love ; 
 and when she have bear a son to Colonel Egerton , it be upon that child 
 that her maternal affection gradually concentrate . 

 William Hazeldean be send by his guardian to a large provincial 
 academy , at which his forefather have receive their education time out 
 of mind . at first he spend his holiday with Mrs. Egerton ; but as she 
 now reside either in London , or follow her lord to Brighton , to 
 partake of the gayetie at the Pavilion , so as he grow old , William , 
 who have a hearty affection for country life , and of whose bluff manner 
 and rural breed Mrs. Egerton   have grow exceedingly refined   be 
 openly ashamed , ask and obtain permission to spend his vacation 
 either with his guardian or at the old Hall . he go late to a small 
 college at Cambridge , endow in the fifteenth century by some ancestral 
 Hazeldean ; and leave it , on come of age , without take a degree . a 
 few year afterwards he marry a young lady , country bear and breed like 
 himself . 

 meanwhile his half - brother , Audley Egerton , may be say to have begin 
 his initiation into the beau monde before he have well cast aside his 
 coral and bell ; he have be fondle in the lap of duchess , and 
 have gallop across the room astride on the cane of ambassador and 
 prince . for Colonel Egerton be not only very highly connected , not 
 only one of the Dii majore of fashion , but he have the still rare good 
 fortune to be an exceedingly popular man with all who know he , - so 
 popular , that even the fine lady whom he have adore and abandon 
 forgave he for marry out of " the set , " and continue to be as 
 friendly as if he have not marry at all . People who be commonly 
 call heartless be never weary of do kind thing to the Egertons . 
 when the time come for Audley to leave the preparatory school at which 
 his infancy bud forth amongst the stateliest of the little lily 
 of the field , and go to Eton , half the fifth and sixth form have be 
 canvass to be exceedingly civil to young Egerton . the boy soon show 
 that he inherit his father 's talent for acquire popularity , and 
 that to this talent he add those which put popularity to use . without 
 achieve any scholastic distinction , he yet contrive to establish at 
 Eton the most desirable reputation which a boy can obtain , - namely , that 
 among his own contemporary , the reputation of a boy who be sure to 
 do something when he grow to be a man . as a gentleman - commoner at Christ 
 Church , Oxford , he continue to sustain this high expectation , though he 
 win no prize , and take but an ordinary degree ; and at Oxford the future 
 ' something " become more define , - it be ' something in public life " that 
 this young man be to do . 

 while he be yet at the University , both his parent die , within a few 
 month of each other . and when Audley Egerton come of age , he succeed 
 to a paternal property which be suppose to be large , and indeed have 
 once be so ; but Colonel Egerton have be too lavish a man to enrich 
 his heir , and about L1500 a year be all that sale and mortgage leave 
 of an estate that have formerly approach a rental of L10,000 . 

 still , Audley be consider to be opulent ; and he do not dispel that 
 favourable notion by any imprudent exhibition of parsimony . on enter 
 the world of London , the Clubs fly open to receive he , and he wake 
 one morning to find himself , not indeed famous - but the fashion . to this 
 fashion he at once give a certain gravity and value , he associate as 
 much as possible with public man and political lady , he succeed in 
 confirm the notion that he be " bear to ruin or to rule the state . " 

 the dearest and most intimate friend of Audley Egerton be Lord 
 L'Estrange , from whom he have be inseparable at Eton , and who now , if 
 Audley Egerton be the fashion , be absolutely the rage in London . 

 Harley , Lord L'Estrange , be the only son of the Earl of Lansmere , a 
 nobleman of considerable wealth , and ally , by intermarriage , to 
 the lofty and most powerful family in England . Lord Lansmere , 
 nevertheless , be but little know in the circle of London . he live 
 chiefly on his estate , occupy himself with the various duty of a 
 great proprietor , and when he come to the metropolis , it be rather to 
 save than to spend ; so that he could afford to give his son a very ample 
 allowance , when Harley , at the age of sixteen   have already attain 
 to the sixth form at Eton , leave school for one of the regiment of the 
 Guards . 

 few know what to make of Harley L'Estrange , - and that be , perhaps , 
 the reason why he be so much thought of . he have be by far the 
 most brilliant boy of his time at Eton , - not only the boast of the 
 cricket - ground , but the marvel of the schoolroom ; yet so full of whim 
 and oddity , and seem to achieve his triumph with so little aid 
 from steadfast application , that he have not leave behind he the same 
 expectation of solid eminence which his friend and senior , Audley 
 Egerton , have excite . his eccentricity , his quaint saying , and 
 out - of - the - way action , become as notable in the great world as they have 
 be in the small one of a public school . that he be very clever there 
 be no doubt , and that the cleverness be of a high order might be 
 surmise , not only from the originality but the independence of his 
 character . he dazzle the world , without seem to care for its praise 
 or its censure , - dazzle it , as it be , because he could not help 
 shin . he have some strange notion , whether political or social , which 
 rather frighten his father . accord to Southey , " a man should be 
 no more ashamed of have be a republican than of have be young . " 
 Youth and extravagant opinion naturally go together . I do not   know 
 whether Harley L'Estrange be a republican at the age of eighteen ; but 
 there be no young man in London who seem to care less for be heir 
 to an illustrious name and some forty or fifty thousand pound a year . 
 it be a vulgar fashion in that day to play the exclusive , and cut 
 person who wear bad neckcloth , and call themselves Smith or Johnson . 
 Lord L'Estrange never cut any one , and it be quite enough to slight 
 some worthy man because of his neckcloth or his birth to insure to 
 the offender the pointed civility of this eccentric successor to the 
 Belforts and the Wildairs . 

 it be the wish of his father that Harley , as soon as he come of age , 
 should represent the borough of Lansmere   which say borough be the 
 single plague of the earl 's life . but this wish be never realize . 
 suddenly , when the young idol of London still want some two or three 
 year of his majority , a new whim appear to seize he . he 
 withdraw entirely from society ; he leave unanswere the most pressing 
 three - cornered note of inquiry and invitation that ever strew the 
 table of a young guardsman ; he be rarely see anywhere in his former 
 haunt , - when see , be either alone or with Egerton ; and his gay 
 spirit seem wholly to have leave he . a profound melancholy be 
 write in his countenance , and breathe in the listless tone of 
 his voice . about this time a vacancy happen to occur for the 
 representation of Lansmere , Harley make it his special request to his 
 father that the family interest might be give to Audley Egerton , - a 
 request which be back by all the influence of his lady mother , 
 who share in the esteem which her son feel for his friend . the earl 
 yield ; and Egerton , accompany by Harley , go down to Lansmere Park , 
 which adjoin the borough , in order to be introduce to the elector . 
 this visit make a notable epoch in the history of many personage who 
 figure in my narrative ; but at present I content myself with say 
 that circumstance arise which , just as the canvass for the new election 
 commence , cause both L'Estrange and Audley to absent themselves from 
 the scene of action , and that the last even write to Lord Lansmere 
 express his intention of decline to contest the borough . 

 fortunately for the parliamentary career of Audley Egerton , the election 
 have become to Lord Lansmere not only a matter of public importance , but 
 of personal feeling . he resolve that the battle should be fight out , 
 even in the absence of the candidate , and at his own expense . Hitherto 
 the contest for this distinguished borough have be , to use the language 
 of Lord Lansmere , " conduct in the spirit of gentleman , " - that be to 
 say , the only opponent to the Lansmere interest have be find in one 
 or the other of the two rival family in the same county ; and as the 
 earl be a hospitable , courteous man , much respect and like by the 
 neighbouring gentry , so the hostile candidate have always interlard his 
 speech with profuse compliment to his Lordship 's high character , 
 and civil expression as to his Lordship 's candidate . but , thank to 
 successive election , one of these two family have come to an end , 
 and its actual representative be now reside within the Rules of the 
 Bench ; the head of the other family be the sit member , and , by an 
 amicable agreement with the lansinere interest , he remain as neutral 
 as it be in the power of any sit member to be amidst the passion 
 of an intractable committee . accordingly it have be hop that Egerton 
 would come in without opposition , when , the very day on which he have 
 abruptly leave the place , a handbill , sign " Haverill Dashmore , Captain 
 R. N. , Baker Street , Portman Square , " announce , in very spirited 
 language , the intention of that gentleman " to emancipate the borough 
 from the unconstitutional domination of an oligarchical faction , not 
 with a view to his own political aggrandizement , - indeed at great 
 personal inconvenience , - but actuate solely by abhorrence to tyranny , 
 and patriotic passion for the purity of election . " 

 this announcement be follow , within two hour , by the arrival of 
 Captain Dashmore himself , in a carriage and four , cover with yellow 
 favour , and fill , inside and out , with harumscarum - look friend , 
 who have come down with he to share the canvass and partake the fun . 

 Captain Dashmore be a thorough sailor , who have , however , conceive a 
 disgust to the profession from the date in which a minister 's nephew have 
 be appoint to the command of a ship to which the captain consider 
 himself unquestionably entitle . it be just to the minister to add that 
 Captain Dashmore have show as little regard for order from a distance 
 as have immortalize Nelson himself ; but then the disobedience have not 
 achieve the same redeem success as that of Nelson , and Captain 
 Dashmore ought to have think himself fortunate in escape a severer 
 treatment than the loss of promotion . but no man know when he be 
 well off ; and retire on half pay , just as he come into unexpected 
 possession of some forty or fifty thousand pound , bequeath by a 
 distant relation , Captain Dashmore be seize with a vindictive 
 desire to enter parliament , and inflict oratorical chastisement on the 
 Administration . 

 a very few hour suffice to show the sea - captain to be a most capital 
 electioneerer for a popular but not enlighten constituency . it be true 
 that he talk the sad nonsense ever hear from an open window ; but 
 then his joke be so broad , his manner so hearty , his voice so big , 
 that in those dark day , before the schoolmaster be abroad , he would 
 have beat your philosophical Radical and moralizing Democrat hollow . 
 moreover , he kiss all the woman , old and young , with the zest of a 
 sailor who have know what it be to be three year at sea without 
 sight of a beardless lip ; he throw open all the public - house , ask a 
 numerous committee every day to dinner , and , chuck his purse up in 
 the air , declare " he would stick to his gun while there be a shot in 
 the locker . " till then , there have be but little political difference 
 between the candidate support by Lord Lansmere 's interest and the 
 oppose party ; for country gentleman , in those day , be pretty 
 much of the same way of thinking , and the question have be really 
 local , - namely , whether the Lansmere interest should or should not 
 prevail over that of the two squire - archical family who have alone , 
 hitherto , venture to oppose it . but though Captain Dashmore be really 
 a very loyal man , and much too old a sailor to think that the State 
  which , accord to establish metaphor , be a vessel par excellence 
 should admit Jack upon quarterdeck , yet , what with talk against lord 
 and aristocracy , job and abuse , and search through no very refined 
 vocabulary for the strong epithet to apply to those irritate 
 noun - substantive , his bile have get the well of his understanding , 
 and he become fuddle , as it be , by his own eloquence . thus , though 
 as innocent of jacobinical design as he be incapable of set the 
 Thames on fire , you would have guess he , by his speech , to be one 
 of the most determined incendiary that ever apply a match to the 
 combustible material of a contested election ; while , be by no mean 
 accustom to respect his adversary , he could not have treat 
 the Earl of Lansmere with less ceremony if his Lordship have be a 
 Frenchman . he usually designate that respectable nobleman , who be 
 still in the prime of life , by the title of " Old Pompous ; " and the 
 mayor , who be never see abroad but in top - boot , and the solicitor , 
 who be of a large build , receive from his irreverent wit the joint 
 sobriquet of " Tops and bottom " ! hence the election have now become , as I 
 say before , a personal matter with my Lord , and , indeed , with the great 
 head of the Lansmere interest . the earl seem to consider his very 
 coronet at stake in the question . " the man from Baker Street , " with his 
 preternatural audacity , appear to he a be ominous and awful - not 
 so much to be regard with resentment as with superstitious terror . he 
 feel as feel the dignified Montezuma , when that ruffianly Cortez , with 
 his handful of spanish rapscallion , beard he in his own capital , 
 and in the midst of his mexican splendour . the god be menace if 
 man could be so insolent ! wherefore , say my Lord tremulously , 
 " the Constitution be go if the Man from Baker Street come in for 
 Lansmere ! " 

 but in the absence of Audley Egerton , the election look extremely 
 ugly , and Captain Dashmore gain ground hourly , when the Lansmere 
 solicitor happily bethink he of a notable proxy for the missing 
 candidate . the squire of Hazeldean , with his young wife , have be 
 invite by the earl in honour of Audley ; and in the squire the solicitor 
 behold the only mortal who could cope with the sea - captain , - a man with 
 a voice as burly and a face as bold ; a man who , if permit for the 
 nonce by Mrs. Hazeldean , would kiss all the woman no less heartily than 
 the captain kiss they ; and who be , moreover , a tall and a handsomer 
 and a young man , - all three great recommendation in the kissing 
 department of a contested election . yes , to canvass the borough , and 
 to speak from the window , Squire Hazeldean would be even more popularly 
 presentable than the London - breed and accomplish Audley Egerton 
 himself . 

 the squire , apply to and urge on all side , at first say bluntly 
 that he would do anything in reason to serve his brother , but that he 
 do not like , for his own part , appear , even in proxy , as a lord 's 
 nominee ; and moreover , if he be to be sponsor for his brother , why , 
 he must promise and vow , in his name , to be stanch and true to the land 
 they live by ! and how could he tell that Audley , when once he get into 
 the House , would not forget the land , and then he , William Hazeldean , 
 would be make a liar , and look like a turncoat ! 

 but these scruple be overrule by the argument of the gentleman 
 and the entreaty of the lady , who take in the election that intense 
 interest which those gentle creature usually do take in all matter of 
 strife and contest , the squire at length consent to confront the man 
 from Baker Street , and go accordingly into the thing with that good 
 heart and old english spirit with which he go into everything whereon 
 he have once make up his mind . 

 the expectation form of the squire 's capacity for popular 
 electioneering be fully realize . he talk quite as much nonsense as 
 Captain Dashmore on every subject except the land interest ; there he 
 be great , for he know the subject well , - know it by the instinct that 
 come with practice , and compare to which all your showy theory be 
 mere cobwebs and moonshine . 

 the agricultural outvoter - many of whom , not live under Lord 
 Lansmere , but be small yeoman , have hitherto pride themselves on 
 their independence , and go against my Lord - could not in their heart 
 go against one who be every inch the farmer 's friend . they begin to 
 share in the earl 's personal interest against the Man from Baker Street ; 
 and big fellow , with leg big round than Captain Dashmore 's tight 
 little body , and huge whip in their hand , be soon see enter 
 the shop , " intimidate the elector , " as Captain Dashmore indignantly 
 declare . 

 these new recruit make a great difference in the musterroll of the 
 Lansmere book ; and when the day for polling arrive , the result be a 
 fair question for even bet . at the last hour , after a neck - and - neck 
 contest , Mr. Audley Egerton beat the captain by two vote ; and the name 
 of these voter be John Avenel , resident freeman , and his son - in - law , 
 Mark Fairfield , an outvoter , who , though a Lansmere freeman , have settle 
 in Hazeldean , where he have obtain the situation of head carpenter on 
 the squire 's estate . 

 these vote be unexpected ; for though Mark Fairfield have come to 
 Lansmere on purpose to support the squire 's brother , and though the 
 Avenels have be always stanch supporter of the Lansmere blue interest , 
 yet a severe affliction   as to the nature of which , not desire to 
 sadden the opening of my story , I be considerately silent   have befall 
 both these person , and they have leave the town on the very day after 
 Lord L'Estrange and Mr. Egerton have quit Lansmere Park . 

 whatever might have be the gratification of the squire , as a canvasser 
 and a brother , at Mr. Egerton 's triumph , it be much damp when , on 
 leave the dinner give in honour of the victory at the Lansmere Arms , 
 and about , with no steady step , to enter a carriage which be to convey 
 he to his Lordship 's house , a letter be put into his hand by one of 
 the gentleman who have accompany the captain to the scene of action ; 
 and the perusal of that letter , and a few whisper word from the 
 bearer thereof , send the squire back to Mrs. Hazeldean a much soberer 
 man than she have venture to hope for . the fact be , that on the day of 
 nomination , the captain have honour Mr. Hazeldean with many poetical 
 and figurative appellation , - such as " Prize Ox , " " Tony Lumpkin , " 
 " blood - suck vampire , " and " Brotherly Warming - Pan , " - the squire have 
 retort by a joke about " Saltwater Jack ; " and the captain , who like all 
 satirist be extremely susceptible and thin - skinned , could not consent 
 to be call " salt - water Jack " by a " Prize Ox " and a " Bloodsucking 
 Vampire . " 

 the letter , therefore , now convey to Mr. Hazeldean by a gentleman , 
 who , be from the Sister Country , be deem the most fitting 
 accomplice in the honourable destruction of a brother mortal , contain 
 nothing more nor less than an invitation to single combat ; and the 
 bearer thereof , with the suave politeness enjoin by etiquette on such 
 well - breed homicidal occasion , suggest the expediency of appoint 
 the place of meeting in the neighbourhood of London , in order to prevent 
 interference from the suspicious authority of Lansmere . 

 the native of some country - the warlike French in particular - think 
 little of that formal operation which go by the name of DUELLING . 
 indeed , they seem rather to like it than otherwise . but there be nothing 
 your thorough - pace Englishman - a Hazeldean of Hazeldean - consider with 
 more repugnance and aversion than that same cold - blooded ceremonial . it 
 be not within the range of an Englishman 's ordinary habit of thinking . 
 he prefer go to law , - a much more destructive proceeding of the two . 
 nevertheless , if an Englishman must fight , why , he will fight . he say 
 " it be very foolish ; " he be sure " it be most unchristianlike ; " he agree 
 with all that Philosophy , Preacher , and Press have lay down on the 
 subject ; but he make his will , say his prayer , and go out - like a 
 heathen . 

 it never , therefore , occur to the squire to show the white feather 
 upon this unpleasant occasion . the next day , feign excuse to attend 
 the sale of a hunting stud at Tattersall 's , he ruefully go up to 
 London , after take a peculiarly affectionate leave of his wife . 
 indeed , the squire feel convinced that he should never return home 
 except in a coffin . " it stand to reason , " say he to himself , " that 
 a man who have be actually pay by the King 's Government for shoot 
 people ever since he be a little boy in a midshipman 's jacket , must 
 be a dead hand at the job . I should not mind if it be with 
 double - barrel Mantons and small shot ; but ball and pistol , they be 
 not   human nor sportsmanlike ! " however , the squire , after settle his 
 worldly affair , and hunt up an old college friend who undertake to 
 be his second , proceed to a sequester corner of Wimbledon Common , 
 and plant himself , not sideways , as one ought to do in such encounter 
  the which posture the squire swear be an unmanly way of shirk , 
 but full front to the mouth of his adversary 's pistol , with such sturdy 
 composure that Captain Dashmore , who , though an excellent shot , be at 
 bottom as good - natured a fellow as ever live , testify his admiration 
 by let off his gallant opponent with a ball in the fleshy part of 
 the shoulder , after which he declare himself perfectly satisfied . 
 the party then shake hand , mutual apology be exchange , and 
 the squire , much to his astonishment to find himself still alive , 
 be convey to Limmer 's Hotel , where , after a considerable amount of 
 anguish , the ball be extract and the wound heal . now it be all 
 over , the squire feel very much raise in his own conceit ; and when he 
 be in a humour more than ordinarily fierce , that perilous event become 
 a favourite allusion with he . 

 he consider , moreover , that his brother have incur at his hand the 
 most lasting obligation ; and that , have procure Audley 's return to 
 parliament , and defend his interest at risk of his own life , he have 
 an absolute right to dictate to that gentleman how to vote , - upon all 
 matter , at least , connect with the land interest . and when , not 
 very long after Audley take his seat in parliament   which he do not 
 do for some month , he think proper both to vote and to speak in a 
 manner wholly belie the promise the squire have make on his behalf , 
 Mr. Hazeldean write he such a trimmer that it could not but produce 
 an unconciliatory reply . shortly afterwards the squire 's exasperation 
 reach the culminate point ; for , have to pass through Lansmere on 
 a market - day , he be hoot by the very farmer whom he have induce to 
 vote for his brother ; and , justly impute the disgrace to Audley , he 
 never hear the name of that traitor to the land mention without a 
 heighten colour and an indignant expletive . M. de Ruqueville - who be 
 the great wit of his day - have , like the squire , a half - brother , with 
 whom he be not on the good of term , and of whom he always speak as 
 his " frere de loin ! " Audley Egerton be thus Squire Hazeldean 's 
 " distant - brother " ! 

 enough of these explanatory antecedent , - let we return to the stock . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 the squire 's carpenter be take from the park pale and set to 
 work at the parish stock . then come the painter and colour they 
 a beautiful dark blue , with white border - and a white rim round the 
 hole - with an ornamental flourish in the middle . it be the gay 
 public edifice in the whole village , though the village possess 
 no less than three other monument of the vitruvian genius of the 
 Hazeldeans , - to wit , the almshouse , the school , and the parish pump . 

 a more elegant , enticing , coquettish pair of stock never gladden the 
 eye of a justice of the peace . 

 and Squire Hazeldean 's eye be gladden . in the pride of his heart he 
 bring all the family down to look at the stock . the squire 's family 
  omit the frere de loin   consist of Mrs. Hazeldean , his wife ; 
 next , of Miss Jemima Hazeldean , his first cousin ; thirdly , of Mr. 
 Francis Hazeldean , his only son ; and fourthly , of Captain Barnabas 
 Higginbotham , a distant relation , - who , indeed , strictly speak , 
 be not of the family , but only a visitor ten month in the year . Mrs. 
 Hazeldean be every inch the lady , - the lady of the parish . in she 
 comely , florid , and somewhat sunburned countenance , there be an equal 
 expression of majesty and benevolence ; she have a blue eye that invite 
 liking , and an aquiline nose that command respect . Mrs. Hazeldean have 
 no affectation of fine air , no wish to be great and handsomer and 
 cleverer than she be . she know herself , and her station , and thank 
 Heaven for it . there be about her speech and manner something of the 
 shortness and bluntness which often characterize royalty ; and if the 
 lady of a parish be not a queen in her own circle , it be never the fault 
 of a parish . Mrs. Hazeldean dress her part to perfection . she wear 
 silk that seem heirloom , - so thick be they , so substantial and 
 impose ; and over these , when she be in her own domain , the whitest 
 of apron ; while at her waist be see no fiddle - faddle chatelaine , with 
 breloque and trumpery , but a good honest gold watch to mark the 
 time , and a long pair of scissor to cut off the dead leaf from her 
 flower , - for she be a great horticulturalist . when occasion need , 
 Mrs. Hazeldean could , however , lie by her more sumptuous and imperial 
 raiment for a stout riding - habit , of blue Saxony , and canter by her 
 husband 's side to see the hound throw off . Nay , on the day on which 
 Mr. Hazeldean drive his famous fast - trotting cob to the market town , it 
 be rarely that you do not see his wife on the left side of the gig . 
 she care as little as her lord do for wind and weather , and in the 
 midst of some pelting shower her pleasant face peep over the collar 
 and cape of a stout dreadnought , expand into smile and bloom as 
 some frank rose , that open from its petal , and rejoice in the dew . 
 it be easy to see that the worthy couple have marry for love ; they 
 be as little apart as they could help it . and still , on the first 
 of September , if the house be not full of company which demand she 
 care , Mrs. Hazeldean ' step out " over the stubble by her husband 's 
 side , with as light a tread and as blithe an eye as when , in the first 
 bridal year , she have enchant the squire by her genial sympathy with 
 his sport . 

 so there now stand Harriet Hazeldean , one hand lean on the squire 's 
 broad shoulder , the other thrust into her apron , and try she good to 
 share her husband 's enthusiasm for his own public - spirited patriotism , 
 in the renovation of the parish stock . a little behind , with two 
 finger rest on the thin arm of Captain Barnabas , stand Miss Jemima , 
 the orphan daughter of the squire 's uncle , by a runaway imprudent 
 marriage with a young lady who belong to a family which have be at 
 war with the Hazeldeans since the reign of Charles the First respect 
 a right of way to a small wood   or rather spring   of about an acre , 
 through a piece of furze land , which be let to a brickmaker at twelve 
 shilling a year . the wood belong to the Hazeldeans , the furze land 
 to the Sticktorights   an old Saxon family , if ever there be one . every 
 twelfth year , when the fagot and timber be fell , this feud break 
 out afresh ; for the Sticktorights refuse to the Hazeldeans the right to 
 cart off the say fagot and timber through the only way by which a cart 
 could possibly pass . it be just to the Hazeldeans to say that they have 
 offer to buy the land at ten time its value . but the Sticktorights , 
 with equal magnanimity , have declare that they would not " alienate the 
 family property for the convenience of the good squire that ever stand 
 upon shoe leather . " therefore , every twelfth year , there be always 
 a great breach of the peace on the part of both Hazeldeans and 
 Sticktorights , magistrate and deputy - lieutenant though they be . 
 the question be fairly fight out by their respective dependant , 
 and follow by various action for assault and trespass . as the legal 
 question of right be extremely obscure , it never have be properly 
 decide ; and , indeed , neither party wish it to be decide , each at 
 heart have some doubt of the propriety of its own claim . a marriage 
 between a young son of the Hazeldeans and a young daughter of the 
 Sticktorights be view with equal indignation by both family ; 
 and the consequence have be that the runaway couple , unblessed and 
 unforgiven , have scramble through life as they could , upon the scanty 
 pay of the husband , who be in a march regiment , and the interest 
 of L1000 , which be the wife 's fortune independent of her parent . they 
 die and leave an only daughter   upon whom the maternal L1000 have be 
 settle , about the time that the squire come of age and into possession 
 of his estate . and though he inherit all the ancestral hostility 
 towards the Sticktorights , it be not in his nature to be unkind to a 
 poor orphan , who be , after all , the child of a Hazeldean . therefore he 
 have educate and foster Jemima with as much tenderness as if she have 
 be his sister ; put out her L1000 at nurse , and devote , from the ready 
 money which have accrue from the rent during his minority , as much as 
 make her fortune   with her own accumulate at compound interest   no less 
 than L4000 , the ordinary marriage portion of the daughter of Hazeldean . 
 on her come of age , he transfer this sum to her absolute disposal , 
 in order that she might feel herself independent , see a little more of 
 the world than she could at Hazeldean , have candidate to choose from 
 if she deign to marry ; or enough to live upon , if she choose to remain 
 single . Miss Jemima have somewhat avail herself of this liberty , by 
 occasional visit to Cheltenham and other watering - place . but her 
 grateful affection to the squire be such that she could never bear to 
 be long away from the Hall . and this be the more praise to her heart , 
 inasmuch as she be far from take kindly to the prospect of be 
 an old maid ; and there be so few bachelor in the neighbourhood of 
 Hazeldean , that she could not but have that prospect before her eye 
 whenever she look out of the Hall window . Miss Jemima be indeed 
 one of the most kindly and affectionate of being feminine ; and if she 
 dislike the thought of single blessedness , it really be from those 
 innocent and womanly instinct towards the tender charity of hearth 
 and home , without which a lady , however otherwise estimable , be little 
 well than a Minerva in bronze . but , whether or not , despite her 
 fortune and her face , which last , though not strictly handsome , be 
 pleasing , and would have be positively pretty if she have laugh more 
 often   for when she laugh , there appear three charming dimple , 
 invisible when she be grave , - whether or not , I say , it be the fault 
 of our insensibility or her own fastidiousness , Miss Jemima approach 
 her thirtieth year , and be still Miss Jemima . now , therefore , that 
 beautify laugh of hers be very rarely hear , and she have of late 
 become confirm in two opinion , not at all conducive to laughter . one 
 be a conviction of the general and progressive wickedness of the male 
 sex , and the other be a decided and lugubrious belief that the world 
 be come to an end . Miss Jemima be now accompany by a small canine 
 favourite , true Blenheim , with a snub nose . it be advance in life , 
 and somewhat obese . it sit on its haunch , with its tongue out of its 
 mouth , except when it snap at the fly . there be a strong platonic 
 friendship between Miss Jemima and Captain Barnabas Higginbotham ; for 
 he , too , be unmarried , and he have the same ill opinion of your sex , my 
 dear madam , that Miss Jemima have of , our . the captain be a man of 
 a slim and elegant figure ; the less say about the face the well , a 
 truth of which the captain himself be sensible , for it be a favourite 
 maxim of his , " that in a man , everything be a slight , gentlemanlike 
 figure . " Captain Barnabas do not absolutely deny that the world be 
 come to an end , only he think it would last his time . 

 quite apart from all the rest , with the nonchalant survey of virgin 
 dandyism , Francis Hazeldean look over one of the high starch 
 neckcloth which be then the fashion , - a handsome lad , fresh from Eton 
 for the summer holiday , but at that ambiguous age when one disdain the 
 sport of the boy , and have not yet arrive at the resource of the man . 

 " I should be glad , Frank , " say the squire , suddenly turn round to 
 his son , " to see you take a little more interest in duty which , one 
 day or other , you may be call upon to discharge . I can not   bear to think 
 that the property should fall into the hand of a fine gentleman , who 
 will let thing go to rack and ruin , instead of keep they up as I 
 do . " 

 and the squire point to the stock . 

 Master Frank 's eye follow the direction of the cane , as well as his 
 cravat would permit ; and he say dryly , - 

 " yes , sir ; but how come the stock to be so long out of repair ? " 

 " because one can not   see to everything at once , " retort the squire , 
 tartly . " when a man have get eight thousand acre to look after , he must 
 do a bit at a time . " 

 " yes , " say Captain Barnabas . " I know that by experience . " 

 " the deuce you do ! " cry the squire , bluntly . " experience in eight 
 thousand acre ! " 

 " no ; in my apartment in the Albany , - no . 3 a. I have have they ten 
 year , and it be only last Christmas that I buy my Japan cat . " 

 " dear I , " say Miss Jemima ; " a Japan cat ! that must be very curious . 
 what sort of a creature be it ? " 

 " do not   you know ? bless I , a thing with three leg , and hold toast ! I 
 never think of it , I assure you , till my friend Cosey say to I one 
 morning when he be breakfast at my room , ' Higginbotham , how be it 
 that you , who like to have thing comfortable about you , do not   have 
 a cat ? ' ' upon my life , ' say I , ' one can not   think of everything at a 
 time , ' - just like you , Squire . " 

 " Pshaw , " say Mr. Hazeldean , gruffly , " not at all like I . and I will 
 thank you another time , Cousin Higginbotham , not to put I out when I be 
 speak on matter of importance ; poke your cat into my stock ! they 
 look something like now , my stock , do not   they , Harry ? I declare that 
 the whole village seem more respectable . it be astonish how much a 
 little improvement add to the - to the - " 

 " Charm of the landscape , " put in Miss Jemina , sentimentally . 

 the squire neither accept nor reject the suggested termination ; but 
 leave his sentence uncomplete , break suddenly off with - 

 " and if I have listen to Parson Dale - " 

 " you would have do a very wise thing , " say a voice behind , as the 
 parson present himself in the rear . 

 " wise thing ? why , surely , Mr. Dale , " say Mrs. Hazeldean , with spirit , 
 for she always resent the least contradiction to her lord and 
 master - perhaps as an interference with her own special right and 
 prerogative ! - " why , surely if it be necessary to have stock , it be 
 necessary to repair they . " 

 " that be right ! go it , Harry ! " cry the squire , chuckle , and 
 rub his hand as if he have be set his terrier at the parson : 
 " St - St - at he ! well , Master Dale , what do you say to that ? " 

 " my dear ma'am , " say the parson , reply in preference to the lady , 
 " there be many institution in the country which be very old , look 
 very decayed , and do not   seem of much use ; but I would not pull they down 
 for all that . " 

 " you would reform they , then , " say Mrs. Hazeldean , doubtfully , and 
 with a look at her husband , as much as to say , " he be on politic 
 now , - that be your business . " 

 " no , I would not , ma'am , " say the parson , stoutly . " what on earth would 
 you do , then ? " quoth the squire . " just let them alone , " say the parson . 
 " Master Frank , there be a latin maxim which be often put in the mouth of 
 Sir Robert Walpole , and which they ought to put into the Eton grammar , 
 ' Quieta non movere . ' if thing be quiet , let they be quiet ! I would not 
 destroy the stock , because that might seem to the ill - dispose like a 
 license to offend ; and I would not repair the stock , because that put 
 it into people 's head to get into they . " 

 the squire be a stanch politician of the old school , and he do 
 not like to think that , in repair the stock , he have perhaps be 
 connive at revolutionary principle . 

 " this constant desire of innovation , " say Miss Jemima , suddenly 
 mount the more funereal of her two favourite hobby , " be one of the 
 great symptom of the approach crash . we be alter and mending and 
 reforming , when in twenty year at the utmost the world itself may 
 be destroy ! " the fair speaker pause , and Captain Barnabas say 
 thoughtfully , " twenty year ! - the insurance officer rarely compute the 
 good life at more than fourteen . " he strike his hand on the stock as he 
 speak , and add , with his usual consolatory conclusion , " the odd be 
 that it will last our time , Squire . " 

 but whether Captain Barnabas mean the stock or the world he do not 
 clearly explain , and no one take the trouble to inquire . 

 " Sir , " say Master Frank to his father , with that furtive spirit of 
 quizzing , which he have acquire amongst other polite accomplishment at 
 Eton , - ' sir , it be no use now consider whether the stock should or 
 should not have be repair . the only question be , whom you will get 
 to put into they . " 

 " true , " say the squire , with much gravity . 

 " yes , there it be ! " say the parson , mournfully . " if you would but learn 
 ' non quieta movere ' ! " 

 " do not   spout your Latin at I , Parson , " cry the squire , angrily ; " I 
 can give you as good as you bring , any day . 

  " ' Propria quae maribus tribuuntur mascula dicas . - 
  as in praesenti , perfectum format in avi . ' 

 " there , " add the squire , turn triumphantly towards his Harry , who 
 look with great admiration at this unprecedented burst of learn on 
 the part of Mr. Hazeldean , - " there , two can play at that game ! and now 
 that we have all see the stock , we may as well go home and drink tea . 
 will you come up and play a rubber , Dale ? no ! hang it , man , I have   not 
 offend you ? - you know my way . " 

 " that I do , and they be among the thing I would not have alter , " 
 cry the parson , hold out his hand cheerfully . the squire give it a 
 hearty shake , and Mrs. Hazeldean hasten to do the same . 

 " do come ; I be afraid we have   be very rude : we be sad blunt folk . do 
 come ; that be a dear good man ; and of course poor Mrs. Dale too . " Mrs. 
 Hazeldean 's favourite epithet for Mrs. Dale be poor , and that for 
 reason to be explain hereafter . 

 " I fear my wife have get one of her bad headache , but I will give she 
 your kind message , and at all event you may depend upon I . " 

 " that be right , " say the squire ; " in half an hour , eh ? how d ' ye do , my 
 little man ? " as Lenny Fairfield , on his way home from some errand in the 
 village , draw aside and pull off his hat with both hand . " stop ; you 
 see those stock , eh ? tell all the bad boy in the parish to take 
 care how they get into they - a sad disgrace - you will never be in such a 
 quandary ? " 

 " that at least I will answer for , " say the parson . 

 " and I too , " add Mrs. Hazeldean , pat the boy 's curly head . 
 " tell your mother I shall come and have a good chat with she to - morrow 
 evening . " 

 and so the party pass on , and Lenny stand still on the road , star 
 hard at the stock , which star back at he from its four great eye . 

 Put Lenny do not remain long alone . as soon as the great folk have 
 fairly disappear , a large number of small folk emerge timorously 
 from the neighbouring cottage , and approach the site of the stock 
 with much marvel , fear , and curiosity . 

 in fact , the renovated appearance of this monster a propos de botte , 
 as one may say - have already excite considerable sensation among the 
 population of Hazeldean . and even as when an unexpected owl make his 
 appearance in broad daylight all the little bird rise from tree and 
 hedgerow , and cluster round their ominous enemy , so now gather all the 
 much - excite villager round the intrusive and portentous phenomenon . 

 " D ' ye know what the diggin the squire do it for , Gaffer solomon ? " 
 ask one many - childe matron , with a baby in arm , an urchin of three 
 year old cling fast to her petticoat , and her hand maternally 
 hold back a more adventurous hero of six , who have a great desire to 
 thrust his head into one of the grisly aperture . all eye turn to a 
 sage old man , the oracle of the village , who , lean both hand on his 
 crutch , shake his head bodingly . 

 " Maw be , " say Gaffer Solomons , ' some of the boy ha ' be rob the 
 orchard . " 

 " Orchards ! " cry a big lad , who seem to think himself personally 
 appeal to ; " why , the bud 's scarce off the tree yet ! " 

 " no more it be not , " say the dame with many child , and she breathe 
 more freely . 

 " Maw be , " say Gaffer Solomons , ' some o ' ye have be sit snare . " 

 " what for ? " say a stout , sullen - look young fellow , whom conscience 
 possibly prick to reply , - " what for , when it bean't   the season ? and if 
 a poor man do find a hear in his pocket I ' the haytime , I should like 
 to know if ever a squire in the world would let ' un off with the stock , 
 eh ? " 

 this last question seem a settler , and the wisdom of Gaffer Solomons 
 go down fifty per cent in the public opinion of Hazeldean . 

 " Maw be , " say the gaffer - this time with a thrilling effect , which 
 restore his reputation , - " maw be some o ' ye ha ' be get drunk , and 
 make beestise o ' yoursel 's ! " 

 there be a dead pause , for this suggestion apply too generally to 
 be meet with a solitary response . at last one of the woman say , with a 
 meaning glance at her husband , 

 " God bless the squire ; he will make some on we happy woman if that be all ! " 

 there then arise an almost unanimous murmur of approbation among the 
 female part of the audience ; and the man look at each other , and then 
 at the phenomenon , with a very hang - dog expression of countenance . 

 " or , maw be , " resume Gaffer Solomons , encourage to a fourth suggestion 
 by the success of its predecessor , - " maw be some o ' the missese ha ' 
 be make a rumpus , and scold their good man . I hear say in 
 my granfeyther 's time , arter old Mother Bang nigh die o ' the 
 ducking - stool , they ' ere stock be first make for the woman , out o ' 
 compassion like ! and every one know the squire be a koind - hearted man , 
 God bless ' un ! " 

 " God bless ' un ! " cry the man , heartily ; and they gather lovingly 
 round the phenomenon , like heathen of old round a tutelary temple . but 
 then there rise one shrill clamour among the female as they retreat 
 with involuntary step towards the verge of the green , whence they 
 glare at solomon and the phenomenon with eye so sparkling , and 
 point at both with gesture so menacing , that Heaven only know if a 
 morsel of either would have remain much long to offend the eye of 
 the justly - enrage matronage of Hazeldean , if fortunately Master Stirn , 
 the squire 's right - hand man , have not come up in the nick of time . 

 Master Stirn be a formidable personage , - more formidable than the 
 squire himself , - as , indeed , a squire 's right hand be generally more 
 formidable than the head can pretend to be . he inspire the great awe , 
 because , like the stock of which he be depute guardian , his power 
 be undefined and obscure , and he have no particular place in the 
 out - of - door establishment . he be not the steward , yet he do much of 
 what ought to be the steward 's work ; he be not the farm - bailiff , 
 for the squire call himself his own farm - bailiff ; nevertheless , Mr. 
 Hazeldean sow and plough , crop and stock , buy and sell , very 
 much as Mr. Stirn condescend to advise . he be not the park - keeper , 
 for he neither shoot the deer nor superintend the preserve ; but it be 
 he who always find out who have break a park pale or snare a rabbit . 
 in short , what may be call all the harsh duty of a large landed 
 proprietor devolve , by custom and choice , upon Mr. Stirn . if a labourer 
 be to be discharge or a rent enforce , and the squire know that he 
 should be talk over , and that the steward would be as soft as himself , 
 Mr. Stirn be sure to be the avenge messenger , to pronounce the word 
 of fate ; so that he appear to the inhabitant of Hazeldean like the 
 poet 's Saeva Necessitas , a vague incarnation of remorseless power , arm 
 with whip , nail , and wedge . the very brute creation stand in awe of 
 Mr. Stirn . the calf know that it be he who single out which should 
 be sell to the butcher , and huddle up into a corner with beat 
 heart at his grim footstep ; the sow grunt , the duck quack , the hen 
 bristle her feather and call to her chick when Mr. Stirn draw near . 
 Nature have set she stamp upon he . indeed , it may be question whether 
 the great M. de Chambray himself , surname the brave , have an aspect so 
 awe - inspiring as that of Mr. Stirn ; albeit the face of that hero be so 
 terrible , that a man who have be his lackey , see his portrait after 
 he have be dead twenty year , fall a trembling all over like a leaf ! 

 " and what the plague be you do here ? " say Mr. Stirn , as he wave 
 and smack a great cart - whip which he hold in his hand , " make such 
 a hullabaloo , you woman , you ! that I suspect the squire will be send 
 out to know if the village be on fire . go home , will ye ? high time 
 indeed to have the stock ready , when you get squall and conspire 
 under the very nose of a justice of the peace , just as the french 
 revolutioner do afore they cut off their king 's head ! my hair stand 
 on end to look at ye . " but already , before half this address be 
 deliver , the crowd have disperse in all direction , - the woman still 
 keep together , and the man sneak off towards the ale - house . such 
 be the beneficent effect of the fatal stock on the first day of their 
 resuscitation . however , in the break up of every crowd there must always 
 be one who get off the last ; and it so happen that our friend Lenny 
 Fairfield , who have mechanically approach close to the stock , the 
 well to hear the oracular opinion of Gaffer Solomons , have no less 
 mechanically , on the abrupt appearance of Mr. Stirn , creep , as he hop , 
 out of sight behind the trunk of the elm - tree which partially shade the 
 stock ; and there now , as if fascinate , he still cower , not dare 
 to emerge in full view of Mr. Stirn , and in immediate reach of the 
 cartwhip , when the quick eye of the right - hand man detect his retreat . 

 " Hallo , sir - what the deuce , lay a mine to blow up the stock ! just 
 like Guy Fox and the Gunpowder Plot , I declare ! what ha ' you get in 
 your willanous little fist there ? " 

 " nothing , sir , " say Lenny , open his palm . " nothing - um ! " say Mr. 
 Stirn , much dissatisfied ; and then , as he gaze more deliberately , 
 recognize the pattern boy of the village , a cloud yet darker gather 
 over his brow ; for Mr. Stirn , who value himself much on his learning , 
 and who , indeed , by dint of more knowledge as well as more wit than 
 his neighbour , have attain his present eminent station of life , be 
 extremely anxious that his only son should also be a scholar . that 
 wish - 

  " the god disperse in empty air . " 

 Master Stirn be a notable dunce at the parson 's school , while Lenny 
 Fairfield be the pride and boast of it ; therefore Mr. Stirn be 
 naturally , and almost justifiably , ill - dispose towards Lenny Fairfield , 
 who have appropriate to himself the praise which Mr. Stirn have design 
 for his son . 

 " um ! " say the right - hand man , glower on Lenny malignantly , " you 
 be the pattern boy of the village , be you ? very well , sir ! then I put 
 these here stock under your care , and you will keep off the other boy 
 from sit on them , and pick off the paint , and play three - hole 
 and chuck - farthing , as I declare they have   be a doing , just in front of 
 the elewation . now , you know your ' sponsibilitie , little boy , - and a 
 great honour they be too , for the like o ' you . 

 " if any damage be do , it be to you I shall look ; d ' ye 
 understand ? - and that be what the squire say to I . so you see what it 
 be to be a pattern boy , Master Lenny ! " with that Mr. Stirn give a loud 
 crack of the cart - whip , by way of military honour , over the head of 
 the vicegerent he have thus create , and stride off to pay a visit to two 
 young unsuspecting pup , whose ear and tail he have graciously promise 
 their proprietor to crop that evening . nor , albeit few charge could 
 be more obnoxious than that of deputy - governor or charge - d'affaires 
 extraordinaire to the parish stock , nor one more likely to render 
 Lenny Fairfield odious to his contemporary , ought he to have be 
 insensible to the signal advantage of his condition over that of the two 
 sufferer , against whose ear and tail Mr. Stirn have no special motif 
 of resentment . to every bad there be a bad ; and fortunately for 
 little boy , and even for grown man , whom the Stirns of the world regard 
 malignly , the majesty and law protect their ear , and the merciful 
 forethought of nature deprive their remote ancestor of the privilege 
 of entail tail upon they . have it be otherwise - consider what 
 handle tail would have give to the oppressor , how many trap envy 
 would have lay for they , how often they must have be scratch and 
 mutilate by the briar of life , how many good excuse would have be 
 find for lop , docking , and trim they - I fear that only the 
 lap - dog of Fortune would have go to the grave tail - whole . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 the card - table be set out in the drawing - room at Hazeldean Hall ; though 
 the little party be still linger in the deep recess of the large 
 bay window , which   in itself of dimension that would have swallow up 
 a moderate - sized London parlour   hold the great round tea - table , with 
 all appliance and mean to boot , - for the beautiful summer moon shed on 
 the sward so silvery a lustre , and the tree cast so quiet a shadow , 
 and the flower and new - mow hay send up so grateful a perfume , that 
 to close the window , draw the curtain , and call for other light than 
 those of heaven would have be an abuse of the prose of life which even 
 Captain Barnabas , who regard whist as the business of town and the 
 holiday of the country , shrink from suggest . without , the scene , 
 beheld by the clear moonlight , have the beauty peculiar to the 
 garden - ground round those old - fashioned country residence which , though 
 a little modernized , still preserve their original character , - the 
 velvet lawn , stud with large plot of flower , shaded and scented , 
 here to the left by lilacs , laburnum , and rich syringas ; there , to the 
 right , give glimpse , over low clip yew , of a green bowling - alley , 
 with the white column of a summer - house build after the dutch taste , 
 in the reign of William III . ; and in front steal away under covert 
 of those still cedar , into the wilder landscape of the well - woode 
 undulating park . within , view by the placid glimmer of the moon , the 
 scene be no less characteristic of the abode of that race which have no 
 parallel in other land , and which , alas ! be somewhat lose its native 
 idiosyncrasy in this , - the stout country gentleman , not the fine 
 gentleman of the country ; the country gentleman somewhat softened and 
 civilized from the mere sportsman or farmer , but still plain and homely ; 
 relinquish the old hall for the drawing - room , and with book not 
 three month old on his table , instead of Fox 's " Martyrs " and Baker 's 
 " Chronicle , " yet still retain many a sacred old prejudice , that , like 
 the knot in his native oak , rather add to the ornament of the grain 
 than take from the strength of the tree . opposite to the window , the 
 high chimneypiece rise to the heavy cornice of the ceiling , with dark 
 panel glisten against the moonlight . the broad and rather clumsy 
 chintz sofas and settee of the reign of George III . contrast at 
 interval with the tall - back chair of a far more distant generation , 
 when lady in fardingale and gentleman in trunk - hose seem never to 
 have indulge in horizontal position . the wall , of shin wainscot , 
 be thickly cover , chiefly with family picture ; though now and then 
 some dutch fair or battle - piece show that a former proprietor have be 
 less exclusive in his taste for the art . the pianoforte stand open 
 near the fireplace ; a long dwarf bookcase at the far end add its sober 
 smile to the room . that bookcase contain what be call " the Lady 's 
 Library , " - a collection commence by the squire 's grandmother , of pious 
 memory , and complete by his mother , who have more taste for the light 
 letter , with but little addition from the bibliomaniac tendency 
 of the present Mrs. Hazeldean , who , be no great reader , content 
 herself with subscribing to the Book Club . in this feminine Bodleian , 
 the sermon collect by Mrs. Hazeldean , the grandmother , stand 
 cheek - by - jowl beside the novel purchase by Mrs. Hazeldean , the 
 mother , - 

  " mixtaque ridenti colocasia fundet acantho ! " 

 but , to be sure , the novel , in spite of very inflammatory title , such 
 as " Fatal sensibility , " " error of the heart , " etc . , be so harmless 
 that I doubt if the sermon could have have much to say against their 
 next - door neighbour , - and that be all that can be expect by the good 
 of we . 

 a parrot dozing on his perch ; some goldfish fast asleep in their glass 
 bowl ; two or three dog on the rug , and Flimsey , Miss Jemima 's spaniel , 
 curl into a ball on the soft sofa ; Mrs. Hazeldean 's work - table 
 rather in disorder , as if it have be lately use ; the " St. James 's 
 Chronicle " dangle down from a little tripod near the squire 's 
 armchair ; a high screen of gilt and stamp leather fence off the 
 card - table , - all these , disperse about a room large enough to hold they 
 all and not seem crowd , offer many a pleasant resting - place for the 
 eye , when it turn from the world of nature to the home of man . 

 but see , Captain Barnabas , fortify by his fourth cup of tea , have at 
 length summon courage to whisper to Mrs. Hazeldean , " do not   you think 
 the parson will be impatient for his rubber ? " Mrs. Hazeldean glance at 
 the parson and smile ; but she give the signal to the captain , and the 
 bell be rung , light be bring in , the curtain let down ; in a few 
 moment more , the group have collect round the cardtable . the good of 
 we be but human - that be not a new truth , I confess , but yet people 
 forget it every day of their life - and I dare say there be many who 
 be charitably think at this very moment that my parson ought not to 
 be play at whist . all I can say to those rigid disciplinarian be , 
 " every man have his favourite sin : whist be Parson Dale 's ! - lady and 
 gentleman , what be yours ? " in truth , I must not set up my poor parson , 
 nowadays , as a pattern parson , - it be enough to have one pattern in a 
 village no big than Hazeldean , and we all know that Lenny Fairfield 
 have bespeak that place , and get the patronage of the stock for his 
 emolument ! Parson Dale be ordain , not indeed so very long ago , but 
 still at a time when Churchmen take it a great deal more easily than 
 they do now . the elderly parson of that day play his rubber as a 
 matter of course , the middle - aged parson be sometimes see rid to 
 cover   I know a schoolmaster , a doctor of divinity , and an excellent 
 man , whose pupil be chiefly take from the high family in 
 England , who hunt regularly three time a week during the season , 
 and the young parson would often sing a capital song - not compose by 
 David - and join in those rotatory dance , which certainly David never 
 dance before the ark . 

 do it need so long an exordium to excuse thee , poor Parson Dale , for 
 turn up that ace of spade with so triumphant a smile at thy partner ? 
 I must own that nothing which could well add to the parson 's offence be 
 want . in the first place , he do not play charitably , and merely to 
 oblige other people . he delight in the game , he rejoice in the game , 
 his whole heart be in the game , - neither be he indifferent to the 
 mammon of the thing , as a christian pastor ought to have be . he look 
 very sad when he take his shilling out of his purse , and exceedingly 
 please when he put the shilling that have just before belong to 
 other people into it . finally , by one of those arrangement common with 
 married people who play at the same table , ' Mr. and - Mrs. Hazeldean be 
 invariably partner , and no two people could play bad ; while Captain 
 Barnabas , who have play at Graham 's with honour and profit , necessarily 
 become partner to Parson Dale , who himself play a good steady parsonic 
 game . so that , in strict truth , it be hardly fair play ; it be almost 
 swindle , - the combination of these two great don against that 
 innocent married couple ! Mr. Dale , it be true , be aware of this 
 disproportion of force , and have often propose either to change partner 
 or to give odd , - proposition always scornfully scout by the squire 
 and his lady , so that the parson be oblige to pocket his conscience , 
 together with the ten point which make his average winning . 

 the strange thing in the world be the different way in which whist 
 affect the temper . it be no test of temper , as some pretend , - not at 
 all ! the well - temper people in the world grow snappish at whist ; and 
 I have see the most testy and peevish in the ordinary affair of life 
 bear their loss with the stoicism of Epictetus . this be notably 
 manifest in the contrast between the present adversary of the Hall 
 and the Rectory . the squire , who be esteem as choleric a gentleman as 
 most in the county , be the well - humour fellow you could imagine when 
 you set he down to whist opposite the sunny face of his wife . you never 
 hear one of those incorrigible blunderer scold each other ; on the 
 contrary , they only laugh when they throw away the game , with four 
 by honour in their hand . the utmost that be ever say be a " well , 
 Harry , that be the oddest trump of your . Ho , ho , ho ! " or a " bless I , 
 Hazeldean - why , they make three trick in club , and you have the ace in 
 your hand all the time ! ha , ha , ha ! " 

 upon which occasion Captain Barnabas , with great goodhumour , always 
 echo both the squire 's Ho , ho , ho ! and Mrs. Hazeldean 's Ha , ha , ha ! 

 not so the parson . he have so keen and sportsmanlike an interest in the 
 game , that even his adversary ' mistake ruffle he . and you would 
 hear he , with elevated voice and agitated gesture , lay down 
 the law , quote Hoyle , appeal to all the power of memory and 
 common - sense against the very delinquency by which he be enrich , - a 
 waste of eloquence that always heighten the hilarity of Mr. and Mrs. 
 Hazeldean . while these four be thus engage , Mrs. Dale , who have come 
 with her husband despite her headache , sit on the sofa beside Miss 
 Jemima , or rather beside Miss Jemima 's Flimsey , which have already 
 secure the centre of the sofa , and snarl at the very idea of be 
 disturb . and Master Frank - at a table by himself - be employ 
 sometimes in look at his pump and sometimes at Gilray 's Caricatures , 
 which his mother have provide for his intellectual requirement . Mrs. 
 Dale , in her heart , like Miss Jemima well than Mrs. Hazeldean , of 
 whom she be rather in awe , notwithstanding they have be little girl 
 together , and occasionally still call each other Harry and Carry . but 
 those tender diminutive belong to the " dear " genus , and be rarely 
 employ by the lady , except at time when , have they be little girl 
 still , and the governess out of the way , they would have slap and 
 pinch each other . Mrs. Dale be still a very pretty woman , as 
 Mrs. Hazeldean be still a very fine woman . Mrs. Dale paint in 
 water - colour , and sing , and make card - rack and penholder , and be 
 call an " elegant , accomplished woman ; " Mrs. Hazeldean cast up the 
 squire 's account , write the good part of his letter , keep a large 
 establishment in excellent order , and be call " a clever , sensible 
 woman . " Mrs. Dale have headache and nerve ; Mrs. Hazeldean have neither 
 nerve nor headache . Mrs. Dale say , " Harry have no real harm in she , 
 but be certainly very masculine ; " Mrs. Hazeldean say , " Carry would 
 be a good creature but for her air and grace . " Mrs. Dale say Mrs. 
 Hazeldean be " just make to be a country squire 's lady ; " Mrs. Hazeldean 
 say , " Mrs. Dale be the last person in the world who ought to have 
 be a parson 's wife . " Carry , when she speak of Harry to a third person , 
 say , " Dear Mrs. Hazeldean ; " Harry , when she refer incidentally 
 to Carry , say , " Poor Mrs. Dale . " and now the reader know why Mrs. 
 Hazeldean call Mrs. Dale " poor , " - at least as well as I do . for , after 
 all , the word belong to that class in the female vocabulary which may 
 be call " obscure significant , " resemble the Konx Ompax , which hath 
 so puzzle the inquirer into the Eleusinian Mysteries : the application 
 be rather to be illustrate than the meaning to be exactly explain . 

 " that be really a sweet little dog of your , Jemima , " say Mrs. Dale , 
 who be embroider the word CAROLINE on the border of a cambric pocket 
 handkerchief ; but edge a little far off , as she add , " he will not 
 bite , will he ? " 

 " Dear I , no ! " say Miss Jemima ; " but "   she add in a confidential 
 whisper   " do not   say he , - ' t be a lady dog ! " 

 " oh , " say Mrs. Dale , edge off still far , as if that confession of 
 the creature 's sex do not serve to allay her apprehension , - " oh , then , 
 you carry your aversion to the gentleman even to lap - dog , - that be 
 be consistent indeed , Jemima ! " 

 MISS jemima . - " I have a gentleman dog once , - a pug ! - pug be get 
 very scarce now . I think he be so fond of I - he snap at every one 
 else ; the battle I fight for he ! well , will you believe - I have be 
 stay with my friend Miss Smilecox at Cheltenham . know that William 
 be so hasty , and his boot be so thick , I tremble to think what a kick 
 might do . so , on come here I leave Bluff - that be his name - with Miss 
 Smilecox . "   a pause . 

 MRS . DALE   look up languidly . - " well , my love ? " 

 MISS jemima . - " will you believe it , I say , when I return to 
 Cheltenham , only three month afterwards , Miss Smilecox have seduce his 
 affection from I , and the ungrateful creature do not even know I 
 again ? a pug , too - yet people say pug be faithful ! I be sure they 
 ought to be , nasty thing ! I have never have a gentleman dog since , - they 
 be all alike , believe I , heartless , selfish creature . " 

 MRS . DALE . - " pug ? I dare say they be ! " 

 MISS JEMIMA   with spirit .-"MEN ! - I tell you it be a gentleman dog ! " 

 MRS . DALE   apologetically . - " true , my love , but the whole thing be so 
 mix up ! " 

 MISS jemima . - " you see that cold - blooded case of Breach of Promise of 
 marriage in the paper , - an old wretch , too , of sixty - four . no age make 
 they a bit well . and when one think that the end of all flesh be 
 approach , and that - " 

 MRS . DALE   quickly , for she prefer Miss Jemima 's other hobby to 
 that black one upon which she be prepare to precede the bi of the 
 universe . - " yes , my love , we will avoid that subject , if you please . Mr. 
 Dale have his own opinion , and it become I , you know , as a parson 's 
 wife "   say smilingly : Mrs. Dale have as pretty a dimple as any of Miss 
 Jemima 's , and make more of that one than Miss Jemima of three , " to 
 agree with he , - that be , in theology . " 

 MISS jemima   earnestly . - " but the thing be so clear , if you will but 
 look into - " 

 MRS . DALE   put her hand on Miss Jemima 's lip playfully . - " not a 
 word more . pray , what do you think of the squire 's tenant at the Casino , 
 Signor Riccabocca ? an interesting creature , be he not ? " 

 MISS jemima . - " Interesting ! not to I . Interesting ? why be he 
 interesting ? " 

 Mrs. Dale be silent , and turn her handkerchief in her pretty little 
 white hand , appear to contemplate the r in Caroline . 

 MISS jemima   half pettishly , half coaxingly . - " why be he interesting ? 
 I scarcely ever look at he ; they say he smoke , and never eat . ugly , 
 too ! " 

 MRS . DALE . - " ugly , - no . a fine bead , - very like Dante 's ; but what be 
 beauty ? " 

 MISS jemima . - " very true : what be it indeed ? yes , as you say , I think 
 there be something interesting about he ; he look melancholy , but that 
 may be because he be poor . " 

 MRS . DALE . - " it be astonish how little one feel poverty when one 
 love . Charles and I be very poor once , - before the squire - " Mrs. 
 Dale pause , look towards the squire , and murmur a blessing , the 
 warmth of which bring tear into her eye . " yes , " she add , after a 
 pause , " we be very poor , but we be happy even then , - more thank 
 to Charles than to I ; " and tear from a new source again dim those 
 quick , lively eye , as the little woman gaze fondly on her husband , 
 whose brow be knit into a black frown over a bad hand . 

 MISS jemima . - " it be only those horrid man who think of money as a 
 source of happiness . I should be the last person to esteem a gentleman 
 less because he be poor . " 

 MRS . DALE . - " I wonder the squire do not ask Signor Riccabocca here 
 more often . such an acquisition we find he ! " 

 the squire 's voice from the card - table . - " whom ought I to ask more 
 often , Mrs. Dale ? " 

 Parson 's voice , impatiently . - " come , come , come , squire : play to my 
 queen of diamond , - do ! " 

 SQUIRE . - " there , I trump it ! pick up the trick , Mrs. H. " 

 parson . - " stop ! stop ! trump my diamond ? " 

 the CAPTAIN   solemnly . - " ' trick turn ; play on , Squire . " 

 SQUIRE . - " the king of diamond . " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " Lord ! Hazeldean , why , that be the most bareface 
 revoke , - ha , ha , ha ! trump the queen of diamond and play out the king ! 
 well , I never ! ha , ha , ha ! " 

 CAPTAIN BARNABAS   in tenor . - " ha , ha , ha ! " 

 SQUIRE . - " Ho , ho , ho ! bless my soul ! ho , ho , ho ! " 

 CAPTAIN BARNABAS   in bass . - " Ho , ho , ho ! " 

 Parson 's voice raise , but drown by the laughter of his adversary 
 and the firm , clear tone of Captain Barnabas . - " three to our 
 score ! - game ! " 

 squire   wipe his eye . - " no help for it ; Harry , deal for I . whom 
 ought I to ask , Mrs. Dale ? "   wax angry .   " first time I ever hear the 
 hospitality of Hazeldean call in question ! " 

 MRS . DALE . - " my dear sir , I beg a thousand pardon , but listener - you 
 know the proverb . " 

 squire   growling like a bear . - " I hear nothing but proverb ever since 
 we have that Mounseer among we . please to speak plainly , ma'am . " 

 Mrs. DALE   slide into a little temper at be thus roughly 
 accost . - " it be of Mounseer , as you call he , that I speak , Mr. 
 Hazeldean . " 

 SQUIRE . - " what ! rickeybockey ? " 

 MRS . DALE   attempt the pure italian accentuation . - " Signor 
 Riccabocca . " 

 parson   slap his card on the table in despair . - " be we play at 
 whist , or be we not ? " 

 the squire , who be fourth player , drop the king to Captain 
 Higginbotham 's lead of the ace of heart . now the captain have leave 
 queen , knave , and two other heart , four trump to the queen , and 
 nothing to win a trick with in the two other suit . this hand be 
 therefore precisely one of those in which , especially after the fall 
 of that king of heart in the adversary 's hand , it become a matter of 
 reasonable doubt whether to lead trump or not . the captain hesitate , 
 and not like to play out his good heart with the certainty of their 
 be trump by the squire , nor , on the other hand , like to open the 
 other suit , in which he have not a card that can assist his partner , 
 resolve , as become a military man in such dilemma , to make a bold push 
 and lead out trump in the chance of find his partner strong and so 
 bring in his long suit . 

 SQUIRE   take advantage of the much meditating pause make by 
 the captain . - " Mrs. Dale , it be not my fault . I have ask 
 Rickeybockey , - time out of mind . but I suppose I be not fine enough for 
 those foreign chap . he will not come , - that be all I know . " 

 parson   aghast at see the captain play out trump , of which he , Mr. 
 Dale , have only two , wherewith he expect to ruff the suit of spade , of 
 which he have only one , the card all fall in suit , while he have not 
 a single other chance of a trick in his hand . - " really , Squire , we have 
 well give up play if you put out my partner in this extraordinary 
 way , - jabber , jabber , jabber ! " 

 SQUIRE . - " well , we must be good child , Harry . what ! - trumps , Barney ? 
 thank ye for that ! " and the squire might well be grateful , for the 
 unfortunate adversary have lead up to ace king knave , with two other 
 trump . squire take the parson 's ten with his knave , and play out ace 
 king ; then , have clear all the trump except the captain 's queen 
 and his own remain two , lead off tierce major in that very suit of 
 spade of which the parson have only one , - and the captain , indeed , but 
 two , - force out the captain 's queen , and win the game in a canter . 

 parson   with a look at the captain which might have become the awful 
 brow of Jove , when about to thunder . - " that , I suppose , be the 
 new - fashioned London play ! in my time the rule be , ' first save the 
 game , then try to win it . ' " 

 CAPTAIN . - " could not save it , sir . " 

 parson   explode   - " not save it ! - two ruff in my own hand , - two trick 
 certain till you take they out ! monstrous ! the rash trump . " - Seizes 
 the card , spread they on the table , lip quivering , hand trembling , 
 try to show how five trick could have be gain , - N.B. it be short 
 whist which Captain Barnabas have introduce at the Hall , - can not   make out 
 more than four ; Captain smile triumphantly ; Parson in a passion , and 
 not at all convince , mix all the card together again , and fall 
 back in his chair , groan , with tear in his voice . - " the cruell 
 trump ! the most wanton cruelty ! " 

 the Hazeldeans in chorus . - " Ho , ho , ho ! ha , ha , ha ! " the captain , who 
 do not laugh this time , and whose turn it be to deal , shuffle the 
 card for the conquering game of the rubber with as much caution and 
 prolixity as Fabius might have employ in post his man . the 
 squire get up to stretch his leg , and , the insinuation against his 
 hospitality recur to his thought , call out to his wife , " write to 
 Rickeybockey to - morrow yourself , Harry , and ask he to come and spend 
 two or three day here . there , Mrs. Dale , you hear I ? " 

 " yes , " say Mrs. Dale , put her hand to her ear in imply rebuke 
 at the loudness of the squire 's tone . " my dear sir , do remember that I be 
 a sad nervous creature . " 

 " Beg pardon , " mutter Mr. Hazeldean , turn to his son , who have 
 get tired of the caricature , have fish out for himself the great folio 
 County History , which be the only book in the library that the squire 
 much value , and which he usually keep under lock and key , in his study , 
 together with the field - book and steward 's account , but which he have 
 reluctantly take into the drawing - room that day , in order to oblige 
 Captain Higginbotham . for the Higginbothams - an old Saxon family , as the 
 name evidently denote - have once possess land in that very county ; 
 and the captain , during his visit to Hazeldean Hall , be regularly in 
 the habit of ask to look into the County history , for the purpose of 
 refresh his eye , and renovate his sense of ancestral dignity , with 
 the following paragraph therein : 

  to the left of the village of Dunder , and pleasantly situate in a 
  hollow , lie Botham Hall , the residence of the ancient family of 
  Higginbotham , as it be now commonly call . yet it appear by the 
  county roll , and sundry old deed , that the family formerly style 
  itself Higges , till the Manor House lie in Botham , they gradually 
  assume the appellation of Higges - in - Botham , and in process of time , 
  yield to the corruption of the vulgar , Higginbotham . " 

 " what , Frank ! my County history ! " cry the squire . " Mrs. H. , he have get 
 my County history ! " 

 " well , Hazeldean , it be time he should know something about the county . " 

 " ay , and history too , " say Mrs. Dale , malevolently , for the little 
 temper be by no mean blow over . 

 FRANK . - " I will not hurt it , I assure you , sir . but I be very much 
 interested just at present . " 

 the CAPTAIN   put down the card to cut . - " you have   get hold of that 
 passage about Botham Hall , page 706 , eh ? " 

 FRANK . - " no ; I be try to make out how far it be to Mr. Leslie 's 
 place , Rood Hall . do you know , Mother ? " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " I can not   say I do . the Leslies do not   mix with the 
 county ; and Rood lie very much out of the way . " 

 FRANK . - " why do not   they mix with the county ? " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " I believe they be poor , and therefore I suppose they 
 be proud ; they be an old family . " 

 parson   thrum on the table with great impatience . - " Old 
 fiddle - dee ! - talk of old family when the card have be shuffle 
 this half - hour ! " 

 CAPTAIN BARNABAS . - " will you cut for your partner , ma'am ? " 

 SQUIRE   who have be listen to Frank 's inquiry with a musing 
 air . - " why do you want to know the distance to Rood Hall ? " 

 FRANK   rather hesitatingly . - " because randal Leslie be there for the 
 holiday , sir . " 

 parson . - " your wife have cut for you , Mr. Hazeldean . I do not   think it 
 be quite fair ; and my partner have turn up a deuce , - deuce of heart . 
 please to come and play , if you mean to play . " 

 the squire return to the table , and in a few minute the game be 
 decide by a dexterous finesse of the captain against the Hazeldeans . 
 the clock strike ten ; the servant enter with a tray ; the squire count 
 up his own and his wife 's losing ; and the captain and parson divide 
 sixteen shilling between they . 

 SQUIRE . - " there , Parson , I hope you will be in a well humour . you win 
 enough out of we to set up a coach - and - four . " 

 " tut ! " mutter the parson ; " at the end of the year , I be not a penny the 
 rich for it all . " 

 and , indeed , monstrous as that assertion seem , it be perfectly true , 
 for the parson portion out his gain into three division . one - third 
 he give to Mrs. Dale , for her own special pocket - money ; what become of 
 the second third he never own even to his well half , - but certain 
 it be , that every time the parson win seven - and - sixpence , half - a - crown , 
 which nobody could account for , find its way to the poor - box ; while the 
 remain third , the parson , it be true , openly and avowedly retain ; 
 but I have no manner of doubt that , at the year 's end , it get to the 
 poor quite as safely as if it have be put into the box . 

 the party have now gather round the tray , and be help themselves 
 to wine and water , or wine without water , - except Frank , who still 
 remain pore over the map in the County history , with his head 
 lean on his hand , and his finger plunge in his hair . 

 " Frank , " say Mrs. Hazeldean , " I never see you so studious before . " 

 Frank start up and colour , as if ashamed of be accuse of too 
 much study in anything . 

 SQUIRE   with a little embarrassment in his voice . - " pray , Frank , what 
 do you know of Randal Leslie ? " 

 " why , sir , he be at Eton . " 

 " what sort of a boy be he ? " ask Mrs. Hazeldean . 

 Frank hesitate , as if reflect , and then answer , " they say he be 
 the clever boy in the school . but then he sap . " 

 " in other word , " say Mr. Dale , with proper parsonic gravity , " he 
 understand that he be send to school to learn his lesson , and he 
 learn they . you call that sapping ? call it do his duty . but pray , 
 who and what be this Randal Leslie , that you look so discompose , 
 squire ? " 

 " who and what be he ? " repeat the squire , in a low growl . " why , you 
 know Mr. Audley Egerton marry Miss Leslie , the great heiress ; and this 
 boy be a relation of her . I may say , " add the squire , " that he be a 
 near relation of mine , for his grandmother be a Hazeldean ; but all I 
 know about the Leslies be , that Mr. Egerton , as I be tell , have no 
 child of his own , take up young Randal   when his wife die , poor 
 woman , pay for his schooling , and have , I suppose , adopt the boy 
 as his heir . quite welcome . Frank and I want nothing from Mr. Audley 
 Egerton , thank Heaven ! " 

 " I can well believe in your brother 's generosity to his wife 's kindre , " 
 say the parson , sturdily , " for I be sure Mr. Egerton be a man of strong 
 feeling . " 

 " what the deuce do you know about Mr. Egerton ? I do not   suppose you could 
 ever have even speak to he . " 

 " yes , " say the parson , colour up , and look confused . " I have some 
 conversation with he once ; " and observe the squire 's surprise , he 
 add - " when I be curate at Lansmere , and about a painful business 
 connect with the family of one of my parishioner . " 

 " oh , one of your parishioner at Lansmere , - one of the constituent Mr. 
 Audley Egerton throw over , after all the pain I have take to get he 
 his seat . rather odd you should never have mention this before , Mr. 
 Dale ! " 

 " my dear sir , " say the parson , sink his voice , and in a mild tone of 
 conciliatory expostulation , " you be so irritable whenever Mr. Egerton 's 
 name be mention at all . " 

 " irritable ! " exclaim the squire , whose wrath have be long simmer , 
 and now fairly boil over , - " irritable , sir ! I should think so : a man 
 for whom I stand godfather at the husting , Mr. Dale ! a man for whose 
 sake I be call a ' prize ox , ' Mr. Dale ! a man for whom I be hiss in 
 a market - place , Mr. Dale ! a man for whom I be shoot at , in cold blood , 
 by an officer in his Majesty 's service , who lodge a ball in my right 
 shoulder , Mr. Dale ! a man who have the ingratitude , after all this , 
 to turn his back on the land interest , - to deny that there be any 
 agricultural distress in a year which break three of the good farmer I 
 ever have , Mr. Dale ! - a man , sir , who make a speech on the currency which 
 be compliment by Ricardo , a Jew ! good heaven ! a pretty parson you 
 be , to stand up for a fellow compliment by a Jew ! nice idea you must 
 have of Christianity ! irritable , sir ! " now fairly roar the squire , 
 add to the thunder of his voice the cloud of a brow , which evince 
 a menacing ferocity that might have do honour to Bussy d'Amboise or 
 Fighting Fitzgerald . " Sir , if that man have not be my own half - brother , 
 I would have call he out . I have stand my ground before now . I have have a 
 ball in my right shoulder . Sir , I would have call he out . " 

 " Mr. Hazeldean ! Mr. Hazeldean ! I be shocked at you , " cry the parson ; 
 and , put his lip close to the squire 's ear , he go on in a 
 whisper , " what an example to your son ! you will have he fight duel 
 one of these day , and nobody to blame but yourself . " 

 this warning cool Mr. Hazeldean ; and mutter , " why the deuce do you 
 set I off ? " he fall back into his chair , and begin to fan himself with 
 his pocket - handkerchief . 

 the parson skilfully and remorselessly pursue the advantage he have 
 gain . " and now that you may have it in your power to show civility and 
 kindness to a boy whom Mr. Egerton have take up , out of respect to 
 his wife 's memory , - a kinsman , you say , of your own , and who have never 
 offend you , - a boy whose diligence in his study prove he to be 
 an excellent companion to your son - Frank "   here the parson raise his 
 voice , " I suppose you would like to call on young Leslie , as you be 
 study the county map so attentively . " 

 " yes , yes , " answer Frank , rather timidly , " if my father do not 
 object to it . Leslie have be very kind tome , though he be in the sixth 
 form , and , indeed , almost the head of the school . " 

 " ah ! " say Mrs. Hazeldean , " one studious boy have a fellow feeling for 
 another ; and though you enjoy your holiday , Frank , I be sure you read 
 hard at school . " 

 Mrs. Dale open her eye very wide , and star in astonishment . 

 Mrs. Hazeldean retort that look , with great animation . " yes , Carry , " 
 say she , toss her head , " though you may not think Frank clever , 
 his master find he so . he get a prize last half . that beautiful book , 
 Frank - hold up your head , my love - what do you get it for ? " 

 FRANK   reluctantly . - " Verses , ma'am . " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN   with triumph . - " Verses ! - there , Carry , verse ! " 

 FRANK   in a hurried tone . - " yes , but Leslie write they for I . " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN   recoil . - " o Frank ! a prize for what another do for 
 you - that be mean . " 

 FRANK   ingenuously . - " you can not   be more ashamed , Mother , than I be 
 when they give I the prize . " 

 MRS . DALE   though previously provoke at be snub by Harry , now 
 show the triumph of generosity over temper . - " I beg your pardon , 
 Frank . your mother must be as proud of that shame as she be of the 
 prize . " 

 Mrs. Hazeldean put her arm round Frank 's neck , smile beamingly on Mrs. 
 Dale , and converse with her son in a low tone about Randal Leslie . 
 Miss Jemima now approach Carry , and say in an " aside , " " but we be 
 forget poor Mr. Riccabocca . Mrs. Hazeldean , though the dear 
 creature in the world , have such a blunt way of invite people - do not 
 you think if you be to say a word to he , Carry ? " 

 MRS . DALE   kindly , as she wrap her shawl round she . - " suppose you 
 write the note yourself ? meanwhile I shall see he , no doubt . " 

 parson   put his hand on the squire 's shoulder . - " you forgive my 
 impertinence , my kind friend . we parson , you know , be apt to take 
 strange liberty , when we honour and love folk as I do . " 

 " Fish , " say the squire ; but his hearty smile come to his lip in spite 
 of himself . " you always get your own way , and I suppose Frank must ride 
 over and see this pet of my - " 

 " Brother 's , " quoth the parson , conclude the sentence in a tone which 
 give to the sweet word so sweet a sound that the squire would not 
 correct the parson , as he have be about to correct himself . 

 Mr. Dale move on ; but as he pass Captain Barnabas , the benignant 
 character of his countenance change sadly . " the cruell trump , 
 Captain Higginbotham ! " say he sternly , and stalk by - majestic . 

 the night be so fine that the parson and his wife , as they walk home , 
 make a little detour through the shrubbery . 

 MRS . DALE . - " I think I have do a good piece of work to - night . " 

 parson   rouse himself from a revery . - " have you , Carry ? - it will be a 
 very pretty handkerchief . " 

 MRS . DALE . - " Handkerchief ? - nonsense , dear . do not   you think it would 
 be a very happy thing for both if Jemima and Signor Riccabocca could be 
 bring together ? " 

 parson . - " bring together ! " 

 MRS . DALE . - " you do snap up one so , my dear ; I mean if I could make a 
 match of it . " 

 parson . - " I think Riccabocca be a match already , not only for Jemima , 
 but yourself into the bargain . " 

 MRS . DALE   smile loftily . - " well , we shall see . be not Jemima 's 
 fortune about L4000 ? " 

 parson   dreamily , for he be relapse fast into his interrupted 
 revery . - " Ay - ay - I dare say . " 

 MRS . DALE . - " and she must have save ! I dare say it be nearly l6000 by 
 this time ; eh ! Charles dear , you really be so - good gracious , what be 
 that ! " 

 as Mrs. Dale make this exclamation , they have just emerge from the 
 shrubbery into the village green . 

 parson . - " what be what ? " 

 MRS . DALE   pinch her husband 's arm very nippingly . " that 
 thing - there - there . " 

 parson . - " only the new stock , Carry ; I do not   wonder they frighten you , 
 for you be a very sensible woman . I only wish they would frighten the 
 squire . " 




 CHAPTER xiii . 

   suppose to be a letter from Mrs. Hazeldean to A. Riccabocca , Esq . , 
  the Casino ; but , edit , and indeed compose , by Miss Jemima 
  Hazeldean . 
 HAZELDEAN HALL . 

 DEAR SIR , - to a feeling heart it must always be painful to give pain 
 to another , and   though I be sure unconsciously   you have give the 
 great pain to poor Mr. Hazeldean and myself , indeed to all our little 
 circle , in so cruelly refuse our attempt to become well acquaint 
 with a gentleman we so highly ESTEEM . do , pray , dear sir , make we the 
 amende honorable , and give we the pleasure of your company for a few 
 day at the Hall . may we expect you Saturday next ? - our dinner hour be 
 six o'clock . 

 with the good compliment of Mr. and Miss Jemima Hazeldean , believe I , 
 my dear sir , 

 your truly , H. H. 

 Miss Jemima have carefully seal this note , which Mrs. Hazeldean 
 have very willingly depute she to write , take it herself into the 
 stable - yard , in order to give the groom proper instruction to wait for 
 an answer . but while she be speak to the man , Frank , equip for 
 riding , with more than his usual dandyism , come into the yard , call 
 for his pony in a loud voice ; and single out the very groom whom Miss 
 Jemima be address - for , indeed , he be the smart of all in the 
 squire 's stable - tell he to saddle the gray pad and accompany the 
 pony . 

 " no , Frank , " say Miss Jemima , " you can not   have George ; your father want 
 he to go on a message , - you can take Mat . " 

 " Mat , indeed ! " say Frank , grumble with some reason ; for Mat be a 
 surly old fellow , who tie a most indefensible neckcloth , and always 
 contrive to have a great patch on his boot , - besides , he call Frank 
 " Master , " and obstinately refuse to trot down hill , - " Mat , indeed ! let 
 Mat take the message , and George go with I . " 

 but Miss Jemima have also her reason for reject Mat . Mat 's foible 
 be not servility , and he always show true english independence in all 
 house where he be not invite to take his ale in the servant ' 
 hall . mat might offend Signor Riccabocca , and spoil all . an animate 
 altercation ensue , in the midst of which the squire and his wife 
 enter the yard , with the intention of drive in the conjugal gig to 
 the market town . the matter be refer to the natural umpire by both 
 the contend party . 

 the squire look with great contempt on his son . " and what do you want 
 a groom at all for ? be you afraid of tumble off the pony ? " 

 FRANK . - " no , Sir ; but I like to go as a gentleman , when I pay a visit to 
 a gentleman ! " 

 SQUIRE   in high wrath . - " you precious puppy ! I think I be as good a 
 gentleman as you any day , and I should like to know when you ever see 
 I ride to call on a neighbour with a fellow jingling at my heel , like 
 that upstart Ned Spankie , whose father keep a cotton mill . first time I 
 ever hear of a Hazeldean thinking a livery coat be necessary to prove 
 his gentility ! " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN   observe Frank colouring , and about to reply . - " hush , 
 Frank , never answer your father , - and you be go to call on Mr. 
 Leslie ? " 

 " yes , ma'am , and I be very much oblige to my father for let I , " 
 say Frank , take the squire 's hand . 

 " well , but , Frank , " continue Mrs. Hazeldean , " I think you hear that 
 the Leslies be very poor . " 

 FRANK . - " Eh , Mother ? " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " and would you run the chance of wound the pride 
 of a gentleman as well bear as yourself by affect any show of be 
 rich than he be ? " 

 SQUIRE   with great admiration . - " Harry , I would give L10 to have say 
 that ! " 

 FRANK   leave the squire 's hand to take his mother 's . - " you be quite 
 right , Mother ; nothing could be more snobbish ! " 

 SQUIRE . " give we your fist , too , sir ; you will be a chip of the old block , 
 after all . " 

 Frank smile , and walk off to his pony . 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN   to Miss Jemima . - " be that the note you be to write 
 for I ? " 

 MISS jemima . - " yes ; I suppose you do not care about see it , so I 
 have seal it , and give it to George . " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " but Frank will pass close by the Casino on his way to 
 the Leslies ' . it may be more civil if he leave the note himself . " 

 MISS jemima   hesitatingly . - " do you think so ? " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " yes , certainly . Frank , Frank , as you pass by the 
 Casino , call on Mr. Riccabocca , give this note , and say we shall be 
 heartily glad if he will come . " Frank nod . 

 " stop a bit , " cry the squire . " if Rickeybockey be at home , ' t be ten 
 to one if he do not   ask you to take a glass of wine ! if he do , mind , 
 ' t be bad than ask you to take a turn on the rack . Faugh ! you 
 remember , Harry ? - I think it be all up with I . " 

 " yes , " cry Mrs. Hazeldean ; " for Heaven 's sake not a drop . wine , 
 indeed ! " 

 " do not   talk of it , " cry the squire , make a wry face . 

 " I will take care , Sir ! " say Frank , laugh as he disappear within the 
 stable , follow by Miss Jemima , who now coaxingly make it up with he , 
 and do not leave off her admonition to be extremely polite to the 
 poor foreign gentleman till Frank get his foot into the stirrup , and 
 the pony , who know whom he have get to deal with , give a preparatory 
 plunge or two , and then dart out of the yard . 




 BOOK SECOND . 




 INITIAL chapter . 

 inform the reader how this work come to have INITIAL chapter . 

 " there can not   be a doubt , " say my father , " that to each of the main 
 division of your work - whether you call they Books or Parts - you should 
 prefix an initial or Introductory chapter . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " can not   be a doubt , sir ? why so ? " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " field lay it down as an indispensable rule , which he 
 support by his example ; and Fielding be an artistical writer , and know 
 what he be about . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " do you remember any of his reason , sir ? " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " why , indeed , Fielding say , very justly , that he be not 
 bind to assign any reason ; but he do assign a good many , here and 
 there , - to find which I refer you to ' Tom Jones . ' I will only observe , 
 that one of his reason , which be unanswerable , run to the effect that 
 thus , in every Part or Book , the reader have the advantage of begin 
 at the fourth or fifth page instead of the first , - ' a matter by no mean 
 of trivial consequence , ' saith Fielding , ' to person who read book with 
 no other view than to say they have read they , - a more general motive to 
 reading than be commonly imagine ; and from which not only law book and 
 good book , but the page of Homer and Virgil , Swift and Cervantes , have 
 be often turn over . ' there , " cry my father , triumphantly , " I will 
 lay a shilling to twopence that I have quote the very word . " 

 MRS . CANTON . - " dear I , that only mean skip ; I do not   see any great 
 advantage in write a chapter , merely for people to skip it . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " neither do I ! " 

 MR . CANTON   dogmatically . - " it be the repose in the picture , - fielding 
 call it ' contrast . ' -   still more dogmatically .   - I say there can not   be a 
 doubt about it . besides " add my father after a pause , - " besides , this 
 usage give you opportunity to explain what have go before , or to 
 prepare for what be come ; or , since Fielding contend , with great 
 truth , that some learning be necessary for this kind of historical 
 composition , it allow you , naturally and easily , the introduction 
 of light and pleasant ornament of that nature . at each flight in the 
 terrace you may give the eye the relief of an urn or a statue . moreover , 
 when so inclined , you create proper pausing - place for reflection ; and 
 complete by a separate , yet harmonious ethical department , the design of 
 a work , which be but a mere Mother Goose 's tale if it do not embrace a 
 general view of the thought and action of mankind . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " but then , in these initial chapter , the author thrust 
 himself forward ; and just when you want to get on with the dramatis 
 personae , you find yourself face to face with the poet himself . " 

 MR . CANTON . - " Pooh ! you can contrive to prevent that ! imitate the chorus 
 of the greek stage , who fill up the interval between the action by 
 say what the author would otherwise say in his own person . " 

 PISISTRATUS   slyly . - " that be a good idea , sir , - and I have a chorus , 
 and a choregus too , already in my eye . " 

 MR . CANTON   unsuspectingly . - " aha ! you be not so dull a fellow as you 
 would make yourself out to be ; and , even if an author do thrust himself 
 forward , what objection be there to that ? it be a mere affectation to 
 suppose that a book can come into the world without an author . every 
 child have a father , - one father at least , - as the great Conde say very 
 well in his poem . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " the great Conde a poet ! I never hear that before . " 

 MR . CANTON . - " I do not   say he be a poet , but he send a poem to Madame de 
 Montansier . envious critic think that he must have pay somebody else 
 to write it ; but there be no reason why a great captain should not write 
 a poem , - I do not   say a good poem , but a poem . I wonder , Roland , if the 
 duke ever try his hand at ' Stanzas to Mary , ' or ' line to a Sleeping 
 Babe . ' " 

 CAPTAIN ROLAND . - " Austin , I be ashamed of you . of course the duke could 
 write poetry if he please , - something , I dare say , in the way of the 
 great Conde ; that is , something warlike and heroic , I will be bind . let us 
 hear ! " 

 MR . CAXTON   reciting . - 

  " Telle est du Ciel la loi severe 
  Qu'il faut qu'un enfant ait un pere ; 
  on dit meme quelquefois 
  Tel enfant en a jusqu'a trois . " 

   " that each child have a father 
  be Nature 's decree ; 
  but , to judge by a rumour , 
  some child have three . " 

 CAPTAIN ROLAND   greatly disgusted . - " Conde write such stuff ! - I do not 
 believe it . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " I do , and accept the quotation ; you and Roland shall be 
 joint father to my child as well as myself . 

  " ' tel enfant en a jusqu'a trois . ' " 

 MR . CAXTON   solemnly . - " I refuse the proffered paternity ; but so far 
 as administer a little wholesome castigation now and then , I have no 
 objection to join in the discharge of a father 's duty . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " agree . have you anything to say against the infant 
 hitherto ? " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " he be in long clothe at present ; let we wait till he can 
 walk . " 

 BLANCHE . - " but pray whom do you mean for a hero ? and be Miss Jemima your 
 heroine ? " 

 CAPTAIN ROLAND . - " there be some mystery about the - " 

 PISISTRATUS   hastily .-"Hush , Uncle : no let the cat out of the 
 bag yet . listen , all of you ! I leave Frank Hazeldean on his way to the 
 Casino . " 




 CHAPTER II . 

 " it be a sweet pretty place , " think Frank , as he open the gate which 
 lead across the field to the Casino , that smile down upon he with 
 its plaster pilaster . " I wonder , though , that my father , who be so 
 particular in general , suffer the carriage - road to be so full of hole 
 and weed . Mounseer do not receive many visit , I take it . " 

 but when Frank get into the ground immediately before the house , he see 
 no cause of complaint as to want of order and repair . nothing could be 
 keep more neatly . Frank be ashamed of the dint make by the pony 's hoof 
 on the smooth gravel : he dismount , tie the animal to the wicket , and 
 go on foot towards the glass door in front . 

 he ring the bell once , twice , but nobody come , for the old 
 woman - servant , who be hard of hearing , be far away in the yard , 
 search for any egg which the hen might have scandalously hide for 
 culinary purpose ; and Jackeymo be fish for the stickleback and 
 minnow which be , when catch , to assist the egg , when find , in 
 keep together the body and soul of himself and his master . the old 
 woman have be lately put upon board wage . lucky old woman ! Frank ring 
 a third time , and with the impetuosity of his age . a face peep from 
 the belvidere on the terrace . " Diavolo ! " say Dr. Riccabocca to himself . 
 " Young cock crow hard on their own dunghill ; it must be a cock of a 
 high race to crow so loud at another 's . " 

 Therewith he shamble out of the summer - house , and appear suddenly 
 before Frank , in a very wizard - like dressing - robe of black serge , a red 
 cap on his head , and a cloud of smoke come rapidly from his lip , as a 
 final consolatory whiff , before he remove the pipe from they . Frank have 
 indeed see the doctor before , but never in so scholastic a costume , and 
 he be a little startled by the apparition at his elbow , as he turn 
 round . 

 " Signorino , " say the Italian , take off his cap with his usual 
 urbanity , " pardon the negligence of my people ; I be too happy to receive 
 your command in person . " 

 " Dr. Rickeybockey ? " stammer Frank , much confused by this polite 
 address , and the low , yet stately , bow with which it be accompany . 
 " I - I have a note from the Hall . Mamma - that be , my mother - and aunt 
 Jemima beg their good compliment , and hope you will come , sir . " 

 the doctor take the note with another bow , and , open the glass door , 
 invite Frank to enter . 

 the young gentleman , with a schoolboy 's usual bluntness , be about to 
 say that he be in a hurry , and have rather not ; but Dr. Riccabocca 's 
 grand manner awe he , while a glimpse of the hall excite his 
 curiosity , so he silently obey the invitation . 

 the hall , which be of an octagon shape , have be originally panel 
 off into compartment , and in these the Italian have paint landscape , 
 rich with the warm sunny light of his native climate . Frank be no 
 judge of the art display ; but he be greatly strike with the scene 
 depict : they be all view of some lake , real or imaginary ; in all , 
 dark - blue shin water reflect dark - blue placid sky . in one , a 
 flight of step ascend to the lake , and a gay group be see feast 
 on the margin ; in another , sunset throw its rose - hue over a vast villa 
 or palace , back by Alpine hill , and flank by long arcade of vine , 
 while pleasure - boat skim over the wave below . in short , throughout 
 all the eight compartment , the scene , though it differ in detail , 
 preserve the same general character , as if illustrate some favourite 
 locality . the Italian do not , however , evince any desire to do the 
 honour of his own art , but , precede Frank across the hall , open the 
 door of his usual sitting - room , and request he to enter . Frank do so 
 rather reluctantly , and seat himself with unwonted bashfulness on the 
 edge of a chair . but here new specimen of the doctor 's handicraft soon 
 rivet attention . the room have be originally paper , but Riccabocca 
 have stretch canvas over the wall , and paint thereon sundry 
 satirical device , each separate from the other by scroll - work of 
 fantastic arabesque . here a Cupid be trundle a wheelbarrow full of 
 heart , which he appear to be sell to an ugly old fellow , with a 
 money - bag in his hand - probably Plutus . there diogene might be see 
 walk through a market - place , with his lantern in his hand , in search 
 of an honest man , whilst the child jeered at he , and the cur 
 snap at his heel . in another place a lion be see half dress in a 
 fox 's hide , while a wolf in a sheep 's mask be converse very amicably 
 with a young lamb . here again might be see the geese stretch out 
 their neck from the Roman Capitol in full cackle , while the stout 
 invader be beheld in the distance , run off as hard as they 
 could . in short , in all these quaint entablature some pithy sarcasm be 
 symbolically convey ; only over the mantel piece be the design graver 
 and more touching . it be the figure of a man in a pilgrim 's garb , 
 chain to the earth by small but innumerable ligament , while a phantom 
 likeness of himself , his shadow , be see hasten down what seem an 
 interminable vista ; and underneath be write the pathetic word of 
 Horace - 

  " Patriae quis exul 
  Se quoque fugit ? " 

   " what exile from his country can also fly from himself ? " 

 the furniture of the room be extremely simple , and somewhat scanty ; 
 yet it be arrange so as to impart an air of taste and elegance to the 
 room . even a few plaster bust and statue , though buy but of some 
 humble itinerant , have their classical effect , glisten from out 
 stand of flower that be group around they , or back by 
 graceful screen - work form from twisted osier , which , by the simple 
 contrivance of tray at the bottom fill with earth , serve for live 
 parasitical plant , with gay flower contrast thick ivy leaf , 
 and give to the whole room the aspect of a bower . " may I ask your 
 permission ? " say the Italian , with his finger on the seal of the 
 letter . 

 " oh , yes , " say Frank , with naivete . 

 Riccabocca break the seal , and a slight smile steal over his 
 countenance . then he turn a little aside from Frank , shade his face 
 with his hand , and seem to muse . " Mrs. Hazeldean , " say he , at last , 
 " do I very great honour . I hardly recognize her handwriting , or I 
 should have be more impatient to open the letter . " the dark eye be 
 lift over the spectacle and go right into Frank 's unprotected 
 and undiplomatic heart . the doctor raise the note , and point to the 
 character with his forefinger . 

 " Cousin Jemima 's hand , " say Frank , as directly as if the question have 
 be put to he . 

 the Italian smile . " Mr. Hazeldean have company stay with he ? " 

 " No ; that be , only Barney , - the captain . there be seldom much company 
 before the shooting season , " add Frank , with a slight sigh ; " and then , 
 you know , the holiday be over . for my part , I think we ought to break 
 up a month later . " 

 the doctor seem reassure by the first sentence in Frank 's reply , 
 and , seat himself at the table , write his answer , - not hastily , as we 
 english write , but with care and precision , like one accustom to 
 weigh the nature of word , - in that stiff italian hand , which allow 
 the writer so much time to think while he form his letter . he do not , 
 therefore , reply at once to Frank 's remark about the holiday , but be 
 silent till he have conclude his note , read it three time over , seal 
 it by the taper he slowly light , and then , give it to Frank , he 
 say , 

 " for your sake , young gentleman , I regret that your holiday be so 
 early ; for mine , I must rejoice , since I accept the kind invitation you 
 have render doubly gratifying by bring it yourself . " 

 " deuce take the fellow and his fine speech ! one do not   know which way 
 to look , " think English Frank . 

 the Italian smile again , as if this time he have read the boy 's heart , 
 without need of those pierce black eye , and say , less ceremoniously 
 than before , " you do not   care much for compliment , young gentleman ? " 

 " no , I do not   indeed , " say Frank , heartily . 

 " so much the well for you , since your way in the world be make : it 
 would be so much the bad if you have to make it ! " 

 Frank look puzzle : the thought be too deep for he , so he turn to 
 the picture . 

 " those be very funny , " say he ; " they seem capitally do . who do 
 them ? " 

 " Signoriuo Hazeldean , you be give I what you refuse yourself . " 

 " Eh ? " say Frank , inquiringly . 

 " compliment ! " 

 " oh - I - no ; but they be well do : be not   they , sir ? " - 

 " not particularly : you speak to the artist . " 

 " what ! you paint they ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " and the picture in the hall ? " 

 " those too . " 

 " take from nature , eh ? " 

 " nature , " say the italian , sententiously , perhaps evasively , " let 
 nothing be take from she . " 

 " oh ! " say Frank , puzzle again . " well , I must wish you good morning , 
 sir ; I be very glad you be come . " 

 " without compliment ? " 

 " without compliment . " 

 " a rivedersi - good - by for the present , my young signorino . this way , " 
 observe Frank make a bolt towards the wrong door . " can I offer you a 
 glass of wine ? - it be pure , of our own making . " 

 " no , thank you , indeed , sir , " cry Frank , suddenly recollect his 
 father 's admonition . " good - by , do not   trouble yourself , sir ; I know any 
 way now . " 

 but the bland Italian follow his guest to the wicket , where Frank 
 have leave the pony . the young gentleman , afraid lest so courteous a host 
 should hold the stirrup for he , twitch off the bridle , and mount in 
 haste , not even stay to ask if the Italian could put he in the way 
 to Rood Hall , of which way he be profoundly ignorant . the Italian 's eye 
 follow the boy as he ride up the ascent in the lane , and the doctor 
 sigh heavily . " the wiser we grow , " say he to himself , " the more we 
 regret the age of our folly : it be well to gallop with a light heart 
 up the stony hill than sit in the summer - house and cry ' how true ! ' to 
 the stony truth of Machiavelli ! " 

 with that he turn back into the belvidere ; but he could not resume 
 his study . he remain some minute gaze on the prospect , till 
 the prospect remind he of the field which Jackeymo be bent on his 
 hiring , and the field remind he of Lenny Fairfield . he return to 
 the house , and in a few moment re - emerge in his out - of - door trim , with 
 cloak and umbrella , re - light his pipe , and stroll towards hazeldean 
 village . 

 meanwhile Frank , after canter on for some distance , stop at a 
 cottage , and there learn that there be a short cut across the field 
 to Rood Hall , by which he could save nearly three mile . Frank , 
 however , miss the short cut , and come out into the high road ; a 
 turnpike - keeper , after first take his toll , put he back again into 
 the short cut ; and finally , he get into some green lane , where a 
 dilapidate finger - post direct he to Rood . late at noon , have 
 ride fifteen mile in the desire to reduce ten to seven , he come 
 suddenly upon a wild and primitive piece of ground , that seem half 
 chase , half common , with crazy tumbledown cottage of villanous aspect 
 scatter about in odd nook and corner . idle , dirty child be 
 make mud - pie on the road ; slovenly - look woman be plait straw 
 at the threshold ; a large but forlorn and decayed church , that seem 
 to say that the generation which see it build be more pious than the 
 generation which now resort to it , stand boldly and nakedly out by the 
 roadside . 

 " be this the village of Rood ? " ask Frank of a stout young man break 
 stone on the road - sad sign that no well labour could be find for 
 he ! 

 the man sullenly nod , and continue his work . " and where be the 
 Hall - Mr. Leslie 's ? " 

 the man look up in stolid surprise , and this time touch his hat . 

 " be you go there ? " 

 " yes , if I can find out where it be . " 

 " I will show your honour , " say the boor , alertly . 

 Frank rein in the pony , and the man walk by his side . Frank be 
 much of his father 's son , despite the difference of age , and that more 
 fastidious change of manner which characterize each succeed race 
 in the progress of civilization . despite all his Eton finery , he be 
 familiar with peasant , and have the quick eye of one country - bear as to 
 country matter . 

 " you do not   seem very well off in this village , my man ? " say he , 
 knowingly . 

 " Noa ; there be a deal of distress here in the winter time , and summer 
 too , for that matter ; and the parish ben't   much help to a single man . " 

 " but surely the farmer want work here as well as elsewhere ? " 

 " ' Deed , and there ben't   much farming work here , - most o ' the parish be 
 all wild ground loike . " 

 " the poor have a right of common , I suppose , " say Frank , survey a 
 large assortment of vagabond bird and quadruped . 

 " yes ; neighbour Timmins keep his geese on the common , and some have 
 a cow , and they be neighbour Jowlas 's pig . I do not   know if there be a 
 right , loike ; but the folk at the Hall do all they can to help we , 
 and that ben't   much : they ben't   as rich as some folk ; but , " add the 
 peasant , proudly , " they be as good blood as any in the shire . " 

 " I ' m glad to see you like they , at all event . " 

 " oh , yes , I like they well eno ' ; mayhap you be at school with the 
 young gentleman ? " 

 " yes , " say Frank . 

 " ah , I hear the clergyman say as how Master Randal be a mighty clever 
 lad , and would get rich some day . I ' se sure I wish he would , for a poor 
 squire make a poor parish . there be the Hall , sir . " 




 CHAPTER III . 

 Frank look right ahead , and see a square house that , in spite of 
 modern sash window , be evidently of remote antiquity . a high conical 
 roof ; a stack of tall quaint chimney - pot of red - baked clay   like 
 those at Sutton Place in Surrey   dominating over isolate vulgar 
 smoke - conductor , of the ignoble fashion of present time ; a dilapidated 
 groin - work , encase within a Tudor arch a door of the comfortable date 
 of George III . , and the peculiarly dingy and weather - stain appearance 
 of the small finely - finish brick , of which the habitation be 
 build , - all show the abode of former generation adapt with 
 tasteless irreverence to the habit of descendant unenlightene by 
 Pugin , or indifferent to the poetry of the past . the house have emerge 
 suddenly upon Frank out of the gloomy waste land , for it be place in 
 a hollow , and shelter from sight by a disorderly group of ragged , 
 dismal , valetudinarian fir - tree , until an abrupt turn of the 
 road clear that screen , and leave the desolate abode bare to the 
 discontent eye . Frank dismount ; the man hold his pony ; and after 
 smooth his cravat , the smart Etonian saunter up to the door , and 
 startle the solitude of the place with a loud peal from the modern 
 brass knocker , - a knock which instantly bring forth an astonished 
 starling who have build under the eave of the gable roof , and call up 
 a cloud of sparrow , tomtit , and yellow - hammer , who have be regale 
 themselves amongst the litter of a slovenly farmyard that lie in full 
 sight to the right of the house , fence off by a primitive paintless 
 wooden rail . in process of time a sow , accompany by a thriving and 
 inquisitive family , stroll up to the gate of the fence , and , lean 
 her nose on the low bar of the gate , contemplate the visitor with 
 much curiosity and some suspicion . 

 while Frank be still without , impatiently swinge his white trouser 
 with his whip , we will steal a hurried glance towards the respective 
 member of the family within . Mr. Leslie , the paterfamilia , be in a 
 little room call his ' study , " to which he regularly retire every 
 morning after breakfast , rarely reappear till one o'clock , which be 
 his unfashionable hour for dinner . in what mysterious occupation 
 Mr. Leslie pass those hour no one ever form a conjecture . at the 
 present moment he be seat before a little rickety bureau , one leg of 
 which be short than the other be prop up by sundry old letter 
 and scrap of newspaper ; and the bureau be open , and reveal a great 
 number of pigeonhole and division , fill with various odd and end , 
 the collection of many year . in some of these compartment be bundle 
 of letter , very yellow , and tie in packet with faded tape ; in 
 another , all by itself , be a fragment of plum - pudding stone , which Mr. 
 Leslie have pick up in his walk , and consider a rare mineral . it 
 be neatly label , " find in Hollow Lane , May 21st , 1804 , by Maunder 
 Slugge Leslie , Esq . " the next division hold several bit of iron in 
 the shape of nail , fragment of horse - shoe , etc . , which Mr. Leslie 
 have also meet with in his ramble , and , accord to a harmless popular 
 superstition , deem it highly unlucky not to pick up , and , once pick 
 up , no less unlucky to throw away . item , in the adjoining pigeon - hole , a 
 goodly collection of pebble with hole in they , preserve for the same 
 reason , in company with a crooked sixpence ; item , neatly arrange in 
 fanciful mosaic , several periwinkle , Blackamoor 's tooth   I mean the 
 shell so call , and other specimen of the conchiferous ingenuity of 
 nature , partly inherit from some ancestral spinster , partly amass 
 by Mr. Leslie himself in a youthful excursion to the seaside . there be 
 the farm - bailiff 's account , several file of bill , an old stirrup , 
 three set of knee and shoe buckle which have belong to Mr. Leslie 's 
 father , a few seal tie together by a shoe - string , a shagreen toothpick 
 case , a tortoise shell magnifying - glass to read with , his eld son 's 
 first copybook , his second son 's ditto , his daughter 's ditto , and a 
 lock of his wife 's hair arrange in a true lover 's knot , frame and 
 glaze . there be also a small mousetrap ; a patent corkscrew too good 
 to be use in common ; fragment of a silver teaspoon , that have , by 
 natural decay , arrive at a dissolution of its part ; a small brown 
 holland bag , contain halfpence of various date , as far back as Queen 
 Anne , accompany by two french sous and a german silber gros , - the 
 which miscellany Mr. Leslie magniloquently call " his coin , " and have 
 leave in his will as a family heirloom . there be many other curiosity 
 of congenial nature and equal value - quae nunc describere longum est . 
 Mr. Leslie be engage at this time in what be term " put thing 
 to right , " - an occupation he perform with exemplary care once a week . 
 this be his day ; and he have just count his coin , and be slowly 
 tie they up again in the brown holland bag , when Frank 's knock reach 
 his ear . 

 Mr. Maunder Slugge Leslie pause , shake his head as if incredulously , 
 and be about to resume his occupation , when he be seize with a fit of 
 yawning which prevent the bag be tie for full two minute . 

 while such the employment of the study , let we turn to the recreation 
 in the drawing - room , or rather parlour . a drawing - room there be on the 
 first floor , with a charming look - out , not on the dreary fir - tree , but 
 on the romantic undulating forest - land ; but the drawing - room have not 
 be use since the death of the last Mrs. Leslie . it be deem 
 too good to sit in , except when there be company : there never be 
 company , it be never sit in . indeed , now the paper be fall off 
 the wall with the damp , and the rat , mouse , and moth - those " edace 
 rerum " - have eat , between they , most of the chair - bottom and a 
 considerable part of the floor . therefore , the parlour be the sole 
 general sitting - room ; and be breakfast in , din , and sup in , 
 and , after supper , smoke in by Mr. Leslie to the accompaniment of 
 rum - and - water , it be impossible to deny that it have what be call " a 
 smell , " - a comfortable , wholesome family smell , speak of number , 
 meal , and miscellaneous social habitation . there be two window : one 
 look full on the fir - tree ; the other on the farmyard , with the pigsty 
 close the view . near the fir - tree window sit Mrs. Leslie ; before she , 
 on a high stool , be a basket of the child 's clothe that want 
 mending . a work - table of rosewood inlay with brass , which have be a 
 wedding - present , and be a costly thing originally , but in that peculiar 
 taste which be vulgarly call " Brummagem , " stand at hand : the brass 
 have start in several place , and occasionally make great havoc in 
 the child 's finger and in Mrs. Leslie 's gown ; in fact it be the 
 lively piece of furniture in the house , thank to the petulant 
 brasswork , and could not have be more mischievous if it have be a 
 monkey . upon the work - table lie a housewife and thimble , and scissor , 
 and skein of worsted and thread , and little scrap of linen and 
 cloth for patch . but Mrs. Leslie be not actually work , - she be 
 prepare to work ; she have be prepare to work for the last hour and 
 a half . upon her lap she support a novel , by a lady who write much for 
 a former generation , under the name of " Mrs. Bridget Blue Mantle . " she 
 have a small needle in her left hand , and a very thick piece of thread 
 in her right ; occasionally she apply the end of the say thread to her 
 lip , and then - her eye fix on the novel - make a blind , vacillate 
 attack at the eye of the needle . but a camel would have go through it 
 with quite as much ease . nor do the novel alone engage Mrs. Leslie 's 
 attention , for ever and anon she interrupt herself to scold the 
 child , to inquire " what o'clock it be ; " to observe that " Sarah 
 would never suit ; " and to wonder " why Mr. Leslie would not see that the 
 work - table be mend . " Mrs. Leslie have be rather a pretty woman . in 
 spite of a dress at once slatternly and economical , she have still the 
 air of a lady , - rather too much so , the hard duty of her situation 
 consider . she be proud of the antiquity of her family on both side ; 
 her mother be of the venerable stock of the daudler of Daudle Place , a 
 race that exist before the Conquest . indeed , one have only to read 
 our early chronicle , and to glance over some of those long - wind 
 moralizing poem which delight the thane and ealderman of old , in 
 order to see that the Daudles must have be a very influential family 
 before William the First turn the country topsy - turvy . while the 
 mother 's race be thus indubitably Saxon , the father 's have not only 
 the name but the peculiar idiosyncrasy of the Normans , and go far to 
 establish that crotchet of the brilliant author of " Sybil ; or , the two 
 nation , " as to the continue distinction between the conquering 
 and conquered population . Mrs. Leslie 's father boast the name of 
 Montfichet , - doubtless of the same kith and kin as those great baron of 
 Alontfichet , who once own such broad land and such turbulent castle . 
 a high - nosed , thin , nervous , excitable progeny , those same montfydget , 
 as the most troublesome Norman could pretend to be . this fusion of race 
 be notable to the most ordinary physiognomist in the physique and 
 in the morale of Mrs. Leslie . she have the speculative blue eye of the 
 Saxon , and the passionate high nose of the Norman ; she have the musing 
 do - nothingness of the daudler , and the reckless have - at - every - thingness 
 of the Montfydgets . at Mrs. Leslie 's foot , a little girl with her hair 
 about her ear   and beautiful hair it be too   be amusing herself with 
 a break - nosed doll . at the far end of the room , before a high desk , 
 sit Frank 's Eton schoolfellow , the eld son . a minute or two before 
 Frank 's alarum have disturb the tranquillity of the household , he have 
 raise his eye from the book on the desk to glance at a very tattered 
 copy of the Greek Testament , in which his brother Oliver have find a 
 difficulty that he come to Randal to solve . as the young Etonian 's face 
 be turn to the light , your first impression on see it would have 
 be melancholy , but respectful , interest , - for the face have already 
 lose the joyous character of youth ; there be a wrinkle between the 
 brow ; and the line that speak of fatigue be already visible under 
 the eye and about the mouth ; the complexion be sallow , the lip be 
 pale . year of study have already sow in the delicate organization the 
 seed of many an infirmity and many a pain ; but if your look have rest 
 long on that countenance , gradually your compassion might have give 
 place to some feeling uneasy and sinister , - a feeling akin to fear . 
 there be in the whole expression so much of cold calm force , that it 
 belie the debility of the frame . you see there the evidence of a mind 
 that be cultivate , and you feel that in that cultivation there 
 be something formidable . a notable contrast to this countenance , 
 prematurely wear and eminently intelligent , be the round healthy face 
 of Oliver , with slow blue eye fix hard on the penetrate orb of his 
 brother , as if try with might and main to catch from they a gleam of 
 that knowledge with which they shine clear and frigid as a star . 

 at Frank 's knock , Oliver 's slow blue eye sparkle into animation , and 
 he spring from his brother 's side . the little girl fling back the hair 
 from her face , and star at her mother with a look which speak wonder 
 and fright . 

 the young student knit his brow , and then turn wearily back to the 
 book on his desk . 

 " dear I , " cry Mrs. Leslie , " who can that possibly be ? oliver , come 
 from the window , sir , this instant : you will be see ! Juliet , run , ring 
 the bell ; no , go to the head of the kitchen stair , and call out to 
 Jenny ' not at home . ' not at home , on any account , " repeat Mrs. Leslie , 
 nervously , for the Montfydget blood be now in full flow . 

 in another minute or so , Frank 's loud boyish voice be distinctly hear 
 at the outer door . 

 randal slightly start . 

 " Frank Hazeldean 's voice , " say he ; " I should like to see he , Mother . " 

 " see he , " repeat Mrs. Leslie , in amaze ; ' see he ! and the room in 
 this state ! " 

 randal might have reply that the room be in no bad state than 
 usual ; but he say nothing . a slight flush come and go over his pale 
 face ; and then he lean his check on his hand , and compress his lip 
 firmly . 

 the outer door close with a sullen , inhospitable jar , and a slip - shod 
 female servant enter with a card between her finger and thumb . 

 " who be that for ? - give it to I . Jenny , " cry Mrs. Leslie . 

 but Jenny shake her head , lay the card on the desk beside Randal , and 
 vanish without say a word . 

 " oh , look , randal , look up , " cry Oliver , who have again rush to the 
 window ; ' such a pretty gray pony ! " 

 Randal do look up ; nay , he go deliberately to the window , and gaze a 
 moment on the high - mettle pony and the well - dress , spirited rider . in 
 that moment change pass over Randal 's countenance more rapidly than 
 cloud over the sky in a gusty day . now envy and discontent , with the 
 curl lip and the gloomy scowl ; now hope and proud self - esteem , with 
 the clearing brow and the lofty smile ; and then again all become 
 cold , firm , and close , as he walk back to his book , seat himself 
 resolutely , and say , half aloud , - " well , KNOWLEDGE be power ! " 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 Mrs. Leslie come up in fidget and in fuss ; she lean over Randal 's 
 shoulder and read the card . write in pen and ink , with an attempt at 
 imitation of print roman character , there appear first " MR . FRANK 
 HAZELDEAN ; " but just over these letter , and scribble hastily and less 
 legibly in pencil , be , - 

 " dear leslie , - sorry you be out ; come and see we , - do ! " 

 " you will go , randal ? " say Mrs. Leslie , after a pause . 

 " I be not sure . " 

 " yes , you can go ; you have clothe like a gentleman ; you can go 
 anywhere , not like those child ; " and Mrs. Leslie glance almost 
 spitefully at poor Oliver 's coarse threadbare jacket , and little 
 Juliet 's tear frock . 

 " what I have I owe at present to Mr. Egerton , and I should consult his 
 wish ; he be not on good term with these Hazeldeans . " then turn 
 towards his brother , who look mortified , he add , with a strange sort 
 of haughty kindness , " what I may have hereafter , Oliver , I shall owe to 
 myself ; and then if I rise , I will raise my family . " 

 " Dear Randal , " say Mrs. Leslie , fondly kiss he on the forehead , 
 " what a good heart you have ! " 

 " no , Mother ; my book do not   tell I that it be a good heart that get 
 on in the world : it be a hard head , " reply Randal , with a rude and 
 scornful candour . " but I can read no more just now : come out , Oliver . " 

 so say , he slide from his mother 's hand and leave the room . when Oliver 
 join he , Randal be already on the common ; and , without seem to 
 notice his brother , he continue to walk quickly , and with long stride , 
 in profound silence . at length he pause under the shade of an old oak , 
 that , too old to be of value save for firewood , have escape the axe . 
 the tree stand on a knoll , and the spot command a view of the decayed 
 house , the dilapidated church , the dreary village . 

 " Oliver , " say Randal , between his tooth , so that his voice have the 
 sound of a hiss , " it be under this tree that I first resolve to - " 

 he pause . 

 " what , randal ? " 

 " read hard : knowledge be power ! " 

 " but you be so fond of reading . " 

 " I ! " cry Randal . " do you think , when Wolsey and Thomas - a - becket become 
 priest , they be fond of tell their bead and pattering Aves ? I 
 fond of reading ! " 

 Oliver star ; the historical allusion be beyond his comprehension . 

 " you know , " continue Randal , " that we leslie be not always the 
 beggarly poor gentleman we be now . you know that there be a man who 
 live in Grosvenor Square , and be very rich , - very . his rich come to 
 he from a Leslie ; that man be my patron , Oliver , and he - be very good 
 to I . " 

 Randal 's smile be wither as he speak . " come on , " he say , after 
 a pause , - " come on . " again the walk be quick , and the brother be 
 silent . 

 they come at length to a little shallow brook , across which some large 
 stone have be place at short interval , so that the boy walk over 
 the ford dryshod . " will you pull down that bough , Oliver ? " say Randal , 
 abruptly , point to a tree . Oliver obey mechanically ; and randal , 
 strip the leaf and snap off the twig , leave a fork at the end ; 
 with this he begin to remove the stepping - stone . 

 " what be you about , randal ? " ask Oliver , wonderingly . 

 " we be on the other side of the brook now , and we shall not come back 
 this way . we do not   want the step - stone any more ! - away with they ! " 




 CHAPTER V. 

 the morning after this visit of Frank Hazeldean 's to Rood Hall , the 
 Right Honourable Audley Egerton , member of parliament , privy councillor , 
 and minister of a high department in the State , - just below the rank of 
 the cabinet , - be seat in his library , await the delivery of the 
 post , before he walk down to his office . in the mean while he 
 sip his tea , and glance over the newspaper with that quick and 
 half - disdainful eye with which your practical man in public life be will not 
 to regard the abuse or the eulogium of the Fourth Estate . 

 there be very little likeness between Mr. Egerton and his half - brother ; 
 none , indeed , except that they be both of tall stature , and strong , 
 sinewy , English build . but even in this last they do not resemble each 
 other ; for the squire 's athletic shape be already begin to expand 
 into that portly embonpoint which seem the natural development of 
 content man as they approach middle life . Audley , on the contrary , be 
 inclined to be spare ; and his figure , though the muscle be as firm 
 as iron , have enough of the slender to satisfy metropolitan idea of 
 elegance . his dress , his look , his tout ensemble , be those of the 
 London man . in the first , there be more attention to fashion than be 
 usual amongst the busy member of the House of Commons ; but then Audley 
 Egerton have always be something more than a mere busy member of 
 the House of Commons . he have always be a person of mark in the 
 good society ; and one secret of his success in life have be his high 
 reputation as " a gentleman . " 

 as he now bend over the journal , there be an air of distinction in the 
 turn of the well - shape head , with the dark brown hair , - dark in spite 
 of a reddish tinge , - cut close behind , and wear away a little towards 
 the crown , so as to give an additional height to a commanding forehead . 
 his profile be very handsome , and of that kind of beauty which impose 
 on man if it please woman ; and be , therefore , unlike that of your mere 
 pretty fellow , a positive advantage in public life . it be a profile 
 with large feature clearly cut , masculine , and somewhat severe . the 
 expression of his face be not open , like the squire 's , nor have it the 
 cold closeness which accompany the intellectual character of 
 young Leslie 's ; but it be reserve and dignified , and significant of 
 self - control , as should be the physiognomy of a man accustomed to think 
 before he speak . when you look at he , you be not surprised to learn 
 that he be not a florid orator nor a smart debater , - he be a " weighty 
 speaker . " he be fairly read , but without any great range either of 
 ornamental scholarship or constitutional lore . he have not much humour ; 
 but he have that kind of wit which be essential to grave and serious 
 irony . he have not much imagination , nor remarkable subtlety in 
 reasoning ; but if he do not dazzle he do not bore , - he be too much 
 of the man of the world for that . he be consider to have sound sense 
 and accurate judgment . Withal , as he now lay aside the journal , and 
 his face relax its austerer line , you will not be astonish to hear 
 that he be a man who be say to have be greatly belove by woman , 
 and still to exercise much influence in drawing - room and boudoir . at 
 least , no one be surprised when the great heiress , Clementina Leslie , 
 kinswoman and ward to Lord Lansmere , - a young lady who have refuse three 
 earl and the heir apparent to a dukedom , - be declare by her dear 
 friend to be die of love for Audley Egerton . it have be the natural 
 wish of the Lansmeres that this lady should marry their son , Lord 
 L'Estrange . but that young gentleman , whose opinion on matrimony 
 partook of the eccentricity of his general character , could never be 
 induce to propose , and have , accord to the on - dit of town , be the 
 principal party to make up the match between Clementina and his friend 
 Audley ; for the match require making - up , despite the predilection of 
 the young heiress . Mr. Egerton have have scruple of delicacy . he avow , 
 for the first time , that his fortune be much less than have be 
 generally suppose , and he do not like the idea of owe all to a wife , 
 however highly be might esteem and admire she . now , Lord L'Estrange   not 
 long after the election at Lansmere , which have give to Audley his first 
 seat in parliament   have suddenly exchange from the battalion of the 
 Guards to which he belong , and which be detain at home , into a 
 cavalry regiment on active service in the Peninsula . nevertheless , even 
 abroad , and amidst the distraction of war , his interest in all that 
 could forward Egerton 's career be unabated ; and by letter to his 
 father and to his cousin Clementina , he assist in the negotiation for 
 the marriage between Miss Leslie and his friend ; and before the year in 
 which Audley be return for Lansmere have expire , the young senator 
 receive the hand of the great heiress . the settlement of her fortune , 
 which be chiefly in the Funds , have be unusually advantageous to the 
 husband ; for though the capital be tie up so long as both survive , 
 for the benefit of any child they might have , yet in the event of 
 one of the party die without issue by the marriage , the whole 
 pass without limitation to the survivor . Miss Leslie , in spite of all 
 remonstrance from her own legal adviser , have settle this clause with 
 Egerton 's confidential solicitor , one Mr. Levy , of whom we shall see 
 more hereafter ; and Egerton be to be keep in ignorance of it till after 
 the marriage . if in this Miss Leslie show a generous trust in Mr. 
 Egerton , she still inflict no positive wrong on her relation , for 
 she have none sufficiently near to she to warrant their claim to the 
 succession . her near kinsman , and therefore her natural heir , be 
 Harley L'Estrange ; and if he be content , no one have a right to 
 complain . the tie of blood between herself and the Leslies of Rood Hall 
 be , as we shall see presently , extremely distant . 

 it be not till after his marriage that Mr. Egerton take an active 
 part in the business of the House of Commons . he be then at the most 
 advantageous starting - point for the career of ambition . his word on the 
 state of the country take importance from his stake in it . his talent 
 find accessory in the opulence of Grosvenor Square , the dignity of 
 a princely establishment , the respectability of one firmly settle in 
 life , the reputation of a fortune in reality very large , and which 
 be magnify by popular report into the revenue of a Croesus . Audley 
 Egerton succeed in parliament beyond the early expectation form 
 of he . he take , from the first , that station in the House which it 
 require tact to establish , and great knowledge of the world to free 
 from the charge of impracticability and crotchet , but which , once 
 establish , be peculiarly impose from the rarity of its independence ; 
 that be to say , the station of the moderate man who belong sufficiently 
 to a party to obtain its support , but be yet sufficiently disengage 
 from a party to make his vote and word , on certain question , matter of 
 anxiety and speculation . 

 Professing Toryism   the word Conservative , which would have suit 
 he well , be not then know , he separate himself from the country 
 party , and always avow great respect for the opinion of the 
 large town . the epithet give to the view of Audley Egerton be 
 " enlighten . " never too much in advance of the passion of the day , yet 
 never behind its movement , he have that shrewd calculation of odd 
 which a consummate mastery of the world sometimes bestow upon 
 politician , - perceive the chance for and against a certain question 
 be carry within a certain time , and nick the question between 
 wind and water . he be so good a barometer of that changeful weather 
 call Public Opinion , that he might have have a hand in the " Times " 
 newspaper . he soon quarrel , and purposely , with his Lansmere 
 constituent ; nor have he ever revisit that borough , - perhaps because 
 it be associate with unpleasant reminiscence in the shape of the 
 squire 's epistolary trimmer , and in that of his own effigy which 
 his agricultural constituent have burn in the corn - market . but the 
 speech that produce such indignation at Lansmere have delight one of 
 the great of our commercial town , which at the next general election 
 honour he with its representation . in those day , before the Reform 
 Bill , great commercial town choose man of high mark for their member ; 
 and a proud station it be for he who be delegate to speak the voice 
 of the princely merchant of England . 

 Mrs. Egerton survive her marriage but a few year . she leave no 
 child ; two have be bear , but die in their first infancy . the 
 property of the wife , therefore , pass without control or limit to the 
 husband . 

 whatever might have be the grief of the widower , he disdain to 
 betray it to the world . indeed , Audley Egerton be a man who have early 
 teach himself to conceal emotion . he bury himself in the country , 
 none know where , for some month . when he return , there be a deep 
 wrinkle on his brow , - but no change in his habit and avocation , except 
 that , shortly afterwards , he accept office , and thus become more busy 
 than ever . 

 Mr. Egerton have always be lavish and magnificent in money spatter . 
 a rich man in public life have many claim on his fortune , and no one 
 yield to those claim with in air so regal as Audley Egerton . but 
 amongst his many liberal action , there be none which seem more 
 worthy of panegyric than the generous favour he extend to the son of 
 his wife 's poor and distant kinsfolk , the Leslies of Rood Hall . 

 some four generation back , there have live a certain squire Leslie , a 
 man of large acre and active mind . he have cause to be displeased with 
 his eld son , and though he do not disinherit he , he leave half his 
 property to a young . 

 the young have capacity and spirit , which justify the parental 
 provision . he increase his fortune ; lift himself into notice and 
 consideration by public service and a noble alliance . his descendant 
 follow his example , and take rank among the first commoner 
 in England , till the last male , dying , leave his sole heiress and 
 representative in one daughter , Clementina , afterwards marry to Mr. 
 Egerton . 

 meanwhile the eld son of the fore - mention squire have muddle and 
 sotte away much of his share in the Leslie property ; and , by low habit 
 and mean society , lower in repute his representation of the name . 

 his successor imitate he , till nothing be leave to Randal 's father , 
 Mr. Maunder Slugge Leslie , but the decayed house , which be what the 
 Germans call the stamm schloss , or ' stem hall , " of the race , and the 
 wretched land immediately around it . 

 still , though all intercourse between the two branch of the family have 
 cease , the young have always feel a respect for the elder , as the head 
 of the House . and it be suppose that , on her death - bed , Mrs. Egerton 
 have recommend her impoverished namesake and kindre to the care of 
 her husband ; for when he return to town , after Mrs. Egerton 's death , 
 Audley have send to Mr. Maunder Slugge Leslie the sum of L5000 , which 
 he say his wife , leave no write will , have orally bequeath as a 
 legacy to that gentleman ; and he request permission to charge himself 
 with the education of the eld son . 

 Mr. Maunder Slugge Leslie might have do great thing for his little 
 property with those L5000 , or even keep in the three - per - cent the 
 interest would have afford a material addition to his comfort . but 
 a neighbouring solicitor , have catch scent of the legacy , hunt 
 it down into his own hand , on pretence of have find a capital 
 investment in a canal ; and when the solicitor have get possession of the 
 L5000 , he go off with they to America . 

 meanwhile Randal , place by Mr. Egerton at an excellent preparatory 
 school , at first give no sign of industry or talent ; but just before 
 he leave it , there come to the school , as classical tutor , an ambitious 
 young Oxford man ; and his zeal - for he be a capital teacher - produce 
 a great effect generally on the pupil , and especially on Randal Leslie . 
 he talk to they much in private on the advantage of learning , and 
 shortly afterwards he exhibit those advantage in his own person ; for , 
 have edit a greek play with much subtle scholarship , his college , 
 which some slight irregularity of his have displease , recall he to 
 its venerable bosom by the presentation of a fellowship . after this he 
 take order , become a college tutor , distinguish himself yet more by 
 a treatise on the Greek accent , get a capital living , and be consider 
 on the high road to a bishopric . this young man , then , communicate to 
 randal the thirst for knowledge ; and when the boy go afterwards to 
 Eton , he apply with such earnestness and resolve that his fame soon 
 reach the ear of Audley ; and that person , who have the sympathy for 
 talent , and yet more for purpose , which often characterize ambitious 
 man , go to Eton to see he . from that time Audley evince great and 
 almost fatherly interest in the brilliant Etonian ; and randal always 
 spend with he some day in each vacation . 

 I have say that Egerton 's conduct with respect to this boy be more 
 praiseworthy than most of those generous action for which he be 
 renowne , since to this the world give no applause . what a man do 
 within the range of his family connection do not carry with it that 
 eclat which invest a munificence exhibit on public occasion . either 
 people care nothing about it , or tacitly suppose it to be but his duty . 
 it be true , too , as the squire have observe , that Randal Leslie be 
 even less distantly related to the Hazeldeans than to Mrs. Egerton , 
 since Randal 's grandfather have actually marry a Miss Hazeldean   the 
 highest worldly connection that branch of the family have form since 
 the great split I have commemorate . but Audley Egerton never appear 
 aware of that fact . as he be not himself descend from the Hazeldeans , 
 he do not trouble himself about their genealogy ; and he take care to 
 impress it upon the Leslies that his generosity on their behalf be 
 solely to be ascribe to his respect for his wife 's memory and kindre . 
 still the squire have feel as if his " distant brother " imply a rebuke 
 on his own neglect of these poor leslie , by the liberality Audley 
 evince towards they ; and this have make he doubly sore when the name of 
 Randal Leslie be mention . but the fact really be , that the leslie 
 of Rood have so shrink out of all notice that the squire have actually 
 forget their existence , until Randal become thus indebted to his 
 brother ; and then he feel a pang of remorse that any one save himself , 
 the head of the Hazeldeans , should lend a help hand to the grandson 
 of a Hazeldean . 

 but have thus , somewhat too tediously , explain the position of 
 Audley Egerton , whether in the world or in relation to his young 
 protege , I may now permit he to receive and to read his letter . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 Mr. Egerton glance over the pile of letter place beside he , 
 and first he tear up some , scarcely read , and throw they into the 
 waste - basket . public man have such odd , out - of - the - way letter , that 
 their waste - basket be never empty , - letter from amateur financier 
 propose new way to pay off the National Debt ; letter from America 
  never free !   ask for autograph ; letter from fond mother in 
 country village , recommend some miracle of a son for a place in 
 the king 's service ; letter from free - thinker in reproof of bigotry ; 
 letter from bigot in reproof of free - thinking ; letter sign Brutus 
 Redivivus , contain the agreeable information that the writer have a 
 dagger for tyrant , if the danish claim be not forthwith adjust ; 
 letter sign Matilda or Caroline , state that Caroline or Matilda 
 have see the public man 's portrait at the exhibition , and that a heart 
 sensible to its attraction may be find at No . - Piccadilly ; letter 
 from beggar , impostor , monomaniac , speculator , jobber , - all food 
 for the waste - basket . 

 from the correspondence thus winnow , Mr. Egerton first select those 
 on business , which he put methodically together in one division of 
 his pocket - book ; and secondly , those of a private nature , which he as 
 carefully put into another . of these last there be but three , - one 
 from his steward , one from Harley L'Estrange , one from Randal Leslie . 
 it be his custom to answer his correspondence at his office ; and to 
 his office , a few minute afterwards , he slowly take his way . many a 
 passenger turn back to look again at the firm figure , which , despite 
 the hot summer day , be button up to the throat ; and the black 
 frock - coat thus wear well become the erect air and the deep , full chest 
 of the handsome senator . when he enter Parliament Street , Audley 
 Egerton be join by one of his colleague , also on his way to the 
 care of office . 

 after a few observation on the last debate this gentleman say , - 

 " by the way , can you dine with I next Saturday , to meet Lansmere ? he 
 come up to town to vote for we on Monday . " 

 " I have ask some people to dine with I , " answer Egerton , " but I will 
 put they off . I see Lord Lansmere too seldom to miss any occasion to 
 meet a man whom I respect so much . " 

 " so seldom ! true , he be very little in town ; but why do not   you go and 
 see he in the country ? good shooting , - pleasant , old - fashioned house . " 

 " my dear Westbourne , his house be ' nimium vicina Cremonae , ' close to a 
 borough in which I have be burn in effigy . " 

 " ha ! ha ! yes , I remember you first come into parliament for that snug 
 little place ; but Lansmere himself never find fault with your vote , 
 do he ? " 

 " he behave very handsomely , and say he have not presume to consider I 
 his mouthpiece ; and then , too , I be so intimate with L'Estrange . " 

 " be that queer fellow ever come back to England ? " 

 " he come , generally , every year , for a few day , just to see his father 
 and mother , and then return to the continent . " 

 " I never meet he . " 

 " he come in September or October , when you , of course , be not in town , 
 and it be in town that the Lansmeres meet he . " 

 " why do he not go to they ? " 

 " a man in England but once a year , and for a few day , have so much to do 
 in London , I suppose . " 

 " be he as amusing as ever ? " Egerton nod . 

 " so distinguished as he might be ! " remark Lord Westbourne . 

 " so distinguished as he be ! " say Egerton , formally ; " an officer 
 select for praise , even in such field as Quatre Bras and Waterloo ; 
 a scholar , too , of the fine taste ; and as an accomplished gentleman 
 matchless ! " 

 " I like to hear one man praise another so warmly in these ill - natured 
 day , " answer Lord Westbourne . " but still , though L'Estrange be 
 doubtless all you say , do not   you think he rather waste his life live 
 abroad ? " 

 " and try to be happy , Westbourne ? be you sure it be not we who waste 
 our life ? but I can not   stay to hear your answer . here we be at the door 
 of my prison . " 

 " on Saturday , then ? " 

 " on Saturday . good day . " 

 for the next hour or more , Mr. Egerton be engage on the affair of the 
 State . he then snatch an interval of leisure   while await a report , 
 which he have instruct a clerk to make he , in order to reply to his 
 letter . those on public business be soon despatch ; and throw 
 his reply aside to be seal by a subordinate hand , he draw out the 
 letter which he have put apart as private . 

 he attend first to that of his steward : the steward 's letter be long , 
 the reply be contain in three line . Pitt himself be scarcely more 
 negligent of his private interest and concern than Audley Egerton ; 
 yet , withal , Audley Egerton be say by his enemy to be an egotist . 

 the next letter he write be to Randal , and that , though long , be far 
 from prolix : it run thus : - 

  DEAR MR . LESLIE , - I appreciate your delicacy in consult I 
  whether you should accept Frank Hazeldean 's invitation to call at 
  the Hall . since you be ask , I can see no objection to it . I 
  should be sorry if you appear to force yourself there ; and for the 
  rest , as a general rule , I think a young man who have his own way to 
  make in life have well avoid all intimacy with those of his own age 
  who have no kindre object nor congenial pursuit . 

  as soon as this visit be pay , I wish you to come to London . the 
  report I receive of your progress at Eton render it unnecessary , in 
  my judgment , that you should return there . if your father have no 
  objection , I propose that you should go to Oxford at the ensue 
  term . meanwhile , I have engage a gentleman , who be a fellow of 
  Balliol , to read with you . he be of opinion , judge only by your 
  high repute at Eton , that you may at once obtain a scholarship in 
  that college . if you do so , I shall look upon your career in life 
  as assure . 

  your affectionate friend , and sincere well - wisher , A. E. 

 the reader will remark that in this letter there be a certain tone of 
 formality . Mr. Egerton do not call his protege " Dear Randal , " as would 
 seem natural , but coldly and stiffly , " dear Mr. Leslie . " he hint , also , 
 that the boy have his own way to make in life . be this mean to guard 
 against too sanguine notion of inheritance , which his generosity may 
 have excite ? the letter to Lord L'Estrange be of a very different kind 
 from the other . it be long , and full of such little scrap of news and 
 gossip as may interest friend in a foreign land ; it be write gayly , 
 and as with a wish to cheer his friend ; you could see that it be a 
 reply to a melancholy letter ; and in the whole tone and spirit there be 
 an affection , even to tenderness , of which those who most like Audley 
 Egerton would have scarcely suppose he capable . yet , notwithstanding , 
 there be a kind of constraint in the letter , which perhaps only the 
 fine tact of a woman would detect . it have not that abandon , that hearty 
 self - outpouring , which you might expect would characterize the letter 
 of two such friend , who have be boy at school together , and which 
 do breathe indeed in all the abrupt ramble sentence of his 
 correspondent . but where be the evidence of the constraint ? Egerton be 
 off - hand enough where his pen run glibly through paragraph that relate 
 to other ; it be simply that he say nothing about himself , - that he 
 avoid all reference to the inner world of sentiment and feeling ! but 
 perhaps , after all , the man have no sentiment and feeling ! how can you 
 expect that a steady personage in practical life , whose morning be 
 spend in Downing Street , and whose night be consume in watch 
 Government bill through a committee , can write in the same style as an 
 idle dreamer amidst the pine of Ravenna , or on the bank of Como ? 

 Audley have just finish this epistle , such as it be , when the 
 attendant in waiting announce the arrival of a deputation from 
 a provincial trading town , the member of which deputation he have 
 appoint to meet at two o'clock . there be no office in London at which 
 deputation be keep wait less than at that over which Mr. Egerton 
 preside . 

 the deputation enter , - some score or so of middle - age , 
 comfortable - look person , who , nevertheless , have their grievance , and 
 consider their own interest , and those of the country , menace by a 
 certain clause in a bill bring in by Mr. Egerton . 

 the mayor of the town be the chief spokesman , and he speak well , - but 
 in a style to which the dignified official be not accustom . it be a 
 slap - dash style , - unceremonious , free and easy , - an american style . and , 
 indeed , there be something altogether in the appearance and bearing of 
 the mayor which savour of residence in the Great Republic . he be a 
 very handsome man , but with a look sharp and domineering , - the look of 
 a man who do not care a straw for president or monarch , and who enjoy 
 the liberty to speak his mind and " wallop his own nigger ! " 

 his fellow - burgher evidently regard he with great respect ; and Mr. 
 Egerton have penetration enough to perceive that Mr. Mayor must be a rich 
 man , as well as an eloquent one , to have overcome those impression 
 of soreness or jealousy which his tone be calculate to create in the 
 self - love of his equal . 

 Mr. Egerton be far too wise to be easily offend by mere manner ; 
 and though he star somewhat haughtily when he find his observation 
 actually pooh - poohe , he be not above be convince . there be much 
 sense and much justice in Mr. Mayor 's argument , and the statesman 
 civilly promise to take they into full consideration . 

 he then bow out the deputation ; but scarcely have the door close 
 before it open again , and Mr. Mayor present himself alone , say 
 aloud to his companion in the passage , " I forgot something I have to say 
 to Mr. Egerton ; wait below for I . " 

 " well , Mr. Mayor , " say Audley , point to a seat , " what else would you 
 suggest ? " 

 the mayor look round to see that the door be close ; and then , 
 draw his chair close to Mr. Egerton 's , lay his forefinger on that 
 gentleman 's arm , and say , " I think I speak to a man of the world , sir ? " 

 Mr. Egerton bow , and make no reply by word , but he gently remove his 
 arm from the touch of the forefinger . 

 MR . MAYOR . - " you observe , sir , that I do not ask the member whom we 
 return to parliament to accompany we . do well without them . you know 
 they be both in Opposition , - out - and - outer . " 

 MR . EGERTON . - " it be a misfortune which the Government can not remember 
 when the question be whether the trade of the town itself be to be 
 serve or injure . " 

 MR . MAYOR . - " well , I guess you speak handsome , sir . but you would be glad to 
 have two member to support minister after the next election . " 

 MR . EGERTON   smile . - " unquestionably , Mr. Mayor . " 

 MR . MAYOR . - " and I can do it , Mr. Egerton . I may say I have the town in 
 my pocket ; so I ought , - I spend a great deal of money in it . now , 
 you see , Mr. Egerton , I have pass a part of my life in a land of 
 liberty - the United States - and I come to the point when I speak to a 
 man of the world . I be a man of the world myself , sir . and so , if the 
 Government will do something for I , why , I will do something for the 
 Government . two vote for a free and independent town like ours , - that be 
 something , be not   it ? " 

 MR . EGERTON   take by surprise . - " really , I - " 

 MR . MAYOR   advance his chair still near , and interrupt the 
 official . - " no nonsense , you see , on one side or the other . the fact 
 be , that I have   take it into my head that I should like to be knight . 
 you may well look surprised , Mr. Egerton , - trumpery thing enough , I 
 dare say ; still , every man have his weakness , and I should like to be 
 Sir Richard . well , if you can get I make Sir Richard , you may just name 
 your two member for the next election , - that be , if they belong to 
 your own set , enlighten man , up to the time . that be speak fair and 
 manful , be not   it ? " 

 MR . EGERTON   draw himself up . - " I be at a loss to guess why you 
 should select I , sir , for this very extraordinary proposition . " 

 MR . MAYOR   nod good - humouredly . - " why , you see , I do not   go along 
 with the government ; you be the good of the bunch . and may be you would 
 like to strengthen your own party . this be quite between you and I , you 
 understand ; honour be a jewel ! " 

 MR . EGERTON   with great gravity . - " Sir , I be oblige by your good 
 opinion ; but I agree with my colleague in all the great question that 
 affect the government of the country , and - " 

 MR . MAYOR   interrupt he . - " ah , of course , you must say so ; very 
 right . but I guess thing would go differently if you be Prime 
 Minister . however , I have another reason for speak to you about my 
 little job . you see you be member for Lansmere once , and I think you 
 only come in by a majority of two , eh ? " 

 MR . EGERTON . - " I know nothing of the particular of that election ; I be 
 not present . " 

 MR . MAYOR . - " no ; but luckily for you , two relation of mine be , and 
 they vote for you . two vote , and you come in by two . since then , you 
 have get into very snug quarter here , and I think we have a claim on 
 you - " 

 MR . EGERTON . - " Sir , I acknowledge no such claim ; I be and be a stranger 
 to Lansmere ; and if the elector do I the honour to return I to 
 parliament , it be in compliment rather to - " 

 MR . MAYOR   again interrupt the official . - " rather to Lord Lansmere , 
 you be go to say ; unconstitutional doctrine that , I fancy . peer of 
 the realm . but never mind , I know the world ; and I would ask Lord Lansmere 
 to do my affair for I , only he be a pompous sort of man ; might be 
 qualmish : antiquated notion . not up to snuff like you and I . " 

 MR . EGERTON   in great disgust , and settle his paper before 
 he . - " Sir , it be not in my department to recommend to his Majesty 
 candidate for the honour of knighthood , and it be still less in my 
 department to make bargain for seat in parliament . " 

 MR . MAYOR . - " oh , if that be the case , you will excuse I ; I do not   know much 
 of the etiquette in these matter . but I think that if I put two 
 seat in your hand for your own friend , you might contrive to take 
 the affair into your department , whatever it be . but since you say you 
 agree with your colleague , perhaps it come to the same thing . now , you 
 must not suppose I want to sell the town , and that I can change and chop 
 my politic for my own purpose . no such thing ! I do not   like the sit 
 member ; I be all for progressing , but they go too much ahead for I ; 
 and since the Government be disposed to move a little , why , I would as 
 lief support they as not . but , in common gratitude , you see , " add the 
 mayor , coaxingly , " I ought to be knight ! I can keep up the dignity , 
 and do credit to his Majesty . " 

 MR . EGERTON   without look up from his paper . - " I can only refer 
 you , sir , to the proper quarter . " 

 MR . MAYOR   impatiently . - " proper quarter ! well , since there be so much 
 humbug in this old country of ours , that one must go through all the 
 form and get at the job regularly , just tell I whom I ought to go to . " 

 MR . EGERTON   begin to be amuse as well as indignant . - " if you want 
 a knighthood , Mr. Mayor , you must ask the Prime Minister ; if you want 
 to give the Government information relative to seat in parliament , you 
 must introduce yourself to Mr. - - - , the Secretary of the Treasury . " 

 MR . MAYOR . - " and if I go to the last chap , what do you think he will say ? " 

 MR . EGERTON   the amusement preponderate over the indignation . - " he 
 will say , I suppose , that you must not put the thing in the light in 
 which you have put it to I ; that the Government will be very proud to 
 have the confidence of yourself and your brother elector ; and that a 
 gentleman like you , in the proud position of mayor , may well hope to be 
 knight on some fitting occasion ; but that you must not talk about the 
 knighthood just at present , and must confine yourself to convert the 
 unfortunate political opinion of the town . " 

 MR . MAYOR . - " well , I guess that chap there would want to do I ! not 
 quite so green , Mr. Egerton . perhaps I would well go at once to the 
 fountain - head . how d ' ye think the Premier would take it ? " 

 MR . EGERTON   the indignation preponderate over the 
 amusement . - " probably just as I be about to do . " 

 Mr. Egerton ring the bell ; the attendant appear . " show Mr. Mayor the 
 way out , " say the minister . 

 the mayor turn round sharply , and his face be purple . he walk 
 straight to the door ; but suffer the attendant to precede he along 
 the corridor , he come back with a rapid stride , and clench his hand , 
 and with a voice thick with passion , cry , " some day or other I will 
 make you smart for this , as sure as my name 's Dick Avenel ! " 

 " Avenel ! " repeat Egerton , recoiling , - " Avenel ! " but the mayor be 
 go . 

 Audley fall into a deep and musing revery , which seem gloomy , and 
 last till the attendant announce that the horse be at the door . 

 he then look up , still abstractedly , and see his letter to Harley 
 L'Estrange open on the table . he draw it towards he , and write , " a man 
 have just leave I , who call himself Aven - " in the middle of the name 
 his pen stop . " no , no , " mutter the writer , " what folly to reopen 
 the old wound there ! " and he carefully erase the word . 

 Audley Egerton do not ride in the Park that day , as be his will not , but 
 dismiss his groom ; and , turn his horse 's head towards Westminster 
 Bridge , take his solitary way into the country . he ride at first slowly , 
 as if in thought ; then fast , as if try to escape from thought . he 
 be later than usual at the House that evening , and he look pale and 
 fatigue . but he have to speak , and he speak well . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 in spite of all his machiavellian wisdom , Dr. Riccabocca have be foil 
 in his attempt to seduce Leonard Fairfield into his service , even though 
 he succeed in partially win over the widow to his view . for to 
 she he represent the worldly advantage of the thing . Lenny would 
 learn to be fit for more than a day - labourer ; he would learn gardening , 
 in all its branch , - rise some day to be a head gardener . " and , " 
 say Riccabocca , " I will take care of his book - learning , and teach he 
 whatever he have a head for . " 

 " he have a head for everything , " say the widow . 

 " then , " say the wise man , " everything shall go into it . " the widow be 
 certainly dazzle ; for , as we have see , she highly prize scholarly 
 distinction , and she know that the parson look upon Riccabocca as a 
 wondrous learn man . but still Riccabocca be say to be a Papist , 
 and suspect to be a conjuror . her scruple on both these point , the 
 Italian , who be an adept in the art of talk over the fair sex , would 
 no doubt have dissipate , if there have be any use in it ; but Lenny 
 put a dead stop to all negotiation . he have take a mortal dislike to 
 Riccabocca : he be very much frighten by he , - and the spectacle , 
 the pipe , the cloak , the long hair , and the red umbrella ; and say so 
 sturdily , in reply to every overture , " please , sir , I would rather not ; I would 
 rather stay along with Mother , " that Riccabocca be force to suspend 
 all further experiment in his machiavellian diplomacy . he be not at 
 all cast down , however , by his first failure ; on the contrary , he be 
 one of those man whom opposition stimulate ; and what before have be 
 but a suggestion of prudence , become an object of desire . plenty 
 of other lad might no doubt be have on as reasonable term as Lenny 
 Fairfield ; but the moment Lenny presume to baffle the Italian 's 
 design upon he , the special acquisition , of Lenny become of paramount 
 importance in the eye of Signor Riccabocca . 

 Jackeymo , however , lose all his interest in the trap , snare , and gin 
 which his master propose to lay for Leonard Fairfield , in the more 
 immediate surprise that await he on learn that Dr. Riccabocca have 
 accept an invitation to pass a few day at the Hall . 

 " there will be no one there but the family , " say Riccabocca . " poor 
 Giacomo , a little chat in the servant ' hall will do you good ; and the 
 squire 's beef be more nourishing , after all , than the stickleback and 
 minnow . it will lengthen your life . " 

 " the padrone jest , " say Jackeymo , statelily ; " as if any one could 
 starve in his service . " 

 " um , " say Riccabocca . " at least , faithful friend , you have try that 
 experiment as far as human nature will permit ; " and he extend his hand 
 to his fellow - exile with that familiarity which exist between servant 
 and master in the usage of the continent . Jackeymo bend low , and a tear 
 fall upon the hand he kiss . 

 " Cospetto ! " say Dr. Riccabocca , " a thousand mock pearl do not make up 
 the cost of a single true one ! the tear of woman - we know their worth ; 
 but the tear of an honest man - Fie , Giacomo ! - at least I can never 
 repay you this ! go and see to our wardrobe . " 

 so far as his master 's wardrobe be concern , that order be pleasing 
 to Jackeymo ; for the doctor have in his drawer suit which Jackeymo 
 pronounce to be as good as new , though many a long year have pass 
 since they leave the tailor 's hand . but when Jackeymo come to examine 
 the state of his own clothing department , his face grow considerably 
 long . it be not that he be without other clothe than those on his 
 back , - quantity be there , but the quality ! mournfully he gaze on two 
 suit , complete in three separate member of which man 's raiment be 
 compose : the one suit extend at length upon his bed , like a veteran 
 stretch by pious hand after death ; the other bring piecemeal to the 
 invidious light , - the torso place upon a chair , the limb dangle down 
 from Jackeymo 's melancholy arm . no body long expose at the Morgue 
 could evince less sign of resuscitation than those respectable defunct ! 
 for , indeed , Jackeymo have be less thrifty of his apparel , more 
 profusus sui , than his master . in the early day of their exile , he 
 preserve the decorous habit of dress for dinner , - it be a respect 
 due to the padrone , - and that habit have last till the two habit on 
 which it necessarily depend have evince the first symptom of decay ; 
 then the evening clothe have be take into morning wear , in which hard 
 service they have breathe their last . 

 the doctor , notwithstanding his general philosophical abstraction from 
 such household detail , have more than once say , rather in pity to 
 Jackeymo than with an eye to that respectability which the costume 
 of the servant reflect on the dignity of the master , " Giacomo , thou 
 want clothe ; fit thyself out of mine ! " 

 and Jackeymo have bow his gratitude , as if the donation have be 
 accept ; but the fact be that that same fitting out be easy say 
 than do . for though - thank to an existence mainly upon stickleback 
 and minnow - both Jackeymo and Riccabocca have arrive at that state 
 which the longevity of miser prove to be most healthful to the human 
 frame , - namely , skin and bone , - yet the bone contain in the skin of 
 Riccabocca all take longitudinal direction ; while those in the skin of 
 Jackeymo spread out latitudinally . and you might as well have make 
 the bark of a lombardy poplar serve for the trunk of some dwarfed and 
 pollard oak - in whose hollow the Babes of the Wood could have sleep 
 at their ease - as have fit out Jackeymo from the garb of Riccabocca . 
 moreover , if the skill of the tailor could have accomplish that 
 undertaking , the faithful Jackeymo would never have have the heart 
 to avail himself of the generosity of his master . he have a sort of 
 religious sentiment , too , about those vestment of the padrone . the 
 ancient , we know , when escape from shipwreck , suspend in the 
 votive temple the garment in which they have struggle through the wave . 
 Jackeymo look on those relic of the past with a kindre superstition . 
 " this coat the padrone wear on such an occasion . I remember the 
 very evening the padrone last put on those pantaloon ! " and coat and 
 pantaloon be tenderly dust , and carefully restore to their sacred 
 rest . 

 but now , after all , what be to be do ? Jackeymo be much too proud 
 to exhibit his person to the eye of the squire 's butler in habiliment 
 discreditable to himself and the padrone . in the midst of his perplexity 
 the bell ring , and he go down into the parlour . 

 Riccabocca be stand on the hearth under his symbolical 
 representation of the " Patriae Exul . " 

 " Giacomo , " quoth he , " I have be think that thou hast never do 
 what I tell thee , and fit thyself out from my superfluity . but we 
 be go now into the great world : visit once begin , Heaven know 
 where it may stop . go to the near town and get thyself clothe . 
 thing be dear in England . will this suffice ? " and Riccabocca extend 
 a five - pound note . 

 Jackeymo , we have see , be more familiar with his master than we formal 
 English permit our domestic to be with we ; but in his familiarity he 
 be usually respectful . this time , however , respect desert he . 

 " the padrone be mad ! " he exclaim ; " he would fling away his whole 
 fortune if I would let he . five pound English , or a hundred and 
 twenty - six pound Milanese ! Santa Maria ! unnatural father ! and what be 
 to become of the poor signorina ? be this the way you be to marry she in 
 the foreign land ? " 

 " Giacomo , " say Riccabocca , bow his head to the storm , " the 
 signorina to - morrow ; to - day the honour of the House . thy small - clothe , 
 Giacomo , - miserable man , thy small - clothe ! " 

 " it be just , " say Jackeymo , recover himself , and with humility ; " and 
 the padrone do right to blame I , but not in so cruel a way . it be 
 just , - the padrone lodge and board I , and give I handsome wage , 
 and he have a right to expect that I should not go in this figure . " 

 " for the board and the lodgment , good , " say Riccabocca . " for the 
 handsome wage , they be the vision of thy fancy ! " 

 " they be no such thing , " say Jackeymo , " they be only in arrear . as if 
 the padrone could not pay they some day or other ; as if I be demean 
 myself by serve a master who do not intend to pay his servant ! and 
 can not   I wait ? have I not my saving too ? but be cheer , be cheer ; 
 you shall be content with I . I have two beautiful suit still . I be 
 arrange they when you rang for I . you shall see , you shall see . " 

 and Jackeymo hurry from the room , hurry back into his own chamber , 
 unlock a little trunk which he keep at his bed - head , toss out 
 a variety of small article , and from the deep depth extract a 
 leathern purse . he empty the content on the bed . they be chiefly 
 italian coin , some five - franc piece , a silver medallion inclose 
 a little image of his patron saint , - San Giacomo , - one solid English 
 guinea , and somewhat more than a pound 's worth in english silver . 
 Jackeymo put back the foreign coin , say prudently , " one will lose on 
 they here ; " he seize the english coin , and count they out . " but be 
 you enough , you rascal ? " quoth he , angrily , give they a good shake . 
 his eye catch sight of the medallion , - he pause ; and after eye the 
 tiny representation of the saint with great deliberation , he add , in 
 a sentence which he must have pick up from the proverbial aphorism of 
 his master , - 

 " what be the difference between the enemy who do not hurt I , and the 
 friend who do not serve I ? Monsignore San Giacomo , my patron saint , 
 you be of very little use to I in the leathern bag ; but if you help I 
 to get into a new pair of small - clothe on this important occasion , 
 you will be a friend indeed . alla bisogna , Monsignore . " then , gravely 
 kiss the medallion , he thrust it into one pocket , the coin into 
 the other , make up a bundle of the two defunct suit , and mutter 
 to himself , " Beast , miser , that I be , to disgrace the padrone with all 
 these saving in his service ! " run downstairs into his pantry , catch 
 up his hat and stick , and in a few moment more be see trudge off to 
 the neighbour town of L - - - - . 

 apparently the poor Italian succeed , for he come back that evening in 
 time to prepare the thin gruel which make his master 's supper , with a 
 suit of black , - a little threadbare , but still highly respectable , - two 
 shirt front , and two white cravat . but out of all this finery , 
 Jackeymo hold the small - clothe in especial veneration ; for as they have 
 cost exactly what the medallion have sell for , so it seem to he that 
 San Giacomo have hear his prayer in that quarter to which he have more 
 exclusively direct the saint 's direction . the other habiliment come 
 to he in the merely human process of sale and barter ; the small - clothe 
 be the personal gratuity of San Giacomo ! 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 Life have be subject to many ingenious comparison ; and if we do 
 not understand it any well , it be not for want of what be call 
 " reasoning by illustration . " amongst other resemblance , there be 
 moment when , to a quiet contemplator , it suggest the image of one of 
 those rotatory entertainment commonly see in fair , and know by the 
 name of " whirligig , " or " roundabout , " in which each participator of 
 the pastime , seat on his hobby , be always apparently in the act of 
 pursue some one before he , while he be pursue by some one behind . 
 Man , and woman too , be naturally animal of chase ; the great still 
 find something to follow , and there be no one too humble not to be an 
 object of prey to another . thus , confine our view to the village of 
 Hazeldean , we behold in this whirligig Dr. Riccabocca spur his hobby 
 after Lenny Fairfield ; and Miss Jemima , on her decorous side - saddle , 
 whip after Dr. Riccabocca . why , with so long and intimate a 
 conviction of the villany of our sex , Miss Jemima should resolve upon 
 give the male animal one more chance of redeem itself in her eye , 
 I leave to the explanation of those gentleman who profess to find 
 " their only book in woman 's look . " perhaps it might be from the 
 over - tenderness and clemency of Miss Jemima 's nature ; perhaps it might 
 be that as yet she have only experience the villany of man bear and 
 rear in these cold northern climate , and in the land of Petrarch and 
 Romeo , of the citron and myrtle , there be reason to expect that 
 the native monster would be more amenable to gentle influence , less 
 obstinately harden in his iniquity . without enter far into 
 these hypothesis , it be sufficient to say that , on Signor Riccabocca 's 
 appearance in the drawing - room at Hazeldean , Miss Jemima feel more than 
 ever rejoice that she have relax in his favour her general hostility 
 to man . in truth , though Frank see something quizzical in the 
 old - fashioned and outlandish cut of the Italian 's sober dress ; in his 
 long hair , and the chapeau bras , over which he bow so gracefully , and 
 then press it , as if to his heart , before tuck it under his arm , 
 after the fashion in which the gizzard repose under the wing of a 
 roasted pullet , - yet it be impossible that even Frank could deny 
 to Riccabocca that praise which be due to the air and manner of an 
 unmistakable gentleman . and certainly as , after dinner , conversation 
 grow more familiar , and the parson and Mrs. Dale , who have be invite 
 to meet their friend , do their good to draw he out , his talk , though 
 sometimes a little too wise for his listener , become eminently animate 
 and agreeable . it be the conversation of a man who , besides the 
 knowledge which be acquire from book and life , have study the art 
 which become a gentleman , - that of please in polite society . 

 the result be that all be charm with he ; and that even Captain 
 Barnabas postpone the whist - table for a full hour after the usual time . 
 the doctor do not play ; he thus become the property of the two lady , 
 Miss Jemima and Mrs. Dale . 

 seat between the two , in the place rightfully appertain to Flimsey , 
 who this time be fairly dislodge , to her great wonder and discontent , 
 the doctor be the emblem of true Domestic Felicity , place between 
 Friendship and Love . 

 friendship , as become she , work quietly at the embroider 
 pocket - handkerchief and leave Love to more animate operation . 

 " you must be very lonely at the Casino , " say love , in a sympathizing 
 tone . 

 " Madam , " reply Riccabocca , gallantly , " I shall think so when I leave 
 you . " 

 friendship cast a sly glance at love ; Love blush , or look down 
 on the carpet , - which come to the same thing . " yet , " begin love 
 again , - " yet solitude to a feeling heart - " 

 Riccabocca think of the note of invitation , and involuntarily button 
 his coat , as if to protect the individual organ thus alarmingly refer 
 to . 

 " solitude to a feeling heart have its charm . it be so hard even for we 
 poor ignorant woman to find a congenial companion - but for you ! " love 
 stop short , as if it have say too much , and smell confusedly at its 
 bouquet . 

 Dr. Riccabocca cautiously lower his spectacle , and dart one glance 
 which , with the rapidity and comprehensiveness of lightning , seem to 
 envelop and take in , as it be , the whole inventory of Miss Jemima 's 
 personal attraction . now Miss Jemima , as I have before observe , have 
 a mild and pensive expression of countenance ; and she would have be 
 positively pretty have the mildness look a little more alert , and the 
 pensiveness somewhat less lackadaisical . in fact , though Miss Jemima be 
 constitutionally mild , she be not de natura pensive ; she have too much 
 of the hazeldean blood in her vein for that sullen and viscid humour 
 call melancholy , and therefore this assumption of pensiveness really 
 spoil her character of feature , which only want to be light up 
 by a cheerful smile to be extremely prepossess . the same remark might 
 apply to the figure , which - thank to the same pensiveness - lose all 
 the undulating grace which movement and animation bestow on the fluent 
 curve of the feminine form . the figure be a good figure , examine in 
 detail , - a little thin , perhaps , but by no mean emaciate , with just 
 and elegant proportion , and naturally light and flexible . but the same 
 unfortunate pensiveness give to the whole a character of inertness and 
 languor ; and when Miss Jemima recline on the sofa , so complete seem 
 the relaxation of nerve and muscle that you would have think she have 
 lose the use of her limb . over her face and form , thus defraud of 
 the charm Providence have bestow on they , Dr. Riccabocca 's eye glance 
 rapidly ; and then move near to Mrs. Dale - " defend I "   he stop 
 a moment , and add   " from the charge of not be able to appreciate 
 congenial companionship . " 

 " oh , I do not say that ! " cry Miss Jemima . 

 " pardon I , " say the Italian , " if I be so dull as to misunderstand 
 you . one may well lose one 's head , at least , in such a neighbourhood as 
 this . " he rise as he speak , and bend over Frank 's shoulder to examine 
 some view of Italy , which Miss Jemima   with what , if wholly unselfish , 
 would have be an attention truly delicate   have extract from the 
 library in order to gratify the guest . 

 " most interesting creature , indeed , " sigh Miss Jemima , " but too - too 
 flattering . " 

 " tell I , " say Mrs. Dale , gravely , " do you think , love , that you could 
 put off the end of the world a little long , or must we make haste in 
 order to be in time ? " 

 " how wicked you be ! " say Miss Jemima , turn aside . some few minute 
 afterwards , Mrs. Dale contrive it so that Dr. Riccabocca and herself 
 be in a farth corner of the room , look at a picture say to be by 
 Wouvermans . 

 MRS . DALE . - " she be very amiable , Jemima , be she not ? " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " exceedingly so . very fine battle - piece ! " 

 MRS . DALE . - " so kind - hearted . " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " all lady be . how naturally that warrior make his 
 desperate cut at the runaway ! " 

 MRS . DALE . - " she be not what be call regularly handsome , but she have 
 something very win . " 

 riccabocca   with a smile . - " so win , that it be strange she be not 
 win . that gray mare in the foreground stand out very boldly ! " 

 MRS . DALE   distrust the smile of Riccabocca , and throw in a more 
 effective grape - charge . - " not win yet ; and it be strange ! she will have 
 a very pretty fortune . " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " ah ! " 

 MRS . DALE . " six thousand pound , I dare say , - certainly four . " 

 riccabocca   suppress a sigh , and with his wonte address . - " if Mrs. 
 Dale be still single , she would never need a friend to say what her 
 portion might be ; but Miss Jemima be so good that I be quite sure it be 
 not Miss Jemima 's fault that she be still - Miss Jemima ! " 

 the foreigner slip away as he speak , and sit himself down beside the 
 whist - player . 

 Mrs. Dale be disappoint , but certainly not offend . " it would be 
 such a good thing for both , " mutter she , almost inaudibly . 

 " Giacomo , " say Riccabocca , as he be undressing that night in the 
 large , comfortable , well - carpet english bedroom , with that great 
 English four - post bed in the recess which seem make to shame folk 
 out of single blessedness , " Giacomo , I have have this evening the offer 
 of probably L6000 , certainly of four thousand . " 

 " Cosa meravigliosa ! " -   " miraculous thing . "   - exclaim Jackeymo , and he 
 cross himself with great fervour . " six thousand pound English ! 
 why , that must be a hundred thousand - blockhead that I be ! - more than 
 L150,000 Milanese ! " and Jackeymo , who be considerably enliven by the 
 squire 's ale , commence a series of gesticulation and caper , in the 
 midst of which he stop and cry , " but not for nothing ? " 

 " nothing ! no ! " 

 " these mercenary English ! the Government want to bribe you ? " 

 " that be not it . " 

 " the priest want you to turn heretic ? " 

 " bad than that ! " say the philosopher . 

 " bad than that ! o padrone ! for shame ! " 

 " do not   be a fool , but pull off my pantaloon - they want I never to wear 
 THESE again ! " 

 " never to wear what ? " exclaim Jackeymo , star outright at his 
 master 's long leg in their linen drawer , - " never to wear - " 

 " the breech , " say Riccabocca , laconically . 

 " the barbarian ! " falter Jackeymo . 

 " my nightcap ! and never to have any comfort in this , " say Riccabocca , 
 draw on the cotton head - gear ; " and never to have any sound sleep 
 in that , " point to the four - post bed ; " and to be a bondsman and 
 a slave , " continue Riccabocca , wax wroth ; " and to be wheedle and 
 purr at , and paw and claw , and scold and fondle , and blind 
 and deafen , and bridle and saddle - bedevil and - married ! " 

 " married ! " say Jackeymo , more dispassionately - " that be very bad , 
 certainly ; but more than a hundred and fifty thousand lira , and perhaps 
 a pretty young lady , and - " 

 " pretty young lady ! " growl Riccabocca , jump into bed and draw 
 the clothe fiercely over he . " put out the candle , and get along with 
 you , - do , you villanous old incendiary ! " 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 it be not many day since the resurrection of those ill - omen stock , 
 and it be evident already , to an ordinary observer , that something 
 wrong have get into the village . the peasant wear a sullen expression of 
 countenance ; when the squire pass , they take off their hat with more 
 than ordinary formality , but they do not return the same broad smile to 
 his quick , hearty " good - day , my man . " the woman peer at he from the 
 threshold or the casement , but do not , as be their will not   as least the 
 will not of the prettiest , take occasion to come out to catch his passing 
 compliment on their own good look , or their tidy cottage . and the 
 child , who use to play after work on the site of the old stock , now 
 shun the place , and , indeed , seem to cease play altogether . 

 on the other hand , no man like to build , or rebuild , a great public 
 work for nothing . now that the squire have resuscitate the stock , and 
 make they so exceedingly handsome , it be natural that he should wish 
 to put somebody into they . moreover , his pride and self - esteem have be 
 wound by the parson 's opposition ; and it would be a justification to 
 his own forethought , and a triumph over the parson 's understanding , 
 if he could satisfactorily and practically establish a proof that the 
 stock have not be repair before they be want . 

 therefore , unconsciously to himself , there be something about the 
 squire more burly and authoritative and menacing than heretofore . Old 
 Gaffer Solomons observe , " that they have well moind well what they 
 be about , for that the squire have a wicked look in the tail of his 
 eye , - just as the dun bull have afore it toss neighbour Barnes 's little 
 boy . " 

 for two or three day these mute sign of something brew in the 
 atmosphere have be rather noticeable than notice , without any positive 
 overt act of tyranny on the one hand or rebellion on the other . but on 
 the very Saturday night in which Dr. Riccabocca be instal in 
 the four - post bed in the chintz chamber , the threaten revolution 
 commence . in the dead of that night personal outrage be commit on 
 the stock . and on the Sunday morning , Mr. Stirn , who be the early 
 riser in the parish , perceive , in go to the farmyard , that the knob 
 of the column that flank the board have be feloniously break off ; 
 that the four hole be bung up with mud ; and that some jacobinical 
 villain have carve , on the very centre of the flourish or scroll - work , 
 " dam the stock ! " Mr. Stirn be much too vigilant a right - hand man , much 
 too zealous a friend of law and order , not to regard such proceeding 
 with horror and alarm . and when the squire come into his dressing - room 
 at half - past seven , his butler   who fulfil also the duty of valet 
 inform he , with a mysterious air , that Mr. Stirn have something " very 
 partikler to communicate about a most howdacious midnight ' spiracy and 
 ' sault . " 

 the squire star , and bade Mr. Stirn be admit . 

 " well ? " cry the squire , suspend the operation of strop his 
 razor . 

 Mr. Stirn groan . 

 " well , man , what now ? " 

 " I never know such a thing in this here parish afore , " begin Mr. 
 Stirn ; " and I can only ' count for it by s'pose that they foreign 
 Papishers have be semminate - " 

 " been what ? " 

 " semminating - " 

 " disseminate , you blockhead , - disseminate what ? " 

 " Damn the stock , " begin Mr. Stirn , plunge right in media re , and by 
 a fine use of one of the noble figure in rhetoric . 

 " Mr. Stirn ! " cry the squire , redden , " do you say , ' damn the 
 stock ' ? - damn my new handsome pair of stock ! " 

 " Lord forbid , sir ; that be what they say : that be what they have digge on 
 it with knife and dagger , and they have stuff mud in its four hole , 
 and break the capital of the elewation . " 

 the squire take the napkin off his shoulder , lay down strop and razor ; 
 he seat himself in his armchair majestically , cross his leg , and , 
 in a voice that affect tranquillity , say , - 

 " compose yourself , Stirn ; you have a deposition to make , touch 
 an assault upon - can I trust my sens ? - upon my new stock . compose 
 yourself ; be calm . now ! what the devil be come to the parish ? " 

 " ah , sir , what indeed ? " reply Mr. Stirn : and then lay the 
 forefinger of the right hand on the palm of the left he narrate the 
 case . 

 " and whom do you suspect ? be calm now ; do not   speak in a passion . you be 
 a witness , sir , - a dispassionate , unprejudiced witness . zound and 
 fury ! this be the most insolent , unprovoked , diabolical - but whom do you 
 suspect , I say ? " Stirn twirl his hat , elevate his eyebrow , jerk 
 his thumb over his shoulder , and whisper , " I hear as how the two 
 Papishers sleep at your honour 's last night . " 

 " what , dolt ! do you suppose Dr. Rickeybockey get out of his warm bed to 
 bung up the hole in my new stock ? " 

 " Noa ; he be too cunning to do it himself , but he may have be 
 semminate . he be mighty thick with Parson Dale , and your honour know 
 as how the parson set his face agin the stock . wait a bit , sir , - do not 
 fly at I yet . there be a boy in this here parish - " 

 " a boy ! ah , fool , now you be near the mark . the parson write ' damn 
 the stock , ' indeed ! what boy do you mean ? " 

 " and that boy be cocker up much by Mr. Dale ; and the Papisher go and 
 sit with he and his mother a whole hour t ' other day ; and that boy be 
 as deep as a well ; and I seed he lurk about the place , and hiding 
 hisself under the tree the day the stock be put up , - and that ' ere boy 
 be Lenny Fairfield . " 

 " whew , " say the squire , whistle , " you have not your usual sens 
 about you to - day , man . Lenny Fairfield , - pattern boy of the village . 
 hold your tongue . I dare say it be not do by any one in the parish , 
 after all : some good - for - nothing vagrant - that cursed tinker , who 
 go about with a very vicious donkey , - a donkey that I catch pick 
 thistle out of the very eye of the old stock ! show how the tinker 
 bring up his donkey ! well , keep a sharp look - out . to - day be Sunday ; 
 bad day of the week , I be sorry and ashamed to say , for row and 
 depredation . between the service , and after evening church , there be 
 always idle fellow from all the neighbour country about , as you know 
 too well . depend on it , the real culprit will be find gather round 
 the stock , and will betray themselves ; have your eye , ear , and wit 
 about you , and I have   no doubt we shall come to the right of the matter 
 before the day 's out . and if we do , " add the squire , " we will make an 
 example of the ruffian ! " 

 " in course , " say Stirn : " and if we do not   find he we must make an 
 example all the same . that be what it be , sir . that be why the stock 
 ben't   respect ; they have not have an example yet , - we want an example . " 

 " on my word I believe that be very true ; and we will clap in the first idle 
 fellow you catch in anything wrong , and keep he there for two hour at 
 least . " 

 " with the big pleasure , your honour , - that be what it be . " 

 and Mr. Stirn have now get what he consider a complete and 
 unconditional authority over all the leg and wrist of Hazeldean 
 parish , quoad the stock , take his departure . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 " randal , " say Mrs. Leslie on this memorable Sunday , - " Randal , do you 
 think of go to Mr. Hazeldean 's ? " 

 " yes , ma'am , " answer Randal . " Mr. Egerton do not object to it ; and 
 as I do not return to Eton , I may have no other opportunity of see 
 Frank for some time . I ought not to fail in respect to Mr. Egerton 's 
 natural heir . " 

 " gracious I ! " cry Mrs. Leslie , who , like many woman of her cast and 
 kind , have a sort of worldliness in her notion , which she never evince 
 in her conduct , - " gracious I ! natural heir to the old Leslie property ! " 

 " he be Mr. Egerton 's nephew , and , " add Randal , ingenuously let out 
 his thought , " I be no relation to Mr. Egerton at all . " 

 " but , " say poor Mrs. Leslie , with tear in her eye , " it would be a 
 shame in the man , after pay your schooling and send you to Oxford , 
 and have you to stay with he in the holiday , if he do not mean 
 anything by it . " 

 " Anything , Mother , yes , - but not the thing you suppose . no matter . it 
 be enough that he have arm I for life , and I shall use the weapon as 
 seem to I well . " 

 here the dialogue be suspend by the entrance of the other member of 
 the family , dress for church . 

 " it can not   be time for church ! no , it can not , " exclaim Mrs. Leslie . she 
 be never in time for anything , 

 " last bell ring , " say Mr. Leslie , who , though a slow man , be 
 methodical and punctual . Mrs. Leslie make a frantic rush at the door , 
 the Montfydget blood be now in a blaze , dash up the stair , burst 
 into her room , tear her good bonnet from the peg , snatch her new 
 shawl from the drawer , crush the bonnet on her head , fling the shawl 
 on her shoulder , thrust a desperate pin into its fold , in order to 
 conceal a buttonless yawn in the body of her gown , and then fly back 
 like a whirlwind . meanwhile the family be already out of door , in 
 wait ; and just as the bell cease , the procession move from the 
 shabby house to the dilapidated church . 

 the church be a large one , but the congregation be small , and so be 
 the income of the parson . it be a lay rectory , and the great tithe 
 have belong to the Leslies , but they have be long since sell . the 
 vicarage , still in their gift , might be worth a little more than L100 a 
 year . the present incumbent have nothing else to live upon . he be a good 
 man , and not originally a stupid one ; but penury and the anxious 
 care for wife and family , combine with what may be call solitary 
 confinement for the cultivate mind , when , amidst the two - legged 
 creature round , it see no other cultivate mind with which it can 
 exchange one extra - parochial thought , have lull he into a lazy 
 mournfulness , which at time be very like imbecility . his income 
 allow he to do no good to the parish , whether in work , trade , or 
 charity ; and thus he have no moral weight with the parishioner beyond 
 the example of his sinless life , and such negative effect as might be 
 produce by his slumberous exhortation . therefore his parishioner 
 trouble he very little ; and but for the influence which , in hour 
 of Montfydget activity , Mrs. Leslie exercise over the most 
 tractable , - that is , the child and the aged , - not half - a - dozen 
 person would have know or care whether he shut up his church or not . 

 but our family be seat in state in their old seignorial pew , and Mr. 
 Dumdrum , with a nasal twang , go lugubriously through the prayer ; and 
 the old people who could sin no more , and the child who have not yet 
 learn to sin , croak forth response that might have come from the 
 choral frog in Aristophanes ; and there be a long sermon a propos to 
 nothing which could possibly interest the congregation , - be , in fact , 
 some controversial homily which Mr. Dumdrum have compose and preach 
 year before . and when this discourse be over , there be a loud 
 universal grunt , as if of relief and thanksgiving , and a great clatter 
 of shoe , and the old hobbled , and the young scramble , to the church 
 door . 

 immediately after church , the Leslie family din ; and as soon as dinner 
 be over , Randal set out on his foot journey to Hazeldean Hall . 

 delicate and even feeble though his frame , he have the energy and 
 quickness of movement which belong to nervous temperament ; and he 
 task the slow stride of a peasant , whom he take to serve he as 
 a guide for the first two or three mile . though Randal have not the 
 gracious open manner with the poor which Frank inherit from his 
 father , he be still   despite many a secret hypocritical vice at war 
 with the character of a gentleman   gentleman enough to have no churlish 
 pride to his inferior . he talk little , but he suffer his guide to 
 talk ; and the boor , who be the same whom Frank have accost , indulge 
 in eulogistic comment on that young gentleman 's pony , from which he 
 diverge into some compliment on the young gentleman himself . randal 
 draw his hat over his brow . there be a wonderful tact and fine breeding 
 in your agricultural peasant ; and though Tom Stowell be but a brutish 
 speciman of the class , he suddenly perceive that he be give pain . 
 he pause , scratch his head , and , glance affectionately towards his 
 companion , exclaim , - 

 " but I shall live to see you on a handsomer beastis than that little 
 pony , Master Randal ; and sure I ought , for you be as good a gentleman as 
 any in the land . " 

 " thank you , " say randal . " but I like walk well than rid , - I be 
 more used to it . " 

 " well , and you walk bra'ly , - there ben't   a well walker in the county . 
 and very pleasant it be walk ; and ' t be a pretty country afore you , 
 all the way to the Hall . " 

 randal strode on , as if impatient of these attempt to flatter or to 
 soothe ; and come at length into a broad lane , say , " I think I can 
 find my way now . many thank to you , Tom ; " and he force a shilling into 
 Tom 's horny palm . the man take it reluctantly , and a tear start to 
 his eye . he feel more grateful for that shilling than he have for Frank 's 
 liberal half - crown ; and he think of the poor fallen family , and forget 
 his own dire wrestle with the wolf at his door . 

 he stay linger in the lane till the figure of Randal be out of 
 sight , and then return slowly . Young Leslie continue to walk on at 
 a quick pace . with all his intellectual culture and his restless 
 aspiration , his breast afford he no thought so generous , no 
 sentiment so poetic , as those with which the unlettered clown creep 
 slouchingly homeward . 

 as Randal gain a point where several lane meet on a broad piece of 
 waste land , he begin to feel tired , and his step slacken . just then 
 a gig emerge from one of these byroad , and take the same direction as 
 the pedestrian . the road be rough and hilly , and the driver proceed 
 at a foot 's pace ; so that the gig and the pedestrian go pretty well 
 abreast . 

 " you seem tired , sir , " say the driver , a stout young farmer of the 
 high class of tenant , and he look down compassionately on the boy 's 
 pale countenance and weary stride . " perhaps we be go the same way , 
 and I can give you a lift ? " 

 it be Randal 's habitual policy to make use of every advantage proffer 
 to he , and he accept the proposal frankly enough to please the honest 
 farmer . 

 " a nice day , sir , " say the latter , as Randal sit by his side . " have you 
 come far ? " 

 " from Rood Hall . " 

 " oh , you be young squire Leslie , " say the farmer , more respectfully , 
 and lift his hat . 

 " yes , my name be Leslie . you know Rood , then ? " 

 " I be bring up on your father 's land , sir . you may have hear of 
 Farmer Bruce ? " 

 RANDAL . - " I remember , when I be a little boy , a Mr. Bruce who rent , I 
 believe , the good part of our land , and who use to bring we cake when 
 he call to see my father . he be a relation of your ? " 

 FARMER BRUCE . - " he be my uncle . he be dead now , poor man . " 

 RANDAL.-"Dead ! I be grieve to hear it . he be very kind to us child . 
 but it be long since he leave my father 's farm . " 

 FARMER BRUCE   apologetically . - " I be sure he be very sorry to go . but , 
 you see , he have an unexpected legacy - " 

 RANDAL . - " and retire from business ? " 

 FARMER BRUCE . - " no . but , have capital , he could afford to pay a good 
 rent for a real good farm . " 

 RANDAL   bitterly . - " all capital seem to fly from the land of Rood . 
 and whose farm do he take ? " 

 FARMER BRUCE . - " he take Hawleigh , under Squire Hazeldean . I rent it now . 
 we have   lay out a power o ' money on it . but I do not   complain . it pay 
 well . " 

 RANDAL . - " would the money have pay as well sink on my father 's land ? " 

 FARMER BRUCE . - " perhaps it might , in the long run . but then , sir , we 
 want new premise , - barn and cattleshed , and a deal more , - which 
 the landlord should do ; but it be not every landlord as can afford that . 
 Squire Hazeldean 's a rich man . " 

 RANDAL . - " ay ! " 

 the road now become pretty good , and the farmer put his horse into a 
 brisk trot . 

 " but which way be you go , sir ? I do not   care for a few mile more or 
 less , if I can be of service . " 

 " I be go to Hazeldean , " say Randal , rouse himself from a revery . 
 " do not   let I take you out of your way . " 

 " O , Hawleigh Farm be on the other side of the village , so it be quite my 
 way , sir . " 

 the farmer , then , who be really a smart young fellow , - one of that race 
 which the application of capital to land have produce , and which , 
 in point of education and refinement , be at least on a par with the 
 squire of a former generation , - begin to talk about his handsome horse , 
 about horse in general , about hunt and coursing : he handle all 
 these subject with spirit , yet with modesty . Randal pull his hat 
 still low down over his brow , and do not interrupt he till they 
 pass the Casino , when , strike by the classic air of the place , and 
 catch a scent from the orange - tree , the boy ask abruptly , " whose 
 house be that ? " 

 " oh , it belong to Squire Hazeldean , but it be let or lend to a foreign 
 mounseer . they say he be quite the gentleman , but uncommonly poor . " 

 " poor , " say Randal , turn back to gaze on the trim garden , the neat 
 terrace , the pretty belvidere , and   the door of the house be open 
 catch a glimpse of the paint hall within , - " poor ? the place seem 
 well keep . what do you call poor , Mr. Bruce ? " 

 the farmer laugh . " well , that be a home question , sir . but I believe 
 the mounseer be as poor as a man can be who make no debt and do not 
 actually starve . " 

 " as poor as my father ? " ask Randal , openly and abruptly . 

 " Lord , sir ! your father be a very rich man compare to he . " randal 
 continue to gaze , and his mind 's eye conjure up the contrast of his 
 slovenly shabby home , with all its neglect appurtenance . no trim 
 garden at Rood Hall , no scent from odorous orange blossom . here poverty 
 at least be elegant , - there , how squalid ! he do not comprehend at 
 how cheap a rate the luxury of the beautiful can be effect . they now 
 approach the extremity of the squire 's park pale ; and Randal , see 
 a little gate , bid the farmer stop his gig , and descend . the boy 
 plunge amidst the thick oak grove ; the farmer go his way blithely , 
 and his mellow merry whistle come to Randal 's moody ear as he glide 
 quick under the shadow of the tree . 

 he arrive at the Hall to find that all the family be at church ; and , 
 accord to the patriarchal custom , the churchgoe family embrace 
 nearly all the servant . it be therefore an old invalid housemaid who 
 open the door to he . she be rather deaf , and seem so stupid 
 that Randal do not ask leave to enter and wait for Frank 's return . he 
 therefore say briefly that he would just stroll on the lawn , and call 
 again when church be over . 

 the old woman star , and strove to hear he ; meanwhile Randal turn 
 round abruptly , and saunter towards the garden side of the handsome 
 old house . 

 there be enough to attract any eye in the smooth greensward of the 
 spacious lawn , in the numerous parterre of variegate flower , in the 
 venerable grandeur of the two mighty cedar , which throw their still 
 shadow over the grass , and in the picturesque building , with its 
 project mullion and heavy gable ; yet I fear that it be with no 
 poet 's nor painter 's eye that this young old man gaze on the scene 
 before he . 

 he behold the evidence of wealth - and the envy of wealth jaundice his 
 soul . 

 fold his arm on his breast , he stand a while , look all around 
 he , with closed lip and lower brow ; then he walk slowly on , his 
 eye fix on the ground , and mutter to himself , - 

 " the heir to this property be little well than a dunce ; and they tell 
 I I have talent and learning , and I have take to my heart the maxim , 
 ' Knowledge be power . ' and yet , with all my struggle , will knowledge 
 ever place I on the same level as that on which this dunce be bear ? I 
 do not   wonder that the poor should hate the rich . but of all the poor , 
 who should hate the rich like the pauper gentleman ? I suppose Audley 
 Egerton mean I to come into parliament , and be a Tory like himself ? 
 what ! keep thing as they be ! no ; for I not even Democracy , unless 
 there first come Revolution . I understand the cry of a Marat , - ' More 
 blood ! ' Marat have live as a poor man , and cultivate science - in the 
 sight of a prince 's palace . " 

 he turn sharply round , and glare vindictively on the poor old Hall , 
 which , though a very comfortable habitation , be certainly no palace ; 
 and , with his arm still fold on his breast , he walk backward , as if 
 not to lose the view , nor the chain of idea it conjure up . 

 " but , " he continue to soliloquize , - " but of revolution there be no 
 chance . yet the same wit and will that would thrive in revolution 
 should thrive in this commonplace life . Knowledge be power . well , then , 
 shall I have no power to oust this blockhead ? oust he - what from ? his 
 father 's hall ? well , but if he be dead , who would be the heir of 
 Hazeldean ? have I not hear my mother say that I be as near in blood to 
 this squire as any one , if he have no child ? oh , but the boy 's life be 
 worth ten of mine ! oust he from what ? at least from the thought of his 
 Uncle Egerton , - an uncle who have never even see he ! that , at least , 
 be more feasible . ' make my way in life , ' sayest thou , Audley Egerton ? 
 ay , - and to the fortune thou hast rob from my ancestor . Simulation ! 
 simulation ! Lord Bacon allow simulation . Lord Bacon practise it , 
 and - " 

 here the soliloquy come to a sudden end ; for as , rapt in his thought , 
 the boy have continue to walk backwards , he have come to the verge where 
 the lawn slide off into the ditch of the ha - ha ; and just as he be 
 fortify himself by the precept and practice of my Lord Bacon , the 
 ground go from under he , and - slap into the ditch go Randal Leslie ! 

 it so happen that the squire , whose active genius be always at some 
 repair or improvement , have be but a few day before widen and 
 slop off the ditch just in that part , so that the earth be fresh 
 and damp , and not yet either turf or flatten down . thus when randal , 
 recover his first surprise and shock , rise to his foot , he find his 
 clothe cover with mud ; while the rudeness of the fall be evince by 
 the fantastic and extraordinary appearance of his hat , which , hollow 
 here , bulge there , and crush out of all recognition generally , 
 be as little like the hat of a decorous , hard - read young 
 gentleman - protege of the dignified Mr. Audley Egerton - as any hat 
 pick out of a kennel after some drunken brawl possibly could be . 

 Randal be dizzy and stunned and bruise , and it be some moment before 
 he take heed of his raiment . when he do so his spleen be greatly 
 aggravate . he be still boy enough not to like the idea of present 
 himself to the unknown squire and the dandy Frank in such a trim : he 
 resolve incontinently to regain the lane and return home , without 
 accomplish the object of his journey ; and see the footpath right 
 before he , which lead to a gate that he conceive would admit he into 
 the highway soon than the path by which he have come , he take it at 
 once . 

 it be surprising how little we human creature hee the warning of our 
 good genius . I have no doubt that some benignant power have precipitate 
 randal Leslie into the ditch , as a significant hint of the fate of all 
 who choose what be , nowadays ; by no mean an uncommon step in the march 
 of intellect , - namely , the walking backwards , in order to gratify a 
 vindictive view of one 's neighbour 's property ! I suspect that , before 
 this century be out , many a fine fellow will thus have find his ha - ha , 
 and scramble out of the ditch with a much shabby coat than he have 
 on when he fall into it . but Randal do not thank his good genius for 
 give he a premonitory tumble , - and I never yet know a man who do ! 




 CHAPTER , XI . 

 the squire be greatly ruffle at breakfast that morning . he be too 
 much of an Englishman to bear insult patiently , and he consider that 
 he have be personally insult in the outrage offer to his recent 
 donation to the parish . his feeling , too , be hurt as well as his 
 pride . there be something so ungrateful in the whole thing , just 
 after he have take so much pain , not only in the resuscitation but the 
 embellishment of the stock . it be not , however , so rare an occurrence 
 for the squire to be ruffle as to create any remark . Riccabocca , 
 indeed , as a stranger , and Mrs. Hazeldean , as a wife , have the quick tact 
 to perceive that the host be glum and the husband snappish ; but the 
 one be too discreet , and the other too sensible , to chafe the new sore , 
 whatever it might be , and shortly after breakfast the squire retire 
 into his study , and absent himself from morning service . in his 
 delightful " life of Oliver Goldsmith , " Mr. Forster take care to 
 touch our heart by introduce his hero 's excuse for not enter 
 the priesthood . " he do not feel himself good enough . " Thy Vicar of 
 Wakefield , poor Goldsmith , be an excellent substitute for thee ; and 
 Dr. Primrose , at least , will be good enough for the world until Miss 
 Jemima 's fear be realize . now , Squire Hazeldean have a tenderness 
 of conscience much less reasonable than Goldsmith 's . there be 
 occasionally day in which he do not feel good enough - I do not   say for 
 a priest , but even for one of the congregation , - " day in which , " say 
 the squire in his own blunt way , " as I have never in my life meet a bad 
 devil than a devil of a temper , I will not carry mine into the family 
 pew . he sha'n't   be growl out hypocritical response from my poor 
 grandmother 's prayer - book . " so the squire and his demon stay at home . 
 but the demon be generally cast out before the day be over : and on 
 this occasion , when the bell ring for afternoon service , it may be 
 presume that the squire have reason or fret himself into a proper 
 state of mind ; for he be then see sallye forth from the porch of his 
 hall , arm - in - arm with his wife , and at the head of his household . the 
 second service be   as be commonly the case in rural district   more 
 numerously attend than the first one ; and it be our parson 's will not to 
 devote to this service his most effective discourse . 

 Parson Dale , though a very fair scholar , have neither the deep theology 
 nor the archaeological learning that distinguish the rise generation 
 of the clergy . I much doubt if he could have pass what would now be 
 call a creditable examination in the Fathers ; and as for all the nice 
 formality in the rubric , he would never have be the man to divide a 
 congregation or puzzle a bishop . neither be Parson Dale very erudite 
 in ecclesiastical architecture . he do not much care whether all the 
 detail in the church be purely Gothic or not ; crocket and finial , 
 round arch and pointed arch , be matter , I fear , on which he have never 
 trouble his head . 

 but one secret Parson Dale do possess , which be perhaps of equal 
 importance with those subtler mystery , - he know how to fill his 
 church ! even at morning service no pew be empty , and at evening 
 service the church overflow . 

 Parson Dale , too , may be consider nowadays to hold but a mean idea 
 of the spiritual authority of the Church . he have never be know 
 to dispute on its exact bearing with the State , - whether it be 
 incorporate with the State or above the State , whether it be 
 antecedent to the Papacy or form from the Papacy , etc . accord to 
 his favourite maxim , " Quieta non movere , " -   " not to disturb thing that 
 be quiet . "   - I have no doubt that he would have think that the less 
 discussion be provoke upon such matter the well for both Church and 
 laity . nor have he ever be know to regret the disuse of the ancient 
 custom of excommunication , nor any other diminution of the power of the 
 priesthood , whether minatory or militant ; yet for all this , Parson 
 Dale have a great notion of the sacred privilege of a minister of the 
 gospel , - to advise , to deter , to persuade , to reprove . and it be for 
 the evening service that he prepare those sermon which may be call 
 ' sermon that preach at you . " he prefer the evening for that salutary 
 discipline , not only because the congregation be more numerous , but 
 also because , be a shrewd man in his own innocent way , he know that 
 people bear well to be preach at after dinner than before ; that you 
 arrive more insinuatingly at the heart when the stomach be at peace . 
 there be a genial kindness in Parson Dale 's way of preach at you . 
 it be do in so imperceptible , fatherly , a manner that you never feel 
 offend . he do it , too , with so much art that nobody but your own 
 guilty self know that you be the sinner he be exhort . yet he do 
 not spare rich nor poor : he preach at the squire , and that great 
 fat farmer , Mr. Bullock , the churchwarden , as boldly as at Hodge the 
 ploughman and Scrub the hedger . as for Mr. Stirn , he have preach at he 
 more often than at any one in the parish ; but Stirn , though he have the 
 sense to know it , never have the grace to reform . there be , too , in 
 Parson Dale 's sermon something of that boldness of illustration which 
 would have be scholarly if he have not make it familiar , and which 
 be find in the discourse of our eld divine . like they , he do not 
 scruple now and then to introduce an anecdote from history , or borrow 
 an allusion from some non - scriptural author , in order to enliven the 
 attention of his audience , or render an argument more plain . and the 
 good man have an object in this , a little distinct from , though wholly 
 subordinate to , the main purpose of his discourse . he be a friend to 
 knowledge , - but to knowledge accompany by religion ; and sometimes 
 his reference to source not within the ordinary reading of his 
 congregation would spirit up some farmer 's son , with an evening 's 
 leisure on his hand , to ask the parson for further explanation , and so 
 to be lure on to a little solid or graceful instruction , under a safe 
 guide . 

 now , on the present occasion , the parson , who have always his eye and 
 heart on his flock , and who have see with great grief the realization of 
 his fear at the revival of the stock ; see that a spirit of discontent 
 be already at work amongst the peasant , and that magisterial and 
 inquisitorial design be darken the natural benevolence of the 
 squire , - see , in short , the sign of a breach between class , and the 
 precursor of the ever inflammable feud between the rich and the poor , 
 meditate nothing less than a great Political Sermon , - a sermon that 
 should extract from the root of social truth a heal virtue for 
 the wound that lie sore , but latent , in the breast of his parish of 
 Hazeldean . 

 and thus run - 

 the POLITICAL SERMON of parson DALE . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

  for every man shall bear his own burden . - Gal . vi . 5 . 

 " BRETHREN ! every man have his burden . if God design our life to end at 
 the grave , may we not believe that he would have free an existence so 
 brief from the care and sorrow to which , since the beginning of the 
 world , mankind have be subject ? suppose that I be a kind father , and 
 have a child whom I dearly love , but I know by a divine revelation 
 that he will die at the age of eight year , surely I should not vex his 
 infancy by needless preparation for the duty of life ? if I be a rich 
 man , I should not send he from the caress of his mother to the stern 
 discipline of school . if I be a poor man , I should not take he with I 
 to hedge and dig , to scorch in the sun , to freeze in the winter 's cold : 
 why inflict hardship on his childhood for the purpose of fit he 
 for manhood , when I know that he be doom not to grow into man ? but 
 if , on the other hand , I believe my child be reserve for a more durable 
 existence , then should I not , out of the very love I bear to he , 
 prepare his childhood for the struggle of life , accord to that 
 station in which he be bear , give many a toil , many a pain , to the 
 infant , in order to rear and strengthen he for his duty as man ? so it 
 be with our Father that be in heaven . view this life as our infancy 
 and the next as our spiritual maturity , where ' in the age to come he 
 may show the exceed rich of his grace , ' it be in his tenderness , 
 as in his wisdom ; to permit the toil and the pain which , in task 
 the power and develop the virtue of the soul , prepare it for ' the 
 earnest of our inheritance . ' hence it be that every man have his burden . 
 Brethren , if you believe that God be good , yea , but as tender as a human 
 father , you will know that your trouble in life be a proof that you 
 be rear for an eternity . but each man think his own burden the 
 hard to bear : the poor - man groan under his poverty , the rich man 
 under the care that multiply with wealth . for so far from wealth 
 free we from trouble , all the wise man who have write in all age 
 have repeat , with one voice , the word of the wise , ' when good 
 increase , they be increase that eat they : and what good be there to 
 the owner thereof , save the beholding of they with their eye ? ' and 
 this be literally true , my brother : for , let a man be as rich as be 
 the great King Solomon himself , unless he lock up all his gold in a 
 chest , it must go abroad to be divide amongst other ; yea , though , 
 like Solomon , he make he great work , - though he build house and plant 
 vineyard , and make he garden and orchard , - still the gold that he 
 spend feed but the mouth he employ ; and Solomon himself could not 
 eat with a well relish than the poor mason who build the house , 
 or the humblest labourer who plant the vineyard . therefore ' when good 
 increase , they be increase that eat they . ' and this , my brother , may 
 teach we toleration and compassion for the rich . we share their rich , 
 whether they will or not ; we do not share their care . the profane 
 history of our own country tell we that a princess , destine to be 
 the great queen that ever sit on this throne , envy the milk - maid 
 singing ; and a profane poet , whose wisdom be only less than that of the 
 inspire writer , represent the man who , by force - and wit , have rise 
 to be a king sigh for the sleep vouchsafe to the mean of his 
 subject , - all bear out the word of the son of David , ' the sleep 
 of the labour man be sweet , whether he eat little or much ; but the 
 abundance of the rich will not suffer he to sleep . ' 

 " amongst my brother now present there be , doubtless , some one who have 
 be poor , and by honest industry have make himself comparatively rich . 
 let his heart answer I while I speak : be not the chief care that now 
 disturb he to be find in the good he hath acquire ? have he not both 
 vexation to his spirit and trial to his virtue , which he know not when 
 he go forth to his labour , and take no heed of the morrow ? but it be 
 right , my brother , that to every station there should be its care , 
 to every man his burden ; for if the poor do not sometimes so far feel 
 poverty to be a burden as to desire to better their condition , and 
  to use the language of the world   ' seek to rise in life , ' their most 
 valuable energy would never be arouse ; and we should not witness 
 that spectacle , which be so common in the land we live in , - namely , the 
 successful struggle of manly labour against adverse fortune , - a struggle 
 in which the triumph of one give hope to thousand . it be say that 
 necessity be the mother of invention ; and the social blessing which be 
 now as common to we as air and sunshine have come from that law of our 
 nature which make we aspire towards indefinite improvement , enrich 
 each successive generation by the labour of the last , and in free 
 country often lift the child of the labourer to a place amongst 
 the ruler of the land . Nay , if necessity be the mother of invention , 
 poverty be the creator of the art . if there have be no poverty , and no 
 sense of poverty , where would have be that which we call the wealth of 
 a country ? subtract from civilization all that have be produce by 
 the poor , and what remain ? - the state of the savage . where you now see 
 labourer and prince , you would see equality indeed , - the equality of 
 wild man . no ; not even equality there ! for there brute force become 
 lordship , and woe to the weak ! where you now see some in frieze , some in 
 purple , you would see nakedness in all . where stand the palace and 
 the cot , you would behold but mud hut and cave . as far as the peasant 
 excel the king among savage , so far do the society exalt and 
 enrich by the struggle of labour excel the state in which poverty 
 feel no disparity , and Toil sigh for no ease . on the other hand , if 
 the rich be perfectly content with their wealth , their heart 
 would become harden in the sensual enjoyment it procure . it be that 
 feeling , by Divine Wisdom implant in the soul , that there be vanity 
 and vexation of spirit in the thing of Mammon , which still leave the 
 rich man sensitive to the instinct of Heaven , and teach he to seek 
 for happiness in those beneficent virtue which distribute his wealth to 
 the profit of other . if you could exclude the air from the ray of the 
 fire , the fire itself would soon languish and die in the midst of its 
 fuel ; and so a man 's joy in his wealth be keep alive by the air which it 
 warm ; and if pen within itself , be extinguish . 

 " and this , my brother , lead I to another view of the vast subject 
 open to we by the word of the apostle , ' every man shall bear his 
 own burden . ' the worldly condition of life be unequal . why be they 
 unequal ? o my brother , do you not perceive ? think you that , if it have 
 be well for our spiritual probation that there should be neither 
 great nor lowly , rich nor poor , Providence would not so have order 
 the dispensation of the world , and so , by its mysterious but merciful 
 agency , have influence the framework and foundation of society ? but 
 if from the remotest period of human annal , and in all the numberless 
 experiment of government which the wit of man have devise , still this 
 inequality be ever find to exist , may we not suspect that there be 
 something in the very principle of our nature to which that inequality 
 be necessary and essential ? ask why this inequality ? why ? - as well ask 
 why life be the sphere of duty and the nursery of virtue ! for if all 
 man be equal , if there be no suffering and no ease , no poverty and 
 no wealth , would you not sweep with one blow the half , at least , of 
 human virtue from the world ? if there be no penury and no pain , what 
 would become of fortitude ; what of patience ; what of resignation ? if 
 there be no greatness and no wealth , what would become of benevolence , 
 of charity , of the bless human pity , of temperance in the midst of 
 luxury , of justice in the exercise of power ? carry the question far ; 
 grant all condition the same , - no reverse , no rise , and no fall , 
 nothing to hope for , nothing to fear , - what a moral death you would at 
 once inflict upon all the energy of the soul , and what a link between 
 the Heart of Man and the Providence of God would be snap asunder ! 
 if we could annihilate evil , we should annihilate hope ; and hope , my 
 brother , be the avenue to faith . if there be ' a time to weep and a time 
 to laugh , ' it be that he who mourn may turn to eternity for comfort , 
 and he who rejoice may bless God for the happy hour . ah , my brother , 
 be it possible to annihilate the inequality of human life , it would 
 be the banishment of our worthy virtue , the torpor of our spiritual 
 nature , the palsy of our mental faculty . the moral world , like the 
 world without we , derive its health and its beauty from diversity and 
 contrast . 

 " ' every man shall bear his own burden . ' true ; but now turn to an early 
 verse in the same chapter , - ' Bear ye one another 's burden , and so 
 fulfil the law of Christ . ' yes , while Heaven ordain to each his 
 peculiar suffering , it connect the family of man into one household , by 
 that feel which , more perhaps than any other , distinguish we from 
 the brute creation , - I mean the feeling to which we give the name of 
 sympathy , - the feeling for each other ! the herd of deer shun the stag 
 that be mark by the gunner ; the flock heedeth not the sheep that 
 creep into the shade to die ; but man have sorrow and joy not in himself 
 alone , but in the joy and sorrow of those around he . he who feel only 
 for himself abjure his very nature as man ; for do we not say of one who 
 have no tenderness for mankind that he be inhuman ; and do we not call he 
 who sorrow with the sorrowful humane ? 

 " now , brother , that which especially mark the divine mission of our 
 Lord be the direct appeal to this sympathy which distinguish we from 
 the brute . he seize , not upon some faculty of genius give but to few , 
 but upon that ready impulse of heart which be give to we all ; and in 
 say , ' love one another , ' ' Bear ye one another 's burden , ' he elevate 
 the most delightful of our emotion into the most sacred of his law . 
 the lawyer ask our Lord , ' who be my neighbour ? ' our Lord reply by the 
 parable of the good Samaritan . the priest and the Levite see the wound 
 man that fall among the thief and pass by on the other side . that 
 priest might have be austere in his doctrine , that Levite might have 
 be learn in the law ; but neither to the learning of the Levite nor 
 to the doctrine of the priest do our saviour even deign to allude . he 
 cite but the action of the Samaritan , and saith to the lawyer , ' which 
 now of these three , think thou , be neighbour unto he that fall 
 among the thief ? and he say , he that show mercy unto he . then say 
 Jesus unto he , go , and do thou likewise . ' 

 " o shallowness of human judgment ! it be enough to be bear a Samaritan 
 in order to be reject by the priest , and despise by the Levite . yet 
 now , what to we the priest and the Levite , of God 's choose race though 
 they be ? they pass from the heart of man when they pass the 
 sufferer by the wayside ; while this loathe Samaritan , half thrust from 
 the pale of the Hebrew , become of our family , of our kindre ; a brother 
 amongst the brotherhood of Love , so long as Mercy and Affliction shall 
 meet in the common thoroughfare of life ! 

 " ' Bear ye one another 's burden and so fulfil the law of Christ . ' think 
 not , o my brother , that this apply only to almsgiving , to that relief 
 of distress which be commonly call charity , to the obvious duty of 
 devote from our superfluity something that we scarcely miss to the 
 want of a starve brother . no . I appeal to the poor amongst ye , 
 if the bad burden be those of the body , - if the kind word and the 
 tender thought have not often lighten your heart more than bread 
 bestow with a grudge , and charity that humble you by a frown . 
 Sympathy be a beneficence at the command of we all , - yea , of the 
 pauper as of the king ; and sympathy be Christ 's wealth . Sympathy be 
 brotherhood . the rich be tell to have charity for the poor , and the 
 poor be enjoin to respect their superior . good : I say not to the 
 contrary . but I say also to the poor , ' in your turn have charity for the 
 rich ; ' and I say to the rich , ' in your turn respect the poor . ' 

 " ' Bear ye one another 's burden , and so fulfil the law of Christ . ' 
 Thou , o poor man , envy not nor grudge thy brother his large portion 
 of worldly good . believe that he hath his sorrow and cross like 
 thyself , and perhaps , as more delicately nurture , he feel they more ; 
 nay , hath he not temptation so great that our Lord hath exclaim , ' how 
 hardly shall they that have rich enter into the kingdom of heaven ' ? 
 and what be temptation but trial ; what be trial but peril and 
 sorrow ? think not that you can bestow no charity on the rich man , even 
 while you take your sustenance from his hand . a heathen writer , 
 often cite by the early preacher of the gospel , hath truly say , 
 ' wherever there be room for a man there be place for a benefit . ' 

 " and I ask any rich brother amongst you , when he hath go forth 
 to survey his barn and his granary , his garden and orchard , if 
 suddenly in the vain pride of his heart , he see the scowl on the brow 
 of the labourer , - if he deem himself hat in the midst of his wealth , 
 if he feel that his least fault be treasure up against he with 
 the hardness of malice , and his plainest benefit receive with the 
 ingratitude of envy , - I ask , I say , any rich man , whether straightway 
 all pleasure in his worldly possession do not fade from his heart , 
 and whether he do not feel what a wealth of gladness it be in the 
 power of the poor man to bestow ! for all these thing of Mammon pass 
 away ; but there be in the smile of he whom we have serve a something 
 that we may take with we into heaven . if , then , ye bear one another 's 
 burden , they who be poor will have mercy on the error and compassion 
 for the grief of the rich . to all man it be say - yes , to Lazarus as 
 to Dives - ' Judge not , that ye be not judge . ' but think not , o rich man , 
 that we preach only to the poor . if it be their duty not to grudge thee 
 thy substance , it be thine to do all that may sweeten their labour . 
 remember that when our Lord say , ' how hardly shall they that have 
 rich enter into the kingdom of heaven , ' he reply also to they who 
 ask , ' who then can be save ? ' ' the thing which be impossible with 
 man be possible with God , ' that is , man leave to his own temptation 
 would fail ; but , strengthen by God , he shall be save . if thy rich 
 be the test of thy trial , so may they also be the instrument of thy 
 virtue . prove by thy rich that thou art compassionate and tender , 
 temperate and benign , and thy rich themselves may become the evidence 
 at once of thy faith and of thy work . 

 " we have constantly on our lip the simple precept , ' do unto other as 
 you would be do by . ' why do we fail so often in the practice ? because 
 we neglect to cultivate that sympathy which nature implant as an 
 instinct , and the Saviour exalt as a command . if thou wouldst do unto 
 thy neighbour as thou wouldst be do by , ponder well how thy neighbour 
 will regard the action thou art about to do to he . put thyself into his 
 place . if thou art strong and he be weak , descend from thy strength and 
 enter into his weakness ; lie aside thy burden for the while , and buckle 
 on his own ; let thy sight see as through his eye , thy heart beat as 
 in his bosom . do this , and thou wilt often confess that what have seem 
 just to thy power will seem harsh to his weakness . for ' as a zealous man 
 hath not do his duty when he call his brother drunkard and beast , ' 
 even so an administrator of the law mistake his object if he write 
 on the grand column of society only warning that irritate the bold and 
 terrify the timid ; and a man will be no more in love with law than with 
 virtue , ' if he be force to it with rudeness and incivility . ' if , 
 then , ye would bear the burden of the lowly , o ye great , feel not only 
 for they , but with ! watch that your pride do not chafe they , your 
 power do not wantonly gall . your worldly inferior be of the class 
 from which the Apostles be choose , amidst which the Lord of Creation 
 descend from a throne above the seraph . " 

 the parson here pause a moment , and his eye glance towards the pew 
 near the pulpit , where sit the magnate of Hazeldean . the squire be 
 lean his chin thoughtfully on his hand , his brow incline downward , 
 and the natural glow of his complexion much heighten . 

 " but , " resume the parson , softly , without turn to his book , and 
 rather as if prompt by the suggestion of the moment - " but he who have 
 cultivate sympathy commit not these error , or , if commit they , 
 hasten to retract . so natural be sympathy to the good man that he 
 obey it mechanically when he suffer his heart to be the monitor of his 
 conscience . in this sympathy , behold the bond between rich and poor ! by 
 this sympathy , whatever our vary worldly lot , they become what they 
 be mean to be , - exercise for the virtue more peculiar to each ; and 
 thus , if in the body each man bear his own burden , yet in the fellowship 
 of the soul all have common relief in bear the burden of each other . 
 this be the law of Christ , - fulfil it , o my flock ! " 

 here the parson close his sermon , and the congregation bow their 
 head . 




 BOOK THIRD . 




 INITIAL chapter . 

 show how MY novel come to be call " MY NOVEL . " 

 " I be not displeased with your novel , so far as it have go , " say my 
 father , graciously ; " though as for the Sermon - " here I tremble ; but 
 the lady , Heaven bless they ! have take Parson Dale under their special 
 protection ; and observe that my father be pucker up his brow 
 critically , they rush forward boldly in defence of the Sermon , and Mr. 
 Caxton be force to beat a retreat . however , like a skilful general , he 
 renew the assault upon outpost less gallantly guard . but as it be 
 not my business to betray my weak point , I leave it to the ingenuity 
 of caviller to discover the place at which the author of " Human Error " 
 direct his great gun . 

 " but , " say the captain , " you be a lad of too much spirit , Pisistratus , 
 to keep we always in the obscure country quarter of Hazeldean , - you 
 will march we out into open service before you have do with we ? " 

 pisistratu   magisterially , for he have be somewhat nettle by Mr. 
 Caxton 's remark , and he put on an air of dignity in order to awe away 
 minor assailant . - " yes , Captain Roland ; not yet a while , but all in 
 good time . I have not stint myself in canvas , and behind my foreground 
 of the Hall and the Parsonage I propose hereafter to open some 
 lengthen perspective of the variety of english life - " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " Hum ! " 

 blanche   put her hand on my father 's lip . - " we shall know well 
 the design , perhaps , when we know the title . pray , Mr. Author , what be 
 the title ? " 

 MY mother   with more animation than usual . - " ay , Sisty , the title ! " 

 PISISTRATUS   startle . - " the title ! by the soul of Cervantes ! I have 
 never yet think of a title ! " 

 CAPTAIN ROLAND   solemnly . - " there be a great deal in a good title . as a 
 novel reader , I know that by experience . " 

 MR . SQUILLS . - " certainly ; there be not a catchpenny in the world but 
 what go down , if the title be apt and seductive . Witness ' Old 
 Parr 's Life Pills . ' sell by the thousand , Sir , when my ' Pills for Weak 
 Stomachs , ' which I believe to be just the same compound , never pay for 
 the advertising . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " Parr 's Life Pills ! a fine stroke of genius . it be not 
 every one who have a weak stomach , or time to attend to it if he have . 
 but who would not swallow a pill to live to a hundred and fifty - two ? " 

 PISISTRATUS   stir the fire in great excitement . - " my title ! my 
 title ! - what shall be my title ? " 

 MR . CAXTON   thrust his hand into his waistcoat , and in his most 
 didactic of tone . - " from a remote period , the choice of a title have 
 perplex the scribble portion of mankind . we may guess how their 
 invention have be rack by the strange contortion it have produce . 
 to begin with the Hebrews . ' the Lips of the sleeping '   Labia 
 Dormientium   - what book do you suppose that title to designate ? - a 
 Catalogue of Rabbinical Writers ! again , imagine some young lady of 
 old captivate by the sentimental title of ' the Pomegranate with its 
 Flower , ' and opening on a treatise on the jewish Ceremonials ! let we 
 turn to the Romans . Aulus Gellius commence his pleasant gossipping 
 ' nocte ' with a list of the title in fashion in his day . for instance , 
 ' the Muses ' and ' the Veil , ' ' the Cornucopia , ' ' the beehive , ' and ' the 
 Meadow . ' some title , indeed , be more truculent , and promise food to 
 those who love to sup upon horror , - such as ' the torch , ' ' the Poniard , ' 
 ' the Stiletto ' - " 

 PISISTRATUS   impatiently . - " yes , sir , but to come to my novel . " 

 MR . CAXTON   unheede the interruption . - " you see you have a fine 
 choice here , and of a nature pleasing , and not unfamiliar , to a 
 classical reader ; or you may borrow a hint from the early dramatic 
 writer . " 

 pisistratu   more hopefully . - " ay , there be something in the Drama akin 
 to the Novel . now , perhaps , I may catch an idea . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " for instance , the author of the ' curiosity of 
 Literature '   from whom , by the way , I be plagiarize much of the 
 information I bestow upon you   tell we of a spanish gentleman who 
 write a Comedy , by which he intend to serve what he take for Moral 
 Philosophy . " 

 PISISTRATUS   eagerly . - " well , sir ? " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " and call it ' the Pain of the Sleep of the World . ' " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " very comic , indeed , sir . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " grave thing be then call Comedies , as old thing be 
 now call novel . then there be all the title of early Romance itself 
 at your disposal , - ' Theagenes and Chariclea ' or ' the Ass ' of Longus , or 
 ' the Golden Ass ' of Apuleius , or the title of Gothic Romance , such as 
 ' the most elegant , delicious , mellifluous , and delightful history of 
 Perceforest , King of Great Britain . ' " and therewith my father run over a 
 list of name as long as the Directory , and about as amusing . 

 " well , to my taste , " say my mother , " the novel I use to read when a 
 girl   for I have not read many since , I be ashamed to say   - " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " no , you need not be at all ashamed of it , Kitty . " 

 MY MOTHER   proceed . - " be much more inviting than any you mention , 
 Austin . " 

 the CAPTAIN . - " true . " 

 MR . SQUILLS . - " certainly . nothing like they nowadays ! " 

 MY MOTHER . - " ' say she to her Neighbour , what ? ' " 

 THE CAPTAIN . - " ' the unknown , or the Northern Gallery ' - " 

 MR . SQUILLS . - " ' there be a secret ; find it out ! ' " 

 PISISTRATUS   push to the verge of human endurance , and upsetting 
 tong , poker , and fire - shovel . - " what nonsense you be talk , all of 
 you ! for Heaven 's sake consider what an important matter we be call 
 upon to decide . it be not now the title of those very respectable work 
 which issue from the Minerva Press that I ask you to remember , - it be 
 to invent a title for mine , - my novel ! " 

 MR . CAXTON   clap his hand gently . - " Excellent ! capital ! nothing 
 can be well ; simple , natural , pertinent , concise - " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " what be it , sir , what be it ? have you really think of a 
 title to my novel ? " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " you have hit it yourself , - ' my novel . ' it be your Novel ; 
 people will know it be your novel . turn and twist the english language 
 as you will , be as allegorical as Hebrew , greek , Roman , Fabulist , or 
 Puritan , still , after all , it be your novel , and nothing more nor less 
 than your novel . " 

 PISISTRATUS   thoughtfully , and sound the word various way . - " ' my 
 novel ! ' - um - um ! ' my novel ! ' rather bold - and curt , eh ? " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " add what you say you intend it to depict , - variety in 
 English Life . " 

 MY MOTHER . - " ' my novel ; or , Varieties in English Life ' - I do not   think 
 it sound amiss . what say you , Roland ? would it attract you in a 
 catalogue ? " 

 my uncle hesitate , when Mr. Caxton exclaim imperiously . - " the thing be 
 settle ! do not   disturb Camarina . " 

 SQUILLS . - " if it be not too great a liberty , pray who or what be 
 Camarina ? " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " Camarina , Mr. Squills , be a lake , apt to be low , and then 
 liable to be muddy ; and ' do not   disturb Camarina ' be a greek proverb 
 derive from an oracle of Apollo ; and from that greek proverb , no doubt , 
 come the origin of the injunction , ' quieta non movere , ' which become 
 the favourite maxim of Sir Robert Walpole and Parson Dale . the greek 
 line , Mr. Squills "   here my father 's memory begin to warm , be preserve 
 by Stephanus Byzantinus , ' De Urbibus , ' 

   greek proverb 

 Zenobius explain it in his proverb ; Suidas repeat Zenobius ; Lucian 
 allude to it ; so do Virgil in the Third Book of the AEneid ; and 
 Silius Italicus imitate Virgil , - 

  " ' et cui non licitum fatis Camarina moveri . ' 

 " Parson Dale , as a clergyman and a scholar , have , no doubt , these 
 authority at his finger ' end . and I wonder he do not quote they , " 
 quoth my father ; " but to be sure he be represent as a mild man , and 
 so might not wish to humble the squire over - much in the presence of his 
 family . meanwhile , my Novel be my Novel ; and now that , that matter be 
 settle , perhaps the tong , poker , and shovel may be pick up , the 
 child may go to bed , Blanche and Kitty may speculate apart upon the 
 future dignity of the Neogilos , - take care , nevertheless , to finish 
 the new pinbefore he require for the present ; Roland may cast up his 
 account book , Mr. Squills have his brandy and water , and all the world 
 be comfortable , each in his own way . Blanche , come away from the 
 screen , get I my slipper , and leave Pisistratus to himself .   greek 
 line   - do not   disturb Camarina . you see , my dear , " add my father 
 kindly , as , after settle himself into his slipper , he detain 
 Blanche 's hand in his own , - " you see , my dear , every house have its 
 Camarina . Alan , who be a lazy animal , be quite content to let it alone ; 
 but woman , be the more active , bustling , curious creature , be always 
 for give it a sly stir . " 

 BLANCHE   with female dignity . - " I assure you , that if Pisistratus have 
 not call I , I should not have - " 

 MR . CAXTON   interrupt she , without lift his eye from the book he 
 have already take . - " certainly you would not . I be now in the midst of 
 the great Oxford Controversy .   the same greek proverb   - do not   disturb 
 Camarina . " 

 a dead silence for half - an - hour , at the end of which - 

 PISISTRATUS   from behind the screen . - " Blanche , my dear , I want to 
 consult you . " 

 Blanche do not stir . 

 PISISTRATUS . - " Blanche , I say . " Blanche glance in triumph towards Mr. 
 Caxton . 

 MR . CAXTON   lay down his theological tract , and rub his 
 spectacle mournfully . - " I hear he , child ; I hear he . I retract my 
 vindication of man . oracle warn in vain : so long as there be a woman on 
 the other side of the screen , it be all up with Camarina . " 




 CHAPTER II . 

 it be greatly to be regret that Mr. Stirn be not present at the 
 parson 's discourse ; but that valuable functionary be far otherwise 
 engage , - indeed , during the summer month he be rarely see at the 
 afternoon service . not that he care for be preach at , - not he ; Mr. 
 Stirn would have snap his finger at the thunder of the Vatican . 
 but the fact be , that Mr. Stirn choose to do a great deal of gratuitous 
 business upon the day of rest . the squire allow all person who choose 
 to walk about the park on a Sunday ; and many come from a distance to 
 stroll by the lake , or recline under the elm . these visitor be 
 object of great suspicion , nay , of positive annoyance , to Mr. 
 Stirn - and , indeed , not altogether without reason , for we English have 
 a natural love of liberty , which we be even more apt to display in 
 the ground of other people than in those which we cultivate ourselves . 
 sometimes , to his inexpressible and fierce satisfaction , Mr. Stirn 
 fall upon a knot of boy pelt the swan ; sometimes he miss a 
 young sapling , and find it in felonious hand , convert into a 
 walking - stick ; sometimes he catch a hulking fellow scramble up the 
 ha - ha to gather a nosegay for his sweetheart from one of poor Mrs. 
 Hazeldean 's pet parterre ; not infrequently , indeed , when all the family 
 be fairly at church , some curious impertinent force or sneak their 
 way into the garden , in order to peep in at the window . for these , 
 and various other offence of like magnitude , Mr. Stirn have long , 
 but vainly , seek to induce the squire to withdraw a permission so 
 villanously abuse . but though there be time when Mr. Hazeldean 
 grunt and growl , and swear " that he would shut up the park , and 
 fill it   illegally   with mantrap and spring - gun , " his anger always 
 evaporate in word . the park be still open to all the world on a 
 Sunday ; and that blessed day be therefore convert into a day of 
 travail and wrath to Mr. Stirn . but it be from the last chime of the 
 afternoon - service bell until dusk that the spirit of this vigilant 
 functionary be most perturb ; for , amidst the flock that gather 
 from the little hamlet round to the voice of the pastor , there be 
 always some stray sheep , or rather climb , desultory , vagabond goat , 
 who strike off in all perverse direction , as if for the special purpose 
 of distract the energetic watchfulness of Mr. Stirn . as soon as 
 church be over , if the day be fine , the whole park become a scene 
 animate with red cloak or lively shawl , Sunday waistcoat and hat 
 stick full of wildflower - which last Mr. Stirn often stoutly 
 maintain to be Mrs. Hazeldean 's new geranium . now , on this Sunday , 
 especially , there be an imperative call upon an extra exertion of 
 vigilance on the part of the superintendent , - he have not only to detect 
 ordinary depredator and trespasser ; but , first , to discover the 
 author of the conspiracy against the stock ; and , secondly , to " make an 
 example . " 

 he have begin his round , therefore , from the early morning ; and just 
 as the afternoon bell be sound its final peal , he emerge upon the 
 village green from a hedgerow , behind which he have be at watch to 
 observe who have the most suspiciously gather round the stock . at that 
 moment the place be desert . at a distance , the superintendent see 
 the fast disappear form of some belate group hasten towards the 
 church ; in front , the stock stand star at he mournfully from its 
 four great eye , which have be cleanse from the mud , but still look 
 bleared and stain with the inark of the recent outrage . here Mr. 
 Stirn pause , take off his hat , and wipe his brow . 

 " if I have sum ' un to watch here , " think he , " while I take a turn by 
 the water - side , p'r'aps summat might come out ; p'r'aps they as do it 
 ben't   go to church , but will come sneak round to look on their 
 willany ! as they say murderer be always lead back to the place where 
 they ha ' leave the body . but in this here willage there ben't   a man , 
 woman , or child as have any consarn for squire or parish , bar 
 myself . " it be just as he arrive at that misanthropical conclusion 
 that Mr. Stirn behold Leonard Fairfield walk very fast from his own 
 home . the superintendent clap on his hat , and stick his right arm 
 akimbo . " hollo , you , sir , " say he , as Lenny now come in hearing , " where 
 be you go at that rate ? " 

 " please , sir , I be go to church . " 

 " stop , sir , - stop , Master Lenny . go to church ! - why , the bell 's 
 do ; and you know the parson be very angry at they as come in late , 
 disturb the congregation . you can not   go to church now ! " 

 " please , sir - " 

 " I say you can not   go to church now . you must learn to think a little 
 of other , lad . you see how I sweat to serve the squire ! and you must 
 serve he too . why , your mother 's get the house and premishe almost 
 rent - free ; you ought to have a grateful heart , Leonard Fairfield , and 
 feel for his honour ! poor man ! his heart be well - nigh bruk , I be sure , 
 with the going on . " 

 Leonard open his innocent blue eye , while Mr. Stirn dolorously wipe 
 his own . 

 " look at that ' ere dumb cretur , " say Stirn , suddenly , point to the 
 stock , - " look at it . if it could speak , what would it say , Leonard 
 Fairfield ? answer I that ! ' damn the stock , ' indeed ! " 

 " it be very bad in they to write such naughty word , " say Lenny , 
 gravely . " Mother be quite shocked when she hear of it this morning . " 

 MR . STIRN . - " I dare say she be , consider what she pay for the 
 premishe ; "   insinuatingly   " you do not know who do it , - eh , Lenny ? " 

 LENNY . - " no , sir ; indeed I do not ! " 

 MR . STIRN . - " well , you see , you can not   go to church , - prayer half 
 over by this time . you recollex that I put they stock under your 
 ' sponsibility , ' and see the way you be do your duty by them ! I have   half a 
 mind to - " 

 Mr. Stirn cast his eye on the eye of the stock . " please , sir , " begin 
 Lenny again , rather frightened . 

 " no , I will not   please ; it ben't   pleasing at all . but I forgive you this 
 time , only keep a sharp lookout , lad , in future . now you must stay 
 here - no , there - under the hedge , and you watch if any person come 
 to loiter about , or look at the stock , or laugh to hisself , while I 
 go my round . I shall be back either afore church be over or just arter ; 
 so you stay till I come , and give I your report . be sharp , boy , or it 
 will be bad for you and your mother ; I can let the premishe for L4 a 
 year more to - morrow . " 

 conclude with that somewhat menacing and very significant remark , and 
 not stay for an answer , Mr. Stirn wave his hand and walk off . 

 Poor Lenny remain by the stock , very much deject , and greatly 
 dislike the neighbourhood to which the be consign . at length he 
 slowly creep off to the hedge , and sit himself down in the place of 
 espionage point out to he . now , philosopher tell we that what be 
 call the point of honour be a barbarous feudal prejudice . amongst 
 the high class , wherein those feudal prejudice may be suppose to 
 prevail , Lenny Fairfield 's occupation would not have be consider 
 peculiarly honourable ; neither would it have seem so to the more 
 turbulent spirit among the humbler order , who have a point of honour 
 of their own , which consist in the adherence to each other in defiance 
 of all lawful authority . but to Lenny Fairfield , bring up much apart 
 from other boy , and with a profound and grateful reverence for the 
 squire instill into all his habit of thought , notion of honour 
 bound themselves to simple honesty and straightforward truth ; and as 
 he cherish an unquestione awe of order and constitutional authority , 
 so it do not appear to he that there be anything derogatory and 
 debasing in be thus set to watch for an offender . on the contrary , as 
 he begin to reconcile himself to the loss of the church service , and 
 to enjoy the cool of the summer shade and the occasional chirp of the 
 bird , he get to look on the bright side of the commission to which he 
 be depute . in youth , at least , everything have its bright side , - even 
 the appointment of Protector to the Parish stock . for the stock itself 
 Leonard have no affection , it be true ; but he have no sympathy with its 
 aggressor , and he could well conceive that the squire would be very 
 much hurt at the revolutionary event of the night . " so , " think poor 
 Leonard in his simple heart , - ' so , if I can serve his honour , by keep 
 off mischievous boy , or let he know who do the thing , I be sure 
 it would be a proud day for Mother . " then he begin to consider that , 
 however ungraciously Mr. Stirn have bestow on he the appointment , 
 still it be a compliment to he , - show trust and confidence in he , 
 pick he out from his contemporary as the sober , moral , pattern boy ; 
 and Lenny have a great deal of pride in he , especially in matter of 
 repute and character . 

 all these thing consider , I say , Leonard Fairfield recline on his 
 lurking - place , if not with positive delight and intoxicate rapture , at 
 least with tolerable content and some complacency . 

 Mr. Stirn might have be go a quarter of an hour , when a boy come 
 through a little gate in the park , just opposite to Lenny 's retreat in 
 the hedge , and , as if fatigue with walking , or oppress by the heat of 
 the day , pause on the green for a moment or so , and then advance under 
 the shade of the great tree which overhang the stock . 

 Lenny prick up his ear , and peep out jealously . 

 he have never see the boy before : it be a strange face to he . 

 Leonard Fairfield be not fond of stranger ; moreover , he have a vague 
 belief that stranger be at the bottom of that desecration of the 
 stock . the boy , then , be a strange ; but what be his rank ? be he 
 of that grade in society in which the natural offence be or be not 
 consonant to , or harmonious with , outrage upon stock ? on that Lenny 
 Fairfield do not feel quite assured . accord to all the experience of 
 the villager , the boy be not dress like a young gentleman . Leonard 's 
 notion of such aristocratic costume be naturally fashion upon the 
 model of Frank Hazeldean . they represent to he a dazzle vision of 
 snow - white trouser and beautiful blue coat and incomparable cravat . 
 now the dress of this stranger , though not that of a peasant or of a 
 farmer , do not in any way correspond with Lenny 's notion of the costume 
 of a young gentleman . it look to he highly disreputable : the coat 
 be cover with mud , and the hat be all manner of shape , with a gap 
 between the side and crown . 

 Lenny be puzzle , till it suddenly occur to he that the gate 
 through which the boy have pass be in the direct path across the park 
 from a small town , the inhabitant of which be in very bad odour at 
 the Hall , - they have immemorially furnish the most daring poacher to 
 the preserve , the most troublesome trespasser on the park , the most 
 unprincipled orchard robber , and the most disputatious asserter of 
 various problematical right of way , which , accord to the Town , be 
 public , and , accord to the Hall , have be private since the Conquest . 
 it be true that the same path lead also directly from the squire 's 
 house , but it be not probable that the wearer of attire so equivocal 
 have be visit there . all thing consider , Lenny have no doubt in 
 his mind but that the stranger be a shop - boy or ' prentice from the town 
 of Thorndyke ; and the notorious repute of that town , couple with this 
 presumption , make it probable that Lenny now see before he one of the 
 midnight desecrator of the stock . as if to confirm the 
 suspicion , which pass through Lenny 's mind with a rapidity wholly 
 disproportionate to the number of line it cost I to convey it , the 
 boy , now stand right before the stock , bend down and read that pithy 
 anathema with which it be deface . and have read it , he repeat it 
 aloud , and Lenny actually see he smile , - such a smile ! so disagreeable 
 and sinister ! Lenny have never before see the smile sardonic . 

 but what be Lenny 's pious horror and dismay when this ominous stranger 
 fairly seat himself on the stock , rest his heel profanely on 
 the lid of two of the four round eye , and take out a pencil and a 
 pocket - book , begin to write . 

 be this audacious Unknown take an inventory of the church and the 
 Hall for the purpose of conflagration ? he look at one and at the 
 other , with a strange fix stare as he write , - not keep his eye 
 on the paper , as Lenny have be teach to do when he sit down to his 
 copy - book . the fact be , that Randal Leslie be tired and faint , and he 
 feel the shock of his fall the more , after the few pace he have walk , 
 so that he be glad to rest himself a few moment ; and he take that 
 opportunity to write a line to Frank , to excuse himself for not 
 call again , intend to tear the leaf on which he write out of 
 his pocket - book and leave it at the first cottage he pass , with 
 instruction to take it to the Hall . 

 while Randal be thus innocently engage , Lenny come up to he , with the 
 firm and measure pace of one who have resolve , cost what it may , to do 
 his duty . and as Lenny , though brave , be not ferocious , so the anger he 
 feel and the suspicion he entertain only exhibit themselves in the 
 follow solemn appeal to the offender 's sense of propriety , - " Ben't 
 you ashamed of yourself ? sit on the squire 's new stock ! do get up , 
 and go along with you ! " 

 Randal turn round sharply ; and though , at any other moment , he would 
 have have sense enough to extricate himself very easily from his false 
 position , yet Nemo mortalium , etc . no one be always wise . and Randal be 
 in an exceedingly bad humour . the affability towards his inferior , 
 for which I lately praise he , be entirely lose in the contempt for 
 impertinent snob natural to an insulted Etonian . 

 therefore , eye Lenny with great disdain , Randal answer briefly , - 

 " you be an insolent young blackguard . " 

 so curt a rejoinder make Lenny 's blood fly to his face . persuade before 
 that the intruder be some lawless apprentice or shop - lad , he be now 
 more confirm in that judgment , not only by language so uncivil , but by 
 the truculent glance which accompany it , and which certainly do 
 not derive any imposing dignity from the mutilated , rakish , hang - dog , 
 ruinous hat , under which it shoot its sullen and menacing fire . 

 of all the various article of which our male attire be compose , there 
 be perhaps not one which have so much character and expression as the top 
 covering . a neat , well - brush , short - nap , gentlemanlike hat , put on 
 with a certain air , give a distinction and respectability to the whole 
 exterior ; whereas , a break , squashed , higgledy - piggledy sort of a hat , 
 such as Randal Leslie have on , would go far towards transform the 
 stateliest gentleman who ever walk down St. James 's Street into the 
 ideal of a ruffianly scamp . 

 now , it be well know that there be nothing more antipathetic to your 
 peasant - boy than a shop - boy . even on grand political occasion , the 
 rural working - class can rarely be coax into sympathy with the trading 
 town class . your true english peasant be always an aristocrat . moreover , 
 and irrespectively of this immemorial grudge of class , there be 
 something peculiarly hostile in the relationship between boy and boy 
 when their back be once up , and they be alone on a quiet bit of 
 green , - something of the game - cock feeling ; something that tend to 
 keep alive , in the population of this island   otherwise so lamblike and 
 peaceful , the martial propensity to double the thumb tightly over the 
 four finger , and make what be call " a fist of it . " dangerous symptom 
 of these mingled and aggressive sentiment be visible in Lenny 
 Fairfield at the word and the look of the unprepossesse stranger . and 
 the stranger seem aware of they ; for his pale face grow more pale , and 
 his sullen eye more fixed and more vigilant . 

 " you get off they stock , " say Lenny , disdain to reply to the coarse 
 expression bestow on he ; and , suit the action to the word , he 
 give the intruder what he mean for a shove , but what randal take for 
 a blow . the Etonian spring up , and the quickness of his movement , aid 
 but by a slight touch of his hand , make Lenny lose his balance , and send 
 he neck - and - crop over the stock . burn with rage , the young villager 
 rise alertly , and , fly at Randal , strike out right and left . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 aid I , o ye Nine ! whom the incomparable Persius satirize his 
 contemporary for invoke , and then , all of a sudden , invoke on his 
 own behalf , - aid I to describe that famous battle by the stock , and 
 in defence of the stock , which be wag by the two representative 
 of Saxon and Norman England . here , sober support of law and duty 
 and delegate trust , - pro aris et focis ; there , haughty invasion and 
 bellicose spirit of knighthood and that respect for name and person 
 which we call " honour . " here , too , hardy physical force , - there , skilful 
 discipline . here - the Nine be as deaf as a post , and as cold as a 
 stone ! plague take the jade ! I can do well without they . 

 Randal be a year or two old than Lenny , but he be not so tall nor so 
 strong , nor even so active ; and after the first blind rush , when the two 
 boy pause , and draw back to breathe , Lenny , eye the slight form and 
 hueless cheek of his opponent , and see blood trickle from Randal 's 
 lip , be seize with an instantaneous and generous remorse . " it be 
 not fair , " he think , " to fight one whom he could beat so easily . " so , 
 retreat still far , and let his arm fall to his side , he say 
 mildly , " there , let us have no more of it ; but go home and be good . " 

 Randal Leslie have no remarkable degree of that constitutional quality 
 call physical courage ; but he have some of those moral quality 
 which supply its place . he be proud , he be vindictive , he have high 
 self - esteem , he have the destructive organ more than the combative , - what 
 have once provoke his wrath it become his instinct to sweep away . 
 therefore , though all his nerve be quiver , and hot tear be in 
 his eye , he approach Lenny with the sternness of a gladiator , and 
 say between his tooth , which he set hard , choke back the sob of rage 
 and pain , - 

 " you have strike I - and you shall not stir from this ground till I have 
 make you repent it . put up your hand , - defend yourself . " 

 Lenny mechanically obey ; and he have good need of the admonition ; for 
 if before he have have the advantage , now that Randal have recover the 
 surprise to his nerve , the battle be not to the strong . 

 though Leslie have not be a fighting boy at Eton , still his temper have 
 involve he in some conflict when he be in the low form , and 
 he have learn something of the art as well as the practice in 
 pugilism , - an excellent thing too , I be barbarous enough to believe , and 
 which I hope will never quite die out of our public school . ah , many a 
 young duke have be a well fellow for life from a fair set - to with a 
 trader 's son ; and many a trader 's son have learn to look a lord more 
 manfully in the face on the husting , from the recollection of the sound 
 thrashing he once give to some little Lord Leopold Dawdle . 

 so randal now bring his experience and art to bear ; put aside 
 those heavy roundabout blow , and dart in his own , quick and sharp , 
 supply to the natural feebleness of his arm the due momentum of 
 pugilistic mechanic . ay , and the arm , too , be no long so feeble ; for 
 strange be the strength that come from passion and pluck ! 

 Poor Lenny , who have never fight before , be bewilder ; his sensation 
 grow so entangled that he could never recall they distinctly ; he have a 
 dim reminiscence of some breathless impotent rush , of a sudden blindness 
 follow by quick flash of intolerable light , of a deadly faintness , 
 from which he be rouse by sharp pang - here - there - everywhere ; and 
 then all he could remember be , that he be lie on the ground , 
 huddle up and pant hard , while his adversary bent over he with a 
 countenance as dark and livid as Lara himself might have bend over the 
 fall Otho . for Randal Leslie be not one who , by impulse and nature , 
 subscribe to the noble English maxim , " never hit a foe when he be 
 down ; " and it cost he a strong , if brief , self - struggle not to set 
 his heel on that prostrate form . it be the mind , not the heart , 
 that subdue the savage within he , as mutter something 
 inwardly - certainly not christian forgiveness - the victor turn 
 gloomily away . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 just at that precise moment , who should appear but Mr. Stirn ! for , in 
 fact , be extremely anxious to get Lenny into disgrace , he have hop 
 that he should have find the young villager have shirk the commission 
 intrust to he ; and the right - hand man have slily come back to see if 
 that amiable expectation be realize . he now behold Lenny rise with 
 some difficulty , still pant hard , and with hysterical sound akin 
 to what be vulgarly call blubber , his fine new waistcoat sprinkle 
 with his own blood , which flow from his nose , - nose that seem 
 to Lenny Fairfield 's feeling to be a nose no more , but a swollen , 
 gigantic , mountainous slawkenbergian excrescence ; in fact , he feel all 
 nose ! turn aghast from this spectacle , Mr. Stirn survey , with no 
 more respect than Lenny have manifest , the strange boy , who have again 
 seat himself on the stock   whether to recover his breath , or whether 
 to show that his victory be consummate , and that he be in his right 
 of possession . " hollo , " say Mr. Stirn , " what be all this ? what be the 
 matter , Lenny , you blockhead ? " 

 " he will sit there , " answer Lenny , in broken gasp , " and he have beat 
 I because I would not let he ; but I do not   mind that , " add the 
 villager , try hard to suppress his tear , " and I be ready again for 
 he - that I be . " 

 " and what do you do lollopope there on they bless stock ? " 

 " look at the landscape ; out of my light , man ! " 

 this tone instantly inspire Mr. Stirn with misgiving : it be a tone 
 so disrespectful to he that he be seize with involuntary respect ; who 
 but a gentleman could speak so to Mr. Stirn ? 

 " and may I ask who you be ? " say Stirn , falteringly , and half incline 
 to touch his hat . " what be your name , pray ? what be your bizness ? " 

 " my name be Randal Leslie , and my business be to visit your master 's 
 family , - that be , if you be , as I guess from your manner , Mr. 
 Hazeldean 's ploughman ! " 

 so say , randal rise ; and move on a few pace , turn , and throw 
 half - a - crown on the road , say to Lenny , " let that pay you for your 
 bruise , and remember another time how you speak to a gentleman . as for 
 you , fellow , " - and he point his scornful hand towards Mr. Stirn , who , 
 with his mouth open , and his hat now fairly off , stand bow to the 
 earth , - " as for you , give my compliment to Mr. Hazeldean , and say that 
 when he do we the honour to visit we at Rood Hall , I trust that the 
 manner of our villager will make he ashamed of Hazeldean . " 

 oh , my poor squire ! Rood Hall ashame of Hazeldean ! if that message have 
 be deliver to you , you would never have look up again ! 

 with those bitter word , randal swing himself over the stile that lead 
 into the parson 's glebe , and leave Lenny Fairfield still feel his 
 nose , and Mr. Stirn still bow to the earth . 




 CHAPTER V. 

 Randal Leslie have a very long walk home ; he be bruise and sore from 
 head to foot , and his mind be still more sore and more bruised than his 
 body . but if Randal Leslie have rest himself in the squire 's garden , 
 without walk backwards and indulge in speculation suggest by 
 Marat , and warrant by my Lord Bacon , he would have pass a most 
 agreeable evening , and really avail himself of the squire 's wealth 
 by go home in the squire 's carriage . but because he choose to take 
 so intellectual a view of property , he tumble into a ditch ; because 
 he tumble into a ditch , he spoil his clothe ; because he spoil his 
 clothe , he give up his visit ; because he give up his visit , he get into 
 the village green , and sit on the stock with a hat that give he the 
 air of a fugitive from the treadmill ; because he sit on the stock - with 
 that hat , and a cross face under it - he have be force into the most 
 discreditable squabble with a clodhopper , and be now limp home , 
 at war with god and man ; ergo   this be a moral that will bear 
 repetition , - ergo , when you walk in a rich man 's ground , be content 
 to enjoy what be your , namely , the prospect , - I dare say you will enjoy 
 it more than he do ! 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 if , in the simplicity of his heart and the crudity of his experience , 
 Lenny Fairfield have conceive it probable that Mr. Stirn would address 
 to he some word in approbation of his gallantry and in sympathy for 
 his bruise , he soon find himself wofully mistaken . that truly 
 great man , worthy prime minister of Hazeldean , might perhaps pardon a 
 dereliction from his order , if such dereliction prove advantageous to 
 the interest of the service , or redound to the credit of the 
 chief ; but he be inexorable to that bad of diplomatic offence , - an 
 ill - time , stupid , over - zealous obedience to order , which , if it 
 establish the devotion of the employee , get the employer into what 
 be popularly call a scrape ! and though , by those unverse in the 
 intricacy of the human heart , and unacquainte with the especial 
 heart of prime minister and right - hand man , it might have seem 
 natural that Mr. Stirn , as he stand still , hat in hand , in the middle 
 of the road , stung , humble , and exasperate by the mortification he have 
 receive from the lip of Randal Leslie , would have feel that that young 
 gentleman be the proper object of his resentment , yet such a breach of 
 all the etiquette of diplomatic life as resentment towards a superior 
 power be the last idea that would have suggest itself to the profound 
 intellect of the premier of Hazeldean . still , as rage , like steam , must 
 escape somewhere , Mr. Stirn , on feeling - as he afterwards express it 
 to his wife - that his " buzzom be a burstin ' , " turn with the natural 
 instinct of self - preservation to the safety - valve provide for the 
 explosion ; and the vapour within he rush into vent upon Lenny 
 Fairfield . he clap his hat on his head fiercely , and thus relieve 
 his " buzzom . " 

 " you young willain ! you howdaeious wiper ! and so all this bless 
 Sabbath afternoon , when you ought to have be in church on your 
 marrow - bone , a praying for your better , you have be a fitting with a 
 young gentleman , and a wisiter to your master , on the wery place of the 
 parridge hinstitution that you be to guard and pertect ; and a bloodying 
 it all over , I declare , with your blaggard little nose ! " thus say , 
 and as if to mend the matter , Mr. Stirn aim an additional stroke at 
 the offend member ; but Lenny mechanically put up both arm to 
 defend his face , Mr. Stirn strike his knuckle against the large brass 
 button that adorn the cuff of the boy 's coat - sleeve , - an incident 
 which considerably aggravate his indignation . and Lenny , whose spirit 
 be fairly rouse at what the narrowness of his education conceive to 
 be a signal injustice , place the trunk of the tree between Mr. Stirn 
 and himself , begin that task of self - justification which it be equally 
 impolitic to conceive and imprudent to execute , since , in such a case , 
 to justify be to recriminate . 

 " I wonder at you , Master Stirn , - if Mother could hear you ! you know it 
 be you who would not let I go to church ; it be you who tell I to - " 

 " fit a young gentleman , and break the Sabbath , " say Mr. Stirn , 
 interrupt he with a wither sneer . " oh , yes ! I tell you to 
 disgrace his honour the squire , and I , and the parridge , and bring 
 we all into trouble . but the squire tell I to make an example , and I 
 will ! " with those word , quick as lightning flash upon Mr. Stirn 's 
 mind the luminous idea of set Lenny in the very stock which he have 
 too faithfully guard . Eureka ! the " example " be before he ! here he 
 could gratify his long grudge against the pattern boy ; here , by such 
 a selection of the very good lad in the parish , he could strike terror 
 into the bad ; here he could appease the offended dignity of randal 
 Leslie ; here be a practical apology to the squire for the affront put 
 upon his young visitor ; here , too , there be prompt obedience to the 
 squire 's own wish that the stock should be provide as soon as possible 
 with a tenant . suit the action to the thought , Mr. Stirn make a rapid 
 plunge at his victim , catch he by the skirt of his jacket ; and in a 
 few second more , the jaw of the stock have open , and Lenny Fairfield 
 be thrust therein , - a sad spectacle of the revers of fortune . 
 this do , and while the boy be too astounded , too stupefy , by the 
 suddenness of the calamity , for the resistance he might otherwise have 
 make , - nay , for more than a few inaudible word , - Mr. Stirn hurry from 
 the spot , but not without first pick up and pocket the half - crown 
 design for Lenny , and which , so great have be his first emotion , 
 he have hitherto even almost forgotten . he then make his way towards the 
 church , with the intention to place himself close by the door , catch 
 the squire as he come out , whisper to he what have pass , and lead he , 
 with the whole congregation at his heel , to gaze upon the sacrifice 
 offer up to the joint power of Nemesis and Themis . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 unaffectedly I say it - upon the honour of a gentleman , and the 
 reputation of an author , - unaffectedly I say it , no word of mine can 
 do justice to the sensation experience by Lenny Fairfield , as he sit 
 alone in that place of penance . he feel no more the physical pain of 
 his bruise ; the anguish of his mind stifle and overbore all corporeal 
 suffering , - an anguish as great as the childish breast be capable of 
 hold . 

 for first and deepest of all , and early feel , be the burn sense 
 of injustice . he have , it might be with err judgment , but with all 
 honesty , earnestness , and zeal , execute the commission entrust to 
 he ; he have stand forth manfully in discharge of his duty ; he have 
 fight for it , suffer for it , bleed for it . this be his reward ! now 
 in Lenny 's mind there be pre - eminently that quality which distinguish 
 the Anglo Saxon race , - the sense of justice . it be perhaps the 
 strong principle in his moral constitution ; and the principle have 
 never lose its virgin bloom and freshness by any of the minor act of 
 oppression and iniquity which boy of high birth often suffer from 
 harsh parent , or in tyrannical school . so that it be for the 
 first time that that iron enter into his soul , and with it come its 
 attendant feeling , - the wrathful , gall sense of impotence . he have 
 be wrong , and he have no means to right himself . then come another 
 sensation , if not so deep , yet more smarting and envenom for the 
 time , - shame ! he , the good boy of all good boy ; he , the pattern of the 
 school , and the pride of the parson ; he , whom the squire , in sight of 
 all his contemporary , have often single out to slap on the back , and 
 the grand squire 's lady to pat on the head , with a smile gratulation 
 on his young and fair repute ; he , who have already learn so dearly to 
 prize the sweet of an honourable name , - he to be make , as it be , in 
 the twinkling of an eye , a mark for opprobrium , a butt of scorn , a jeer , 
 and a byword ! the stream of his life be poison at the fountain . and 
 then come a tenderer thought of his mother ! of the shock this would be 
 to she , - she who have already begin to look up to he as her stay and 
 support ; he bow his head , and the tear , long suppress , roll down . 

 then he wrestle and struggle , and strove to wrench his limb from 
 that hateful bondage , - for he hear step approach . and he begin to 
 picture to himself the arrival of all the villager from church , the 
 sad gaze of the parson , the bent brow of the squire , the idle , 
 ill - suppress titter of all the boy , jealous of his unspotted 
 character , - character of which the original whiteness could never , never 
 be restore ! 

 he would always be the boy who have sit in the stock ! and the word 
 utter by the squire come back on his soul , like the voice of 
 conscience in the ear of some doom Macbeth : " a sad disgrace , 
 Lenny , - you will never be in such a quandary . " " Quandary " - the word be 
 unfamiliar to he ; it must mean something awfully discreditable . the 
 poor boy could have pray for the earth to swallow he . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 " Kettles and frying - pan ! what have we here ? " cry the tinker . 

 this time Mr. Sprott be without his donkey ; for it be Sunday , it 
 be presume that the donkey be enjoy his Sabbath on the common . 
 the tinker be in his Sunday 's good , clean and smart , about to take his 
 lounge in the park . 

 Lenny Fairfield make no answer to the appeal . 

 " you in the wood , my baby ! well , that be the last sight I should 
 ha ' thought to see . but we all live to larn , " add the tinker , 
 sententiously . " who give you they leggin ? can not   you speak , lad ? " 

 " Nick Stirn . " 

 " Nick Stirn ! ay , I would ha ' ta'en my davy on that : and cos vy ? " 

 " 'cause I do as he tell I , and fight a boy as be trespass on 
 these very stock ; and he beat I - but I do not   care for that ; and that 
 boy be a young gentleman , and go to visit the squire ; and so Nick 
 Stirn - " Lenny stop short , choke by rage and humiliation . 

 " Augh , " say the tinker , start , " you fit with a young gentleman , do 
 you ? sorry to hear you confess that , my lad ! sit there and be thankful 
 you ha ' get off so cheap . ' t be salt and battery to fit with your 
 better , and a Lunnon justice o ' peace would have give you two month 
 o ' the treadmill . 

 " but vy should you fit cos he trespass on the stock ? it ben't   your 
 natural side for fitting , I take it . " 

 Lenny murmur something not very distinguishable about serve the 
 squire , and do as he be bid . 

 " oh , I see , Lenny , " interrupt the tinker , in a tone of great 
 contempt , " you be one of those who would rayther ' unt with the ' ound 
 than run with the ' be ! you be 's the good pattern boy , and would peach 
 agin your own border to curry favour with the grand folk . Fie , lad ! you 
 be sarve right ; stick by your border , then you will be ' specte when you 
 get into trouble , and not be ' varsally ' spise , - as you will be arter 
 church - time ! Vell , I can not   be see ' sort with you , now you be in 
 this d'rogotary fix ; it might hurt my c'r'acter , both with they as build 
 the stock and they as want to pull them down . old kettle to mend ! Vy , 
 you make I forgit the Sabbath ! Sarvent , my lad , and wish you well 
 out of it ; ' speck to your mother , and say we can deal for the pan and 
 shovel all the same for your misfortin . " 

 the tinker go his way . Lenny 's eye follow he with the sullenness 
 of despair . the tinker , like all the tribe of human comforter , have only 
 water the bramble to invigorate the prick of the horn . yes , if Lenny 
 have be catch break the stock , some at least would have pity 
 he ; but to be incarcerate for defend they ! you might as well have 
 expect that the widow and orphan of the Reign of Terror would have 
 pity Dr. Guillotin when he slide through the groove of his own deadly 
 machine . and even the tinker , itinerant , ragamuffin vagabond as he be , 
 feel ashamed to be find with the pattern boy ! Lenny 's head sink again 
 on his breast heavily , as if it have be of lead . some few minute 
 thus pass , when the unhappy prisoner become aware of the presence of 
 another spectator to his shame ; he hear no step , but he see a shadow 
 throw over the sward . he hold his breath , and would not look up , with 
 some vague idea that if he refuse to see he might escape be see . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 " per Bacco ! " say Dr. Riccabocca , put his hand on Lenny 's shoulder , 
 and bend down to look into his face , - " per Bacco ! my young friend , do 
 you sit here from choice or necessity ? " 

 Lenny slightly shudder , and wince under the touch of one whom he have 
 hitherto regard with a sort of superstitious abhorrence . 

 " I fear , " resume Riccabocca , after wait in vain for an answer to his 
 question , " that though the situation be charming , you do not select it 
 yourself . what be this ? " - and the irony of the tone vanish - " what be 
 this , my poor boy ? you have be bleed , and I see that those tear 
 which you try to check come from a deep well . tell I , povero fanciullo 
 mio "   the sweet italian vowel , though Lenny do not understand they , 
 sound softly and soothingly , - " tell I , my child , how all this 
 happen . perhaps I can help you ; we have all err , - we should all help 
 each other . " 

 Lenny 's heart , that just before have seem bind in brass , find itself 
 a way as the Italian speak thus kindly , and the tear rush down ; but 
 he again stop they , and gulp out sturdily , - 

 " I have not do no wrong ; it ben't   my fault , - and ' t be that which 
 kill I ! " conclude Lenny , with a burst of energy . 

 " you have not do wrong ? then , " say the philosopher , draw out 
 his pocket - handkerchief with great composure , and spread it on the 
 ground , - " then I may sit beside you . I could only stoop pityingly over 
 sin , but I can lie down on equal term with misfortune . " 

 Lenny Fairfield do not quite comprehend the word , but enough of their 
 general meaning be apparent to make he cast a grateful glance on the 
 Italian . Riccabocca resume , as he adjust the pocket - handkerchief , " I 
 have a right to your confidence , my child , for I have be afflict 
 in my day ; yet I too say with thee , ' I have not do wrong . ' Cospetto ! " 
  and here the doctor seat himself deliberately , rest one arm on 
 the side column of the stock , in familiar contact with the 
 captive 's shoulder , while his eye wander over the lovely scene 
 around   - " Cospetto ! my prison , if they have catch I , would not have have 
 so fair a look - out as this . but , to be sure , it be all one ; there be no 
 ugly love , and no handsome prison . " 

 with that sententious maxim , which , indeed , he utter in his native 
 Italian , Riccabocca turn round and renew his soothe invitation to 
 confidence . a friend in need be a friend indeed , even if he come in 
 the guise of a Papist and wizard . all Lenny 's ancient dislike to the 
 foreigner have go , and he tell he his little tale . 

 Dr. Riccabocca be much too shrewd a man not to see exactly the motif 
 which have induce Mr. Stirn to incarcerate his agent   bar only that 
 of personal grudge , to which Lenny 's account give he no clew . that a 
 man high in office should make a scapegoat of his own watch - dog for an 
 unlucky snap , or even an indiscreet bark , be nothing strange to the 
 wisdom of the student of Machiavelli . however , he set himself to the 
 task of consolation with equal philosophy and tenderness . he begin by 
 reminding , or rather inform , Leonard Fairfield of all the instance 
 of illustrious man afflict by the injustice of other that occur to 
 his own excellent memory . he tell he how the great Epictetus , when in 
 slavery , have a master whose favourite amusement be pinch his leg , 
 which , as the amusement end in break that limb , be bad than the 
 stock . he also tell he the anecdote of Lenny 's own gallant countryman , 
 Admiral Byng , whose execution give rise to Voltaire 's celebrated 
 witticism , " En Angleterre on tue un admiral pour encourager les autre . " 

   " in England they execute one admiral in order to encourage the 
  other . " 

 many other illustration , still more pertinent to the case in point , his 
 erudition supply from the store of history . but on see that 
 Lenny do not seem in the slight degree console by these memorable 
 example , he shift his ground , and reduce his logic to the strict 
 argumentum ad rem , begin to prove , first , that there be no disgrace 
 at all in Lenny 's present position , that every equitable person 
 would recognize the tyranny of Stirn and the innocence of its victim ; 
 secondly , that if even here he be mistaken , for public opinion be 
 not always righteous , what be public opinion after all ? - " a breath , a 
 puff , " cry Dr. Riccabocca , " a thing without matter , - without length , 
 breadth , or substance , - a shadow , a goblin of our own creating . a man 's 
 own conscience be his sole tribunal , and he should care no more for that 
 phantom ' opinion ' than he should fear meet a ghost if he cross the 
 churchyard at dark . " 

 now , as Lenny do very much fear meet a ghost if he cross the 
 churchyard at dark , the simile spoil the argument , and he shake his 
 head very mournfully . Dr. Riccabocca , be about to enter into a third 
 course of reasoning , which , have it come to an end , would doubtless have 
 settle the matter , and reconcile Lenny to sit in the stock till 
 doomsday , when the captive , with the quick ear and eye of terror and 
 calamity , become conscious that church be over , that the congregation 
 in a few second more would be flock thitherward . he see visionary 
 hat and bonnet through the tree , which Riccabocca see not , despite 
 all the excellence of his spectacle ; hear phantasmal rustling and 
 murmuring which Riccabocca hear not , despite all that theoretical 
 experience in plot , stratagem , and treason , which should have make 
 the Italian 's ear as fine as a conspirator 's or a mole 's . and with 
 another violent but vain effort at escape , the prisoner exclaim , - 

 " oh , if I could but get out before they come ! let I out , let I out ! 
 oh , kind sir , have pity , - let I out ! " 

 " Diavolo ! " say the philosopher , startle , " I wonder that I never 
 think of that before . after all , I believe he have hit the right nail 
 on the head , " and , look close , he perceive that though the partition 
 of wood have hitch firmly into a sort of spring - clasp , which defy 
 Lenny 's unaided struggle , still it be not lock   for , indeed , the 
 padlock and key be snug in the justice - room of the squire , who never 
 dream that his order would be execute so literally and summarily 
 as to dispense with all formal appeal to himself . as soon as Dr. 
 Riccabocca make that discovery , it occur to he that all the wisdom 
 of all the school that ever exist can not   reconcile man or boy to a bad 
 position - the moment there be a fair opportunity of let he out of 
 it . accordingly , without more ado , he lift up the creak board , and 
 Lenny Fairfield dart forth like a bird from a cage , halt a moment as 
 if for breath , or in joy ; and then , take at once to his heel , flee , 
 as a hare to its form , fast to his mother 's home . 

 Dr. Riccabocca drop the yawn wood into its place , pick up 
 his handkerchief and restore it to his pocket ; and then , with some 
 curiosity , begin to examine the nature of that place of duress which 
 have cause so much painful emotion to its rescue victim . " Man be a 
 very irrational animal at good , " quoth the sage , soliloquizing , " and be 
 frighten by strange buggaboo ! ' t be but a piece of wood ! how little 
 it really injure ! and , after all , the hole be but rest to the leg , 
 and keep the foot out of the dirt . and this green bank to sit upon , 
 under the shade of the elm - tree - verily the position must be more 
 pleasant than otherwise ! I have   a great mind - " here the doctor look 
 around , and see the coast still clear , the oddest notion imaginable 
 take possession of he ; yet , not indeed a notion so odd , consider 
 philosophically , - for all philosophy be base on practical 
 experiment , - and Dr. Riccabocca feel an irresistible desire practically 
 to experience what manner of thing that punishment of the stock really 
 be . " I can but try ! only for a moment , " say he apologetically to his 
 own expostulate sense of dignity . " I have time to do it , before any 
 one come . " he lift up the partition again : but stock be build 
 on the true principle of english law , and do not   easily allow a man to 
 criminate himself , - it be hard to get into they without the help of 
 a friend . however , as we before notice , obstacle only whet Dr. 
 Riccabocca 's invention . he look round , and see a withered bit of stick 
 under the tree ; this he insert in the division of the stock , somewhat 
 in the manner in which boy place a stick under a sieve for the purpose 
 of ensnare sparrow ; the fatal wood thus prop , Dr. Riceabocca sit 
 gravely down on the bank , and thrust his foot through the aperture . 

 " nothing in it ! " cry he , triumphantly , after a moment 's deliberation . 
 " the evil be only in idea . such be the boasted reason of mortal ! " with 
 that reflection , nevertheless , he be about to withdraw his foot from 
 their voluntary dilemma , when the crazy stick suddenly give way and 
 the partition fall back into its clasp . Dr. Riceabocca be fairly 
 catch , - " Facilis descensus - se revocare gradum ! " true , his hand be 
 at liberty , but his leg be so long that , be thus fix , they keep 
 the hand from the rescue ; and as Dr. Riccabocca 's form be by no mean 
 supple , and the twin part of the wood stick together with that firmness 
 of adhesion which thing newly paint possess , so , after some vain 
 twist and contortion , in which he succeed at length   not without a 
 stretch of the sinew that make they crack again   in find the clasp 
 and break his nail thereon , the victim of his own rash experiment 
 resign himself to his fate . Dr. Riceabocca be one of those man who 
 never do thing by half . when I say he resign himself , I mean not 
 only christian but philosophical resignation . the position be not quite 
 so pleasant as , theoretically , he have deem it ; but he resolve to 
 make himself as comfortable as he could . at first , as be natural in all 
 trouble to man who have grow familiar with that odoriferous comforter 
 which Sir Walter Raleigh be say first to have bestow upon the 
 caucasian race , the doctor make use of his hand to extract from his 
 pocket his pipe , match - box , and tobacco - pouch . after a few whiff he 
 would have be quite reconcile to his situation , but for the discovery 
 that the sun have shift its place in the heaven , and be no long 
 shade from his face by the elm - tree . the doctor again look round , and 
 perceive that his red silk umbrella , which he have lay aside when he 
 have seat himself by Lenny , be within arm 's reach . possess himself 
 of this treasure , he soon expand its friendly fold . and thus , doubly 
 fortify within and without , under shade of the umbrella , and his 
 pipe composedly between his lip , Dr. Riceabocca gaze on his own 
 incarcerate leg , even with complacency . 

 " ' he who can despise all thing , ' " say he , in one of his native 
 proverb , " ' possess all thing ! ' - if one despise freedom , one be 
 free ! this seat be as soft as a sofa ! I be not sure , " he resume , 
 soliloquize , after a pause , - " I be not sure that there be not 
 something more witty than manly and philosophical in that national 
 proverb of mine which I quote to the fanciullo , ' that there be 
 no handsome prison ' ! do not the son of that celebrated Frenchman , 
 surname Bras de Fer , write a book not only to prove that adversity 
 be more necessary than prosperity , but that among all adversity a 
 prison be the most pleasant and profitable ? but be not this condition of 
 mine , voluntarily and experimentally incur , a type of my life ? be 
 it the first time that I have thrust myself into a hobble ? and if in a 
 hobble of mine own choosing , why should I blame the god ? " 

 upon this , Dr. Riceabocca fall into a train of musing so remote from 
 time and place , that in a few minute he no more remember that he be 
 in the parish stock than a lover remember that flesh be grass , a miser 
 that mammon be perishable , a philosopher that wisdom be vanity . Dr. 
 Riccabocca be in the cloud . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 the dull dog that ever write a novel   and , entre nous , reader   - but 
 let it go no far , - we have a good many dog among the fraternity 
 that be not Munitos might have see with half an eye that the parson 's 
 discourse have produce a very genial and humanizing effect upon his 
 audience . 

   Munito be the name of a dog famous for his learning   a Porson of a 
  dog   at the date of my childhood . there be no such dog nowadays . 

 when all be over , and the congregation stand up to let Mr. Hazeldean 
 and his family walk first down the aisle   for that be the custom at 
 Hazeldean , moistened eye glance at the squire 's sun - burn manly 
 face , with a kindness that bespoke revive memory of many a generous 
 benefit and ready service . the head might be wrong now and then , - the 
 heart be in the right place after all . and the lady lean on his arm 
 come in for a large share of that gracious good feeling . true , she now 
 and then give a little offence when the cottage be not so clean as 
 she fancy they ought to be , - and poor folk do not   like a liberty take 
 with their house any more than the rich do ; true that she be not quite 
 so popular with the woman as the squire be , for , if the husband go 
 too often to the ale - house , she always lay the fault on the wife , 
 and say , " no man would go out of door for his comfort , if he have 
 a smile face and a clean hearth at his home ; " whereas the squire 
 maintain the more gallant opinion that " if Gill be a shrew , it be 
 because Jack do not , as in duty bind , stop her mouth with a kiss ! " 
 still , notwithstanding these more obnoxious notion on her part , and a 
 certain awe inspire by the stiff silk gown and the handsome aquiline 
 nose , it be impossible , especially in the softened temper of 
 that Sunday afternoon , not to associate the honest , comely , beam 
 countenance of Mrs. Hazeldean with comfortable recollection of soup , 
 jelly , and wine in sickness , loaf and blanket in winter , cheer 
 word and ready visit in every little distress , and pretexts afford 
 by improvement in the ground and garden   improvement which , as the 
 squire , who prefer productive labour , justly complain , " would never 
 finish "   for little timely job of work to some veteran grandsire , who 
 still like to earn a penny , or some ruddy urchin in a family that " come 
 too fast . " nor be Frank , as he walk a little behind , in the whitest 
 of trouser and the stiff of neckcloth , - with a look of suppress 
 roguery in his bright hazel eye , that contrast his assumed stateliness 
 of mien , - without his portion of the silent blessing . not that he have 
 do anything yet to deserve it ; but we all give youth so large a credit 
 in the future . as for Miss Jemima , her trifle foible only rise from 
 too soft and feminine a susceptibility , too ivy - like a yearning for some 
 masculine oak whereon to entwine she tendril ; and so little confine to 
 self be the natural lovingness of her disposition , that she have help 
 many a village lass to find a husband , by the bribe of a marriage gift 
 from her own privy purse ; notwithstanding the assurance with which she 
 accompany the marriage gift , - namely , that " the bridegroom would turn 
 out like the rest of his ungrateful sex ; but that it be a comfort to 
 think that it would be all one in the approach crash ! " so that she 
 have her warm partisan , especially amongst the young ; while the 
 slim captain , on whose arm she rest her forefinger , be at least 
 a civil - speak gentleman , who have never do any harm , and who would 
 doubtless do a deal of good if he belong to the parish . Nay , even 
 the fat footman who come last , with the family Prayer - book , have his due 
 share in the general association of neighbourly kindness between hall 
 and hamlet . few be there present to whom he have not extend the 
 right - hand of fellowship with a full horn of October in the clasp of 
 it ; and he be a hazeldean man , too , bear and breed , as two - third of 
 the squire 's household   now let themselves out from their large pew 
 under the gallery   be . 

 on his part , too , you could see that the squire " be move withal , " and 
 a little humble moreover . instead of walk erect , and take bow 
 and courtesy as a matter of course , and of no meaning , he hang his head 
 somewhat , and there be a slight blush on his cheek ; and as he glance 
 upward and round he - shyly , as it be - and his eye meet those friendly 
 look , it return they with an earnestness that have in it something 
 touch as well as cordial , - an eye that say , as well as eye could 
 say , " I do not   quite deserve it , I fear , neighbour ; but I thank you for 
 your good - will with my whole heart . " and so readily be that glance of 
 the eye understand , that I think , if that scene have take place out of 
 door instead of in the church , there would have be a hurrah as the 
 squire pass out of sight . 

 Scarcely have Mr. Hazeldean get clear of the churchyard , ere Mr. Stirn 
 be whisper in his ear . as Stirn whisper , the squire 's face grow 
 long , and his colour rise . the congregation , now flock out of the 
 church , exchange look with each other ; that ominous conjunction 
 between squire and man chill back all the effect of the parson 's 
 sermon . the squire strike his cane violently into the ground . " I 
 would rather you have tell I Black Bess have get the glander . a young 
 gentleman , come to visit my son , strike and insult in Hazeldean ; 
 a young gentleman , - 's death , sir , a relation - his grandmother be a 
 Hazeldean . I do believe Jemima 's right , and the world be come to an 
 end ! but Leonard Fairfield in the stock ! what will the parson say ? and 
 after such a sermon ! ' rich man , respect the poor ! ' and the good widow 
 too ; and poor Mark , who almost die in my arm ! stirn , you have a heart 
 of stone ! you confound , lawless , merciless miscreant , who the deuce 
 give you the right to imprison man or boy in my parish of Hazeldean 
 without trial , sentence , or warrant ? run and let the boy out before any 
 one see he : run , or I shall - " 

 the squire elevate the cane , and his eye shoot fire . Mr. Stirn do not 
 run , but he walk off very fast . the squire draw back a few pace , and 
 again take his wife 's arm . " just wait a bit for the parson , while I talk 
 to the congregation . I want to stop them all , if I can , from go into 
 the village ; but how ? " 

 Frank hear , and reply readily , - " give them some beer , sir . " 

 " Beer ! on a Sunday ! for shame , Frank ! " cry Mrs. Hazeldean . 

 " hold your tongue , Harry . thank you , Frank , " say the squire , and his 
 brow grow as clear as the blue sky above he . I doubt if Riccabocca 
 could have get he out of his dilemma with the same ease as Frank have 
 do . 

 " halt there , my man , - lad and lass too , - there , halt a bit . Mrs. 
 Fairfield , do you hear ? - halt . I think his reverence have give we a 
 capital sermon . go up to the Great House all of you , and drink a glass 
 to his health . Frank , go with they , and tell Spruce to tap one of the 
 cask keep for the haymaker . Harry "   this in a whisper , " catch the 
 parson , and tell he to come to I instantly . " 

 " my dear Hazeldean , what have happen ? you be mad . " 

 " do not   bother ; do what I tell you . " 

 " but where be the parson to find you ? " 

 " where ? gadzook , Mrs. H. , - at the stock , to be sure ! " 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 Dr. Riccabocca , awaken out of his revery by the sound of footstep , 
 be still so little sensible of the indignity of his position , that he 
 enjoy exceedingly , and with all the malice of his natural humour , 
 the astonishment and stupor manifest by Stirn , when that functionary 
 behold the extraordinary substitute which fate and philosophy have find 
 for Lenny Fairfield . instead of the weeping , crush , break - hearte 
 captive whom he have reluctantly come to deliver , he star speechless 
 and aghast upon the grotesque but tranquil figure of the doctor enjoy 
 his pipe , and cool himself under his umbrella , with a sangfroid 
 that be truly appalling and diabolical . indeed , consider that Stirn 
 always suspect the Papisher of have have a hand in the whole of that 
 black and midnight business , in which the stock have be break , bung 
 up , and consign to perdition , and that the Papisher have the evil 
 reputation of dabble in the Black Art , the hocus - pocus way in which 
 the Lenny he have incarcerate be transform into the doctor he find , 
 conjoin with the peculiarly strange eldrich and mephistophelean 
 physiognomy and person of Riccabocca , could not but strike a thrill of 
 superstitious dismay into the breast of the parochial tyrant ; while 
 to his first confused and stammer exclamation and interrogatory , 
 Riccabocca reply with so tragic an air , such ominous shake of the 
 head , such mysterious equivocating , long - word sentence , that Stirn 
 every moment feel more and more convinced that the boy have sell himself 
 to the Powers of Darkness , and that he himself , prematurely and in the 
 flesh , stand face to face with the Arch - Enemy . 

 Mr. Stirn have not yet recover his wonted intelligence , which , to do 
 him justice , be usually prompt enough , when the squire , follow hard 
 by the parson , arrive at the spot . indeed , Mrs. Hazeldean 's report of 
 the squire 's urgent message , disturb manner , and most unparalleled 
 invitation to the parishioner , have give wing to Parson Dale 's 
 ordinarily slow and sedate movement . and while the squire , share 
 Stirn 's amazement , beheld indeed a great pair of foot project from 
 the stock , and see behind they the grave face of Dr. Riccabocca under 
 the majestic shade of the umbrella , but not a vestige of the only 
 be his mind could identify with the tenancy of the stock , Mr. Dale , 
 catch he by the arm , and pant hard , exclaim with a petulance he 
 have never before be know to display , - except at the whist - table , - 

 " Mr. Hazeldean , Mr. Hazeldean , I be scandalize , - I be shock at you . 
 I can bear a great deal from you , sir , as I ought to do ; but to ask my 
 whole congregation , the moment after divine service , to go up and guzzle 
 ale at the Hall , and drink my health , as if a clergyman 's sermon have 
 be a speech at a cattle - fair ! I be ashamed of you , and of the parish ! 
 what on earth have come to you all ? " 

 " that be the very question I wish to Heaven I could answer , " groan the 
 squire , quite mildly and pathetically , - " what on earth have come to we 
 all ? ask Stirn : "   then burst out   " Stirn , you infernal rascal , do not 
 you hear ? what on earth have come to we all ? " 

 " the Papisher be at the bottom of it , sir , " say Stirn , provoke out of 
 all temper . " I do my duty , but I be but a mortal man , arter all . " 

 " a mortal fiddlestick ! where 's Leonard Fairfield , I say ? " 

 " he know well , " answer Stirn , retreat mechanically for safety 's 
 sake behind the parson , and point to Dr. Riccabocca . Hitherto , though 
 both the squire and parson have indeed recognize the italian , they have 
 merely suppose he to be seat on the bank . it never enter into 
 their head that so respectable and dignify a man could by any 
 possibility be an inmate , compel or voluntary , of the parish stock . 
 no , not even though , as I before say , the squire have see , just under 
 his nose , a very long pair of sol insert in the aperture , that 
 sight have only confused and bewilder he , unaccompanie , as it ought 
 to have be , with the trunk and face of Lenny Fairfield . those sol 
 seem to he optical delusion , phantom of the overheat brain ; but 
 now , catch hold of Stirn , while the parson in equal astonishment 
 catch hold of he , the squire falter out , " well , this beat 
 cock - fighting ! the man 's as mad as a March hare , and have take Dr. 
 Rickeybockey for Little Lenny ! " 

 " perhaps , " say the doctor , break silence with a bland smile , and 
 attempt an inclination of the head as courteous as his position would 
 permit , - " perhaps , if it be quite the same to you , before you proceed to 
 explanation , you will just help I out of the stock . " 

 the parson , despite his perplexity and anger , could not repress a smile , 
 as he approach his learn friend , and bend down for the purpose of 
 extricate he . 

 " Lord love your reverence , you would well not ! " cry Mr. Stirn . " do not   be 
 tempt , - he only want to get you into be claw . I would not go a near 
 he for all the - " 

 the speech be interrupt by Dr. Riccabocca himself , who now , thank to 
 the parson , have rise into his full height , and half a head tall than 
 all present - even than the tall squire - approach Mr. Stirn , with 
 a gracious wave of the hand . Mr. Stirn retreat rapidly towards the 
 hedge , amidst the bramble of which he plunge himself incontinently . 

 " I guess whom you take I for , Mr. Stirn , " say the Italian , lift his 
 hat with his characteristic politeness . " it be certainly a great honour ; 
 but you will know well one of these day , when the gentleman in 
 question admit you to a personal interview in another - and a hotter 
 world . " 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 " but how on earth do you get into my new stock ? " ask the squire , 
 scratch his head . 

 " my dear sir , Pliny the elder get into the crater of Mount Etna . " 

 " do he , and what for ? " 

 " to try what it be like , I suppose , " answer Riccabocca . the squire 
 burst out a laughing . 

 " and so you get into the stock to try what it be like . well , I can not 
 wonder , - it be a very handsome pair of stock , " continue the squire , 
 with a love look at the object of his praise . " nobody need be ashamed 
 of be see in those stock , - i'should not mind it myself . " 

 " we have well move on , " say the parson , dryly , " or we shall have the 
 whole village here presently , gaze on the lord of the manor in the 
 same predicament as that from which we have just extricate the doctor . 
 now , pray , what be the matter with Lenny Fairfield ? I can not   understand a 
 word of what have pass . you do not   mean to say that good Lenny Fairfield 
  who be absent from church , by the by   can have do anything to get 
 into disgrace ? " 

 " yes , he have though , " cry the squire . " Stirn , I say , stirn ! " but Stirn 
 have force his way through the hedge and vanish . thus leave to his own 
 power of narrative at secondhand , Mr. Hazeldean now tell all he have to 
 communicate , - the assault upon Randal Leslie , and the prompt punishment 
 inflict by Stirn ; his own indignation at the affront to his young 
 kinsman , and his good - natured merciful desire to save the culprit from 
 public humiliation . 

 the parson , mollify towards the rude and hasty invention of the 
 beer - drinking , take the squire by the hand . " ah , Mr. Hazeldean , forgive 
 I , " he say repentantly ; " I ought to have know at once that it be 
 only some ebullition of your heart that could stifle your sense of 
 decorum . but this be a sad story about Lenny brawl and fight on 
 the Sabbath - day . so unlike he , too . I do not   know what to make of it . " 

 " like or unlike , " say the squire , " it have be a gross insult to young 
 Leslie , and look all the bad because I and Audley be not just the 
 good friend in the world . I can not   think what it be , " continue Mr. 
 Hazeldean , musingly ; " but it seem that there must be always some 
 association of fighting connect with that prim half - brother of mine . 
 there be I , son of his own mother , - who might have be shoot through 
 the lung , only the ball lodge in the shoulder ! and now his wife 's 
 kinsman - my kinsman , too - grandmother a Hazeldean , - a hard - reading , 
 sober lad , as I be give to understand , can not   set his foot into the 
 quiet parish in the three kingdom , but what the mild boy that 
 ever be see make a rush at he like a mad bull . it be fatality ! " 
 cry the squire , solemnly . 

 " ancient legend record similar instance of fatality in certain 
 house , " observe Riccabocca . " there be the House of Pelops , and 
 polynice and Eteocles , the son of OEdipus . " 

 " Pshaw ! " say the parson ; " but what be to be do ? " 

 " do ? " say the squire ; " why , reparation must be make to young 
 Leslie . and though I wish to spare Lenny , the young ruffian , a public 
 disgrace - for your sake , Parson Dale , and Mrs. Fairfield 's - yet a good 
 can in private - " 

 " stop , sir ! " say Riccabocca , mildly , " and hear I . " the Italian then , 
 with much feeling and considerable tact , plead the cause of his poor 
 protege , and explain how Lenny 's error arise only from mistaken zeal 
 for the squire 's service , and in the execution of the order receive 
 from Mr. Stirn . 

 " that alter the matter , " say the squire , soften ; " and all that be 
 necessary now will be for he to make a proper apology to my kinsman . " 

 " yes , that be just , " rejoin the parson ; " but I still do not   learn how 
 he get out of the stock . " 

 Riccabocca then resume his tale ; and , after confess his own 
 principal share in Lenny 's escape , draw a moving picture of the boy 's 
 shame and honest mortification . " let we march against Philip ! " cry the 
 Athenians when they hear Demosthenes - 

 " let we go at once and comfort the child ! " cry the parson , before 
 Riccabocca could finish . 

 with that benevolent intention all three quicken their pace , and soon 
 arrive at the widow 's cottage . but Lenny have catch sight of their 
 approach through the window ; and not doubt that , in spite of 
 Riccabocca 's intercession , the parson be come to upbraid and the squire 
 to re - imprison , he dart out by the back way , get amongst the wood , 
 and lie there perdu all the evening . Nay , it be not till after dark 
 that his mother - who sit wring her hand in the little kitchen , and 
 try in vain to listen to the parson and Mrs. Dale , who   after send 
 in search of the fugitive   have kindly come to console the mother - hear 
 a timid knock at the door and a nervous fumble at the latch . she start 
 up , open the door , and Lenny spring to her bosom , and there bury his 
 face , sob aloud . 

 " no harm , my boy , " say the parson , tenderly ; " you have nothing to 
 fear , - all be explain and forgive . " 

 Lenny look up , and the vein on his forehead be much swollen . " Sir , " 
 say he , sturdily , " I do not   want to be forgive , - I be not   do no wrong . 
 and - I have   be disgrace - and I will not   go to school , never no more . " 

 " Hush , Carry ! " say the parson to his wife , who with the usual 
 liveliness of her little temper , be about to expostulate . " good - night , 
 Mrs. Fairfield . I shall come and talk to you to - morrow , Lenny ; by that 
 time you will think well of it . " 

 the parson then conduct his wife home , and go up to the Hall to 
 report Lenny 's safe return ; for the squire be very uneasy about he , 
 and have even in person share the search . as soon as he hear Lenny 
 be safe - " well , " say the squire , " let he go the first thing in the 
 morning to Rood Hall , to ask Master Leslie 's pardon , and all will be 
 right and smooth again . " 

 " a young villain ! " cry Frank , with his cheek the colour of scarlet ; 
 " to strike a gentleman and an Etonian , who have just be to call on I ! 
 but I wonder Randal let he off so well , - any other boy in the sixth 
 form would have kill he ! " 

 " Frank , " say the parson , sternly , " if we all have our desert , what 
 should be do to he who not only let the sun go down on his own 
 wrath , but strive with uncharitable breath to fan the die ember of 
 another 's ? " 

 the clergyman here turn away from Frank , who bite his lip , and seem 
 abash , while even his mother say not a word in his exculpation ; for 
 when the parson do reprove in that stern tone , the majesty of the 
 Hall stand awe before the rebuke of the Church . Catching Riccabocca 's 
 inquisitive eye , Mr. Dale draw aside the philosopher , and whisper to 
 he his fear that it would be a very hard matter to induce Lenny to beg 
 Randal Leslie 's pardon , and that the proud stomach of the pattern - boy 
 would not digest the stock with as much ease as a long regimen of 
 philosophy have enable the sage to do . this conference Miss Jemima soon 
 interrupt by a direct appeal to the doctor respect the number of 
 year   even without any previous and more violent incident   that the 
 world could possibly withstand its own wear and tear . 

 " Ma'am , " say the doctor , reluctantly summon away to look at a passage 
 in some prophetic periodical upon that interesting subject , - " ma'am , 
 it be very hard that you should make one remember the end of the world , 
 since , in converse with you , one 's natural temptation be to forget its 
 existence . " 

 Miss Jemima 's cheek be suffuse with a deep scarlet than Frank 's 
 have be a few minute before . certainly that deceitful , heartless 
 compliment justify all her contempt for the male sex ; and yet - such be 
 human blindness - it go far to redeem all mankind in her credulous and 
 too confide soul . 

 " he be about to propose , " sigh Miss Jemima . 

 " Giacomo , " say Riccabocca , as he draw on his nightcap , and step 
 majestically into the four - post bed , " I think we shall get that boy 
 for the garden now ! " 

 thus each spur his hobby , or drive her car , round the Hazeldean 
 whirligig . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

 whatever , may be the ultimate success of Miss Jemima Hazeldean 's design 
 upon Dr. Riccabocca , the machiavellian sagacity with which the Italian 
 have count upon secure the service of Lenny Fairfield be speedily 
 and triumphantly establish by the result . no voice of the parson 's , 
 charm he ever so wisely , could persuade the peasant - boy to go and ask 
 pardon of the young gentleman , to whom , because he have do as he be 
 bid , he owe an agonizing defeat and a shameful incarceration ; and , 
 to Mrs. Dale 's vexation , the widow take the boy 's part . she be deeply 
 offend at the unjust disgrace Lenny have undergo in be put in the 
 stock ; she share his pride , and openly approve his spirit . nor be 
 it without great difficulty that Lenny could be induce to resume his 
 lesson at school , - nay , even to set foot beyond the precinct of his 
 mother 's holding . the point of the school at last he yield , though 
 sullenly ; and the parson think it well to temporize as to the more 
 unpalatable demand . unluckily , Lenny 's apprehension of the mockery that 
 await he in the merciless world of his village be realize . though 
 Stirn at first keep his own counsel the tinker blab the whole affair . 
 and after the search institute for Lenny on the fatal night , all 
 attempt to hush up what have pass would have be impossible . so then 
 Stirn tell his story , as the tinker have tell his own ; both tale be 
 very unfavourable to Leonard Fairfield . the pattern - boy have break the 
 Sabbath , fight with his better , and be well maul into the bargain ; 
 the village lad have side with Stirn and the authority in spy out 
 the misdemeanour of his equal therefore Leonard Fairfield , in both 
 capacity of degraded pattern - boy and baffled spy , could expect no 
 mercy , - he be ridicule in the one , and hat in the other . 

 it be true that , in the presence of the schoolmaster and under the eye 
 of Mr. Dale , no one openly give vent to malignant feeling ; but the 
 moment those check be remove , popular persecution begin . 

 some point and mow at he , some curse he for a sneak , and all 
 shun his society ; voice be hear in the hedgerow , as he pass 
 through the village at dusk , " who be put into the stock ? - baa ! " " who 
 get a bloody nob for play spy to Nick Stirn ? - baa ! " to resist this 
 specie of aggression would have be a vain attempt for a wise head 
 and a cold temper than our poor pattern - boy 's . he take his resolution 
 at once , and his mother approve it ; and the second or third day after 
 Dr. Riccabocca 's return to the Casino , Lenny Fairfield present himself 
 on the terrace with a little bundle in his hand . " please , sir , " say he 
 to the doctor , who be sit cross - legged on the balustrade , with his 
 red silk umbrella over his head , - " please , sir , if you will be good enough 
 to take I now , and give I any hole to sleep in , I will work for 
 your honour night and day ; and as for wage , Mother say , ' just suit 
 yourself , sir . ' " 

 " my child , " say the doctor , take Lenny by the hand , and look at 
 he with the sagacious eye of a wizard , " I know you would come ! and 
 Giacomo be already prepare for you ! as to wage , we will talk of they by 
 and by . " 

 Lenny be thus settle , his mother look for some evening on the 
 vacant chair , where he have so long sit in the place of her beloved 
 Mark ; and the chair seem so comfortless and desolate , thus leave all to 
 itself , that she could bear it no long . 

 indeed the village have grow as distasteful to she as to Lenny , - perhaps 
 more so ; and one morning she hail the steward as he be trot his 
 hog - maue cob beside the door , and bid he tell the squire that ' she 
 would take it very kind if he would let she off the six month ' notice 
 for the land and premise she hold ; there be plenty to step into the 
 place at a much well rent . " 

 " you be a fool , " say the good - natured steward ; " and I be very glad you 
 do not speak to that fellow Stirn instead of to I . you have   be do 
 extremely well here , and have the place , I may say , for nothing . " 

 " nothing as to rent , sir , but a great deal as to feelin ' , " say the 
 widow . " and now Lenny have go to work with the foreign gentleman , I 
 should like to go and live near he . " 

 " ah , yes , I hear Lenny have take himself off to the Casino , more fool 
 he ; but , bless your heart , ' t be no distance , - two mile or so . can not   he 
 come home every night after work ? " 

 " no , sir , " exclaim the widow , almost fiercely ; " he sha'n't   come home 
 here , to be call bad name and jeer at ! - he whom my dead good man 
 be so fond and proud of . no , sir ; we poor folk have our feeling , as 
 I say to Mrs. Dale , and as I will say to the squire hisself . not that 
 I do not   thank he for all favour , - he be a good gentleman if let alone ; 
 but he say he will not   come near we till Lenny go and axis pardin . 
 pardin for what , I should like to know ? poor lamb ! I wish you could ha ' 
 see his nose , sir , - as big as your two fist . ax pardin ! if the squire 
 have have such a nose as that , I do not   think it be pardin he have be ha ' 
 ax . but I let the passion get the well of I , - I humbly beg you will 
 excuse it , sir . I be no schollard , as poor Mark be , and Lenny would have 
 be , if the Lord have not visit us otherway . therefore just get the 
 squire to let I go as soon as may be ; and as for the bit o ' hay and 
 what be on the ground and orchard , the new comer will no doubt settle 
 that . " 

 the steward , find no eloquence of his could induce the widow 
 to relinquish her resolution , take her message to the squire . Mr. 
 Hazeldean , who be indeed really offend at the boy 's obstinate refusal 
 to make the amende honorable to randal Leslie , at first only bestow a 
 hearty curse or two on the pride and ingratitude both of mother and son . 
 it may be suppose , however , that his second thought be more gentle , 
 since that evening , though he do not go himself to the widow , he send 
 his " Harry . " now , though Harry be sometimes austere and brusque 
 enough on her own account , and in such business as might especially be 
 transact between herself and the cottager , yet she never appear as 
 the delegate of her lord except in the capacity of a herald of peace and 
 mediating angel . it be with good heart , too , that she undertake 
 this mission , since , as we have see , both mother and son be great 
 favourite of her . she enter the cottage with the friendly beam 
 in her bright blue eye , and it be with the soft tone of her 
 frank cordial voice that she accost the widow . but she be no more 
 successful than the steward have be . the truth be , that I do not   believe 
 the haughty duke in the three kingdom be really so proud as your 
 plain english rural peasant , nor half so hard to propitiate and deal 
 with when his sense of dignity be ruffle . nor be there many of my own 
 literary brother   thin - skinned creature though we be   so sensitively 
 alive to the Public Opinion , wisely despise by Dr. Riccabocca , as that 
 same peasant . he can endure a good deal of contumely sometimes , it be 
 true , from his superior   though , thank Heaven ! that he rarely meet 
 with unjustly ; but to be look down upon and mock and point at by 
 his own equal - his own little world - cut he to the soul . and if you 
 can succeed in break this pride and destroy this sensitiveness , 
 then he be a lost being . he can never recover his self - esteem , and 
 you have chuck he half - way - a stolid , inert , sullen victim - to the 
 perdition of the prison or the convict - ship . 

 of this stuff be the nature both of the widow and her son . have the 
 honey of Plato flow from the tongue of Mrs. Hazeldean , it could not 
 have turn into sweetness the bitter spirit upon which it descend . 
 but Mrs. Hazeldean , though an excellent woman , be rather a bluff , 
 plain - speak one ; and after all she have some little feeling for the son 
 of a gentleman , and a decayed , fallen gentleman , who , even by Lenny 's 
 account , have be assail without any intelligible provocation ; nor 
 could she , with her strong common - sense , attach all the importance which 
 Mrs. Fairfield do to the unmannerly impertinence of a few young cub , 
 which she say truly , " would soon die away if no notice be take of 
 it . " the widow 's mind be make up , and Mrs. Hazeldean depart , - with 
 much chagrin and some displeasure . 

 Mrs. Fairfield , however , tacitly understand that the request she have 
 make be grant , and early one morning her door be find lock , the 
 key left at a neighbour 's to be give to the steward ; and , on further 
 inquiry , it be ascertain that her furniture and effect have be 
 remove by the errand cart in the dead of the night . Lenny have succeed 
 in find a cottage on the road - side , not far from the Casino ; and 
 there , with a joyous face , he wait to welcome his mother to breakfast , 
 and show how he have spend the night in arrange her furniture . 

 " Parson ! " cry the squire , when all this news come upon he , as he be 
 walk arm in arm with Mr. Dale to inspect some propose improvement in 
 the Almshouse , " this be all your fault . why do you not go and talk to 
 that brute of a boy and that dolt of a woman ? you have   get ' soft sawder 
 enough , ' as Frank call it in his new - fashioned slang . " 

 " as if I have not talk myself hoarse to both ! " say the parson , in a 
 tone of reproachful surprise at the accusation . " but it be in vain ! 
 o squire , if you have take my advice about the stock , - ' quieta non 
 movere ' ! " 

 " Bother ! " say the squire . " I suppose I be to be hold up as a tyrant , 
 a Nero , a Richard the Third , or a Grand Inquisitor , merely for have 
 thing smart and tidy ! stock indeed ! your friend Rickeybockey say he 
 be never more comfortable in his life , - quite enjoy sit there . 
 and what do not hurt Rickeybockey 's dignity   a very gentlemanlike 
 man he be , when he please   ought to be no such great matter to Master 
 Leonard Fairfield . but ' t be no use talk ! what be to be do now ? the 
 woman must not starve ; and I be sure she can not   live out of Rickeybockey 's 
 wage to Lenny , - by the way , I hope he do not   board the boy upon his 
 and Jackeymo 's leaving : I hear they dine upon newts and stickleback , 
 faugh ! I will tell you what , Parson , now I think of it , at the back of the 
 cottage which she have take there be some field of capital land just 
 vacant . rickeybockey want to have them , and sound I as to the rent 
 when he be at the Hall . I only half promise he the refusal . and he 
 must give up four or five acre of the good land round the cottage to 
 the widow - just enough for she to manage - and she can keep a dairy . 
 if she want capital , I will lend she some in your name , - only do not   tell 
 Stirn ; and as for the rent - we will talk of that when we see how she get 
 on , thankless , obstinate jade that she be ! you see , " add the squire , 
 as if he feel there be some apology due for this generosity to an 
 object whom he profess to consider so ungrateful , " her husband be a 
 faithful servant , and so - I wish you would not stand there star I 
 out of countenance , but go down to the woman at once , or Stirn will 
 have let the land to Rickeybockey , as sure as a gun . and hark ye , Dale , 
 perhaps you can contrive , if the woman be so cursedly stiffbacke , not 
 to say the land be mine , or that it be any favour I want to do she - or , 
 in short , manage it as you can for the good . " still even this charitable 
 message fail . the widow know that the land be the squire 's , and worth 
 a good L3 an acre . " she thank he humbly for that and all favour ; but 
 she could not afford to buy cow , and she do not wish to be beholden 
 to any one for her living . and Lenny be well off at Mr. Rickeybockey 's , 
 and come on wonderfully in the garden way , and she do not doubt she 
 could get some washing ; at all event , her haystack would bring in a 
 good bit of money , and she should do nicely , thank their honour . " 

 nothing far could be do in the direct way , but the remark about 
 the washing suggest some mode of indirectly benefit the widow ; 
 and a little time afterwards , the sole laundress in that immediate 
 neighbourhood happen to die , a hint from the squire obtain from 
 the landlady of the inn opposite the Casino such custom as she have to 
 bestow , which at time be not inconsiderable . and what with Lenny 's 
 wage   whatever that mysterious item might be , the mother and son 
 contrive to live without exhibit any of those physical sign of fast 
 and abstinence which Riccabocca and his valet gratuitously afford to 
 the student in animal anatomy . 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 of all the ware and commodity in exchange and barter , wherein so 
 mainly consist the civilization of our modern world , there be not one 
 which be so carefully weigh , so accurately measure , so plumb and 
 gauge , so dole and scrap , so pour out in minima and balance with 
 scruple , - as that necessary of social commerce call " an apology " ! if 
 the chemist be half so careful in vend their poison , there would 
 be a notable diminution in the yearly average of victim to arsenic and 
 oxalic acid . but , alas ! in the matter of apology , it be not from the 
 excess of the dose , but the timid , niggardly , miserly manner in which 
 it be dispense , that poor Humanity be hurry off to the Styx ! how many 
 time do a life depend on the exact proportion of an apology ! be it 
 a hairbreadth too short to cover the scratch for which you want it ? make 
 your will , - you be a dead man ! a life do I say ? - a hecatomb of life ! 
 how many war would have be prevent , how many throne would be 
 stand , dynasty flourish , commonwealth brawl round a bema , 
 or fit out galley for corn and cotton , if an inch or two more 
 of apology have be add to the proffer ell ! but then that plaguy , 
 jealous , suspicious , old vinegar - face Honour , and her partner Pride - as 
 penny - wise and pound - foolish a she - skinflint as herself - have the 
 monopoly of the article . and what with the time they lose in adjust 
 their spectacle , hunt in the precise shelf for the precise quality 
 demand , then   quality find   the haggling as to quantum , - consider 
 whether it should be Apothecary 's weight or Avoirdupois , or English 
 measure or flemish , - and , finally , the hullabuloo they make if the 
 customer be not perfectly satisfied with the monstrous little he get 
 for his money , I do not   wonder , for my part , how one lose temper 
 and patience , and send Pride , Honour , and Apology all to the devil . 
 aristophane , in his comedy of " Peace , " insinuate a beautiful allegory 
 by only suffer that goddess , though in fact she be his heroine , to 
 appear as a mute . she take care never to open her lip . the shrewd 
 Greek know very well that she would cease to be Peace , if she once begin 
 to chatter . wherefore , o reader , if ever you find your pump under the 
 iron heel of another man 's boot , Heaven grant that you may hold your 
 tongue , and not make thing past all endurance and forgiveness by 
 bawl out for an apology ! 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 but the squire and his son , Frank , be large - hearted generous creature 
 in the article of apology , as in all thing less skimpingly deal out . 
 and see that Leonard Fairfield would offer no plaster to randal 
 Leslie , they make amend for his stinginess by their own prodigality . 
 the squire accompany his son to Rood Hall , and none of the family 
 choose to be at home , the squire in his own hand , and from his own 
 head , indite and compose an epistle which might have satisfy all the 
 wound which the dignity of the Leslies have ever receive . 

 this letter of apology end with a hearty request that Randal would 
 come and spend a few day with his son . Frank 's epistle be to the same 
 purport , only more etonian and less legible . 

 it be some day before Randal 's reply to these epistle be 
 receive . the reply bear the address of a village near London ; and 
 state that the writer be now read with a tutor preparatory to 
 entrance to Oxford , and could not , therefore , accept the invitation 
 extend to he . 

 for the rest , Randal express himself with good sense , though not with 
 much generosity . he excuse his participation in the vulgarity of such a 
 conflict by a bitter , but short allusion to the obstinacy and ignorance 
 of the village boor ; and do not do what you , my kind reader , certainly 
 would have do under similar circumstance , - namely , intercede in 
 behalf of a brave and unfortunate antagonist . Most of we like a foe 
 well after we have fight he , - that be , if we be the conquering 
 party ; this be not the case with Randal Leslie . there , so far as the 
 Etonian be concern , the matter rest . and the squire , irritate that 
 he could not repair whatever wrong that young gentleman have sustain , 
 no long feel a pang of regret as he pass by Mrs. Fairfield 's 
 deserted cottage . 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

 Lenny Fairfield continue to give great satisfaction to his new 
 employer , and to profit in many respect by the familiar kindness with 
 which he be treat . Riccabocca , who value himself on penetrate into 
 character , have from the first see that much stuff of no common quality 
 and texture be to be find in the disposition and mind of the english 
 village boy . on further acquaintance , he perceive that , under a child 's 
 innocent simplicity , there be the working of an acuteness that 
 required but development and direction . he ascertain that the 
 pattern - boy 's progress at the village school proceed from something 
 more than mechanical docility and readiness of comprehension . Lenny have 
 a keen thirst for knowledge , and through all the disadvantage of birth 
 and circumstance , there be the indication of that natural genius 
 which convert disadvantage themselves into stimulant . still , with 
 the germ of good quality lie the embryo of those which , difficult to 
 separate , and hard to destroy , often mar the produce of the soil . with 
 a remarkable and generous pride in self - repute , there be some 
 stubbornness ; with great sensibility to kindness , there be also strong 
 reluctance to forgive affront . 

 this mixed nature in an uncultivated peasant 's breast interested 
 Riccabocca , who , though long seclude from the commerce of mankind , 
 still look upon man as the most various and entertaining volume which 
 philosophical research can explore . he soon accustom the boy to the 
 tone of a conversation generally subtle and suggestive ; and Lenny 's 
 language and idea become insensibly less rustic and more refined . 
 then Riccabocca select from his library , small as it be , book that , 
 though elementary , be of a high cast than Lenny could have find 
 within his reach at Hazeldean . Riccabocca know the English language 
 well , - well in grammar , construction , and genius than many a not 
 ill - educate Englishman ; for he have study it with the minuteness with 
 which a scholar study a dead language , and amidst his collection he 
 have many of the book which have formerly serve he for that purpose . 
 these be the first work he lend to Lenny . meanwhile Jackeymo impart 
 to the boy many secret in practical gardening and minute husbandry , 
 for at that day farming in England   some favour county and 
 estate except   be far below the nicety to which the art have be 
 immemorially carry in the north of Italy , - where , indeed , you may 
 travel for mile and mile as through a series of market - garden ; so 
 that , all these thing consider , Leonard Fairfield might be say to 
 have make a change for the well . yet , in truth , and look below the 
 surface , that might be fair matter of doubt . for the same reason which 
 have induce the boy to fly his native village , he no long repair to 
 the church of Hazeldean . the old intimate intercourse between he and 
 the parson become necessarily suspend , or bound to an occasional 
 kindly visit from the latter , - visit which grow more rare and less 
 familiar , as he find his former pupil in no want of his service , and 
 wholly deaf to his mild entreaty to forget and forgive the past , and 
 come at least to his old seat in the parish church . Lenny still go to 
 church , - a church a long way off in another parish , - but the sermon do 
 not do he the same good as Parson Dale 's have do ; and the clergyman , 
 who have his own flock to attend to , do not condescend , as Parson Dale 
 would have do , to explain what seem obscure , and enforce what be 
 profitable , in private talk , with that stray lamb from another 's fold . 

 now I question much if all Dr. Riccabocca 's maxim , though they be 
 often very moral and generally very wise , serve to expand the peasant 
 boy 's native good quality , and correct his bad , half so well as the 
 few simple word , not at all indebted to Machiavelli , which Leonard have 
 once reverently listen to when he stand by Mark 's elbow - chair , yield 
 up for the moment to the good parson , worthy to sit in it ; for Mr. Dale 
 have a heart in which all the fatherless of the parish find their place . 
 nor be this loss of tender , intimate , spiritual lore so counterbalance 
 by the great facility for purely intellectual instruction as modern 
 enlightenment might presume . for , without dispute the advantage of 
 knowledge in a general way , knowledge , in itself , be not friendly 
 to content . its tendency , of course , be to increase the desire , to 
 dissatisfy we with what be , in order to urge progress to what may be ; 
 and in that progress , what unnoticed martyr among the many must fall 
 baffle and crush by the way ! to how large a number will be give 
 desire they will never realize , dissatisfaction of the lot from which 
 they will never rise ! allon ! one be view the dark side of the 
 question . it be all the fault of that confound Riccabocca , who have 
 already cause Lenny Fairfield to lean gloomily on his spade , and , after 
 look round and see no one near he , groan out querulously , - " and 
 be I bear to dig a potato ground ? " 

 Pardieu , my friend Lenny , if you live to be seventy , and ride in your 
 carriage , and by the help of a dinner - pill digest a spoonful of curry , 
 you may sigh to think what a relish there be in potato , roast in 
 ash after you have digge they out of that ground with your own stout 
 young hand . dig on , Lenny Fairfield , dig on ! Dr. Riccabocca will 
 tell you that there be once an illustrious personage -   the Emperor 
 Diocletian   - who make experience of two very different occupation , - one 
 be rule man , the other be plant cabbage ; he think plant 
 cabbage much the pleasanter of the two ! 




 CHAPTER XVIL 

 Dr. Riccabocca have secure Lenny Fairfield , and might therefore 
 be consider to have ride his hobby in the great whirligig with 
 adroitness and success . but Miss Jemima be still drive round in her 
 car , handle the rein , and flourish the whip , without apparently 
 have get an inch near to the fly form of Dr. Riccabocca . 

 indeed , that excellent and only too susceptible spinster , with all her 
 experience of the villany of man , have never conceive the wretch to be 
 so thoroughly beyond the reach of redemption as when Dr. Riccabocca take 
 his leave , and once more inter himself amidst the solitude of the 
 Casino , and without have make any formal renunciation of his criminal 
 celibacy . for some day she shut herself up in her own chamber , and 
 brood with more than her usual gloomy satisfaction on the certainty 
 of the approach crash . indeed , many sign of that universal calamity , 
 which , while the visit of Riccabocca last , she have permit herself 
 to consider ambiguous , now become luminously apparent . even the 
 newspaper , which during that credulous and happy period have give half a 
 column to Births and Marriages , now bear an ominously long catalogue of 
 death ; so that it seem as if the whole population have lose heart , and 
 have no chance of repair its daily loss . the lead article speak , 
 with the obscurity of a Pythian , of an impending crisis . monstrous 
 turnip sprout out from the paragraph devote to General News . cow 
 bear calf with two head , whale be strand in the Humber , shower 
 of frog descend in the High Street of Cheltenham . 

 all these symptom of the world 's decrepitude and consummation , which by 
 the side of the fascinating Riccabocca might admit of some doubt as to 
 their origin and cause , now , conjoin with the bad of all , namely , 
 the frightfully progressive wickedness of man , - leave to Miss Jemima 
 no ray of hope save that afford by the reflection that she could 
 contemplate the wreck of matter without a single sentiment of regret . 

 Mrs. Dale , however , by no mean share the despondency of her fair 
 friend , and have gain access to Miss Jemima 's chamber , succeed , 
 though not without difficulty , in her kindly attempt to cheer the 
 droop spirit of that female misanthropist . nor , in her benevolent 
 desire to speed the car of Miss Jemima to its hymeneal goal , be Mrs. 
 Dale so cruel towards her male friend , Dr. Riccabocca , as she seem to 
 her husband . for Mrs. Dale be a woman of shrewdness and penetration , as 
 most quick - temper woman be ; and she know that Miss Jemima be one 
 of those excellent young lady who be likely to value a husband in 
 proportion to the difficulty of obtain he . in fact , my reader of 
 both sex must often have meet , in the course of their experience , with 
 that peculiar sort of feminine disposition , which require the warmth of 
 the conjugal hearth to develop all its native good quality ; nor be 
 it to be blame overmuch if , innocently aware of this tendency in 
 its nature , it turn towards what be well fit for its growth and 
 improvement , by law akin to those which make the sunflower turn to 
 the sun , or the willow to the stream . lady of this disposition , 
 permanently thwart in their affectionate bias , gradually languish 
 away into intellectual inanition , or sprout out into those abnormal 
 eccentricity which be class under the general name of " oddity " or 
 " character . " but once admit to their proper soil , it be astonishing 
 what healthful improvement take place , - how the poor heart , before 
 starve and stint of nourishment , throw out its sucker , and burst 
 into bloom and fruit . and thus many a belle from whom the beaux have 
 stand aloof , only because the puppy think she could be have for the 
 asking , they see afterwards settle down into true wife and fond mother , 
 with amaze at their former disparagement , and a sigh at their blind 
 hardness of heart . 

 in all probability Mrs. Dale take this view of the subject ; and 
 certainly , in addition to all the hitherto dormant virtue which would 
 be awaken in Miss Jemima when fairly Mrs. Riccabocca , she count 
 somewhat upon the mere worldly advantage which such a match would bestow 
 upon the exile . so respectable a connection with one of the old , 
 wealthy , and most popular family in the shire would in itself give 
 he a position not to be despise by a poor stranger in the land ; and 
 though the interest of Miss Jemima 's dowry might not be much , regard 
 in the light of english pound   not milanese lira , still it would 
 suffice to prevent that gradual process of dematerialization which the 
 lengthen diet upon minnow and stickleback have already make apparent 
 in the fine and slow - evanishe form of the philosopher . 

 like all person convince of the expediency of a thing , Mrs. Dale see 
 nothing want but opportunity to insure its success . and that these 
 might be forthcoming she not only renew with great frequency , and 
 more urgent instance than ever , her friendly invitation to Riccabocca 
 to drink tea and spend the evening , but she so artfully chafe the 
 squire on his sore point of hospitality , that the doctor receive weekly 
 a press solicitation to dine and sleep at the Hall . 

 at first the italian pishe and grunt , and say Cospetto , and 
 per Bacco , and Diavolo , and try to creep out of so much proffered 
 courtesy . but like all single gentleman , he be a little under the 
 tyrannical influence of his faithful servant ; and Jackeymo , though he 
 could bear starve as well as his master when necessary , still , when 
 he have the option , preferred roast beef and plum - pudding . moreover , that 
 vain and incautious confidence of Riccabocca touch the vast sum at 
 his command , and with no heavy drawback than that of so amiable a 
 lady as Miss Jemima - who have already show he   Jackeymo   many little 
 delicate attention - have greatly whet the cupidity which be in 
 the servant 's italian nature , - a cupidity the more keen because , long 
 debar its legitimate exercise on his own mercenary interest , he 
 carry it all to the account of his master 's ! 

 thus tempt by his enemy and betray by his servant , the unfortunate 
 Riccabocca fall , though with eye not unblinde , into the hospitable 
 snare extend for the destruction of his - celibacy ! he go often 
 to the Parsonage , often to the Hall , and by degree the sweet of 
 the social domestic life , long deny he , begin to exercise their 
 enervate charm upon the stoicism of our poor exile . Frank have now 
 return to Eton . an unexpected invitation have carry off Captain 
 Higginbotham to pass a few week at Bath with a distant relation , who 
 have lately return from India , and who , as rich as Creesus , feel 
 so estranged and solitary in his native isle that , when the captain 
 " claim kindre there , " to his own amaze " he have his claim allow ; " 
 while a very protracted sitting of parliament still delay in London 
 the squire 's habitual visitor during the later summer ; so that - a 
 chasm thus make in his society - Mr. Hazeldean welcome with no hollow 
 cordiality the diversion or distraction he find in the foreigner 's 
 companionship . thus , with pleasure to all party , and strong hope to 
 the two female conspirator , the intimacy between the Casino and Hall 
 rapidly thicken ; but still not a word resemble a distinct proposal 
 do Dr. Riccabocca breathe . and still , if such an idea obtrude itself 
 on his mind , it be chase therefrom with so determined a Diavolo that 
 perhaps , if not the end of the world , at least the end of Miss Jemima 's 
 tenure in it , might have approach and see she still Miss Jemima , but 
 for a certain letter with a foreign postmark that reach the doctor one 
 Tuesday morning . 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 the servant see that something have go wrong , and , under pretence of 
 syringe the orange - tree , he linger near his master , and peer 
 through the sunny leaf upon Riccabocca 's melancholy brow . 

 the doctor sigh heavily . nor do he , as be his will not after some such 
 sigh , mechanically take up that dear comforter the pipe . but though 
 the tobacco - pouch lay by his side on the balustrade , and the pipe stand 
 against the wall between his knee , childlike lift up its lip to the 
 customary caress , he heed neither the one nor the other , but lay the 
 letter silently on his lap , and fix his eye upon the ground . 

 " it must be bad news indeed ! " think Jackeymo , and desist from his 
 work . approach his master , he take up the pipe and the tobacco - pouch , 
 and fill the bowl slowly , glance all the while towards that dark 
 musing face on which , when abandon by the expression of intellectual 
 vivacity or the exquisite smile of italian courtesy , the deep downward 
 line reveal the character of sorrow . Jackeymo do not venture to 
 speak ; but the continued silence of his master disturb he much . he 
 lay that peculiar tinder which your smoker use upon the steel , and 
 strike the spark , - still not a word , nor do Riccabocca stretch forth 
 his hand . 

 " I never know he in this taking before , " think Jackeymo ; and 
 delicately he insinuate the neck of the pipe into the nerveless finger 
 of the band that lie supine on those quiet knee . the pipe fall to the 
 ground . 

 Jackeymo cross himself , and begin pray to his sainted namesake with 
 great fervour . 

 the doctor rise slowly , and as if with effort ; he walk once or twice 
 to and fro the terrace ; and then he halt abruptly and say , - 

 " Friend ! " 

 " bless Monsignore San Giacomo , I know thou wouldst hear I ! " cry 
 the servant ; and he raise his master 's hand to his lip , then abruptly 
 turn away and wipe his eye . 

 " friend , " repeat Riccabocca , and this time with a tremulous emphasis , 
 and in the soft tone of a voice never wholly without the music of the 
 sweet South , " I would talk to thee of my child . " 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

 " the letter , then , relate to the signorina . she be well ? " 

 " yes , she be well now . she be in our native Italy . " Jackeymo raise 
 his eye involuntarily towards the orange - tree , and the morning breeze 
 sweep by and bore to he the odour of their blossom . 

 " those be sweet even here , with care , " say he , point to the tree . 
 " I think I have say that before to the padrone . " 

 but Riccabocca be now look again at the letter , and do not notice 
 either the gesture or the remark of his servant . " my aunt be no more ! " 
 say he , after a pause . 

 " we will pray for her soul ! " answer Jackeymo , solemnly . " but she be 
 very old , and have be a long time ail . let it not grieve the padrone 
 too keenly : at that age , and with those infirmity , death come as a 
 friend . " 

 " peace be to her dust ! " return the Italian . " if she have her fault , 
 be they now forget forever ; and in the hour of my danger and distress 
 she shelter my infant ! that shelter be destroy . this letter be from 
 the priest , her confessor . and the home of which my child be bereave 
 fall to the inheritance of my enemy . " 

 " traitor ! " mutter Jackeymo ; and his right hand seem to feel for 
 the weapon which the Italians of low rank often openly wear in their 
 girdle . 

 " the priest , " resume Riccabocca , calmly , " have rightly judge in 
 remove my child as a guest from the house in which that traitor enter 
 as lord . " 

 " and where be the signorina ? " 

 " with the poor priest . see , Giacomo , here , here - this be her handwriting 
 at the end of the letter , - the first line she ever yet trace to I . " 

 Jackeymo take off his hat , and look reverently on the large character 
 of a child 's writing . but large as they be , they seem indistinct , 
 for the paper be blister with the child 's tear ; and on the place 
 where they have not fall , there be a round fresh moist stain of the 
 tear that have drop from the lid of the father . Riccabocca renew , 
 " the priest recommend a convent . " 

 " to the devil with the priest ! " cry the servant ; then cross 
 himself rapidly , he add , " I do not mean that , Monsignore San 
 Giacomo , - forgive I ! but your Excellency do not think of make a nun 
 of his only child ! " 

   the title of Excellency do not , in italian , necessarily express 
  any exalt rank , but be often give by servant to their master . 

 " and yet why not ? " say Riccabocca , mournfully ; " what can I give she in 
 the world ? be the land of the stranger a well refuge than the home of 
 peace in her native clime ? " 

 " in the land of the stranger beat her father 's heart ! " 

 " and if that beat be still , what then ? Ill fare the life that a 
 single death can bereave of all . in a convent at least   and the priest 's 
 influence can obtain she that asylum amongst her equal and amidst her 
 sex   she be safe from trial and from penury - to her grave ! " 

 " Penury ! just see how rich we shall be when we take those field at 
 Michaelmas . " 

 " Pazzie ! " -   Follies   - say Riccabocca , listlessly . " be these sun more 
 serene than ours , or the soil more fertile ? yet in our own Italy , saith 
 the proverb , ' he who sow land reap more care than corn . ' it be 
 different , " continue the father , after a pause , and in a more resolute 
 tone , " if I have some independence , however small , to count on , - nay , 
 if among all my tribe of dainty relative there be but one female who 
 would accompany Violante to the exile 's hearth , - Ishmael have his Hagar . 
 but how can we two rough - bearded man provide for all the nameless 
 want and care of a frail female child ? and she have be so delicately 
 rear , - the woman - child need the foster hand and tender eye of a 
 woman . " 

 " and with a word , " say Jackeymo , resolutely , " the padrone might secure 
 to his child all that he need to save she from the sepulchre of a 
 convent ; and ere the autumn leave fall , she might be sit on his 
 knee . padrone , do not think that you can conceal from I the truth , that 
 you love your child well than all thing in the world , - now the Patria 
 be as dead to you as the dust of your father , - and your heart - string 
 would crack with the effort to tear she from they , and consign she to a 
 convent . padrone , never again to hear her voice , never again to see she 
 face ! those little arm that twin round your neck that dark night , 
 when we flee fast for life and freedom , and you say , as you feel their 
 clasp , ' friend , all be not yet lose . ' " 

 " Giacomo ! " exclaim the father , reproachfully , and his voice seem to 
 choke he . Riccabocca turn away , and walk restlessly to and fro 
 the terrace ; then , lift his arm with a wild gesture , as he still 
 continue his long irregular stride , he mutter , " yes , Heaven be my 
 witness that I could have bear reverse and banishment without a murmur , 
 have I permit myself that young partner in exile and privation . Heaven 
 be my witness that , if I hesitate now , it be because I would not listen 
 to my own selfish heart . yet never , never to see she again , - my child ! 
 and it be but as the infant that I behold she ! o friend , friend ! "   and , 
 stop short with a burst of uncontrollable emotion , he bow his 
 head upon his servant 's shoulder , " thou know what I have endure 
 and suffer at my hearth , as in my country ; the wrong , the perfidy , 
 the - the - " his voice again fail he ; he cling to his servant 's 
 breast , and his whole frame shake . 

 " but your child , the innocent one - think now only of she ! " falter 
 Giacomo , struggle with his own sob . " true , only of she , " reply 
 the exile , raise his face , " only of she . put aside thy thought for 
 thyself , friend , - counsel I . if I be to send for Violante , and if , 
 transplant to these keen air , she droop and die - look , look , 
 the priest say that she need such tender care ; or if I myself be 
 summon from the world , to leave she in it alone , friendless , homeless , 
 breadless perhaps , at the age of woman 's sharp trial against 
 temptation , would she not live to mourn the cruel egotism that close on 
 her infant innocence the gate of the House of God ? " 

 Jackeymo be appal by this appeal ; and indeed Riccabocca have 
 never before thus reverently speak of the cloister . in his hour of 
 philosophy , he be will not to sneer at monk and nun , priesthood and 
 superstition . but now , in that hour of emotion , the Old Religion 
 reclaim her empire ; and the sceptical world - wise man , think only of 
 his child , speak and feel with a child 's simple faith . 




 CHAPTER XX . 

 " but again I say , " murmur Jackeymo , scarce audibly , and after a long 
 silence , " if the padrone would make up his mind - to marry ! " 

 he expect that his master would start up in his customary indignation 
 at such a suggestion , - nay , he might not have be sorry so to have 
 change the current of feeling ; but the poor Italian only wince 
 slightly , and mildly withdraw himself from his servant 's support 
 arm , again pace the terrace , but this time quietly and in silence . a 
 quarter of an hour thus pass . " give I the pipe , " say Dr. Riccabocca , 
 pass into the belvidere . 

 Jackeymo again strike the spark , and , wonderfully relieve at the 
 padrone 's return to the habitual adviser , mentally besought his sainted 
 namesake to bestow a double portion of soothe wisdom on the benignant 
 influence of the weed . 




 CHAPTER XXI . 

 Dr. Riccabocca have be some little time in the solitude of the 
 belvidere , when Lenny Fairfield , not know that his employer be 
 therein , enter to lay down a book which the doctor have lend he , with 
 injunction to leave it on a certain table when do with . Riccabocca 
 look up at the sound of the young peasant 's step . 

 " I beg your honour 's pardon , I do not know - " 

 " never mind : lie the book there . I wish to speak with you . you look 
 well , my child : this air agree with you as well as that of Hazeldean ? " 

 " oh , yes , Sir ! " 

 " yet it be high ground , - more expose ? " 

 " that can hardly be , sir , " say Lenny ; " there be many plant grow here 
 which do not   flourish at the squire 's . the hill yonder keep off the east 
 wind , and the place lay to the south . " 

 " lie , not lay , Lenny . what be the principal complaint in these 
 part ? " 

 " eh , sir ? " 

 " I mean what malady , what disease ? " 

 " I never hear tell of any , sir , except the rheumatism . " 

 " no low fever , no consumption ? " 

 " never hear of they , sir . " 

 Riccabocca draw a long breath , as if relieve . " that seem a very kind 
 family at the Hall . " 

 " I have nothing to say against it , " answer Lenny , bluntly . " I have not 
 be treat justly . but as that book say , sir , ' it be not every one 
 who come into the world with a silver spoon in his mouth . ' " 

 Little think the doctor that those wise maxim may leave sore thought 
 behind they ! he be too occupy with the subject most at his own heart 
 to think then of what be in Lenny Fairfield 's . 

 " yes ; a kind , english domestic family . do you see much of Miss 
 Hazeldean ? " 

 " not so much as of the Lady . " 

 " be she like in the village , think you ? " 

 " Miss Jemima ? yes . she never do harm . her little dog bit I once , - she 
 do not ask I to beg its pardon , she ask mine ! she be a very nice 
 young lady ; the girl say she be very affable ; and , " add Lenny , with a 
 smile , " there be always more wedding go on when she be down at the 
 Hall . " 

 " oh ! " say Riccabocca . then , after a long whiff , " do you ever see she 
 play with the little child ? be she fond of child , do you think ? " 

 " Lord , sir , you guess everything ! she be never so pleased as when she be 
 play with the baby . " 

 " Humph ! " grunt Riccabocca . " baby ! well , that be woman - like . I do not 
 mean exactly baby , but when they be old , - little girl ? " 

 " indeed , Sir , I dare say ; but , " say Lenny , primly , " I never as yet keep 
 company with the little girl . " 

 " quite right , Lenny ; be equally discreet all your life . Mrs. Dale be 
 very intimate with Miss Hazeldean , - more than with the squire 's lady . 
 why be that , think you ? " 

 " well , sir , " say Leonard , shrewdly , " Mrs. Dale have her little temper , 
 though she be a very good lady ; and Madame Hazeldean be rather high , and 
 have a spirit . but Miss Jemima be so soft : any one could live with Miss 
 Jemima , as Joe and the servant say at the Hall . " 

 " indeed ! get my hat out of the parlour , and - just bring a clothe - brush , 
 Lenny . a fine sunny day for a walk . " 

 after this most mean and dishonourable inquisition into the character 
 and popular repute of Miss Hazeldean , Signor Riccabocca seem as much 
 cheer up and elated as if he have commit some very noble action ; 
 and he walk forth in the direction of the Hall with a far light and 
 lively step than that with which he have pace the terrace . 

 " Monsignore San Giacomo , by thy help and the pipe 's , the padrone shall 
 have his child ! " mutter the servant , look up from the garden . 




 CHAPTER XXII . 

 yet Dr. Riccabocca be not rash . the man who want his wedding - garment 
 to fit he must allow plenty of time for the measure . but from that day , 
 the Italian notably change his manner towards Miss Hazeldean . he cease 
 that profusion of compliment in which he have hitherto carry off 
 in safety all serious meaning . for indeed the doctor consider that 
 compliment to a single gentleman be what the inky liquid it dispense 
 be to the cuttle - fish , that by obscure the water sail away from its 
 enemy . neither do he , as before , avoid prolonged conversation with 
 the young lady , and contrive to escape from all solitary ramble by 
 her side . on the contrary , he now seek every occasion to be in her 
 society ; and entirely drop the language of gallantry , he assume 
 something of the earnest tone of friendship . he bend down his intellect 
 to examine and plumb her own . to use a very homely simile , he blow away 
 that froth which there be on the surface of mere acquaintanceship , 
 especially with the opposite sex ; and which , while it last , scarce 
 allow you to distinguish between small beer and double x. apparently 
 Dr. Riccabocca be satisfied with his scrutiny , - at all event under 
 that froth there be no taste of bitter . the italian might not find 
 any great strength of intellect in Miss Jemima , but he find that , 
 disentangle from many little whim and foible , - which he have himself 
 the sense to perceive be harmless enough if they last , and not so 
 absolutely constitutional but what they might be remove by a tender 
 hand , - Miss Hazeldean have quite enough sense to comprehend the plain 
 duty of married life ; and if the sense could fail , it find a 
 substitute in good old homely english principle , and the instinct of 
 amiable , kindly feeling . 

 I know not how it be , but your very clever man never seem to care so 
 much as your less gifted mortal for cleverness in his helpmate . your 
 scholar and poet and minister of state be more often than not find 
 assort with exceedingly humdrum , good sort of woman , and apparently 
 like they all the well for their deficiency . just see how happily 
 Racine live with his wife , and what an angel he think she , and yet 
 she have never read his play . certainly Goethe never trouble the lady 
 who call he " Mr. Privy Councillor " with whim about " monad , " and 
 speculation on colour , nor those stiff metaphysical problem on which 
 one break one 's shin in the second Past of the " Faust . " probably 
 it may be that such great genius - know that , as compare with 
 themselves , there be little difference between your clever woman and 
 your humdrum woman - merge at once all minor distinction , relinquish 
 all attempt at sympathy in hard intellectual pursuit , and be quite 
 satisfied to establish that tie which , after all , good resist wear 
 and tear , - namely , the tough household bond between one human heart and 
 another . 

 at all event , this , I suspect , be the reasoning of Dr. Riccabocca , 
 when one morning , after a long walk with Miss Hazeldean , he mutter to 
 himself , - 

  " Duro con duro 
  Non fete mai buon muro , " - 

 which may bear the paraphrase , " Bricks without mortar would make a very 
 bad wall . " there be quite enough in Miss Jemima 's disposition to make 
 excellent mortar : the doctor take the brick to himself . 

 when his examination be conclude , our philosopher symbolically evince 
 the result he have arrive at by a very simple proceeding on his 
 part , which would have puzzle you greatly if you have not pause , and 
 meditate thereon , till you see all that it imply . Dr. Riccabocca , 
 take of his spectacle ! he wipe they carefully , put they into their 
 shagreen case , and lock they in his bureau , - that be to say , he leave 
 off wear his spectacle . 

 you will observe that there be a wonderful depth of meaning in that 
 critical symptom , whether it be regard as a sign outward , positive , 
 and explicit , or a sign metaphysical , mystical , and esoteric . for , as 
 to the last , it denote that the task of the spectacle be over ; 
 that , when a philosopher have make up his mind to marry , it be well 
 henceforth to be shortsighte - nay , even somewhat purblind - than to 
 be always scrutinize the domestic felicity , to which he be about to 
 resign himself , through a pair of cold , unillusory barnacle . as for the 
 thing beyond the hearth , if he can not see without spectacle , be he 
 not about to ally to his own defective vision a good sharp pair of eye , 
 never at fault where his interest be concern ? on the other hand , 
 regard positively , categorically , and explicitly , Dr. Roccabocca , by 
 lay aside those spectacle , signify that he be about to commence 
 that happy initiation of courtship when every man , be he ever so much a 
 philosopher , wish to look as young and as handsome as time and nature 
 will allow . vain task to speed the soft language of the eye through the 
 medium of those glassy interpreter ! I remember , for my own part , that 
 once , on a visit to the town of Adelaide , I - Pisistratus Caxton - be in 
 great danger of fall in love , - with a young lady , too , who would have 
 bring I a very good fortune , - when she suddenly produce from her 
 reticule a very neat pair of no . 4 , set in tortoiseshell , and fix 
 upon I their Gorgon gaze , freeze the astonish Cupid into stone ! and 
 I hold it a great proof of the wisdom of Riccabocca , and of his vast 
 experience in mankind , that he be not above the consideration of what 
 your pseudo - sage would have regard as foppish and ridiculous trifle . 
 it argue all the well for that happiness which be our being 's end 
 and aim that in condescend to play the lover , he put those unbecoming 
 petrifier under lock and key . 

 and certainly , now the spectacle be abandon , it be impossible to 
 deny that the Italian have remarkably handsome eye . even through the 
 spectacle , or lift a little above they , they be always bright and 
 expressive ; but without those adjunct , the blaze be soft and more 
 temper : they have that look which the french call veloute , or velvety ; 
 and he appear altogether ten year young . if our Ulysses , thus 
 rejuvenate by his Minerva , have not fully make up his mind to make 
 a Penelope of Miss Jemima , all I can say be , that he be bad than 
 Polyphemus , who be only an Anthropophagos , - 

 he prey upon the weak sex , and be a Gynopophagite ! 




 CHAPTER XXIII . 

 " and you commission I , then , to speak to our dear Jemima ? " say Mrs. 
 Dale , joyfully , and without any bitterness whatever in that " dear . " 

 DR . RICCABOCCA . - " Nay , before speak to Miss Hazeldean , it would 
 surely be proper to know how far my address would be acceptable to the 
 family . " 

 MRS . DALE . - " ah ! " 

 DR . RICCAROCCA . - " the squire be of course the head of the family . " 

 MRS . DALE   absent and distraite . - " the squire - yes , very true - quite 
 proper . "   then , look up , and with naivete   " can you believe I ? I 
 never think of the squire . and he be such an odd man , and have so many 
 english prejudice , that really - dear I , how vexatious that it should 
 never once have occur to I that Mr. Hazeldean have a voice in the 
 matter ! indeed , the relationship be so distant , it be not like be her 
 father ; and Jemima be of age , and can do as she please ; and - but , as 
 you say , it be quite proper that he should be consult as the head of 
 the family . " 

 DR . RICCASOCCA . - " and you think that the squire of Hazeldean might 
 reject my alliance ! Pshaw ! that be a grand word indeed , - I mean , that he 
 might object very reasonably to his cousin 's marriage with a foreigner , 
 of whom he can know nothing , except that which in all country be 
 disreputable , and be say in this to be criminal , - poverty . " 

 MRS . DALE   kindly   - " you misjudge we poor english people , and you wrong 
 the squire , Heaven bless he ! for we be poor enough when he single 
 out my husband from a hundred for the minister of his parish , for his 
 neighbour and his friend . I will speak to he fearlessly - " 

 DR . RICCABOCCA . - " and frankly . and now I have use that word , let I 
 go on with the confession which your kindly readiness , my fair friend , 
 somewhat interrupted . I say that if I might presume to think my 
 address would be acceptable to Miss Hazeldean and her family , I be 
 too sensible of her amiable quality not to - not to - " 

 MRS . DALE   with demure archness . - " not to be the happy of 
 man , - that be the customary english phrase , Doctor . " 

 riccabocca   gallantly . - " there can not be a well . but , " continue he , 
 seriously , " I wish it first to be understand that I have - be marry 
 before ! " 

 MRS . DALE   astonish . - " marry before ! " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " and that I have an only child , dear to I , - inexpressibly 
 dear . that child , a daughter , have hitherto live abroad ; circumstance 
 now render it desirable that she should make her home with I ; and I own 
 fairly that nothing have so attach I to Miss Hazeldean , nor so induce 
 my desire for our matrimonial connection , as my belief that she have the 
 heart and the temper to become a kind mother to my little one . " 

 MRS . DALE   with feeling and warmth . - " you judge she rightly there . " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " now , in pecuniary matter , as you may conjecture from my 
 mode of life , I have nothing to offer to Miss Hazeldean correspondent 
 with her own fortune , whatever that may be ! " 

 MRS . DALE . - " that difficulty be obviate by settle Miss Hazeldean 's 
 fortune on herself , which be customary in such case . " 

 Dr. Riccabocca 's face lengthen . " and my child , then ? " say he , 
 feelingly . there be something in that appeal so alien from all sordid 
 and merely personal mercenary motif , that Mrs. Dale could not have have 
 the heart to make the very rational suggestion , " but that child be not 
 Jemima 's , and you may have child by she . " 

 she be touch , and reply hesitatingly , " but from what you and Jemima 
 may jointly possess you can save something annually , - you can insure 
 your life for your child . we do so when our poor child whom we lose be 
 bear "   the tear rush into Mrs. Dale 's eye ; " and I fear that Charles 
 still insure his life for my sake , though Heaven know that - that - " 

 the tear burst out . that little heart , quick and petulant though 
 it be , have not a fibre of the elastic muscular tissue which be 
 mercifully bestow on the heart of predestine widow . Dr. Riccabocca 
 could not pursue the subject of life insurance far . but the 
 idea - which have never occur to the foreigner before , though 
 so familiar with we english people when only possess of a life 
 income - please he greatly . I will do he the justice to say that he 
 prefer it to the thought of actually appropriate to himself and to 
 his child a portion of Miss Hazeldean 's dower . 

 shortly afterwards he take his leave , and Mrs. Dale hasten to seek 
 her husband in his study , inform he of the success of her matrimonial 
 scheme , and consult he as to the chance of the squire 's acquiescence 
 therein . " you see , " say she , hesitatingly , " though the squire might be 
 glad to see Jemima marry to some Englishman , yet if he ask who and 
 what be this Dr. Riccabocca , how be I to answer he ? " 

 " you should have think of that before , " say Mr. Dale , with unwonted 
 asperity ; " and , indeed , if I have ever believe anything serious could 
 come out of what seem to I so absurd , I should long since have 
 request you not to interfere in such matter . good heaven ! " continue 
 the parson , change colour , " if we should have assist , underhand as 
 it be , to introduce into the family of a man to whom we owe so much 
 a connection that he would dislike , how base we should be , how 
 ungrateful ! " 

 Poor Mrs. Dale be frighten by this speech , and still more by her 
 husband 's consternation and displeasure . to do Mrs. Dale justice , 
 whenever her mild partner be really either grieve or offend , her 
 little temper vanish , - she become as meek as a lamb . as soon as she 
 recover the first shock she experience , she hasten to dissipate the 
 parson 's apprehension . she assure he that she be convince that , if 
 the squire disapprove of Riccabocca 's pretension , the italian would 
 withdraw they at once , and Miss Hazeldean would never know of his 
 proposal . therefore , in that case , no harm would be do . 

 this assurance , coincide with Mr. Dale 's conviction as to 
 Riccabocca 's scruple on the point of honour , tend much to compose 
 the good man ; and if he do not , as my reader of the gentler sex would 
 expect from he , feel alarm lest Miss Jemima 's affection should have 
 be irretrievably engage , and her happiness thus put in jeopardy by 
 the squire 's refusal , it be not that the parson want tenderness of 
 heart , but experience in womankind ; and he believe , very erroneously , 
 that Miss Jemima Hazeldean be not one upon whom a disappointment of 
 that kind would produce a lasting impression . therefore Mr. Dale , after 
 a pause of consideration , say kindly , - 

 " well , do not   vex yourself , - and I be to blame quite as much as you . 
 but , indeed , I should have think it easy for the squire to have 
 transplant one of his tall cedar into his kitchen - garden than for you 
 to inveigle Dr. Riccabocca into matrimonial intention . but a man who 
 could voluntarily put himself into the parish stock for the sake of 
 experiment must be capable of anything ! however , I think it well that 
 I , rather than yourself , should speak to the squire , and I will go at 
 once . " 




 CHAPTER XXIV . 

 the parson put on the shovel - hat , which - conjoin with other detail in 
 his dress peculiarly clerical , and already , even then , begin to be 
 out of fashion with Churchmen - have serve to fix upon he emphatically 
 the dignified but antiquated style and cognoman of " Parson ; " and take 
 his way towards the Home Farm , at which he expect to find the squire . 
 but he have scarcely enter upon the village green when he behold Mr. 
 Hazeldean , lean both hand on his stick , and gaze intently upon 
 the parish stock . now , sorry be I to say that , ever since the Hegira 
 of Lenny and his mother , the Anti - stockian and Revolutionary spirit in 
 Hazeldean , which the memorable homily of our parson have a while avert 
 or suspend , have break forth afresh . for though while Lenny be 
 present to be mow and jeer at , there have be no pity for he , 
 yet no soon be he remove from the scene of trial than a universal 
 compassion for the barbarous usage he have receive produce what be 
 call " the reaction of public opinion . " not that those who have mow 
 and jeer repent they of their mockery , or consider themselves in 
 the slight degree the cause of his expatriation . no ; they , with the 
 rest of the villager , lay all the blame upon the stock . it be not to 
 be expect that a lad of such exemplary character could be thrust into 
 that place of ignominy , and not be sensible to the affront . and who , in 
 the whole village , be safe , if such going - on and putting - in be 
 to be tolerate in silence , and at the expense of the very good and 
 quiet lad the village have ever know ? thus , a few day after 
 the widow 's departure , the stock be again the object of midnight 
 desecration : it be bedaub and bescratche , it be hack and hew , 
 it be scrawl over with pithy lamentation for Lenny , and laconic 
 execration on tyrant . night after night new inscription appear , 
 testify the sarcastic wit and the vindictive sentiment of the parish . 
 and perhaps the stock be only spar from axe and bonfire by the 
 convenience it afford to the malice of the disaffect : it become the 
 Pasquin of Hazeldean . 

 as disaffection naturally produce a correspondent vigour in authority , 
 so affair have be lately administer with great severity than have 
 be hitherto will not in the easy rule of the squire and his predecessor . 
 suspect person be naturally mark out by Mr. Stirn , and report 
 to his employer , who , too proud or too pained to charge they openly with 
 ingratitude , at first only pass they by in his walk with a silent and 
 stiff inclination of his head ; and afterwards , gradually yield to the 
 baleful influence of Stirn , the squire grumble forth " that he do 
 not see why he should be always put himself out of his way to show 
 kindness to those who make such a return . there ought to be a difference 
 between the good and the bad . " encourage by this admission , Stirn have 
 conduct himself towards the suspect party , and their whole kith 
 and kin , with the iron - hand justice that belong to his character . 
 for some , habitual donation of milk from the dairy and vegetable from 
 the garden be surlily suspend ; other be inform that their pig 
 be always trespass on the wood in search of acorn , or that they 
 be violate the Game Laws in keep lurcher . a beer - house , 
 popular in the neighbourhood , but of late resort to over - much by the 
 grievance - monger   and no wonder , since they have become the popular 
 party , be threaten with an application to the magistrate for 
 the withdrawal of its license . sundry old woman , whose grandson be 
 notoriously ill - dispose towards the stock , be interdict from 
 gather dead stick under the avenue , on pretence that they break 
 down the live bough ; and , what be more obnoxious to the young 
 member of the parish than most other retaliatory measure , three 
 chestnut - tree , one walnut , and two cherry - tree , stand at the bottom 
 of the Park , and which have , from time immemorial , be give up to the 
 youth of Hazeldean , be now solemnly place under the general defence 
 of " private property . " and the crier have announce that , henceforth , all 
 depredator on the fruit tree in Copse Hollow would be punish with 
 the utmost rigour of the law . stirn , indeed , recommend much more 
 stringent proceeding than all these indication of a change of policy , 
 which , he aver , would soon bring the parish to its sens , - such as 
 discontinue many little job of unprofitable work that employ the 
 surplus labour of the village . but there the squire , fall into the 
 department and under the benigner influence of his Harry , be as yet not 
 properly harden . when it come to a question that affect the absolute 
 quantity of loaf to be consume by the graceless mouth that feed 
 upon he , the milk of human kindness - with which Providence have so 
 bountifully supply that class of the mammalia call the " Bucolic , " 
 and of which our squire have an extra " yield " - burst forth , and wash 
 away all the indignation of the harsh Adam . 

 still your policy of half - measure , which irritate without crush 
 its victim , which flap an exasperate wasp - nest with a silk 
 pocket - handkerchief , instead of blow it up with a match and train , 
 be rarely successful ; and after three or four other and much guilty 
 victim than Lenny have be incarcerate in the stock , the parish 
 of Hazeldean be ripe for any enormity . Pestilent jacobinical tract , 
 conceive and compose in the sink of manufacturing town , find their 
 way into the popular beer - house , - Heaven know how , though the tinker 
 be suspect of be the disseminator by all but Stirn , who still , in 
 a whisper , accuse the Papishers . and , finally , there appear amongst 
 the other graphic embellishment which the poor stock have receive , 
 the rude gravure of a gentleman in a broad - brim hat and top - boot , 
 suspend from a gibbet , with the inscription beneath , " a warnin to hall 
 tirans - mind your hi ! - sighnde Captin sTraw . " 

 it be upon this significant and emblematic portraiture that the 
 squire be gaze when the parson join he . " well , Parson , " say Mr. 
 Hazeldean , with a smile which he mean to be pleasant and easy , 
 but which be exceedingly bitter and grim , " I wish you joy of your 
 flock , - you see they have just hang I in effigy ! " 

 the parson star , and though greatly shock , smother his emotion ; 
 and attempt , with the wisdom of the serpent and the mildness of the 
 dove , to find another original for the effigy . 

 " it be very bad , " quoth he , " but not so bad as all that , Squire ; that be 
 not the shape of your bat . it be evidently mean for Mr. Stirn . " 

 " do you think so ? " say the squire , soften . " yet the top - boots - Stirn 
 never wear top - boot . " 

 " no more do you , except in the hunting - field . if you look again , those 
 be not top , they be legging , - stirn wear legging . besides , that 
 flourish , which be mean for a nose , be a kind of hook , like Stirn 's ; 
 whereas your nose - though by no mean a snub - rather turn up than not , 
 as the Apollo 's do , accord to the plaster cast in Riccabocca 's 
 parlour . " 

 " Poor Stirn ! " say the squire , in a tone that evince complacency , not 
 unmingled with compassion , " that be what a man get in this world by 
 be a faithful servant , and do his duty with zeal for his employer . 
 but you see thing have come to a strange pass , and the question now 
 be , what course to pursue . the miscreant hitherto have defy all 
 vigilance , and Stirn recommend the employment of a regular nightwatch , 
 with a lanthorn and bludgeon . " 

 " that may protect the stock certainly ; but will it keep those 
 detestable tract out of the beer - house ? " 

 " we shall shut the beer - house up the next session . " 

 " the tract will break out elsewhere , - the humour be in the blood ! " 

 " I have   half a mind to run off to Brighton or Leamingtongood hunt at 
 Leamington - for a year , just to let the rogue see how they can get on 
 without I ! " 

 the squire 's lip tremble . 

 " my dear Mr. Hazeldean , " say the parson , take his friend 's hand , 
 " I do not   want to parade my superior wisdom ; but , if you have take my 
 advice , ' quieta non movere ! ' be there ever a parish so peaceable 
 as this , or a country gentleman so beloved as you be , before you 
 undertake the task which have dethrone king and ruin States , - that 
 of wantonly meddle with antiquity , whether for the purpose of 
 uncalled - for repair , or the revival of obsolete us . " 

 at this rebuke , the squire do not manifest his constitutional 
 tendency to chol ; but he reply almost meekly , " if it be to do 
 again , faith , I would leave the parish to the enjoyment of the shabby 
 pair of stock that ever disgrace a village . certainly I mean it for 
 the good , - an ornament to the green ; however , now the stock be rebuild , 
 the stock must be support . will Hazeldean be not the man to give way 
 to a set of thankless rapscallion . " 

 " I think , " say the parson , " that you will allow that the House 
 of Tudor , whatever its fault , be a determine , resolute dynasty 
 enough , - high - hearted and strong - headed . a Tudor would never have fall 
 into the same calamity as the poor Stuart do ! " 

 " what the plague have the House of Tudor get to do with my stock ? " 

 " a great deal . Henry VIII . find a subsidy so unpopular that he give it 
 up ; and the people , in return , allow he to cut off as many head as 
 he please , besides those in his own family . good Queen Bess , who , I 
 know , be your idol in history - " 

 " to be sure ! - she knight my ancestor at Tilbury Fort . " 

 " Good Queen Bess struggle hard to maintain a certain monopoly ; she see 
 it would not do , and she surrender it with that frank heartiness which 
 become a sovereign , and make surrender a grace . " 

 " ha ! and you would have I give up the stock ? " 

 " I would much rather the stock have remain as it be before 
 you touch it ; but , as it be , if you could find a good plausible 
 pretext - and there be an excellent one at hand , - the stern king open 
 prison , and grant favour , upon joyful occasion . now a marriage in the 
 royal family be of course a joyful occasion ! and so it should be in 
 that of the King of Hazeldean . " Admire that artful turn in the parson 's 
 eloquence ! - it be worthy of Riccabocca himself . indeed , Mr. Dale have 
 profit much by his companionship with that Machiavellian intellect . 

 " a marriage , - yes ; but Frank have only just get into coattail ! " 

 " I do not allude to Frank , but to your cousin Jemima ! " 




 CHAPTER XXV . 

 the squire stagger as if the breath have be knock out of he , and , 
 for want of a well seat , sit down on the stock . all the female head 
 in the neighbouring cottage peer , themselves unseen , through the 
 casement . what could the squire be about ? what new mischief do he 
 meditate ? do he mean to fortify the stock ? Old Gaffer Solomons , who 
 have an indefinite idea of the lawful power of squire , and who have be 
 for the last ten minute at watch on his threshold , shake his head and 
 say , " they as a cut out the mon a hanging , as a put it in the squire 's 
 head ! " 

 " put what ? " ask his grand - daughter . 

 " the gallus ! " answer Solomons , - " he be a go to have it hang from 
 the great elfin - tree . and the parson , good mon , be a quote Scripter 
 agin it ; you see he be a taking off his glove , and a put his two 
 han be together , as he do when he pray for the sick , Jeany . " 

 that description of the parson 's mien and manner , which with his usual 
 niceness of observation , Gaffer Solomons thus sketch off , will convey 
 to you some idea of the earnestness with which the parson plead the 
 cause he have undertake to advocate . he dwell much upon the sense of 
 propriety which the foreigner have evince in request that the squire 
 might be consult before any formal communication to his cousin ; and 
 he repeat Mrs. Dale 's assurance , that such be Riccabocca 's high 
 standard of honour and belief in the sacred right of hospitality , that , 
 if the squire withhold his consent to his proposal , the parson 
 be convince that the Italian would instantly retract they . now , 
 consider that Miss Hazeldean be , to say the least , come to year of 
 discretion , and the squire have long since place her property entirely 
 at her own disposal , Mr. Hazeldean be force to acquiesce in the 
 parson 's corollary remark , " that this be a delicacy which could not be 
 expect from every english pretender to the lady 's hand . " see that 
 he have so far clear the ground , the parson go on to intimate , though 
 with great tact , that since Miss Jemima would probably marry soon or 
 later   and , indeed , that the squire could not wish to prevent she , it 
 might be well for all party concerned that it should be with some 
 one who , though a foreigner , be settle in the neighbourhood , and of 
 whose character what be know be certainly favourable , rather than 
 run the hazard of her be married for her money by some adventurer , or 
 irish fortune - hunter , at the watering - place she yearly visit . then he 
 touch lightly on Riccabocca 's agreeable and companionable quality ; 
 and conclude with a skilful peroration upon the excellent occasion the 
 wedding would afford to reconcile Hall and parish , by make a voluntary 
 holocaust of the stock . 

 as he conclude , the squire 's brow , before thoughtful , though not 
 sullen , clear up benignly . to say truth , the squire be die to get 
 rid of the stock , if he could but do so handsomely and with dignity ; 
 and have all the star in the astrological horoscope conjoin together 
 to give Miss Jemima " assurance of a husband , " they could not so have 
 serve she with the squire as that conjunction between the altar and the 
 stock which the parson have effect ! 

 accordingly , when Mr. Dale have come to an end , the squire reply , with 
 great placidity and good sense , " that Mr. Rickeybockey have behave very 
 much like a gentleman , and that he be very much oblige to he ; that he 
  the squire   have no right to interfere in the matter , far than with 
 his advice ; that Jemima be old enough to choose for herself , and that , 
 as the parson have imply , after all she might go far and fare 
 bad , - indeed , the far she go   that be , the long she wait 
 the bad she be likely to fare . I own , for my part , " continue the 
 squire , " that though I like Rickeybockey very much , I never suspect 
 that Jemima be catch with his long face ; but there be no accounting for 
 taste . my Harry , indeed , be more shrewd , and give I many a hint , for 
 which I only laugh at she . still I ought to have think it look 
 queer when Mounseer take to disguise himself by leave off his 
 glass , ha , ha ! I wonder what Harry will say ; let us go and talk to 
 she . " 

 the parson , rejoice at this easy way of take the matter , hook his 
 arm into the squire 's , and they walk amicably towards the Hall . but 
 on come first into the garden they find Mrs. Hazeldean herself , 
 clip dead leaf or fade flower from her rose - tree . the squire 
 steal slyly behind she , and startle she in her turn by put his arm 
 round her waist , and salute her smooth cheek with one of his hearty 
 kiss ; which , by the way , from some association of idea , be a 
 conjugal freedom that he usually indulge whenever a wedding be go 
 on in the village . 

 " Fie , William ! " say Mrs. Hazeldean , coyly , and blush as she see the 
 parson . " well , who be go to be marry now ? " 

 " Lord ! be there ever such a woman ? - she be guess it ! " cry the 
 squire , in great admiration . " tell she all about it , Parson . " 

 the parson obey . 

 Mrs. Hazeldean , as the reader may suppose , show much less surprise 
 than her husband have do ; but she take the news graciously , and make 
 much the same answer as that which have occur to the squire , only with 
 somewhat more qualification and reserve . " Signor Riccabocca have behave 
 very handsomely ; and though a daughter of the Hazeldeans of Hazeldean 
 might expect a much well marriage in a worldly point of view , yet 
 as the lady in question have defer find one so long , it would be 
 equally idle and impertinent now to quarrel with her choice , - if indeed 
 she should decide on accept Signor Riccabocca . as for fortune , that 
 be a consideration for the two contracting party . still , it ought , 
 to be point out to Miss Jemima that the interest of her fortune would 
 afford but a very small income . that Dr. Riccabocca be a widower be 
 another matter for deliberation ; and it seem rather suspicious that he 
 should have be hitherto so close upon all matter connect with his 
 former life . certainly his manner be in his favour , and as long as he 
 be merely an acquaintance , and at most a tenant , no one have a right to 
 institute inquiry of a strictly private nature ; but that , when he be 
 about to marry a Hazeldean of Hazeldean , it become the squire at least 
 to know a little more about he , - who and what he be . why do he leave 
 his own country ? english people go abroad to save : no foreigner would 
 choose England as a country in which to save money ! she suppose that 
 a foreign doctor be no very great thing ; probably he have be a 
 professor in some italian university . at all event , if the squire 
 interfere at all , it be on such point that he should request 
 information . " 

 " my clear madam , " say the parson , " what you say be extremely just . as 
 to the cause which have induce our friend to expatriate himself , I 
 think we need not look far for they . he be evidently one of the many 
 italian refugee whom political disturbance have drive to a land of 
 which it be the boast to receive all exile of whatever party . for his 
 respectability of birth and family he certainly ought to obtain some 
 voucher . and if that be the only objection , I trust we may soon 
 congratulate Miss Hazeldean on a marriage with a man who , though 
 certainly very poor , have bear privation without a murmur ; have 
 prefer all hardship to debt ; have scorn to attempt betray the 
 young lady into any clandestine connection ; who , in short , have show 
 himself so upright and honest , that I hope my dear Mr. Hazeldean will 
 forgive he if he be only a doctor - probably of law - and not , as most 
 foreigner pretend to be , a marquis or a baron at least . " 

 " as to that , " cry the squire , " it be the good thing I know about 
 Rickeybockey that he do not   attempt to humbug we by any such foreign 
 trumpery . thank Heaven , the Hazeldeans of Hazeldean be never 
 tuft - hunter and title - monger ; and if I never run after an English 
 lord , I should certainly be devilishly ashamed of a brother - in - law 
 whom I be force to call markee or count ! I should feel sure he be 
 a courier , or runaway valley - de - sham . turn up your nose at a doctor , 
 indeed , Harry ! - pshaw , good english style that ! Doctor ! my aunt marry 
 a Doctor of divinity - excellent man - wear a wig and be make a dean ! so 
 long as Rickeybockey be not a doctor of physic , I do not   care a button . 
 if he be that , indeed , it would be suspicious ; because , you see , those 
 foreign doctor of physic be quack , and tell fortune , and go about on 
 a stage with a Merry - Andrew . " 

 " Lord ! Hazeldean , where on earth do you pick up that idea ? " say Harry , 
 laugh . 

 " pick it up ! - why , I see a fellow myself at the cattle fair last 
 year - when I be buy short - horn - with a red waistcoat and a 
 cocked hat , a little like the parson 's shovel . he call himself 
 Dr. Phoscophornio , and sell pill . the Merry - Andrew be the funniest 
 creature , in salmon - colour tight , turn head over heel , and say he 
 come from timbuctoo . no , no : if Rickeybockey 's a physic doctor , we 
 shall have Jemima in a pink tinsel dress tramp about the country in a 
 caravan ! " 

 at this notion both the squire and his wife laugh so heartily that the 
 parson feel the thing be settle , and slip away , with the intention 
 of make his report to Riccabocca . 




 CHAPTER XXVI . 

 it be with a slight disturbance of his ordinary suave and well - breed 
 equanimity that the Italian receive the information that he need 
 apprehend no obstacle to his suit from the insular prejudice or the 
 worldly view of the lady 's family . not that he be mean and cowardly 
 enough to recoil from the near and unclouded prospect of that felicity 
 which he have leave off his glass to behold with unblinking , naked 
 eye , - no , there his mind be make up ; but he have meet in life with much 
 that incline a man towards misanthropy , and he be touch not only by 
 the interest in his welfare testify by a heretical priest , but by 
 the generosity with which he be admit into a well - bear and wealthy 
 family , despite his notorious poverty and his foreign descent . he 
 concede the propriety of the only stipulation , which be convey 
 to he by the parson with all the delicacy that become one long 
 professionally habituate to deal with the subtler susceptibility of 
 mankind , - namely , that , amongst Riccabocca 's friend or kindre , some 
 person should be find whose report would confirm the persuasion of his 
 respectability entertain by his neighbour , - he assent , I say , 
 to the propriety of this condition ; but it be not with alacrity and 
 eagerness . his brow become clouded . the parson hasten to assure he 
 that the squire be not a man qui stupet in tituli , -   " who be besotte 
 with title . "   - that he neither expect nor desire to find an 
 origin and rank for his brother - in - law above that decent mediocrity 
 of condition to which it be evident from Riccabocca 's breeding and 
 accomplishment he could easily establish his claim . " and though , " say 
 he , smile , " the squire be a warm politician in his own country , and 
 would never see his sister again , I fear , if she marry some convict 
 enemy of our happy constitution , yet for foreign politic he do not 
 care a straw ; so that if , as I suspect , your exile arise from some 
 quarrel with your government , - which , be foreign , he take for 
 grant must be insupportable , - he would but consider you as he would 
 a Saxon who flee from the iron hand of William the Conqueror , or a 
 Lancastrian expel by the Yorkists in our war of the Roses . " 

 the Italian smile . " Mr. Hazeldean shall be satisfy , " say he , simply . 
 " I see , by the squire 's newspaper , that an english gentleman who know I 
 in my own country have just arrive in London . I will write to he for 
 a testimonial , at least to my probity and character . probably he may 
 be know to you by name , - nay , he must be , for he be a distinguished 
 officer in the late war . I allude to Lord L'Estrange . " 

 the parson start . 

 " you know Lord L'Estrange ? - profligate , bad man , I fear . " 

 " profligate ! bad ! " exclaim Riccabocca . " well , calumnious as the world 
 be , I should never have think that such expression would be apply 
 to one who , though I know he but little , - know he chiefly by the 
 service he once render to I , - first teach I to love and revere the 
 english name ! " 

 " he may be change since - " the parson pause . 

 " since when ? " ask Riccabocca , with evident curiosity . Mr. Dale seem 
 embarrassed . " excuse I , " say he , " it be many year ago ; and in short 
 the opinion I then form of the nobleman you name be base upon 
 circumstance which I can not communicate . " 

 the punctilious italian bow in silence , but he still look as if he 
 should have like to prosecute inquiry . 

 after a pause he say , " whatever your impression respect Lord 
 L'Estrange , there be nothing , I suppose , which would lead you to doubt 
 his honour , or reject his testimonial in my favour ? " 

 " accord to fashionable morality , " say Mr. Dale , rather precisely , 
 " I know of nothing that could induce I to suppose that Lord L'Estrange 
 would not , in this instance , speak the truth . and he have unquestionably 
 a high reputation as a soldier , and a considerable position in the 
 world . " Therewith the parson take his leave . a few day afterwards , Dr. 
 Riccabocca inclose to the squire , in a blank envelope , a letter he 
 have receive from Harley L'Estrange . it be evidently intend for 
 the squire 's eye , and to serve as a voucher for the Italian 's 
 respectability ; but this object be fulfil , not in the coarse form of 
 a direct testimonial , but with a tact and delicacy which seem to show 
 more than the fine breeding to be expect from one in Lord L'Estrange 's 
 station . it evince that most exquisite of all politeness which come 
 from the heart ; a certain tone of affectionate respect   which even the 
 homely sense of the squire feel , intuitively , prove far more in favour 
 of Riccabocca than the most elaborate certificate of his quality and 
 antecedent   pervade the whole , and would have suffice in itself to 
 remove all scruple from a mind much more suspicious and exact than 
 that of the Squire of Hazeldean . but , to and behold ! an obstacle 
 now occur to the parson , of which he ought to have think long 
 before , - namely , the papistical religion of the Italian . Dr. Riccabocca 
 be professedly a roman Catholic . he so little obtrude that fact - and , 
 indeed , have assent so readily to any animadversion upon the 
 superstition and priestcraft which , accord to Protestants , be the 
 essential characteristic of papistical community - that it be not 
 till the hymeneal torch , which bring all fault to light , be fairly 
 illumined for the altar , that the remembrance of a faith so cast into 
 the shade burst upon the conscience of the parson . the first idea that 
 then occur to he be the proper and professional one , - namely , the 
 conversion of Dr. Riccabocca . he hasten to his study , take down from 
 his shelf long neglect volume of controversial divinity , arm 
 himself with an arsenal of authority , argument , and text ; then , 
 seize the shovel - hat , post off to the Casino . 




 CHAPTER XXVII . 

 the parson burst upon the philosopher like an avalanche ! he be so full 
 of his subject that he could not let it out in prudent driblet . no , he 
 go souse upon the astounded Riccabocca - 

  " Tremendo 
  Jupiter ipse rueus tumultu . " 

 the sage - shrink deeply into his armchair , and draw his 
 dressing - robe more closely round he - suffer the parson to talk for 
 three quarter of an hour , till indeed he have thoroughly prove his 
 case ; and , like Brutus , " pause for a reply . " 

 then say Riccabocca mildly : " in much of what you have urge so ably , 
 and so suddenly , I be inclined to agree . but base be the man who 
 formally forswear the creed he have inherit from his father , and 
 profess since the cradle up to year of maturity , when the change 
 present itself in the guise of a bribe ; when , for such be human nature , 
 he can hardly distinguish or disentangle the appeal to his reason 
 from the lure to his interest , - here a text , and there a dowry ! - here 
 protestantism , there Jemima ! Own , my friend , that the sober casuist 
 would see double under the inebriate effect produce by so mix 
 his polemical liquor . Appeal , my good Mr. Dale , from Philip drunken to 
 Philip sober ! - from Riccabocca intoxicate with the assurance of 
 your excellent lady , that he be about to be ' the happy of man , ' to 
 Riccabocca accustom to his happiness , and carry it off with the 
 seasoned equability of one grow familiar with stimulant , - in a word , 
 appeal from Riccabocca the wooer to Riccabocca the spouse . I may be 
 convertible , but conversion be a slow progress ; courtship should be a 
 quick one , - ask Miss Jemima . Finalmente , marry I first , and convert I 
 afterwards ! " 

 " you take this too jestingly , " begin the parson ; " and I do not   see why , 
 with your excellent understanding , truth so plain and obvious should 
 not strike you at once . " 

 " truth , " interrupt Riccabocca , profoundly , " be the slow grow 
 thing in the world ! it take fifteen hundred year from the date of the 
 christian era to produce your own Luther , and then he fling his Bible at 
 Satan   I have see the mark make by the book on the wall of his prison 
 in Germany , besides run off with a nun , which no protestant 
 clergyman would think it proper and right to do nowadays . " then he 
 add , with seriousness , " look you , my dear sir , I should lose my 
 own esteem if I be even to listen to you now with become 
 attention , - now , I say , when you hint that the creed I have profess 
 may be in the way of my advantage . if so , I must keep the creed and 
 resign the advantage . but if , as I trust not only as a Christian but a 
 man of honour , you will defer this discussion , I will promise to listen 
 to you hereafter ; and though , to say truth , I believe that you will not 
 convert I , I will promise you faithfully never to interfere with my 
 wife 's religion . " 

 " and any child you may have ? " 

 " child ! " say Dr. Riccabocca , recoiling ; " you be not content with 
 fire your pocket - pistol right in my face ! you must also pepper I all 
 over with small shot . child ! well , if they be girl , let they follow 
 the faith of their mother ; and if boy , while in childhood , let they be 
 content with learn to be Christians ; and when they grow into man , 
 let they choose for themselves which be the good form for the practice 
 of the great principle which all sect have in common . " 

 " but , " begin Mr. Dale again , pull a large book from his pocket . 

 Dr. Riccabocca fling open the window , and jump out of it . 

 it be the rapidest and most dastardly flight you could possibly 
 conceive ; but it be a great compliment to the argumentative power of 
 the parson , and he feel it as such . nevertheless , Mr. Dale think it 
 right to have a long conversation , both with the squire and Miss 
 Jemima herself , upon the subject which his intended convert have so 
 ignominiously escape . 

 the squire , though a great foe to Popery , politically consider , have 
 also quite as great a hatred to renegade and apostate . and in his 
 heart he would have despise Riccabocca if he could have throw off 
 his religion as easily as he have do his spectacle . therefore he say 
 simply , " well , it be certainly a great pity that Rickeybockey be not of 
 the Church of England ; though , I take it , that would be unreasonable to 
 expect in a man bear and breed under the nose of the inquisition "   the 
 squire firmly believe that the inquisition be in full force in all 
 the italian States , with whip , rack , and thumbscrew ; and , indeed , his 
 chief information of Italy be gather from a perusal he have give 
 in early youth to " the one - handed Monk " ; " but I think he speak very 
 fairly , on the whole , as to his wife and child . and the thing 's 
 go too far now to retract . it be all your fault for not think of 
 it before ; and I have   now just make up my mind as to the course to pursue 
 respect the d - -d stock ! " 

 as for Miss Jemima , the parson leave she with a pious thanksgiving that 
 Riccabocca at least be a Christian , and not a Pagan , Mahometan , or Jew ! 




 CHAPTER XXVIII . 

 there be that in a wedding which appeal to a universal sympathy . no 
 other event in the life of their superior in rank create an equal 
 sensation amongst the humbler class . 

 from the moment the news that Miss Jemima be to be marry have spread 
 throughout the village , all the old affection for the squire and his 
 House burst forth the strong for its temporary suspension . who could 
 think of the stock in such a season ? the stock be sweep out of 
 fashion , - hunt from remembrance as completely as the question of 
 Repeal or the thought of Rebellion from the warm irish heart , when the 
 fair young face of the Royal Wife beam on the sister isle . 

 again cordial courtesy be drop at the threshold by which the 
 squire pass to his own farm ; again the sunburned brow uncover - no 
 more with sullen ceremony - be smooth into cheerful gladness at 
 his nod . Nay , the little one begin again to assemble at their ancient 
 rendezvous by the stock , as if either familiarize with the phenomenon , 
 or convince that , in the general sentiment of good - will , its power of 
 evil be annul . 

 the squire taste once more the sweet of the only popularity which be 
 much worth have , and the loss of which a wise man would reasonably 
 deplore , - namely , the popularity which arise from a persuasion of our 
 goodness , and a reluctance to recall our fault . like all blessing , the 
 more sensibly feel from previous interruption , the squire enjoy this 
 restore popularity with an exhilarated sense of existence ; his stout 
 heart beat more vigorously ; his stalwart step trod more lightly ; his 
 comely english face look comelier and more english than ever , - you 
 would have be a merry man for a week to have come within hearing of 
 his jovial laugh . 

 he feel grateful to Jemima and to Riccabocca as the special agent of 
 Providence in this general integratio amoris . to have look at he , 
 you would suppose that it be the squire who be go to be marry a 
 second time to his Harry ! 

 one may well conceive that such would have be an inauspicious moment 
 for Parson Dale 's theological scruple to have stop that marriage , 
 chill all the sunshine it diffuse over the village , see himself 
 surround again by long sulky visage , - I verily believe , though a 
 well friend of Church and State never stand on a husting , that , 
 rather than court such a revulsion , the squire would have find 
 jesuitical excuse for the marriage if Riccabocca have be discover to 
 be the Pope in disguise ! as for the stock , its fate be now irrevocably 
 seal . in short , the marriage be conclude , - first privately , 
 accord to the bridegroom creed , by a roman catholic clergyman , who 
 live in a town some mile off , and next publicly in the village church 
 of Hazeldean . 

 it be the heartiest rural wedding ! village girl strew flower on the 
 way ; a booth be place amidst the prettiest scenery of the Park on the 
 margin of the lake - for there be to be a dance later in the day . even 
 Mr. Stirn - no , Mr. Stirn be not present ; so much happiness would have 
 be the death of he ! and the Papisher too , who have conjure Lenny 
 out of the stock nay , who have himself sit in the stock for the very 
 purpose of bring they into contempt , - the Papisher ! he have a lief 
 Miss Jemima have marry the devil ! indeed he be persuade that , in 
 point of fact , it be all one and the same . therefore Mr. Stirn have 
 ask leave to go and attend his uncle the pawnbroker , about to undergo 
 a torturing operation for the stone ! Frank be there , summon from Eton 
 for the occasion - have grow two inch tall since he leave - for the 
 one inch of which nature be to be thank , for the other a new pair of 
 resplendent wellington . but the boy 's joy be less apparent than that 
 of other . for Jemima , be a special favourite with he , as she would 
 have be with all boy , - for she be always kind and gentle , and make 
 he many pretty present whenever she come from the watering - place ; 
 and Frank know that he should miss she sadly , and think she have make a 
 very queer choice . 

 Captain Higginbotham have be invite ; but to the astonishment of 
 Jemima , he have reply to the invitation by a letter to herself , mark 
 " private and confidential . " 

 " she must have long know , " say the letter , " of his devoted attachment 
 to she ! motif of delicacy , arise from the narrowness of his income 
 and the magnanimity of his sentiment , have alone prevent his formal 
 proposal ; but now that he be inform   he could scarcely believe his 
 sens or command his passion   that her relation wish to force 
 she into a barbarous marriage with a foreigner of MOST forbid 
 APPEARANCE , and most abject circumstance , he lose not a moment in 
 lay at her foot his own hand and fortune . and he do this the more 
 confidently , inasmuch as he could not but be aware of Miss Jemima 's 
 secret feeling towards he , while he be proud and happy to say , that 
 his dear and distinguished cousin , Mr. Sharpe Currie , have honour 
 he with a warmth of regard which justify the most brilliant 
 expectation , - likely to be soon realize , as his eminent relative have 
 contract a very bad liver complaint in the service of his country , and 
 could not last long ! " 

 in all the year they have know each other , Miss Jemima , strange as it 
 may appear , have never once suspect the captain of any other feeling 
 to she than those of a brother . to say that she be not gratify by 
 learn her mistake would be to say that she be more than woman . 
 indeed , it must have be a source of no ignoble triumph to think that 
 she could prove her disinterested affection to her dear Riccabocca by 
 a prompt rejection of this more brilliant offer . she couch the 
 rejection , it be true , in the most soothing term . but the captain 
 evidently consider himself ill use ; he do not reply to the letter , 
 and do not come to the wedding . 

 to let the reader into a secret , never know to Miss Jemima , Captain 
 Higginbotham be much less influence by Cupid than by Plutus in the 
 offer he have make . the captain be one of that class of gentleman who 
 read their account by those corpse - light , or will - o'-the - wisps , call 
 expectation . ever since the squire 's grandfather have leave he - then in 
 short clothe - a legacy of l500 , the captain have people the future with 
 expectation ! he talk of his expectation as a man talk of share in 
 a Tontine ; they might fluctuate a little , - be now up and now down , - but 
 it be morally impossible , if he live on , but that he should be a 
 millionnaire one of these day . now , though Miss Jemima be a good 
 fifteen year young than himself , yet she always stand for a good 
 round sum in the ghostly book of the captain . she be an expectation to 
 the full amount of her L4000 , see that Frank be an only child , and 
 it would be carry coal to Newcastle to leave he anything . 

 rather than see so considerable a cipher suddenly sponge out of his 
 visionary ledger , rather than so much money should vanish clean out 
 of the family , Captain Higginbotham have take what he conceive , if 
 a desperate , at least a certain , step for the preservation of his 
 property . if the golden horn could not be have without the heifer , why , 
 he must take the heifer into the bargain . he have never form to himself 
 an idea that a heifer so gentle would toss and fle he over . the blow 
 be stunning . but no one compassionate the misfortune of the covetous , 
 though few perhaps be in great need of compassion . and leave poor 
 Captain Higginbotham to retrieve his illusory fortune as he well may 
 among " the expectation " which gather round the form of Mr. Sharpe 
 Currie , who be the cross old tyrant imaginable , and never allow 
 at his table any dish not compound with rice , which play Old Nick 
 with the captain 's constitutional function , I return to the wedding 
 at Hazeldean , just in time to see the bridegroom - who look singularly 
 well on the occasion - hand the bride   who , between sunshiny tear and 
 affectionate smile , be really a very interesting and even a pretty 
 bride , as bride go   into a carriage which the squire have present to 
 they , and depart on the orthodox nuptial excursion amidst the blessing 
 of the assemble crowd . 

 it may be think strange by the unreflective that these rural 
 spectator should so have approve and bless the marriage of a 
 Hazeldean of Hazeldean with a poor , outlandish , long - haired foreigner ; 
 but besides that Riccabocca , after all , have become one of the 
 neighbourhood , and be proverbially " a civil - speak gentleman , " it be 
 generally noticeable that on wedding occasion the bride so monopolize 
 interest , curiosity , and admiration that the bridegroom himself go for 
 little or nothing . he be merely the passive agent in the affair , - the 
 unregarded cause of the general satisfaction . it be not Riccabocca 
 himself that they approve and bless , - it be the gentleman in the 
 white waistcoat who have make Miss Jemima Madam Rickeybockey ! 

 lean on his wife 's arm   for it be a habit of the squire to lean on 
 his wife 's arm rather than she on his , when he be specially pleased ; 
 and there be something touch in the sight of that strong sturdy 
 frame thus insensibly , in hour of happiness , seek dependence on the 
 frail arm of woman , - lean , I say , on his wife 's arm , the squire , 
 about the hour of sunset , walk down to the booth by the lake . 

 all the parish - young and old , man , woman , and child , be assemble 
 there , and their face seem to bear one family likeness , in the common 
 emotion which animate all , as they turn to his frank , fatherly smile . 
 Squire Hazeldean stand at the head of the long table : he fill a horn 
 with ale from the brim tankard beside he . then he look round , 
 and lift his hand to request silence ; and ascend the chair , rise 
 in full view of all . every one feel that the squire be about to make 
 a speech , and the earnestness of the attention be proportion to the 
 rarity of the event ; for   though he be not unpractised in the oratory 
 of the husting   only thrice before have the squire make what could 
 fairly be call " a speech " to the villager of Hazeldean , - once on a 
 kindre festive occasion , when he have present to they his bride ; 
 once in a contested election for the shire , in which he take more than 
 ordinary interest , and be not quite so sober as he ought to have 
 be ; once in a time of great agricultural distress , when in spite of 
 reduction of rent , the farmer have be compel to discard a large 
 number of their customary labourer , and when the squire have say , " I 
 have give up keep the hound because I want to make a fine piece of 
 water   that be the origin of the lake , and to drain all the low land 
 round the Park . let every man who want work come to I ! " and that sad 
 year the parish rate of Hazeldean be not a penny the heavy . 

 now , for the fourth time , the squire rise , and thus he speak , - at his 
 right hand , Harry ; at his left , Frank ; at the bottom of the table , as 
 vice - president , Parson Dale , his little wife behind he , only obscurely 
 see . she cry readily , and her handkerchief be already before her 
 eye . 




 CHAPTER XXIX . 

 the SQUIRE 's SPEECH . 

 " friend and neighbour , I thank you kindly for come round I this 
 day , and for show so much interest in I and mine . my cousin be not 
 bear amongst you as I be , but you have know she from a child . it be a 
 familiar face , and one that never frown , which you will miss at your 
 cottage door , as I and mine will miss it long in the old Hall - " 

 here there be a sob from some of the woman , and nothing be see of 
 Mrs. Dale but the white handkerchief . the squire himself pause , and 
 brush away a tear with the back of his hand . then he resume , with a 
 sudden change of voice that be electrical , - 

 " for we none of we prize a blessing till we have lose it ! now , friend 
 and neighbour , a little time ago , it seem as if some ill - will have 
 creep into the village , - ill - will between you and I , neighbour ! - why , 
 that be not like Hazeldean ! " 

 the audience hang their head ! you never see people look so thoroughly 
 ashamed of themselves . the squire proceed , - 

 " I do not   say it be all your fault ; perhaps it be mine . " 

 " Noa , noa , noa , " burst forth in a general chorus . 

 " Nay , friend , " continue the squire , humbly , and in one of those 
 illustrative aphorism which , if less subtle than Riccabocca 's , be 
 more within reach of the popular comprehension , - " nay , we be all human , 
 and every man have his hobby ; sometimes he break in the hobby , and 
 sometimes the hobby , if it be very hard in the mouth , break in he . 
 one man 's hobby have an ill habit of always stop at the public house ! 
  Laughter .   another man 's hobby refuse to stir a peg beyond the door 
 where some buxom lass pat its neck the week before , - a hobby I ride 
 pretty often when I go court my good wife here !   much laughter and 
 applause .   other have a lazy hobby that there be no getting on ; other , 
 a runaway hobby that there be no stopping : but to cut the matter short , 
 my favourite hobby , as you well know , be always trot out to any place 
 on my property which seem to want the eye and hand of the master . I 
 hate , " cry the squire , warming , " to see thing neglect and decay , 
 and go to the dog ! this land we live in be a good mother to we , and 
 we can not   do too much for she . it be very true , neighbour , that I owe 
 she a good many acre , and ought to speak well of she ; but what then ? I 
 live amongst you , and what I take from the rent with one hand , I divide 
 amongst you with the other .   low but assent murmur .   now the more I 
 improve my property , the more mouth it feed . my great - grandfather keep 
 a field - book in which be enter not only the name of all the farmer 
 and the quantity of land they hold , but the average number of the 
 labourer each employ . my grandfather and father follow his example : 
 I have do the same . I find , neighbour , that our rent have double 
 since my great - grandfather begin to make the book . ay , - but there be 
 more than four time the number of labourer employ on the estate , and 
 at much well wage too ! well , my man , that say a great deal in favour 
 of improve property , and not let it go to the dog .   applause . 
 and therefore , neighbour , you will kindly excuse my bobby : it carry 
 grist to your mill .   reiterate applause .   well , but you will say , 
 ' what be the squire drive at ? ' why this , my friend : there be only one 
 wear - out , dilapidated , tumble - down thing in the parish of Hazeldean , and 
 it become an eyesore to I ; so I saddle my hobby , and ride at it . oh , 
 ho ! you know what I mean now ! yes , but , neighbour , you need not have 
 take it so to heart . that be a scurvy trick of some of you to hang I 
 in effigy , as they call it . " 

 " it warn't   you , " cry a voice in the crowd , " it war Nick Stirn . " 

 the squire recognize the voice of the tinker ; but though he now guess 
 at the ringleader , on that day of general amnesty he have the prudence 
 and magnanimity not to say , " stand forth , Sprott : thou art the man . " 
 yet his gallant english spirit would not suffer he to come off at the 
 expense of his servant . 

 " if it be Nick Stirn you mean , " say he , gravely , " more shame for you . 
 it show some pluck to hang the master ; but to hang the poor servant , 
 who only think to do his duty , careless of what ill - will it bring 
 upon he , be a shabby trick , - so little like the lad of Hazeldean , 
 that I suspect the man who teach it to they be never bear in the 
 parish . but let bygone be bygone . one thing be clear , - you do not   take 
 kindly to my new pair of stock ! the stock have be a stumble - block 
 and a grievance , and there be no deny that we go on very pleasantly 
 without it . I may also say that , in spite of it , we have be come 
 together again lately . and I can not   tell you what good it do I to see 
 your child play again on the green , and your honest face , in 
 spite of the stock , and those diabolical tract you have   be read 
 lately , light up at the thought that something pleasant be go on 
 at the Hall . do you know , neighbour , you put I in mind of an old story 
 which , besides apply to the parish , all who be marry , and all who 
 intend to marry , will do well to recollect . a worthy couple , name John 
 and Joan , have live happily together many a long year , till one unlucky 
 day they buy a new bolster . Joan say the bolster be too hard , and 
 John that it be too soft . so , of course , they quarrel . after sulk 
 all day , they agree to put the bolster between they at night . "   roar 
 of laughter amongst the man ; the woman do not know which way to look , 
 except , indeed , Mrs. Hazeldean , who , though she be more than usually 
 rosy , maintain her innocent genial smile , as much as to say , " there 
 be no harm in the squire 's jest . "   the orator resume , " after they have 
 thus lain apart for a little time , very silent and sullen , John sneeze . 
 ' God bless you ! ' say Joan , over the bolster . ' do you say God bless 
 I ? ' cry John , ' then here go the bolster ! ' " 

 prolonged laughter and tumultuous applause . 

 " friend and neighbour , " say the squire , when silence be restore , 
 and lift the horn of ale , " I have the pleasure to inform you that I 
 have order the stock to be take down , and make into a bench for 
 the chimney - nook of our old friend Gaffer Solomons yonder . but mind I , 
 lad , if ever you make the parish regret the loss of the stock , and 
 the overseer come to I with long face , and say , ' the stock must 
 be rebuild , ' why - " here from all the youth of the village rise so 
 deprecate a clamour , that the squire would have be the most burgle 
 orator in the world , if he say a word far on the subject . he 
 elevate the horn over his head - " why , that be my old Hazeldean again ! 
 Health and long life to you all ! " 

 the tinker have sneak out of the assembly , and do not show his face in 
 the village for the next six month . and as to those poisonous tract , 
 in spite of their salubrious label , " the Poor Man 's friend , " or " the 
 Rights of Labour , " you could no more have find one of they lurk in 
 the drawer of the kitchen dresser in Hazeldean than you would have 
 find the deadly nightshade on the flower - stand in the drawing - room of 
 the Hall . as for the revolutionary beerhouse , there be no need to apply 
 to the magistrate to shut it up , - it shut itself up before the week be 
 out . 

 o young head of the great House of Hapsburg , what a Hazeldean you might 
 have make of Hungary ! what a " moriamur pro rege nostro ! " would have ring 
 in your infant reign , - if you have make such a speech as the squire 's ! 




 BOOK FOURTH . 




 INITIAL chapter . 

 COMPRISING MR . CAXTON 's opinion on the MATRIMONIAL state , support BY 
 LEARNED AUTHORITIES . 

 " it be no bad idea of your , Pisistratus , " say my father , graciously , 
 " to depict the heightened affection and the serious intention of Signor 
 Riccabocca by a single stroke , - he leave of his spectacle ! good . " 

 " yet , " quoth my uncle , " I think Shakspeare represent a lover as fall 
 into slovenly habit , neglect his person , and suffer his hose to 
 be ungartered , rather than pay that attention to his outer man which 
 induce Signor Riccabocca to leave off his spectacle , and look as 
 handsome as nature will permit he . " 

 " there be different degree and many phase of the passion , " reply 
 my father . " Shakspeare be speak of an ill - treat , pining , woe - begone 
 lover , much aggrieve by the cruelty of his mistress , - a lover who have 
 find it of no avail to smarten himself up , and have fall despondently 
 into the opposite extreme . whereas Signor Riccabocca have nothing to 
 complain of in the barbarity of Miss Jemima . " 

 " indeed he have not ! " cry Blanche , toss her head , - " forward 
 creature ! " 

 " yes , my dear , " say my mother , try she good to look stately , " I be 
 decidedly of opinion that , in that respect , Pisistratus have lower the 
 dignity of the sex . not intentionally , " add my mother , mildly , and 
 afraid she have say something too bitter ; " but it be very hard for a man 
 to describe we woman . " 

 the captain nod approvingly ; Mr. Squills smile ; my father quietly 
 resume the thread of his discourse . 

 " to continue , " quoth he . " Riccabocca have no reason to despair of success 
 in his suit , nor any object in move his mistress to compassion . he 
 may , therefore , very properly tie up his garter and leave off his 
 spectacle . what do you say , Mr. Squills ? - for , after all , since 
 love - making can not fail to be a great constitutional derangement , the 
 experience of a medical man must be the good to consult . " 

 " Mr. Caxton , " reply Squills , obviously flatter , " you be quite 
 right : when a man make love , the organ of self - esteem and desire 
 of applause be greatly stimulate , and therefore , of course , he set 
 himself off to the good advantage . it be only , as you observe , when , 
 like Shakspeare 's lover , he have give up make love as a bad job , and 
 have receive that severe hit on the ganglion which the cruelty of a 
 mistress inflict , that he neglect his personal appearance : he neglect 
 it , not because he be in love , but because his nervous system be 
 depressed . that be the cause , if you remember , with poor Major Prim . 
 he wear his wig all awry when Susan Smart jilt he ; but I set it right 
 for he . " 

 " by sham Miss Smart into repentance , or get he a new 
 sweetheart ? " ask my uncle . 

 " Pooh ! " answer Squills , " by quinine and cold bathing . " 

 " we may therefore grant , " renew my father , " that , as a general rule , 
 the process of courtship tend to the spruceness , and even foppery , of 
 the individual engage in the experiment , as Voltaire have very prettily 
 prove somewhere . Nay , the Mexicans , indeed , be of opinion that the 
 lady at least ought to continue those care of her person even after 
 marriage . there be extant , in Sahagun 's ' history of New Spain , ' the 
 advice of an aztec or mexican mother to her daughter , in which she say , 
 ' that your husband may not take you in dislike , adorn yourself , wash 
 yourself , and let your garment be clean . ' it be true that the good lady 
 add , ' do it in moderation ; since if every day you be wash yourself 
 and your clothe , the world will say that you be over - delicate ; and 
 particular people will call you - TAPETZON TINEMAXOCH ! ' what those word 
 precisely mean , " add my father , modestly , " I can not say , since I 
 never have the opportunity to acquire the ancient aztec language , - but 
 something very opprobrious and horrible , no doubt . " 

 " I dare say a philosopher like Signor Riccabocca , " say my uncle , " be 
 not himself very tapetzon tine - what d ' ye call it ? - and a good healthy 
 english wife , that poor affectionate Jemima , be throw away upon he . " 

 " Roland , " say my father , " you do not   like foreigner ; a respectable 
 prejudice , and quite natural in a man who have be try his good to 
 hew they in piece and blow they up into splinter . but you do not   like 
 philosopher either , - and for that dislike you have no equally good 
 reason . " 

 " I only imply that they be not much addicted to soap and water , " say 
 my uncle . 

 " a notable mistake . many great philosopher have be very great beaux . 
 Aristotle be a notorious fop . Buffon put on his well laced ruffle 
 when he sit down to write , which imply that he wash his hand first . 
 Pythagoras insist greatly on the holiness of frequent ablution ; and 
 Horace - who , in his own way , be as good a philosopher as any the Romans 
 produce - take care to let we know what a neat , well - dress , dapper 
 little gentleman he be . but I do not   think you ever read the ' apology ' 
 of Apuleius ? " 

 " not I ; what be it about ? " ask the captain . 

 " about a great many thing . it be that Sage 's vindication from several 
 malignant charge , - amongst other , and principally indeed , that of 
 be much too refined and effeminate for a philosopher . nothing 
 can exceed the rhetorical skill with which he excuse himself for 
 use - tooth - powder . ' ought a philosopher , ' he exclaim , ' to allow 
 anything unclean about he , especially in the mouth , - the mouth , which 
 be the vestibule of the soul , the gate of discourse , the portico of 
 think ! ah , but AEmilianus   the accuser of Apuleius   never open 
 his mouth but for slander and calumny , - tooth - powder would indeed be 
 unbecoming to he ! or , if he use any , it will not be my good arabian 
 tooth powder , but charcoal and cinder . ay , his tooth should be as foul 
 as his language ! and yet even the crocodile like to have his tooth 
 clean ; insect get into they , and , horrible reptile though he be , 
 he open his jaw inoffensively to a faithful dentistical bird , who 
 volunteer his beak for a toothpick . ' " 

 my father be now warm in the subject he have start , and soar 
 mile away from Riccabocca and " my novel . " " and observe , " he 
 exclaim , - " observe with what gravity this eminent Platonist plead 
 guilty to the charge of have a mirror . ' why , what , ' he exclaim , ' more 
 worthy of the regard of a human creature than his own image ' nihil 
 respectabilius homini quam formam suam ! be not that one of our child 
 the most dear to we who be call ' the picture of his father ' ? but take 
 what pain you will with a picture , it can never be so like you as 
 the face in your mirror ! think it discreditable to look with proper 
 attention on one 's self in the glass ! do not Socrates recommend such 
 attention to his disciple , - do he not make a great moral agent of 
 the speculum ? the handsome , in admire their beauty therein , be 
 admonish that handsome be who handsome do ; and the more the ugly 
 star at themselves , the more they become naturally anxious to hide the 
 disgrace of their feature in the loveliness of their merit . be not 
 demosthene always at his speculum ? do he not rehearse his cause 
 before it as before a master in the art ? he learn his eloquence from 
 Plato , his dialectics from eubulide ; but as for his delivery - there , he 
 come to the mirror ! 

 " therefore , " conclude Mr. Caxton , return unexpectedly to the 
 subject , - " therefore , it be no reason to suppose that Dr. Riccabocca 
 be averse to cleanliness and decent care of the person because he be a 
 philosopher ; and , all thing consider , he never show himself more a 
 philosopher than when he leave off his spectacle and look his good . " 

 " well , " say my mother , kindly , " I only hope it may turn out happily . 
 but I should have be well pleased if Pisistratus have not make Dr. 
 Riccabocca so reluctant a wooer . " 

 " very true , " say the captain ; " the Italian do not shine as a lover . 
 throw a little more fire into he , Pisistratus , - something gallant and 
 chivalrous . " 

 " Fire ! gallantry ! chivalry ! " cry my father , who have take Riccabocca 
 under his special protection ; " why , do not   you see that the man 
 be describe as a philosopher ? - and I should like to know when a 
 philosopher ever plunge into matrimony without considerable misgiving 
 and cold shiver ! indeed , it seem that - perhaps before he be a 
 philosopher - Riccabocca have try the experiment , and know what it 
 be . why , even that plain - speak , sensible , practical man , Metellus 
 Numidicus , who be not even a philosopher , but only a roman censor , 
 thus express himself in an exhortation to the people to perpetrate 
 matrimony : ' if , o Quirites , we could do without wife , we should all 
 dispense with that subject of care ea molestia careremus ; but since 
 nature have so manage it that we can not live with woman comfortably , nor 
 without they at all , let we rather provide for the human race than our 
 own temporary felicity . ' " 

 here the lady set up such a cry of indignation , that both Roland and 
 myself endeavour to appease their wrath by hasty assurance that we 
 utterly repudiate the damnable doctrine of Metellus Numidicus . 

 my father , wholly unmove , as soon as a sullen silence be establish , 
 recommence . " do not think , lady , " say he , " that you be without 
 advocate at that day : there be many Romans gallant enough to blame 
 the censor for a mode of express himself which they hold to be 
 equally impolite and injudicious . ' surely , ' say they , with some 
 plausibility , if Numidicus wish man to marry , he need not have 
 refer so peremptorily to the disquietude of the connection , and thus 
 have make they more inclined to turn away from matrimony than give they 
 a relish for it . ' but against these critic one honest man   whose name 
 of Titus Castricius should not be forget by posterity   maintain 
 that Metellus Numidicus could not have speak more properly ; ' for 
 remark , ' say he , ' that Metellus be a censor , not a rhetorician . it 
 become rhetoricians to adorn and disguise and make the good of thing ; 
 but Metellus , sanctus vir , - a holy and blameless man , grave and sincere 
 to wit , and address the roman people in the solemn capacity of 
 Censor , - be bind to speak the plain truth , especially as he be 
 treat of a subject on which the observation of every day , and the 
 experience of every life , could not leave the least doubt upon the mind 
 of his audience . ' still , Riccabocca , have decide to marry , have no 
 doubt prepare himself to bear all the concomitant evil - as become a 
 profess sage ; and I own I admire the art with which Pisistratus have 
 draw the kind of woman most likely to suit a philosopher - " 

 Pisistratus bow , and look round complacently ; but recoil from two 
 very peevish and discontent face feminine . 

 MR . CAXTON   complete his sentence . - " not only as regard mildness 
 of temper and other household qualification , but as regard the 
 very person of the object of his choice . for you evidently remember , 
 Pisistratus , the reply of Bias , when ask his opinion on marriage : 
  long sentence in Greek " 

 Pisistratus try to look as if he have the opinion of Bias by heart , and 
 nod acquiescingly . 

 MR . CAXTON . - " that be , my dear , ' the woman you would marry be either 
 handsome or ugly : if handsome , she be koine , - namely , you do not   have 
 she to yourself ; if ugly , she be poine , - that is , a fury . ' but , as it 
 be observe in Aulus Gellius   whence I borrow this citation , there be a 
 wide interval between handsome and ugly . and thus Ennius , in his tragedy 
 of ' Menalippus , ' use an admirable expression to designate woman of the 
 proper degree of matrimonial comeliness , such as a philosopher would 
 select . he call this degree stata forma , - a rational , mediocre sort of 
 beauty , which be not liable to be either koine or poine . and Favorinus , 
 who be a remarkably sensible man , and come from Provence - the male 
 inhabitant of which district have always value themselves on their 
 knowledge of love and lady - call this say stata forma the beauty of 
 wife , - the uxorial beauty . Ennius say that woman of a stata forma be 
 almost always safe and modest . now , Jemima , you observe , be describe as 
 possess this stata forma ; and it be the nicety of your observation in 
 this respect , which I like the most in the whole of your description of 
 a philosopher 's matrimonial courtship , Pisistratus   except only the 
 stroke of the spectacle , for it show that you have properly consider 
 the opinion of Bias , and master all the counter logic suggest in 
 Book v. , chapter xi . , of Aulus Gellius . " 

 " for all that , " say Blanche , half archly , half demurely , with a smile 
 in the eye and a pout of the lip , " I do not   remember that Pisistratus , in 
 the day when he wish to be most complimentary , ever assure I that I 
 have a stata forma , - a rational , mediocre sort of beauty . " 

 " and I think , " observe my uncle , " that when he come to his real 
 heroine , whoever she may be , he will not trouble his head much about 
 either Bias or Aulus Gellius . " 




 CHAPTER II . 

 Matrimony be certainly a great change in life . one be astonish not to 
 find a notable alteration in one 's friend , even if he or she have be 
 only wed a week . in the instance of Dr. and Mrs. Riccabocca the 
 change be peculiarly visible . to speak first of the lady , as in 
 chivalry bind , Mrs. Riccabocca have entirely renounce that melancholy 
 which have characterize Miss Jemima ; she become even sprightly and gay , 
 and look all the well and pretty for the alteration . she do not 
 scruple to confess honestly to Mrs. Dale that she be now of opinion 
 that the world be very far from approach its end . but , in the 
 meanwhile , she do not neglect the duty which the belief she have 
 abandon serf to inculcate , - " she set her house in order . " the cold 
 and penurious elegance that have characterize the casino disappear 
 like enchantment , - that is , the elegance remain , but the cold and 
 penury flee before the smile of woman . like Puss - in - Boots , after 
 the nuptial of his master , Jackeymo only now catch minnow and 
 stickleback for his own amusement . Jackeymo look much plumper , and 
 so do Riccabocca . in a word , the fair Jemima become an excellent wife . 
 Riccabocca secretly think her extravagant , but , like a wise man , 
 decline to look at the house bill , and eat his joint in unreproachful 
 silence . 

 indeed there be so much unaffected kindness in the nature of Mrs. 
 Riccabocca - beneath the quiet of her manner there beat so genially 
 the heart of the Hazeldeans - that she fairly justify the favourable 
 anticipation of Mrs. Dale . and though the doctor do not noisily 
 boast of his felicity , nor , as some new married folk do , thrust it 
 insultingly under the nimis unctis naribus , - the turn - up nose of 
 your surly old married folk , - nor force it gaudily and glaringly on 
 the envious eye of the single , you might still see that he be a more 
 cheerful and light - hearted man than before . his smile be less 
 ironical , his politeness less distant . he do not study Machiavelli so 
 intensely , - and he do not return to the spectacle ; which last be an 
 excellent sign . moreover , the humanizing influence of the tidy English 
 wife might be see in the improvement of his outward or artificial man . 
 his clothe seem to fit he well ; indeed , the clothe be new . Mrs. 
 Dale no long remark that the button be off the wristband , which 
 be a great satisfaction to she . but the sage still remain faithful to 
 the pipe , the cloak , and the red silk umbrella . Mrs. Riccabocca have   to 
 her credit be it speak   use all become and wife - like art against 
 these three remnant of the old bachelor , Adam , but in vain . " Anima 
 mia , "   soul of mine   - say the doctor , tenderly , " I hold the cloak , the 
 umbrella , and the pipe as the sole relic that remain to I of my native 
 country . respect and spare they . " 

 Mrs. Riccabocca be touch , and have the good sense to perceive that 
 man , let he be ever so much married , retain certain sign of his 
 ancient independence , - certain token of his old identity , which a wife , 
 the most despotic , will do well to concede . she concede the cloak , 
 she submit to the umbrella , she overcome her abhorrence of the pipe . 
 after all , consider the natural villany of our sex , she confess to 
 herself that she might have be bad off . but through all the calm 
 and cheerfulness of Riccabocca , a nervous perturbation be sufficiently 
 perceptible ; it commence after the second week of marriage ; it go on 
 increase , till one bright sunny afternoon , as he be stand on his 
 terrace , gaze down upon the road , at which Jackeymo be place , lo , a 
 stage - coach stop ! the doctor make a bound , and put both hand to his 
 heart as if he have be shoot ; he then leap over the balustrade , and 
 his wife from her window behold he fly down the hill , with his long 
 hair stream in the wind , till the tree hide he from her sight . 

 " ah , " think she , with a natural pang of conjugal jealousy , " henceforth 
 I be only second in his home . he have go to welcome his child ! " and at 
 that reflection Mrs. Riccabocca shed tear . 

 but so naturally amiable be she , that she hasten to curb her emotion , 
 and efface as well as she could the trace of a stepmother 's grief . when 
 this be do , and a silent , self - rebuke prayer murmur over , the 
 good woman descend the stair with alacrity , and summon up her good 
 smile , emerge on the terrace . 

 she be repay ; for scarcely have she come into the open air , when two 
 little arm be throw around she , and the sweetest voice that ever 
 come from a child 's lip sigh out in break English , " good mamma , love 
 I a little . " 

 " love you ? with my whole heart ! " cry the stepmother , with all a 
 mother 's honest passion . and she clasp the child to her breast . 

 " God bless you , my wife ! " say Riccabocca , in a husky tone . 

 " please take this too , " add Jackeymo , in Italian , as well as his sob 
 would let he , and he break off a great bough full of blossom from his 
 favourite orange - tree , and thrust it into his mistress 's hand . she have 
 not the slight notion what he mean by it ! 




 CHAPTER III . 

 Violante be indeed a bewitching child , - a child to whom I defy Mrs. 
 Caudle herself   immortal Mrs. Caudle !   to have be a harsh stepmother . 

 look at she now , as release from those kindly arm , she stand , still 
 cling with one hand to her new mamma , and hold out the other to 
 Riccabocca , with those large dark eye swim in happy tear . what a 
 lovely smile ! what an ingenuous , candid brow ! she look delicate , she 
 evidently require care , she want the mother . and rare be the woman 
 who would not love she the well for that ! still , what an innocent , 
 infantine bloom in those clear , smooth cheek ! and in that slight frame , 
 what exquisite natural grace ! 

 " and this , I suppose , be your nurse , darling ? " say Mrs. Riccabocca , 
 observe a dark , foreign - look woman , dress very strangely , 
 without cap or bonnet , but a great silver arrow stick in her hair , and a 
 filigree chain or necklace rest upon her kerchief . 

 " ah , good Annetta , " say Violante , in Italian . " Papa , she say she be to 
 go back ; but she be not to go back , be she ? " 

 Riccabocca , who have scarcely before notice the woman , start at that 
 question , exchange a rapid glance with Jackeymo , and then , mutter 
 some inaudible excuse , approach the nurse , and , beckon she to 
 follow he , go away into the ground . he do not return for more than 
 an hour , nor do the woman then accompany he home . he say briefly to 
 his wife that the nurse be oblige to return at once to Italy , and that 
 she would stay in the village to catch the mail ; that indeed she would 
 be of no use in their establishment , as she could not speak a word 
 of English ; that he be sadly afraid Violante would pine for she . and 
 Violante do pine at first . but still , to a child it be so great a thing 
 to find a parent , to be at home , that , tender and grateful as Violante 
 be , she could not be inconsolable while her father be there to 
 comfort . 

 for the first few day , Riccabocca scarcely permit any one to be with 
 his daughter but himself . he would not even leave she alone with 
 his Jemima . they walk out together , - sit together for hour in the 
 belvidere . then by degree he begin to resign she more and more to 
 Jemima 's care and tuition , especially in English , of which language at 
 present she speak only a few sentence   previously , perhaps , learn by 
 heart   so as to be clearly intelligible . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 there be one person in the establishment of Dr. Riccabocca who be 
 satisfied neither with the marriage of his master nor the arrival of 
 Violante , - and that be our friend Lenny Fairfield . previous to the 
 all - absorb duty of courtship , the young peasant have secure a very 
 large share of Riccabocca 's attention . the sage have feel interest in the 
 growth of this rude intelligence struggle up to light . but what with 
 the wooing and what with the wedding , Lenny Fairfield have sink very 
 much out of his artificial position as pupil into his natural station 
 of under - gardener . and on the arrival of Violante , he see , with natural 
 bitterness , that he be clean forget , not only by Riccabocca , but 
 almost by Jackeymo . it be true that the master still lend he book , 
 and the servant still give he lecture on horticulture . but Riccabocca 
 have no time nor inclination now to amuse himself with enlighten that 
 tumult of conjecture which the book create . and if Jackeymo have be 
 covetous of those mine of gold bury beneath the acre now fairly 
 take from the squire   and good - naturedly add rent - free , as an aid to 
 Jemima 's dower , before the advent of the young lady whose future dowry 
 the produce be to swell , now that she be actually under the eye of 
 the faithful servant , such a stimulus be give to his industry that he 
 could think of nothing else but the land , and the revolution he design 
 to effect in its natural english crop . the garden , save only the 
 orangetree , be abandon entirely to Lenny , and additional labourer 
 be call in for the field work . Jackeymo have discover that one part 
 of the soil be suit to lavender , that another would grow camomile . he 
 have in his heart apportion a beautiful field of rich loam to flax ; 
 but against the growth of flax the squire set his face obstinately . 
 that most lucrative , perhaps , of all crop when soil and skill suit , be 
 formerly attempt in England much more commonly than it be now , since 
 you will find few old lease do not contain a clause prohibitory of 
 flax as an impoverishment of the land . and though Jackeymo learnedly 
 endeavour to prove to the squire that the flax itself contain 
 particle which , if return to the soil , repay all that the crop take 
 away , Mr. Hazeldean have his old - fashioned prejudice on the matter , 
 which be insuperable . " my forefather , " quoth he , " do not put that 
 clause in their lease without good cause ; and as the casino land be 
 entail on Frank , I have no right to gratify your foreign whim at his 
 expense . " 

 to make up for the loss of the flax , Jackeymo resolve to convert a very 
 nice bit of pasture into orchard ground , which he calculate would bring 
 in L10 net per acre by the time Miss Violante be marriageable . at this 
 the squire pishe a little ; but as it be quite clear that the land 
 would be all the more valuable hereafter for the fruit - tree , he 
 consent to permit the " grass - land " to be thus partially break up . 

 all these change leave poor Lenny Fairfield very much to himself , - at 
 a time when the new and strange device which the initiation into 
 book knowledge create make it most desirable that he should have the 
 constant guidance of a superior mind . 

 one evening after his work , as Lenny be return to his mother 's 
 cottage , very sullen and very moody , he suddenly come in contact with 
 Sprott the tinker . 




 CHAPTER V. 

 the tinker be seat under a hedge , hammer away at an old kettle , 
 with a little fire burn in front of he , and the donkey hard by , 
 indulge in a placid doze . Mr. Sprott look up as Lenny pass , nod 
 kindly , and say , - 

 " Good evenin ' , Lenny : glad to hear you be so ' spectably sitivate with 
 Mounseer . " 

 " ay , " answer Lenny , with a leaven of rancour in his recollection , 
 " you be not ashamed to speak to I now that I be not in disgrace . but 
 it be in disgrace , when it be not   my fault , that the real gentleman be 
 most kind to I . " 

 " Ar - r , Lenny , " say the tinker , with a prolonged rattle in that say 
 Ar - r , which be not without great significance . " but you see the real 
 gentleman , who han't   get his bread to get , can hafford to ' spise his 
 c'racter in the world . a poor tinker must be timbersome and nice in his 
 ' sociation . but sit down here a bit , Lenny ; I have   summat to say to ye ! " 

 " to I ? " 

 " to ye . give the neddy a shove out I ' the vay , and sit down , I say . " 

 Lenny rather reluctantly , and somewhat superciliously , accept this 
 invitation . 

 " I hear , " say the tinker , in a voice make rather indistinct by a 
 couple of nail , which he have insert between his tooth , - " I hear as 
 how you be unkimmon fond of reading . I ha ' sum nice cheap book in my 
 bag yonder , - sum as low as a penny . " 

 " I should like to see they , " say Lenny , his eye sparkle . 

 the tinker rise , open one of the pannier on the ass 's back , take out 
 a bag , which he place before Lenny , and tell he to suit himself . the 
 young peasant desire no well . he spread all the content of the 
 bag on the sward , and a motley collection of food for the mind be 
 there , - food and poison , serpente avibus good and evil . here Milton 's 
 Paradise Lost , there " the Age of Reason ; " here Methodist Tracts , there 
 " True Principles of socialism , " - treatise on useful Knowledge by sound 
 learning actuate by pure benevolence , Appeals to Operatives by the 
 shallow reasoner , instigate by the same ambition that have move 
 eratosthene to the conflagration of a temple ; work of fiction 
 admirable as " Robinson Crusoe , " or innocent as " The Old English Baron , " 
 beside coarse translation of such garbage as have rot away the youth 
 of France under Louis Quinze . this miscellany be an epitome , in short , 
 of the mixed World of Books , of that vast city of the Press , with its 
 palace and hovel , its aqueduct and sewer , which open all alike 
 to the naked eye and the curious mind of he to whom you say , in the 
 tinker 's careless phrase , " suit yourself . " 

 but it be not the first impulse of a nature healthful and still pure 
 to settle in the hovel and lose itself amidst the sewer ; and Lenny 
 Fairfield turn innocently over the bad book , and select two or 
 three of the good , bring they to the tinker , and ask the price . 

 " why , " say Mr. Sprott , put on his spectacle , " you have take the 
 werry dearest : they ' ere be much cheap , and more hinterestin ' . " 

 " but I do not   fancy they , " answer Lenny ; " I do not   understand what they 
 be about , and this seem to tell one how the steam - engine be make , and 
 have nice plate ; and this be ' Robinson Crusoe , ' which Parson Dale once 
 say he would give I - I would rather buy it out of my own money . " 

 " well , please yourself , " quoth the tinker ; " you shall have the book for 
 four bob , and you can pay I next month . " 

 " four bobs , four shilling ? it be a great sum , " say Lenny ; " but I will 
 lay by , as you be kind enough to trust I : good - evening , Mr. Sprott . " 

 " stay a bit , " say the tinker ; " I will just throw you these two little 
 tract into the bargain ; they be only a shilling a dozen , so ' t be 
 but tuppence , - and ven you have read those , vy , you will be a regular 
 customer . " 

 the tinker toss to Lenny Nos . 1 and 2 of " Appeals to Operatives , " and 
 the peasant take they up gratefully . 

 the young knowledge - seeker go his way across the green field , and 
 under the still autumn foliage of the hedgerow . he look first at one 
 book , then at another ; he do not know on which to settle . 

 the tinker rise , and make a fire with leaf and furze and stick , some 
 dry and some green . 

 Lenny have now open no . 1 of the tract : they be the short to read , 
 and do not   require so much effort of the mind as the explanation of the 
 steam - engine . 

 the tinker have set on his grimy glue - pot , and the glue simmer . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 as Violante become more familiar with her new home , and those around 
 she become more familiar with Violante , she be remark for a certain 
 stateliness of manner and bearing , which , have it be less evidently 
 natural and inborn , would have seem misplace in the daughter of 
 a forlorn exile , and would have be rare at so early an age among 
 child of the lofty pretension . it be with the air of a little 
 princess that she present her tiny hand to a friendly pressure , or 
 submit her calm clear cheek to a presuming kiss . yet withal she be 
 so graceful , and her very stateliness be so pretty and captivating , 
 that she be not the less loved for all her grand air . and , indeed , she 
 deserve to be love ; for though she be certainly prouder than Mr. Dale 
 could approve of , her pride be devoid of egotism , - and that be a pride 
 by no mean common . she have an intuitive forethought for other : you 
 could see that she be capable of that grand woman - heroism , abnegation 
 of self ; and though she be an original child , and often grave and 
 musing , with a tinge of melancholy , sweet , but deep in her character , 
 still she be not above the happy genial merriment of childhood , - only 
 her silver laugh be more attuned , and her gesture more compose , than 
 those of child habituate to many play - fellow usually be . Mrs. 
 Hazeldean like she good when she be grave , and say ' she would become 
 a very sensible woman . " Mrs. Dale like she well when she be gay , and 
 say ' she be bear to make many a heart ache ; " for which Mrs. Dale be 
 properly reprove by the parson . Mrs. Hazeldean give she a little set of 
 garden tool ; Mrs. Dale a picture - book and a beautiful doll . for a long 
 time the book and the doll have the preference . but Mrs. Hazeldean have 
 observe to Riccabocca that the poor child look pale , and ought to be 
 a good deal in the open air , the wise father ingeniously pretend 
 to Violante that Mrs. Riccabocca have take a great fancy to the 
 picture - book , and that he should be very glad to have the doll , upon 
 which Violante hasten to give they both away , and be never so 
 happy as when Mamma   as she call Mrs. Riccabocca   be admire the 
 picture - book , and Riccabocca with austere gravity dandle the doll . 
 then Riccabocca assure she that she could be of great use to he in 
 the garden ; and Violante instantly put into movement her spade , hoe , and 
 wheelbarrow . 

 this last occupation bring she into immediate contact with Mr. Leonard 
 Fairfield ; and that personage one morning , to his great horror , find 
 Miss Violante have nearly exterminate a whole celery - bed , which she have 
 ignorantly conceive to be a crop of weed . 

 Lenny be extremely angry . he snatch away the hoe , and say angrily , 
 " you must not do that , Miss. I will tell your papa if you - " 

 Violante draw herself up , and never have be so speak to before , 
 at least since her arrival in England , there be something comic in the 
 surprise of her large eye , as well as something tragic in the dignity 
 of her offend mien . " it be very naughty of you , Miss , " continue 
 Leonard , in a milder tone , for he be both soften by the eye and awe 
 by the mien , " and I trust you will not do it again . " 

 " Non capisco , " murmur Violante , and the dark eye fill with tear . 
 at that moment up come Jackeymo : and Violante , point to Leonard , 
 say , with an effort not to betray her emotion , " Il fanciullo e molto 
 grossolano . " -   " he be a very rude boy . " 

 Jackeymo turn to Leonard with the look of an enraged tiger . " how you 
 dare , scum of de earth that you be , " cry he , " how you dare make cry 
 the signorina ? " and his English not supply familiar vituperative 
 sufficiently , he pour out upon Lenny such a profusion of italian 
 abuse , that the boy turn red and white , in a breath , with rage and 
 perplexity . 

 Violante take instant compassion upon the victim she have make , and with 
 true feminine caprice now begin to scold Jackeymo for his anger , and , 
 finally approach Leonard , lay her hand on his arm , and say with a 
 kindness at once childlike and queenly , and in the prettiest imaginable 
 mixture of imperfect English and soft Italian , to which I can not pretend 
 to do justice , and shall therefore translate : " do not   mind he . I dare 
 say it be all my fault , only I do not understand you : be not these 
 thing weed ? " 

 " no , my darling signorina , " say Jackeymo in Italian , look ruefully 
 at the celery - bed , " they be not weed , and they sell very well at this 
 time of the year . but still , if it amuse you to pluck they up , I should 
 like to see who be to prevent it . " 

 Lenny walk away . he have be call " the scum of the earth , " - by a 
 foreigner too ! he have again be ill - treat for do what he conceive 
 his duty . he be again feel the distinction between rich and poor , 
 and he now fancy that that distinction involve deadly warfare , for 
 he have read from begin to end those two damnable tract which 
 the tinker have present to he . but in the midst of all the angry 
 disturbance of his mind , he feel the soft touch of the infant 's hand , 
 the soothe influence of her conciliate word , and he be half 
 ashamed that he have speak so roughly to a child . 

 still , not trust himself to speak , he walk away , and sit down at a 
 distance : " I do not   see , " think he , " why there should be rich and poor , 
 master and servant . " Lenny , be it remember , have not hear the Parson 's 
 Political Sermon . 

 an hour after , have compose himself , Lenny return to his work . 
 Jackeymo be no long in the garden : he have go to the field ; but 
 Riccabocca be stand by the celerybed , and hold the red silk 
 umbrella over Violante as she sit on the ground , look up at her 
 father with those eye already so full of intelligence and love and 
 soul . 

 " Lenny , " say Riccabocca , " my young lady have be tell I that she 
 have be very naughty , and Giacomo very unjust to you . forgive they 
 both . " 

 Lenny 's sullenness melt in an instant : the reminiscence of tract 
 Nos . 1 and 2 , - 

  " like the baseless fabric of a vision , 
  leave not a wreck behind . " 

 he raise eye swim with all his native goodness towards the wise 
 man , and drop they gratefully on the infant peace - maker . then he 
 turn away his head and fairly wept . the parson be right : " o ye poor , 
 have charity for the rich ; o ye rich , respect the poor . " 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 now from that day the humble Lenny and the regal Violante become great 
 friend . with what pride he teach she to distinguish between celery and 
 weed , - and how proud too be she when she learn that she be useful ! 
 there be not a great pleasure you can give child , especially female 
 child , than to make they feel they be already of value in the world , 
 and serviceable as well as protect . week and month roll away , and 
 Lenny still read , not only the book lend he by the doctor , but those 
 he buy of Mr. Sprott . as for the bomb and shell against religion 
 which the tinker carry in his bag , Lenny be not induce to blow 
 himself up with they . he have be rear from his cradle in simple love 
 and reverence for the Divine Father , and the tender Saviour , whose life 
 beyond all record of human goodness , whose death beyond all epic of 
 mortal heroism , no be whose infancy have be teach to supplicate 
 the merciful and adore the Holy , yea , even though his later life may be 
 entangle amidst the thorn of some desolate pyrrhonism , can ever hear 
 revile and scoff without a shock to the conscience and a revolt of 
 the heart . as the deer recoil by instinct from the tiger , as the very 
 look of the scorpion deter you from handle it , though you never see 
 a scorpion before , so the very first line in some ribald profanity on 
 which the tinker put his black finger make Lenny 's blood run cold . safe , 
 too , be the peasant boy from any temptation in work of a gross and 
 licentious nature , not only because of the happy ignorance of his rural 
 life , but because of a more enduring safeguard , - genius ! Genius , 
 that , manly , robust , healthful as it be , be long before it lose its 
 instinctive dorian modesty ; shameface , because so susceptible to 
 glory , - genius , that love indeed to dream , but on the violet bank , not 
 the dunghill . wherefore , even in the error of the sens , it seek to 
 escape from the sensual into world of fancy , subtle and refine . but 
 apart from the passion , true genius be the most practical of all human 
 gift . like the Apollo , whom the Greek worship as its type , even 
 Arcady be its exile , not its home . soon weary of the dalliance of Tempe , 
 it ascend to its mission , - the Archer of the silver bow , the guide of 
 the car of light . speak more plainly , genius be the enthusiasm for 
 self - improvement ; it cease or sleep the moment it desist from seek 
 some object which it believe of value , and by that object it insensibly 
 connect its self - improvement with the positive advance of the world . 
 at present Lenny 's genius have no bias that be not to the Positive 
 and useful . it take the direction natural to its sphere , and the want 
 therein , - namely , to the art which we call mechanical . he want to 
 know about steam - engine and artesian well ; and to know about they it 
 be necessary to know something of mechanic and hydrostatic ; so he 
 buy popular elementary work on those mystic science , and set all 
 the power of his mind at work on experiment . 

 noble and generous spirit be ye , who , with small care for fame , and 
 little reward from pelf , have open to the intellect of the poor the 
 portal of wisdom ! I honour and revere ye ; only do not think ye have 
 do all that be needful . consider , I pray ye , whether so good a choice 
 from the tinker 's bag would have be make by a boy whom religion 
 have not scar from the Pestilent , and genius have not lead to the 
 self - improve . and Lenny do not wholly escape from the mephitic 
 portion of the motley element from which his awakening mind draw its 
 nurture . think not it be all pure oxygen that the pant lip draw in . 
 no ; there be still those inflammatory tract . political I do not like 
 to call they , for politic mean the art of government , and the tract I 
 speak of assailed all government which mankind have hitherto recognize . 
 sad rubbish , perhaps , be such tract to you , o sound thinker , in your 
 easy - chair ! or to you , practise statesman , at your post on the Treasury 
 Bench ; to you , calm dignitary of a learn Church ; or to you , my lord 
 judge , who may often have send from your bar to the dire Orcus 
 of Norfolk 's Isle the ghost of man whom that rubbish , fall 
 simultaneously on the bump of acquisitiveness and combativeness , hath 
 untimely slain ! sad rubbish to you ! but seem it such rubbish to the 
 poor man , to whom it promise a paradise on the easy term of upset 
 a world ? for , ye see , those " Appeals to Operatives " represent that 
 same world - upsetting as the simple thing imaginable , - a sort of 
 two - and - two - make - four proposition . the poor have only get to set 
 their strong hand to the axle , and heave - a - boy ! and hurrah for 
 the topsy - turvy ! then just to put a little wholesome rage into the 
 heave - a - hoy ! it be so facile to accompany the eloquence of " Appeals " 
 with a kind of stir - the - bile - up statistic , - " abuse of the 
 aristocracy , " " job of the priesthood , " " expense of the Army keep up 
 for Peers ' young son , " " war contract for the villanous purpose of 
 raise the rent of the landowner , " - all arithmetically dish up , 
 and season with tale of every gentleman who have commit a misdeed , 
 every clergyman who have dishonour his cloth ; as if such instance be 
 fair specimen of average gentleman and minister of religion ! all this , 
 passionately advanced   and , observe , never answer , for that literature 
 admit no controversialist , and the writer have it all his own way , 
 may be rubbish ; but it be out of such rubbish that operative build 
 barricade for attack , and legislator prison for defence . 

 our poor friend Lenny draw plenty of this stuff from the tinker 's 
 bag . he think it very clever and very eloquent ; and he suppose the 
 statistic be as true as mathematical demonstration . 

 a famous knowledge - diffuser be look over my shoulder , and tell I , 
 " increase education , and cheapen good book , and all this rubbish will 
 disappear ! " Sir , I do not   believe a word of it . if you print Ricardo 
 and Adam Smith at a farthe a volume , I still believe that they would 
 be as little read by the operative as they be nowadays by a very large 
 proportion of highly - cultivate man . I still believe that , while the 
 press work , attack on the rich and proposition for heave - a - hoy will 
 always form a popular portion of the Literature of Labour . there 's Lenny 
 Fairfield read a treatise on hydraulic , and construct a model for 
 a fountain into the bargain ; but that do not prevent his acquiescence 
 in any proposition for get rid of a National Debt , which he 
 certainly never agree to pay , and which he be tell make sugar and tea 
 so shamefully dear . no . I tell you what do a little counteract those 
 eloquent incentive to break his own head against the strong wall of 
 the Social System , - it be , that he have two eye in that head which 
 be not always employ in reading . and have be tell in print that 
 master be tyrant , parson hypocrite or drone in the hive , and 
 landowner vampire and bloodsucker , he look out into the little world 
 around he , and , first , he be compel to acknowledge that his master 
 be not a tyrant   perhaps because he be a foreigner and a philosopher , 
 and , for what I and Lenny know , a republican . but then Parson Dale , 
 though High Church to the marrow , be neither hypocrite nor drone . he 
 have a very good living , it be true , - much well than he ought to have , 
 accord to the " political " opinion of those tract ! but Lenny be 
 oblige to confess that if Parson Dale be a penny the poor , he would 
 do a pennyworth 's less good ; and compare one parish with another , such 
 as Rood Hall and Hazeldean , he be dimly aware that there be no great 
 CIVILIZER than a parson tolerably well off . then , too , Squire Hazeldean , 
 though as arrant a tory as ever stand upon shoe - leather , be certainly 
 not a vampire nor blood sucker . he do not feed on the public ; a 
 great many of the public feed upon he : and , therefore , his practical 
 experience a little stagger and perplex Lenny Fairfield as to 
 the gospel accuracy of his theoretical dogma . master , parson , and 
 landowner ! have , at the risk of all popularity , just give a coup de 
 patte to certain sage extremely the fashion at present , I be not go 
 to let you off without an admonitory flea in the ear . do not   suppose that 
 any mere scribbling and typework will suffice to answer the scribble 
 and typework set at work to demolish you , - write down that rubbish you 
 can not ; live it down you may . if you be rich , like Squire Hazeldean , do 
 good with your money ; if you be poor , like Signor Riccabocca , do good 
 with your kindness . 

 see ! there be Lenny now receive his week 's wage ; and though Lenny 
 know that he can get high wage in the very next parish , his blue 
 eye be sparkle with gratitude , not at the chink of the money , but at 
 the poor exile 's friendly talk on thing apart from all service ; while 
 Violante be descend the step from the terrace , charge by her 
 mother - in - law with a little basket of sago , and such - like delicacy , 
 for Mrs. Fairfield , who have be ail the last few day . 

 Lenny will see the tinker as he go home , and he will buy a most 
 demosthenean " Appeal , " - a tract of tract , upon the propriety of Strikes 
 and the Avarice of Masters . but , somehow or other , I think a few word 
 from Signor Riccabocca , that do not cost the signor a farthing , and the 
 sight of his mother 's smile at the content of the basket , which cost 
 very little , will serve to neutralize the effect of that " appeal " much 
 more efficaciously than the good article a Brougham or a Mill could 
 write on the subject . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 Spring have come again ; and one beautiful May day , Leonard Fairfield sit 
 beside the little fountain which he have now actually construct in the 
 garden . the butterfly be hover over the belt of flower which 
 he have place around his fountain , and the bird be sing overhead . 
 Leonard Fairfield be rest from his day 's work , to enjoy his 
 abstemious dinner , beside the cool play of the sparkling water , and , 
 with the yet keener appetite of knowledge , he devour his book as he 
 munch his crust . 

 a penny tract be the shoeing - horn of literature ! it draw on a great 
 many book , and some too tight to be very useful in walk . the penny 
 tract quote a celebrate writer - you long to read he ; it prop a 
 startling assertion by a grave authority - you long to refer to it . 
 during the night of the past winter , Leonard 's intelligence have 
 make vast progress ; he have teach himself more than the element of 
 mechanic , and put to practice the principle he have acquire not only 
 in the hydraulical achievement of the fountain , nor in the still 
 more notable application of science , commence on the stream in which 
 Jackeymo have fish for minnow , and which Lenny have divert to the 
 purpose of irrigate two field , but in various ingenious contrivance 
 for the facilitation or abridgment of labour , which have excite great 
 wonder and praise in the neighbourhood . on the other hand , those rabid 
 little tract , which deal so summarily with the destiny of the 
 human race , even when his grow reason and the perusal of work 
 more classical or more logical have lead he to perceive that they be 
 illiterate , and to suspect that they jump from premise to conclusion 
 with a celerity very different from the careful ratiocination of 
 mechanical science , have still , in the citation and reference wherewith 
 they abound , lure he on to philosopher more specious and more 
 perilous . out of the tinker 's bag he have draw a translation of 
 Condorcet 's " Progress of Man " and another of Rousseau 's " Social 
 Contract . " work so eloquent have induce he to select from the tract 
 in the tinker 's miscellany those which abound most in profession of 
 philanthropy , and prediction of some come Golden Age , to which old 
 Saturn 's be a joke , - tract so mild and mother - like in their language , 
 that it require a much more practical experience than Lenny 's to 
 perceive that you would have to pass a river of blood before you have 
 the slight chance of set foot on the flowery bank on which they 
 invite you to repose ; tract which rouge poor Christianity on the 
 cheek , clap a crown of innocent daffodillie on her head , and 
 set she to dance a pas de zephyr in the pastoral ballet in which 
 Saint - Simon pipe to the flock he shear ; or have first lay it down 
 as a preliminary axiom that - 

  " the cloud - cap tower , the gorgeous palace , 
  the solemn temple , the great globe itself , - 
  Yea , all which it inherit , shall dissolve , " 

 substitute in place thereof M. Fourier 's symmetrical phalanstere , or 
 Mr. Owen 's architectural parallelogram . it be with some such tract 
 that Lenny be season his crust and his radish , when Riccabocca , 
 bend his long dark face over the student 's shoulder , say abruptly , - 

 " Diavolo , my friend ! what on earth have you get there ? just let I look 
 at it , will you ? " 

 Leonard rise respectfully , and colour deeply as he surrender the 
 tract to Riccabocca . 

 the wise man read the first page attentively , the second more cursorily , 
 and only run his eye over the rest . he have go through too vast a 
 range of problem political , not to have pass over that venerable 
 Pons Asinorum of Socialism , on which Fouriers and Saint - Simons sit 
 straddling , and cry aloud that they have arrive at the last boundary of 
 knowledge ! 

 " all this be as old as the hill , " quoth Riccabocca , irreverently ; " but 
 the hill stand still , and this - there it go ! " and the sage point to 
 a cloud emit from his pipe . " do you ever read Sir David Brewster on 
 Optical Delusions ? no ! well , I will lend it to you . you will find therein 
 a story of a lady who always see a black cat on her hearth - rug . the 
 black cat exist only in her fancy , but the hallucination be natural 
 and reasonable , - eh , what do you think ? " 

 " why , sir , " say Leonard , not catch the Italian 's meaning , " I do not 
 exactly see that it be natural and reasonable . " 

 " foolish boy , yes ! because black cat be thing possible and know . 
 but who ever see upon earth a community of man such as sit on the 
 hearth - rug of Messrs. Owen and Fourier ? if the lady 's hallucination be 
 not reasonable , what be his who believe in such vision as these ? " 

 Leonard bite his lip . 

 " my dear boy , " cry Riccabocca , kindly , " the only thing sure and 
 tangible to which these writer would lead you lie at the first step , 
 and that be what be commonly call a revolution . now , I know what that 
 be . I have go , not indeed through a revolution , but an attempt at 
 one . " 

 Leonard raise his eye towards his master with a look of profound 
 respect and great curiosity . 

 " yes , " add Riccabocca , and the face on which the boy gaze exchange 
 its usual grotesque and sardonic expression for one animate , noble , and 
 heroic . " yes , not a revolution for chimeras , but for that cause which 
 the cold allow to be good , and which , when successful , all time 
 approve as divine , - the redemption of our native soil from the rule 
 of the foreigner ! I have share in such an attempt . and , " continue the 
 Italian , mournfully , " recall now all the evil passion it arouse , 
 all the tie it dissolve , all the blood that it command to flow , all 
 the healthful industry it arrest , all the madman that it arm , all the 
 victim that it dupe , I question whether one man really honest , pure , 
 and humane , who have once go through such an ordeal , would ever hazard 
 it again , unless he be assure that the victory be certain , - ay , and 
 the object for which he fight not to be wrest from his hand amidst 
 the uproar of the element that the battle have release . " 

 the Italian pause , shade his brow with his hand , and remain long 
 silent . then , gradually resume his ordinary tone , he continue , - 

 " revolution that have no definite object make clear by the positive 
 experience of history ; revolution , in a word , that aim less at 
 substitute one law or one dynasty for another , than at change the 
 whole scheme of society , have be little attempt by real statesman . 
 even Lycurgus be prove to be a myth who never exist . such organic 
 change be but in the day - dream of philosopher who live apart from 
 the actual world , and whose opinion   though generally they be very 
 benevolent , good sort of man , and write in an elegant poetical style 
 one would no more take on a plain matter of life , than one would look 
 upon Virgil 's Eclogues as a faithful picture of the ordinary pain and 
 pleasure of the peasant who tend our sheep . read they as you would 
 read poet , and they be delightful . but attempt to shape the world 
 accord to the poetry , and fit yourself for a madhouse . the far 
 off the age be from the realization of such project , the more these 
 poor philosopher have indulge they . thus , it be amidst the sad 
 corruption of court manner that it become the fashion in Paris to sit 
 for one 's picture with a crook in one 's hand , as Alexis or Daphne . just 
 as liberty be fast die out of Greece , and the successor of Alexander 
 be found their monarchy , and Rome be grow up to crush in its 
 iron grasp all state save its own , Plato withdraw his eye from the 
 world , to open they in his dreamy " Atlantis . " just in the grim 
 period of english history , with the axe hang over his head , Sir 
 Thomas more give you his " Utopia . " just when the world be to be the 
 theatre of a new Sesostris , the sage of France tell you that the age be 
 too enlightened for war , that man be henceforth to be govern by pure 
 reason , and live in a paradise . very pretty read all this to a man 
 like I , Lenny , who can admire and smile at it . but to you , to the man 
 who have to work for his living , to the man who think it would be so 
 much more pleasant to live at his ease in a phalanstere than to work 
 eight or ten hour a day ; to the man of talent and action and industry , 
 whose future be invest in that tranquillity and order of a state 
 in which talent and action and industry be a certain capital , - why , 
 Messrs. Coutts , the great banker , have well encourage a theory to 
 upset the system of banking ! whatever disturb society , yea , even by a 
 causeless panic , much more by an actual struggle , fall first upon the 
 market of labour , and thence affect prejudicially every department 
 of intelligence . in such time the art be arrest ; literature be 
 neglect ; people be too busy to read anything save appeal to their 
 passion . and capital , shake in its sense of security , no long 
 venture boldly through the land , call forth all the energy of toil 
 and enterprise , and extend to every workman his reward . now , Lenny , 
 take this piece of advice . you be young , clever , and aspiring : man 
 rarely succeed in change the world ; but a man seldom fail of success 
 if he let the world alone , and resolve to make the good of it . you 
 be in the midst of the great crisis of your life ; it be the struggle 
 between the new desire knowledge excite , and that sense of poverty 
 which those desire convert either into hope and emulation , or into envy 
 and despair . I grant that it be an up - hill work that lie before you ; 
 but do not   you think it be always easy to climb a mountain than it be 
 to level it ? these book call on you to level the mountain ; and that 
 mountain be the property of other people , subdivide amongst a great 
 many proprietor , and protect by law . at the first stroke of the 
 pickaxe , it be ten to one but what you be take up for a trespass . but 
 the path up the mountain be a right of way uncontested . you may be safe 
 at the summit , before   even if the owner be fool enough to let you 
 you could have level a yard . cospetto ! " quoth the doctor , " it be more 
 than two thousand year ago since poor Plato begin to level it , and the 
 mountain be as high as ever ! " 

 thus say , Riccabocca come to the end of his pipe , and stalk 
 thoughtfully away , he leave Leonard Fairfield try to extract light 
 from the smoke . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 shortly after this discourse of Riccabocca 's , an incident occur to 
 Leonard that serve to carry his mind into new direction . one evening , 
 when his mother be out , he be at work on a new mechanical contrivance , 
 and have the misfortune to break one of the instrument which he 
 employ . now it will be remember that his father have be the 
 squire 's head carpenter : the widow have carefully hoard the tool 
 of his craft , which have belong to her poor Mark ; and though she 
 occasionally lend they to Leonard , she would not give they up to his 
 service . amongst these Leonard know that he should find the one that he 
 want ; and be much interested in his contrivance , he could not wait 
 till his mother 's return . the tool , with other little relie of the 
 lose , be keep in a large trunk in Mrs. Fairfield 's sleepingroom ; 
 the trunk be not lock , and Leonard go to it with out ceremony or 
 scruple . in rummage for the instrument his eye fall upon a bundle of 
 manuscript ; and he suddenly recollect that when he be a mere child , 
 and before he much know the difference between verse and prose , his 
 mother have point to these manuscript , and say , " one day or other , 
 when you can read nicely , I will let you look at these , Lenny . my poor 
 Mark write such verse - ah , he be a schollard ! " Leonard , reasonably 
 enough , think that the time have now arrive when he be worthy the 
 privilege of read the paternal effusion , and he take forth the 
 manuscript with a keen but melancholy interest . he recognize his 
 father 's handwriting , which he have often see before in account - book 
 and memorandum , and read eagerly some trifling poem , which do not show 
 much genius , nor much mastery of language and rhythm , - such poem , in 
 short , as a self - educate man , with poetic taste and feel rather than 
 poetic inspiration or artistic culture , might compose with credit , but 
 not for fame . but suddenly , as he turn over these " occasional 
 Pieces , " Leonard come to other in a different handwriting , - a woman 's 
 handwriting , small and fine and exquisitely form . he have scarcely read 
 six line of these last , before his attention be irresistibly chain . 
 they be of a different order of merit from poor Mark 's ; they bear the 
 unmistakable stamp of genius . like the poetry of woman in general , they 
 be devoted to personal feeling , - they be not the mirror of a world , 
 but reflection of a solitary heart . yet this be the kind of poetry most 
 pleasing to the young . and the verse in question have another attraction 
 for Leonard : they seem to express some struggle akin to his own , - some 
 complaint against the actual condition of the writer 's life , some sweet 
 melodious murmur at fortune . for the rest , they be characterize by a 
 vein of sentiment so elevated , that , if write by a man , it would have 
 run into exaggeration ; write by a woman , the romance be carry off 
 by so many genuine revelation of sincere , deep , pathetic feeling , that 
 it be always natural , though true to a nature for which you would not 
 augur happiness . 

 Leonard be still absorb in the perusal of these poem when Mrs. 
 Fairfield enter the room . 

 " what have you be about , Lenny , - search in my box ? " 

 " I come to look for my father 's bag of tool , Mother , and I find these 
 paper , which you say I might read some day . " 

 " I do not   wonder you do not hear I when I come in , " say the widow , 
 sigh . " I use to sit still for the hour together , when my poor Mark 
 read his poem to I . there be such a pretty one about the ' Peasant 's 
 Fireside , ' Lenny , - have you get hold of that ? " 

 " yes , dear mother ; and I remark the allusion to you : it bring tear 
 to my eye . but these verse be not my father 's ; whose be they ? they 
 seem in a woman 's handwriting . " 

 Mrs. Fairfield look , change colour , grow faint and seat herself . 

 " poor , poor Nora ! " say she , falteringly . " I do not know as they be 
 there ; Mark kep ' them ; they get among his - " 

 LEONARD . - " who be Nora ? " 

 MRS . FAIRFIELD . - " who ? - child - who ? Nora be - be my own - own sister . " 

 LEONARD   in great amaze , contrast his ideal of the writer of these 
 musical line , in that graceful hand , with his homely uneducated mother , 
 who could neither read nor write . - " your sister ! be it possible ! my 
 aunt , then . how come it you never speak of she before ? oh , you should 
 be so proud of she , Mother ! " 

 MRS . FAIRFIELD   clasp her hand . - " we be proud of she , all of 
 we , - father , mother , all ! she be so beautiful and so good , and not 
 proud she ! though she look like the first lady in the land . oh , Nora , 
 Nora ! " 

 LEONARD   after a pause . - " but she must have be highly educate ? " 

 MRS . FAIRFIELD . - " ' Deed she be ! " 

 LEONARD . - " how be that ? " 

 MRS . FAIRFIELD   rock herself to and fro in her chair . - " oh , my Lady 
 be her godmother , - Lady Lansmere I mean , - and take a fancy to she when 
 she be that high , and have she to stay at the Park , and wait on her 
 ladyship ; and then she put she to school , and Nora be so clever that 
 nothing would do but she must go to London as a governess . but do not 
 talk of it , boy ! do not   talk of it ! " 

 LEONARD . - " why not , Mother ? what have become of she ; where be she ? " 

 MRS . FAIRFIELD   burst into a paroxysm of tear . - " in her grave , - in 
 her cold grave ! dead , dead ! " 

 Leonard be inexpressibly grieve and shock . it be the attribute of 
 the poet to seem always live , always a friend . Leonard feel as if some 
 one very dear have be suddenly tear from his heart . he try to console 
 his mother ; but her emotion be contagious , and he weep with she . 

 " and how long have she be dead ? " he ask at last , in mournful accent . 

 " Many be the long year , many ; but , " add Mrs. Fairfield , rise , and 
 put her tremulous hand on Leonard 's shoulder , " you will just never 
 talk to I about she ; I can not   bear it , it break my heart . I can bear 
 well to talk of Mark ; come downstairs , - come . " 

 " may I not keep these verse , Mother ? do let I . " 

 " well , well , those bit o ' paper be all she leave behind she , - yes , keep 
 they , but put back Mark 's . be they all here , - sure ? " and the widow , 
 though she could not read her husband 's verse , look jealously at the 
 manuscript write in his irregular , large scrawl , and , smooth they 
 carefully , replace they in the trunk , and resettle over they some 
 sprig of lavender , which Leonard have unwittingly disturb . 

 " but , " say Leonard , as his eye again rest on the beautiful 
 handwriting of his lost aunt , - " but you call she Nora - I see she sign 
 herself L. " 

 " Leonora be her name . I say she be my Lady 's god - child . we call she 
 Nora for short - " 

 " Leonora - and I be Leonard - be that how I come by the name ? " 

 " yes , yes ; do hold your tongue , boy , " sob poor Mrs. Fairfield ; 
 and she could not be soothe nor coax into continue or renew a 
 subject which be evidently associate with insupportable pain . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 it be difficult to exaggerate the effect that this discovery produce 
 on Leonard 's train of thought . some one belong to his own humble race 
 have , then , precede he in his struggle flight towards the lofty 
 region of Intelligence and Desire . it be like the mariner amidst 
 unknown sea , who find carve upon some desert isle a familiar 
 household name . 

 and this creature of genius and of sorrow - whose existence he have only 
 learn by her song , and whose death create , in the simple heart of 
 her sister , so passionate a grief , after the lapse of so many 
 year - supply to the romance awake in his young heart the ideal 
 which it unconsciously seek . he be pleased to hear that she have be 
 beautiful and good . he pause from his book to muse on she , and picture 
 her image to his fancy . that there be some mystery in her fate be 
 evident to he ; and while that conviction deepen his interest , the 
 mystery itself by degree take a charm which he be not anxious to 
 dispel . he resign himself to Mrs. Fairfield 's obstinate silence . he 
 be content to rank the dead amongst those holy and ineffable image 
 which we do not seek to unveil . Youth and Fancy have many secret hoard 
 of idea which they do not desire to impart , even to those most in their 
 confidence . I doubt the depth of feeling in any man who have not certain 
 recess in his soul into which none may enter . 

 Hitherto , as I have say , the talent of Leonard Fairfield have be 
 more turn to thing positive than to the ideal , - to science and 
 investigation of fact than to poetry , and that airier truth in which 
 poetry have its element . he have read our great poet , indeed , but 
 without thought of imitating ; and rather from the general curiosity 
 to inspect all celebrate monument of the human mind than from that 
 especial predilection for verse which be too common in childhood and 
 youth to be any sure sign of a poet . but now these melody , unknown to 
 all the world beside , ring in his ear , mingle with his thought , - set , 
 as it be , his whole life to music . he read poetry with a different 
 sentiment , - it seem to he that he have discover its secret . and so 
 reading , the passion seize he , and " the number come . " 

 to many mind , at the commencement of our grave and earnest pilgrimage , 
 I be vandal enough to think that the indulgence of poetic taste and 
 revery do great and lasting harm ; that it serve to enervate the 
 character , give false idea of life , impart the semblance of drudgery 
 to the noble toil and duty of the active man . all poetry would not do 
 this , - not , for instance , the Classical , in its diviner master ; not the 
 poetry of Homer , of Virgil , of Sophocles ; not , perhaps , even that of 
 the indolent horace . but the poetry which youth usually love and 
 appreciate the good - the poetry of mere sentiment - do so in mind 
 already over - predispose to the sentimental , and which require brace 
 to grow into healthful manhood . 

 on the other hand , even this latter kind of poetry , which be peculiarly 
 modern , do suit many mind of another mould , - mind which our modern 
 life , with its hard positive form , tend to produce . and as in certain 
 climate plant and herb , peculiarly adapt as antidote to those 
 disease most prevalent in the atmosphere , be profusely sown , as it 
 be , by the benignant providence of Nature , so it may be that the 
 soft and more romantic specie of poetry , which come forth in 
 harsh , money - making , unromantic time , be intend as curative and 
 counter - poison . the world be so much with we , nowadays , that we need 
 have something that prate to we , albeit even in too fine a euphuism , of 
 the moon and star . 

 Certes , to Leonard Fairfield , at that period of his intellectual life , 
 the softness of our Helicon descend as healing dew . in his turbulent 
 and unsettled ambition , in his vague grapple with the giant form of 
 political truth , in his bias towards the application of science to 
 immediate practical purpose , this lovely vision of the Muse come in the 
 white robe of the Peacemaker ; and with upraised hand pointing to serene 
 sky , she open to he fair glimpse of the Beautiful , which be give 
 to Peasant as to Prince , - show to he that on the surface of earth 
 there be something noble than fortune , that he who can view the world 
 as a poet be always at soul a king ; while to practical purpose itself , 
 that large and more profound invention , which poetry stimulate , 
 supply the grand design and the subtle view , - lead he beyond the 
 mere ingenuity of the mechanic , and habituate he to regard the inert 
 force of the matter at his command with the ambition of the Discoverer . 
 but , above all , the discontent that be within he find a vent , not 
 in deliberate war upon this actual world , but through the purifying 
 channel of song , in the vent itself it evaporate , it be lose . by 
 accustom ourselves to survey all thing with the spirit that retain 
 and reproduce they only in their lovelier or grander aspect , a vast 
 philosophy of toleration for what we before gaze on with scorn or 
 hate insensibly grow upon we . Leonard look into his heart after the 
 Enchantress have breathe upon it ; and through the mist of the fleeting 
 and tender melancholy which betray where she have be , he behold a new 
 sun of delight and joy dawn over the landscape of human life . 

 thus , though she be dead and go from his actual knowledge , this 
 mysterious kinswoman - " a voice , and nothing more " - have speak to he , 
 soothe , elevated , cheer , attune each discord into harmony ; and if 
 now permit from some serener sphere to behold the life that her soul 
 thus strangely influence , verily with yet holier joy the saving and 
 lovely spirit might have glide onward in the Eternal Progress . 

 we call the large majority of human life obscure . presumptuous that we 
 be ! how know we what live a single thought retain from the dust of 
 nameless graf may have light to renown ? 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 it be about a year after Leonard 's discovery of the family manuscript 
 that Parson Dale borrow the quiet pad - mare in the squire 's stable , 
 and set out on an equestrian excursion . he say that he be bind on 
 business connect with his old parishioner of Lansmere ; for , as it have 
 be incidentally imply in a previous chapter , he have be connect 
 with that borough town   and , I may here add , in the capacity of curate 
 before he have be induct into the living of Hazeldean . 

 it be so rarely that the parson stir from home , that this journey 
 to a town more than twenty mile off be regard as a most daring 
 adventure , both at the Hall and at the Parsonage . Mrs. Dale could not 
 sleep the whole previous night with thinking of it ; and though she have 
 naturally one of her bad nervous headache on the eventful morn , 
 she yet suffer no hand less thoughtful than her own to pack up the 
 saddle - bag which the parson have borrow along with the pad . Nay , so 
 distrustful be she of the possibility of the good man 's exert the 
 slight common - sense in her absence , that she keep he close at 
 her side while she be engage in that same operation of 
 packing - up , - show he the exact spot in which the clean shirt be 
 put ; and how nicely the old slipper be pack up in one of his 
 own sermon . she implore he not to mistake the sandwich for his 
 shaving - soap , and make he observe how carefully she have provide 
 against such confusion , by place they as far apart from each other as 
 the nature of saddle - bag will admit . the poor parson - who be really 
 by no mean an absent man , but as little likely to shave himself with 
 sandwich and lunch upon soap as the most commonplace mortal may 
 be - listen with conjugal patience , and think that man never have such 
 a wife before ; nor be it without tear in his own eye that he tear 
 himself from the farewell embrace of his weeping Carry . 

 I confess , however , that it be with some apprehension that he set 
 his foot in the stirrup , and trust his person to the mercy of 
 an unfamiliar animal . for , whatever might be Mr. Dale 's minor 
 accomplishment as man and parson , horsemanship be not his forte . 
 indeed , I doubt if he have take the rein in his hand more than twice 
 since he have be marry . 

 the squire 's surly old groom , Mat , be in attendance with the pad ; and , 
 to the parson 's gentle inquiry whether Mat be quite sure that the pad 
 be quite safe , reply laconically , " Oi , oi ; give she her head . " 

 " give she her head ! " repeat Mr. Dale , rather amazed , for he have not 
 the slight intention of take away that part of the beast 's frame , 
 so essential to its vital economy , - " give she her head ! " 

 " Oi , oi ; and do not   jerk she up like that , or she will fall a doince on 
 her hind - leg . " 

 the parson instantly slacken the rein ; and Mrs. Dale - who have tarry 
 behind to control her tear - now run to the door for " more last 
 word , " he wave his hand with courageous amenity , and amble forth into 
 the lane . 

 our equestrian be absorb at first in study the idiosyncrasy of 
 the pad - mare , and try thereby to arrive at some notion of her general 
 character : guess , for instance , why she raise one ear and lay down 
 the other ; why she keep bear so close to the left that she brush 
 his leg against the hedge ; and why , when she arrive at a little 
 side - gate in the field , which lead towards the home - farm , she come to a 
 full stop , and fall to rub her nose against the rail , - an occupation 
 from which the parson , find all civil remonstrance in vain , at 
 length divert she by a timorous application of the whip . 

 this crisis on the road fairly pass , the pad seem to comprehend that 
 she have a journey before she , and give a petulant whisk of her tail , 
 quicken her amble into a short trot , which soon bring the parson 
 into the high road , and nearly opposite the Casino . 

 here , sit on the gate which lead to his abode , and shade by his 
 umbrella , he behold Dr. Riccabocca . 

 the Italian lift his eye from the book he be read , and star 
 hard at the parson ; and he - not venture to withdraw his whole 
 attention from the pad   who , indeed , set up both her ear at the 
 apparition of Riccabocca , and evince symptom of that surprise and 
 superstitious repugnance at unknown object which go by the name of 
 ' shy "   - look askance at Riccabocca . 

 " do not   stir , please , " say the parson , " or I fear you will alarm the 
 creature ; it seem a nervous , timid thing ; - soho , gently , gently . " 

 and he fall to pat the mare with great unction . 

 the pad , thus encouraged , overcome her first natural astonishment at the 
 sight of Riccabocca and the red umbrella ; and have before be at the 
 Casino on sundry occasion , and sagaciously prefer place within the 
 range of her experience to bourn neither cognate nor conjecturable , she 
 move gravely up towards the gate on which the italian sit ; and , 
 after eye he a moment , - as much as to say , " I wish you would get 
 off , " - come to a deadlock . 

 " well , " say Riccabocca , ' since your horse seem more disposed to be 
 polite to I than yourself , Mr. Dale , I take the opportunity of your 
 present involuntary pause to congratulate you on your elevation in life , 
 and to breathe a friendly prayer that pride may not have a fall ! " 

 " tut , " say the parson , affect an easy air , though still 
 contemplate the pad , who appear to have fall into a quiet doze , 
 " it be true that I have not ride much of late year , and the squire 's 
 horse be very high - fed and spirit ; but there be no more harm in they 
 than their master when one once know their way . " 

  " ' chi va piano va sano , 
  E chi va sano va lontano , ' " 

 say Riccabocca , point to the saddle - bag . " you go slowly , therefore 
 safely ; and he who go safely may go far . you seem prepared for a 
 journey ? " 

 " I be , " say the parson ; " and on a matter that concern you a little . " 

 " I ! " exclaim Riccabocca , - " concern I ! " 

 " yes , so far as the chance of deprive you of a servant whom you like 
 and esteem affect you . " 

 " oh , " say Riccabocca , " I understand : you have hint to I very often 
 that I or Knowledge , or both together , have unfit Leonard Fairfield 
 for service . " 

 " I do not say that exactly ; I say that you have fit he for 
 something high than service . but do not repeat this to he . and I 
 can not yet say more to you , for I be very doubtful as to the success 
 of my mission ; and it will not do to unsettle poor Leonard until we be 
 sure that we can improve his condition . " 

 " of that you can never be sure , " quoth the wise man , shake his head ; 
 " and I can not   say that I be unselfish enough not to bear you a grudge for 
 seek to decoy away from I an invaluable servant , - faithful , steady , 
 intelligent , and "   add Riccabocca , warming as he approach the 
 climacteric adjective   " exceedingly cheap ! nevertheless go , and Heaven 
 speed you . I be not an Alexander , to stand between man and the sun . " 

 " you be a noble , great - hearted creature , Signor Riccabocca , in spite of 
 your cold - blooded proverb and villanous book . " the parson , as he say 
 this , bring down the whiphand with so indiscreet an enthusiasm on the 
 pad 's shoulder , that the poor beast , startle out of her innocent doze , 
 make a bolt forward , which nearly precipitate Riccabocca from his seat 
 on the stile , and then turn round - as the parson tug desperately 
 at the rein - catch the bit between her tooth , and set off at a canter . 
 the parson lose both his stirrup ; and when he regain they   as the 
 pad slacken her pace , and have time to breathe and look about he , 
 Riccabocca and the Casino be both out of sight . 

 " certainly , " quoth Parson Dale , as he resettle himself with great 
 complacency , and a conscious triumph that he be still on the pad 's 
 back , - " certainly it be true ' that the noble conquest ever make by 
 man be that of the horse : ' a fine creature it be , - a very fine 
 creature , - and uncommonly difficult to sit on , especially without 
 stirrup . " firmly in his stirrup the parson plant his foot ; and the 
 heart within he be very proud . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 the borough town of Lansmere be situate in the county adjoining 
 that which contain the village of Hazeldean . late at noon the parson 
 cross the little stream which divide the two shire , and come to an 
 inn , which be place at an angle , where the great main road branch 
 off into two direction , the one lead towards Lansmere , the other 
 go more direct to London . at this inn the pad stop , and put down 
 both ear with the air of a pad who have make up her mind to bait . and 
 the parson himself , feel very warm and somewhat sore , say to the 
 pad , benignly , " it be just , - thou shalt have corn and water ! " 

 Dismounting , therefore , and find himself very stiff as soon as he 
 reach terra firma , the parson consign the pad to the hostler , and 
 walk into the sanded parlour of the inn , to repose himself on a very 
 hard Windsor chair . 

 he have be alone rather more than half - an - hour , read a county 
 newspaper which smell much of tobacco , and try to keep off the 
 fly that gather round he in swarm , as if they have never before 
 see a parson , and be anxious to ascertain how the flesh of he 
 taste , - when a stagecoach stop at the inn . a traveller get out with 
 his carpetbag in his hand , and be show into the sanded parlour . 

 the parson rise politely , and make a bow . 

 the traveller touch his hat , without take it off , look at Mr. 
 Dale from top to toe , then walk to the window , and whistle a lively , 
 impatient tune , then stride towards the fireplace and ring the bell ; 
 then star again at the parson ; and that gentleman have courteously 
 lay down the newspaper , the traveller seize it , throw himself into a 
 chair , fling one of his leg over the table , toss the other up on the 
 mantelpiece , and begin read the paper , while he tilt the chair on 
 its hind - leg with so dare a disregard to the ordinary position of 
 chair and their occupant , that the shudder parson expect every 
 moment to see he come down on the back of his skull . 

 move , therefore , to compassion , Mr. Dale say mildly , - " those chair 
 be very treacherous , sir . I be afraid you will be down . " 

 " eh , " say the traveller , look up much astonish . " eh , down ? - oh , 
 you be satirical , sir . " 

 " satirical , sir ? upon my word , no ! " exclaim the parson , earnestly . 

 " I think every freeborn man have a right to sit as he please in his 
 own house , " resume the traveller , with warmth ; " and an inn be his own 
 house , I guess , so long as he pay his score . Betty , my dear . " 

 for the chambermaid have now reply to the bell . " I han't   Betty , sir ; do 
 you want she ? " 

 " no , Sally ; cold brandy and water - and a biscuit . " 

 " I han't   Sally , either , " mutter the chambermaid ; but the traveller , 
 turn round , show so smart a neckcloth and so comely a face , that 
 she smile , colour , and go her way . 

 the traveller now rise , and fling down the paper . he take out a 
 penknife , and begin par his nail . suddenly desist from this 
 elegant occupation , his eye catch sight of the parson 's shovel - hat , 
 which lie on a chair in the corner . 

 " you be a clergyman , I reckon , sir , " say the traveller , with a slight 
 sneer . 

 again Mr. Dale bow , - bow in part deprecatingly , in part with 
 dignity . it be a bow that say , " no offence , sir , but I be a clergyman , 
 and I be not ashamed of it . " 

 " go far ? " ask the traveller . 

 parson . - " not very . " 

 TRAVELLER . - " in a chaise or fly ? if so , and we be go the same way , 
 half . " 

 parson . - " Halves ? " 

 TRAVELLER . - " yes , I will pay half the damage , pike inclusive . " 

 parson . - " you be very good , sir . but "   speak with pride   " I be on 
 horseback . " 

 TRAVELLER . - " on horseback ! well , I should not have guess that ! you 
 do not   look like it . where do you say you be go ? " 

 " I do not say where I be go , sir , " say the parson , dryly , for he 
 be much offend at that vague and ungrammatical remark applicable to 
 his horsemanship , that " he do not look like it . " 

 " close ! " say the traveller , laughing ; " an old traveller , I reckon . " 

 the parson make no reply , but he take up his shovel - hat , and , with a bow 
 more majestic than the previous one , walk out to see if his pad have 
 finish her corn . 

 the animal have indeed finish all the corn afford to she , which be 
 not much , and in a few minute more Mr. Dale resume his journey . he have 
 perform about three mile , when the sound of wheel behind he make 
 he turn his head ; and he perceive a chaise drive very fast , while out 
 of the window thereof dangle strangely a pair of human leg . the pad 
 begin to curvet as the post - horse rattle behind , and the parson have 
 only an indistinct vision of a human face supplant those human leg . 
 the traveller peer out at he as he whirl by , - see Mr. Dale toss 
 up and down on the saddle , and cry out , " how be the leather ? " 

 " leather ! " soliloquize the parson , as the pad recompose herself , " what 
 do he mean by that ? leather ! a very vulgar man . but I get rid of he 
 cleverly . " 

 Mr. Dale arrive without further adventure at Lansmere . he put up at 
 the principal inn , refresh himself by a general ablution , and sit down 
 with good appetite to his beefsteak and pint of port . 

 the parson be a well judge of the physiognomy of man than that of the 
 horse ; and after a satisfactory glance at the civil smirk landlord , 
 who remove the cover and set on the wine , he venture on an attempt at 
 conversation . " be my Lord at the Park ? " 

 LANDLORD   still more civilly than before . - " no , sir , his Lordship and 
 my Lady have go to town to meet Lord L'Estrange ! " 

 " Lord L'Estrange ! he be in England , then ? " 

 " why , so I hear , " reply the landlord , " but we never see he here now . 
 I remember he a very pretty young man . every one be fond of he and 
 proud of he . but what prank be do play when he be a lad ! we hop 
 he would come in for our boro ' some of these day , but he have take to 
 foren part , - more be the pity . I be a reg'lar Blue , sir , as I ought to 
 be . the blue candidate always do I the honour to come to the Lansmere 
 arm . ' t be only the low party put up with the Boar , " add the 
 landlord , with a look of ineffable disgust . " I hope you like the wine , 
 sir ? " 

 " very good , and seem old . " 

 " bottled these eighteen year , sir . I have in the cask for the great 
 election of Dashmore and Egerton . I have little left of it , and I never 
 give it but to old friend like , - for , I think , Sir , though you be grow 
 stout , and look more grand , I may say that I have   have the pleasure of 
 see you before . " 

 " that be true , I dare say , though I fear I be never a very good 
 customer . " 

 " ah , it be Mr. Dale , then ! I think so when you come into the hall . I 
 hope your lady be quite well , and the squire too ; fine pleasant - speak 
 gentleman ; no fault of his if Mr. Egerton go wrong . well , we have 
 never see he - I mean Mr. Egerton - since that time . I do not   wonder he 
 stay away ; but my Lord 's son , who be bring up here , it an't   nat'ral 
 like that he should turn his back on we ! " 

 Mr. Dale make no reply , and the landlord be about to retire , when the 
 parson , pour out another glass of the port , say , " there must be 
 great change in the parish . be Mr. Morgan , the medical man , still 
 here ? " 

 " no , indeed ! he take out his ' ploma after you leave , and become a real 
 doctor ; and a pretty practice he have too , when he take , all of a 
 sudden , to some new - fangled way of physicking , - I think they call it 
 homy - something . " 

 " Homoeopathy ? " 

 " that be it ; something against all reason : and so he lose his practice 
 here and go up to Lunnun . I have   not hear of he since . " 

 " do the Avenels still reside in their old house ? " 

 " oh , yes ! - and be pretty well off , I hear say . John be always poorly , 
 though he still go now and then to the Odd Fellows , and take his 
 glass ; but his wife come and fetch he away before he can do himself 
 any harm . " 

 " Mrs. Avenel be the same as ever ? " 

 " she hold her head higher , I think , " say the landlord , smile . " she 
 be always - not exactly proud like , but what I call bumptious . " 

 " I never hear that word before , " say the parson , lay down his 
 knife and fork . " bumptious indeed , though I believe it be not in the 
 dictionary , have creep into familiar parlance , especially amongst young 
 folk at school and college . " 

 " bumptious be bumptious , and gumptious be bumptious , " say the landlord , 
 delight to puzzle a parson . " now the town beadle be bumptious , and 
 Mrs. Avenel be bumptious . " 

 " she be a very respectable woman , " say Mr. Dale , somewhat rebukingly . 

 " in course , sir , all gumptious folk be ; they value themselves on their 
 respectability , and look down on their neighbour . " 

 parson   still philologically occupy . - " gumptious - gumptious . I think 
 I remember the substantive at school , - not that my master teach it to 
 I . ' gumption ' - it mean cleverness . " 

 LANDLORD   doggedly . - " there be gumption and Bumptious ! gumption be 
 know ; but when I say that sum ' un be gumptious , I mean - though that be 
 more vulgar like - sum ' un who do not think small beer of hisself . you 
 take I , sir ? " 

 " I think I do , " say the parson , half smile . " I believe the Avenels 
 have only two of their child alive still , - their daughter who marry 
 Mark Fairfield , and a son who go off to America ? " 

 " ah , but he make his fortune there and have come back . " 

 " indeed ! I be very glad to hear it . he have settle at Lansmere ? " 

 " no , Sir . I hear as he be buy a property a long way off . but he come 
 to see his parent pretty often - so John tell I - but I can not   say 
 that I ever see he . I fancy Dick do not   like to be see by folk who 
 remember he play in the kennel . " 

 " not unnatural , " say the parson , indulgently ; " but he visit his 
 parent ; he be a good son at all event , then ? " 

 " I have   nothing to say against he . Dick be a wild chap before he take 
 himself off . I never think he would make his fortune ; but the Avenels 
 be a clever set . do you remember poor Nora - the Rose of Lansmere , as 
 they call she ? ah , no , I think she go up to Lunnun afore your time , 
 sir . " 

 " Humph ! " say the parson , dryly . " well , I think you may take away now . 
 it will be dark soon , and I will just stroll out and look about I . " 

 " there be a nice tart coming , sir . " 

 " thank you , I have   din . " 

 the parson put on his hat and sally forth into the street . he eye 
 the house on either hand with that melancholy and wistful interest 
 with which , in middle life , man revisit scene familiar to they in 
 youth , - surprised to find either so little change or so much , and 
 recalling , by fit and snatch , old association and past emotion . 
 the long High Street which he thread now begin to change its bustling 
 character , and slide , as it be gradually , into the high road of a 
 suburb . on the left , the house give way to the moss - grow pale of 
 Lansmere Park ; to the right , though house still remain , they be 
 separate from each other by garden , and take the pleasing appearance 
 of villas , - such villa as retire tradesman or their widow , old maid , 
 and half - pay officer select for the evening of their day . 

 Mr. Dale look at these villa with the deliberate attention of a man 
 awaken his power of memory , and at last stop before one , almost 
 the last on the road , and which face the broad patch of sward that lie 
 before the lodge of Lansmere Park . an old pollard - oak stand near it , and 
 from the oak there come a low discordant sound ; it be the hungry cry of 
 young raven , await the belate return of the parent bird ! Mr. Dale 
 put his hand to his brow , pause a moment , and then , with a hurried 
 step , pass through the little garden , and knock at the door . a light 
 be burn in the parlour , and Mr. Dale 's eye catch through the window 
 a vague outline of three form . there be an evident bustle within at 
 the sound of the knock . one of the form rise and disappear . a very 
 prim , neat , middle - aged maid - servant now appear at the threshold , and 
 austerely inquire the visitor 's business . 

 " I want to see Mr. or Mrs. Avenel . say that I have come many mile to 
 see they ; and take in this card . " 

 the maid - servant take the card , and half close the door . at least three 
 minute elapse before she reappear . 

 " missis say it be late , sir ; but walk in . " 

 the parson accept the not very gracious invitation , step across the 
 little hall , and enter the parlour . 

 Old John Avenel , a mild - look man , who seem slightly paralytic , 
 rise slowly from his armchair . Mrs. Avenel , in an awfully stiff , 
 clean , calvinistical cap , and a gray dress , every fold of which bespoke 
 respectability and staid repute , stand erect on the floor , and fix on 
 the parson a cold and cautious eye , say , - 

 " you do the like of we great honour , Mr. Dale ; take a chair . you call 
 upon business ? " 

 " of which I apprise Mr. Avenel by letter . " 

 " my husband be very poorly . " 

 " a poor creature ! " say John , feebly , and as if in compassion of 
 himself . " I can not   get about as I use to do . but it ben't   near election 
 time , be it , sir ? " 

 " no , John , " say Mrs. Avenel , place her husband 's arm within her own . 
 " you must lie down a bit , while I talk to the gentleman . " 

 " I be a real good blue , " say poor John ; " but I be not   quite the man I 
 be ; " and lean heavily on his wife , he leave the room , turn round 
 at the threshold , and say , with great urbanity , " anything to oblige , 
 sir ! " 

 Mr. Dale be much touch . he have remember John Avenel the comely , 
 the most active , and the most cheerful man in Lansmere ; great at glee 
 club and cricket   though then somewhat stricken in year , great in 
 vestry ; repute great in election . 

 " last scene of all , " murmur the parson ; " and oh , well , turn from 
 the poet , may we cry with the disbelieving philosopher , ' poor , poor 
 humanity ! ' " 

 in a few minute Mrs. Avenel return . she take a chair at some distance 
 from the parson 's , and rest one hand on the elbow of the chair , while 
 with the other she stiffly smooth the stiff gown , she say , - 

 " now , sir . " 

 that " now , sir , " have in its sound something sinister and warlike . this 
 the shrewd parson recognize with his usual tact . he edge his chair 
 nearer to Mrs. Avenel , and place his hand on her , - 

 " yes , now then , and as friend to friend . " 




 CHAPTER xiii . 

 Mr. Dale have be more than a quarter of an hour converse with Mrs. 
 Avenel , and have seemingly make little progress in the object of his 
 diplomatic mission , for now , slowly draw on his glove , he say , - 

 " I grieve to think , Mrs. Avenel , that you should have so harden 
 your heart - yes , you must pardon I , - it be my vocation to speak stern 
 truth . you can not say that I have not keep faith with you , but I must 
 now invite you to remember that I specially reserved to myself the 
 right of exercise a discretion to act as I judge well for the child 's 
 interest on any future occasion ; and it be upon this understanding that 
 you give I the promise , which you would now evade , of provide for he 
 when he come to manhood . " 

 " I say I will provide for he . I say that you may ' prentice he in any 
 distant town , and by and by we will stock a shop for he . what would 
 you have more , sir , from folk like we , who have keep shop ourselves ? it 
 be not   reasonable what you ask , sir . " 

 " my dear friend , " say the parson , " what I ask of you at present be but 
 to see he , to receive he kindly , to listen to his conversation , 
 to judge for yourself . we can have but a common object , - that your 
 grandson should succeed in life , and do you credit . now , I doubt very 
 much whether we can effect this by make he a small shopkeeper . " 

 " and have Jane Fairfield , who marry a common carpenter , bring he up 
 to despise small shopkeeper ? " exclaim Mrs. Avenel , angrily . 

 " heaven forbid ! some of the first man in England have be the son of 
 small shopkeeper . but be it a crime in they , or in their parent , 
 if their talent have lift they into such rank or renown as the 
 haughty duke might envy ? England be not England if a man must rest 
 where his father begin . " 

 " good ! " say , or rather grunt , an approve voice , but neither Mrs. 
 Avenel nor the parson hear it . 

 " all very fine , " say Mrs. Avenel , bluntly . " but to send a boy like that 
 to the University - where be the money to come from ? " 

 " my dear Mrs. Avenel , " say the parson , coaxingly , " the cost need not 
 be great at a small college at Cambridge ; and if you will pay half the 
 expense , I will pay the other half . I have no child of my own , and 
 can afford it . " 

 " that be very handsome in you , sir , " say Mrs. Avenel , somewhat touch , 
 yet still not graciously . " but the money be not the only point . " 

 " once at Cambridge , " continue Mr. Dale , speak rapidly , " at 
 Cambridge , where the study be mathematical , - that be , of a nature for 
 which he have show so great an aptitude , - and I have no doubt he will 
 distinguish himself ; if he do , he will obtain , on leave , what be 
 call a fellowship , - that is , a collegiate dignity accompany by an 
 income on which he could maintain himself until he make his way in life . 
 come , Mrs. Avenel , you be well off ; you have no relation near to you 
 in want of your aid . your son , I hear , have be very fortunate . " 

 " Sir , " say - Mrs. Avenel , interrupt the parson , " it be not because 
 my son Richard be an honour to we , and be a good son , and have make his 
 fortin , that we be to rob he of what we have to leave , and give it 
 to a boy whom we know nothing about , and who , in spite of what you say , 
 can not   bring upon we any credit at all . " 

 " why ? I do not   see that . " 

 " why ! " exclaim Mrs. Avenel , fiercely , - " why ! you , know why . no , I 
 do not   want he to rise in life : I do not   want folk to be speire and 
 ask about he . I think it be a very wicked thing to have put fine 
 notion in his head , and I be sure my daughter Fairfield could not have 
 do it herself . and now , to ask I to rob Richard , and bring out a 
 great boy - who be be a gardener or ploughman , or suchlike - to disgrace 
 a gentleman who keep his carriage , as my son Richard do - I would have 
 you to know , sir . no ! I will not   do it , and there be an end of the matter . " 

 during the last two or three minute , and just before that approve 
 " good " have respond to the parson 's popular sentiment , a door 
 communicating with an inner room have be gently open , and stand ajar ; 
 but this incident neither party have even notice . but now the door be 
 throw boldly open , and the traveller whom the parson have meet at the inn 
 walk up to Mr. Dale , and say , " no ! that be not the end of the matter . 
 you say the boy be a ' cute , clever lad ? " 

 " Richard , have you be listen ? " exclaim Mrs. Avenel . 

 " well , I guess , yes , - the last few minute . " 

 " and what have you hear ? " 

 " why , that this reverend gentleman think so highly of my sister 
 Fairfield 's boy that he offer to pay half of his keep at college . Sir , 
 I be very much oblige to you , and there be my hand if you will take it . " 

 the parson jump up , overjoyed , and , with a triumphant glance towards 
 Mrs. Avenel , shake hand heartily with Mr. Richard . 

 " now , " say the latter , " just put on your hat , sir , and take a 
 stroll with I , and we will discuss the thing businesslike . woman do not 
 understand business : never talk to woman on business . " 

 with these word , Mr. Richard draw out a cigar - case , select a cigar , 
 which he apply to the candle , and walk into the hall . 

 Mrs. Avenel catch hold of the parson . " Sir , you will be on your guard 
 with Richard . remember your promise . " 

 " he do not know all , then ? " 

 " he ? no ! and you see he do not overhear more than what he say . I be 
 sure you be a gentleman , and will not   go against your word . " 

 " my word be conditional ; but I will promise you never to break the 
 silence without more reason than I think there be here for it . indeed , 
 Mr. Richard Avenel seem to save all necessity for that . " 

 " be you come , sir ? " cry Richard , as he open the street - door . 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 the parson join Mr. Richard Avenel on the road . it be a fine night , 
 and the moon clear and shin . 

 " so , then , " say Mr. Richard , thoughtfully , " poor Jane , who be always 
 the drudge of the family , have contrive to bring up her son well ; and 
 the boy be really what you say , eh , - could make a figure at college ? " 

 " I be sure of it , " say the parson , hook himself on to the arm which 
 Mr. Avenel proffer . 

 " I should like to see he , " say Richard . " have he any manner ? be he 
 genteel , or a mere country lout ? " 

 " indeed , he speak with so much propriety , and have so much modest 
 dignity about he , that there be many a rich gentleman who would be proud 
 of such a son . " 

 " it be odd , " observe Richard , " what a difference there be in family . 
 there be Jane , now , who can not   read nor write , and be just fit to be a 
 workman 's wife , have not a thought above her station ; and when I think of 
 my poor sister Nora - you would not believe it , sir , but she be the 
 most elegant creature in the world , - yes , even as a child   she be but 
 a child when I go off to America . and often , as I be get on in 
 life , often I use to say to myself , ' my little Nora shall be a lady 
 after all . ' poor thing - but she die young . " Richard 's voice grow husky . 

 the parson kindly press the arm on which he lean , and say , after a 
 pause , - 

 " nothing refine we like education , sir . I believe your sister Nora have 
 receive much instruction , and have the talent to profit by it : it be 
 the same with your nephew . " 

 " I will see he , " say Richard , stamp his foot firmly on the ground , 
 " and if I like he , I will be as good as a father to he . look you , 
 Mr. - what be your name , sir ? " 

 " Dale . " 

 " Mr. Dale , look you , I be a single man . perhaps I may marry some day ; 
 perhaps I sha ' not . I be not go to throw myself away . if I can get 
 a lady of quality , why - but that be neither here nor there ; meanwhile I 
 should be glad of a nephew whom I need not be ashamed of . you see , sir , 
 I be a new man , the builder of my own fortune ; and though I have pick 
 up a little education - I do not   well know how , - as I scramble on still , 
 now I come back to the old country , I be well aware that I ' m not 
 exactly a match for those d - -d aristocrat ; do not   show so well in a 
 drawing - room as I could wish . I could be a parliament man if I like , 
 but I might make a goose of myself ; so , all thing consider , if I can 
 get a sort of junior partner to do the polite work , and show off 
 the good , I think the house of Avenel    Co. might become a pretty 
 considerable honour to the Britishers . you understand I , sir ? " 

 " oh , very well , " answer Mr. Dale , smile , though rather gravely . 

 " now , " continue the New Man , " I be not ashamed to have rise in life by 
 my own merit ; and I do not   disguise what I have   be . and , when I be in my 
 own grand house , I be fond of say , ' I land at New York with L10 in 
 my purse , and here I be ! ' but it would not do to have the old folk with 
 I . People take you with all your fault if you be rich ; but they will not 
 swallow your family into the bargain . so if I do not   have at my house 
 my own father and mother , whom I love dearly , and should like to see 
 sit at table , with my servant behind their chair , I could still 
 less have sister Jane . I recollect she very well , but she can not   have get 
 genteeler as she be grow old . therefore I beg you will not set she on 
 come after I ! it would not do by any manner of mean . do not   say a 
 word about I to she . but send the boy down here to his grandfather , and 
 I will see he quietly , you understand . " 

 " yes , but it will be hard to separate she from the boy . " 

 " Stuff ! all boy be separate from their parent when they go into the 
 world . so that be settle . now , just tell I . I know the old folk always 
 snub Jane , - that be , Mother do . my poor dear father never snub 
 any of we . perhaps Mother have not behave altogether well to Jane . but 
 we must not blame she for that ; you see this be how it happen . there 
 be a good many of we , while Father and Mother keep shop in the High 
 Street , so we be all to be provide for anyhow ; and Jane , be very 
 useful and handy at work , get a place when she be a little girl , and 
 have no time for learn . afterwards my father make a lucky hit , in 
 get my Lord Lansmere 's custom after an election , in which he do 
 a great deal for the Blues   for he be a famous electioneerer , my poor 
 father . my Lady stand godmother to Nora ; and then all my brother , and 
 two of my sister , die off , and Father retire from business ; and when 
 he take Jane from service , she be so common - like that Mother could not 
 help contrast she with Nora . you see Jane be their child when they 
 be poor little shop - people , with their head scarce above water ; 
 and Nora be their child when they be well off , and have retire from 
 trade , and live genteel : so that make a great difference . and mother 
 do not quite look on she as on her own child . but it be Jane 's own 
 fault : for Mother would have make it up with she if she have marry the 
 son of our neighbour the great linen - draper , as she might have do ; 
 but she would take Mark Fairfield , a common carpenter . parent like good 
 those of their child who succeed well in life . natural . why , they do 
 not care for I till I come back the man I be . but to return to Jane : 
 I be afraid they have   neglect she . how be she off ? " 

 " she earn her livelihood , and be poor , but content . " 

 " ah , just be good enough to give she this "   and Richard take a bank - note 
 of L50 from his pocket - book . 

 " you can say the old folk send it to she ; or that it be a present from 
 Dick , without tell she he have come back from America . " 

 " my dear sir , " say the parson , " I be more and more thankful to have 
 make your acquaintance . this be a very liberal gift of your ; but your 
 good plan will be to send it through your mother . for , though I do not 
 want to betray any confidence you place in I , I should not know what to 
 answer if Mrs. Fairfield begin to question I about her brother . I never 
 have but one secret to keep , and I hope I shall never have another . a 
 secret be very like a lie ! " 

 " you have a secret then ? " say Richard , as he take back the bank - note . he 
 have learn , perhaps in America , to be a very inquisitive man . he add 
 point - blank , " pray , what be it ? " 

 " why , what it would not be if I tell you , " say the parson , with a 
 force laugh , - " a secret ! " 

 " well , I guess we be in a land of liberty . do as you like . now , I dare 
 say you think I a very odd fellow to come out of my shell to you in 
 this off - hand way ; but I like the look of you , even when we be at the 
 inn together . and just now I be uncommonly pleased to find that , 
 though you be a parson , you do not   want to keep a man 's nose down to 
 a shopboard , if he have anything in he . you be not one of the 
 aristocrat - " 

 " indeed , " say the parson , with imprudent warmth , " it be not the 
 character of the aristocracy of this country to keep people down . they 
 make way amongst themselves for any man , whatever his birth , who have the 
 talent and energy to aspire to their level . that be the especial boast of 
 the british constitution , sir ! " 

 " oh , you think so , do you ? " say Mr. Richard , look sourly at the 
 parson . " I dare say those be the opinion in which you have bring 
 up the lad . just keep he yourself and let the aristocracy provide for 
 he ! " 

 the parson 's generous and patriotic warmth evaporate at once , at this 
 sudden inlet of cold air into the conversation . he perceive that he have 
 make a terrible blunder ; and as it be not his business at that moment 
 to vindicate the british constitution , but to serve Leonard Fairfield , 
 he abandon the cause of the aristocracy with the most poltroon 
 and scandalous abruptness . catch at the arm which Mr. Avenel have 
 withdraw from he , he exclaim , - 

 " indeed , sir , you be mistaken ; I have never attempt to influence your 
 nephew 's political opinion . on the contrary , if , at his age , he can be 
 say to have form any opinion , I be greatly afraid - that be , I think 
 his opinion be by no means sound - that be , constitutional . I mean , 
 I mean - " and the poor parson , anxious to select a word that would not 
 offend his listener , stop short in lamentable confusion of idea . 

 Mr. Avenel enjoy his distress for a moment , with a saturnine smile , 
 and then say , - 

 " well , I calculate he be a Radical . natural enough , if he have not get a 
 sixpence to lose - all come right by and by . I be not a Radical , - at least 
 not a Destructive - much too clever a man for that , I hope . but I wish 
 to see thing very different from what they be . do not   fancy that I want 
 the common people , who have   get nothing , to pretend to dictate to their 
 better , because I hate to see a parcel of fellow who be call lord 
 and squire try to rule the roast . I think , sir , that it be man like 
 I who ought to be at the top of the tree ! and that be the long and the 
 short of it . what do you say ? " 

 " I have   not the least objection , " say the crestfallen parson , basely . 
 but , to do he justice , I must add that he do not the least know what 
 he be say ! 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 Unconscious of the change in his fate which the diplomacy of the parson 
 seek to effect , Leonard Fairfield be enjoy the first virgin 
 sweetness of fame ; for the principal town in his neighbourhood have 
 follow the then grow fashion of the age , and set up a Mechanics ' 
 Institute , and some worthy person interested in the formation of that 
 provincial Athenaeum have offer a prize for the good essay on the 
 Diffusion of Knowledge , - a very trite subject , on which person seem to 
 think they can never say too much , and on which there be , nevertheless , 
 a great deal yet to be say . this prize Leonard Fairfield have recently 
 win . his Essay have be publicly compliment by a full meeting of the 
 Institute ; it have be print at the expense of the Society , and have 
 be reward by a silver medal , - delineative of Apollo crown Merit 
  poor Merit have not a rag to his back ; but Merit , leave only to the care 
 of Apollo , never be too good a customer to the tailor !   and the County 
 Gazette have declare that Britain have produce another prodigy in the 
 person of Dr. Riccabocca 's self - educate gardener . 

 attention be now direct to Leonard 's mechanical contrivance . the 
 squire , ever eagerly bent on improvement , have bring an engineer 
 to inspect the lad 's system of irrigation , and the engineer have 
 be greatly strike by the simple mean by which a very considerable 
 technical difficulty have be overcome . the neighbour farmer now 
 call Leonard " Mr. Fairfield , " and invite he on equal term to their 
 house . Mr. Stirn have meet he on the high road , touch his hat , and 
 hop that " he bear no malice . " all this , I say , be the first sweetness 
 of fame ; and if Leonard Fairfield come to be a great man , he will 
 never find such sweet in the after fruit . it be this success which have 
 determine the parson on the step which he have just take , and which he 
 have long before anxiously meditate . for , during the last year or so , 
 he have renew his old intimacy with the widow and the boy ; and he 
 have notice , with great hope and great fear , the rapid growth of 
 an intellect , which now stand out from the lowly circumstance that 
 surround it in bold and unharmonize relief . 

 it be the evening after his return home that the parson stroll up to 
 the Casino . he put Leonard Fairfield 's Prize Essay in his pocket ; for he 
 feel that he could not let the young man go forth into the world without 
 a preparatory lecture , and he intend to scourge poor Merit with the 
 very laurel wreath which it have receive from Apollo . but in this he 
 want Riccabocca 's assistance ; or rather he fear that , if he do not 
 get the philosopher on his side , the philosopher might undo all the work 
 of the parson . 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

 a sweet sound come through the orange bough , and float to the ear 
 of the parson , as he wind slowly up the gentle ascent , - so sweet , 
 so silvery , he pause in delight - unaware , wretched man ! that he be 
 thereby connive at papistical error . Soft it come and sweet ; soft 
 and sweet , - " Ave Maria ! " Violante be chant the evening hymn to the 
 Virgin Mother . the parson at last distinguish the sense of the word , 
 and shake his head with the pious shake of an orthodox protestant . 
 he break from the spell resolutely , and walk on with a sturdy 
 step . gain the terrace , he find the little family seat under an 
 awning , - Mrs. Riccabocca knitting ; the signor with his arm fold on 
 his breast : the book he have be read a few moment before have fall 
 on the ground , and his dark eye be soft and dreamy . Violante have 
 finish her hymn , and seat herself on the ground between the two , 
 pillow her head on her stepmother 's lap , but with her hand rest on 
 her father 's knee , and her gaze fix fondly on his face . 

 " good - evening , " say Mr. Dale . Violante steal up to he , and , pull 
 he so as to bring his ear near to her lip , whisper , " talk to papa , 
 do , - and cheerfully ; he be sad . " 

 she escape from he as she say this , and appear to busy herself with 
 water the flower arrange on stand round the awning . but she keep 
 her swim lustrous eye wistfully on her father . 

 " how fare it with you , my dear friend ? " say the parson , kindly , as he 
 rest his hand on the Italian 's shoulder . " you must not let he get out 
 of spirit , Mrs. Riccabocca . " 

 " I be very ungrateful to she if I ever be so , " say the poor Italian , 
 with all his natural gallantry . many a good wife , who think it be a 
 reproach to she if her husband be ever " out of spirit , " might have 
 turn peevishly from that speech , more elegant than sincere , and so 
 have make bad bad ; but Mrs. Riccabocca take her husband 's proffered 
 hand affectionately , and say with great naivete , - 

 " you see I be so stupid , Mr. Dale ; I never know I be so stupid till I 
 marry . but I be very glad you be come . you can get on some learn 
 subject together , and then he will not miss so much his - " 

 " his what ? " ask Riccabocca , inquisitively . 

 " his country . do you think that I can not sometimes read your thought ? " 

 " very often . but you do not read they just then . the tongue touch 
 where the tooth ache , but the good dentist can not guess at the tooth 
 unless one open one 's mouth . - Basta ! can we offer you some wine of our 
 own making , Mr. Dale ? - it be pure . " 

 " I would rather have some tea , " quoth the parson , hastily . Mrs. Riccabocca , 
 too pleased to be in her natural element of domestic use , hurry into 
 the house to prepare our national beverage . and the parson , slide into 
 her chair , say , - 

 " but you be deject then ? Fie ! if there be a virtue in the world at 
 which we should always aim , it be cheerfulness . " 

 " I do not   dispute it , " say Riccabocca , with a heavy sigh . " but though it 
 be say by some Greek , who , I think , be quote by your favourite seneca , 
 that a wise man carry his country with he at the sol of his foot , 
 he can not   carry also the sunshine over his head . " 

 " I tell you what it be , " say the parson , bluntly ; " you would have 
 a much keener sense of happiness if you have much less esteem for 
 philosophy . " 

 " Cospetto ! " say the doctor , rouse himself . " just explain , will you ? " 

 " do not the search after wisdom induce desire not satisfied in this 
 small circle to which your life be confine ? it be not so much your 
 country for which you yearn , as it be for space to your intellect , 
 employment for your thought , career for your aspiration . " 

 " you have guess at the tooth which ache , " say Riccabocca , with 
 admiration . 

 " easy to do that , " answer the parson . " our wisdom tooth come last and 
 give we the most pain ; and if you would just starve the mind a little , 
 and nourish the heart more , you would be less of a philosopher and more 
 of a - " the parson have the word " Christian " at the tip of his tongue ; 
 he suppress a word that , so spoken , would have be exceedingly 
 irritate , and substitute , with elegant antithesis , " and more of a 
 happy man ! " 

 " I do all I can with my heart , " quoth the doctor . 

 " not you ! for a man with such a heart as yours should never feel the 
 want of the sunshine . my friend , we live in an age of over mental 
 cultivation . we neglect too much the simple healthful outer life , in 
 which there be so much positive joy . in turn to the world within we , 
 we grow blind to this beautiful world without ; in study ourselves 
 as man , we almost forget to look up to heaven , and warm to the smile of 
 God . " 

 the philosopher mechanically shrug his shoulder , as he always do 
 when another man moralize , - especially if the moralizer be a priest ; 
 but there be no irony in his smile , as he answer thoughtfully , - 

 " there be some truth in what you say . I own that we live too much as if 
 we be all brain . Knowledge have its penalty and pain , as well as its 
 prize . " 

 " that be just what I want you to say to Leonard . " 

 " how have you settle the object of your journey ? " 

 " I will tell you as we walk down to he after tea . at present , I be 
 rather too much occupy with you . " 

 " I ? the tree be form - try only to bend the young twig ! " 

 " tree be tree , and twig twig , " say the parson , dogmatically ; " but 
 man be always grow till he fall into the grave . I think I have hear 
 you say that you once have a narrow escape of a prison ? " 

 " very narrow . " 

 " just suppose that you be now in that prison , and that a fairy 
 conjure up the prospect of this quiet home in a safe land ; that you 
 see the orange - tree in flower , feel the evening breeze on your cheek ; 
 behold your child gay or sad , as you smile or knit your brow ; that 
 within this phantom home be a woman , not , indeed , all your young 
 romance might have dream of , but faithful and true , every beat of her 
 heart all your own , - would you not cry from the depth of your dungeon , 
 ' o fairy ! such a change be a paradise ! ' ungrateful man ! you want 
 interchange for your mind , and your heart should suffice for all ! " 

 Riccabocca be touch and silent . 

 " come hither , my child , " say Mr. Dale , turn round to Violante , who 
 stand still among the flower , out of hearing , but with watchful eye . 
 " come hither , " he say , open his arm . 

 Violante bound forward , and nestle to the good man 's heart . 

 " tell I , Violante , when you be alone in the field or the garden , and 
 have leave your father look pleased and serene , so that you have 
 no care for he at your heart , - tell I , Violante , though you be all 
 alone , with the flower below , and the bird sing overhead , do you 
 feel that life itself be happiness or sorrow ? " 

 " happiness ! " answer Violante , half shut her eye , and in a 
 measure voice . 

 " can you explain what kind of happiness it be ? " 

 " oh , no , impossible ! and it be never the same . sometimes it be so 
 still - so still , and sometimes so joyous , that I long for wing to fly 
 up to God , and thank he ! " 

 " o friend , " say the parson , " this be the true sympathy between life and 
 nature , and thus we should feel ever , do we take more care to preserve 
 the health and innocence of a child . we be tell that we must become as 
 child to enter into the kingdom of Heaven ; methink we should also 
 become as child to know what delight there be in our heritage of 
 earth ! " 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

 the maid - servant   for Jackeymo be in the field   bring the table 
 under the awning , and with the english luxury of tea , there be other 
 drink as cheap and as grateful on summer evening , - drink 
 which Jackeymo have retain and teach from the custom of the 
 South , - unebriate liquor , press from cool fruit , sweeten with 
 honey , and deliciously ice : ice should cost nothing in a country in 
 which one be freeze up half the year ! and Jackeymo , too , have add to 
 our good , solid , heavy english bread preparation of wheat much light , 
 and more propitious to digestion , - with those crisp grissin , which seem 
 to enjoy be eat , they make so pleasant a noise between one 's tooth . 

 the parson esteem it a little treat to drink tea with the Riccaboccas . 
 there be something of elegance and grace in that homely meal at the 
 poor exile 's table , which please the eye as well as taste . and the very 
 utensil , plain Wedgwood though they be , have a classical simplicity , 
 which make Mrs. Hazeldean 's old India delf , and Mrs. Dale 's good 
 Worcester china , look tawdry and barbarous in comparison . for it be 
 Flaxman who give design to Wedgwood , and the most truly refined of all 
 our manufacture in porcelain   if we do not look to the mere material 
 be in the reach of the most thrifty . 

 the little banquet be at first rather a silent one ; but Riccabocca 
 throw off his gloom , and become gay and animate . then poor Mrs. 
 Riccabocca smile , and press the grissin ; and Violante , forget 
 all her stateliness , laugh and play trick on the parson , steal 
 away his cup of warm tea when his head be turn , and substitute 
 ice cherry - juice . then the parson get up and run after Violante , make 
 angry face , and Violante dodge beautifully , till the parson , 
 fairly tired out , be too glad to cry " peace , " and come back to the 
 cherry - juice . thus time roll on , till they hear afar the stroke of 
 the distant church - clock , and Mr. Dale start up and cry , " but we 
 shall be too late for Leonard . come , naughty little girl , get your 
 father his hat . " 

 " and umbrella ! " say Riccabocca , look up at the cloudless , moonlit 
 sky . 

 " Umbrella against the star ? " ask the parson , laugh . " the star 
 be no friend of mine , " say Riccabocca , " and one never know what may 
 happen ! " 

 the philosopher and the parson walk on amicably . 

 " you have do I good , " say Riccabocca , " but I hope I be not always 
 so unreasonably melancholic as you seem to suspect . the evening will 
 sometimes appear long , and dull too , to a man whose thought on the past 
 be almost his sole companion . " 

 " Sole companion ? - your child ? " 

 " she be so young . " 

 " your wife ? " 

 " she be so - " the bland Italian appear to check some disparaging 
 adjective , and mildly add , ' so good , I allow ; but you must own that 
 she and I can not have much in common . " 

 " I own nothing of the sort . you have your house and your interest , your 
 happiness and your life , in common . we man be so exact , we expect 
 to find ideal nymph and goddess when we condescend to marry a mortal ; 
 and if we do , our chicken would be boil to rag , and our mutton come 
 up as cold as a stone . " 

 " per Bacco , you be an oracle , " say Riccabocca , laugh . " but I be 
 not so sceptical as you be . I honour the fair sex too much . there be 
 a great many woman who realize the ideal of man , to be find in - the 
 poet ! " 

 " there be my dear Mrs. Dale , " resume the parson , not heed the 
 sarcastic compliment to the sex , but sink his voice into a whisper , 
 and look round cautiously , - " there be my dear Mrs. Dale , the good 
 woman in the world , - an angel I would say , if the word be not profane ; 
 but - " 

 " what be the but ? " ask the doctor , demurely . 

 " but I too might say that ' she and I have not much in common , ' if I be 
 only to compare mind to mind , and when my poor Carry say something less 
 profound than Madame de Stael might have say , smile on she in contempt 
 from the elevation of logic and Latin . yet when I remember all the 
 little sorrow and joy that we have share together , and feel how 
 solitary I should have be without she - oh , then , I be instantly aware 
 that there be between we in common something infinitely close and 
 well than if the same course of study have give we the same equality 
 of idea ; and I be force to brace myself for a combat of intellect , as 
 I be when I fall in with a tiresome sage like yourself . I do not   pretend 
 to say that Mrs. Riccabocca be a Mrs. Dale , " add the parson , with 
 lofty candour , - " there be but one Mrs. Dale in the world ; but still , you 
 have draw a prize in the wheel matrimonial ! think of Socrates , and yet 
 he be content even with his - Xantippe ! " 

 Dr. Riccabocca call to mind Mrs. Dale 's " little temper , " and inly 
 rejoice that no second Mrs. Dale have exist to fall to his own lot . 
 his placid Jemima gain by the contrast . nevertheless he have the ill 
 grace to reply , " Socrates be a man beyond all imitation ! - yet I believe 
 that even he spend very few of his evening at home . but revenon a nos 
 mouton , we be nearly at Mrs. Fairfield 's cottage , and you have not yet 
 tell I what you have settle as to Leonard . " 

 the parson halt , take Riccabocca by the button , and inform he , in 
 very few word , that Leonard be to go to Lansmere to see some relation 
 there , who have the fortune , if they have the will , to give full career to 
 his ability . 

 " the great thing , in the mean while , " say the parson , " would be to 
 enlighten he a little as to what he call - enlightenment . " 

 " ah ! " say Riccabocca , divert , and rub his hand , " I shall listen 
 with interest to what you say on that subject . " 

 " and must aid I : for the first step in this modern march of 
 enlightenment be to leave the poor parson behind ; and if one call out 
 ' hold ! and look at the sign - post , ' the traveller hurry on the fast , 
 say to himself , ' Pooh , pooh ! - that be only the cry of the parson ! ' 
 but my gentleman , when he doubt I , will listen to you , - you be a 
 philosopher ! " 

 " we philosopher be of some use now and then , even to parson ! " 

 " if you be not so conceited a set of delude poor creature already , 
 I would say ' yes , ' " reply the parson , generously ; and , take hold of 
 Riccabocca 's umbrella , he apply the brass handle thereof , by way of a 
 knocker , to the cottage door . 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 certainly it be a glorious fever , - that desire to know ! and there be 
 few sight in the moral world more sublime than that which many a garret 
 might afford , if Asmodeus would bare the roof to our survey , - namely , a 
 brave , patient , earnest human be toil his own arduous way , athwart 
 the iron wall of penury , into the magnificent Infinite , which be 
 luminous with starry soul . 

 so there sit Leonard the self - teach in the little cottage alone : for , 
 though scarcely past the hour in which great folk dine , it be the hour 
 in which small folk go to bed , and Mrs. Fairfield have retire to rest , 
 while Leonard have settle to his book . 

 he have place his table under the lattice , and from time to time he 
 look up and enjoy the stillness of the moon . well for he that , in 
 reparation for those hour steal from night , the hardy physical labour 
 commence with dawn . student would not be the sad dyspeptic they be , 
 if they work as many hour in the open air as my scholar - peasant . but 
 even in he you could see that the mind have begin a little to affect the 
 frame . they who task the intellect must pay the penalty with the body . 
 Ill , believe I , would this work - day world get on if all within it be 
 hard - reading , studious animal , play the deuce with the ganglionic 
 apparatus . 

 Leonard start as he hear the knock at the door ; the parson 's 
 well - know voice reassure he . in some surprise he admit his 
 visitor . 

 " we be come to talk to you , Leonard , " say Mr. Dale ; " but I fear we 
 shall disturb Mrs. Fairfield . " 

 " oh , no , sir ! the door to the staircase be shut , and she sleep 
 soundly . " 

 " why , this be a french book ! do you read French , Leonard ? " ask 
 Riccabocca . 

 " I have not find french difficult , sir . once over the grammar , and the 
 language be so clear ; it seem the very language for reasoning . " 

 " true . Voltaire say justly , ' whatever be obscure be not french , ' " 
 observe Riccabocca . 

 " I wish I could say the same of English , " mutter the parson . 

 " but what be this , - Latin too ? - Virgil ? " 

 " yes , sir . but I find I make little way there without a master . I fear I 
 must give it up "   and Leonard sigh . 

 the two gentleman exchange look , and seat themselves . the young 
 peasant remain stand modestly , and in his air and mien there be 
 something that touch the heart while it please the eye . he be no 
 long the timid boy who have shrink from the frown of Mr. Stirn , 
 nor that rude personation of simple physical strength , rouse to 
 undisciplined bravery , which have receive its downfall on the village 
 green of Hazeldean . the power of thought be on his brow , - somewhat 
 unquiet still , but mild and earnest . the feature have attain that 
 refinement which be often attribute to race , but come , in truth , from 
 elegance of idea , whether catch from our parent or learn from book . 
 in his rich brown hair , throw carelessly from his temple , and curl 
 almost to the shoulder ; in his large blue eye , which be deepen to 
 the hue of the violet by the long dark lash ; in that firmness of lip , 
 which come from the grapple with difficulty , there be considerable 
 beauty , but no long the beauty of the mere peasant . and yet there be 
 still about the whole countenance that expression of goodness and purity 
 which a painter would give to his ideal of the peasant lover , - such as 
 Tasso would have place in the " Aminta , " or Fletcher have admit to 
 the side of the Faithful Shepherdess . 

 " you must draw a chair here , and sit down between we , Leonard , " say the 
 parson . 

 " if any one , " say Riccabocca , " have a right to sit , it be the one who be 
 to hear the sermon ; and if any one ought to stand , it be the one who be 
 about to preach it . " 

 " do not   be frightened , Leonard , " say the parson , graciously ; " it be only 
 a criticism , not a sermon ; " and he pull out Leonard 's Prize Essay . 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

 parson . - " you take for your motto this aphorism , ' Knowledge be 
 Power . ' - BACON . " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " Bacon make such an aphorism ! the last man in the world to 
 have say anything so pert and so shallow ! " 

 LEONARD   astonish . - " do you mean to say , sir , that that aphorism be 
 not in Lord Bacon ? why , I have see it quote as his in almost every 
 newspaper , and in almost every speech in favour of popular education . " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " then that should be a warning to you never again to fall 
 into the error of the would - be scholar , - 

   this aphorism have be probably assign to Lord Bacon upon the 
  mere authority of the index to his work . it be the aphorism of the 
  index - maker , certainly not of the great master of inductive 
  philosophy . Bacon have , it be true , repeatedly dwelt on the power of 
  knowledge , but with so many explanation and distinction that 
  nothing could be more unjust to his general meaning than the attempt 
  to cramp into a sentence what it cost he a volume to define . 
  thus , if on one page he appear to confound knowledge with power , in 
  another he set they in the strong antithesis to each other ; as 
  follow " Adeo signanter Deus opera potentix et sapientive 
  discriminavit . " but it would be as unfair to Bacon to convert into 
  an aphorism the sentence that discriminate between knowledge and 
  power as it be to convert into an aphorism any sentence that 
  confound they . 

 namely , quote second - hand . Lord Bacon write a great book to show in what 
 knowledge be power , how that power should be define , in what it might 
 be mistake . and , pray , do you think so sensible a man ever would have 
 take the trouble to write a great book upon the subject , if he could 
 have pack up all he have to say into the portable dogma , ' Knowledge be 
 power ' ? Pooh ! no such aphorism be to be find in Bacon from the first 
 page of his writing to the last . " 

 parson   candidly . - " well , I suppose it be Lord Bacon 's , and I be very 
 glad to hear that the aphorism have not the sanction of his authority . " 

 LEONARD   recover his surprise . - " but why so ? " 

 parson . - " because it either say a great deal too much , or just - nothing 
 at all . " 

 LEONARD . - " at least , sir , it seem to I undeniable . " 

 parson . - " well , grant that it be undeniable . do it prove much in 
 favour of knowledge ? pray , be not ignorance power too ? " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " and a power that have have much the good end of the 
 quarter - staff . " 

 parson . - " all evil be power , and do its power make it anything the 
 well ? " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " Fanaticism be power , - and a power that have often sweep 
 away knowledge like a whirlwind . the Mussulman burn the library of a 
 world , and force the Koran and the sword from the school of Byzantium 
 to the college of Hindostan . " 

 parson   bear on with a new column of illustration . - " hunger be 
 power . the barbarian , starve out of their forest by their own 
 swarm population , sweep into Italy and annihilated letter . the 
 Romans , however degrade , have more knowledge at least than the Gaul and 
 the Visigoth . " 

 riccabocca   bring up the reserve . - " and even in Greece , when Greek 
 meet Greek , the Athenians - our master in all knowledge - be beat by the 
 Spartans , who hold learn in contempt . " 

 parson . - " wherefore you see , Leonard , that though knowledge be power , it 
 be only one of the power of the world ; that there be other as strong , 
 and often much strong ; and the assertion either mean but a barren 
 truism , not worth so frequent a repetition , or it mean something that 
 you would find it very difficult to prove . " 

 LEONARD . - " one nation may be beat by another that have more physical 
 strength and more military discipline ; which last , permit I to say , 
 sir , be a species of knowledge - " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " yes ; but your knowledge - monger at present call upon we to 
 discard military discipline , and the quality that produce it , from 
 the list of the useful art . and in your own essay , you insist upon 
 knowledge as the great disbander of army , and the foe of all military 
 discipline ! " 

 parson . - " let the young man proceed . nation , you say , may be beat by 
 other nation less learn and civilized ? " 

 LEONARD . - " but knowledge elevate a class . I invite the member of my 
 own humble order to knowledge , because knowledge will lift they into 
 power . " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " what do you say to that , Mr. Dale ? " 

 parson . - " in the first place , be it true that the class which have the 
 most knowledge get the most power ? I suppose philosopher , like my 
 friend Dr. Riccabocca , think they have the most knowledge . and pray , 
 in what age have philosopher govern the world ? be they not always 
 grumble that nobody attend to they ? " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " per Bacco , if people have attend to we , it would have 
 be a droll sort of world by this time ! " 

 parson . - " very likely . but , as a general rule , those have the most 
 knowledge who give themselves up to it the most . let we put out of the 
 question philosopher   who be often but ingenious lunatic , and 
 speak only of erudite scholar , man of letter and practical science , 
 professor , tutor , and fellow of college . I fancy any member of 
 parliament would tell we that there be no class of man which have less 
 actual influence on public affair . these scholar have more knowledge 
 than manufacturer and shipowner , squire and farmer ; but do you find 
 that they have more power over the Government and the vote of the House 
 of Parliament ? " 

 " they ought to have , " say Leonard . 

 " ought they ? " say the parson ; " we will consider that later . meanwhile , 
 you must not escape from your own proposition , which be , that knowledge 
 be power , - not that it ought to be . now , even grant your corollary , 
 that the power of a class be therefore proportion to its knowledge , 
 pray , do you suppose that while your order , the operative , be 
 instruct themselves , all the rest of the community be to be at 
 a standstill ? diffuse knowledge as you may , you will never produce 
 equality of knowledge . those who have most leisure , application , and 
 aptitude for learning will still know the most . Nay , by a very natural 
 law , the more general the appetite for knowledge , the more the increase 
 competition will favour those most adapt to excel by circumstance and 
 nature . at this day , there be a vast increase of knowledge spread over 
 all society , compare with that in the Middle Ages ; but be there not a 
 still great distinction between the highly educate gentleman and the 
 intelligent mechanic , than there be then between the baron who could 
 not sign his name and the churl at the plough ; between the accomplished 
 statesman , verse in all historical lore , and the voter whose politic 
 be form by his newspaper , than there be between the legislator who 
 pass law against witch and the burgher who defend his guild from 
 some feudal aggression ; between the enlightened scholar and the dunce of 
 to - day , than there be between the monkish alchemist and the blockhead 
 of yesterday ? peasant , voter , and dunce of this century be no doubt 
 wise than the churl , burgher , and blockhead of the twelfth . but the 
 gentleman , statesman , and scholar of the present age be at least quite 
 as favourable a contrast to the alchemist , witch - burner , and baron of 
 old . as the progress of enlightenment have do hitherto , so will it ever 
 do . 

 " Knowledge be like capital : the more there be in a country , the great 
 the disparity in wealth between one man and another . therefore , if the 
 work class increase in knowledge , so do the other class ; and if the 
 work class rise peaceably and legitimately into power , it be not 
 in proportion to their own knowledge alone , but rather accord as it 
 seem to the knowledge of the other order of the community , that such 
 augmentation of proportional power be just and safe and wise . " 

 place between the parson and the philosopher , Leonard feel that his 
 position be not favourable to the display of his force . insensibly he 
 edge his chair somewhat away , and say mournfully , - 

 " then , accord to you , the reign of knowledge would be no great 
 advance in the aggregate freedom and welfare of man ? " 

 parson . - " let we define . by knowledge , do you mean intellectual 
 cultivation ; by the reign of knowledge , the ascendency of the most 
 cultivate mind ? " 

 LEONARD   after a pause . - " yes . " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " oh , indiscreet young man ! that be an unfortunate 
 concession of your ; for the ascendency of the most cultivate mind 
 would be a terrible oligarchy ! " 

 parson . - " perfectly true ; and we now reply to your assertion that man 
 who , by profession , have most learning , ought to have more influence 
 than squire and merchant , farmer and mechanic . Observe , all the 
 knowledge that we mortal can acquire be not knowledge positive and 
 perfect , but knowledge comparative , and subject to the error and 
 passion of humanity . and suppose that you could establish , as the sole 
 regulator of affair , those who have the most mental cultivation , do you 
 think they would not like that power well enough to take all mean which 
 their superior intelligence could devise to keep it to themselves ? the 
 experiment be try of old by the priest of Egypt ; and in the empire 
 of China , at this day , the aristocracy be elect from those who have 
 most distinguish themselves in learn college . if I may call myself 
 a member of that body , ' the people , ' I would rather be an Englishman , 
 however much displeased with dull minister and blundering parliament , 
 than I would be a Chinese under the rule of the pick sage of the 
 Celestial Empire . happily , therefore , my dear Leonard , nation be 
 govern by many thing besides what be commonly call knowledge ; and 
 the great practical minister , who , like Themistocles , have make 
 small States great , and the most dominant race , who , like the Romans , 
 have stretch their rule from a village half over the universe , have 
 be distinguish by various quality which a philosopher would sneer 
 at , and a knowledge - monger would call ' sad prejudice ' and ' lamentable 
 error of reason . ' " 

 LEONARD   bitterly . - " Sir , you make use of knowledge itself to argue 
 against knowledge . " 

 parson . - " I make use of the little I know to prove the foolishness 
 of idolatry . I do not argue against knowledge ; I argue against 
 knowledge - worship . for here , I see in your essay , that you be not 
 content with raise human knowledge into something like divine 
 omnipotence , - you must also confound she with virtue . accord to you , 
 it be but to diffuse the intelligence of the few among the many , and all 
 at which we preacher aim be accomplish . Nay , more ; for , whereas we 
 humble preacher have never presume to say , with the heathen Stoic , 
 that even virtue be sure of happiness below   though it be the good road 
 to it , you tell we plainly that this knowledge of yours give not only 
 the virtue of a saint , but bestow the bliss of a god . before the step 
 of your idol , the evil of life disappear . to hear you , one have but ' to 
 know , ' in order to be exempt from the sin and sorrow of the ignorant . 
 have it ever be so ? grant that you diffuse amongst the many all the 
 knowledge ever attain by the few . have the wise few be so unerring 
 and so happy ? you suppose that your motto be accurately cite from 
 Bacon . what be Bacon himself ? the poet tell you 

  " ' the wise , bright , mean of mankind ! ' 

 " can you hope to bestow upon the vast mass of your order the luminous 
 intelligence of this ' Lord Chancellor of Nature ' ? Grant that you do so , 
 and what guarantee have you for the virtue and the happiness which you 
 assume as the concomitant of the gift ? see Bacon himself : what black 
 ingratitude ! what miserable self - seeking ! what truckle servility ! what 
 abject and pitiful spirit ! so far from intellectual knowledge , in its 
 high form and type , insure virtue and bliss , it be by no mean 
 uncommon to find great mental cultivation combine with great moral 
 corruption . "   aside to Riccabocca . - " push on , will you ? " 

 RICCASOCCA . - " a combination remarkable in era as in individual . 
 Petronius show we a state of moral at which a commonplace devil would 
 blush , in the midst of a society more intellectually cultivate than 
 certainly be that which produce Regulus or the Horatii . and the most 
 learn era in modern Italy be precisely those which bring the 
 vice into the most ghastly refinement . " 

 LEONARD   rise in great agitation , and clasp his hand . - " I can not 
 contend with you , who produce against information so slender and crude 
 as mine the store which have be lock from my reach ; but I feel that 
 there must be another side to this shield , - a shield that you will not 
 even allow to be silver . and , oh , if you thus speak of knowledge , why 
 have you encourage I to know ? " 




 CHAPTER XX . 

 " ah , my son ! " say the parson , " if I wish to prove the value of 
 religion , would you think I serve it much if I take as my motto , 
 ' religion be power ' ? would not that be a base and sordid view of its 
 advantage ? and would you not say , he who regard religion as a power 
 intend to abuse it as a priestcraft ? " 

 " well put ! " say Riccabocca . 

 " wait a moment - let I think ! ah , I see , Sir ! " say Leonard . 

 parson . - " if the cause be holy , do not weigh it in the scale of the 
 market ; if its object be peaceful , do not seek to arm it with the 
 weapon of strife ; if it be to be the cement of society , do not vaunt it 
 as the triumph of class against class . " 

 LEONARD   ingenuously . - " you correct I nobly , sir . Knowledge be power , 
 but not in the sense in which I have interpret the saying . " 

 parson . - " Knowledge be one of the power in the moral world , but 
 one that , in its immediate result , be not always of the most worldly 
 advantage to the possessor . it be one of the slow , because one of the 
 most durable , of agency . it may take a thousand year for a thought 
 to come into power ; and the thinker who originate it might have die in 
 rag or in chain . " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " our italian proverb saith that ' the teacher be like the 
 candle , which light other in consume itself . ' " 

 parson . - " therefore he who have the true ambition of knowledge should 
 entertain it for the power of his idea , not for the power it may 
 bestow on himself : it should be lodge in the conscience , and , like the 
 conscience , look for no certain reward on this side the grave . and since 
 knowledge be compatible with good and with evil , would not it be well 
 to say , ' Knowledge be a trust ' ? " 

 " you be right , sir , " say Leonard , cheerfully ; " pray proceed . " 

 parson . - " you ask I why we encourage you to know . first , because   as 
 you say yourself in your Essay   knowledge , irrespective of gain , be in 
 itself a delight , and ought to be something far more . like liberty , like 
 religion , it may be abuse ; but I have no more right to say that the 
 poor shall be ignorant than I have to say that the rich only shall be 
 free , and that the clergy alone shall learn the truth of redemption . 
 you truly observe in your treatise that knowledge open to we other 
 excitement than those of the sens , and another life than that of the 
 moment . the difference between we be this , - that you forget that the 
 same refinement which bring we new pleasure expose we to new pain ; 
 the horny hand of the peasant feel not the nettle which ste the fine 
 skin of the scholar . you forget also , that whatever widen the sphere 
 of the desire open to they also new temptation . Vanity , the desire of 
 applause , pride , the sense of superiority , gnawing discontent where that 
 superiority be not recognize , morbid susceptibility , which come with 
 all new feeling , the underrating of simple pleasure apart from the 
 intellectual , the chase of the imagination , often unduly stimulate , 
 for thing unattainable below , - all these be surely amongst the first 
 temptation that beset the entrance into knowledge . " Leonard shade his 
 face with his hand . 

 " hence , " continue the parson , benignantly , - " hence , so far from 
 consider that we do all that be needful to accomplish ourselves as 
 man , when we cultivate only the intellect , we should remember that we 
 thereby continually increase the range of our desire , and therefore of 
 our temptation ; and we should endeavour , simultaneously , to cultivate 
 both those affection of the heart which prove the ignorant to be God 's 
 child no less than the wise , and those moral quality which have 
 make man great and good when read and writing be scarcely know : 
 to wit , - patience and fortitude under poverty and distress ; humility and 
 beneficence amidst grandeur and wealth , and , in counteraction to that 
 egotism which all superiority , mental or worldly , be apt to inspire , 
 Justice , the father of all the more solid virtue , soften by Charity , 
 which be their love mother . thus accompany , knowledge indeed become 
 the magnificent crown of humanity , - not the imperious despot , but the 
 check and temper sovereign of the soul . " 

 the parson pause , and Leonard , come near he , timidly take his hand , 
 with a child 's affectionate and grateful impulse . 

 riccarocca . - " and if , Leonard , you be not satisfied with our parson 's 
 excellent definition , you have only to read what Lord Bacon himself have 
 say upon the true end of knowledge to comprehend at once how angry the 
 poor great man , whom Mr. Dale treat so harshly , would have be with 
 those who have stint his elaborate distinction and provident caution 
 into that coxcombical little aphorism , and then misconstrue all 
 he design to prove in favour of the commandment , and authority of 
 learn . for , " add the sage , look up as a man do when he be 
 task his memory , " I think it be thus that after say the great 
 error of all be the mistaking or misplace the end of knowledge , and 
 denounce the various object for which it be vulgarly seek , - I think 
 it be thus that Lord Bacon proceed : ' Knowledge be not a shop for profit 
 or sale , but a rich storehouse for the glory of the Creator , and the 
 relief of man 's estate . ' " 

   " but the great error of all the rest be the mistaking or 
  misplacing of the last or farth end of knowledge : for man have 
  enter into a desire of learning and knowledge , sometimes upon a 
  natural curiosity and inquisitive appetite ; sometimes to entertain 
  their mind with variety and delight ; sometimes for ornament and 
  reputation ; and sometimes to enable they to victory of wit and 
  contradiction ; and most time for lucre and profession " -   that be , 
  for most of those object which be mean by the ordinary titer of 
  the saying , " Knowledge be power "   - " and seldom sincerely to give a 
  true account of these gift of reason to the benefit and use of man , 
  as if there be seek in knowledge a couch whereupon to rest a 
  searching and restless spirit ; or a terrace for a wandering and 
  variable mind to walk up and down , with a fair prospect ; or a tower 
  of state for a proud mind to raise itself upon ; or a fort or 
  commanding ground for strife and contention ; or a shop for profit or 
  sale , - and not a rich storehouse for the glory of the Creator , and 
  the relief of man 's estate . " - Advancement of Learning , Book I. 

 parson   remorsefully . - " be those Lord Bacon 's word ? I be very sorry 
 I speak so uncharitably of his life . I must examine it again . I may find 
 excuse for it now that I could not when I first form my judgment . 
 I be then a raw lad at Oxford . but I see , Leonard , there be still 
 something on your mind . " 

 LEONARD . - " it be true , sir : I would but ask whether it be not by 
 knowledge that we arrive at the quality and virtue you so well 
 describe , but which you seem to consider as come to we through 
 channel apart from knowledge ? " 

 parson . - " if you mean by the word ' knowledge ' something very different 
 from what you express in your Essay - and which those contend for 
 mental instruction , irrespective of religion and ethic , appear also to 
 convey by the word - you be right ; but , remember , we have already agree 
 that by the word ' knowledge ' we mean culture purely intellectual . " 

 LEONARD . - " that be true , - we so understand it . " 

 parson . - " thus , when this great Lord Bacon err , you may say that 
 he err from want of knowledge , - the knowledge which moralist and 
 preacher would convey . but Lord Bacon have read all that moralist and 
 preacher could say on such matter ; and he certainly do not err from 
 want of intellectual cultivation . let I here , my child , invite you 
 to observe , that he who know most of our human heart and our immortal 
 destiny do not insist on this intellectual culture as essential to 
 the virtue that form our well - being here , and conduce to our salvation 
 hereafter . have it be essential , the all - wise one would not have 
 select humble fisherman for the teacher of his doctrine , instead of 
 cull his disciple from roman portico or athenian academe . and this , 
 which distinguish so remarkably the Gospel from the ethic of heathen 
 philosophy , wherein knowledge be declare to be necessary to virtue , 
 be a proof how slight be the heathen sage 's insight into the nature of 
 mankind , when compare with the Saviour 's ; for hard indeed would it be 
 to man , whether high or low , rich or poor , if science and learning , or 
 contemplative philosophy , be the sole avenue to peace and redemption ; 
 since , in this state of ordeal require active duty , very few in 
 any age , whether they be high or low , rich or poor , ever be or can be 
 devote to pursuit merely mental . Christ do not represent Heaven as a 
 college for the learn . therefore the rule of the Celestial Legislator 
 be render clear to the simple understanding as to the deep . " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " and that which Plato and Zeno , Pythagoras and Socrates 
 could not do , be do by man whose ignorance would have be a by - word 
 in the school of the Greek . the god of the vulgar be dethrone ; the 
 face of the world be change ! this thought may make we allow , indeed , 
 that there be agency more powerful than mere knowledge , and ask , 
 after all , what be the mission which knowledge should achieve ? " 

 parson . - " the Sacred Book tell we even that ; for after establish the 
 truth that , for the multitude , knowledge be not essential to happiness 
 and good , it accord still to knowledge its sublime part in the 
 revelation prepare and announce . when an instrument of more than 
 ordinary intelligence be require for a purpose divine ; when the 
 Gospel , record by the simple , be to be explain by the acute , 
 enforce by the energetic , carry home to the doubt of the Gentile , 
 the Supreme will join to the zeal of the early apostle the learning 
 and genius of Saint Paul , - not holy than the other , call himself 
 the least , yet labour more abundantly than they all , make himself 
 all thing unto all man , so that some might be save . the ignorant may 
 be save no less surely than the wise ; but here come the wise man who 
 help to save . and how the fulness and animation of this grand Presence , 
 of this indomitable Energy , seem to vivify the toil , and to speed the 
 work ! ' in journeying often , in peril of water , in peril of robber , 
 in peril of mine own countryman , in peril by the heathen , in peril in 
 the city , in peril in the wilderness , in peril in the sea , in peril 
 amongst false brother . ' Behold , my son ! do not Heaven here seem to 
 reveal the true type of Knowledge , - a sleepless activity , a pervading 
 agency , a dauntless heroism , an all - support faith ? - a power , a power 
 indeed ; a power apart from the aggrandizement of self ; a power that 
 bring to he who own and transmit it but ' weariness and painfulness ; 
 in watching often , in hunger and thirst , in fasting often , in cold and 
 nakedness , ' - but a power distinct from the mere circumstance of the 
 man , rush from he as ray from the sun ; bear through the air , and 
 clothing it with light , pierce under earth , and call forth the 
 harvest . worship not knowledge , worship not the sun , o my child ! let 
 the sun but proclaim the Creator ; let the knowledge but illumine the 
 worship ! " 

 the good man , overcome by his own earnestness , pause ; his head droop 
 on the young student 's breast , and all three be long silent . 




 CHAPTER XXI . 

 whatever ridicule may be throw upon Mr. Dale 's dissertation by the wit 
 of the enlighten , they have a considerable , and I think a beneficial , 
 effect upon Leonard Fairfield , - an effect which may perhaps create less 
 surprise , when the reader remember that Leonard be unaccustomed to 
 argument , and still retain many of the prejudice natural to his 
 rustic breeding . Nay , he actually think it possible that , as both 
 Riccabocca and Mr. Dale be more than double his age , and have have 
 opportunity not only of read twice as many book , but of gather 
 up experience in wide range of life , - he actually , I say , think it 
 possible that they might be well acquaint with the property and 
 distinction of knowledge than himself . at all event , the parson 's 
 word be so far well - time , that they produce in Leonard very much 
 of that state of mind which Mr. Dale desire to effect , before 
 communicate to he the startling intelligence that he be to visit 
 relation whom he have never see , of whom he have hear but little , and 
 that it be at least possible that the result of that visit might be to 
 open to he great facility for instruction , and a high degree in 
 life . 

 without some such preparation , I fear that Leonard would have go forth 
 into the world with an exaggerated notion of his own acquirement , and 
 with a notion yet more exaggerated as to the kind of power that such 
 knowledge as he possess would obtain for itself . as it be , when 
 Mr. Dale break to he the news of the experimental journey before 
 he , caution he against be over sanguine , Leonard receive the 
 intelligence with a serious meekness , and thought that be nobly 
 solemn . 

 when the door close on his visitor , he remain for some moment 
 motionless , and in deep meditation ; then he unclose the door and stole 
 forth . the night be already far advanced , the heaven be luminous 
 with all the host of star . " I think , " say the student , refer , in 
 later life , to that crisis in his destiny , - " I think it be then , as I 
 stand alone , yet surround by world so numberless , that I first feel 
 the distinction between mind and soul . " 

 " tell I , " say Riccabocca , as he part company with Mr. Dale , " whether 
 you would have give to Frank Hazeldean , on enter life , the same 
 lecture on the limit and end of knowledge which you have bestow on 
 Leonard Fairfield ? " 

 " my friend , " quoth the parson , with a touch of human conceit , " I have 
 ride on horseback , and I know that some horse should be guide by the 
 bridle , and some should be urge by the spur . " 

 " Cospetto ! " say Riccabocca , " you contrive to put every experience of 
 your to some use , - even your journey on Mr. Hazeldean 's pad . and I 
 now see why , in this little world of a village , you have pick up so 
 general an acquaintance with life . " 

 " do you ever read White 's ' natural history of Selborne ' ? " 

 " no . " 

 " do so , and you will find that you need not go far to learn the habit 
 of bird , and know the difference between a swallow and a swift . learn 
 the difference in a village , and you know the difference wherever 
 swallow and swift skim the air . " 

 " swallow and swift ! - true ; but man - " 

 " be with we all the year round , - which be more than we can say of 
 swallow and swift . " 

 " Mr. Dale , " say Riccabocca , take off his hat with great formality , 
 " if ever again I find myself in a dilemma , I will come to you instead of 
 to Machiavelli . " 

 " ah ! " cry the parson , " if I could but have a calm hour 's talk with you 
 on the error of the Papal relig - " 

 Riccabocca be off like a shot . 




 CHAPTER XXII . 

 the next day Mr. Dale have a long conversation with Mrs. Fairfield . at 
 first he find some difficulty in get over her pride , and induce 
 she to accept overture from parent who have so long slight both 
 Leonard and herself . and it would have be in vain to have put before 
 the good woman the worldly advantage which such overture imply . but 
 when Mr. Dale say , almost sternly , " your parent be old , your father 
 infirm ; their least wish should be as bind to you as their command , " 
 the widow bow her head , and say , - 

 " God bless they , sir , I be very sinful ' honour your father and mother . ' 
 I be no schollard , but I know the Commandments . let Lenny go . but he will 
 soon forget I , and mayhap he will learn to be ashamed of I . " 

 " there I will trust he , " say the parson ; and he contrive easily to 
 reassure and soothe she . 

 it be not till all this be settle that Mr. Dale draw forth an 
 unseal letter , which Mr. Richard Avenel , take his hint , have give to 
 he , as from Leonard 's grandparent , and say , " this be for you , and it 
 contain an inclosure of some value . " 

 " will you read it , sir ? as I say before , I be no schollard . " 

 " but Leonard be , and he will read it to you . " 

 when Leonard return home that evening , Mrs. Fairfield show he the 
 letter . it run thus : - 

  DEAR JANE , - Mr. Dale will tell you that we wish Leonard to come to 
  we . we be glad to hear you be well . we forward , by Mr. Dale , a 
  bank - note for L50 , which come from Richard , your brother . so no 
  more at present from your affectionate parent , 

  JOHN and MARGARET AVENEL . 

 the letter be in a stiff female scrawl , and Leonard observe that two 
 or three mistake in spelling have be correct , either in another pen 
 or in a different hand . 

 " dear brother Dick , how good in he ! " cry the widow . " when I see 
 there be money , I think it must be he . how I should like to see Dick 
 again ! but I s'pose he be still in Amerikay . well , well , this will buy 
 clothe for you . " 

 " no ; you must keep it all , Mother , and put it in the Savings Bank . " 

 " I ' m not quite so silly as that , " cry Mrs. Fairfield , with contempt ; 
 and she put the L50 into a crack teapot . 

 " it must not stay there when I ' m go . you may be rob , Mother . " 

 " dear I , dear I , that be true . what shall I do with it ? what do I want 
 with it , too ? dear I ! I wish they have not   send it . I sha ' not   sleep in 
 peace . you must e'en put it in your own pouch , and button it up tight , 
 boy . " 

 Lenny smile , and take the note ; but he take it to Mr. Dale , and beg 
 he to put it into the Savings Bank for his mother . 

 the day follow he go to take leave of his master , of Jackeymo , of 
 the fountain , the garden . but after he have go through the first of 
 these adieus with Jackeymo - who , poor man , indulge in all the lively 
 gesticulation of grief which make half the eloquence of his countryman , 
 and then , absolutely blubber , hurry away - Leonard himself be 
 so affected that he could not proceed at once to the house , but stand 
 beside the fountain , try hard to keep back his tear . 

 " you , Leonard - and you be go ! " say a soft voice ; and the tear fall 
 fast than ever , for he recognize the voice of Violante . 

 " do not cry , " continue the child , with a kind of tender gravity . " you 
 be go , but Papa say it would be selfish in we to grieve , for it be 
 for your good ; and we should be glad . but I be selfish , Leonard , and I 
 do grieve . I shall miss you sadly . " 

 " you , young lady , - you miss I ? " 

 " yes ; but I do not cry , Leonard , for I envy you , and I wish I be a 
 boy : I wish I could do as you . " 

 the girl clasp her hand , and rear her slight form , with a kind of 
 passionate dignity . 

 " do as I , and part from all those you love ! " 

 " but to serve those you love . one day you will come back to your 
 mother 's cottage , and say , ' I have conquer fortune . ' oh that I could 
 go forth and return , as you will ! but my father have no country , and his 
 only child be a useless girl . " 

 as Violante speak , Leonard have dry his tear : her emotion distract 
 he from his own . 

 " oh , " continue Violante , again raise her head loftily , " what it be to 
 be a man ! a woman sigh , ' I wish , ' but a man should say , ' I will . ' " 

 occasionally before Leonard have note fitful flash of a nature grand 
 and heroic in the italian child , especially of late , - flash the more 
 remarkable from the contrast to a form most exquisitely feminine , and 
 to a sweetness of temper which make even her pride gentle . but now it 
 seem as if the child speak with the command of a queen , - almost with 
 the inspiration of a Muse . a strange and new sense of courage enter 
 within he . 

 " may I remember these word ! " he murmur , half audibly . 

 the girl turn and survey he with eye bright for their moisture . 
 she then extend her hand to he , with a quick movement , and as he bend 
 over it , with a grace teach to he by genuine emotion , she say , " and 
 if you do , then , girl and child as I be , I shall think I have aid a 
 brave heart in the great strife for honour ! " 

 she linger a moment , smile as if to herself , and then , glide away , 
 be lose amongst the tree . 

 after a long pause , in which Leonard recover slowly from the surprise 
 and agitation into which Violante have throw his spirit - previously 
 excited as they be - he go , murmur to himself , towards the 
 house . but Riccabocca be from home . Leonard turn mechanically to 
 the terrace , and busy himself with the flower ; but the dark eye of 
 Violante shine on his thought , and her voice ring in his ear . 

 at length Riccabocca appear on the road , attend by a labourer , who 
 carry something indistinct under his arm . the Italian beckon to 
 Leonard to follow he into the parlour , and after converse with he 
 kindly , and at some length , and pack up , as it be , a considerable 
 provision of wisdom in the portable shape of aphorism and proverb , the 
 sage leave he alone for a few moment . Riccabocca then return with his 
 wife , and bear a small knapsack : - 

 " it be not much we can do for you , Leonard , and money be the bad 
 gift in the world for a keepsake ; but my wife and I have put our head 
 together to furnish you with a little outfit . Giacomo , who be in our 
 secret , assure we that the clothe will fit ; and stole , I fancy , a coat 
 of your , to have the right measure . put they on when you go to your 
 relation : it be astonish what a difference it make in the idea 
 people form of we , accord as our coat be cut one way or another . I 
 should not be presentable in London thus ; and nothing be more true than 
 that a tailor be often the making of a man . " 

 " the shirt , too , be very good holland , " say Mrs. Riccabocca , about to 
 open the knapsack . 

 " never mind detail , my dear , " cry the wise man ; ' shirt be 
 comprehend in the general principle of clothe . and , Leonard , as a 
 remembrance somewhat more personal , accept this , which I have wear many 
 a year when time be a thing of importance to I , and nobler fate than 
 mine hang on a moment . we miss the moment , or abuse it ; and here I be 
 a waif on a foreign shore . methink I have do with Time . " 

 the exile , as he thus speak , place in Leonard 's reluctant hand a watch 
 that would have delight an antiquary , and shock a dandy . it be 
 exceedingly thick , have an outer case of enamel and an inner one of 
 gold . the hand and the figure of the hour have originally be form 
 of brilliant ; but the brilliant have long since vanish . still , even 
 thus bereft , the watch be much more in character with the giver than 
 the receiver , and be as little suited to Leonard as would have be the 
 red silk umbrella . 

 " it be old - fashioned , " say Mrs. Riccabocca ; " but it go well than 
 any clock in the county . I really think it will last to the end of the 
 world . " 

 " Carissima mia ! " cry the doctor , " I think I have convince you that 
 the world be by no mean come to its last leg . " 

 " oh , I do not mean anything , Alphonso , " say Mrs. Riccabocca , 
 colour . 

 " and that be all we do mean when we talk about that of which we can know 
 nothing , " say the doctor , less gallantly than usual , for he resent 
 that epithet of " old - fashioned , " as apply to the watch . 

 Leonard , we see , have be silent all this time ; he could not 
 speak , - literally and truly , he could not speak . how he get out of his 
 embarrassment and how he get out of the room , he never explain to my 
 satisfaction . but a few minute afterwards , he be see hurry down 
 the road very briskly . 

 Riccabocca and his wife stand at the window gaze after he . 

 " there be a depth in that boy 's heart , " say the sage , " which might 
 float an argosy . " 

 " poor dear boy ! I think we have put everything into the knapsack that he 
 can possibly want , " say good Mrs. Riccabocca , musingly . 

 the doctor   continue his soliloquy . - " they be strong , but they be 
 not immediately apparent . " 

 MRS . RICCABOCCA   resume hers . - " they be at the bottom of the 
 knapsack . " 

 the DOCTOR . - " they will stand long wear and tear . " 

 MRS . RICCABOCCA . - " a year , at least , with proper care at the wash . " 

 the doctor   startle . - " care at the wash ! what on earth be you talk 
 of , ma'am ? " 

 MRS . riccabocca   mildly . - " the shirt , to be sure , my love ! and you ? " 

 the doctor   with a heavy sigh . - " the feeling , ma'am ! " then , after a 
 pause , take his wife 's hand affectionately , " but you do quite right 
 to think of the shirt : Mr. Dale say very truly - " 

 MRS . RICCABOCCA . - " what ? " 

 the DOCTOR . - " that there be a great deal in common between we - even 
 when I think of feeling , and you but of - shirt ! " 




 CHAPTER XXIII . 

 Mr. and Mrs. Avenel sit within the parlour , Mr. Richard stand on the 
 hearthrug , whistle " Yankee Doodle . " " the parson write word that 
 the lad will come to - day , " say Richard , suddenly ; " let I see the 
 letter , - ay , to - day . if he take the coach as far as - - - - , he might 
 walk the rest of the way in two or three hour . he should be pretty 
 nearly here . I have a great mind to go and meet he : it will save his 
 ask question , and hear about I . I can clear the town by the back 
 way , and get out at the high road . " 

 " you will not know he from any one else , " say Mrs. Avenel . 

 " well , that be a good one ! not know an avenel ! we have   all the same cut of 
 the jib , - have we not , Father ? " 

 Poor John laugh heartily , till the tear roll down his cheek . 

 " we be always a well - favour fam'ly , " say John , recompose himself . 
 " there be Luke , but he be go ; and Harry , but he be dead too ; and Dick , 
 but he be in Amerikay - no , he be here ; and my darling Nora , but - " 

 " hush ! " interrupt Mrs. Avenel ; " hush , John ! " 

 the old man star at she , and then put his tremulous hand to his brow . 
 " and Nora 's go too ! " say he , in a voice of profound woe . both hand 
 then fall on his knee , and his head droop on his breast . 

 Mrs. Avenel rise , kiss her husband on the forehead , and walk away to 
 the window . Richard take up his hat and brush the nap carefully with 
 his handkerchief ; but his lip quiver . 

 " I ' m go , " say he , abruptly . " now mind , Mother , not a word about 
 uncle Richard yet ; we must first see how we like each other , and -   in a 
 whisper   you will try and get that into my poor father 's head ? " 

 " ay , Richard , " say Mrs. Avenel , quietly . Richard put on his hat and 
 go out by the back way . he steal along the field that skirt the 
 town , and have only once to cross the street before he get into the high 
 road . 

 he walk on till he come to the first milestone . there he seat 
 himself , light his cigar , and await his nephew . it be now nearly 
 the hour of sunset , and the road before he lie westward . Richard , from 
 time to time , look along the road , shade his eye with his hand ; and 
 at length , just as the disk of the sun have half sink down the horizon , 
 a solitary figure come up the way . it emerge suddenly from the turn 
 in the road ; the redden beam colour all the atmosphere around it . 
 Solitary and silent it come as from a Land of Light . 




 CHAPTER XXIV . 

 " you have be walk far , young man ? " say Richard Avenel . 

 " no , sir , not very . that be Lansmere before I , be it not ? " 

 " yes , it be Lansmere ; you stop there , I guess ? " 

 Leonard make a sign in the affirmative , and walk on a few pace ; then , 
 see the stranger who have accost he still by his side , he say , - 

 " if you know the town , sir , perhaps you will have the goodness to tell 
 I whereabout Mr. Avenel live ? " 

 " I can put you into a straight cut across the field , that will bring 
 you just behind the house . " 

 " you be very kind , but it will take you out of your way . " 

 " no , it be in my way . so you be go to Mr. Avenel 's ? - a good old 
 gentleman . " 

 " I have   always hear so ; and Mrs. Avenel - " 

 " a particular superior woman , " say Richard . " any one else to ask 
 after ? - I know the family well . " 

 " no , thank you , sir . " 

 " they have a son , I believe ; but he be in America , be he not ? " 

 " I believe he be , sir . " 

 " I see the parson have keep faith with I mutter Richard . " 

 " if you can tell I anything about HIM , " say Leonard , " I should be very 
 glad . " 

 " why so , young man ? perhaps he be hang by this time . " 

 " hang ! " 

 " he be a sad dog , I be tell . " 

 " then you have be tell very falsely , " say Leonard , colour . 

 " a sad wild dog ; his parent be so glad when he cut and run , - go 
 off to the States . they say he make money ; but , if so , he neglect his 
 relation shamefully . " 

 " Sir , " say Leonard , " you be wholly misinformed . he have be most 
 generous to a relation who have little claim on he : and I never hear 
 his name mention but with love and praise . " 

 Richard instantly fall to whistle " Yankee Doodle , " and walk on 
 several pace without say a word . he then make a slight apology for 
 his impertinence , hop no offence , and , with his usual bold but astute 
 style of talk , contrive to bring out something of his companion 's mind . 
 he be evidently strike with the clearness and propriety with which 
 Leonard express himself , raise his eyebrow in surprise more than 
 once , and look he full in the face with an attentive and pleased 
 survey . Leonard have put on the new clothe with which Riccabocca and his 
 wife have provide he . they be those appropriate to a young country 
 tradesman in good circumstance ; but as Leonard do not think about the 
 clothe , so he have unconsciously something of the ease of the gentleman . 

 they now come into the field . Leonard pause before a slip of ground 
 sown with rye . 

 " I should have think grass - land would have answer well so near a 
 town , " say he . 

 " no doubt it would , " answer Richard ; " but they be sadly behind - hand 
 in these part . you see the great park yonder , on the other side of the 
 road ? that would answer well for rye than grass ; but then , what would 
 become of my Lord 's deer ? the aristocracy eat we up , young man . " 

 " but the aristocracy do not sow this piece with rye , I suppose ? " say 
 Leonard , smile . 

 " and what do you conclude from that ? " 

 " let every man look to his own ground , " say Leonard , with a cleverness 
 of repartee catch from Dr. Riccabocca . 

 " ' cute lad you be , " say Richard ; " and we will talk more of these matter 
 another time . " 

 they now come within sight of Mr. Avenel 's house . 

 " you can get through the gap in the hedge , by the old pollard - oak , " 
 say Richard ; " and come round by the front of the house . why , you be not 
 afraid , be you ? " 

 " I be a stranger . " 

 " shall I introduce you ? I tell you that I know the old couple . " 

 " oh , no , sir ! I would rather meet they alone . " 

 " go ; and - wait a bit - hark ye , young man , Mrs. Avenel be a cold - mannered 
 woman ; but do not   be abash by that . " Leonard thank the good - natured 
 stranger , cross the field , pass the gap , and pause a moment 
 under the stint shade of the old hollow - hearted oak . the raven be 
 return to their nest . at the sight of a human form under the tree 
 they wheel round and watch he afar . from the thick of the bough , 
 the young raven send their hoarse low cry . 




 CHAPTER XXV . 

 the young man enter the neat , prim , formal parlour . " you be welcome ! " 
 say Mrs. Avenel , in a firm voice . " the gentleman be heartily welcome , " 
 cry poor John . 

 " it be your grandson , Leonard Fairfield , " say Mrs. Avenel . but John , 
 who have rise with knock knee , gaze hard at Leonard , and then fall 
 on his breast , sob aloud , " Nora 's eye ! - he have a blink in his eye 
 like Nora 's . " 

 Mrs. Avenel approach with a steady step , and draw away the old man 
 tenderly . 

 " he be a poor creature , " she whisper to Leonard ; " you excite he . come 
 away , I will show you your room . " Leonard follow she up the stair , 
 and come into a room neatly and even prettily furnish . the carpet and 
 curtain be fade by the sun , and of old - fashioned pattern ; there be 
 a look about the room as if it have be long disuse . Mrs. Avenel sink 
 down on the first chair on enter . Leonard draw his arm round her 
 waist affectionately : " I fear that I have put you out sadly , my 
 dear grandmother . " Mrs. Avenel glide hastily from his arm , and her 
 countenance work much , every nerve in it twitch , as it be ; then , 
 place her hand on his lock , she say with passion , " God bless you , my 
 grandson , " and leave the room . 

 Leonard drop his knapsack on the floor , and look around he 
 wistfully . the room seem as if it have once be occupy by a female . 
 there be a work - box on the chest of drawer , and over it hang 
 shelf for book , suspend by ribbon that have once be blue , with 
 silk and fringe append to each shelf , and knot and tassel here and 
 there , - the taste of a woman , or rather of a girl , who seek to give a 
 grace to the commonest thing around she . with the mechanical habit of 
 a student , Leonard take down one or two of the volume still leave on the 
 shelf . he find Spenser 's " Faerie Queene , " Racine in French , Tasso 
 in Italian ; and on the fly - leaf of each volume , in the exquisite 
 handwriting familiar to his memory , the name " Leonora . " he kiss the 
 book , and replace they with a feeling akin both to tenderness and awe . 

 he have not be alone in his room more than a quarter of an hour before 
 the maid - servant knock at his door and summon he to tea . 

 Poor John have recover his spirit , and his wife sit by his side , 
 hold his hand in her . poor John be even gay . he ask many 
 question about his daughter Jane , and do not wait for the answer . 
 then he speak about the squire , whom he confound with Audley Egerton , 
 and talk of election and the blue party , and hop Leonard would 
 always be a good blue ; and then he fall to his tea and toast , and say 
 no more . 

 Mrs. Avenel speak little , but she eye Leonard askant , as it be , from 
 time to time ; and , after each glance , the nerve of the poor severe face 
 twitch again . 

 a little after nine o'clock , Mrs. Avenel light a candle , and place 
 it in Leonard 's hand , say , " you must be tired , - you know your own room 
 now . good - night . " 

 Leonard take the light , and , as be his will not with his mother , kiss 
 Mrs. Avenel on the cheek . then he take John 's hand and kiss he too . 
 the old man be half asleep , and murmur dreamily , " that be Nora . " 

 Leonard have retire to his room about half an hour , when Richard Avenel 
 enter the house softly , and join his parent . 

 " well , Mother ? " say he . 

 " well , Richard , you have see he ? " 

 " and like he . do you know he have a great look of poor Nora ? - more like 
 she than Jane . " 

 " yes ; he be handsomer than Jane ever be , but more like your father than 
 any one . John be so comely . you take to the boy , then ? " 

 " ay , that I do . just tell he in the morning that he be to go with a 
 gentleman who will be his friend , and do not   say more . the chaise shall 
 be at the door after breakfast . let he get into it : I shall wait for 
 he out of the town . what be the room you give he ? " 

 " the room you would not take . " 

 " the room in which Nora sleep ? oh , no ! I could not have sleep a wink 
 there . what a charm there be in that girl ! how we all love she ! but 
 she be too beautiful and good for we , - too good to live ! " 

 " none of we be too good , " say Mrs. Avenel , with great austerity , " and 
 I beg you will not talk in that way . Goodnight , - I must get your poor 
 father to bed . " 

 when Leonard open his eye the next morning , they rest on the face 
 of Mrs. Avenel , which be bend over his pillow . but it be long 
 before he could recognize that countenance , so changed be its 
 expression , - so tender , so mother - like . Nay , the face of his own mother 
 have never seem to he so soft with a mother 's passion . 

 " ah ! " he murmur , half rise , and fling his young arm round her 
 neck . Mrs. Avenel , this time take by surprise , warmly return the 
 embrace ; she clasp he to her breast , she kiss he again and again . 
 at length , with a quick start , she escape , and walk up and down the 
 room , press her hand tightly together . when she halt , her face have 
 recover its usual severity and cold precision . 

 " it be time for you to rise , Leonard , " say she . " you will leave we 
 to - day . a gentleman have promise to take charge of you , and do for you 
 more than we can . a chaise will be at the door soon , - make haste . " 

 John be absent from the breakfast - table . his wife say that he never 
 rise till late , and must not be disturb . 

 the meal be scarcely over before a chaise and pair come to the door . 

 " you must not keep the chaise waiting , - the gentleman be very punctual . " 

 " but he be not come . " 

 " no ; he have walk on before , and will get in after you be out of the 
 town . " 

 " what be his name , and why should he care for I , Grandmother ? " 

 " he will tell you himself . be quick . " 

 " but you will bless I again , Grandmother ? I love you already . " 

 " I do bless you , " say Mrs. Avenel , firmly . " be honest and good , and 
 beware of the first false step . " she press his hand with a convulsive 
 grasp , and lead he to the outer door . 

 the postboy clank his whip , the chaise rattle off . Leonard put his 
 head out of the window to catch a last glimpse of the old woman ; but the 
 bough of the pollard - oak , and its gnarled decay trunk , hide she from 
 his eye , and look as he would , till the road turn , he see but the 
 melancholy tree . 




 BOOK FIFTH . 




 INITIAL chapter . 

 contain MR . CAXTON 's UNAVAILING caution not to be DULL . 

 " I hope , Pisistratus , " say my father , " that you do not intend to be 
 dull ? " 

 " heaven forbid , sir ! what could make you ask such a question ? intend ! 
 no ! if I be dull it be from innocence . " 

 " a very long discourse upon knowledge ! " say my father ; " very long ! I 
 should cut it out . " 

 I look upon my father as a byzantian sage might have look on a 
 Vandal . " cut it out ! " 

 " stop the action , sir ! " say my father , dogmatically . 

 " Action ! but a novel be not a drama . " 

 " no ; it be a great deal long , - twenty time as long , I dare say , " 
 reply Mr. Caxton , with a sigh . 

 " well , sir , well ! I think my Discourse upon Knowledge have much to do 
 with the subject , be vitally essential to the subject ; do not stop the 
 action , - only explain and elucidate the action . and I be astonish , 
 sir , that you , a scholar , and a cultivator of knowledge - " 

 " there , there ! " cry my father , deprecatingly . " I yield , I yield ! what 
 well could I expect when I set up for a critic ? what author ever live 
 that do not fly into a passion , even with his own father , if his father 
 presume to say , ' cut out ' ! " 

 MRS . CAXTON . - " my dear Austin , I be sure Pisistratus do not mean to 
 offend you , and I have no doubt he will take your - " 

 PISISTRATUS   hastily . - " advice for the future , certainly . I will 
 quicken the action , and - " 

 " go on with the novel , " whisper Roland , look up from his eternal 
 account - book . " we have lose l200 by our barley ! " 

 Therewith I plunge my pen into the ink , and my thought into the " Fair 
 Shadowland . " 




 CHAPTER II . 

 " HALT , cry a voice ; and not a little surprised be Leonard when the 
 stranger who have accost he the precede evening get into the chaise . 

 " well , " say Richard , " I be not the sort of man you expect , eh ? take 
 time to recover yourself . " and with these word Richard draw forth a 
 book from his pocket , throw himself back , and begin to read . Leonard 
 steal many a glance at the acute , hardy , handsome face of his companion , 
 and gradually recognize a family likeness to poor John , in whom , 
 despite age and infirmity , the trace of no common share of physical 
 beauty be still evident . and , with that quick link in idea which 
 mathematical aptitude bestow , the young student at once conjecture 
 that he see before he his uncle Richard . he have the discretion , 
 however , to leave that gentleman free to choose his own time for 
 introduce himself , and silently revolve the new thought produce 
 by the novelty of his situation . Mr. Richard read with notable 
 quickness , - sometimes cut the leaf of the book with his penknife , 
 sometimes tear they open with his forefinger , sometimes skip 
 whole page altogether . thus he gallop to the end of the volume , flung 
 it aside , light his cigar , and begin to talk . he put many question to 
 Leonard relative to his rearing , and especially to the mode by which he 
 have acquire his education ; and Leonard , confirm in the idea that he 
 be reply to a kinsman , answer frankly . 

 Richard do not think it strange that Leonard should have acquire so 
 much instruction with so little direct tuition . Richard Avenel himself 
 have be tutor to himself . he have live too long with our go - ahead 
 brother who stride the world on the other side the Atlantic with 
 the seven - league boot of the Giant - killer , not to have catch their 
 glorious fever for reading . but it be for a reading wholly different 
 from that which be familiar to Leonard . the book he read must be new ; 
 to read old book would have seem to he go back in the world . 
 he fancy that new book necessarily contain new idea , - a common 
 mistake , - and our lucky adventurer be the man of his day . 

 tired with talk , he at length chuck the book he have run through to 
 Leonard , and take out a pocket - book and pencil , amuse himself with 
 calculation on some detail of his business , after which he fall into an 
 absorb train of thought , part pecuniary , part ambitious . 

 Leonard find the book interesting : it be one of the numerous work , 
 half - statistic , half - declamatory , relate to the condition of the 
 working class , which peculiarly distinguish our century , and ought to 
 bind together rich and poor , by prove the grave attention which modern 
 society bestow upon all that can affect the welfare of the last . 

 " dull stuff ! theory ! claptrap ! " say Richard , rouse himself from his 
 revery at last ; " it can not   interest you . " 

 " all book interest I , I think , " say Leonard , " and this especially ; 
 for it relate to the work class , and I be one of they . " 

 " you be yesterday , but you may not   be to - morrow , " answer Richard , 
 good - humouredly , and pat he on the shoulder . " you see , my lad , that 
 it be the middle class which ought to govern the country . what the book 
 say about the ignorance of country magistrate be very good ; but the 
 man write pretty considerable trash when he want to regulate the 
 number of hour a free - bear boy should work at a factory , - only ten 
 hour a day - pooh ! and so lose two hour to the nation ! labour be 
 wealth ; and if we could get man to work twenty - four hour a day , 
 we should be just twice as rich . if the march of civilization be to 
 proceed , " continue Richard , loftily , " man , and boy too , must not lie 
 a bed do nothing , all night , sir . " then , with a complacent tone , " we 
 shall get to the twenty - four hour at last ; and , by gad , we must , or we 
 sha'n't   flog the Europeans as we do now . " 

 on arrive at the inn at which Richard have first make acquaintance with 
 Mr. Dale , the coach by which he have intend to perform the rest of the 
 journey be find to be full . Richard continue to perform the journey 
 in postchaise , not without some grumbling at the expense , and incessant 
 order to the post - boy to make the good of the way . " slow country this 
 in spite of all its brag , " say he , - " very slow . time be money - they 
 know that in the States ; for why ? they be all man of business there . 
 always slow in a country where a parcel of lazy , idle lord and duke 
 and baronet seem to think ' time be pleasure . ' " 

 towards evening the chaise approach the confine of a very large town , 
 and Richard begin to grow fidgety . his easy , cavalier air be abandon . 
 he withdraw his leg from the window , out of which they have be 
 luxuriously dangle , pull down his waistcoat , buckle more tightly 
 his stock ; it be clear that he be resume the decorous dignity that 
 belong to state . he be like a monarch who , after travel happy and 
 incognito , return to his capital . Leonard divine at once that they 
 be near their journey 's end . 

 humble foot - passenger now look at the chaise , and touch their hat . 
 Richard return the salutation with a nod , - a nod less gracious than 
 condescend . the chaise turn rapidly to the left , and stop before 
 a small lodge , very new , very white , adorn with two doric column 
 in stucco , and flank by a large pair of gate . " Hollo ! " cry the 
 post - boy , and crack his whip . 

 two child be play before the lodge , and some clothe be 
 hang out to dry on the shrub and pale round the neat little 
 building . 

 " hang those brat ! they be actually play , " growl Dick . " as I live , 
 the jade have be wash again ! stop , boy ! " during this soliloquy , a 
 good - look young woman have rush from the door , slap the child 
 as , catch sight of the chaise , they run towards the house , open the 
 gate , and drop a courtesy to the ground , seem to wish that she 
 could drop into it altogether ; so frightened and so trembling seem 
 she to shrink from the wrathful face which the master now put out of the 
 window . 

 " do I tell you , or do I not , " say Dick , " that I would not have those 
 horrid , disreputable cub of yours play just before my lodge gate ? " 

 " please , sir - " 

 " do not   answer I . and do I tell you , or do I not , that the next time I 
 see you make a drying - ground of my lilac , you should go out , neck and 
 crop - " 

 " oh , please , sir - " 

 " you leave my lodge next Saturday ! drive on , boy . the ingratitude and 
 insolence of those common people be disgraceful to human nature , " 
 mutter Richard , with an accent of the bitter misanthropy . 

 the chaise wheel along the smooth and fresh of gravel road , and 
 through field of the fine land , in the high state of cultivation . 
 Rapid as be Leonard 's survey , his rural eye detect the sign of a 
 master in the art agronomial . Hitherto he have consider the squire 's 
 model farm as the near approach to good husbandry he have see ; for 
 Jackeymo 's fine skill be develop rather on the minute scale of 
 market - gardening than what can fairly be call husbandry . but 
 the squire 's farm be degrade by many old - fashioned notion , and 
 concession to the whim of the eye , which would not be find in model 
 farm nowadays , - large tangled hedgerow , which , though they constitute 
 one of the beauty most picturesque in old England , make sad deduction 
 from produce ; great tree , overshadow the corn and harbour the 
 bird ; little patch of rough sward leave to waste ; and angle of 
 woodland run into field , expose they to rabbit and block out 
 the sun . these and such like blot on a gentleman - farmer 's agriculture , 
 common - sense and Giacomo have make clear to the acute comprehension of 
 Leonard . no such fault be perceptible in Richard Avenel 's domain . the 
 field lie in broad division , the hedge be clip and narrow 
 into their proper destination of mere boundary . not a blade of wheat 
 wither under the cold shade of a tree ; not a yard of land lie waste ; 
 not a weed be to be see , not a thistle to waft its baleful seed 
 through the air : some young plantation be place , not where the 
 artist would put they , but just where the farmer want a fence from 
 the wind . be there no beauty in this ? yes , there be beauty of its 
 kind , - beauty at once recognizable to the initiate , beauty of use 
 and profit , beauty that could bear a monstrous high rent . and Leonard 
 utter a cry of admiration which thrill through the heart of Richard 
 Avenel . 

 " this be farm ! " say the villager . 

 " well , I guess it be , " answer Richard , all his ill - humour vanishing . 
 " you should have see the land when I buy it . but we new man , as they 
 call we   damn their impertinence !   be the new blood of this country . " 

 Richard Avenel never say anything more true . long may the new blood 
 circulate through the vein of the mighty giantess ; but let the grand 
 heart be the same as it have beat for proud age . 

 the chaise now pass through a pretty shrubbery , and the house come 
 into gradual view , - a house with a portico , all the office carefully 
 thrust out of sight . 

 the postboy dismount and ring the bell . 

 " I almost think they be go to keep I wait , " say Mr. Richard , 
 well - nigh in the very word of Louis XIV . but the fear be not 
 realize , - the door open ; a well - feed servant out of livery present 
 himself . there be no hearty welcoming smile on his face , but he open 
 the chaise - door with demure and taciturn respect . 

 " where 's George ? why do he not come to the door ? " ask Richard ; 
 descend from the chaise slowly , and lean on the servant 's 
 outstretche arm with as much precaution as if he have have the gout . 

 fortunately , George here come into sight , settle himself hastily into 
 his livery coat . 

 " see to the thing , both of you , " say Richard , as he pay the postboy . 

 Leonard stand on the gravel sweep , gaze at the square white house . 

 " handsome elevation - classical , I take it , eh ? " say Richard , join 
 he . " but you should see the office . " he then , with familiar kindness , 
 take Leonard by the arm , and draw he within . he show he the hall , 
 with a carve mahogany stand for hat ; he show he the drawing - room , 
 and point out all its beauty ; though it be summer , the drawing - room 
 look cold , as will look room newly furnish , with wall newly 
 paper , in house newly build . the furniture be handsome , and suit 
 to the rank of a rich trader . there be no pretence about it , and 
 therefore no vulgarity , which be more than can be say for the house 
 of many an honourable Mrs. Somebody in Mayfair , with room twelve foot 
 square , ebokeful of buhl , that would have have its proper place in 
 the Tuileries . then Richard show he the library , with mahogany 
 book - case , and plate glass , and the fashionable author handsomely 
 bind . your new man be much well friend to live author than 
 your old family who live in the country , and at most subscribe to 
 a book - club . then Richard take he up - stair , and lead he through 
 the bedroom , - all very clean and comfortable , and with every modern 
 convenience ; and pause in a very pretty single gentleman 's chamber , 
 say , " this be your den . and now , can you guess who I be ? " 

 " no one but my uncle Richard could be so kind , " answer Leonard . 

 but the compliment do not flatter Richard . he be extremely 
 disconcert and disappointed . he have hop that he should be take for 
 a lord at least , forgetful of all that he have say in disparagement of 
 lord . 

 " Fish ! " say he at last , bite his lip , ' so you do not   think that I look 
 like a gentleman ? Come , now , speak honestly . " 

 Leonard , wonderingly , see he have give pain , and with the good breeding 
 which come instinctively from good nature , reply , " I judge you by 
 your heart , sir , and your likeness to my grandfather , - otherwise I 
 should never have presume to fancy we could be relation . " 

 " Hum ! " answer Richard . " you can just wash your hand , and then come 
 down to dinner ; you will hear the gong in ten ininute . there be the 
 bell , - ring for what you want . " with that , he turn on his heel ; and 
 descend the stair , give a look into the dining - room , and admire the 
 plat salver on the sideboard , and the king 's pattern spoon and silver 
 on the table . then he walk to the look - glass over the mantelpiece ; 
 and , wish to survey the whole effect of his form , mount a chair . 
 he be just get into an attitude which he think impose , when 
 the butler enter , and , be London breed , have the discretion to try to 
 escape unseen ; but Richard catch sight of he in the look - glass , and 
 colour up to the temple . 

 " Jarvis , " say he , mildly , " Jarvis , put I in mind to have these 
 inexpressible alter . " 




 CHAPTER III . 

 a propos of the inexpressible , Mr. Richard do not forget to provide 
 his nephew with a much large wardrobe than could have be thrust into 
 Dr. Riccabocca 's knapsack . there be a very good tailor in the town , and 
 the clothe be very well make . and , but for an air more ingenuous , 
 and a cheek that , despite study and night vigil , retain much of the 
 sunburned bloom of the rustic , Leonard Fairfield might now have almost 
 pass , without disparage comment , by the bow - window at White 's . 
 Richard burst into an immoderate fit of laughter when he first see the 
 watch which the poor Italian have bestow upon Leonard ; but to atone 
 for the laughter , he make he a present of a very pretty substitute , and 
 bid he " lock up his turnip . " Leonard be more hurt by the jeer at his 
 old patron 's gift than pleased by his uncle 's . but Richard Avenel have 
 no conception of sentiment . it be not for many day that Leonard could 
 reconcile himself to his uncle 's manner . not that the peasant could 
 pretend to judge of its mere conventional defect ; but there be an ill 
 breeding to which , whatever our rank and nurture , we be almost equally 
 sensitive , - the ill breeding that come from want of consideration for 
 other . now , the squire be as homely in his way as Richard Avenel , but 
 the squire 's bluntness rarely hurt the feeling ; and when it do so , the 
 squire perceive and hasten to repair his blunder . but Mr. Richard , 
 whether kind or cross , be always wound you in some little delicate 
 fibre , - not from malice , but from the absence of any little delicate 
 fibre of his own . he be really , in many respect , a most excellent 
 man , and certainly a very valuable citizen - ; but his merit want the 
 fine tint and fluent curve that constitute beauty of character . he be 
 honest , but sharp in his practice , and with a keen eye to his interest . 
 he be just , but as a matter of business . he make no allowance , and do 
 not leave to his justice the large margin of tenderness and mercy . he 
 be generous , but rather from an idea of what be due to himself 
 than with much thought of the pleasure he give to other ; and he even 
 regard generosity as a capital put out to interest . he expect 
 a great deal of gratitude in return , and , when he oblige a man , 
 consider that he have buy a slave . every needy voter know where to 
 come , if he want relief or a loan ; but woe to he if he have venture 
 to express hesitation when Mr. Avenel tell he how he must vote . 

 in this town Richard have settle after his return from America , in which 
 country he have enrich himself , - first , by spirit and industry , 
 lastly , by bold speculation and good luck . he invest his fortune in 
 business , - become a partner in a large brewery , soon buy out his 
 associate , and then take a principal share in a flourish corn - mill . 
 he prosper rapidly , - buy a property of some two or three hundred 
 acre , build a house , and resolve to enjoy himself , and make a figure . 
 he have now become the lead man of the town , and the boast to Audley 
 Egerton that he could return one of the member , perhaps both , be by 
 no mean an exaggerated estimate of his power . nor be his proposition , 
 accord to his own view , so unprincipled as it appear to the 
 statesman . he have take a great dislike to both the sit member , - a 
 dislike natural to a sensible man of moderate politic , who have 
 something to lose . for Mr. Slappe , the active member , who be 
 head - over - ear in debt , be one of the furious democrats - rare before 
 the Reform Bill , - and whose opinion be hold dangerous even by the 
 mass of a liberal constituency ; while Mr. Sleekie , the gentleman member 
 who lay by L5000 every year from his dividend in the Funds , be one of 
 those man whom Richard justly pronounce to be " humbug , " - man who curry 
 favour with the extreme party by vote for measure sure not to 
 be carry ; while if there be the least probability of come to a 
 decision that would lower the money market . Mr. Sleekie be seize with 
 a well - time influenza . those politician be common enough now . Propose 
 to march to the Millennium , and they be your man . ask they to march a 
 quarter of a mile , and they fall to feel their pocket , and tremble 
 for fear of the footpad . they be never so joyful as when there be no 
 chance of a victory . do they beat the minister , they would be carry 
 out of the House in a fit . 

 Richard Avenel - despise both these gentleman , and not take kindly 
 to the whig since the great Whig leader be lord - have look with 
 a friendly eye to the government as it then exist , and especially 
 to Audley Egerton , the enlighten representative of commerce . but in 
 give Audley and his colleague the benefit of his influence , through 
 conscience , he think it all fair and right to have a quid pro quo , 
 and , as he have so frankly confess , it be his whim to rise up " Sir 
 Richard . " for this worthy citizen abuse the aristocracy much on the 
 same principle as the fair Olivia depreciated squire Thornhill , - he have 
 a sneak affection for what he abuse . the society of Screwstown be , 
 like most provincial capital , compose of two class , - the commercial 
 and the exclusive . these last dwelt chiefly apart , around the ruin of 
 an old abbey ; they affect its antiquity in their pedigree , and 
 have much of its ruin in their finance . widow of rural thane in the 
 neighbourhood , genteel spinster , officer retire on half - pay , young 
 son of rich squire , who have now become old bachelor , - in short , 
 a very respectable , proud , aristocratic set , who think more of 
 themselves than do all the Gowers and howard , Courtenays and Seymours , 
 put together . it have early be the ambition of Richard Avenel to 
 be admit into this sublime coterie ; and , strange to say , he have 
 partially succeed . he be never more happy than when he be ask to 
 their card - party , and never more unhappy than when he be actually 
 there . various circumstance combine to raise Mr. Avenel into this 
 elevated society . first , he be unmarried , still very handsome , and in 
 that society there be a large proportion of unwedded female . secondly , 
 he be the only rich trader in Screwstown who keep a good cook , and 
 profess to give dinner , and the half - pay captain and colonel 
 swallow the host for the sake of the venison . thirdly , and 
 principally , all these exclusive abhor the two sit member , and 
 " idem nolle idem velle de republica , ea firma amicitia est ; " that be , 
 congeniality in politic piece porcelain and crockery together well 
 than the good diamond cement . the sturdy Richard Avenel , who value 
 himself on american independence , hold these lady and gentleman in 
 an awe that be truly brahminical . whether it be that , in England , 
 all notion , even of liberty , be mix up historically , traditionally , 
 socially , with that fine and subtle element of aristocracy which , like 
 the press , be the air we breathe ; or whether Richard imagine that 
 he really become magnetically imbue with the virtue of these silver 
 penny and gold seven - shill piece , distinct from the vulgar coinage 
 in popular use , it be hard to say . but the truth must be tell , - Richard 
 Avenel be a notable tuft - hunter . he have a great longing to marry out of 
 this society ; but he have not yet see any one sufficiently high - bear and 
 high - breed to satisfy his aspiration . in the meanwhile , he have convince 
 himself that his way would be smooth could he offer to make his ultimate 
 choice " my Lady ; " and he feel that it would be a proud hour in his life 
 when he could walk before stiff Colonel Pompley to the sound of " Sir 
 Richard . " still , however disappointed at the ill - success of his 
 bluff diplomacy with Mr. Egerton , and however yet cherish the most 
 vindictive resentment against that individual , he do not , as many would 
 have do , throw up his political conviction out of personal spite . 
 he reserve his private grudge for some special occasion , and continue 
 still to support the Administration , and to hate one of the minister . 

 but , duly to appreciate the value of Richard Avenel , and in just 
 counterpoise to all his foible , one ought to have see what he have 
 effect for the town . well might he boast of " new blood ; " he have do 
 as much for the town as he have for his field . his energy , his quick 
 comprehension of public utility , back by his wealth and bold , 
 bullying , imperious character , have speed the work of civilization as if 
 with the celerity and force of a steam - engine . 

 if the town be so well paved and so well light , if half - a - dozen 
 squalid lane have be transform into a stately street , if half the 
 town no long depend on tank for their water , if the poor - rate be 
 reduce one - third , praise to the brisk new blood which Richard Avenel 
 have infuse into vestry and corporation . and his example itself be so 
 contagious ! 

 " there be not a plate - glass window in the town when I come into it , " 
 say Richard Avenel ; " and now look down the High Street ! " he take the 
 credit to himself , and justly ; for though his own business do not 
 require window of plate - glass , he have awaken the spirit of enterprise 
 which adorn a whole city . 

 Mr. Avenel do not present Leonard to his friend for more than a 
 fortnight . he allow he to wear off his rust . he then give a grand 
 dinner , at which his nephew be formally introduce , and , to his great 
 wrath and disappointment , never open his lip . how could he , poor 
 youth , when Miss Clarina Mowbray only talk upon high life , till 
 proud Colonel Pompley go in state through the history of the Siege of 
 Seringapatam ? 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 while Leonard accustom himself gradually to the splendour that 
 surround he , and often turn with a sigh to the remembrance of his 
 mother 's cottage and the sparkle fount in the Italian 's flowery 
 garden , we will make with thee , o reader , a rapid flight to the 
 metropolis , and drop ourselves amidst the gay group that loiter along 
 the dusty ground or loll over the roadside paling of Hyde Park . the 
 season be still at its height ; but the short day of fashionable London 
 life , which commence two hour after noon , be in its decline . 

 the crowd in Rotten row begin to thin . near the statue of Achilles , and 
 apart from all other lounger , a gentleman , with one hand thrust into 
 his waistcoat , and the other rest on his cane , gaze listlessly on 
 the horseman and carriage in the brilliant ring . he be still in the 
 prime of life , at the age when man be usually the most social , - when the 
 acquaintance of youth have ripen into friendship , and a personage of 
 some rank and fortune have become a well - know feature in the mobile 
 face of society . but though , when his contemporary be boy scarce 
 at college , this gentleman have blaze foremost amongst the prince of 
 fashion , and though he have all the quality of nature and circumstance 
 which either retain fashion to the last , or exchange its false celebrity 
 for a graver repute , he stand as a stranger in that throng of his 
 countryman . Beauties whirl by to the toilet , statesman pass on to 
 the senate , dandy take flight to the club ; and neither nod , nor 
 beck , nor wreathe smile say to the solitary spectator , " follow 
 we , - thou art one of our set . " now and then some middle - aged beau , 
 near the post of the loiterer , turn round to look again ; but the 
 second glance seem to dissipate the recognition of the first , and the 
 beau silently continue his way . 

 " by the tomb of my father ! " say the solitary to himself , " I know now 
 what a dead man might feel if he come to life again , and take a peep at 
 the living . " 

 Time pass on , - the evening shade descend fast . our stranger in 
 London have well - nigh the Park to himself . he seem to breathe more 
 freely as he see that the space be so clear . 

 " there be oxygen in the atmosphere now , " say he , half aloud ; " and I can 
 walk without breathe in the gaseous fume of the multitude . oh , those 
 chemist - what dolt they be ! they tell we that crowd taint the air , 
 but they never guess why ! Pah , it be not the lung that poison the 
 element , - it be the reek of bad heart . when a periwigpated fellow 
 breathe on I , I swallow a mouthful of care . allon ! my friend Nero ; 
 now for a stroll . " he touch with his cane a large Newfoundland dog , 
 who lie stretch near his foot , and dog and man go slow through the 
 grow twilight , and over the brown dry turf . at length our solitary 
 pause , and throw himself on a bench under a tree . " half - past eight ! " 
 say he , look at his watch , " one may smoke one 's cigar without 
 shock the world . " 

 he take out his cigar - case , strike a light , and in another moment 
 recline at length on the bench , seem absorb in regard the smoke , 
 that scarce colour ere it vanish into air . 

 " it be the most bareface lie in the world , my Nero , " say he , 
 address his dog , " this boasted liberty of man ! now , here be I , a 
 free - bear Englishman , a citizen of the world , care - I often say to 
 myself - care not a jot for Kaiser or Mob ; and yet I no more dare smoke 
 this cigar in the Park at half - past six , when all the world be abroad , 
 than I dare pick my Lord Chancellor 's pocket , or hit the archbishop 
 of Canterbury a thump on the nose . yet no law in England forbid I my 
 cigar , Nero ! what be law at half - past eight be not crime at six and 
 a half ! Britannia say , ' Man , thou art free , and she lie like a 
 commonplace woman . o Nero , Nero ! you enviable dog ! you serve but from 
 like . no thought of the world cost you one wag of the tail . your big 
 heart and true instinct suffice you for reason and law . you would want 
 nothing to your felicity , if in these moment of ennui you would but 
 smoke a cigar . try it , Nero ! - try it ! " and , rise from his incumbent 
 posture , he seek to force the end of the weed between the tooth of the 
 dog . 

 while thus gravely engage , two figure have approach the place . 
 the one be a man who seem weak and sickly . his threadbare coat be 
 button to the chin , but hang large on his shrunken breast . the other 
 be a girl , who might be from twelve to fourteen , on whose arm he lean 
 heavily . her cheek be wan , and there be a patient , sad look on her 
 face , which seem so settle that you would think she could never have 
 know the mirthfulness of childhood . 

 " pray rest here , Papa , " say the child , softly ; and she point to 
 the bench , without take heed of its pre - occupant , who now , indeed , 
 confine to one corner of the seat , be almost hide by the shadow of 
 the tree . 

 the man sit down , with a feeble sigh , and then , observe the stranger , 
 raise his hat , and say , in that tone of voice which betray the usage 
 of polished society , " forgive I if I intrude on you , sir . " 

 the stranger look up from his dog , and see that the girl be 
 stand , rise at once , as if to make room for she on the bench . 

 but still the girl do not heed he . she hang over her father , and wipe 
 his brow tenderly with a little kerchief which she take from her own 
 neck for the purpose . 

 Nero , delight to escape the cigar , have take to some unwieldy curvet 
 and gambol , to vent the excitement into which he have be throw ; and 
 now return , approach the bench with a low growl of surprise , and 
 sniff at the intruder of his master 's privacy . 

 " come here , sir , " say the master . " you need not fear he , " he add , 
 address himself to the girl . 

 but the girl , without turn round to he , cry in a voice rather of 
 anguish than alarm , " he have faint ! Father ! Father ! " 

 the stranger kick aside his dog , which be in the way , and loosen 
 the poor man 's stiff military stock . while thus charitably engage , the 
 moon break out , and the light fall full on the pale , careworn face of 
 the unconscious sufferer . 

 " this face seem not unfamiliar to I , though sadly change , " say the 
 stranger to himself ; and bend towards the girl , who have sink on her 
 knee , and be chafe her father 's hand , he ask , " my child , what be 
 your father 's name ? " 

 the child continue her task , too absorb to answer . 

 the stranger put his hand on her shoulder , and repeat the question . 

 " Digby , " answer the child , almost unconsciously ; and as she speak the 
 man 's sens begin to return . in a few minute more he have sufficiently 
 recover to falter forth his thank to the stranger . but the last take 
 his hand , and say , in a voice at once tremulous and soothing , " be it 
 possible that I see once more an old brother in arm ? Algernon Digby , I 
 do not forget you ; but it seem England have forget . " 

 a hectic flush spread over the soldier 's face , and he look away from 
 the speaker as he answer , - 

 " my name be Digby , it be true , sir ; but I do not think we have meet 
 before . Come , Helen , I be well now , - we will go home . " 

 " try and play with that great dog , my child , " say the strange , - " I 
 want to talk with your father . " 

 the child bow her submissive head , and move away ; but she do not 
 play with the dog . 

 " I must reintroduce myself formally , I see , " quoth the stranger . " you 
 be in the same regiment with myself , and my name be L'Estrange . " 

 " my Lord , " say the soldier , rise , " forgive I that - " 

 " I do not   think that it be the fashion to call I ' my lord ' at the 
 mess - table . come , what have happen to you ? - on half - pay ? " 

 Mr. Digby shake his head mournfully . 

 " Digby , old fellow , can you lend I L100 ? " say Lord L'Estrange , 
 clap his ci - devant brother - officer on the shoulder , and in a tone of 
 voice that seem like a boy 's , so impudent be it , and devil - I - garish . 
 " no ! well , that be lucky , for I can lend it to you . " Mr. Digby burst into 
 tear . 

 Lord L'Estrange do not seem to observe the emotion , but go on 
 carelessly , - 

 " perhaps you do not   know that , besides be heir to a father who be not 
 only very rich , but very liberal , I inherit , on come of age , from a 
 maternal relation , a fortune so large that it would bore I to death 
 if I be oblige to live up to it . but in the day of our old 
 acquaintance , I fear we be both sad extravagant fellow , and I dare 
 say I borrow of you pretty freely . " 

 " I ! oh , Lord L'Estrange ! " 

 " you have marry since then , and reform , I suppose . tell I , old 
 friend , all about it . " 

 Mr. Digby , who by this time have succeed in restore some calm to his 
 shattered nerve , now rise , and say in brief sentence , but clear , firm 
 tone , - 

 " my Lord , it be idle to talk of I , - useless to help I . I be fast 
 die . but my child there , my only child "   he pause for an instant , and 
 go on rapidly . " I have relation in a distant county , if I could but 
 get to they ; I think they would , at least , provide for she . this have 
 be for week my hope , my dream , my prayer . I can not afford the journey 
 except by your help . I have beg without shame for myself ; shall I be 
 ashamed , then , to beg for she ? " 

 " Digby , " say L'Estrange , with some grave alteration of manner , " talk 
 neither of die nor beg . you be nearer death when the ball 
 whistle round you at Waterloo . if soldier meet soldier and say 
 ' Friend , thy purse , ' it be not beg , but brotherhood . Ashamed ! by the 
 soul of Belisarius ! if I need money , I would stand at a crossing with 
 my Waterloo medal over my breast , and say to each sleek citizen I have 
 help to save from the sword of the Frenchman , ' it be your shame if I 
 starve . ' now , lean upon I ; I see you should be at home : which way ? " 

 the poor soldier point his hand towards Oxford Street , and reluctantly 
 accept the proffered arm . 

 " and when you return from your relation , you will call on I ? 
 what - hesitate ? come , promise . " 

 " I will . " 

 " on your honour . " 

 " if I live , on my honour . " 

 " I be stay at present at Knightsbridge , with my father ; but you will 
 always hear of my address at No . - , Grosvenor Square , Mr. Egerton 's . so 
 you have a long journey before you ? " 

 " very long . " 

 " do not fatigue yourself , - travel slowly . Ho , you foolish child ! I see 
 you be jealous of I . your father have another arm to spare you . " 

 thus talk , and get but short answer , Lord L'Estrange continue 
 to exhibit those whimsical peculiarity of character , which have 
 obtain for he the repute of heartlessness in the world . perhaps the 
 reader may think the world be not in the right ; but if ever the world 
 do judge rightly of the character of a man who do not live for 
 the world nor talk of the world nor feel with the world , it will be 
 century after the soul of Harley L'Estrange have do with this planet . 




 CHAPTER V. 

 Lord L'Estrange part company with Mr. Digby at the entrance of Oxford 
 Street . the father and child there take a cabriolet . Mr. Digby direct 
 the driver to go down the Edgware Road . he refuse to tell L'Estrange 
 his address , and this with such evident pain , from the sore of pride , 
 that L'Estrange could not press the point . remind the soldier of his 
 promise to call , Harley thrust a pocket - book into his hand , and walk 
 off hastily towards Grosvenor Square . 

 he reach Audley Egerton 's door just as that gentleman be get out 
 of his carriage ; and the two friend enter the house together . 

 " do the nation take a nap to - night ? " ask L'Estrange . " poor old 
 lady ! she hear so much of her affair , that she may well boast of her 
 constitution : it must be of iron . " 

 " the House be still sit , " answer Audley , seriously , and with small 
 heed of his friend 's witticism . " but it be not a Government motion , and 
 the division will be late , so I come home ; and if I have not find you 
 here , I should have go into the Park to look for you . " 

 " yes ; one always know where to find I at this hour , nine o'clock 
 P.M. , cigar , Hyde Park . there be not a man in England so regular in his 
 habit . " 

 here the friend reach a drawing - room in which the member of 
 parliament seldom sit , for his private apartment be all on the 
 ground - floor . 

 " but it be the strange whim of your , Harley , " say he . 

 " what ? " 

 " to affect detestation of ground - floor . " 

 " affect ! o sophisticated man , of the earth , earthy ! affect ! - nothing 
 less natural to the human soul than a ground - floor . we be quite far 
 enough from Heaven , mount as many stair as we will , without grovel 
 by preference . " 

 " accord to that symbolical view of the case , " say Audley , " you 
 should lodge in an attic . " 

 " so I would , but that I abhor new slipper . as for hairbrush , I be 
 indifferent . " 

 " what have slipper and hair - brush to do with attic ? " 

 " try ! make your bed in an attic , and the next morning you will have 
 neither slipper nor hair - brush ! " 

 " what shall I have do with they ? " 

 " shy they at the cat ! " 

 " what odd thing you say , Harley ! " 

 " Odd ! by Apollo and his nine spinster ! there be no human being who have 
 so little imagination as a distinguished member of parliament . answer I 
 this , thou solemn right Honourable , - Hast thou climb to the height of 
 august contemplation ? Hast thou gaze on the star with the rapt eye 
 of song ? Hast thou dream of a love know to the angel , or seek to 
 seize in the Infinite the mystery of life ? " 

 " not I indeed , my poor Harley . " 

 " then no wonder , poor Audley , that you can not conjecture why he who 
 make his bed in an attic , disturb by base catterwaul , shy his 
 slipper at cat . bring a chair into the balcony . Nero spoil my cigar 
 to - night . I be go to smoke now . you never smoke . you can look on the 
 shrub in the square . " 

 Audley slightly shrug his shoulder , but he follow his friend 's 
 counsel and example , and bring his chair into the balcony . Nero come 
 too , but at sight and smell of the cigar prudently retreat , and take 
 refuge under the table . 

 " Audley Egerton , I want something from Government . " 

 " I be delighted to hear it . " 

 " there be a cornet in my regiment , who would have do well not to 
 have come into it . we be , for the most part of we , puppy and fop . " 

 " you all fight well , however . " 

 " puppy and fop do fight well . vanity and valour generally go 
 together . CAesar , who scratch his head with due care of his scanty 
 curl , and even in die thought of the fold in his toga ; Walter 
 Raleigh , who could not walk twenty yard because of the gem in his 
 shoe ; Alcibiades , who lounge into the Agora with dove in his bosom , 
 and an apple in his hand ; Murat , bedizen in gold lace and fur ; and 
 Demetrius , the City - Taker , who make himself up like a french marquise , 
 be all pretty good fellow at fight . a slovenly hero like Cromwell 
 be a paradox in nature , and a marvel in history . but to return to my 
 cornet . we be rich ; he be poor . when the pot of clay swim down the 
 stream with the brass - pot , it be sure of a smash . man say Digby be 
 stingy ; I see he be extravagant . but every one , I fear , would be rather 
 thought stingy than poor . Bref - I leave the army , and see he no more 
 till to - night . there be never shabby poor gentleman on the stage more 
 awfully shabby , more pathetically gentleman . but , look ye , this man have 
 fight for England . it be no child 's play at Waterloo , let I tell you , 
 Mr. Egerton ; and , but for such man , you would be at good a sous prefet , 
 and your parliament a Provincial Assembly . you must do something for 
 Digby . what shall it be ? " 

 " why , really , my dear Harley , this man be no great friend of your , 
 eh ? " 

 " if he be , he would not want the Government to help he , - he would not 
 be ashamed of take money from I . " 

 " that be all very fine , Harley ; but there be so many poor officer , 
 and so little to give . it be the most difficult thing in the world 
 that which you ask I . indeed , I know nothing can be do : he have his 
 half - pay ? " 

 " I think not ; or , if he have it , no doubt it all go on his debt . 
 that be nothing to we : the man and his child be starve . " 

 " but if it be his own fault , - if he have be imprudent ? " 

 " ah , well , well ; where the devil be Nero ? " 

 " I be so sorry I can not   oblige you . if it be anything else - " 

 " there be something else . my valet - I can not   turn he adrift - excellent 
 fellow , but get drunk now and then . will you find he a place in the 
 Stamp Office ? " 

 " with pleasure . " 

 " no , now I think of it , the man know my way : I must keep he . but my 
 old wine - merchant - civil man , never dun - be a bankrupt . I be under 
 great obligation to he , and he have a very pretty daughter . do you 
 think you could thrust he into some small place in the Colonies , or 
 make he a King 's Messenger , or something of the sort ? " 

 " if you very much wish it , no doubt I can . " 

 " my dear Audley , I be but feel my way : the fact be , I want something 
 for myself . " 

 " ah , that indeed give I pleasure ! " cry Egerton , with animation . 

 " the mission to Florence will soon be vacant , - I know it privately . the 
 place would quite suit I . pleasant city ; the good fig in Italy ; very 
 little to do . you could sound Lord on the subject . " 

 " I will answer beforehand . Lord - would be enchant to secure to the 
 public service a man so accomplished as yourself , and the son of a peer 
 like Lord Lansmere . " 

 Harley L'Estrange spring to his foot , and fling his cigar in the face of 
 a stately policeman who be look up at the balcony . 

 " infamous and bloodless official ! " cry Harley L'Estrange ; ' so you 
 could provide for a pimple - nosed lackey , for a wine - merchant who have 
 be poison the king 's subject with white lead , - or sloe - juice , - for 
 an idle sybarite , who would complain of a crumpled rose - leaf ; and 
 nothing , in all the vast patronage of England , for a break - down 
 soldier , whose dauntless breast be her rampart ? " 

 " Harley , " say the member of parliament , with his calm , sensible smile , 
 " this would be a very good claptrap at a small theatre ; but there be 
 nothing in which parliament demand such rigid economy as the military 
 branch of the public service ; and no man for whom it be so hard to 
 effect what we must plainly call a job as a subaltern officer who have 
 do nothing more than his duty , - and all military man do that . still , 
 as you take it so earnestly , I will use what interest I can at the War 
 Office , and get he , perhaps , the mastership of a barrack . " 

 " you have well ; for , if you do not , I swear I will turn Radical , and 
 come down to your own city to oppose you , with Hunt and Cobbett to 
 canvass for I . " 

 " I should be very glad to see you come into parliament , even as a 
 Radical , and at my expense , " say Audley , with great kindness ; " but the 
 air be grow cold , and you be not accustomed to our climate . Nay , if 
 you be too poetic for catarrhs and rheum , I be not , - come in . " 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 Lord L'Estrange throw himself on a sofa , and lean his cheek on his 
 hand thoughtfully . Audley Egerton sit near he , with his arm fold , 
 and gaze on his friend 's face with a soft expression of aspect , which 
 be very unusual to the firm outline of his handsome feature . the two 
 man be as dissimilar in person as the reader will have divine that 
 they be in character . all about Egerton be so rigid , all about 
 L'Estrange so easy . in every posture of Harley 's there be the 
 unconscious grace of a child . the very fashion of his garment show 
 his abhorrence of restraint . his clothe be wide and loose ; his 
 neckcloth , tie carelessly , leave his throat half bare . you could see 
 that he have live much in warm and southern land , and contract a 
 contempt for conventionality ; there be as little in his dress as 
 in his talk of the formal precision of the North . he be three or four 
 year young than Audley , but he look at least twelve year young . 
 in fact , he be one of those man to whom old age seem impossible ; 
 voice , look , figure , have all the charm of youth : and perhaps it be from 
 this gracious youthfulness - at all event , it be characteristic of the 
 kind of love he inspire - that neither his parent , nor the few 
 friend admit into his intimacy , ever call he , in their habitual 
 intercourse , by the name of his title . he be not L'Estrange with they , 
 he be Harley ; and by that familiar baptismal I will usually designate 
 he . he be not one of those man whom author or reader wish to view at a 
 distance , and remember as " my Lord " - it be so rarely that he remember 
 it himself . for the rest , it have be say of he by a shrewd wit , " he 
 be so natural that every one call he affect . " Harley L'Estrange be 
 not so critically handsome as Audley Egerton ; to a commonplace observer , 
 he be only rather good - look than otherwise . but woman say that 
 he have " a beautiful countenance , " and they be not wrong . he wear 
 his hair , which be of a fair chestnut , long , and in loose curl ; 
 and instead of the Englishman 's whisker , indulge in the foreigner 's 
 mustache . his complexion be delicate , though not effeminate : it be 
 rather the delicacy of a student than of a woman . but in his clear 
 gray eye there be a wonderful vigour of life . a skilful physiologist , 
 look only into that eye , would have recognize rare stamina of 
 constitution , - a nature so rich that , while easily disturb , it would 
 require all the effect of time , or all the fell combination of passion 
 and grief , to exhaust it . even now , though so thoughtful , and even so 
 sad , the ray of that eye be as concentrated and steadfast as the 
 light of the diamond . 

 " you be only , then , in jest , " say Audley , after a long silence , 
 " when you speak of this mission to Florence . you have still no idea of 
 enter into public life ? " 

 " none . " 

 " I have hop well thing when I get your promise to pass one season in 
 London ; but , indeed , you have keep your promise to the ear to break it 
 to the spirit . I could not presuppose that you would shun all society , 
 and be as much of a hermit here as under the vine of Como . " 

 " I have sit in the Strangers ' Gallery , and hear your great speaker ; 
 I have be in the pit of the opera , and see your fine lady ; I have 
 walk your street ; I have lounge in your park , and I say that 
 I can not   fall in love with a fade dowager , because she fill up her 
 wrinkle with rouge . " 

 " of what dowager do you speak ? " ask the matter - of - fact Audley . 

 " she have a great many title . some people call she fashion , you busy 
 man , politic : it be all one , - trick out and artificial . I mean London 
 Life . no , I can not   fall in love with she , fawn old harridan ! " 

 " I wish you could fall in love with something . " 

 " I wish I could , with all my heart . " 

 " but you be so blaze . " 

 " on the contrary , I be so fresh . look out of the window - what do you 
 see ? " 

 " nothing ! " 

 " nothing ? " 

 " nothing but house and dusty lilac , my coachman dozing on his box , and 
 two woman in patten cross the kennel . " 

 " I see not those where I lie on the sofa . I see but the star . and I 
 feel for they as I do when I be a schoolboy at Eton . it be you who 
 be blaze , not I. enough of this . you do not forget my commission with 
 respect to the exile who have marry into your brother 's family ? " 

 " no ; but here you set I a task more difficult than that of saddle 
 your cornet on the War Office . " 

 " I know it be difficult , for the counter influence be vigilant and 
 strong ; but , on the other hand , the enemy be so damnable a traitor that 
 one must have the Fates and the household god on one 's side . " 

 " nevertheless , " say the practical Audley , bend over a book on the 
 table ; " I think that the good plan would be to attempt a compromise with 
 the traitor . " 

 " to judge of other by myself , " answer Harley , with spirit , " it 
 be less bitter to put up with wrong than to palter with it for 
 compensation . and such wrong ! compromise with the open foe - that maybe 
 do with honour ; but with the perjure friend - that be to forgive the 
 perjury ! " 

 " you be too vindictive , " say Egerton ; " there may be excuse for the 
 friend , which palliate even - " 

 " Hush ! Audley , hush ! or I shall think the world have indeed corrupt 
 you . excuse for the friend who deceive , who betray ! no , such be the 
 true outlaw of Humanity ; and the fury surround he even while he 
 sleep in the temple . " 

 the man of the world lift his eye slowly on the animate face of one 
 still natural enough for the passion . he then once more return to his 
 book , and say , after a pause , " it be time you should marry , Harley . " 

 " no , " answer L'Estrange , with a smile at this sudden turn in the 
 conversation , " not time yet ; for my chief objection to that change in 
 life be , that the woman nowadays be too old for I , or I be too young 
 for they . a few , indeed , be so infantine that one be ashamed to be 
 their toy ; but most be so know that one be afraid to be their dupe . 
 the first , if they condescend to love you , love you as the big doll 
 they have yet dandle , and for a doll 's good quality , - your pretty 
 blue eye and your exquisite millinery . the last , if they prudently 
 accept you , do so on algebraical principle ; you be but the x or the 
 Y that represent a certain aggregate of good matrimonial , - pedigree , 
 title , rent - roll , diamond , pin - money , opera - box . they cast you up with 
 the help of mamma , and you wake some morning to find that plus wife 
 minus affection equal - the Devil ! " 

 " nonsense , " say Audley , with his quiet , grave laugh . " I grant that it 
 be often the misfortune of a man in your station to be married rather 
 for what he have than for what he be ; but you be tolerably penetrate , 
 and not likely to be deceive in the character of the woman you court . " 

 " of the woman I court ? - no ! but of the woman I marry , very likely 
 indeed ! woman be a changeable thing , as our Virgil inform we at 
 school ; but her change par excellence be from the fairy you woo to the 
 brownie you we d. it be not that she have be a hypocrite , - it be that 
 she be a transmigration . you marry a girl for her accomplishment . 
 she paint charmingly , or play like Saint Cecilia . clap a ring on her 
 finger , and she never draw again , - except perhaps your caricature on 
 the back of a letter , - and never open a piano after the honeymoon . 
 you marry she for her sweet temper ; and next year , her nerve be so 
 shatter that you can not   contradict she but you be whirl into a storm 
 of hysteric . you marry she because she declare she hat ball 
 and like quiet ; and ten to one but what she become a patroness at 
 Almack 's , or a lady - in - waiting . " 

 " yet most man marry , and most man survive the operation . " 

 " if it be only necessary to live , that would be a consolatory and 
 encourage reflection . but to live with peace , to live with dignity , to 
 live with freedom , to live in harmony with your thought , your habit , 
 your aspiration - and this in the perpetual companionship of a person 
 to whom you have give the power to wound your peace , to assail your 
 dignity , to cripple your freedom , to jar on each thought and each habit , 
 and bring you down to the mean detail of earth , when you invite she , 
 poor soul , to soar to the sphere - that make the to be or not to be , 
 which be the question . " 

 " if I be you , Harley , I would do as I have hear the author of 
 ' Sandford and Merton ' do , - choose out a child and educate she yourself , 
 after your own heart . " 

 " you have hit it , " answer Harley , seriously . " that have long be my 
 idea , - a very vague one , I confess . but I fear I shall be an old man 
 before I find even the child . " 

 " ah ! " he continue , yet more earnestly , while the whole character of his 
 vary countenance change again , - " ah , if indeed I could discover what 
 I seek , - one who , with the heart of a child , have the mind of a woman ; 
 one who behold in nature the variety , the charm , the never feverish , 
 ever healthful excitement that other vainly seek in the bastard 
 sentimentality of a life false with artificial form ; one who can 
 comprehend , as by intuition , the rich poetry with which creation be 
 clothe , - poetry so clear to the child when enrapture with the flower , 
 or when wonder at the star ! if on I such exquisite companionship 
 be bestow - why , then - " he pause , sigh deeply , and , cover his 
 face with his hand , resume , in falter accent , - 

 " but once - but once only , do such vision of the Beautiful make human 
 rise before I , - rise amidst ' golden exhalation of the dawn . ' it 
 beggar my life in vanish . you know only - you only - how - how - " 

 he bow his head , and the tear force themselves through his clench 
 finger . 

 " so long ago ! " say Audley , share his friend 's emotion . " year so long 
 and so weary , yet still thus tenacious of a mere boyish memory ! " 

 " away with it , then ! " cry Harley , spring to his foot , and with 
 a laugh of strange merriment . " your carriage still wait : set I home 
 before you go to the House . " 

 then lay his hand lightly on his friend 's shoulder , he say , " be it 
 for you , Audley Egerton , to speak sneeringly of boyish memory ? what 
 else be it that bind we together ? what else warm my heart when I meet 
 you ? what else draw your thought from blue - book and beer - bill to 
 waste they on a vagrant like I ? shake hand . oh , friend of my boyhood ! 
 recollect the oar that we ply and the bat that we wield in the old 
 time , or the murmur talk on the moss - grow bank , as we sit together , 
 building in the summer air castle mightier than Windsor . ah , they be 
 strong tie , those boyish memory believe I ! I remember , as if it 
 be yesterday , my translation of that lovely passage in Persius , 
 beginning - let I see - ah ! 

  " ' Quum primum pavido custos mihi purpura cernet , ' - 

 that passage on friendship which gush out so livingly from the stern 
 heart of the satirist . and when old - compliment I on my verse , my 
 eye seek your . verily , I now say as then , - 

  " ' Nescio quod , certe est quod I tibi temperet astrum . ' " 

   " what be the star I know not , but certainly some star 
  it be that attune I unto thee . " 

 Audley turn away his head as he return the grasp of his friend 's 
 hand ; and while Harley , with his light elastic footstep , descend the 
 stair , Egerton linger behind , and there be no trace of the worldly 
 man upon his countenance when he take his place in the carriage by his 
 companion 's side . 

 two hour afterwards , weary cry of " question , question ! " " Divide , 
 divide ! " sink into reluctant silence as Audley Egerton rise to conclude 
 the debate , - the man of man to speak late at night , and to impatient 
 bench : a man who would be hear ; whom a Bedlam break loose would not 
 have roar down ; with a voice clear and sound as a bell , and a form as 
 firmly set on the ground as a church - tower . and while , on the dull 
 of dull question , Audley Egerton thus , not too lively himself , enforce 
 attention , where be Harley L'Estrange ? stand alone by the river 
 at Richmond , and murmur low fantastic thought as he gaze on the 
 moonlit tide . 

 when Audley leave he at home he have join his parent , make they gay 
 with his careless gayety , see the old - fashioned folk retire to 
 rest , and then - while they , perhaps , deem he once more the hero of 
 ball - room and the cynosure of club - he drive slowly through the soft 
 summer night , amidst the perfume of many a garden and many a gleam 
 chestnut grove , with no other aim before he than to reach the lovely 
 margin of England 's lovely river , at the hour when the moon be 
 full and the song of the nightingale most sweet . and so eccentric a 
 humourist be this man , that I believe , as he there loiter , - no one 
 near to cry " how affected ! " or " how romantic ! " - he enjoy himself 
 more than if he have be exchange the politest " how - d'ye - dos " in the 
 hottest of London drawing - room , or bet his hundred on the odd 
 trick , with Lord de R - - - for his partner . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 Leonard have be about six week with his uncle , and those week 
 be well spend . Mr. Richard have take he to his counting - house , and 
 initiate he into business and the mystery of double entry ; and in 
 return for the young man 's readiness and zeal in matter which the 
 acute trader instinctively feel be not exactly to his taste , Richard 
 engage the good master the town afford to read with his nephew in the 
 evening . this gentleman be the head usher of a large school , who have 
 his hour to himself after eight o'clock , and be pleased to vary the 
 dull routine of enforce lesson by instruction to a pupil who take 
 delightedly even to the Latin grammar . Leonard make rapid stride , and 
 learn more in those six week than many a cleverish boy do in twice 
 as many month . these hour which Leonard devote to study Richard 
 usually spend from home , - sometimes at the house of his grand 
 acquaintance in the Abbey Gardens , sometimes in the Reading - Room 
 appropriate to those aristocrat . if he stay at home , it be in 
 company with his head clerk , and for the purpose of check his 
 account - book , or look over the name of doubtful elector . 

 Leonard have naturally wish to communicate his altered prospect to his 
 old friend , that they , in turn , might rejoice his mother with such good 
 tiding . but he have not be two day in the house before Richard have 
 strictly forbid all such correspondence . 

 " look you , " say he , " at present we be on an experiment , - we must 
 see if we like each other . suppose we do not , you will only have raise 
 expectation in your mother which must end in bitter disappointment ; and 
 suppose we do , it will be time enough to write when something definite 
 be settle . " 

 " but my mother will be so anxious - " 

 " make your mind easy on that score . I will write regularly to Mr. Dale , 
 and he can tell she that you be well and thriving . no more word , my 
 man , - when I say a thing , I say it . " then , observe that Leonard look 
 blank and dissatisfied , Richard add , with a good - humour smile , " I 
 have my reason for all this - you shall know they later . and I tell you 
 what : if you do as I bid you , it be my intention to settle something 
 handsome on your mother ; but if you do not , devil a penny she will get from 
 I . " 

 with that Richard turn on his heel , and in a few moment his voice be 
 hear loud in objurgation with some of his people . 

 about the fourth week of Leonard 's residence at Mr. Avenel 's , his host 
 begin to evince a certain change of manner . he be no long quite so 
 cordial with Leonard , nor do he take the same interest in his progress . 
 about the same period he be frequently catch by the London butler 
 before the look - glass . he have always be a smart man in his dress , 
 but he be now more particular . he would spoil three white cravat when 
 he go out of an evening , before he could satisfy himself as to the 
 tie . he also buy a ' peerage , ' and it become his favourite study at 
 odd quarter of an hour . all these symptom proceed from a cause , and 
 that cause be - woman . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 the first people at Screwstown be indisputably the Pompleys . Colonel 
 Pompley be grand , but Mrs. Pompley be grander . the colonel be stately 
 in right of his military rank and his service in India ; Mrs. Pompley 
 be majestic in right of her connection . indeed , Colonel Pompley 
 himself would have be crush under the weight of the dignity 
 which his lady heap upon he , if he have not be enable to prop his 
 position with a " connection " of his own . he would never have hold 
 his own , nor be permit to have an independent opinion on matter 
 aristocratic , but for the well - sound name of his relation , " the 
 Digbies . " perhaps on the principle that obscurity increase the natural 
 size of object and be an element of the sublime , the colonel do not 
 too accurately define his relation " the Digbies : " he let it be casually 
 understand that they be the Digbies to be find in Debrett . but if 
 some indiscreet Vulgarian   a favourite word with both the Pompleys 
 ask point - blank if he mean " my Lord Digby , " the colonel , with a lofty 
 air , answer , " the eld branch , sir . " no one at Screwstown have ever 
 see these digbie : they lie amidst the Far , the Recondite , - even to the 
 wife of Colonel Pompley 's bosom . now and then , when the colonel refer 
 to the lapse of year , and the uncertainty of human affection , he would 
 say , " when young Digby and I be boy together , " and then add with a 
 sigh , " but we shall never meet again in this world . his family interest 
 secure he a valuable appointment in a distant part of the british 
 dominion . " Mrs. Pompley be always rather cow by the Digbies . she 
 could not be sceptical as to this connection , for the colonel 's mother 
 be certainly a Digby , and the colonel impale the Digby arm . en 
 revanche , as the french say , for these marital connection , Mrs. Pompley 
 have her own favourite affinity , which she specially select from all 
 other when she most desire to produce effect ; nay , even upon ordinary 
 occasion the name rise spontaneously to her lip , - the name of the 
 Honourable Mrs. M'Catchley . be the fashion of a gown or cap admire , 
 her cousin , Mrs. M'Catchley , have just send to she the pattern from 
 Paris . be it a question whether the Ministry would stand , Mrs. 
 M'Catchley be in the secret , but Mrs. Pompley have be request not to 
 say . do it freeze , " my cousin , Mrs. M'Catchley , have write word that 
 the iceberg at the Pole be suppose to be come this way . " do the 
 sun glow with more than usual fervour , Mrs. M'Catchley have inform she 
 " that it be Sir Henry Halford 's decide opinion that it be on account 
 of the cholera . " the good people know all that be do at London , at 
 court , in this world - nay , almost in the other - through the medium of 
 the Honourable Mrs. M'Catchley . Mrs. M'Catchley be , moreover , the most 
 elegant of woman , the witty creature , the dear . King George the 
 Fourth have presume to admire Mrs. M'Catehley ; but Mrs. M'Catchley , 
 though no prude , let he see that she be proof against the corruption 
 of a throne . so long have the ear of Mrs. Pompley 's friend be fill 
 with the renown of Mrs. M'Catchley , that at last Mrs. M'Catchley be 
 secretly suppose to be a myth , a creature of the element , a poetic 
 fiction of Mrs. Pompley 's . Richard Avenel , however , though by no mean 
 a credulous man , be an implicit believer in Mrs. M'Catchley . he have 
 learn that she be a widow , and honourable by birth , and honourable by 
 marriage , live on her handsome jointure , and refuse offer every day 
 that she so live . somehow or other , whenever Richard Avenel thought 
 of a wife , he think of the Honourable Mrs. M'Catchley . perhaps that 
 romantic attachment to the fair invisible preserve he heart - whole 
 amongst the temptation of Screwstown . suddenly , to the astonishment of 
 the Abbey Gardens , Mrs. M'Catchley prove her identity , and arrive at 
 Colonel Pompley 's in a handsome travel - carriage , attend by she 
 maid and footman . she have come to stay some week ; a tea - party be give 
 in her honour . Mr. Avenel and his nephew be invite . Colonel Pompley , 
 who keep his head clear in the midst of the great excitement , have 
 a desire to get from the Corporation a lease of a piece of ground 
 adjoin his garden , and he no soon see Richard Avenel enter than he 
 catch he by the button , and draw he into a quiet corner , in order 
 to secure his interest . Leonard , meanwhile , be bear on by the stream , 
 till his progress be arrest by a sofa - table at which sit Mrs. 
 M'Catchley herself , with Mrs. Pompley by her side . for on this great 
 occasion the hostess have abandon her proper post at the entrance , 
 and , whether to show her respect to Mrs. M'Catchley , or to show Mrs. 
 M'Catchley her well - breed contempt for the people of Screwstown , remain 
 in state by her friend , honour only the elite of the town with 
 introduction to the illustrious visitor . 

 Mrs. M'Catchley be a very fine woman , - a woman who justify Mrs. 
 Pompley 's pride in she . her cheek - bone be rather high , it be true but 
 that prove the purity of her caledonian descent ; for the rest , she have 
 a brilliant complexion , heighten by a soupcon of rouge , good eye and 
 tooth , a showy figure , and all the lady of Screwstown pronounce she 
 dress to be perfect . she might have arrive at that age at which one 
 intend to stop for the next ten year , but even a Frenchman would not 
 have call she passee , - that be , for a widow . for a spinster it would 
 have be different . 

 look round she with a glass , which Mrs. Pompley be in the habit of 
 declare that " Mrs. M'Catchley use like an angel , " this lady suddenly 
 perceive Leonard Fairfield ; and his quiet , simple , thoughtful air and 
 look so contrast with the stiff beaux to whom she have be present , 
 that , experience in fashion as so fine a personage must be suppose to 
 be , she be nevertheless deceive into whispering to Mrs. Pompley , 

 " that young man have really an air distingue ; who be he ? " 

 " oh , " say Mrs. Pompley , in unaffected surprise , " that be the nephew of 
 the rich Vulgarian I be tell you of this morning . " 

 " ah ! and you say that he be Mr. Arundel 's heir ? " 

 " Avenel - not Arundel - my sweet friend . " 

 " Avenel be not a bad name , " say Mrs. M'Catchley . " but be the uncle 
 really so rich ? " 

 " the colonel be try this very day to guess what he be worth ; but he 
 say it be impossible to guess it . " 

 " and the young man be his heir ? " 

 " it be think so ; and read for College , I hear . they say he be 
 clever . " 

 " present he , my love ; I like clever people , " say Mrs. M'Catchley , 
 fall back languidly . 

 about ten minute afterwards , Richard Avenel have effect his escape 
 from the colonel , and his gaze be attract towards the sofa - table 
 by the buzz of the admire crowd , beheld his nephew in animate 
 conversation with the long cherish idol of his dream . a fierce pang 
 of jealousy shoot through his breast . his nephew have never look so 
 handsome and so intelligent ; in fact , poor Leonard have never before be 
 draw out by a woman of the world , who have learn how to make the most 
 of what little she know . and as jealousy operate like a pair of bellow 
 on incipient flame , so , at first sight of the smile which the fair 
 widow bestow upon Leonard , the heart of Mr. Avenel feel in a blaze . 

 he approach with a step less assured than usual , and , overhear 
 Leonard 's talk , marvel much at the boy 's audacity . Mrs. M'Catchley 
 have be speak of Scotland and the Waverley Novels , about which 
 Leonard know nothing . but he know Burns , and on Burns he grow artlessly 
 eloquent . Burns the poet and peasant - Leonard might well be eloquent 
 on he . Mrs. M'Catchley be amuse and pleased with his freshness and 
 naivete , so unlike anything she have ever hear or see , and she draw 
 he on and on till Leonard fall to quote . and Richard hear , with less 
 respect for the sentiment than might be suppose , that 

  " Rank be but the guinea 's stamp , 
  the man be the gowd for a ' that . " 

 " well ! " exclaim Mr. Avenel . " pretty piece of politeness to tell that 
 to a lady like the Honourable Mrs. M'Catch ley ! you will excuse he , 
 ma'am . " 

 " Sir ! " say Mrs. M'Catchley , startle , and lift her glass . Leonard , 
 rather confused , rise and offer his chair to Richard , who drop into 
 it . the lady , without wait for formal introduction , guess that she 
 see the rich uncle . " such a sweet poet - Burns ! " say she , drop she 
 glass . " and it be so refreshing to find so much youthful enthusiasm , " 
 she add , point her fan towards Leonard , who be recede fast among 
 the crowd . 

 " well , he be youthful , my nephew , - rather green ! " 

 " do not   say green ! " say Mrs. M'Catchley . Richard blush scarlet . he be 
 afraid he have commit himself to some expression low and shocking . the 
 lady resume , " say unsophisticate . " 

 " a tarnation long word , " think Richard ; but he prudently bow and 
 hold his tongue . 

 " young man nowadays , " continue Mrs. M'Catchley , resettle herself on 
 the sofa , " affect to be so old . they do not   dance , and they do not   read , 
 and they do not   talk much ! and a great many of they wear toupet before 
 they be two - and - twenty ! " 

 Richard mechanically pass his hand through his thick curl . but he 
 be still mute ; he be still ruefully chew the cud of the epithet 
 " green . " what occult horrid meaning do the word convey to ear polite ? 
 why should he not say " green " ? 

 " a very fine young man your nephew , sir , " resume Mrs. M ' Catchley . 

 Richard grunt . 

 " and seem full of talent . not yet at the University ? will he go to 
 Oxford or Cambridge ? " 

 " I have not make up my mind yet if I shall send he to the University at 
 all . " 

 " a young man of his expectation ! " exclaim Mrs. M'Catchley , artfully . 

 " expectation ! " repeat Richard , fire up . " have he be talk to you 
 of his expectation ? " 

 " no , indeed , sir . but the nephew of the rich Mr. Avenel ! ah , one hear 
 a great deal , you know , of rich people ; it be the penalty of wealth , Mr. 
 Avenel ! " 

 Richard be very much flattered . his crest rise . 

 " and they say , " continue Mrs. M'Catchley , drop out her word very 
 slowly , as she adjust her blonde scarf , " that Mr. Avenel have resolve 
 not to marry . " 

 " the devil they do , ma'am ! " bolt out Richard , gruffly ; and then , 
 ashamed of his lapsus linguae , screw up his lip firmly , and glare on 
 the company with an eye of indignant fire . 

 Mrs. M'Catchley observe he over her fan . Richard turn abruptly , and 
 she withdraw her eye modestly , and raise the fan . 

 " she be a real beauty , " say Richard , between his tooth . the fan 
 flutter . 

 five minute afterwards , the widow and the bachelor seem so much at 
 their ease that Mrs. Pompley , who have be force to leave her friend , 
 in order to receive the dean 's lady , could scarcely believe her eye 
 when she return to the sofa . 

 now , it be from that evening that Mr. Richard Avenel exhibit 
 the change of mood which I have describe ; and from that evening he 
 abstain from take Leonard with he to any of the party in the 
 Abbey Gardens . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 some day after this memorable soiree , Colonel Pompley sit alone in his 
 study   which open pleasantly on an old - fashioned garden , absorb in 
 the house bill . for Colonel Pompley do not leave that domestic care 
 to his lady , - perhaps she be too grand for it . Colonel Pompley with 
 his own sonorous voice order the joint , and with his own heroic hand 
 dispense the store . in justice to the colonel , I must add - at 
 whatever risk of offence to the fair sex - that there be not a house at 
 Screwstown so well manage as the Pompleys ' ; none which so successfully 
 achieve the difficult art of unite economy with show . I should 
 despair of conveying to you an idea of the extent to which Colonel 
 Pompley make his income go . it be but seven hundred a year ; and many 
 a family contrive to do less upon three thousand . to be sure , the 
 Pompleys have no child to sponge upon they . what they have they spend 
 all on themselves . neither , if the pompley never exceed their income , 
 do they pretend to live much within it . the two end of the year meet at 
 Christmas , - just meet , and no more . 

 Colonel Pompley sit at his desk . he be in his well - brush blue coat , 
 button across his breast , his gray trouser fit tight to his limb , 
 and fasten under his boot with a link chain . he save a great deal 
 of money in strap . no one ever see Colonel Pompley in dressing - gown and 
 slipper . he and his house be alike in order - always fit to be see 

  " from morn to noon , from noon to dewy eve . " 

 the colonel be a short compact man , incline to be stout , - with a very 
 red face , that seem not only shave , but rasp . he wear his 
 hair crop close , except just in front , where it form what the 
 hairdresser call a feather , but it seem a feather of iron , so stiff 
 and so strong be it . firmness and precision be emphatically mark on 
 the colonel 's countenance . there be a resolute strain on his feature , 
 as if he be always employ in make the two end meet ! 

 so he sit before his house - book , with his steel - pen in his hand , and 
 make cross here and note of interrogation there . 

 " Mrs. M'Catchley 's maid , " say the colonel to himself , " must be put upon 
 ration . the tea that she drink ! good heavens ! - tea again ! " 

 there be a modest ring at the outer door . " too early for a visitor ! " 
 think the colonel . " perhaps it be the water - rate . " 

 the neat man - servant - never see beyond the office , save in grande 
 tenue , plushed and powder - enter and bow . " a gentleman , sir , wish 
 to see you . " 

 " a gentleman , " repeat the colonel , glance towards the clock . " be 
 you sure it be a gentleman ? " 

 the man hesitate . " why , sir , I ben't   exactly sure ; but he speak like a 
 gentleman . he do say he come from London to see you , sir . " 

 a long and interesting correspondence be then be hold between the 
 colonel and one of his wife 's trustee touch the investment of 
 Mrs. Pompley 's fortune . it might be the trustee , - nay , it must be . the 
 trustee have talk of run down to see he . 

 " let he come in , " say the colonel , " and when I ring - sandwich and 
 sherry . " 

 " Beef , sir ? " 

 " Ham . " 

 the colonel put aside his house - book , and wipe his pen . in another 
 minute the door open and the servant announce - 

  " MR . DIGBY . " 

 the colonel 's face fall , and he stagger back . 

 the door close , and Mr. Digby stand in the middle of the room , lean 
 on the great writing - table for support . the poor soldier look sickly 
 and shabby , and near the end of all thing in life and fortune , 
 than when Lord L'Estrange have thrust the pocket - book into his hand . 
 but still the servant show knowledge of the world in call he 
 gentleman ; there be no other word to apply to he . 

 " Sir , " begin Colonel Pompley , recover himself , and with great 
 solemnity , " I do not expect this pleasure . " 

 the poor visitor star round he dizzily , and sink into a chair , 
 breathe hard . the colonel look as a man only look upon a poor 
 relation , and button up first one trouser pocket and then the other . 

 " I think you be in Canada , " say the colonel , at last . Mr. Digby 
 have now get breath to speak , and he say meekly , " the climate would have 
 kill my child , and it be two year since I return . " 

 " you ought to have find a very good place in England to make it worth 
 your while to leave Canada . " 

 " she could not have live through another winter in Canada , - the doctor 
 say so . " 

 " Pooh , " quoth the colonel . 

 Mr. Digby draw a long breath . " I would not come to you , Colonel Pompley , 
 while you could think that I come as a beggar for myself . " 

 the colonel 's brow relaxed . " a very honourable sentiment , Mr. Digby . " 

 " no : I have go through a great deal ; but you see , Colonel , " add the 
 poor relation , with a faint smile , " the campaign be well - nigh over , and 
 peace be at hand . " 

 the colonel seem touch . 

 " do not   talk so , Digby , - I do not   like it . you be young than I 
 be - nothing more disagreeable than these gloomy view of thing . you 
 have get enough to live upon , you say , - at least so I understand you . 
 I be very glad to hear it ; and , indeed , I could not assist you - so many 
 claim on I . so it be all very well , Digby . " 

 " oh , Colonel Pompley , " cry the soldier , clasp his hand , and with 
 feverish energy , " I be a suppliant , not for myself , but my child ! I have 
 but one , - only one , a girl . she have be so good to I ! she will cost 
 you little . take she when I die ; promise she a shelter , a home . I ask no 
 more . you be my near relative . I have no other to look to . you have 
 no child of your own . she will be a blessing to you , as she have be 
 all upon earth to I ! " 

 if Colonel Pompley 's face be red in ordinary hour , no epithet 
 sufficiently rubicund or sanguineous can express its colour at this 
 appeal . " the man 's mad , " he say , at last , with a tone of astonishment 
 that almost conceal his wrath , - ' stark mad ! I take his child ! - lodge 
 and board a great , positive , hungry child ! why , sir , many and many a 
 time have I say to Mrs. Pompley , " t be a mercy we have no child . we 
 could never live in this style if we have child , - never make both 
 end meet . ' child - the most expensive , ravenous , ruinous thing in the 
 world - a child . " 

 " she have be accustom to starve , " say Mr. Digby , plaintively . " oh , 
 Colonel , let I see your wife . her heart I can touch , - she be a woman . " 

 Unlucky father ! a more untoward , unseasonable request the Fates could 
 not have put into his lip . 

 Mrs. Pompley see the Digbies ! Mrs. Pompley learn the condition of the 
 colonel 's grand connection ! the colonel would never have be his own 
 man again . at the bare idea , he feel as if he could have sink into the 
 earth with shame . in his alarm he make a stride to the door , with the 
 intention of lock it . good heaven , if Mrs. Pompley should come in ! 
 and the man , too , have be announce by name . Mrs. Pompley might 
 have learn already that a Digby be with her husband , - she might be 
 actually dress to receive he worthily ; there be not a moment to 
 lose . 

 the colonel explode . " Sir , I wonder at your impudence . see Mrs. 
 Pompley ! Hush , sir , hush ! - hold your tongue . I have disown your 
 connection . I will not have my wife - a woman , sir , of the first 
 family - disgrace by it . yes ; you need not fire up . John Pompley be not 
 a man to be bully in his own house . I say disgrace . do not you run 
 into debt , and spend your fortune ? do not you marry a low creature , - a 
 vulgarian , a tradesman 's daughter ? - and your poor father such a 
 respectable man , - a benefit clergyman ! do not you sell your 
 commission ? Heaven know what become of the money ! do not you turn   I 
 shudder to say it   a common stage - player , sir ? and then , when you be 
 on your last leg , do I not give you l200 out of my own purse to go 
 to Canada ? and now here you be again , - and ask I , with a coolness 
 that - that take away my breath - take away - my breath , sir - to 
 provide for the child you have think proper to have , - a child 
 whose connection on the mother 's side be of the most abject and 
 discreditable condition . leave my house , leave it ! good heavens , sir , 
 not that way ! - this . " and the colonel open the glass - door that lead 
 into the garden . " I will let you out this way . if Mrs. Pompley should 
 see you ! " and with that think the colonel absolutely hook his arm 
 into his poor relation 's , and hurry he into the garden . 

 Mr. Digby say not a word , but he struggle ineffectually to escape from 
 the colonel 's arm ; and his colour go and come , come and go , with a 
 quickness that show that in those shrink vein there be still some 
 drop of a soldier 's blood . 

 but the colonel have now reach a little postern - door in the 
 garden - wall . he open the latch , and thrust out his poor cousin . then 
 look down the lane , which be long , straight , and narrow , and see 
 it be quite solitary , his eye fall upon the forlorn man , and remorse 
 shoot through his heart . for a moment the hard of all kind of 
 avarice , that of the genteel , relax its gripe . for a moment the 
 most intolerant of all form of pride , that which be base upon false 
 pretence , hush its voice , and the colonel hastily draw out his purse . 
 " there , " say he , " that be all I can do for you . do leave the town as 
 quick as you can , and do not   mention your name to any one . your father 
 be such a respectable man , - benefice clergyman ! " 

 " and pay for your commission , Mr. Pompley . my name ! I be not ashamed of 
 it . but do not fear I shall claim your relationship . no ; I be ashamed of 
 you ! " 

 the poor cousin put aside the purse , still stretch towards he , with 
 a scornful hand , and walk firmly down the lane . Colonel Pompley stand 
 irresolute . at that moment a window in his house be throw open . he 
 hear the noise , turn round , and see his wife look out . 

 Colonel Pompley sneak back through the shrubbery , hide himself 
 amongst the tree . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 " Ill - luck be a betise , " say the great Cardinal Richelieu ; and in the 
 long run , I fear , his Eminence be right . if you could drop Dick Avenel 
 and Mr. Digby in the middle of Oxford Street , - Dick in a fustian jacket , 
 Digby in a suit of superfine ; Dick with five shilling in his pocket , 
 Digby with L1000 , - and if , at the end of ten year , you look up your 
 two man , Dick would be on his road to a fortune , Digby - what we have 
 see he ! yet Digby have no vice ; he do not drink nor gamble . what be 
 he , then ? helpless . he have be an only son , - a spoiled child , bring 
 up as " a gentleman ; " that be , as a man who be not expect to be 
 able to turn his hand to anything . he enter , as we have see , a very 
 expensive regiment , wherein he find himself , at his father 's death , 
 with L4000 and the incapacity to say " no . " not naturally extravagant , 
 but without an idea of the value of money , - the easy , gentle , 
 well - temper man whom example ever lead astray . this part of his career 
 comprise a very common history , - the poor man live on equal term 
 with the rich . debt ; recourse to usurer ; bill sign sometimes for 
 other , renew at twenty per cent ; the L4000 melt like snow ; pathetic 
 appeal to relation ; relation have child of their own ; small help 
 give grudgingly , eke out by much advice , and couple with 
 condition . amongst the condition there be a very proper and prudent 
 one , - exchange into a less expensive regiment . Exchange effect ; peace ; 
 obscure country quarter ; ennui , flute - playing , and idleness . Mr. Digby 
 have no resource on a rainy day - except flute - playing ; pretty girl of 
 inferior rank ; all the officer after she ; Digby smitten ; pretty girl 
 very virtuous ; Digby form honourable intention ; excellent sentiment ; 
 imprudent marriage . Digby fall in life ; colonel 's lady will not 
 associate with Mrs. Digby ; Digby cut by his whole kith and kin ; many 
 disagreeable circumstance in regimental life ; Digby sell out ; love 
 in a cottage ; execution in ditto . Digby have be much applaud as an 
 amateur actor ; think of the stage ; genteel comedy , - a gentlemanlike 
 profession . try in a provincial town , under another name ; unhappily 
 succeed ; life of an actor ; hand - to - mouth life ; illness ; chest affect ; 
 Digby 's voice become hoarse and feeble ; not aware of it ; attribute 
 fail success to ignorant provincial public ; appear in London ; be 
 hiss ; return to the province ; sink into very small part ; prison ; 
 despair ; wife die ; appeal again to relation ; a subscription make 
 to get rid of he ; send he out of the country ; place in 
 Canada , - superintendent to an estate , L150 a year ; pursue by ill - luck ; 
 never before fit for business , not fit now ; honest as the day , but keep 
 slovenly account ; child can not bear the winter of Canada ; Digby wrap 
 up in the child ; return home ; mysterious life for two year ; child 
 patient , thoughtful , loving ; have learn to work ; manage for father ; 
 often support he ; constitution rapidly break ; think of what will 
 become of his child , - bad disease of all . poor Digby ! never do a 
 base , cruel , unkind thing in his life ; and here he be , walk down 
 the lane from Colonel Pompley 's house ! now , if Digby have but learn a 
 little of the world 's cunning , I think he would have succeed even with 
 Colonel Pompley . have he spend the l100 receive from Lord L'Estrange 
 with a view to effect ; have he bestow a fitting wardrobe on himself and 
 his pretty Helen ; have he stop at the last stage , take thence a smart 
 chaise and pair , and present himself at Colonel Pompley 's in a way 
 that would not have discredit the colonel 's connection , and then , 
 instead of pray for home and shelter , ask the colonel to become 
 guardian to his child in case of his death , I have a strong notion that 
 the colonel , in spite of his avarice , would have stretch both end so 
 as to take in Helen Digby . but our poor friend have no such art . indeed , 
 of the l100 he have already very little left , for before leave town 
 he have commit what Sheridan consider the extreme of 
 extravagance , - fritter away his money in pay his debt ; and as for 
 dress up Helen and himself - if that think have ever occur to he , 
 he would have reject it as foolish . he would have think that the 
 more he show his poverty , the more he would be pity , - the bad 
 mistake a poor cousin can commit . accord to Theophrastus , the 
 partridge of Paphlagonia have two heart : so have most man ; it be the 
 common mistake of the unlucky to knock at the wrong one . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 Mr. Digby enter the room of the inn in which he have leave Helen . 
 she be seat by the window , and look out wistfully on the narrow 
 street , perhaps at the child at play . there have never be a playtime 
 for Helen Digby . 

 she spring forward as her father come in . his come be her holiday . 

 " we must go back to London , " say Mr. Digby , sink helplessly on the 
 chair . then with his sort of sickly smile , - for he be bland even to his 
 child , - " will you kindly inquire when the first coach leave ? " 

 all the active care of their careful life devolve upon that quiet 
 child . she kiss her father , place before he a cough mixture which 
 he have bring from London , and go out silently to make the necessary 
 inquiry , and prepare for the journey back . 

 at eight o'clock the father and child be seat in the night - coach , 
 with one other passenger , - a man muffle up to the chin . after the first 
 mile the man let down one of the window . though it be summer the air 
 be chill and raw . Digby shiver and cough . 

 Helen place her hand on the window , and , lean towards the passenger , 
 whisper softly . 

 " eh ! " say the passenger , " draw up the window ? you have get your own 
 window ; this be mine . Oxygen , young lady , " he add solemnly , " oxygen be 
 the breath of life . Cott , child ! " he continue with suppress choler , 
 and a Welsh pronunciation , " Cott ! let we breathe and live . " 

 Helen be frightened , and recoil . 

 her father , who have not hear , or have not heed , this colloquy , 
 retreat into the corner , put up the collar of his coat , and cough 
 again . 

 " it be cold , my dear , " say he , languidly , to Helen . 

 the passenger catch the word , and reply indignantly , but as if 
 soliloquize , - 

 " Cold - ugh ! I do believe the English be the stuffy people ! look at 
 their four - post bed - all the curtain draw , shutter closed , board 
 before the chimney - not a house with a ventilator ! cold - ugh ! " 

 the window next Mr. Digby do not fit well into its frame . " there be a 
 sad draught , " say the invalid . 

 Helen instantly occupy herself in stop up the chink of the window 
 with her handkerchief . Mr. Digby glance ruefully at the other window . 
 the look , which be very eloquent , arouse yet more the traveller 's 
 spleen . 

 " Pleasant ! " say he . " Cott ! I suppose you will ask I to go outside 
 next ! but people who travel in a coach should know the law of a coach . I 
 do not   interfere with your window ; you have no business to interfere with 
 mine . " 

 " Sir , I do not speak , " say Mr. Digby , meekly . 

 " but Miss here do . " 

 " ah , sir ! " say Helen , plaintively , " if you know how Papa suffer ! " and 
 her hand again move towards the obnoxious window . 

 " no , my dear ; the gentleman be in his right , " say Mr. Digby ; and , 
 bow with his wonted suavity , he add , " excuse she , sir . she think a 
 great deal too much of I . " 

 the passenger say nothing , and Helen nestle close to her father , and 
 strove to screen he from the air . 

 the passenger move uneasily . " well , " say he , with a sort of snort , 
 " air be air , and right be right : but here go - " and he hastily draw up 
 the window . 

 Helen turn her face full towards the passenger with a grateful 
 expression , visible even in the dim light . 

 " you be very kind , sir , " say poor Mr. Digby ; " I be ashamed to - " 
 his cough choke the rest of the sentence . the passenger , who be a 
 plethoric , sanguineous man , feel as if he be stifle . but he take off 
 his wrapper , and resign the oxygen like a hero . 

 presently he draw near to the sufferer , and lay hand on his wrist . 

 " you be feverish , I fear . I be a medical man . St ! - one - two . Cott ! you 
 should not travel ; you be not fit for it ! " 

 Mr. Digby shake his head ; he be too feeble to reply . 

 the passenger thrust his hand into his coat - pocket , and draw out what 
 seem a cigar - case , but what , in fact , be a leathern repertory , 
 contain a variety of minute phial . 

 from one of these phial he extract two tiny globule . " there , " say 
 he , " open your mouth , put those on the tip of your tongue . they will 
 lower the pulse , check the fever . be well presently , but should not 
 travel , want rest ; you should be in bed . Aconite ! henbane ! hum ! your 
 papa be of fair complexion , - a timid character , I should say ; - a horror 
 of work , perhaps . eh , child ? " 

 " Sir ! " falter Helen , astonish and alarmed . be the man a conjuror ? 

 " a case for phosphor ! " cry the passenger : " that fool Browne would have 
 say arsenic . do not   be persuade to take arsenic ! " 

 " Arsenic , sir ! " echo the mild Digby . " no : however unfortunate a man 
 may be , I think , sir , that suicide be - tempting , perhaps , but highly 
 criminal . " 

 " Suicide , " say the passenger , tranquilly , - ' suicide be my hobby ! you 
 have no symptom of that kind , you say ? " 

 " good heaven ! no , sir . " 

 " if ever you feel violently impel to drown yourself , take pulsatilla ; 
 but if you feel a preference towards blow out your brain , 
 accompany with weight in the limb , loss of appetite , dry cough , and 
 bad corn , sulphuret of antimony . do not   forget . " 

 though poor Mr. Digby confusedly think that the gentleman be out of 
 his mind , yet he try politely to say " that he be much oblige , and 
 would be sure to remember ; " but his tongue fail he , and his own idea 
 grow perplexed . his head fall back heavily , and he sink into a silence 
 which seem that of sleep . 

 the traveller look hard at Helen , as she gently draw her father 's head 
 on her shoulder , and there pillow it with a tenderness which be more 
 that of a mother than child . 

 " moral affection , soft , compassionate ! - a good child and would go well 
 with - pulsatilla . " 

 Helen hold up her finger , and glance from her father to the traveller , 
 and then to her father again . 

 " certainly , - pulsatilla ! " mutter the homoeopathist , and ensconce 
 himself in his own corner , he also seek to sleep . but after vain 
 effort , accompany by restless gesture and movement , he suddenly 
 start up , and again extract his phial - book . 

 " what the deuce be they to I ? " he mutter . " morbid sensibility of 
 character - coffee ? no ! - accompany by vivacity and violence - nux ! " he 
 bring his book to the window , contrive to read the label on a pigmy 
 bottle . " Nux ! that be it , " he say , - and he swallow a globule ! 

 " now , " quoth he , after a pause , " I do not   care a straw for the 
 misfortune of other people ; nay , I have half a mind to let down the 
 window . " 

 Helen look up . 

 " but I will not , " he add resolutely ; and this time he fall fairly 
 asleep . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 the coach stop at eleven o'clock to allow the passenger to sup . the 
 homoeopathist wake up , get out , give himself a shake , and inhale the 
 fresh air into his vigorous lung with an evident sensation of delight . 
 he then turn and look into the coach . 

 " let your father get out , my dear , " say he , with a tone more gentle 
 than usual . " I should like to see he indoor , - perhaps I can do he 
 good . " 

 but what be Helen 's terror when she find that her father do not stir ! 
 he be in a deep swoon , and still quite insensible when they lift he 
 from the carriage . when he recover his sens his cough return , and 
 the effort bring up blood . 

 it be impossible for he to proceed far . the homoeopathist assist 
 to undress and put he into bed . and have administer another of his 
 mysterious globule , he inquire of the landlady how far it be to the 
 near doctor , - for the inn stand by itself in a small hamlet . there 
 be the parish apothecary three mile off . but on hear that the 
 gentlefolk employ Dr. Dosewell , and it be a good seven mile to his 
 house , the homoeopathist fetch a deep breath . the coach only stop a 
 quarter of an hour . 

 " Cott ! " say he , angrily , to himself , " the nux be a failure . my 
 sensibility be chronic . I must go through a long course to get rid of 
 it . hollo , guard ! get out my carpet - bag . I sha'n't   go on to - night . " 

 and the good man after a very slight supper go upstairs again to the 
 sufferer . 

 " shall I send for Dr. Dosewell , sir ? " ask the landlady , stop he 
 at the door . 

 " Hum ! at what hour to - morrow do the next coach to London pass ? " 

 " not before eight , sir . " 

 " well , send for the doctor to be here at seven . that leave we at least 
 some hour free from allopathy and murder , " grunt the disciple of 
 Hahnemann , as he enter the room . 

 whether it be the globule that the homoeopathist have administer , 
 or the effect of nature , aid by repose , that check the effusion of 
 blood , and restore some temporary strength to the poor sufferer , be 
 more than it become one not of the Faculty to opine . but certainly Mr. 
 Digby seem well , and he gradually fall into a profound sleep , but 
 not till the doctor have put his ear to his chest , tap it with his 
 hand , and ask several question ; after which the homoeopathist retire 
 into a corner of the room , and lean his face on his hand seem to 
 meditate . from his thought he be disturb by a gentle touch . Helen 
 be kneel at his foot . " be he very ill , very ? " say she ; and her fond 
 wistful eye be fix on the physician 's with all the earnestness of 
 despair . 

 " your father be very ill , " reply the doctor , after a short pause . " he 
 can not move hence for some day at least . I be go to London ; shall I 
 call on your relation , and tell some of they to join you ? " 

 " no , thank you , sir , " answer Helen , colour . " but do not fear ; I 
 can nurse Papa . I think he have be bad before , - that is , he have 
 complain more . " 

 the homeopathist rise , and take two stride across the room ; then he 
 pause by the bed , and listen to the breathing of the sleep man . 

 he steal back to the child , who be still kneel , take she in his arm 
 and kiss she . " tamn it , " say he , angrily , and put she down , " go 
 to bed now , - you be not want any more . " 

 " please , sir , " say Helen , " I can not leave he so . if he wake he would 
 miss I . " 

 the doctor 's hand tremble ; he have recourse to his globule . 

 " anxiety - grief suppress , " mutter he . " do not   you want to cry , my 
 dear ? cry , - do ! " 

 " I can not , " murmur Helen . 

 " Pulsatilla ! " say the doctor , almost with triumph . " I say so from the 
 first . open your mouth - here ! Goodnight . my room be opposite , - no . 6 ; 
 call I if he wake . " 




 CHAPTER xiii . 

 at seven o'clock Dr. Dosewell arrive , and be show into the room of 
 the homoeopathist , who , already up and dress , have visit his patient . 

 " my name be Morgan , " say the homoeopathist ; " I be a physician . I leave 
 in your hand a patient whom , I fear , neither I nor you can restore . 
 come and look at he . " 

 the two doctor go into the sick - room . Mr. Digby be very feeble , but 
 he have recover his consciousness , and incline his head courteously . 

 " I be sorry to cause so much trouble , " say he . the homoeopathist drew 
 away Helen ; the allopathist seat himself by the bedside and put his 
 question , feel the pulse , sound the lung , and look at the tongue 
 of the patient . Helen 's eye be fix on the strange doctor , and her 
 colour rise , and her eye sparkle when he get up cheerfully , and say in 
 a pleasant voice , " you may have a little tea . " 

 " Tea ! " growl the homeopathist , - " barbarian ! " 

 " he be well , then , sir ? " say Helen , creep to the allopathist . 

 " oh , yes , my dear , - certainly ; and we shall do very well , I hope . " 

 the two doctor then withdraw . 

 " last about a week ! " say Dr. Dosewell , smile pleasantly , and show 
 a very white set of tooth . 

 " I should have say a month ; but our system be different , " reply Dr. 
 Morgan , dryly . 

 DR . DOSEWELL   courteously . - " we country doctor bow to our metropolitan 
 superior ; what would you advise ? you would venture , perhaps , the 
 experiment of bleed . " 

 DR . MORGAN   splutter and growl Welsh , which he never do but in 
 excitement . - " Pleed ! Cott in heaven ! do you think I be a putcher , - an 
 executioner ? pleed ! never . " 

 DR . DOSEWELL . - " I do not   find it answer , myself , when both lung be 
 go ! but perhaps you be for inhaling ? " 

 DR . MORGAN . - " Fiddledee ! " 

 DR . DOSEWELL   with some displeasure . - " what would you advise , then , in 
 order to prolong our patient 's life for a month ? " 

 DR . MORGAN . - " give he Rhus ! " 

 DR . DOSEWELL . - " Rhus , sir ! Rhus ! I do not   know that medicine . Rhus ! " 

 Dr. MORGAN . - " Rhus Toxicodendron . " 

 the length of the last word excite Dr. Dosewell 's respect . a word of 
 five syllable , - that be something like ! he bow deferentially , but 
 still look puzzle . at last he say , smile frankly , " you great 
 London practitioner have so many new medicine : may I ask what Rhus 
 toxico - toxico - " 

 " Dendron . " 

 " be ? " 

 " the juice of the upa , - vulgarly call the poison - tree . " Dr. Dosewell 
 start . 

 " Upas - poison - tree - little bird that come under the shade fall down 
 dead ! you give upas juice in these desperate case : what be the dose ? " 

 Dr. Morgan grin maliciously , and produce a globule the size of a 
 small pin 's head . 

 Dr. Dosewell recoil in disgust . 

 " oh ! " say he , very coldly , and assume at once an air of superb 
 superiority , " I see , a homoeopathist , sir ! " 

 " a homoeopathist . " 

 " um ! " 

 " um ! " 

 " a strange system , Dr. Morgan , " say Dr. Dosewell , recover his 
 cheerful smile , but with a curl of contempt in it , " and would soon do 
 for the druggist . " 

 " serve them right . the druggist soon do for the patient . " 

 " Sir ! " 

 " Sir ! " 

 DR . DOSEWELL   with dignity . - " you do not   know , perhaps , Dr. Morgan , 
 that I be an apothecary as well as a surgeon . in fact , " he add , with 
 a certain grand humility , " I have not yet take a diploma , and be but 
 doctor by courtesy . " 

 DR . MORGAN . - " all one , sir ! doctor sign the death - warrant , ' pothecary 
 do the deed ! " 

 DR . DOSEWELL   with a wither sneer . - " certainly we do not   profess to 
 keep a die man alive upon the juice of the deadly upas - tree . " 

 DR . MORGAN   complacently . - " of course you do not . there be no poison 
 with we . that be just the difference between you and I , Dr. Dosewell . " 

 DR . DOSEWELL   point to the homeopathist 's travel pharmacopoeia , 
 and with affected candour . - " indeed , I have always say that if you can 
 do no good , you can do no harm , with your infinitesimal . " 

 DR . MORGAN , who have be obtuse to the insinuation of poisoning , fire 
 up violently at the charge of do no harm . " you know nothing about 
 it ! I could kill quite as many people as you , if I choose it ; but I do not 
 choose . " 

 DR . DOSEWELL   shrug his shoulder . - " Sir Sir ! it be no use arguing ; 
 the thing be against common - sense . in short , it be my firm belief that it 
 be - be a complete - " 

 DR . MORGAN . - " a complete what ? " 

 DR . DOSEWELL   provoke to the utmost . - " Humbug ! " 

 DR . MORGAN . - " Humbug ! Cott in heaven ! you old - " 

 DR . DOSEWELL . - " Old what , sir ? " 

 DR . MORGAN   at home in a series of alliteral vowel , which none but 
 a Cymbrian could have utter without gasp . - " old allopathical 
 anthropophagite ! " 

 DR . DOSEWELL   start up , seize by the back the chair on which he have 
 sit , and bring it down violently on its four leg . - " Sir ! " 

 DR . MORGAN   imitate the action with his own chair . - " Sir ! " 

 DR . DOSEWELL . - " you be abusive . " 

 DR . MORGAN . - " you be impertinent . " 

 DR . DOSEWELL . - " Sir ! " 

 DR . MORGAN . - " Sir ! " 

 the two rival confront each other . 

 they be both athletic man , and fiery man . Dr. Dosewell be the tall , 
 but Dr. Morgan be the stouter . Dr. Dosewell on the mother 's side be 
 irish ; but Dr. Morgan on both side be Welsh . all thing consider , I 
 would have back Dr. Morgan if it have come to blow . but , luckily for 
 the honour of science , here the chambermaid knock at the door , and 
 say , " the coach be come , sir . " 

 Dr. Morgan recover his temper and his manner at that announcement . 
 " Dr. Dosewell , " say he , " I have be too hot , - I apologize . " 

 " Dr. Morgan , " answer the allopathist , " I forget myself . your hand , 
 sir . " 

 DR . MORGAN . - " we be both devoted to humanity , though with different 
 opinion . we should respect each other . " 

 DR . DOSEWELL . - " where look for liberality , if man of science be 
 illiberal to their brother ? " 

 DR . MORGAN   aside . - " the old hypocrite ! he would pound I in a mortar 
 if the law would let he . " 

 DR . DOSEWELL   aside . - " the wretched charlatan ! I should like to pound 
 he in a mortar . " 

 DR . MORGAN . - " good - by , my esteemed and worthy brother . " 

 DR . DOSEWELL . - " my excellent friend , good - by . " 

 DR . MORGAN   return in haste . - " I forget . I do not   think our poor 
 patient be very rich . I confide he to your disinterested benevolence . " 
  hurry away . 

 DR . DOSEWELL   in a rage . - " seven mile at six o'clock in the morning , 
 and perhaps do out of my fee ! quack ! villain ! " 

 meanwhile , Dr. Morgan have return to the sick - room . 

 " I must wish you farewell , " say he to poor Mr. Digby , who be languidly 
 sip his tea . " but you be in the hand of a - of a - gentleman in the 
 profession . " 

 " you have be too kind , - I be shocked , " say Mr. Digby . " Helen , where be 
 my purse ? " 

 Dr. Morgan pause . 

 he pause , first , because it must be own that his practice be 
 restrict , and a fee gratify the vanity natural to unappreciated 
 talent , and have the charm of novelty , which be sweet to human nature 
 itself . secondly , he be a man - 

  " who know his right ; and , know , dare maintain . " 

 he have resign a coach fare , stay a night , and think he have 
 relieve his patient . he have a right to his fee . 

 on the other hand , he pause , because , though he have small practice , 
 he be tolerably well off , and do not care for money in itself , and he 
 suspect his patient to be no Croesus . 

 meanwhile the purse be in Helen 's hand . he take it from she , and see 
 but a few sovereign within the well - wear network . he draw the child a 
 little aside . 

 " answer I , my dear , frankly , - be your papa rich ? - " and he glance at 
 the shabby clothe strew on the chair and Helen 's fade frock . 

 " alas , no ! " say Helen , hang her head . " be that all you have ? " 

 " All . " 

 " I be ashamed to offer you two guineas , " say Mr. Digby 's hollow voice 
 from the bed . 

 " and I should be still more ashamed to take they . good by , sir . come 
 here , my child . keep your money , and do not   waste it on the other doctor 
 more than you can help . his medicine can do your father no good . but I 
 suppose you must have some . he be no physician , therefore there be no fee . 
 he will send a bill , - it can not   be much . you understand . and now , God bless 
 you . " 

 Dr. Morgan be off . but , as he pay the landlady his bill , he say 
 considerately , " the poor people upstairs can pay you , but not that 
 doctor , - and he be of no use . be kind to the little girl , and get 
 the doctor to tell his patient   quietly of course   to write to his 
 friend - soon - you understand . somebody must take charge of the poor 
 child . and stop - hold your hand ; take care - these globule for the 
 little girl when her father die , " - here the doctor mutter to himself , 
 " grief , - aconite , and if she cry too much afterwards , these -   do not 
 mistake . tear , - caustic ! " 

 " come , sir , " cry the coachman . 

 " come ; tear , - caustic , " repeat the homoeopathist , pull out his 
 handkerchief and his phial - book together as he get into the coach ; and 
 he hastily swallow his antilachrymal . 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 Richard Avenel be in a state of great nervous excitement . he propose 
 to give an entertainment of a kind wholly new to the experience of 
 Screwstown . Mrs. M'Catchley have describe with much eloquence the 
 dejeune dansant of her fashionable friend reside in the elegant 
 suburb of Wimbledon and Fulham . she declare that nothing be so 
 agreeable . she have even say point - blank to Mr. Avenel , " why do not   you 
 give a Dejeune dansant ? " and , therewith , a Dejeune dansant Mr. Avenel 
 resolve to give . 

 the day be fix , and Mr. Avenel enter into all the requisite 
 preparation , with the energy of a man and the providence of a woman . 

 one morning as he stand muse on the lawn , irresolute as to the good 
 site for the tent , Leonard come up to he with an open letter in his 
 hand . 

 " my dear uncle , " say he , softly . 

 " ha ! " exclaim Mr. Avenel , with a start . " ha - well , what now ? " 

 " I have just receive a letter from Mr. Dale . he tell I that my poor 
 mother be very restless and uneasy , because he can not assure she that 
 he have hear from I ; and his letter require an answer . indeed I shall 
 seem very ungrateful to he - to all - if I do not write . " 

 Richard Avenel 's brow meet . he utter an impatient " Pish ! " and turn 
 away . then come back , he fix his clear hawk - like eye on Leonard 's 
 ingenuous countenance , link his arm into his nephew 's , and draw he 
 into the shrubbery . 

 " well , Leonard , " say he , after a pause , " it be time that I should give 
 you some idea of my plan with regard to you . you have see my manner of 
 live - some difference from what you ever see before , I calculate ! now 
 I have give you , what no one give I , a lift in the world ; and where I 
 place you , there you must help yourself . " 

 " such be my duty and my desire , " say Leonard , heartily . " good . you 
 be a clever lad , and a genteel lad , and will do I credit . I have have 
 doubt of what be good for you . at one time I think of send you to 
 college . that , I know ; be Mr. Dale 's wish ; perhaps it be your own . but 
 I have give up that idea ; I have something well for you . you have 
 a clear head for business , and be a capital arithmetician . I think of 
 bring you up to superintend my business ; by and by I will admit you 
 into partnership ; and before you be thirty you will be a rich man . 
 come , do that suit you ? " 

 " my dear uncle , " say Leonard , frankly , but much touch by this 
 generosity , " it be not for I to have a choice . I should have prefer 
 go to college , because there I might gain independence for myself and 
 cease to be a burden on you . moreover , my heart move I to study 
 more congenial with the college than the counting - house . but all this be 
 nothing compare with my wish to be of use to you , and to prove in any 
 way , however feebly , my gratitude for all your kindness . " 

 " you be a good , grateful , sensible lad , " exclaim Richard , heartily ; 
 " and believe I , though I be a rough diamond , I have your true interest 
 at heart . you can be of use to I , and in be so you will well 
 serve yourself . to tell you the truth , I have some idea of change 
 my condition . there be a lady of fashion and quality who , I think , may 
 condescend to become Mrs. Avenel ; and if so , I shall probably reside a 
 great part of the year in London . I do not   want to give up my business . 
 no other investment will yield the same interest . but you can soon learn 
 to superintend it for I , as some day or other I may retire , and then 
 you can step in . once a member of our great commercial class , and with 
 your talent you may be anything , - member of parliament , and after that , 
 minister of State , for what I know . and my wife - hem ! that be to be - have 
 great connection , and you shall marry well ; and - oh , the Avenels will 
 hold their head with the high , after all ! damn the aristocracy ! we 
 clever fellow will be the aristocrat , eh ? " Richard rub his hand . 

 certainly , as we have see , Leonard , especially in his early step 
 to knowledge , have repine at his position in the many degree of life ; 
 certainly he be still ambitious ; certainly he could not now have 
 return contentedly to the humble occupation he have leave ; and woe to 
 the young man who do not hear with a quickened pulse and brightening 
 eye word that promise independence , and flatter with the hope of 
 distinction . still , it be with all the reaction of chill and mournful 
 disappointment that Leonard , a few hour after this dialogue with 
 his uncle , find himself alone in the field , and ponder over 
 the prospect before he . he have set his heart upon complete his 
 intellectual education , upon develop those power within he which 
 yearn for an arena of literature , and revolt from the routine of 
 trade . 

 but to his credit be it say , that he vigorously resist this natural 
 disappointment , and by degree school himself to look cheerfully on 
 the path impose on his duty , and sanction by the manly sense that be 
 at the core of his character . 

 I believe that this self - conquest show that the boy have true genius . 
 the false genius would have write sonnet and despair . 

 but still , Richard Avenel leave his nephew sadly perplex as to 
 the knotty question from which their talk on the future have 
 diverge , - namely , should he write to the parson , and assure the fear 
 of his mother ? how do so without Richard 's consent , when Richard have on 
 a former occasion so imperiously declare that , if he do , it would 
 lose his mother all that Richard intend to settle on she ? while he be 
 debate this matter with his conscience , lean against a stile that 
 interrupt a path to the town , Leonard Fairfield be startle by an 
 exclamation . he look up , and beheld Mr. Sprott the tinker . 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 the tinker , blacker and grimmer than ever , star hard at the alter 
 person of his old acquaintance , and extend his sable finger , as if 
 inclined to convince himself by the sense of touch that it be Leonard 
 in the flesh that he beheld , under vestment so marvellously elegant and 
 preternaturally spruce . 

 Leonard shrink mechanically from the contact , while in great surprise he 
 falter , - 

 " you here , Mr. Sprott ! what could bring you so far from home ? " 

 " ' Ome ! " echo the tinker , " I ' as no ' ome ! or rather , d ' ye see , Muster 
 Fairfilt , I make myself at ' ome verever I go ! Lor ' love ye ! I ben't 
 settle on no parridge . I wander here and I vander there , and that be 
 my ' ome verever I can mend my kettle and sell my track ! " 

 so say , the tinker slide his pannier on the ground , give a grunt of 
 release and satisfaction , and seat himself with great composure on the 
 stile from which Leonard have retreat . 

 " but , dash my wig , " resume Mr. Sprott , as he once more survey 
 Leonard , " vy , you be a rale gentleman , now , surely ! Vot 's the dodge , 
 eh ? " 

 " Dodge ! " repeat Leonard , mechanically , " I do not   understand you . " then , 
 think that it be neither necessary nor expedient to keep up his 
 acquaintance with Mr. Sprott , nor prudent to expose himself to the 
 battery of question which he foresee that further parley would bring 
 upon he , he extend a crown - piece to the tinker ; and say , with a 
 half - smile , " you must excuse I for leave you - I have business in the 
 town ; and do I the favour to accept this trifle , " he walk briskly 
 off . 

 the tinker look long at the crown - piece , and then slide it into his 
 pocket , say to himself , - 

 " Ho , ' ush - money ! no go , my swell cove . " 

 after vent that brief soliloquy he sit silent a little while , till 
 Leonard be nearly out of sight ; then rise , resume his fardel , and 
 creep quick along the hedgerow , follow Leonard towards the town . 
 just in the last field , as he look over the hedge , he see Leonard 
 accost by a gentleman of comely mien and important swagger . that 
 gentleman soon leave the young man , and come , whistle loud , up the 
 path , and straight towards the tinker . Mr. Sprott look round , but the 
 hedge be too neat to allow of a good hiding - place , so he put a bold 
 front on it , and step forth like a man . but , alas for he ! before he 
 get into the public path , the proprietor of the land , Mr. Richard 
 Avenel   for the gentleman be no less a personage , have spy out the 
 trespasser , and call to he with a " Hillo , fellow , " that bespoke all 
 the dignity of a man who own acre , and all the wrath of a man who 
 behold those acre impudently invade . 

 the tinker stop , and Mr. Avenel stalk up to he . " what the devil 
 be you do on my property , lurk by my hedge ? I suspect you be an 
 incendiary ! " 

 " I be a tinker , " quoth Mr. Sprott , not loute low , for a sturdy 
 republican be Mr. Sprott , but , like a lord of human kind , - 

  " Pride in his port , defiance in his eye . " 

 Mr. Avenel 's finger itch to knock the tinker 's villanous hat off his 
 jacobinical head , but he repress the undignified impulse by thrust 
 both hand deep into his trouser ' pocket . 

 " a tinker ! " he cry , - " that be a vagrant ; and I be a magistrate , and I have 
 a great mind to send you to the treadmill , - that I have . what do you do 
 here , I say ? you have not answer my question . " 

 " what do I do ' ere ? " say Mr. Sprott . " vy , you have well ax my 
 crakter of the young gent I see you talk with just now ; he know I . " 

 " what ! my nephew know you ? " 

 " W - hew , " whistle the tinker , " your nephew be it , sir ? I have a great 
 respek for your family . I ' ve   know Mrs. Fairfilt the vashervoman this 
 many a year . I ' umbly ax your pardon . " and he take off his hat this 
 time . 

 Mr. Avenel turn red and white in a breath . he growl out something 
 inaudible , turn on his heel , and stride off . the tinker watch he as 
 he have watch Leonard , and then dog the uncle as he have dog the 
 nephew . I do not   presume to say that there be cause and effect in what 
 happen that night , but it be what be call " a curious coincidence " 
 that that night one of Richard Avenel 's rick be set on fire , and that 
 that day he have call Mr. Sprott an incendiary . Mr. Sprott be a man of 
 a very high spirit , and do not forgive an insult easily . his nature be 
 inflammatory , and so be that of the lucifer which he always carry 
 about he , with his tract and glue - pot . 

 the next morning there be an inquiry make for the tinker , but he have 
 disappear from the neighbourhood . 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

 it be a fortunate thing that the dejeune dansant so absorb Mr. 
 Richard Avenel 's thought that even the conflagration of his rick 
 could not scare away the graceful and poetic image connect with that 
 pastoral festivity . he be even loose and careless in the question he 
 put to Leonard about the tinker ; nor do he send justice in pursuit 
 of that itinerant trader ; for , to say truth , Richard Avenel be a man 
 accustomed to make enemy amongst the low order ; and though he 
 suspect Mr. Sprott of destroy his rick , yet , when he once set about 
 suspecting , he find he have quite as good cause to suspect fifty other 
 person . how on earth could a man puzzle himself about rick and tinker 
 when all his care and energy be devoted to a dejeune dansant ? it 
 be a maxim of Richard Avenel 's , as it ought to be of every clever 
 man , " to do one thing at a time ; " and therefore he postpone all other 
 consideration till the dejeune dansant be fairly do with . amongst 
 these consideration be the letter which Leonard wish to write to 
 the parson . " wait a bit , and we will both write ! " say Richard , 
 good - humouredly , " the moment the dijeune dansant be over ! " 

 it must be own that this fete be no ordinary provincial ceremonial . 
 Richard Avenel be a man to do a thing well when he set about it , - 

  " he souse the cabbage with a bounteous heart . " 

 by little and little his first notion have expand , till what have 
 be mean to be only neat and elegant now embrace the costly and 
 magnificent . artificer accustom to dejeune dansant come all the 
 way from London to assist , to direct , to create . hungarian singer and 
 tyrolese singer and swiss peasant - woman , who be to chant the Ranz des 
 Vaches , and milk cow or make syllabub , be engage . the great marquee 
 be decorate as a Gothic banquet - hall ; the breakfast itself be to 
 consist of " all the delicacy of the season . " in short , as Richard 
 Avenel say to himself , " it be a thing once in a way ; a thing on which I 
 do not   object to spend money , provide that the thing be - the thing ! " 

 it have be a matter of grave meditation how to make the society 
 worthy of the revel ; for Richard Avenel be not content with the mere 
 aristocracy of the town , - his ambition have grow with his expense . 
 " since it will cost so much , " say he , " I may as well come it strong , 
 and get in the county . " 

 true , that he be personally acquaint with very few of what be call 
 county family . but still , when a man make himself a mark in a 
 large town , and can return one of the member whom that town send to 
 parliament ; and when , moreover , that man propose to give some superb 
 and original entertainment , in which the old can eat and the young can 
 dance , there be no county in the island that have not family enow 
 who will be delight by an invitation from that MAN . and so Richard , 
 find that , as the thing get talk of , the dean 's lady , and Mrs. 
 Pompley , and various other great personage , take the liberty to suggest 
 that squire this , and Sir somebody that , would be so pleased if they 
 be ask , fairly take the bull by the horn , and send out his card to 
 Park , Hall , and Rectory , within a circumference of twelve mile . he meet 
 with but few refusal , and he now count upon five hundred guest . 

 " in for a penny in for a pound , " say Mr. Richard Avenel . " I wonder 
 what Mrs. M'Catchley will say ? " indeed , if the whole truth must be 
 know , - Mr. Richard Avenel not only give that dejeune dansant in honour 
 of Mrs. M'Catchley , but he have fix in his heart of heart upon that 
 occasion   when surround by all his splendour , and assist by the 
 seductive art of Terpsichore and Bacchus   to whisper to Mrs. M'Catchley 
 those soft word which - but why not here let Mr. Richard Avenel use his 
 own idiomatic and unsophisticated expression ? " please the pig , then , " 
 say Mr. Avenel to himself , " I shall pop the question ! " 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

 the Great Day arrive at last ; and Mr. Richard Avenel , from his 
 dressing - room window , look on the scene below as Hannibal or Napoleon 
 look from the Alps on Italy . it be a scene to gratify the thought 
 of conquest , and reward the labour of ambition . place on a little 
 eminence stand the singer from the mountain of the Tyrol , their 
 high - crown hat and filigree button and gay sash gleam in the 
 sun . just see from his place of watch , though conceal from the casual 
 eye , the hungarian musician lie in ambush amidst a little belt of 
 laurel and american shrub . far to the right lay what have once be 
 call horresco referen the duckpond , where - " Dulce sonant tenui 
 gutture carman ave . " but the ruthless ingenuity of the head - artificer 
 have convert the duck - pond into a swiss lake , despite grievous wrong 
 and sorrow to the assuetum innocuumque genus , - the familiar and harmless 
 inhabitant , who have be all expatriate and banish from their native 
 wave . large pole twist with fir branch , stick thickly around the 
 lake , give to the water the become helvetian gloom . and here , beside 
 three cow all bedeck with ribbon , stand the swiss maiden destine 
 to startle the shade with the Ranz des Vaches . to the left , full upon 
 the sward , which it almost entirely cover , stretch the great Gothic 
 marquee , divide into two grand section , - one for the dancing , one for 
 the dejeune . 

 the day be propitious , - not a cloud in the sky . the musician 
 be already tune their instrument ; figure of waiter hire 
 of Gunter - trim and decorous , in black trouser and white 
 waistcoat - pass to and fro the space between the house and marquee . 
 Richard look and look ; and as he look he draw mechanically his 
 razor across the strop ; and when he have look his fill , he turn 
 reluctantly to the glass and shave ! all that blessed morning he have 
 be too busy , till then , to think of shaving . 

 there be a vast deal of character in the way that a man perform that 
 operation of shaving ! you should have see Richard Avenel shave ! you 
 could have judge at once how he would shave his neighbour , when you 
 see the celerity , the completeness with which he shave himself , - a 
 forestroke and a backstroke , and tondenti barba cadebat . cheek and 
 chin be as smooth as glass . you would have button up your pocket 
 instinctively if you have see he . 

 but the rest of Mr. Avenel 's toilet be not complete with correspondent 
 despatch . on his bed , and on his chair , and on his sofa , and on his 
 drawer , lie trouser and vest and cravat enough to distract the 
 choice of a stoic . and first one pair of trouser be try on , and 
 then another - and one waistcoat , and then a second , and then a third . 
 gradually that chef - d'oeuvre of civilization - a man dress - grow into 
 development and form ; and , finally , Mr. Richard Avenel emerge into the 
 light of day . he have be lucky in his costume , - he feel it . it might 
 not suit every one in colour or cut , but it suit he . 

 and this be his garb . on such occasion , what epic poet would not 
 describe the robe and tunic of a hero ? 

 his surtout - in modern phrase his frockcoat - be blue , a rich blue , a 
 blue that the royal brother of George the Fourth be will not to favour . 
 and the surtout , single - breast , be throw open gallantly ; and in the 
 second button - hole thereof be a moss - rose . the vest be white , and the 
 trouser a pearl gray , with what tailor style " a handsome fall over the 
 boot . " a blue and white silk cravat , tie loose and debonair ; an ample 
 field of shirt front , with plain gold stud ; a pair of lemon - colour 
 kid glove , and a white hat , place somewhat too knowingly on one side , 
 complete the description , and " give the world assurance of the man . " 
 and , with his light , firm , well - shape figure , his clear complexion , his 
 keen , bright eye , and feature that bespoke the courage , precision , and 
 alertness of his character , - that be to say , feature bold , not large , 
 well - define , and regular , - you might walk long through town or country 
 before you would see a handsomer speciman of humanity than our friend 
 Richard Avenel . 

 handsome , and feel that he be handsome ; rich , and feel that he 
 be rich ; lord of the fete , and feel that he be lord of the fete , 
 Richard Avenel step out upon his lawn . 

 and now the dust begin to rise along the road , and carriage and gig 
 and chaise and fly might be see at near interval and in quick 
 procession . People come pretty much about the same time - as they do in 
 the country - Heaven reward they for it ! 

 Richard Avenel be not quite at his ease at first in receive his 
 guest , especially those whom he do not know by sight . but when the 
 dancing begin , and he have secure the fair hand of Mrs. M'Catchley for 
 the initiary quadrille , his courage and presence of mind return to 
 he ; and , see that many people whom he have not receive at all seem 
 to enjoy themselves very much , he give up the attempt to receive those 
 who come after , - and that be a great relief to all party . 

 meanwhile Leonard look on the animate scene with a silent melancholy , 
 which he in vain endeavour to shake off , - a melancholy more common 
 amongst very young man in such scene than we be apt to suppose . 
 somehow or other , the pleasure be not congenial to he ; he have no Mrs. 
 M'Catchley to endear it ; he know very few people , he be shy , he feel 
 his position with his uncle be equivocal , he have not the habit of 
 society , he hear , incidentally , many an ill - natured remark upon his 
 uncle and the entertainment , he feel indignant and mortify . he have 
 be a great deal happy eat his radish and read his book by 
 the little fountain in Riccabocca 's garden . he retire to a quiet part 
 of the ground , seat himself under a tree , lean his cheek on his 
 hand , and muse . he be soon far away ; - happy age , when , whatever the 
 present , the future seem so fair and so infinite ! 

 but now the dejeune have succeed the early dance ; and , as champagne 
 flow royally , it be astonish how the entertainment brighten . 

 the sun be begin to slope towards the west , when , during a 
 temporary cessation of the dance , all the guest have assemble in 
 such space as the tent leave on the lawn , or thickly fill the walk 
 immediately adjoin it . the gay dress of the lady , the joyous 
 laughter hear everywhere , and the brilliant sunlight over all , convey 
 even to Leonard the notion , not of mere hypocritical pleasure , but 
 actual healthful happiness . he be attract from his revery , and 
 timidly mingle with the group . but Richard Avenel , with the fair Mrs. 
 M'Catchley - her complexion more vivid , and her eye more dazzling , and 
 her step more elastic than usual - have turn from the gayety just as 
 Leonard have turn towards it , and be now on the very spot   remote , 
 obscure , shade by the few tree above five year old that Mr. Avenel 's 
 property boast   which the young dreamer have desert . 

 and then ! ah , then ! moment so meet for the sweet question of question , 
 place so appropriate for the delicate , bashful , murmured popping 
 thereof ! - suddenly from the sward before , from the group beyond , there 
 float to the ear of Richard Avenel an indescribable , mingled , ominous 
 sound , - a sound as of a general titter , a horrid , malignant , but 
 low cachinnation . and Mrs. M'Catchley , stretch forth her parasol , 
 exclaim , " dear I , Mr. Avenel , what can they be all crowd there 
 for ? " 

 there be certain sound and certain sight - the one indistinct , 
 the other vaguely conjecturable - which , nevertheless , we know , by an 
 instinct , bode some diabolical agency at work in our affair . and if any 
 man give an entertainment , and hear afar a general , ill - suppress , 
 derisive titter , and see all his guest hurry towards one spot , I 
 defy he to remain unmoved and uninquisitive . I defy he still more to 
 take that precise occasion   however much he may have before design 
 it   to drop gracefully on his right knee before the handsome Mrs. 
 M'Catchley in the universe , and - pop the question ! Richard Avenel 
 blurt out something very like an oath ; and , half guess that 
 something must have happen that it would not be pleasing to bring 
 immediately under the notice of Mrs. M'Catchley , he say hastily , 
 " excuse I . I will just go and see what be the matter ; pray , stay till I 
 come back . " with that he spring forward ; in a minute he be in the midst 
 of the group , that part aside with the most obliging complacency to 
 make way for he . 

 " but what be the matter ? " he ask impatiently , yet fearfully . not a 
 voice answer . he stride on , and behold his nephew in the arm of a 
 woman ! 

 " God bless my soul ! " say Richard Avenel . 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 and such a woman ! 

 she have on a cotton gown , - very neat , I dare say , for an 
 under - housemaid ; and such thick shoe ! she have on a little black straw 
 bonnet ; and a kerchief , that might have cost tenpence , pin across 
 her waist instead of a shawl ; and she look altogether - respectable , no 
 doubt , but exceedingly dusty ! and she be hang upon Leonard 's neck , 
 and scold , and caressing , and cry very loud . " God bless my soul ! " 
 say Mr. Richard Avenel . 

 and as he utter that innocent self - benediction , the woman hastily 
 turn round , and dart from Leonard , throw herself right upon Richard 
 Avenel - burying under her embrace blue - coat , moss rise , white waistcoat 
 and all - with a vehement sob and a loud exclamation ! 

 " oh ! brother Dick ! - dear , dear brother Dick ! and I live to see thee 
 agin ! " and then come two such kiss - you might have hear they a mile 
 off ! the situation of brother Dick be appalling ; and the crowd , that 
 have before only tittered politely , could not now resist the effect of 
 this sudden embrace . there be a general explosion ! it be a roar ! that 
 roar would have kill a weak man ; but it sound to the strong heart 
 of Richard Avenel like the defiance of a foe , and it pluck forth in an 
 instant from all conventional let and barrier the native spirit of the 
 Anglo - Saxon . 

 he lift abruptly his handsome masculine head , and look round 
 the ring of his ill - breed visitor with a haughty stare of rebuke and 
 surprise . 

 " lady and gentleman , " then say he , very coolly , " I do not   see what 
 there be to laugh at ! a brother and sister meet after many year ' 
 separation , and the sister cry , poor thing . for my part I think it 
 very natural that she should cry ; but not that you should laugh ! " 

 in an instant the whole shame be remove from Richard Avenel , and 
 rest in full weight upon the bystander . it be impossible to say how 
 foolish and sheepish they all look , nor how slinkingly each try to 
 creep off . 

 Richard Avenel seize his advantage with the promptitude of a man who 
 have get on in America , and be , therefore , accustom to make the good 
 of thing . he draw Mrs. Fairfield 's arm in his , and lead she into the 
 house ; but when he have get she safe into his parlour - Leonard follow 
 all the time - and the door be close upon those three , then Richard 
 Avenel 's ire burst forth . 

 " you impudent , ungrateful , audacious - drab ! " 

 yes , drab be the word . I be shocked to say it , but the duty of a 
 historian be stern : and the word be drab . 

 " Drab ! " falter poor Jane Fairfield ; and she clutch hold of Leonard 
 to save herself from fall . 

 " Sir ! " cry Leonard , fiercely . 

 you might as well have cry ' sir " to a mountain torrent . Richard 
 hurry on , for he be furious . 

 " you nasty , dirty , dusty dowdy ! how dare you come here to disgrace I 
 in my own house and premise , after my send you L50 ! to take the very 
 time , too , when - when Richard gasp for breath ; and the laugh of his 
 guest rang in his ear , and get into his chest , and choke he . Jane 
 Fairfield draw herself up , and her tear be dry . 

 " I do not come to disgrace you ! I come to see my boy , and - " 

 " ha ! " interrupt Richard , " to see he . " 

 he turn to Leonard : " you have write to this woman , then ? " 

 " no , sir , I have not . " 

 " I believe you lie . " 

 " he do not lie ; and he be as good as yourself , and well , Richard 
 Avenel , " exclaim Mrs. Fairfield ; " and I will not   stand here and hear 
 he insult , - that be what I will not . and as for your L50 , there be 
 forty - five of it ; and I will work my finger to the bone till I pay back 
 the other five . and do not   be afeard I shall disgrace you , for I will never 
 look on your face agin ; and you be a wicked , bad man , - that be what you 
 be ! " 

 the poor woman 's voice be so raise and so shrill , that any other and 
 more remorseful feeling which Richard might have conceive be drown 
 in his apprehension that she would be overhear by his servant or his 
 guest , - a masculine apprehension , with which female rarely sympathize ; 
 which , on the contrary , they be inclined to consider a mean and 
 cowardly terror on the part of their male oppressor . 

 " hush ! hold your infernal squall , - do ' . " say Mr. Avenel , in a tone that 
 he mean to be soothe . " there - sit down - and do not   stir till I come 
 back again , and can talk to you calmly . Leonard , follow I , and help to 
 explain thing to our guest . " 

 Leonard stand still , but shake his head slightly . 

 " what do you mean , sir ? " say Richard Avenel , in a very portentous 
 growl . " shake your head at I ? do you intend to disobey I ? you have 
 well take care ! " 

 Leonard 's front rise ; he draw one arm round his mother , and thus he 
 speak , 

 " Sir , you have be kind to I , and generous , and that think alone 
 silence my indignation when I hear you address such language to my 
 mother ; for I feel that , if I speak , I should say too much . now I speak , 
 and it be to say , shortly , that - " 

 " hush , boy , " say poor Mrs. Fairfield , frighten ; " do not   mind I . I do 
 not come to make mischief , and ruin your prospex . I will go ! " 

 " will you ask her pardon , Mr. Avenel ? " say Leonard , firmly ; and he 
 advance towards his uncle . 

 Richard , naturally hot and intolerant of contradiction , be then 
 excited , not only by the angry emotion , which , it must be own , a man 
 so mortify , and in the very flush of triumph , might well experience , 
 but by much more wine than he be in the habit of drinking ; and when 
 Leonard approach he , he misinterpret the movement into one of 
 menace and aggression . he lift his arm : " come a step nearer , " say 
 he , between his tooth , " and I will knock you down . " Leonard advance the 
 forbid step ; but as Richard catch his eye , there be something in 
 that eye - not defy , not threaten , but bold and dauntless - which 
 Richard recognize and respect , for that something speak the Freeman . 
 the uncle 's arm mechanically fall to his side . " you can not strike I , 
 Mr. Avenel , " say Leonard , " for you be aware that I could not strike 
 again my mother 's brother . as her son , I once more say to you , - ask she 
 pardon . " 

 " ten thousand devil ! be you mad ? - or do you want to drive I mad ? you 
 insolent beggar , feed and clothe by my charity ! ask her pardon ! - what 
 for ? that she have make I the object of jeer and ridicule with that 
 d - -d cotton gown and those double - d - -d thick shoe - I vow and protest 
 they have   get nail in they ! Hark ye , sir , I have   be insult by she , but 
 I be not to be bully by you . come with I instantly , or I discard 
 you ; not a shilling of mine shall you have as long as I live . take your 
 choice : be a peasant , a labourer , or - " 

 " a base renegade to natural affection , a degraded beggar indeed ! " cry 
 Leonard , his breast heaving , and his cheek in a glow . " Mother , Mother , 
 come away . never fear , - I have strength and youth , and we will work 
 together as before . " 

 but poor Mrs. Fairfield , overcome by her excitement , have sink down into 
 Richard 's own handsome morocco leather easy - chair , and could neither 
 speak nor stir . 

 " confound you both ! " mutter Richard . " you can not   be see creep out 
 of my house now . keep she here , you young viper , you ; keep she till I 
 come back ; and then , if you choose to go , go and be - " 

 not finish his sentence , Mr. Avenel hurry out of the room , and 
 lock the door , put the key into his pocket . he pause for a moment 
 in the hall , in order to collect his thought , draw three or four deep 
 breath , give himself a great shake , and , resolve to be faithful to 
 his principle of do one thing at a time , shake off in that shake all 
 disturbing recollection of his mutinous captive . stern as Achilles when 
 he appear to the Trojans , Richard Avenel stalk back to his lawn . 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

 Brief as have be his absence , the host could see that , in the interval , 
 a great and notable change have come over the spirit of his company . some 
 of those who live in the town be evidently prepare to return home 
 on foot ; those who live at a distance , and whose carriage   have be 
 send away , and order to return at a fix hour   have not yet arrive , 
 be gather together in small knot and group ; all look sullen and 
 displease , and all instinctively turn from their host as he pass 
 they by . they feel they have be lecture , and they be more put out 
 than Richard himself . they do not know if they might not be lecture 
 again . this vulgar man , of what might he not be capable ? Richard 's 
 shrewd sense comprehend in an instant all the difficulty of his 
 position ; but he walk on deliberately and directly towards Mrs. 
 M'Catchley , who be stand near the grand marquee with the Pompleys 
 and the dean 's lady . as those personage see he make thus boldly 
 towards they , there be a flutter . " hang the fellow ! " say the 
 colonel , intrench himself in his stock , " he be come here . low and 
 shocking - what shall we do ? let we stroll on . " but Richard throw himself 
 in the way of the retreat . " Mrs. M'Catchley , " say he , very gravely , and 
 offer she his arm , " allow I three word with you . " 

 the poor widow look very much discompose . Mrs. Pompley pull she 
 by the sleeve . Richard still stand gaze into her face , with his arm 
 extend . she hesitate a minute , and then take the arm . 

 " monstrous impudent ! " cry the colonel . 

 " let Mrs. M'Catchley alone , my dear , " respond Mrs. Pompley ; ' she will 
 know how to give he a lesson . " 

 " Madam , " say Richard , as soon as he and his companion be out of 
 hearing , " I rely on you to do I a favour . " 

 " on I ? " 

 " on you , and you alone . you have influence with all those people , and 
 a word from you will effect what I desire . Mrs. M'Catchley , " add 
 Richard , with a solemnity that be actually impose , " I flatter myself 
 that you have some friendship for I , which be more than I can say of 
 any other soul in these ground ; will you do I this favour , ay or no ? " 

 " what be it , Mr. Avenel ? " ask Mrs. M'Catchley , much disturbed , and 
 somewhat soften , - for she be by no mean a woman without feel ; 
 indeed , she consider herself nervous . 

 " get all your friend - all the company , in short - to come back into the 
 tent for refreshment , for anything . I want to say a few word to they . " 

 " bless I ! Mr. Avenel - a few word ! " cry the widow , " but that be just 
 what they be all afraid of . you must pardon I , but you really can not   ask 
 people to a dejeune dansant , and then - scold them ! " 

 " I be not go to scold they , " say Air . Avenel , very seriously , - " upon 
 my honour , I be not . I be go to make all right , and I even hope 
 afterwards that the dancing may go on - and that you will honour I again 
 with your hand . I leave you to your task ; and believe I , I be not an 
 ungrateful man . " he speak , and bow - not without some dignity - and 
 vanish within the breakfast division of the marquee . there he busy 
 himself in re - collect the waiter , and direct they to re - arrange 
 the mangle remain of the table as they good could . Mrs. M'Catchley , 
 whose curiosity and interest be arouse , execute her commission with 
 all the ability and tact of a woman of the world , and in less than a 
 quarter of an hour the marquee be fill , the cork fly , the champagne 
 bounce and sparkle , people drink in silence , munch fruit and cake , 
 keep up their courage with the conscious sense of number , and feel a 
 great desire to know what be come . Mr. Avenel , at the head of the 
 table , suddenly rise . 

 " lady and Gentlemen , " say he , " I have take the liberty to invite you 
 once more into this tent , in order to ask you to sympathize with I upon 
 an occasion which take we all a little by surprise to - day . 

 " of course , you all know I be a new man , - the maker of my own fortune . " 

 a great many head bow involuntarily . the word be say manfully , 
 and there be a general feeling of respect . " probably , too , " resume Mr. 
 Avenel , " you may know that I be the son of very honest tradespeople . I 
 say honest , and they be not ashamed of I ; I say tradespeople , and I be 
 not ashamed of they . my sister marry and settle at a distance . I take 
 her son to educate and bring up . but I do not tell she where he be , 
 nor even that I have return from America ; I wish to choose my own 
 time for that , when I could give she the surprise , not only of a rich 
 brother , but of a son whom I intend to make a gentleman , so far as 
 manner and education can make one . well , the poor dear woman have find 
 I out soon than I expect , and turn the table on I by give I 
 a surprise of her own invention . pray , forgive the confusion this little 
 family - scene have create ; and though I own it be very laughable at the 
 moment , and I be wrong to say otherwise , yet I be sure I do not   judge 
 ill of your good heart , when I ask you to think what brother and sister 
 must feel who part from each other when they be boy and girl . to 
 I "   and Richard give a great gulp , for he feel that a great gulp alone 
 could swallow the abominable lie he be about to utter   - " to I this have 
 be a very happy occasion ! I be a plain man : no one can take ill what 
 I have   say . and wish that you may be all as happy in your family as I 
 be in mine - humble though it be - I beg to drink your very good health ! " 

 there be a universal applause when Richard sit down ; and so well in 
 his plain way have he look the thing , and do the thing , that at least 
 half of those present - who till then have certainly dislike and half 
 despise he - suddenly feel that they be proud of his acquaintance . 
 for however aristocratic this country of our may be , and however 
 especially aristocratic be the genteeler class in provincial town and 
 coterie , there be nothing which english folk , from the high to the 
 low , in their heart so respect as a man who have rise from nothing , 
 and own it frankly . Sir Compton Delaval , an old baronet , with a 
 pedigree as long as a Welshman 's , who have be reluctantly decoy to 
 the feast by his three unmarried daughter - not one of whom , however , 
 have hitherto condescend even to bow to the host - now rise . it be his 
 right , - he be the first person there in rank and station . 

 " lady and Gentlemen , " quoth Sir Compton Delaval , " I be sure that I 
 express the feeling of all present when I say that we have hear with 
 great delight and admiration the word address to we by our excellent 
 host .   applause .   and if any of we , in what - Mr. Avenel describe justly 
 as the surprise of the moment , be betray into an unseemly merriment 
 at - at -   the dean 's lady whisper ' some of the '   - some of the - some of 
 the - " repeat Sir Compton , puzzle , and come to a deadlock   " holy 
 sentiment , " whisper the dean 's lady   - " ay , some of the holy 
 sentiment in our nature , I beg he to accept our sincere apology . 
 I can only say , for my part , that I be proud to rank Mr. Avenel amongst 
 the gentleman of the county "   here Sir Compton give a sound thump 
 on the table , " and to thank he for one of the most brilliant 
 entertainment it have ever be my lot to witness . if he win his fortune 
 honestly , he know how to spend it nobly . " 

 Whiz go a fresh bottle of champagne . 

 " I be not accustomed to public speaking , but I could not repress my 
 sentiment . and I have   now only to propose to you the health of our host . 
 Richard Avenel , Esquire ; and to couple with that the health of his - very 
 interesting sister , and long life to they both . " 

 the sentence be half drown in enthusiastic plaudit , and in three 
 cheer for Richard Avenel , Esquire , and his very interesting sister . 

 " I be a cursed humbug , " think Richard Avenel , as he wipe his 
 forehead ; " but the world be such a humbug ! " then he glance towards Mrs. 
 M'Catehley and , to his great satisfaction , see Mrs. M'Catchley with her 
 handkerchief before her eye . 

 truth must be tell ; although the fair widow might certainly have 
 contemplate the probability of accept Mr. Avenel as a husband , she 
 have never before feel the least bit in love with he ; and now she do . 
 there be something in courage and candour - in a word , in manliness - that 
 all woman , the most worldly , do admire in man ; and Richard Avenel , 
 humbug though his conscience say he be , seem to Mrs. M'Catchley like 
 a hero . 

 the host see his triumph . " now for another dance ! " say he , gayly ; and 
 he be about to offer his hand to Mrs. M'Catchley , when Sir Compton 
 Delaval seize it , and give it a hearty shake , cry , " you have not 
 yet dance with my eld daughter ; so if you will not ask she , why , I 
 must offer she to you as your partner . here , Sarah . " 

 Miss Sarah Delaval , who be five foot eight , and as stately as she be 
 tall , bow her head graciously ; and Mr. Avenel , before he know where 
 he be , find she lean on his arm . but as he pass into the next 
 division of the tent , he have to run the gauntlet of all the gentleman , 
 who throng round to shake hand with he . their warm english heart 
 could not be satisfied till they have so repair the sin of their 
 previous haughtiness and mockery . Richard Avenel might then have safely 
 introduce his sister - gown , kerchief , thick shoe , and all - to the 
 crowd ; but he have no such thought . he thank Heaven devoutly that she 
 be safely under lock and key . 

 it be not till the third dance that he could secure Mrs. M'Catchley 's 
 hand , and then it be twilight . the carriage be at the door , but no 
 one yet think of go . People be really enjoy themselves . 
 Mr. Avenel have have time , in the interim , to mature all his plan for 
 complete and consummate that triumph which his tact and pluck have 
 draw from his momentary disgrace . excite as he be with wine , and 
 suppress passion , he have yet the sense to feel that , when all the 
 halo that now surround he have evaporate , and Mrs. M'Catchley be 
 redelivere up to the Pompleys , whom he feel to be the last person his 
 interest could desire for her adviser , the thought of his low relation 
 would return with calm reflection . now be the time . the iron be hot , 
 now be the time to strike it , and forge the endure chain . as he 
 lead Mrs. M'Catchley after the dance , into the lawn , he therefore say 
 tenderly , - 

 " how shall I thank you for the favour you have do I ? " 

 " oh ! " say Mrs. M'Catchley , warmly , " it be no favour , and I be so 
 glad - " she stop . 

 " you be not ashamed of I , then , in spite of what have happen ? " 

 " ashamed of you ! why , I should be so proud of you , if I be - " 

 " finish the sentence and say - ' your wife ! ' - there , it be out . my dear 
 madam , I be rich , as you know ; I love you very heartily . with your 
 help , I think I can make a figure in a large world than this : and that , 
 whatever my father , my grandson at least will be - but it be time enough 
 to speak of he . what say you ? - you - turn away . I will not tease you , - it 
 be not my way . I say before , ay or no ; and your kindness so embolden 
 I that I say it again , ay or no ? " 

 " but you take I so unawares - so - so - Lord ! my dear Mr. Avenel ; you 
 be so hasty - I - I - " and the widow actually blush , and be genuinely 
 bashful . 

 " those horrid Pompleys ! " think Richard , as he see the colonel bustle 
 up with Mrs. M'Catchley 's cloak on his arm . " I press for your answer , " 
 continue the suitor , speak very fast . " I shall leave this place 
 to - morrow , if you will not give it . " 

 " leave this place - leave I ? " 

 " then you will be mine ? " 

 " ah , Mr. Avenel ! " say the widow , languidly , and leave her hand in 
 his , " who can resist you ? " 

 up come Colonel Pompley ; Richard take the shawl : " no hurry for that now , 
 Colonel , - Mrs. M'Catchley feel already at home here . " 

 ten minute afterwards , Richard Avenel so contrive that it be know 
 by the whole company that their host be accept by the Honourable Mrs. 
 M'Catchley . and every one say , " he be a very clever man and a very good 
 fellow , " except the Pompleys - and the Pompleys be frantic . Mr. Richard 
 Avenel have force his way into the aristocracy of the country ; the 
 husband of an honourable , connect with peer ! 

 " he will stand for our city - Vulgarian ! " cry the colonel . " and his 
 wife will walk out before I , " cry the colonel 's lady , - " nasty woman ! " 
 and she burst into tear . 

 the guest be go ; and Richard have now leisure to consider what 
 course to pursue with regard to his sister and her son . 

 his victory over his guest have in much soften his heart towards his 
 relation ; but he still feel bitterly aggrieve at Mrs. Fairfield 's 
 unseasonable intrusion , and his pride be greatly chafe by the boldness 
 of Leonard . he have no idea of any man whom he have serve , or mean to 
 serve , have a will of his own , have a single thought in opposition 
 to his pleasure . he begin , too , to feel that word have pass between 
 he and Leonard which could not be well forget by either , and would 
 render their close connection less pleasant than heretofore . he , the 
 great Richard Avenel , beg pardon of Mrs. Fairfield , the washerwoman ! 
 no ; she and Leonard must beg his . " that must be the first step , " say 
 Richard Avenel ; " and I suppose they have come to their sens . " with 
 that expectation , he unlock the door of his parlour , and find himself 
 in complete solitude . the moon , lately risen , shine full into the room , 
 and light up every corner . he star round bewilder , - the bird have 
 fly . " do they go through the keyhole ? " say Air . Avenel . " ha ! I see ! 
 the window be open ! " the window reach to the ground . Mr. Avenel , in 
 his excitement , have forget that easy mode of egress . " well , " say he , 
 throw himself into his easy - chair , " I suppose I shall soon hear from 
 they : they will be want my money fast enough , I fancy . " his eye catch 
 sight of a letter , unseal , lie on the table . he open it , and see 
 bank - note to the amount of L50 , - the widow 's forty - five country note , 
 and a new note , Bank of England , that he have lately give to Leonard . 
 with the money be these line , write in Leonard 's bold , clear 
 writing , though a word or two here and there show that the hand have 
 tremble , - 

  I thank you for all you have do to one whom you regard as the 
  object of charity . my mother and I forgive what have pass . I 
  depart with she . you bade I make my choice , and I have make it . 

  LEONARD FAIRFIELD . 

 the paper drop from Richard 's hand , and he remain mute and 
 remorseful for a moment . he soon feel , however , that he have no help for 
 it but work himself up into a rage . " of all people in the world , " 
 cry Richard , stamp his foot on the floor , " there be none so 
 disagreeable , insolent , and ungrateful as poor relation . I wash my 
 hand of they ! " 




 BOOK SIXTH . 




 INITIAL chapter . 

 WHEREIN MR . CAXTON be PROFOUNDLY METAPHYSICAL . 

 " life , " say my father , in his most dogmatical tone , " be a certain 
 quantity in time , which may be regard in two way , - first , as life 
 integral ; second , as life fractional . life integral be that complete 
 whole expressive of a certain value , large or small , which each man 
 possess in himself . life fractional be that same whole seize upon 
 and invade by other people , and subdivide amongst they . they who get a 
 large slice of it say , ' a very valuable life this ! ' those who get but a 
 small handful say , ' so , so ; nothing very great ! ' those who get none of 
 it in the scramble exclaim , ' good for nothing ! ' " 

 " I do not   understand a word you be say , " growl Captain Roland . 

 my father survey his brother with compassion : " I will make it all 
 clear , even to your understanding . when I sit down by myself in my 
 study , have carefully lock the door on all of you , alone with my 
 book and thought , I be in full possession of my integral life . I be 
 totu , tere , atque rotundus , - a whole human being , equivalent in value , 
 we will say , for the sake of illustration , to a fix round sum , l100 
 for example . but when I go forth into the common apartment , each of 
 those to whom I be of any worth whatsoever put his finger into the bag 
 that contain I , and take out of I what he want . Kitty require I 
 to pay a bill ; Pisistratus to save he the time and trouble of look 
 into a score or two of book ; the child to tell they story , or 
 play at hide - and - seek ; and so on throughout the circle to which I have 
 incautiously give myself up for plunder and subdivision . the l100 which 
 I represent in my study be now parcel out ; I be worth L40 or L50 
 to Kitty , L20 to Pisistratus , and perhaps 30 . to the child . this be 
 life fractional . and I cease to be an integral till once more return 
 to my study , and again close the door on all existence but my own . 
 meanwhile , it be perfectly clear that to those who , whether I be in the 
 study or whether I be in the common sitting - room , get nothing at all 
 out of I , I be not worth a farthing . it must be wholly indifferent to a 
 native of Kamschatka whether Austin Caxton be or be not raze out of the 
 great account - book of human being . 

 " hence , " continue my father , - " hence it follow that the more 
 fractional a life be - that is , the great the number of person among 
 whom it can be subdivide - why , the more there be to say , ' a very 
 valuable life that ! ' thus the leader of a political party , a conqueror , 
 a king , an author , who be amusing hundred or thousand or million , have 
 a great number of person whom his worth interest and affect than a 
 Saint Simeon Stylites could have when he perch himself at the top of 
 a column ; although , regard each in himself , Saint Simeon , in his grand 
 mortification of flesh , in the idea that he thereby please his Divine 
 Benefactor , might represent a large sum of moral value per se than 
 Bonaparte or Voltaire . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " perfectly clear , sir ; but I do not   see what it have to do 
 with ' my novel . ' " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " everything . your novel , if it be to be a full and 
 comprehensive survey of the ' Quicquid agunt homine '   which it ought to 
 be , consider the length and breadth to which I foresee , from the slow 
 development of your story , you meditate extend and expand 
 it , will embrace the two view of existence , - the integral and the 
 fractional . you have show we the former in Leonard , when he be sit 
 in his mother 's cottage , or rest from his work by the little fount in 
 Riccabocca 's garden . and in harmony with that view of his life , you have 
 surround he with comparative integral , only subdivide by the tender 
 hand of their immediate family and neighbour , - your squire and 
 parson , your italian exile and his Jemima . with all these , life be , 
 more or less , the life natural , and this be always , more or less , the 
 life integral . then come the life artificial , which be always , more or 
 less , the life fractional . in the life natural , wherein we be sway 
 but by our own native impulse and desire , subservient only to the 
 great silent law of Virtue   which have pervade the universe since 
 it swing out of chaos , a man be of worth from what he be in 
 himself , - Newton be as worthy before the apple fall from the tree as 
 when all Europe applaud the discoverer of the Principle of Gravity . 
 but in the life artificial we be only of worth inasmuch as we affect 
 other ; and , relative to that life , Newton rise in value more than a 
 million per cent when down fall the apple from which ultimately spring 
 up his discovery . in order to keep civilization go and spread over 
 the world the light of human intellect , we have certain desire within 
 we , ever swell beyond the ease and independence which belong to we 
 as integral . cold man as Newton might be   he once take a lady 's hand in 
 his own , Kitty , and use her forefinger for his tobacco - stopper , - great 
 philosopher ! , cold as he might be , he be yet move into give his 
 discovery to the world , and that from motif very little differ 
 in their quality from the motif that make Dr. Squills communicate 
 article to the ' Phrenological Journal ' upon the skull of Bushmen and 
 wombat . for it be the property of light to travel . when a man have 
 light in he , forth it must go . but the first passage of genius from its 
 integral state   in which it have be repose on its own wealth   into 
 the fractional be usually through a hard and vulgar pathway . it leave 
 behind it the revery of solitude , - that self - contemplate rest which 
 may be call the Visionary , - and enter suddenly into the state that 
 may be call the positive and actual . there it see the operation 
 of money on the outer life ; see all the ruder and commoner spring 
 of action ; see ambition without nobleness , love without romance ; be 
 bustle about and order and trample and cow , - in short , it pass 
 an apprenticeship with some Richard Avenel , and do not detect what 
 good and what grandeur , what addition even to the true poetry of the 
 social universe , fractional existence like Richard Avenel 's bestow ; 
 for the pillar that support society be like those of the Court of the 
 Hebrew Tabernacle , - they be of brass , it be true , but they be fillet 
 with silver . from such intermediate state Genius be expel and drive 
 on its way , and would have be so in this case have Mrs. Fairfield   who 
 be but the representative of the homely natural affection , strong 
 ever in true genius , - for light be warm   never crush Mr. Avenel 's moss 
 rise on her sisterly bosom . now , forth from this passage and defile of 
 transition into the large world , must Genius go on , work out its 
 natural destiny amidst thing and form the most artificial . passion 
 that move and influence the world be at work around it . often lose 
 sight of itself , its very absence be a silent contrast to the agency 
 present . Merged and vanish for a while amidst the Practical World , yet 
 we ourselves feel all the while that it be there ; be at work amidst the 
 working around it . this practical world that efface it rise out of 
 some genius that have go before ; and so each man of genius , though we 
 never come across he , as his operation proceed in place remote from 
 our thoroughfare , be yet influence the practical world that ignore 
 he , for ever and ever . that be geniu ! we can not   describe it in book ; 
 we can only hint and suggest it by the accessory which we artfully 
 heap about it . the entrance of a true probationer into the terrible 
 ordeal of Practical Life be like that into the miraculous cavern , by 
 which , legend inform we , Saint Patrick convert Ireland . " 

 BLANCHE . - " what be that legend ? I never hear of it . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " my dear , you will find it in a thin folio at the right on 
 enter my study , write by Thomas Messingham , and call ' Florilegium 
 Insulae Sanctorum , ' etc . the account therein be confirm by the 
 relation of an honest soldier , one Louis Ennius , who have actually 
 enter the cavern . in short , the truth of the legend be undeniable , 
 unless you mean to say , which I can not   for a moment suppose , that Louis 
 Ennius be a liar . thus it run : Saint Patrick , find that the irish 
 pagan be incredulous as to his pathetic assurance of the pain and 
 torment destine to those who do not expiate their sin in this world , 
 pray for a miracle to convince they . his prayer be hear ; and a 
 certain cavern , so small that a man could not stand up therein at his 
 ease , be suddenly convert into a Purgatory , comprehend torture 
 sufficient to convince the most incredulous . one unacquainted with 
 human nature might conjecture that few would be dispose to venture 
 voluntarily into such a place ; on the contrary , pilgrim come in crowd . 
 now , all who enter from vain curiosity or with soul unprepared 
 perish miserably ; but those who enter with deep and earnest faith , 
 conscious of their fault , and if bold , yet humble , not only come out 
 safe and sound , but purify , as if from the water of a second baptism . 
 see Savage and Johnson at night in Fleet Street , - and who shall doubt 
 the truth of Saint Patrick 's purgatory ! " Therewith my father sigh ; 
 close his Lucian , which have lie open on the table , and would read none 
 but " good book " for the rest of the evening . 




 CHAPTER II . 

 on their escape from the prison to which Mr. Avenel have condemn they , 
 Leonard and his mother find their way to a small public - house that lie 
 at a little distance from the town , and on the outskirt of the high 
 road . with his arm round his mother 's waist , Leonard support she 
 step , and soothe her excitement . in fact , the poor woman 's nerve 
 be greatly shake , and she feel an uneasy remorse at the injury her 
 intrusion have inflict on the young man 's worldly prospect . as the 
 shrewd reader have guess already , that infamous tinker be the prime 
 agent of evil in this critical turn in the affair of his quondam 
 customer ; for , on his return to his haunt around Hazeldean and the 
 Casino , the tinker have hasten to apprise Mrs. Fairfield of his 
 interview with Leonard , and , on find that she be not aware that the 
 boy be under the roof of his uncle , the pestilent vagabond   perhaps 
 from spite against Mr. Avenel , or perhaps from that pure love of 
 mischief by which metaphysical critic explain the character of Iago , 
 and which certainly form a main element in the idiosyncrasy of Mr. 
 Sprott   have so impressed on the widow 's mind the haughty demeanour of 
 the uncle , and the refined costume of the nephew , that Mrs. Fairfield 
 have be seize with a bitter and insupportable jealousy . there be an 
 intention to rob she of her boy ! - he be to be make too fine for she . 
 his silence be now account for . this sort of jealousy , always more or 
 less a feminine quality , be often very strong amongst the poor ; and it 
 be the more strong in Mrs. Fairfield , because , lone woman that she be , 
 the boy be all in all to she . and though she be reconcile to the loss 
 of his presence , nothing could reconcile she to the thought that his 
 affection should be wean from she . moreover , there be in her mind 
 certain impression , of the justice of which the reader may well 
 judge hereafter , as to the gratitude - more than ordinarily filial - which 
 Leonard owe to she . in short , she do not like , as she phrase it , " to 
 be shake off ; " and after a sleepless night she resolve to judge for 
 herself , much move thereto by the malicious suggestion to that effect 
 make by Mr. Sprott , who mightily enjoy the idea of mortify the 
 gentleman by whom he have be so disrespectfully threaten with 
 the treadmill . the widow feel angry with Parson Dale and with the 
 Riccaboccas : she think they be in the plot against she ; she 
 communicate therefore , her intention to none , and off she set , 
 perform the journey partly on the top of the coach , partly on foot . 
 no wonder that she be dusty , poor woman ! 

 " and , oh , boy ! " say she , half sob , " when I get through the 
 lodge - gate , come on the lawn , and see all that power o ' fine folk , I 
 say to myself , say I - for I feel fritt - I will just have a look at he 
 and go back . but ah , Lenny , when I see thee , look so handsome , and 
 when thee turn and cry ' Mother , ' my heart be just ready to leap out 
 o ' my mouth , and so I could not help hug thee , if I have die for 
 it . and thou wert so kind , that I forget all Mr. Sprott have say about 
 Dick 's pride , or think he have just tell a fib about that , as he have 
 want I to believe a fib about thee . then Dick come up - and I have not 
 see he for so many year - and we come o ' the same father and mother ; 
 and so - and so - " the widow 's sob here fairly choke she . " ah , " she 
 say , after give vent to her passion , and throw her arm round 
 Leonard 's neck , as they sit in the little sand parlour of the 
 public - house , - " ah , and I have   bring thee to this . go back ; go back , 
 boy , and never mind I . " 

 with some difficulty Leonard pacify poor Mrs. Fairfield , and get she 
 to retire to bed ; for she be , indeed , thoroughly exhaust . he then 
 step forth into the road ; musingly . all the star be out ; and 
 Youth , in its trouble , instinctively look up to the star . fold his 
 arm , Leonard gaze on the heaven , and his lip murmur . 

 from this trance , for so it might be call , he be awaken by a 
 voice in a decidedly London accent ; and , turn hastily round , see Mr. 
 Avenel 's very gentlemanlike butler . 

 Leonard 's first idea be that his uncle have repent , and send in search 
 of he . but the butler seem as much surprised at the rencontre as 
 himself : that personage , indeed , the fatigue of the day be over , be 
 accompany one of Mr. Gunter 's waiter to the public - house   at which 
 the latter have secure his lodging , have discover an old friend 
 in the waiter , and propose to regale himself with a cheerful glass , 
 and - that of course - abuse of his present situation . 

 " Mr. Fairfield ! " exclaim the butler , while the waiter walk 
 discreetly on . 

 Leonard look , and say nothing . the butler begin to think that some 
 apology be due for leave his plate and his pantry , and that he might 
 as well secure Leonard 's propitiatory influence with his master . 

 " please , sir , " say he , touch his hat , " I be just a showing Mr. 
 Giles the way to the Blue Bells , where he put up for the night . I hope 
 my master will not be offend . if you be a go back , sir , would you 
 kindly mention it ? " 

 " I be not go back , Jarvis , " answer Leonard , after a pause ; " I be 
 leave Mr. Avenel 's house , to accompany my mother , - rather suddenly . 
 I should be very much oblige to you if you would bring some thing of 
 mine to I at the Blue Bells . I will give you the list , if you will step 
 with I to the inn . " 

 without wait for a reply , Leonard then turn towards the inn , and 
 make his humble inventory : item , the clothe he have bring with he 
 from the Casino ; item , the knapsack that have contain they ; item , a few 
 book , ditto ; item , Dr. Riccabocca 's watch ; item , sundry manuscript , 
 on which the young student now build all his hope of fame and fortune . 
 this list he put into Mr. Jarvis 's hand . 

 " Sir , " say the butler , twirl the paper between his finger and thumb , 
 " you be not a go for long , I hope ? " and he look on the face of 
 the young man , who have always be " civil speak to he , " with as 
 much curiosity and as much compassion as so apathetic and princely 
 a personage could experience in matter affect a family less 
 aristocratic than he have hitherto condescend to serve . 

 " yes , " say Leonard , simply and briefly ; " and your master will no doubt 
 excuse you for render I this service . " Mr. Jarvis postpone for the 
 present his glass and chat with the waiter , and go back at once to Mr. 
 Avenel . that gentleman , still seat in his library , have not be aware 
 of the butler 's absence ; and when Mr. Jarvis enter and tell he that 
 he have meet Mr. Fairfield , and communicate the commission with which 
 he be intrust , ask leave to execute it , Mr. Avenel feel the man 's 
 inquisitive eye be on he , and conceive new wrath against Leonard for 
 a new humiliation to his pride . it be awkward to give no explanation 
 of his nephew 's departure , still more awkward to explain . after a short 
 pause , Mr. Avenel say sullenly , " my nephew be go away on business 
 for some time , - do what he tell you ; " and then turn his back , and 
 light his cigar . 

 " that beast of a boy , " say he , soliloquizing , " either mean this as an 
 affront , or an overture : if an affront , he be , indeed , well get rid 
 of ; if an overture , he will soon make a more respectful and proper 
 one . after all , I can not   have too little of relation till I have fairly 
 secure Mrs. M'Catchley . an Honourable ! I wonder if that make I an 
 honourable too ? this curse Debrett contain no practical information on 
 those point . " 

 the next morning the clothe and the watch with which Mr. Avenel 
 present Leonard be return , with a note mean to express gratitude , 
 but certainly write with very little knowledge of the world ; and so 
 full of that somewhat over - resentful pride which have in early life 
 make Leonard fly from Hazeldean , and refuse all apology to Randal , that 
 it be not to be wonder at that Mr. Avenel 's last remorseful 
 feeling evaporate in ire . " I hope he will starve ! " say the uncle , 
 vindictively . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 " listen to I , my dear mother , " say Leonard the next morning , as , with 
 knapsack on his shoulder and Mrs. Fairfield on his arm , he walk along 
 the high road ; " I do assure you from my heart that I do not regret the 
 loss of favour which I see plainly would have crush out of I the 
 very sense of independence . but do not fear for I ; I have education 
 and energy , - I shall do well for myself , trust I . - no , I can not , it be 
 true , go back to our cottage ; I can not be a gardener again . do not   ask 
 I , - I should be discontent , miserable . but I will go up to London ! 
 that be the place to make a fortune and a name : I will make both . oh , 
 yes , trust I , I will . you shall soon be proud of your Leonard ; and then 
 we will always live together , - always ! do not   cry . " 

 " but what can you do in Lunnon , - such a big place , Lenny ? " 

 " what ! every year do not some lad leave our village , and go and seek 
 his fortune , take with he but health and strong hand ? I have these , 
 and I have more : I have brain and thought and hope , that - again I 
 say , no , no ; never fear for I ! " 

 the boy throw back his head proudly ; there be something sublime in his 
 young trust in the future . 

 " well . but you will write to Mr. Dale or to I ? I will get Mr. Dale 
 or the good mounseer   now I know they be not agin I   to read your 
 letter . " 

 " I will , indeed ! " 

 " and , boy , you have nothing in your pocket . we have pay Dick ; these , 
 at least , be my own , after pay the coach fare . " and she would thrust 
 a sovereign and some shilling into Leonard 's waistcoat pocket . 

 after some resistance , he be force to consent . 

 " and there be a sixpence with a hole in it . do not   part with that , Lenny ; 
 it will bring thee good luck . " 

 thus talk , they gain the inn where the three road meet , and from 
 which a coach go direct to the Casino . and here , without enter the 
 inn , they sit on the greensward by the hedgerow , wait the arrival 
 of the coach - Mrs. Fairfield be much subdue in spirit , and there 
 be evidently on her mind something uneasy , - some struggle with her 
 conscience . she not only upbraid herself for her rash visit , but she 
 keep talk of her dead Mark . and what would he say of she , if he could 
 see she in heaven ? 

 " it be so selfish in I , Lenny . " 

 " Pooh , pooh ! have not a mother a right to her child ? " 

 " ay , ay , ay ! " cry Mrs. Fairfield . " I do love you as a child , - my own 
 child . but if I be not your mother , after all , Lenny , and cost you all 
 this - oh , what would you say of I then ? " 

 " not my own mother ! " say Leonard , laugh as he kiss she . " well , I 
 do not   know what I should say then differently from what I say now , - that 
 you , who bring I up and nurse and cherish I , have a right to my 
 home and my heart , wherever I be . " 

 " bless thee ! " cry Mrs. Fairfield , as she press he to her heart . 
 " but it weigh here , - it weigh , " she say , start up . 

 at that instant the coach appear , and Leonard run forward to inquire 
 if there be an outside place . then there be a short bustle while the 
 horse be be change ; and Mrs. Fairfield be lift up to the roof 
 of the vehicle , so all further private conversation between she and 
 Leonard cease . but as the coach whirl away , and she wave her hand 
 to the boy , who stand on the road - side gaze after she , she still 
 murmur , " it weigh here , - it weigh ! " 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 Leonard walk sturdily on in the high road to the Great City . the day 
 be calm and sunlit , but with a gentle breeze from gray hill at the 
 distance ; and with each mile that he pass , his step seem to grow 
 more firm , and his front more elate . oh , it be such joy in youth to be 
 alone with one 's daydream ! and youth feel so glorious a vigour in the 
 sense of its own strength , though the world be before and - against it ! 
 remove from that chilling counting - house , from the imperious will of 
 a patron and master , all friendless , but all independent , the young 
 adventurer feel a new being , feel his grand nature as Man . and on the 
 Man rush the genius long interdict and thrust aside , - rush back , 
 with the first breath of adversity , to console - no ! the Man need not 
 consolation , - to kindle , to animate , to rejoice ! if there be a being in 
 the world worthy of our envy , after we have grow wise philosopher 
 of the fireside , it be not the palled voluptuary , nor the careworn 
 statesman , nor even the great prince of art and letter , already 
 crown with the laurel , whose leaf be as fit for poison as for 
 garland ; it be the young child of adventure and hope . ay , and the 
 emptier his purse , ten to one but the rich his heart , and the wide 
 the domain which his fancy enjoy as he go on with kingly step to the 
 Future . 

 not till towards the evening do our adventurer slacken his pace and 
 think of rest and refreshment . there , then , lie before he on either 
 side the road those wide patch of uninclosed land which in England 
 often denote the entrance to a village . presently one or two neat 
 cottage come in sight ; then a small farmhouse , with its yard and barn . 
 and some way far yet , he see the sign swing before an inn of some 
 pretension , - the sort of inn often find on a long stage between two 
 great town commonly call " the Halfway House . " but the inn stand back 
 from the road , have its own separate sward in front , whereon be a 
 great beech - tree   from which the sign extend   and a rustic arbour ; so 
 that to gain the inn , the coach that stop there take a sweep from 
 the main thoroughfare . between our pedestrian and the inn there stand , 
 naked and alone , on the common land , a church ; our ancestor never would 
 have choose that site for it ; therefore it be a modern church , - modern 
 Gothic ; handsome to an eye not verse in the attribute of 
 ecclesiastical architecture , very barbarous to an eye that be . somehow 
 or other the church look cold and raw and uninviting . it look a 
 church for show , - much too big for the scattered hamlet , and void of 
 all the venerable association which give their peculiar and unspeakable 
 atmosphere of piety to the church in which succeed generation have 
 kneel and worship . Leonard pause and survey the edifice with 
 an unlearned but poetical gaze ; it dissatisfy he . and he be yet 
 ponder why , when a young girl pass slowly before he , her 
 eye fix on the ground , open the little gate that lead into the 
 churchyard , and vanish . he do not see the child 's face ; but there be 
 something in her movement so utterly listless , forlorn , and sad that 
 his heart be touch . what do she there ? he approach the low wall 
 with a noiseless step , and look over it wistfully . 

 there by a grave , evidently quite recent , with no wooden tomb nor 
 tombstone like the rest , the little girl have throw herself , and she be 
 sob loud and passionately . Leonard open the gate , and approach 
 she with a soft step . mingle with her sob , he hear broken sentence , 
 wild and vain , as all human sorrowing over graf must be . 

 " Father ! oh , Father , do you not really hear I ? I be so lone , so lone ! 
 take I to you , - take I ! " and she bury her face in the deep grass . 

 " poor child ! " say Leonard , in a half whisper , - " he be not there . look 
 above ! " 

 the girl do not heed he ; he put his arm round her waist gently ; she 
 make a gesture of impatience and anger , but she would not turn her face , 
 and she cling to the grave with her hand . 

 after clear , sunny day the dew fall more heavily ; and now , as the sun 
 set , the herbage be bath in a vaporous haze , - a dim mist rise around . 
 the young man seat himself beside she , and try to draw the child to 
 his breast . then she turn eagerly , indignantly , and push he aside 
 with jealous arm . he profane the grave ! he understand she with his 
 deep poet - heart , and rise . there be a pause . Leonard be the first to 
 break it . 

 " come to your home with I , my child , and we will talk of he by the 
 way . " 

 " Him ! who be you ? you do not know he ! " say the girl , still with 
 anger . " go away ! why do you disturb I ? I do no one harm . go ! go ! " 

 " you do yourself harm , and that will grieve he if he see you yonder ! 
 come ! " 

 the child look at he through her blind tear , and his face 
 soften and soothe she . 

 " go ! " she say , very plaintively , and in subdued accent . " I will but 
 stay a minute more . I - I have so much to say yet . " 

 Leonard leave the churchyard , and wait without ; and in a short time 
 the child come forth , waive he aside as he approach she , and hurry 
 away . he follow she at a distance , and see she disappear within the 
 inn . 




 CHAPTER V. 

 " hip - Hip - Hurrah ! " such be the sound that greet our young traveller 
 as he reach the inn door , - a sound joyous in itself , but sadly out of 
 harmony with the feeling which the child sob on the tombless grave 
 have leave at his heart . the sound come from within , and be follow by 
 thump and stamp , and the jingle of glass . a strong odour of 
 tobacco be waft to his olfactory sense . he hesitate a moment at the 
 threshold . 

 before he , on bench under the beech - tree and within the arbour , be 
 group sundry athletic form with " pipe in the liberal air . " 

 the landlady , as she pass across the passage to the taproom , catch 
 sight of his form at the doorway , and come forward . Leonard still stand 
 irresolute . he would have go on his way , but for the child : she have 
 interested he strongly . 

 " you seem full , ma'am , " say he . " can I have accommodation for the 
 night ? " 

 " why , indeed , sir , " say the landlady , civilly , " I can give you a 
 bedroom , but I do not   know where to put you meanwhile . the two parlour 
 and the tap - room and the kitchen be all choke - full . there have be a 
 great cattle - fair in the neighbourhood , and I suppose we have as many as 
 fifty farmer and drover stop here . " 

 " as to that , ma'am , I can sit in the bedroom you be kind enough to give 
 I ; and if it do not cause you much trouble to let I have some 
 tea there , I should be glad ; but I can wait your leisure . do not put 
 yourself out of the way for I . " 

 the landlady be touch by a consideration she be not much habituate 
 to receive from her bluff customer . " you speak very handsome , sir , and 
 we will do our good to serve you , if you will excuse all fault . this 
 way , sir . " Leonard lower his knapsack , step into the passage , 
 with some difficulty force his way through a knot of sturdy giant 
 in top - boot or leathern gaiter , who be swarine in and out the 
 tap - room , and follow his hostess upstairs to a little bedroom at the 
 top of the house . 

 " it be small , sir , and high , " say the hostess , apologetically . " but 
 there be four gentleman farmer that have come a great distance , and all 
 the first floor be engage ; you will be more out of the noise here . " 

 " nothing can suit I well . but , stay , - pardon I ; " and Leonard , 
 glance at the garb of the hostess , observe she be not in mourning . 
 " a little girl whom I see in the churchyard yonder , weep very 
 bitterly - be she a relation of your ? poor child ! she seem to have 
 deep feeling than be common at her age . " 

 " ah , sir , " say the landlady , put the corner of her apron to her 
 eye , " it be a very sad story . I do not   know what to do . her father be 
 take ill on his way to Lunnon , and stop here , and have be bury 
 four day . and the poor little girl seem to have no relation - and 
 where be she to go ? Laryer Jones say we must pass she to Marybone 
 parish , where her father live last ; and what be to become of she then ? 
 my heart bleed to think on it . " 

 here there rise such an uproar from below , that it be evident some 
 quarrel have break out ; and the hostess , recall to her duty , 
 hasten to carry thither her propitiatory influence . 

 Leonard seat himself pensively by the little lattice . here be some 
 one more alone in the world than he ; and she , poor orphan , have no stout 
 man 's heart to grapple with fate , and no golden manuscript that be 
 to be as the " open - Sesame " to the treasure of Aladdin . by and by , 
 the hostess bring he up a tray with tea and other refreshment , and 
 Leonard resume his inquiry . " no relative ? " say he ; ' surely the 
 child must have some kinsfolk in London ? do her father leave no 
 direction , or be he in possession of his faculty ? " 

 " yes , sir ; he be quite reasonable like to the last . and I ask he 
 if he have not anything on his mind , and he say , ' I have . ' and I say , 
 ' your little girl , sir ? ' and he answer I , ' yes , ma'am ; ' and lay 
 his head on his pillow , he weep very quietly . I could not say more 
 myself , for it set I off to see he cry so meekly ; but my husband be 
 hard nor I , and he say , ' cheer up , Mr. Digby ; have not you well 
 write to your friend ? ' 

 " ' friend ! ' say the gentleman , in such a voice ! ' friend I have but 
 one , and I be go to he ! I can not take she there ! ' then he seem 
 suddenly to recollect himself , and call for his clothe , and rummage 
 in the pocket as if look for some address , and could not find it . 
 he seem a forgetful kind of gentleman , and his hand be what I call 
 helpless hand , sir ! and then he gasp out , ' stop , stop ! I never have 
 the address . write to Lord Les - ' , something like Lord Lester , but we 
 could not make out the name . indeed he do not finish it , for there 
 be a rush of blood to his lip ; and though he seem sensible when 
 he recover   and know we and his little girl too , till he go off 
 smile , he never speak word more . " 

 " poor man , " say Leonard , wipe his eye . " but his little girl surely 
 remember the name that he do not finish ? " 

 " no . she say he must have mean a gentleman whom they have meet in 
 the Park not long ago , who be very kind to her father , and be Lord 
 something ; but she do not   remember the name , for she never see he before 
 or since , and her father talk very little about any one lately , but 
 think he should find some kind friend at Screwstown , and travel 
 down there with she from Lunnon . but she suppose he be disappoint , 
 for he go out , come back , and merely tell she to put up the thing , as 
 they must go back to Lunnon . and on his way there he - die . hush , what be 
 that ? I hope she do not overhear we . no , we be talk low . she have 
 the next room to your'n , sir . I think I hear her sobbing . hush ! " 

 " in the next room ? I hear nothing . well , with your leave , I will speak 
 to she before I quit you . and have her father no money with he ? " 

 " yes , a few sovereign , sir ; they pay for his funeral , and there be 
 a little left still , - enough to take she to town ; for my husband say , 
 say he , ' Hannah , the widow give her mite , and we must not take the 
 orphan 's ; ' and my husband be a hard man , too , sir - bless he ! " 

 " let I take your hand , ma'am . God reward you both . " 

 " La , sir ! why , even Dr. Dosewell say , rather grumpily though , ' never 
 mind my bill ; but do not   call I up at six o'clock in the morning again , 
 without know a little more about people . ' and I never afore know Dr. 
 Dosewell go without his bill be pay . he say it be a trick o ' the 
 other doctor to spite he . " 

 " what other doctor ? " 

 " oh , a very good gentleman , who get out with Mr. Digby when he be take 
 ill , and stay till the next morning ; and our doctor say his name be 
 Morgan , and he live in Lunnou , and be a homy - something . " 

 " Homicide , " suggest Leonard , ignorantly . 

 " ah , homicide ; something like that , only a deal long and bad . but 
 he leave some of the tiny little ball you ever see , sir , to give the 
 child ; but , bless you , they do she no good , - how should they ? " 

 " tiny ball , oh - homoeopathist - I understand . and the doctor be kind to 
 she ; perhaps he may help she . have you write to he ? " 

 " but we do not   know his address , and Lunnon be a vast place , sir . " 

 " I be go to London and will find it out . " 

 " ah , sir , you seem very kind ; and sin ' she must go to Lunnon   for what 
 can we do with she here ? - she be too genteel for service , I wish she be 
 go with you . " 

 " with I ! " say Leonard , startle , - " with I ! well , why not ? " 

 " I be sure she come of good blood , sir . you would have know her father 
 be quite the gentleman , only to see he die , sir . he go off so kind 
 and civil like , as if he be ashamed to give so much trouble , - quite a 
 gentleman , if ever there be one . and so be you , sir , I be sure , " say 
 the land lady , courtesye ; " I know what gentlefolk be . I have   be a 
 housekeeper in the first of family in this very shire , sir , though I 
 can not   say I have   serve in Lunnon ; and so , as gentlefolk know each other , 
 I ' ve   no doubt you could find out her relation . dear , dear ! come , 
 come ! " 

 here there be loud cry for the hostess , and she hurry away . the 
 farmer and drover be begin to depart , and their bill be to be 
 make out and pay . Leonard see his hostess no more that night . the last 
 hip - hip - hurrah be hear , - some toast , perhaps to the health of the 
 county member , - and the chamber of woe beside Leonard 's rattle with 
 the shout . by and by , silence gradually succeed the various dissonant 
 sound below . the cart and gig roll away ; the clatter of hoof on 
 the road cease ; there be then a dumb dull sound as of lock - up , and 
 low , hum voice below , and footstep mount the stair to bed , 
 with now and then a drunken hiccough or maudlin laugh , as some conquer 
 votary of Bacchus be fairly carry up to his domicile . 

 all , then , at last be silent , just as the clock from the church sound 
 the stroke of eleven . 

 Leonard , meanwhile , have be look over his manuscript . there be 
 first a project for an improvement on the steam - engine , - a project that 
 have long lain in his mind , begin with the first knowledge of mechanic 
 that he have glean from his purchase of the tinker . he put that 
 aside now , - it require too great an effort of the reasoning faculty to 
 re - examine . 

 he glance less hastily over a collection of essay on various 
 subject , - some that he think indifferent , some that he think good . 
 he then linger over a collection of verse write in his good hand 
 with love care , - verse first inspire by his perusal of Nora 's 
 melancholy memorial . these verse be as a diary of his heart and his 
 fancy , - those deep , unwitnessed struggle which the boyhood of all more 
 thoughtful nature have pass in its bright yet murky storm of the cloud 
 and the lightning - flash , though but few boy pause to record the crisis 
 from which slowly emerge Man . and these first desultory grappling with 
 the fugitive airy image that flit through the dim chamber of the 
 brain have become with each effort more sustained and vigorous , till the 
 phantom be spell , the fly one arrest , the Immaterial seize , 
 and clothe with Form . gaze on his last effort , Leonard feel that 
 there at length speak forth the poet . it be a work which though as yet 
 but half complete , come from a strong hand ; not that shadow tremble 
 on unsteady water , which be but the pale reflex and imitation of 
 some bright mind , sphere out of reach and afar , but an original 
 substance , - a life , a thing of the Creative Faculty , - breathing 
 back already the breath it have receive . this work have pause during 
 Leonard 's residence with Mr. Avenel , or have only now and then , in 
 stealth , and at night , receive a rare touch . now , as with a fresh eye 
 he reperuse it , and with that strange , innocent admiration , not of 
 self - for a man 's work be not , alas ! himself , - it be the beautify 
 and idealize essence , extract he know not how from his own human 
 element of clay ; admiration know but to poet , - their pure delight , 
 often their sole reward . and then with a warm and more earthly beat of 
 his full heart , he rush in fancy to the Great City , where all river 
 of fame meet , but not to be merge and lose , sallye forth again , 
 individualized and separate , to flow through that one vast Thought of 
 God which we call the world . 

 he put up his paper ; and open his window , as be his ordinary custom , 
 before he retire to rest , - for he have many odd habit ; and he love to 
 look out into the night when he pray . his soul seem to escape from 
 the body - to mount on the air , to gain more rapid access to the far 
 Throne in the Infinite - when his breath go forth among the wind , and 
 his eye rest fix on the star of heaven . 

 so the boy pray silently ; and after his prayer he be about , 
 lingeringly , to close the lattice , when he hear distinctly sob close 
 at hand . he pause , and hold his breath , then look gently out ; the 
 casement next his own be also open . someone be also at watch by that 
 casement , - perhaps also pray . he listen yet more intently , and 
 catch , soft and low , the word , " Father , Father , do you hear I now ? " 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 Leonard open his door and steal towards that of the room adjoining ; 
 for his first natural impulse have be to enter and console . but when 
 his touch be on the handle , he draw back . child though the mourner be , 
 her sorrow be render yet more sacred from intrusion by her sex . 
 something , he know not what , in his young ignorance , withhold he 
 from the threshold . to have cross it then would have seem to he 
 profanation . so he return , and for hour yet he occasionally hear the 
 sob , till they die away , and childhood weep itself to sleep . 

 but the next morning , when he hear his neighbour astir , he knock 
 gently at her door : there be no answer . he enter softly , and see 
 she seat very listlessly in the centre of the room , - as if it have no 
 familiar nook or corner as the room of home have , her hand droop on 
 her lap , and her eye gaze desolately on the floor . then he approach 
 and speak to she . 

 Helen be very subdued , and very silent . her tear seem dry up ; 
 and it be long before she give sign or token that she heed he . at 
 length , however , he gradually succeed in rouse her interest ; and 
 the first symptom of his success be in the quiver of her lip , and the 
 overflow of her downcast eye . 

 by little and little he worm himself into her confidence ; and she tell 
 he in broken whisper her simple story . but what move he the most 
 be , that beyond her sense of loneliness she do not seem to feel her 
 own unprotected state . she mourn the object she have nurse and 
 heed and cherish , for she have be rather the protectress than the 
 protect to the helpless dead . he could not gain from she any more 
 satisfactory information than the landlady have already impart , as to 
 her friend and prospect ; but she permit he passively to look among 
 the effect her father have leave , save only that , if his hand touch 
 something that seem to her association especially holy , she wave he 
 back , or draw it quickly away . there be many bill receipt in the 
 name of Captain Digby , old yellow fade music - score for the flute , 
 extract of Parts from Prompt Books , gay part of lively comedy , 
 in which hero have so noble a contempt for money , - fit hero for 
 a Sheridan and a Farquhar ; close by these be several pawnbroker 's 
 ticket ; and , not array smoothly , but crumple up , as if with an 
 indignant nervous clutch of the helpless hand , some two or three 
 letter . he ask Helen 's permission to glance at these , for they might 
 afford a clew to friend . Helen give the permission by a silent bend of 
 the head . the letter , however , be but short and freeze answer from 
 what appear to be distant connection or former friend , or person 
 to whom the deceased have apply for some situation . they be all very 
 disheartening in their tone . Leonard next endeavour to refresh 
 Helen 's memory as to the name of the nobleman which have be last on her 
 father 's lip ; but there he fail wholly . for it may be remember that 
 Lord L'Estrange , when he press his loan on Mr. Digby , and subsequently 
 tell that gentleman to address he at Mr. Egerton 's , have , from a natural 
 delicacy , send the child on , that she might not witness the charity 
 bestow on the father ; and Helen say truly that Mr. Digby have sink 
 latterly into an habitual silence on all his affair . she might have 
 hear her father mention the name , but she have not treasure it up ; all 
 she could say be , that she should know the stranger again if she meet 
 he , and his dog too . see that the child have grow calm , Leonard be 
 then go to leave the room , in order to confer with the hostess , when 
 she rise suddenly , though noiselessly , and put she little hand in his , 
 as if to detain he . she do not say a word ; the action say all , - say , 
 " do not desert I . " and Leonard 's heart rush to his lip , and he 
 answer to the action , as he bend down , and kiss she cheek , " Orphan , 
 will you go with I ? we have one Father yet to both of we , and he will 
 guide we on earth . I be fatherless like you . " she raise her eye to 
 his , look at he long , and then lean her head confidingly on his 
 strong young shoulder . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 at noon that same day the young man and the child be on their road to 
 London . the host have at first a little demurred at trust Helen to so 
 young a companion ; but Leonard , in his happy ignorance , have talk so 
 sanguinely of find out this lord , or some adequate protector for the 
 child ; and in so grand a strain , though with all sincerity , have speak 
 of his own great prospect in the metropolis   he do not say what they 
 be !   that have he be the craftiest impostor he could not more have 
 take in the rustic host . and while the landlady still cherish the 
 illusive fancy that all gentlefolk must know each other in London , as 
 they do in a county , the landlord believe , at least , that a young man 
 so respectably dressed , although but a foot - traveller , who talk in 
 so confident a tone , and who be so willing to undertake what might 
 be rather a burdensome charge , unless he see how to rid himself of it , 
 would be sure to have friend old and wise than himself , who would 
 judge what could well be do for the orphan . 

 and what be the host to do with she ? well this volunteered escort , 
 at least , than vaguely pass she on from parish to parish , and leave 
 her friendless at last in the street of London . Helen , too , smile 
 for the first time on be ask her wish , and again put her hand in 
 Leonard 's . in short , so it be settle . 

 the little girl make up a bundle of the thing she most prize or 
 need . Leonard do not feel the additional load , as he sling it to his 
 knapsack ; the rest of the luggage be to be send to London as soon as 
 Leonard write   which he promise to do soon   and give an address . 

 Helen pay her last visit to the churchyard ; and she join she 
 companion as he stand on the road , without the solemn precinct . and now 
 they have go on some hour ; and when he ask she if she be tired , 
 she still answer " no . " but Leonard be merciful , and make their day 's 
 journey short ; and it take they some day to reach London . by the long 
 lonely way they grow so intimate , at the end of the second day , they 
 call each other brother and sister ; and Leonard , to his delight , find 
 that as her grief , with the bodily movement and the change of scene , 
 subside from its first intenseness and its insensibility to other 
 impression , she develop a quickness of comprehension far beyond her 
 year . poor child ! that have be force upon she by Necessity . and 
 she understand he in his spiritual consolation , half poetical , half 
 religious ; and she listen to his own tale , and the story of his 
 self - education and solitary struggle , - those , too , she understand . 
 but when he burst out with his enthusiasm , his glorious hope , his 
 confidence in the fate before they , then she would shake her head very 
 quietly and very sadly . do she comprehend they ! alas ! perhaps too well . 
 she know more as to real life than he do . Leonard be at first their 
 joint treasurer ; but before the second day be over , Helen seem to 
 discover that he be too lavish ; and she tell he so , with a prudent 
 grave look , put her hand on his arm as he be about to enter an 
 inn to dine ; and the gravity would have be comic , but that the eye 
 through their moisture be so meek and grateful . she feel he be about 
 to incur that ruinous extravagance on her account . somehow or other , the 
 purse find its way into her keeping , and then she look proud and in 
 her natural element . 

 ah ! what happy meal under her care be provide ; so much more 
 enjoyable than in dull , sand inn - parlour , swarm with fly , and 
 reeking with stale tobacco . she would leave he at the entrance of a 
 village , bind forward , and cater , and return with a little basket and a 
 pretty blue jug - which she have buy on the road , - the last fill with 
 new milk ; the first with new bread , and some special dainty in radish 
 or water - tress . and she have such a talent for find out the 
 prettiest spot whereon to halt and dine : sometimes in the heart of a 
 wood , - so still , it be like a forest in fairy tale , the hare steal 
 through the alley , or the squirrel peep at they from the bough ; 
 sometimes by a little brawl stream , with the fish see under the 
 clear wave , and shoot round the crumb throw to they . they make an 
 Arcadia of the dull road up to their dread Thermopylae , the war against 
 the million that wait they on the other side of their pass through 
 Tempo . 

 " shall we be as happy when we be great ? " say Leonard , in his grand 
 simplicity . 

 Helen sigh , and the wise little head be shake . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 at last they come within easy reach of London ; but Leonard have resolve 
 not to enter the metropolis fatigued and exhaust , as a wanderer 
 need refuge , but fresh and elate , as a conqueror come in triumph 
 to take possession of the capital . therefore they halt early in the 
 evening of the day precede this imperial entry , about six mile from 
 the metropolis , in the neighbourhood of Ealing   for by that route lay 
 their way . they be not tired on arrive at their inn . the weather 
 be singularly lovely , with that combination of softness and brilliancy 
 which be only know to the rare true summer day of England ; all below 
 so green , above so blue , - day of which we have about six in the year , 
 and recall vaguely when we read of Robin Hood and Maid Marian , of Damsel 
 and Knight in Spenser 's golden Summer Song , or of Jacques , drop under 
 the oak - tree , watch the deer amidst the dell of Ardennes . so , after 
 a little pause at their inn , they stroll forth , not for travel but 
 pleasure , towards the cool of sunset , pass by the ground that once 
 belong to the Duke of Kent , and catch a glimpse of the shrub 
 and lawn of that beautiful domain through the lodge - gate ; then they 
 cross into some field , and come to a little rivulet call the 
 Brent . Helen have be more sad that day than on any during their 
 journey , - perhaps because , on approach London , the memory of her 
 father become more vivid ; perhaps from her precocious knowledge of life , 
 and her foreboding of what be to befall they , child that they both 
 be . but Leonard be selfish that day ; he could not be influence by 
 his companion 's sorrow ; he be so full of his own sense of be , and 
 he already catch from the atmosphere the fever that belong to anxious 
 capital . 

 " sit here , sister , " say he , imperiously , throw himself under the 
 shade of a pollard - tree that overhang the wind brook , ' sit here and 
 talk . " 

 he fling off his hat , toss back his rich curl , and sprinkle his brow 
 from the stream that eddy round the root of the tree that bulge out , 
 bald and gnarl , from the bank and delve into the wave below . Helen 
 quietly obey he , and nestle close to his side . 

 " and so this London be really very vast , - very ? " he repeat 
 inquisitively . 

 " very , " answer Helen , as , abstractedly , she pluck the cowslip near 
 she , and let they fall into the running water . " see how the flower 
 be carry down the stream ! they be lose now . London be to we what the 
 river be to the flower , very vast , very strong ; " and she add , after a 
 pause , " very cruel ! " 

 " Cruel ! ah , it have be so to you ; but now - now I will take care of 
 you ! " he smile triumphantly ; and his smile be beautiful both in its 
 pride and its kindness . it be astonish how Leonard have alter since 
 he have leave his uncle 's . he be both young and old ; for the sense of 
 genius , when it snap its shackle , make we both old and wise as to 
 the world it soar to , young and blinder as to the world it spring 
 from . 

 " and it be not a very handsome city , either , you say ? " 

 " very ugly indeed , " say Helen , with some fervour ; " at least all I have 
 see of it . " 

 " but there must be part that be pretty than other ? you say there 
 be park : why should not we lodge near they and look upon the green 
 tree ? " 

 " that would be nice , " say Helen , almost joyously ; " but - " and here 
 the head be shake - " there be no lodging for we except in court and 
 alley . " 

 " why ? " 

 " why ? " echo Helen , with a smile , and she hold up the purse . 

 " Pooh ! always that horrid purse ; as if , too , we be not go to fill 
 it ! do not I tell you the story of Fortunio ? well , at all event , we 
 will go first to the neighbourhood where you last live , and learn there 
 all we can ; and then the day after to - morrow I will see this Dr. Morgan , 
 and find out the lord . " 

 the tear start to Helen 's soft eye . " you want to get rid of I soon , 
 brother . " 

 " I ! ah , I feel so happy to have you with I it seem to I as if I have 
 pin for you all my life , and you have come at last ; for I never have 
 brother nor sister nor any one to love , that be not old than myself , 
 except - " 

 " except the young lady you tell I of , " say Helen , turn away her 
 face ; for child be very jealous . 

 " yes , I love she , love she still . but that be different , " say 
 Leonard . " I could never have talk to she as to you : to you I open my 
 whole heart ; you be my little Muse , Helen : I confess to you my wild 
 whim and fancy as frankly as if I be write poetry . " as he say 
 this , a step be hear , and a shadow fall over the stream . a belated 
 angler appear on the margin , draw his line impatiently across the 
 water , as if to worry some doze fish into a bite before it finally 
 settle itself for the night . absorb in his occupation , the angler do 
 not observe the young person on the sward under the tree , and he halt 
 there , close upon they . 

 " curse that perch ! " say he , aloud . 

 " take care , sir , " cry Leonard ; for the man , in step back , nearly 
 trod upon Helen . 

 the angler turn . " what be the matter ? Hist ! you have frighten my 
 perch . keep still , can not   you ? " 

 Helen draw herself out of the way , and Leonard remain motionless . he 
 remember Jackeymo , and feel a sympathy for the angler . 

 " it be the most extraordinary perch , that ! " mutter the stranger , 
 soliloquize . " it have the devil 's own luck . it must have be bear 
 with a silver spoon in its mouth , that damned perch ! I shall never 
 catch it , - never ! ha ! no , only a weed . I give it up . " with this , he 
 indignantly jerk his rod from the water and begin to disjoint it . 
 while leisurely engage in this occupation , he turn to Leonard . 

 " Humph ! be you intimately acquaint with this stream , sir ? " 

 " no , " answer Leonard . " I never see it before . " 

 ANGLER ,   solemnly . - " then , young man , take my advice , and do not give 
 way to its fascination . Sir , I be a martyr to this stream ; it have be 
 the Delilah of my existence . " 

 LEONARD   interested , the last sentence seem to he poetical . - " The 
 Delilah ! sir , the Delilah ! " 

 ANGLER . - " the Delilah . young man , listen , and be warn by example . when 
 I be about your age , I first come to this stream to fish . Sir , on that 
 fatal day , about three p.m. , I hook up a fish , - such a big one , it 
 must have weigh a pound and a half . Sir , it be that length ; " and the 
 angler put finger to wrist . " and just when I have get it nearly ashore , 
 by the very place where you be sit , on that shelving bank , young 
 man , the line break , and the perch twist himself among those root , 
 and - cacodaemon that he be - run off , hook and all . well , that fish 
 haunt I ; never before have I see such a fish . minnow I have catch in 
 the Thames and elsewhere , also gudgeon , and occasionally a dace . but 
 a fish like that - a PERCH , all his fin up , like the sail of a 
 man - of - war - a monster perch , - a whale of a perch ! no , never till then 
 have I know what leviathan lie hide within the deep . I could not sleep 
 till I have return ; and again , sir , - I catch that perch . and this time 
 I pull he fairly out of the water . he escape ; and how do he escape ? 
 Sir , he leave his eye behind he on the hook . year , long year , have 
 pass since then ; but never shall I forget the agony of that moment . " 

 LEONARD . - " to the perch , sir ? " 

 ANGLER . - " perch ! agony to he ! he enjoy it . Agony to I ! I gaze on 
 that eye , and the eye look as sly and as wicked as if it be laugh 
 in my face . well , sir , I have hear that there be no well bait for a 
 perch than a perch 's eye . I adjust that eye on the hook , and drop 
 in the line gently . the water be unusually clear ; in two minute I 
 see that perch return . he approach the hook ; he recognize his eye , 
 frisk his tail , make a plunge , and , as I live , carry off the 
 eye , safe and sound ; and I see he digest it by the side of that 
 water - lily . the mocking fiend ! seven time since that day , in the course 
 of a varied and eventful life , have I catch that perch , and seven time 
 have that perch escape . " 

 LEONARD   astonish . - " it can not   be the same perch ; perch be very 
 tender fish . a hook inside of it , and an eye hook out of it - no perch 
 could withstand such havoc in its constitution . " 

 angler   with an appearance of awe . - " it do seem supernatural . but it 
 be that perch ; for hark ye , sir , there be only one perch in the whole 
 brook ! all the year I have fish here , I have never catch another 
 perch ; and this solitary inmate of the watery element I know by sight 
 well than I know my own lose father . for each time that I have raise 
 it out of the water , its profile have be turn to I , and I have see 
 with a shudder that it have have only - one Eye ! it be a most mysterious 
 and a most diabolical phenomenon , that perch ! it have be the ruin of my 
 prospect in life . I be offer a situation in Jamaica : I could not 
 go with that perch leave here in triumph . I might afterwards have have an 
 appointinent in India , but I could not put the ocean between myself 
 and that perch : thus have I fritter away my existence in the fatal 
 metropolis of my native land . and once a week from February to December 
 I come hither . good heaven ! if I should catch the perch at last , the 
 occupation of my existence will be go . " 

 Leonard gaze curiously at the angler , as the last thus mournfully 
 conclude . the ornate turn of his period do not suit with his costume . 
 he look wofully threadbare and shabby , - a genteel sort of shabbiness 
 too , - shabbiness in black . there be humour in the corner of his 
 lip ; and his hand , though they do not seem very clean - indeed his 
 occupation be not friendly to such nicety - be those of a man who 
 have not know manual labour . his face be pale and puff , but the tip 
 of the nose be red . he do not seem as if the watery element be as 
 familiar to himself as to his Delilah , the perch . 

 " such be life ! " recommence the angler , in a moralize tone , as he slide 
 his rod into its canvas case . " if a man know what it be to fish all 
 one 's life in a stream that have only one perch , to catch that one perch 
 nine time in all , and nine time to see it fall back into the water , 
 plump , - if a man know what it be , why , then " - here the angler look 
 over his shoulder full at Leonard - " why then , young sir , he would know 
 what human life be to vain ambition . good - evening . " 

 away he go treading over the daisy and kingcup . Helen 's eye 
 follow he wistfully . 

 " what a strange person ! " say Leonard , laugh . 

 " I think he be a very wise one , " murmur Helen ; and she come close up 
 to Leonard , and take his hand in both her , as if she feel already that 
 he be in need of the Comforter , - the line break , and the perch lose ! 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 at noon the next day , London steal upon they through a gloomy , thick , 
 oppressive atmosphere ; for where be it that we can say London burst on 
 the sight ? it steal on they through one of its fairest and most gracious 
 avenue of approach , - by the stately garden of Kensington , along the 
 side of Hyde Park , and so on towards Cumberland Gate . 

 Leonard be not the least strike . and yet with a very little money , and 
 a very little taste , it would be easy to render this entrance to London 
 as grand and as impose as that to Paris from the Champs Elysees . as 
 they come near the Edgware Road , Helen take her new brother by the 
 hand and guide he ; for she know all that neighbourhood , and she be 
 acquaint with a lodging near that occupy by her father   to that 
 lodge itself she could not have go for the world , where they might 
 be house cheaply . 

 but just then the sky , so dull and overcast since morning , seem one 
 mass of black cloud . there suddenly come on a violent storm of rain . the 
 boy and girl take refuge in a cover mew , in a street run out 
 of the Edgware Road . this shelter soon become crowded ; the two young 
 pilgrim creep close to the wall , apart from the rest , Leonard 's arm 
 round Helen 's waist , shelter she from the rain that the strong 
 wind contend with it beat in through the passage . presently a young 
 gentleman of well mien and dress than the other refugee enter , not 
 hastily , but rather with a slow and proud step , as if , though he deign 
 to take shelter , he scorn to run to it . he glance somewhat haughtily 
 at the assemble group , pass on through the midst of it , come near 
 Leonard , take off his hat , and shake the rain from its brim . his head 
 thus uncover , leave all his feature expose ; and the village youth 
 recognize , at the first glance , his old victorious assailant on the 
 green at Hazeldean . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 yet Randal Leslie be alter . his dark cheek be as thin as in boyhood , 
 and even yet more waste by intense study and night vigil ; but the 
 expression of his face be at once more refined and manly , and there be 
 a steady concentrated light in his eye , like that of one who have be 
 in the habit of bring all his thought to one point . he look old 
 than he be . he be dress simply in black , a colour which become 
 he ; and altogether his aspect and figure be , not showy indeed , but 
 distinguish . he look to the common eye a gentleman ; and to the more 
 observant a scholar . 

 helter - skelter ! pell - mell ! the group in the passage now press each 
 on each , now scatter on all side , make way , rush down the mew , 
 against the wall , as a fiery horse dart under shelter . the rider , a 
 young man with a very handsome face , and dress with that peculiar care 
 which we commonly call dandyism , cry out , good - humouredly , " do not   be 
 afraid ; the horse sha'n't   hurt any of you . a thousand pardon - so ho ! so 
 ho ! " he pat the horse , and it stand as still as a statue , fill up 
 the centre of the passage . the group resettle ; Randal approach the 
 rider . 

 " Frank Hazeldean ! " 

 " ah , be it indeed randal Leslie ? " 

 Frank be off his horse in a moment , and the bridle be consign to the 
 care of a slim ' prentice - boy hold a bundle . 

 " my dear fellow , how glad I be to see you . how lucky it be that I 
 should turn in here . not like I either , for I do not   much care for a 
 ducking . stay in town , Randal ? " 

 " yes ; at your uncle 's , Mr. Egerton . I have leave Oxford . " 

 " for good ? " 

 " for good . " 

 " but you have not take your degree , I think ? we Etonians all consider 
 you book for a double - first . oh , we have be so proud of your 
 fame , - you carry off all the prize . " 

 " not all ; but some , certainly . Mr. Egerton offer I my choice , - to 
 stay for my degree , or to enter at once into the Foreign Office . I 
 prefer the end to the mean . for , after all , what good be academical 
 honours but as the entrance to life ? to enter now be to save a step in a 
 long way , Frank . " 

 " ah , you be always ambitious , and you will make a great figure , I be 
 sure . " 

 " perhaps so - if I work for it . Knowledge be power . " Leonard start . 

 " and you ! " resume Randal , look with some curious attention at his 
 old schoolfellow . " you never come to Oxford . I do hear you be go 
 into the army . " 

 " I be in the Guards , " say Frank , try hard not to look too conceited 
 as he make that acknowledgment . " the governor pishe a little , and would 
 rather I have come to live with he in the old Hall , and take to farming . 
 Time enough for that , eh ? by Jove , Randal , how pleasant a thing be life 
 in London ! do you go to Almack 's to - night ? " 

 " no ; Wednesday be a holiday in the House . there be a great parliamentary 
 dinner at Mr. Egerton 's . he be in the Cabinet now , you know ; but you 
 do not   see much of your uncle , I think . " 

 " our set be different , " say the young gentleman , in a tone of voice 
 worthy of Brummel . " all those parliamentary fellow be devilish dull . 
 the rain be over . I do not   know whether the governor would like I to call 
 at Grosvenor Square ; but pray come and see I . here be my card to remind 
 you ; you must dine at our mess . such capital fellow ! what day will you 
 fix ? " 

 " I will call and let you know . do not   you find it rather expensive in the 
 Guards ? I remember that you think the governor , as you call he , use 
 to chafe a little when you write for more pocket - money ; and the only 
 time I ever see you with tear in your eye be when Mr. Hazeldean , in 
 send you L5 , remind you that his estate be not entail , - be 
 at his own disposal , and they should never go to an extravagant 
 spendthrift . it be not a pleasant threat that , Frank . " 

 " oh ! " cry the young man , colour deeply . " it be not the threat that 
 pain I ; it be that my father could think so meanly of I as to 
 fancy that - well , well , but those be schoolboy day . and my father be 
 always more generous than I deserve . we must see a great deal of each 
 other , randal . how good - natured you be at Eton , make my long and 
 short for I ; I shall never forget it . do call soon . " 

 Frank swing himself into his saddle , and reward the slim youth with 
 half - a - crown , - a largess four time more ample than his father would 
 have deem sufficient . a jerk of the rein and a touch of the heel , off 
 bound the fiery horse and the gay young rider . randal muse , and as 
 the rain have now cease , the passenger under shelter disperse and go 
 their way . only Randal , Leonard , and Helen remain behind . then , as 
 randal , still muse , lift his eye , they fall full upon Leonard 's 
 face . he start , pass his hand quickly over his brow , look again , 
 hard and piercingly ; and the change in his pale cheek to a shade still 
 paler , a quick compression and nervous gnawing of his lip , show that 
 he too recognize an old foe . then his glance run over Leonard 's dress , 
 which be somewhat dust - stain , but far above the class amongst which 
 the peasant be bear . randal raise his brow in surprise , and with a 
 smile slightly supercilious - the smile sting Leonard - and with a slow 
 step , Randal leave the passage , and take his way towards Grosvenor 
 Square . the Entrance of Ambition be clear to he . 

 then the little girl once more take Leonard by the hand , and lead he 
 through row of humble , obscure , dreary street . it seem almost like 
 an allegory personify , as the sad , silent child lead on the penniless 
 and low - bear adventurer of genius by the squalid shop and through 
 the winding lane , which grow mean and meaner , till both their form 
 vanish from the view . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 " but do come ; change your dress , return and dine with I ; you will have 
 just time , Harley . you will meet the most eminent man of our party ; 
 surely they be worth your study , philosopher that you affect to be . " 

 thus say Audley Egerton to Lord L'Estrange , with whom he have be 
 rid   after the toil of his office . the two gentleman be in 
 Audley 's library , - Mr. Egerton , as usual , button up , seat in his 
 chair , in the erect posture of a man who scorn " inglorious ease ; " 
 Harley , as usual , throw at length on the sofa . , his long hair in 
 careless curl , his neckcloth loose , his habiliment flow simplex 
 mundit be , indeed , his grace all his own ; seemingly negligent , never 
 slovenly ; at ease everywhere and with every one , even with Mr. Audley 
 Egerton , who chill or awe the ease out of most people . 

 " Nay , my dear Audley , forgive I . but your eminent man be all man of 
 one idea , and that not a divert one , politic ! politic ! politic ! 
 the storm in the saucer . " 

 " but what be your life , Harley ? - the saucer without the storm ? " 

 " do you know , that be very well say , Audley ? I do not think you have 
 so much liveliness of repartee . life ! life ! it be insipid , it be 
 shallow , - no launch Argosies in the saucer . Audley , I have the oddest 
 fancy - " 

 " that of course , " say Audley , dryly ; " you never have any other . what be 
 the new one ? " 

 HARLEY   with great gravity . - " do you believe in Mesmerism ? " 

 AUDLEY . - " certainly not . " 

 HARLEY . - " if it be in the power of an animal magnetizer to get I out 
 of my own skin into somebody 's else ! that be my fancy ! I be so tired of 
 myself , - so tired ! I have run through all my idea , - know every one of 
 they by heart . when some pretentious impostor of an idea perk itself up 
 and say , ' look at I , - I ' m a new acquaintance , ' I just give it a nod , 
 and say ' not at all , you have only get a new coat on ; you be the same 
 old wretch that have bore I these last twenty year ; get away . ' but 
 if one could be in a new skin , if I could be for half - an - hour your tall 
 porter , or one of your eminent matter - of - fact man , I should then really 
 travel into a new world . ' every man 's brain must be a world in 
 itself , eh ? if I could but make a parochial settlement even in your , 
 Audley , - run over all your thought and sensation . upon my life , I will 
 go and talk to that french mesmerizer about it . " 

   if , at the date in which Lord L'Estrange hold this conversation 
  with Mr. Egerton , Alfred de Musset have write his comedy , we 
  should suspect that his lordship have plagiarize from one of they 
  the whimsical idea that he here vent upon Audley . in repeat it , 
  the author at least can not escape from the charge of obligation to a 
  writer whose humour be sufficiently opulent to justify the loan . 

 AUDLEY   who do not seem to like the notion of have his thought 
 and sensation rummage , even by his friend , and even in fancy   - " Pooh , 
 pooh , pooh ! do talk like a man of sense . " 

 HARLEY . - " Man of sense ! where shall I find a model ? I do not   know a man 
 of sense ! - never meet such a creature . do not   believe it ever exist . at 
 one time I think Socrates must have be a man of sense : a delusion ; 
 he would stand gaze into the air , and talk to his genius from 
 sunrise to sunset . be that like a man of sense ? poor Audley ! how puzzle 
 he look ! well , I will try and talk sense to oblige you . and first "   here 
 Harley raise himself on his elbow , - " first , be it true , as I have 
 hear vaguely , that you be pay court to the sister of that infamous 
 italian traitor ? " 

 " Madame di Negra ? no : I be not pay court to she , " answer Audley , 
 with a cold smile . " but she be very handsome ; she be very clever ; she be 
 useful to I , - I need not say how or why ; that belong to my metier as a 
 politician . but I think , if you will take my advice , or get your friend 
 to take it , I could obtain from her brother , through my influence with 
 she , some liberal concession to your exile . she be very anxious to know 
 where he be . " 

 " you have not tell she ? " 

 " no ; I promise you I would keep that secret . " 

 " be sure you do ; it be only for some mischief , some snare , that she 
 could desire such information . concession ! pooh ! this be no question of 
 concession , but of right . " 

 " I think you should leave your friend to judge of that . " 

 " well , I will write to he . meanwhile , beware of this woman . I have 
 hear much of she abroad , and she have the character of her brother for 
 duplicity and - " 

 " beauty , " interrupt Audley , turn the conversation with practise 
 adroitness . " I be tell that the count be one of the handsome man in 
 Europe , much handsomer than his sister still , though nearly twice her 
 age . tut , tut , Harley ; fear not for I . I be proof against all feminine 
 attraction . this heart be dead . " 

 " Nay , nay ; it be not for you to speak thus , - leave that to I . but even 
 I will not say it . the heart never die . and you ; what have you lose ? - a 
 wife ; true : an excellent , noble - hearted woman . but be it love that you 
 feel for she ? enviable man , have you ever love ? " 

 " perhaps not , Harley , " say Audley , with a sombre aspect and in deject 
 accent ; " very few man ever have love , at least as you mean by the 
 word . but there be other passion than love that kill the heart , and 
 reduce we to mechanism . " 

 while Egerton speak , Harley turn aside , and his breast heave . there 
 be a short silence ; Audley be the first to break it . 

 " speak of my lost wife , I be sorry that you do not approve what I 
 have do for her young kinsman , Randal Leslie . " 

 HARLEY   recover himself with an effort . - " be it true kindness to 
 bid he exchange manly independence for the protection of an official 
 patron ? " 

 AUDLEV . - " I do not bid he . I give he his choice . at his age , I should 
 have choose as he have do . " 

 HARLEY . - " I trust not ; I think well of you . but answer I one question 
 frankly , and then I will ask another . do you mean to make this young man 
 your heir ? " 

 AUDLEY   with a slight embarrassment . - " Heir , pooh ! I be young still . I 
 may live as long as he - time enough to think of that . " 

 HARLEY . - " then now to my second question . have you tell this youth 
 plainly that he may look to you for influence , but not for wealth ? " 

 AUDLEY   firmly . - " I think I have ; but I shall repeat it more 
 emphatically . " 

 HARLEY . - " then I be satisfied as to your conduct , but not as to his . 
 for he have too acute an intellect not to know what it be to forfeit 
 independence ; and , depend on it , he have make his calculation , and would 
 throw you into the bargain in any balance that he could strike in his 
 favour . you go by your experience in judge man ; I by my instinct . 
 Nature warn we as it do the inferior animal , - only we be too 
 conceited , we bipeds , to heed she . my instinct of soldier and gentleman 
 recoil from that old young man . he have the soul of the Jesuit . I see 
 it in his eye , I hear it in the tread of his foot ; volto sciolto he have 
 not ; I pensieri stretti he have . Hist ! I hear now his step in the hall . 
 I should know it from a thousand . that be his very touch on the handle of 
 the door . " 

 Randal Leslie enter . Harley - who , despite his disregard for form , and 
 his dislike to Randal , be too high - breed not to be polite to his junior 
 in age or inferior in rank - rose and bow . but his bright pierce eye 
 do not soften as they catch and bear down the deep and more latent 
 fire in Randal 's . Harley do not resume his seat , but move to the 
 mantelpiece , and lean against it . 

 RANDAL . - " I have fulfil your commission , Mr. Egerton . I go first 
 to Maida Hill , and see Mr. Burley . I give he the check , but he say it 
 be too much , and he should return half to the banker ; he will write the 
 article as you suggest . I then - " 

 AUDLEY . - " enough , Randal ! we will not fatigue Lord L'Estrange with these 
 little detail of a life that displease he , - the life political . " 

 HARLEY . - " but these detail do not displease I ; they reconcile I to my 
 own life . go on , pray , Mr. Leslie . " 

 Randal have too much tact to need the caution glance of Mr. Egerton . 
 he do not continue , but say with a soft voice , " do you think , Lord 
 L'Estrange , that the contemplation of the mode of life pursue by other 
 can reconcile a man to his own , if he have before think it need a 
 reconciler ? " Harley look pleased , for the question be ironical ; and 
 if there be a thing in the world be abhor , it be flattery . 

 " recollect your Lucretius , Mr. Leslie , the Suave mare , etc . , ' pleasant 
 from the cliff to see the mariner toss on the ocean . ' faith , I think 
 that sight reconcile one to the cliff , though , before , one might have 
 be tease by the splash from the spray , and deafen by the scream 
 of the sea - gull . but I leave you , Audley . strange that I have hear no 
 more of my soldier ! remember I have your promise when I come to claim 
 it . good - by , Mr. Leslie , I hope that Burley 's article will be worth the 
 check . " 

 Lord L'Estrange mount his horse , which be still at the door , and ride 
 through the Park . but he be no long now unknown by sight . bow and 
 nod salute he on every side . 

 " alas , I be find out , then , " say he to himself . " that terrible duchess 
 of Knaresborough , too - I must fly my country . " he push his horse into 
 a canter , and be soon out of the Park . as he dismount at his 
 father 's sequester house , you would have hardly suppose he the same 
 whimsical , fantastic , but deep and subtle humourist that delight in 
 perplex the material Audley , for his expressive face be unutterably 
 serious . but the moment he come into the presence of his parent , the 
 countenance be again light and cheerful . it brighten the whole room 
 like sunshine . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 " Mr. Leslie , " say Egerton , when Harley have leave the library , " you do 
 not act with your usual discretion in touch upon matter connect 
 with politic in the presence of a third party . " 

 " I feel that already , sir ; my excuse be , that I hold Lord L'Estrange to 
 be your most intimate friend . " 

 " a public man , Mr. Leslie , would ill serve his country if he be not 
 especially reserve towards his private friend - when they do not belong 
 to his party . " 

 " but pardon I my ignorance . Lord Lansmere be so well known to be one of 
 your supporter , that I fancy his son must share his sentiment , and 
 be in your confidence . " 

 Egerton 's brow slightly contract , and give a stern expression to a 
 countenance always firm and decide . he however answer in a mild tone , 

 " at the entrance into political life , Mr. Leslie , there be nothing 
 in which a young man of your talent should be more on his guard than 
 think for himself ; he will nearly always think wrong . and I believe 
 that be one reason why young man of talent disappoint their friend , and 
 remain so long out of office . " 

 a haughty flush pass over Randal 's brow , and fade away quickly ; he 
 bow in silence . 

 Egerton resume , as if in explanation , and even in kindly apology , 

 " look at Lord L'Estrange himself . what young man could come into life 
 with bright auspex ? rank , wealth , high animal spirit   a great 
 advantage those same spirit , Mr. Leslie , courage , self - possession , 
 scholarship as brilliant perhaps as your own ; and now see how his life 
 be waste ! why ? he always think fit to think for himself . he could 
 never be break into harness , and never will be . the state coach , Mr. 
 Leslie , require that all the horse should pull together . " 

 " with submission , sir , " answer Randal , " I should think that there be 
 other reason why Lord L'Estrange , whatever be his talent - and of these 
 you must be indeed an adequate judge - would never do anything in public 
 life . " 

 " ay , and what ? " say Egerton , quickly . 

 " first , " say Randal , shrewdly , " private life have do too much for he . 
 what could public life give to one who need nothing ? bear at the top 
 of the social ladder , why should he put himself voluntarily at the last 
 step , for the sake of climb up again ? and secondly , Lord L'Estrange 
 seem to I a man in whose organization sentiment usurp too large a 
 share for practical existence . " 

 " you have a keen eye , " say Audley , with some admiration , - " keen for one 
 so young . poor Harley ! " 

 Mr. Egerton 's last word be say to himself . he resume quickly , 

 " there be something on my mind , my young friend . let we be frank with 
 each other . I place before you fairly the advantage and disadvantage 
 of the choice I give you . to take your degree with such honour as no 
 doubt you would have win , to obtain your fellowship , to go to the Bar , 
 with those credential in favour of your talent , - this be one career . 
 to come at once into public life , to profit by my experience , avail 
 yourself of my interest , to take the chance of rise or fall with a 
 party , - this be another . you choose the last . but in so do , there 
 be a consideration which might weigh with you , and on which , in state 
 your reason for your option , you be silent . " 

 " what be that , sir ? " 

 " you might have count on my fortune , should the chance of party fail 
 you : speak , and without shame if so ; it would be natural in a young man , 
 who come from the eld branch of the House whose heiress be my wife . " 

 " you wound I , Mr. Egerton , " say Randal , turn away . 

 Mr. Egerton 's cold glance follow Randal 's movement ; the face be hide 
 from the glance , and the statesman 's eye rest on the figure , which be 
 often as self - betraying as the countenance itself . randal baffle Mr. 
 Egerton 's penetration , - the young man 's emotion might be honest pride 
 and pain and generous feeling , or it might be something else . Egerton 
 continue slowly , 

 " once for all , then , distinctly and emphatically , I say , never count 
 upon that ; count upon all else that I can do for you , and forgive I 
 when I advise harshly or censure coldly ; ascribe this to my interest in 
 your career . moreover , before decision become irrevocable , I wish you 
 to know practically all that be disagreeable or even humiliating in the 
 first subordinate step of he who , without wealth or station , would 
 rise in public life . I will not consider your choice settle till the 
 end of a year at least , - your name will be keep on the college book 
 till then ; if on experience you should prefer to return to Oxford , and 
 pursue the slow but surer path to independence and distinction , you 
 can . and now give I your hand , Mr. Leslie , in sign that you forgive my 
 bluntness : it be time to dress . " 

 Randal , with his face still avert , extend his hand . Mr. Egerton hold 
 it a moment , then drop it , leave the room . Randal turn as the door 
 close ; and there be in his dark face a power of sinister passion , that 
 justify all Harley 's warning . his lip move , but not audibly ; then 
 as if strike by a sudden thought , he follow Egerton into the hall . 

 " Sir , " say he , " I forgot to say , that on return from Maida Hill , 
 I take shelter from the rain under a covered passage , and there I meet 
 unexpectedly with your nephew , Frank Hazeldean . " 

 " ah ! " say Egerton , indifferently , " a fine young man ; in the Guards . 
 it be a pity that my brother have such antiquated political notion ; he 
 should put his son into parliament , and under my guidance ; I could push 
 he . well , and what say Frank ? " 

 " he invite I to call on he . I remember that you once rather caution 
 I against too intimate an acquaintance with those who have not get 
 their fortune to make . " 

 " because they be idle , and idleness be contagious . right , - well not 
 to be too intimate with a young guardsman . " 

 " then you would not have I call on he , sir ? we be rather friend 
 at Eton ; and if I wholly reject his overture , might he not think that 
 you - " 

 " I ! " interrupt Egerton . " ah , true ; my brother might think I bear he 
 a grudge ; absurd . call then , and ask the young man here . yet still , I do 
 not advise intimacy . " Egerton turn into his dressing - room . " Sir , " 
 say his valet , who be in wait , " Mr. Levy be here , - he say by 
 appointment ; and Mr. Grinders be also just come from the country . " 

 " tell Mr. Grinders to come in first , " say Egerton , seat himself . 
 " you need not wait ; I can dress without you . tell Mr. Levy I will see 
 he in five minute . " 

 Mr. Grinders be steward to Audley Egerton . 

 Mr. Levy be a handsome man , who wear a camellia in his button - hole ; 
 drive , in his cabriolet , a high - step horse that have cost l200 ; be 
 well known to young man of fashion , and consider by their father a 
 very dangerous acquaintance . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 as the company assemble in the drawing - room , Mr. Egerton introduce 
 Randal Leslie to his eminent friend in a way that greatly contrast 
 the distant and admonitory manner which he have exhibit to he in 
 private . the presentation be make with that cordiality and that 
 gracious respect , by which those who be in station command notice for 
 those who have their station yet to win . 

 " my dear lord , let I introduce to you a kinsman of my late wife 's "   in 
 a whisper , - " the heir to the eld branch of her family . Stanmore , this 
 be Mr. Leslie , of whom I speak to you . you , who be so distinguished 
 at Oxford , will not like he the bad for the prize he gain there . 
 Duke , let I present to you Mr. Leslie . the duchess be angry with I for 
 desert her ball ; I shall hope to make my peace , by provide myself 
 with a young and lively substitute . ah , Mr. Howard , here be a young 
 gentleman just fresh from Oxford , who will tell we all about the new 
 sect spring up there . he have not waste his time on billiard and 
 horse . " 

 Leslie be receive with all that charming courtesy which be the to 
 Kalon of an aristocracy . 

 after dinner , conversation settle on politic . randal listen with 
 attention , and in silence , till Egerton draw he gently out ; just 
 enough , and no more , - just enough to make his intelligence evident , and 
 without subject he to the charge of lay down the law . Egerton 
 know how to draw out young man , - a difficult art . it be one reason why 
 he be so peculiarly popular with the more rise member of his party . 

 the party break up early . 

 " we be in time for Almack 's , " say Egerton , glance at the clock , " and 
 I have a voucher for you ; come . " 

 Randal follow his patron into the carriage . by the way Egerton thus 
 address he , 

 " I shall introduce you to the principal leader of society ; know they 
 and study they : I do not advise you to attempt to do more , - that be , to 
 attempt to become the fashion . it be a very expensive ambition : some man 
 it help , most man it ruin . on the whole , you have well card in your 
 hand . Dance or not as it please you ; do not   flirt . if you flirt people 
 will inquire into your fortune , - an inquiry that will do you little 
 good ; and flirt entangle a young man into marrying . that would never 
 do . here we be . " 

 in two minute more they be in the great ballroom , and Randal 's eye 
 be dazzle with the light , the diamond , the blaze of beauty . 
 Audley present he in quick succession to some dozen lady , and then 
 disappear amidst the crowd . Randal be not at a loss : he be without 
 shyness ; or if he have that disable infirmity , he conceal it . he 
 answer the languid question put to he with a certain spirit 
 that keep up talk , and leave a favourable impression of his agreeable 
 quality . but the lady with whom he get on the good be one who have no 
 daughter out , a handsome and witty woman of the world , - Lady Frederick 
 conier . 

 " it be your first ball at Almack 's then , Mr. Leslie ? " 

 " my first . " 

 " and you have not secure a partner ? shall I find you one ? what do you 
 think of that pretty girl in pink ? " 

 " I see she - but I can not think of she . " 

 " you be rather , perhaps , like a diplomatist in a new court , and your 
 first object be to know who be who . " 

 " I confess that on begin to study the history of my own day I should 
 like to distinguish the portrait that illustrate the memoir . " 

 " give I your arm , then , and we will come into the next room . we shall 
 see the different notabilite enter one by one , and observe without 
 be observe . this be the least I can do for a friend of Mr. 
 Egerton 's . " 

 " Mr. Egerton , then , " say Randal , - as they thread their way through 
 the space without the rope that protect the dancer , - " Mr. Egerton have 
 have the good fortune to win your esteem even for his friend , however 
 obscure ? " 

 " why , to say truth , I think no one whom Mr. Egerton call his friend 
 need long remain obscure , if he have the ambition to be otherwise ; for 
 Mr. Egerton hold it a maxim never to forget a friend nor a service . " 

 " ah , indeed ! " say Randal , surprised . 

 " and therefore , " continue Lady Frederick , " as he pass through life , 
 friend gather round he . he will rise even high yet . Gratitude , Mr. 
 Leslie , be a very good policy . " 

 " Hem , " mutter Mr. Leslie . 

 they have now gain the room where tea and bread and butter be the 
 homely refreshment to the habitue of what at that day be the most 
 exclusive assembly in London . they ensconce themselves in a corner by 
 a window , and Lady Frederick perform her task of cicerone with 
 lively ease , accompany each notice of the various person who 
 pass panoramically before they with sketch and anecdote , sometimes 
 good - nature , generally satirical , always graphic and amusing . 

 by and by Frank Hazeldean , have on his arm a young lady of haughty air 
 and with high though delicate feature , come to the tea - table . 

 " the last new Guardsman , " say Lady Frederick ; " very handsome , and not 
 yet quite spoiled . but he have get into a dangerous set . " 

 RANDAL . - " the young lady with he be handsome enough to be dangerous . " 

 LADY FREDERICK   laugh . - " no danger for he there , - as yet at least . 
 Lady Mary   the Duke of Knaresborough 's daughter   be only in her second 
 year . the first year , nothing under an earl ; the second , nothing under 
 a baron . it will be full four year before she come down to a commoner . 
 Mr. Hazeldean 's danger be of another kind . he live much with man who 
 be not exactly mauvais ton , but certainly not of the good taste . yet 
 he be very young ; he may extricate himself , - leave half his fortune 
 behind he . what , he nod to you ! you know he ? " 

 " very well ; he be nephew to Mr. Egerton . " 

 " indeed ! I do not know that . Hazeldean be a new name in London . I hear 
 his father be a plain country gentleman , of good fortune , but not that 
 he be relate to Mr. Egerton . " 

 " half - brother . " 

 " will Mr. Egerton pay the young gentleman 's debt ? he have no son 
 himself . " 

 RANDAL . - " Mr. Egerton 's fortune come from his wife , from my 
 family , - from a Leslie , not from a Hazeldean . " Lady Frederick turn 
 sharply , look at Randal 's countenance with more attention than she have 
 yet vouchsafe to it , and try to talk of the Leslies . randal be very 
 short there . 

 an hour afterwards , Randal , who have not dance , be still in the 
 refreshment - room , but Lady Frederick have long quit he . he be 
 talk with some old Etonians who have recognize he , when there 
 enter a lady of very remarkable appearance , and a murmur pass 
 through the room as she appear . 

 she might be three or four and twenty . she be dress in black velvet , 
 which contrast with the alabaster whiteness of her throat and the 
 clear paleness of her complexion , while it set off the diamond with 
 which she be profusely cover . her hair be of the deep jet , 
 and wear simply braid . her eye , too , be dark and brilliant , she 
 feature regular and striking ; but their expression , when in repose , be 
 not prepossess to such as love modesty and softness in the look 
 of woman . but when she speak and smile , there be so much spirit and 
 vivacity in the countenance , so much fascination in the smile , that all 
 which might before have mar the effect of her beauty strangely and 
 suddenly disappear . 

 " who be that very handsome woman ? " ask Randal . " an italian , - a 
 Marchesa something , " say one of the Etonians . 

 " Di Negra , " suggest another , who have be abroad : ' she be a widow ; her 
 husband be of the great genoese family of Negra , - a young branch of 
 it . " 

 several man now gather thickly around the fair italian . a few lady 
 of the high rank speak to she , but with a more distant courtesy than 
 lady of high rank usually show to foreigner of such quality as Madame 
 di Negra . lady of rank less elevated seem rather shy of she , - that 
 might be from jealousy . as Randal gaze at the marchesa with more 
 admiration than any woman , perhaps , have before excited in he , he hear 
 a voice near he say , 

 " oh , Madame di Negra be resolve to settle amongst we , and marry an 
 Englishman . " 

 " if she can find one sufficiently courageous , " return a female voice . 

 " well , she be try hard for Egerton , and he have courage enough for 
 anything . " 

 the female voice reply , with a laugh , " Mr Egerton know the world too 
 well , and have resist too many temptation to be - " 

 " Hush ! there he be . " 

 Egerton come into the room with his usual firm step and erect mien . 
 Randal observe that a quick glance be exchange between he and the 
 marchesa ; but the minister pass she by with a bow . 

 still Randal watch , and , ten minute afterwards , Egerton and the 
 marchesa be seat apart in the very same convenient nook that randal 
 and Lady Frederick have occupy an hour or so before . 

 " be this the reason why Mr. Egerton so insultingly warn I against 
 counting on his fortune ? " mutter Randal . " do he mean to marry 
 again ? " 

 unjust suspicion ! - for , at that moment , these be the word that Audley 
 Egerton be drop forth from his lip of bronze , 

 " Nay , dear madam , do not ascribe to my frank admiration more gallantry 
 than it merit . your conversation charm I , your beauty delight I ; 
 your society be as a holiday that I look forward to in the fatigue of 
 my life . but I have do with love , and I shall never marry again . " 

 " you almost pique I into try to win , in order to reject you , " say 
 the Italian , with a flash from her bright eye . 

 " I defy even you , " answer Audley , with his cold hard smile . " but to 
 return to the point . you have more influence , at least , over this subtle 
 ambassador ; and the secret we speak of I rely on you to obtain I . 
 ah , Madam , let we rest friend . you see I have conquer the unjust 
 prejudice against you ; you be receive and fete everywhere , as 
 become your birth and your attraction . rely on I ever , as I on you . 
 but I shall excite too much envy if I stay here long , and be vain 
 enough to think that I may injure you if I provoke the gossip of the 
 ill - natured . as the avow friend , I can serve you ; as the suppose 
 lover , no - " Audley rise as he say this , and , stand by the chair , 
 add carelessly , " - propos , the sum you do I the honour to borrow will 
 be pay to your banker to - morrow . " 

 " a thousand thank ! my brother will hasten to repay you . " 

 Audley bow . " your brother , I hope , will repay I in person , not 
 before . when do he come ? " 

 " oh , he have again postpone his visit to London ; he be so much need in 
 Vienna . but while we be talk of he , allow I to ask if your friend , 
 Lord L'Estrange , be indeed still so bitter against that poor brother of 
 mine ? " 

 " still the same . " 

 " it be shameful ! " cry the italian , with warmth ; " what have my brother 
 ever do to he that he should actually intrigue against the count in 
 his own court ? " 

 " Intrigue ! I think you wrong Lord L'Estrange ; he but represent what he 
 believe to be the truth , in defence of a ruined exile . " 

 " and you will not tell I where that exile be , or if his daughter still 
 live ? " 

 " my dear marchesa , I have call you friend , therefore I will not aid 
 L'Estrange to injure you or your . but I call L'Estrange a friend also ; 
 and I can not violate the trust that - " Audley stop short , and bit 
 his lip . " you understand I , " he resume , with a more genial smile than 
 usual ; and he take his leave . 

 the Italian 's brow meet as her eye follow he ; then , as she too rise , 
 that eye encounter Randal 's . 

 " that young man have the eye of an italian , " say the marchesa to 
 herself , as she pass by he into the ballroom . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

 Leonard and Helen settle themselves in two little chamber in a small 
 lane . the neighbourhood be dull enough , the accommodation humble ; but 
 their landlady have a smile . that be the reason , perhaps , why Helen 
 choose the lodging : a smile be not always find on the face of a 
 landlady when the lodger be poor . and out of their window they 
 catch sight of a green tree , an elm , that grow up fair and tall in a 
 carpenter 's yard at the rear . that tree be like another smile to the 
 place . they see the bird come and go to its shelter ; and they even 
 hear , when a breeze arise , the pleasant murmur of its bough . 

 Leonard go the same evening to Captain Digby 's old lodging , but he 
 could learn there no intelligence of friend or protector for Helen . 
 the people be rude and surly , and say that the captain still owe 
 they L1 17s . the claim , however , seem very disputable , and be stoutly 
 deny by Helen . the next morning Leonard set out in search of Dr. 
 Morgan . he think his good plan be to inquire the address of the 
 doctor at the near chemist 's , and the chemist civilly look into 
 the " Court Guide , " and refer he to a house in Bulstrode Street , 
 Manchester Square . to this street Leonard contrive to find his way , 
 much marvelling at the meanness of London : Screwstown seem to he the 
 handsomer town of the two . 

 a shabby man - servant open the door , and Leonard remark that the 
 narrow passage be choke with box , trunk , and various article of 
 furniture . he be show into a small room contain a very large round 
 table , whereon be sundry work on homoeopathy , Parry 's " Cymbrian 
 Plutarch , " davy 's " celtic research , " and a Sunday news paper . an 
 engrave portrait of the illustrious Hahnemann occupy the place of 
 honour over the chimneypiece . in a few minute the door to an inner room 
 open , and Dr. Morgan appear , and say politely , " come in , sir . " 

 the doctor seat himself at a desk , look hastily at Leonard , and then 
 at a great chronometer lie on the table . " my time 's short , sir , - go 
 abroad : and now that I be go , patient flock to I . too late . London 
 will repent its apathy . let it ! " 

 the doctor pause majestically , and not remark on Leonard 's face the 
 consternation he have anticipate , he repeat peevishly , " I be go 
 abroad , sir , but I will make a synopsis of your case , and leave it to my 
 successor . Hum ! 

 " hair chestnut ; eye - what colour ? look this way , - blue , dark blue . Hem ! 
 Constitution nervous . what be the symptom ? " 

 " Sir , " begin Leonard , " a little girl - " 

 DR . MORGAN   impatiently . - " little girl ; never mind the history of your 
 suffering ; stick to the symptom , - stick to the symptom . " 

 LEONARD . - " you mistake I , Doctor , I have nothing the matter with I . a 
 little girl - " 

 DR . MORGAN . - " Girl again ! I understand ! it be she who be ill . shall I 
 go to she ? she must describe her own symptom , - I can not   judge from your 
 talk . you will be tell I she have consumption , or dyspepsia , or some 
 such disease that do not   exist : mere allopathic invention , - symptom , 
 sir , symptom . " 

 LEONARD   force his way . - " you attend her poor father , Captain 
 Digby , when he be take ill in the coach with you . he be dead , and his 
 child be an orphan . " 

 DR . MORGAN   fumbling in his medical pocket - book . - " Orphan ! nothing for 
 orphan , especially if inconsolable , like aconite and chamomilla . " 

   it may be necessary to observe that homoeopathy professe to deal 
  with our moral affection as well as with our physical malady , and 
  have a globule for every sorrow . 

 with some difficulty Leonard succeed in bring Helen to the 
 recollection of the homoeopathist , state how he come in charge of she , 
 and why he seek Dr. Morgan . 

 the doctor be much move . 

 " but , really , " say he , after a pause , " I do not   see how I can help the 
 poor child . I know nothing of her relation . this Lord Les - whatever his 
 name be - I know of no lord in London . I know lord , and physic 
 they too , when I be a blundering allopathist . there be the Earl of 
 Lansmere , - have have many a blue pill from I , sinner that I be . his 
 son be wise ; never would take physic . very clever boy be Lord 
 L'Estrange - " 

 " Lord L'Estrange ! that name begin with Les - " 

 " stuff ! he be always abroad , - show his sense . I be go abroad too . no 
 development for science in this horrid city , - full of prejudice , 
 sir , and give up to the most barbarous allopathical and phlebotomical 
 propensity . I be go to the land of Hahnemann , sir , - sell my 
 good - will , lease , and furniture , and have buy in on the Rhine . 
 natural life there , sir , - homeeopathy need nature : dine at one o'clock , 
 get up at four , tea little know , and science appreciate . but I forget . 
 Cott ! what can I do for the orphan ? " 

 " well , sir , " say Leonard , rise , " Heaven will give I strength to 
 support she . " 

 the doctor look at the young man attentively . " and yet , " say he , in a 
 gentler voice , " you , young man , be , by your account , a perfect stranger 
 to she , or be so when you undertake to bring she to London . you have a 
 good heart , always keep it . very healthy thing , sir , a good heart , - that 
 be , when not carry to excess . but you have friend of your own in 
 town ? " 

 LEONARD . - " not yet , sir ; I hope to make they . " 

 DOCTOR . - " Pless I , you do ? how ? - I can not   make any . " 

 Leonard colour and hang his head . he long to say , " author find 
 friend in their reader , - I be go to be an author . " but he feel that 
 the reply would savour of presumption , and hold his tongue . 

 the doctor continue to examine he , and with friendly interest . " you 
 say you walk up to London : be that from choice or economy ? " 

 LEONARD . - " both , sir . " 

 DOCTOR . - " sit down again , and let we talk . I can give you a quarter of 
 an hour , and I will see if I can help either of you , provide you tell I 
 all the symptom , - I mean all the particular . " 

 then , with that peculiar adroitness which belong to experience in the 
 medical profession , Dr. Morgan , who be really an acute and able man , 
 proceed to put his question , and soon extract from Leonard the 
 boy 's history and hope . but when the doctor , in admiration at a 
 simplicity which contrast so evident an intelligence , finally ask 
 he his name and connection , and Leonard tell they , the homoeopathist 
 actually start . " Leonard Fairfield , grandson of my old friend , John 
 Avenel of Lansmere ! I must shake you by the hand . bring up by Mrs. 
 Fairfield ! - 

 " ah , now I look , strong family likeness , - very strong " 

 the tear stand in the doctor 's eye . " Poor Nora ! " say he . 

 " Nora ! do you know my aunt ? " 

 " your aunt ! ah ! ah ! yes , yes ! Poor Nora ! she die almost in these 
 arm , - so young , so beautiful . I remember it as if yesterday . " 

 the doctor brush his hand across his eye , and swallow a globule ; 
 and before the boy know what he be about , have , in his benevolence , 
 thrust another between Leonard 's quivering lip . 

 a knock be hear at the door . 

 " ha ! that be my great patient , " cry the doctor , recover 
 his self - possession , - " must see he . a chronic case , excellent 
 patient , - tic , sir , tic . puzzling and interesting . if I could take 
 that tic with I , I should ask nothing more from Heaven . call again on 
 Monday ; I may have something to tell you then as to yourself . the little 
 girl can not   stay with you , - wrong and nonsensical ! I will see after she . 
 leave I your address , - write it here . I think I know a lady who will 
 take charge of she . good - by . Monday next , ten o'clock . " with this , the 
 doctor thrust out Leonard , and usher in his grand patient , whom he be 
 very anxious to take with he to the bank of the Rhine . 

 Leonard have now only to discover the nobleman whose name have be so 
 vaguely utter by poor Captain Digby . he have again recourse to the 
 " Court Guide ; " and find the address of two or three lord the first 
 syllable of whose title seem similar to that repeat to he , and 
 all live pretty near to each other , in the region of Mayfair , he 
 ascertain his way to that quarter , and , exercise his mother - wit , 
 inquire at the neighbouring shop as to the personal appearance of 
 these nobleman . out of consideration for his rusticity , he get very 
 civil and clear answer ; but none of the lord in question correspond 
 with the description give by Helen . one be old , another be 
 exceedingly corpulent , a third be bedridden , - none of they be know to 
 keep a great dog . it be needless to say that the name of L'Estrange 
  no habitant of London   be not in the " Court Guide . " and Dr. Morgan 's 
 assertion that that person be always abroad unluckily dismiss from 
 Leonard 's mind the name the homoeopathist have so casually mention . but 
 Helen be not disappointed when her young protector return late in the 
 day , and tell she of his ill - success . poor child ! she be so pleased 
 in her heart not to be separate from her new brother ; and Leonard be 
 touch to see how she have contrive , in his absence , to give a certain 
 comfort and cheerful grace to the bare room devote to himself . she have 
 arrange his few book and paper so neatly , near the window , in sight 
 of the one green elm . she have coax the smile landlady out of one or 
 two extra article of furniture , especially a walnut - tree bureau , and 
 some odd and end of ribbon , with which last she have loop up the 
 curtain . even the old rush - bottom chair have a strange air of elegance , 
 from the mode in which they be place . the fairy have give sweet 
 Helen the art that adorn a home , and bring out a smile from the 
 dingy corner of hut and attic . 

 Leonard wonder and praise . he kiss his blushing ministrant 
 gratefully , and they sit down in joy to their abstemious meal ; 
 when suddenly his face be overcloud , - there shoot through he the 
 remembrance of Dr. Morgan 's word , " the little girl can not   stay with 
 you , - wrong and nonsensical . I think I know a lady who will take charge 
 of she . " 

 " ah , " cry Leonard , sorrowfully , " how could I forget ? " and he tell 
 Helen what grieve he . Helen at first exclaim that she would not go . 
 Leonard , rejoice , then begin to talk as usual of his great prospect ; 
 and , hastily finish his meal , as if there be no time to lose , sit 
 down at once to his paper . then Helen contemplate he sadly , as he 
 bent over his delightful work . and when , lift his radiant eye from 
 his manuscript , he exclaim , " no , no , you shall not go . this must 
 succeed , - and we shall live together in some pretty cottage , where we 
 can see more than one tree , " - then Helen sigh , and do not answer this 
 time , " no , I will not go . " 

 shortly after she steal from the room , and into her own ; and there , 
 kneel down , she pray , and her prayer be somewhat this , " guard I 
 against my own selfish heart ; may I never be a burden to he who have 
 shield I . " 

 perhaps as the Creator look down on this world , whose wondrous beauty 
 beam on we more and more , in proportion as our science would take it 
 from poetry into law , - perhaps he behold nothing so beautiful as the 
 pure heart of a simple love child . 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 Leonard go out the next day with his precious manuscript . he have 
 read sufficient of modern literature to know the name of the principal 
 London publisher ; and to these he take his way with a bold step , though 
 a beat heart . 

 that day he be out long than the last ; and when he return , and come 
 into the little room , Helen utter a cry , for she scarcely recognize 
 he , - there be on his face so deep , so silent , and so concentrate a 
 despondency . he sit down listlessly , and do not kiss she this time , as 
 she steal towards he . he feel so humble . he be a king depose . 

 he take charge of another life ! he ! 

 she coax he at last into communicate his day 's chronicle . the 
 reader beforehand know too well what it must be to need detailed 
 repetition . Most of the publisher have absolutely refuse to look at 
 his manuscript ; one or two have good - naturedly glanced over and return 
 they at once with a civil word or two of flat rejection . one publisher 
 alone - himself a man of letter , and who in youth have go through 
 the same bitter process of disillusion that now await the village 
 genius - volunteer some kindly though stern explanation and counsel to 
 the unhappy boy . this gentleman read a portion of Leonard 's principal 
 poem with attention , and even with frank admiration . he could appreciate 
 the rare promise that it manifest . he sympathize with the boy 's 
 history , and even with his hope ; and then he say , in bid he 
 farewell , 

 " if I publish this poem for you , speak as a trader , I shall be a 
 considerable loser . do I publish all I admire , out of sympathy with 
 the author , I should be a ruin man . but suppose that , impress as 
 I really be with the evidence of no common poetic gift in this 
 manuscript , I publish it , not as a trader , but a lover of literature , 
 I shall in reality , I fear , render you a great disservice , and perhaps 
 unfit your whole life for the exertion on which you must rely for 
 independence . " 

 " how , sir ? " cry Leonard . " not that I would ask you to injure yourself 
 for I , " he add , with proud tear in his eye . 

 " how , my young friend ? I will explain . there be enough talent in 
 these verse to induce very flattering review in some of the literary 
 journal . you will read these , find yourself proclaim a poet , will cry 
 ' I be on the road to fame . ' you will come to I , ' and my poem , how do 
 it sell ? ' I shall point to some groan shelf , and say , ' not twenty 
 copy ! the journal may praise , but the public will not buy it . ' 
 ' but you will have get a name , ' you say . yes , a name as a poet just 
 sufficiently know to make every man in practical business disincline 
 to give fair trial to your talent in a single department of positive 
 life ; none like to employ poet ; - a name that will not put a penny in 
 your purse , - bad still , that will operate as a barrier against every 
 escape into the way whereby man get to fortune . but have once taste 
 praise , you will continue to sigh for it : you will perhaps never again 
 get a publisher to bring forth a poem , but you will hanker round the 
 purlieus of the Muses , scribble for periodical , fall at last into a 
 bookseller 's drudge . profit will be so precarious and uncertain , that 
 to avoid debt may be impossible ; then , you who now seem so ingenuous and 
 so proud , will sink deeply still into the literary mendicant , begging , 
 borrowing - " 

 " never ! never ! never ! " cry Leonard , veil his face with his hand . 

 " such would have be my career , " continue the publisher ; " but I 
 luckily have a rich relative , a trader , whose call I despise as a 
 boy , who kindly forgive my folly , bind I as an apprentice , and here I 
 be ; and now I can afford to write book as well as sell they . 

 " young man , you must have respectable relation , - go by their advice and 
 counsel ; cle fast to some positive calling . be anything in this city 
 rather than poet by profession . " 

 " and how , sir , have there ever be poet ? have they other calling ? " 

 " read their biography , and then - envy they ! " 

 Leonard be silent a moment ; but lift his head , answer loud 
 and quickly , " I have read their biography . true , their lot be 
 poverty , - perhaps hunger . Sir , i - envy they ! " 

 " poverty and hunger be small evil , " answer the bookseller , with 
 a grave , kind smile . " there be bad , - debt and degradation , 
 and - despair . " 

 " no , sir , no , you exaggerate ; these last be not the lot of all poet . " 

 " right , for most of our great poet have some private mean of their 
 own . and for other - why , all who have put into a lottery have not 
 draw blank . but who could advise another man to set his whole hope 
 of fortune on the chance of a prize in a lottery ? and such a lottery ! " 
 groan the publisher , glance towards sheet and ream of dead 
 author , lie , like lead , upon his shelf . 

 Leonard clutch his manuscript to his heart , and hurry away . 

 " yes , " he mutter , as Helen clung to he , and try to console , - " yes , 
 you be right : London be very vast , very strong , and very cruel ; " and 
 his head sink lower and low yet upon his bosom . 

 the door be fling widely open , and in , unannounced , walk Dr. Morgan . 

 the child turn to he , and at the sight of his face she remember 
 her father ; and the tear that for Leonard 's sake she have be try to 
 suppress find way . 

 the good doctor soon gain all the confidence of these two young 
 heart ; and after listen to Leonard 's story of his paradise lose in a 
 day , he pat he on the shoulder and say , " well , you will call on 
 I on Monday , and we will see . meanwhile , borrow these of I ! " - and 
 he try to slip three sovereign into the boy 's hand . Leonard be 
 indignant . the bookseller 's warning flash on he . mendicancy ! oh , 
 no , he have not yet come to that ! he be almost rude and savage in his 
 rejection ; and the doctor do not like he the less for it . 

 " you be an obstinate mule , " say the homoeopathist , reluctantly put 
 up his sovereign . " will you work at something practical and prosy , and 
 let the poetry rest a while ? " 

 " yes , " say Leonard , doggedly . " I will work . " 

 " very well , then . I know an honest bookseller , and he shall give you 
 some employment ; and meanwhile , at all event , you will be among book , 
 and that will be some comfort . " 

 Leonard 's eye brighten . " a great comfort , sir . " he press the hand 
 he have before put aside to his grateful heart . 

 " but , " resume the doctor , seriously , " you really feel a strong 
 predisposition to make verse ? " 

 " I do , sir . " 

 " very bad symptom indeed , and must be stop before a relapse ! here , I 
 have cure three prophet and ten poet with this novel specific . " 

 while thus speak he have get out his book and a globule . " Agaricus 
 muscarius dissolve in a tumbler of distilled water , - teaspoonful 
 whenever the fit come on . Sir , it would have cure Milton himself . " 

 " and now for you , my child , " turn to Helen , " I have find a lady who 
 will be very kind to you . not a menial situation . she want some one to 
 read to she and tend on she ; she be old and have no child . she want 
 a companion , and prefer a girl of your age to one old . will this suit 
 you ? " 

 Leonard walk away . 

 Helen get close to the doctor 's ear , and whisper , " no , I can not leave 
 he now , - he be so sad . " 

 " Cott ! " grunt the doctor , " you two must have be read ' Paul and 
 Virginia . ' if I could but stay in England , I would try what ignatia 
 would do in this case , - interesting experiment ! listen to I , little 
 girl , and go out of the room , you , sir . " 

 Leonard , avert his face , obey . Helen make an involuntary step after 
 he ; the doctor detain and draw she on his knee . 

 " what be your christian name ? - I forget . " 

 " Helen . " 

 " Helen , listen . in a year or two you will be a young woman , and it would 
 be very wrong then to live alone with that young man . meanwhile you have 
 no right to cripple all his energy . he must not have you lean on 
 his right arm , - you would weigh it down . I be go away , and when I be 
 go there will be no one to help you , if you reject the friend I offer 
 you . do as I tell you , for a little girl so peculiarly susceptible   a 
 thorough pulsatilla constitution   can not be obstinate and egotistical . " 

 " let I see he care for and happy , sir , " say she , firmly , " and I will 
 go where you wish . " 

 " he shall be so ; and to - morrow , while he be out , I will come and fetch 
 you . nothing so painful as leave - taking , shake the nervous system , and 
 be a mere waste of the animal economy . " 

 Helen sob aloud ; then , writhe from the doctor , she exclaim , " but 
 he may know where I be ? we may see each other sometimes ? ah , sir , it be 
 at my father 's grave that we first meet , and I think Heaven send he to 
 I . do not part we forever . " 

 " I should have a heart of stone if I do , " cry the doctor , vehemently ; 
 " and Miss Starke shall let he come and visit you once a week . I will give 
 her something to make she . she be naturally indifferent to other . I 
 will alter her whole constitution , and melt she into sympathy - with 
 rhododendron and arsenic ! " 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 before he go the doctor write a line to " Mr. Prickett , Bookseller , 
 Holborn , " and tell Leonard to take it the next morning , as address . " I 
 will call on Prickett myself tonight and prepare he for your visit . but 
 I hope and trust you will only have to stay there a few day . " 

 he then turn the conversation , to communicate his plan for Helen . 
 Miss Starke live at Highgate , - a worthy woman , stiff and prim , as old 
 maid sometimes be ; but just the place for a little girl like Helen , 
 and Leonard should certainly be allow to call and see she . 

 Leonard listen and make no opposition , - now that his day - dream be 
 dispel , he have no right to pretend to be Helen 's protector . he could 
 have pray she to share his wealth and his fame ; his penury and his 
 drudgery - no . 

 it be a very sorrowful evening , - that between the adventurer and 
 the child . they sit up late , till their candle have burn down to the 
 socket ; neither do they talk much ; but his hand clasp hers all the 
 time , and her head pillow it self on his shoulder . I fear when they 
 part it be not for sleep . 

 and when Leonard go forth the next morning , Helen stand at the street 
 door watch he depart - slowly , slowly . no doubt , in that humble lane 
 there be many sad heart ; but no heart so heavy as that of the still , 
 quiet child , when the form she have watch be to be see no more , and , 
 still stand on the desolate threshold , she gaze into space , and all 
 be vacant . 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

 Mr. Prickett be a believer in homeeopathy , and declare , to the 
 indignation of all the apothecary round Holborn , that he have be 
 cure of a chronic rheumatism by Dr. Morgan . the good doctor have , as 
 he promise , see Mr. Prickett when he leave Leonard , and ask he as a 
 favour to find some light occupation for the boy , that would serve as an 
 excuse for a modest weekly salary . " it will not be for long , " say the 
 doctor : " his relation be respectable and well off . I will write to his 
 grandparent , and in a few day I hope to relieve you of the charge . of 
 course , if you do not   want he , I will repay what he cost meanwhile . " 

 Mr. Prickett , thus prepare for Leonard , receive he very graciously ; 
 and , after a few question , say Leonard be just the person he want 
 to assist he in catalogue his book , and offer he most handsomely 
 l1 a week for the task . 

 plunge at once into a world of book vast than he have ever before win 
 admission to , that old divine dream of knowledge , out of which poetry 
 have spring , return to the village student at the very sight of the 
 venerable volume . the collection of Mr. Prickett be , however , in 
 reality by no mean large ; but it comprise not only the ordinary 
 standard work , but several curious and rare one . and Leonard pause 
 in make the catalogue , and take many a hasty snatch of the content 
 of each tome , as it pass through his hand . the bookseller , who be 
 an enthusiast for old book , be pleased to see a kindre feeling   which 
 his shop - boy have never exhibit   in his new assistant ; and he talk 
 about rare edition and scarce copy , and initiate Leonard into many 
 of the mystery of the bibliographist . 

 nothing could be more dark and dingy than the shop . there be a booth 
 outside , contain cheap book and odd volume , round which there be 
 always an attentive group ; within , a gas - lamp burn night and day . 

 but time pass quickly to Leonard . he miss not the green field , he 
 forget his disappointment , he cease to remember even Helen . o strange 
 passion of knowledge ! nothing like thee for strength and devotion ! 

 Mr. Prickett be a bachelor , and ask Leonard to dine with he on a 
 cold shoulder of mutton . during dinner the shop - boy keep the shop , 
 and Mr. Prickett be really pleasant , as well as loquacious . he take 
 a liking to Leonard , and Leonard tell he his adventure with the 
 publisher , at which Mr. Prickett rub his hand and laugh , as at a 
 capital joke . " oh , give up poetry , and stick to a shop , " cry he ; " and 
 to cure you forever of the mad whim to be author , I will just lend you the 
 ' Life and Works of Chatterton . ' you may take it home with you and read 
 before you go to bed . you will come back quite a new man to - morrow . " 

 not till night , when the shop be closed , do Leonard return to his 
 lodging . and when he enter the room , he be strike to the soul by the 
 silence , by the void . Helen be go ! 

 there be a rose - tree in its pot on the table at which he write , and by 
 it a scrap of paper , on which be write , 

  DEAR , dear brother Leonard , God bless you . I will let you know when 
  we can meet again . take care of this rose , Brother , and do not 
  forget poor 

  HELEN . 

 over the word " forget " there be a big round blister spot that nearly 
 efface the word . 

 Leonard lean his face on his hand , and for the first time in his life 
 he feel what solitude really be . he could not stay long in the room . 
 he walk out again , and wander objectless to and fro the street . he 
 pass that stiller and humbler neighbourhood , he mix with the throng 
 that swarm in the more populous thoroughfare . hundred and thousand 
 pass he by , and still - still such solitude . 

 he come back , light his candle , and resolutely draw forth the 
 " Chatterton " which the bookseller have lend he . it be an old edition , 
 in one thick volume . it have evidently belong to some contemporary 
 of the poet 's , - apparently an inhabitant of Bristol , - some one who 
 have gather up many anecdote respect Chatterton 's habit , and who 
 appear even to have see he , nay , be in his company ; for the book 
 be interleave , and the leaf cover with note and remark , in 
 a stiff clear hand , - all evince personal knowledge of the mournful 
 immortal dead . at first , Leonard read with an effort ; then the strange 
 and fierce spell of that dread life seize upon he , - seize with pain 
 and gloom and terror , - this boy die by his own hand , about the age 
 Leonard have attain himself . this wondrous boy , of a genius beyond all 
 comparison the great that ever yet be develop and extinguish 
 at the age of eighteen , - self - teach , self - struggle , self - immolated . 
 nothing in literature like that life and that death ! 

 with intense interest Leonard peruse the tale of the brilliant 
 imposture , which have be so harshly and so absurdly construe into the 
 crime of a forgery , and which be   if not wholly innocent   so akin to 
 the literary device always in other case view with indulgence , 
 and exhibit , in this , intellectual quality in themselves so 
 amazing , - such patience , such forethought , such labour , such courage , 
 such ingenuity , - the quality that , well direct , make man great , 
 not only in book , but action . and , turn from the history of the 
 imposture to the poem themselves , the young reader bend before their 
 beauty , literally awed and breathless . how this strange Bristol boy 
 tame and master his rude and motley material into a music that 
 comprehend every tune and key , from the simple to the sublimest ! 
 he turn back to the biography ; he read on ; he see the proud , daring , 
 mournful spirit alone in the Great City , like himself . he follow its 
 dismal career , he see it fall with bruised and soil wing into 
 the mire . he turn again to the later work , wring forth as task for 
 bread , - the satire without moral grandeur , the politic without honest 
 faith . he shudder and sicken as he read . true , even here his poet 
 mind appreciate   what perhaps only poet can   the divine fire that 
 burn fitfully through that mean and more sordid fuel , - he still 
 trace in those crude , hasty , bitter offering to dire Necessity the 
 hand of the young giant who have build up the stately verse of Rowley . 
 but alas ! how different from that " mighty line . " how all serenity 
 and joy have flee from these later exercise of art degrade into 
 journey - work ! then rapidly come on the catastrophe , - the closed door , 
 the poison , the suicide , the manuscript tear by the hand of despairing 
 wrath , and strew round the corpse upon the funereal floor . it be 
 terrible ! the spectre of the Titan boy   as describe in the note 
 write on the margin , with his haughty brow , his cynic smile , his 
 lustrous eye , haunt all the night the baffled and solitary child of 
 song . 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

 it will often happen that what ought to turn the human mind from some 
 peculiar tendency produce the opposite effect . one would think that the 
 perusal in the newspaper of some crime and capital punishment would 
 warn away all who have ever meditate the crime , or dread the chance 
 of detection . yet it be well known to we that many a criminal be make 
 by ponder over the fate of some predecessor in guilt . there be a 
 fascination in the Dark and Forbidden , which , strange to say , be only 
 lose in fiction . no man be more inclined to murder his nephew , or 
 stifle his wife , after read " Richard the Third " or " Othello . " it be 
 the reality that be necessary to constitute the danger of contagion . 
 now , it be this reality in the fate and life and crown suicide of 
 Chatterton that force itself upon Leonard 's thought , and sit there 
 like a visible evil thing , gather evil like cloud around it . there 
 be much in the dead poet 's character , his trial , and his doom , that 
 stand out to Leonard like a bold and colossal shadow of himself and his 
 fate . alas ! the book seller , in one respect , have say truly . Leonard 
 come back to he the next day a new man ; and it seem even to himself 
 as if he have lose a good angel in lose Helen . " oh , that she have be 
 by my side ! " think he . " oh , that I could have feel the touch of she 
 confide hand ; that , look up from the scathed and dreary ruin of 
 this life , that have sublimely lift itself from the plain , and 
 seek to tower aloft from a deluge , her mild look have speak to I 
 of innocent , humble , unaspire childhood ! ah ! if indeed I be still 
 necessary to she , - still the sole guardian and protector , - then could I 
 say to myself ; ' Thou must not despair and die ! thou hast she to live 
 and to strive for . ' but no , no ! only this vast and terrible London , - the 
 solitude of the dreary garret , and those lustrous eye , glare alike 
 through the throng and through the solitude . " 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 on the following Monday Dr. Morgan 's shabby man - servant open the door 
 to a young man in whom he do not at first remember a former visitor . 
 a few day before , embrown with healthful travel , serene light in his 
 eye , simple trust on his careless lip , Leonard Fairfield have stand at 
 that threshold . now again he stand there , pale and haggard , with a cheek 
 already hollow into those deep anxious line that speak of work 
 thought and sleepless night ; and a settle sullen gloom rest 
 heavily on his whole aspect . 

 " I call by appointment , " say the boy , testily , as the servant stand 
 irresolute . the man give way . " Master be just go out to a patient : 
 please to wait , sir ; " and he show he into the little parlour . in a 
 few moment , two other patient be admit . these be woman , 
 and they begin talk very loud . they disturb Leonard 's unsocial 
 thought . he see that the door into the doctor 's receiving - room be half 
 open , and , ignorant of the etiquette which hold such penetralia as 
 sacred , he walk in to escape from the gossip . he throw himself into 
 the doctor 's own wellworn chair , and mutter to himself , " why do 
 he tell I to come ? what new can he think of for I ? and if a favour , 
 should I take it ? he have give I the mean of bread by work : that be 
 all I have a right to ask from he , from any man , - all I should accept . " 

 while thus soliloquizing , his eye fall on a letter lie open on the 
 table . he start . he recognize the handwriting , - the same as that of 
 the letter which have inclose . L50 to his mother , - the letter of his 
 grandparent . he see his own name : he see something more , - word that 
 make his heart stand still , and his blood seem like ice in his vein . as 
 he thus stand aghast , a hand be lay on the letter , and a voice , in an 
 angry growl , mutter , " how dare you come into my room , and pe read 
 my letter ? er - r - r ! " 

 Leonard place his own hand on the doctor 's firmly , and say , in a 
 fierce tone , " this letter relate to I , belong to I , crush I . I 
 have see enough to know that . I demand to read all , - learn all . " 

 the doctor look round , and see the door into the waiting - room still 
 open , kick it to with his foot , and then say , under his breath , " what 
 have you read ? tell I the truth . " 

 " two line only , and I be call - I be call - " Leonard 's frame shake 
 from head to foot , and the vein on his forehead swell like cord . he 
 could not complete the sentence . it seem as if an ocean be roll up 
 through his brain , and roar in his ear . the doctor see at a glance 
 that there be physical danger in his state , and hastily and soothingly 
 answer , " sit down , sit down ; calm yourself ; you shall know all , - read 
 all ; drink this water ; " and he pour into a tumbler of the pure liquid 
 a drop or two from a tiny phial . 

 Leonard obey mechanically , for he be no long able to stand . he 
 close his eye , and for a minute or two life seem to pass from he ; 
 then he recover , and see the good doctor 's gaze fix on he with 
 great compassion . he silently stretch forth his hand towards the 
 letter . " wait a few moment , " say the physician , judiciously , " and hear 
 I meanwhile . it be very unfortunate you should have see a letter never 
 mean for your eye , and contain allusion to a secret you be never 
 to have know . but if I tell you more , will you promise I , on your word 
 of honour , that you will hold the confidence sacred from Mrs. Fairfield , 
 the Avenels , - from all ? I myself be pledge to conceal a secret , which I 
 can only share with you on the same condition . " 

 " there be nothing , " announce Leonard , indistinctly , and with a bitter 
 smile on his lip , - " nothing , it seem , that I should be proud to boast 
 of . yes , I promise ; the letter , the letter ! " 

 the doctor place it in Leonard 's right hand , and quietly slip to the 
 wrist of the leave his forefinger and thumb , as physician be say to do 
 when a victim be stretch on the rack . " Pulse decreasing , " he mutter ; 
 " wonderful thing , aconite ! " meanwhile Leonard read as follow , fault in 
 spelling and all : - 

  DR . MORGAN 

  SIR , - I receive your favur duly , and be glad to hear that the pore 
  boy be safe and well . but he have be behave ill , and ungrateful 
  to my good son Richard , who be a credit to the whole famuly and have 
  make himself a Gentleman and be very kind and good to the boy , not 
  know who and what he be - God forbid ! I do not   want never to see 
  he again - the boy . Pore John be ill and Restless for day 
  afterwards . John be a pore cretur now , and have have paralytick . 
  and he talk of nothing but Nora - the boy 's eye be so like his 
  Mother 's . I can not , can not see the Child of Shame . he can not   cum 
  here - for our Lord 's sake , sir , do not   ask it - he can not , so 
  respectable as we have   always be ! - and such disgrace ! Base 
  bear ! base bear ! keep he where he be , bind he prentis , I will pay 
  anything for that . you say , sir , he be clever , and quick at 
  learning ; so do Parson Dale , and want he to go to Collidge and 
  make a Figur , - then all would cum out . it would be my death , sir ; I 
  could not sleep in my grave , sir . Nora , that we be all so proud 
  of . sinful cretur that we be ! Nora 's good name that we have   save , 
  now go , go . and Richard , who be so grand , and who be so fond 
  of pore , pore Nora ! he would not hold up his Head again . do not   let 
  he make a Figur in the world ; let he be a tradesman , as we be 
  afore he , - any trade he take to , - and not cross we no more while 
  he live . then I shall pray for he , and wish he happy . and have 
  not we have enuff of bring up child to be above their birth ? 
  Nora , that I use to say be like the first lady o ' the land - oh , but 
  we be rightly punish ! so now , sir , I leave all to you , and will 
  pay all you want for the boy . and be sure that the secret 's kept . 
  for we have never hear from the father , and , at lee , no one know 
  that Nora have a live son but I and my daughter Jane , and Parson 
  Dale and you - and you two be good Gentlemen - and Jane will keep she 
  word , and I be old , and shall be in my grave soon , but I hope it 
  will not   be while pore John need I . what could he do without I ? 
  and if that get wind , it would kill I straght , sir . Pore John be a 
  helpless cretur , God bless he . so no more from your servant in all 
  dooty , 

  M. AVENEL . 

 Leonard lay down this letter very calmly , and , except by a slight 
 heaving at his breast , and a deathlike whiteness of his lip , the 
 emotion he feel be undetecte . and it be a proof how much exquisite 
 goodness there be in his heart that the first word he speak be , 
 " thank Heaven ! " 

 the doctor do not expect that thanksgiving , and he be so startled that 
 he exclaim , " for what ? " 

 " I have nothing to pity or excuse in the woman I know and honour as a 
 mother . I be not her son - her- " he stop short . 

 " no : but do not   be hard on your true mother , - poor Nora ! " 

 Leonard stagger , and then burst into a sudden paroxysm of tear . 

 " oh , my own mother ! my dead mother ! Thou for whom I feel so mysterious a 
 love , - thou from whom I take this poet soul ! pardon I , pardon I ! hard 
 on thee ! would that thou wert live yet , that I might comfort thee ! 
 what thou must have suffer ! " 

 these word be sob forth in broken gasp from the depth of his 
 heart . then he catch up the letter again , and his thought be change 
 as his eye fall upon the writer 's shame and fear , as it be , of his 
 very existence . all his native haughtiness return to he . his crest 
 rise , his tear dry . " tell she , " he say , with astern , unfaltere 
 voice , " tell Mrs. Avenel that she be obey ; that I will never seek her 
 roof , never cross her path , never disgrace her wealthy son . but tell 
 she , also , that I will choose my own way in life , - that I will not take 
 from she a bribe for concealment . tell she that I be nameless , and will 
 yet make a name . " 

 a name ! be this but an idle boast , or be it one of those flash of 
 conviction which be never belie , light up our future for one lurid 
 instant , and then fade into darkness ? 

 " I do not doubt it , my prave poy , " say Dr. Morgan , grow exceedingly 
 Welsh in his excitement ; " and perhaps you may find a father , who - " 

 " Father ! who be he , what be he ? he live , then ! but he have desert 
 I , - he must have betray she ! I need he not . the law give I no 
 father . " 

 the last word be say with a return of bitter anguish : then , in a 
 calm tone , he resume , " but I should know who he be - as another one 
 whose path I may not cross . " 

 Dr. Morgan look embarrassed , and pause in deliberation . " Nay , " say 
 he , at length , " as you know so much , it be surely good that you should 
 know all . " 

 the doctor then proceed to detail , with some circumlocution , what we 
 will here repeat from his account more succinctly . 

 Nora Avenel , while yet very young , leave her native village , or rather 
 the house of Lady Lansinere , by whom she have be educate and bring 
 up , in order to accept the place of companion to a lady in London . one 
 evening she suddenly present herself at her father 's house , and at 
 the first sight of her mother 's face she fall down insensible . she be 
 carry to bed . Dr. Morgan   then the chief medical practitioner of the 
 town   be send for . that night Leonard come into the world , and his 
 mother die . she never recover her sens , never speak intelligibly 
 from the time she enter the house . " and never , therefore , name your 
 father , " say Dr. Morgan . " we know not who he be . " 

 " and how , " cry Leonard , fiercely , - " how have they dare to slander 
 this dead mother ? how know they that I - be - be - be not the child of 
 wedlock ? " 

 " there be no wedding - ring on Nora 's finger , never any rumour of her 
 marriage ; her strange and sudden appearance at her father 's house ; her 
 emotion on entrance , so unlike those natural to a wife return to a 
 parent 's home , - these be all the evidence against she . but Mrs. Avenel 
 deem they strong , and so do I. you have a right to think we judge 
 too harshly , - perhaps we do . " 

 " and no inquiry be ever make ? " say Leonard , mournfully , and after 
 a long silence , - " no inquiry to learn who be the father of the 
 motherless child ? " 

 " Inquiries ! Mrs. Avenel would have die first . your grandmother 's nature 
 be very rigid . have she come from prince , from Cadwallader himself , " 
 say the Welshman , ' she could not more have shrink from the thought of 
 dishonour . even over her dead child , the child she have love the good , 
 she think but how to save that child 's name and memory from suspicion . 
 there be luckily no servant in the house , only Mark Fairfield and his 
 wife   Nora 's sister : they have arrive the same day on a visit . 

 " Mrs. Fairfield be nurse her own infant two or three month old ; she 
 take charge of you ; Nora be bury and the secret kept . none out of the 
 family know of it but myself and the curate of the town , - Mr. Dale . the 
 day after your birth , Mrs. Fairfield , to prevent discovery , move to a 
 village at some distance . there her child die ; and when she return to 
 Hazeldean , where her husband be settle , you pass as the son she have 
 lose . Mark , I know , be as a father to you , for he have love Nora : they 
 have be child together . " 

 " and she come to London , - London be strong and cruel , " mutter Leonard . 
 " she be friendless and deceive . I see all , - I desire to know no more . 
 this father - he must in deed have be like those whom I have read of in 
 book . to love , to wrong she , - that I can conceive ; but then to leave , 
 to abandon ; no visit to her grave , no remorse , no search for his own 
 child . well , well ; Mrs. Avenel be right . let we think of he no more . " 

 the man - servant knock at the door , and then put in his head . " Sir , the 
 lady be get very impatient , and say they will go . " 

 " Sir , " say Leonard , with a strange calm return to the thing about he , 
 " I ask your pardon for take up your time so long . I go now . I will 
 never mention to my moth - I mean to Mrs. Fairfield - what I have learn , 
 nor to any one . I will work my way somehow . if Mr. Prickett will keep 
 I , I will stay with he at present ; but I repeat , I can not take Mrs. 
 Avenel 's money and be bind apprentice . Sir , you have be good and 
 patient with I , - Heaven reward you . " 

 the doctor be too move to answer . he wring Leonard 's hand , and in 
 another minute the door close upon the nameless boy . he stand alone 
 in the street of London ; and the sun flash on he , red and menacing , 
 like the eye of a foe ! 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

 Leonard do not appear at the shop of Mr. Prickett that day . needless it 
 be to say where he wander , what he suffer , what think , what feel . 
 all within be storm . late at night he return to his solitary lodging . 
 on his table , neglect since the morning , be Helen 's rose - tree . it 
 look parch and fade . his heart smite he : he water the poor 
 plant , - perhaps with his tear . 

 meanwhile Dr. Morgan , after some debate with himself whether or not 
 to apprise Mrs. Avenel of Leonard 's discovery and message , resolve to 
 spare she an uneasiness and alarm that might be dangerous to her health , 
 and unnecessary in itself . he reply shortly , that she need not fear 
 Leonard 's come to her house ; that he be disinclined to bind himself 
 an apprentice , but that he be provide for at present ; and in a few 
 week , when Dr. Morgan hear more of he through the tradesman by whom 
 he be employ , the doctor would write to she from Germany . he then 
 go to Mr. Prickett 's , tell the willing bookseller to keep the young 
 man for the present , - to be kind to he , watch over his habit and 
 conduct , and report to the doctor in his new home , on the Rhine , what 
 avocation he think Leonard would be well suit for , and most incline 
 to adopt . the charitable welshman divide with the bookseller the salary 
 give to Leonard , and leave a quarter of his moiety in advance . it be 
 true that he know he should be repay on apply to Mrs. Avenel ; 
 but be a man of independent spirit himself , he so sympathize with 
 Leonard 's present feeling , that he feel as if he should degrade the boy 
 do he maintain he , even secretly , out of Mrs. Avenel 's money , - money 
 intend not to raise , but keep he down in life . at the bad , it be a 
 sum the doctor could afford , and he have bring the boy into the world . 
 have thus , as he think , safely provide for his two young charge , 
 Helen and Leonard , the doctor then give himself up to his final 
 preparation for departure . he leave a short note for Leonard with Mr. 
 Prickett , contain some brief advice , some kind cheer ; a 
 postscript to the effect that he have not communicate to Mrs. Avenel the 
 information Leonard have acquire , and that it be good to leave she in 
 that ignorance ; and six small powder to be dissolve in water , and 
 a teaspoonful every fourth hour , - " sovereign against rage and sombre 
 thought , " write the doctor . 

 by the evening of the next day Dr. Morgan , accompany by his pet 
 patient with the chronic tic , whom he have talk into exile , be on the 
 steamboat on his way to Ostend . 

 Leonard resume his life at Mr. Prickett 's ; but the change in he do 
 not escape the bookseller . all his ingenuous simplicity have desert 
 he . he be very distant and very taciturn ; he seem to have grow much 
 old . I shall not attempt to analyze metaphysically this change . by 
 the help of such word as Leonard may himself occasionally let fall , the 
 reader will dive into the boy 's heart , and see how there the change have 
 work , and be work still . the happy , dreamy peasant - genius gaze on 
 Glory with inebriate , undazzled eye be no more . it be a man , suddenly 
 cut off from the old household holy tie , - conscious of great power , 
 and confront on all side by barrier of iron , alone with hard reality 
 and scornful London ; and if he catch a glimpse of the lose Helicon , he 
 see , where he see the Muse , a pale melancholy spirit veil its face 
 in shame , - the ghost of the mournful mother , whose child have no name , 
 not even the humblest , among the family of man . 

 on the second evening after Dr. Morgan 's departure , as Leonard be just 
 about to leave the shop , a customer step in with a book in his hand , 
 which he have snatch from the shop - boy , who be remove the volume 
 for the night from the booth without . 

 " Mr. Prickett , Mr. Prickett ! " say the customer , " I be ashamed of you . 
 you presume to put upon this work , in two volume , the sum of eight 
 shilling . " 

 Mr. Prickett step forth from the cimmerian gloom of some recess , and 
 cry , " what ! Mr. Burley , be that you ? but for your voice , I should not 
 have know you . " 

 " man be like a book , Mr. Prickett ; the commonalty only look to his 
 binding . I be well bind , it be very true . " Leonard glance towards 
 the speaker , who now stand under the gas - lamp , and think he recognize 
 his face . he look again . yes ; it be the perch - fisher whom he have meet 
 on the bank of the Brent , and who have warn he of the lose fish and 
 the broken line . 

 MR . BURLEY   continue . - " but the ' art of thinking ' ! - you charge eight 
 shilling for the ' art of Thinking . ' " 

 MR . PRICKETT . - " cheap enough , Mr. Burley . a very clean copy . " 

 MR . BURLEY . - " Usurer ! I sell it to you for three shilling . it be more 
 than one hundred and fifty per cent you propose to gain from my ' art of 
 Thinking . ' " 

 MR . PRICKETT   stuttering and take aback . - " you sell it to I ! ah , 
 now I remember . but it be more than three shilling I give . you 
 forget , - two glass of brandy - and - water . " 

 MR . BURLEY . - " Hospitality , sir , be not to be price . if you sell your 
 hospitality , you be not worthy to possess my ' art of Thinking . ' I 
 resume it . there be three shilling , and a shilling more for interest . 
 no ; on second thought , instead of that shilling , I will return your 
 hospitality : and the first time you come my way you shall have two 
 glass of brandy - and - water . " 

 Mr. Prickett do not look pleased , but he make no objection ; and Mr. 
 Burley put the book into his pocket , and turn to examine the 
 shelf . he buy an old jest - book , a stray volume of the Comedies 
 of Destouches , pay for they , put they also into his pocket , and be 
 saunter out , when he perceive Leonard , who be now stand at the 
 doorway . 

 " Hem ! who be that ? " he ask , whisper Mr. Prickett . " a young 
 assistant of mine , and very clever . " 

 Mr. Burley scan Leonard from top to toe . 

 " we have meet before , sir . but you look as if you have return to the 
 Brent , and be fish for my perch . " 

 " possibly , sir , " answer Leonard . " but my line be tough , and be not yet 
 break , though the fish drag it amongst the weed , and bury itself in 
 the mud . " 

 he lift his hat , bow slightly , and walk on . 

 " he be clever , " say Mr. Burley to the bookseller : " he understand 
 allegory . " 

 MR . PRICKETT . - " poor youth ! he come to town with the idea of turn 
 author : you know what that be , Mr. Burley . " 

 MR . BURLEY   with an air of superb dignity . - " Bibliopole , yes ! an author 
 be a be between god and man , who ought to be lodge in a palace , and 
 entertain at the public charge upon ortolan and Tokay . he should be 
 keep lap in down , and curtain with silken awning from the care 
 of life , have nothing to do but to write book upon table of cedar , and 
 fish for perch from a gild galley . and that be what will come to 
 pass when the age lose their barbarism and know their benefactor . 
 meanwhile , sir , I invite you to my room , and will regale you upon 
 brandy - and - water as long as I can pay for it ; and when I can not - you 
 shall regale I . " 

 Mr. Prickett mutter , " a very bad bargain indeed , " as Mr. Burley , with 
 his chin in the air , step into the street . 




 CHAPTER XX . 

 at first Leonard have always return home through the crowd 
 thoroughfare , - the contact of number have animate his spirit . but the 
 last two day , since the discovery of his birth , he have take his way 
 down the comparatively unpeopled path of the New Road . 

 he have just gain that part of this outskirt in which the statuary 
 and tomb - maker exhibit their gloomy ware , furniture alike for garden 
 and for graf , - and , pausing , contemplate a column , on which be 
 place an urn , half cover with a funeral mantle , when his shoulder be 
 lightly tap , and , turn quickly , he see Mr. Burley stand behind 
 he . 

 " excuse I , sir , but you understand perch - fishing ; and since we find 
 ourselves on the same road , I should like to be well acquaint with 
 you . I hear you once wish to be an author . I be one . " 

 Leonard have never before , to his knowledge , see an author , and a 
 mournful smile pass his lip as he survey the perch - fisher . 

 Mr. Burley be indeed very differently attire since the first interview 
 by the brooklet . he look much less like an author , - but more perhaps 
 like a perch - fisher . he have a new white hat , stick on one side of his 
 head , a new green overcoat , new gray trouser , and new boot . in his 
 hand be a whalebone stick , with a silver handle . nothing could be more 
 vagrant , devil - I - garish , and , to use a slang word , tigerish , than 
 his whole air . yet , vulgar as be his costume , he do not himself seem 
 vulgar , but rather eccentric , lawless , - something out of the pale of 
 convention . his face look more pale and more puff than before , 
 the tip of his nose redder ; but the spark in his eye be of a lively 
 light , and there be self - enjoyment in the corner of his sensual , 
 humorous lip . 

 " you be an author , sir , " repeat Leonard . " well ; and what be your 
 report of the calling ? yonder column prop an urn . the column be tall , 
 and the urn be graceful . but it look out of place by the roadside : what 
 say you ? " 

 MR . BURLEY . - " it would look well in the churchyard . " 

 LEONARD . - " so I be think . and you be an author ! " 

 MR . BURLEY . - " ah , I say you have a quick sense of allegory . and so you 
 think an author look well in a churchyard , when you see he but as a 
 muffle urn under the moonshine , than stand beneath the gas - lamp in a 
 white hat , and with a red tip to his nose . abstractedly , you be right . 
 but , with your leave , the author would rather be where he be . let we 
 walk on . " the two man feel an interest in each other , and they walk 
 some yard in silence . 

 " to return to the urn , " say Mr. Burley , - " you think of fame and 
 churchyard . natural enough , before illusion die ; but I think of the 
 moment , of existence , - and I laugh at fame . Fame , sir - not worth a 
 glass of cold - without ! and as for a glass of warm , with sugar - and five 
 shilling in one 's pocket to spend as one please - what be there in 
 Westminster Abbey to compare with it ? " 

 " talk on , sir , - I should like to hear you talk . let I listen and hold 
 my tongue . " Leonard pull his hat over his brow , and give up his 
 moody , questioning , turbulent mind to his new acquaintance . 

 and John Burley talk on . a dangerous and fascinating talk it be , - the 
 talk of a great intellect fall ; a serpent trail its length on the 
 ground , and show bright , shifting , glorious hue , as it grovel , - a 
 serpent , yet without the serpent 's guile . if John Burley deceive and 
 tempt , he mean it not , - he crawl and glitter alike honestly . no 
 dove could be more simple . 

 laugh at fame , he yet dwelt with an eloquent enthusiasm on the joy 
 of composition . " what do I care what man without be to say and think 
 of the word that gush forth on my page ? " cry he . " if you think of the 
 public , of urn , and laurel , while you write , you be no genius ; you 
 be not fit to be an author . I write because it rejoice I , because it 
 be my nature . write , I care no more what become of it than the lark 
 for the effect that the song have on the peasant it wake to the plough . 
 the poet , like the lark , sing ' from his watch - tower in the sky . ' be 
 this true ? " 

 " yes , very true ! " 

 " what can rob we of this joy ? the bookseller will not buy ; the 
 public will not read . let they sleep at the foot of the ladder of the 
 angel , - we climb it all the same . and then one settle down into such 
 good - temper lucianic contempt for man . one want so little from they , 
 when one know what one 's self be worth , and what they be . they be 
 just worth the coin one can extract from they , in order to live . 

 " our life - that be worth so much to we . and then their joy , so vulgar 
 to they , we can make they golden and kingly . do you suppose Burns 
 drinking at the alehouse , with his boor around he , be drink , like 
 they , only beer and whiskey ? no , he be drink nectar ; he be imbibe 
 his own ambrosial thought , - shake with the laughter of the god . 
 the coarse human liquid be just need to unlock his spirit from the 
 clay , - take it from jerkin and corduroys , and wrap it in the ' singing 
 robe ' that float wide in the sky : the beer or the whiskey need 
 but for that , and then it change at once into the drink of Hebe . but 
 come , you have not know this life , - you have not see it . come , give 
 I this night . I have money about I , - I will fling they abroad as 
 liberally as Alexander himself , when he leave to his share but hope . 
 come ! " 

 " Whither ? " 

 " to my throne . on that throne last sit Edmund Kean , mighty mime ! I be 
 his successor . we will see whether in truth these wild son of genius , 
 who be cite but ' to point a moral and adorn a tale , ' be object of 
 compassion . sober - suit tit to lament over a Savage or a Morland , a 
 Porson and a Burns ! " 

 " or a Chatterton , " say Leonard , gloomily . 

 " Chatterton be an impostor in all thing ; he feign excess that he 
 never know . he a bacchanalian , a royster ! he ! no . we will talk of he . 
 come ! " 

 Leonard go . 




 CHAPTER XXI . 

 the Room ! and the smoke - reek , and the gas glare of it ! the whitewash of 
 the wall , and the print thereon of the actor in their mime - robe , and 
 stage posture , - actor as far back as their own lose Augustan era , when 
 the stage be a real live influence on the manner and the age ! there 
 be Betterton , in wig and gown , - as Cato , moralize on the soul 's 
 eternity , and halt between Plato and the dagger . there be Woodward 
 as " The Fine Gentleman , " with the inimitable rake - hell in which the 
 hero of Wycherly and Congreve and Farquhar live again . there be 
 jovial Quin as Falstaff , with round buckler and " fair round belly . " 
 there be Colley Cibber in brocade , take snuff as with " his Lord , " 
 the thumb and forefinger raise in air , and look at you for applause . 
 there be Macklin as Shylock , with knife in hand : and kemble in the 
 solemn weed of the dane ; and Kean in the place of honour over the 
 chimneypiece . 

 when we be suddenly take from practical life , with its real workday 
 man , and present to the portrait of those sole hero of a world 
 Fantastic and Phantasmal , in the garment wherein they do ' strut and 
 fret their hour upon the stage , " verily there be something in the sight 
 that move an inner sense within ourselves , - for all of we have an inner 
 sense of some existence , apart from the one that wear away our day : 
 an existence that , afar from St. James 's and St. Giles 's , the Law Courts 
 and Exchange , go its way in terror or mirth , in smile or in tear , 
 through a vague magic - land of the poet . there , see those actor - they 
 be the man who live it - to whom our world be the false one , to whom 
 the Imaginary be the actual ! and do Shakspeare himself , in his life , 
 ever hearken to such applause as thunder round the personator of his 
 airy image ? vague child of the most transient of the art , fleet 
 shadow on run water , though throw down from the steadfast star , 
 be ye not happy than we who live in the real ? how strange you 
 must feel in the great circuit that ye now take through eternity ! no 
 prompt - book , no lamp , no act Congreve and Shakspeare there ! for 
 what part in the sky have your study on the earth fit you ? your 
 ultimate destiny be very puzzling . hail to your effigy , and pass we 
 on ! 

 there , too , on the whitewashed wall , be admit the portrait of 
 ruder rival in the arena of fame , - yet they , too , have know an 
 applause warm than his age give to Shakspeare ; the Champions of the 
 Ring , - Cribb and Molyneux and Dutch Sam . intersperse with these be an 
 old print of Newmarket in the early part of the last century , and sundry 
 engraving from Hogarth . but poet , oh , they be there too ! poet who 
 might be suppose to have be sufficiently good fellow to be at home 
 with such companion , - Shakspeare , of course , with his placid forehead ; 
 Ben Jonson , with his heavy scowl ; Burns and Byron cheek by jowl . but 
 the strange of all these heterogeneous specimen of graphic art be 
 a full - length print of William Pitt ! - William Pitt , the austere and 
 imperious . what the deuce do he do there amongst prize - fighter and 
 actor and poet ? it seem an insult to his grand memory . nevertheless 
 there he be , very erect , and with a look of ineffable disgust in his 
 upturned nostril . the portrait on the sordid wall be very like the 
 crambo in the mind of ordinary man , - very like the motley picture 
 of the FAMOUS hang up in your parlour , o my Public ! actor and 
 prize - fighter , poet and statesman , all without congruity and fitness , 
 all whom you have be to see or to hear for a moment , and whose name 
 have star out in your newspaper , o my public ! 

 and the company ? indescribable ! comedian , from small theatre , out of 
 employ ; pale , haggard - look boy , probably the son of worthy trader , 
 try their good to break their father ' heart ; here and there the 
 mark feature of a Jew . now and then you might see the curious puzzle 
 face of some greenhorn about town , or perhaps a Cantab ; and man of grave 
 age , and grayhaire , be there , and amongst they a wondrous proportion 
 of carbuncled face and bottle - nose . and when John Burley enter , 
 there be a shout that make William Pitt shake in his frame . such 
 stamping and hallooing , and such hurrah for " Burley John . " and the 
 gentleman who have fill the great high leathern chair in his absence 
 give it up to John Burley ; and Leonard , with his grave , observant eye , 
 and lip half sad and half scornful , place himself by the side of his 
 introducer . there be a nameless , expectant stir through the assembly , 
 as there be in the pit of the opera when some great singer advance to 
 the lamp , and begin , " Di tanti palpiti . " time fly . look at the dutch 
 clock over the door . half - an - hour . John Burley begin to warm . a yet 
 quick light begin to break from his Eye ; his voice have a mellow 
 luscious roll in it . 

 " he will be grand to - night , " whisper a thin man , who look like a 
 tailor , seat on the other side of Leonard . time fly , - an hour . look 
 again at the dutch clock . John Burley be grand , he be in his zenith , at 
 his culminate point . what magnificent drollery ! what luxuriant humour ! 
 how the Rabelais shake in his easy - chair ! under the rush and the roar 
 of this fun   what word else shall describe it ?   the man 's intellect be 
 as clear as gold sand under a river . such wit and such truth , and , at 
 time , such a flood of quick eloquence ! all now be listener , - silent , 
 save in applause . 

 and Leonard listen too . not , as he would some night ago , in innocent 
 unquestione delight . no ; his mind have pass through great sorrow , 
 great passion , and it come out unsettled , inquire , eager , brood 
 over joy itself as over a problem . and the drink circulate , and face 
 change ; and there be gabble and babbling ; and Burley 's head sink 
 in his bosom , and he be silent . and up start a wild , dissolute , 
 bacchanalian glee for seven voice . and the smoke - reek grow denser 
 and thick , and the gaslight look dizzy through the haze . and John 
 Burley 's eye reel . 

 look again at the dutch clock . two hour have go . John Burley have 
 break out again from his silence , his voice thick and husky , and his 
 laugh crack ; and he talk , o ye god ! such rubbish and ribaldry ; and 
 the listener roar aloud , and think it fine than before . and Leonard , 
 who have hitherto be measure himself in his mind against the giant , 
 and say inly , " he soar out of my reach , " find the giant shrink 
 small and small , and saith to himself , " he be but of man 's common 
 standard after all ! " 

 look again at the dutch clock . three hour have pass . be John Burley 
 now of man 's common standard ? man himself seem to have vanish from 
 the scene , - his soul steal from he , his form go away with the fume 
 of the smoke , and the nauseous steam from that fiery bowl . and Leonard 
 look round , and see but the swine of Circe , - some on the floor , some 
 staggering against the wall , some hug each other on the table , 
 some fighting , some bawling , some weeping . the divine spark have flee 
 from the human face ; the Beast be everywhere grow more and more out 
 of the thing that have be Man . and John Burley , still unconquered , but 
 clean lose to his sens , fancy himself a preacher , and drawl forth 
 the most lugubrious sermon upon the brevity of life that mortal ever 
 beard , accompany with unctuous sob ; and now and then in the midst of 
 balderdash gleam out a gorgeous sentence , that Jeremy Taylor might have 
 envy , drivel away again into a cadence below the rhetoric of 
 a Muggletonian . and the waiter choke up the doorway , listen and 
 laughing , and prepare to call cab and coach ; and suddenly some one 
 turn off the gaslight , and all be dark as pitch , - howl and laughter , 
 as of the damned , ring through the Pandemonium . out from the black 
 atmosphere step the boy - poet ; and the still star rush on his 
 sight , as they look over the grimy roof - top . 




 CHAPTER XXII . 

 well , Leonard , this be the first time thou hast show that thou hast in 
 thee the iron out of which true manhood be forge and shape . Thou hast 
 the power to resist . forth , unebriate , unpolluted , he come from the 
 orgy , as yon star above he come from the cloud . 

 he have a latch - key to his lodging . he let himself in and walk 
 noiselessly up the creak wooden stair . it be dawn . he pass on to 
 his window and throw it open . the green elm - tree from the carpenter 's 
 yard look as fresh and fair as if root in solitude , league away 
 from the smoke of Babylon . 

 " Nature , Nature ! " murmur Leonard , " I hear thy voice now . this still , 
 this strengthen . but the struggle be very dread . here , despair of 
 life , - there , faith in life . nature think of neither , and life 
 serenely on . " 

 by and by a bird slide softly from the heart of the tree , and drop on 
 the ground below out of sight . but Leonard hear its carol . it awake its 
 companion ; wing begin to glance in the air , and the cloud grow red 
 towards the east . 

 Leonard sigh and leave the window . on the table , near Helen 's 
 rose - tree , which he bent over wistfully , lie a letter . he have not 
 observe it before . it be in Helen 's hand . he take it to the light , and 
 read it by the pure , healthful gleam of morn : - 

  IVY LODGE . 

  oh , my dear brother Leonard , will this find you well , and   more 
  happy I dare not say , but   less sad than when we part ? I write 
  kneeling , so that it seem to I as if I write and pray at the 
  same time . you may come and see I to - morrow evening , Leonard . do 
  come , do , - we shall walk together in this pretty garden ; and there 
  be an arbour all cover with jessamine and honeysuckle , from which 
  we can look down on London . I have look from it so many time , - 
  so many - try if I can guess the roof in our poor little street , 
  and fancy that I do see the dear elm - tree . 

  Miss Starke be very kind to I ; and I think after I have see you , 
  that I shall be happy here , - that be , if you be happy . 

  your own grateful sister , 

  HELEN . 

  P. S. - any one will direct you to our house ; it lie to the left 
  near the top of the hill , a little way down a lane that be overhung 
  on one side with chestnut - tree and lilac . I shall be watch for 
  you at the gate . 

 Leonard 's brow soften , he look again like his former self . up from 
 the dark sea at his heart smile the meek face of a child , and the wave 
 lie still as at the charm of a spirit . 




 CHAPTER XXIII . 

 " and what be Mr. Burley , and what have he write ? " ask Leonard of Mr. 
 Prickett , when he return to the shop . 

 let we reply to that question in our own word , for we know more about 
 Mr. Burley than Mr. Prickett do . 

 John Burley be the only son of a poor clergyman , in a village near 
 Ealing , who have scrap and save and pinch , to send his son to an 
 excellent provincial school in a northern county , and thence to college . 
 at the latter , during his first year , young Burley be remark by the 
 undergraduate for his thick shoe and coarse linen , and remarkable to 
 the authority for his assiduity and learning . the high hope be 
 entertain of he by the tutor and examiner . at the beginning of the 
 second year his high animal spirit , before keep down by study , break 
 out . reading have become easy to he . he knock off his task with a 
 facile stroke , as it be . he give up his leisure hour to Symposia by 
 no mean Socratical . he fall into an idle , hard - drinking set . he get 
 into all kind of scrape . the authority be at first kind and 
 forbear in their admonition , for they respect his ability , and 
 still hop he might become an honour to the University . but at last 
 he go drunk into a formal examination , and send in paper , after 
 the manner of Aristophanes , contain capital joke upon the Dons and 
 big - wig themselves . the offence be the great and seem the more 
 premeditate for be clothe in Greek . John Burley be expel . he 
 go home to his father 's a miserable man , for , with all his folly , 
 he have a good heart . remove from ill example , his life for a year be 
 blameless . he get admit as usher into the school in which he have 
 receive instruction as a pupil . this school be in a large town . John 
 Burley become member of a club form among the tradesman , and 
 spend three evening a week there . his astonishing convivial and 
 conversational power begin to declare themselves . he grow the oracle 
 of the club ; and , from be the most sober , peaceful assembly in which 
 grave father of a family ever smoke a pipe or sip a glass , it 
 grow under Mr. Burley 's auspex the parent of revel as frolic and 
 frantic as those out of which the old Greek Goat Song ever tipsily rise . 
 this would not do . there be a great riot in the street one night , and 
 the next morning the usher be dismiss . fortunately for John Burley 's 
 conscience , his father have die before this happen , - die believe 
 in the reform of his son . during his ushership Mr. Burley have scrap 
 acquaintance with the editor of the county newspaper , and give he 
 some capital political article ; for Burley be , like Parr and Porson , 
 a notable politician . the editor furnish he with letter to the 
 journalist in London , and John come to the metropolis and get employ 
 on a very respectable newspaper . at college he have know Audley Egerton , 
 though but slightly : that gentleman be then just rise into repute in 
 parliament . Burley sympathize with some question on which Audley 
 have distinguish himself , and write a very good article thereon , - an 
 article so good that Egerton inquire into the authorship , find out 
 Burley , and resolve in his own mind to provide for he whenever he 
 himself come into office . but Burley be a man whom it be impossible to 
 provide for . he soon lose his connection with the news paper . first , he 
 be so irregular that he could never be depend upon . secondly , he have 
 strange , honest , eccentric twist of thinking , that could coalesce 
 with the thought of no party in the long run . an article of his , 
 inadvertently admit , have horrify all the proprietor , staff , and 
 reader of the paper . it be diametrically opposite to the principle 
 the paper advocate , and compare its pet politician to catiline . then 
 John Burley shut himself up and write book . he write two or three 
 book , very clever , but not at all to the popular taste , - abstract and 
 learn , full of whim that be caviare to the multitude , and lard 
 with Greek . nevertheless they obtain for he a little money , and among 
 literary man some reputation . now Audley Egerton come into power , and 
 get he , though with great difficulty , - for there be many prejudice 
 against this scampish , harum - scarum son of the Muses , - a place in a 
 public office . he keep it about a month , and then voluntarily resign 
 it . " my crust of bread and liberty ! " quoth John Burley , and he vanish 
 into a garret . from that time to the present he live - Heaven know how ! 
 literature be a business , like everything else ; John Burley grow more 
 and more incapable of business . " he could not do task - work , " he say ; he 
 write when the whim seize he , or when the last penny be in his pouch , 
 or when he be actually in the spunge - house or the Fleet , - migrations 
 which occur to he , on an average , twice a year . he could generally 
 sell what he have actually write , but no one would engage he 
 beforehand . editor of magazine and other periodical be very glad 
 to have his article , on the condition that they be anonymous ; and 
 his style be not necessarily detect , for he could vary it with 
 the facility of a practised pen . Audley Egerton continue his good 
 supporter , for there be certain question on which no one write with 
 such force as John Burley , - question connect with the metaphysics of 
 politic , such as law reform and economical science . and Audley Egerton 
 be the only man John Burley put himself out of the way to serve , and 
 for whom he would give up a drinking bout and do task - work ; for John 
 Burley be grateful by nature , and he feel that Egerton have really try 
 to befriend he . indeed , it be true , as he have state to Leonard by the 
 Brent , that even after he have resign his desk in the London office , 
 he have have the offer of an appointment in Jamaica , and a place in India , 
 from the minister . but probably there be other charm then than those 
 exercise by the one - eyed perch that keep he to the neighbourhood of 
 London . with all his grave fault of character and conduct , John Burley 
 be not without the fine quality of a large nature . he be most 
 resolutely his own enemy , it be true , but he could hardly be say to be 
 any one else 's . even when he criticise some more fortunate writer , he 
 be good - humour in his very satire : he have no bile , no envy . and as 
 for freedom from malignant personality , he might have be a model to 
 all critic . I must except politic , however , for in these he could 
 be rabid and savage . he have a passion for independence , which , though 
 push to excess , be not without grandeur . no lick - platter , no 
 parasite , no toad - eater , no literary beggar , no hunter after patronage 
 and subscription ; even in his dealing with Audley Egerton , he insist 
 on name the price for his labour . he take a price , because , as the 
 paper require by Audley demand much reading and detail , which 
 be not at all to his taste , he consider himself entitle fairly 
 to something more than the editor of the journal wherein the paper 
 appear be in the habit of giving . but he assess this extra price 
 himself , and as he would have do to a bookseller . and when in debt and 
 in prison , though he know a line to Egerton would have extricate he , 
 he never write that line . he would depend alone on his pen , - dip it 
 hastily in the ink , and scrawl himself free . the most debase point 
 about he be certainly the incorrigible vice of drinking , and with it 
 the usual concomitant of that vice , - the love of low company . to be king 
 of the Bohemians , to dazzle by his wild humour , and sometimes to exalt 
 by his fanciful eloquence , the rude , gross nature that gather round 
 he , - this be a royalty that repay he for all sacrifice of solid 
 dignity ; a foolscap crown that he would not have change for an 
 emperor 's diadem . indeed , to appreciate rightly the talent of John 
 Burley , it be necessary to hear he talk on such occasion . as a 
 writer , after all , he be now only capable of unequal desultory effort ; 
 but as a talker , in his own wild way , he be original and matchless . and 
 the gift of talk be one of the most dangerous gift a man can possess 
 for his own sake , - the applause be so immediate , and gain with so 
 little labour . low and low and low have sink John Burley , not only 
 in the opinion of all who know his name , but in the habitual exercise of 
 his talent . and this seem wilfully - from choice . he would write for 
 some unstamped journal of the populace , out of the pale of the law , for 
 penny , when he could have get pound from journal of high repute . he 
 be very fond of scribble off penny ballad , and then stand in the 
 street to hear they sung . he actually once make himself the poet of an 
 advertising tailor , and enjoy it excessively . but that do not last 
 long , for John Burley be a Pittite , - not a Tory , he use to say , but 
 a Pittite . and if you have hear he talk of Pitt , you would never have 
 know what to make of that great statesman . he treat he as the german 
 commentator do Shakspeare , and invest he with all imaginary meaning 
 and object , that would have turn the grand practical man into a 
 sibyl . well , he be a Pittite ; the tailor a fanatic for Thelwall and 
 Cobbett . Mr. Burley write a poem wherein Britannia appear to the 
 tailor , compliment he highly on the art he exhibit in adorn the 
 person of her son ; and bestow upon he a gigantic mantle , say that 
 he , and he alone , might be enable to fit it to the shoulder of live 
 man . the rest of the poem be occupy in Mr. Snip 's unavaile attempt 
 to adjust this mantle to the eminent politician of the day , when , 
 just as he have sink down in despair , Britannia reappear to he , and 
 console he with the information that he have do all mortal man could 
 do , and that she have only desire to convince pigmy that no human art 
 could adjust to their proportion the mantle of William Pitt . sic itur 
 ad astra , - she go back to the star , mantle and all ! Mr. Snip be 
 exceedingly indignant at this allegorical effusion , and with wrathful 
 shear cut the tie between himself and his poet . 

 thus , then , the reader have , we trust , a pretty good idea of John 
 Burley , - a speciman of his genus not very common in any age , and now 
 happily almost extinct , since author of all degree share in the 
 general improvement in order , economy , and sober decorum , which have 
 obtain in the national manner . Mr. Prickett , though enter 
 into less historical detail than we have do , convey to Leonard a 
 tolerably accurate notion of the man , represent he as a person of 
 great power and learning , who have thoroughly throw himself away . 

 Leonard do not , however , see how much Mr. Burley himself be to be 
 blame for his waste of life ; he could not conceive a man of genius 
 voluntarily seat himself at the low step in the social ladder . he 
 rather suppose he have be thrust down there by Necessity . 

 and when Mr. Prickett , concluding , say , " well , I should think Burley 
 would cure you of the desire to be an author even more than Chatterton , " 
 the young man answer gloomily , " perhaps , " and turn to the 
 book - shelf . 

 with Mr. Prickett 's consent , Leonard be release early than usual 
 from his task , and a little before sunset he take his way to Highgate . 
 he be fortunately direct to take the new road by the Regent 's Park , 
 and so on through a very green and smile country . the walk , the 
 freshness of the air , the song of the bird , and , above all , when he 
 have get half - way , the solitude of the road , serve to rouse he from his 
 stern and sombre meditation . and when he come into the lane overhung 
 with chestnut - tree , and suddenly catch sight of Helen 's watchful and 
 then brighten face , as she stand by the wicket , and under the shadow 
 of cool , murmurous bough , the blood rush gayly through his vein , and 
 his heart beat loud and gratefully . 




 CHAPTER XXIV . 

 she draw he into the garden with such true childlike joy . now behold 
 they seat in the arbour , - a perfect bower of sweet and blossom ; 
 the wilderness of roof - top and spire stretch below , broad and far ; 
 London see dim and silent , as in a dream . 

 she take his hat from his brow gently , and look he in the face with 
 tearful penetrate eye . 

 she do not say , " you be change . " she say , " why , why do I leave 
 you ? " and then turn away . 

 " never mind I , Helen . I be man , and rudely bear ; speak of yourself . 
 this lady be kind to you , then ? " 

 " do she not let I see you ? oh , very kind , - and look here . " 

 Helen point to fruit and cake set out on the table . " a feast , 
 brother . " 

 and she begin to press her hospitality with pretty win way , more 
 playful than be usual to she , and talk very fast , and with force , 
 but silvery , laughter . 

 by degree she steal he from his gloom and reserve ; and though he could 
 not reveal to she the cause of his bitter sorrow , he own that he 
 have suffer much . he would not have own that to another living being . 
 and then , quickly turn from this brief confession , with assurance 
 that the bad be over , he seek to amuse she by speak of his new 
 acquaintance with the perch - fisher . but when he speak of this man with 
 a kind of reluctant admiration , mix with compassionate yet gloomy 
 interest , and draw a grotesque , though subdue , sketch of the wild scene 
 in which he have be spectator , Helen grow alarmed and grave . 

 " oh , brother , do not go there again , - do not see more of this bad man . " 

 " bad ! - no ! hopeless and unhappy , he have stoop to stimulant and 
 oblivion - but you can not understand these thing , my pretty preacher . " 

 " yes , I do , Leonard . what be the difference between be good and bad ? 
 the good do not yield to temptation , and the bad do . " 

 the definition be so simple and so wise that Leonard be more strike 
 with it than he might have be by the most elaborate sermon by Parson 
 Dale . 

 " I have often murmur to myself since I lose you , ' Helen be my good 
 angel ; ' - say on . for my heart be dark to myself , and while you speak 
 light seem to dawn on it . " 

 this praise so confused Helen that she be long before she could obey 
 the command annex to it . but , by little and little , word come to 
 both more frankly . and then he tell she the sad tale of Chatterton , and 
 wait , anxious to hear her comment . 

 " well , " he say , see that she remain silent , " how can I hope , when 
 this mighty genius labour and despair ? what do he want , save birth 
 and fortune and friend and human justice ? " 

 " do he pray to God ? " ask Helen , dry her tear . again Leonard be 
 startle . in read the life of Chatterton he have not much note 
 the scepticism , assume or real , of the ill - fat aspirer to earthly 
 immortality . at Helen 's question , that scepticism strike he forcibly . 
 " why do you ask that , Helen ? " 

 " because , when we pray often , we grow so very , very patient , " answer 
 the child . " perhaps , have he be patient a few month more , all would 
 have be win by he , as it will be by you , brother , for you pray , and 
 you will be patient . " 

 Leonard bow his head in deep thought , and this time the thought be 
 not gloomy . then out from that awful life there glow another passage , 
 which before he have not heed duly , but regard rather as one of the 
 dark mystery in the fate of Chatterton . 

 at the very time the despairing poet have lock himself up in his 
 garret , to dismiss his soul from its earthly ordeal , his genius have just 
 find its way into the light of renown . good and learn and powerful 
 man be prepare to serve and save he . another year - nay , perchance 
 another month - and he might have stand acknowledge sublime in the 
 foremost rank of his age . 

 " oh , Helen ! " cry Leonard , raise his brow , from which the cloud have 
 pass , " why , indeed , do you leave I ? " 

 Helen start in her turn as he repeat this regret , and in her turn 
 grow thoughtful . at length she ask he if he have write for the box 
 which have belong to her father and be leave at the inn . 

 and Leonard , though a little chafed at what he think a childish 
 interruption to theme of graver interest , own , with self - reproach , 
 that he have forget to do so . should he not write now to order the box 
 to be send to she at Miss Starke 's ? 

 " no ; let it be send to you . take care of it . I should like to know that 
 something of mine be with you ; and perhaps I may not stay here long . " 

 " not stay here ? that you must , my dear Helen , - at least as long as 
 Miss Starke will keep you , and be kind . by and by "   add Leonard , with 
 something of his former sanguine tone   " I may yet make my way , and we 
 shall have our cottage to ourselves . but - oh , Helen ! - I forget - you 
 wound I ; you leave your money with I . I only find it in my drawer 
 the other day . Fie ! I have bring it back . " 

 " it be not mine , - it be yours . we be to share together , - you pay 
 all ; and how can I want it here , too ? " but Leonard be obstinate ; and 
 as Helen mournfully receive back all that of fortune her father have 
 bequeath to she , a tall female figure stand at the entrance of the 
 arbour , and say , in a voice that scatter all sentiment to the wind , 
 " young man , it be time to go . " 




 CHAPTER XXV . 

 " already ? " say Helen , with falter accent , as she creep to Miss 
 Starke 's side while Leonard rise and bow . " I be very grateful to you , 
 madam , " say he , with the grace that come from all refinement of idea , 
 " for allow I to see Miss Helen . do not let I abuse your kindness . " 

 Miss Starke seem strike with his look and manner , and make a stiff 
 half courtesy . 

 a form more rigid than Miss Starke 's it be hard to conceive . she be 
 like the Grim White Woman in the nursery ballad . yet , apparently , there 
 be a good - nature in allow the stranger to enter her trim garden , 
 and provide for he and her little charge those fruit and cake which 
 belie her aspect . " may I go with he to the gate ? " whisper Helen , as 
 Leonard have already pass up the path . 

 " you may , child ; but do not loiter . and then come back , and lock up the 
 cake and cherry , or Patty will get at they . " 

 Helen run after Leonard . 

 " write to I , brother , - write to I ; and do not , do not be friend with 
 this man , who take you to that wicked , wicked place . " 

 " oh , Helen , I go from you strong enough to brave bad danger than 
 that , " say Leonard , almost gayly . 

 they kiss each other at the little wicket gate , and part . 

 Leonard walk home under the summer moonlight , and on enter his 
 chamber look first at his rose - tree . the leaf of yesterday 's flower 
 lie strew around it ; but the tree have put forth new bud . 

 " nature ever restore , " say the young man . he pause a moment , and 
 add , " be it that nature be very patient ? " his sleep that night be not 
 break by the fearful dream he have lately know . he rise refresh , 
 and go his way to his day 's work , - not steal along the less 
 crowded path , but with a firm step , through the throng of man . be bold , 
 adventurer , - thou hast more to suffer ! wilt thou sink ? I look into thy 
 heart , and I can not answer . 




 BOOK SEVENTH . 




 INITIAL CHAPTER . 

 MR . CAXTON UPON COURAGE and PATIENCE . 

 " what be courage ? " say my uncle Roland , rouse himself from a revery 
 into which he have fall , after the Sixth Book in this history have be 
 read to our family circle . 

 " what be courage ? " he repeat more earnestly . " be it insensibility to 
 fear ? that may be the mere accident of constitution ; and if so , there be 
 no more merit in be courageous than in be this table . " 

 " I be very glad to hear you speak thus , " observe Mr. Caxton , " for I 
 should not like to consider myself a coward ; yet I be very sensible to 
 fear in all danger , bodily and moral . " 

 " La , Austin , how can you say so ? " cry my mother , fire up ; " be it 
 not only last week that you face the great bull that be rush after 
 Blanche and the child ? " 

 Blanche at that recollection steal to my father 's chair , and , hang 
 over his shoulder , kiss his forehead . 

 MR . CAXTON   sublimely unmove by these flattery . - " I do not   deny that 
 I face the bull , but I assert that I be horribly frightened . " 

 ROLAND . - " the sense of honour which conquer fear be the true courage 
 of chivalry : you could not run away when other be look on , - no 
 gentleman could . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " Fiddledee ! it be not on my gentility that I stand , 
 Captain . I should have run fast enough , if it have do any good . I stand 
 upon my understanding . as the bull could run fast than I could , the 
 only chance of escape be to make the brute as frightened as myself . " 

 BLANCHE . - " ah , you do not think of that ; your only thought be to save 
 I and the child . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " possibly , my dear , very possibly , I might have be afraid 
 for you too ; but I be very much afraid for myself . however , luckily I 
 have the umbrella , and I spring it up and spread it forth in the animal 's 
 stupid eye , hurl at he simultaneously the big line I could 
 think of in the First Chorus of the ' Seven against Thebes . ' I begin with 
 ELEDEMNAS PEDIOPLOKTUPOS ; and when I come to the grand howl of   a line 
 in Greek , the beast stand appal as at the roar of a lion . I shall 
 never forget his amazed snort at the Greek . then he kick up his hind 
 leg , and go bolt through the gap in the hedge . thus , arm with 
 AEschylus and the umbrella , I remain master of the field ; but " 
  continue Mr. Caxton ingenuously   " I should not like to go through that 
 half - minute again . " 

 " no man would , " say the captain , kindly . " I should be very sorry to 
 face a bull myself , even with a big umbrella than your , and even 
 though I have AEschylus , and Homer to boot , at my finger ' end . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " you would not have minded if it have be a Frenchman with 
 a sword in his hand ? " 

 CAPTAIN . - " of course not . rather like it than otherwise , " he add 
 grimly . 

 MR . CAXTON . - " yet many a spanish matador , who do not   care a button 
 for a bull , would take to his heel at the first lunge en carte from a 
 Frenchman . therefore , in fact , if courage be a matter of constitution , 
 it be also a matter of custom . we face calmly the danger we be 
 habituate to , and recoil from those of which we have no familiar 
 experience . I doubt if Marshal Turenue himself would have be quite 
 at his ease on the tight - rope ; and a rope - dancer , who seem disposed to 
 scale the heaven with titanic temerity , might possibly object to charge 
 on a cannon . " 

 CAPTAIN ROLAND . - " still , either this be not the courage I mean , or it be 
 another kind of it . I mean by courage that which be the especial force 
 and dignity of the human character , without which there be no reliance 
 on principle , no constancy in virtue , - a something , " continue my uncle , 
 gallantly , and with a half bow towards my mother , " which your sex share 
 with our own . when the lover , for instance , clasp the hand of his 
 betrothed , and say , ' wilt thou be true to I , in spite of absence and 
 time , in spite of hazard and fortune , though my foe malign I , though 
 thy friend may dissuade thee , and our lot in life may be rough and 
 rude ? ' and when the betroth answer , ' I will be true , ' do not the 
 lover trust to her courage as well as her love ? " 

 " admirably put , Roland , " say my father . " but a propos of what do you 
 puzzle we with these query on courage ? " 

 CAPTAIN ROLAND   with a slight blush . - " I be lead to the inquiry   though 
 perhaps it may be frivolous to take so much thought of what , no doubt , 
 cost Pisistratus so little   by the last chapter in my nephew 's story . 
 I see this poor boy Leonard , alone with his fall hope   though very 
 irrational they be   and his sense of shame . and I read his heart , I 
 dare say , well than Pisistratus do , for I could feel like that 
 boy if I have be in the same position ; and conjecture what he and 
 thousand like he must go through , I ask myself , ' what can save he 
 and they ? ' I answer , as a soldier would answer , ' courage . ' very well . 
 but pray ; Austin , what be courage ? " 

 MR . CAXTON   prudently back out of a reply . - " Papae ! ' brother , since 
 you have just compliment the lady on that quality , you have well 
 address your question to they . " 

 Blanche here lean both hand on my father 's chair , and say , look 
 down at first bashfully , but afterwards warm with the subject , " do 
 you not think , sir , that little Helen have already suggest , if not 
 what be courage , what at least be the real essence of all courage that 
 endure and conquer , that ennoble and hallow and redeem ? be it not 
 PATIENCE , Father ? and that be why we woman have a courage of our own . 
 Patience do not affect to be superior to fear , but at least it never 
 admit despair . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " kiss I , my Blanche , for you have come near to the truth 
 which perplex the soldier and puzzle the sage . " 

 MR . CAXTON   tartly . - " if you mean I by the sage , I be not puzzle at 
 all . Heaven know you do right to inculcate patience , - it be a virtue 
 very much require - in your reader . nevertheless , " add my father , 
 soften with the enjoyment of his joke , - " nevertheless Blanche and 
 Helen be quite right . patience be the courage of the conqueror ; it be 
 the virtue , par excellence , of Man against Destiny , - of the one against 
 the World , and of the Soul against Matter . therefore this be the courage 
 of the Gospel ; and its importance in a social view - its importance to 
 race and institution - can not be too earnestly inculcate . what be it 
 that distinguish the Anglo - Saxon from all other branch of the human 
 family , - people desert with his child and consign to they the 
 heritage of rise world ? what but his faculty to brave , to suffer , to 
 endure , - the patience that resist firmly and innovate slowly ? compare 
 he with the Frenchman . the Frenchman have plenty of valour , - that there 
 be no deny ; but as for fortitude , he have not enough to cover the 
 point of a pin . he be ready to rush out of the world if he be bite by 
 a flea . " 

 CAPTAIN ROLAND . - " there be a case in the paper the other day , Austin , 
 of a Frenchman who actually do destroy himself because he be so tease 
 by the little creature you speak of . he leave a paper on his table , 
 say that ' life be not worth have at the price of such torment . ' " 

 MR . CAXTON   solemnly . - " Sir , their whole political history , since the 
 great meeting of the Tiers Etat , have be the history of man who would 
 rather go to the devil than be bite by a flea . it be the record of 
 human impatience that seek to force time , and expect to grow forest 
 from the spawn of a mushroom . wherefore , run through all extreme of 
 constitutional experiment , when they be near to democracy they 
 be next door to a despot ; and all they have really do be to destroy 
 whatever constitute the foundation of every tolerable government . 
 a constitutional monarchy can not exist without aristocracy , nor a 
 healthful republic endure with corruption of manner . the cry of 
 equality be incompatible with civilization , which , of necessity , 
 contrast poverty with wealth ; and , in short , whether it be an emperor 
 or a mob I that be to rule , Force be the sole hope of order , and the 
 government be but an army . " 

   publish more than a year before the date of the french empire 
  under Louis Napoleon . 

 " impress , o Pisistratus ! impress the value of patience as regard man 
 and man . you touch there on the kernel of the social system , - the secret 
 that fortify the individual and discipline the million . I care not , 
 for my part , if you be tedious so long as you be earnest . be minute 
 and detail . let the real Human Life , in its war with circumstance , 
 stand out . never mind if one can read you but slowly , - well chance 
 of be less quickly forget . patience , patience ! by the soul of 
 Epictetus , your reader shall set you an example . " 




 CHAPTER II . 

 Leonard have write twice to Mrs. Fairfield , twice to Riccabocca , and 
 once to Mr. Dale ; and the poor proud boy could not bear to betray 
 his humiliation . he write as with cheerful spirit , - as if perfectly 
 satisfied with his prospect . he say that he be well employ , in the 
 midst of book , and that he have find kind friend . then he turn from 
 himself to write about those whom he address , and the affair and 
 interest of the quiet world wherein they live . he do not give his 
 own address , nor that of Mr. Prickett . he date his letter from a small 
 coffee - house near the bookseller 's , to which he occasionally go for 
 his simple meal . he have a motive in this . he do not desire to be 
 find out . Mr. Dale reply for himself and for Mrs. Fairfield , to the 
 epistle address to these two . Riccabocca write also . 

 nothing could be more kind than the reply of both . they come to 
 Leonard in a very dark period in his life , and they strengthen he in 
 the noiseless battle with despair . 

 if there be a good in the world that we do without know it , without 
 conjecture the effect it may have upon a human soul ; it be when we 
 show kindness to the young in the first barren footpath up the mountain 
 of life . 

 Leonard 's face resume its serenity in his intercourse with his 
 employer ; but he do not recover his boyish ingenuous frankness . the 
 under - current flow again pure from the turbid soil and the splinter 
 fragment uptorn from the deep ; but they be still too strong and too 
 rapid to allow transparency to the surface . and now he stand in the 
 sublime world of book , still and earnest as a seer who invoke the 
 dead ; and thus , face to face with knowledge , hourly he discover how 
 little he know . Mr. Prickett lend he such work as he select and 
 ask to take home with he . he spend whole night in reading , and no 
 long desultorily . he read no more poetry , no more life of poet . he 
 read what poet must read if they desire to be great - Sapere principium 
 et fon , - strict reasoning on the human mind ; the relation between 
 motive and conduct , thought and action ; the grave and solemn truth of 
 the past world ; antiquity , history , philosophy . he be take out of 
 himself ; he be carry along the ocean of the universe . in that ocean , 
 o seeker , study the law of the tide ; and see Chance nowhere , 
 thought preside over all , Fate , that dread phantom , shall vanish from 
 creation , and Providence alone be visible in heaven and on earth ! 




 CHAPTER III . 

 there be to be a considerable book - sale at a country house one day 's 
 journey from London . Mr. Prickett mean to have attend it on his own 
 behalf , and that of several gentleman who have give he commission for 
 purchase ; but on the morning fix for his departure , he be seize with 
 a severe return of his old foe the rheumatism . he request Leonard to 
 attend instead of himself . Leonard go , and be absent for the three 
 day during which the sale last . he return late in the evening , and 
 go at once to Mr. Prickett 's house . the shop be close ; he knock 
 at the private entrance ; a strange person open the door to he , and in 
 reply to his question if Mr. Prickett be at home , say , with a long and 
 funereal face , " young man , Mr. Prickett senior be go to his long home , 
 but Mr. Richard Prickett will see you . " 

 at this moment a very grave - looking man , with lank hair , look forth 
 from the side - door communicating between the shop and the passage , and 
 then step forward . " come in , sir ; you be my late uncle 's assistant , 
 Mr. Fairfield , I suppose ? " 

 " your late uncle ! Heavens , sir , do I understand aright , can Mr. Prickett 
 be dead since I leave London ? " 

 " die , sir , suddenly , last night . it be an affection of the heart . the 
 doctor think the rheumatism attack that organ . he have small time to 
 provide for his departure , and his account - book seem in sad disorder : I 
 be his nephew and executor . " 

 Leonard have now - follow the nephew into the shop . there still burn 
 the gas - lamp . the place seem more dingy and cavernous than before . 
 death always make its presence feel in the house it visit . 

 Leonard be greatly affect , - and yet more , perhaps , by the utter want 
 of feeling which the nephew exhibit . in fact the deceased have not 
 be on friendly term with this person , his near relative and 
 heir - at - law , who be also a bookseller . 

 " you be engage but by the week , I find , young man , on reference to 
 my late uncle 's paper . he give you l1 a week , - a monstrous sum ! I shall 
 not require your service any far . I shall move these book to my 
 own house . you will be good enough to send I a list of those you buy 
 at the sale , and your account of travel expense , etc . what may be 
 due to you shall be send to your address . good - evening . " 

 Leonard go home , shock and sadden at the sudden death of his kind 
 employer . he do not think much of himself that night ; but when he rise 
 the next day , he suddenly feel that the world of London lie before he , 
 without a friend , without a calling , without an occupation for bread . 

 this time it be no fancied sorrow , no poetic dream disappoint . 
 before he , gaunt and palpable , stand Famine . Escape ! - yes . back to the 
 village : his mother 's cottage ; the exile 's garden ; the radish and the 
 fount . why could he not escape ? ask why civilization can not escape its 
 ill , and fly back to the wild and the wigwam . 

 Leonard could not have return to the cottage , even if the Famine that 
 face have already seize he with her skeleton hand . London release not 
 so readily her fat step - son . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 one day three person be stand before an old bookstall in a 
 passage lead from Oxford Street into Tottenham Court Road . two be 
 gentleman ; the third , of the class and appearance of those who more 
 habitually halt at old bookstall . 

 " look , " say one of the gentleman to the other , " I have discover here 
 what I have search for in vain the last ten year , - the Horace of 
 1580 , the Horace of the Forty Commentators , a perfect treasury of 
 learning , and mark only fourteen shilling ! " 

 " Hush , Norreys , " say the other , " and observe what be yet more worth 
 your study ; " and he point to the third bystander , whose face , sharp 
 and attenuate , be bent with an absorbed , and , as it be , with a 
 hunger attention over an old worm - eat volume . 

 " what be the book , my lord ? " whisper Mr. Norreys . his companion 
 smile , and reply by another question , " what be the man who read the 
 book ? " 

 Mr. Norreys move a few pace , and look over the student 's shoulder . 
 " Preston 's translation of Boethius 's ' the Consolations of Philosophy , ' " 
 he say , come back to his friend . 

 " he look as if he want all the consolation philosophy can give he , 
 poor boy . " 

 at this moment a fourth passenger pause at the bookstall , and , 
 recognize the pale student , place his hand on his shoulder , and say , 
 " aha , young sir , we meet again . so poor Prickett be dead . but you be 
 still haunt by association . book , book , - magnet to which all iron 
 mind move insensibly . what be this ? Boethius ! ah , a book write in 
 prison , but a little time before the advent of the only philosopher who 
 solve to the simple understanding every mystery of life - " 

 " and that philosopher ? " 

 " be death ! " say Mr. Burley . " how can you be dull enough to ask ? Poor 
 Boethius , rich , nobly bear , a consul , his son consul , the world one 
 smile to the last Philosopher of Rome . then suddenly , against this type 
 of the old world 's depart WISDOM stand frown the new world 's 
 grim genius , FORCE , - Theodoric the Ostrogoth condemn Boethius the 
 schoolman ; and Boethius in his pavian dungeon hold a dialogue with 
 the shade of Athenian Philosophy . it be the fine picture upon which 
 linger the glimmering of the western golden day , before night rush 
 over time . " 

 " and , " say Mr. Norreys , abruptly , " Boethius come back to we with the 
 faint gleam of return light , translate by Alfred the great ; and , 
 again , as the sun of knowledge burst forth in all its splendour by 
 Queen Elizabeth . Boethius influence we as we stand in this passage ; 
 and that be the good of all the Consolations of Philosophy , - eh , Mr. 
 Burley ? " 

 Mr. Burley turn and bow . 

 the two man look at each other ; you could not see a great 
 contrast , - Mr. Burley , his gay green dress already shabby and soil , 
 with a rent in the skirt and his face speak of habitual night - cup ; 
 Mr. Norreys , neat and somewhat precise in dress , with firm , lean figure , 
 and quiet , collected , vigorous energy in his eye and aspect . 

 " if , " reply Mr. Burley , " a poor devil like I may argue with a 
 gentleman who may command his own price with the bookseller , I should 
 say it be no consolation at all , Mr. Norreys . and I should like to see 
 any man of sense accept the condition of Boethius in his prison , with 
 some strangler or headsman wait behind the door , upon the promise 
 proviso that he should be translate , century afterwards , by king 
 and queen , and help indirectly to influence the mind of northern 
 barbarian , babble about he in an alley , jostle by passer - by 
 who never hear the name of Boethius , and who do not   care a fig for 
 philosophy . your servant , sir , young man , come and talk . " 

 Burley hook his arm within Leonard 's , and lead the boy passively away . 

 " that be a clever man , " say Harley L'Estrange . " but I be sorry to see 
 yon young student , with his bright earnest eye , and his lip that have 
 the quiver of passion and enthusiasm , lean on the arm of a guide 
 who seem disenchanted of all that give purpose to learn , and link 
 philosophy with use to the world . who and what be this clever man whom 
 you call Burley ? " 

 " a man who might have be famous , if he have condescend to be 
 respectable ! the boy listen to we both so attentively interested 
 I too , - I should like to have the making of he . but I must buy this 
 Horace . " 

 the shopman , lurk within his hole like a spider for fly , be now 
 call out . and when Mr. Norreys have buy the Horace , and give an 
 address where to send it , Harley ask the shopman if he know the young 
 man who have be read Boethius . 

 " only by sight . he have come here every day the last week , and spend 
 hour at the stall . when once he fasten on a book , he read it 
 through . " 

 " and never buy ? " say Mr. Norreys . 

 " Sir , " say the shopman , with a good - natured smile , " they who buy seldom 
 read . the poor boy pay I twopence a day to read as long as he please . 
 I would not take it , but he be proud . " 

 " I have know man amass great learning in that way , " say Mr. Norreys . 
 " yes , I should like to have that boy in my hand . and now , my lord , I be 
 at your service , and we will go to the studio of your artist . " 

 the two gentleman walk on towards one of the street out of Fitzroy 
 Square . 

 in a few minute more Harley L'Estrange be in his element , seat 
 carelessly on a deal table smoke his cigar , and discuss art with 
 the gusto of a man who honestly love , and the taste of a man who 
 thoroughly understand it . the young artist , in his dress robe , add 
 slow touch upon touch , pause often to listen the well . and Henry 
 Norrey s , enjoy the brief respite from a life of great labour , be 
 gladly remind of idle hour under rosy sky ; for these three man 
 have form their friendship in Italy , where the band of friendship be 
 weave by the hand of the Graces . 




 CHAPTER V. 

 Leonard and Mr. Burley walk on into the suburb round the north road 
 from London , and Mr. Burley offer to find literary employment for 
 Leonard , - an offer eagerly accept . 

 then they go into a public - house by the wayside . Burley demand 
 a private room , call for pen , ink , and paper ; and place these 
 implement before Leonard , say , " write what you please , in prose , five 
 sheet of letter - paper , twenty - two line to a page , - neither more nor 
 less . " 

 " I can not write so . " 

 " tut , ' t be for bread . " 

 the boy 's face crimson . 

 " I must forget that , " say he . 

 " there be an arbour in the garden , under a weeping - ash , " return 
 Burley . " go there , and fancy yourself in Arcadia . " 

 Leonard be too pleased to obey . he find out the little arbour at one 
 end of a deserted bowling - green . all be still , - the hedgerow shut 
 out the sight of the inn . the sun lie warm on the grass , and glint 
 pleasantly through the leaf of the ash . and Leonard there write the 
 first essay from his hand as author by profession . what be it that he 
 write ? his dreamy impression of London , an anathema on its street and 
 its heart of stone , murmur against poverty , dark elegy on fate ? 

 oh , no ! little know thou true genius , if thou ask such question , 
 or think that there under the weeping - ash the task - work for bread be 
 remember ; or that the sunbeam glint but over the practical world , 
 which , vulgar and sordid , lie around . Leonard write a fairy tale , - one 
 of the lovely you can conceive , with a delicate touch of playful 
 humour , in a style all flower over with happy fancy . he smile as 
 he write the last word , - he be happy . in rather more than an hour Mr. 
 Burley come to he , and find he with that smile on his lip . 

 Mr. Burley have a glass of brandy - and - water in his hand ; it be his 
 third . he too smile , he too look happy . he read the paper aloud , 
 and well . he be very complimentary . " you will do ! " say he , clapping 
 Leonard on the back . " perhaps some day you will catch my one - eye 
 perch . " then he fold up the manuscript , scribble off a note , put the 
 whole in one envelope , and they return to London . 

 Mr. Burley disappear within a dingy office near Fleet Street , on which 
 be inscribe , " Office of the ' beehive , ' " and soon come forth with a 
 golden sovereign in his hand , Leonard 's first - fruit . Leonard think 
 Peru lie before he . he accompany Mr. Burley to that gentleman 's 
 lodge in Maida Hill . the walk have be very long ; Leonard be not 
 fatigue . he listen with a lively attention than before to Burley 's 
 talk . and when they reach the apartment of the latter , and Mr. Burley 
 send to the cookshop , and their joint supper be take out of the golden 
 sovereign , Leonard feel proud , and for the first time for week he 
 laugh the heart 's laugh . the two writer grow more and more intimate 
 and cordial . and there be a vast deal in Burley by which any young man 
 might be make the wiser . there be no apparent evidence of poverty in 
 the apartment , - clean , new , well - furnish ; but all thing in the most 
 horrible litter , - all speak of the huge literary sloven . 

 for several day Leonard almost live in those room . he write 
 continuously , save when Burley 's conversation fascinate he into 
 idleness . Nay , it be not idleness , - his knowledge grow large as he 
 listen ; but the cynicism of the talker begin slowly to work its way . 
 that cynicism in which there be no faith , no hope , no vivifying breath 
 from Glory , from Religion , - the cynicism of the epicurean , more degraded 
 in his sty than ever be Diogenes in his tub ; and yet present with 
 such ease and such eloquence , with such art and such mirth , so adorn 
 with illustration and anecdote , so unconscious of debasement ! 

 strange and dread philosophy , that make it a maxim to squander the gift 
 of mind on the mere care for matter , and fit the soul to live but as 
 from day to day , with its scornful cry , " a fig for immortality and 
 laurel ! " an author for bread ! oh , miserable calling ! be there 
 something grand and holy , after all , even in Chatterton 's despair ? 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 the villanous " beehive " ! Bread be work out of it , certainly ; but 
 fame , but hope for the future , - certainly not . Milton 's Paradise Lost 
 would have perish without a sound have it appear in the " Beehive . " 

 fine thing be there in a fragmentary crude state , compose by Burley 
 himself . at the end of a week they be dead and forget , - never 
 read by one man of education and taste ; take simultaneously and 
 indifferently with shallow politic and wretched essay , yet sell , 
 perhaps , twenty or thirty thousand copy , - an immense sale ; and nothing 
 get out of they but bread and brandy ! 

 " what more would you have ? " cry John Burley . " do not stern old Sam 
 Johnson say he could never write but from want ? " 

 " he might say it , " answer Leonard ; " but he never mean posterity to 
 believe he . and he would have die of want , I suspect , rather than have 
 write ' Rasselas ' for the ' beehive ' ! want be a grand thing , " continue 
 the boy , thoughtfully , - " a parent of grand thing . necessity be strong , 
 and should give we its own strength ; but want should shatter asunder , 
 with its very writhing , the wall of our prison - house , and not sit 
 content with the allowance the jail give we in exchange for our 
 work . " 

 " there be no prison - house to a man who call upon Bacchus ; stay , I will 
 translate to you Schiller 's Dithyramb . ' then see I Bacchus ; then up come 
 Cupid and Phoebus , and all the Celestials be fill my dwelling . ' " 

 break into impromptu careless rhyme , Burley throw off a rude but 
 spirited translation of that divine lyric . " o materialist ! " cry the 
 boy , with his bright eye suffuse . " schiller call on the god to 
 take he to their heaven with they ; and you would debase the god to a 
 ginpalace . " 

 " Ho , ho ! " cry Burley , with his giant laugh . " drink , and you will 
 understand the Dithyramb . " 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 suddenly one morning , as Leonard sit with Burley , a fashionable 
 cabriolet , with a very handsome horse , stop at the door . a loud 
 knock , a quick step on the stair , and Randal Leslie enter . Leonard 
 recognize he , and start . randal glanced at he in surprise , and 
 then , with a tact that show he have already learn to profit by London 
 life , after shake hand with Burley , approach , and say , with some 
 successful attempt at ease , " unless I be not mistaken , sir , we have meet 
 before . if you remember I , I hope all boyish quarrel be forget ? " 

 Leonard bow , and his heart be still good enough to be soften . 

 " where could you two ever have meet ? " ask Burley . " in a village green , 
 and in single combat , " answer Randal , smile ; and he tell the story 
 of the Battle of the stock , with a well - breed jest on himself . Burley 
 laugh at the story . " but , " say he , when this laugh be over , " my 
 young friend have well have remain guardian of the village stock 
 than come to London in search of such fortune as lie at the bottom of 
 an inkhorn . " 

 " ah , " say Randal , with the secret contempt which man elaborately 
 cultivate be apt to feel for those who seek to educate 
 themselves , - " ah , you make literature your calling , sir ? at what school 
 do you conceive a taste for letter ? not very common at our great 
 public school . " 

 " I be at school now for the first time , " answer Leonard , dryly . 

 " experience be the good schoolmistress , " say Burley ; " and that be the 
 maxim of Goethe , who have book - learn enough , in all conscience . " 

 Randal slightly shrug his shoulder , and without waste another 
 thought on Leonard , peasant - bear and self - teach , take his seat , and 
 begin to talk to Burley upon a political question , which make then the 
 war - cry between the two great parliamentary party . it be a subject 
 in which Burley show much general knowledge ; and Randal , seem to 
 differ from he , draw forth alike his information and his argumentative 
 power . the conversation last more than an hour . 

 " I can not   quite agree with you , " say Randal , take his leave ; " but you 
 must allow I to call again , - will the same hour tomorrow suit you ? " 

 " yes , " say Burley . 

 away go the young man in his cabriolet . Leonard watch he from the 
 window . 

 for five day , consecutively , do randal call and discuss the question 
 in all its bearing ; and Burley , after the second day , get interested 
 in the matter , look up his authority , refresh his memory , and even 
 spend an hour or two in the Library of the British Museum . 

 by the fifth day , Burley have really exhaust all that could well be 
 say on his side of the question . 

 Leonard , during these colloquy , have sit apart seemingly absorb in 
 reading , and secretly sting by Randal 's disregard of his presence . for 
 indeed that young man , in his superb self - esteem , and in the absorption 
 of his ambitious project , scarce feel even curiosity as to Leonard 's 
 rise above his early station , and look on he as a mere journeyman 
 of Burley 's . 

 but the self - teach be keen and quick observer ; and Leonard have 
 remark that Randal seem more as one play a part for some private 
 purpose , than argue in earnest ; and that , when he rise , and say , " Mr. 
 Burley , you have convince I , " it be not with the modesty of a sincere 
 reasoner , but the triumph of one who have gain his end . but so struck , 
 meanwhile , be our unheeded and silent listener with Burley 's power of 
 generalization and the wide surface over which his information 
 extend , that when randal leave the room the boy look at the slovenly , 
 purposeless man , and say aloud , " true ; knowledge be not power . " 

 " certainly not , " say Burley , dryly , - " the weak thing in the world . " 

 " Knowledge be power , " mutter Randal Leslie , as , with a smile on his 
 lip , he drive from the door . 

 not many day after this last interview there appear a short pamphlet ; 
 anonymous , but one which make a great impression on the town . it be on 
 the subject discuss between Randal and Burley . it be quote at great 
 length in the newspaper . and Burley start to his foot one morning , 
 and exclaim , " my own thought ! my very word ! who the devil be this 
 pamphleteer ? " 

 Leonard take the newspaper from Burley 's hand . the most flattering 
 encomium precede the extract , and the extract be as stereotype of 
 Burley 's talk . 

 " can you doubt the author ? " cry Leonard , in deep disgust and ingenuous 
 scorn . " the young man who come to steal your brain , and turn your 
 knowledge - " 

 " into power , " interrupt Burley , with a laugh , - but it be a laugh of 
 pain . " well , this be very mean ; I shall tell he so when he come . " 

 " he will come no more , " say Leonard . nor do Randal come again . but he 
 send Mr. Burley a copy of the pamphlet with a polite note , say , with 
 candid but careless acknowledgment , that he " have profit much by Mr. 
 Burley 's hint and remark . " 

 and now it be in all the paper that the pamphlet which have make so 
 great a noise be by a very young man , Mr. Audley Egerton 's relation . 
 and high hope be express of the future career of Mr. Randal Leslie . 

 Burley still attempt to laugh , and still his pain be visible . leonard 
 most cordially despise and hat Randal Leslie , and his heart move to 
 Burley with noble but perilous compassion . in his desire to soothe 
 and comfort the man whom he deem cheat out of fame , he forget the 
 caution he have hitherto impose on himself , and yield more and more 
 to the charm of that waste intellect . he accompany Burley now to 
 the haunt to which his friend go to spend his evening ; and more and 
 more - though gradually , and with many a recoil and self - rebuke - there 
 creep over he the cynic 's contempt for glory , and miserable philosophy 
 of debase content . 

 Randal have rise into grave repute upon the strength of Burley 's 
 knowledge . but , have Burley write the pamphlet , would the same 
 repute have attend he ? certainly not . randal Leslie bring to that 
 knowledge quality all his own , - a style simple , strong , and logical ; 
 a certain tone of good society , and allusion to man and to party that 
 show his connection with a Cabinet minister , and prove that he have 
 profit no less by Egerton 's talk than Burley 's . 

 have Burley write the pamphlet , it would have show more genius , it 
 would have have humour and wit , but have be so full of whim and quip , 
 sin against taste , and defect in earnestness , that it would have 
 fail to create any serious sensation . here , then , there be something 
 else be side knowledge , by which knowledge become power . Knowledge must 
 not smell of the brandy - bottle . 

 randal Leslie might be mean in his plagiarism , but he turn the useless 
 into use . and so far he be original . but one 's admiration , after all , 
 rest where Leonard 's rest , - with the poor , riotous , lawless , big , 
 fall man . Burley take himself off to the Brent , and fish again for 
 the one - eyed perch . Leonard accompany he . his feeling be indeed 
 different from what they have be when he have recline under the old 
 tree , and talk with Helen of the future . but it be almost pathetic to 
 see how Burley 's nature seem to alter , as he stray along the bank 
 of the rivulet , and discourse of his own boyhood . the man then seem 
 restore to something of the innocence of the child . he care , in truth , 
 little for the perch , which continue intractable , but he enjoy the 
 air and the sky , the rustle grass and the murmur water . these 
 excursion to the haunt of youth seem to rebaptize he , and then his 
 eloquence take a pastoral character , and Izaak Walton himself would have 
 love to hear he . but as he get back into the smoke of the metropolis , 
 and the gas - lamp make he forget the ruddy sunset and the soft evening 
 star , the gross habit reassume their sway ; and on he go with his 
 swaggering , reckless step to the orgy in which his abused intellect 
 flame forth , and then sink into the socket quench and rayless . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 Helen be seize with profound and anxious sadness . Leonard have be 
 three or four time to see she , and each time she see a change in he 
 that excite all her fear . he seem , it be true , more shrewd , more 
 worldly - wise , more fit , it might be , for coarse daily life ; but , on 
 the other hand , the freshness and glory of his youth be wan slowly . 
 his aspiring droop earthward . he have not master the practical , and 
 mould its us with the strong hand of the Spiritual Architect , of 
 the Ideal Builder ; the Practical be overpower himself . she grow pale 
 when he talk of Burley , and shudder , poor little Helen ? when she 
 find he be daily , and almost nightly , in a companionship which , with 
 her native honest prudence , she see so unsuited to strengthen he in 
 his struggle , and aid he against temptation . she almost groan when , 
 press he as to his pecuniary mean , she find his old terror of debt 
 seem fade away , and the solid healthful principle he have take from 
 his village be loosen fast . under all , it be true , there be what 
 a wise and old person than Helen would have hail as the redeem 
 promise . but that something be grief , - a sublime grief in his own sense 
 of fall , in his own impotence against the fate he have provoke and 
 covet . the Sublimity of that grief Helen could not detect ; she see 
 only that it be grief , and she grieve with it , let it excuse every 
 fault , - make she more anxious to comfort , in order that she might 
 save . even from the first , when Leonard have exclaim , " ah , Helen , why 
 do you ever leave I ? " she have revolve the idea of return to he ; 
 and when in the boy 's last visit he tell she that Burley , persecute 
 by dun , be about to fly from his present lodging , and take his abode 
 with Leonard , in the room she have leave vacant , all doubt be over . she 
 resolve to sacrifice the safety and shelter of the home assure she . 
 she resolve to come back and share Leonard 's penury and struggle , and 
 save the old room , wherein she have pray for he , from the tempter 's 
 dangerous presence . should she burden he ? no ; she have assist she 
 father by many little female art in needle and fancy work . she have 
 improve herself in these during her sojourn with Miss Starke . she 
 could bring her share to the common stock . possess with this idea , she 
 determine to realize it before the day on which Leonard have tell she 
 Burley be to move his quarter . accordingly she rise very early one 
 morning ; she write a pretty and grateful note to Miss Starke , who be 
 fast asleep , leave it on the table , and before any one be astir , stole 
 from the house , her little bundle on her arm . 

 she linger an instant at the garden - gate , with a remorseful 
 sentiment , - a feeling that she have ill - repay the cold and prim 
 protection that Miss Starke have show she . but sisterly love carry all 
 before it . she close the gate with a sigh , and go on . 

 she arrive at the lodging - house before Leonard be up , take possession 
 of her old chamber , and present herself to Leonard , as he be about 
 to go forth , say   story - teller that she be , " I be send away , brother , 
 and I have come to you to take care of I . do not let we part again . 
 but you must be very cheerful and very happy , or I shall think that I be 
 sadly in your way . " 

 Leonard at first do look cheerful , and even happy ; but then he think 
 of Burley , and then of his own mean of support Helen , and be 
 embarrassed , and begin question she as to the possibility 
 of reconciliation with Miss Starke . and Helen say gravely , 
 " impossible , - do not ask it , and do not go near she . " 

 then Leonard think she have be humble and insult , and remember 
 that she be a gentleman 's child , and feel for her wounded pride , he be 
 so proud himself . yet still he be embarrassed . 

 " shall I keep the purse again , Leonard ? " say Helen , coaxingly . 

 " alas ! " reply Leonard , " the purse be empty . " 

 " that be very naughty in the purse , " say Helen , ' since you put so much 
 into it . " 

 " do not you say that you make , at least , a guinea a week ? " 

 " yes ; but Burley take the money ; and then , poor fellow ! as I owe all to 
 he , I have not the heart to prevent he spend it as he like . " 

 " please , I wish you could settle the month 's rent , " say the landlady , 
 suddenly show herself . she say it civilly , but with firmness . 

 Leonard colour . " it shall be pay to - day . " 

 then he press his hat on his head , and put Helen gently aside , 
 go forth . 

 " speak to I in future , kind Mrs. Smedley , " say Helen , with the air of 
 a housewife . " he be always in study , and must not be disturb . " 

 the landlady - a good woman , though she like her rent - smile benignly . 
 she be fond of Helen , whom she have know of old . 

 " I be so glad you be come back ; and perhaps now the young man will not 
 keep such late hour . I mean to give he warning , but - " 

 " but he will be a great man one of these day , and you must bear with 
 he now . " and Helen kiss Mrs. Smedley , and send she away half incline 
 to cry . 

 then Helen busy herself in the room . she find her father 's box , 
 which have be duly forward . she re - examine its content , and weep as 
 she touch each humble and pious relic . but her father 's memory itself 
 thus seem to give this home a sanction which the former have not ; and 
 she rise quietly and begin mechanically to put thing in order , sigh 
 as she see all so neglect , till she come to the rosetree , and that 
 alone show heed and care . " Dear Leonard ! " she murmur , and the smile 
 resettle on her lip . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 nothing , perhaps , could have sever Leonard from Burley but Helen 's 
 return to his care . it be impossible for he , even have there be 
 another room in the house vacant   which there be not , to install 
 this noisy , riotous son of the Muse by Bacchus , talk at random and 
 smelling of spirit , in the same dwelling with an innocent , delicate , 
 timid , female child . and Leonard could not leave she alone all the 
 twenty - four hour . she restore a home to he and impose its duty . 
 he therefore tell Mr. Burley that in future he should write and study 
 in his own room , and hint , with many a blush , and as delicately as 
 he could , that it seem to he that whatever he obtain from his 
 pen ought to be halve with Burley , to whose interest he owe the 
 employment , and from whose book or whose knowledge he take what help 
 to maintain it ; but that the other half , if his , he could no long 
 afford to spend upon feast or libation . he have another life to provide 
 for . 

 Burley pooh - poohe the notion of take half his coadjutor 's earning 
 with much grandeur , but speak very fretfully of Leonard 's sober 
 appropriation of the other half ; and though a good - natured , warm - hearted 
 man , feel extremely indignant at the sudden interposition of poor Helen . 
 however , Leonard be firm ; and then Burley grow sullen , and so they 
 part . but the rent be still to be pay . how ? Leonard for the 
 first time thought of the pawnbroker . he have clothe to spare , and 
 Riccabocca 's watch . no ; that last he shrink from apply to such base 
 us . 

 he go home at noon , and meet Helen at the street - door . she too have 
 be out , and her soft cheek be rosy red with unwonted exercise and the 
 sense of joy . she have still preserve the few gold piece which Leonard 
 have take back to she on his first visit to Miss Starke 's . she have now 
 go out and buy wool and implement for work ; and meanwhile she have 
 pay the rent . 

 Leonard do not object to the work , but he blush deeply when he know 
 about the rent , and be very angry . he pay back to she that night what 
 she have advance ; and Helen weep silently at his pride , and weep more 
 when she see the next day a woful hiatus in his wardrobe . 

 but Leonard now work at home , and work resolutely ; and Helen sit 
 by his side , work too ; so that next day , and the next , slip 
 peacefully away , and in the evening of the second he ask she to walk 
 out in the field . she spring up joyously at the invitation , when bang 
 go the door , and in reel John Burley , - drunk , - and so drunk ! 




 CHAPTER X. 

 and with Burley there reel in another man , - a friend of his , a man who 
 have be a wealthy trader and once well to do , but who , unluckily , have 
 literary taste , and be fond of hear Burley talk . so , since he 
 have know the wit , his business have fall from he , and he have pass 
 through the Bankrupt Court . a very shabby - look dog he be , indeed , 
 and his nose be red than Burley 's . 

 John make a drunken dash at poor Helen . " so you be the Pentheus in 
 petticoat who defy Bacchus , " cry he ; and therewith he roar out a 
 verse from euripide . Helen run away , and Leonard interpose . 

 " for shame , Burley ! " 

 " he be drunk , " say Mr. Douce , the bankrupt trader , " very drunk ; do not 
 mind he . I say , sir , I hope we do not   intrude . sit still , Burley , 
 sit still , and talk , do , - that be a good man . you should hear 
 he - ta - ta - talk , sir . " Leonard meanwhile have get Helen out of the 
 room into her own , and beg she not to be alarm , and keep the door 
 lock . he then return to Burley , who have seat himself on the 
 bed , try wondrous hard to keep himself upright ; while Mr. Douce 
 be strive to light a short pipe that he carry in his 
 button - hole - without have fill it - and , naturally fail in that 
 attempt , be now begin to weep . 

 Leonard be deeply shock and revolt for Helen 's sake ; but it be 
 hopeless to make Burley listen to reason . and how could the boy turn out 
 of his room the man to whom he be under obligation ? 

 meanwhile there smite upon Helen 's shrink ear loud jarring talk and 
 maudlin laughter , and crack attempt at jovial song . then she hear 
 Mrs. Smedley in Leonard 's room , remonstrating ; and Burley 's laugh be 
 loud than before , and Mrs. Smedley , who be a meek woman , evidently 
 get frightened , and be hear in precipitate retreat . long and loud talk 
 recommence , Burley 's great voice predominant , Mr. Douce chime in with 
 hiccoughy break treble . hour after hour this last , for want of 
 the drink that would have bring it to a premature close . and Burley 
 gradually begin to talk himself somewhat sober . then Mr. Douce be hear 
 descend the stair , and silence follow . at dawn , Leonard knock at 
 Helen 's door . she open it at once , for she have not go to bed . 

 " Helen , " say he , very sadly , " you can not continue here . I must find 
 out some proper home for you . this man have serve I when all London be 
 friendless , and he tell I that he have nowhere else to go , - that the 
 bailiff be after he . he have now fall asleep . I will go and find you 
 some lodge close at hand , for I can not expel he who have protect I ; 
 and yet you can not be under the same roof with he . my own good angel , I 
 must lose you . " 

 he do not wait for her answer , but hurry down stair . the morning 
 look through the shutterless pane in Leonard 's garret , and the bird 
 begin to chirp from the elmtree , when Burley rise and shake himself , and 
 star round . he could not quite make out where he be . he get hold 
 of the water - jug , which he empty at three draught , and feel greatly 
 refresh . he then begin to reconnoitre the chamber , - look at 
 Leonard 's manuscript , peep into the drawer , wonder where the devil 
 Leonard himself have go to , and finally amuse himself by throw down 
 the fireiron , ring the bell , and make all the noise he could , 
 in the hope of attract the attention of somebody or other , and 
 procure himself his morning dram . 

 in the midst of this charivari the door open softly , but as if with 
 a resolute hand , and the small quiet form of Helen stand before the 
 threshold . Burley turn round , and the two look at each other for 
 some moment with silent scrutiny . 

 BURLEY   compose his feature into their most friendly 
 expression . - " come hither , my dear . so you be the little girl whom I 
 see with Leonard on the bank of the Brent , and you have come back to 
 live with he , - and I have come to live with he too . you shall be our 
 little housekeeper , and I will tell you the story of Prince Pettyman , 
 and a great many other not to be find in ' Mother Goose . ' meanwhile , my 
 dear little girl , here 's sixpence , - just run out and change this for its 
 worth in rum . " 

 HELEN   come slowly up to Mr. Burley , and still gaze earnestly into 
 his face . - " ah , sir , Leonard say you have a kind heart , and that you 
 have serve he ; he can not ask you to leave the house ; and so I , who 
 have never serve he , be to go hence and live alone . " 

 BURLEY   move . - " you go , my little lady ; and why ? can we not all live 
 together ? " 

 HELEN . - " no , sir . I leave everything to come to Leonard , for we have meet 
 first at my father 's grave ; but you rob I of he , and I have no other 
 friend on earth . " 

 BURLEY   discompose . - " explain yourself . why must you leave he because 
 I come ? " 

 Helen look at Mr. Burley again , long and wistfully , but make no 
 answer . 

 BURLEY   with a gulp . - " be it because he think I be not fit company for 
 you ? " 

 Helen bow her head . 

 Burley wince , and after a moment 's pause say , " he be right . " 

 HELEN   obey the impulse of her heart , spring forward and take 
 Burley 's hand . - " ah , sir , " she cry , " before he know you he be 
 so different ; then he be cheerful , then , even when his first 
 disappointment come , I grieve and weep but I feel he would conquer 
 still , for his heart be so good and pure . oh , sir , do not   think I 
 reproach you ; but what be to become of he if - if - no , it be not for 
 myself I speak . I know that if I be here , that if he have I to care 
 for , he would come home early , and work patiently , and - and - that I 
 might save he . but now when I be go , and you live with he , - you to 
 whom he be grateful , you whom he would follow against his own conscience 
  you must see that , sir , what be to become of he ? " 

 Helen 's voice die in sob . 

 Burley take three or four long stride through the room ; he be greatly 
 agitated . " I be a demon , " he murmur . " I never see it before ; but it be 
 true , I should be this boy 's ruin . " tear stand in his eye , he pause 
 abruptly , make a clutch at his hat , and turn to the door . 

 Helen stop the way , and take he gently by the arm , say , " oh , 
 sir , forgive I , - I have pain you ; " and look up at he with a 
 compassionate expression , that indeed make the child 's sweet face as 
 that of an angel . 

 Burley bend down as if to kiss she , and then draw back , perhaps with a 
 sentiment that his lip be not worthy to touch that innocent brow . 

 " if I have have a sister , - a child like you , little one , " he mutter , 
 " perhaps I too might have be save in time . now - " 

 " ah , now you may stay , sir ; I do not   fear you any more . " 

 " no , no ; you would fear I again ere night - time , and I might not be 
 always in the right mood to listen to a voice like your , child . your 
 Leonard have a noble heart and rare gift . he should rise yet , and he 
 shall . I will not drag he into the mire . good - by , - you will see I no 
 more . " he break from Helen , clear the stair with a bound , and be out 
 of the house . 

 when Leonard return he be surprised to hear his unwelcome guest be 
 gone , - but Helen do not venture to tell he of her interposition . she 
 know instinctively how such officiousness would mortify and offend the 
 pride of man ; but she never again speak harshly of poor Burley . Leonard 
 suppose that he should either see or hear of the humourist in the 
 course of the day . find he do not , he go in search of he at his 
 old haunt ; but no trace . he inquire at the " beehive " if they know 
 there of his new address , but no tiding of Burley could be obtain . 

 as he come home disappointed and anxious , for he feel uneasy as to the 
 disappearance of his wild friend , Mrs. Smedley meet he at the door . 

 " please , sir , suit yourself with another lodging , " say she . " I can have 
 no such singing and shouting go on at night in my house . and that 
 poor little girl , too ! you should be ashamed of yourself . " 

 Leonard frown , and pass by . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 meanwhile , on leave Helen , Burley stride on ; and , as if by some well 
 instinct , for he be unconscious of his own step , he take his way 
 towards the still green haunt of his youth . when he pause at length , 
 he be already before the door of a rural cottage , stand alone in the 
 midst of field , with a little farmyard at the back ; and far through the 
 tree in front be catch a glimpse of the winding Brent . 

 with this cottage Burley be familiar ; it be inhabit by a good old 
 couple who have know he from a boy . there he habitually leave his rod 
 and fishing - tackle ; there , for interval in his turbid , riotous life , 
 he have sojourn for two or three day together , fancy the first day 
 that the country be a heaven , and convince before the third that it 
 be a purgatory . 

 an old woman , of neat and tidy exterior , come forth to greet he . 

 " ah , Master John , " say she , clasp his nerveless hand , " well , the 
 field be pleasant now ; I hope you be come to stay a bit ? do ; it will 
 freshen you ; you lose all the fine colour you have once , in Lunnon town . " 

 " I will stay with you , my kind friend , " say Burley , with unusual 
 meekness ; " I can have the old room , then ? " 

 " oh , yes , come and look at it . I never let it now to any one but 
 you , - never have let it since the dear beautiful lady with the angel 's 
 face go away . poor thing , what could have become of she ? " 

 thus speak , while Burley listen not , the old woman draw he within 
 the cottage , and lead he up the stair into a room that might have 
 well become a well house , for it be furnish with taste , and even 
 elegance . a small cabinet pianoforte stand opposite the fireplace , and 
 the window look upon pleasant mead and tangled hedgerow , and the 
 narrow winding of the blue rivulet . Burley sink down exhausted , and 
 gaze wistfully from the casement . 

 " you have not breakfast ? " say the hostess , anxiously . 

 " no . " 

 " well , the egg be fresh lay , and you would like a rasher of bacon , 
 Master John ? and if you will have brandy in your tea , I have some that 
 you leave long ago in your own bottle . " 

 Burley shake his head . " no brandy , Mrs. Goodyer ; only fresh milk . I will 
 see whether I can yet coax Nature . " 

 Mrs. Goodyer do not know what be mean by coax Nature , but she 
 say , " pray do , Master John , " and vanish . that day Burley go out 
 with his rod , and he fish hard for the one - eyed perch ; but in vain . 
 then he rove along the stream with his hand in his pocket , whistle . 
 he return to the cottage at sunset , partook of the fare provide for 
 he , abstain from the brandy , and feel dreadfully low . 

 he call for pen , ink , and paper , and seek to write , but could not 
 achieve two line . he summon Mrs. Goodyer . " tell your husband to come 
 and sit and talk . " 

 up come old Jacob Goodyer , and the great wit bade he tell he all the 
 news of the village . Jacob obey willingly , and Burley at last fell 
 asleep . the next day it be much the same , only at dinner he have up the 
 brandy - bottle , and finish it ; and he do not have up Jacob , but he 
 contrive to write . 

 the third day it rain incessantly . " have you no book , Mrs. Goodyer ? " 
 ask poor John Burley . 

 " oh , yes , some that the dear lady leave behind she ; and perhaps you would 
 like to look at some paper in her own writing ? " 

 " no , not the paper , - all woman scribble , and all scribble the same 
 thing . get I the book . " 

 the book be bring up , - poetry and essay - John know they by heart . 
 he look out on the rain , and at evening the rain have cease . he rush 
 to his hat and flee . 

 " Nature , Nature ! " he exclaim , when he be out in the air and hurrying 
 by the dripping hedgerow , " you be not to be coax by I ! I have 
 jilt you shamefully , I own it ; you be a female , and unforgiving . I 
 do not   complain . you may be very pretty , but you be the stupid and 
 most tire some companion that ever I meet with . thank Heaven , I be not 
 married to you ! " 

 thus John Burley make his way into town , and pause at the first 
 public - house . out of that house he come with a jovial air , and on he 
 stride towards the heart of London . now he be in Leicester Square , and 
 he gaze on the foreigner who stalk that region , and hum a tune ; and 
 now from yonder alley two form emerge , and dog his careless footstep ; 
 now through the maze of passage towards St. Martin 's he thread his 
 path , and , anticipate an orgy as he near his favourite haunt , 
 jingle the silver in his pocket ; and now the two form be at his 
 heel . 

 " hail to thee , o freedom ! " mutter John Burley , " thy dwelling be in 
 city , and thy palace be the tavern . " 

 " in the king 's name , " quoth a gruff voice ; and John Burley feel the 
 horrid and familiar tap on the shoulder . 

 the two bailiff who dog have seize their prey . " at whose suit ? " 
 ask John Burley , falteringly . " Mr. Cox , the wine - merchant . " 

 " Cox ! a man to whom I give a check on my banker not three month ago ! " 

 " but it war not   cash . " 

 " what do that signify ? - the intention be the same . a good heart take 
 the will for the deed . Cox be a monster of ingratitude , and I withdraw 
 my custom . " 

 " sarve he right . would your honour like a jarvey ? " 

 " I would rather spend the money on something else , " say John Burley . 
 " give I your arm , I be not proud . after all , thank Heaven , I shall not 
 sleep in the country . " 

 and John Burley make a night of it in the Fleet . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 Miss Starke be one of those lady who pass their life in the dire 
 of all civil strife , - war with their servant . she look upon the 
 member of that class as the unrelenting and sleepless enemy of the 
 unfortunate householder condemn to employ they . she think they eat 
 and drink to their villanous utmost , in order to ruin their benefactor ; 
 that they live in one constant conspiracy with one another and the 
 tradesman , the object of which be to cheat and pilfer . Miss Starke be 
 a miserable woman . as she have no relation or friend who care enough 
 for she to share her solitary struggle against her domestic foe ; and 
 her income , though easy , be an annuity that die with herself , thereby 
 reduce various nephew , niece , or cousin to the strict bound of a 
 natural affection , - that do not exist ; and as she feel the want of some 
 friendly face amidst this world of distrust and hate , - so she have try 
 the resource of venal companion . but the venal companion have never 
 stay long , either they dislike Miss Starke , or Miss Starke dislike 
 they . therefore the poor woman have resolve upon bring up some 
 little girl , whose heart , as she say to herself , would be fresh and 
 uncorrupted , and from whom she might expect gratitude . she have be 
 content , on the whole , with Helen , and have mean to keep that child in 
 her house as long as she   Miss Starke   remain upon the earth , - perhaps 
 some thirty year long ; and then , have carefully seclude she from 
 marriage and other friendship , to leave she nothing but the regret of 
 have lose so kind a benefactress . conformably with this notion , and in 
 order to secure the affection of the child , Miss Starke have relax 
 the frigid austerity natural to her manner and mode of thought , and be 
 kind to Helen in an iron way . she have neither slap nor pinch she , 
 neither have she starve . she have allow she to see Leonard , accord 
 to the agreement make with Dr. Morgan , and have lay out tenpence 
 on cake , besides contribute fruit from her garden for the first 
 interview , - a hospitality she do not think it fit to renew on 
 subsequent occasion . in return for this , she conceive she have 
 purchase the right to Helen bodily and spiritually , and nothing could 
 exceed her indignation when she rise one morning and find the child have 
 go . as it never have occur to she to ask Leonard 's address , though 
 she suspect Helen have go to he , she be at a loss what to do , and 
 remain for twenty - four hour in a state of inane depression . but then 
 she begin to miss the child so much that her energy wake , and she 
 persuade herself that she be actuate by the pure benevolence in 
 try to reclaim this poor creature from the world into which Helen have 
 thus rashly plunge . 

 accordingly she put an advertisement into the " Times , " to the follow 
 effect , liberally imitate from one by which in former year she have 
 recover a favourite Blenheim : - 

  two GUINEAS ' reward . 

  STRAYED , from Ivy Cottage , Highgate , a little Girl , - answer to the 
  name of Helen ; with blue eye and brown hair ; white muslin frock , 
  and straw hat with blue ribbon . whoever will bring the same to Ivy 
  Cottage , shall receive the above Reward . 

  N. B. - Nothing more will be offer . 

 now it so happen that Mrs. Smedley have put an advertisement in the 
 " Times " on her own account , relative to a niece of hers who be come 
 from the country , and for whom she desire to find a situation . so , 
 contrary to her usual habit , she send for the newspaper , and close by 
 her own advertisement , she see Miss Starke 's . 

 it be impossible that she could mistake the description of Helen ; and 
 as this advertisement catch her eye the very day after the whole house 
 have be disturb and scandalize by Burley 's noisy visit , and on which 
 she have resolve to get rid of a lodger who receive such visitor , the 
 good - hearted woman be delighted to think that she could restore Helen 
 to some safe home . while thus think , Helen herself enter the 
 kitchen where Mrs. Smedley sit , and the landlady have the imprudence to 
 point out the advertisement , and talk , as she call it , ' seriously , " to 
 the little girl . 

 Helen in vain and with tear entreat she to take no step in reply to 
 the advertisement . Mrs. Smedley feel that it be an affair of duty , 
 and be obdurate , and shortly afterwards put on her bonnet and leave the 
 house . Helen conjecture that she be on her way to Miss Starke 's , and 
 her whole soul be bent on flight . Leonard have go to the office of 
 the " beehive " with his manuscript ; but she pack up all their joint 
 effect , and just as she have do so , he return . she communicate 
 the news of the advertisement , and say she should be so miserable if 
 compel to go back to Miss Starke 's , and implore he so pathetically 
 to save she from such sorrow , that he at once assent to her proposal 
 of flight . luckily , little be owe to the landlady , - that little be 
 leave with the maid - servant ; and , profit by Mrs. Smedley 's absence , 
 they escape without scene or conflict . their effect be take by 
 Leonard to a stand of hackney vehicle , and then leave at a coach - office 
 while they go in search of lodging . it be wise to choose an entirely 
 new and remote district ; and before night they be settle in an attic 
 in Lambeth . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

 as the reader will expect , no trace of Burley could Leonard find : the 
 humourist have cease to communicate with the " Beehive . " but Leonard 
 grieve for Burley 's sake ; and , indeed , he miss the intercourse of the 
 large , wrong mind . but he settle down by degree to the simple , love 
 society of his child companion , and in that presence grow more tranquil . 
 the hour in the daytime that he do not pass at work , he spend as 
 before , pick up knowledge at book - stall ; and at dusk he and Helen 
 would stroll out , - sometimes strive to escape from the long suburb 
 into fresh rural air ; more often wander to and fro the bridge that 
 lead to glorious Westminster - London 's classic land - and watch the 
 vague lamp reflect on the river . this haunt suit the musing , 
 melancholy boy . he would stand long and with wistful silence by the 
 balustrade , seat Helen thereon , that she too might look along the 
 dark mournful water , which , dark though they be , still have their charm 
 of mysterious repose . 

 as the river flow between the world of roof , and the roar of human 
 passion on either side , so in those two heart flow Thought - and all 
 they know of London be its shadow . 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 there appear in the " beehive " certain very truculent political 
 paper , - paper very like the tract in the tinker 's bag . Leonard do 
 not heed they much , but they make far more sensation in the public that 
 read the " beehive " than Leonard 's paper , full of rare promise though 
 the last be . they greatly increase the sale of the periodical in the 
 manufacturing town , and begin to awake the drowsy vigilance of the 
 Home Office . suddenly a descent be make upon the " beehive " and all 
 its paper and plant . the editor see himself threaten with a criminal 
 prosecution , and the certainty of two year ' imprisonment : he do 
 not like the prospect , and disappear . one evening , when Leonard , 
 unconscious of these mischance , arrive at the door of the office , he 
 find it close . an agitated mob be before it , and a voice that be 
 not new to his ear be harangue the bystander , with many imprecation 
 against " tyrant . " he look , and , to his amaze , recognize in the 
 orator Mr. Sprott the Tinker . 

 the police come in number to disperse the crowd , and Mr. Sprott 
 prudently vanish . Leonard learn , then , what have befall , and again 
 see himself without employment and the mean of bread . 

 slowly he walk back . " o knowledge , knowledge ! - powerless , indeed ! " he 
 murmur . 

 as he thus speak , a handbill in large capital meet his eye on a dead 
 wall , " Wanted , a few smart young man for India . " 

 a crimp accost he . " you would make a fine soldier , my man . you have 
 stout limb of your own . " Leonard move on . 

 " it have come back then to this , - brute physical force after all ! O 
 Mind , despair ! o Peasant , be a machine again ! " he enter his attic 
 noiselessly , and gaze upon Helen as she sit at work , strain her eye 
 by the open window - with tender and deep compassion . she have not hear 
 he enter , nor be she aware of his presence . Patient and still she sit , 
 and the small finger ply busily . he gaze , and see that her cheek 
 be pale and hollow , and the hand look so thin ! his heart be deeply 
 touch , and at that moment he have not one memory of the baffle Poet , 
 one think that proclaim the Egotist . 

 he approach she gently , lay his hand on her shoulder , " Helen , put on 
 your shawl and bonnet , and walk out , - I have much to say . " 

 in a few moment she be ready , and they take their way to their 
 favourite haunt upon the bridge . pause in one of the recess , or 
 nook , Leonard then begin , " Helen , we must part ! " 

 " Part ? - oh , brother ! " 

 " listen . all work that depend on mind be over for I , nothing remain 
 but the labour of thew and sinew . I can not go back to my village and 
 say to all , ' my hope be self - conceit , and my intellect a delusion ! ' I 
 can not . neither in this sordid city can I turn menial or porter . I might 
 be bear to that drudgery , but my mind have , it may be unhappily , raise 
 I above my birth . what , then , shall I do ? I know not yet , - serve as 
 a soldier , or push my way to some wilderness afar , as an emigrant , 
 perhaps . but whatever my choice , I must henceforth be alone ; I have a 
 home no more . but there be a home for you , Helen , a very humble one 
  for you too , so well bear , but very safe , - the roof of - of - my peasant 
 mother . she will love you for my sake , and - and - " 

 Helen clung to he tremble , and sob out , " anything , anything you 
 will . but I can work ; I can make money , Leonard . I do , indeed , make 
 money , - you do not know how much , but enough for we both till well 
 time come to you . do not let we part . " 

 " and I - a man , and bear to labour - to be maintain by the work of an 
 infant ! no , Helen , do not so degrade I . " 

 she draw back as she look on his flushed brow , bow her head 
 submissively , and murmur , " Pardon . " 

 " ah , " say Helen , after a pause , " if now we could but find my poor 
 father 's friend ! I never so much care for it before . " 

 " yes , he would surely provide for you . " 

 " for I ! " repeat Helen , in a tone of soft , deep reproach , and she 
 turn away her head to conceal her tear . 

 " you be sure you would remember he , if we meet he by chance ? " 

 " oh , yes . he be so different from all we see in this terrible city , and 
 his eye be like yonder star , so clear and so bright ; yet the light 
 seem to come from afar off , as the light do in your , when your 
 thought be away from all thing round you . and then , too , his dog , 
 whom he call Nero - I could not forget that . " 

 " but his dog may not be always with he . " 

 " but the bright clear eye be ! ah , now you look up to heaven , and your 
 seem to dream like his . " 

 Leonard do not answer , for his thought be indeed less on earth than 
 struggle to pierce into that remote and mysterious heaven . 

 both be silent long ; the crowd pass they by unheedingly . night 
 deepen over the river , but the reflection of the lamp - light on its 
 wave be more visible than that of the star . the beam show the 
 darkness of the strong current ; and the craft that lie eastward on 
 the tide , with sail - less spectral mast and black dismal hulk , look 
 death - like in their stillness . 

 Leonard look down , and the thought of Chatterton 's grim suicide come 
 back to his soul ; and a pale , scornful face , with luminous haunt 
 eye , seem to look up from the stream , and murmur from livid lip , 
 " struggle no more against the tide on the surface , - all be calm and 
 rest within the deep . " 

 start in terror from the gloom of his revery , the boy begin to talk 
 fast to Helen , and try to soothe she with description of the lowly 
 home which he have offer . 

 he speak of the light care which she would participate with his 
 mother   for by that name he still call the widow , and dwelt , with an 
 eloquence that the contrast round he make sincere and strong , on the 
 happy rural life , the shadowy woodland , the ripple cornfield , the 
 solemn , lone churchspire soar from the tranquil landscape . 

 Flatteringly he paint the flowery terrace of the italian exile , and 
 the playful fountain that , even as he speak , be fling up its spray 
 to the star , through serene air untrouble by the smoke of city , 
 and untainted by the sinful sigh of man . he promise she the love and 
 protection of nature akin to the happy scene : the simple , affectionate 
 mother , the gentle pastor , the exile wise and kind , Violante , with 
 dark eye full of the mystic thought that solitude call from 
 childhood , - Violante should be her companion . 

 " and , oh ! " cry Helen , " if life be thus happy there , return with I , 
 return ! return ! " 

 " alas ! " murmur the boy , " if the hammer once strike the spark from the 
 anvil , the spark must fly upward ; it can not fall back to earth until 
 light have leave it . Upward still , Helen , - let I go upward still ! " 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 the next morning Helen be very ill , - so ill that , shortly after rise , 
 she be force to creep back to bed . her frame shiver , her eye be 
 heavy , her hand burn like fire . Fever have set in . perhaps she might 
 have catch cold on the bridge , perhaps her emotion have prove too 
 much for her frame . Leonard , in great alarm , call in the near 
 apothecary . the apothecary look grave , and say there be danger . and 
 danger soon declare itself , - Helen become delirious . for several day 
 she lie in this state , be tween life and death . Leonard then feel that 
 all the sorrow of earth be light , compare with the fear of lose 
 what we love . how valueless the envy laurel seem beside the dying 
 rise ! 

 thank , perhaps , more to his heed and tend than to medical skill , she 
 recover sense at last . immediate peril be over ; but she be very weak 
 and reduce , her ultimate recovery doubtful , convalescence , at well , 
 likely to be very slow . 

 but when she learn how long she have be thus ill , she look 
 anxiously at Leonard 's face as he bend over she , and falter forth , 
 " give I my work ; I be strong enough for that now , - it would amuse I . " 

 Leonard burst into tear . 

 alas ! he have no work himself ; all their joint money have melt away . the 
 apothecary be not like good Dr. Morgan ; the medicine be to be pay 
 for , and the rent . two day before , Leonard have pawn Riccabocca 's 
 watch ; and when the last shilling thus raise be go , how should he 
 support Helen ? nevertheless he conquer his tear , and assure she that 
 he have employment ; and that so earnestly that she believe he , and sink 
 into soft sleep . he listen to her breathing , kiss her forehead , and 
 leave the room . he turn into his own neighbouring garret , and lean 
 his face on his hand , collect all his thought . 

 he must be a beggar at last . he must write to Mr. Dale for money , - Mr. 
 Dale , too , who know the secret of his birth . he would rather have beg 
 of a stranger ; it seem to add a new dishonour to his mother 's memory 
 for the child to beg of one who be acquaint with her shame . have he 
 himself be the only one to want and to starve , he would have sink inch 
 by inch into the grave of famine , before he would have so subdue his 
 pride . but Helen , there on that bed , - Helen needing , for week perhaps , 
 all support , and illness make luxury themselves like necessary ! 
 beg he must . and when he so resolve , have you but see the proud , 
 bitter soul he conquer , you would have say , " this , which he think 
 be degradation , - this be heroism . " oh , strange human heart ! no epic ever 
 write achieve the Sublime and the Beautiful which be graven , unread 
 by human eye , in thy secret leaf . 

 of whom else should he beg ? his mother have nothing , Riccabocca be poor , 
 and the stately Violante , who have exclaim , " would that I be a man ! 
 " - he could not endure the thought that she should pity he and despise . 
 the Avenels ! no , - thrice no . he draw towards he hastily ink and paper , 
 and write rapid line that be wring from he as from the bleeding 
 string of life . 

 but the hour for the post have pass , the letter must wait till the next 
 day ; and three day at least would elapse before he could receive an 
 answer . he leave the letter on the table , and , stifle as for air , go 
 forth . he cross the bridge , he pass on mechanically , and be bear 
 along by a crowd press towards the door of parliament . a debate that 
 excited popular interest be fix for that evening , and many bystander 
 collect in the street to see the member pass to and fro , or hear what 
 speaker have yet rise to take part in the debate , or try to get order 
 for the gallery . 

 he halt amidst these loiterer , with no interest , indeed , in common 
 with they , but look over their head abstractedly towards the tall 
 Funeral Abbey , - imperial Golgotha of Poets and Chiefs and king . 

 suddenly his attention be divert to those around by the sound of a 
 name , displeasingly know to he . " how be you , Randal Leslie ? come to 
 hear the debate ? " say a member , who be pass through the street . 

 " yes ; Mr. Egerton promise to get I under the gallery . he be to speak 
 himself to - night , and I have never hear he . as you be go into the 
 House , will you remind he of his promise to I ? " 

 " I can not   now , for he be speak already , - and well too . I hurry from 
 the Athenaeum , where I be dining , on purpose to be in time , as I hear 
 that his speech be make a great effect . " 

 " this be very unlucky , " say randal . " I have no idea he would speak so 
 early . " 

 " C - - - bring he up by a direct personal attack . but follow I ; 
 perhaps I can get you into the House ; and a man like you , Leslie , from 
 whom we expect great thing some day , I can tell you , should not 
 miss any such opportunity of know what this House of our be on a 
 field - night . come on ! " 

 the member hurry towards the door ; and as Randal follow he , 
 a bystander cry , " that be the young man who write the famous 
 pamphlet , - Egerton 's relation . " 

 " oh , indeed ! " say another . " clever man , Egerton , - I be wait for 
 he . " 

 " so be i. " 

 " why , you be not a constituent , as I be . " 

 " no ; but he have be very kind to my nephew , and I must thank he . you 
 be a constituent - he be an honour to your town . " 

 " so he be : enlighten man ! " 

 " and so generous ! " 

 " bring forward really good measure , " quoth the politician . 

 " and clever young man , " say the uncle . 

 Therewith one or two other join in the praise of Audley Egerton , and 
 many anecdote of his liberality be tell . Leonard listen at first 
 listlessly , at last with thoughtful attention . he have hear Burley , 
 too , speak highly of this generous statesman , who , without pretend to 
 genius himself , appreciate it in other . he suddenly remember , too , 
 that Egerton be half - brother to the squire . vague notion of some 
 appeal to this eminent person , not for charity , but employment to his 
 mind , gleam across he , - inexperienced boy that he yet be ! and 
 while thus meditate , the door of the House open and out come Audley 
 Egerton himself . a partial cheering , follow by a general murmur , 
 apprise Leonard of the presence of the popular statesman . Egerton be 
 catch hold of by some five or six person in succession ; a shake of 
 the hand , a nod , a brief whisper word or two , suffice the practised 
 member for graceful escape ; and soon , free from the crowd , his tall , 
 erect figure pass on , and turn towards the bridge . he pause at the 
 angle and take out his watch , look at it by the lamp - light . 

 " Harley will be here soon , " he mutter , - " he be always punctual ; and 
 now that I have speak , I can give he an hour or so . that be well . " 

 as he replace his watch in his pocket and re - button his coat over 
 his firm , broad chest , he lift his eye , and see a young man stand 
 before he . 

 " do you want I ? " ask the statesman , with the direct brevity of his 
 practical character . 

 " Mr. Egerton , " say the young man , with a voice that slightly tremble 
 and yet be manly amidst emotion , " you have a great name , and great 
 power ; I stand here in these street of London without a friend , and 
 without employment . I believe that I have it in I to do some nobler 
 work than that of bodily labour , have I but one friend , - one opening for 
 my thought . and now I have say this , I scarcely know how , or why , but 
 from despair , and the sudden impulse which that despair take from the 
 praise that follow your success , I have nothing more to add . " 

 Audley Egerton be silent for a moment , strike by the tone and 
 address of the stranger ; but the consummate and wary man of the world , 
 accustom to all manner of strange application and all variety of 
 imposture , quickly recover from a passing and slight effect . 

 " be you a native of ? "   name the town which the statesman 
 represent . 

 " no , sir . " 

 " well , young man , I be very sorry for you ; but the good sense you 
 must possess   for I judge of that by the education you have evidently 
 receive   must tell you that a public man , whatever be his patronage , 
 have it too fully absorb by claimant who have a right to demand it , to 
 be able to listen to stranger . " 

 he pause a moment , and as Leonard stand silent , add with more 
 kindness than most public man so accosted would have show , 

 " you say you be friendless , - poor fellow ! in early life that happen 
 to many of we , who find friend enough before the close . be honest , and 
 well - conduct : lean on yourself , not on stranger ; work with the body 
 if you can not   with the mind ; and , believe I , that advice be all I can 
 give you , unless this trifle " - and the minister hold out a crown - piece . 

 Leonard bow , shake his head sadly , and walk away . Egerton look 
 after he with a slight pang . 

 " Pooh ! " say he to himself , " there must be thousand in the same 
 state in these street of London . I can not redress the necessity of 
 civilization . well educate ! it be not from ignorance henceforth that 
 society will suffer , - it be from over - educate the hungry thousand 
 who , thus unfit for manual toil , and with no career for mental , will 
 some day or other stand like that boy in our street , and puzzle wiser 
 minister than I be . " 

 as Egerton thus muse , and pass on to the bridge , a bugle - horn rang 
 merrily from the box of a gay four - in - hand . a drag - coach with superb 
 blood - horse rattle over the causeway , and in the driver Egerton 
 recognize his nephew , Frank Hazeldean . 

 the young Guardsman be return with a lively party of man from dining 
 at Greenwich , and the careless laughter of these child of pleasure 
 float far over the still river ; it vex the ear of the careworn 
 statesman , - sad , perhaps , with all his greatness , lonely amidst all his 
 crowd of friend . it remind he , perhaps , of his own youth , when such 
 party and companionship be familiar to he , though through they all 
 he have bear an ambitious , aspiring soul . " Le jeu vaut - il la chandelle ? " 
 say he , shrug his shoulder . 

 the coach roll rapidly past Leonard , as he stand lean against the 
 corner of the bridge , and the mire of the kennel splash over he 
 from the hoof of the fiery horse . the laughter smite on his ear more 
 discordantly than on the minister 's , but it begot no envy . 

 " life be a dark riddle , " say he , smite his breast . 

 and he walk slowly on , gain the recess where he have stand several 
 night before with Helen , and , dizzy with want of food , and wear out for 
 want of sleep , he sink down into the dark corner ; while the river that 
 roll under the arch of stone muttered dirge - like in his ear , - as under 
 the social key - stone wail and roll on forever the mystery of Human 
 Discontent . take comfort , o Thinker by the stream ! ' t be the river that 
 found and give pomp to the city ; and , without the discontent , where 
 be progress , what be man ? take comfort , o THINKER ! wherever the 
 stream over which thou bend , or beside which thou sinkest , weary 
 and desolate , fret the arch that support thee , never dream that , by 
 destroy the bridge , thou canst silence the moan of the wave ! 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

 before a table , in the apartment appropriate to he in his father 's 
 house at Knightsbridge , sit Lord L'Estrange , sort or destroy 
 letter and paper , - an ordinary symptom of change of residence . there 
 be certain trifle by which a shrewd observer may judge of a man 's 
 disposition . thus , range on the table , with some elegance , but with 
 soldier - like precision , be sundry little relic of former day , 
 hallow by some sentiment of memory , or perhaps endear solely by 
 custom ; which , whether he be in Egypt , Italy , or England , always make 
 part of the furniture of Harley 's room . even the small , old - fashion , 
 and somewhat inconvenient inkstand into which he dip the pen as he 
 label the letter he put aside , belong to the writing - desk which 
 have be his pride as a schoolboy . even the book that lay scattered 
 round be not new work , not those to which we turn to satisfy the 
 curiosity of an hour , or to distract our graver thought ; they be 
 chiefly either latin or italian poet , with many a pencil - mark on the 
 margin ; or book which , make severe demand on thought , require slow 
 and frequent perusal , and become companion . somehow or other , in 
 remark that even in dumb , inanimate thing the man be averse to 
 change , and have the habit of attach himself to whatever be connect 
 with old association , you might guess that he clung with pertinacity to 
 affection more important , and you could well comprehend the freshness 
 of his friendship for one so dissimilar in pursuit and character as 
 Audley Egerton . an affection once admit into the heart of Harley 
 L'Estrange seem never to be question or reason with ; it become 
 tacitly fix , as it be , into his own nature , and little less than a 
 revolution of his whole system could dislodge or disturb it . 

 Lord L'Estrange 's hand rest now upon a letter in a stiff , legible 
 italian character , and instead of dispose of it at once as he have do 
 with the rest , he spread it before he , and re - read the content . it be 
 a letter from Riccabocca , receive a few week since , and run thus : - 

  letter from SIGNOR riccabocca to LORD L'ESTRANGE . 

 I thank you , my noble friend , for judge of I with faith in my honour , 
 and respect for my revers . 

 no , and thrice no , to all concession , all overture , all treaty with 
 Giulio Franzini . I write the name , and my emotion choke I . I must 
 pause , and cool back into disdain . it be over . pass from that subject . 
 but you have alarm I . this sister ! I have not see she since her 
 childhood ; but she be bring up under his influence , 

  - she can but work as his agent . she wish to learn my residence ! it can 
 be but for some hostile and malignant purpose . I may trust in you , - I 
 know that . you say I may trust equally in the discretion of your friend . 
 pardon I , - my confidence be not so elastic . a word may give the clew 
 to my retreat . but , if discover , what harm can ensue ? an english roof 
 protect I from austrian despotism : true ; but not the brazen tower 
 of Danae could protect I from italian craft . and , be there nothing 
 bad , it would be intolerable to I to live under the eye of a 
 relentless spy . truly saith our proverb , ' he sleep ill for whom the 
 enemy wake . ' look you , my friend , I have do with my old life , - I wish 
 to cast it from I as a snake its skin . I have deny myself all that 
 exile deem consolation . no pity for misfortune , no message from 
 sympathize friendship , no news from a lost and bereaved country follow 
 I to my hearth under the sky of the stranger . from all these I have 
 voluntarily cut thyself off . I be as dead to the life I once live as 
 if the Styx roll between it and I . with that sternness which 
 be admissible only to the afflict , I have deny myself even the 
 consolation of your visit . I have tell you fairly and simply that 
 your presence would unsettle all my enforced and infirm philosophy , and 
 remind I only of the past , which I seek to blot from remembrance . you 
 have comply on the one condition , that whenever I really want your aid 
 I will ask it ; and , meanwhile , you have generously seek to obtain I 
 justice from the cabinet of minister and in the court of king . I do 
 not refuse your heart this luxury ; for I have a child - ah ! I have teach 
 that child already to revere your name , and in her prayer it be 
 not forget . but now that you be convince that even your zeal be 
 unavaile , I ask you to discontinue attempt which may but bring the 
 spy upon my track , and involve I in new misfortune . believe I , O 
 brilliant Englishman , that I be satisfied and content with my lot . 
 I be sure it would not be for my happiness to change it , ' Chi non ha 
 provato il male non conosce il bone . ' 

   " one do not know when one be well off till one have know 
  misfortune . " 

 you ask I how I live , - I answer , alla giornata , -   to the day   - not 
 for the morrow , as I do once . I have accustom myself to the calm 
 existence of a village . I take interest in its detail . there be my 
 wife , good creature , sit opposite to I , never ask what I write , 
 or to whom , but ready to throw aside her work and talk the moment the 
 pen be out of my hand . talk - and what about ? Heaven know ! but I would 
 rather hear that talk , though on the affair of a hamlet , than babble 
 again with recreant noble and blunder professor about commonwealth 
 and constitution . when I want to see how little those last influence 
 the happiness of wise man , have I not Machiavelli and Thucydides ? then , 
 by and by , the parson will drop in , and we argue . he never know when he 
 be beat , so the argument be everlaste . on fine day I ramble out by 
 a wind rill with my Violante , or stroll to my friend the squire 's , 
 and see how healthful a thing be true pleasure ; and on wet day I shut 
 myself up , and mope , perhaps till , hark ! a gentle tap at the door , 
 and in come Violante , with her dark eye , that shine out through 
 reproachful tear , - reproachful that I should mourn alone , while she be 
 under my roof ; so she put her arm round I , and in five minute all be 
 sunshine within . what care we for your english gray cloud without ? 

 leave I , my dear Lord , - leave I to this quiet happy passage towards 
 old age , serene than the youth that I waste so wildly ; and guard well 
 the secret on which my happiness depend . 

 now to yourself , before I close . of that same yourself you speak 
 too little , as of I too much . but I so well comprehend the profound 
 melancholy that lie underneath the wild and fanciful humour with which 
 you but suggest , as in sport , what you feel so in earnest . the laborious 
 solitude of city weigh on you . you be fly back to the dolce 
 far niente , - to friend few , but intimate ; to life monotonous , but 
 unrestrained ; and even there the sense of loneliness will again 
 seize upon you ; and you do not seek , as I do , the annihilation of 
 memory , - your dead passion be turn to ghost that haunt you , and 
 unfit you for the live world . I see it all , - I see it still , in your 
 hurried fantastic line , as I see it when we two sit amidst the pine 
 and beheld the blue lake stretch below , I trouble by the shadow of 
 the future , you disturb by that of the Past . 

 well , but you say , half seriously , half in jest , " I will escape from 
 this prison - house of memory ; I will form new tie , like other man , and 
 before it be too late ; I will marry . ay , but I must love , - there be the 
 difficulty . " Difficulty , - yes , and Heaven be thank for it ! recall all 
 the unhappy marriage that have come to your knowledge : pray , have not 
 eighteen out of twenty be marriage for Love ? it always have be so , 
 and it always will ; because , whenever we love deeply , we exact so much 
 and forgive so little . be content to find some one with whom your hearth 
 and your honour be safe . you will grow to love what never wound your 
 heart , you will soon grow out of love with what must always disappoint 
 your imagination . cospetto ! I wish my Jemima have a young sister for 
 you . yet it be with a deep groan that I settle myself to a - Jemima . 

 now , I have write you a long letter , to prove how little I need 
 of your compassion or your zeal . once more let there be long silence 
 between we . it be not easy for I to correspond with a man of your rank , 
 and not incur the curious gossip of my still little pool of a world 
 which the splash of a pebble can break into circle . I must take this 
 over to a post - town some ten mile off , and drop it into the box by 
 stealth . Adieu , dear and noble friend , gentle heart and subtle fancy 
 that I have meet in my walk through life . adieu . write I word when you 
 have abandon a day - dream and find a Jemima . 

  ALPHONSO . 

 P. S. - For Heaven 's sake , caution and recaution your friend the minister 
 not to drop a word to this woman that may betray my hiding - place . 

 " be he really happy ? " murmur Harley , as he close the letter ; and he 
 sink for a few moment into a revery . 

 " this life in a village , this wife in a lady who put down her work to 
 talk about villager - what a contrast to Audley 's full existence ! and I 
 can not envy nor comprehend either ! yet my own existence - what be it ? " 

 he rise , and move towards the window , from which a rustic stair 
 descend to a green lawn , stud with large tree than be often 
 find in the ground of a suburban residence . there be calm and 
 coolness in the sight , and one could scarcely have suppose that London 
 lie so near . 

 the door open softly , and a lady past middle age enter , and 
 approach Harley , as he still stand muse by the window , lay she 
 hand on his shoulder . what character there be in a hand ! Hers be a hand 
 that Titian would have paint with elaborate care ! thin , white , and 
 delicate , with the blue vein raise from the surface . yet there be 
 something more than mere patrician elegance in the form and texture . 
 a true physiologist would have say at once , " there be intellect and 
 pride in that hand , which seem to fix a hold where it rest ; and lie 
 so lightly , yet will not be as lightly shake off . " 

 " Harley , " say the lady - and Harley turn - " you do not deceive I by 
 that smile , " she continue sadly ; " you be not smile when I enter . " 

 " it be rarely that we smile to ourselves , my dear mother ; and I have 
 do nothing lately so foolish as to cause I to smile at myself . " 

 " my son , " say Lady Lansmere , somewhat abruptly , but with great 
 earnestness , " you come from a line of illustrious ancestor ; and 
 methink they ask from their tomb why the last of their race have no aim 
 and no object , no interest , no home , in the land which they serve , and 
 which reward they with its honour . " 

 " Mother , " say the soldier , simply , " when the land be in danger I 
 serve it as my forefather serve , - and my answer would be the scar on 
 my breast . " 

 " be it only in danger that a country be serve , only in war that duty 
 be fulfil ? do you think that your father , in his plain , manly life 
 of country gentleman , do not fulfil , though perhaps too obscurely , the 
 object for which aristocracy be create , and wealth be bestow ? " 

 " Doubtless he do , ma'am , - and well than his vagrant son ever can . " 

 " yet his vagrant son have receive such gift from nature , his youth be 
 so rich in promise , his boyhood so glow at the dream of glory ! " 

 " ay , " say Harley , very softly , " it be possible , - and all to be bury 
 in a single grave ! " 

 the countess start , and withdraw her hand from Harley 's shoulder . 

 Lady Lansmere 's countenance be not one that much varied in expression . 
 she have in this , as in her cast of feature , little resemblance to her 
 son . 

 her feature be slightly aquiline , - the eyebrow of that arch which 
 give a certain majesty to the aspect ; the line round the mouth be 
 habitually rigid and compressed . her face be that of one who have go 
 through great emotion and subdue it . there be something formal , 
 and even ascetic , in the character of her beauty , which be still 
 considerable , in her air and in her dress . she might have suggest 
 to you the idea of some Gothic baroness of old , half chatelaine , 
 half - abbess ; you would see at a glance that she do not live in the 
 light world around she , and disdain its fashion and its mode of 
 thought ; yet with all this rigidity it be still the face of the woman 
 who have know human tie and human affection . and now , as she gaze 
 long on Harley 's quiet , sadden brow , it be the face of a mother . 

 " a single grave , " she say , after a long pause . " and you be then but 
 a boy , Harley ! can such a memory influence you even to this day ? it be 
 scarcely possible : it do not seem to I within the reality of man 's 
 life , - though it might be of woman 's . " 

 " I believe , " say Harley , half soliloquize , " that I have a great deal 
 of the woman in I . perhaps man who live much alone , and care not for 
 man 's object , do grow tenacious of impression , as your sex do . but 
 oh , " he cry , aloud , and with a sudden change of countenance , " oh , the 
 hard and the cold man would have feel as I do , have he know she , 
 have he love she . she be like no other woman I have ever meet . bright 
 and glorious creature of another sphere ! she descend on this earth and 
 darken it when she pass away . it be no use strive . mother , I have 
 as much courage as our steel - clothe father ever have . I have dare in 
 battle and in desert , against man and the wild beast , against the storm 
 and the ocean , against the rude power of Nature , - danger as dread as 
 ever pilgrim or Crusader rejoice to brave . but courage against that one 
 memory ! no , I have none ! " 

 " Harley , Harley , you break my heart ! " cry the countess , clasp her 
 hand . 

 " it be astonishing , " continue her son , so rapt in his own thought that 
 he do not , perhaps , hear her outcry . " yea , verily , it be astonishing , 
 that consider the thousand of woman I have see and speak with , I 
 never see a face like her , - never hear a voice so sweet . and all this 
 universe of life can not afford I one look and one tone that can restore 
 I to man 's privilege , - love . well , well , well , life have other thing 
 yet ; Poetry and Art live still ; still smile the heaven and still wave 
 the tree . leave I to happiness in my own way . " 

 the countess be about to reply , when the door be throw hastily open , 
 and Lord Lansmere walk in . 

 the earl be some year old than the countess , but his placid face 
 show less wear and tear , - a benevolent , kindly face , without any 
 evidence of command intellect , but with no lack of sense in its 
 pleasant line ; his form not tall , but upright and with an air of 
 consequence , - a little pompous , but good - humouredly so , - the pomposity 
 of the Grand Seigneur who have live much in province , whose will 
 have be rarely dispute , and whose importance have be so feel and 
 acknowledge as to react insensibly on himself ; - an excellent man ; but 
 when you glance towards the high brow and dark eye of the countess , 
 you marvel a little how the two have come together , and , accord to 
 common report , live so happily in the union . 

 " Ho , ho ! my dear Harley , " cry Lord Lansmere , rub his hand with an 
 appearance of much satisfaction , " I have just be pay a visit to the 
 duchess . " 

 " what duchess , my dear father ? " 

 " why , your mother 's first cousin , to be sure , - the Duchess of 
 Knaresborough , whom , to oblige I , you condescend to call upon ; and 
 delight I be to hear that you admire Lady Mary - " 

 " she be very high breed , and rather - high - nosed , " answer Harley . then , 
 observe that his mother look pained , and his father disconcert , he 
 add seriously , " but handsome certainly . " 

 " well , Harley , " say the earl , recover himself , " the duchess , take 
 advantage of our connection to speak freely , have intimate to I that 
 Lady Mary have be no less strike with yourself ; and to come to the 
 point , since you allow that it be time you should think of marry , I 
 do not know a more desirable alliance . what do you say , Katherine ? " 

 " the duke be of a family that rank in history before the Wars of the 
 Roses , " say Lady Lansmere , with an air of deference to her husband ; 
 " and there have never be one scandal in its annal , nor one blot on its 
 scutcheon . but I be sure my dear Lord must think that the duchess should 
 not have make the first overture , - even to a friend and a kinsman ? " 

 " why , we be old - fashioned people , " say the earl , rather embarrassed , 
 " and the duchess be a woman of the world . " 

 " let we hope , " say the countess , mildly , " that her daughter be not . " 

 " I would not marry Lady Mary , if all the rest of the female sex be 
 turn into ape , " say Lord L'Estrange , with deliberate fervour . 

 " good heaven ! " cry the earl , " what extraordinary language be this ? 
 and pray why , sir ? " 

 HARLEY . - " I can not   say ; there be no why in these case . but , my dear 
 father , you be not keep faith with I . " 

 LORD LANSMERE . - " how ? " 

 HARLEY . - " you and my Lady , here , entreat I to marry ; I promise to do 
 my good to obey you , but on one condition , that I choose for myself , 
 and take my time about it . agree on both side . Whereon , off go 
 your lordship - actually before noon , at an hour when no lady , without 
 a shudder , could think of cold blonde and damp orange flower - off go 
 your Lordship , I say , and commit poor Lady Mary and your unworthy son 
 to a mutual admiration , - which neither of we ever feel . pardon I , my 
 father , but this be grave . again let I claim your promise , - full choice 
 for myself , and no reference to the Wars of the Roses . what War of the 
 rose like that between Modesty and Love upon the cheek of the virgin ! " 

 LADY LANSMERE . - " full choice for yourself , Harley : so be it . but we , 
 too , name a condition , - do we not , Lansmere ? " 

 the EARL   puzzle . - " eh , do we ? certainly we do . " 

 HARLEY . - " what be it ? " 

 LADY LANSMERE . - " the son of Lord Lansmere can only marry the daughter of 
 a gentleman . " 

 the EARL . - " of course , of course . " 

 the blood rush over Harley 's fair face , and then as suddenly leave it 
 pale . 

 he walk away to the window ; his mother follow he , and again lay 
 her hand on his shoulder . 

 " you be cruel , " say he , gently , and in a whisper , as he wince under 
 the touch of the hand . then turn to the earl , who be gaze at he 
 in blank surprise , - it never occur to Lord Lansmere that there could 
 be a doubt of his son 's marrying beneath the rank modestly state by 
 the countess , - Harley stretch forth his hand , and say , in his 
 soft win tone , " you have ever be most gracious to I , and most 
 forbearing ; it be but just that I should sacrifice the habit of an 
 egotist , to gratify a wish which you so warmly entertain . I agree with 
 you , too , that our race should not close in I , - Noblesse oblige . but 
 you know I be ever romantic ; and I must love where I marry ; or , if not 
 love , I must feel that my wife be worthy of all the love I could once 
 have bestow . now , as to the vague word ' gentleman ' that my mother 
 employ - word that mean so differently on different lip - I confess 
 that I have a prejudice against young lady bring up in the 
 ' excellent foppery of the world , ' as the daughter of gentleman of our 
 rank mostly be . I crave , therefore , the most liberal interpretation of 
 this word ' gentleman . ' and so long as there be nothing mean or sordid 
 in the birth , habit , and education of the father of this bride to be , 
 I trust you will both agree to demand nothing more , - neither title nor 
 pedigree . " 

 " Titles , no , assuredly , " say Lady Lansmere ; " they do not make 
 gentleman . " 

 " certainly not , " say the earl ; " many of our good family be 
 untitled . " 

 " Titles - no , " repeat Lady Lansmere ; " but ancestor yes . " 

 " ah , my mother , " say Harley , with his most sad and quiet smile , " it be 
 fat that we shall never agree . the first of our race be ever the one 
 we be most proud of ; and pray , what ancestor have he ? Beauty , virtue , 
 modesty , intellect , - if these be not nobility enough for a man , he be a 
 slave to the dead . " 

 with these word Harley take up his hat and make towards the door . 

 " you say yourself , ' Noblesse oblige , ' " say the countess , follow he 
 to the threshold ; " we have nothing more to add . " 

 Harley slightly shrug his shoulder , kiss his mother 's hand ; 
 whistle to Nero , who start up from a doze by the window , and go his 
 way . 

 " do he really go abroad next week ? " say the earl . " so he say . " 

 " I be afraid there be no chance for Lady Mary , " resume Lord Lansmere , 
 with a slight but melancholy smile . 

 " she have not intellect enough to charm he . she be not worthy of 
 Harley , " say the proud mother . 

 " between you and I , " rejoin the earl , rather timidly , " I do not   see 
 what good his intellect do he . he could not be more unsettled and 
 useless if he be the mere dunce in the three kingdom . and so 
 ambitious as he be when a boy ! Katherine , I sometimes fancy that you 
 know what change he . " 

 " I ! Nay , my dear Lord , it be a common change enough with the young , when 
 of such fortune , who find , when they enter life , that there be really 
 little leave for they to strive for . have Harley be a poor man 's son , it 
 might have be different . " 

 " I be bear to the same fortune as Harley , " say the earl , shrewdly , 
 " and yet I flatter myself I be of some use to old England . " 

 the countess seize upon the occasion , compliment her Lord , and turn 
 the subject . 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

 Harley spend his day in his usual desultory , lounge manner , - din 
 in his quiet corner at his favourite club . Nero , not admit into the 
 club , patiently wait for he outside the door . the dinner over , 
 dog and man , equally indifferent to the crowd , saunter down that 
 thoroughfare which , to the few who can comprehend the Poetry of London , 
 have association of glory and of woe sublime as any that the ruin of 
 the dead eld world can furnish , - thoroughfare that traverse what 
 be once the courtyard of Whitehall , have to its leave the site of 
 the palace that lodge the royalty of Scotland ; gain , through a narrow 
 strait , that old isle of Thorney , in which Edward the Confessor receive 
 the ominous visit of the Conqueror ; and , widen once more by the Abbey 
 and the Hall of Westminster , then lose itself , like all memory of 
 earthly grandeur , amidst humble passage and mean defile . 

 thus think Harley L'Estrange - ever less amidst the actual world around 
 he than the image invoke by his own solitary soul - as he gain the 
 bridge , and see the dull , lifeless craft sleep on the " Silent Way , " 
 once loud and glitter with the gild bark of the antique Seignorie 
 of England . 

 it be on that bridge that Audley Egerton have appoint to meet 
 L'Estrange , at an hour when he calculate he could well steal a respite 
 from debate . for Harley , with his fastidious dislike to all the resort 
 of his equal , have decline to seek his friend in the crowded region of 
 Bellamy 's . 

 Harley 's eye , as he pass along the bridge , be attract by a still 
 form , seat on the stone in one of the nook , with its face cover 
 by its hand . " if I be a sculptor , " say he to himself , " I 
 should remember that image whenever I wish to convey the idea of 
 Despondency ! " he lift his look and see , a little before he in the 
 midst of the causeway , the firm , erect figure of Audley Egerton . the 
 moonlight be full on the bronzed countenance of the strong public man , 
 with its line of thought and care , and its vigorous but cold expression 
 of intense self - control . 

 " and look yonder , " continue Harley 's soliloquy , " I should remember 
 that form , when I wish to hew out from the granite the idea of 
 Endurance . " 

 " so you be come , and punctually , " say Egerton , link his arm in 
 Harley 's . 

 HARLEY - " Punctually , of course , for I respect your time , and I will not 
 detain you long . I presume you will speak to - night ? " 

 EGERTON . - " I have speak . " 

 HARLEY   with interest . - " and well , I hope ? " 

 EGERTON . - " with effect , I suppose , for I have be loudly cheer , which 
 do not always happen to I . " 

 HARLEY . - " and that give you pleasure ? " 

 egerton   after a moment 's thought . - " no , not the least . " 

 HARLEY . - " what , then , attach you so much to this life , - constant 
 drudgery , constant warfare , the more pleasurable faculty dormant , all 
 the harsh one arouse , if even its reward   and I take the good of 
 those to be applause   do not please you ? " 

 EGERTON . - " what ? Custom . " 

 HARLEY . - " Martyr . " 

 EGERTON . - " you say it : but turn to yourself ; you have decide , then , to 
 leave England next week ? " 

 HARLEY   moodily . - " yes . this life in a capital , where all be so 
 active , myself so objectless , prey on I like a low fever . nothing here 
 amuse I , nothing interest , nothing comfort and console . but I be 
 resolve , before it be too late , to make one great struggle out of the 
 Past , and into the natural world of man . in a word , I have resolve to 
 marry . " 

 EGERTON . - " whom ? " 

 HARLEY   seriously . - " upon my life , my dear fellow , you be a great 
 philosopher . you have hit the exact question . you see I can not marry a 
 dream ; and where , out of dream , shall I find this ' whom ' ? " 

 EGERTON . - " you do not search for she . " 

 HARLEY . " do we ever search for love ? do it not flash upon we when we 
 least expect it ? be it not like the inspiration to the muse ? what poet 
 sit down and say , ' I will write a poem ' ? what man look out and say , 
 ' I will fall in love ' ? no ! happiness , as the great German tell we , 
 ' fall suddenly from the bosom of the god ; ' so do love . " 

 EGERTON . - " you remember the old line in Horace : ' the tide flow away 
 while the boor sit on the margin and wait for the ford . ' " 

 harlev . - " an idea which incidentally drop from you some week ago , 
 and which I have before half - meditate , have since haunt I . if I could 
 but find some child with sweet disposition and fair intellect not yet 
 form , and train she up accord to my ideal . I be still young enough 
 to wait a few year . and meanwhile I shall have gain what I so sadly 
 want , - an object in life . " 

 EGERTON . - " you be ever the child of romance . but what - " 

 here the minister be interrupt by a messenger from the House of 
 Commons , whom Audley have instruct to seek he on the bridge should his 
 presence be require . " Sir , the opposition be take advantage of the 
 thinness of the House to call for a division . Mr. - - - be put up to 
 speak for time , but they will not   hear he . " 

 Egerton turn hastily to Lord L'Estrange . " you see , you must excuse I 
 now . to - morrow I must go to Windsor for two day : but we shall meet on 
 my return . " 

 " it do not matter , " answer Harley ; " I stand out of the pale of 
 your advice , o practical man of sense . and if , " add Harley , with 
 affectionate and mournful sweetness , - " if I weary you with complaint 
 which you can not understand , it be only because of old schoolboy habit . 
 I can have no trouble that I do not confide to you . " 

 Egerton 's hand tremble as it press his friend 's , and without a word , 
 he hurry away abruptly . Harley remain motionless for some second , 
 in deep and quiet revery ; then he call to his dog , and turn back 
 towards Westminster . 

 he pass the nook in which have sit the still figure of Despondency ; but 
 the figure have now rise , and be lean against the balustrade . the 
 dog , who precede his master , pass by the solitary form and sniff it 
 suspiciously . 

 " Nero , sir , come here , " say Harley . 

 " Nero , " - that be the name by which Helen have say that her father 's 
 friend have call his dog ; and the sound startle Leonard as he 
 lean , sick at heart , against the stone . he lift his head and look 
 wistfully , eagerly into Harley 's face . those eye , bright , clear , yet so 
 strangely deep and absent , which Helen have describe , meet his own , and 
 chain they . for L'Estrange halt also ; the boy 's countenance be not 
 unfamiliar to he . he return the inquire look fix on his own , and 
 recognize the student by the bookstall . 

 " the dog be quite harmless , sir , " say L'Estrange , with a smile . 

 " and you call he ' nero ' ? " say Leonard , still gaze on the stranger . 

 Harley mistake the drift of the question . 

 " Nero , sir ; but he be free from the sanguinary propensity of his roman 
 namesake . " Harley be about to pass on , when Leonard say falteringly , 

 " pardon I , but can it be possible that you be one whom I have seek 
 in vain on behalf of the child of Captain Digby ? " 

 Harley stop short . " Digby ! " he exclaim , " where be he ? he should 
 have find I easily . I give he an address . " 

 " ah , Heaven be thank ! " cry Leonard . " Helen be save - she will not 
 die , " and he burst into tear . 

 a very few moment and a very few word suffice to explain to Harley 
 the state of his old fellow - soldier 's orphan . and Harley himself soon 
 stand in the young sufferer 's room , support her burn temple on 
 his breast , and whisper into ear that hear he as in a happy dream , 
 " Comfort , comfort ; your father yet live in I . " 

 and then Helen , raise her eye , say , " but Leonard be my brother - more 
 than brother - and he need a father 's care more than I do . " 

 " hush , hush , Helen . I need no one , nothing now ! " cry Leonard , and his 
 tear gush over the little hand that clasp his own . 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 Harley L'Estrange be a man whom all thing that belong to the romantic 
 and poetic side of our human life deeply impressed . when he come to 
 learn the tie between these two child of Nature , stand side by 
 side , alone amidst the storm of fate , his heart be more deeply move 
 than it have be for many year . in those dreary attic , overshadow 
 by the smoke and reek of the humble suburb , the workday world in its 
 harsh and tritest form below and around they , he recognize that 
 divine poem which come out from all union between the mind and the 
 heart . here , on the rough deal table   the ink scarcely dry , lie the 
 writing of the young wrestler for fame and bread ; there , on the 
 other side of the partition , on that mean pallet , lie the boy 's sole 
 comforter , the all that warm his heart with live mortal affection . 
 on one side the wall , the world of imagination ; on the other , this world 
 of grief and of love . and in both , a spirit equally sublime , - unselfish 
 devotion , - " the something afar from the sphere of our sorrow . " 

 he look round the room into which he have follow Leonard , on quit 
 Helen 's bedside . he note the manuscript on the table , and point to 
 they , say gently , " and these be the labour by which you support the 
 soldier 's orphan ? - soldier yourself in a hard battle ! " 

 " the battle be lose , - I could not support she , " reply Leonard , 
 mournfully . 

 " but you do not desert she . when Pandora 's box be open , they say 
 Hope linger last - " 

 " false , false , " say Leonard ; " a heathen 's notion . there be deity 
 that linger behind Hope , - Gratitude , Love , and Duty . " 

 " yours be no common nature , " exclaim Harley , admiringly , " but I must 
 sound it more deeply hereafter : at present I hasten for the physician ; I 
 shall return with he . we must move that poor child from this low close 
 air as soon as possible . meanwhile , let I qualify your rejection of the 
 old fable . Wherever Gratitude , Love , and Duty remain to man , believe I 
 that Hope be there too , though she may be often invisible , hide behind 
 the shelter wing of the nobler deity . " 

 Harley say this with that wondrous smile of his , which cast a 
 brightness over the whole room , and go away . Leonard steal softly 
 towards the grimy window ; and look up towards the star that shine 
 pale over the roof - top , he murmur , " o Thou , the all - seeing and 
 all - merciful ! how it comfort I now to think that , though my dream of 
 knowledge may have sometimes obscure the heaven , I never doubt that 
 Thou wert there ! as luminous and everlasting , though behind the cloud ! " 
 so , for a few minute , he pray silently , then pass into Helen 's 
 room , and sit beside her motionless , for she sleep . she wake just as 
 Harley return with a physician ; and then Leonard , return to his own 
 room , see amongst his paper the letter he have write to Mr. Dale , and 
 muttering , " I need not disgrace my calling , - I need not be the mendicant 
 now " - hold the letter to the flame of the candle . and while he say 
 this , and as the burn tinder drop on the floor , the sharp hunger , 
 unfelt during his late anxious emotion , gnaw at his entrail . still , 
 even hunger could not reach that noble pride which have yield to 
 a sentiment nobler than itself , and he smile as he repeat , " no 
 mendicant ! - the life that I be swear to guard be save . I can raise 
 against Fate the front of Man once more . " 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

 a few day afterwards , and Helen , remove to a pure air , and under the 
 advice of the first physician , be out of all danger . 

 it be a pretty detached cottage , with its window look over the wild 
 heath of Norwood , to which Harley ride daily to watch the convalescence 
 of his young charge : an object in life be already find . as she grow 
 well and strong , he coax she easily into talking , and listen 
 to she with pleased surprise . the heart so infantine and the sense so 
 womanly strike he much by its rare contrast and combination . Leonard , 
 whom he have insist on place also in the cottage , have stay there 
 willingly till Helen 's recovery be beyond question . then he come to 
 Lord L'Estrange , as the latter be about one day to leave the cottage , 
 and say quietly , " now , my Lord , that Helen be safe , and now that she 
 will need I no more , I can no long be a pensioner on your bounty . I 
 return to London . " 

 " you be my visitor , not my pensioner , foolish boy , " say Harley , who 
 have already notice the pride which speak in that farewell ; " come into 
 the garden and let we talk . " 

 Harley seat himself on a bench on the little lawn ; Nero crouch at 
 his foot ; Leonard stand beside he . 

 " so , " say Lord L'Estrange , " you would return to London ? what to do ? " 

 " Fulfil my fate . " 

 " and that ? " 

 " I can not guess . Fate be the isis whose veil no mortal can ever raise . " 

 " you should be bear for great thing , " say Harley , abruptly . " I be sure 
 that you write well . I have see that you study with passion . well 
 than write and well than study , you have a noble heart , and the 
 proud desire of independence . let I see your manuscript , or any copy 
 of what you have already print . do not hesitate , - I ask but to be a 
 reader . I do not   pretend to be a patron : it be a word I hate . " 

 Leonard 's eye sparkle through their sudden moisture . he bring out 
 his portfolio , place it on the bench beside Harley , and then go 
 softly to the farther part of the garden . Nero look after he , and 
 then rise and follow he slowly . the boy seat himself on the turf , 
 and Nero rest his dull head on the loud heart of the poet . 

 Harley take up the various paper before he , and read they through 
 leisurely . certainly he be no critic . he be not accustomed to analyze 
 what please or displease he ; but his perception be quick , and 
 his taste exquisite . as he read , his countenance , always so genuinely 
 expressive , exhibit now doubt and now admiration . he be soon strike 
 by the contrast , in the boy 's writing , between the piece that sport 
 with fancy and those that grapple with thought . in the first , the young 
 poet seem so unconscious of his own individuality . his imagination , 
 afar and aloft from the scene of his suffering , run riot amidst a 
 paradise of happy golden creation . but in the last , the THINKER stand 
 out alone and mournful , question , in troubled sorrow , the hard world 
 on which he gaze . all in the thought be unsettled , tumultuous ; all 
 in the fancy serene and peaceful . the genius seem divide into twain 
 shape , - the one bath its wing amidst the starry dew of heaven ; 
 the other wandering , " melancholy , slow , " amidst desolate and boundless 
 sand . Harley gently lay down the paper and muse a little while . then 
 he rise and walk to Leonard , gaze on his countenance as he near 
 the boy , with a new and a deep interest . 

 " I have read your paper , " he say , " and recognize in they two man , 
 belong to two world , essentially distinct . " Leonard start , and 
 murmur , " true , true ! " 

 " I apprehend , " resume Harley , " that one of these man must either 
 destroy the other , or that the two must become fuse and harmonize into 
 a single existence . get your hat , mount my groom 's horse , and come with 
 I to London ; we will converse by the way . look you , I believe you and 
 I agree in this , - that the first object of every noble spirit be 
 independence . it be towards this independence that I alone presume to 
 assist you , and this be a service which the proud man can receive 
 without a blush . " 

 Leonard lift his eye towards Harley 's , and those eye swam with 
 grateful tear ; but his heart be too full to answer . " I be not one of 
 those , " say Harley , when they be on the road , " who think that because 
 a young man write poetry he be fit for nothing else , and that he must 
 be a poet or a pauper . I have say that in you there seem to I to be 
 two man , - the man of the actual world , the man of the Ideal . to each of 
 these man I can offer a separate career . the first be perhaps the more 
 tempting . it be the interest of the State to draw into its service all 
 the talent and industry it can obtain ; and under his native State every 
 citizen of a free country should be proud to take service . I have a 
 friend who be a minister , and who be know to encourage talent , - Audley 
 Egerton . I have but to say to he , ' there be a young man who will repay 
 the government whatever the government bestow on he ; ' and you will 
 rise to - morrow independent in mean , and with fair occasion to attain 
 to fortune and distinction . this be one offer , - what say you to it ? " 

 Leonard think bitterly of his interview with Audley Egerton , and the 
 minister 's proffered crown - piece . he shake his head , and reply , 

 " oh , my Lord , how have I deserve such kindness ? do with I what you 
 will ; but if I have the option , I would rather follow my own calling . 
 this be not the ambition that inflame I . " 

 " hear , then , the other offer . I have a friend with whom I be less 
 intimate than Egerton , and who have nothing in his gift to bestow . I 
 speak of a man of letter , - Henry Norreys , - of whom you have doubtless 
 heard , who , I should say , conceive an interest in you when he observe 
 you read at the bookstall . I have often hear he say that literature 
 as a profession be misunderstood , and that rightly follow , with the 
 same pain and the same prudence which be bring to bear on other 
 profession , a competence at least can be always ultimately obtain . 
 but the way may be long and tedious , and it lead to no power but over 
 thought ; it rarely attain to wealth ; and though reputation may be 
 certain , fame , such as poet dream of , be the lot of few . what say you 
 to this course ? " 

 " my Lord , I decide , " say Leonard , firmly ; and then , his young face 
 light up with enthusiasm , he exclaim , " yes , if , as you say , 
 there be two man within I , I feel that be I condemn wholly to the 
 mechanical and practical world , one would indeed destroy the other . and 
 the conqueror would be the ruder and the coarser . let I pursue those 
 idea that , though they have but flit across I , vague and formless , 
 have ever soar towards the sunlight . no matter whether or not 
 they lead to fortune or to fame , - at least they will lead I upward ! 
 knowledge for itself I desire ; what care I if it be not power ! " 

 " enough , " say Harley , with a pleased smile at his young companion 's 
 outburst . " as you decide so shall it be settle . and now permit I , 
 if not impertinent , to ask you a few question . your name be Leonard 
 Fairfield ? " 

 the boy blush deeply , and bow his head as if in assent . 

 " Helen say you be self - teach ; for the rest she refer I to 
 you , - thinking , perhaps , that I should esteem you less - rather than yet 
 more highly - if she say you be , as I presume to conjecture , of humble 
 birth . " 

 " my birth , " say Leonard , slowly , " be very - very - humble . " 

 " the name of Fairfield be not unknown to I . there be one of that name 
 who marry into a family in Lansmere , marry an avenel , " continue 
 Harley , and his voice quiver . " you change countenance . oh , could your 
 mother 's name have be Avenel ? " 

 " yes , " say Leonard , between his set tooth . Harley lay his hand on the 
 boy 's shoulder . " then , indeed , I have a claim on you ; then , indeed , we 
 be friend . I have a right to serve any of that family . " 

 Leonard look at he in surprise - " for , " continue Harley , recover 
 himself , " they always serve my family ; and my recollection of 
 Lansmere , though boyish , be indelible . " he spur on his horse as 
 the word close , and again there be a long pause ; but from that time 
 Harley always speak to Leonard in a soft voice , and often gaze on he 
 with earnest and kindly eye . 

 they reach a house in a central , though not fashionable street . a 
 man - servant of a singularly grave and awful aspect open the door , - a 
 man who have live all his life with author . poor fellow , he be indeed 
 prematurely old ! the care on his lip and the pomp on his brow - no 
 mortal 's pen can describe ! 

 " be Mr. Norreys at home ? " ask Harley . 

 " he be at home - to his friend , my Lord , " answer the man , 
 majestically ; and he stalk across the hall with the step of a Dangeau 
 usher some Montmorenci into the presence of Louis le Grand . 

 " stay ; show this gentleman into another room . I will go first into the 
 library ; wait for I , Leonard . " the man nod , and conduct Leonard 
 into the dining - room . then pause before the door of the library , and 
 listen an instant , as if fearful to disturb some mood of inspiration , 
 open it very softly . to his ineffable disgust , Harley push before , 
 and enter abruptly . it be a large room , line with book from the 
 floor to the ceiling . book be on all the table , book be on all 
 the chair . Harley seat himself on a folio of Raleigh 's " history of 
 the World , " and cry , " I have bring you a treasure ! " 

 " what be it ? " say Norreys , good - humouredly , look up from his desk . 

 " a mind ! " 

 " a mind ! " echo Norreys , vaguely . 

 " your own ? " 

 " Pooh ! I have none , - I have only a heart and a fancy . listen . you 
 remember the boy we see read at the book stall . I have catch he for 
 you , and you shall train he into a man . I have the warm interest in 
 his future , for I know some of his family , and one of that family be 
 very dear to I . as for money , he have not a shilling , and not a shilling 
 would he accept gratis from you or I either . but he come with bold 
 heart to work , - and work you must find he . " Harley then rapidly tell 
 his friend of the two offer he have make to Leonard , and Leonard 's 
 choice . 

 " this promise very well ; for letter a man must have a strong vocation , 
 as he should have for law . I will do all that you wish . " 

 Harley rise with alertness , shake Norreys cordially by the hand , hurry 
 out of the room , and return with Leonard . 

 Mr. Norreys eye the young man with attention . he be naturally rather 
 severe than cordial in his manner to stranger , - contrast in this , as 
 in most thing , the poor vagabond Burley ; but he be a good judge of the 
 human countenance , and he like Leonard 's . after a pause he hold out his 
 hand . 

 " Sir , " say he , " Lord L'Estrange tell I that you wish to enter 
 literature as a calling , and no doubt to study it as an art . I may help 
 you in this , and you meanwhile can help I . I want an amanuensis , - I 
 offer you that place . the salary will be proportion to the service 
 you will render I . I have a room in my house at your disposal . when 
 I first come up to London , I make the same choice that I hear you have 
 do . I have no cause , even in a worldly point of view , to repent my 
 choice . it give I an income large than my want . I trace my success 
 to these maxim , which be applicable to all profession : 1st , never 
 to trust to genius for what can be obtain by labour ; 2dly , never to 
 profess to teach what we have not study to understand ; 3dly , never to 
 engage our word to what we do not our good to execute . 

 " with these rule , literature - provide a man do not mistake his 
 vocation for it , and will , under good advice , go through the preliminary 
 discipline of natural power , which all vocation require - be as good a 
 call as any other . without they , a shoeblack 's be infinitely well . " 

 " possibly enough , " mutter Harley ; " but there have be great writer 
 who observe none of your maxim . " 

 " great writer , probably , but very unenviable man . my Lord , my Lord , 
 do not   corrupt the pupil you bring to I . " Harley smile , and take his 
 departure , and leave Genius at school with Common - sense and experience . 




 CHAPTER XX . 

 while Leonard Fairfield have be obscurely wrestle against poverty , 
 neglect , hunger , and dread temptation , bright have be the opening day 
 and smooth the upward path of Randal Leslie . certainly no young 
 man , able and ambitious , could enter life under fairer auspex ; the 
 connection and avow favourite of a popular and energetic statesman , 
 the brilliant writer of a political work that have lift he at once 
 into a station of his own , receive and court in those high 
 circle , to which neither rank nor fortune alone suffice for a familiar 
 passport , - the circle above fashion itself the circle of power , - with 
 every facility of augment information , and learn the world betime 
 through the talk of its acknowledge master , - randal have but to move 
 straight onward , and success be sure . but his tortuous spirit delight 
 in scheme and intrigue for their own sake . in scheme and intrigue he see 
 short path to fortune , if not to fame . 

 his besetting sin be also his besetting weakness . he do not 
 aspire , - he covet . though in a far high social position than Frank 
 Hazeldean , despite the worldly prospect of his old schoolfellow , he 
 covet the very thing that keep Frank Hazeldean below he , - covet 
 his idle gayetie , his careless pleasure , his very waste of youth . 
 thus , also , Randal less aspire to Audley Egerton 's repute than he 
 covet Audley Egerton 's wealth and pomp , his princely expenditure , and 
 his Castle Rackrent in Grosvenor Square . it be the misfortune of his 
 birth to be so near to both these fortune , - near to that of Leslie , as 
 the future head of that fallen House ; near even to that of Hazeldean , 
 since , as we have see before , if the squire have have no son , Randal 's 
 descent from the Hazeldeans suggest himself as the one on whom these 
 broad land should devolve . Most young man bring into intimate contact 
 with Audley Egerton would have feel for that personage a certain loyal 
 and admire , if not very affectionate , respect . for there be something 
 grand in Egerton , - something that command and fascinate the young . 
 his determined courage , his energetic will , his almost regal liberality , 
 contrast a simplicity in personal taste and habit that be almost 
 austere , his rare and seemingly unconscious power of charming even the 
 woman most weary of homage , and persuade even the man most obdurate 
 to counsel , - all serve to invest the practical man with those spell 
 which be usually confine to the ideal one . but , indeed , Audley 
 Egerton be an Ideal , - the ideal of the Practical . not the mere vulgar , 
 plodding , red - tape machine of petty business , but the man of strong 
 sense , inspire by inflexible energy and guide to definite earthly 
 object . in a dissolute and corrupt form of government , under a decrepit 
 monarchy or a vitiated republic , Audley Egerton might have be a most 
 dangerous citizen : for his ambition be so resolute , and his sight to 
 its end be so clear . but there be something in public life in England 
 which compel the really ambitious man to honour , unless his eye be 
 jaundice and oblique , like Randal Leslie 's . it be so necessary in 
 England to be a gentleman . and thus Egerton be emphatically consider 
 a gentleman . without the least pride in other matter , with little 
 apparent sensitiveness , touch he on the point of gentleman , and no one 
 so sensitive and so proud . as Randal see more of he , and watch his 
 mood with the lynx - eye of the household spy , he could perceive that 
 this hard mechanical man be subject to fit of melancholy , even of 
 gloom ; and though they do not last long , there be even in his habitual 
 coldness an evidence of something compress , latent , painful , lie 
 deep within his memory . this would have interest the kindly feeling 
 of a grateful heart ; but Randal detect and watch it only as a clew 
 to some secret it might profit he to gain . for Randal Leslie hat 
 Egerton ; and hat he the more because , with all his book - knowledge and 
 his conceit in his own talent , he could not despise his patron ; 
 because he have not yet succeed in make his patron the mere tool or 
 step - stone ; because he think that Egerton 's keen eye see through 
 his wily heart , even while , as if in profound disdain , the minister 
 help the protege . but this last suspicion be unsound . Egerton have not 
 detect Leslie 's corrupt and treacherous nature . he might have other 
 reason for keep he at a certain distance , but he inquire 
 too little into Randal 's feeling towards himself to question the 
 attachment , or doubt the sincerity , of one who owe to he so much . but 
 that which more than all embitter Randal 's feeling towards Egerton 
 be the careful and deliberate frankness with which the latter have , more 
 than once , repeat and enforce the odious announcement , that Randal 
 have nothing to expect from the minister 's WILL , nothing to expect from 
 that wealth which glare in the hungry eye of the pauper heir to 
 the Leslies of Rood . to whom , then , could Egerton mean to devise his 
 fortune ? to whom but Frank Hazeldean ? yet Audley take so little notice 
 of his nephew , seem so indifferent to he , that that supposition , 
 however natural , be expose to doubt . the astuteness of Randal be 
 perplexed . meanwhile , however , the less he himself could rely upon 
 Egerton for fortune , the more he revolve the possible chance of 
 oust Frank from the inheritance of Hazeldean , - in part , at least , if 
 not wholly . to one less scheming , crafty , and remorseless than randal 
 Leslie , such a project would have seem the wild delusion . but there 
 be something fearful in the manner in which this young man seek to 
 turn knowledge into power , and make the study of all weakness in other 
 subservient to his own end . he worm himself thoroughly into Frank 's 
 confidence . he learn , through Frank , all the squire 's peculiarity of 
 thought and temper , and ponder over each word in the father 's letter , 
 which the son gradually get into the habit of show to the perfidious 
 eye of his friend . randal see that the squire have two characteristic , 
 which be very common amongst proprietor , and which might be invoke as 
 antagonist to his warm fatherly love . first , the squire be as fond of 
 his estate as if it be a living thing , and part of his own flesh and 
 blood ; and in his lecture to Frank upon the sin of extravagance , the 
 squire always let out this foible , - " what be to become of the estate 
 if it fall into the hand of a spendthrift ? no man should make duck 
 and drake of Hazeldean ; let Frank beware of that , " etc . secondly , the 
 squire be not only fond of his land , but he be jealous of they , - that 
 jealousy which even the tender father sometimes entertain towards 
 their natural heir . he could not bear the notion that Frank should 
 count on his death ; and he seldom close an admonitory letter without 
 repeat the information that Hazeldean be not entail ; that it be 
 his to do with as he please through life and in death . indirect menace 
 of this nature rather wound and gall than intimidate Frank ; for the 
 young man be extremely generous and high - spirited by nature , and be 
 always more disposed to some indiscretion after such warning to his 
 self - interest , as if to show that those be the last kind of appeal 
 likely to influence he . by the help of such insight into the character 
 of father and son , randal think he see gleam of daylight illumine 
 his own chance to the land of Hazeldean . meanwhile , it appear to he 
 obvious that , come what might of it , his own interest could not lose , 
 and might most probably gain , by whatever could alienate the squire 
 from his natural heir . accordingly , though with consummate tact , he 
 instigate Frank towards the very excess most calculate to irritate 
 the squire , all the while appear rather to give the counter advice , 
 and never share in any of the folly to which he conduct 
 his thoughtless friend . in this he work chiefly through other , 
 introduce Frank to every acquaintance most dangerous to youth , either 
 from the wit that laugh at prudence , or the spurious magnificence 
 that subsist so handsomely upon bill endorse by friend of " great 
 expectation . " 

 the minister and his protege be seat at breakfast , the first reading 
 the newspaper , the last glancing over his letter ; for Randal have 
 arrive to the dignity of receive many letter , - ay , and note , 
 too , three - cornered and fantastically emboss . Egerton utter an 
 exclamation , and lay down the newspaper . randal look up from his 
 correspondence . the minister have sink into one of his absent revery . 

 after a long silence , observe that Egerton do not return to the 
 newspaper , Randal say , " Ahem , sir , I have a note from Frank Hazeldean , 
 who want much to see I ; his father have arrive in town unexpectedly . " 

 " what bring he here ? " ask Egerton , still abstractedly . " why , it 
 seem that he have hear some vague report of poor Frank 's extravagance , 
 and Frank be rather afraid or ashamed to meet he . " 

 " ay , a very great fault , extravagance in the young ! - destroy 
 independence ; ruin or enslave the future . great fault , - very ! and what 
 do youth want that it should be extravagant ? have it not everything in 
 itself , merely because it be ? youth be youth - what need it more ? " 

 Egerton rise as he say this , and retire to his writing - table , and in 
 his turn open his correspondence . randal take up the newspaper , and 
 endeavour , but in vain , to conjecture what have excite the minister 's 
 exclamation and the revery that succeed it . 

 Egerton suddenly and sharply turn round in his chair - " if you have 
 do with the ' Times , ' have the goodness to place it here . " 

 Randal have just obey , when a knock at the street - door be hear , and 
 presently Lord L'Estrange come into the room , with somewhat a quicker 
 step and somewhat a gayer mien than usual . 

 Audley 's hand , as if mechanically , fall upon the newspaper , - fall upon 
 that part of the column devote to birth , death , and marriage . 
 Randal stand by , and note ; then , bow to L'Estrange , leave the room . 

 " Audley , " say L'Estrange , " I have have an adventure since I see you , - an 
 adventure that reopen the Past , and may influence my future . " 

 " how ? " 

 " in the first place , I have meet with a relation of - of - the Avenels . " 

 " indeed ! whom , - Richard Avenel ? " 

 " Richard - Richard - who be he ? oh , I remember , the wild lad who go off 
 to America ; but that be when I be a mere child . " 

 " that Richard Avenel be now a rich , thriving trader , and his marriage be 
 in this newspaper , - marry to an Honourable Mrs. M'Catchley . well , in 
 this country who should plume himself on birth ? " 

 " you do not say so always , Egerton , " reply Harley , with a tone of 
 mournful reproach . 

 " and I say so now pertinently to a Mrs. M'Catchley , not to the heir of 
 the L'Estranges . but no more of these - these Avenels . " 

 " yes , more of they . I tell you I have meet a relation of theirs - a nephew 
 of - of - " 

 " of Richard Avenel 's ? " interrupt Egerton ; and then add in the slow , 
 deliberate , argumentative tone in which he be will not to speak in public , 
 " Richard Avenel the trader ! I see he once , - a presuming and intolerable 
 man ! " 

 " the nephew have not those sin . he be full of promise , of modesty , yet 
 of pride . and his countenance - oh , Egerton , he have her eye . " 

 Egerton make no answer , and Harley resume , 

 " I have think of place he under your care . I know you would provide 
 for he . " 

 " I will . bring he hither , " cry Egerton , eagerly . " all that I can do 
 to prove my - regard for a wish of your . " Harley press his friend 's 
 hand warmly . 

 " I thank you from my heart ; the Audley of my boyhood speak now . but the 
 young man have decide otherwise ; and I do not blame he . Nay , I rejoice 
 that he choose a career in which , if he find hardship , he may escape 
 dependence . " 

 " and that career be - " 

 " letter . " 

 " letter ! literature ! " exclaim the statesman . " Beggary ! no , no , 
 Harley , this be your absurd romance . " 

 " it will not be beggary , and it be not my romance : it be the boy 's . 
 leave he alone , he be my care and my charge henceforth . he be of her 
 blood , and I say that he have her eye . " 

 " but you be go abroad ; let I know where he be ; I will watch over 
 he . " 

 " and unsettle a right ambition for a wrong one ? no , you shall know 
 nothing of he till he can proclaim himself . I think that day will 
 come . " 

 Audley muse a moment , and then say , " well , perhaps you be right . 
 after all , as you say , independence be a great blessing , and my ambition 
 have not render myself the well or the happy . " 

 " yet , my poor Audley , you ask I to be ambitious . " 

 " I only wish you to be console , " cry Egerton , with passion . 

 " I will try to be so ; and by the help of a milder remedy than your . 
 I say that my adventure might influence my future ; it bring I 
 acquaint not only with the young man I speak of , but the most win , 
 affectionate child , - a girl . " 

 " be this child an Avenel too ? " 

 " no , she be of gentle blood , - a soldier 's daughter ; the daughter of that 
 Captain Digby on whose behalf I be a petitioner to your patronage . he 
 be dead , and in die , my name be on his lip . he mean I , doubtless , 
 to be the guardian to his orphan . I shall be so . I have at last an 
 object in life . " 

 " but can you seriously mean to take this child with you abroad ? " 

 " seriously , I do . " 

 " and lodge she in your own house ? " 

 " for a year or so , while she be yet a child . then , as she approach 
 youth , I shall place she elsewhere . " 

 " you may grow to love she . be it clear that she will love you , - not 
 mistake gratitude for love ? it be a very hazardous experiment . " 

 " so be William the Norman 's , - still he be William the Conqueror . Thou 
 bidd I move on from the past , and be console , yet thou wouldst make 
 I as inapt to progress as the mule in Slawkenbergius 's tale , with thy 
 curse interlocution , ' stumble , by Saint Nicholas , every step . 
 why , at this rate , we shall be all night in get into ' - HAPPINESS ! 
 listen , " continue Harley , set off , full pelt , into one of his wild 
 whimsical humour . " one of the son of the prophet in Israel felling 
 wood near the river Jordan , his hatchet forsook the helve , and fall to 
 the bottom of the river ; so he pray to have it again   it be but a 
 small request , mark you ; and have a strong faith , he do not throw 
 the hatchet after the helve , but the helve after the hatchet . presently 
 two great miracle be see . up spring the hatchet from the bottom of 
 the water , and fix itself to its old acquaintance , the helve . now , have 
 he wish to coach it up to heaven in a fiery chariot like Elias , be as 
 rich as Job , strong as Samson , and beautiful as Absalom , would he have 
 obtain the wish , do you think ? in truth , my friend , I question it very 
 much . " 

 " I can not   comprehend what you mean . sad stuff you be talk . " 

 " I can not help that ; ' Rabelais be to be blame for it . I be quote he , 
 and it be to be find in his Prologue to the Chapters on the ' moderation 
 of Wishes . ' and a propos of ' moderate wish in point of hatchet , ' I 
 want you to understand that I ask but little from Heaven . I fling but 
 the helve after the hatchet that have sink into the silent stream . I want 
 the other half of the weapon that be bury fathom deep , and for want 
 of which the thick wood darken round I by the Sacred River , and I can 
 catch not a glimpse of the star . " 

 " in plain English , " say Audley Egerton , " you want - " he stop short , 
 puzzle . 

 " I want my purpose and my will , and my old character , and the nature 
 God give I . I want the half of my soul which have fall from I . I want 
 such love as may replace to I the vanish affection . reason not , - I 
 throw the helve after the hatchet . " 




 CHAPTER XXI . 

 Randal Leslie , on leave Audley , repair to Frank 's lodging , and 
 after be closet with the young Guardsman an hour or so , take his 
 way to Limmer 's hotel , and ask for Mr. Hazeldean . he be show into 
 the coffee - room , while the waiter go up - stair with his card , to see 
 if the squire be within , and disengage . the " Times " newspaper lie 
 sprawl on one of the table , and Randal , lean over it , look with 
 attention into the column contain birth , death , and marriage . but 
 in that long and miscellaneous list he could not conjecture the name 
 which have so excite Mr. Egerton 's interest . 

 " vexatious ! " he mutter ; " there be no knowledge which have power more 
 useful than that of the secret of man . " 

 he turn as the waiter enter and say that Mr. Hazeldean would be 
 glad to see he . 

 as Randal enter the drawing - room , the squire , shake hand with he , 
 look towards the door as if expect some one else ; and his honest 
 face assume a blank expression of disappointment , when the door close , 
 and he find that Randal be unaccompanie . 

 " well , " say he , bluntly , " I think your old schoolfellow , Frank , might 
 have be with you . " 

 " have you not see he yet , sir ? " 

 " no , I come to town this morning ; travel outside the mail ; send 
 to his barrack , but the young gentleman do not sleep there , have an 
 apartment of his own ; he never tell I that . we be a plain family , the 
 Hazeldeans , young sir ; and I hate be keep in the dark , - by my own 
 son , too . " 

 Randal make no answer , but look sorrowful . the squire , who have never 
 before see his kinsman , have a vague idea that it be not polite to 
 entertain a stranger , though a connection to himself , with his family 
 trouble , and so resume good - naturedly , " I be very glad to make your 
 acquaintance at last , Mr. Leslie . you know , I hope , that you have good 
 hazeldean blood in your vein ? " 

 randal   smile . - " I be not likely to forget that ; it be the boast of 
 our pedigree . " 

 SQUIRE   heartily . - " shake hand again on it , my boy . you do not   want a 
 friend , since my grandee of a half - brother have take you up ; but if ever 
 you should , Hazeldean be not very far from Rood . can not   get on with your 
 father at all , my lad , - more be the pity , for I think I could have give 
 he a hint or two as to the improvement of his property . if he would 
 plant those ugly commons - larch and fir soon come into profit , sir ; and 
 there be some low land about Rood that would take mighty kindly to 
 drain . " 

 RANDAL . - " my poor father live a life so retired - and you can not wonder 
 at it . fall tree lie still , and so do fall family . " 

 SQUIRE . - " fall family can get up again , which fall tree can not . " 

 RANDAL . - " ah , sir , it often take the energy of generation to repair 
 the thriftlessness and extravagance of a single owner . " 

 SQUIRE   his brow lower . - " that be very true . Frank be d - -d 
 extravagant ; treat I very coolly , too - not come ; near three o'clock . 
 by the by , I suppose he tell you where I be , otherwise how do you find 
 I out ? " 

 RANDAL   reluctantly . - " Sir , he do ; and to speak frankly , I be not 
 surprised that he have not yet appear . " 

 SQUIRE . - " eh ! " 

 RANDAL . - " we have grow very intimate . " 

 SQUIRE . - " so he write I word , - and I be glad of it . our member , Sir 
 John , tell I you be a very clever fellow , and a very steady one . and 
 Frank say that he wish he have your prudence , if he can not   have your 
 talent . he have a good heart , Frank , " add the father , relentingly . " but 
 zound , sir , you say you be not surprised he have not come to welcome 
 his own father ! " 

 " my dear sir , " say Randal , " you write word to Frank that you have 
 hear from Sir John and other of his going - on , and that you be not 
 satisfied with his reply to your letter . " 

 " well . " 

 " and then you suddenly come up to town . " 

 " well . " 

 " well . and Frank be ashamed to meet you . for , as you say , he have be 
 extravagant , and he have exceed his allowance ; and know my respect 
 for you and my great affection for himself , he have ask I to prepare 
 you to receive his confession and forgive he . I know I be take a 
 great liberty . I have no right to interfere between father and son ; but 
 pray - pray think I mean for the good . " 

 " Humph ! " say the squire , recover himself very slowly , and show 
 evident pain , " I know already that Frank have spend more than he ought ; 
 but I think he should not have employ a third person to prepare I to 
 forgive he .   excuse I , - no offence .   and if he want a third person , 
 be not there his own mother ? what the devil !   fire up   be I a tyrant , 
 a bashaw , that my own son be afraid to speak to I ? ' Gad , I will give it 
 he ! " 

 " Pardon I , sir , " say Randal , assume at once that air of authority 
 which superior intellect so well carry off and excuse , " but I 
 strongly advise you not to express any anger at Frank 's confidence in 
 I . at present I have influence over he . whatever you may think of his 
 extravagance , I have save he from many an indiscretion , and many 
 a debt , - a young man will listen to one of his own age so much more 
 readily than even to the kind friend of graver year . indeed , sir , I 
 speak for your sake as well as for Frank 's . let I keep this influence 
 over he ; and do not   reproach he for the confidence place in I . Nay , 
 let he rather think that I have soften any displeasure you might 
 otherwise have feel . " 

 there seem so much good sense in what Randal say , and the kindness 
 of it seem so disinterested , that the squire 's native shrewdness be 
 deceive . 

 " you be a fine young fellow , " say he , " and I be very much oblige to 
 you . well , I suppose there be no put old head upon young shoulder ; 
 and I promise you I will not say an angry word to Frank . I dare say , poor 
 boy , he be very much afflict , and I long to shake hand with he . so , 
 set his mind at ease . " 

 " ah , sir , " say Randal , with much apparent emotion , " your son may well 
 love you : and it seem to be a hard matter for so kind a heart as your 
 to preserve the proper firmness with he . " 

 " oh , I can be firm enough , " quoth the squire , - " especially when I do not 
 see he , - handsome dog that he be : very like his mother - do not   you think 
 so ? 

 " I never see his mother , sir . " 

 " ' Gad ! not see my Harry ? no more you have ; you must come and pay we a 
 visit . I suppose my half - brother will let you come ? " 

 " to be sure , sir . will you not call on he while you be in town ? " 

 " not i. he would think I expect to get something from the Government . 
 tell he the minister must go on a little well , if they want my vote 
 for their member . but go , I see you be impatient to tell Frank that all 
 's forgot and forgive . come and dine with he here at six , and let he 
 bring his bill in his pocket . oh , I sha'n't   scold he . " 

 " why , as to that , " say randal , smile , " I think   forgive I still 
 that you should not take it too easily ; just as I think that you have 
 well not blame he for his very natural and praiseworthy shame in 
 approach you , so I think , also , that you should do nothing that would 
 tend to diminish that shame , - it be such a check on he . and therefore , 
 if you can contrive to affect to be angry with he for his extravagance , 
 it will do good . " 

 " you speak like a book , and I will try my good . " 

 " if you threaten , for instance , to take he out of the army , and settle 
 he in the country , it would have a very good effect . " 

 " what ! would he think it so great a punishment to come home and live 
 with his parent ? " 

 " I do not   say that ; but he be naturally so fond of London . at his age , 
 and with his large inheritance , that be natural . " 

 " Inheritance ! " say the squire , moodily , - " inheritance ! he be not 
 think of that , I trust ? Zounds , sir , I have as good a life as his 
 own . Inheritance ! - to be sure the casino property be entail on he ; 
 but as for the rest , sir , I be no tenant for life . I could leave the 
 Hazeldean land to my ploughman , if I choose it . inheritance ; indeed ! " 

 " my dear sir , I do not mean to imply that Frank would entertain the 
 unnatural and monstrous idea of calculate on your death ; and all 
 we have to do be to get he to sow his wild oats as soon as 
 possible , - marry and settle down into the country . for it would be a 
 thousand pity if his town habit and taste grow permanent , - a bad 
 thing for the hazeldean property , that ! and , " add Randal , laugh , 
 " I feel an interest in the old place , since my grandmother come of the 
 stock . so , just force yourself to seem angry , and grumble a little when 
 you pay the bill . " 

 " ah , ah , trust I , " say the squire , doggedly , and with a very altered 
 air . " I be much oblige to you for these hint , my young kinsman . " and 
 his stout hand tremble a little as he extend it to Randal . 

 leave Limmer 's , Randal hasten to Frank 's room in St. James 's 
 Street . " my dear fellow , " say he , when he enter , " it be very 
 fortunate that I persuade you to let I break matter to your father . 
 you might well say he be rather passionate ; but I have contrive to 
 soothe he . you need not fear that he will not pay your debt . " 

 " I never fear that , " say Frank , change colour ; " I only fear his 
 anger . but , indeed , I fear his kindness still more . what a reckless 
 hound I have be ! however , it shall be a lesson to I . and my debt 
 once pay , I will turn as economical as yourself . " 

 " quite right , Frank . and , indeed , I be a little afraid that , when your 
 father know the total , he may execute a threat that would be very 
 unpleasant to you . " 

 " what be that ? " 

 " make you sell out , and give up London . " 

 " the devil ! " exclaim Frank , with fervent emphasis ; " that would be 
 treat I like a child . " 

 " why , it would make you seem rather ridiculous to your set , which be not 
 a very rural one . and you , who like London so much , and be so much the 
 fashion ! " 

 " do not   talk of it , " cry Frank , walk to and fro the room in great 
 disorder . 

 " perhaps , on the whole , it might be well not to say all you owe , at 
 once . if you name half the sum , your father would let you off with a 
 lecture ; and really I tremble at the effect of the total . " 

 " but how shall I pay the other half ? " 

 " oh , you must save from your allowance ; it be a very liberal one ; and 
 the tradesman be not press . " 

 " no ; but the curse bill - broker - " 

 " always renew to a young man of your expectation . and if I get into an 
 office , I can always help you , my dear Frank . " 

 " ah , Randal , I be not so bad as to take advantage of your friendship , " 
 say Frank , warmly . " but it seem to I mean after all , and a sort of a 
 lie , indeed , disguise the real state of my affair . I should not have 
 listen to the idea from any one else ; but you be such a sensible , 
 kind , honourable fellow . " 

 " after epithet so flattering , I shrink from the responsibility of 
 advice . but apart from your own interest , I should be glad to save your 
 father the pain he would feel at know the whole extent of the scrape 
 you have get into . and if it entail on you the necessity to lay 
 by - and give up hazard , and not be security for other man - why , it would 
 be the good thing that could happen . really , too , it seem hard upon Mr. 
 Hazeldean that he should be the only sufferer , and quite just that you 
 should bear half your own burden . " 

 " so it be , randal ; that do not strike I before . I will take your 
 counsel ; and now I will go at once to Limmer 's . my dear father ! I hope 
 he be look well ? " 

 " oh , very . such a contrast to the sallow londoner ! but I think you have 
 well not go till dinner . he have ask I to meet you at six . I will 
 call for you a little before , and we can go together . this will prevent 
 a good deal of gene and constraint . good - by till then . ha ! by the way , 
 I think if I be you , I would not take the matter too seriously and 
 penitentially . you see the good of father like to keep their son under 
 their thumb , as the saying be . and if you want at your age to preserve 
 your independence , and not be hurry off and bury in the country , 
 like a schoolboy in disgrace , a little manliness of bearing would not be 
 amiss . you can think over it . " 

 the dinner at Limmer 's go off very differently from what it ought 
 to have do . Randal 's word have sink deep , and rankle sorely in the 
 squire 's mind ; and that impression impart a certain coldness to his 
 manner which belie the hearty , forgiving , generous impulse with which 
 he have come up to London , and which even Randal have not yet altogether 
 whisper away . on the other hand , Frank , embarrass both by the sense 
 of disingenuousness , and a desire " not to take the thing too seriously , " 
 seem to the squire ungracious and thankless . 

 after dinner the squire begin to hum and haw , and Frank to colour up and 
 shrink . both feel discompose by the presence of a third person ; till , 
 with an art and address worthy of a well cause , Randal himself break 
 the ice , and so contrive to remove the restraint he have before impose , 
 that at length each be heartily glad to have matter make clear and 
 brief by his dexterity and tact . 

 Frank 's debt be not in reality large ; and when he name the half of 
 they , look down in shame , the squire , agreeably surprised , be about 
 to express himself with a liberal heartiness that would have open his 
 son 's excellent heart at once to he . 

 but a warning look from Randal check the impulse ; and the squire 
 think it right , as he have promise , to affect an anger he do not 
 feel , and let fall the unlucky threat , " that it be all very well once 
 in a way to exceed his allowance ; but if Frank do not , in future , show 
 more sense than to be lead away by a set of London shark and coxcomb , 
 he must cut the army , come home , and take to farming . " 

 Frank imprudently exclaim , " oh , sir , I have no taste for farming . and 
 after London , at my age , the country would be so horribly dull . " 

 " Aha ! " say the squire , very grimly - and he thrust back into his 
 pocket - book some extra bank - note which his finger have itch to add to 
 those he have already count out . " the country be terribly dull , be it ? 
 money go there not upon folly and vice , but upon employ honest 
 labourer , and increase the wealth of the nation . it do not please 
 you to spend money in that way : it be a pity you should ever be plague 
 with such duty . " 

 " my dear father - " 

 " hold your tongue , you puppy . oh , I dare say , if you be in my shoe , 
 you would cut down the oak , and mortgage the property ; sell it , for 
 what I know , - all go on a cast of the dice ! aha , sir - very well , very 
 well - the country be horribly dull , be it ? pray stay in town . " 

 " my dear Mr. Hazeldean , " say Randal , blandly , and as if with the wish 
 to turn off into a joke what threaten to be serious , " you must not 
 interpret a hasty expression so literally . why , you would make Frank 
 as bad as Lord A - - - , who write word to his steward to cut down more 
 timber ; and when the steward reply , ' there be only three sign - post 
 leave on the whole estate , ' write back , ' they have   do grow at all 
 event , - down with they ! ' you ought to know Lord A - - - , sir ; so witty ; 
 and - Frank 's particular friend . " 

 " your particular friend , Master Frank ? pretty friend ! " and the squire 
 button up the pocket to which he have transfer his note - book , with a 
 determine air . 

 " but I be his friend , too , " say randal , kindly ; " and I preach to he 
 properly , I can tell you . " then , as if delicately anxious to change the 
 subject , he begin to ask question upon crop and the experiment of bone 
 manure . he speak earnestly , and with gusto , yet with the deference 
 of one listen to a great practical authority . randal have spend 
 the afternoon in cram the subject from agricultural journal and 
 parliamentary report ; and like all practise reader , have really 
 learn in a few hour more than many a man , unaccustomed to study , 
 could gain from book in a year . the squire be surprised and please at 
 the young scholar 's information and taste for such subject . 

 " but , to be sure , " quoth he , with an angry look at poor Frank , " you have 
 good hazeldean blood in you , and know a bean from a turnip . " 

 " why , sir , " say randal , ingenuously , " I be train myself for public 
 life ; and what be a public man worth if he do not study the agriculture 
 of his country ? " 

 " right - what be he worth ? put that question , with my compliment , to my 
 half - brother . what stuff he do talk , the other night , on the malt - tax , 
 to be sure ! " 

 " Mr. Egerton have have so many other thing to think of , that we must 
 excuse his want of information upon one topic , however important . with 
 his strong sense he must acquire that information , soon or later ; for 
 he be fond of power ; and , sir , knowledge be power ! " 

 " very true , - very fine saying , " quoth the poor squire , unsuspiciously , 
 as Randal 's eye rest on Mr. Hazeldean 's open face , and then glance 
 towards Frank , who look sad and bored . 

 " yes , " repeat Randal , " knowledge be power ; " and he shake his head 
 wisely , as he pass the bottle to his host . 

 still , when the squire , who mean to return to the Hall next morning , 
 take leave of Frank , his heart warm to his son ; and still more for 
 Frank 's deject look . it be not Randal 's policy to push estrangement 
 too far at first , and in his own presence . 

 " speak to poor Frank , - kindly now , sir - do ; " whisper be , observe the 
 squire 's watery eye , as he move to the window . 

 the squire , rejoice to obey , thrust out his hand to his son . 

 " my dear boy , " say he , " there , do not   fret - pshaw ! - it be but a trifle 
 after all . think no more of it . " 

 Frank take the hand , and suddenly throw his arm round his father 's broad 
 shoulder . 

 " oh , sir , you be too good , - too good . " his voice tremble so that 
 randal take alarm , pass by he , and touch he meaningly . 

 the squire press his son to his heart , - heart so large , that it seem 
 to fill the whole width under his broadcloth . " my dear Frank , " say he , 
 half blubber , " it be not the money ; but , you see , it so vex your 
 poor mother ; you must be careful in future ; and , zounds , boy , it will be 
 all yours one day ; only do not   calculate on it ; I could not bear that , I 
 could not , indeed . " 

 " Calculate ! " cry Frank . " oh , sir , can you think it ? " 

 " I be so delighted that I have some slight hand in your complete 
 reconciliation with Mr. Hazeldean , " say Randal , as the young man walk 
 from the hotel . " I see that you be dishearten , and I tell he to 
 speak to you kindly . " 

 " do you ? ah - I be sorry he need tell . " 

 " I know his character so well already , " say Randal , " that I flatter 
 myself I can always keep thing between you as they ought to be . what an 
 excellent man ! " 

 " the good man in the world , " cry Frank , heartily ; and then , as his 
 accent droop , " yet I have deceive he . I have a great mind to go 
 back - " 

 " and tell he to give you twice as much money as you have ask for ? he 
 would think you have only seem so affectionate in order to take he in . 
 no , no , Frank ! save , lie by , economize ; and then tell he that you have 
 pay half your own debt . something high - minded in that . " 

 " so there be . your heart be as good as your head . Goodnight . " 

 " be you go home so early ? have you no engagement ! " 

 " none that I shall keep . " 

 " good - night , then . " 

 they part , and Randal walk into one of the fashionable club . he 
 near a table where three or four young man   young son , who live in 
 the most splendid style , Heaven know how   be still over their wine . 

 Leslie have little in common with these gentleman , but he force his 
 nature to be agreeable to they , in consequence of a very excellent piece 
 of worldly advice give to he by Audley Egerton . " never let the dandy 
 call you a prig , " say the statesman . " many a clever fellow fail 
 through life , because the silly fellow , whom half a word well speak 
 could make his claqueur , turn he into ridicule . whatever you be , 
 avoid the fault of most read man : in a word , do not   be a prig ! " 

 " I have just leave Hazeldean , " say randal . " what a good fellow he be ! " 

 " Capital ! " say the Honourable George Borrowell . " where be he ? " 

 " why , he be go to his room . he have have a little scene with his 
 father , a thorough , rough country squire . it would be an act of charity 
 if you would go and keep he company , or take he with you to some place 
 a little more lively than his own lodging . " 

 " what ! the old gentleman have be tease he ! - a horrid shame ! why , 
 Frank be not extravagant , and he will be very rich , eh ? " 

 " an immense property , " say Randal , " and not a mortgage on it : an only 
 son , " he add , turn away . 

 among these young gentleman there be a kindly and most benevolent 
 whisper , and presently they all rise , and walk away towards Frank 's 
 lodging . 

 " the wedge be in the tree , " say randal to himself , " and there be a gap 
 already between the bark and the wood . " 




 CHAPTER XXII 

 Harley L'Estrange be seat beside Helen at the lattice - window in the 
 cottage at Norwood . the bloom of revive health be on the child 's face , 
 and she be listen with a smile , for Harley be speak of Leonard 
 with praise , and of Leonard 's future with hope . " and thus , " he 
 continue , ' secure from his former trial , happy in his occupation , and 
 pursue the career he have choose , we must be content , my dear child , to 
 leave he . " 

 " leave he ! " exclaim Helen , and the rise on her cheek fade . 

 Harley be not displeased to see her emotion . he would have be 
 disappointed in her heart if it have be less susceptible to affection . 

 " it be hard on you , Helen , " say he , " to be separate from one who have 
 be to you as a brother . do not hate I for do so . but I consider 
 myself your guardian , and your home as yet must be mine . we be go 
 from this land of cloud and mist , go as into the world of summer . 
 well , that do not content you . you weep , my child ; you mourn your 
 own friend , but do not forget your father 's . I be alone , and often sad , 
 Helen ; will you not comfort I ? you press my hand , but you must learn to 
 smile on I also . you be bear to be the comforter . comforter be not 
 egotist ; they be always cheerful when they console . " 

 the voice of Harley be so sweet and his word go so home to the 
 child 's heart , that she look up and smile in his face as he kiss 
 her ingenuous brow . but then she think of Leonard , and feel so 
 solitary , so bereft , that tear burst forth again . before these be 
 dry , Leonard himself enter , and , obey an irresistible impulse , 
 she spring to his arm , and lean her head on his shoulder , sob 
 out , 

 " I be go from you , brother ; do not grieve , do not miss I . " 

 Harley be much move : he fold his arm , and contemplate they both 
 silently , - and his own eye be moist . " this heart , " think he , " will 
 be worth the winning ! " 

 he draw aside Leonard , and whisper , " Soothe , but encourage and support 
 she . I leave you together ; come to I in the garden later . " 

 it be nearly an hour before Leonard join Harley . 

 " she be not weep when you leave she ? " ask L'Estrange . 

 " no ; she have more fortitude than we might suppose . Heaven know how that 
 fortitude have support mine . I have promise to write to she often . " 

 Harley take two stride across the lawn , and then , come back to 
 Leonard , say , " keep your promise , and write often for the first year . I 
 would then ask you to let the correspondence drop gradually . " 

 " drop ! ah , my Lord ! " 

 " look you , my young friend , I wish to lead this fair mind wholly from 
 the sorrow of the past . I wish Helen to enter , not abruptly , but 
 step by step , into a new life . you love each other now , as do two 
 child , - as brother and sister . but later , if encourage , would the 
 love be the same ? and be it not well for both of you that youth 
 should open upon the world with youth 's natural affection free and 
 unforestalled ? " 

 " true ! and she be so above I , " say Leonard , mournfully . 

 " no one be above he who succeed in your ambition , Leonard . it be not 
 that , believe I . " 

 Leonard shake his head . 

 " perhaps , " say Harley , with a smile , " I rather feel that you be above 
 I . for what vantage - ground be so high as youth ? perhaps I may become 
 jealous of you . it be well that she should learn to like one who be to 
 be henceforth her guardian and protector . yet how can she like I as she 
 ought , if her heart be to be full of you ? " 

 the boy bow his head ; and Harley hasten to change the subject , and 
 speak of letter and of glory . his word be eloquent and his voice 
 kindling ; for he have be an enthusiast for fame in his boyhood , and 
 in Leonard 's his own seem to he to revive . but the poet 's heart give 
 back no echo , - suddenly it seem void and desolate . yet when Leonard 
 walk back by the moonlight , he mutter to himself , " strange , strange , 
 so mere a child ! this can not be love ! still , what else to love be there 
 leave to I ? " 

 and so he pause upon the bridge where he have so often stand with Helen , 
 and on which he have find the protector that have give to she a home , 
 to himself a career . and life seem very long , and fame but a dreary 
 phantom . courage still , Leonard ! these be the sorrow of the heart that 
 teach thee more than all the precept of sage and critic . 

 another day , and Helen have leave the shore of England , with her fanciful 
 and dream guardian . year will pass before our tale re - open . life 
 in all the form we have see it travel on . and the squire farm and 
 hunt ; and the parson preache and chide and soothe ; and Riccabocca 
 read his Machiavelli , and sigh and smile as he moralize on Men and 
 States ; and Violante 's dark eye grow deep and more spiritual in 
 their lustre , and her beauty take thought from solitary dream . and Mr. 
 Richard Avenel have his house in London , and the Honourable Mrs. Avenel 
 her opera - box ; and hard and dire be their struggle into fashion , 
 and hotly do the new man , scorn the aristocracy , pant to become 
 aristocrat . and Audley Egerton go from the office to the parliament , 
 and drudge , and debate , and help to govern the empire in which the 
 sun never set . poor sun , how tired he must be - but not more tired than 
 the Government ! and Randal Leslie have an excellent place in the bureau 
 of a minister , and be look to the time when he shall resign it to 
 come into parliament , and on that large arena turn knowledge into power . 
 and meanwhile he be much where he be with Audley Egerton ; but he have 
 establish intimacy with the squire , and visit Hazeldean twice , and 
 examine the house and the map of the property , and very nearly fall 
 a second time into the ha - ha , and the squire believe that Randal Leslie 
 alone can keep Frank out of mischief , and have speak rough word to his 
 Harry about Frank 's continued extravagance . and Frank do continue to 
 pursue pleasure , and be very miserable , and horribly in debt . and 
 Madame di Negra have go from London to Paris , and take a tour into 
 Switzerland , and come back to London again , and have grow very intimate 
 with Randal Leslie ; and Randal have introduce Frank to she ; and Frank 
 think she the lovely woman in the world , and grossly slander by 
 certain evil tongue . and the brother of Madame di Negra be expect 
 in England at last ; and what with his repute for beauty and for wealth , 
 people anticipate a sensation . and Leonard , and Harley , and Helen ? 
 Patience , - they will all re - appear . 




 BOOK EIGHTH . 




 INITIAL chapter . 

 the ABUSE of INTELLECT . 

 there be at present so vehement a flourish of trumpet , and so 
 prodigious a roll of the drum , whenever we be call upon to throw up 
 our hat , and cry " Huzza " to the " March of Enlightenment , " that , out of 
 that very spirit of contradiction natural to all rational animal , 
 one be tempt to stop one 's ear , and say , " gently , gently ; light be 
 noiseless : how come ' Enlightenment ' to make such a clatter ? meanwhile , 
 if it be not impertinent , pray , where be Enlightenment march to ? " ask 
 that question of any six of the loud bawler in the procession , and 
 I will wager tenpence to California that you get six very unsatisfactory 
 answer . one respectable gentleman , who , to our great astonishment , 
 insist upon call himself " a slave , " but have a remarkably free way of 
 express his opinion , will reply , " Enlightenment be march towards 
 the seven point of the Charter . " another , with his hair a la jeune 
 France , who have take a fancy to his friend 's wife , and be rather 
 embarrassed with his own , assert that Enlightenment be proceed 
 towards the Rights of Women , the reign of Social Love , and the 
 annihilation of Tyrannical Prejudice . a third , who have the air of a man 
 well - to - do in the middle class , more modest in his hope , because he 
 neither wish to have his head break by his errand - boy , nor his 
 wife carry off to an Agapemone by his apprentice , do not take 
 Enlightenment a step far than a siege on Debrett , and a cannonade 
 on the Budget . illiberal man ! the march that he swell will soon trample 
 he under foot . no one fare so ill in a crowd as the man who be wedge 
 in the middle . a fourth , look wild and dreamy , as if he have come out 
 of the cave of Trophonius , and who be a mesmerizer and a mystic , think 
 Enlightenment be in full career towards the good old day of alchemist 
 and necromancer . a fifth , whom one might take for a Quaker , assert 
 that the march of Enlightenment be a crusade for universal philanthropy , 
 vegetable diet , and the perpetuation of peace by mean of speech , 
 which certainly do produce a very contrary effect from the Philippics of 
 demosthene ! the sixth - good fellow without a rag on his back - do not 
 care a straw where the march go . he can not   be bad off than he be ; and 
 it be quite immaterial to he whether he go to the dog - star above , 
 or the bottomless pit below . I say nothing , however , against the march , 
 while we take it altogether . whatever happen , one be in good company ; 
 and though I be somewhat indolent by nature , and would rather stay at 
 home with Locke and Burke   dull dog though they be   than have my 
 thought set off helter - skelter with those cursed trumpet and drum , 
 blow and dub - a - dub by fellow whom I vow to heaven I would not trust 
 with a five - pound note , - still , if I must march , I must ; and so deuce 
 take the hindmost ! but when it come to individual marcher upon their 
 own account , - privateer and condottieri of Enlightenment , - who have 
 fill their pocket with Lucifer match , and have a sublime contempt 
 for their neighbour 's barn and hay - rick , I do not   see why I should 
 throw myself into the seventh heaven of admiration and ecstasy . 

 if those who be eternally rhapsodize on the celestial blessing that 
 be to follow Enlightenment , Universal Knowledge , and so forth , would 
 just take their eye out of their pocket , and look about they , I 
 would respectfully inquire if they have never meet any very knowing and 
 enlighten gentleman , whose acquaintance be by no mean desirable . 
 if not , they be monstrous lucky . every man must judge by his own 
 experience ; and the bad rogue I have ever encounter be amazingly 
 well - inform clever fellow . from dunderhead and dunce we can protect 
 ourselves , but from your sharpwitte gentleman , all enlightenment and no 
 prejudice , we have but to cry , " Heaven defend we ! " it be true , that 
 the rogue   let he be ever so enlighten   usually come to no good 
 himself , - though not before he have do harm enough to his neighbour . 
 but that only show that the world want something else in those it 
 reward besides intelligence per se and in the abstract ; and be much too 
 old a world to allow any Jack Horner to pick out its plum for his own 
 personal gratification . hence a man of very moderate intelligence , who 
 believe in God , suffer his heart to beat with human sympathy , and 
 keep his eye off your strongbox , will perhaps gain a vast deal more 
 power than knowledge ever give to a rogue . 

 wherefore , though I anticipate an outcry against I on the part of the 
 blockhead , who , strange to say , be the most credulous idolator of 
 Enlightenment , and if knowledge be power , would rot on a dunghill , 
 yet , nevertheless , I think all really enlighten man will agree with 
 I , that when one fall in with detach sharpshooter from the general 
 March of Enlightenment , it be no reason that we should make ourselves 
 a target , because Enlightenment have furnish they with a gun . it have , 
 doubtless , be already remark by the judicious reader that of the 
 numerous character introduce into this work , the large portion belong 
 to that specie which we call the INTELLECTUAL , - that through they be 
 analyze and develop human intellect , in various form and direction . 
 so that this history , rightly consider , be a kind of humble familiar 
 Epic , or , if you prefer it , a long Serio - Comedy , upon the Varieties of 
 English Life in this our Century , set in movement by the intelligence 
 most prevalent . and where more ordinary and less refined type of the 
 species round and complete the survey of our pass generation , 
 they will often suggest , by contrast , the deficiency which mere 
 intellectual culture leaf in the human being . certainly , I have no 
 spite against intellect and enlightenment . Heaven forbid I should be 
 such a Goth ! I be only the advocate for common - sense and fair play . I 
 do not   think an able man necessarily an angel ; but I think if his heart 
 match his head , and both proceed in the Great March under the divine 
 Oriflamine , he go as near to the angel as humanity will permit : if 
 not , if he have but a penn'orth of heart to a pound of brain , I 
 say , " Bon jour , mon ange ! I see not the starry upward wing , but the 
 grovel cloven - hoof . " I would rather be obfuscate by the Squire of 
 Hazeldean than en lighten by Randal Leslie . every man to his taste . 
 but intellect itself   not in the philosophical but the ordinary sense of 
 the term   be rarely , if ever , one complete harmonious agency ; it be not 
 one faculty , but a compound of many , some of which be often at war with 
 each other , and mar the concord of the whole . few of we but have 
 some predominant faculty , in itself a strength ; but which , usurp 
 unseasonably dominion over the rest , share the lot of all tyranny , 
 however brilliant , and leave the empire weak against disaffection 
 within , and invasion from without . hence , intellect may be pervert 
 in a man of evil disposition , and sometimes merely waste in a man of 
 excellent impulse , for want of the necessary discipline , or of a strong 
 ruling motive . I doubt if there be one person in the world who have 
 obtain a high reputation for talent , who have not meet somebody much 
 cleverer than himself , which say somebody have never obtain any 
 reputation at all ! man like Audley Egerton be constantly see in the 
 great position of life ; while man like Harley L'Estrange , who could 
 have beat they hollow in anything equally strive for by both , float 
 away down the stream , and , unless some sudden stimulant arouse their 
 dreamy energy , vanish out of sight into silent graf . if Hamlet and 
 Polonius be live now , Polonius would have a much well chance of 
 be a Cabinet Minister , though Hamlet would unquestionably be a much 
 more intellectual character . what would become of Hamlet ? Heaven know ! 
 Dr. Arnold say , from his experience of a school , that the difference 
 between one man and another be not mere ability , - it be energy . there 
 be a great deal of truth in that saying . 

 submit these hint to the judgment and penetration of the sagacious , 
 I enter on the fresh division of this work , and see already randal 
 Leslie gnaw his lip on the background . the german poet observe that 
 the cow of Isis be to some the divine symbol of knowledge , to other but 
 the milch cow , only regard for the pound of butter she will yield . O 
 tendency of our age , to look on isis as the milch cow ! o prostitution 
 of the grand desire to the basest us ! Gaze on the goddess , randal 
 Leslie , and get ready thy churn and thy scale . let we see what the 
 butter will fetch in the market . 




 CHAPTER II . 

 a new reign have commence . there have be a general election ; the 
 unpopularity of the Administration have be apparent at the husting . 
 Audley Egerton , hitherto return by vast majority , have barely escape 
 defeat - thank to a majority of five . the expense of his election be 
 say to have be prodigious . " but who can stand against such wealth 
 as Egerton 's , - no doubt back , too , by the Treasury purse ? " say 
 the defeat candidate . it be towards the close of October ; London be 
 already full ; parliament will meet in less than a fortnight . 

 in one of the principal apartment of that hotel in which foreigner 
 may discover what be mean by English comfort , and the price which 
 foreigner must pay for it , there sit two person side by side , engage 
 in close conversation . the one be a female , in whose pale clear 
 complexion and raven hair , in whose eye , vivid with a power of 
 expression rarely bestow on the beauty of the North , we recognize 
 Beatrice , Marchesa di Negra . undeniably handsome as be the italian 
 lady , her companion , though a man , and far advanced into middle age , be 
 yet more remarkable for personal advantage . there be a strong family 
 likeness between the two ; but there be also a striking contrast in air , 
 manner , and all that stamp on the physiognomy the idiosyncrasy of 
 character . there be something of gravity , of earnestness and passion , 
 in Beatrice 's countenance when carefully examine ; her smile at time 
 might be false , but it be rarely ironical , never cynical . her gesture , 
 though graceful , be unrestrained and frequent . you could see she be a 
 daughter of the South . her companion , on the contrary , preserve on the 
 fair , smooth face , to which year have give scarcely a line or wrinkle , 
 something that might have pass , at first glance , for the levity and 
 thoughtlessness of a gay and youthful nature ; but the smile , though 
 exquisitely polish , take at time the derision of a sneer . in his 
 manner he be as compose and as free from gesture as an Englishman . 
 his hair be of that red brown with which the italian painter produce 
 such marvellous effect of colour ; and if here and there a silver thread 
 gleam through the lock , it be lose at once amidst their luxuriance . 
 his eye be light , and his complexion , though without much colour , 
 be singularly transparent . his beauty , indeed , would have be rather 
 womanly than masculine , but for the height and sinewy spareness of a 
 frame in which muscular strength be rather adorn than conceal by an 
 admirable elegance of proportion . you would never have guess this man 
 to be an italian ; more likely you would have suppose he a Parisian . 
 he converse in French , his dress be of french fashion , his mode of 
 thought seem french . not that he be like the Frenchman of the present 
 day , - an animal , either rude or reserve ; but your ideal of the marquis 
 of the old regime , the roue of the Regency . 

 italian , however , he be , and of a race renowned in italian history . 
 but , as if ashamed of his country and his birth , he affect to be 
 a citizen of the world . Heaven help the world if it hold only such 
 citizen ! 

 " but , Giulio , " say Beatrice di Negra , speak in Italian , " even 
 grant that you discover this girl , can you suppose that her father 
 will ever consent to your alliance ? surely you know too well the nature 
 of your kinsman ? " 

 " tu to trompe , ma soeur , " reply Giulio Franzini , Count di Peschiera , 
 in French as usual , - " tu to trompe ; I know it before he have go 
 through exile and penury . how can I know it now ? but comfort yourself , 
 my too anxious Beatrice , I shall not care for his consent , till I ' ve 
 make sure of his daughter 's . " 

 " but how win that in despite of the father ? " 

 " eh , mordieu ! " interrupt the count , with true french gayety ; " what 
 would become of all the comedy ever write , if marriage be not 
 make in despite of the father ? look you , " he resume , with a very 
 slight compression of his lip , and a still slighter movement in his 
 chair , - " look you , this be no question of if and but ! it be a question 
 of must and shall , - a question of existence to you and to I . when 
 Danton be condemn to the guillotine , he say , fling a pellet of 
 bread at the nose of his respectable judge , ' Mon individu sera bientot 
 dans le neant . ' my patrimony be there already ! I be load with debt . 
 I see before I , on the one side , ruin or suicide ; on the other side , 
 wedlock and wealth . " 

 " but from those vast possession which you have be permit to enjoy 
 so long , have you really save nothing against the time when they might 
 be reclaim at your hand ? " 

 " my sister , " reply the count , " do I look like a man who save ? 
 besides , when the Austrian Emperor , unwilling to raze from his Lombard 
 domain a name and a House so illustrious as our kinsman 's , and 
 desirous , while punish that kinsman 's rebellion , to reward my 
 adherence , forbore the peremptory confiscation of those vast possession 
 at which my mouth water while we speak , but , annex they to the crown 
 during pleasure , allow I , as the next of male kin , to retain the 
 revenue of one half for the same very indefinite period , - have I not 
 every reason to suppose that before long I could so influence his 
 Imperial Majesty , or his minister , as to obtain a decree that might 
 transfer the whole , unconditionally and absolutely , to myself ? and 
 methink I should have do so , but for this accursed , intermeddle 
 English Milord , who have never cease to besiege the court or the 
 minister with alleged extenuation of our cousin 's rebellion , and 
 proofless assertion that I share it in order to entangle my kinsman , 
 and betray it in order to profit by his spoil . so that , at last , in 
 return for all my service , and in answer to all my claim , I receive 
 from the minister himself this cold reply , Count of Peschiera , your aid 
 be important , and your reward have be large . that reward it would 
 not be for your honour to extend , and justify the ill opinion of your 
 italian countryman by formally appropriate to yourself all that be 
 forfeit by the treason you denounce . a name so noble as yours should 
 be dearer to you than fortune itself . ' " 

 " Ah Giulio , " cry Beatrice , her face light up , change in its whole 
 character , " those be word that might make the demon that tempt to 
 avarice fly from your breast in shame . " 

 the count open his eye in great amaze ; then he glance round the 
 room , and say quietly , 

 " nobody else hear you , my dear Beatrice ; talk commonsense . heroic 
 sound well in mixed society ; but there be nothing less suited to the 
 tone of a family conversation . " 

 Madame di Negra bend down her head abash , and that sudden change 
 in the expression of her countenance which have seem to betray 
 susceptibility to generous emotion , fade as suddenly away . 

 " but still , " she say coldly , " you enjoy one half of those ample 
 revenue : why talk , then , of suicide and ruin ? " 

 " I enjoy they at the pleasure of the crown ; and what if it be the 
 pleasure of the crown to recall our cousin , and reinstate he in his 
 possession ? " 

 " there be a probability , then , of that pardon ? when you first employ 
 I in your research you only think there be a possibility . " 

 " there be a great probability of it , and therefore I be here . I learn 
 some little time since that the question of such recall have be 
 suggest by the emperor , and discuss in Council . the danger to 
 the State , which might arise from our cousin 's wealth , his allege 
 ability , - ability ! bah ! and his popular name , defer any decision 
 on the point ; and , indeed , the difficulty of deal with myself must 
 have embarrass the minister . but it be a mere question of time . he 
 can not long remain exclude from the general amnesty already extend to 
 the other refugee . the person who give I this information be high in 
 power , and friendly to myself ; and he add a piece of advice on which 
 I act . ' it be intimate , ' say he , ' by one of the partisan of your 
 kinsman , that the exile could give a hostage for his loyalty in the 
 person of his daughter and heiress ; that she have arrive at marriageable 
 age ; that if she be to we d , with the emperor 's consent , some one whose 
 attachment to the austrian crown be unquestionable , there would be a 
 guarantee both for the faith of the father , and for the transmission of 
 so important a heritage to safe and loyal hand . why not '   continue 
 my friend   ' apply to the emperor for his consent to that alliance for 
 yourself , - you , on whom he can depend ; you who , if the daughter should 
 die , would be the legal heir to those land ? ' on that hint I speak . " 

 " you see the emperor ? " 

 " and after combat the unjust prepossession against I , I state that 
 so far from my cousin have any fair cause of resentment against 
 I , when all be duly explain to he , I do not doubt that he would 
 willingly give I the hand of his child . " 

 " you do ! " cry the marchesa , amazed . 

 " and , " continue the count , imperturbably , as he smooth , with careless 
 hand , the snowy plait of his shirt front , - " and that I should thus have 
 the happiness of become myself the guarantee of my kinsman 's loyalty , 
 the agent for the restoration of his honour , while , in the eye of the 
 envious and malignant , I should clear up my own name from all suspicion 
 that I have wrong he . " 

 " and the emperor consent ? " 

 " Pardieu , my dear sister , what else could his Majesty do ? my proposition 
 smooth every obstacle , and reconcile policy with mercy . it 
 remain , therefore , only to find out what have hitherto baffle all 
 our research , the retreat of our dear kinsfolk , and to make myself 
 a welcome lover to the demoiselle . there be some disparity of year , I 
 own ; but - unless your sex and my glass flatter I overmuch - I be still a 
 match for many a gallant of five - and - twenty . " 

 the count say this with so charming a smile , and look so 
 pre - eminently handsome , that he carry off the coxcombry of the word 
 as gracefully as if they have be speak by some dazzle hero of the 
 grand old comedy of parisian life . 

 then interlace his finger and lightly lean his hand , thus 
 clasp , upon his sister 's shoulder , he look into her face , and say 
 slowly , " and now , my sister , for some gentle but deserved reproach . 
 have you not sadly fail I in the task I impose on your regard for my 
 interest ? be it not some year since you first come to England on the 
 mission of discover these worthy relation of our ? do I not entreat 
 you to seduce into your toil the man whom I new to be my enemy , and who 
 be indubitably acquaint with our cousin 's retreat , - a secret he have 
 hitherto lock within his bosom ? do you not tell I , that though he 
 be then in England , you could find no occasion even to meet he , but 
 that you have obtain the friendship of the statesman to whom I direct 
 your attention , as his most intimate associate ? and yet you , whose 
 charm be usually so irresistible , learn nothing from the statesman , as 
 you see nothing of Milord . Nay , baffle and mislead , you actually suppose 
 that the quarry have take refuge in France . you go thither , you pretend 
 to search the capital , the province , Switzerland , que sais je ? all 
 in vain , - though - foi de gentilhomme - your police cost I dearly . you 
 return to England ; the same chase , and the same result . Palsambleu , ma 
 soeur , I do too much credit to your talent not to question your zeal . 
 in a word , have you be in earnest , - or have you not have some womanly 
 pleasure in amuse yourself and abuse my trust ? " 

 " Giulio , " answer Beatrice , sadly , " you know the influence you have 
 exercise over my character and my fate . your reproach be not just . I 
 make such inquiry as be in my power , and I have now cause to believe 
 that I know one who be possess of this secret , and can guide we to 
 it . " 

 " ah , you do ! " exclaim the count . Beatrice do not heed the 
 exclamation , and hurry on . 

 " but grant that my heart shrink from the task you impose on I , would 
 it not have be natural ? when I first come to England , you inform 
 I that your object in discover the exile be one which I could 
 honestly aid . you naturally wish first to know if the daughter live ; 
 if not , you be the heir . if she do , you assure I you desire to 
 effect , through my mediation , some liberal compromise with Alphonso , by 
 which you would have seek to obtain his restoration , provide he would 
 leave you for life in possession of the grant you hold from the crown . 
 while these be your object , I do my good , ineffectual as it be , to 
 obtain the information require . " 

 " and what make I lose so important , though so ineffectual an ally ? " 
 ask the count , still smile ; but a gleam that belie the smile shot 
 from his eye . 

 " what ! when you bade I receive and co - operate with the miserable 
 spy - the false Italians - whom you send over , and seek to entangle this 
 poor exile , when find , in some rash correspondence to be reveal 
 to the court ; when you seek to seduce the daughter of the Count of 
 Peschiera , the descendant of those who have rule in Italy , into 
 the informer , the corrupter , and the traitress , - no , Giulio , then I 
 recoil ; and then , fearful of your own sway over I , I retreat into 
 France . I have answer you frankly . " 

 the count remove his hand from the shoulder on which they have recline 
 so cordially . 

 " and this , " say he , " be your wisdom , and this your gratitude ! you , 
 whose fortune be bind up in mine ; you , who subsist on my bounty ; you , 
 who - " 

 " hold , " cry the marchesa , rise , and with a burst of emotion , as 
 if sting to the utmost , and break into revolt from the tyranny of 
 year , - " hold ! Gratitude ! bounty ! Brother , brother ! what , indeed , do I 
 owe to you ? the shame and the misery of a life . while yet a child , you 
 condemn I to marry against my will , against my heart , against my 
 prayer , - and laugh at my tear when I kneel to you for mercy . I be 
 pure then , Giulio , - pure and innocent as the flower in my virgin crown . 
 and now - now - " 

 Beatrice stop abruptly , and clasp her hand before her face . 

 " now you upbraid I , " say the count , unruffled by her sudden passion , 
 " because I give you in marriage to a man young and noble ? " 

 " old in vice , and mean of soul ! the marriage I forgave you . you have the 
 right , accord to the custom of our country , to dispose of my hand . 
 but I forgave you not the consolation that you whisper in the ear of 
 a wretched and insulted wife . " 

 " pardon I the remark , " reply the count , with a courtly bend of his 
 head , " but those consolation be also conformable to the custom of 
 our country , and I be not aware till now that you have wholly disdain 
 they . and , " continue the count , " you be not so long a wife that the 
 gall of the chain should smart still . you be soon leave a widow , - free , 
 childless , young , beautiful . " 

 " and penniless . " 

 " true , Di Negra be a gambler , and very unlucky ; no fault of mine . I 
 could neither keep the card from his hand , nor advise he how to play 
 they . " 

 " and my own portion ? o Giulio , I know but at his death why you have 
 condemn I to that renegade Genoese . he owe you money , and , against 
 honour , and I believe against law , you have accept my fortune in 
 discharge of the debt . " 

 " he have no other way to discharge it ; a debt of honour must be 
 pay , - old story these . what matter ? since then my purse have be 
 open to you . " 

 " yes , not as your sister , but your instrument , your spy ! yes , your purse 
 have be open - with a niggard hand . " 

 " Un peu de conscience , ma chere , - you be so extravagant . but come , be 
 plain . what would you ? " 

 " I would be free from you . " 

 " that be , you would form some second marriage with one of these rich 
 island lord . Ma foi , I respect your ambition . " 

 " it be not so high . I aim but to escape from slavery , - to be place 
 beyond dishonourable temptation . I desire , " cry Beatrice , with 
 increase emotion , - " I desire to re - enter the life of woman . " 

 " Eno ' ! " say the count , with a visible impatience ; " be there anything 
 in the attainment of your object that should render you indifferent to 
 mine ? you desire to marry , if I comprehend you right . and to marry as 
 become you , you should bring to your husband not debt , but a dowry . 
 be it so . I will restore the portion that I save from the spendthrift 
 clutch of the Genoese , - the moment that it be mine to bestow , the moment 
 that I be husband to my kinsman 's heiress . and now , Beatrice , you imply 
 that my former notion revolt your conscience ; my present plan should 
 content it , for by this marriage shall our kinsman regain his country , 
 and repossess , at least , half his land . and if I be not an excellent 
 husband to the demoiselle , it will be her own fault . I have sow my wild 
 oat . Je suis bon prince , when I have thing a little my own way . it 
 be my hope and my intention , and certainly it will be my interest , 
 to become digne epoux et irreprochable pere de famille . I speak 
 lightly , - ' t be my way . I mean seriously . the little girl will be very 
 happy with I , and I shall succeed in soothe all resentment her father 
 may retain . will you aid I then , yes or no ? aid I , and you shall 
 indeed be free . the magician will release the fair spirit he have bind 
 to his will . aid I not , ma chere , and mark , I do not threaten - I do but 
 warn - aid I not ; grant that I become a beggar , and ask yourself what 
 be to become of you , - still young , still beautiful , and still penniless ? 
 Nay , bad than penniless ; you have do I the honour , " and here the 
 count , look on the table , draw a letter from a portfolio emblazon 
 with his arm and coronet , - " you have do I the honour to consult I 
 as to your debt . " 

 " you will restore my fortune ? " say the marchesa , irresolutely , - and 
 avert her head from an odious schedule of figure . 

 " when my own , with your aid , be secure . " 

 " but do you not overrate the value of my aid ? " 

 " possibly , " say the count , with a caress suavity - and he kiss his 
 sister 's forehead . " possibly ; but , by my honour , I wish to repair to you 
 any wrong , real or suppose , I may have do you in past time . I wish 
 to find again my own dear sister . I may over - value your aid , but not the 
 affection from which it come . let we be friend , cara Beatrice mia , " 
 add the count , for the first time employ italian word . 

 the marchesa lay her head on his shoulder , and her tear flow 
 softly . evidently this man have great influence over she , - and evidently , 
 whatever her cause for complaint , her affection for he be still 
 sisterly and strong . a nature with fine flash of generosity , spirit , 
 honour , and passion be her ; but uncultured , unguided , spoilt by the 
 bad social example , easily lead into wrong , not always aware where the 
 wrong be , let affection good or bad whisper away her conscience or 
 blind her reason . such woman be often far more dangerous when induce 
 to wrong than those who be thoroughly abandon , - such woman be the 
 accomplice man like the Count of Peschiera most desire to obtain . 

 " ah , Giulio , " say Beatrice , after a pause , and look up at he 
 through her tear , " when you speak to I thus , you know you can do with 
 I what you will . fatherless and motherless , whom have my childhood to 
 love and obey but you ? " 

 " Dear Beatrice , " murmur the count , tenderly , and he again kiss she 
 forehead . " so , " he continue , more carelessly , - ' so the reconciliation 
 be effect , and our interest and our heart re - allied . now , alas ! to 
 descend to business . you say that you know some one whom you believe 
 to be acquaint with the lurking - place of my father - in - law - that be to 
 be ! " 

 " I think so . you remind I that I have an appointment with he this day : 
 it be near the hour , - I must leave you . " 

 " to learn the secret ? - quick , quick . I have no fear of your success , if 
 it be by his heart that you lead he ! " 

 " you mistake ; on his heart I have no hold . but he have a friend who love 
 I , and honourably , and whose cause he plead . I think here that I have 
 some mean to control or persuade he . if not - ah , he be of a character 
 that perplex I in all but his worldly ambition ; and how can we 
 foreigner influence he through that ? " 

 " be he poor , or be he extravagant ? " 

 " not extravagant , and not positively poor , but dependent . " 

 " then we have he , " say the count , composedly . " if his assistance be 
 worth buy , we can bid high for it . sur mon ame , I never yet know 
 money fail with any man who be both worldly and dependent . I put he 
 and myself in your hand . " 

 thus say , the count open the door , and conduct his sister with 
 formal politeness to her carriage . he then return , reseat himself , 
 and muse in silence . as he do so , the muscle of his countenance 
 relaxed . the levity of the Frenchman flee from his visage , and in his 
 eye , as it gaze abstractedly into space , there be that steady depth 
 so remarkable in the old portrait of Florentine diplomatist or venetian 
 oligarch . thus see , there be in that face , despite all its 
 beauty , something that would have awe back even the fond gaze of 
 love , - something hard , collect , inscrutable , remorseless . but this 
 change of countenance do not last long . evidently think , though 
 intense for the moment , be not habitual to the man ; evidently he have 
 live the life which take all thing lightly , - so he rise with a look 
 of fatigue , shake and stretch himself , as if to cast off , or grow 
 out of , an unwelcome and irksome mood . an hour afterwards , the Count of 
 Peschiera be charming all eye , and please all ear , in the saloon of 
 a high - bear beauty , whose acquaintance he have make at Vienna , and whose 
 charm , accord to that old and never - truth - speak oracle , Polite 
 scandal , be now say to have attract to London the brilliant 
 foreigner . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 the marehesa regain her house , which be in Curzon Street , and 
 withdraw to her own room , to readjust her dress , and remove from her 
 countenance all trace of the tear she have shed . 

 half an hour afterwards she be seat in her drawing - room , compose and 
 calm ; nor , see she then , could you have guess that she be capable 
 of so much emotion and so much weakness . in that stately exterior , in 
 that quiet attitude , in that elaborate and finished elegance which come 
 alike from the art of the toilet and the conventional repose of rank , 
 you could see but the woman of the world and the great lady . 

 a knock at the door be hear , and in a few moment there enter a 
 visitor , with the easy familiarity of intimate acquaintance , - a young 
 man , but with none of the bloom of youth . his hair , fine as a woman 's , 
 be thin and scanty , but it fall low over the forehead , and conceal 
 that noblest of our human feature . " a gentleman , " say Apuleius , " ought 
 to wear his whole mind on his forehead . " the young visitor would never 
 have commit so frank an imprudence . his cheek be pale , and in his 
 step and his movement there be a languor that speak of fatigued nerve 
 or delicate health . but the light of the eye and the tone of the voice 
 be those of a mental temperament control the bodily , - vigorous and 
 energetic . for the rest , his general appearance be distinguish by 
 a refinement alike intellectual and social . once see , you would not 
 easily forget he ; and the reader , no doubt , already recognize 
 Randal Leslie . his salutation , as I before say , be that of intimate 
 familiarity ; yet it be give and reply to with that unreserved 
 openness which denote the absence of a more tender sentiment . 

 seat himself by the marchesa 's side , Randal begin first to converse 
 on the fashionable topic and gossip of the day ; but it be observable 
 that while he extract from she the current anecdote and scandal of the 
 great world , neither anecdote nor scandal do he communicate in return . 
 Randal Leslie have already learn the art not to commit himself , nor to 
 have quote against he one ill - natured remark upon the eminent . nothing 
 more injure the man who would rise beyond the fame of the salon 
 than to be consider backbiter and gossip ; " yet it be always useful , " 
 think Randal Leslie , " to know the foible , the small social and 
 private spring , by which the great be move . critical occasion 
 may arise in which such a knowledge may be power . " and hence , perhaps 
  besides a more private motive , soon to be perceive , Randal do 
 not consider his time throw away in cultivate Madame di Negra 's 
 friendship . for , despite much that be whisper against she , she have 
 succeed in dispel the coldness with which she have at first be 
 receive in the London circle . her beauty , her grace , and her high 
 birth have raise she into fashion , and the homage of man of the first 
 station , while it perhaps injure her reputation as woman , add to her 
 celebrity as fine lady . so much do we cold English , prude though we be , 
 forgive to the foreigner what we avenge on the native . 

 slide at last from these general topic into very well - breed and 
 elegant personal compliment , and recite various eulogy , which Lord 
 this and the Duke of that have pass on the marchesa 's charm , Randal 
 lay his hand on her , with the license of admit friendship , and 
 say , 

 " but since you have deign to confide in I , since when   happily for 
 I , and with a generosity of which no coquette could have be capable 
 you , in good time , repress into friendship feeling that might else 
 have ripen into those you be form to inspire and disdain to return , 
 you tell I with your charming smile , ' let no one speak to I of love 
 who do not offer I his hand , and with it the mean to supply taste 
 that I fear be terribly extravagant , ' - since thus you allow I to 
 divine your natural object , and upon that understand our intimacy 
 have be found , you will pardon I for say that the admiration you 
 excite amongst these grand seigneur I have name only serf to defeat 
 your own purpose , and scare away admirer less brilliant , but more in 
 earnest . Most of these gentleman be unfortunately marry ; and they 
 who be not belong to those member of our aristocracy who , in marriage , 
 seek more than beauty and wit , - namely , connection to strengthen their 
 political station , or wealth to redeem a mortgage and sustain a title . " 

 " my dear Mr. Leslie , " reply the marchesa , - and a certain sadness might 
 be detect in the tone of the voice and the droop of the eye , - " I have 
 live long enough in the real world to appreciate the baseness and the 
 falsehood of most of those sentiment which take the noble name . I 
 see through the heart of the admirer you parade before I , and know 
 that not one of they would shelter with his ermine the woman to whom he 
 talk of his heart . ah , " continue Beatrice , with a softness of which 
 she be unconscious , but which might have be extremely dangerous to 
 youth less steel and self - guard than be Randal Leslie 's , - " ah , I 
 be less ambitious than you suppose . I have dream of a friend , a 
 companion , a protector , with feeling still fresh , undebase by the low 
 round of vulgar dissipation and mean pleasure , - of a heart so new , that 
 it might restore my own to what it be in its happy spring . I have see 
 in your country some marriage , the mere contemplation of which have 
 fill my eye with delicious tear . I have learn in England to know 
 the value of home . and with such a heart as I describe , and such a home , 
 I could forget that I ever know a less pure ambition . " 

 " this language do not surprise I , " say randal ; " yet it do not 
 harmonize with your former answer to I . " 

 " to you , " repeat Beatrice , smile , and regain her light manner ; 
 " to you , - true . but I never have the vanity to think that your affection 
 for I could bear the sacrifice it would cost you in marriage ; that 
 you , with your ambition , could bind your dream of happiness to home . 
 and then , too , " say she , raise her head , and with a certain grave 
 pride in her air , - " and then , I could not have consent to share my 
 fate with one whom my poverty would cripple . I could not listen to my 
 heart , if it have beat for a lover without fortune , for to he I could 
 then have bring but a burden , and betray he into a union with 
 poverty and debt . now , it may be different . now I may have the dowry 
 that befit my birth . and now I may be free to choose accord to my 
 heart as woman , not accord to my necessity , as one poor , harass , 
 and despairing . " 

 " ah , " say Randal , interested , and draw still close towards his fair 
 companion , - " ah , I congratulate you sincerely ; you have cause , then , to 
 think that you shall be - rich ? " 

 the marchesa pause before she answer , and during that pause Randal 
 relax the web of the scheme which he have be secretly weave , and 
 rapidly consider whether , if Beatrice di Negra would indeed be rich , 
 she might answer to himself as a wife ; and in what way , if so , he have 
 well change his tone from that of friendship into that of love . while 
 thus reflect , Beatrice answer , 

 " not rich for an Englishwoman ; for an italian , yes . my fortune should be 
 half a million - " 

 " half a million ! " cry Randal , and with difficulty he restrain 
 himself from fall at her foot in adoration . " of franc ! " continue 
 the marchesa . 

 " franc ! ah , " say Randal , with a long - draw breath , and recover from 
 his sudden enthusiasm , " about L20,000 ? eight hundred a year at four per 
 cent . a very handsome portion , certainly   Genteel poverty ! " he murmur 
 to himself . " what an escape I have have ! but I see - I see . this will 
 smooth all difficulty in the way of my well and early project . I 
 see , - a very handsome portion , " he repeat aloud , - " not for a grand 
 seigneur , indeed , but still for a gentleman of birth and expectation 
 worthy of your choice , if ambition be not your first object . ah , while 
 you speak with such endear eloquence of feeling that be fresh , of 
 a heart that be new , of the happy English home , you might guess that 
 my thought run to my friend who love you so devotedly , and who so 
 realize your ideal . proverbially , with we , happy marriage and happy 
 home be find not in the gay circle of London fashion , but at the 
 hearth of our rural nobility , our untitled country gentleman . and who , 
 amongst all your adorer , can offer you a lot so really enviable as the 
 one whom , I see by your blush , you already guess that I refer to ? " 

 " do I blush ? " say the marchesa , with a silvery laugh . " Nay , I think 
 that your zeal for your friend mislead you . but I will own frankly , I 
 have be touch by his honest ingenuous love , - so evident , yet rather 
 look than speak . I have contrast the love that honour I with the 
 suitor that seek to degrade ; more I can not say . for though I grant that 
 your friend be handsome , high - spirited , and generous , still he be not 
 what - " 

 " you mistake , believe I , " interrupt Randal . " you shall not finish 
 your sentence . he be all that you do not yet suppose he ; for his 
 shyness , and his very love , his very respect for your superiority , do 
 not allow his mind and his nature to appear to advantage . you , it be 
 true , have a taste for letter and poetry rare among your countrywoman . 
 he have not at present - few man have . but what Cimon would not be refine 
 by so fair an Iphigenia ? such frivolity as he now show belong but 
 to youth and inexperience of life . happy the brother who could see his 
 sister the wife of Frank Hazeldean . " 

 the marchesa lean her cheek on her hand in silence . to she , marriage 
 be more than it usually seem to dream maiden or to disconsolate 
 widow . so have the strong desire to escape from the control of she 
 unprincipled and remorseless brother grow a part of her very soul ; 
 so have whatever be good and high in her very mixed and complex 
 character be gall and outrage by her friendless and exposed 
 position , the equivocal worship render to her beauty , the various 
 debasement to which pecuniary embarrassment have subject she - not 
 without design on the part of the count , who though grasping , be not 
 miserly , and who by precarious and seemingly capricious gift at one 
 time , and refusal of all aid at another , have involve she in debt in 
 order to retain his hold on she ; so utterly painful and humiliating to 
 a woman of her pride and her birth be the station that she hold in the 
 world , - that in marriage she see liberty , life , honour , self - redemption ; 
 and these thought , while they compel she to co - operate with the 
 scheme by which the count , on secure to himself a bride , be to 
 bestow on herself a dower , also dispose she now to receive with favour 
 Randal Leslie 's pleading on behalf of his friend . 

 the advocate see that he have make an impression , and with the marvellous 
 skill which his knowledge of those nature that engage his study 
 bestow on his intelligence , he continue to improve his cause by such 
 representation as be likely to be most effective . with what admirable 
 tact he avoid panegyric of Frank as the mere individual , and draw he 
 rather as the type , the ideal of what a woman in Beatrice 's position 
 might desire , in the safety , peace , and Honour of a home , in the trust 
 and constancy and honest confide love of its partner ! he do not paint 
 an elysium , - he describe a haven ; he do not glowingly delineate a hero 
 of romance , - he soberly portray that Representative of the Respectable 
 and the real which a woman turn to when romance begin to seem to she 
 but delusion . verily , if you could have look into the heart of 
 the person he address , and hear he speak , you would have cry 
 admiringly , " Knowledge be power ; and this man , if as able on a large 
 field of action , should play no mean part in the history of his time . " 

 slowly Beatrice rouse herself from the revery which creep over she as 
 he speak , - slowly , and with a deep sigh , and say , 

 " well , well , grant all you say ! at least before I can listen to so 
 honourable a love , I must be relieve from the base and sordid pleasure 
 that weigh on I . I can not say to the man who woo I , ' will you pay 
 the debt of the daughter of Franzini , and the widow of Di Negra ? ' " 

 " Nay , your debt , surely , make so slight a portion of your dowry . " 

 " but the dowry have to be secure ; " and here , turn the table upon her 
 companion , as the apt proverb express it , Madame di Negra extend she 
 hand to Randal , and say in the most winning accent , " you be , then , 
 truly and sincerely my friend ? " 

 " can you doubt it ? " 

 " I prove that I do not , for I ask your assistance . " 

 " mine ? how ? " 

 " listen ; my brother have arrive in London - " 

 " I see that arrival announce in the paper . " 

 " and he come , empower by the consent of the emperor , to ask the hand 
 of a relation and countrywoman of his , - an alliance that will heal long 
 family dissension , and add to his own fortune those of an heiress . my 
 brother , like myself , have be extravagant . the dowry which by law 
 he still owe I it would distress he to pay till this marriage be 
 assure . " 

 " I understand , " say randal . " but how can I aid this marriage ? " 

 " by assist we to discover the bride . she , with her father , seek 
 refuge and concealment in England . " 

 " the father have , then , take part in some political disaffection , and 
 be proscribe ? " 

 " exactly ; and so well have he conceal himself , that he have baffle 
 all our effort to discover his retreat . my brother can obtain he his 
 pardon in cement this alliance - " 

 " proceed . " 

 " ah , Randal , Randal , be this the frankness of friendship ? you know 
 that I have before seek to obtain the secret of our relation 's 
 retreat , - seek in vain to obtain it from Mr. Egerton , who assuredly 
 know it - " 

 " but who communicate no secret to live man , " say Randal , almost 
 bitterly ; " who , close and compact as iron , be as little malleable to I 
 as to you . " 

 " pardon I . I know you so well that I believe you could attain to any 
 secret you seek earnestly to acquire . Nay , more , I believe that you 
 know already that secret which I ask you to share with I . " 

 " what on earth make you think so ? " 

 " when , some week ago , you ask I to describe the personal appearance 
 and manner of the exile , which I do partly from the recollection of 
 my childhood , partly from the description give to I by other , I could 
 not but notice your countenance , and remark its change ; in spite , " say 
 the marchesa , smile , and watch randal while she speak , - " in spite 
 of your habitual self - command . and when I press you to own that you 
 have actually see some one who tally with that description , your 
 denial do not deceive I . still more , when return recently , of 
 your own accord , to the subject , you question I so shrewdly as to my 
 motif in seek the clew to our refugee , and I do not then answer 
 you satisfactorily , I could detect - " 

 " ha , ha , " interrupt Randal , with the low soft laugh by which 
 occasionally he infringe upon Lord Chesterfield 's recommendation to 
 shun a merriment so natural as to be illbre , - " ha , ha , you have the 
 fault of all observer too minute and refine . but even grant that I 
 may have see some italian exile   which be likely enough , what could 
 be more natural than my seeking to compare your description with their 
 appearance ; and grant that I might suspect some one amongst they to 
 be the man you search for , what more natural also than that I should 
 desire to know if you mean he harm or good in discover his 
 ' whereabout ' ? for ill , " add Randal , with an air of prudery , - " ill 
 would it become I to betray , even to friendship , the retreat of one who 
 would hide from persecution ; and even if I do so - for honour itself be 
 a weak safeguard against your fascination - such indiscretion might be 
 fatal to my future career . " 

 " how ? " 

 " do you not say that Egerton know the secret , yet will not communicate ; 
 and be he a man who would ever forgive in I an imprudence that 
 commit himself ? my dear friend , I will tell you more . when Audley 
 Egerton first notice my grow intimacy with you , he say , with his 
 usual dryness of counsel , ' randal , I do not ask you to discontinue 
 acquaintance with Madame di Negra , for an acquaintance with woman like 
 her form the manner , and refine the intellect ; but charming woman be 
 dangerous , and Madame di Negra be - a charming woman . ' " 

 the marchesa 's face flush . randal resume : " ' your fair acquaintance ' 
  I be still quote Egerton   ' seek to dis cover the home of a 
 countryman of her . she suspect that I know it . she may try to learn 
 it through you . accident may possibly give you the information she 
 require . beware how you betray it . by one such weakness I should judge 
 of your general character . he from whom a woman can extract a secret 
 will never be fit for public life . ' therefore , my dear marchesa , even 
 suppose I possess this secret , you would be no true friend of mine to 
 ask I to reveal what would imperil all my prospect . for as yet , " add 
 Randal , with a gloomy shade on his brow , - " as yet , I do not stand alone 
 and erect , - I lean , I be dependent . " 

 " there may be a way , " reply Madame di Negra , persist , " to 
 communicate this intelligence without the possibility of Mr. Egerton 's 
 trace our discovery to yourself ; and , though I will not press you 
 far , I add this , - you urge I to accept your friend 's hand ; you seem 
 interested in the success of his suit , and you plead it with a warmth 
 that show how much you regard what you suppose be his happiness ; I 
 will never accept his hand till I can do so without blush for my 
 penury , - till my dowry be secure ; and that can only be by my brother 's 
 union with the exile 's daughter . for your friend 's sake , therefore , 
 think well how you can aid I in the first step to that alliance . the 
 young lady once discover , and my brother have no fear for the success 
 of his suit . " 

 " and you would marry Frank if the dower be secure ? " 

 " your argument in his favour seem irresistible , " reply Beatrice , 
 look down . 

 a flash go from Randal 's eye , and he muse a few moment . 

 then slowly rise , and draw on his glove , he say , " well , at least 
 you so far reconcile my honour towards aid your research , that you 
 now inform I you mean no ill to the exile . " 

 " Ill ! - the restoration to fortune , honour , his native land ! " 

 " and you so far enlist my heart on your side , that you inspire I with 
 the hope to contribute to the happiness of two friend whom I dearly 
 love . I will , therefore , diligently try to ascertain if , among the 
 refugee I have meet with , lurk those whom you seek ; and if so , I will 
 thoughtfully consider how to give you the clew . meanwhile , not one 
 incautious word to Egerton . " 

 " trust I , - I be a woman of the world . " 

 randal now have gain the door . he pause , and renew carelessly , - 

 " this young lady must be heiress to great wealth , to induce a man of 
 your brother 's rank to take so much pain to discover she . " 

 " her wealth will be vast , " reply the marchesa ; " and if anything from 
 wealth or influence in a foreign State could be permit to prove my 
 brother 's gratitude - " 

 " ah , fie ! " interrupt Randal ; and , approach Madame di Negra , he 
 lift her hand to his lip , and say gallantly , " this be reward enough 
 to your preux chevalier . " 

 with those word he take his leave . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 with his hand behind he , and his head droop on his breast , slow , 
 stealthy , noiseless , Randal Leslie glide along the street on leave 
 the Italian 's house . across the scheme he have before revolve , there 
 glance another yet more glittering , for its gain might be more sure and 
 immediate . if the exile 's daughter be heiress to such wealth , might he 
 himself hope - he stop short even in his own soliloquy , and his breath 
 come quick . now , in his last visit to Hazeldean , he have come in contact 
 with Riccabocca , and be strike by the beauty of Violante . a vague 
 suspicion have cross he that these might be the person of whom 
 the marchesa be in search , and the suspicion have be confirm by 
 Beatrice 's description of the refugee she desire to discover . but as 
 he have not then learn the reason for her inquiry , nor conceive the 
 possibility that he could have any personal interest in ascertain 
 the truth , he have only class the secret in question among those 
 the further research into which might be leave to time and occasion . 
 certainly the reader will not do the unscrupulous intellect of randal 
 Leslie the injustice to suppose that he be deter from confide 
 to his fair friend all that he know of Riccabocca by the refinement of 
 honour to which he have so chivalrously allude . he have correctly state 
 Audley Egerton 's warning against any indiscreet confidence , though he 
 have forborne to mention a more recent and direct renewal of the same 
 caution . his first visit to Hazeldean have be pay without consult 
 Egerton . he have be pass some day at his father 's house , and have 
 go over thence to the squire 's . on his return to London , he have , 
 however , mention this visit to Audley , who have seem annoyed and even 
 displease at it , though Randal know sufficient of Egerton 's character 
 to guess that such feeling could scarce be occasion merely by his 
 estrangement from his half - brother . this dissatisfaction have , therefore , 
 puzzle the young man . but as it be necessary to his view to establish 
 intimacy with the squire , he do not yield the point with his customary 
 deference to his patron 's whim . accordingly he observe that he should 
 be very sorry to do anything displease to his benefactor , but that his 
 father have be naturally anxious that he should not appear positively 
 to slight the friendly overture of Mr. Hazeldean . 

 " why naturally ? " ask Egerton . 

 " because you know that Mr. Hazeldean be a relation of mine , - that my 
 grandmother be a Hazeldean . " 

 " ah ! " say Egerton , who , as it have be before say , know little and 
 care less about the Hazeldean pedigree , " I be either not aware of 
 that circumstance , or have forget it . and your father think that the 
 squire may leave you a legacy ? " 

 " oh , sir , my father be not so mercenary , - such an idea never enter his 
 head . but the squire himself have indeed say , ' why , if anything happen 
 to Frank , you would be next heir to my land , and therefore we ought to 
 know each other . ' but - " 

 " enough , " interrupt Egerton . " I be the last man to pretend to the 
 right of standing between you and a single chance of fortune , or of aid 
 to it . and whom do you meet at Hazeldean ? " 

 " there be no one there , sir ; not even Frank . " 

 " Hum . be the squire not on good term with his parson ? any quarrel about 
 tithe ? " 

 " oh , no quarrel . I forget Mr. Dale ; I see he pretty often . he admire 
 and praise you very much , sir . " 

 " Me - and why ? what do he say of I ? " 

 " that your heart be as sound as your head ; that he have once see you 
 about some old parishioner of his , and that he have be much impressed 
 with the depth of feeling he could not have anticipate in a man of the 
 world , and a statesman . " 

 " oh , that be all ; some affair when I be member for Lansmere ? " 

 " I suppose so . " 

 here the conversation have break off ; but the next time Randal be lead 
 to visit the squire he have formally ask Egerton 's consent , who , after 
 a moment 's hesitation , have as formally reply , " I have no objection . " 

 on return from this visit , Randal mention that he have see 
 Riccabocca : and Egerton , a little startled at first , say composedly , 
 " doubtless one of the political refugee ; take care not to set Madame 
 di Negra on his track . remember , she be suspect of be a spy of the 
 austrian government . " 

 " rely on I , sir , " say randal ; " but I should think this poor doctor can 
 scarcely be the person she seek to discover . " 

 " that be no affair of our , " answer Egerton : " we be english 
 gentleman , and make not a step towards the secret of another . " 

 now , when Randal revolve this rather ambiguous answer , and recall the 
 uneasiness with which Egerton have first hear of his visit to Hazeldean , 
 he think that he be indeed near the secret which Egerton desire to 
 conceal from he and from all , - namely , the incognito of the italian 
 whom Lord L'Estrange have take under his protection . 

 " my card , " say randal to himself , as with a deep - draw sigh he resume 
 his soliloquy , " be become difficult to play . on the one hand , to 
 entangle Frank into marriage with this foreigner , the squire could never 
 forgive he . on the other hand , if she will not marry he without the 
 dowry - and that depend on her brother 's wedding this countrywoman - and 
 that countrywoman be , as I surmise , Violante , and Violante be this 
 heiress , and to be win by I ! tush , tush . such delicate scruple in a 
 woman so place and so constitute as Beatrice di Negra must be easily 
 talk away . Nay , the loss itself of this alliance to her brother , the 
 loss of her own dowry , the very pressure of poverty and debt , would 
 compel she into the sole escape leave to her option . I will then follow 
 up the old plan ; I will go down to Hazeldean , and see if there be any 
 substance in the new one ; and then to reconcile both . Aha - the House of 
 Leslie shall rise yet from its ruin - and - " 

 here he be startle from his revery by a friendly slap on the shoulder , 
 and an exclamation , " why , randal , you be more absent than when you use 
 to steal away from the cricket - ground , mutter greek verse , at Eton . " 

 " my dear Frank , " say Randal , " you - you be so brusque , and I be just 
 think of you . " 

 " be you ? and kindly , then , I be sure , " say Frank Hazeldean , his 
 honest handsome face light up with the unsuspecting genial trust of 
 friendship ; " and Heaven know , " he add , with a sad voice , and a 
 graver expression on his eye and lip , - " Heaven know I want all the 
 kindness you can give I ! " 

 " I think , " say Randal , " that your father 's last supply , of which 
 I be fortunate enough to be the bearer , would clear off your more 
 press debt . I do not   pretend to preach , but really , I must say once 
 more , you should not be so extravagant . " 

 FRANK   seriously . - " I have do my good to reform . I have sell off my 
 horse , and I have not touch dice nor card these six month ; I would 
 not even put into the raffle for the last Derby . " this last be say 
 with the air of a man who doubt the possibility of obtain belief to 
 some assertion of preternatural abstinence and virtue . 

 RANDAL . - " be it possible ? but with such self - conquest , how be it 
 that you can not contrive to live within the bound of a very liberal 
 allowance ? " 

 FRANK   despondingly . - " why , when a man once get his head under water , 
 it be so hard to float back again on the surface . you see , I attribute 
 all my embarrassment to that first concealment of my debt from my 
 father , when they could have be so easily meet , and when he come up to 
 town so kindly . " 

 " I be sorry , then , that I give you that advice . " 

 " oh , you mean it so kindly , I do not   reproach you ; it be all my own 
 fault . " 

 " why , indeed , I do urge you to pay off that moiety of your debt leave 
 unpaid , with your allowance . have you do so , all have be well . " 

 " yes ; but poor Borrowell get into such a scrape at Goodwood , I could 
 not resist he ; a debt of honour , - that must be pay ; so when I sign 
 another bill for he , he could not pay it , poor fellow ! really he would 
 have shoot himself , if I have not renew it . and now it be swell to 
 such an amount with that cursed interest , that he never can pay it ; 
 and one bill , of course , beget another , - and to be renew every three 
 month ; ' t be the devil and all ! so little as I ever get for all I have 
 borrow , " add Frank , with a kind of rueful amaze . " not l1,500 ready 
 money ; and the interest would cost I almost as much yearly , - if I have 
 it . " " Only L1,500 ! " 

 " well ; besides seven large chest of the bad cigar you ever smoke , 
 three pipe of wine that no one would drink , and a great bear that have 
 be import from Greenland for the sake of its grease . " 

 " that should , at least , have save you a bill with your hairdresser . " 

 " I pay his bill with it , " say Frank , " and very good - natured he be to 
 take the monster off my hand , - it have already hug two soldier and 
 one groom into the shape of a flounder . I tell you what , " resume Frank , 
 after a short pause , " I have a great mind even now to tell my father 
 honestly all my embarrassment . " 

 RANDAL   solemnly . - " Hum ! " 

 FRANK . - " what ? do not   you think it would be the good way ? I never 
 can save enough , - never can pay off what I owe ; and it roll like a 
 snowball . " 

 RANDAL . - " judge by the squire 's talk , I think that with the first 
 sight of your affair you would forfeit his favour forever ; and your 
 mother would be so shocked , especially after suppose that the sum I 
 bring you so lately suffice to pay off every claim on you . if you have 
 not assure she of that it might be different ; but she , who so hat an 
 untruth , and who say to the squire , ' Frank say this will clear he ; 
 and with all his fault , Frank never yet tell a lie ! ' " 

 " oh , my dear mother ! - I fancy I hear she ! " cry Frank , with deep 
 emotion . " but I do not tell a lie , Randal ; I do not say that that sum 
 would clear I . " 

 " you empower and beg I to say so , " reply Randal , with grave 
 coldness ; " and do not   blame I if I believe you . " 

 " no , no ! I only say it would clear I for the moment . " 

 " I misunderstood you , then , sadly ; and such mistake involve my own 
 honour . pardon I , Frank ; do not   ask my aid in future . you see , with the 
 good intention , I only compromise myself . " 

 " if you forsake I , I may as well go and throw myself into the river , " 
 say Frank , in a tone of despair ; " and soon or later , my father must 
 know my necessity . the Jews threaten to go to he already ; and the 
 long the delay , the more terrible the explanation . " 

 " I do not   see why your father should ever learn the state of your 
 affair ; and it seem to I that you could pay off these usurer , and 
 get rid of these bill , by raise money on comparatively easy term - " 

 " how ? " cry Frank , eagerly . 

 " why , the casino property be entail on you , and you might obtain a sum 
 upon that , not to be pay till the property become your . " 

 " at my poor father 's death ? oh , no , no ! I can not bear the idea of this 
 cold - blooded calculation on a father 's death . I know it be not uncommon ; 
 I know other fellow who have do it , but they never have parent 
 so kind as mine ; and even in they it shock and revolt I . the 
 contemplate a father 's death , and profit by the contemplation it 
 seem a kind of parricide : it be not natural , randal . besides , do not 
 you remember what the Governor say , - he actually weep while he say 
 it , - ' never calculate on my death ; I could not bear that . ' oh , Randal , 
 do not   speak of it ! " 

 " I respect your sentiment ; but still , all the post - orbit you could 
 raise could not shorten Mr. Hazeldean 's life by a day . however , dismiss 
 that idea ; we must think of some other device . ha , Frank ! you be a 
 handsome fellow , and your expectation be great - why do not   you marry 
 some woman with money ? " 

 " Pooh ! " exclaim Frank , colour . " you know , Randal , that there be but 
 one woman in the world I can ever think of ; and I love she so devotedly , 
 that , though I be as gay as most man before , I really feel as if the 
 rest of her sex have lose every charm . I be pass through the street 
 now - merely to look up at her window . " 

 " you speak of Madame di Negra ? I have just leave she . certainly , she 
 be two or three year old than you ; but if you can get over that 
 misfortune , why not marry she ? " 

 " marry she ! " cry Frank , in amaze , and all his colour flee from his 
 cheek . " marry she ! be you serious ? " 

 " why not ? " 

 " but even if she , who be so accomplished , so admired , even if she would 
 accept I , she be , you know , poor than myself . she have tell I so 
 frankly . that woman have such a noble heart , - and - and - my father would 
 never consent , nor my mother either . I know they would not . " 

 " because she be a foreigner ? " 

 " yes - partly . " 

 " yet the squire suffer his cousin to marry a foreigner . " 

 " that be different . he have no control over Jemima ; and a 
 daughter - in - law be so different ; and my father be so english in his 
 notion ; and Madame di Negra , you see , be altogether so foreign . she 
 very grace would be against she in his eye . " 

 " I think you do both your parent injustice . a foreigner of low 
 birth - an actress or singer , for instance - of course would be highly 
 objectionable ; but a woman like Madame di Negra , of such high birth and 
 connection - " 

 Frank shake his head . " I do not   think the Governor would care a straw 
 about her connection , if she be a king 's daughter . he consider all 
 foreigner pretty much alike . and then , you know "   Frank 's voice sink 
 into a whisper , - " you know that one of the very reason why she be so 
 dear to I would be an insuperable objection to the old - fashioned folk 
 at home . " 

 " I do not   understand you , Frank . " 

 " I love she the more , " say young Hazeldean , raise his front with 
 a noble pride , that seem to speak of his descent from a race of 
 cavalier and gentleman , - " I love she the more because the world have 
 slander her name , - because I believe she to be pure and wrong . but 
 would they at the Hall , - they who do not see with a lover 's eye , 
 they who have all the stubborn english notion about the indecorum and 
 license of continental manner , and will so readily credit the bad ? 
 oh , no ! I love , I can not help it - but I have no hope . " 

 " it be very possible that you may be right , " exclaim Randal , as if 
 strike and half convince by his companion 's argument , - " very possible ; 
 and certainly I think that the homely folk at the Hall would fret and 
 fume at first , if they hear you be married to Madame di Negra . yet 
 still , when your father learn that you have do so , not from passion 
 alone , but to save he from all pecuniary sacrifice , - to clear yourself 
 of debt , to - " 

 " what do you mean ? " exclaim Frank , impatiently . 

 " I have reason to know that Madame di Negra will have as large a portion 
 as your father could reasonably expect you to receive with any english 
 wife . and when this be properly state to the squire , and the high 
 position and rank of your wife fully establish and bring home to 
 he , - for I must think that these would tell , despite your exaggerated 
 notion of his prejudice , - and then , when he really see Madame di 
 Negra , and can judge of her beauty and rare gift , upon my word , I 
 think , Frank , that there would be no cause for fear . after all , too , you 
 be his only son . he will have no option but to forgive you ; and I know 
 how anxiously both your parent wish to see you settle in life . " 

 Frank 's whole countenance become illuminate . " there be no one who 
 understand the squire like you , certainly , " say he , with lively joy . 
 " he have the high opinion of your judgment . and you really believe you 
 could smooth matter ? " 

 " I believe so ; but I should be sorry to induce you to run any risk ; and 
 if , on cool consideration , you think that risk be incur , I strongly 
 advise you to avoid all occasion of see the poor marchesa . ah , you 
 wince ; but I say it for her sake as well as your own . first , you must 
 be aware , that , unless you have serious thought of marriage , your 
 attention can but add to the very rumour that , equally groundless , you 
 so feelingly resent ; and , secondly , because I do not   think any man have a 
 right to win the affection of a woman - especially a woman who seem to 
 I likely to love with her whole heart and soul - merely to gratify his 
 own vanity . " 

 " vanity ! good heaven ! can you think so poorly of I ? but as to the 
 marchesa 's affection , " continue Frank , with a falter voice , " do you 
 really and honestly believe that they be to be win by I ? " 

 " I fear lest they may be half win already , " say Randal , with a smile 
 and a shake of the head ; " but she be too proud to let you see any effect 
 you may produce on she , especially when , as I take it for grant , you 
 have never hint at the hope of obtain her hand . " 

 " I never till now conceive such a hope . my dear Randal , all my care 
 have vanish ! I tread upon air ! I have a great mind to call on she at 
 once . " 

 " stay , stay , " say randal . " let I give you a caution . I have just 
 inform you that Madame di Negra will have , what you suspect not 
 before , a fortune suitable to her birth . any abrupt change in your 
 manner at present might induce she to believe that you be influence 
 by that intelligence . " 

 " ah ! " exclaim Frank , stop short , as if wound to the quick . " and 
 I feel guilty , - feel as if I be influence by that intelligence . so 
 I be , too , when I reflect , " he continue , with a naivete that be half 
 pathetic ; " but I hope she will not be very rich ; if so , I will not call . " 

 " make your mind easy , it be but a portion of some twenty or thirty 
 thousand pound , that would just suffice to discharge all your debt , 
 clear away all obstacle to your union , and in return for which you 
 could secure a more than adequate jointure and settlement on the Casino 
 property . now I be on that head , I will be yet more communicative . 
 Madame di Negra have a noble heart , as you say , and tell I herself , 
 that , until her brother on his arrival have assure she of this dowry , 
 she would never have consent to marry you , never crippled with her own 
 embarrassment the man she love . ah ! with what delight she will hail 
 the thought of assist you to win back your father 's heart ! but be 
 guard meanwhile . and now , Frank , what say you - would it not be well if 
 I run down to Hazeldean to sound your parent ? it be rather inconvenient 
 to I , to be sure , to leave town just at present ; but I would do more 
 than that to render you a small service . yes , I will go to Rood Hall 
 to - morrow , and thence to Hazeldean . I be sure your father will press I 
 to stay , and I shall have ample opportunity to judge of the manner 
 in which he would be likely to regard your marriage with Madame di 
 Negra , - suppose always it be properly put to he . we can then act 
 accordingly . " 

 " my dear , dear Randal , how can I thank you ? if ever a poor fellow like 
 I can serve you in return - but that be impossible . " 

 " why , certainly , I will never ask you to be security to a bill of mine , " 
 say randal , laugh . " I practise the economy I preach . " 

 " ah ! " say Frank , with a groan , " that be because your mind be 
 cultivate , - you have so many resource ; and all my fault have come 
 from idleness . if I have have anything to do on a rainy day , I should 
 never have get into these scrape . " 

 " oh , you will have enough to do some day manage your property . we who 
 have no property must find one in knowledge . Adieu , my dear Frank , I 
 must go home now . by the way , you have never , by chance , speak of the 
 Riccaboccas to Madame di Negra . " 

 " the Riccaboccas ? no . that be well think of . it may interest she to 
 know that a relation of mine have marry her countryman . very odd that 
 I never do mention it ; but , to say truth , I really do talk so little to 
 she : she be so superior , and I feel positively shy with she . " 

 " do I the favour , Frank , " say Randal , wait patiently till this 
 reply end , - for he be devise all the time what reason to give for 
 his request , - " never to allude to the Riccaboccas either to she or to 
 her brother , to whom you be sure to be present . " 

 " why not allude to they ? " 

 Randal hesitate a moment . his invention be still at fault , and , for a 
 wonder , he think it the good policy to go pretty near the truth . 

 " why , I will tell you . the marchesa conceal nothing from her brother , 
 and he be one of the few Italians who be in high favour with the 
 austrian court . " 

 " well ! " 

 " and I suspect that poor Dr. Riccabocca flee his country from some mad 
 experiment at revolution , and be still hide from the austrian police . " 

 " but they can not   hurt he here , " say Frank , with an Englishman 's dog 
 inborn conviction of the sanctity of his native island . " I should like 
 to see an austrian pretend to dictate to we whom to receive and whom to 
 reject . " 

 " Hum - that be true and constitutional , no doubt ; but Riccabocca may have 
 excellent reason - and , to speak plainly , I know he have   perhaps as 
 affect the safety of friend in Italy   - for preserve his incognito , 
 and we be bind to respect those reason without inquire far . " 

 " still I can not think so meanly of Madame di Negra , " persist Frank 
  shrewd here , though credulous elsewhere , and both from his sense of 
 honour , " as to suppose that she would descend to be a spy , and injure 
 a poor countryman of her own , who trust to the same hospitality she 
 receive herself at our english hand . oh , if I think that , I could 
 not love she ! " add Frank , with energy . 

 " certainly you be right . but see in what a false position you would 
 place both her brother and herself . if they know Riccabocca 's secret , 
 and proclaim it to the Austrian Government , as you say , it would be 
 cruel and mean ; but if they know it and conceal it , it might involve 
 they both in the most serious consequence . you know the austrian policy 
 be proverbially so jealous and tyrannical ? " 

 " well , the newspaper say so , certainly . " 

 " and , in short , your discretion can do no harm , and your indiscretion 
 may . therefore , give I your word , Frank . I can not   stay to argue now . " 

 " I will not allude to the Riccaboccas , upon my honour , " answer Frank ; 
 ' still , I be sure that they would be as safe with the marchesa as 
 with - " 

 " I rely on your honour , " interrupt randal , hastily , and hurry off . 




 CHAPTER V. 

 towards the evening of the follow day , Randal Leslie walk slowly 
 from a village in the main road   about two mile from Rood Hall , 
 at which he have get out of the coach . he pass through mead and 
 cornfield , and by the skirt of wood which have formerly belong to 
 his ancestor , but have be long since alienate . he be alone amidst 
 the haunt of his boyhood , the scene in which he have first invoke the 
 grand Spirit of Knowledge , to bid the Celestial still one minister to 
 the command of an earthly and turbulent ambition . he pause often in 
 his path , especially when the undulation of the ground give a glimpse 
 of the gray church tower , or the gloomy fir that rise above the 
 desolate waste of Rood . 

 " here , " think Randal , with a soften eye , - " here , how often , 
 compare the fertility of the land pass away from the inheritance 
 of my father , with the forlorn wild that be leave to their mouldering 
 Hall , - here how often have I say to myself , ' I will rebuild the 
 fortune of my House . ' and straightway Toil lose its aspect of drudge , 
 and grow kingly , and book become as live army to serve my thought . 
 again - again o thou haughty Past , brace and strengthen I in the battle 
 with the future . " his pale lip writhe as he soliloquize , for his 
 conscience speak to he while he thus address his will , and its voice 
 be hear more audibly in the quiet of the rural landscape , than amidst 
 the turmoil and din of that armed and sleepless camp which we call a 
 city . 

 Doubtless , though Ambition have object more vast and beneficent than 
 the restoration of a name , that in itself be high and chivalrous , and 
 appeal to a strong interest in the human heart . but all emotion and 
 all end of a nobler character have seem to filter themselves free 
 from every golden grain in pass through the mechanism of Randal 's 
 intellect , and come forth at last into egotism clear and unalloyed . 
 nevertheless , it be a strange truth that , to a man of cultivate mind , 
 however perverted and vicious , there be vouchsafed gleam of bright 
 sentiment , irregular perception of moral beauty , deny to the brutal 
 unreasoning wickedness of uneducated villany , - which perhaps ultimately 
 serve as his punishment , accord to the old thought of the satirist , 
 that there be no great curse than to perceive virtue yet adopt 
 vice . and as the solitary schemer walk slowly on , and his 
 childhood - innocent at least indeed - come distinct before he through 
 the halo of bygone dream , - dream far pure than those from which he 
 now rise each morning to the active world of Man , - a profound melancholy 
 creep over he , and suddenly he exclaim aloud , " then I aspire to be 
 renowned and great ; now , how be it that , so advanced in my career , all 
 that seem lofty in the end have vanish from I , and the only mean 
 that I contemplate be those which my childhood would have call poor 
 and vile ? ah , be it that I then read but book , and now my knowledge have 
 pass onward , and man contaminate more than book ? but , " he continue , 
 in a low voice , as if argue with himself , " if power be only so to be 
 win , - and of what use be knowledge if it be not power - do not success 
 in life justify all thing ? and who prize the wise man if he fail ? " he 
 continue his way , but still the soft tranquillity around rebuke he , 
 and still his reason be dissatisfy , as well as his conscience . there 
 be time when nature , like a bath of youth , seem to restore to the 
 jade soul its freshness , - time from which some man have emerge , as if 
 reborn . the crisis of life be very silent . suddenly the scene open on 
 Randal Leslie 's eye , - the bare desert common , the dilapidated church , 
 the old house , partially see in the dank dreary hollow , into which it 
 seem to randal to have sink deeply and lowly than when he see 
 it last . and on the common be some young man play at hockey . that 
 old - fashioned game , now very uncommon in England , except at school , be 
 still preserve in the primitive vicinity of Rood by the young yeoman 
 and farmer . randal stand by the stile and look on , for among the 
 player he recognize his brother Oliver . presently the ball be strike 
 towards Oliver , and the group instantly gather round that young 
 gentleman , and snatch he from Randal 's eye ; but the eld brother 
 hear a displeasing din , a derisive laughter . Oliver have shrink from the 
 danger of the thick clubbed stick that ply around he , and receive 
 some stroke across the leg , for his voice rise whine , and be drown 
 by shout of , " go to your mammy . that be Noll Leslie all over . butter 
 shin ! " 

 Randal 's sallow face become scarlet . " the jest of boor - a Leslie ! " he 
 mutter , and grind his tooth . he spring over the stile , and 
 walk erect and haughtily across the ground . the player cry out 
 indignantly . randal raise his hat , and they recognize he , and stop 
 the game . for he at least a certain respect be feel . Oliver turn 
 round quickly , and run up to he . Randal catch his arm firmly , and 
 without say a word to the rest , draw he away towards the house . 
 Oliver cast a regretful , linger look behind he , rub his shin , 
 and then steal a timid glance towards Randal 's severe and moody 
 countenance . 

 " you be not angry that I be play at hockey with our neighbour , " 
 say he , deprecatingly , observe that Randal would not break the 
 silence . 

 " no , " reply the eld brother ; " but in associate with his inferior , 
 a gentleman still know how to maintain his dignity . there be no harm 
 in play with inferior , but it be necessary to a gentleman to play so 
 that he be not the laugh - stock of clown . " 

 Oliver hang his head , and make no answer . they come into the slovenly 
 precinct of the court , and the pig star at they from the paling , as 
 their progenitor have star , year before , at Frank Hazeldean . 

 Mr. Leslie , senior , in a shabby straw - hat , be engage in feed the 
 chicken before the threshold , and he perform even that occupation 
 with a maunder lack - a - daisical slothfulness , drop down the grain 
 almost one by one from his inert dreamy finger . 

 Randal 's sister , her hair still and forever hang about her ear , be 
 seat on a rush - bottom chair , read a tattered novel ; and from the 
 parlour window be hear the querulous voice of Mrs. Leslie , in high 
 fidget and complaint . 

 somehow or other , as the young heir to all this helpless poverty stand 
 in the courtyard , with his sharp , refined , intelligent feature , and his 
 strange elegance of dress and aspect , one well comprehend how , 
 leave solely to the egotism of his knowledge and his ambition , in such 
 a family , and without any of the sweet nameless lesson of home , he have 
 grow up into such close and secret solitude of soul , - how the mind have 
 take so little nutriment from the heart , and how that affection and 
 respect which the warm circle of the heart usually call forth have 
 pass with he to the graf of dead father , grow , as it be , 
 bloodless and ghoul - like amidst the charnel on which they feed . 

 " ha , Randal , boy , " say Mr. Leslie , look up lazily , " how d ' ye do ? 
 who could have expect you ? my dear , my dear , " he cry , in a break 
 voice , and as if in helpless dismay , " here be randal , and he will be 
 want dinner , or supper , or something . " but , in the mean while , 
 Randal 's sister Juliet have spring up and throw her arm round her 
 brother 's neck , and he have draw she aside caressingly , for Randal 's 
 strong human affection be for this sister . 

 " you be grow very pretty , Juliet , " say he , smooth back her hair ; 
 " why do yourself such injustice , - why not pay more attention to your 
 appearance , as I have so often beg you to do ? " 

 " I do not expect you , dear Randal ; you always come so suddenly , and 
 catch we en dish - a - bill . " 

 " dish - a - bill ! " echo Randal , with a groan . " Dishabille ! you ought never 
 to be so catch ! " 

 " no one else do so catch we , - nobody else ever come . Heigho ! " and the 
 young lady sigh very heartily . " patience , patience ; my day be come , 
 and then your , my sister , " reply Randal , with genuine pity , as he 
 gaze upon what a little care could have train into so fair a flower , 
 and what now look so like a weed . 

 here Mrs. Leslie , in a state of intense excitement - have rush 
 through the parlour , leave a fragment of her gown between the yawning 
 brass of the never - mend Brummagem work - table - tear across the hall , 
 whirl out of the door , scatter the chicken to the right and leave , 
 and clutched hold of randal in her motherly embrace . " La , how you 
 do shake my nerve , " she cry , after give he a most hasty and 
 uncomfortable kiss . " and you be hungry too , and nothing in the house 
 but cold mutton ! Jenny , Jenny , I say , Jenny ! Juliet , have you see 
 Jenny ? where be Jenny ? out with the odd man , I will be bind . " 

 " I be not hungry , Mother , " say randal ; " I wish for nothing but tea . " 
 Juliet , scramble up her hair , dart into the house to prepare the 
 tea , and also to " tidy herself . " she dearly love her fine brother , but 
 she be greatly in awe of he . 

 randal seat himself on the broken pale . " take care they do not   come 
 down , " say Mr. Leslie , with some anxiety . 

 " oh , Sir , I be very light ; nothing come down with I . " the pig star 
 up , and grunt in amaze at the stranger . " Mother , " say the young man , 
 detain Mrs. Leslie , who want to set off in chase of Jenny , " Mother , 
 you should not let Oliver associate with those village boor . it be time 
 to think of a profession for he . " 

 " oh , he eat we out of house and home - such an appetite ! but as to a 
 profession , what be he fit for ? he will never be a scholar . " 

 Randal nod a moody assent ; for , indeed , Oliver have be send to 
 Cambridge , and support there out of Randal 's income from his official 
 pay ; and Oliver have be pluck for his Little Go . 

 " there be the army , " say the eld brother , - " a gentleman 's calling . 
 how handsome Juliet ought to be - but - I leave money for master - and she 
 pronounce french like a chambermaid . " 

 " yet she be fond of her book too . she be always read , and good for 
 nothing else . " 

 " reading ! those trashy novel ! " 

 " so like you , - you always come to scold , and make thing unpleasant , " 
 say Mrs. Leslie , peevishly . " you be grow too fine for we , and I be 
 sure we suffer affront enough from other , not to want a little respect 
 from our own child . " 

 " I do not mean to affront you , " say Randal , sadly . " pardon I . but who 
 else have do so ? " 

 then Mrs. Leslie go into a minute and most irritate catalogue of 
 all the mortification and insult she have receive ; the grievance of 
 a petty provincial family , with much pretension and small power , - of all 
 people , indeed , without the disposition to please - without the ability 
 to serve - who exaggerate every offence , and be thankful for no 
 kindness . Farmer Jones have insolently refuse to send his wagon twenty 
 mile for coal . Mr. Giles , the butcher , request the payment of his 
 bill , have state that the custom at Rood be too small for he to allow 
 credit . Squire Thornhill , who be the present owner of the fair slice 
 of the old Leslie domain , have take the liberty to ask permission to 
 shoot over Mr. Leslie 's land , since Mr. Leslie do not preserve . Lady 
 Spratt   new people from the city , who hire a neighbouring country - seat 
 have take a discharged servant of Mrs. Leslie 's without apply for the 
 character . the Lord - Lieutenant have give a ball , and have not invite the 
 Leslies . Mr. Leslie 's tenant have vote against their landlord 's wish at 
 the recent election . More than all , Squire Hazeldean and his Harry have 
 call at Rood , and though Mrs. Leslie have scream out to Jenny , " not 
 at home , " she have be see at the window , and the squire have actually 
 force his way in , and catch the whole family " in a state not fit to 
 be see . " that be a trifle , but the squire have presume to instruct Mr. 
 Leslie how to manage his property , and Mrs. Hazeldean have actually tell 
 Juliet to hold up her head , and tie up her hair , " as if we be her 
 cottager ! " say Mrs. Leslie , with the pride of a Montfydget . 

 all these , and various other annoyance , though Randal be too sensible 
 not to perceive their insignificance , still gall and mortify the 
 listening heir of Rood . they show , at least , even to the well - mean 
 officiousness of the Hazeldeans , the small account in which the fall 
 family be hold . as he sit still on the moss - grow pale , gloomy and 
 taciturn , his mother stand beside he , with her cap awry , Mr. Leslie 
 shamblingly saunter up , and say in a pensive , dolorous whine , 

 " I wish we have a good sum of money , Randal , boy ! " 

 to do Mr. Leslie justice , he seldom give vent to any wish that savour 
 of avarice . his mind must be singularly arouse , to wander out of its 
 normal limit of sluggish , dull content . 

 so Randal look at he in surprise , and say , " do you , Sir ? - why ? " 

 " the manor of Rood and Dulmansberry , and all the land therein , 
 which my great - grandfather sell away , be to be sell again when Squire 
 Thornhill 's eld son come of age , to cut off the entail . Sir John 
 Spratt talk of buy they . I should like to have they back again ! ' t 
 be a shame to see the Leslie estate hawk about , and buy by Spratts 
 and people . I wish I have a great , great sum of ready money . " the poor 
 gentleman extend his helpless finger as he speak , and fall into a 
 dejected revery . 

 randal spring from the pal , a movement which frighten the 
 contemplative pig , and set they off squall and scampering . " when 
 do young Thornhill come of age ? " 

 " he be nineteen last August . I know it , because the day he be bear I 
 pick up my fossil of the sea - horse , just by Dulmansberry church , when 
 the joy - bell be ring . my fossil sea - horse ! it will be an heirloom , 
 randal - " 

 " two year - nearly two year - yet - ah , ah ! " say Randal ; and his sister 
 now appear , to announce that tea be ready , he throw his arm round 
 her neck and kiss she . Juliet have arrange her hair and trim up 
 her dress . she look very pretty , and she have now the air of a 
 gentlewoman , - something of Randal 's own refinement in her slender 
 proportion and well - shape head . 

 " be patient , patient still , my dear sister , " whisper Randal , " and 
 keep your heart whole for two year long . " the young man be gay and 
 good - humour over his simple meal , while his family group round 
 he . when it be over , Mr. Leslie light his pipe , and call for his 
 brandy - and - water . Mrs. Leslie begin to question about London and Court , 
 and the new king and the new queen , and Mr. Audley Egerton , and hop 
 Mr. Egerton would leave Randal all his money , and that Randal would 
 marry a rich woman , and that the king would make he a prime minister 
 one of these day ; and then she should like to see if Farmer Jones would 
 refuse to send his wagon for coal ! and every now and then , as the word 
 " rich " or " money " catch Mr. Leslie 's ear , he shake his head , draw 
 his pipe from his mouth , " a Spratt should not have what belong to my 
 great - great - grandfather . if I have a good sum of ready money ! the 
 old family estate ! " Oliver and Juliet sit silent , and on their good 
 behaviour ; and Randal , indulge his own revery , dreamily hear the 
 word " money , " " Spratt , " " great - great - grandfather , " " rich wife , " " family 
 estate ; " and they sound to he vague and afar off , like whisper from 
 the world of romance and legend , - weird prophecy of thing to be . 

 such be the hearth which warm the viper that nestle and gnaw at 
 the heart of Randal , poison all the aspiration that youth should 
 have render pure , ambition lofty , and knowledge beneficent and divine . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 when the rest of the household be in deep sleep , Randal stand long at 
 his open window , look over the dreary , comfortless scene , - the moon 
 gleam from sky half - autumnal , half - wintry , upon squalid decay , 
 through the ragged fissure of the fir ; and when he lie down to rest , 
 his sleep be feverish , and trouble by turbulent dream . 

 however , he be up early , and with an unwonted colour in his cheek , 
 which his sister ascribe to the country air . after breakfast , he take 
 his way towards Hazeldean , mount upon a tolerable , horse , which he 
 borrow of a neighbouring farmer who occasionally hunt . before noon , 
 the garden and ter race of the Casino come in sight . he rein in his 
 horse , and by the little fountain at which Leonard have be will not to eat 
 his radish and con his book , he see Riccabocca seat under the shade 
 of the red umbrella . and by the Italian 's side stand a form that a Greek 
 of old might have deem the Naiad of the Fount ; for in its youthful 
 beauty there be something so full of poetry , something at once so sweet 
 and so stately , that it speak to the imagination while it charm the 
 sense . 

 Randal dismount , tie his horse to the gate , and , walk down a 
 trellis alley , come suddenly to the spot . his dark shadow fall over 
 the clear mirror of the fountain just as Riccabocca have say , " all here 
 be so secure from evil ! - the wave of the fountain be never trouble 
 like those of the river ! " and Violante have answer in her soft native 
 tongue , and lift her dark , spiritual eye , " but the fountain would 
 be but a lifeless pool , oh my father , if the spray do not mount towards 
 the sky ! " 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 RANDAL advanced - " I fear , Signor Riccabocca , that I be guilty of some 
 want of ceremony . " 

 " to dispense with ceremony be the most delicate mode of confer a 
 compliment , " reply the urbane Italian , as he recover from his first 
 surprise at Randal 's sudden address , and extend his hand . 

 Violante bow her graceful head to the young man 's respectful 
 salutation . " I be on my way to Hazeldean , " resume Randal , " and , see 
 you in the garden , could not resist this intrusion . " 

 RICCOBOCCA . - " you come from London ? stir time for you English , but 
 I do not ask you the news . no news can affect we . " 

 RANDAL   softly . - " perhaps yes . " 

 riccabocca   startle . - " how ? " 

 VIOLANTE . - " surely he speak of Italy , and news from that country 
 affect you still , my father . " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " Nay , nay , nothing affect I like this country ; its east 
 wind might affect a pyramid ! draw your mantle round you , child , and go 
 in ; the air have suddenly grow chill . " 

 Violante smile on her father , glance uneasily towards Randal 's grave 
 brow , and go slowly towards the house . Riccabocca , after wait some 
 moment in silence , as if expect Randal to speak , say , with affected 
 carelessness , 

 " so you think that you have news that might affect I ? Corpo di Bacco ! I 
 be curious to learn what ? " 

 " I may be mistake - that depend on your answer to one question . do you 
 know the Count of Peschiera ? " 

 Riccabocca wince , and turn pale . he could not baffle the watchful eye 
 of the questioner . 

 " Enough , " say randal ; " I see that I be right . believe in my sincerity . 
 I speak but to warn and to serve you . the count seek to discover the 
 retreat of a countryman and kinsman of his own . " 

 " and for what end ? " cry Riccabocca , throw off his guard , and his 
 breast dilate , his crest rise , and his eye flash ; valour and defiance 
 break from habitual caution and self - control . " but - pooh ! " he add , 
 strive to regain his ordinary and half - ironical calm , " it matter not 
 to I . I grant , sir , that I know the Count di Peschiera ; but what have 
 Dr. Riccabocca to do with the kinsman of so grand a personage ? " 

 " Dr. Riccabocca - nothing . but - " here Randal put his lip close to the 
 Italian 's ear , and whisper a brief sentence . then retreat a step , 
 but lay his hand on the exile 's shoulder , he add , " need I say that 
 your secret be safe with I ? " 

 Riccabocca make no answer . his eye rest on the ground musingly . 

 Randal continue , " and I shall esteem it the high honour you can 
 bestow on I , to be permit to assist you in forestall danger . " 

 riccabocca   slowly . - " Sir , I thank you ; you have my secret , and I feel 
 assure it be safe , for I speak to an english gentleman . there may be 
 family reason why I should avoid the Count di Peschiera ; and , indeed , 
 he be safe from shoal who steer clear of his relation . " 

 the poor Italian regain his caustic smile as he utter that wise , 
 villanous italian maxim . 

 RANDAL . - " I know little of the Count of Peschiera save from the current 
 talk of the world . he be say to hold the estate of a kinsman who take 
 part in a conspiracy against the austrian power . " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " it be true . let that content he ; what more do he 
 desire ? you speak of forestall danger ; what danger ? I be on the soil 
 of England , and protect by its law . " 

 RANDAL . - " allow I to inquire if , have the kinsman no child , the Count di 
 Peschiera would be legitimate and natural heir to the estate he hold ? " 

 RICCABOCCA . - " he would - what then ? " 

 RANDAL . - " do that thought suggest no danger to the child of the 
 kinsman ? " 

 Riccabocca recoil , and gasp forth , " the child ! you do not mean to 
 imply that this man , infamous though he be , can contemplate the crime of 
 an assassin ? " 

 randal pause perplexed . his ground be delicate . he know not what 
 cause of resentment the exile entertain against the count . he know 
 not whether Riccabocca would not assent to an alliance that might 
 restore he to his country , - and he resolve to feel his way with 
 precaution . 

 " I do not , " say he , smile gravely , " mean to insinuate so horrible a 
 charge against a man whom I have never see . he seek you , - that be all 
 I know . I imagine , from his general character , that in this search he 
 consult his interest . perhaps all matter might be conciliate by an 
 interview ! " 

 " an interview ! " exclaim Riccabocca ; " there be but one way we should 
 meet , - foot to foot , and hand to hand . " 

 " be it so ? then you would not listen to the count if he propose some 
 amicable compromise , - if , for instance , he be a candidate for the hand 
 of your daughter ? " 

 the poor italian , so wise and so subtle in his talk , be as rash and 
 blind when it come to action as if he have be bear in Ireland and 
 nourish on potato and repeal . he bar his whole soul to the 
 merciless eye of Randal . 

 " my daughter ! " he exclaim . " Sir , your very question be an insult . " 

 Randal 's way become clear at once . " forgive I , " he say mildly ; " I 
 will tell you frankly all that I know . I be acquaint with the count 's 
 sister . I have some little influence over she . it be she who inform 
 I that the count have come here , bent upon discover your refuge , and 
 resolve to we d your daughter . this be the danger of which I speak . and 
 when I ask your permission to aid in forestall it , I only intend 
 to suggest that it might be wise to find some securer home , and that I , 
 if permit to know that home , and to visit you , could apprise you from 
 time to time of the count 's plan and movement . " 

 " Sir , I thank you sincerely , " say Riccabocca , with emotion ; " but be I 
 not safe here ? " 

 " I doubt it . many people have visit the squire in the shooting season , 
 who will have hear of you , - perhaps see you , and who be likely 
 to meet the count in London . and Frank Hazeldean , too , who know the 
 count 's sister - " 

 " true , true " interrupted Riccabocca . " I see , I see . I will consider , I 
 will reflect . meanwhile you be go to Hazel dean . do not say a word 
 to the squire . he know not the secret you have discover . " 

 with those word Riccabocca turn slightly away , and Randal take the 
 hint to depart . 

 " at all time command and rely on I , " say the young traitor , and he 
 regain the pale to which he have fasten his horse . 

 as he remount , he cast his eye towards the place where he have leave 
 Riccabocca . the Italian be still stand there . presently the form of 
 Jackeymo be see emerge from the shrub . Riccabocca turn hastily 
 round , recognize his servant , utter an exclamation loud enough to 
 reach Randal 's ear , and then , catch Jackeymo by the arm , disappear 
 with he amidst the deep recess of the garden . 

 " it will be indeed in my favour , " think Randal , as he ride on , " if I 
 can get they into the neighbourhood of London , - all occasion there to 
 woo , and if expedient , to win , the heiress . " 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 " Br the Lord , Harry ! " cry the squire , as he stand with his wife in the 
 park , on a visit of inspection to some first - rate southdown just add 
 to his stock , - " by the Lord , if that be not randal Leslie try to get 
 into the park at the back gate ! Hollo , Randal ! you must come round by 
 the lodge , my boy , " say he . " you see this gate be lock to keep out 
 trespasser . " 

 " a pity , " say randal . " I like short cut , and you have shut up a very 
 short one . " 

 " so the trespasser say , " quoth the squire ; " but Stirn insist on 
 it - valuable man , stirn . but ride round to the lodge . put up your horse , 
 and you will join we before we can get to the house . " 

 Randal nod and smile , and ride briskly on . the squire rejoin his 
 Harry . 

 " ah , William , " say she , anxiously , " though certainly Randal Leslie 
 mean well , I always dread his visit . " 

 " so do I , in one sense , " quoth the squire , " for he always carry away a 
 bank - note for Frank . " 

 " I hope he be really Frank 's friend , " say Mrs. Hazeldean . " who be else 
 can he be ? not his own , poor fellow , for he will never accept a shilling 
 from I , though his grandmother be as good a Hazeldean as I be . but , 
 zound , I like his pride , and his economy too . as for Frank - " 

 " Hush , William ! " cry Mrs. Hazeldean , and put her fair hand before 
 the squire 's mouth . the squire be soften , and kiss the fair hand 
 gallantly , - perhaps he kiss the lip too ; at all event , the worthy 
 pair be walk lovingly arm - in - arm when Randal join they . 

 he do not affect to perceive a certain coldness in the manner of Mrs. 
 Hazeldean , but begin immediately to talk to she about Frank ; praise that 
 young gentleman 's appearance ; expatiate on his health , his popularity , 
 and his good gift , personal and mental , - and this with so much warmth , 
 that any dim and undeveloped suspicion Mrs. Hazeldean might have form 
 soon melt away . 

 Randal continue to make himself thus agreeable , until the squire , 
 persuade that his young kinsman be a first - rate agriculturalist , 
 insist upon carry he off to the home - farm ; and Harry turn 
 towards the house ; to order Randal 's room to be get ready : " for , " say 
 Randal , " know that you will excuse my morning dress , I venture to 
 invite myself to dine and sleep at the Hall . " 

 on approach the farm - building , Randal be seize with the terror of 
 an impostor ; for , despite all the theoretical learning on Bucolics and 
 Georgics with which he have dazzle the squire , poor Frank , so despised , 
 would have beat he hollow when it come to the judging of the point of 
 an ox , or the show of a crop . 

 " ha , ha , " cry the squire , chuckle , " I long to see how you will 
 astonish Stirn . why , you will guess in a moment where we put the 
 top - dressing ; and when you come to handle my short - horn , I dare swear 
 you will know to a pound how much oil - cake have go into their side . " 

 " oh , you do I too much honour , - indeed you do . I only know the general 
 principle of agriculture ; the detail be eminently interesting , but I 
 have not have the opportunity to acquire they . " 

 " Stuff ! " cry the squire . " how can a man know general principle unless 
 he have first study the detail ? you be too modest , my boy . Ho ! 
 there be stirn look out for we ! " randal see the grim visage of Stirn 
 peer out of a cattleshe , and feel undone . he make a desperate rush 
 towards change the squire 's humour . 

 " well , sir , perhaps Frank may soon gratify your wish , and turn farmer 
 himself . " 

 " eh ! " quoth the squire , stop short , - " what now ? " 

 " suppose he be to marry ? " 

 " I would give he the two good farm on the property rent free . ha , ha ! have 
 he see the girl yet ? I would leave he free to choose ; sir , I choose for 
 myself , - every man should . not but what Miss Stick - to - right be an 
 heiress , and , I hear , a very decent girl , and that would join the two 
 property , and put an end to that law - suit about the right of way , 
 which begin in the reign of King Charles the Second , and be likely 
 otherwise to last till the day of judgment . but never mind she ; let 
 Frank choose to please himself . " 

 " I will not fail to tell he so , sir . I do fear you might have some 
 prejudice . but here we be at the farmyard . " 

 " burn the farmyard ! how can I think of farmyard when you talk of 
 Frank 's marriage ? come on - this way . what be you say about 
 prejudice ? " 

 " why , you might wish he to marry an Englishwoman , for instance . " 

 " english ! good heavens , sir , do he mean to marry a Hindoo ? " 

 " Nay , I do not   know that he mean to marry at all ; I be only surmise ; 
 but if he do fall in love with a foreigner - " 

 " a foreigner ! ah , then Harry be - " the squire stop short . 

 " who might , perhaps , " observe randal - not truly , if he refer to 
 Madame di Negra - " who might , perhaps , speak very little English ? " 

 " Lord ha ' mercy ! " 

 " and a roman Catholic - " 

 " worship idol , and roast people who do not   worship they . " 

 " Signor Riccabocca be not so bad as that . " 

 " Rickeybockey ! well , if it be his daughter ! but not speak English ! 
 and not go to the parish church ! by George , if Frank think of such a 
 thing , I would cut he off with a shilling . do not   talk to I , sir ; I would . 
 I ' m a mild man , and an easy man ; but when I say a thing , I say it , Mr. 
 Leslie . oh , but it be a jest , - you be laugh at I . there be no such 
 paint good - for - nothing creature in Frank 's eye , eh ? " 

 " indeed , sir , if ever I find there be , I will give you notice in 
 time . at present , I be only try to ascertain what you wish for a 
 daughter - in - law . you say you have no prejudice . " 

 " no more I have , - not a bit of it . " 

 " you do not   like a foreigner and a Catholic ? " 

 " who the devil would ? " 

 " but if she have rank and title ? " 

 " rank and title ! bubble and squeak ! no , not half so good as bubble 
 and squeak . english beef and good cabbage . but foreign rank and 
 title ! - foreign cabbage and beef ! - foreign bubble and foreign squeak ! " 
 and the squire make a wry face , and spat forth his disgust and 
 indignation . 

 " you must have an Englishwoman ? " 

 " of course . " 

 " money ? " 

 " do not   care , provide she be a tidy , sensible , active lass , with a good 
 character for her dower . " 

 " Character - ah , that be indispensable ? " 

 " I should think so , indeed . a Mrs. Hazeldean of Hazeldean - you frighten 
 I . he be not go to run off with a divorced woman , or a - " 

 the squire stop , and look so red in the face that randal fear he 
 might be seize with apoplexy before Frank 's crime have make he alter 
 his will . 

 therefore he hasten to relieve Mr. Hazeldean 's mind , and assure he 
 that he have be only talk at random ; that Frank be in the habit , 
 indeed , of see foreign lady occasionally , as all person in the 
 London world be ; but that he be sure Frank would never marry without 
 the full consent and approval of his parent . he end by repeat his 
 assurance , that he would warn the squire if ever it become necessary . 
 still , however , he leave Mr. Hazeldean so disturbed and uneasy that that 
 gentleman forget all about the farm , and go moodily on in the opposite 
 direction , reentere the park at its farth extremity . as soon as they 
 approach the house , the squire hasten to shut himself with his wife 
 in full parental consultation ; and Randal , seat upon a bench on the 
 terrace , revolve the mischief he have do , and its chance of success . 

 while thus seat , and thus think , a footstep approach cautiously , 
 and a low voice say , in broken English , " Sare , sare , let I speak vid 
 you . " 

 Randal turn in surprise , and beheld a swarthy , saturnine face , with 
 grizzle hair and marked feature . he recognize the figure that have 
 join Riccabocca in the Italian 's garden . " speak - a - you italian ? " 
 resume Jackeymo . 

 Randal , who have make himself an excellent linguist , nodded assent ; and 
 Jackeymo , rejoice , beg he to withdraw into a more private part of 
 the ground . 

 randal obey , and the two gain the shade of a stately chestnut 
 avenue . 

 " Sir , " then say Jackeymo , speak in his native tongue , and express 
 himself with a certain simple pathos , " I be but a poor man ; my name 
 be Giacomo . you have hear of I ; servant to the signore whom you see 
 to - day , - only a servant ; but he honour I with his confidence . we have 
 know danger together ; and of all his friend and follower , I alone 
 come with he to the stranger 's land . " 

 " good , faithful fellow , " say Randal , examine the man 's face , ' say on . 
 your master confide in you ? he have confide that which I tell he this 
 day ? " 

 " he do . ah , sir ; the padrone be too proud to ask you to explain 
 more , - too proud to show fear of another . but he do fear , he ought 
 to fear , he shall fear , " continue Jackeymo , work himself up to 
 passion , - " for the padrone have a daughter , and his enemy be a villain . 
 oh , sir , tell I all that you do not tell to the padrone . you hint 
 that this man might wish to marry the signora . marry she ! - I could cut 
 his throat at the altar ! " 

 " indeed , " say Randal , " I believe that such be his object . " 

 " but why ? he be rich , she be penniless , - no , not quite that , for we have 
 save - but penniless , compare to he . " 

 " my good friend , I know not yet his motif ; but I can easily learn 
 they . if , however , this count be your master 's enemy , it be surely well 
 to guard against he , whatever his design ; and to do so , you should 
 move into London or its neighbourhood . I fear that , while we speak , the 
 count may get upon his track . " 

 " he have well not come here ! " cry the servant , menacingly , and 
 put his hand where the knife be not . 

 " beware of your own anger , Giacomo . one act of violence , and you would 
 be transport from England , and your mast'r would lose a friend . " 

 Jackeymo seem strike by this caution . 

 " and if the padrone be to meet he , do you think the padrone would 
 meekly say , ' come sta sa Signoria ' ? the padrone would strike he dead ! " 

 " hush ! hush ! you speak of what in England be call murder , and be 
 punish by the gallow . if you really love your master , for Heaven 's 
 sake get he from this place , get he from all chance of such passion 
 and peril . I go to town to - morrow ; I will find he a house , that shall 
 be safe from all spy , all discovery . and there , too , my friend . I can 
 do what I can not at this distance , - watch over he , and keep watch also 
 on his enemy . " 

 Jackeymo seize Randal 's hand , and lift it towards his lip ; then , as 
 if strike by a sudden suspicion , drop the hand , and say bluntly , 
 " Signore , I think you have see the padrone twice . why do you take this 
 interest in he ? " 

 " be it so uncommon to take interest even in a stranger who be menace by 
 some peril ? " 

 Jackeymo , who believe little in general philanthropy , shake his head 
 sceptically . 

 " besides , " continue Randal , suddenly bethink himself of a more 
 plausible reason , - " besides , I be a friend and connection of Mr. 
 Egerton ; and Mr. Egerton 's most intimate friend be Lord L'Estrange ; and 
 I have hear that Lord L'Estrange - " 

 " the good lord ! oh , now I understand , " interrupt Jackeymo , and his 
 brow clear . " ah , if he be in England ! but you will let we know when 
 he come ? " 

 " certainly . now , tell I , Giacomo , be this count really unprincipled and 
 dangerous ? remember I know he not personally . " 

 " he have neither heart nor conscience . " 

 " that defect make he dangerous to man ; perhaps not less so to woman . 
 could it be possible , if he obtain any interview with the signora , 
 that he could win her affection ? " Jackeymo cross himself rapidly and 
 make no answer . 

 " I have hear that he be still very handsome . " Jackeymo groan . 

 Randal resume , " enough ; persuade the padrone to come to town . " 

 " but if the count be in town ? " 

 " that make no difference ; the safe place be always the large city . 
 everywhere else , a foreigner be in himself an object of attention and 
 curiosity . " 

 " true . " 

 " let your master , then , come to London , or rather , into its 
 neighbourhood . he can reside in one of the suburb most remote from the 
 count 's haunt . in two day I will have find he a lodging and write to 
 he . you trust to I now ? " 

 " I do indeed , - I do , Excellency . ah , if the signorina be marry , we 
 would not care ! " 

 " married ! but she look so high ! " 

 " alas ! not now ! not here ! " 

 Randal sigh heavily . Jackeymo 's eye sparkle . he think he have 
 detect a new motive for Randal 's interest , - a motive to an italian the 
 most natural , the most laudable of all . 

 " find the house , Signore , write to the padrone . he shall come . I will talk 
 to he . I can manage he . Holy San Giacomo , bestir thyself now , - ' t be 
 long since I trouble thee ! " 

 Jackeymo stride off through the fade tree , smile and muttering as 
 he go . 

 the first dinner - bell rang , and on enter the drawingroom , Randal 
 find Parson Dale and his wife , who have be invite in haste to meet 
 the unexpected visitor . 

 the preliminary greeting over , Mr. Dale take the opportunity afford 
 by the squire 's absence to inquire after the health of Mr. Egerton . 

 " he be always well , " say randal . " I believe he be make of iron . " 

 " his heart be of gold , " say the parson . 

 " ah , " say Randal , inquisitively , " you tell I you have come in contact 
 with he once , respect , I think , some of your old parishioner at 
 Lansmere ? " 

 the parson nod , and there be a moment 's silence . 

 " do you remember your battle by the stock , Mr. Leslie ? " say Mr. Dale , 
 with a good - humour laugh . 

 " indeed , yes . by the way , now you speak of it , I meet my old opponent in 
 London the first year I go up to it . " 

 " you do ! where ? " 

 " at a literary scamp 's , - a cleverish man call Burley . " 

 " Burley ! I have see some burlesque verse in Greek by a Mr. Burley . " 

 " no doubt the same person . he have disappear , - go to the dog , I dare 
 say . Burlesque Greek be not a knowledge very much in power at present . " 

 " well , but Leonard Fairfield - you have see he since ? " 

 " no . " 

 " nor hear of he ? " 

 " no ; have you ? " 

 " strange to say , not for a long time . but I have reason to believe that 
 he must be do well . " 

 " you surprise I ! why ? " 

 " because two year ago he send for his mother . she go to he . " 

 " be that all ? " 

 " it be enough ; for he would not have send for she if he could not 
 maintain she . " 

 here the Hazeldeans enter , arm - in - arm , and the fat butler announce 
 dinner . 

 the squire be unusually taciturn , Mrs. Hazeldean thoughtful , Mrs. 
 Dale languid and headachy . the parson , who seldom enjoy the luxury of 
 converse with a scholar , save when he quarrel with Dr. Riccaboeca , 
 be animate by Randal 's repute for ability into a great desire for 
 argument . 

 " a glass of wine , Mr. Leslie . you be say , before dinner , that 
 burlesque Greek be not a knowledge very much in power at present . pray , 
 Sir , what knowledge be in power ? " 

 RANDAL   laconically . - " practical knowledge . " 

 parson . - " what of ? " 

 RANDAL . - " Men . " 

 parson   candidly . - " well , I suppose that be the most available sort of 
 knowledge , in a worldly point of view . how do one learn it ? do book 
 help ? " 

 RANDAL . - " accord as they be read , they help or injure . " 

 parson . - " how should they be read in order to help ? " 

 RANDAL . - " read specially to apply to purpose that lead to power . " 

 parson   very much strike with Randal 's pithy and spartan logic . - " upon 
 my word , Sir , you express yourself very well . I must own that I begin 
 these question in the hope of differ from you ; for I like an 
 argument . " 

 " that he do , " growl the squire ; " the most contradictory creature ! " 

 parson . - " Argument be the salt of talk . but now I be afraid I must agree 
 with you , which I be not at all prepare for . " 

 randal bow and answer , " no two man of our education can dispute upon 
 the application of knowledge . " 

 parson   prick up his ear . - " Eh ? - what to ? " 

 RANDAL . - " Power , of course . " 

 parson   overjoyed . - " Power ! - the vulgar application of it , or the 
 lofty ? but you mean the lofty ? " 

 RANDAL   in his turn interested and interrogative . - " what do you call 
 the lofty , and what the vulgar ? " 

 parson . - " the vulgar , self - interest ; the lofty , beneficence . " 

 Randal suppress the half - disdainful smile that rise to his lip . 

 " you speak , Sir , as a clergyman should do . I admire your sentiment , and 
 adopt it ; but I fear that the knowledge which aim only at beneficence 
 very rarely in this world get any power at all . " 

 SQUIRE   seriously . - " that be true ; I never get my own way when I want 
 to do a kindness , and Stirn always get his when he insist on something 
 diabolically brutal and harsh . " 

 parson . - " pray , Mr. Leslie , what do intellectual power refine to the 
 utmost , but entirely strip of beneficence , most resemble ? " 

 RANDAL . - " Resemble ? - I can hardly say . some very great man - almost 
 any very great man - who have baffle all his foe , and attain all his 
 end . " 

 parson . - " I doubt if any man have ever become very great who have not 
 mean to be beneficent , though he might err in the mean . Caesar be 
 naturally beneficent , and so be Alexander . but intellectual power 
 refine to the utmost , and wholly void of beneficence , resemble only 
 one being , and that , sir , be the Principle of Evil . " 

 RANDAL   startle . - " do you mean the Devil ? " 

 parson . - " yes , Sir , the Devil ; and even he , Sir , do not succeed ! even 
 he , Sir , be what your great man would call a most decide failure . " 

 MRS . DALE . - " my dear , my dear ! " 

 parson . - " our religion prove it , my love ; he be an angel , and he 
 fall . " 

 there be a solemn pause . randal be more impressed than he like to 
 own to himself . by this time the dinner be over , and the servant have 
 retire . Harry glance at Carry . Carry smooth her gown and rise . 

 the gentleman remain over their wine ; and the parson , satisfied with 
 what he deem a clencher upon his favourite subject of discussion , 
 change the subject to light topic , till , happen to fall upon 
 tithe , the squire strike in , and by dint of loudness of voice , and 
 truculence of brow , fairly overwhelm both his guest , and prove to 
 his own satisfaction that tithe be an unjust and unchristianlike 
 usurpation on the part of the Church generally , and a most especial and 
 iniquitous infliction upon the hazeldean estate in particular . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 on enter the drawing - room , Randal find the two lady seat close 
 together , in a position much more appropriate to the familiarity of 
 their school - day than to the politeness of the friendship now exist 
 between they . Mrs. Hazeldean 's hand hang affectionately over Carry 's 
 shoulder , and both those fair english face be bent over the same 
 book . it be pretty to see these sober matron , so different from 
 each other in character and aspect , thus unconsciously restore to the 
 intimacy of happy maiden youth by the golden link of some Magician from 
 the still land of Truth or Fancy , bring together in heart , as each eye 
 rest on the same thought ; close and close , as sympathy , lose in the 
 actual world , grow out of that world which unite in one bond of feel 
 the reader of some gentle book . 

 " and what work interest you so much ? " ask Randal , pause by the 
 table . 

 " one you have read , of course , " reply Mrs. Dale , put a book - mark 
 embroider by herself into the page , and hand the volume to Randal . 
 " it have make a great sensation , I believe . " 

 randal glance at the title of the work . " true , " say he , " I have hear 
 much of it in London , but I have not yet have time to read it . " 

 MRS . DALE . - " I can lend it to you , if you like to look over it to - night , 
 and you can leave it for I with Mrs. Hazeldean . " 

 parson   approach . - " oh , that book ! - yes , you must read it . I do not 
 know a work more instructive . " 

 RANDAL . - " Instructive ! certainly I will read it then . but I think it 
 be a mere work of amusement , - of fancy . it seem so as I look over it . " 

 parson . - " so be the ' Vicar of Wakefield ; ' yet what book more 
 instructive ? " 

 RANDAL . - " I should not have say that of the ' Vicar of Wakefield . ' a 
 pretty book enough , though the story be most improbable . but how be it 
 instructive ? " 

 parson . - " by its result : it leave we happy and well . what can any 
 instruction do more ? some work instruct through the head , some through 
 the heart . the last reach the wide circle , and often produce the most 
 genial influence on the character . this book belong to the last . you 
 will grant my proposition when you have read it . " 

 randal smile and take the volume . 

 MRS . DALE . - " be the author know yet ? " 

 RANDAL . - " I have hear it ascribe to many writer , but I believe no one 
 have claim it . " 

 parson . - " I think it must have be write by my old college friend , 
 Professor Moss , the naturalist , - its description of scenery be so 
 accurate . " 

 MRS . DALE . - " La , Charles dear ! that snuffy , tiresome , prosy professor ? 
 how can you talk such nonsense ? I be sure the author must be young , 
 there be so much freshness of feeling . " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN   positively . - " yes , certainly , young . " 

 parson   no less positively . - " I should say just the contrary . its tone 
 be too serene , and its style too simple , for a young man . besides , I 
 do not   know any young man who would send I his book , and this book have 
 be send I , very handsomely bind , too , you see . depend upon it Moss 
 be the loan - quite his turn of mind . " 

 MRS . DALE . - " you be too provoking , Charles dear ! Mr. Moss be so 
 remarkably plain , too . " 

 RANDAL . - " must an author be handsome ? " 

 parson . - " ha ! ha ! answer that if you can , Carry . " Carry remain mute 
 and disdainful . 

 SQUIRE   with great naivete . - " well , I do not   think there be much in the 
 book , whoever write it ; for I have   read it myself , and understand every 
 word of it . " 

 MRS . DALE . - " I do not   see why you should suppose it be write by a man 
 at all . for my part , I think it must be a woman . " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " yes , there be a passage about maternal affection , which 
 only a woman could have write . " 

 parson . - " Pooh ! pooh ! I should like to see a woman who could have 
 write that description of an August evening before a thunderstorm ; 
 every wild - flower in the hedgerow exactly the flower of August , every 
 sign in the air exactly those of the month . bless you ! a woman would 
 have fill the hedge with violet and cowslip . nobody else but my 
 friend Moss could have write that description . " 

 SQUIRE . - " I do not   know ; there be a simile about the waste of corn - seed in 
 hand - sowing , which make I think he must be a farmer ! " 

 MRS . DALE   scornfully . - " a farmer ! in hobnailed shoe , I suppose ! I say 
 it be a woman . " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " a woman , and a mother ! " 

 parson . - " a middle - aged man , and a naturalist . " 

 SQUIRE . - " no , no , Parson , certainly a young man ; for that love - scene 
 put I in mind of my own young day , when I would have give my ear 
 to tell Harry how handsome I think she ; and all I could say be , ' fine 
 weather for the crop , Miss. ' yes , a young man and a farmer . I should 
 not wonder if he have hold the plough himself . " 

 RANDAL   who have be turn over the page . - " this sketch of Night in 
 London come from a man who have live the life of city and look at 
 wealth with the eye of poverty . not bad ! I will read the book . " 

 " strange , " say the parson , smile , " that this little work should so 
 have enter into our mind , suggest to all of we different idea , yet 
 equally charm all , - give a new and fresh current to our dull country 
 life , animate we as with the sight of a world in our breast we have 
 never see before save in dream : a little work like this by a man we 
 do not   know and never may ! well , that knowledge be power , and a noble 
 one ! " 

 " a sort of power , certainly , sir , " say Randal , candidly ; and that 
 night , when randal retire to his own room , he suspend his scheme and 
 project , and read , as he rarely do , without an object to gain by the 
 reading . 

 the work surprise he by the pleasure it give . its charm lie in the 
 writer 's calm enjoyment of the beautiful . it seem like some happy 
 soul sun itself in the light of its own thought . its power be so 
 tranquil and even , that it be only a critic who could perceive how much 
 force and vigour be necessary to sustain the wing that float aloft 
 with so imperceptible an effort . there be no one faculty predominate 
 tyrannically over the other ; all seem proportion in the felicitous 
 symmetry of a nature rounded , integral , and complete . and when the work 
 be close , it leave behind it a tender warmth that play round the 
 heart of the reader and vivified feeling which seem unknown before . 
 randal lay down the book softly ; and for five minute the ignoble and 
 base purpose to which his own knowledge be apply stand before he , 
 naked and unmasked . 

 " Tut ! " say he , wrench himself violently away from the benign 
 influence , " it be not to sympathize with Hector , but to conquer with 
 Achilles , that Alexander of Macedon keep Homer under his pillow . such 
 should be the true use of book to he who have the practical world to 
 subdue ; let parson and woman construe it otherwise , as they may ! " 

 and the Principle of Evil descend again upon the intellect from which 
 the guide of Beneficence be go . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 Randal rise at the sound of the first breakfast - bell , and on the 
 staircase meet Mrs. Haaeldean . he give she back the book ; and as he 
 be about to speak , she beckon to he to follow she into a little 
 morning - room appropriate to herself , - no boudoir of white and gold , 
 with picture by Watteau , but line with large walnut - tree press , 
 that hold the old heirloom linen , strew with lavender , store for the 
 housekeeper , and medicine for the poor . 

 seat herself on a large chair in this sanctum , Mrs. Hazeldean look 
 formidably at home . 

 " pray , " say the lady , come at once to the point , with her usual 
 straightforward candour , " what be all this you have be say to my 
 husband as to the possibility of Frank 's marry a foreigner ? " 

 RANDAL . - " would you be as averse to such a notion as Mr. Hazeldean be ? " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " you ask I a question , instead of answer mine . " 

 Randal be greatly put out in his fence by these rude thrust . for 
 indeed he have a double purpose to serve , - first , thoroughly to know if 
 Frank 's marriage with a woman like Madame di Negra would irritate the 
 squire sufficiently to endanger the son 's inheritance ; and , secondly , to 
 prevent Mr. and Mrs. Hazeldean believe seriously that such a marriage 
 be to be apprehend , lest they should prematurely address Frank on 
 the subject , and frustrate the marriage itself . yet , withal , he must so 
 express himself , that he could not be afterwards accuse by the parent 
 of disguise matter . in his talk to the squire the precede day , he 
 have go a little too far , - far than he would have do but for his 
 desire of escape the cattle - shed and short - horn . while he muse , 
 Mrs. Hazeldean observe he with her honest sensible eye , and finally 
 exclaim , 

 " out with it , Mr. Leslie ! " 

 " out with what , my dear madam ? the squire have sadly exaggerate the 
 importance of what be say mainly in jest . but I will own to you 
 plainly , that Frank have appear to I a little smitten with a certain 
 fair italian . " 

 " italian ! " cry Mrs. Hazeldean . " well , I say so from the first . 
 italian ! - that be all , be it ? " and she smile . Randal be more and more 
 perplexed . the pupil of his eye contract , as it do when we retreat 
 into ourselves , and think , watch , and keep guard . 

 " and perhaps , " resume Mrs. Hazeldean , with a very sunny expression of 
 countenance , " you have notice this in Frank since he be here ? " 

 " it be true , " murmur Randal ; " but I think his heart or his fancy be 
 touch even before . " 

 " very natural , " say Mrs. Hazeldean ; " how could he help it ? - such a 
 beautiful creature ! well , I must not ask you to tell Frank 's secret ; 
 but I guess the object of attraction ; and though she will have no 
 fortune to speak of , and it be not such a match as he might form , still 
 she be so amiable , and have be so well bring up , and be so little 
 like one 's general notion of a Roman Catholic , that I think I could 
 persuade Hazeldean into give his consent . " 

 " ah , " say Randal , draw a long breath , and beginning , with his 
 practise acuteness , to detect Mrs. Ilazeldean 's error , " I be very much 
 relieve and rejoice to hear this ; and I may venture to give Frank some 
 hope , if I find he dishearten and desponding , poor fellow ? " 

 " I think you may , " reply Mrs. Hazeldean , laugh pleasantly . " but you 
 should not have frighten poor William so , hint that the lady know 
 very little english . she have an accent , to be sure ; but she speak our 
 tongue very prettily . I always forget that she be not English bear ! ha , 
 ha , poor William ! " 

 RANDAL . - " ha , ha ! " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " we have once think of another match for Frank , - a 
 girl of good English family . " 

 RANDAL . - " Miss Sticktorights ? " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " no ; that be an old whim of Hazeldean 's . but I doubt if 
 the Sticktorights would ever merge their property in our . bless you ! it 
 would be all off the moment they come to settlement , and have to give up 
 the right of way . we think of a very different match ; but there be no 
 dictate to young heart , Mr. Leslie . " 

 RANDAL . - " indeed no , Mrs. Hazeldean . but since we now understand each 
 other so well , excuse I if I suggest that you have well leave thing 
 to themselves , and not write to Frank on the subject . young heart , you 
 know , be often stimulate by apparent difficulty , and grow cool when 
 the obstacle vanish . " 

 MRS . HAZELDEAN . - " very possibly ; it be not so with Hazeldean and 
 I . but I shall not write to Frank on the subject for a different 
 reason - though I would consent to the match , and so would William ; yet 
 we both would rather , after all , that Frank marry an Englishwoman , and 
 a protestant . we will not , therefore , do anything to encourage the idea . 
 but if Frank 's happiness become really at stake , then we will step in . 
 in short , we would neither encourage nor oppose . you understand ? " 

 " perfectly . " 

 " and in the mean while , it be quite right that Frank should see the 
 world , and try to distract his mind , or at least to know it . and I dare 
 say it have be some thought of that kind which have prevent his coming 
 here . " 

 Randal , dread a further and plainer eclaircissement , now rise , and 
 say , " pardon I , but I must hurry over breakfast , and be back in time 
 to catch the coach " - offer his arm to his hostess , and lead she into 
 the breakfast - parlour . devour his meal , as if in great haste , he 
 then mount his horse , and , take cordial leave of his entertainer , 
 trot briskly away . 

 all thing favour his project , - even chance have befriend he in Mrs. 
 Hazeldean 's mistake . she have , not unnaturally , suppose Violante to have 
 captivate Frank on his last visit to the Hall . thus , while Randal have 
 certify his own mind that nothing could more exasperate the squire 
 than an alliance with Madame di Negra , he could yet assure Frank that 
 Mrs. Hazeldean be all on his side . and when the error be discover , 
 Mrs. Hazeldean would only have to blame herself for it . still more 
 successful have his diplomacy prove with the Riccaboccas : he have 
 ascertain the secret he have come to discover ; he should induce the 
 Italian to remove to the neighbourhood of London ; and if Violante be 
 the great heiress he suspect she to prove , whom else of her own age 
 would she see but he ? and the old Leslie domain to be sell in two 
 year - a portion of the dowry might purchase they ! flush by the 
 triumph of his craft , all former vacillation of conscience cease . in 
 high and fervent spirit he pass the Casino , the garden of which 
 be solitary and deserted , reach his home , and , tell Oliver to be 
 studious , and Juliet to be patient , walk thence to meet the coach and 
 regain the capital . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 Violante be seat in her own little room , and look from the window 
 on the terrace that stretch below . the day be warm for the time of 
 year . the orange - tree have be remove under shelter for the approach 
 of winter ; but where they have stand sit Mrs. Riccabocca at work . in the 
 belvidere , Riccabocca himself be converse with his favourite servant . 
 but the casement and the door of the belvidere be open ; and where 
 they sit , both wife and daughter could see the padrone lean against 
 the wall , with his arm fold and his eye fix on the floor ; while 
 Jackeymo , with one finger on his master 's arm , be talk to he with 
 visible earnestness . and the daughter from the window and the wife from 
 her work direct tender , anxious eye towards the still , thoughtful 
 form so dear to both . for the last day or two , Riccabocca have be 
 peculiarly abstract , even to gloom . each feel there be something 
 stir at his heart , - neither , as yet , know what . 

 Violante 's room silently reveal the nature of the education by which 
 her character have be form . save a sketchbook , which lie open on a 
 desk at hand , and which show talent exquisitely teach   for in this 
 Riccabocca have be her teacher , there be nothing that speak of the 
 ordinary female accomplishment . no piano stand open , no harp occupy 
 yon nook , which seem make for one ; no broidery - frame , nor implement 
 of work , betray the usual and graceful resource of a girl ; but range 
 on shelf against the wall be the good writer in English , italian , 
 and French ; and these betoken an extent of reading , that he who wish 
 for a companion to his mind in the sweet commune of woman , which soften 
 and refine all it give and take in interchange , will never condemn as 
 masculine . you have but to look into Violante 's face to see how noble 
 be the intelligence that bring soul to those lovely feature . nothing 
 hard , nothing dry and stern be there . even as you detect knowledge , 
 it be lose in the gentleness of grace . in fact , whatever she gain in 
 the graver kind of information become transmute , through her heart and 
 her fancy , into spiritual , golden store . give she some tedious and arid 
 history , her imagination seize upon beauty other reader have 
 pass by , and , like the eye of the artist , detect everywhere the 
 Picturesque . something in her mind seem to reject all that be mean 
 and commonplace , and to bring out all that be rare and elevate in 
 whatever it receive . live so apart from all companion of her age , 
 she scarcely belong to the present time . she dwelt in the past , as 
 Sabrina in her crystal well . image of chivalry , of the beautiful and 
 the Heroic , - such as , in read the silvery line of Tasso , rise before 
 we , soften force and valour into love and song , - haunt the revery 
 of the fair italian maid . 

 tell we not that the Past , examine by cold Philosophy , be no well 
 and no loftier than the Present : it be not thus see by pure and 
 generous eye . let the past perish , when it cease to reflect on its 
 magic mirror the beautiful Romance which be its noble reality , though 
 perchance but the shadow of Delusion . 

 yet Violante be not merely the dreamer . in she , life be so 
 puissant and rich , that action seem necessary to its glorious 
 development , - action , but still in the woman 's sphere , - action to bless 
 and to refine and to exalt all around she , and to pour whatever else of 
 ambition be leave unsatisfie into sympathy with the aspiration of man . 
 despite her father 's fear of the bleak air of England , in that air she 
 have strengthen the delicate health of her childhood . her elastic 
 step , her eye full of sweetness and light , her bloom , at once soft and 
 luxuriant , - all speak of the vital power fit to sustain a mind of such 
 exquisite mould , and the emotion of a heart that , once arouse , could 
 ennoble the passion of the South with the purity and devotion of the 
 North . Solitude make some nature more timid , some more bold . Violante 
 be fearless . when she speak , her eye frankly meet your own ; and she 
 be so ignorant of evil , that as yet she seem nearly unacquainted 
 with shame . from this courage , combine with affluence of idea , come a 
 delightful flow of happy converse . though possess so imperfectly 
 the accomplishment ordinarily teach to young woman , and which may be 
 cultured to the utmost , and yet leave the thought so barren , and the 
 talk so vapid , she have that accomplishment which most please the taste , 
 and command the love , of the man of talent ; especially if his talent be 
 not so actively employ as to make he desire only relaxation where 
 he seek companionship , - the accomplishment of facility in intellectual 
 interchange , the charm that clothe in musical word beautiful womanly 
 idea . 

 " I hear he sigh at this distance , " say Violante , softly , as she still 
 watch her father ; " and methink this be a new grief , and not for 
 his country . he speak twice yesterday of that dear english friend , and 
 wish that he be here . " 

 as she say this , unconsciously the virgin blush , her hand droop on 
 her knee , and she fall herself into thought as profound as her father 's , 
 but less gloomy . from her arrival in England , Violante have be teach 
 a grateful interest in the name of Harley L'Estrange . her father , 
 preserve a silence that seem disdain of all his old italian 
 intimate , have be pleased to converse with open heart of the 
 Englishman who have save where countryman have betray . he speak of the 
 soldier , then in the full bloom of youth , who , unconsole by fame , have 
 nurse the memory of some hide sorrow amidst the pine - tree that cast 
 their shadow over the sunny italian lake ; how Riccabocca , then honour 
 and happy , have court from his seclusion the English signore , then the 
 mourner and the voluntary exile ; how they have grow friend amidst 
 the landscape in which her eye have open to the day ; how Harley 
 have vainly warn he from the rash scheme in which he have seek to 
 reconstruct in an hour the ruin of weary age ; how , when abandon , 
 deserted , proscribe , pursue , he have flee for life , the infant Violante 
 clasp to his bosom , the english soldier have give he refuge , baffle 
 the pursuer , arm his servant , accompany the fugitive at night 
 towards the defile in the Apennines , and , when the emissary of a 
 perfidious enemy , hot in the chase , come near , have say , " you have your 
 child to save ! fly on ! another league , and you be beyond the border . 
 we will delay the foe with parley ; they will not harm we . " and not 
 till escape be gain do the father know that the english friend 
 have delay the foe , not by parley , but by the sword , hold the pass 
 against number , with a breast as dauntless as Bayard 's on the glorious 
 bridge . 

 and since then , the same Englishman have never cease to vindicate his 
 name , to urge his cause ; and if hope yet remain of restoration to land 
 and honour , it be in that untiring zeal . 

 hence , naturally and insensibly , this seclude and muse girl have 
 associate all that she read in tale of romance and chivalry with 
 the image of the brave and loyal stranger . he it be who animate she 
 drearh of the Past , and seem bear to be , in the destine hour , the 
 deliverer of the Future . around this image group all the charm that 
 the fancy of virgin woman can raise from the enchant lore of old 
 Heroic Fable . once in her early girlhood , her father   to satisfy her 
 curiosity , eager for general description   have draw from memory a sketch 
 of the feature of the Englishman , - draw Harley , as he be in that 
 first youth , flatter and idealize , no doubt , by art , and by partial 
 gratitude , but still resemble he as he be then , while the deep 
 mournfulness of recent sorrow yet shadow and concentrate all the 
 vary expression of his countenance ; and to look on he be to say , 
 " so sad , yet so young ! " never do Violante pause to remember that the 
 same year which ripen herself from infancy into woman be pass 
 less gently over that smooth cheek and dreamy brow , - that the world 
 might be alter the nature as time the aspect . to she the hero of the 
 Ideal remain immortal in bloom and youth . bright illusion , common to 
 we all , where Poetry once hallow the human form ! who ever think of 
 Petrarch as the old , timeworn man ? ' who do not see he as when he 
 first gaze on Laura ? - 

  " Ogni altra cosa ogni pensier va fore ; 
  E sol ivi con voi rimansi Amore ! " 



 CHAPTER XII . 

 and Violante , thus absorb in revery , forget to keep watch on the 
 belvidere . and the belvidere be now desert . the wife , who have no 
 other ideal to distract her thought , see Riccabocca pass into the 
 house . 

 the exile enter his daughter 's room , and she start to feel his hand 
 upon her lock and his kiss upon her brow . " my child ! " cry Riccabocca , 
 seat himself , " I have resolve to leave for a time this retreat , and 
 to seek the neighbourhood of London . " 

 " ah , dear father , that , then , be your thought ? but what can be your 
 reason ? do not turn away ; you know how care fully I have obey your 
 command and keep your secret . ah , you will confide in I . " 

 " I do , indeed , " return Riccabocca , with emotion . " I leave this place 
 in the fear lest my enemy discover I . I shall say to other that you 
 be of an age to require teacher not to be obtain here , but I should 
 like none to know where we go . " 

 the Italian say these last word through his tooth , and hang his 
 head . he say they in shame . 

 " my mother -   so Violante always call Jemima   - my mother - you have 
 speak to she ? " 

 " not yet . there be the difficulty . " 

 " no difficulty , for she love you so well , " reply Violante , with soft 
 reproach . " ah , why not also confide in she ? who so true , so good ? " 

 " good - I grant it ! " exclaim Riccabocca . " what then ? ' da cattiva Donna 
 guardati , ed alla buona non fidar niente . ' -   from the bad woman , guard 
 thyself ; to the good woman trust nothing .   - and if you must trust , " 
 add the abominable man , " trust she with anything but a secret ! " 

 " Fie , " say Violante , with arch reproach , for she know her father 's 
 humour too well to interpret his horrible sentiment literally , - " fie 
 on your consistency , Padre Carissimo . do you not trust your secret to 
 I ? " 

 " you ! a kitten be not a cat , and a girl be not a woman . besides , the 
 secret be already know to you , and I have no choice . peace , Jemima will 
 stay here for the present . see to what you wish to take with you ; we 
 shall leave to - night . " not wait for an answer , Riccabocca hurry 
 away , and with a firm step stride the terrace , and approach his wife . 
 " Anima mia , " say the pupil of Machiavelli , disguise in the tender 
 word the cruell intention , - for one of his most cherished italian 
 proverb be to the effect that there be no getting on with a mule or 
 a woman unless you coax they , - " Anima mia , soul of my being , you have 
 already see that Violante mop herself to death here . " 

 " she , poor child ! oh , no ! " 

 " she do , core of my heart , - she do , and be as ignorant of music as I 
 be of tent - stitch . " 

 " she sing beautifully . " 

 " just as bird do , against all the rule , and in defiance of gamut . 
 therefore , to come to the point , o treasure of my soul ! I be go to 
 take she with I for a short time , perhaps to Cheltenham or Brighton . we 
 shall see . " 

 " all place with you be the same to I , Alphonso . when shall we go ? " 

 " we shall go to - night ; but terrible as it be to part from you , - you - " 

 " ah ! " interrupt the wife , and cover her face with her hand . 

 Riccabocca , the wily and most relentless of man in his maxim , melt 
 into absolute uxorial imbecility at the sight of that mute distress . he 
 put his arm round his wife 's waist , with genuine affection , and without 
 a single proverb at his heart . " Carissima , do not grieve so ; we shall be 
 back soon , and travelling be expensive ; rolling stone gather no moss , 
 and there be so much to see to at home . " 

 Mrs. Riccabocca gently escape from her husband 's arm . she withdraw she 
 hand from her face and brush away the tear that stand in her eye . 

 " Alphonso , " she say touchingly , " hear I ! what you think good , that 
 shall ever be good to I . but do not think that I grieve solely because 
 of our parting . no ; I grieve to think that , despite all these year 
 in which I have be the partner of your hearth , and sleep on your 
 breast , - all these year in which I have have no thought but , however 
 humbly , to do my duty to you and your , and could have wish that you 
 have read my heart , and see there but yourself and your child , - I grieve 
 to think that you still deem I as unworthy your trust as when you stand 
 by my side at the altar . " 

 " Trust ! " repeat Riccabocca , startled and conscience - stricken ; " why 
 do you say ' trust ' ? in what have I distrust you ? I be sure , " he 
 continue , with the artful volubility of guilt , " that I never doubt 
 your fidelity , hook - nose , long - visage foreigner though I be ; never 
 pry into your letter ; never inquire into your solitary walk ; never 
 heed your flirtation with that good - look Parson Dale ; never keep 
 the money ; and never look into the account - book ! " Mrs. Riccabocca 
 refuse even a smile of contempt at these revolting evasion ; nay , she 
 seem scarcely to hear they . 

 " can you think , " she resume , press her hand on her heart to still 
 its struggle for relief in sob , - " can you think that I could have 
 watch and think and tax my poor mind so constantly , to conjecture 
 what might well soothe or please you , and not see , long since , that 
 you have secret know to your daughter , your servant , not to I ? fear 
 not , - the secret can not be evil , or you would not tell they to your 
 innocent child . besides , do I not know your nature ; and do I not love 
 you because I know it ? - it be for something connect with those 
 secret that you leave your home . you think that I should be incautious , 
 imprudent . you will not take I with you . be it so . I go to prepare 
 for your departure . forgive I if I have displease you , husband . " Mrs. 
 Riccabocca turn away ; but a soft hand touch the Italian 's arm . " O 
 Father , can you resist this ? trust she ! trust she ! - I be a woman like 
 she ! I answer for her woman 's faith . be yourself , - ever noble than all 
 other , my own father . " 

 " Diavolo ! never one door shut but another open , " groan Riccabocca . 
 " be you a fool , child ? do not   you see that it be for your sake only I 
 fear , and would be cautious ? " 

 " for mine ! oh , then do not make I deem myself mean , and the cause of 
 meanness . for mine ! be I not your daughter , - the descendant of man who 
 never fear ? " Violante look sublime while she speak ; and as she end 
 she lead her father gently on towards the door , which his wife have now 
 gain . 

 " Jemima , wife mine ! pardon , pardon , " cry the Italian , whose heart have 
 be yearn to repay such tenderness and devotion , - " come back to 
 my breast - it have be long close , - it shall be open to you now and 
 forever . " 

 in another moment the wife be in her right place , - on her husband 's 
 bosom ; and Violante , beautiful peacemaker , stand smile awhile at both , 
 and then lift her eye gratefully to heaven and steal away . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

 on Randal 's return to town , he hear mixed and contradictory rumour 
 in the street , and at the club , of the probable downfall of the 
 Government at the approach session of parliament . these rumour have 
 spring up suddenly , as if in an hour . true that , for some time , the 
 sagacious have shake their head and say , " minister could not last . " 
 true , that certain change in policy , a year or two before , have divide 
 the party on which the Government depend , and strengthen that which 
 oppose it . but still the more important member of that Government 
 have be so long identify with official station , and there seem so 
 little power in the Opposition to form a Cabinet of name familiar to 
 official ear , that the general public have anticipate , at most , a few 
 partial change . Rumour now go far beyond this . randal , whose whole 
 prospect at present be but reflection from the greatness of 
 his patron , be alarmed . he seek Egerton , but the minister be 
 impenetrable , and seem calm , confident , and imperturbed . somewhat 
 relieve , Randal then set himself to work to find a safe home for 
 Riccabocca ; for the great need to succeed in obtain fortune there , 
 if he fail in get it through Egerton . he find a quiet house , 
 detach and seclude , in the neighbourhood of Norwood . no vicinity 
 more secure from espionage and remark . he write to Riccabocca , and 
 communicate the address , add fresh assurance of his own power to 
 be of use . the next morning he be seat in his office , think 
 very little of the detail , that he master , however , with mechanical 
 precision , when the minister who preside over that department of the 
 public service send for he into his private room , and beg he to 
 take a letter to Egerton , with whom he wish to consult relative to a 
 very important point to be decide in the Cabinet that day . " I want you 
 to take it , " say the minister , smile   the minister be a frank homely 
 man , " because you be in Mr. Egerton 's confidence , and he may give 
 you some verbal message besides a write reply . Egerton be often over 
 cautious and brief in the litera scripta . " 

 Randal go first to Egerton 's neighbour office - Egerton have not be 
 there that day . he then take a cabriolet and drive to Grosvenor Square . 
 a quiet - look chariot be at the door . Mr. Egerton be at home ; but 
 the servant say , " Dr. F - - - be with he , sir ; and perhaps he may not 
 like to be disturb . " 

 " what ! be your master ill ? " 

 " not that I know of , sir . he never say he be ill . but he have look 
 poorly the last day or two . " 

 Randal hesitate a moment ; but his commission might be important , and 
 Egerton be a man who so hold the maxim that health and all else must 
 give way to business , that he resolve to enter ; and , unannounced and 
 unceremoniously , as be his will not , he open the door of the library . he 
 start as he do so . Audley Egerton be lean back on the sofa , and 
 the doctor , on his knee before he , be apply the stethoscope to his 
 breast . Egerton 's eye be partially close as the door open . but at 
 the noise he spring up , nearly overset the doctor . " who be that ? how 
 dare you ? " he exclaim , in a voice of great anger . then recognize 
 Randal , he change colour , bit his lip , and mutter dryly , " I beg 
 pardon for my abruptness ; what do you want , Mr. Leslie ? " 

 " this letter from Lord - ; I be tell to deliver it immediately into your 
 own hand . I beg pardon - " 

 " there be no cause , " say Egerton , coldly . " I have have a slight attack 
 of bronchitis ; and as parliament meet so soon , I must take advice from 
 my doctor , if I would be hear by the reporter . Lay the letter on the 
 table , and be kind enough to wait for my reply . " 

 randal withdraw . he have never see a physician in that house before , 
 and it seem surprising that Egerton should even take a medical opinion 
 upon a slight attack . while wait in the ante - room there be a knock 
 at the street door , and presently a gentleman , exceedingly well dress , 
 be show in , and honour Randal with an easy and half - familiar bow . 
 randal remember to have meet this personage at dinner , and at the house 
 of a young nobleman of high fashion , but have not be introduce to he , 
 and do not even know he by name . the visitor be well inform . 

 " our friend Egerton be busy , I hear , Mr. Leslie , " say he , arrange the 
 camellia in his button - hole . 

 " our friend Egerton ! " it must be a very great man to say " our friend 
 Egerton . " 

 " he will not be engage long , I dare say , " return Randal , glance his 
 shrewd inquire eye over the stranger 's person . 

 " I trust not ; my time be almost as precious as his own . I be not so 
 fortunate as to be present to you when we meet at Lord Spendquick 's . 
 good fellow , Spendquick ; and decidedly clever . " 

 Lord Spendquick be usually esteem a gentleman without three idea . 

 Randal smile . 

 in the mean while the visitor have take out a card from an embossed 
 morocco case , and now present it to Randal , who read thereon , " Baron 
 Levy , No . - , Bruton St. " 

 the name be not unknown to Randal . it be a name too often on the lip 
 of man of fashion not to have reach the ear of an habitue of good 
 society . 

 Mr. Levy have be a solicitor by profession . he have of late year 
 relinquish his ostensible calling : and not long since , in consequence 
 of some service towards the negotiation of a loan , have be create a 
 baron by one of the german king . the wealth of Mr. Levy be say to be 
 only equalled by his good - nature to all who be in want of a temporary 
 loan , and with sound expectation of repay it some day or other . 

 you seldom see a finer - look man than Baron Levy , about the same age 
 as Egerton , but look young : so well preserve , such magnificent 
 black whisker , such superb tooth ! despite his name and his dark 
 complexion , he do not , however , resemble a Jew , - at least externally ; 
 and , in fact , he be not a Jew on the father 's side , but the natural son 
 of a rich English grand seigneur , by a Hebrew lady of distinction - in 
 the opera . after his birth , this lady have marry a german trader of 
 her own persuasion , and her husband have be prevail upon , for the 
 convenience of all party , to adopt his wife 's son , and accord to he 
 his own Hebrew name . Mr. Levy , senior , be soon leave a widower , and then 
 the real father , though never actually own the boy , have show he 
 great attention , - have he frequently at his house , initiate he betime 
 into his own high - bear society , for which the boy show great taste . 
 but when my Lord die , and leave but a moderate legacy to the young 
 Levy , who be then about eighteen , that ambiguous person be article to 
 an attorney by his putative sire , who shortly afterwards return to his 
 native land , and be bury at Prague , where his tombstone may yet be 
 see . Young Levy , however , contrive to do very well without he . his 
 real birth be generally know , and rather advantageous to he in a 
 social point of view . his legacy enable he to become a partner 
 where he have be a clerk , and his practice become great amongst the 
 fashionable class of society . indeed he be so useful , so pleasant , 
 so much a man of the world , that he grow intimate with his 
 client , - chiefly young man of rank ; be on good term with both Jew 
 and Christian ; and be neither one nor the other , resemble   to use 
 Sheridan 's incomparable simile   the blank page between the Old and the 
 New Testament . 

 Vulgar some might call Mr. Levy from his assurance , but it be not the 
 vulgarity of a man accustom to low and coarse society , - rather the 
 mauvais ton of a person not sure of his own position , but who have 
 resolve to swagger into the good one he can get . when it be remember 
 that he have make his way in the world , and glean together an immense 
 fortune , it be needless to add that he be as sharp as a needle , and as 
 hard as a flint . no man have have more friend , and no man have stick by 
 they more firmly - so long as there be a pound in their pocket ! 

 something of this character have randal hear of the baron , and he now 
 gaze , first at his card , and then at he with - admiration . 

 " I meet a friend of yours at Borrowell 's the other day , " resume the 
 baron , - " young Hazeldean . careful fellow - quite a man of the world . " 

 as this be the last praise poor Frank deserve , Randal again smile . 

 the baron go on : " I hear , Mr. Leslie , that you have much influence 
 over this same Hazeldean . his affair be in a sad state . I should be 
 very happy to be of use to he , as a relation of my friend Egerton 's ; 
 but he understand business so well that he despise my advice . " 

 " I be sure you do he injustice . " 

 " Injustice ! I honour his caution . I say to every man , ' do not   come to I : 
 I can get you money on much easy term than any one else ; and what be 
 the result ! you come so often that you ruin yourself ; whereas a regular 
 usurer without conscience frighten you . ' cent percent , ' you say ; ' oh , I 
 must pull in . ' if you have influence over your friend , tell he to stick 
 to his bill - broker , and have nothing to do with Baron Levy . " 

 here the minister 's bell rung , and Randal , look through the window , 
 see Dr. F - - - walk to his carriage , which have make way for Baron 
 Levy 's splendid cabriolet , - a cabriolet in the most perfect taste , 
 baron 's coronet on the dark - brown panel , horse black , with such 
 action ! harness just relieve with plating . the servant now enter , and 
 request Randal to step in ; and address the baron , assure he that 
 he would not be detain a minute . 

 " Leslie , " say the minister , seal a note , " take this back to Lord 
  - - - , and say that I shall be with he in an hour . " 

 " no other message ? - he seem to expect one . " 

 " I dare say he do . well , my letter be official , my message be not : beg 
 he to see Mr. - - - before we meet , - he will understand , - all rest 
 upon that interview . " 

 Egerton then , extend the letter , resume gravely , " of course you will 
 not mention to any one that Dr. F - - - be with I : the health of public 
 man be not to be suspect . Hum , - be you in your own room or the 
 ante - room ? " 

 " the ante - room , sir . " 

 Egerton 's brow contract slightly . " and Mr. Levy be there , eh ? " 

 " yes - the baron . " 

 " Baron ! true . come to plague I about the mexican loan , I suppose . I 
 will keep you no long . " 

 randal , much meditating , leave the house , and re - enter his hack cab . 
 the baron be admit to the statesman 's presence . 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 Egerton have throw himself at full length on the sofa , a position 
 exceedingly rare with he ; and about his whole air and manner , as Levy 
 enter , there be something singularly different from that stateliness 
 of port common to the austere legislator . the very tone of his voice 
 be different . it be as if the statesman , the man of business , have 
 vanish ; it be rather the man of fashion and the idler who , nod 
 languidly to his visitor , say , " Levy , what money can I have for a 
 year ? " 

 " the estate will bear very little more . my dear fellow , that last 
 election be the very devil . you can not go on thus much long . " 

 " my dear fellow ! " Baron Levy hail Audley Egerton as " my dear fellow " ! 
 and Audley Egerton , perhaps , see nothing strange in the word , though 
 his lip curl . 

 " I shall not want to go on thus much long , " answer Egerton , as the 
 curl on his lip change to a gloomy smile . " the estate must , meanwhile , 
 bear L5,000 more . " 

 " a hard pull on it . you have really well sell . " 

 " I can not afford to sell at present . I can not afford man to say , ' Audley 
 Egerton be do up , - his property be for sale . ' " 

 " it be very sad when one think what a rich man you have be - and may 
 be yet ! " 

 " be yet ! how ? " 

 Baron Levy glance towards the thick mahogany door , - thick and 
 impervious , as should be the door of statesman . " why , you know that , 
 with three word from you , I could produce an effect upon the stock 
 of three nation , that might give we each a hundred thousand pound . we 
 would go share . " 

 " Levy , " say Egerton , coldly , though a deep blush overspread his face , 
 " you be a scoundrel ; that be your look - out . I interfere with no man 's 
 taste and conscience . I do not   intend to be a scoundrel myself . I have 
 tell you that long ago . " 

 the usurer 's brow darken , but he dispel the cloud with an easy 
 laugh . 

 " well , " say he , " you be neither wise nor complimentary , but you shall 
 have the money . but yet , would it not be well , " add Levy , with 
 emphasis , " to borrow it without interest , of your friend L'Estrange ? " 

 Egerton start as if sting . 

 " you mean to taunt I , sir ! " he exclaim passionately . " I accept 
 pecuniary favour from Lord L'Estrange ! - I ! " 

 " Tut , my dear Egerton , I dare say my Lord would not think so ill now of 
 that act in your life which - " 

 " hold ! " exclaim Egerton , writhe . " hold ! " 

 he stop , and pace the room , muttering , in broken sentence , " to 
 blush before this man ! chastisement , chastisement ! " 

 Levy gaze on he with hard and sinister eye . the minister turn 
 abruptly . 

 " look you , Levy , " say he , with forced composure , " you hate I - why , I 
 know not . " 

 " hate you ! how have I show hatred ? would you ever have live in this 
 palace , and rule this country as one of the most influential of its 
 minister , but for my management , my whisper to the wealthy Miss 
 Leslie ? come , but for I what would you have be , - perhaps a beggar . " 

 " what shall I be now , if I live ? and this fortune which my marriage 
 bring to I - it have pass for the main part into your hand . be 
 patient , you will have it all ere long . but there be one man in the 
 world who have love I from a boy , and woe to you if ever he learn that 
 he have the right to despise I ! " 

 " Egerton , my good fellow , " say Levy , with great composure , " you need 
 not threaten I , for what interest can I possibly have in tale - telling 
 to Lord L'Estrange ? again , dismiss from your mind the absurd thought 
 that I hate you . true , you snub I in private , you cut I in public , 
 you refuse to come to my dinner , you will not ask I to your own ; still , 
 there be no man I like well , nor would more willingly serve . when do 
 you want the L5,000 ? " 

 " perhaps in one month , perhaps not for three or four . let it be ready 
 when require . " 

 " enough ; depend on it . have you any other command ? " 

 " none . " 

 " I will take my leave , then . by - the - by , what do you suppose the 
 Hazeldean rental be worth - net ? " 

 " I do not   know , nor care . you have no design upon that too ? " 

 " well , I like keep up family connection . Mr. Frank seem a liberal 
 young gentleman . " 

 before Egerton could answer , the baron have glide to the door , and , 
 nod pleasantly , vanish with that nod . Egerton remain , stand 
 on his solitary hearth . a drear , single man 's room it be , from wall 
 to wall , despite its fretted ceiling and official pomp of Brahmah 
 escritoire and red box . drear and cheerless , - no trace of woman 's 
 habitation , no vestige of intrude , happy child . there stand the 
 austere man alone . and then with a deep sigh he mutter , " thank Heaven , 
 not for long , - it will not last long . " 

 repeat those word , he mechanically lock up his paper , and press 
 his hand to his heart for an instant , as if a spasm have shoot through it . 

 " so - I must shun all emotion ! " say he , shake his head gently . 

 in five minute more Audley Egerton be in the street , his mien erect , 
 and his step firm as ever . 

 " that man be make of bronze , " say a leader of the Opposition to a 
 friend as they ride past the minister . " what would I not give for his 
 nerve ! " 




 BOOK NINTH . 




 INITIAL chapter . 

 on PUBLIC LIFE . 

 now that I be fairly in the heart of my story , these preliminary 
 chapter must shrink into comparatively small dimension , and not 
 encroach upon the space require by the various personage whose 
 acquaintance I have pick up here and there , and who be now all 
 crowd upon I like poor relation to whom one have unadvisedly give 
 a general invitation , and who descend upon one simultaneously about 
 Christmas time . where they be to be stow , and what be to become of 
 they all , Heaven know ; in the mean while , the reader will have already 
 observe that the Caxton Family themselves be turn out of their own 
 room , send a packing , in order to make way for the new comer . 

 but to proceed : note the heading to the present chapter , " ON PUBLIC 
 life , " - a thesis pertinent to this portion of my narrative ; and if 
 somewhat trite in itself , the great be the stimulus to suggest thereon 
 some original hint for reflection . 

 be you ever in public life , my dear reader ? I do not   mean , by that 
 question , to ask whether you be ever Lord Chancellor , Prime Minister , 
 Leader of the Opposition , or even a member of the House of Commons . an 
 author hop to find reader far beyond that very egregious but very 
 limited segment of the Great Circle . be you ever a busy man in your 
 vestry , active in a municipal corporation , one of a committee for 
 further the interest of an enlightened candidate for your native 
 burgh , town , or shire , - in a word , do you ever resign your private 
 comfort as man in order to share the public trouble of mankind ? if 
 ever you have so far depart from the lucretian philosophy , just look 
 back - be it life at all that you live ? be you an individual 
 distinct existence , - a passenger in the railway , - or be you merely 
 an indistinct portion of that common flame which heat the boiler and 
 generate the steam that set off the monster train ? - very hot , very 
 active , very useful , no doubt ; but all your identity fuse in flame , and 
 all your force vanish in gas . 

 and do you think the people in the railway carriage care for you ? do 
 you think that the gentleman in the worsted wrapper be say to his 
 neighbour with the striped rug on his comfortable knee , " how grateful 
 we ought to be for that fiery particle which be crackle and hiss 
 under the boiler . it help we on a fraction of an inch from Vauxhall 
 to Putney ! " not a bit of it . ten to one but he be say , " not sixteen 
 mile an hour ! what the deuce be the matter with the stoker ? " 

 look at our friend Audley Egerton . you have just have a glimpse of the 
 real being that struggle under the huge copper ; you have hear the 
 hollow sound of the rich man 's coffer under the tap of Baron Levy 's 
 friendly knuckle , hear the strong man 's heart give out its dull warning 
 sound to the scientific ear of Dr. F - - - . and away once more vanishe 
 the separate existence , lose again in the flame that heat the boiler , 
 and the smoke that curl into air from the grimy furnace . 

 look to it , o Public Man , whoever thou art , and whatsoever thy 
 degree , - see if thou canst not compound matter , so as to keep a little 
 nook apart for thy private life ; that be , for thyself ! let the Great 
 Popkins Question not absorb wholly the individual soul of thee , as Smith 
 or Johnson . do not   so entirely consume thyself under that insatiable 
 boiler , that when thy poor little monad rush out from the sooty 
 furnace , and arrive at the star , thou mayest find no vocation for 
 thee there , and feel as if thou hadst nothing to do amidst the still 
 splendour of the Infinite . I do not   deny to thee the us of " Public 
 life ; " I grant that it be much to have help to carry that Great 
 Popkins Question ; but private Life , my friend , be the life of thy 
 private soul ; and there may be matter concerned with that which , on 
 consideration , thou mayest allow can not be wholly mix up with the 
 Great Popkins Question , and be not finally settle when thou didst 
 exclaim , " I have not live in vain , - the Popkins Question be carry 
 at last ! " oh , immortal soul , for one quarter of an hour per diem 
 de - popkinize thine immortality ! 




 CHAPTER II . 

 it have not be without much persuasion on the part of Jackeymo that 
 Riccabocca have consent to settle himself in the house which Randal have 
 recommend to he . not that the exile conceive any suspicion of the 
 young man beyond that which he might have share with Jackeymo , namely , 
 that Randal 's interest in the father be increase by a very natural 
 and excusable admiration of the daughter ; but the Italian have the pride 
 common to misfortune , - he do not like to be indebted to other , and he 
 shrink from the pity of those to whom it be know that he have hold a 
 high station in his own land . these scruple give way to the strength 
 of his affection for his daughter and his dread of his foe . good man , 
 however able and brave , who have suffer from the wicked , be apt to 
 form exaggerated notion of the power that have prevail against 
 they . Jackeymo have conceive a superstitious terror of Peschiera ; and 
 Riccabocca , though by no mean addict to superstition , still have a 
 certain creep of the flesh whenever he think of his foe . 

 but Riccabocca - than whom no man be more physically brave , and no man , 
 in some respect , more morally timid - fear the count less as a foe 
 than as a gallant . he remember his kinsman 's surpass beauty , the 
 power he have obtain over woman . he know he verse in every art that 
 corrupt , and wholly void of the conscience that deter . and Riccabocca 
 have unhappily nurse himself into so poor an estimate of the female 
 character , that even the pure and lofty nature of Violante do not seem 
 to he a sufficient safeguard against the craft and determination of a 
 practised and remorseless intriguer . but of all the precaution he 
 could take , none appear more likely to conduce to safety than his 
 establish a friendly communication with one who profess to be able 
 to get at all the count 's plan and movement , and who could apprise 
 Riccabocca at once should his retreat be discover . " forewarned be 
 forearmed , " say he to himself , in one of the proverb common to all 
 nation . however , as with his usual sagacity he come to reflect upon the 
 alarming intelligence convey to he by Randal , namely , that the 
 count seek his daughter 's hand , he divine that there be some strong 
 personal interest under such ambition ; and what could be that interest 
 save the probability of Riccabocca 's ultimate admission to the imperial 
 grace , and the count 's desire to assure himself of the heritage to an 
 estate that he might be permit to retain no more ? Riccabocca be 
 not indeed aware of the condition   not accord to usual custom in 
 Austria   on which the count hold the forfeit domain . he know not that 
 they have be grant merely on pleasure ; but he be too well aware of 
 Peschiera 's nature to suppose that he would woo a bride without a 
 dower , or be move by remorse in any overture of reconciliation . he 
 feel assure too - and this increase all his fear - that Peschiera would 
 never venture to seek an interview with himself ; all the count 's design 
 on Violante would be dark , secret , and clandestine . he be perplexed and 
 torment by the doubt whether or not to express openly to Violante his 
 apprehension of the nature of the danger to be apprehend . he have 
 tell she vaguely that it be for her sake that he desire secrecy and 
 concealment . but that might mean anything : what danger to himself would 
 not menace she ? yet to say more be so contrary to a man of his italian 
 notion and machiavellian maxim ! to say to a young girl , " there be a 
 man come over to England on purpose to woo and win you . for Heaven 's 
 sake take care of he ; he be diabolically handsome ; he never fail 
 where he set his heart . - Cospetto ! " cry the doctor , aloud , as these 
 admonition shape themselves to speech in the camera obscura of his 
 brain ; ' such a warning would have undo a Cornelia while she be yet 
 an innocent spinster . " no , he resolve to say nothing to Violante of the 
 count 's intention , only to keep guard , and make himself and Jackeymo all 
 eye and all ear . 

 the house Randal have select pleased Riccabocca at first glance . it 
 stand alone , upon a little eminence ; its upper window command the 
 high road . it have be a school , and be surround by high wall , which 
 contain a garden and lawn sufficiently large for exercise . the garden 
 door be thick , fortify by strong bolt , and have a little wicket 
 lattice , shut and open at pleasure , from which Jackeymo could inspect 
 all visitor before he permit they to enter . 

 an old female servant from the neighbourhood be cautiously hire ; 
 Riccabocca renounce his italian name , and abjure his origin . he speak 
 English sufficiently well to think he could pass as an Englishman . he 
 call himself Mr. Richmouth   a liberal translation of Riccabocca . he 
 buy a blunderbuss , two pair of pistol , and a huge housedog . 
 thus provide for , he allow Jackeymo to write a line to randal and 
 communicate his arrival . 

 Randal lose no time in call . with his usual adaptability and his 
 power of dissimulation , he contrive easily to please Mrs. Riccabocca , 
 and to increase the good opinion the exile be disposed to form of he . 
 he engage Violante in conversation on Italy and its poet . he promise 
 to bring her book . he begin , though more distantly than he could have 
 desire , - for her sweet stateliness awe he , - the preliminary of 
 courtship . he establish himself at once as a familiar guest , rid 
 down daily in the dusk of evening , after the toil of office , and 
 return at night . in four or five day he think he have make great 
 progress with all . Riccabocca watch he narrowly , and grow absorb 
 in thought after every visit . at length one night , when he and Mrs. 
 Riccabocca be alone in the drawing - room , Violante have retire to 
 rest , he thus speak as he fill his pipe , - 

 " Happy be the man who have no child ! Thrice happy he who have no 
 girl ! " 

 " my dear Alphonso ! " say the wife , look up from the waistband to 
 which she be attach a neat mother - o'-pearl button . she say no more ; 
 it be the sharp rebuke she be in the custom of administer to her 
 husband 's cynical and odious observation . Riccabocca light his pipe 
 with a thread paper , give three great puff , and resume , 

 " one blunderbuss , four pistol , and a house - dog call Pompey , who would 
 have make mincemeat of Julius Caesar ! " 

 " he certainly eat a great deal , do Pompey ! " say Mrs. Riccabocca , 
 simply . " but if he relieve your mind ! " 

 " he do not relieve it in the least , ma'am , " groan Riccabocca ; " and 
 that be the point I be come to . this be a most harass life , and a 
 most undignified life . and I who have only ask from Heaven dignity 
 and repose ! but if Violante be once marry , I should want neither 
 blunderbuss , pistol , nor Pompey . and it be that which would relieve my 
 mind , cara mia , - Pompey only relieve my larder . " 

 now Riccabocca have be more communicative to Jemima than he have be to 
 Violante . have once trust she with one secret , he have every motive 
 to trust she with another ; and he have accordingly speak out his fear 
 of the Count di Peschiera . therefore she answer , lay down the work , 
 and take her husband 's hand tenderly , 

 " indeed , my love , since you dread so much   though I own that I must 
 think unreasonably   this wicked , dangerous man , it would be the happy 
 thing in the world to see dear Violante well marry ; because , you see , 
 if she be married to one person she can not be married to another ; and 
 all fear of this count , as you say , would be at an end . " 

 " you can not express yourself well . it be a great comfort to unbosom 
 one's - self to a wife , after all , " quoth Riccabocca . 

 " but , " say the wife , after a grateful kiss , - " but where and how can we 
 find a husband suitable to the rank of your daughter ? " 

 " there ! there ! there ! " cry Riccabocca , push back his chair to the 
 farther end of the room , " that come of unbosom one's - self ! out fly 
 one secret ; it be open the lid of Pandora 's box ; one be betray , 
 ruin , undo ! " 

 " why , there be not a soul that can hear we ! " say Mrs. Riccabocca , 
 soothingly . 

 " ' that 's chance , ma'am ! if you once contract the habit of blab out 
 a secret when nobody be by , how on earth can you resist it when you 
 have the pleasurable excitement of tell it to all the world ? vanity , 
 vanity , - woman 's vanity ! woman never could withstand rank , - never ! " 
 the doctor go on rail for a quarter of an hour , and be very 
 reluctantly appease by Mrs. Riccabocca 's repeat and tearful 
 assurance that she would never even whisper to herself that her husband 
 have ever hold any other rank than that of doctor . Riccabocca , with a 
 dubious shake of the head , renew , 

 " I have do with all pomp and pretension . besides , the young man be a 
 bear gentleman : he seem in good circumstance ; he have energy and latent 
 ambition ; he be akin to L'Estrange 's intimate friend : he seem attach 
 to Violante . I do not   think it probable that we could do well . Nay , if 
 Peschiera fear that I shall be restore to my country , and I learn 
 the wherefore , and the ground to take , through this young man - why , 
 gratitude be the first virtue of the noble ! " 

 " you speak , then , of Mr. Leslie ? " 

 " to be sure - of whom else ? " 

 Mrs. Riccabocca lean her cheek on her hand thoughtfully . " now you have 
 tell I that , I will observe he with different eye . " 

 " Anima mia , I do not   see how the difference of your eye will alter the 
 object they look upon ! " grumble Riccabocca , shake the ash out of 
 his pipe . 

 " the object alter when we see it in a different point of view ! " reply 
 Jemima , modestly . " this thread do very well when I look at it in order 
 to sew on a button , but I should say it would never do to tie up Pompey 
 in his Kennel . " 

 " reason by illustration , upon my soul ! " ejaculate Riccabocca , 
 amazed . 

 " and , " continue Jemima , " when I be to regard one who be to constitute 
 the happiness of that dear child , and for life , can I regard he as I 
 would the pleasant guest of an evening ? ah , trust I , Alphonso ; I do not 
 pretend to be wise like you ; but when a woman consider what a man be 
 likely to prove to woman , - his sincerity , his honour , his heart , - oh , 
 trust I , she be wise than the wise man ! " 

 Riccabocca continue to gaze on Jemima with unaffected admiration and 
 surprise . and certainly , to use his phrase , since he have unbosom 
 himself to his well half , since he have confide in she , consult with 
 she , her sense have seem to quicken , her whole mind to expand . 

 " my dear , " say the sage , " I vow and declare that Machiavelli be a fool 
 to you . and I have be as dull as the chair I sit upon , to deny myself 
 so many year the comfort and counsel of such a - But , corpo di Bacco ! 
 forget all about rank ; and so now to bed . - one must not holloa till 
 one be out of the wood , " mutter the ungrateful , suspicious villain , as 
 he light the chamber candle . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 RICCABOCCA could not confine himself to the precinct within the wall 
 to which he condemn Violante . resume his spectacle , and wrap 
 in his cloak , he occasionally sally forth upon a kind of outwatch 
 or reconnoitre expedition , - restrict himself , however , to the 
 immediate neighbourhood , and never go quite out of sight of his 
 house . his favourite walk be to the summit of a hillock overgrown with 
 stunt bush - wood . here he would sit himself musingly , often till the 
 hoof of Randal 's horse ring on the wind road , as the sun set , over 
 fade herbage , red and vaporous , in autumnal sky . just below the 
 hillock , and not two hundred yard from his own house , be the only 
 other habitation in view , - a charming , thoroughly english cottage , 
 though somewhat imitate from the Swiss , with gable end , thatched roof , 
 and pretty , project casement , open through creeper and climbing 
 rose . from his height he command the garden of this cottage , and his 
 eye of artist be pleased , from the first sight , with the beauty which 
 some exquisite taste have give to the ground . even in that cheerless 
 season of the year , the garden wear a summer smile ; the evergreen be 
 so bright and various , and the few flow er still leave so hardy and so 
 healthful . face the south , a colonnade , or cover gallery , of rustic 
 woodwork have be form , and creep plant , lately set , be already 
 begin to clothe its column . opposite to this colonnade there be a 
 fountain which remind Riccabocca of his own at the deserted casino . it 
 be indeed singularly like it ; the same circular shape , the same girdle 
 of flower around it . but the jet from it vary every day , fantastic 
 and multiform , like the sport of a Naiad , - sometimes shoot up like 
 a tree , sometimes shape as a convolvulus , sometimes toss from its 
 silver spray a flower of vermilion , or a fruit of gold , - as if at play 
 with its toy like a happy child . and near the fountain be a large 
 aviary , large enough to enclose a tree . the italian could just catch a 
 gleam of rich colour from the wing of the bird , as they glance to 
 and fro within the network , and could hear their song , contrast the 
 silence of the free populace of air , whom the come winter have already 
 still . 

 Riccabocca 's eye , so alive to all aspect of beauty , luxuriate in the 
 view of this garden . its pleasantness have a charm that steal he from 
 his anxious fear and melancholy memory . 

 he never see but two form within the demesne , and he could not 
 distinguish their feature . one be a woman , who seem to he of staid 
 manner and homely appearance : she be see but rarely . the other a man , 
 often pace to and fro the colonnade , with frequent pause before the 
 playful fountain , or the bird that sing louder as he approach . this 
 latter form would then disappear within a room , the glass door of which 
 be at the extreme end of the colonnade ; and if the door be leave open , 
 Riccabocca could catch a glimpse of the figure bend over a table 
 cover with book . 

 always , however , before the sun set , the man would step forth more 
 briskly , and occupy himself with the garden , often work at it with 
 good heart , as if at a task of delight ; and then , too , the woman would 
 come out , and stand by as if talk to her companion . Riccabocca 's 
 curiosity grow arouse . he bid Jemima inquire of the old maid - servant 
 who live at the cottage , and hear that its owner be a Mr. Oran , - a 
 quiet gentleman , and fond of his book . 

 while Riccabocca thus amuse himself , Randal have not be prevent , 
 either by his official care or his scheme on Violante 's heart and 
 fortune , from further the project that be to unite Frank Hazeldean 
 and Beatrice di Negra . indeed , as to the first , a ray of hope be 
 sufficient to fire the ardent and unsuspecting lover . and Randal 's 
 artful misrepresentation of his conference with Mrs. Hazeldean remove 
 all fear of parental displeasure from a mind always too disposed to give 
 itself up to the temptation of the moment . Beatrice , though her feeling 
 for Frank be not those of love , become more and more influence by 
 Randal 's argument and representation , the more especially as she 
 brother grow morose , and even menacing , as day slip on , and she 
 could give no clew to the retreat of those whom he seek for . her 
 debt , too , be really urgent . as Randal 's profound knowledge of human 
 infirmity have shrewdly conjecture , the scruple of honour and pride , 
 that have make her declare she would not bring to a husband her own 
 encumbrance , begin to yield to the pressure of necessity . she listen 
 already , with but faint objection , when Randal urge she not to wait 
 for the uncertain discovery that be to secure her dowry , but by a 
 private marriage with Frank escape at once into freedom and security . 
 while , though he have first hold out to young Hazeldean the inducement 
 of Beatrice 's dowry as a reason of self - justification in the eye of the 
 squire , it be still easy to drop that inducement , which have always 
 rather damp than fire the high spirit and generous heart of the poor 
 Guardsman . and Randal could conscientiously say , that when he have ask 
 the squire if he expect fortune with Frank 's bride , the squire have 
 reply , " I do not   care . " thus encourage by his friend and his own 
 heart , and the soften manner of a woman who might have charm many a 
 colder , and fool many a wise man , Frank rapidly yield to the snare 
 hold out for his perdition . and though as yet he honestly shrink from 
 propose to Beatrice or himself a marriage without the consent , and 
 even the knowledge , of his parent , yet Randal be quite content to 
 leave a nature , however good , so thoroughly impulsive and undisciplined , 
 to the influence of the first strong passion it have ever know . 
 meanwhile , it be so easy to dissuade Frank from even give a hint to 
 the folk at home . " for , " say the wily and able traitor , " though we 
 may be sure of Mrs. Hazeldean 's consent , and her power over your father , 
 when the step be once take , yet we can not count for certain on the 
 squire , he be so choleric and hasty . he might hurry to town , see Madame 
 di Negra , blurt out some passionate , rude expression , which would wake 
 her resentment , and cause her instant rejection . and it might be too 
 late if he repent afterwards , as he would be sure to do . " 

 meanwhile randal Leslie give a dinner at the Clarendon Hotel   an 
 extravagance most contrary to his habit , and invite Frank , Mr. 
 Borrowell , and Baron Levy . 

 but this house - spider , which glide with so much ease after its fly , 
 through webs so numerous and mazy , have yet to amuse Madame di Negra 
 with assurance that the fugitive seek for would soon or later be 
 discover . though Randal baffle and elude her suspicion that he 
 be already acquaint with the exile   " the person he have think 
 of be , " he say , " quite different from her description ; " and he even 
 present to she an old singing - master and a sallow - faced daughter , as 
 the Italians who have cause his mistake , it be necessary for Beatrice 
 to prove the sincerity of the aid she have promise to her brother , and 
 to introduce Randal to the count . it be no less desirable to Randal to 
 know , and even win the confidence of this man - his rival . 

 the two meet at Madame di Negra 's house . there be something very strange , 
 and almost mesmerical , in the rapport between two evil nature . bring 
 two honest man together , and it be ten to one if they recognize each 
 other as honest ; difference in temper , manner , even politic , may make 
 each misjudge the other . but bring together two man unprincipled and 
 pervert - man who , if bear in a cellar , would have be food for the 
 hulk or gallow - and they understand each other by instant sympathy . 
 the eye of Franzini , Count of Peschiera , and Randal Leslie no soon 
 meet than a gleam of intelligence shot from both . they talk on 
 indifferent subject , - weather , gossip , politic , - what not . they bow 
 and they smile ; but all the while , each be watch , plumb the 
 other 's heart , each measure his strength with his companion ; each inly 
 say , " this be a very remarkable rascal ; be I a match for he ? " it be 
 at dinner they meet ; and follow the english fashion , Madame di Negra 
 leave they alone with their wine . 

 then , for the first time , Count di Peschiera cautiously and adroitly 
 make a cover push towards the object of the meeting . 

 " you have never be abroad , my dear sir ? you must contrive to visit 
 I at Vienna . I grant the splendour of your London world ; but , honestly 
 speak , it want the freedom of ours , - a freedom which unite gayety 
 with polish . for as your society be mixed , there be pretension 
 and effort with those who have no right to be in it , and artificial 
 condescension and chilling arrogance with those who have to keep their 
 inferior at a certain distance . with we , all be of fix rank and 
 acknowledge birth , familiarity be at once establish . hence , " add 
 the count , with his french lively smile , - " hence there be no place like 
 Vienna for a young man , no place like Vienna for bonne fortune . " 

 " those make the paradise of the idle , " reply Randal , " but the 
 purgatory of the busy . I confess frankly to you , my dear count , that 
 I have as little of the leisure which become the aspirer to bonne 
 fortune as I have the personal grace which obtain they without an 
 effort ; " and he incline his head as in compliment . 

 " so , " think the count , " woman be not his weak side . what be ? " 

 " Morbleu ! my dear Mr. Leslie , have I think as you do some year since , 
 I have save myself from many a trouble . after all , Ambition be the good 
 mistress to woo ; for with she there be always the hope , and never the 
 possession . " 

 " Ambition , Count , " reply Randal , still guard himself in dry 
 sententiousness , " be the luxury of the rich , and the necessity of the 
 poor . " 

 " aha , " think the count , " it come , as I anticipate from the 
 first , - come to the bribe . " he pass the wine to Randal , fill his 
 own glass , and drain it carelessly ; " sur mon ame , mon cher , " say the 
 count , " luxury be ever pleasanter than necessity ; and I be resolve 
 at least to give Ambition a trial ; je vais me refugier dans le sein du 
 bonheur domestique , - a married life and a settle home . peste ! if it 
 be not for ambition , one would die of ennui . a propos , my dear sir , I 
 have to thank you for promise my sister your aid in find a near and 
 dear kinsman of mine , who have take refuge in your country , and hide 
 himself even from I . " 

 " I should be most happy to assist in your search . as yet , however , I 
 have only to regret that all my good wish be fruitless . I should have 
 think , however , that a man of such rank have be easily find , even 
 through the medium of your own ambassador . " 

 " our own ambassador be no very warm friend of mine ; and the rank would 
 be no clew , for it be clear that my kinsman have never assume it since 
 he quit his country . " 

 " he quit it , I understand , not exactly from choice , " say randal , 
 smile . " pardon my freedom and curiosity , but will you explain to I 
 a little more than I learn from english rumour   which never accurately 
 report upon foreign matter still more notorious , how a person who have 
 so much to lose , and so little to win , by revolution , could put himself 
 into the same crazy boat with a crew of hair - brain adventurer and 
 visionary professor . " 

 " professor ! " repeat the count ; " I think you have hit on the very 
 answer to your question ; not but what man of high birth be as mad as 
 the canaille . I be the more willing to gratify your curiosity , since 
 it will perhaps serve to guide your kind search in my favour . you 
 must know , then , that my kinsman be not bear the heir to the rank he 
 obtain . he be but a distant relation to the head of the House which 
 he afterwards represent . bring up in an italian university , he be 
 distinguish for his learning and his eccentricity . there too , I 
 suppose , brood over old wife ' tale about freedom , and so forth , 
 he contract his carbonaro , chimerical notion for the independence of 
 Italy . suddenly , by three death , he be elevate , while yet young , to 
 a station and honour which might have satisfy any man in his sens . 
 Que diable ! what could the independence of Italy do for he ? he and I 
 be cousin ; we have play together as boy ; but our life have be 
 separate till his succession to rank bring we necessarily together . 
 we become exceedingly intimate . and you may judge how I love he , " 
 say the count , avert his eye slightly from Randal 's quiet , watchful 
 gaze , " when I add , that I forgive he for enjoy a heritage that , but 
 for he , have be mine . " 

 " ah , you be next heir ? " 

 " and it be a hard trial to be very near a great fortune , and yet just to 
 miss it . " 

 " true , " cry Randal , almost impetuously . the count now raise his eye , 
 and again the two man look into each other 's soul . 

 " hard still , perhaps , " resume the count , after a short 
 pause , - " hard still might it have be to some man to forgive the 
 rival as well as the heir . " 

 " Rival ! how ? " 

 " a lady , who have be destine by her parent to myself , though we have 
 never , I own , be formally betroth , become the wife of my kinsman . " 

 " do he know of your pretension ? " 

 " I do he the justice to say he do not . he see and fall in love with 
 the young lady I speak of . her parent be dazzle . her father send 
 for I . he apologize , he explain ; he set before I , mildly enough , 
 certain youthful imprudence or error of my own , as an excuse for 
 his change of mind ; and he ask I not only to resign all hope of his 
 daughter , but to conceal from her new suitor that I have ever venture to 
 hope . " 

 " and you consent ? " 

 " I consent . " 

 " that be generous . you must indeed have be much attach to your 
 kinsman . as a lover , I can not comprehend it ; perhaps , my dear count , you 
 may enable I to understand it well - as a man of the world . " 

 " well , " say the count , with his most roue air , " I suppose we be both 
 man of the world ? " 

 " Both ! certainly , " reply Randal , just in the tone which Peachum might 
 have use in court the confidence of Lockit . 

 " as a man of the world , then , I own , " say the count , play with the 
 ring on his finger , " that if I could not marry the lady myself   and 
 that seem to I clear , it be very natural that I should wish to see 
 she married to my wealthy kinsman . " 

 " very natural ; it might bring your wealthy kinsman and yourself still 
 close together . " 

 " this be really a very clever fellow ! " think the count , but he make no 
 direct reply . 

 " enfin , to cut short a long story , my cousin afterwards get entangle in 
 attempt , the failure of which be historically know . his project be 
 detect , himself denounce . he flee , and the emperor , in sequestrate 
 his estate , be pleased , with rare and singular clemency , to permit 
 I , as his near kinsman , to enjoy the revenue of half those estate 
 during the royal pleasure ; nor be the other half formally confiscate . 
 it be no doubt his Majesty 's desire not to extinguish a great italian 
 name ; and if my cousin and his child die in exile , why , of that name , 
 I , a loyal subject of Austria , - I , Franzini , Count di Peschiera , would 
 become the representative . such , in a similar case , have be sometimes 
 the russian policy towards polish insurgent . " 

 " I comprehend perfectly ; and I can also conceive that you , in profit 
 so largely , though so justly , by the fall of your kinsman , may have be 
 expose to much unpopularity , even to painful suspicion . " 

 " Entre nous , mon cher , I care not a stiver for popularity ; and as to 
 suspicion , who be he that can escape from the calumny of the envious ? 
 but , unquestionably , it would be most desirable to unite the divided 
 member of our house ; and this union I can now effect by the consent 
 of the emperor to my marriage with my kinsman 's daughter . you see , 
 therefore , why I have so great an interest in this research ? " 

 " by the marriage article you could no doubt secure the retention of 
 the half you hold ; and if you survive your kinsman , you would enjoy the 
 whole . a most desirable marriage ; and , if make , I suppose that would 
 suffice to obtain your cousin 's amnesty and grace ? " 

 " you say it . " 

 " but even without such marriage , since the emperor 's clemency have be 
 extend to so many of the proscribed , it be perhaps probable that your 
 cousin might be restore ? " 

 " it once seem to I possible , " say the count , reluctantly ; " but since 
 I have be in England , I think not . the recent revolution in France , 
 the democratic spirit rise in Europe , tend to throw back the cause 
 of a proscribe rebel . england swarm with revolutionist ; my cousin 's 
 residence in this country be in itself suspicious . the suspicion be 
 increase by his strange seclusion . there be many Italians here who 
 would aver that they have meet with he , and that he be still engage in 
 revolutionary project . " 

 " aver - untruly ? " 

 " Ma foi , it come to the same thing ; ' les absent ont toujour tort . ' 
 I speak to a man of the world . no ; without some such guarantee for his 
 faith as his daughter 's marriage with myself would give , his recall be 
 improbable . by the heaven above we , it shall be impossible ! " the count 
 rise as he say this , - rise as if the mask of simulation have fairly 
 fall from the visage of crime ; rise tall and towering , a very image of 
 masculine power and strength , beside the slight , bended form and sickly 
 face of the intellectual schemer . and have you see they thus confront 
 and contrast , you would have feel that if ever the time should come 
 when the interest of the one would compel he openly to denounce 
 or boldly to expose the other , the odd be that the brilliant and 
 audacious reprobate would master the weak nerve but superior wit 
 of the furtive traitor . Randal be startle ; but rise also , he say 
 carelessly , 

 " what if this guarantee can no long be give ; what if , in despair 
 of return , and in resignation to his altered fortune , your cousin have 
 already marry his daughter to some english suitor ? " 

 " ah , that would indeed be , next to my own marriage with she , the most 
 fortunate thing that could happen to myself . " 

 " how ? I do not   understand ! " 

 " why , if my cousin have so abjure his birthright , and forswear his rank ; 
 if this heritage , which be so dangerous from its grandeur , pass , in case 
 of his pardon , to some obscure Englishman , - a foreigner , a native of a 
 country that have no tie with ours , a country that be the very refuge 
 of leveller and Carbonari - mort de ma vie ! do you think that such would 
 not annihilate all chance of my cousin 's restoration , and be an excuse 
 even in the eye of Italy for formally confer the sequestrate 
 estate on an italian ? no ; unless , indeed , the girl be to marry an 
 Englishman of such name and birth and connection as would in themselves 
 be a guarantee   and how in poverty be this likely ?   I should go back 
 to Vienna with a light heart , if I could say , ' my kinswoman be an 
 Englishman 's wife ; shall her child be the heir to a house so 
 renowned for its lineage , and so formidable for its wealth ? ' Parbleu ! 
 if my cousin be but an adventurer , or merely a professor , he have 
 be pardon long ago . the great enjoy the honour not to be pardon 
 easily . " 

 Randal fall into deep but brief thought . the count observe he , not 
 face to face , but by the reflection of an opposite mirror . " this man 
 know something ; this man be deliberate ; this man can help I , " 
 think the count . 

 but Randal say nothing to confirm these hypothesis . recover from his 
 abstraction , he express courteously his satisfaction at the count 's 
 prospect , either way . " and since , after all , " he add , " you mean so 
 well to your cousin , it occur to I that you might discover he by a 
 very simple english process . " 

 " how ? " 

 " Advertise that , if he will come to some place appoint , he will hear 
 of something to his advantage . " 

 the count shake his head . " he would suspect I , and not come . " 

 " but he be intimate with you . he join an insurrection ; you be more 
 prudent . you do not injure he , though you may have benefit yourself . 
 why should he shun you ? " 

 " the conspirator forgive none who do not conspire ; besides , to speak 
 frankly , he think I injure he . " 

 " could you not conciliate he through his wife - whom you resign to 
 he ? " 

 " she be dead , - die before he leave the country . " 

 " oh , that be unlucky ! still I think an advertisement might do good . 
 allow I to reflect on that subject . shall we now join Madame la 
 Marquise ? " 

 on re - enter the drawing - room , the gentleman find Beatrice in full 
 dress , seat by the fire , and read so intently that she do not 
 remark they enter . 

 " what so interest you , ma seuur ? - the last novel by Balzac , no doubt ? " 

 Beatrice start , and , look up , show eye that be full of tear . 
 " oh , no ! no picture of miserable , vicious , parisian life . this be 
 beautiful ; there be soul here . " 

 Randal take up the book which the marchesa lay down ; it be the same 
 which have charm the circle at Hazeldean , charm the innocent and 
 fresh - hearted , charm now the wearied and tempt votaress of the 
 world . 

 " Hum , " murmur Randal ; " the parson be right . this be power , - a sort of 
 a power . " 

 " how I should like to know the author ! who can he be ? can you guess ? " 

 " not I. some old pedant in spectacle . " 

 " I think not , I be sure not . here beat a heart I have ever sigh to 
 find , and never find . " 

 " oh , la naive enfant ! " cry the count ; " comme son imagination s'egare 
 en rev enchante . and to think that while you talk like an Arcadian , 
 you be dress like a princess . " 

 " ah , I forget - the austrian ambassador 's . I shall not go to - night . this 
 book unfit I for the artificial world . " 

 " just as you will , my sister . I shall go . I dislike the man , and he I ; 
 but ceremony before man ! " 

 " you be go to the Austrian Embassy ? " say randal . " I , too , shall be 
 there . we shall meet . " and he take his leave . 

 " I like your young friend prodigiously , " say the count , yawn . " I 
 be sure that he know of the lose bird , and will stand to they like a 
 pointer , if I can but make it his interest to do so . we shall see . " 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 Randal arrive at the ambassador 's before the count , and contrive to 
 mix with the young nobleman attach to the embassy , and to whom he be 
 know . stand among these be a young Austrian , on his travel , of 
 very high birth , and with an air of noble grace that suit the ideal 
 of the old german chivalry . Randal be present to he , and , after some 
 talk on general topic , observe , " by the way , Prince , there be now in 
 London a countryman of your , with whom you be , doubtless , familiarly 
 acquaint , - the Count di Peschiera . " 

 " he be no countryman of mine . he be an italian . I know he but by sight 
 and by name , " say the prince , stiffly . 

 " he be of very ancient birth , I believe . " 

 " unquestionably . his ancestor be gentleman . " 

 " and very rich . " 

 " indeed ! I have understand the contrary . he enjoy , it be true , a large 
 revenue . " 

 a young attache , less discreet than the prince ; here observe , " oh , 
 Peschiera ! poor fellow , he be too fond of play to be rich . " 

 " and there be some chance that the kinsman whose revenue he hold may 
 obtain his pardon , and re - enter into possession of his fortune - so I 
 hear , at least , " say Randal , artfully . 

 " I shall be glad if it be true , " say the prince , with decision ; " and I 
 speak the common sentiment at Vienna . that kinsman have a noble spirit , 
 and be , I believe , equally dupe and betray . pardon I , sir ; but we 
 Austrians be not so bad as we be paint . have you ever meet in England 
 the kinsman you speak of ? " 

 " never , though he be suppose to reside here ; and the count tell I 
 that he have a daughter . " 

 " the count - ha ! I hear something of a scheme , - a wager of that - that 
 count 's . a daughter ! poor girl ! I hope she will escape his pursuit ; for , 
 no doubt , he pursue she . " 

 " possibly she may already have marry an Englishman . " 

 " I trust not , " say the prince , seriously ; " that might at present be a 
 serious obstacle to her father 's return . " 

 " you think so ? " 

 " there can be no doubt of it , " interpose the attache , with a grand and 
 positive air ; " unless , indeed , the Englishman be of a rank equal to 
 her own . " 

 here there be a slight , well - breed murmur and buzz at the door , for 
 the Count di Peschiera himself be announce ; and as he enter , his 
 presence be so striking , and his beauty so dazzle , that whatever 
 there might be to the prejudice of his character , it seem instantly 
 effaced or forget in that irresistible admiration which it be the 
 prerogative of personal attribute alone to create . 

 the prince , with a slight curve of his lip at the group that collect 
 round the count , turn to Randal , and say , " can you tell I if a 
 distinguish countryman of yours be in England , Lord L'Estrange ? " 

 " no , Prince , he be not . you know he ? " 

 " well . " 

 " he be acquaint with the count 's kinsman ; and perhaps from he you 
 have learn to think so highly of that kinsman ? " 

 the prince bow , and answer as he move away , " when one man of high 
 honour vouche for another , he command the belief of all . " 

 " certainly , " soliloquize Randal , " I must not be precipitate . I be 
 very near fall into a terrible trap . if I be to marry the girl , and 
 only , by so do , settle away her inheritance on Peschiera ! - how hard 
 it be to be sufficiently cautious in this world ! " 

 while thus meditate , a member of parliament tap he on the 
 shoulder . 

 " melancholy , Leslie ! I lie a wager I guess your thought . " 

 " guess , " answer Randal . 

 " you be think of the place you be so soon to lose . " 

 " soon to lose ! " 

 " why , if minister go out , you could hardly keep it , I suppose . " 

 this ominous and horrid member of parliament , Squire Hazeldean 's 
 favourite county member , Sir John , be one of those legislator 
 especially odious to official , - an independent " large - acre " member , 
 who would no more take office himself than he would cut down the oak 
 in his park , and who have no bowel of human feeling for those who have 
 opposite taste and less magnificent mean . 

 " Hem ! " say Randal , rather surlily . " in the first place , Sir John , 
 minister be not go out . " 

 " oh , yes , they will go . you know I vote with they generally , and would 
 willingly keep they in ; but they be man of honour and spirit ; and if 
 they can not   carry their measure , they must resign ; otherwise , by Jove , I 
 would turn round and vote they out myself ! " 

 " I have no doubt you would , Sir John ; you be quite capable of it ; that 
 rest with you and your constituent . but even if minister do go out , 
 I be but a poor subaltern in a public office , - I be no minister . why 
 should I go out too ? 

 " why ? hang it , Leslie , you be laugh at I . a young fellow like you 
 could never be mean enough to stay in , under the very man who drive out 
 your friend Egerton ? " 

 " it be not usual for those in the public office to retire with every 
 change of government . " 

 " certainly not ; but always those who be the relation of a retire 
 minister ; always those who have be regard as politician , and who 
 mean to enter parliament , as of course you will do at the next election . 
 but you know that as well as I do , - you who be so decide a politician , 
 the writer of that admirable pamphlet ! I should not like to tell my 
 friend Hazeldean , who have a sincere interest in you , that you ever 
 doubt on a question of honour as plain as your a , B , C. " 

 " indeed , Sir John , " say Randal , recover his suavity , while he inly 
 breathe a dire anathema on his county member , " I be so new to these 
 thing that what you say never strike I before . no doubt you must be 
 right ; at all event I can not have a well guide and adviser than Mr. 
 Egerton himself . " 

 SIR JOHN . - " no , certainly ; perfect gentleman , Egerton ! I wish we could 
 make it up with he and Hazeldean . " 

 randal   sigh . - " ah , I wish we could ! " 

 SIR JOHN . - " and some chance of it now ; for the time be come when all 
 true man of the old school must stick together . " 

 RANDAL . - " wisely , admirably say , my dear Sir John . but , pardon I , I 
 must pay my respect to the ambassador . " randal escape , and pass on , 
 see the ambassador himself in the next room , confer in a corner 
 with Audley Egerton . the ambassador seem very grave , Egerton calm 
 and impenetrable , as usual . presently the count pass by , and the 
 ambassador bow to he very stiffly . 

 as Randal , some time later , be search for his cloak below , Audley 
 Egerton unexpectedly join he . 

 " ah , Leslie , " say the minister , with more kindness than usual , " if you 
 do not   think the night air too cold for you , let we walk home together . I 
 have send away the carriage . " 

 this condescension in his patron be so singular , that it quite startle 
 Randal , and give he a presentiment of some evil . when they be in the 
 street , Egerton , after a pause , begin , 

 " my dear Mr. Leslie , it be my hope and belief that I have provide for 
 you at least a competence ; and that I might open to you , later , a career 
 yet more brilliant . hush ! I do not   doubt your gratitude ; let I proceed . 
 there be a possible chance , after certain decision that the government 
 have come to , that we may be beat in the House of Commons , and of 
 course resign . I tell you this beforehand , for I wish you to have time 
 to consider what , in that case , would be your good course . my power of 
 serve you may then probably be over . it would , no doubt   see our 
 close connection , and my view with regard to your future be so well 
 know , - no doubt , he expect that you should give up the place you 
 hold , and follow my fortune for good or ill . but as I have no personal 
 enemy with the opposite party , and as I have sufficient position in 
 the world to uphold and sanction your choice , whatever it may be , if 
 you think it more prudent to retain your place , tell I so openly , and 
 I think I can contrive that you may do it without loss of character and 
 credit . in that case , confine your ambition merely to rise gradually 
 in your office , without mix in politic . if , on the other hand , you 
 should prefer to take your chance of my return to office , and so resign 
 your present place ; and , furthermore , should commit yourself to a policy 
 that may then be not only in opposition but unpopular , I will do my good 
 to introduce you into parliamentary life . I can not say that I advise the 
 latter . " 

 Randal feel as a man feel after a severe fall , - he be literally 
 stun . at length he falter out , - 

 " can you think , sir , that I should ever desert your fortune , your 
 party , your cause ? " 

 " my dear Leslie , " reply the minister , " you be too young to have 
 commit yourself to any man or to any party , except , indeed , in that 
 unlucky pamphlet . this must not be an affair of sentiment , but of sense 
 and reflection . let we say no more on the point now ; but by consider 
 the pro and the con , you can well judge what to do , should the time 
 for option suddenly arrive . " 

 " but I hope that time may not come . " 

 " I hope so too , and most sincerely , " say the minister , with deliberate 
 and genuine emphasis . 

 " what could be so bad for the country ? " ejaculate Pandal . " it do not 
 seem to I possible , in the nature of thing , that you and your party 
 should ever go out ! " 

 " and when we be once out , there will be plenty of wiseacre to say it 
 be out of the nature of thing that we should ever come in again . here 
 we be at the door . " 




 CHAPTER V. 

 Randal pass a sleepless night ; but , indeed , he be one of those 
 person who neither need , nor be accustom to , much sleep . however , 
 towards morning , when dream be say to be prophetic , he fall into a 
 most delightful slumber , a slumber people by vision fit to lure on , 
 through labyrinth of law , predestine chancellor , or wreck upon the 
 rock of glory the inebriate soul of youthful ensign ; dream from 
 which Rood Hall emerge crown with the tower of Belvoir or Raby , 
 and look over subject land and manor wrest from the nefarious 
 usurpation of Thornhills and Hazeldeans ; dream in which Audley 
 Egerton 's gold and power , room in Downing Street , and saloon in 
 Grosvenor Square , have pass away to the smile dreamer , as the empire 
 of Chaldaea pass to Darius the Median . why vision so belie the 
 gloomy and anxious thought that precede they should visit the pillow 
 of Randal Leslie , surpass my philosophy to conjecture . he yield , 
 however , passively to their spell , and be startled to hear the clock 
 strike eleven as he descend the stair to breakfast . he be vex at 
 the lateness of the hour , for he have mean to have take advantage of 
 the unwonted softness of Egerton , and draw therefrom some promise or 
 proffer to cheer the prospect which the minister have so chillingly 
 expand before he the precede night ; and it be only at breakfast 
 that he usually find the opportunity of private conference with his 
 busy patron . but Audley Egerton would be sure to have sally forth ; and 
 so he have , only Randal be surprised to hear that he have go out in his 
 carriage , instead of on foot , as be his habit . randal soon despatch 
 his solitary meal , and with a new and sudden affection for his office , 
 thitherward bent his way . as he pass through Piccadilly , he hear 
 behind a voice that have lately become familiar to he , and turn 
 round , see Baron Levy walk side by side , though not arm - in - arm , with 
 a gentleman almost as smart as himself , but with a jaunty step and a 
 brisker air , - a step that , like Diomed 's , as describe by Shakspeare , - 

  " rise on the toe ; that spirit of his 
  in aspiration lift he from the earth . " 

 indeed , one may judge of the spirit and disposition of a man by his 
 ordinary gait and mien in walk . he who habitually pursue abstract 
 thought look down on the ground . he who be accustomed to sudden 
 impulse , or be try to seize upon some necessary recollection , look 
 up with a kind of jerk . he who be a steady , cautious , merely practical 
 man , walk on deliberately , his eye straight before he ; and , even in 
 his most musing mood , observe thing around sufficiently to avoid a 
 porter 's knot or a butcher 's tray . but the man with strong ganglion - of 
 push , lively temperament , who , though practical , be yet speculative ; 
 the man who be emulous and active , and ever try to rise in life ; 
 sanguine , alert , bold - walk with a spring , look rather above the head 
 of his fellow - passenger , but with a quick , easy turn of his own , which 
 be lightly set on his shoulder ; his mouth be a little open , his eye 
 be bright , rather restless , but penetrative , his port have something 
 of defiance , his form be erect , but without stiffness . such be the 
 appearance of the baron 's companion . and as Randal turn round at 
 Levy 's voice , the baron say to his companion , " a young man in the first 
 circle - you should book he for your fair lady 's party . how d ' ye 
 do , Mr. Leslie ? let I introduce you to Mr. Richard Avenel . " then , as he 
 hook his arm into Randal 's , he whisper , " Man of first - rate talent , 
 monstrous rich , have two or three parliamentary seat in his pocket , wife 
 give party , - her foible . " 

 " proud to make your acquaintance , sir , " say Mr. Avenel , lift his 
 hat . " fine day . " 

 " rather cold too , " say Leslie , who , like all thin person with weak 
 digestion , be chilly by temperament ; besides , he have enough on his 
 mind to chill his body . 

 " so much the healthy , - brace the nerve , " say Mr. Avenel ; " but you 
 young fellow relax the system by hot room and late hour . fond of 
 dancing , of course , sir ? " then , without wait for Randal 's negative , 
 Mr. Richard continue rapidly , " Mrs. Avenel have a soiree dansante on 
 Thursday , - shall be very happy to see you in Eaton Square . stop , I have 
 a card ; " and he draw out a dozen large invitation - card , from which he 
 select one , and present it to Randal . the baron press that young 
 gentleman 's arm , and Randal reply courteously that it would give he 
 great pleasure to be introduce to Mrs. Avenel . then , as he be not 
 desirous to be see under the wing of Baron Levy , like a pigeon under 
 that of a hawk , he gently extricate himself , and plead great haste , 
 walk quickly on towards his office . 

 " that young man will make a figure some day , " say the baron . " I do not 
 know any one of his age with so few prejudice . he be a connection by 
 marriage to Audley Egerton , who - " 

 " Audley Egerton ! " exclaim Mr. Avenel ; " a d - -d haughty , aristocratic , 
 disagreeable , ungrateful fellow ! " 

 " why , what do you know of he ? " 

 " he owe his first seat in parliament to the vote of two near relation 
 of mine , and when I call upon he some time ago , in his office , he 
 absolutely order I out of the room . hang his impertinence ; if ever I 
 can pay he off , I guess I sha'n't   fail for want of good will ! " 

 " order you out of the room ? that be not like Egerton , who be civil , if 
 formal , - at least to most man . you must have offend he in his weak 
 point . " 

 " a man whom the public pay so handsomely should have no weak point . 
 what be Egerton 's ? " 

 " oh , he value himself on be a thorough gentleman , - a man of the 
 nice honour , " say Levy , with a sneer . " you must have ruffle his 
 plume there . how be it ? " 

 " I forget , " answer Mr. Avenel , who be far too well verse in the 
 London scale of human dignity since his marriage , not to look back 
 with a blush at his desire of knighthood . " no use bother our head 
 now about the plume of an arrogant popinjay . to return to the subject 
 we be discuss : you must be sure to let I have this money next 
 week . " 

 " rely on it . " 

 " and you will not let my bill get into the market ; keep they under lock 
 and key . " 

 " so we agree . " 

 " it be but a temporary difficulty , - royal mourning , such nonsense ; panic 
 in trade , lest these precious minister go out . I shall soon float over 
 the troubled water . " 

 " by the help of a paper boat , " say the baron , laughing ; and the two 
 gentleman shake hand and part . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 meanwhile Audley Egerton 's carriage have deposit he at the door of 
 Lord Lansmere 's house , at Knightsbridge . he ask for the countess , and 
 be show into the drawing - room , which be desert . Egerton be pale 
 than usual ; and as the door open , he wipe the unwonted moisture from 
 his forehead , and there be a quiver on his firm lip . the countess 
 too , on enter , show an emotion almost equally unusual to her 
 self - control . she press Audley 's hand in silence , and seat herself 
 by his side , seem to collect her thought . at length she say , 

 " it be rarely indeed that we meet , Mr. Egerton , in spite of your 
 intimacy with Lansmere and Harley . I go so little into your world , and 
 you will not voluntarily come to I . " 

 " Madam , " reply Egerton , " I might evade your kind reproach by state 
 that my hour be not at my disposal ; but I answer you with plain 
 truth , - it must be painful to both of we to meet . " 

 the countess colour and sigh , but do not dispute the assertion . 

 Audley resume : " and therefore , I presume that , in send for I , you 
 have something of moment to communicate ? " 

 " it relate to Harley , " say the countess , as if in apology ; " and I 
 would take your advice . " 

 " to Harley ! speak on , I beseech you . " 

 " my son have probably tell you that he have educate and rear a young 
 girl , with the intention to make her Lady L'Estrange , and hereafter 
 Countess of Lansmere . " 

 " Harley have no secret from I , " say Egerton , mournfully . " this young 
 lady have arrive in England , be here , in this house . " 

 " and Harley too ? " 

 " no , she come over with Lady N - - - and her daughter . Harley be to 
 follow shortly , and I expect he daily . here be his letter . Observe , 
 he have never yet communicate his intention to this young person , now 
 entrust to my care , never speak to she as the lover . " 

 Egerton take the letter and read it rapidly , though with attention . 

 " true , " say he , as he return the letter : " and before he do so he 
 wish you to see Miss Digby and to judge of her yourself , - wish to 
 know if you will approve and sanction his choice . " 

 " it be on this that I would consult you : a girl without rank ; the 
 father , it be true , a gentleman , though almost equivocally one , but the 
 mother , I know not what . and Harley , for whom I hop an alliance 
 with the first house in England ! " the countess press her hand 
 convulsively together . 

 EGERTON . - " he be no more a boy . his talent have be waste , his life 
 a wanderer 's . he present to you a chance of resettle his mind , 
 of re - arouse his native power , of a home besides your own . Lady 
 Lansmere , you can not hesitate ! " 

 LADY LANSMERE . - " I do , I do ? after all that I have hop after all that 
 I do to prevent - " 

 egerton   interrupt she . - " you owe he now an atonement ; that be in 
 your power , - it be not in mine . " the countess again press Audley 's 
 hand , and the tear gush from her eye . 

 " it shall be so . I consent , I consent . I will silence , I will crush back 
 this proud heart . alas ! it well - nigh break his own ! I be glad you 
 speak thus . I like to think he owe my consent to you . in that there be 
 atonement for both . " 

 " you be too generous , madam , " say Egerton , evidently move , though 
 still , as ever , strive to repress emotion . " and now may I see the 
 young lady ? this conference pain I ; you see even my strong nerve 
 quiver ; and at this time I have much to go through , - need of all my 
 strength and firmness . " 

 " I hear , indeed , that the Government will probably retire . but it be 
 with honour : it will be soon call back by the voice of the nation . " 

 " let I see the future wife of Harley L'Estrange , " say Egerton , without 
 heed of this consolatory exclamation . 

 the countess rise and leave the room . in a few minute she return with 
 Helen Digby . 

 Helen be wondrously improve from the pale , delicate child , with the 
 soft smile and intelligent eye , who have sit by the side of Leonard 
 in his garret . she be about the middle height , still slight , but 
 beautifully form ; that exquisite roundness of proportion which convey 
 so well the idea of woman , in its undulating , pliant grace , - form to 
 embellish life , and soften away its rude angle ; form to embellish , 
 not to protect . her face might not have satisfy the critical eye of 
 an artist , - it be not without defect in regularity ; but its expression 
 be eminently gentle and prepossess ; and there be few who would not 
 have exclaim , " what a lovely countenance ! " the mildness of her brow 
 be touch with melancholy - her childhood have leave its trace on her 
 youth . her step be slow , and her manner shy , subdue , and timid . 

 Audley gaze on she with earnestness as she approach he ; and then 
 come forward , take her hand and kiss it . " I be your guardian 's 
 constant friend , " say he , and he draw she gently to a seat beside he , 
 in the recess of a window . with a quick glance of his eye towards the 
 countess , he seem to imply the wish to converse with Helen somewhat 
 apart . so the countess interpret the glance ; and though she remain 
 in the room , she seat herself at a distance , and bent over a book . 

 it be touch to see how the austere man of business lend himself 
 to draw forth the mind of this quiet , shrink girl ; and if you have 
 listen , you would have comprehend how he come to possess such social 
 influence , and how well , some time or other in the course of his life , 
 he have learn to adapt himself to woman . 

 he speak first of Harley L'Estrange , - speak with tact and delicacy . 
 Helen at first answer by monosyllable , and then , by degree , with 
 grateful and open affection . Audley 's brow grow shade . he then speak 
 of Italy ; and though no man have less of the poet in his nature , yet 
 with the dexterity of one long verse in the world , and who have be 
 accustomed to extract evidence from character most oppose to his 
 own , he suggest such topic as might serve to arouse poetry in other . 
 Helen 's reply betray a cultivate taste , and a charming womanly 
 mind ; but they betray , also , one accustom to take its colouring 
 from another 's , - to appreciate , admire , revere the Lofty and the 
 Beautiful , but humbly and meekly . there be no vivid enthusiasm , no 
 remark of strike originality , no flash of the self - kindle , creative 
 faculty . lastly , Egerton turn to England , - to the critical nature of 
 the time , to the claim which the country possess upon all who have 
 the ability to serve and guide its troubled destiny . he enlarge 
 warmly on Harley 's natural talent , and rejoice that he have return to 
 England , perhaps to commence some great career . Helen look surprised , 
 but her face catch no correspondent glow from Audley 's eloquence . 
 he rise , and an expression of disappointment pass over his grave , 
 handsome feature , and as quickly vanish . 

 " Adieu , my dear Miss Digby ; I fear I have weary you , especially with 
 my politic . Adieu , Lady Lansmere ; no doubt I shall see Harley as soon 
 as he return . " 

 then he hasten from the room , gain his carriage , and order the 
 coachman to drive to Downing Street . he draw down the blind , and lean 
 back . a certain languor become visible in his face , and once or twice , 
 he mechanically put his hand to his heart . 

 " she be good , amiable , docile , - will make an excellent wife , no doubt , " 
 say he , murmuringly . " but do she love Harley as he have dream of 
 love ? no ! have she the power and energy to arouse his faculty , and 
 restore to the world the Harley of old ? no ! mean by Heaven to be the 
 shadow of another 's sun - not herself the sun , - this child be not the one 
 who can atone for the Past and illume the Future . " 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 that evening Harley L'Estrange arrive at his father 's house . the few 
 year that have pass since we see he last have make no perceptible 
 change in his appearance . he still preserve his elastic youthfulness 
 of form , and singular variety and play of countenance . he seem 
 unaffectedly rejoice to greet his parent , and have something of the 
 gayety and tenderness of a boy return from school . his manner to Helen 
 bespoke the chivalry that pervade all the complexity and curve 
 of his character . it be affectionate , but respectful , - her to he , 
 subdue , but innocently sweet and gently cordial . Harley be the chief 
 talker . the aspect of the time be so critical that he could not avoid 
 question on politic ; and , indeed , he show an interest in they which 
 he have never evince before . Lord Lansmere be delighted . 

 " why , Harley , you love your country after all ? " 

 " the moment she seem in danger , yes ! " reply the Patrician ; and the 
 Sybarite seem to rise into the Athenian . then he ask with eagerness 
 about his old friend Audley ; and , his curiosity satisfy there , he 
 inquire the last literary news . he have hear much of a book lately 
 publish . he name the one ascribe by Parson Dale to Professor Moss ; 
 none of his listener have read it . 

 Harley pishe at this , and accuse they all of indolence and stupidity , 
 in his own quaint , metaphorical style . then he say , " and town gossip ? " 

 " we never hear it , " say Lady Lansmere . 

 " there be a new plough much talk of at Boodle 's , " say Lord Lansmere . 

 " God speed it . but be not there a new man much talk of at White 's ? " 

 " I do not   belong to White 's . " 

 " nevertheless , you may have hear of he , - a foreigner , a Count di 
 Peschiera . " 

 " yes , " say Lord Lansmere ; " he be point out to I in the Park , - a 
 handsome man for a foreigner ; wear his hair properly cut ; look 
 gentlemanlike and English . " 

 " ah , ah ! he be here then ! " and Harley rub his hand . 

 " which road do you take ? do you pass the Simplon ? " 

 " no ; I come straight from Vienna . " 

 then , relate with lively vein his adventure by the way , he continue 
 to delight Lord Lansmere by his gayety till the time come to retire to 
 rest . as soon as Harley be in his own room his mother join he . 

 " well , " say he , " I need not ask if you like Miss Digby ? who would not ? " 

 " Harley , my own son , " say the mother , burst into tear , " be happy 
 your own way ; only be happy , that be all I ask . " 

 Harley , much affect , reply gratefully and soothingly to this fond 
 injunction . and then gradually lead his mother on to converse 
 of Helen , ask abruptly , " and of the chance of our happiness , - her 
 happiness as well as mine , - what be your opinion ? speak frankly . " 

 " of her happiness there can be no doubt , " reply the mother , proudly . 
 " of your , how can you ask I ? have you not decide on that yourself ? " 

 " but still it cheer and encourage one in any experiment , however well 
 consider , to hear the approval of another . Helen have certainly a most 
 gentle temper . " 

 " I should conjecture so . but her mind - " 

 " be very well store . " 

 " she speak so little - " 

 " yes . I wonder why ? she be surely a woman ! " 

 " Pshaw , " say the countess , smile in spite of herself . 

 " but tell I more of the process of your experiment . you take she as a 
 child , and resolve to train she accord to your own ideal . be that 
 easy ? " 

 " it seem so . I desire to instil habit of truth : she be already by 
 nature truthful as the day ; a taste for Nature and all thing natural : 
 that seem inborn ; perception of art as the interpreter of Nature : 
 those be more difficult to teach . I think they may come . you have 
 hear her play and sing ? " 

 " no . " 

 " she will surprise you . she have less talent for drawing ; still , all 
 that teaching could do have be do , - in a word , she be accomplish . 
 Temper , heart , mind , - these all be excellent . " Harley stop , and 
 suppress a sigh . " certainly I ought to be very happy , " say he ; and he 
 begin to wind up his watch . 

 " of course she must love you , " say the countess , after a pause . " how 
 could she fail ? " 

 " love I ! my dear mother , that be the very question I shall have to 
 ask . " 

 " Ask ! love be discover by a glance ; it have no need of ask . " 

 " I have never discover it , then , I assure you . the fact be , that 
 before her childhood be pass , I remove she , as you may suppose , 
 from my roof . she reside with an italian family near my usual abode . I 
 visit she often , direct her study , watch her improvement - " 

 " and fall in love with she ? " 

 " fall be such a very violent word . no ; I do not   remember to have have a 
 fall . it be all a smooth incline plane from the first step , until at 
 last I say to myself , ' Harley L'Estrange , thy time have come . the bud 
 have blossom into flower . take it to thy breast . ' and myself reply 
 to myself , meekly , ' so be it . ' then I find that Lady N - - - , with her 
 daughter , be come to England . I ask her ladyship to take my 
 ward to your house . I write to you , and pray your assent ; and , that 
 grant , I know you would obtain my father 's . Iam here , - you give I the 
 approval I seek for . I will speak to Helen to - morrow . perhaps , after 
 all , she may reject I . " 

 " strange , strange ! you speak thus coldly , thus lightly , you , so capable 
 of ardent love ! " 

 " Mother , " say Harley , earnestly , " be satisfied ! I be ! love as of old , I 
 feel , alas ! too well , can visit I never more . but gentle companionship , 
 tender friendship , the relief and the sunlight of woman 's smile , 
 hereafter the voice of child , - music that , strike on the heart 
 of both parent , waken the most lasting and the pure of all 
 sympathy , - these be my hope . be the hope so mean , my fond mother ? " 

 again the countess weep , and her tear be not dry when she leave the 
 room . 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 oh , Helen , fair Helen , - type of the quiet , serene , unnoticed , deep - feel 
 excellence of woman ! woman , less as the ideal that a poet conjure from 
 the air , than as the companion of a poet on the earth ! woman , who , with 
 her clear sunny vision of thing actual , and the exquisite fibre of her 
 delicate sense , supply the deficiency of he whose foot stumble 
 on the soil , because his eye be too intent upon the star ! woman , the 
 provident , the comforting , angel whose pinion be fold round the 
 heart , guard there a divine spring unmarre by the winter of the 
 world ! Helen , soft Helen , be it indeed in thee that the wild and 
 brilliant " lord of wantonness and ease " be to find the regeneration 
 of his life , the rebaptism of his soul ? of what avail thy meek prudent 
 household virtue to one whom Fortune screen from rough trial ; whose 
 sorrow lie remote from thy ken ; whose spirit , erratic and perturb , 
 now rise , now fall , need a vision more subtle than thine to 
 pursue , and a strength that can sustain the reason , when it droop , on 
 the wing of enthusiasm and passion ? 

 and thou , thyself , o nature , shrink and humble , that needest to be 
 court forth from the shelter , and develop under the calm and genial 
 atmosphere of holy , happy love - can such affection as Harley L'Estrange 
 may proffer suffice to thee ? will not the blossom , yet fold in the 
 petal , wither away beneath the shade that may protect they from the 
 storm , and yet shut they from the sun ? Thou who , where thou giv 
 love , seek , though meekly , for love in return ; to be the soul 's sweet 
 necessity , the life 's household partner to he who receive all thy 
 faith and devotion , - canst thou influence the source of joy and of 
 sorrow in the heart that do not heave at thy name ? Hast thou the charm 
 and the force of the moon , that the tide of that wayward sea shall ebb 
 and flow at thy will ? yet who shall say , who conjecture how near two 
 heart can become , when no guilt lie between they , and time bring the 
 tie all its own ? Rarest of all thing on earth be the union in which 
 both , by their contrast , make harmonious their blending ; each supply 
 the defect of the helpmate , and complete , by fusion , one strong human 
 soul ! happiness enough , where even peace do but seldom preside , when 
 each can bring to the altar , if not the flame , still the incense . where 
 man 's thought be all noble and generous , woman 's feeling all gentle 
 and pure , love may follow if it do not precede ; and if not , if the 
 rose be miss from the garland , one may sigh for the rose , but one be 
 safe from the thorn . 

 the morning be mild , yet somewhat overcast by the mist which announce 
 come winter in London , and Helen walk musingly beneath the tree 
 that surround the garden of Lord Lansmere 's house . many leaf be 
 yet leave on the bough ; but they be sere and wither . and the bird 
 chirp at time ; but their note be mournful and complain . all 
 within this house , until Harley 's arrival , have be strange and 
 saddening to Helen 's timid and subdued spirit . Lady Lansmere have 
 receive she kindly , but with a certain restraint ; and the loftiness of 
 manner , common to the countess with all but Harley , have awe and chill 
 the diffident orphan . Lady Lansmere 's very interest in Harley 's choice , 
 her attempt to draw Helen out of her reserve , her watchful eye 
 whenever Helen shyly speak or shyly move , frighten the poor child , 
 and make she unjust to herself . 

 the very servant , though staid , grave , and respectful , as suit a 
 dignified , old - fashioned household , painfully contrast the bright 
 welcome smile and free talk of italian domestic . her recollection 
 of the happy , warm Continental manner , which so set the bashful at 
 their ease , make the stately and cold precision of all around her doubly 
 awful and dispiriting . Lord Lansmere himself , who do not as yet know 
 the view of Harley , and little dream that he be to anticipate a 
 daughter - in - law in the ward , whom he understand Harley , in a freak of 
 generous romance , have adopt , be familiar and courteous , as become a 
 host ; but he look upon Helen as a mere child , and naturally leave 
 she to the countess . the dim sense of her equivocal position , of her 
 comparative humbleness of birth and fortune , oppress and pain she ; 
 and even her gratitude to Harley be make burdensome by a sentiment of 
 helplessness . the grateful long to requite . and what could she ever do 
 for he ? 

 thus musing , she wander alone through the curve walk ; and this sort 
 of mock - country landscape - London loud , and even visible , beyond the 
 high gloomy wall , and no escape from the window of the square formal 
 house - seem a type of the prison bound of Rank to one whose soul 
 yearn for simple love nature . 

 Helen 's revery be interrupt by Nero 's joyous bark . he have catch 
 sight of she , and come bound up , and thrust his large head into her 
 hand . as she stoop to caress the dog , happy at his honest greeting , 
 and tear that have be long gathering at the lid fall silently on his 
 face   for I know nothing that more move we to tear than the hearty 
 kindness of a dog , when something in human being have pain or chill 
 we , she hear behind the musical voice of Harley . hastily she dry or 
 repress her tear , as her guardian come up , and draw her arm within 
 his own . 

 " I have so little of your conversation last evening , my dear ward , that 
 I may well monopolize you now , even to the privation of Nero . and so you 
 be once more in your native land ? " 

 Helen sigh softly . 

 " may I not hope that you return under fairer auspex than those which 
 your childhood know ? " 

 Helen turn her eye with ingenuous thankfulness to her guardian , and 
 the memory of all she owe to he rush upon her heart . 

 Harley renew , and with earnest , though melancholy sweetness , " Helen , 
 your eye thank I ; but hear I before your word do . I deserve no 
 thank . I be about to make to you a strange confession of egotism and 
 selfishness . " 

 " you ! - oh , impossible ! " 

 " judge yourself , and then decide which of we shall have cause to be 
 grateful . Helen , when I be scarcely your age - a boy in year , but 
 more , methink , a man at heart , with man 's strong energy and sublime 
 aspiring , than I have ever since be - I love , and deeply - " 

 he pause a moment , in evident struggle . Helen listen in mute 
 surprise , but his emotion awaken her own ; her tender woman 's heart 
 yearn to console . unconsciously her arm rest on his less lightly . 

 " deeply , and for sorrow . it be a long tale , that may be tell hereafter . 
 the worldly would call my love a madness . I do not reason on it then , I 
 can not reason on it now . enough : death smite suddenly , terribly , and 
 to I , mysteriously , she whom I love . the love live on . fortunately , 
 perhaps , for I , I have quick distraction , not to grief , but to its inert 
 indulgence . I be a soldier ; I join our army . man call I brave . 
 Flattery ! I be a coward before the thought of life . I seek death : 
 like sleep , it do not come at our call . peace ensue . as when the 
 wind fall the sail droop , so when excitement cease , all seem to I 
 flat and objectless . heavy , heavy be my heart . perhaps grief have be 
 less obstinate , but that I fear I have cause for self - reproach . since 
 then I have be a wanderer , a self - make exile . my boyhood have be 
 ambitious , - all ambition cease . flame , when they reach the core of the 
 heart , spread , and leave all in ash . let I be brief : I do not mean 
 thus weakly to complain , - I to whom Heaven have give so many blessing ! 
 I feel , as it be , separate from the common object and joy of man . I 
 grow startled to see how , year by year , wayward humour possess I . 
 I resolve again to attach myself to some live heart - it be my sole 
 chance to rekindle my own . but the one I have love remain as my type 
 of woman , and she be different from all I see . therefore I say to 
 myself , ' I will rear from childhood some young fresh life , to grow up 
 into my ideal . ' as this thought begin to haunt I , I chance to discover 
 you . strike with the romance of your early life , touch by your 
 courage , charm by your affectionate nature , I say to myself , ' here be 
 what I seek . ' Helen , in assume the guardianship of your ' life , in all 
 the culture which I have seek to bestow on your docile childhood , I 
 repeat , that I have be but the egotist . and now , when you have reach 
 that age when it become I to speak , and you to listen ; now , when 
 you be under the sacred roof of my own mother ; now I ask you , can you 
 accept this heart , such as waste year , and grief too fondly nurse , 
 have leave it ? can you be , at least , my comforter ? can you aid I to 
 regard life as a duty , and recover those aspiration which once soar 
 from the paltry and miserable confine of our frivolous daily being ? 
 Helen , here I ask you , can you be all this , and under the name 
 of - wife ? " 

 it would be in vain to describe the rapid , varying , indefinable emotion 
 that pass through the inexperienced heart of the youthful listener 
 as Harley thus speak . he so move all the spring of amaze , compassion , 
 tender respect , sympathy , child - like gratitude , that when he pause and 
 gently take her hand , she remain bewildered , speechless , overpower . 
 Harley smile as he gaze upon her blushing , downcast , expressive face . 
 he conjecture at once that the idea of such proposal have never cross 
 her mind ; that she have never contemplate he in the character of wooer ; 
 never even sound her heart as to the nature of such feeling as his 
 image have arouse . 

 " my Helen , " he resume , with a calm pathos of voice , " there be some 
 disparity of year between we , and perhaps I may not hope henceforth for 
 that love which youth give to the young . permit I simply to ask , what 
 you will frankly answer , can you have see in our quiet life abroad , or 
 under the roof of your italian friend , any one you prefer to I ? " 

 " no , indeed , no ! " murmur Helen . " how could I ; who be like you ? " then , 
 with a sudden effort - for her innate truthfulness take alarm , and her 
 very affection for Harley , childlike and reverent , make her tremble lest 
 she should deceive he - she draw a little aside , and speak thus , 

 " oh , my dear guardian , noble of all human being , at least in my eye , 
 forgive , forgive I , if I seem ungrateful , hesitating ; but I can not , 
 can not think of myself as worthy of you . I never so lift my eye . your 
 rank , your position - " 

 " why should they be eternally my curse ? forget they , and go on . " 

 " it be not only they , " say Helen , almost sob , " though they be 
 much ; but I your type , your ideal ! - I ? - impossible ! oh , how can I ever 
 be anything even of use , of aid , of comfort to one like you ! " 

 " you can , Helen - you can , " cry Harley , charm by such ingenuous 
 modesty . " may I not keep this hand ? " and Helen leave her hand in 
 Harley 's , and turn away her face , fairly weep . 

 a stately step pass under the wintry tree . 

 " my mother , " say Harley L'Estrange , look up , " I present to you my 
 future wife . " 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 with a slow step and an abstract air , Harley L'Estrange bend his way 
 towards Egerton 's house , after his eventful interview with Helen . he have 
 just enter one of the street lead into Grosvenor Square , when 
 a young man , walk quickly from the opposite direction , come full 
 against he , and draw back with a brief apology , recognize he , 
 and exclaim , " what ! you in England , Lord L'Estrange ! accept my 
 congratulation on your return . but you seem scarcely to remember I . " 

 " I beg your pardon , Mr. Leslie . I remember you now by your smile ; but 
 you be of an age in which it be permit I to say that you look old 
 than when I see you last . " 

 " and yet , Lord L'Estrange , it seem to I that you look young . " 

 indeed , this reply be so far true that there appear less difference 
 of year than before between Leslie and L'Estrange ; for the wrinkle 
 in the schemer 's mind be visible in his visage , while Harley 's dreamy 
 worship of Truth and Beauty seem to have preserve to the votary the 
 endure youth of the divinity . 

 Harley receive the compliment with a supreme indifference , which might 
 have be suitable to a stoic , but which seem scarcely natural to 
 a gentleman who have just propose to a lady many year young than 
 himself . 

 Leslie renew : " perhaps you be on your way to Mr. Egerton 's . if so , 
 you will not find he at home ; he be at his office . " 

 " thank you . then to his office I must re - direct my step . " 

 " I be go to he myself , " say Randal , hesitatingly . L'Estrange have no 
 prepossession in favour of Leslie from the little he have see of that 
 young gentleman ; but Randal 's remark be an appeal to his habitual 
 urbanity , and he reply , with well - breed readiness , " let we be 
 companion so far . " 

 Randal accept the arm proffer to he ; and Lord L'Estrange , as 
 be usual with one long absent from his native land , bear part as a 
 questioner in the dialogue that ensue . 

 " Egerton be always the same man , I suppose , - too busy for illness , and 
 too firm for sorrow ? " 

 " if he ever feel either , he will never stoop to complain . but , indeed , 
 my dear lord , I should like much to know what you think of his health . " 

 " how ! you alarm I ! " 

 " Nay , I do not mean to do that ; and pray do not let he know that 
 I go so far . but I have fancy that he look a little worn and 
 suffering . " 

 " Poor Audley ! " say L'Estrange , in a tone of deep affection . " I will 
 sound he , and , be assure , without name you ; for I know well how 
 little he like to be suppose capable of human infirmity . I be oblige 
 to you for your hint , oblige to you for your interest in one so dear to 
 I . " 

 and Harley 's voice be more cordial to randal than it have ever be 
 before . he then begin to inquire what randal thought of the rumour that 
 have reach himself as to the probable defeat of the Government , and 
 how far Audley 's spirit be affect by such risk . but randal here , 
 see that Harley could communicate nothing , be reserve and guard . 

 " Loss of office could not , I think , affect a man like Audley , " observe 
 Lord L'Estrange . " he would be as great in opposition - perhaps great ; 
 and as to emolument - " 

 " the emolument be good , " interpose Randal , with a half - sigh . 

 " good enough , I suppose , to pay he back about a tenth of what his 
 place cost our magnificent friend . no , I will say one thing for english 
 statesman , no man amongst they ever yet be the rich for place . " 

 " and Mr. Egerton 's private fortune must be large , I take for grant , " 
 say Randal , carelessly . 

 " it ought to be , if he have time to look to it . " 

 here they pass by the hotel in which lodge the Count di Peschiera . 

 Randal stop . " will you excuse I for an instant ? as we be pass 
 this hotel , I will just leave my card here . " so say he give his card 
 to a waiter lounge by the door . " for the Count di Peschiera , " say he , 
 aloud . 

 L'Estrange start ; and as Randal again take his arm , say , " so that 
 italian lodge here ; and you know he ? " 

 " I know he but slightly , as one know any foreigner who make a 
 sensation . " 

 " he make a sensation ? " 

 " naturally ; for he be handsome , witty , and say to be very rich , - that 
 be , as long as he receive the revenue of his exile kinsman . " 

 " I see you be well inform , Mr. Leslie . and what be suppose to bring 
 hither the Count di Peschiera ? " 

 " I do hear something , which I do not quite understand , about a bet 
 of his that he would marry his kinsman 's daughter , and so , I conclude , 
 secure to himself all the inheritance ; and that he be therefore here 
 to discover the kinsman and win the heiress . but probably you know 
 the right of the story , and can tell I what credit to give to such 
 gossip . " 

 " I know this at least , that if he do lay such a wager , I would advise 
 you to take any odd against he that his backer may give , " say 
 L'Estrange , dryly ; and while his lip quiver with anger , his eye 
 gleam with arch ironical humour . 

 " you think , then , that this poor kinsman will not need such an alliance 
 in order to regain his estate ? " 

 " yes ; for I never yet know a rogue whom I would not bet against , when he 
 back his own luck as a rogue against Justice and Providence . " 

 Randal wince , and feel as if an arrow have graze his heart ; but he soon 
 recover . 

 " and indeed there be another vague rumour that the young lady in 
 question be marry already - to some Englishman . " this time it be 
 Harley who wince . " good heaven ! that can not be true , - that would 
 undo all ! an Englishman just at this moment ! but some Englishman of 
 correspondent rank I trust , or at least one know for opinion oppose 
 to what an Austrian would call Revolutionary doctrine ? " 

 " I know nothing . but it be suppose merely a private gentleman of 
 good family . would not that suffice ? can the Austrian Court dictate a 
 marriage to the daughter as a condition for grace to the father ? " 

 " no , - not that ! " say Harley , greatly disturb . " but put yourself in 
 the position of any minister to one of the great european monarchy . 
 suppose a political insurgent , formidable for station and wealth , have 
 be proscribe , much interest make on his behalf , a powerful party 
 strive against it ; and just when the minister be disposed to relent , 
 he hear that the heiress to this wealth and this station be marry 
 to the native of a country in which sentiment friendly to the 
 very opinion for which the insurgent be proscribe be popularly 
 entertain , and thus that the fortune to be restore may be so 
 employ as to disturb the national security , the exist order of 
 thing , - this , too , at the very time when a popular revolution have just 
 occur in France , and its effect be feel most in the very land of 
 the exile ; - suppose all this , and then say if anything could be more 
 untoward for the hope of the banish man , or furnish his adversary 
 with strong argument against the restoration of his fortune ? but 
 pshaw ! this must be a chimera ! if true , I should have know of it . " 

   as there have be so many revolution in France , it may be 
  convenient to suggest that , accord to the date of this story , 
  Harley no doubt allude to that revolution which exile Charles X. 
  and place Louis Philippe on the throne . 

 " I quite agree with your lordship , - there can be no truth in such a 
 rumour . some Englishman , hearing , perhaps , of the probable pardon of the 
 exile , may have count on an heiress , and spread the report in order to 
 keep off other candidate . by your account , if successful in his suit , 
 he might fail to find an heiress in the bride . " 

 " no doubt of that . whatever might be arrange , I can not   conceive that 
 he would be allow to get at the fortune , though it might be hold 
 in suspense for his child . but indeed it so rarely happen that an 
 italian girl of high name marry a foreigner that we must dismiss this 
 notion with a smile at the long face of the hypothetical fortune - hunter . 
 Heaven help he , if he exist ! " 

 " amen ! " echo Randal , devoutly . 

 " I hear that Peschiera , 's sister be return to England . do you know she 
 too ? " 

 " a little . " 

 " my dear Mr. Leslie , pardon I if I take a liberty not warrant by our 
 acquaintance . against the lady I say nothing . indeed , I have hear some 
 thing which appear to entitle she to compassion and respect . but as to 
 Peschiera all who prize honour suspect he to be a knave , - I know he 
 to be one . now , I think that the long we preserve that abhorrence for 
 knavery which be the generous instinct of youth , why , the fairer will 
 be our manhood , and the more reverend our age . you agree with I ? " 
 and Harley suddenly turn , his eye fall like a flood of light upon 
 Randal 's pale and secret countenance . 

 " to be sure , " murmur the schemer . 

 Harley , survey he , mechanically recoil , and withdraw his arm . 

 fortunately for Randal , who somehow or other feel himself slip into 
 a false position , he scarce know how or why , he be here seize by the 
 arm ; and a clear , open , manly voice cry , " my dear fellow , how be you ? 
 I see you be engage now ; but look into my room when you can , in the 
 course of the day . " 

 and with a bow of excuse for his interruption to Lord L'Estrange , the 
 speaker be then turn away , when Harley say , 

 " no , do not   let I take you from your friend , Mr. Leslie . and you need 
 not be in a hurry to see Egerton ; for I shall claim the privilege of 
 old friendship for the first interview . " 

 " it be Mr. Egerton 's nephew Frank Hazeldan . " 

 " pray , call he back , and present I to he . he have a face that would 
 have go far to reconcile Timon to Athens . " randal obey , and after a 
 few kindly word to Frank , Harley insist on leave the two young man 
 together , and walk on to Downing Street with a brisker step . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 " that Lord L'Estrange seem a very good fellow . " 

 " so - so ; an effeminate humourist , - say the most absurd thing , and 
 fancy they wise . never mind he . you want to speak to I , Frank ? " 

 " yes ; I be so obliged to you for introduce I to Levy . I must tell you 
 how handsomely he have behave . " 

 " stop ; allow I to remind you that I do not introduce you to Levy ; you 
 have meet he before at Borrowell 's , if I recollect right , and he din 
 with we at the Clarendon , - that be all I have to do with bring you 
 together . indeed I rather caution you against he than not . pray 
 do not   think I introduce you to a man who , however pleasant and perhaps 
 honest , be still a money - lender . your father would be justly angry with 
 I if I have do so . " 

 " oh , pooh ! you be prejudiced against poor Levy . but just hear : I be 
 sit very ruefully , think over those cursed bill , and how the 
 deuce I should renew they , when Levy walk into my room ; and 
 after tell I of his long friendship for my uncle Egerton and his 
 admiration for yourself , and   give I your hand , randal   say how 
 touch he feel by your kind sympathy in my trouble , he open 
 his pocket - book , and show I the bill safe and sound in his own 
 possession . " 

 " how ? " 

 " he have buy they up . ' it must be so disagreeable to I , ' he say , ' to 
 have they fly about the London moneymarket , and those Jews would be 
 sure soon or later to apply to my father . and now , ' add Levy , ' I be 
 in no immediate hurry for the money , and we must put the interest upon 
 fair term . ' in short , nothing could be more liberal than his tone . 
 and he say , he be think of a way to relieve I altogether , and will 
 call about it in a few day , when his plan be mature . after all , I must 
 owe this to you , Randal . I dare swear you put it into his head . " 

 " oh , no , indeed ! on the contrary , I still say , be cautious in all your 
 dealing with Levy . I do not   know , I ' m sure , what he mean to propose . 
 have you hear from the Hall lately ? " 

 " yes , to - day . only think - the Riccaboccas have disappear . my mother 
 write I word of it , - a very odd letter . she seem to suspect that I 
 know where they be , and reproach I for ' mystery ' - quite enigmatical . 
 but there be one sentence in her letter - see , here it be in the 
 postscript - which seem to refer to Beatrice : ' I do not   ask you to tell 
 I your secret , Frank , but Randal will no doubt have assure you that 
 my first consideration will be for your own happiness , in any matter in 
 which your heart be really engage . ' " 

 " yes , " say Randal , slowly ; " no doubt this refer to Beatrice ; but , as 
 I tell you , your mother will not interfere one way or the other , - such 
 interference would weaken her influence with the squire . besides , as she 
 say , she can not   wish , you to marry a foreigner ; though once marry , she 
 would - but how do you stand now with the marchesa ? have she consent to 
 accept you ? " 

 " not quite ; indeed I have not actually propose . her manner , though much 
 soften , have not so far embolden I ; and , besides , before a positive 
 declaration , I certainly must go down to the Hall and speak at least to 
 my mother . " 

 " you must judge for yourself , but do not   do anything rash : talk first to 
 I . here we be at my office . good - by ; and - and pray believe that , in 
 whatever you do with Levy , I have no hand in it . " 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 towards the evening , Randal be rid fast on the road to Norwood . the 
 arrival of Harley , and the conversation that have pass between that 
 nobleman and Randal , make the latter anxious to ascertain how far 
 Riccabocca be likely to learn L'Estrange 's return to England , and to 
 meet with he . for he feel that , should the latter come to know that 
 Riccabocca , in his movement , have go by Randal 's advice . Harley would 
 find that Randal have speak to he disingenuously ; and on the other 
 hand , Riccabocca , place under the friendly protection of Lord 
 L'Estrange , would no long need randal Leslie to defend he from the 
 machination of Peschiera . to a reader happily unaccustomed to dive 
 into the deep and mazy recess of a schemer 's mind , it might seem that 
 Randal 's interest in retain a hold over the exile 's confidence would 
 terminate with the assurance that have reach he , from more than 
 one quarter , that Violante might cease to be an heiress if she 
 marry himself . " but perhaps , " suggest some candid and youthful 
 conjecturer , - " perhaps Randal Leslie be in love with this fair 
 creature ? " randal in love ! - no ! he be too absorb by hard passion 
 for that blissful folly . nor , if he could have fall in love , be 
 Violante the one to attract that sullen , secret heart ; her instinctive 
 nobleness , the very stateliness of her beauty , womanlike though it be , 
 awe he . man of that kind may love some soft slave , - they can not lift 
 their eye to a queen . they may look down , - they can not lookup . but on 
 the one hand , Randal could not resign altogether the chance of secure 
 a fortune that would realize his most dazzling dream , upon the mere 
 assurance , however probable , which have so dismay he ; and on the other 
 hand , should he be compel to relinquish all idea of such alliance , 
 though he do not contemplate the base perfidy of actually assist 
 Peschiera 's avow design , still , if Frank 's marriage with Beatrice 
 should absolutely depend upon her brother 's obtain the knowledge 
 of Violante 's retreat , and that marriage should be as conducive to his 
 interest as he think he could make it , why - he do not then push 
 his deduction far , even to himself , - they seem too black ; but 
 he sigh heavily , and that sigh forebode how weak would be honour 
 and virtue against avarice and ambition . therefore , on all account , 
 Riccabocca be one of those card in a sequence , which so calculate a 
 player would not throw out of his hand : it might serve for repique , at 
 the bad it might score well in the game . intimacy with the Italian be 
 still part and parcel in that knowledge which be the synonym of power . 

 while the young man be thus meditate , on his road to Norwood , 
 Riccabocca and his Jemima be close confer in their drawing - room . 
 and if you could have see they , reader , you would have be seize with 
 equal surprise and curiosity : for some extraordinary communication have 
 certainly pass between they . Riccabocca be evidently much agitated , 
 and with emotion not familiar to he . the tear stand in his eye at 
 the same time that a smile , the reverse of cynical or sardonic , curve 
 his lip ; while his wife be lean her head on his shoulder , her hand 
 clasp in his , and , by the expression of her face , you might guess 
 that he have pay she some very gratifying compliment , of a nature more 
 genuine and sincere than those which characterize his habitual hollow 
 and dissimulate gallantry . but just at this moment Giacomo enter , 
 and Jemima , with her native English modesty , withdraw in haste from 
 Riccabocca 's shelter side . 

 " Padrone , " say Giacomo , who , whatever his astonishment at the 
 connubial position he have disturb , be much too discreet to betray 
 it , - " Padrone , I see the young Englishman rid towards the house , and 
 I hope , when he arrive , you will not forget the alarming information I 
 give to you this morning . " 

 " ah , ah ! " say Riccabocca , his face fall . " if the signorina be but 
 marry ! " 

 " my very thought , - my constant thought ! " exclaim Riccabocca . " and you 
 really believe the young Englishman love she ? " 

 " why else should he come , Excellency ? " ask Giacomo , with great 
 naivete . 

 " very true ; why , indeed ? " say Riccabocca . " Jemima , I can not endure 
 the terror I suffer on that poor child 's account . I will open myself 
 frankly to randal Leslie . and now , too , that which might have be a 
 serious consideration , in case I return to Italy , will no long stand 
 in our way , Jemima . " 

 Jemima smile faintly , and whisper something to Riccabocca , to which 
 he reply , 

 " nonsense , anima mia . I know it will be , - have not a doubt of it . I tell 
 you it be as nine to four , accord to the nice calculation . I will 
 speak at once to Randal . he be too young , too timid to speak himself . " 

 " certainly , " interpose Giacomo ; " how could he dare to speak , let he 
 love ever so well ? " 

 Jemima shake her head . 

 " oh , never fear , " say Riccabocca , observe this gesture ; " I will give 
 he the trial . if he entertain but mercenary view , I shall soon detect 
 they . I know human nature pretty well , I think , my love ; and , Giacomo , 
 just get I my Machiavelli ; - that be right . now leave I , my dear ; I must 
 reflect and prepare myself . " 

 when Randal enter the house , Giacomo , with a smile of peculiar 
 suavity , usher he into the drawing - room . he find Riccabocca alone , 
 and seat before the fireplace , lean his face on his hand , with the 
 great folio of Machiavelli lie open on the table . 

 the Italian receive he as courteously as usual ; but there be in his 
 manner a certain serious and thoughtful dignity , which be perhaps 
 the more imposing , because but rarely assume . after a few preliminary 
 observation , Randal remark that Frank Hazeldean have inform he of 
 the curiosity which the disappearance of the Riccaboccas have excite at 
 the Hall , and inquire carelessly if the doctor have leave instruction 
 as to the forwarding of any letter that might be direct to he at the 
 Casino . 

 " letter ! " say Riccabocca , simply ; " I never receive any ; or , at least , 
 so rarely , that it be not worth while to take an event so little to 
 be expect into consideration . no ; if any letter do reach the Casino , 
 there they will wait . " 

 " then I can see no possibility of indiscretion ; no chance of a clew to 
 your address . " 

 " nor I either . " 

 satisfy so far , and know that it be not in Riecabocca 's habit 
 to read the newspaper , by which he might otherwise have learn of 
 L'Estrange 's arrival in London , Randal then proceed to inquire , with 
 much seeming interest , into the health of Violante , - hop it do not 
 suffer by confinement , etc . Riccabocca eye he gravely while he speak , 
 and then suddenly rise , that air of dignity to which I have before 
 refer become yet more striking . 

 " my young friend , " say he , " hear I attentively , and answer I frankly . 
 I know human nature - " here a slight smile of proud complacency pass 
 the sage 's lip , and his eye glance towards his Machiavelli . 

 " I know human nature , - at least I have study it , " he renew more 
 earnestly , and with less evident self - conceit ; " and I believe that 
 when a perfect stranger to I exhibit an interest in my affair , which 
 occasion he no small trouble , - an interest , " continue the wise 
 man , lay his hand on Randal 's shoulder , " which scarcely a son could 
 exceed , he must be under the influence of some strong personal motive . " 

 " oh , sir ! " cry Randal , turn a shade more pale , and with a faltering 
 tone . Riccabocca , survey he with the tenderness of a superior being , 
 and pursue his deductive theory . 

 " in your case , what be that motive ? not political ; for I conclude you 
 share the opinion of your government , and those opinion have not 
 favour mine . not that of pecuniary or ambitious calculation ; for 
 how can such calculation enlist you on behalf of a ruin exile ? what 
 remain ? why , the motive which at your age be ever the most natural and 
 the strong . I do not   blame you . Machiavelli himself allow that such 
 a motive have sway the wise mind , and overturn the most solid 
 state . in a word , young man , you be in love , and with my daughter 
 Violante . " 

 Randal be so startled by this direct and unexpected charge upon his 
 own mask battery , that he do not even attempt his defence . his head 
 droop on his breast , and he remain speechless . 

 " I do not doubt , " resume the penetrate judge of human nature , " that 
 you would have be withhold by the laudable and generous scruple which 
 characterize your happy age , from voluntarily disclose to I the state 
 of your heart . you might suppose that , proud of the position I once 
 hold , or sanguine in the hope of regain my inheritance , I might 
 be over - ambitious in my matrimonial view for Violante ; or that you , 
 anticipate my restoration to honour and fortune , might seem actuate 
 by the last motif which influence love and youth ; and , therefore , my 
 dear young friend , I have depart from the ordinary custom in England , 
 and adopt a very common one in my own country . with we , a suitor 
 seldom present himself till he be assure of the consent of a father . 
 I have only to say this , - if I be right , and you love my daughter , my 
 first object in life be to see her safe and secure ; and , in a word - you 
 understand I . " 

 now , mightily may it comfort and console we ordinary mortal , who 
 advance no pretence to superior wisdom and ability , to see the huge 
 mistake make by both these very sagacious personage , - Dr. Riccabocca , 
 value himself on his profound acquaintance with character , and randal 
 Leslie , accustom to grope into every hole and corner of thought and 
 action , wherefrom to extract that knowledge which be power ! for whereas 
 the sage , judge not only by his own heart in youth , but by the general 
 influence of the master passion on the young , have ascribe to randal 
 sentiment wholly foreign to that able diplomatist 's nature , so no 
 soon have Riccabocca bring his speech to a close , than randal , 
 judging also by his own heart , and by the general law which influence 
 man of the mature age and boast worldly wisdom of the pupil of 
 Machiavelli , instantly decide that Riccabocca presume upon his youth 
 and inexperience , and mean most nefariously to take he in . 

 " the poor youth ! " think Riccabocca , " how unprepared he be for the 
 happiness I give he ! " 

 " the cunning old jesuit ! " think Randal ; " he have certainly learn , 
 since we meet last , that he have no chance of regain his patrimony , and 
 so he want to impose on I the hand of a girl without a shilling . 
 what other motive can he possibly have ? have his daughter the remotest 
 probability of become the great heiress in Italy , would he dream of 
 bestow she on I in this off - hand way ? the thing stand to reason . " 

 actuate by his resentment at the trap thus lay for he , Randal be 
 about to disclaim altogether the disinterested and absurd affection 
 lay to his charge , when it occur to he that , by so do , he might 
 mortally offend the italian , since the cunning never forgive those who 
 refuse to be dupe by they , - and it might still be conducive to his 
 interest to preserve intimate and familiar term with Riccabocca ; 
 therefore , subdue his first impulse , he exclaim , 

 " oh , too generous man ! pardon I if I have so long be unable to 
 express my amaze , my gratitude ; but I can not - no , I can not , while 
 your prospect remain thus uncertain , avail myself of your - of your 
 inconsiderate magnanimity . your rare conduct can only redouble my own 
 scruple , if you , as I firmly hope and believe , be restore to your 
 great possession - you would naturally look so much high than I . 
 should these hope fail , then , indeed , it may be different ; yet even 
 then , what position , what fortune , have I to offer to your daughter 
 worthy of she ? " 

 " you be well bear ! all gentleman be equal , " say Riccabocca , with a 
 sort of easy nobleness . " you have youth , information , talent , - source 
 of certain wealth in this happy country , - powerful connection ; and , in 
 fine , if you be satisfied with marry for love , I shall be content ; 
 if not , speak openly . as to the restoration to my possession , I can 
 scarcely think that probable while my enemy live . and even in that 
 case , since I see you last , something have occur , " add Riccabocca , 
 with a strange smile , which seem to randal singularly sinister and 
 malignant , " that may remove all difficulty . meanwhile , do not think I 
 so extravagantly magnanimous ; do not underrate the satisfaction I must 
 feel at know Violante safe from the design of Peschiera , - safe , and 
 forever , under a husband 's roof . I will tell you an italian proverb , - it 
 contain a truth full of wisdom and terror , 

 " ' hai cinquanta Amici ? - non basta . Hai un Nemico ? - e troppo . ' "   " have 
 you fifty friend ? - it be not enough . have you one enemy ? - it be too 
 much . " 

 " something have occur ! " echo Randal , not heed the conclusion of 
 this speech , and scarcely hear the proverb , which the sage deliver 
 in his most emphatic and tragic tone . " something have occur ! my dear 
 friend , be plainer . what have occur ? " Riccabocca remain silent . 
 " something that induce you to bestow your daughter on I ? " Riccabocca 
 nod , and emit a low chuckle . 

 " the very laugh of a fiend , " mutter Randal . " something that make she 
 not worth bestow . he betray himself . cunning people always do . " 

 " Pardon I , " say the Italian , at last , " if I do not   answer your 
 question ; you will know later ; but at present this be a family secret . 
 and now I must turn to another and more alarming cause for my frankness 
 to you . " here Riccabocca 's face change , and assume an expression of 
 mingle rage and fear . " you must know , " he add , sink his voice , 
 " that Giacomo have see a strange person loiter about the house , and 
 look up at the window ; and he have no doubt - nor have i - that this be 
 some spy or emissary of Peschiera 's . " 

 " impossible ; how could he discover you ? " 

 " I know not ; but no one else have any interest in do so . the man keep 
 at a distance , and Giacomo could not see his face . " 

 " it may be but a mere idler . be this all ? " 

 " no ; the old woman who serve we say that she be ask at a shop ' if 
 we be not Italians ' ? " 

 " and she answer ? " 

 " ' no ; ' but own that ' we have a foreign servant , Giacomo . ' " 

 " I will see to this . rely on it that if Peschiera have discover you , 
 I will learn it . Nay , I will hasten from you in order to commence 
 inquiry . " 

 " I can not detain you . may I think that we have now an interest in 
 common ? " 

 " oh , indeed yes ; but - but - your daughter ! how can I dream that one so 
 beautiful , so peerless , will confirm the hope you have extend to I ? " 

 " the daughter of an Italian be bring up to consider that it be a 
 father 's right to dispose of her hand . " 

 " but the heart ? " 

 " Cospetto ! " say the italian , true to his infamous notion as to the 
 sex , " the heart of a girl be like a convent , - the holy the cloister , 
 the more charitable the door . " 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 Randal have scarcely leave the house before Mrs. Riccabocca , who be 
 affectionately anxious in all that concerned Violante , rejoin she 
 husband . 

 " I like the young man very well , " say the sage , - " very well indeed . 
 I find he just what I expect , from my general knowledge of human 
 nature ; for as love ordinarily go with youth , so modesty usually 
 accompany talent . he be young , ergo , he be in love ; he have talent , 
 ergo , he be modest , modest and ingenuous . " 

 " and you think not in any way sway by interest in his affection ? " 

 " quite the contrary ; and to prove he the more , I have not say a word 
 as to the worldly advantage which , in any case , would accrue to he 
 from an alliance with my daughter . in any case : for if I regain my 
 country , her fortune be assure ; and if not , I trust "   say the poor 
 exile , lift his brow with stately and become pride   " that I be too 
 well aware of my child 's dignity , as well as my own , to ask any one to 
 marry she to his own worldly injury . " 

 " eh ! I do not   quite understand you , Alphonso . to be sure , your dear life 
 be insure for her marriage portion ; but - " 

 " Pazzie - stuff ! " say Riccabocca , petulantly ; " her marriage portion would 
 be as nothing to a young man of Randal 's birth and prospect . I think 
 not of that . but listen : I have never consent to profit by Harley 
 L'Estrange 's friendship for I ; my scruple would not extend to my 
 son - in - law . this noble friend have not only high rank , but considerable 
 influence , - influence with the government , influence with Randal 's 
 patron , who , between ourselves , do not seem to push the young man as 
 he might do ; I judge by what Randal say . I should write , therefore , 
 before anything be settle , to L'Estrange , and I should say to he 
 simply , ' I never ask you to save I from penury , but I do ask you 
 to save a daughter of my House from humiliation . I can give to her no 
 dowry ; can her husband owe to my friend that advance in an honourable 
 career , that open to energy and talent , which be more than a dowry to 
 generous ambition ? ' " 

 " oh , it be in vain you would disguise your rank , " cry Jemima , with 
 enthusiasm ; " it speak in all you utter , when your passion be move . " 

 the Italian do not seem flatter by that eulogy . " Pish , " say he , 
 " there you be ! rank again ! " 

 but Jemima be right . there be something about her husband that 
 be grandiose and princely , whenever he escape from his accursed 
 Machiavelli , and give fair play to his heart . 

 and he spend the next hour or so in think over all that he could 
 do for Randal , and devise for his intended son - in - law the agreeable 
 surprise , which Randal be at that very time rack his yet cleverer 
 brain to disappoint . 

 these plan con sufficiently , Riccabocca shut up his Machiavelli , and 
 hunt out of his scanty collection of book , Buffon on Man , and various 
 other psychological volume , in which he soon become deeply absorb . 
 why be these work the object of the sage 's study ? perhaps he will let 
 we know soon , for it be clearly a secret know to his wife ; and though 
 she have hitherto keep one secret , that be precisely the reason why 
 Riccabocca would not wish long to overburden her discretion with 
 another . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

 Randal reach home in time to dress for a late dinner at Baron Levy 's . 

 the baron 's style of living be of that character especially affect 
 both by the most acknowledge exquisite of that day , and , it must be 
 own , also , by the most egregious parvenus . for it be noticeable 
 that it be your parvenu who always come near in fashion   so far as 
 external be concern   to your genuine exquisite . it be your parvenu 
 who be most particular as to the cut of his coat , and the precision of 
 his equipage , and the minutia , of his menage . those between the parvenu 
 and the exquisite , who know their own consequence , and have something 
 solid to rest upon , be slow in follow all the caprice of fashion , 
 and obtuse in observation as to those nicety which neither give they 
 another ancestor , nor add another thousand to the account at their 
 banker 's , - as to the last , rather indeed the contrary ! there be a 
 decide elegance about the baron 's house and his dinner . if he have be 
 one of the lawful king of the dandy , you would have cry , " what 
 perfect taste ! " - but such be human nature , that the dandy who din 
 with he say to each other , " he pretend to imitate D - - ! vulgar dog ! " 
 there be little affectation of your more showy opulence . the furniture 
 in the room be apparently simple , but , in truth , costly , from its 
 luxurious comfort ; the ornament and china scatter about the commode 
 be of curious rarity and great value , and the picture on the wall 
 be gem . at dinner , no plate be admit on the table . the russian 
 fashion , then uncommon , now more prevalent , be adopt , fruit and 
 flower in old sevre dish of priceless vertu , and in sparkling glass 
 of bohemian fabric . no livery servant be permit to wait ; behind each 
 guest stand a gentleman dress so like the guest himself , in fine linen 
 and simple black , that guest and lacquey seem stereotype from one 
 plate . 

 the viand be exquisite ; the wine come from the cellar of deceased 
 archbishop and ambassador . the company be select ; the party do not 
 exceed eight . four be the eld son of peer   from a baron to 
 a duke ; one be a professed wit , never to be get without a month 's 
 notice , and , where a parvenu be host , a certainty of green pea and 
 peach - out of season ; the sixth , to Randal 's astonishment , be Mr. 
 Richard Avenel ; himself and the baron make up the complement . 

 the eld son recognize each other with a meaning smile ; the most 
 juvenile of they , indeed   it be his first year in London , have the 
 grace to blush and look sheepish . the other be more harden ; but 
 they all unite in regard with surprise both Randal and Dick Avenel . 
 the former be know to most of they personally , and to all , by repute , 
 as a grave , clever , promise young man , rather prudent than lavish , 
 and never suspect to have get into a scrape . what the deuce do he do 
 there ? Mr. Avenel puzzle they yet more . a middle - aged man , say to 
 be in business , whom they have observe " about town "   for he have a 
 noticeable face and figure , - that be , see rid in the Park , or 
 lounge in the pit at the opera , but never set eye on at a recognize 
 club , or in the coterie of their ' set ; " a man whose wife give horrid 
 third - rate party , that take up half a column in the " Morning Post " 
 with a list of " the Company Present , " in which a sprinkling of dowager 
 fade out of fashion , and a foreign title or two , make the darkness 
 of the obscurer name doubly dark . why this man should be ask to 
 meet they , by Baron Levy , too - a decided tuft - hunter and would - be 
 exclusive - call all their faculty into exercise . the wit , who , be 
 the son of a small tradesman , but in the very good society , give himself 
 far great air than the young lord , impertinently solve the mystery . 
 " depend on it , " whisper he to Spendquick , - " depend on it the man be 
 the X. Y. of the ' time ' who offer to lend any sum of money from L10 
 to half - a - million . he be the man who have all your bill ; Levy be only his 
 jackal . " 

 " ' pon my soul , " say Spendquick , rather alarmed , " if that be the case , 
 one may as well be civil to he . " 

 " you , certainly , " say the wit . " but I never have find an X. Y. who 
 would advance I the L. s. ; and therefore I shall not be more respectful 
 to X. Y. than to any other unknown quantity . " 

 by degree , as the wine circulate , the party grow gay and sociable . 
 Levy be really an entertaining fellow ; have all the gossip of the town 
 at his finger ' end ; and possess , moreover , that pleasant art of 
 say ill - natured thing of the absent , which those present always 
 enjoy . by degree , too , Mr. Richard Avenel come out ; and , as the whisper 
 have circulate round the table that he be X. Y. , he be listen to 
 with a profound respect , which greatly elevate his spirit . Nay , when 
 the wit try once to show he up or mystify he , Dick answer with a 
 bluff spirit , that , though very coarse , be find so humorous by Lord 
 Spendquick and other gentleman similarly situate in the money - market 
 that they turn the laugh against the wit , and silence he for the 
 rest of the night , - a circumstance which make the party go off much more 
 pleasantly . after dinner , the conversation , quite that of single man , 
 easy and debonnaire , glance from the turf and the ballet and the last 
 scandal towards politic ; for the time be such that politic be 
 discuss everywhere , and three of the young lord be county member . 

 Randal say little , but , as be his will not , listen attentively ; and he 
 be aghast to find how general be the belief that the Government be 
 doom . out of regard to he , and with that delicacy of breeding which 
 belong to a certain society , nothing personal to Egerton be say , 
 except by Avenel , who , however , on blurt out some rude expression 
 respect that minister , be instantly check by the baron . " Spare 
 my friend and Mr. Leslie 's near connection , " say he , with a polite but 
 grave smile . 

 " oh , " say Avenel , " public man , whom we pay , be public 
 property , - be not   they , my Lord ? " appeal to Spendquick . 

 " certainly , " say Spendquick , with great spirit , - " public property , or 
 why should we pay they ? there must be a very strong motive to induce we 
 to do that ! I hate pay people . in fact , " he subjoin in an aside , " I 
 never do . " 

 " however , " resume Mr. Avenel , graciously , " I do not   want to hurt your 
 feeling , Mr. Leslie . as to the feeling of our host , the baron , I 
 calculate that they have get tolerably tough by the exercise they have 
 go through . " 

 " nevertheless , " say the baron , join in the laugh which any lively 
 say by the suppose X. Y. be sure to excite , " nevertheless , ' love 
 I , love my dog , ' - love I , love my Egerton . " 

 Randal start , for his quick ear and subtle intelligence catch 
 something sinister and hostile in the tone with which Levy utter this 
 equivocal comparison , and his eye dart towards the baron . but the 
 baron have bend down his face , and be regale himself upon an olive . 

 by - and - by the party rise from table . the four young nobleman have their 
 engagement elsewhere , and propose to separate without re - enter the 
 drawing - room . as , in Goethe 's theory , monad which have affinity with 
 each other be irresistibly draw together , so these gay child of 
 pleasure have , by a common impulse , on rise from table , move each 
 to each , and form a group round the fireplace . randal stand a little 
 apart , musing ; the wit examine the picture through his eye - glass ; and 
 Mr. Avenel draw the baron towards the side - board , and there hold he in 
 whisper conference . this colloquy do not escape the young gentleman 
 round the fireplace ; they glance towards each other . 

 " settle the percentage on renewal , " say one , sotto voce . " X. Y. do 
 not seem such a very bad fellow , " say another . 

 " he look rich , and talk rich , " say a third . 

 " a decide , independent way of express his sentiment ; those moneyed 
 man generally have . " 

 " good heaven ! " ejaculate Spendquick , who have be keep his eye 
 anxiously fix on the pair , " do look ; X. Y. be actually take out 
 his pocket - book ; he be come this way . depend on it he have get our 
 bill - mine be due to - morrow ! " 

 " and mine too , " say another , edge off . " why , it be a perfect 
 guet - apen . " 

 meanwhile , break away from the baron , who appear anxious to detain 
 he , and fail in that attempt , turn aside , as if not to see Dick 's 
 movement , - a circumstance which do not escape the notice of the 
 group , and confirm all their suspicion , - Mr. Avenel , with a serious , 
 thoughtful face , and a slow step , approach the group . nor do the 
 great roman general more nervously " flutter the dove - cot in Corioli , " 
 than do the advance of the suppose X. Y. agitate the bosom of Lord 
 Spendquick and his sympathize friend . pocket - book in hand , and 
 apparently feel for something formidable within its mystic recess , 
 step by step come Dick Avenel towards the fireplace . the group stand 
 still , fascinate by horror . 

 " Hum , " say Mr. Avenel , clear his throat . 

 " I do not   like that hum at all , " mutter Spendquick . " proud to have make 
 your acquaintance , gentleman , " say Dick , bow . 

 the gentleman thus address bow low in return . 

 " my friend the baron think this not exactly the time to - " Dick 
 stop a moment ; you might have knock down those four young 
 gentleman , though four fine specimen of humanity no aristocracy in 
 Europe could produce , - you might have knock they down with a feather ! 
 " but , " renew avenel , not finish his sentence , " I have make it a 
 rule in life never to lose secure a good opportunity ; in short , to 
 make the most of the present moment . and , " add he , with a smile which 
 freeze the blood in Lord Spendquick 's vein , " the rule have make I a very 
 warm man ! therefore , gentleman , allow I to present you each with one 
 of these " - every hand retreat behind the back of its well - bear owner , 
 when , to the inexpressible relief of all , Dick conclude with , - " a 
 little soiree dansante , " and extend four card of invitation . 

 " most happy ! " exclaim Spendquick . " I do not   dance in general ; but to 
 oblige X - I mean , to have a well acquaintance , sir , with you - I would 
 dance on the tight - rope . " 

 there be a good - humour , pleasant laugh at Spendquick 's enthusiasm , 
 and a general shaking of hand and pocket of the invitation card . 

 " you do not   look like a dancing man , " say Avenel , turn to the wit , 
 who be plump and somewhat gouty , - as wit who dine out five day in the 
 week generally be ; " but we shall have supper at one o'clock . " 

 infinitely offend and disgust , the wit reply dryly , " that every 
 hour of his time be engage for the rest of the season , " and , with a 
 stiff salutation to the baron , take his departure . the rest , in good 
 spirit , hurry away to their respective cabriolet ; and Leslie be 
 follow they into the hall , when the baron , catch hold of he , 
 say , " stay , I want to talk to you . " 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 the baron turn into his drawing - room , and Leslie follow . 

 " pleasant young man , those , " say Levy , with a slight sneer , as he throw 
 himself into an easy - chair and stir the fire . " and not at all proud ; 
 but , to be sure , they be - under great obligation to I . yes ; they 
 owe I a great deal a propos , I have have a long talk with Frank 
 Hazeldean , - fine young man , remarkable capacity for business . I can 
 arrange his affair for he . I find , on reference to the Will Office , 
 that you be quite right ; the casino property be entail on Frank . he 
 will have the fee simple . he can dispose of the reversion entirely . so 
 that there will be no difficulty in our arrangement . " 

 " but I tell you also that Frank have scruple about borrow on the 
 event of his father 's death . " 

 " ay , you do so . filial affection ! I never take that into account 
 in matter of business . such little scruple , though they be highly 
 honourable to human nature , soon vanish before the prospect of the 
 King 's Bench . and , too , as you so judiciously remark , our clever young 
 friend be in love with Madame di Negra . " 

 " do he tell you that ? " 

 " no ; but Madame di Negra do ! " 

 " you know she ? " 

 " I know most people in good society , who now and then require a friend 
 in the management of their affair . and have make sure of the fact you 
 state , as to Hazeldean 's contingent property   excuse my prudence , I 
 have accommodate Madame di Negra and buy up her debt . " 

 " you have - you surprise I ! " 

 " the surprise will vanish on reflection . but you be very new to the 
 world yet , my dear Leslie . by the way , I have have an interview with 
 Peschiera - " 

 " about his sister 's debt ? " 

 " partly . a man of the nice honour be Peschiera . " Aware of Levy 's habit 
 of praise people for the quality in which , accord to the judgment 
 of less penetrate mortal , they be most deficient , randal only 
 smile at this eulogy , and wait for Levy to resume . but the baron sit 
 silent and thoughtful for a minute or two , and then wholly change the 
 subject . 

 " I think your father have some property in - - shire , and you probably 
 can give I a little information as to certain estate of a Mr. 
 Thornhill , estate which , on examination of the title - deed , I find 
 once , indeed , belong to your family . " the baron glance at a very 
 elegant memorandum - book . - " the manor of Rood and Dulmansberry , with 
 sundry farm thereon . Mr. Thornhill want to sell they - an old client of 
 mine , Thornhill . he have apply to I on the matter . do you think it an 
 improvable property ? " 

 Randal listen with a livid cheek and a throb heart . we have see 
 that , if there be one ambitious scheme in his calculation which , though 
 not absolutely generous and heroic , still might win its way to a certain 
 sympathy in the undebased human mind , it be the hope to restore the 
 fall fortune of his ancient house , and repossess himself of the long 
 alienated land that surround the dismal waste of the mouldering 
 hall . and now to hear that those land be get into the inexorable 
 gripe of Levy - tear of bitterness stand in his eye . 

 " Thornhill , " continue Levy , who watch the young man 's 
 countenance , - " Thornhill tell I that that part of his property - the 
 old Leslie land - produce l2 , 000 a year , and that the rental could 
 be raise . he would take L50,000 for it , L20,000 down , and suffer the 
 remain L30,000 to lie on mortgage at four per cent . it seem a very 
 good purchase . what do you say ? " 

 " do not   ask I , " say Randal , sting into rare honesty ; " for I have hop I 
 might live to repossess myself of that property . " 

 " ah , indeed ! it would be a very great addition to your consequence 
 in the world , - not from the mere size of the estate , but from its 
 hereditary association . and if you have any idea of the purchase , 
 believe I , I will not stand in your way . " 

 " how can I have any idea of it ? " 

 " but I think you say you have . " 

 " I understand that these land could not be sell till Mr. Thornhill 's 
 son come of age , and join in get rid of the entail . " 

 " yes , so Thornhill himself suppose , till , on examine the title - deed , 
 I find he be under a mistake . these land be not comprise in the 
 settlement make by old Jasper Thornhill , which tie up the rest of 
 the property . the title will be perfect . Thornhill want to settle 
 the matter at once , - loss on the turf , you understand ; an immediate 
 purchaser would get still well term . a Sir John Spratt would give the 
 money ; but the addition of these land would make the Spratt property 
 of more consequence in the county than the Thornhill . so my client would 
 rather take a few thousand less from a man who do not   set up to be his 
 rival . balance of power in county as well as nation . " 

 Randal be silent . 

 " well , " say Levy , with great kindness of manner , " I see I pain you ; 
 and though I be what my very pleasant guest would call a parvenu , 
 I comprehend your natural feeling as a gentleman of ancient birth . 
 Parvenu ! ah , be it not strange , Leslie , that no wealth , no fashion , 
 no fame can wipe out that blot ? they call I a parvenu , and borrow my 
 money . they call our friend the wit a parvenu , and submit to all his 
 insolence - if they condescend to regard his birth at all - provide they 
 can but get he to dinner . they call the good debater in the parliament 
 of England a parvenu , and will entreat he , some day or other , to be 
 prime minister , and ask he for star and garter . a droll world , and no 
 wonder the parvenus want to upset it . " 

 Randal have hitherto suppose that this notorious tufthunter , this dandy 
 capitalist , this money - lender , whose whole fortune have be wring from 
 the want and folly of an aristocracy , be naturally a firm supporter 
 of thing as they be - how could thing be well for man like Baron 
 Levy ? but the usurer 's burst of democratic spleen do not surprise his 
 precocious and acute faculty of observation . he have before remark , 
 that it be the person who fawn most upon an aristocracy , and profit the 
 most by the fawning , who be ever at heart its bitter disparager . 
 why be this ? because one full half of democratic opinion be make up of 
 envy ; and we can only envy what be bring before our eye , and 
 what , while very near to we , be still unattainable . no man envy an 
 archangel . 

 " but , " say Levy , throw himself back in his chair , " a new order of 
 thing be commence ; we shall see . Leslie , it be lucky for you that 
 you do not enter parliament under the government ; it would be your 
 political ruin for life . " 

 " you think , then , that the ministry really can not last ? " 

 " of course I do ; and what be more , I think that a ministry of the same 
 principle can not be restore . you be a young man of talent and spirit ; 
 your birth be nothing compare to the rank of the reign party ; it 
 would tell , to a certain degree , in a democratic one . I say , you should 
 be more civil to avenel ; he could return you to parliament at the next 
 election . " 

 " the next election ! in six year ! we have just have a general election . " 

 " there will be another before this year , or half of it , or perhaps a 
 quarter of it , be out . " 

 " what make you think so ? " 

 " Leslie , let there be confidence between we ; we can help each other . 
 shall we be friend ? " 

 " with all my heart . but though you may help I , how can I help you ? " 

 " you have help I already to Frank Hazeldean and the casino estate . 
 all clever man can help I . come , then , we be friend ; and what I say 
 be secret . you ask I why I think there will be a general election so 
 soon ? I will answer you frankly . of all the public man I ever meet with , 
 there be no one who have so clear a vision of thing immediately before 
 he as Audley Egerton . " 

 " he have that character . not far - seeing , but clear - sighted to a certain 
 limit . " 

 " exactly so . no one well , therefore , know public opinion and its 
 immediate ebb and flow . " 

 " grant . " 

 " Egerton , then , count on a general election within three month , and I 
 have lend he the money for it . " 

 " lent he the money ! Egerton borrow money of you , the rich Audley 
 Egerton ! " 

 " Rich ! " repeat Levy , in a tone impossible to describe , and 
 accompany the word with that movement of the middle finger and thumb , 
 commonly call a ' snap , " which indicate profound contempt . 

 he say no more . Randal sit stupefy . at length the latter muttered , 
 " but if Egerton be really not rich ; if he lose office , and without the 
 hope of return to it - " 

 " if so , he be ruin ! " say Levy , coldly ; " and therefore , from regard to 
 you , and feel interest in your future fate , I say , rest no hope of 
 fortune or career upon Audley Egerton . keep your place for the present , 
 but be prepare at the next election to stand upon popular principle . 
 avenel shall return you to parliament ; and the rest be with luck and 
 energy . and now , I will not detain you long , " say Levy , rise and 
 ring the bell . the servant enter . " be my carriage here ? " 

 " yes , Baron . " 

 " can I set you down anywhere ? " 

 " no , thank you , I prefer walk . " 

 " Adieu , then . and mind you remember the soiree dansante at Mrs. 
 Avenel 's . " randal mechanically shake the hand extend to he , and go 
 down the stair . 

 the fresh frosty air rouse his intellectual faculty , which Levy 's 
 ominous word have almost paralyze . 

 and the first thing the clever schemer say to himself be this , 

 " but what can be the man 's motive in what he say to I ? " 

 the next be , - 

 " Egerton ruin ! what be I , then ? " and the third be , 

 " and that fair remnant of the old Leslie property ! l20,000 down - how to 
 get the sum ? why should Levy have speak to I of this ? " 

 and lastly , the soliloquy round back - " the man 's motif ! his 
 motif ! " 

 meanwhile , the baron throw himself into his chariot - the most 
 comfortable , easy chariot you can possibly conceive , single man 's 
 chariot , perfect taste , - no married man ever have such a chariot ; and in 
 a few minute he be at - - - - - 's hotel , and in the presence of Giulio 
 Franzini , Count di Peschiera . 

 " Mon cher , " say the baron , in very good French , and in a tone of the 
 most familiar equality with the descendant of the prince and hero of 
 grand medieval Italy , - " mon cher , give I one of your excellent cigar . 
 I think I have put all matter in train . " 

 " you have find out - " 

 " no ; not so fast yet , " say the baron , light the cigar extend to 
 he . " but you say that you should be perfectly content if it only 
 cost you L20,000 to marry off your sister   to whom that sum be legally 
 due , and to marry yourself to the heiress . " 

 " I do , indeed . " 

 " then I have no doubt I shall manage both object for that sum , if 
 Randal Leslie really know where the young lady be , and can assist you . 
 Most promising , able man be randal Leslie - but innocent as a babe just 
 bear . " 

 " ha , ha ! innocent ? Que diable ! " 

 " innocent as this cigar , mon cher , - strong certainly , but smoke very 
 easily . Soyez tranquille ! " 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 who have not see , who not admire , that noble picture by Daniel Maclise , 
 which refresh the immortal name of my ancestor Caxton ! for myself , 
 while with national pride I hear the admire murmur of the foreigner 
 who group around it   nothing , indeed , of which our nation may be more 
 proud have they see in the Crystal Palace , - hear , with no less a pride 
 in the generous nature of fellow - artist , the warm applause of living 
 and deathless master sanction the enthusiasm of the popular crowd , 
 what strike I more than the precision of drawing , for which the artist 
 have be always renowne , and the just , though gorgeous affluence of 
 colour which he have more recently acquire , be the profound depth of 
 conception , out of which this great work have so elaborately arise . that 
 monk , with his scowl towards the printer and his back on the Bible over 
 which his form cast a shadow - the whole transition between the medieval 
 Christianity of cell and cloister , and the modern Christianity that 
 rejoice in the daylight , be depict there , in the shadow that obscure 
 the Book , in the scowl that be fix upon the Book - diffuser ; - that 
 sombre , muse face of Richard , Duke of Gloucester , with the beauty 
 of Napoleon , darken to the expression of a fiend , look far and 
 anxiously into futurity , as if foresee there what antagonism be 
 about to be create to the scheme of secret crime and unrelenting 
 force ; the chivalrous head of the accomplished Rivers , see but in 
 profile , under his helmet , as if the age when Chivalry must defend its 
 noble attribute in steel be already half pass away ; and , not least 
 grand of all , the rude thews and sinew of the artisan force into 
 service on the type , and the ray of intellect , fierce , and menacing 
 revolution yet to be , struggle through his rugged feature , and 
 across his low knitted brow , - all this , which show how deeply the 
 idea of the discovery in its good and its evil , its save light and 
 its perilous storm , have sink into the artist 's soul , charm I as 
 effect the exact union between sentiment and execution , which be the 
 true and rare consummation of the Ideal in Art . but observe , while 
 in these personage of the group be depict the deep and graver 
 agency implicate in the bright but terrible invention , observe how 
 little the light epicure of the hour hee the scowl of the monk , or the 
 restless gesture of Richard , or the troubled gleam in the eye of the 
 artisan , King Edward , handsome Poco curante , delight in the surprise 
 of a child , with a new toy , and Clarence , with his curious , yet 
 careless , glance , - all the while Caxton himself , calm , serene , 
 untroubled , intent solely upon the manifestation of his discovery , and 
 no doubt supremely indifferent whether the first proof of it shall be 
 dedicate to a Rivers or an Edward , a Richard or a Henry , Plantagenet or 
 Tudor - ' t be all the same to that comely , gentle - looking man . so be it 
 ever with your Abstract Science ! - not a jot care its passionless logic 
 for the woe or weal of a generation or two . the stream , once emerge 
 from its source , pass on into the great Intellectual Sea , smile over 
 the wretch that it drown , or under the keel of the ship which it serve 
 as a slave . 

 now , when about to commence the present chapter on the Varieties 
 of Life , this masterpiece of thoughtful art force itself on my 
 recollection , and illustrate what I design to convey . in the surface 
 of every age it be often that which but amuse for the moment the 
 ordinary child of pleasant existence , the Edwards and the clarence 
  be they king and duke , or simple of simple subject , which 
 afterwards tower out as the great serious epoch of the time . when we 
 look back upon human record , how the eye settle upon writer as 
 the main landmark of the past ! we talk of the age of Augustus , of 
 Elizabeth , of Louis XIV . , of Anne , as the notable era of the world . 
 why ? because it be their writer who have make they so . interval 
 between one age of author and another lie unnoticed , as the flat and 
 common land of uncultured history . and yet , strange to say , when these 
 author be live amongst we , they occupy a very small portion of our 
 thought , and fill up but desultory interstice in the bituman and tufo 
 wherefrom we build up the Babylon of our life . so it be , and perhaps so 
 it should be , whether it please the conceit of penman or not . life be 
 mean to be active ; and book , though they give the action to future 
 generation , administer but to the holiday of the present . 

 and so , with this long preface , I turn suddenly from the Randals and 
 the Egertons , and the Levys , Avenels , and Peschieras , from the plot 
 and passion of practical life , and drop the reader suddenly into one of 
 those obscure retreat wherein Thought weave , from unnoticed moment , a 
 new link to the chain that unite the age . 

 within a small room , the single window of which open on a fanciful and 
 fairy - like garden that have be before describe , sit a young man alone . 
 he have be write ; the ink be not dry on his manuscript , but his 
 thought have be suddenly interrupt from his work , and his eye , now 
 lift from the letter which have occasion that interruption , sparkle 
 with delight . " he will come , " exclaim the young man ; " come here , - to 
 the home which I owe to he . I have not be unworthy of his friendship . 
 and she - " his breast heave , but the joy fade from his face . " oh , 
 strange , strange , that I feel sad at the thought to see she again ! see 
 she - ah , no ! my own comfort Helen , my own child - angel ! she I can 
 never see again ! the grown woman - that be not my Helen . and yet - and 
 yet , " he resume after a pause , " if ever she read the page in which 
 think flow and tremble under her distant starry light , if ever 
 she see how her image have rest with I , and feel that , while other 
 believe that I invent , I have but remember , will she not , for a 
 moment , be my own Helen again ? again , in heart and in fancy , stand by my 
 side on the desolate bridge , hand in hand , orphan both , as we stand 
 in the day so sorrowful , yet , as I recall they , so sweet ? Helen in 
 England - it be a dream ! " 

 he rise , half - consciously , and go to the window . the fountain play 
 merrily before his eye , and the bird in the aviary carol loud to 
 his ear . " and in this house , " he murmur , " I see she last ! and there , 
 where the fountain now throw its spray on high , - there her benefactor 
 and mine tell I that I be to lose she , that I might win - fame . alas ! " 

 at this time a woman , whose dress be somewhat above her mien and air , 
 which , though not without a certain respectability , be very homely , 
 enter the room ; and see the young man stand thus thoughtful by 
 the window , pause . she be use to his habit ; and since his success 
 in life , have learn to respect they . so she do not disturb his revery , 
 but begin softly to arrange the room , dust , with the corner of her 
 apron , the various article of furniture , put a stray chair or two 
 in its right place , but not touch a single paper . virtuous woman , and 
 rare as virtuous ! 

 the young man turn at last , with a deep , yet not altogether painful 
 sigh , 

 " my dear mother , good day to you . ah , you do well to make the room look 
 its good . happy news ! I expect a visitor ! " 

 " dear I , Leonard , will he want lunch - or what ? " 

 " Nay , I think not , Mother . it be he to whom we owe all , - ' Haec otia 
 fecit . ' pardon my Latin ; it be Lord L'Estrange . " 

 the face of Mrs. Fairfield   the reader have long since divine the name 
 change instantly , and betray a nervous twitch of all the muscle , 
 which give she a family likeness to old Mrs. Avenel . 

 " do not be alarm , Mother . he be the kind - " 

 " do not   talk so ; I can not   bear it ! " cry Mrs. Fairfield . 

 " no wonder you be affect by the recollection of all his benefit . but 
 when once you have see he , you will find yourself ever after at your 
 ease . and so , pray smile and look as good as you be ; for I be proud of 
 your open honest look when you be pleased , Mother . and he must see your 
 heart in your face , as I do . " 

 with this , Leonard put his arm round the widow 's neck and kiss she . 
 she cling to he fondly for a moment , and he feel her tremble from head 
 to foot . then she break from his embrace , and hurry out of the room . 
 Leonard think perhaps she have go to improve her dress , or to carry 
 her housewife energie to the decoration of the other room ; for " the 
 house " be Mrs. Fairfield 's hobby and passion ; and now that she work 
 no more , save for her amusement , it be her main occupation . the hour 
 she contrive to spend daily in bustle about those little room , and 
 leave everything therein to all appearance precisely the same , 
 be among the marvel in life which the genius of Leonard have never 
 comprehend . but she be always so delighted when Mr. Norreys , or some 
 rare visitor come , and say , - Mr. Norreys never fail to do so,-"how 
 neatly all be keep here . what could Leonard do without you , Mrs. 
 Fairfield ? " 

 and , to Norreys 's infinite amusement , Mrs. Fairfield always return the 
 same answer . " ' Deed , sir , and thank you kindly , but ' t be my belief that 
 the drawin'-room would be awful dusty . " 

 once more leave alone , Leonard 's mind return to the state of revery , 
 and his face assume the expression that have now become to it habitual . 
 thus see , he be change much since we last behold he . his cheek be 
 more pale and thin , his lip more firmly compress , his eye more 
 fixed and abstract . you could detect , if I may borrow a touching french 
 expression , that " Sorrow have pass by there . " but the melancholy on his 
 countenance be ineffably sweet and serene , and on his ample forehead 
 there be that power , so rarely see in early youth , - the power that have 
 conquer , and betray its conquest but in calm . the period of doubt , 
 of struggle , of defiance , be go , perhaps forever ; genius and soul 
 be reconcile to human life . it be a face most lovable ; so gentle and 
 peaceful in its character . no want of fire ; on the contrary , the fire 
 be so clear and so steadfast , that it convey but the impression of 
 light . the candour of boyhood , the simplicity of the villager , be 
 still there , - refine by intelligence , but intelligence that seem to 
 have traverse through knowledge , not with the ' footstep , but the wing , 
 unsullie by the mire , tend towards the star , seek through the 
 various grade of be but the lovelier form of truth and goodness ; at 
 home , as should be the art that consummate the beautiful , - 

  " in den heitern Regionen 
  wo die reinen Formen wohnen . " 

   at home - " in the serene region 
  where dwell the pure form . " 

 from this revery Leonard do not seek to rouse himself , till the bell at 
 the garden gate rang loud and shrill ; and then start up and hurry 
 into the hall , his hand be grasp in Harley 's . 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

 a full and happy hour pass away in Harley 's question and Leonard 's 
 answer , - the dialogue that naturally ensue between the two , on the 
 first interview after an absence of year so eventful to the young 
 man . 

 the history of Leonard during this interval be almost solely internal , 
 the struggle of intellect with its own difficulty , the wandering of 
 imagination through its own adventurous world . 

 the first aim of Norreys , in prepare the mind of his pupil for its 
 vocation , have be to establish the equilibrium of its power , to calm 
 into harmony the element rudely shake by the trial and passion of 
 the old hard outer life . 

 the theory of Norreys be briefly this : the education of a superior 
 human being be but the development of idea in one for the benefit of 
 other . to this end , attention should be direct , - 1st , to the value 
 of the idea collect ; 2dly , to their discipline ; 3dly , to their 
 expression . for the first , acquirement be necessary ; for the second , 
 discipline ; for the third , art . the first comprehend knowledge purely 
 intellectual , whether derive from observation , memory , reflection , 
 book , or man , Aristotle or Fleet Street . the second demand training , 
 not only intellectual , but moral ; the purifying and exaltation of 
 motif ; the formation of habit ; in which method be but a part of a 
 divine and harmonious symmetry , a union of intellect and conscience . 
 idea of value , store by the first process ; marshal into force , and 
 place under guidance , by the second , - it be the result of the third , to 
 place they before the world in the most attractive or commanding form . 
 this may be do by action no less than word ; but the adaptation of 
 mean to end , the passage of idea from the brain of one man into the 
 life and soul of all , no less in action than in book , require study . 
 Action have its art as well as literature . here Norreys have but to deal 
 with the calling of the scholar , the formation of the writer , and so 
 to guide the perception towards those variety in the sublime and 
 beautiful , the just combination of which be at once CREATION . Man 
 himself be but a combination of element . he who combine in nature , 
 create in art . such , very succinctly and inadequately express , be 
 the system upon which Norreys proceed to regulate and perfect the 
 great native power of his pupil ; and though the reader may perhaps say 
 that no system lay down by another can either form genius or dictate 
 to its result , yet probably nine - tenth at least of those in whom 
 we recognize the luminary of our race have pass , unconsciously 
 to themselves   for self - education be rarely conscious of its phase , 
 through each of these process . and no one who pause to reflect 
 will deny , that accord to this theory , illustrate by a man of vast 
 experience , profound knowledge , and exquisite taste , the struggle 
 of genius would be infinitely lessen , its vision clear and 
 strengthen , and the distance between effort and success notably 
 abridge . 

 norrey , however , be far too deep a reasoner to fall into the error of 
 modern teacher , who suppose that education can dispense with labour . no 
 mind become muscular without rude and early exercise . labour should be 
 strenuous , but in right direction . all that we can do for it be to save 
 the waste of time in blunder into needless toil . 

 the master have thus first employ his neophyte in arrange and 
 compile material for a great critical work in which Norreys himself 
 be engage . in this stage of scholastic preparation , Leonard be 
 necessarily lead to the acquisition of language , for which he have great 
 aptitude ; the foundation of a large and comprehensive erudition be 
 solidly construct . he trace by the ploughshare the wall of the 
 destine city . habit of accuracy and of generalization become form 
 insensibly ; and that precious faculty which seize , amidst 
 accumulate material , those that serve the object for which they be 
 explore , - that faculty which quadruple all force , by concentrate it 
 on one point , - once rouse into action , give purpose to every toil and 
 quickness to each perception . but Norreys do not confine his pupil 
 solely to the mute world of a library ; he introduce he to some of the 
 first mind in art , science , and letter , and active life . " these , " 
 say he , " be the live idea of the present , out of which book for 
 the future will be write : study they ; and here , as in the volume of 
 the past , diligently amass and deliberately compile . " 

 by degree Norreys lead on that young ardent mind from the selection of 
 idea to their aesthetic analysis , - from compilation to criticism ; but 
 criticism severe , close , and logical , - a reason for each word of praise 
 or of blame . lead in this stage of his career to examine into the law 
 of beauty , a new light break upon his mind ; from amidst the mass of 
 marble he have pile around he rise the vision of the statue . 

 and so , suddenly , one day Norreys say to he , " I need a compil no 
 long , - maintain yourself by your own creation . " and Leonard write , 
 and a work flower up from the seed deep bury , and the soil well 
 clear to the ray of the sun and the healthful influence of expand 
 air . 

 that first work do not penetrate to a very wide circle of reader , not 
 from any perceptible fault of its own - there be luck in these thing ; 
 the first anonymous work of an original genius be rarely at once 
 eminently successful . but the more experienced recognize the promise of 
 the book . publisher , who have an instinct in the discovery of 
 available talent , which often forestall the appreciation of the public , 
 volunteer liberal offer . " be fully successful this time , " say 
 Norreys ; " think not of model nor of style . strike at once at the 
 common human heart , - throw away the cork , swim out boldly . one word 
 more , - never write a page till you have walk from your room to Temple 
 Bar , and , mingle with man , and read the human face , learn why great 
 poet have mostly pass their life in city . " 

 thus Leonard write again , and wake one morning to find himself famous . 
 so far as the chance of all profession dependent on health will 
 permit , present independence , and , with foresight and economy , the 
 prospect of future competence be secure . 

 " and , indeed , " say Leonard , conclude a long but a simple narrative 
 than be here tell , - " indeed , there be some chance that I may obtain at 
 once a sum that will leave I free for the rest of my life to select my 
 own subject , and write without care for remuneration . this be what I 
 call the true   and , perhaps , alas ! the rare   independence of he who 
 devote himself to letter . Norreys , have see my boyish plan for the 
 improvement of certain machinery in the steam engine , insist on my 
 give much time to mechanic . the study that once please I so greatly 
 now seem dull ; but I go into it with good heart ; and the result be , 
 that I have improve so far on my original idea , that my scheme have 
 meet the approbation of one of our most scientific engineer : and I be 
 assure that the patent for it will be purchase of I upon term which 
 I be ashamed to name to you , so disproportioned do they seem to the 
 value of so simple a discovery . meanwhile , I be already rich enough to 
 have realize the two dream of my heart , - to make a home in the cottage 
 where I have last see you and Helen - I mean Miss Digby ; and to invite to 
 that home she who have shelter my infancy . " 

 " your mother , where be she ? let I see she . " 

 Leonard run out to call the widow , but to his surprise and vexation 
 learn that she have quit the house before L'Estrange arrive . 

 he come back , perplex how to explain what seem ungracious and 
 ungrateful , and speak with hesitate lip and flush cheek of the 
 widow 's natural timidity and sense of her own homely station . " and so 
 overpower be she , " add Leonard , " by the recollection of all that we 
 owe to you , that she never hear your name without agitation or tear , 
 and tremble like a leaf at the thought of see you . " 

 " ha ! " say Harley , with visible emotion . " be it so ? " and he bend down , 
 shade his face with his hand . " and , " he renew , after a pause , but 
 not look up - " and you ascribe this fear of see I , this agitation 
 at my name , solely to an exaggerated sense of - of the circumstance 
 attend my acquaintance with yourself ? " 

 " and , perhaps , to a sort of shame that the mother of one you have make 
 her proud of be but a peasant . " 

 " that be all ? " say Harley , earnestly , now look up and fix eye in 
 which stand tear upon Leonard 's ingenuous brow . 

 " oh , my dear Lord , what else can it be ? do not judge she harshly . " 

 L'Estrange arise abruptly , press Leonard 's hand , mutter something 
 not audible , and then draw his young friend 's arm in his , lead he 
 into the garden , and turn the conversation back to its former topic . 

 Leonard 's heart yearn to ask after Helen , and yet something withhold 
 he from do so , till , see Harley do not volunteer to speak of 
 she , he could not resist his impulse . " and Helen - Miss Digby - be she 
 much change ? " 

 " change , no - yes ; very much . " 

 " very much ! " Leonard sigh . 

 " I shall see she again ? " 

 " certainly , " say Harley , in a tone of surprise . " how can you doubt it ? 
 and I reserve to you the pleasure of say that you be renowne . 
 you blush ; well , I will say that for you . but you shall give she your 
 book . " 

 " she have not yet read they , then ? - not the last ? the first be not 
 worthy of her attention , " say Leonard , disappointed . " she have only just 
 arrive in England ; and , though your book reach I in Germany , she 
 be not then with I . when I have settle some business that will take 
 I from town , I shall present you to she and my mother . " there be a 
 certain embarrassment in Harley 's voice as he speak ; and , turn round 
 abruptly , he exclaim , " but you have show poetry even here . I could 
 not have conceive that so much beauty could be draw from what appear 
 to I the most commonplace of all suburban garden . why , surely , where 
 that charming fountain now play stand the rude bench in which I read 
 your verse . " 

 " it be true ; I wish to unite all together my happy association . I 
 think I tell you , my Lord , in one of my letter , that I have owe a very 
 happy , yet very struggle time in my boyhood to the singular kindness 
 and generous instruction of a foreigner whom I serve . this fountain 
 be copy from one that I make in his garden , and by the margin of which 
 many a summer day I have sit and dream of fame and knowledge . " 

 " true , you tell I of that ; and your foreigner will be pleased to hear 
 of your success , and no less so of your grateful recollection . by the 
 way , you do not mention his name . " 

 " Riccabocca . " 

 " Riccabocca ! my own dear and noble friend ! - be it possible ? one of my 
 reason for return to England be connect with he . you shall go 
 down with I and see he . I mean to start this evening . " 

 " my dear Lord , " say Leonard , " I think that you may spare yourself so 
 long a journey . I have reason to suspect that Signor Riccabocca be 
 my near neighbour . two day ago I be in the garden , when suddenly 
 lift my eye to yon hillock I perceive the form of a man seat 
 amongst the brushwood ; and though I could not see his feature , there 
 be something in the very outline of his figure and his peculiar 
 posture , that irresistibly remind I of Riccabocca . I hasten out of 
 the garden and ascend the hill , but he be go . my suspicion be so 
 strong that I cause inquiry to be make at the different shop scatter 
 about , and learn that a family consist of a gentleman , his wife , 
 and daughter have lately come to live in a house that you must have 
 pass in your way hither , stand a little back from the road , 
 surround by high wall ; and though they be say to be English , yet 
 from the description give to I of the gentleman 's person by one who 
 have notice it , by the fact of a foreign servant in their employ , and 
 by the very name ' richmouth , ' assign to the newcomer , I can scarcely 
 doubt that it be the family you seek . " 

 " and you have not call to ascertain ? " 

 " pardon I , but the family so evidently shun observation   no one but 
 the master himself ever see without the wall , the adoption of another 
 name too , lead I to infer that Signor Riccabocca have some strong motive 
 for concealment ; and now , with my improved knowledge of life , and 
 recall all the past , I can not but suppose that Riccabocca be not 
 what he appear . hence , I have hesitate on formally obtrude myself 
 upon his secret , whatever they be , and have rather watch for some 
 chance occasion to meet he in his walk . " 

 " you do right , my dear Leonard ; but my reason for see my old friend 
 forbid all scruple of delicacy , and I will go at once to his house . " 

 " you will tell I , my Lord , if I be right . " 

 " I hope to be allow to do so . pray , stay at home till I return . 
 and now , ere I go , one question more : you indulge conjecture as to 
 Riccabocca , because he have change his name , - why have you drop your 
 own ? " 

 " I wish to have no name , " say Leonard , colour deeply , " but that 
 which I could make myself . " 

 " proud poet , this I can comprehend . but from what reason do you assume 
 the strange and fantastic name of Oran ? " 

 the flush on Leonard 's face become deep . " my Lord , " say he , in a low 
 voice , " it be a childish fancy of mine ; it be an anagram . " 

 " ah ! " 

 " at a time when my craving after knowledge be likely much to mislead , 
 and perhaps undo I , I chance on some poem that suddenly affect 
 my whole mind , and lead I up into purer air ; and I be tell that these 
 poem be write in youth by one who have beauty and genius , - one 
 who be in her grave , - a relation of my own , and her familiar name be 
 Nora - " 

 " ah , " again ejaculate Lord L'Estrange , and his arm press heavily upon 
 Leonard 's . 

 " so , somehow or other , " continue the young author , falteringly , " I 
 wish that if ever I win to a poet 's fame , it might be to my own heart , 
 at least , associate with this name of Nora ; with she whom death have 
 rob of the fame that she might otherwise have win ; with she who - " 

 he pause , greatly agitated . 

 Harley be no less so . but , as if by a sudden impulse , the soldier bend 
 down his manly head and kiss the poet 's brow ; then he hasten to the 
 gate , fling himself on his horse , and ride away . 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

 Lord L'Estrange do not proceed at once to Riecabocca 's house . he be 
 under the influence of a remembrance too deep and too strong to yield 
 easily to the lukewarm claim of friendship . he ride fast and far ; and 
 impossible it would be to define the feeling that pass through a mind 
 so acutely sensitive , and so rootedly tenacious of all affection . when , 
 recall his duty to the italian , he once more strike into the road to 
 Norwood , the slow pace of his horse be significant of his own exhausted 
 spirit ; a deep dejection have succeed to feverish excitement . 
 " vain task , " he murmur , " to wean myself from the dead ! yet I be now 
 betroth to another ; and she , with all her virtue , be not the one 
 to - " he stop short in generous self - rebuke . " too late to think of 
 that ! now , all that should remain to I be to insure the happiness 
 of the life to which I have pledge my own . but - " he sigh as he so 
 murmur . on reach the vicinity of Riccabocca 's house , he put up 
 his horse at a little inn , and proceed on foot across the heathland 
 towards the dull square building , which Leonard 's description have 
 suffice to indicate as the exile 's new home . it be long before any 
 one answer his summon at the gate . not till he have thrice rung do he 
 hear a heavy step on the gravel walk within ; then the wicket within the 
 gate be partially draw aside , a dark eye gleam out , and a voice in 
 imperfect English ask who be there . 

 " Lord L'Estrange ; and if I be right as to the person I seek , that name 
 will at once admit I . " 

 the door fly open as do that of the mystic cavern at the sound 
 of " Open , Sesame ; " and Giacomo , almost weep with joyous emotion , 
 exclaim in Italian , " the good Lord ! Holy San Giacomo ! thou hast hear 
 I at last ! we be safe now . " and drop the blunderbuss with which he 
 have take the precaution to arm himself , he lift Harley 's hand to his 
 lip , in the affectionate greeting familiar to his countryman . 

 " and the padrone ? " ask Harley , as he enter the jealous precinct . 

 " oh , he be just go out ; but he will not be long . you will wait for 
 he ? " 

 " certainly . what lady be that I see at the far end of the garden ? " 

 " bless she , it be our signorina . I will run and tell she you be come . " 

 " that I be come ; but she can not know I even by name . " 

 " ah , Excellency , can you think so ? many and many a time have she talk 
 to I of you , and I have hear she pray to the holy Madonna to bless 
 you , and in a voice so sweet - " 

 " Stay , I will present myself to she . go into the house , and we will wait 
 without for the padrone . Nay , I need the air , my friend . " Harley , as he 
 say this , break from Giacomo , and approach Violante . 

 the poor child , in her solitary walk in the obscurer part of the dull 
 garden , have escape the eye of Giacomo when he have go forth to answer 
 the bell ; and she , unconscious of the fear of which she be the object , 
 have feel something of youthful curiosity at the summon at the gate , 
 and the sight of a stranger in close and friendly conference with the 
 unsocial Giacomo . 

 as Harley now near she with that singular grace of movement which 
 belong to he , a thrill shot through her heart , she know not why . she 
 do not recognize his likeness to the sketch take by her father from 
 his recollection of Harley 's early youth . she do not guess who he be ; 
 and yet she feel herself colour , and , naturally fearless though she be , 
 turn away with a vague alarm . 

 " Pardon my want of ceremony , Signorina , " say Harley , in Italian ; " but I 
 be so old a friend of your father 's that I can not feel as a stranger to 
 yourself . " 

 then Violante lift to he her dark eye so intelligent and so 
 innocent , - eye full of surprise , but not displeased surprise . and 
 Harley himself stand amazed , and almost abash , by the rich and 
 marvellous beauty that beam upon he . " my father 's friend , " she say 
 hesitatingly , " and I never to have see you ! " 

 " ah , Signorina , " say Harley   and something of its native humour , half 
 arch , half sad , play round his lip , " you be mistaken there ; you have 
 see I before , and you receive I much more kindly then . " 

 " Signor ! " say Violante , more and more surprised , and with a yet rich 
 colour on her cheek . 

 Harley , who have now recover from the first effect of her beauty , and 
 who regard she as man of his year and character be apt to regard 
 lady in their teen , as more child than woman , suffer himself to be 
 amuse by her perplexity ; for it be in his nature that the graver and 
 more mournful he feel at heart , the more he seek to give play and whim 
 to his spirit . 

 " indeed , Signorina , " say he , demurely , " you insist then on place 
 one of those fair hand in mine ; the other   forgive I the fidelity of 
 my recollection   be affectionately throw around my neck . " 

 " Signor ! " again exclaim Violante ; but this time there be anger in her 
 voice as well as surprise , and nothing could be more charming than she 
 look of pride and resentment . 

 Harley smile again , but with so much kindly sweetness , that the anger 
 vanish at once , or rather Violante feel angry with herself that she 
 be no long angry with he . but she have look so beautiful in 
 her anger , that Harley wish , perhaps , to see she angry again . so , 
 compose his lip from their propitiatory smile , he resume gravely , 

 " your flatterer will tell you , Signorina , that you be much improve 
 since then , but I like you well as you be ; not but what I hope to 
 return some day what you then so generously press upon I . " 

 " press upon you ! - I ? Signor , you be under some strange mistake . " 

 " alas ! no ; but the female heart be so capricious and fickle ! you press 
 it upon I , I assure you . I own that I be not loath to accept it . " 

 " press it ! press what ? " 

 " your kiss , my child , " say Harley ; and then add , with a serious 
 tenderness , " and I again say that I hope to return it some day , when I 
 see you , by the side of father and of husband , in your native land , - the 
 fair bride on whom the sky of Italy ever smile ! and now , pardon a 
 hermit and a soldier for his rude jest , and give your hand , in token of 
 that pardon , to Harley L'Estrange . " 

 Violante , who at the first word of his address have recoil , with a 
 vague belief that the stranger be out of his mind , spring forward as it 
 close , and in all the vivid enthusiasm of her nature press the hand 
 hold out to she with both her own . " Harley L'Estrange ! the preserver of 
 my father 's life ! " she cry ; and her eye be fix on his with such 
 evident gratitude and reverence , that Harley feel at once confuse 
 and delighted . she do not think at that instant of the hero of her 
 dream , - she think but of he who have save her father . but , as his 
 eye sink before her own , and his head , uncover , bow over the hand 
 he hold , she recognize the likeness to the feature on which she have 
 so often gaze . the first bloom of youth be go , but enough of youth 
 still remain to soften the lapse of year , and to leave to manhood the 
 attraction which charm the eye . instinctively she withdraw her hand 
 from his clasp , and in her turn look down . 

 in this pause of embarrassment to both , Riccabocca let himself into the 
 garden by his own latch - key , and , startle to see a man by the side of 
 Violante , spring forward with an abrupt and angry cry . Harley hear , and 
 turn . 

 as if restore to courage and self - possession by the sense of her 
 father 's presence , Violante again take the hand of the visitor . 
 " Father , " she say simply , " it be he , - he be come at last . " and then , 
 retire a few step , she contemplate they both ; and her face be 
 radiant with happiness , as if something , long silently miss and look 
 for , be as silently find , and life have no more a want , nor the heart a 
 void . 




 BOOK TENTH . 




 INITIAL chapter . 

 UPON this fact , - that the world be still MUCH the same as it always have 
 be . 

 it be observe by a very pleasant writer , read nowadays only by the 
 brave pertinacious few who still struggle hard to rescue from the House 
 of Pluto the soul of depart author , jostle and chase as those 
 soul be by the noisy footstep of the living , - it be observe by the 
 admirable Charron , that " judgment and wisdom be not only the good , but 
 the happy portion God Almighty hath distribute amongst man ; for 
 though this distribution be make with a very uneven hand , yet nobody 
 think himself stint or ill - deal with , but he that hath never so 
 little be content in this respect . " 

 and , certainly , the present narrative may serve in notable illustration 
 of the remark so dryly make by the witty and wise preacher . for whether 
 our friend Riccabocca deduce theory for daily life from the great 
 folio of Machiavelli ; or that promise young gentleman , Mr. Randal 
 Leslie , interpret the power of knowledge into the art of be too 
 know for dull honest folk to cope with he ; or acute Dick Avenel 
 push his way up the social ascent with a blow for those before , and a 
 kick for those behind he , after the approved fashion of your strong New 
 man ; or Baron Levy - that cynical impersonation of Gold - compare himself 
 to the Magnetic Rock in the arabian tale , to which the nail in every 
 ship that approach the influence of the loadstone fly from the plank , 
 and a shipwreck per day add its waif to the Rock , - questionless , at 
 least ; it be , that each of those personage believe that Providence have 
 bestow on he an eld son 's inheritance of wisdom . nor , be we to 
 glance towards the obscurer path of life , should we find good Parson 
 Dale deem himself bad off than the rest of the world in this precious 
 commodity , - as , indeed , he have signally evince of late in that shrewd 
 guess of his touching Professor Moss . even plain Squire Hazeldean take 
 it for grant that he could teach Audley Egerton a thing or two worth 
 know in politic ; Mr. Stirn think that there be no branch of useful 
 lore on which he could not instruct the squire ; while Sprott the tinker , 
 with his bag full of tract and lucifer match , regard the whole 
 framework of modern society , from a rick to a constitution , with the 
 profound disdain of a revolutionary philosopher . consider that every 
 individual thus bring into the stock of the world so vast a share of 
 intelligence , it can not but excite our wonder to find that Oxenstiern be 
 popularly hold to be right when he say , " see , my son , how little wisdom 
 it require to govern state , " - that be , Men ! that so many million 
 of person , each with a profound assurance that he be possess of an 
 exalt sagacity , should concur in the ascendancy of a few inferior 
 intellect , accord to a few stupid , prosy , matter - of - fact rule as 
 old as the hill , be a phenomenon very discreditable to the spirit and 
 energy of the aggregate human specie ! it create no surprise that one 
 sensible watch - dog should control the movement of a flock of silly 
 grass - eat sheep ; but that two or three silly grass - eat 
 sheep should give the law to whole flock of such mighty sensible 
 watch - dog - Diavolo ! Dr. Riecabocca , explain that , if you can ! and 
 wonderfully strange it be , that notwithstanding all the march of 
 enlightenment , notwithstanding our progressive discovery in the 
 law of Nature , our railway , steam - engine , animal magnetism , and 
 electrobiology , - we have never make any improvement that be generally 
 acknowledge , since man cease to be troglodyte and nomad , in the 
 old - fashioned gamut of flat and sharp , which attune into irregular 
 social jog - trot all the generation that pass from the cradle to the 
 grave ; still , " the desire for something have have not " impel all the 
 energy that keep we in movement , for good or for ill , accord to the 
 check or the direction of each favourite desire . 

 a friend of mine once say to a millionaire , whom he see forever engage 
 in make money which he never seem to have any pleasure in spending , 
 " pray , Mr - - , will you answer I one question : you be say to have 
 two million , and you spend L600 a year . in order to rest and enjoy , 
 what will content you ? " 

 " a little more , " answer the millionaire . that " little more " be the 
 mainspring of civilization . nobody ever get it ! 

 " Philus , " saith a latin writer , " be not so rich as Laelius ; Laelius be 
 not so rich as Scipio ; Scipio be not so rich as Crassus ; and Crassus 
 be not so rich - as he wish to be ! " if John Bull be once content , 
 Manchester might shut up its mill . it be the " little more " that make a 
 mere trifle of the National Debt ! - long life to it ! 

 still , mend our law - book as we will , one be force to confess that 
 knave be often see in fine linen , and honest man in the most shabby 
 old rag ; and still , notwithstanding the exception , knavery be a very 
 hazardous game , and honesty , on the whole , by far the good policy . 
 still , most of the ten Commandments remain at the core of all the 
 Pandects and Institutes that keep our hand off our neighbour ' 
 throat , wife , and pocket ; still , every year show that the parson 's 
 maxim - " non quieta movere " - be as prudent for the health of community 
 as when Apollo recommend his votary not to rake up a fever by 
 stir the Lake Camarina ; still , people , thank Heaven , decline to 
 reside in parallelogram , and the sure token that we live under a free 
 government be when we be govern by person whom we have a full 
 right to imply , by our censure and ridicule , be blockhead compare to 
 ourselves ! stop that delightful privilege , and , by Jove ! sir , there be 
 neither pleasure nor honour in be govern at all ! you might as well 
 be - a Frenchman ! 




 CHAPTER II . 

 the Italian and his friend be closet together . 

 " and why have you leave your home in - - -shire , and why this new change 
 of name ? " 

 " peschiera be in England . " 

 " I know it . " 

 " and bent on discover I ; and , it be say , of steal from I my 
 child . " 

 " he have have the assurance to lay wager that he will win the hand 
 of your heiress . I know that too ; and therefore I have come to 
 England , - first to baffle his design - for I do not think your fear 
 altogether exaggerated , - and next to learn from you how to follow up 
 a clew which , unless I be too sanguine , may lead to his ruin , and your 
 unconditional restoration . listen to I . you be aware that , after 
 the skirmish with Peschiera 's armed hireling send in search of you , I 
 receive a polite message from the austrian government , request I 
 to leave its italian domain . now , as I hold it the obvious duty of any 
 foreigner admit to the hospitality of a State , to refrain from all 
 participation in its civil disturbance , so I think my honour assail 
 at this intimation , and go at once to Vienna , to explain to the 
 minister there   to whom I be personally know , that though I have , as 
 become man to man , aid to protect a refugee , who have take shelter 
 under my roof , from the infuriate soldier at the command of his 
 private foe , I have not only not share in any attempt at revolt , but 
 dissuade , as far as I could , my italian friend from their enterprise ; 
 and that because , without discuss its merit , I believe , as a 
 military man and a cool spectator , the enterprise could only terminate 
 in fruitless bloodshed . I be enable to establish my explanation 
 by satisfactory proof ; and my acquaintance with the minister assume 
 something of the character of friendship . I be then in a position to 
 advocate your cause , and to state your original reluctance to enter into 
 the plot of the insurgent . I admit freely that you have such natural 
 desire for the independence of your native land , that , have the standard 
 of Italy be boldly hoist by its legitimate chief , or at the common 
 uprising of its whole people , you would have be find in the van , 
 amidst the rank of your countryman ; but I maintain that you would 
 never have share in a conspiracy frantic in itself , and defile by the 
 lawless scheme and sordid ambition of its main projector , have you not 
 be betray and decoy into it by the misrepresentation and 
 domestic treachery of your kinsman , - the very man who denounce you . 
 unfortunately , of this statement I have no proof but your own word . I 
 make , however , so far an impression in your favour , and , it may be , 
 against the traitor , that your property be not confiscate to the 
 State , nor hand over , upon the plea of your civil death , to your 
 kinsman . " 

 " how ! - I do not understand . Peschiera have the property ? " 

 " he hold the revenue but of one half upon pleasure , and they would be 
 withdraw , could I succeed in establish the case that exist against 
 he . I be forbid before to mention this to you ; the minister , not 
 inexcusably , submit you to the probation of unconditional exile . 
 your grace might depend upon your own forbearance from further 
 conspiracy - forgive the word . I need not say I be permit to return 
 to Lombardy . I find , on my arrival , that - that your unhappy wife 
 have be to my house , and exhibit great despair at hearing of my 
 departure . " 

 Riccabocca knit his dark brow , and breathe hard . 

 " I do not judge it necessary to acquaint you with this circumstance , 
 nor do it much affect I . I believe in her guilt - and what could now 
 avail her remorse , if remorse she feel ? shortly afterwards , I hear that 
 she be no more . " 

 " yes , " mutter Riccabocca , ' she die in the same year that I leave 
 Italy . it must be a strong reason that can excuse a friend for remind 
 I even that she once live ! " 

 " I come at once to that reason , " say L'Estrange , gently . " this autumn I 
 be roam through Switzerland , and , in one of my pedestrian excursion 
 amidst the mountain , I meet with an accident , which confine I for some 
 day to a sofa at a little inn in an obscure village . my hostess be 
 an italian ; and as I have leave my servant at a town at some distance , I 
 require her attention till I could write to he to come to I . I be 
 thankful for her care , and amuse by her italian babble . we become very 
 good friend . she tell I she have be servant to a lady of great rank , 
 who have die in Switzerland ; and that , be enrich by the generosity 
 of her mistress , she have marry a swiss innkeeper , and his people have 
 become her . my servant arrive , and my hostess learn my name , which 
 she do not know before . she come into my room greatly agitated . in 
 brief , this woman have be servant to your wife . she have accompany 
 she to my villa , and know of her anxiety to see I , as your friend . 
 the Government have assign to your wife your palace at Milan , with a 
 competent income . she have refuse to accept of either . fail to see 
 I , she have set off towards England , resolve upon see yourself ; for 
 the journal have state that to England you have escape . " 

 " she dare ! shameless ! and see , but a moment before , I have forget 
 all but her grave in a foreign soil , - and these tear have forgive she , " 
 murmur the italian . 

 " let they forgive she still , " say Harley , with all his exquisite 
 sweetness of look and tone . " I resume . on enter Switzerland your 
 wife 's health , which you know be always delicate , give way . to fatigue 
 and anxiety succeed fever , and delirium ensue . she have take with she 
 but this one female attendant - the sole one she could trust - on leave 
 home . she suspect Peschiera to have bribe her household . in the 
 presence of this woman she rave of her innocence , in accent of terror 
 and aversion denounce your kinsman , and call on you to vindicate she 
 name and your own . " 

 " raving indeed ! Poor Paulina ! " groan Riccabocca , cover his face 
 with both hand . 

 " but in her delirium there be lucid interval . in one of these she 
 rise , in spite of all her servant could do to restrain she , take from 
 her desk several letter , and read they over , exclaim piteously , 
 ' but how to get they to he ; whom to trust ? and his friend be go ! ' 
 then an idea seem suddenly to flash upon she , for she utter a joyous 
 exclamation , sit down , and write long and rapidly , enclose what she 
 write with all the letter , in one packet , which she seal carefully , 
 and bade her servant carry to the post , with many injunction to take 
 it with her own hand , and pay the charge on it . ' for oh ! ' say she   I 
 repeat the word as my informant tell they to I , - ' for oh ! this be my 
 sole chance to prove to my husband that , though I have err , I be not 
 the guilty thing he believe I ; the sole chance , too , to redeem my 
 error , and restore , perhaps , to my husband his country , to my child 
 her heritage . ' the servant take the letter to the post ; and when she 
 return , her lady be asleep , with a smile upon her face . but from that 
 sleep she wake again delirious , and before the next morning her soul 
 have flee . " here Riccabocca lift one hand from his face and grasp 
 Harley 's arm , as if mutely beseech he to pause . the heart of the man 
 struggle hard with his pride and his philosophy ; and it be long before 
 Harley could lead he to regard the worldly prospect which this last 
 communication from his wife might open to his ruin fortune , - not , 
 indeed , till Riccabocca have persuade himself , and half persuade Harley 
  for strong , indeed , be all presumption of guilt against the dead , 
 that his wife 's protestation of innocence from all but error have be 
 but raving . 

 " be this as it may , " say Harley , " there seem every reason to suppose 
 that the letter enclose be Peschiera 's correspondence , and that , if 
 so , these would establish the proof of his influence over your wife , 
 and of his perfidious machination against yourself . I resolve , before 
 come hither , to go round by Vienna . there I hear , with dismay , that 
 Peschiera have not only obtain the imperial sanction to demand your 
 daughter 's hand , but have boast to his profligate circle that he should 
 succeed ; and he be actually on his road to England . I see at once that 
 could this design , by any fraud or artifice , be successful with Violante 
  for of your consent , I need not say , I do not dream , the discovery 
 of the packet , whatever its content , would be useless ; Peschiera 's end 
 would be secure . I see also that his success would suffice forever to 
 clear his name ; for his success must imply your consent   it would be to 
 disgrace your daughter , to assert that she have marry without it , and 
 your consent would be his acquittal . I see , too , with alarm , that to 
 all mean for the accomplishment of his project he would be urge by 
 despair ; for his debt be great , and his character nothing but new 
 wealth can support . I know that he be able , bold , determine , and that 
 he have take with he a large supply of money borrow upon usury , - in 
 a word , I tremble for you both . I have now see your daughter , and I 
 tremble no more . accomplished seducer as Peschiera boast himself , the 
 first look upon her face so sweet , yet so noble , convince I that she 
 be proof against a legion of Peschieras . now , then , return we to this 
 all - important subject , - to this packet . it never reach you . long year 
 have pass since then . 

 " do it exist still ? into whose hand would it have fall ? 

 " try to summon up all your recollection . the servant could not remember 
 the name of the person to whom it be address ; she only insist that 
 the name begin with a b , that it be direct to England , and that to 
 England she accordingly pay the postage . whom then , with a name that 
 begin with B , or   in case the servant 's memory here mislead she   whom 
 do you or your wife know , during your visit to England , with sufficient 
 intimacy to make it probable that she would select such a person for her 
 confidant ? " 

 " I can not conceive , " say Riccabocca , shake his head . " we come to 
 England shortly after our marriage . Paulina be affect by the climate . 
 she speak not a word of English , and indeed not even French , as 
 might have be expect from her birth , for her father be poor , 
 and thoroughly italian . she refuse all society . I go , it be true , 
 somewhat into the London world , - enough to induce I to shrink from the 
 contrast that my second visit as a beggar refugee would have make 
 to the reception I meet with on my first ; but I form no intimate 
 friendship . I recall no one whom she could have write to as intimate 
 with I . " 

 " but , " persist Harley , " think again . be there no lady well acquaint 
 with italian , and with whom , perhaps , for that very reason , your wife 
 become familiar ? " 

 " ah , it be true . there be one old lady of retired habit , but who have 
 be much in Italy . Lady - Lady - I remember - Lady Jane Horton . " 

 " Horton - Lady Jane ! " exclaim Harley ; " again ; thrice in one day ! - be 
 this wound never to scar over ? " then , note Riccabocca 's look of 
 surprise , he say , " excuse I , my friend ; I listen to you with renew 
 interest . Lady Jane be a distant relation of my own ; she judge I , 
 perhaps , harshly - and I have some painful association with her name ; 
 but she be a woman of many virtue . your wife know she ? " 

 " not , however , intimately ; still , well than any one else in London . 
 but Paulina would not have write to she ; she know that Lady Jane have 
 die shortly after her own departure from England . I myself be summon 
 back to Italy on press business ; she be too unwell to journey with 
 I as rapidly as I be oblige to travel ; indeed , illness detain 
 her several week in England . in this interval she might have make 
 acquaintance . ah , now I see ; I guess . you say the name begin with B. 
 Paulina , in my absence , engage a companion , - a Mrs. Bertram . this lady 
 accompany she abroad . Paulina become excessively attach to she , she 
 know italian so well . Mrs. Bertram leave she on the road , and return to 
 England , for some private affair of her own . I forget why or wherefore ; 
 if , indeed , I ever ask or learn . Paulina miss she sadly , often 
 talk of she , wonder why she never hear from she . no doubt it be to 
 this Mrs. Bertram that she write ! " 

 " and you do not   know the lady 's friend , or address ? " 

 " no . " 

 " nor who recommend she to your wife ? " 

 " no . " 

 " probably Lady Jane Horton ? " 

 " it may be so . 

 " very likely . " 

 " I will follow up this track , slight as it be . " 

 " but if Mrs. Bertram receive the communication , how come it that it 
 never reach myself - oh , fool that I be , how should it ! I , who guard 
 so carefully my incognito ! " 

 " true . this your wife could not foresee ; she would naturally imagine 
 that your residence in England would be easily discover . but many 
 year must have pass since your wife lose sight of this Mrs. Bertram , 
 if their acquaintance be make so soon after your marriage ; and now it 
 be a long time to retrace , - before even your Violante be bear . " 

 " alas ! yes . I lose two fair son in the interval . Violante be bear to 
 I as the child of sorrow . " 

 " and to make sorrow lovely ! how beautiful she be ! " the father smile 
 proudly . 

 " where , in the lofty house of Europe , find a husband worthy of such 
 a prize ? " 

 " you forget that I be still an exile , she still dowerless . you forget 
 that I be pursue by Peschiera ; that I would rather see she a beggar 's 
 wife - than - pah , the very thought madden I , it be so foul . Corpo di 
 Bacco ! I have be glad to find she a husband already . " 

 " already ! then that young man speak truly ? " 

 " what young man ? " 

 " randal Leslie . how ! you know he ? " here a brief explanation follow . 
 Harley hear with attentive ear , and mark vexation , the particular of 
 Riccabocca 's connection and imply engagement with Leslie . 

 " there be something very suspicious to I in all this , " say he . 

 " why should this young man have so sound I as to Violante 's chance of 
 lose fortune if she marry , an Englishman ? " 

 " do he ? oh , pooh ! excuse he . it be but his natural wish to seem 
 ignorant of all about I . he do not know enough of my intimacy with you 
 to betray my secret . " 

 " but he know enough of it - must have know enough - to have make it right 
 that he should tell you I be in England . he do not seem to have do 
 so . " 

 " No ; that be strange - yet scarcely strange ; for , when we last meet , his 
 head be full of other thing , - love and marriage . Basta ! youth will be 
 youth . " 

 " he have no youth leave in he ! " exclaim Harley , passionately . " I doubt 
 if he ever have any . he be one of those man who come into the world with 
 the pulse of a centenarian . you and I never shall be as old as he be in 
 long clothe . ah , you may laugh ; but I be never wrong in my instinct . 
 I dislike he at the first , - his eye , his smile , his voice , his very 
 footstep . it be madness in you to countenance such a marriage ; it may 
 destroy all chance of your restoration . " 

 " well that than infringe my word once pass . " 

 " no , no , " exclaim Harley ; " your word be not pass , it shall not be 
 pass . Nay , never look so piteously at I . at all event , pause till 
 we know more of this young man . if he be worthy of she without a dower , 
 why , then , let he lose you your heritage . I should have no more to 
 say . " 

 " but why lose I my heritage ? there be no law in Austria which can 
 dictate to a father what husband to choose for his daughter . " 

 " certainly not . but you be out of the pale of law itself just at 
 present ; and it would surely be a reason for State policy to withhold 
 your pardon , and it would be to the loss of that favour with your own 
 countryman , which would now make that pardon so popular , if it be 
 know that the representative of your name be debase by your 
 daughter 's alliance with an English adventurer , - a clerk in a public 
 office . oh , sage in theory , why be you such a simpleton in action ? " 

 nothing move by this taunt , Riceabocca rub his hand , and then 
 stretch they comfortably over the fire . 

 " my friend , " say he , " the representation of my name would pass to my 
 son . " 

 " but you have no son . " 

 " Hush ! I be go to have one ; my Jemima inform I of it yesterday 
 morning ; and it be upon that information that I resolve to speak to 
 Leslie . be I a simpleton now ? " 

 " go to have a son , " repeat Harley , look very bewildered ; " how do 
 you know it be to be a son ? " 

 " physiologist be agree , " say the sage , positively , " that where the 
 husband be much old than the wife , and there have be a long interval 
 without child before she condescend to increase the population of 
 the world , she   that be , it be at least as nine to four   - she bring 
 into the world a male . I consider that point therefore as settle , 
 accord to the calculation of statistician and the research of 
 naturalist . " 

 Harley could not help laugh , though he be still angry and disturb . 

 " the same man as ever ; always the fool of philosophy . " 

 " Cospetto ! " say Riccabocca . " I be rather the philosopher of fool . and 
 talk of that , shall I present you to my Jemima ? " 

 " yes ; but in turn I must present you to one who remember with gratitude 
 your kindness , and whom your philosophy , for a wonder , have not ruin . 
 some time or other you must explain that to I . excuse I for a moment ; 
 I will go for he . 

 " for he , - for whom ? in my position I must be cautious ; and - " 

 " I will answer for his faith and discretion . meanwhile order dinner , and 
 let I and my friend stay to share it . " 

 " Dinner ? Corpo di Bacco ! - not that Bacchus can help we here . what will 
 Jemima say ? " 

 " henpecke man , settle that with your connubial tyrant . but dinner it 
 must be . " 

 I leave the reader to imagine the delight of Leonard at see once more 
 Riccabocca unchanged and Violante so improve , and the kind Jemima too ; 
 and their wonder at he and his history , his book and his fame . he 
 narrate his struggle and adventure with a simplicity that remove 
 from a story so personal the character of egotism . but when he come to 
 speak of Helen he be brief and reserve . 

 Violante would have question more closely ; but , to Leonard 's relief , 
 Harley interpose . 

 " you shall see she whom he speak of before long , and question she 
 yourself . " 

 with these word , Harley turn the young man 's narrative into new 
 direction ; and Leonard 's word again flow freely . thus the evening 
 pass away happily to all save Riccabocca . for the thought of his dead 
 wife rise ever and anon before the exile ; but when it do , and become 
 too painful , he creep near to Jemima , and look in her simple face , 
 and press her cordial hand . and yet the monster have imply to Harley 
 that his comforter be a fool , - so she be , to love so contemptible a 
 slanderer of herself and her sex . 

 Violante be in a state of blissful excitement ; she could not analyze 
 her own joy . but her conversation be chiefly with Leonard ; and the 
 most silent of all be Harley . he sit listen to Leonard 's warm yet 
 unpretende eloquence , - that eloquence which flow so naturally from 
 genius , when thoroughly at its ease , and not chill back on itself 
 by hard , unsympathize hearer ; listen , yet more charm , to the 
 sentiment less profound , yet no less earnest , - sentiment so feminine , 
 yet so noble , with which Violante 's fresh virgin heart respond to the 
 poet 's kindling soul . those sentiment of her be so unlike all 
 he hear in the common world , so akin to himself in his go youth ! 
 occasionally - at some high thought of her own , or some lofty line 
 from italian song , that she cite with lighted eye , and in melodious 
 accent - occasionally he rear his knightly head , and his lip quiver , 
 as if he have hear the sound of a trumpet . the inertness of long year 
 be shake . the Heroic , that lie deep beneath all the humour of his 
 temperament , be reach , appeal to ; and stir within he , rouse 
 up all the bright association connect with it , and long dormant . when 
 he arise to take leave , surprised at the lateness of the hour , Harley 
 say , in a tone that bespoke the sincerity of the compliment , " I thank 
 you for the happy hour I have know for year . " his eye dwelt on 
 Violante as he speak . 

 but timidity return to she with his word , at his look ; and it be no 
 long the inspire muse , but the bashful girl that stand before he . 

 " and when shall I see you again ? " ask Riccabocca , disconsolately , 
 follow his guest to the door . 

 " when ? why , of course , to - morrow . Adieu ! my friend . no wonder you have 
 bear your exile so patiently , - with such a child ! " 

 he take Leonard 's arm , and walk with he to the inn where he have leave 
 his horse . Leonard speak of Violante with enthusiasm . Harley be silent . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 the next day a somewhat old - fashioned , but exceedingly patrician , 
 equipage stop at Riccabocca 's garden - gate . Giacomo , who , from a 
 bedroom window , have catch sight of its winding towards the house , be 
 seize with undefinable terror when he behold it pause before their 
 wall , and hear the shrill summon at the portal . he rush into his 
 master 's presence , and implore he not to stir , - not to allow any 
 one to give ingress to the enemy the machine might disgorge . " I have 
 hear , " say he , " how a town in Italy - I think it be Bologna - be once 
 take and give to the sword , by incautiously admit a wooden horse 
 full of the troop of Barbarossa and all manner of bomb and Congreve 
 rocket . " 

 " the story be differently tell in Virgil , " quoth Riccabocca , peep 
 out of the window . " nevertheless , the machine look very large and 
 suspicious ; unloose Pompey . " 

 " Father , " say Violante , colour , " it be your friend , Lord L'Estrange ; 
 I hear his voice . " 

 " be you sure ? " 

 " quite . how can I be mistake ? " 

 " go , then , Giacomo ; but take Pompey with thee , - and give the alarm if we 
 be deceive . " 

 but Violante be right ; and in a few moment Lord L'Estrange be see 
 walk up the garden , and give the arm to two lady . 

 " ah , " say Riccabocca , compose his dressing - robe round he , " go , my 
 child , and summon Jemima . man to man ; but , for Heaven 's sake , woman to 
 woman . " 

 Harley have bring his mother and Helen , in compliment to the lady of 
 his friend 's household . 

 the proud countess know that she be in the presence of Adversity , and 
 her salute to Riccabocca be only less respectful than that with which 
 she would have render homage to her sovereign . but Riccabocca , always 
 gallant to the sex that he pretend to despise , be not to be outdo 
 in ceremony ; and the bow which reply to the courtesy would have 
 edify the rise generation , and delight such survive relic of 
 the old Court breeding as may linger yet amidst the gloomy pomp of the 
 Faubourg St. Germain . these due pay to etiquette , the countess briefly 
 introduce Helen as Miss Digby , and seat herself near the exile . in 
 a few moment the two elder personage become quite at home with each 
 other ; and , really , perhaps Riccabocca have never , since we have know 
 he , show to such advantage as by the side of his polished , but 
 somewhat formal visitor . both have live so little with our modern , 
 ill - breed age ! they take out their manner of a former race , with a 
 sort of pride in airing once more such fine lace and superb brocade . 
 Riccabocca give truce to the shrewd but homely wisdom of his proverb , 
 perhaps he remember that Lord Chesterfield denounce proverb as 
 vulgar ; and gaunt though his figure , and far from elegant though his 
 dressing - robe , there be that about he which speak undeniably of the 
 grand seigneur , - of one to whom a Marquis de Dangeau would have offer 
 a fauteuil by the side of the Rohans and montmorencie . 

 meanwhile Helen and Harley seat themselves a little apart , and be 
 both silent , - the first , from timidity ; the second , from abstraction . 
 at length the door open , and Harley suddenly spring to his 
 foot , - Violante and Jemima enter . Lady Lansinere 's eye first rest 
 on the daughter , and she could scarcely refrain from an exclamation of 
 admire surprise ; but then , when she catch sight of Mrs. Riccabocca 's 
 somewhat humble , yet not obsequious mien , - look a little shy , a 
 little homely , yet still thoroughly a gentlewoman   though of your plain , 
 rural kind of that genus , she turn from the daughter , and with the 
 savoir vivre of the fine old school , pay her first respect to the 
 wife ; respect literally , for her manner imply respect , - but it 
 be more kind , simple , and cordial than the respect she have show to 
 Riccabocca ; as the sage himself have say , here " it be woman to Woman . " 
 and then she take Violante 's hand in both her , and gaze on she as if 
 she could not resist the pleasure of contemplate so much beauty . " my 
 son , " she say softly , and with a half sigh , - " my son in vain tell I 
 not to be surprised . this be the first time I have ever know reality 
 exceed description ! " 

 Violante 's blush here make she still more beautiful ; and as the countess 
 return to Riccabocca , she steal gently to Helen 's side . 

 " Miss Digby , my ward , " say Harley , pointedly , observe that his 
 mother have neglect her duty of present Helen to the lady . he then 
 reseat himself , and converse with Mrs. Riccabocca ; but his bright , 
 quick eye glance over at the two girl . they be about the same 
 age - and youth be all that , to the superficial eye , they seem to have 
 in common . a great contrast could not well be conceive ; and , what be 
 strange , both gain by it . Violante 's brilliant loveliness seem yet 
 more dazzling , and Helen 's fair , gentle face yet more win . neither 
 have mix much with girl of her own age ; each take to the other at 
 first sight . Violante , as the less shy , begin the conversation . 

 " you be his ward , - Lord L'Estrange 's ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " perhaps you come with he from Italy ? " 

 " no , not exactly ; but I have be in Italy for some year . " 

 " ah ! you regret - nay , I be foolish - you return to your native land . 
 but the sky in Italy be so blue , - here it seem as if Nature want 
 colour . " 

 " Lord L'Estrange say that you be very young when you leave Italy ; you 
 remember it well . he , too , prefer Italy to England . " 

 " he ! impossible ! " 

 " why impossible , fair sceptic ? " cry Harley , interrupt himself in 
 the midst of a speech to Jemima . 

 Violante have not dream that she could be overhear - she be speak 
 low ; but , though visibly embarrassed , she answer distinctly , 

 " because in England there be the noble career for noble mind . " 

 Harley be startle , and reply , with a slight sigh , " at your age I 
 should have say as you do . but this England of our be so crowded with 
 noble mind that they only jostle each other , and the career be one 
 cloud of dust . " 

 " so , I have read , seem a battle to a common soldier , but not to the 
 chief . " 

 " you have read good description of battle , I see . " 

 Mrs. Riccabocca , who think this remark a taunt upon her 
 step - daughter 's study , hasten to Violante 's relief . 

 " her papa make she read the history of Italy , and I believe that be full 
 of battle . " 

 HARLEY . - " all history be , and all woman be fond of war and of warrior . 
 I wonder why ? " 

 VIOLANTE   turn to Helen , and in a very low voice , resolve that 
 Harley should not hear this time . - " we can guess why , - can we not ? " 

 HARLEY   hear every word , as if it have be speak in St. Paul 's 
 Whispering Gallery . - " if you can guess , Helen , pray tell I . " 

 HELEN   shake her pretty head , and answer with a lively smile than 
 usual . - " but I be not fond of war and warrior . " 

 HARLEY   to Violante . - " then I must appeal at once to you , 
 self - convict Bellona that you be . be it from the cruelty natural to 
 the female disposition ? " 

 VIOLANTE   with a sweet musical laugh . " from two propensity still more 
 natural to it . " 

 HARLEY . - " you puzzle I : what can they be ? " 

 VIOLANTE . - " pity and admiration ; we pity the weak and admire the brave . " 

 Harley incline his head , and be silent . 

 Lady Lansmere have suspend her conversation with Riccabocca to listen 
 to this dialogue . " Charming ! " she cry . 

 " you have explain what have often perplex I . ah , Harley , I be glad 
 to see that your satire be foil : you have no reply to that . " 

 " no ; I willingly own myself defeat , too glad to claim the signorina 's 
 pity , since my cavalry sword hang on the wall , and I can have no long 
 a professional pretence to her admiration . " 

 he then rise , and glance towards the window . " but I see a more 
 formidable disputant for my conqueror to encounter be come into the 
 field , - one whose profession it be to substitute some other romance for 
 that of camp and siege . " 

 " our friend Leonard , " say Riccabocca , turn his eye also towards the 
 window . " true ; as Quevedo say , wittily , ' ever since there have be 
 so great a demand for type , there have be much less lead to spare for 
 cannon - ball . ' " 

 here Leonard enter . Harley have send Lady Lansmere 's footman to he 
 with a note , that prepare he to meet Helen . as he come into the room , 
 Harley take he by the hand and lead he to Lady Lansmere . 

 " the friend of whom I speak . welcome he now for my sake , ever after for 
 his own ; " and then , scarcely allow time for the countess 's elegant 
 and gracious response , he draw Leonard towards Helen . " child , " say 
 he , with a touching voice , that thrill through the heart of both , " go 
 and seat yourselves yonder , and talk together of the past . Signorina , I 
 invite you to renew discussion upon the abstruse metaphysical subject 
 you have start ; let we see if we can not find gentle source for pity 
 and admiration than war and warrior . " he take Violante aside to the 
 window . " you remember that Leonard , in tell you his history last 
 night , speak , you think , rather too briefly of the little girl who have 
 be his companion in the rude time of his trial . when you would 
 have question more , I interrupt you , and say , ' you should see she 
 shortly , and question she yourself . ' and now what think you of Helen 
 Digby ? Hush , speak low . but her ear be not so sharp as mine . " 

 VIOLANTE . - " ah ! that be the fair creature whom Leonard call his 
 child - angel ? what a lovely innocent face ! - the angel be there still . " 

 HARLEY   please both at the praise and with she who give it . - " you 
 think so ; and you be right . Helen be not communicative . but fine 
 nature be like fine poem , - a glance at the first two line suffice 
 for a guess into the beauty that wait you if you read on . " 

 Violante gaze on Leonard and Helen as they sit apart . Leonard be the 
 speaker , Helen the listener ; and though the former have , in his narrative 
 the night before , be indeed brief as to the episode in his life 
 connect with the orphan , enough have be say to interest Violante 
 in the pathos of their former position towards each other , and in the 
 happiness they must feel in their meeting again , - separate for year on 
 the wide sea of life , now both save from the storm and shipwreck . the 
 tear come into her eye . " true , " she say , very softly , " there be more 
 here to move pity and admiration than in - " she pause . 

 HARLEY . - " complete the sentence . be you ashamed to retract ? fie on your 
 pride and obstinacy ! " 

 VIOLANTE . - " no ; but even here there have be war and heroism , - the war 
 of genius with adversity , and heroism in the comforter who share it 
 and console . ah , wherever pity and admiration be both feel , something 
 nobler than mere sorrow must have go before : the heroic must exist . " 

 " Helen do not know what the word ' heroic ' mean , " say Harley , rather 
 sadly ; " you must teach she . " 

 " be it possible , " think he as he speak , " that a Randal Leslie could 
 have charm this grand creature ? no ' Heroic ' surely , in that sleek 
 young placeman . - your father , " he say aloud , and fix his eye on her 
 face , ' see much , he tell I , of a young man about Leonard 's age , as to 
 date ; but I never estimate the age of man by the parish register , and 
 I should speak of that so - call young man as a contemporary of my 
 great - grandfather , - I mean Mr. Randal Leslie . do you like he ? " 

 " like he , " say Violante , slowly , and as if sound her own 
 mind , - " like he - yes . " 

 " why ? " ask Harley , with dry and curt indignation . " his visit seem to 
 please my dear father . certainly I like he . " 

 " Hum . he profess to like you , I suppose ? " 

 Violante laugh unsuspiciously . she have half a mind to reply , " be that 
 so strange ? " but her respect for Harley stop she . the word would 
 have seem to her pert . " I be tell he be clever , " resume Harley . 

 " oh , certainly . " 

 " and he be rather handsome . but I like Leonard 's face well . " 

 " Better - that be not the word . Leonard 's face be as that of one who have 
 gaze so often upon Heaven ; and Mr. Leslie 's - there be neither sunlight 
 nor starlight reflect there . " 

 " my dear Violante ? " exclaim Harley , overjoy ; and he press she 
 hand . 

 the blood rush over the girl 's cheek and brow ; her hand tremble in 
 his . but Harley 's familiar exclamation might have come from a father 's 
 lip . 

 at this moment Helen softly approach they , and look timidly into 
 her guardian 's face , say , " Leonard 's mother be with he : he ask I to 
 call and see she . may I ? " 

 " may you ! a pretty notion the signorina must form of your enslaved state 
 of pupilage , when she hear you ask that question . of course you may . " 

 " will you come with we ? " 

 Harley look embarrassed . he think of the widow 's agitation at his 
 name ; of that desire to shun he , which Leonard have confess , and of 
 which he think he divine the cause . and so divine , he too shrank 
 from such a meeting . 

 " another time , then , " say he , after a pause . Helen look disappointed , 
 but say no more . 

 Violante be surprised at this ungracious answer . she would have blame 
 it as unfeele in another ; but all that Harley do be right in her 
 eye . 

 " can not I go with Miss Digby ? " say she , " and my mother will go too . we 
 both know Mrs. Fairfield . we shall be so pleased to see she again . " 

 " so be it , " say Harley ; " I will wait here with your father till you 
 come back . oh , as to my mother , she will excuse the - excuse Madame 
 Riccabocca , and you too . see how charmed she be with your father . I must 
 stay to watch over the conjugal interest of mine . " 

 but Mrs. Riccabocca have too much good old country breed to leave the 
 countess ; and Harley be force himself to appeal to Lady Lansmere . when 
 he have explain the case in point , the countess rise and say , 

 " but I will call myself , with Miss Digby . " 

 " no , " say Harley , gravely , but in a whisper . " no ; I would rather not . I 
 will explain later . " 

 " then , " say the countess aloud , after a glance of surprise at her son , 
 " I must insist on your perform this visit , my dear madam , and you , 
 Signorina . in truth , I have something to say confidentially to - " 

 " to I , " interrupt Riccabocca . " ah , Madame la Comtesse , you restore I 
 to five - and - twenty . go , quick , o jealous and injured wife ; go , both of 
 you , quick ; and you , too , Harley . " 

 " Nay , " say Lady Lansmere , in the same tone , " Harley must stay , for my 
 design be not at present upon destroy your matrimonial happiness , 
 whatever it may be later . it be a design so innocent that my son will be 
 a partner in it . " 

 here the countess put her lip to Harley 's ear , and whisper . he 
 receive her communication in attentive silence ; but when she have do , 
 press her hand , and bow his head , as if in assent to a proposal . 

 in a few minute the three lady and Leonard be on their road to the 
 neighbouring cottage . 

 Violante , with her usual delicate intuition , think that Leonard and 
 Helen must have much to say to each other ; and   ignorant , as Leonard 
 himself be , of Helen 's engagement to Harley   begin already , in the 
 romance natural to her age , to predict for they happy and united day in 
 the future . so she take her stepmother 's arm , and leave Helen and Leonard 
 to follow . 

 " I wonder , " she say musingly , " how Miss Digby become Lord L'Estrange 's 
 ward . I hope she be not very rich , nor very high - bear . " 

 " La , my love , " say the good Jemima , " that be not like you ; you be not 
 envious of she , poor girl ? " 

 " envious ! dear mamma , what a word ! but do not   you think Leonard and Miss 
 Digby seem bear for each other ? and then the recollection of their 
 childhood - the thought of childhood be so deep , and its memory so 
 strangely soft ! " the long lash droop over Violante 's muse eye as 
 she speak . " and therefore , " she say , after a pause , - " therefore I hop 
 that Miss Digby might not be very rich nor very high - bear . " 

 " I understand you now , Violante , " exclaim Jemima , her own early 
 passion for match - making instantly return to she ; " for as Leonard , 
 however clever and distinguish , be still the son of Mark Fairfield the 
 carpenter , it would spoil all if - Miss Digby be , as you say , rich and 
 high - bear . I agree with you , - a very pretty match , a very pretty match , 
 indeed . I wish dear - Mrs. Dale be here now , - she be so clever in 
 settle such matter . " 

 meanwhile Leonard and Helen walk side by side a few pace in the rear . 
 he have not offer she his arm . they have be silent hitherto since they 
 leave Riccabocca 's house . 

 Helen now speak first . in similar case it be generally the woman , be 
 she ever so timid , who do speak first . and here Helen be the bold ; 
 for Leonard do not disguise from himself the nature of his feeling , 
 and Helen be engage to another , and her pure heart be fortify by 
 the trust repose in it . 

 " and have you ever hear more of the good Dr. Morgan , who have powder 
 against sorrow , and who mean to be so kind to we , - though , " she add , 
 colour , " we do not think so then ? " 

 " he take my child - angel from I , " say Leonard , with visible emotion ; 
 " and if she have not return , where and what should I be now ? but I have 
 forgive he . no , I have never meet he since . " 

 " and that terrible Mr. Burley ? " 

 " poor , poor Burley ! he , too , be vanish out of my present life . I have 
 make many inquiry after he ; all I can hear be that he go abroad , 
 suppose as a correspondent to some journal . I should like so much to 
 see he again , now that perhaps I could help he as he help I . " 

 " help you - ah ! " 

 Leonard smile with a beat heart , as he see again the dear prudent , 
 warning look , and involuntarily draw close to Helen . she seem more 
 restore to he and to her former self . 

 " help I much by his instruction ; more , perhaps , by his very fault . 
 you can not guess , Helen , - I beg pardon , Miss Digby , but I forget that we 
 be no long child , - you can not guess how much we man , and more than 
 all , perhaps , we writer whose task it be to unravel the web of human 
 action , owe even to our own past error ; and if we learn nothing by 
 the error of other , we should be dull indeed . we must know where the 
 road divide , and have mark where they lead to , before we can erect 
 our sign - post ; and book be the sign - post in human life . " 

 " book ! and I have not yet read your . and Lord L'Estrange tell I you 
 be famous now . yet you remember I still , - the poor orphan child , whom 
 you first see weeping at her father 's grave , and with whom you burden 
 your own young life , over - burden already . no , still call I Helen - you 
 must always be to I a brother ! Lord L'Estrange feel that ; he say so 
 to I when he tell I that we be to meet again . he be so generous , so 
 noble . brother ! " cry Helen , suddenly , and extend her hand , with 
 a sweet but sublime look in her gentle face , - " brother , we will never 
 forfeit his esteem ; we will both do our good to repay he ! will we 
 not ? - say so ! " 

 Leonard feel overpower by contend and unanalyzed emotion . touch 
 almost to tear by the affectionate address , thrill by the hand 
 that press his own , and yet with a vague fear , a consciousness that 
 something more than the word themselves be imply , - something that 
 check all hope . and this word " brother , " once so precious and so dear , 
 why do he shrink from it now ; why could he not too say the sweet word 
 ' sister " ? 

 " she be above I now and evermore ! " he think mournfully ; and the tone 
 of his voice , when he speak again , be change . the appeal to renew 
 intimacy but make he more distant , and to that appeal itself he make no 
 direct answer ; for Mrs. Riccabocca , now turn round , and point to 
 the cottage which come in view , with its picturesque gable - end , cry 
 out , 

 " but be that your house , Leonard ? I never see anything so pretty . " 

 " you do not remember it then , " say Leonard to Helen , in accent of 
 melancholy reproach , - " there where I see you last ? I doubt whether 
 to keep it exactly as it be , and I say , ' - no ! the association be 
 not change because we try to surround it with whatever beauty we can 
 create ; the dearer the association , the more the Beautiful become to it 
 natural . ' perhaps you do not   understand this , - perhaps it be only we poor 
 poet who do . " 

 " I understand it , " say Helen , gently . she look wistfully at the 
 cottage . 

 " so change ! I have so often picture it to myself , never , never like 
 this ; yet I love it , commonplace as it be to my recollection ; and the 
 garret , and the tree in the carpenter 's yard . " 

 she do not give these thought utterance . and they now enter the 
 garden . 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 Mrs. Fairfield be a proud woman when she receive Mrs. Riccabocca and 
 Violante in her grand house ; for a grand house to she be that cottage 
 to which her boy Lenny have bring her home . Proud , indeed , ever be 
 Widow Fairfield ; but she think then in her secret heart , that if ever 
 she could receive in the drawing - room of that grand house the great Mrs. 
 Hazeldean , who have so lecture she for refuse to live any long in 
 the humble , tenement rent of the squire , the cup of human bliss would 
 be fill , and she could contentedly die of the pride of it . she do 
 not much notice Helen , - her attention be too absorb by the lady who 
 renew their old acquaintance with she , and she carry they all over 
 the house , yea , into the very kitchen ; and so , somehow or other , there 
 be a short time when Helen and Leonard find themselves alone . it be 
 in the study . Helen have unconsciously seat herself in Leonard 's own 
 chair , and she be gaze with anxious and wistful interest on the 
 scatter paper , look so disorderly   though , in truth , in that 
 disorder there be method , but method only know to the owner , and at 
 the venerable well - wear book , in all language , lie on the floor , on 
 the chair - anywhere . I must confess that Helen 's first tidy womanlike 
 idea be a great desire to arrange the litter . " Poor Leonard , " she 
 think to herself , " the rest of the house so neat , but no one to take 
 care of his own room and of he ! " 

 as if he divine her thought , Leonard smile and say , " it would be a 
 cruel kindness to the spider , if the gentle band in the world try to 
 set its cobweb to right . " 

 HELEN . - " you be not quite so bad in the old day . " 

 LEONARD . - " yet even then you be oblige to take care of the money . I 
 have more book now , and more money . my present housekeeper let I take 
 care of the book , but she be less indulgent as to the money . " 

 HELEN   archly . - " be you as absent as ever ? " 

 LEONARD . - " much more so , I fear . the habit be incorrigible , Miss 
 Digby - " 

 HELEN . - " not Miss Digby ; sister , if you like . " 

 LEONARD   evade the word that imply so forbid an 
 affinity . - " Helen , will you grant I a favour ? your eye and your smile 
 say ' yes . ' will you lay aside , for one minute , your shawl and bonnet ? 
 what ! can you be surprised that I ask it ? can you not understand that 
 I wish for one minute to think that you be at home again under this 
 roof ? " 

 Helen cast down her eye , and seem troubled ; then she raise they , 
 with a soft angelic candour in their dovelike blue , and , as if in 
 shelter from all thought of more warm affection , again murmur 
 " brother , " and do as he ask she . 

 so there she sit , amongst the dull book , by his table , near the open 
 window , her fair hair part on her forehead , look so good , so calm , 
 so happy ! Leonard wonder at his own self - command . his heart yearn to 
 she with such inexpressible love , his lip so long to murmur , " ah , 
 as now so could it be forever ! be the home too mean ? " but that word 
 " brother " be as a talisman between she and he . yet she look so at 
 home - perhaps so at home she feel ! - more certainly than she have yet 
 learn to do in that stiff stately house in which she be soon to have 
 a daughter 's right . be she suddenly make aware of this , that she so 
 suddenly arise , and with a look of alarm and distress on her face . 

 " but - we be keep Lady Lansmere too long , " she say falteringly . " we 
 must go now , " and she hastily take up her shawl and bonnet . 

 just then Mrs. Fairfield enter with the visitor , and begin make 
 excuse for inattention to Miss Digby , whose identity with Leonard 's 
 child - angel she have not yet learn . 

 Helen receive these apology with her usual sweetness . " Nay , " she 
 say , " your son and I be such old friend , how could you stand on 
 ceremony with I ? " 

 " old friend ! " Mrs. Fairfield star amazed , and then survey the 
 fair speaker more curiously than she have yet do . " pretty , nice - speak 
 thing , " think the widow ; " as nice - speak as Miss Violante , and 
 humbler - look like , - though , as to dress , I never see anything so 
 elegant out of a picter . " 

 Helen now appropriate Mrs. Riccabocca 's arm ; and , after a kind 
 leave - taking with the widow , the lady return towards Riccabocca 's 
 house . 

 Mrs. Fairfield , however , run after they with Leonard 's hat and glove , 
 which he have forget . 

 " ' deed , boy , " she say , kindly , yet scoldingly , " but there would be no more 
 fine book , if the Lord have not fix your head on your shoulder . you 
 would not think it , marm , " she add to Mrs. Riccabocca , " but sin ' he 
 have leave you , he be not the ' cute lad he be ; very helpless at time , 
 marm ! " 

 Helen could not resist turn round , and look at Leonard , with a sly 
 smile . 

 the widow see the smile , and catch Leonard by the arm , whisper , 
 " but where before have you see that pretty young lady ? old friend ! " 

 " ah , Mother , " say Leonard , sadly , " it be a long tale ; you have hear 
 the beginning , who can guess the end ? " and he escape . but Helen still 
 lean on the arm of Mrs. Riccabocca , and , in the walk back , it seem 
 to Leonard as if the winter have re - settle in the sky . 

 yet he be by the side of Violante , and she speak to he with such 
 praise of Helen ! alas ! it be not always so sweet as folk say to 
 hear the praise of one we love . sometimes those praise seem to ask 
 ironically , " and what right hast thou to hope because thou lovest ? all 
 love she . " 




 CHAPTER V. 

 no soon have Lady Lansmere find herself alone with Riccabocca and 
 Harley than she lay her hand on the exile 's arm , and , address he 
 by a title she have not before give he , and from which he appear to 
 shrink nervously , say , " Harley , in bring I to visit you , be force 
 to reveal to I your incognito , for I should have discover it . you 
 may not remember I , in spite of your gallantry ; but I mix more in the 
 world than I do now , during your first visit to England , and once sit 
 next to you at dinner at Carlton House . Nay , no compliment , but listen 
 to I . Harley tell I you have cause for some alarm respect the 
 design of an audacious and unprincipled adventurer , I may call he ; for 
 adventurer be of all rank . suffer your daughter to come to I on a 
 visit , as long as you please . with I , at least , she will be safe ; and 
 if you , too , and the - " 

 " stop , my dear madam , " interrupt Riccabocca , with great vivacity ; 
 " your kindness overpower I . I thank you most gratefully for your 
 invitation to my child ; but - " 

 " Nay , " in his turn interrupt Harley , " no but . I be not aware of my 
 mother 's intention when she enter this room . but since she whisper 
 it to I , I have reflect on it , and be convinced that it be but a 
 prudent precaution . your retreat be know to Mr. Leslie , he be know to 
 Peschiera . Grant that no indiscretion of Mr. Leslie 's betray the 
 secret ; still I have reason to believe that the count guess Randal 's 
 acquaintance with you . Audley Egerton this morning tell I he have 
 gather that , not from the young man himself , but from question put to 
 himself by Madame di Negra ; and Peschiera might and would set spy to 
 track Leslie to every house that he visit , - might and would , still more 
 naturally , set spy to track myself . be this man an Englishman , I 
 should laugh at his machination ; but he be an italian , and have be a 
 conspirator . what he could do I know not ; but an assassin can penetrate 
 into a camp , and a traitor can creep through close wall to one 's 
 hearth . with my mother , Violante must be safe ; that you can not oppose . 
 and why not come yourself ? " 

 Riccabocca have no reply to these argument , so far as they affect 
 Violante ; indeed , they awaken the almost superstitious terror with 
 which he regard his enemy , and he consent at once that Violante 
 should accept the invitation proffer . but he refuse it for himself 
 and Jemima . 

 " to say truth , " say he , simply , " I make a secret vow , on re - enter 
 England , that I would associate with none who know the rank I have 
 formerly hold in my own land . I feel that all my philosophy be need 
 to reconcile and habituate myself to my altered circumstance . in order 
 to find in my present existence , however humble , those blessing which 
 make all life noble , - dignity and peace , - it be necessary for poor , 
 weak human nature wholly to dismiss the past . it would unsettle I 
 sadly , could I come to your house , renew awhile , in your kindness and 
 respect - nay , in the very atmosphere of your society - the sense of what 
 I have be ; and then   should the more than doubtful chance of recall 
 from my exile fail I   to awake , and find myself for the rest of life 
 what I be . and though , be I alone , I might trust myself perhaps to the 
 danger , yet my wife : she be happy and content now ; would she be so , 
 if you have once spoil she for the simple position of Dr. Riccabocca 's 
 wife ? should I not have to listen to regret and hope and fear that 
 would prick sharp through my thin cloak of philosophy ? even as it be , 
 since in a moment of weakness I confide my secret to she , I have have 
 ' my rank ' throw at I , - with a careless hand , it be true , but it hit 
 hard nevertheless . no stone hurt like one take from the ruin of one 's 
 own home ; and the grander the home , why , the heavy the stone ! protect , 
 dear madam , protect my daughter , since her father doubt his own power 
 to do so . but - ask no more . " 

 Riccabocca be immovable here ; and the matter be settle as he decide , 
 it be agree that Violante should be still style but the daughter of 
 Dr. Riccabocca . 

 " and now , one word more , " say Harley . " do not confide to Mr. Leslie 
 these arrangement ; do not let he know where Violante be place , - at 
 least , until I authorize such confidence in he . it be sufficient 
 excuse that it be no use to know unless he call to see she , and his 
 movement , as I say before , may be watch . you can give the same 
 reason to suspend his visit to yourself . suffer I , meanwhile , to 
 mature my judgment on this young man . in the meanwhile , also , I think 
 that I shall have mean of ascertain the real nature of Peschiera 's 
 scheme . his sister have seek to know I ; I will give she the occasion . 
 I have hear some thing of she in my last residence abroad , which make 
 I believe that she can not be wholly the count 's tool in any scheme 
 nakedly villanous ; that she have some fine quality in she than I once 
 suppose ; and that she can be win from his influence . it be a state of 
 war ; we will carry it into the enemy 's camp . you will promise I , then , 
 to refrain from all further confidence in Mr. Leslie ? " 

 " for the present , yes , " say Riccabocca , reluctantly . 

 " do not even say that you have see I , unless he first tell you that 
 I be in England , and wish to learn your residence . I will give he full 
 occasion to do so . pish ! do not   hesitate ; you know your own proverb - 

  " ' boccha chiusa , ed occhio aperto 
  Non fece mai nissun deserto . ' 

 " the closed mouth and the open eye , ' etc . " 

 " that be very true , " say the doctor , much strike . " very true . ' in boccha 
 chiusa non c'entrano mosche . ' one can not   swallow fly if one keep one 's 
 mouth shut . Corpo di Bacco ! that be very true indeed . " 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 Violante and Jemima be both greatly surprised , as the reader may 
 suppose , when they hear , on their return , the arrangement already 
 make for the former . the countess insist on take she at once , and 
 Riccabocca briefly say , " certainly , the soon the well . " Violante 
 be stunned and bewilder . Jemima hasten to make up a little bundle 
 of thing necessary , with many a woman 's sigh that the poor wardrobe 
 contain so few thing befit . but among the clothe she slip a 
 purse , contain the saving of month , perhaps of year , and with it a 
 few affectionate line , beg Violante to ask the countess to buy she 
 all that be proper for her father 's child . there be always something 
 hurried and uncomfortable in the abrupt and unexpected withdrawal of any 
 member from a quiet household . the small party break into still small 
 knot . Violante hang on her father , and listen vaguely to his not very 
 lucid explanation . the countess approach Leonard , and , accord 
 to the usual mode with person of quality address young author , 
 compliment he highly on the book she have not read , but which her son 
 assure she be so remarkable . she be a little anxious to know where 
 Harley have first meet with Mr. Oran , whom he call his friend ; but she 
 be too highbred to inquire , or to express any wonder that rank should 
 be friend with genius . she take it for grant that they have form 
 their acquaintance abroad . 

 Harley converse with Helen . - " you be not sorry that Violante be come 
 to we ? she will be just such a companion for you as I could desire ; of 
 your own year too . " 

 HELEN   ingenuously . - " it be hard to think I be not young than she 
 be . " 

 HARLEY . - " why , my dear Helen ? " 

 HELEN . - " she be so brilliant . she talk so beautifully . and I - " 

 HARLEY . - " and you want but the habit of talk , to do justice to your 
 own beautiful thought . " 

 Helen look at he gratefully , but shake her head . it be a common 
 trick of her , and always when she be praise . 

 at last the preparation be make , the farewell be say , Violante be 
 in the carriage by Lady Lansmere 's side . slowly move on the stately 
 equipage with its four horse and trim postilion , heraldic badge on 
 their shoulder , in the style rarely see in the neighbourhood of the 
 metropolis , and now fast vanish even amidst distant county . 

 Riccabocca , Jemima , and Jackeymo continue to gaze after it from the 
 gate . 

 " she be go , " say Jackeymo , brush his eye with his coat - sleeve . 
 " but it be a load off one 's mind . " 

 " and another load on one 's heart , " murmur Riccabocca . " do not   cry , 
 Jemima ; it may be bad for you , and bad for he that be to come . it 
 be astonish how the humour of the mother may affect the unborn . I 
 should not like to have a son who have a more than usual propensity to 
 tear . " 

 the poor philosopher try to smile ; but it be a bad attempt . he go 
 slowly in , and shut himself with his book . but he could not read . his 
 whole mind be unsettled . and though , like all parent , he have be 
 anxious to rid himself of a beloved daughter for life , now that she be 
 go but for a while , a string seem break in the Music of Home . 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 the evening of the same day , as Egerton , who be to entertain a large 
 party at dinner , be change his dress , Harley walk into his room . 

 Egerton dismiss his valet by a sign , and continue his toilet . 

 " excuse I , my dear Harley , I have only ten minute to give you . I 
 expect one of the royal duke , and punctuality be the stern virtue of 
 man of business , and the graceful courtesy of prince . " 

 Harley have usually a jest for his friend 's aphorism ; but he have none 
 now . he lay his hand kindly on Egerton 's shoulder . " before I speak of 
 my business , tell I how you be , - well ? " 

 " well , - nay , I be always well . Pooh ! I may look a little tired , - year 
 of toil will tell on the countenance . but that matter little : the 
 period of life have pass with I when one care how one look in the 
 glass . " 

 as he speak , Egerton complete his dress , and come to the hearth , 
 stand there , erect and dignified as usual , still far handsomer than 
 many a young man , and with a form that seem to have ample vigour to 
 support for many a year the sad and glorious burden of power . 

 " so now to your business , Harley . " 

 " in the first place , I want you to present I , at the early 
 opportunity , to Madame di Negra . you say she wish to know I . " 

 " be you serious ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " well , then , she receive this evening . I do not mean to go ; but when 
 my party break up - " 

 " you can call for I at the Travellers . do ! " 

 " next , you know Lady Jane Horton well even than I do , at least in the 
 last year of her life . " Harley sigh , and Egerton turn and stir 
 the fire . 

 " pray , do you ever see at her house , or hear she speak of , a Mrs. 
 Bertram ? " 

 " of whom ? " say Egerton , in a hollow voice , his face still turn 
 towards the fire . 

 " a Mrs. Bertram ; but heaven ! my dear fellow , what be the matter ? be 
 you ill ? " 

 " a spasm at the heart , that be all ; do not   ring , I shall be well 
 presently ; go on talk . Mrs. - why do you ask ? " 

 " why ? I have hardly time to explain ; but I be , as I tell you , resolve 
 on right my old italian friend , if Heaven will help I , as it ever 
 do help the just when they bestir themselves ; and this Mrs. Bertram be 
 mix up in my friend 's affair . " 

 " his ! how be that possible ? " 

 Harley rapidly and succinctly explain . Audley listen attentively , 
 with his eye fix on the floor , and still seem to labour under 
 great difficulty of breathing . 

 at last he answer , " I remember something of this Mrs. - Mrs. - Bertram . 
 but your inquiry after she would be useless . I think I have hear that 
 she be long since dead ; nay , I be sure of it . " 

 " dead ! - that be most unfortunate . but do you know any of her relation 
 or friend ? can you suggest any mode of trace this packet , if it come 
 to her hand ? " 

 " no . " 

 " and Lady Jane have scarcely any friend that I remember except my mother , 
 and she know nothing of this Mrs. Bertram . how unlucky ! I think I shall 
 advertise . yet , no . I could only distinguish this Mrs. Bertram from any 
 other of the same name , by state with whom she have go abroad , and 
 that would catch the attention of Peschiera , and set he to counterwork 
 we . " 

 " and what avail it ? " say Egerton . " she whom you seek be no more - no 
 more ! " he pause , and go on rapidly : " the packet do not arrive 
 in England till year after her death , be no doubt return to the 
 post - office , be destroy long ago . " 

 Harley look very much disappointed . Egerton go on in a sort of set , 
 mechanical voice , as if not think of what he say , but speak from 
 the dry practical mode of reasoning which be habitual to he , and by 
 which the man of the world destroy the hope of an enthusiast . then 
 start up at the sound of the first thunder knock at the street 
 door , he say , " Hark ! you must excuse I . " 

 " I leave you , my dear Audley . but I must again ask , be you well now ? " 

 " much , much , - quite well : I will call for you , - probably between eleven 
 and twelve . " 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 if any one could be more surprised at see Lord L'Estrange at the 
 house of Madame di Negra that evening than the fair hostess herself , 
 it be randal Leslie . something instinctively tell he that this visit 
 threaten interference with whatever might be his ultimate project 
 in regard to Riccabocca and Violante . but Randal Leslie be not one of 
 those who shrink from an intellectual combat . on the contrary , he be 
 too confident of his power of intrigue not to take a delight in their 
 exercise . he could not conceive that the indolent Harley could be a 
 match for his own restless activity and dogged perseverance . but in a 
 very few moment fear creep on he . no man of his day could produce a 
 more brilliant effect than Lord L'Estrange , when he deign to desire 
 it . without much pretence to that personal beauty which strike at first 
 sight , he still retain all the charm of countenance , and all the grace 
 of manner , which have make he in boyhood the spoiled darling of society . 
 Madame di Negra have collect but a small circle round she ; still it be 
 of the elite of the great world , - not , indeed , those more precise and 
 reserve dame de chateau , whom the light and easy of the fair 
 dispenser of fashion ridicule as prude ; but nevertheless , lady 
 be there , as unblemished in reputation , as high in rank , flirt and 
 coquette , perhaps , - nothing more ; in short , " charming woman , " - the 
 gay butterfly that hover over the stiff parterre . and there be 
 ambassador and minister , and wit and brilliant debater , and 
 first - rate dandy   dandy , when first - rate , be generally very 
 agreeable man . amongst all these various person , Harley , so long a 
 stranger to the London world , seem to make himself at home with the 
 ease of an Alcibiades . many of the less juvenile lady remember he , 
 and rush to claim his acquaintance , with nod and beck , and wreathe 
 smile . he have ready compliment for each . and few indeed be there , 
 man or woman , for whom Harley L'Estrange have not appropriate attraction . 
 distinguished reputation as soldier and scholar for the grave ; whim and 
 pleasantry for the gay ; novelty for the sated ; and for the more vulgar 
 nature be he not Lord L'Estrange , unmarried , possess already of 
 a large independence , and heir to an ancient earldom , and some fifty 
 thousand a year ? 

 not till he have succeed in the general effect - which , it must be 
 own , he do his good to create - do Harley seriously and especially 
 devote himself to his hostess . and then he seat himself by her side ; 
 and , as if in compliment to both , less press admirer insensibly 
 slip away and edge off . 

 Frank Hazeldean be the last to quit his ground behind Madame di Negra 's 
 chair ; but when he find that the two begin to talk in Italian , and he 
 could not understand a word they say , he too - fancy , poor fellow , 
 that he look foolish , and curse his Eton education that have 
 neglect , for language speak by the dead , of which he have learn 
 little , those still in use among the living , of which he have learn 
 nought - retreat towards Randal , and ask wistfully , " pray , what age 
 should you say L'Estrange be ? he must be devilish old , in spite of his 
 look . why , he be at Waterloo ! " 

 " he be young enough to be a terrible rival , " answer Randal , with 
 artful truth . 

 Frank turn pale , and begin to meditate dreadful bloodthirsty thought , 
 of which hair - trigger and Lord 's Cricket - ground form the staple . 

 certainly there be apparent ground for a lover 's jealousy ; for Harley 
 and Beatrice now converse in a low tone , and Beatrice seem agitated , 
 and Harley earnest . randal himself grow more and more perplexed . be 
 Lord L'Estrange really enamour of the marchesa ? if so , farewell to all 
 hope of Frank 's marriage with she ! or be he merely play a part in 
 Riccabocca 's interest ; pretend to be the lover , in order to obtain 
 an influence over her mind , rule she through her ambition , and secure 
 an ally against her brother ? be this finesse compatible with Randal 's 
 notion of Harley 's character ? be it consistent with that chivalric and 
 soldierly spirit of honour which the frank nobleman affect , to make 
 love to a woman in mere ruse de guerre ? could mere friendship for 
 Riccabocca be a sufficient inducement to a man , who , whatever his 
 weakness or his error , seem to wear on his very forehead a soul 
 above deceit , to stoop to paltry mean , even for a worthy end ? at this 
 question , a new thought flash upon Randal , - might not Lord L'Estrange 
 have speculate himself upon win Violante ; would not that account 
 for all the exertion he have make on behalf of her inheritance at the 
 court of Vienna , - exertion of which Peschiera and Beatrice have both 
 complain ? those objection which the austrian government might take 
 to Violante 's marriage with some obscure Englishman would probably 
 not exist against a man like Harley L'Estrange , whose family not only 
 belong to the high aristocracy of England , but have always support 
 opinion in vogue amongst the lead government of Europe . Harley 
 himself , it be true , have never take part in politic , but his notion 
 be , no doubt , those of a high - bear soldier , who have fight , in 
 alliance with Austria , for the restoration of the Bourbons . and this 
 immense wealth - which Violante might lose , if she marry one like 
 randal himself - her marriage with the heir of the Lansmeres might 
 actually tend only to secure . could Harley , with all his own 
 expectation , be indifferent to such a prize ? - and no doubt he have 
 learn Violante 's rare beauty in his correspondence with Riccabocca . 

 thus consider , it seem natural to Randal 's estimate of human nature 
 that Harley 's more prudish scruple of honour , as regard what be due to 
 woman , could not resist a temptation so strong . mere friendship be not 
 a motive powerful enough to shake they , but ambition be . 

 while Randal be thus cogitate , Frank thus suffer , and many a 
 whisper , in comment on the evident flirtation between the beautiful 
 hostess and the accomplished guest , reach the ear both of the 
 brood schemer and the jealous lover , the conversation between the two 
 object of remark and gossip have take a new turn . indeed , Beatrice have 
 make an effort to change it . 

 " it be long , my Lord , " say she , still speak italian , ' since I have 
 hear sentiment like those you address to I ; and if I do not feel 
 myself wholly unworthy of they , it be from the pleasure I have feel in 
 reading sentiment equally foreign to the language of the world in which 
 I live . " she take a book from the table as she speak : " have you see 
 this work ? " 

 Harley glance at the title - page . " to be sure I have , and I know the 
 author . " 

 " I envy you that honour . I should so like also to know one who have 
 discover to I deep in my own heart which I have never explore . " 

 " Charming marchesa , if the book have do this , believe I that I have 
 pay you no false compliment , - form no overflattering estimate of your 
 nature ; for the charm of the work be but in its simple appeal to good 
 and generous emotion , and it can charm none in whom those emotion 
 exist not ! " 

 " Nay , that can not be true , or why be it so popular ? " 

 " because good and generous emotion be more common to the human heart 
 than we be aware of till the appeal come . " 

 " do not   ask I to think that ! I have find the world so base . " 

 " pardon I a rude question ; but what do you know of the world ? " 

 Beatrice look first in surprise at Harley , then glance round the room 
 with significant irony . 

 " as I think ; you call this little room ' the world . ' be it so . I will 
 venture to say , that if the people in this room be suddenly convert 
 into an audience before a stage , and you be as consummate in the 
 actor 's art as you be in all other that please and command - " 

 " well ? " 

 " and be to deliver a speech full of sordid and base sentiment , you 
 would be hiss . but let any other woman , with half your power , 
 arise and utter sentiment sweet and womanly , or honest and lofty , and 
 applause would flow from every lip , and tear rush to many a worldly 
 eye . the true proof of the inherent nobleness of our common nature be 
 in the sympathy it betray with what be noble wherever crowd be 
 collect . never believe the world be base ; if it be so , no society 
 could hold together for a day . but you would know the author of this 
 book ? I will bring he to you . " 

 " do . " 

 " and now , " say Harley , rise , and with his candid , win smile , " do 
 you think we shall ever be friend ? " 

 " you have startle I so that I can scarcely answer . but why would you 
 be friend with I ? " 

 " because you need a friend . you have none ? " 

 " strange flatterer ! " say Beatrice , smile , though very sadly ; and 
 look up , her eye catch Randal 's . 

 " Pooh ! " say Harley , " you be too penetrate to believe that you 
 inspire friendship there . ah , do you suppose that ; all the while I have 
 be converse with you , I have not notice the watchful gaze of Mr. 
 Randal Leslie ? what tie can possibly connect you together I know not 
 yet ; but I soon shall . " 

 " indeed ! you talk like one of the old Council of Venice . you try hard to 
 make I fear you , " say Beatrice , seek to escape from the graver 
 kind of impression Harley have make on she , by the affectation partly of 
 coquetry , partly of levity . 

 " and I , " say L'Estrange , calmly , " tell you already that I fear you no 
 more . " he bow , and pass through the crowd to rejoin Audley , who be 
 seat in a corner whisper with some of his political colleague . 
 before Harley reach the minister , he find himself close to randal and 
 young Hazeldean . 

 he bow to the first , and extend his hand to the last . randal feel 
 the distinction , and his sullen , bitter pride be deeply gall , - a 
 feeling of hate towards Harley pass into his mind . he be pleased to 
 see the cold hesitation with which Frank just touch the hand offer 
 to he . but Randal have not be the only person whose watch upon 
 Beatrice the keen - eyed Harley have notice . Harley have see the 
 angry look of Frank Hazeldean , and divine the cause . so he smile 
 forgivingly at the slight he have receive . " you be like I , Mr. 
 Hazeldean , " say he . " you think something of the heart should go with 
 all courtesy that bespeak friendship - 

  " ' the hand of Douglas be his own . ' " 

 here Harley draw aside Randal . " Mr. Leslie , a word with you . if I wish 
 to know the retreat of Dr. Riccabocca , in order to render he a great 
 service , would you confide to I that secret ? " 

 " that woman have let out her suspicion that I know the exile 's retreat , " 
 think Randal ; and with quick presence of mind , he reply at once , 

 " my Lord , yonder stand a connection of Dr. Riccabocca 's . Mr. Hazeldean 
 be surely the person to whom you should address this inquiry . " 

 " not so , Mr. Leslie ; for I suspect that he can not answer it , and that 
 you can . well , I will ask something that it seem to I you may grant 
 without hesitation . should you see Dr. Riccabocca , tell he that I be 
 in England , and so leave it to he to communicate with I or not ; but 
 perhaps you have already do so ? " 

 " Lord L'Estrange , " say Randal , bow low , with pointed formality , 
 " excuse I if I decline either to disclaim or acquiesce in the knowledge 
 you impute to I . if I be acquaint with any secret intrust to I by 
 Dr. Riccabocca , it be for I to use my own discretion how good to guard 
 it . and for the rest , after the Scotch earl , whose word your Lordship 
 have quote , refuse to touch the hand of Marmion , Douglas could scarcely 
 have call Marmion back in order to give he - a message ! " 

 Harley be not prepare for this tone in Mr. Egerton 's protege , and his 
 own gallant nature be rather pleased than irritated by a haughtiness 
 that at least seem to bespeak independence of spirit . nevertheless , 
 L'Estrange 's suspicion of Randal be too strong to be easily set 
 aside , and therefore he reply , civilly , but with covert taunt , 

 " I submit to your rebuke , Mr. Leslie , though I mean not the offence you 
 would ascribe to I . I regret my unlucky quotation yet the more , 
 since the wit of your retort have oblige you to identify yourself 
 with Marmion , who , though a clever and brave fellow , be an 
 uncommonly - tricky one . " and so Harley , certainly have the good of it , 
 move on , and join Egerton , and in a few minute more both leave the 
 room . 

 " what be L'Estrange say to you ? " ask Frank . " something about 
 Beatrice , I be sure . " 

 " no ; only quote poetry . " 

 " then what make you look so angry , my dear fellow ? I know it be your 
 kind feeling for I . as you say , he be a formidable rival . but that 
 can not   be his own hair . do you think he wear a toupet ? I be sure he be 
 praise Beatrice . he be evidently very much smite with she . but I 
 do not   think she be a woman to be catch by mere rank and fortune ! do 
 you ? why can not   you speak ? " 

 " if you do not get her consent soon , I think she be lose to you , " say 
 randal , slowly ; and before Frank could recover his dismay , glide from 
 the house . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 Violante 's first evening at the Lansmeres have pass more happily to she 
 than the first evening under the same roof have do to Helen . true that 
 she miss her father much , Jemima somewhat ; but she so identify she 
 father 's cause with Harley that she have a sort of vague feeling that 
 it be to promote that cause that she be on this visit to Harley 's 
 parent . and the countess , it must be own , be more emphatically 
 cordial to she than she have ever yet be to Captain Digby 's orphan . but 
 perhaps the real difference in the heart of either girl be this , that 
 Helen feel awe of Lady Lansmere , and Violante feel only love for Lord 
 L'Estrange 's mother . Violante , too , be one of those person whom a 
 reserved and formal person , like the countess , " can get on with , " as the 
 phrase go . not so poor little Helen , - so shy herself , and so hard to 
 coax into more than gentle monosyllable . and Lady Lansmere 's favourite 
 talk be always of Harley . Helen have listen to such talk with respect 
 and interest . Violante listen to it with inquisitive eagerness , with 
 blush delight . the mother 's heart notice the distinction between the 
 two , and no wonder that that heart move more to Violante than to Helen . 
 Lord Lansmere , too , like most gentleman of his age , clump all young 
 lady together as a harmless , amiable , but singularly stupid class of 
 the genus - Petticoat , mean to look pretty , play the piano , and talk 
 to each other about frock and sweetheart . therefore this animate , 
 dazzle creature , with her infinite variety of look and play of mind , 
 take he by surprise , charm he into attention , and warm he 
 into gallantry . Helen sit in her quiet corner , at her work , sometimes 
 listen with almost mournful , though certainly unenvious , admiration 
 at Violante 's vivid , yet ever unconscious , eloquence of word and 
 thought , sometimes plunge deep into her own secret meditation . and all 
 the while the work go on the same , under the small , noiseless finger . 
 this be one of Helen 's habit that irritate the nerve of Lady 
 Lansmere . she despise young lady who be fond of work . she do not 
 comprehend how often it be the resource of the sweet womanly mind , not 
 from want of thought , but from the silence and the depth of it . Violante 
 be surprised , and perhaps disappoint , that Harley have leave the house 
 before dinner , and do not return all the evening . but Lady Lansmere , in 
 make excuse for his absence , on the plea of engagement , find so good 
 an opportunity to talk of his way in general , - of his rare promise in 
 boyhood , of her regret at the inaction of his maturity , of her hope 
 to see he yet do justice to his natural power , - that Violante almost 
 cease to miss he . 

 and when Lady Lansmere conduct she to her room , and , kiss her cheek 
 tenderly , say , " but you be just the person Harley admire , - just the 
 person to rouse he from melancholy dream , of which his wild humour 
 be now but the vain disguise " - Violante cross her arm on her bosom , 
 and her bright eye , deepen into tenderness , seem to ask , " he 
 melancholy - and why ? " 

 on leave Violante 's room , Lady Lansmere pause before the door of 
 Helen 's ; and , after muse a little while , enter softly . 

 Helen have dismiss she maid ; and , at the moment Lady Lansmere enter , 
 she be kneel at the foot of the bed , her hand clasp before she 
 face . 

 her form , thus see , look so youthful and child - like , the attitude 
 itself be so holy and so touching , that the proud and cold expression 
 on Lady Lansmere 's face change . she shade the light involuntarily , and 
 seat herself in silence that she might not disturb the act of prayer . 

 when Helen rise , she be startled to see the countess seat by the 
 fire , and hastily draw her hand across her eye . she have be weep . 

 Lady Lansmere do not , however , turn to observe those trace of tear , 
 which Helen fear be too visible . the countess be too absorb in 
 her own thought ; and as Helen timidly approach , she say - still with 
 her eye on the clear low fire - " I beg your pardon , Miss Digby , for 
 my intrusion ; but my son have leave it to I to prepare Lord Lansmere to 
 learn the offer you have do Harley the honour to accept . I have not 
 yet speak to my Lord ; it may be day before I find a fitting occasion 
 to do so ; meanwhile I feel assured that your sense of propriety will 
 make you agree , with I that it be due to Lord L'Estrange 's father , that 
 stranger should not learn arrangement of such moment in his family 
 before his own consent be obtain . " 

 here the countess come to a full pause ; and poor Helen , find herself 
 call upon for some reply to this chilling speech , stammer out , 
 scarce audibly , 

 " certainly , madam , I never dream of - " 

 " that be right , my dear , " interrupt Lady Lansmere , rise suddenly , 
 and as if greatly relieve . " I could not doubt your superiority to 
 ordinary girl of your age , with whom these matter be never secret for 
 a moment . therefore , of course , you will not mention , at present , what 
 have pass between you and Harley , to any of the friend with whom you 
 may correspond . " 

 " I have no correspondent , no friend , Lady Lansmere , " say Helen , 
 deprecatingly , and try hard not to cry . 

 " I be very glad to hear it , my dear ; young lady never should have . 
 friend , especially friend who correspond , be the bad enemy they 
 can have . good - night , Miss Digby . I need not add , by the way , that 
 though we be bind to show all kindness to this young italian lady , 
 still she be wholly unconnected with our family ; and you will be as 
 prudent with she as you would have be with your correspondent , have 
 you have the misfortune to have any . " 

 Lady Lansmere say the last word with a smile , and leave an ungenial 
 kiss   the stepmother 's kiss   on Helen 's bended brow . she then leave the 
 room , and Helen sit on the seat vacate by the stately , unloving form , 
 and again cover her face with her hand , and again weep . but when she 
 rise at last , and the light fall upon her face , that soft face be sad 
 indeed , but serene , - serene , as with some inward sense of duty , sad , as 
 with the resignation which accept patience instead of hope . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 the next morning Harley appear at breakfast . he be in gay spirit , 
 and converse more freely with Violante than he have yet do . he 
 seem to amuse himself by attack all she say , and provoke she to 
 argument . Violante be naturally a very earnest person ; whether grave or 
 gay , she speak with her heart on her lip , and her soul in her eye . 
 she do not yet comprehend the light vein of Harley 's irony , so she grow 
 pique and chafe ; and she be so lovely in anger ; it so brighten the 
 beauty and animate her word , that no wonder Harley thus maliciously 
 tease she . but what , perhaps , she like still less than the 
 teasing - though she could not tell why - be the kind of familiarity that 
 Harley assume with she , - a familiarity as if he have know she all her 
 life , - that of a good - humour eld brother , or a bachelor uncle . to 
 Helen , on the contrary , when he do not address she apart , his manner 
 be more respectful . he do not call she by her christian name , as he 
 do Violante , but " Miss Digby , " and soften his tone and incline his 
 head when he speak to she . nor do he presume to jest at the very few 
 and brief sentence he draw from Helen , but rather listen to they with 
 deference , and invariably honour they with approval . after breakfast 
 he ask Violante to play or sing ; and when she frankly own how little 
 she have cultivate those accomplishment , he persuade Helen to sit down 
 to the piano , and stand by her side while she do so , turn over the 
 leaf of her music - book with the ready devotion of an admire amateur . 
 Helen always play well , but less well than usual that day , for she 
 generous nature feel abash . it be as if she be show off to 
 mortify Violante . but Violante , on the other hand , be so passionately 
 fond of music that she have no feeling leave for the sense of her own 
 inferiority . yet she sigh when Helen rise , and Harley thank Miss 
 Digby for the delight she have give he . 

 the day be fine . Lady Lansmere propose to walk in the garden . while 
 the lady go up - stair for their shawl and bonnet , Harley light 
 his cigar , and step from the window upon the lawn . Lady Lansmere 
 join he before the girl come out . 

 " Harley , " say she , take his arm , " what a charming companion you have 
 introduce to we ! I never meet with any that both pleased and delight 
 I like this dear Violante . Most girl who possess some power of 
 conversation , and who have dare to think for themselves , be so 
 pedantic , or so masculine ; but she be always so simple , and always still 
 the girl . ah , Harley ! " 

 " why that sigh , my dear mother ? " 

 " I be think how exactly she would have suit you , - how proud I 
 should have be of such a daughter - in - law , and how happy you would have 
 be with such a wife . " 

 Harley start . " Tut , " say he , peevishly , ' she be a mere child ; you 
 forget my year . " 

 " why , " say Lady Lansmere , surprised , " Helen be quite as young as 
 Violante . " 

 " in date - yes . but Helen 's character be so staid ; what it be now it will 
 be ever ; and Helen , from gratitude , respect , or pity , condescend to 
 accept the ruin of my heart , while this bright Italian have the soul of 
 a Juliet , and would expect in a husband all the passion of a Romeo . Nay , 
 Mother , hush . do you forget that I be engage , - and of my own free will 
 and choice ? poor dear Helen ! a propos , have you speak to my father , as 
 you undertake to do ? " 

 " not yet . I must seize the right moment . you know that my Lord require 
 management . " 

 " my dear mother , that female notion of manage us man cost you lady 
 a great waste of time , and occasion we a great deal of sorrow . man be 
 easily manage by plain truth . we be bring up to respect it , strange 
 as it may seem to you ! " 

 Lady Lansmere smile with the air of superior wisdom , and the experience 
 of an accomplished wife . " leave it to I , Harley , and rely on my Lord 's 
 consent . " 

 Harley know that Lady Lansmere always succeed in obtain she 
 way with his father ; and he feel that the earl might naturally be 
 disappoint in such an alliance , and , without due propitiation , evince 
 that disappointment in his manner to Helen . Harley be bind to save she 
 from all chance of such humiliation . he do not wish she to think that 
 she be not welcome into his family ; therefore he say , " I resign 
 myself to your promise and your diplomacy . meanwhile , as you love I , be 
 kind to my betrothed . " 

 " be I not so ? " 

 " Hem . be you as kind as if she be the great heiress you believe 
 Violante to be ? " 

 " be it , " answer Lady Lansmere , evade the question - " be it because 
 one be an heiress and the other be not that you make so mark a 
 difference in your own manner to the two ; treat Violante as a spoilt 
 child , and Miss Digby as - " 

 " the destine wife of Lord L'Estrange , and the daughter - in - law of Lady 
 Lansmere , - yes . " 

 the countess suppress an impatient exclamation that rise to her lip , 
 for Harley 's brow wear that serious aspect which it rarely assume save 
 when he be in those mood in which man must be soothe , not resist . 
 and after a pause he go on , " I be go to leave you to - day . I have 
 engage apartment at the Clarendon . I intend to gratify your wish , so 
 often express , that I should enjoy what be call the pleasure of my 
 rank , and the privilege of single - blessedness , - celebrate my adieu to 
 celibacy , and blaze once more , with the splendour of a set sun , upon 
 Hyde Park and May Fair . " 

 " you be a positive enigma . leave our house , just when you be betroth 
 to its inmate ! be that the natural conduct of a lover ? " 

 " how can your woman eye be so dull , and your woman heart so obtuse ? " 
 answer Harley , half laugh , half scold . " can you not guess that I 
 wish that Helen and myself should both lose the association of mere ward 
 and guardian ; that the very familiarity of our intercourse under the 
 same roof almost forbid we to be lover ; that we lose the joy to meet , 
 and the pang to part . do not   you remember the story of the Frenchman , who 
 for twenty year love a lady , and never miss pass his evening at 
 her house . she become a widow . ' I wish you joy , ' cry his friend ; ' you 
 may now marry the woman you have so long adore . ' ' alas ! ' say the 
 poor Frenchman , profoundly deject ; ' and if so , where shall I spend my 
 evening ? ' " 

 here Violante and Helen be see in the garden , walk affectionately 
 arm in arm . 

 " I do not   perceive the point of your witty , heartless anecdote , " say 
 Lady Lansmere , obstinately . " settle that , however , with Miss Digby . 
 but to leave the very day after your friend 's daughter come as a 
 guest ! - what will she think of it ? " 

 Lord L'Estrange look steadfastly at his mother . " do it matter much 
 what she think of I , - of a man engage to another ; and old enough to 
 be - " 

 " I wish to heaven you would not talk of your age , Harley ; it be a 
 reflection upon mine ; and I never see you look so well nor so handsome . " 
 with that she draw he on towards the young lady ; and , take Helen 's 
 arm , ask she , aside , " if she know that Lord L'Estrange have engage 
 room at the Clarendon ; and if she understand why ? " as while she say 
 this she move on , Harley be leave by Violante 's side . 

 " you will be very dull here , I fear , my poor child , " say he . 

 " dull ! but why will you call I child ? be I so very - very child - like ? " 

 " certainly , you be to I , - a mere infant . have I not see you one ; have 
 I not hold you in my arm ? " 

 VIOLANTE . - " but that be a long time ago ! " 

 HARLEY . - " true . but if year have not stand still for you , they have not 
 be stationary for I . there be the same difference between we now that 
 there be then . and , therefore , permit I still to call you child , and 
 as child to treat you ! " 

 VIOLANTE . - " I will do no such thing . do you know that I always think I 
 be good - temper till this morning . " 

 HARLEY . - " and what undeceive you ? do you break your doll ? " 

 VIOLANTE   with an indignant flash from her dark 
 eye . - " there ! - again ! - you delight in provoke I ! " 

 HARLEY . - " it be the doll , then . do not   cry ; I will get you another . " 

 Violante pluck her arm from he , and walk away towards the countess 
 in speechless scorn . Harley 's brow contract , in thought and in gloom . 
 he stand still for a moment or so , and then join the lady . 

 " I be trespass sadly on your morning ; but I wait for a visitor whom 
 I send to before you be up . he be to be here at twelve . with your 
 permission , I will dine with you tomorrow , and you will invite he to 
 meet I . " 

 " certainly . and who be your friend ? I guess - the young author ? " 

 " Leonard Fairfield , " cry Violante , who have conquer , or feel ashamed , 
 of her short - live anger . 

 " Fairfield ! " repeat Lady Lansmere . " I think , Harley , you say the 
 name be Oran . " 

 " he have assume the latter name . he be the son of Mark Fairfield , who 
 marry an avenel . do you recognize no family likeness ? - none in those 
 eye , Mother ? " say Harley , sink his voice into a whisper . 

 " no ; " answer the countess , falteringly . 

 Harley , observe that Violante be now speak to Helen about Leonard , 
 and that neither be listen to he , resume in the same low tone , 
 " and his mother - Nora 's sister - shrink from see I ! that be the 
 reason why I wish you not to call . she have not tell the young man 
 why she shrink from see I ; nor have I explain it to he as yet . 
 perhaps I never shall . " 

 " indeed , dear Harley , " say the countess , with great gentleness , 
 " I wish you too much to forget the folly - well , I will not say that 
 word - the sorrow of your boyhood , not to hope that you will rather 
 strive against such painful memory than renew they by unnecessary 
 confidence to any one ; least of all to the relation of - " 

 " enough ! do not   name she ; the very name pain I . and as to confidence , 
 there be but two person in the world to whom I ever bare the old 
 wound , - yourself and Egerton . let this pass . ha ! - a ring at the 
 bell - that be he ! " 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 Leonard enter on the scene , and join the party in the garden . the 
 countess , perhaps to please her son , be more than civil , - she be 
 markedly kind to he . she notice he more attentively than she have 
 hitherto do ; and , with all her prejudice of birth , be strike to find 
 the son of Mark Fairfield the carpenter so thoroughly the gentleman . he 
 might not have the exact tone and phrase by which convention stereotype 
 those bear and school in a certain world ; but the aristocrat of 
 nature can dispense with such trite minutia ? and Leonard have live , 
 of late at least , in the good society that exist for the polish of 
 language and the refinement of manner , - the society in which the most 
 graceful idea be clothe in the most graceful form ; the society which 
 really , though indirectly , give the law to court ; the society of 
 the most classic author , in the various age in which literature have 
 flower forth from civilization . and if there be something in the 
 exquisite sweetness of Leonard 's voice , look , and manner , which the 
 countess acknowledge to attain that perfection in high breeding , which , 
 under the name of ' suavity , " steal its way into the heart , so her 
 interest in he be arouse by a certain subdue melancholy which 
 be rarely without distinction , and never without charm . he and Helen 
 exchange but few word . there be but one occasion in which they could 
 have speak apart , and Helen herself contrive to elude it . his face 
 brighten at Lady Lansmere 's cordial invitation , and he glance at 
 Helen as he accept it ; but her eye do not meet his own . 

 " and now , " say Harley , whistle to Nero , whom his ward be silently 
 caressing , " I must take Leonard away . Adieu ! all of you , till to - morrow 
 at dinner . Miss Violante , be the doll to have blue eye or black ? " 

 Violante turn her own black eye in mute appeal to Lady Lansmere , and 
 nestle to that lady 's side as if in refuge from unworthy insult . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 " let the carriage go to the Clarendon , " say Harley to his servant ; " I 
 and Mr. Oran will walk to town . Leonard , I think you would rejoice at an 
 occasion to serve your old friend , Dr. Riccabocca and his daughter ? " 

 " serve they ! oh , yes . " and there instantly return to Leonard the 
 recollection of Violante 's word when , on leave his quiet village , 
 he have sigh to part from all those he love ; and the little dark - eye 
 girl have say , proudly , yet consolingly , " but to SERVE those you love ! " 
 he turn to L'Estrange , with beaming , inquisitive eye . 

 " I say to our friend , " resume Harley , " that I would vouch for your 
 honour as my own . I be about to prove my word , and to confide the 
 secret which your penetration have indeed divine , - our friend be not 
 what he seem . " Harley then briefly relate to Leonard the particular 
 of the exile 's history , the rank he have hold in his native land , the 
 manner in which , partly through the misrepresentation of a kinsman he 
 have trust , partly through the influence of a wife he have love , he have 
 be draw into scheme which he believe bound to the emancipation 
 of Italy from a foreign yoke by the united exertion of her good and 
 brave son . 

 " a noble ambition ! " interrupt Leonard , manfully . " and pardon I , my 
 Lord , I should not have think that you would speak of it in a tone 
 that imply blame . " 

 " the ambition in itself be noble , " answer Harley ; " but the cause to 
 which it be devoted become defile in its dark channel through 
 Secret Societies . it be the misfortune of all miscellaneous political 
 combination , that with the pure motif of their more generous 
 member be ever mix the most sordid interest , and the fierce 
 passion of mean confederate . when those combination act openly , and 
 in daylight , under the eye of Public Opinion , the healthy element 
 usually prevail ; where they be shroud in mystery , where they 
 be subject to no censor in the discussion of the impartial and 
 dispassionate , where chief work in the dark exact blind obedience , 
 and every man who be at war with law be at once admit as a friend of 
 freedom , the history of the world tell we that patriotism soon pass 
 away . where all be in public , public virtue , by the natural sympathy 
 of the common mind , and by the wholesome control of shame , be likely to 
 obtain ascendancy ; where all be in private , and shame be but for he who 
 refuse the abnegation of his conscience , each man seek the indulgence 
 of his private vice . and hence in Secret Societies   from which may 
 yet proceed great danger to all Europe   we find but foul and hateful 
 Eleusinia , afford pretext to the ambition of the great , to the 
 license of the penniless , to the passion of the revengeful , to the 
 anarchy of the ignorant . in a word , the society of these italian 
 Carbonari do but engender scheme in which the abler chiefs disguise 
 new form of despotism , and in which the revolutionary many look 
 forward to the overthrow of all the institution that stand between Law 
 and Chaos . naturally , therefore , " add L'Estrange , dryly , " when their 
 scheme be detect , and the conspiracy foil , it be for the silly , 
 honest man entrap into the league to suffer , the leader turn 
 king 's evidence , and the common mercenary become - banditti . " Harley 
 then proceed to state that it be just when the soi - disant Riccabocca 
 have discover the true nature and ulterior view of the conspirator 
 he have join , and actually withdraw from their council , that he be 
 denounce by the kinsman who have dupe he into the enterprise , and who 
 now profit by his treason . Harley next speak of the packet despatch 
 by Riccabocca 's die wife , as it be suppose , to Mrs. Bertram ; and of 
 the hope he found on the content of that packet , if discover . he 
 then refer to the design which have bring Peschiera to England , - a 
 design which that personage have avow with such effrontery to his 
 companion at Vienna , that he have publicly lay wager on his success . 

 " but these man can know nothing of England , of the safety of english 
 law , " say Leonard , naturally . " we take it for grant that Riccabocca , 
 if I be still so to call he , refuse his consent to the marriage 
 between his daughter and his foe . where , then , the danger ? this count , 
 even if Violante be not under your mother 's roof , could not get an 
 opportunity to see she . he could not attack the house and carry she off 
 like a feudal baron in the middle age . " 

 " all this be very true , " answer Harley . " yet I have find through life 
 that we can not estimate danger by external circumstance , but by the 
 character of those from whom it be threaten . this count be a man of 
 singular audacity , of no mean natural talent , - talent practise in 
 every art of duplicity and intrigue ; one of those man whose boast it be 
 that they succeed in whatever they undertake ; and he be , here , urge on 
 the one hand by all that can whet the avarice , and on the other , by all 
 that can give invention to despair . therefore , though I can not guess 
 what plan he may possibly adopt , I never doubt that some plan , form 
 with cunning and pursue with daring , will be embrace the moment he 
 discover Violante 's retreat , - unless , indeed , we can forestall all 
 peril by the restoration of her father , and the detection of the fraud 
 and falsehood to which peschiera owe the fortune he appropriate . thus , 
 while we must prosecute to the utmost our inquiry for the missing 
 document , so it should be our care to possess ourselves , if possible , 
 of such knowledge of the count 's machination as may enable we to defeat 
 they . now , it be with satisfaction that I learn in Germany that 
 Peschiera 's sister be in London . I know enough both of his disposition 
 and of the intimacy between himself and this lady , to make I think it 
 probable he will seek to make she his instrument and accomplice , should 
 he require one . peschiera   as you may suppose by his audacious wager   be 
 not one of those secret villain who would cut off their right hand if 
 it could betray the knowledge of what be do by the left , - rather 
 one of those self - confident vaunt knave of high animal spirit , and 
 conscience so obtuse that it cloud their intellect , who must have 
 some one to whom they can boast of their ability and confide their 
 project . and Peschiera have do all he can to render this poor woman 
 so wholly dependent on he as to be his slave and his tool . but I 
 have learn certain trait in her character that show it to be 
 impressionable to good , and with tendency to honour . Peschiera have 
 take advantage of the admiration she excite , some year ago , in a rich 
 young Englishman , to entice this admirer into gambling , and seek 
 to make his sister both a decoy and an instrument in his design of 
 plunder . she do not encourage the address of our countryman , but she 
 warn he of the snare lay for he , and entreat he to leave the 
 place lest her brother should discover and punish her honesty . the 
 Englishman tell I this himself . in fine , my hope of detach this 
 lady from Peschiera 's interest , and induce she to forewarn we of his 
 purpose , consist but in the innocent , and , I hope , laudable artifice , 
 of redeem herself , - of appeal to , and call into disused 
 exercise , the well spring of her nature . " 

 Leonard listen with admiration and some surprise to the singularly 
 subtle and sagacious insight into character which Harley evince in 
 the brief clear stroke by which he have thus depict Peschiera and 
 Beatrice , and be strike by the boldness with which Harley rest a 
 whole system of action upon a few deduction draw from his reasoning 
 on human motive and characteristic bias . Leonard have not expect to 
 find so much practical acuteness in a man who , however accomplish , 
 usually seem indifferent , dreamy , and abstract to the ordinary 
 thing of life . but Harley L'Estrange be one of those whose power 
 lie dormant till circumstance apply to they all they need for 
 activity , - the stimulant of a motive . 

 Harley resume : " after a conversation I have with the lady last night , 
 it occur to I that in this part of our diplomacy you could render 
 us essential service . Madame di Negra - such be the sister 's name - have 
 conceive an admiration for your genius , and a strong desire to know 
 you personally . I have promise to present you to she ; and I shall do 
 so after a preliminary caution . the lady be very handsome , and very 
 fascinating . it be possible that your heart and your sens may not be 
 proof against her attraction . " 

 " oh , do not fear that ! " exclaim Leonard , with a tone of conviction so 
 earnest that Harley smile . 

 " Forewarned be not always forearm against the might of beauty , my dear 
 Leonard ; so I can not at once accept your assurance . but listen to I ! 
 watch yourself narrowly , and if you find that you be likely to be 
 captivate , promise , on your honour , to retreat at once from the field . 
 I have no right , for the sake of another , to expose you to danger ; and 
 Madame di Negra , whatever may be her good quality , be the last person 
 I should wish to see you in love with . " 

 " in love with she ! impossible ! " 

 " Impossible be a strong word , " return Harley ; ' still I own fairly   and 
 this belief alone warrant I in trust you to her fascination , that 
 I do think , as far as one man can judge of another , that she be not the 
 woman to attract you ; and if fill by one pure and generous object in 
 your intercourse with she , you will see she with purged eye . still I 
 claim your promise as one of honour . " 

 " I give it , " say Leonard , positively . " but how can I serve Riccabocca ? 
 how aid in - " 

 " thus , " interrupt Harley : " the spell of your writing be , that , 
 unconsciously to ourselves , they make we well and nobler . and your 
 writing be but the impression strike off from your mind . your 
 conversation , when you be rouse , have the same effect . and as you grow 
 more familiar with Madame di Negra , I wish you to speak of your boyhood , 
 your youth . describe the exile as you have see he , - so touching 
 amidst his foible , so grand amidst the petty privation of his fall 
 fortune , so benevolent while pore over his hateful Machiavelli , 
 so stingless in his wisdom of the serpent , so playfully astute in his 
 innocence of the dove - I leave the picture to your knowledge of humour 
 and pathos . Describe Violante brood over her italian poet , and 
 fill with dream of her fatherland ; describe she with all the flash 
 of her princely nature , shin forth through humble circumstance and 
 obscure position ; waken in your listener compassion , respect , admiration 
 for her kindre exile , - and I think our work be do . she will 
 recognize evidently those whom her brother seek . she will question 
 you closely where you meet with they , where they now be . protect that 
 secret ; say at once that it be not your own . against your description 
 and the feeling they excite , she will not be guard as against mine . 
 and there be other reason why your influence over this woman of mixed 
 nature may be more direct and effectual than my own . " 

 " Nay , I can not conceive that . " 

 " believe it , without ask I to explain , " answer Harley . 

 for he do not judge it necessary to say to Leonard : " I be high - bear and 
 wealthy , you a peasant 's son , and live by your exertion . this woman 
 be ambitious and distressed . she might have project on I that would 
 counteract mine on she . you she would but listen to , and receive , 
 through the sentiment of good or of poetical that be in she ; you she 
 would have no interest to subjugate , no motive to ensnare . " 

 " and now , " say Harley , turn the subject , " I have another object in 
 view . this foolish sage friend of ours , in his bewilderment and fear , 
 have seek to save Violante from one rogue by promise her hand to a 
 man who , unless my instinct deceive I , I suspect much disposed to be 
 another . Sacrifice such exuberance of life and spirit to that bloodless 
 heart , to that cold and earthward intellect ! by Heaven , it shall not 
 be ! " 

 " but whom can the exile possibly have see of birth and fortune to 
 render he a fitting spouse for his daughter ? Whom , my Lord , except 
 yourself ? " 

 " I ! " exclaim Harley , angrily , and change colour . " I worthy of such 
 a creature ? - I , with my habit ! I , silken egotist that I be ! and you , a 
 poet , to form such an estimate of one who might be the queen of a poet 's 
 dream ! " 

 " my Lord , when we sit the other night round Riccabocca 's hearth , when 
 I hear she speak , and observe you listen , I say to myself , from such 
 knowledge of human nature as come , we know not how , to we poet , - I 
 say , ' Harley L'Estrange have look long and wistfully on the heaven , 
 and he now hear the murmur of the wing that can waft he towards 
 they . ' and then I sigh , for I think how the world rule we all in 
 spite of ourselves , and I say , ' what pity for both , that the exile 's 
 daughter be not the worldly equal of the peer 's son ! ' and you too 
 sigh , as I thus think ; and I fancy that , while you listen to 
 the music of the wing , you feel the iron of the chain . but the exile 's 
 daughter be your equal in birth , and you be she equal in heart and in 
 soul . " 

 " my poor Leonard , you rave , " answer Harley , calmly . " and if Violante 
 be not to be some young prince 's bride , she should be some young 
 poet 's . " 

 " Poet 's ! oh , no ! " say Leonard , with a gentle laugh . " poet need repose 
 where they love ! " 

 Harley be strike by the answer , and muse over it in silence . " I 
 comprehend , " think he ; " it be a new light that dawn on I . what be 
 need by the man whose whole life be one strain after glory - whose soul 
 sink , in fatigue , to the companionship of earth - be not the love of a 
 nature like his own . he be right , - it be repose ! while I ! - it be true ; 
 boy that he be , his intuition be wise than all my experience ! it be 
 excitement , energy , elevation , that Love should bestow on I . but I have 
 choose ; and , at least , with Helen my life will be calm , and my hearth 
 sacred . let the rest sleep in the same grave as my youth . " 

 " but , " say Leonard , wish kindly to arouse his noble friend from a 
 revery which he feel be mournful , though he do not divine its true 
 cause , - " but you have not yet tell I the name of the signorina 's 
 suitor . may I know ? " 

 " probably one you never hear of . randal Leslie , - a placeman . you 
 refuse a place ; you be right . " 

 " randal Leslie ? Heaven forbid ! " cry Leonard , reveal his surprise at 
 the name . 

 " amen ! but what do you know of he ? 

 " Leonard relate the story of Burley 's pamphlet . " 

 Harley seem delighted to hear his suspicion of Randal confirm . 
 " the paltry pretender ; - and yet I fancy that he might be formidable ! 
 however , we must dismiss he for the present , - we be approach Madame 
 di Negra 's house . prepare yourself , and remember your promise . " 




 CHAPTER xiii . 

 some day have pass by . Leonard and Beatrice di Negra have already 
 make friend . Harley be satisfied with his young friend 's report . he 
 himself have be actively occupy . he have seek , but hitherto in vain , 
 all trace of Mrs. Bertram ; he have put that investigation into the hand 
 of his lawyer , and his lawyer have not be more fortunate than himself . 
 moreover , Harley have blaze forth again in the London world , and 
 promise again de faire fureur ; but he have always find time to spend 
 some hour in the twenty - four at his father 's house . he have continue 
 much the same tone with Violante , and she begin to accustom herself to 
 it , and reply saucily . his calm courtship to Helen flow on in silence . 
 Leonard , too , have be a frequent guest at the Lansmeres : all welcome 
 and like he there . Peschiera have not evince any sign of the deadly 
 machination ascribe to he . he go less into the drawing - room world ; 
 for in that world he meet Lord L'Estrange ; and brilliant and handsome 
 though Peschiera be , Lord L'Estrange , like Rob Roy Macgregor , be " on 
 his native heath , " and have the decide advantage over the foreigner . 
 Peschiera , however , shin in the club , and play high . still , scarcely 
 an evening pass in which he and Baron Levy do not meet . 

 Audley Egerton have be intensely occupy with affair , only see once 
 by Harley . Harley then be about to deliver himself of his sentiment 
 respect Randal Leslie , and to communicate the story of Burley and the 
 pamphlet . Egerton stop he short . 

 " my dear Harley , do not   try to set I against this young man . I wish to 
 hear nothing in his disfavour . in the first place , it would not alter 
 the line of conduct I mean to adopt with regard to he . he be my wife 's 
 kinsman ; I charge myself with his career , as a wish of her , and 
 therefore as a duty to myself . in attach he so young to my own fate , 
 I draw he necessarily away from the profession in which his industry 
 and talent   for he have both in no common degree   would have secure his 
 fortune ; therefore , be he bad , be he good , I shall try to provide 
 for he as I well can ; and , moreover , cold as I be to he , and worldly 
 though perhaps he be , I have somehow or other conceive an interest in 
 he , a liking to he . he have be under my roof , he be dependent on 
 I ; he have be docile and prudent , and I be a lone childless man ; 
 therefore , spare he , since in so do you spare I ; and ah , Harley , I 
 have so many care on I now that - " 

 " oh , say no more , my dear , dear Audley , " cry the generous friend ; " how 
 little people know you ! " 

 Audley 's hand tremble . certainly his nerve begin to show wear and 
 tear . 

 meanwhile , the object of this dialogue - the type of perverted intellect , 
 of mind without heart , of knowledge which have no aim but power - be in 
 a state of anxious , perturb gloom . he do not know whether wholly to 
 believe Levy 's assurance of his patron 's ruin . he could not believe it 
 when he see that great house in Grosvenor Square , its hall crowd with 
 lacquey , its sideboard blaze with plate ; when no dun be ever see in 
 the antechamber ; when not a tradesman be ever know to call twice for a 
 bill . he hint to Levy the doubt all these phenomenon suggest to he ; 
 but the baron only smile ominously , and say , 

 " true , the tradesman be always pay ; but the how be the question ! 
 Randal , mon cher , you be too innocent . I have but two piece of advice 
 to suggest , in the shape of two proverb , - ' wise rat run from a fall 
 house , ' and , ' make hay while the sun shin . ' a propos , Mr. Avenel like 
 you greatly , and have be talk of the borough of Lansmere for you . he 
 have contrive to get together a great interest there . make much of he . " 

 Randal have indeed be to Mrs. Avenel 's soiree dansante , and call 
 twice and find she at home , and be very bland and civil , and admire 
 the child . she have two , a boy and a girl , very like their father , 
 with open face as bold as brass . and as all this have win Mrs. Avenel 's 
 good grace , so it have propitiate her husband 's . Avenel be shrewd 
 enough to see how clever Randal be . he call he ' smart , " and say " he 
 would have get on in America , " which be the high praise Dick Avenel 
 ever accord to any man . but Dick himself look a little careworn ; 
 and this be the first year in which he have murmur at the bill of his 
 wife 's dressmaker , and say with an oath , that " there be such a thing 
 as go too much ahead . " 

 Randal have visit Dr. Riccabocca , and find Violante fly . true to his 
 promise to Harley , the Italian refuse to say where , and suggest , 
 as be agree , that for the present it would be more prudent if Randal 
 suspend his visit to himself . Leslie , not like this proposition , 
 attempt to make himself still necessary by work on Riccabocca 's 
 fear as to that espionage on his retreat , which have be among the 
 reason that have hurry the sage into offer Randal Violante 's hand . 
 but Riccabocca have already learn that the fancied spy be but his 
 neighbour Leonard ; and , without so say , he cleverly contrive to make 
 the supposition of such espionage an additional reason for the cessation 
 of Leslie 's visit . randal then , in his own artful , quiet , roundabout 
 way , have seek to find out if any communication have pass between 
 L'Estrange and Riccabocca . brood over Harley 's word to he , he 
 suspect there have be such communication , with his usual penetrate 
 astuteness . Riceabocca , here , be less on his guard , and rather parry 
 the sidelong question than deny their inference . 

 Randal begin already to surmise the truth . where be it likely Violante 
 should go but to the Lansmeres ? this confirm his idea of Harley 's 
 pretension to her hand . with such a rival what chance have he ? randal 
 never doubt for a moment that the pupil of Machiavelli would " throw 
 he over , " if such an alliance to his daughter really present itself . 
 the schemer at once discard from his object all far aim on 
 Violante ; either she would be poor , and he would not have she ; or she 
 would be rich , and her father would give she to another . as his 
 heart have never be touch by the fair italian , so the moment her 
 inheritance become more doubtful , it give he no pang to lose she ; but 
 he do feel very sore and resentful at the thought of be supplant 
 by Lord L'Estrange , - the man who have insult he . 

 Neither , as yet , have Randal make any way in his design on Frank . for 
 several day Madame di Negra have not be at home either to himself or 
 young Hazeldean ; and Frank , though very unhappy , be pique and angry ; 
 and randal suspect , and suspect , and suspect , he know not exactly 
 what , but that the devil be not so kind to he there as that father 
 of lie ought to have be to a son so dutiful . yet , with all these 
 discouragement , there be in Randal Leslie so dog and determine a 
 conviction of his own success , there be so great a tenacity of purpose 
 under obstacle , and so vigilant an eye upon all chance that could be 
 turn to his favour , that he never once abandon hope , nor do 
 more than change the detail in his main scheme . out of calculation 
 apparently the most far - fetched and improbable , he have construct a 
 patient policy , to which he obstinately clung . how far his reasoning 
 and patience serve to his end remain yet to be see . but could 
 our contempt for the baseness of Randal himself be separate from the 
 faculty which he elaborately degrade to the service of that baseness , 
 one might allow that there be something one could scarcely despise in 
 this still self - reliance , this inflexible resolve . have such quality , 
 aid as they be by ability of no ordinary acuteness , be apply 
 to object commonly honest , one would have back Randal Leslie against 
 any fifty pick prize - man from the college . but there be judge of 
 weight and metal who do that now , especially Baron Levy , who say to 
 himself as he eye that pale face all intellect , and that spare form all 
 nerve , " this be a man who must make way in life ; he be worth help . " 

 by the word " worth help " Baron Levy mean " worth get into my 
 power , that he may help I . " 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 but parliament have meet . event that belong to history have contribute 
 yet more to weaken the administration . randal Leslie 's interest become 
 absorb in politic , for the stake to he be his whole political 
 career . should Audley lose office , and for good , Audley could aid he no 
 more ; but to abandon his patron , as Levy recommend , and pin himself , 
 in the hope of a seat in parliament , to a stranger , - an obscure 
 stranger , like Dick Avenel , - that be a policy not to be adopt at a 
 breath . meanwhile , almost every night , when the House meet , that pale 
 face and spare form , which Levy so identify with shrewdness and 
 energy , might be see amongst the bench appropriate to those more 
 select stranger who obtain the Speaker 's order of admission . there , 
 Randal hear the great man of that day , and with the half - contemptuous 
 surprise at their fame , which be common enough amongst clever , 
 well - educate young man , who know not what it be to speak in the House 
 of Commons . he hear much slovenly English , much trite reasoning , some 
 eloquent thought , and close argument , often deliver in a jerking 
 tone of voice   popularly call the parliamentary twang , and often 
 accompany by gesticulation that would have shock the manager of 
 a provincial theatre . he think how much well than these great don 
  with but one or two exception , he himself could speak , - with what 
 more refined logic , with what more polished period , how much more like 
 Cicero and Burke ! very probably he might have so speak , and for that 
 very reason have make that dead of all dead failure , - a pretentious 
 imitation of Burke and Cicero . one thing , however , he be oblige to 
 own , - namely , that in a popular representative assembly , it be not 
 precisely knowledge which be power , or if knowledge , it be but the 
 knowledge of that particular assembly , and what will well take with it ; 
 passion , invective , sarcasm , bold declamation , shrewd common - sense , the 
 readiness so rarely find in a very profound mind , - he own that all 
 these be the quality that tell ; when a man who exhibit nothing but 
 " knowledge , " in the ordinary sense of the word , stand an imminent chance 
 of be cough down . 

 there at his left - last but one in the row of the ministerial 
 chiefs - randal watch Audley Egerton , his arm fold on his breast , 
 his hat draw over his brow , his eye fix with steady courage on 
 whatever speaker in the opposition hold possession of the floor . and 
 twice randal hear Egerton speak , and marvel much at the effect that 
 minister produce . for of those quality enumerate above , and which 
 Randal have observe to be most sure of success , Audley Egerton only 
 exhibit to a marked degree the common - sense and the readiness . and 
 yet , though but little applaud by noisy cheer , no speaker seem more 
 to satisfy friend , and command respect from foe . the true secret 
 be this , which Randal might well not divine , since that young person , 
 despite his ancient birth , his Eton rearing , and his refined air , be 
 not one of Nature 's gentleman , - the true secret be , that Audley Egerton 
 move , look , and speak like a thorough gentleman of England , - a 
 gentleman of more than average talent and of long experience , speak 
 his sincere opinion , not a rhetorician aim at effect . moreover , 
 Egerton be a consummate man of the world . he say , with nervous 
 simplicity , what his party desire to be say , and put what his 
 opponent feel to be the strong point of the case . calm and decorous , 
 yet spirited and energetic , with little variety of tone , and action 
 subdued and rare , but yet signalize by earnest vigour , Audley Egerton 
 impress the understanding of the dull , and please the taste of the 
 most fastidious . 

 but once , when allusion be make to a certain popular question , on 
 which the premier have announce his resolution to refuse all concession , 
 and on the expediency of which it be announce that the Cabinet be 
 nevertheless divide , and when such allusion be couple with direct 
 appeal to Mr. Egerton , as " the enlightened member of a great commercial 
 constituency , " and with a flattering doubt that " that Right honourable 
 gentleman , member for that great city , identify with the cause of 
 the burgher class , could be so far behind the spirit of the age as his 
 official chief , " - randal observe that Egerton draw his hat still 
 more closely over his brow , and turn to whisper with one of his 
 colleague . he could not be get up to speak . 

 that evening Randal walk home with Egerton , and intimate his surprise 
 that the minister have decline what seem to he a good occasion 
 for one of those brief , weighty reply by which Audley be chiefly 
 distinguish , - an occasion to which he have be loudly invite by the 
 " hear " of the House . 

 " Leslie , " answer the statesman , briefly , " I owe all my success in 
 parliament to this rule , - I have never speak against my conviction . I 
 intend to abide by it to the last . " 

 " but if the question at issue come before the House , you will vote 
 against it ? " 

 " certainly , I vote as a member of the Cabinet . but since I be not leader 
 and mouthpiece of the party , I retain as an individual the privilege to 
 speak or keep silence . " 

 " ah , my dear Mr. Egerton , " exclaim Randal , " forgive I . but this 
 question , right or wrong , have get such hold of the public mind . so 
 little , if concede in time , would give content ; and it be so clear   if 
 I may judge by the talk I hear everywhere I go   that by refuse all 
 concession , the Government must fall , that I wish - " 

 " so do I wish , " interrupt Egerton , with a gloomy , impatient sigh , - ' so 
 do I wish ! but what avail it ? if my advice have be take but three 
 week ago - now it be too late - we could have double the rock ; we 
 refuse , we must split upon it . " 

 this speech be so unlike the discreet and reserved minister , that 
 randal gather courage to proceed with an idea that have occur to his 
 own sagacity . and before I state it , I must add that Egerton have of late 
 show much more personal kindness to his protege ; whether his spirit 
 be break , or that at last , close and compact as his nature of bronze 
 be , he feel the imperious want to groan aloud in some love ear , the 
 stern Audley seem tame and soften . so Randal go on , 

 " may I say what I have hear express with regard to you and your 
 position - in the street , in the club ? " 

 " yes , it be in the street and the club that statesman should go to 
 school . say on . " 

 " well , then , I have hear it make a matter of wonder why you , and one or 
 two other I will not name , do not at once retire from the ministry , 
 and on the avow ground that you side with the public feeling on this 
 irresistible question . " 

 " eh ! " 

 " it be clear that in so do you would become the most popular man 
 in the country , - clear that you would be summon back to power on the 
 shoulder of the people . no new Cabinet could be form without you , and 
 your station in it would perhaps be high , for life , than that which 
 you may now retain but for a few week long . have not this ever 
 occur to you ? " 

 " never , " say Audley , with dry composure . 

 Amazed at such obtuseness , Randal exclaim , " be it possible ! and yet , 
 forgive I if I say I think you be ambitious , and love power . " 

 " no man more ambitious ; and if by power you mean office , it have grow 
 the habit of my life , and I shall not know what to do without it . " 

 " and how , then , have what seem to I so obvious never occur to you ? " 

 " because you be young , and therefore I forgive you ; but not the gossip 
 who could wonder why Audley Egerton refuse to betray the friend of his 
 whole career , and to profit by the treason . " 

 " but one should love one 's country before a party . " 

 " no doubt of that ; and the first interest of a country be the honour of 
 its public man . " 

 " but man may leave their party without dishonour ! " 

 " who doubt that ? do you suppose that if I be an ordinary independent 
 member of parliament , load with no obligation , charge with no trust , 
 I could hesitate for a moment what course to pursue ? oh , that I be but 
 the member for - - - - - ! oh , that I have the full right to be a free 
 agent ! but if a member of a Cabinet , a chief in whom thousand confide , 
 because he be outvote in a council of his colleague , suddenly retire , 
 and by so do break up the whole party whose confidence he have 
 enjoy , whose reward he have reap , to whom he owe the very position 
 which he employ to their ruin , - own that though his choice may be 
 honest , it be one which require all the consolation of conscience . " 

 " but you will have those consolation . and , " add Randal , 
 energetically , " the gain to your career will be so immense ! " 

 " that be precisely what it can not be , " answer Egerton , gloomily . 
 " I grant that I may , if I choose , resign office with the present 
 Government , and so at once destroy that Government ; for my resignation 
 on such ground would suffice to do it . I grant this ; but for that very 
 reason I could not the next day take office with another administration . 
 I could not accept wage for desertion . no gentleman could ! and 
 therefore - " Audley stop short , and button his coat over his broad 
 breast . the action be significant ; it say that the man 's mind be make 
 up . 

 in fact , whether Audley Egerton be right or wrong in his theory depend 
 upon much subtler , and perhaps lofty , view in the casuistry of 
 political duty , than it be in his character to take . and I guard 
 myself from say anything in praise or disfavour of his notion , or 
 imply that he be a fit or unfit example in a parallel case . I be but 
 describe the man as he be , and as a man like he would inevitably be , 
 under the influence in which he live , and in that peculiar world of 
 which he be so emphatically a member . " ce n'est pa moi qui parle , 
 c'est Marc Aurele . " 

 he speak , not I. 

 Randal have no time for further discussion . they now reach Egerton 's 
 house , and the minister , take the chamber candlestick from his 
 servant 's hand , nod a silent goodnight to Leslie , and with a jade 
 look retire to his room . 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 but not on the threatened question be that eventful campaign of Party 
 decide . the Government fall less in battle than skirmish . it be one 
 fatal Monday - a dull question of finance and figure . Prosy and few be 
 the speaker , - all the Government silent , save the Chancellor of the 
 Exchequer , and another business - like personage connect with the Board 
 of Trade , whom the House would hardly condescend to hear . the House be 
 in no mood to think of fact and figure . early in the evening , between 
 nine and ten , the Speaker 's sonorous voice sound , " stranger must 
 withdraw ! " and randal , anxious and foreboding , descend from his seat 
 and go out of the fatal door . he turn to take a last glance 
 at Audley Egerton . the whipper - in be whisper to Audley ; and the 
 minister push back his hat from his brow , and glance round the 
 House , and up into the gallery , as if to calculate rapidly the 
 relative number of the two army in the field ; then he smile 
 bitterly , and throw himself back into his seat . that smile long haunt 
 Leslie . 

 amongst the stranger thus banish with Randal , while the division 
 be be take , be many young man , like himself , connect with the 
 administration , - some by blood , some by place . heart beat loud in the 
 swarm lobby . ominous mournful whisper be exchange . " they say 
 the Government will have a majority of ten . " " no ; I hear they will 
 certainly be beat . " " h - say by fifty . " " I do not   believe it , " say 
 a Lord of the Bedchamber ; " it be impossible . I leave five Government 
 member dining at the Travellers . " " no one think the division would be 
 so early . " " a trick of the whig - shameful ! " " wonder some one be not 
 set up to talk for time ; very odd p - do not speak ; however , he be so 
 cursedly rich , he do not care whether he be out or in . " " yes ; and 
 Audley Egerton too , just such another : glad , no doubt , to be set free 
 to look after his property ; very different tactic if we have man to whom 
 office be as necessary as it be - to I ! " say a candid young placeman . 
 suddenly the silent Leslie feel a friendly grasp on his arm . he turn 
 and see Levy . 

 " do I not tell you ? " say the baron , with an exult smile . 

 " you be sure , then , that the Government will be outvote ? " 

 " I spend the morning in go over the list of member with a 
 parliamentary client of mine , who know they all as a shepherd do his 
 sheep . majority for the Opposition at least twenty - five . " 

 " and in that case must the Government resign , sir ? " ask the candid 
 young placeman , who have be listen to the smart , well - dress baron , 
 " his soul plant in his ear . " 

 " of course , sir , " reply the baron , blandly , and offer his snuff - box 
  true Louis Quinze , with a miniature of Madame de Pompadour , set in 
 pearl . " you be a friend to the present minister ? you could not wish 
 they to be mean enough to stay in ? " randal draw aside the baron . 

 " if Audley 's affair be as you state , what can he do ? " 

 " I shall ask he that question to - morrow , " answer the baron , with a 
 look of visible hate ; " and I have come here just to see how he bear the 
 prospect before he . " 

 " you will not discover that in his face . and those absurd scruple of 
 his ! if he have but go out in time - to come in again with the New Men ! " 

 " oh , of course , our right Honourable be too punctilious for that ! " 
 answer the baron , sneer . 

 suddenly the door open , in rush the breathless expectant . " what 
 be the number ? what be the division ? " 

 " majority against minister , " say a member of Opposition , peel an 
 orange , " twenty - nine . " 

 the baron , too , have a Speaker 's order ; and he come into the House with 
 Randal , and sit by his side . but , to their disgust , some member be 
 talk about the other motion before the House . 

 " what ! have nothing be say as to the division ? " ask the baron of a 
 young county member , who be talk to some non - parliamentary friend 
 in the bench before Levy . the county member be one of the baron 's pet 
 eld son , have din often with Levy , be under " obligation " to he . 
 the young legislator look very much ashamed of Levy 's friendly pat on 
 his shoulder , and answer hurriedly , " oh , yes ; H - - - ask if , after 
 such an expression of the House , it be the intention of minister to 
 retain their place , and carry on the business of the Government . " 

 " just like H - - - - ! very inquisitive mind ! and what be the answer he 
 get ? " 

 " none , " say the county member ; and return in haste to his proper seat 
 in the body of the House . 

 " there come Egerton , " say the baron . and , indeed , as most of the 
 member be now leave the House , to talk over affair at club or 
 in saloon , and spread through town the great tiding , Audley Egerton 's 
 tall head be see tower above the rest . and Levy turn away 
 disappointed . for not only be the minister 's handsome face , though 
 pale , serene and cheerful , but there be an obvious courtesy , a marked 
 respect , in the mode in which that assembly - heated though it be - make 
 way for the fall minister as he pass through the jostle crowd . and 
 the frank urbane nobleman , who afterwards , from the force , not of talent 
 but of character , become the leader in that House , press the hand of 
 his old opponent , as they meet in the throng near the door , and say 
 aloud , " I shall not be a proud man if ever I live to have office ; but I 
 shall be proud if ever I leave it with as little to be say against I 
 as your bitter opponent can say against you , Egerton . " 

 " I wonder , " exclaim the baron , aloud , and lean over the partition 
 that divide he from the throng below , so that his voice reach 
 Egerton - and there be a cry from formal , indignant member , " order in 
 the stranger ' gallery I wonder what Lord L'Estrange will say ? " 

 Audley lift his dark brow , survey the baron for an instant with 
 flash eye , then walk down the narrow defile between the last 
 bench , and vanish from the scene , in which , alas ! so few of the most 
 admire performer leave more than an actor 's short - live name ! 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

 Baron Levy do not execute his threat of call on Egerton the next 
 morning . perhaps he shrink from again meet the flash of those 
 indignant eye . and indeed Egerton be too busy all the forenoon to 
 see any one not upon public affair , except Harley , who hasten to 
 console or cheer he . when the House meet , it be announce that the 
 minister have resign , only hold their office till their successor 
 be appoint . but already there be some reaction in their favour ; 
 and when it become generally know that the new administration be to be 
 form of man few indeed of whom have ever before hold office , the common 
 superstition in the public mind that government be like a trade , in 
 which a regular apprenticeship must be serve , begin to prevail ; and the 
 talk at the club be that the new man could not stand ; that the former 
 ministry , with some modification , would be back in a month . perhaps that 
 too might be a reason why Baron Levy think it prudent not prematurely 
 to offer vindictive condolence to Mr. Egerton . Randal spend part of his 
 morning in inquiry as to what gentleman in his situation mean to do 
 with regard to their place ; he hear with great satisfaction that very 
 few intend to volunteer retirement from their desk . as Randal himself 
 have observe to Egerton , " their country before their party ! " 

 Randal 's place be of great moment to he ; its duty be easy , its 
 salary amply sufficient for his want , and defray such expense as 
 be bestow on the education of Oliver and his sister . for I be bind 
 to do justice to this young man , - indifferent as he be towards his 
 specie in general , the tie of family be strong with he ; and he 
 stint himself in many temptation most alluring to his age , in the 
 endeavour to raise the dull honest Oliver and the loose - haired pretty 
 Juliet somewhat more to his own level of culture and refinement . man 
 essentially griping and unscrupulous often do make the care for their 
 family an apology for their sin against the world . even Richard III . , 
 if the chronicler be to be trust , excuse the murder of his nephew 
 by his passionate affection for his son . with the loss of that place , 
 randal lose all mean of support , save what Audley could give he ; and 
 if Audley be in truth ruin ? moreover , Randal have already establish 
 at the office a reputation for ability and industry . it be a career 
 in which , if he abstain from party politic , he might rise to a fair 
 station and to a considerable income . therefore , much content with 
 what he learn as to the general determination of his fellow official , 
 a determination warrant by ordinary precedent in such case , Randal 
 din at a club with good relish , and much christian resignation for 
 the reverse of his patron , and then walk to Grosvenor Square , on 
 the chance of find Audley within . learn that he be so , from the 
 porter who open the door , Randal enter the library . three gentleman 
 be seat there with Egerton : one of the three be Lord L'Estrange ; 
 the other two be member of the really defunct , though nominally still 
 exist , government . he be about to withdraw from intrude on this 
 conclave , when Egerton say to he gently , " come in , Leslie ; I be just 
 speak about yourself . " 

 " about I , sir ? " 

 " yes ; about you and the place you hold . I have ask Sir - -   pointing 
 to a fellow minister   whether I might not , with propriety , request your 
 chief to leave some note of his opinion of your talent , which I know be 
 high , and which might serve you with his successor . " 

 " oh , sir , at such a time to think of I ! " exclaim Randal , and he be 
 genuinely touch . 

 " but , " resume Audley , with his usual dryness , " Sir - - , to my 
 surprise , think that it would well become you that you should resign . 
 unless his reason , which he have not yet state , be very strong , such 
 would not be my advice . " 

 " my reason , " say Sir - - , with official formality , " be simply these : 
 I have a nephew in a similar situation ; he will resign , as a matter 
 of course . every one in the public office whose relation and near 
 connection hold high appointment in the Government will do so . I do 
 not think Mr. Leslie will like to feel himself a solitary exception . " 

 " Mr. Leslie be no relation of mine , - not even a near connection , " 
 answer Egerton . 

 " but his name be so associate with your own : he have reside so long in 
 your house , be so well know in society   and do not   think I compliment 
 when I add , that we hope so well of he , that I can not   think it worth 
 his while to keep this paltry place , which incapacitate he too from a 
 seat in parliament . " 

 Sir - - be one of those terribly rich man , to whom all consideration 
 of mere bread and cheese be paltry . but I must add that he suppose 
 Egerton to be still wealthy than himself , and sure to provide 
 handsomely for Randal , whom Sir - - rather like than not ; and for 
 Randal 's own sake , Sir - - think it would lower he in the estimation 
 of Egerton himself , despite that gentleman 's advocacy , if he do not 
 follow the example of his avowed and notorious patron . 

 " you see , Leslie , " say Egerton , check Randal 's meditate reply , 
 " that nothing can be say against your honour if you stay where you be ; 
 it be a mere question of expediency ; I will judge that for you ; keep 
 your place . " 

 unhappily the other member of the Government , who have hitherto be 
 silent , be a literary man . unhappily , while this talk have proceed , he 
 have place his hand upon Randal Leslie 's celebrated pamphlet , which lay 
 on the library table ; and , turn over the leaf , the whole spirit and 
 matter of that masterly composition in defence of the administration 
  a composition steep in all the essence of party   recur to his too 
 faithful recollection . he , too , like Randal ; he do more , - he admire 
 the author of that striking and effective pamphlet . and therefore , 
 rouse himself from the sublime indifference he have before feel for the 
 fate of a subaltern , he say , with a bland and complimentary smile , " no ; 
 the writer of this most able publication be no ordinary placeman . his 
 opinion here be too vigorously state ; this fine irony on the very 
 person who in all probability will be the chief in his office have 
 excite too lively an attention to allow he the sedet eternumque 
 sedebit on an official stool . ha , ha ! this be so good ! read it , 
 L'Estrange . what say you ? " Harley glance over the page point out 
 to he . the original be in one of Burley 's broad , coarse , but tell 
 burlesque , strain fine through Randal 's more polished satire . it 
 be capital . Harley smile , and lift his eye to Randal . the unlucky 
 plagiarist 's face be flushed , - the bead stand on his brow . Harley be 
 a good hater ; he love too warmly not to err on the opposite side ; but 
 he be one of those man who forget hate when its object be distressed 
 and humble . he put down the pamphlet and say , " I be no politician ; 
 but Egerton be so well known to be fastidious and over - scrupulous in 
 all point of official etiquette , that Mr. Leslie can not follow a safe 
 counsellor . " 

 " read that yourself , Egerton , " say Sir - - ; and he push the pamphlet 
 to Audley . 

 now Egerton have a dim recollection that that pamphlet be unlucky ; 
 but he have skim over its content hastily , and at that moment have 
 forget all about it . he take up the too famous work with a reluctant 
 hand , but he read attentively the passage point out to he , and then 
 say gravely and sadly , 

 " Mr. Leslie , I retract my advice . I believe Sir - - be right , - that the 
 nobleman here so keenly satirize will be the chief in your office . I 
 doubt whether he will not compel your dismissal ; at all event , he 
 could scarcely be expect to promote your advancement . under the 
 circumstance , I fear you have no option as a - " Egerton pause a 
 moment , and , with a sigh that seem to settle the question , conclude 
 with - " as a gentleman . " 

 never do Jack Cade , never do Wat Tyler , feel a more deadly hate to 
 that word " gentleman " than the well - bear Leslie feel then ; but he bow 
 his head , and answer with his usual presence of mind , 

 " you utter my own sentiment . " 

 " you think we be right , Harley ? " ask Egerton , with an irresolution 
 that surprise all present . 

 " I think , " answer Harley , with a compassion for Randal that be almost 
 over - generous , and yet with an equivoque on the word , despite the 
 compassion , - " I think whoever have serve Audley Egerton never yet have 
 be a loser by it ; and if Mr. Leslie write this pamphlet , he must have 
 well serve Audley Egerton . if he undergo the penalty , we may safely 
 trust to Egerton for the compensation . " 

 " my compensation have long since be make , " answer Randal , with grace ; 
 " and that Mr. Egerton could thus have care for my fortune , at an hour 
 so occupy , be a thought of pride which - " 

 " enough , Leslie ! enough ! " interrupt Egerton , rise and press his 
 protege 's hand . " see I before you go to bed . " 

 then the two other minister rise also and shake hand with Leslie , and 
 tell he he have do the right thing , and that they hop soon to see 
 he in parliament ; and hint , smilingly , that the next administration 
 do not promise to be very long - lived ; and one ask he to dinner , 
 and the other to spend a week at his country - seat . and amidst these 
 congratulation at the stroke that leave he penniless , the distinguished 
 pamphleteer leave the room . how he curse big John Burley ! 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

 it be past midnight when Audley Egerton summon Randal . the statesman 
 be then alone , seat before his great desk , with its manifold 
 compartment , and engage on the task of transfer various paper and 
 letter , some to the waste - basket , some to the flame , some to two great 
 iron chest with patent lock , that stand , open - mouthed , at his foot . 
 strong , stern , and grim look those iron chest , silently receive the 
 relic of power depart ; strong , stern , and grim as the grave . Audley 
 lift his eye at Randal 's entrance , sign to he to take a chair , 
 continue his task for a few moment , and then turn round , as if by 
 an effort he pluck himself from his master - passion , - Public Life , he 
 say , with deliberate tone , 

 " I know not , Randal Leslie , whether you think I needlessly cautious , 
 or wantonly unkind , when I tell you never to expect from I more than 
 such advance to your career as my then position could effect , - never to 
 expect from my liberality in life , nor from my testament in death , an 
 addition to your private fortune . I see by your gesture what would 
 be your reply , and I thank you for it . I now tell you , as yet in 
 confidence , though before long it can be no secret to the world , that my 
 pecuniary affair have be so neglect by I in my devotion to those 
 of the State , that I be somewhat like the man who portion out his 
 capital at so much a day , calculate to live just long enough to make 
 it last . unfortunately he live too long . " Audley smile - but the 
 smile be cold as a sunbeam upon ice - and go on with the same firm , 
 unfaltere accent . " the prospect that face I I be prepared for ; they 
 do not take I by surprise . I know long since how this would end , if 
 I survive the loss of office . I know it before you come to I , and 
 therefore I speak to you as I do , judge it manful and right to guard 
 you against hope which you might otherwise have naturally entertain . 
 on this head , I need say no more . it may excite your surprise , possibly 
 your blame , that I , esteem methodical and practical enough in the 
 affair of the State , should be so imprudent as to my own . " 

 " oh , sir ! you owe no account to I . " 

 " to you , at least , as much as to any one . I be a solitary man ; my few 
 relation need nothing from I . I have a right do spend what I possess 
 as I please ; and if I have spend it recklessly as regard myself , I 
 have not spend it ill in its effect on other . it have be my object for 
 many year to have no private life , - to dispense with its sorrow , joy , 
 affection ; and as to its duty , they do not exist for I . I have 
 say . " mechanically , as he end , the minister 's hand close the lid of 
 one of the iron box , and on the closed lid he rest his firm foot . 
 " but now , " he resume , " I have fail to advance your career . true , I 
 warn you that you draw into a lottery ; but you have more chance of 
 a prize than a blank . a blank , however , it have turn out , and the 
 question become grave , - what be you to do ? " 

 here , see that Egerton come to a full pause , Randal answer readily , 

 " still , sir , to go by your advice . " 

 " my advice , " say Audley , with a softened look , " would perhaps be rude 
 and unpalatable . I would rather place before you an option . on the one 
 hand , recommence life again . I tell you that I would keep your name 
 on your college book . you can return , you can take your degree , after 
 that , you can go to the Bar , - you have just the talent calculate to 
 succeed in that profession . success will be slow , it be true ; but , with 
 perseverance , it will be sure . and , believe I , Leslie , Ambition be only 
 sweet while it be but the lofty name for Hope . who would care for a 
 fox 's brush if it have not be render a prize by the excitement of the 
 chase ? " 

 " Oxford - again ! it be a long step back in life , " say Randal , drearily , 
 and little heed Egerton 's unusual indulgence of illustration . " a long 
 step back - and to what ? to a profession in which one never begin to 
 rise till one 's hair be gray . besides , how live in the mean while ? " 

 " do not let that thought disturb you . the modest income that suffice 
 for a student at the Bar , I trust , at least , to insure you from the 
 wreck of my fortune . " 

 " ah , sir , I would not burden you far . what right have I to such 
 kindness , save my name of Leslie ? " and in spite of himself , as Randal 
 conclude , a tone of bitterness , that betray reproach , break forth . 
 Egerton be too much the man of the world not to comprehend the 
 reproach , and not to pardon it . 

 " certainly , " he answer calmly , " as a Leslie you be entitle to my 
 consideration , and would have be entitle perhaps to more , have I not 
 so explicitly warn you to the contrary . but the Bar do not seem to 
 please you ? " 

 " what be the alternative , sir ? let I decide when I hear it , " answer 
 Randal , sullenly . he begin to lose respect for the roan who own he 
 could do so little for he , and who evidently recommend he to shift 
 for himself . 

 if one could have pierce into Egerton 's gloomy heart as he note the 
 young man 's change of tone , it may be a doubt whether one would have 
 see there pain or pleasure , - pain , for merely from the force of habit 
 he have begin to like Randal , or pleasure at the thought that he might 
 have reason to withdraw that liking . so lone and stoical have grow 
 the man who have make it his object to have no private life ! revealing , 
 however , neither pleasure nor pain , but with the compose calmness of a 
 judge upon the bench , Egerton reply , - 

 " the alternative be , to continue in the course you have begin , and still 
 to rely on I . " 

 " Sir , my dear Mr. Egerton , " exclaim Randal , regain all his usual 
 tenderness of look and voice , " rely on you ! but that be all I ask . only " 

 " only , you would say , I be go out of power , and you do not   see the 
 chance of my return ? " 

 " I do not mean that . " 

 " permit I to suppose that you do : very true ; but the party I belong to 
 be as sure of return as the pendulum of that clock be sure to obey the 
 mechanism that move it from left to right . our successor profess to 
 come in upon a popular question . all administration who do that be 
 necessarily short - lived . either they do not go far enough to please 
 present supporter , or they go so far as to arm new enemy in the 
 rival who outbid they with the people . ' t be the history of all 
 revolution , and of all reform . our own administration in reality be 
 destroy for have pass what be call a popular measure a year 
 ago , which lose we half our friend , and refuse to propose another 
 popular measure this year , in the which we be outstrip by the man 
 who halloo we on to the last . therefore , whatever our successor 
 do , we shall by the law of reaction , have another experiment of power 
 afford to ourselves . it be but a question of time ; you can wait for 
 it , - whether I can be uncertain . but if I die before that day arrive , I 
 have influence enough still leave with those who will come in , to obtain 
 a promise of a well provision for you than that which you have lose . 
 the promise of public man be proverbially uncertain ; but I shall 
 entrust your cause to a man who never fail a friend , and whose rank 
 will enable he to see that justice be do to you , - I speak of Lord 
 L'Estrange . " 

 " oh , not he ; he be unjust to I ; he dislike I ; he - " 

 " may dislike you   he have his whim , but he love I ; and though for no 
 other human being but you would I ask Harley L'Estrange a favour , yet 
 for you I will , " say Egerton , betraying , for the first time in that 
 dialogue , a visible emotion , - " for you , a Leslie , a kinsman , however 
 remote , to the wife from whom I receive my fortune ! and despite all my 
 caution , it be possible that in waste that fortune I may have wrong 
 you . enough : you have now before you the two option , much as you have 
 at first ; but you have at present more experience to aid you in your 
 choice . you be a man , and with more brain than most man ; think over it 
 well , and decide for yourself . now to bed , and postpone think till the 
 morrow . poor Randal , you look pale ! " 

 Audley , as he say the last word , put his hand on Randal 's shoulder , 
 almost with a father 's gentleness ; and then suddenly draw himself 
 up , as the hard inflexible expression , stamp on that face by year , 
 return , he move away and resettle to Public Life and the iron box . 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 early the next day Randal Leslie be in the luxurious business - room 
 of Baron Levy . how unlike the cold doric simplicity of the statesman 's 
 library ! axminster carpet , three inch thick ; portiere a la francaise 
 before the door ; parisian bronze on the chimney - piece ; and all the 
 receptacle that line the room , and contain title - deed and postobit 
 and bill and promise to pay and lawyer - like japan boxes , with many 
 a noble name write thereon in large white capital - " make ruin 
 pompous , " all these sepulchre of depart patrimony veneer in 
 rosewood that gleam with french polish , and blaze with ormulu . there 
 be a coquetry , an air of petit maitre , so diffused over the whole 
 room , that you could not , for the life of you , recollect you be with a 
 usurer ! Plutus wear the aspect of his enemy Cupid ; and how realize your 
 idea of Harpagon in that baron , with his easy french " Mon cher , " and 
 his white , warm hand that press yours so genially , and his dress so 
 exquisite , even at the early morn ? no man ever yet see that baron in 
 a dressing - gown and slipper ! as one fancy some feudal baron of old 
  not half so terrible   everlastingly clothe in mail , so all one 's notion 
 of this grand marauder of civilization be inseparably associate with 
 varnish boot and a camellia in the button - hole . 

 " and this be all that he do for you ! " cry the baron , press 
 together the point of his ten taper finger . " have he but let you 
 conclude your career at Oxford , I have hear enough of your scholarship 
 to know that you would have take high honour , be secure of a 
 fellowship , have betake yourself with content to a slow and laborious 
 profession , and prepare yourself to die on the woolsack . " 

 " he propose to I now to return to Oxford , " say randal . " it be not too 
 late ! " 

 " yes , it be , " say the baron . " neither individual nor nation ever go 
 back of their own accord . there must be an earthquake before a river 
 recede to its source . " 

 " you speak well , " answer Randal , " and I can not gainsay you . but now ! " 

 " ah , the now be the grand question in life , the then be obsolete , go 
 by , - out of fashion ; and now , mon cher , you come to ask my advice ? " 

 " no , Baron , I come to ask your explanation . " 

 " of what ? " 

 " I want to know why you speak to I of Mr. Egerton 's ruin ; why you speak 
 to I of the land to be sell by Mr. Thornhill ; and why you speak to 
 I of Count Peschiera . you touch on each of those point within ten 
 minute , you omit to indicate what link can connect they . " 

 " by Jove , " say the baron , rise , and with more admiration in his face 
 than you could have conceive that face , so smile and so cynical , 
 could exhibit , - " by Jove , Randal Leslie , but your shrewdness be 
 wonderful . you really be the first young man of your day ; and I 
 will ' help you , ' as I help Audley Egerton . perhaps you will be more 
 grateful . " 

 randal thought of Egerton 's ruin . the parallel imply by the baron do 
 not suggest to he the rare enthusiasm of gratitude . however , he merely 
 say , " pray , proceed ; I listen to you with interest . " 

 " as for politic , then , " say the baron , " we will discuss that topic 
 later . I be wait myself to see how these new man get on . the first 
 consideration be for your private fortune . you should buy this ancient 
 Leslie property - Rood and Dulmansberry - only L20,000 down ; the rest may 
 remain on mortgage forever - or at least till I find you a rich wife , - as 
 in fact I do for Egerton . Thornhill want the L20,000 now , - want they 
 very much . " 

 " and where , " say Randal , with an iron smile , " be the L20,000 you 
 ascribe to I to come from ? " 

 " ten thousand shall come to you the day Count Peschiera marry the 
 daughter of his kinsman with your help and aid ; the remain ten 
 thousand I will lend you . no scruple , I shall hazard nothing , the 
 estate will bear that additional burden . what say you , - shall it be 
 so ? " 

 " ten thousand pound from Count Peschiera ! " say Randal , breathing 
 hard . " you can not be serious ? such a sum - for what ? - for a mere piece 
 of information ? how otherwise can I aid he ? there must be trick and 
 deception intend here . " 

 " my dear fellow , " answer Levy , " I will give you a hint . there be such 
 a thing in life as be over - suspicious . if you have a fault , it be 
 that . the information you allude to be , of course , the first assistance 
 you be to give . perhaps more may be need , perhaps not . of that you 
 will judge yourself , since the L10,000 be contingent on the marriage 
 aforesaid . " 

 " over - suspicious or not , " answer Randal , " the amount of the sum be 
 too improbable , and the security too bad , for I to listen to this 
 proposition , even if I could descend to - " 

 " Stop , mon cher . business first , scruple afterwards . the security too 
 bad ; what security ? " 

 " the word of Count di Peschiera . " 

 " he have nothing to do with it , he need know nothing about it . ' t be my 
 word you doubt . I be your security . " 

 randal thought of that dry witticism in Gibbon , " Abu Rafe say he will 
 be witness for this fact , but who will be witness for Abu Rafe ? " but 
 he remain silent , only fix on Levy those dark observant eye , with 
 their contract , wary pupil . 

 " the fact be simply this , " resume Levy : " Count di Peschiera have 
 promise to pay his sister a dowry of L20,000 , in case he have the 
 money to spare . he can only have it to spare by the marriage we be 
 discuss . on my part , as I manage his affair in England for he , I 
 have promise that , for the say sum of L20,000 , I will guarantee the 
 expense in the way of that marriage , and settle with Madame di Negra . 
 now , though Peschiera be a very liberal , warm - hearted fellow , I do not 
 say that he would have name so large a sum for his sister 's dowry , if 
 in strict truth he do not owe it to she . it be the amount of her own 
 fortune , which by some arrangement with her late husband , not exactly 
 legal , he possess himself of . if Madame di Negra go to law with he 
 for it , she could get it back . I have explain this to he ; and , in 
 short , you now understand why the sum be thus assess . but I have 
 buy up Madame di Negra 's debt , I have buy up young Hazeldean 's 
  for we must make a match between these two a part of our arrangement . 
 I shall present to Peschiera , and to these excellent young person , an 
 account that will absorb the whole L20,000 . that sum will come into my 
 hand . if I settle the claim against they for half the money , which , 
 make myself the sole creditor , I have the right to do , the moiety will 
 remain . and if I choose to give it to you in return for the service 
 which provide Peschiera with a princely fortune , discharge the debt of 
 his sister , and secure she a husband in my promising young client , Mr. 
 Hazeldean , that be my lookout , - all party be satisfied , and no one 
 need ever be the wiser . the sum be large , no doubt ; it answer to I to 
 give it to you ; do it answer to you to receive it ? " 

 Randal be greatly agitated ; but vile as he be , and systematically as 
 in thought he have bring himself to regard other merely as they could 
 be make subservient to his own interest , still , with all who have not 
 harden themselves in actual crime , there be a wide distinction between 
 the thought and the act ; and though , in the exercise of ingenuity and 
 cunning , he would have have few scruple in that moral swindling which 
 be mildly call " outwit another , " yet thus nakedly and openly to 
 accept a bribe for a deed of treachery towards the poor italian who 
 have so generously trust he - he recoil . he be nerve himself to 
 refuse , when Levy , open his pocket - book , glance over the memoranda 
 therein , and say , as to himself , " Rood Manor - Dulmansberry , sell to the 
 Thornhills by Sir Gilbert Leslie , knight of the shire ; estimate present 
 net rental L2,250 7s . 0d . it be the great bargain I ever know . and 
 with this estate in hand , and your talent , Leslie , I do not   see why 
 you should not rise high than Audley Egerton . he be poor than you 
 once ! " 

 the old Leslie land - a positive stake in the country - the restoration 
 of the fallen family ; and on the other hand , either long drudgery at 
 the Bar , - a scanty allowance on Egerton 's bounty , his sister waste 
 her youth at slovenly , dismal Rood , Oliver debase into a boor ! - or 
 a mendicant 's dependence on the contemptuous pity of Harley 
 L'Estrange , - Harley , who have refuse his hand to he , Harley , who 
 perhaps would become the husband of Violante ! rage seize he as these 
 contrast picture rise before his view . he walk to and fro in 
 disorder , strive to re - collect his thought , and reduce himself from 
 the passion of the human heart into the mere mechanism of calculate 
 intellect . " I can not conceive , " say he , abruptly , " why you should tempt 
 I thus , - what interest it be to you ! " 

 Baron Levy smile , and put up his pocket - book . he see from that moment 
 that the victory be gain . 

 " my dear boy , " say he , with the most agreeable bonhommie , " it be very 
 natural that you should think a man would have a personal interest in 
 whatever he do for another . I believe that view of human nature be 
 call utilitarian philosophy , and be much in fashion at present . let 
 I try and explain to you . in this affair I sha'n't   injure myself . true , 
 you will say , if I settle claim which amount to L20,000 for L10,000 , I 
 might put the surplus into my own pocket instead of your . agree . but 
 I shall not get the L20,000 , nor repay myself Madame di Negra 's debt 
  whatever I may do as to Hazeldean 's , unless the count get this 
 heiress . you can help in this . I want you ; and I do not   think I could 
 get you by a less offer than I make . I shall soon pay myself back the 
 L10,000 if the count get hold of the lady and her fortune . Brief , I see 
 my way here to my own interest . do you want more reason , - you shall 
 have they . I be now a very rich man . how have I become so ? through 
 attach myself from the first to person of expectation , whether from 
 fortune or talent . I have make connection in society , and society have 
 enrich I . I have still a passion for make money . ' Que voulez - vous ? ' 
 it be my profession , my hobby . it will be useful to I in a thousand 
 way to secure as a friend a young man who will have influence with 
 other young man , heir to something well than Rood Hall . you may 
 succeed in public life . a man in public life may attain to the knowledge 
 of State secret that be very profitable to one who dabble a little 
 in the Funds . we can perhaps hereafter do business together that may put 
 yourself in a way of clear off all mortgage on these estate , - on 
 the encumbered possession of which I shall soon congratulate you . you 
 see I be frank ; ' t be the only way of come to the point with so clever 
 a fellow as you . and now , since the less we rake up the mud in a pond 
 from which we have resolve to drink the well , let we dismiss all 
 other thought but that of secure our end . will you tell Peschiera 
 where the young lady be , or shall I ? well do it yourself ; reason 
 enough for it , that he have confide to you his hope , and ask you 
 to help he ; why should not you ? not a word to he about our little 
 arrangement ; he need never know it . you need never be trouble . " Levy 
 ring the bell : " order my carriage round . " 

 Randal make no objection . he be deathlike pale , but there be a 
 sinister expression of firmness on his thin , bloodless lip . 

 " the next point , " Levy resume , " be to hasten the match between Frank 
 and the fair widow . how do that stand ? " 

 " she will not see I , nor receive he . " 

 " oh , learn why ! and if you find on either side there be a hitch , just 
 let I know ; I will soon remove it . " 

 " have Hazeldean consent to the post - obit ? " 

 " not yet ; I have not press it ; I wait the right moment , if necessary . " 

 " it will be necessary . " 

 " ah , you wish it . it shall be so . " 

 Randal Leslie again pace the room , and after a silent self - commune come 
 up close to the baron , and say , 

 " look you , sir , I be poor and ambitious ; you have tempt I at the 
 right moment , and with the right inducement . I succumb . but what 
 guarantee have I that this money will be pay , these estate make mine 
 upon the condition stipulate ? " 

 " before anything be settle , " reply the baron , " go and ask my 
 character of any of our young friend , Borrowell , Spendquick - whom you 
 please ; you will hear I abuse , of course ; but they will all say this 
 of I , that when I pass my word , I keep it . if I say , ' Mon cher , you 
 shall have the money , ' a man have it ; if I say , ' I renew your bill for 
 six month , ' it be renew . ' t , be my way of do business . in all 
 case any word be my bond . in this case , where no writing can pass 
 between we , my only bond must be my word . go , then , make your mind clear 
 as to your security , and come here and dine at eight . we will call on 
 Peschiera afterwards . " 

 " yes , " say Randal , " I will at all event take the day to consider . 
 meanwhile , I say this , I do not disguise from myself the nature of the 
 propose transaction , but what I have once resolve I go through with . 
 my sole vindication to myself be , that if I play here with a false die , 
 it will be for a stake so grand , as once win , the magnitude of the prize 
 will cancel the ignominy of the play . it be not this sum of money for 
 which I sell myself , - it be for what that sum will aid I to achieve . 
 and in the marriage of young Hazeldean with the italian woman , I have 
 another , and it may be a large interest . I have sleep on it lately , - I 
 wake to it now . insure that marriage , obtain the post - obit . from 
 Hazeldean , and whatever the issue of the more direct scheme for which 
 you seek my service , rely on my gratitude , and believe that you will 
 have put I in the way to render gratitude of avail . at eight I will be 
 with you . " 

 Randal leave the room . 

 the baron sit thoughtful . " it be true , " say he to himself , " this young 
 man be the next of kin to the hazeldean estate , if Frank displease his 
 father sufficiently to lose his inheritance ; that must be the clever 
 boy 's design . well , in the long - run , I should make as much , or more , out 
 of he than out of the spendthrift Frank . Frank 's fault be those of 
 youth . he will reform and retrench . but this man ! no , I shall have 
 he for life . and should he fail in this project , and have but this 
 encumbered property - a land proprietor mortgage up to his ear - why , 
 he be my slave , and I can foreclose when I wish , or if he prove 
 useless ; - no , I risk nothing . and if I do - if I lose L10,000 - what 
 then ? I can afford it for revenge ! - afford it for the luxury of leave 
 Audley Egerton alone with penury and ruin , deserted , in his hour of 
 need , by the pensioner of his bounty , as he will be by the last friend 
 of his youth , when it so please I , - I whom he have call ' scoundrel ' ! 
 and whom he - " Levy 's soliloquy halt there , for the servant enter to 
 announce the carriage . and the baron hurry his band over his feature , 
 as if to sweep away all trace of the passion that distort their 
 smile effrontery . and so , as he take up his cane and glove , and 
 glance at the glass , the face of the fashionable usurer be once more 
 as varnish as his boot . 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

 when a clever man resolve on a villanous action , he hasten , by the 
 exercise of his cleverness , to get rid of the sense of his villany . with 
 more than his usual alertness , Randal employ the next hour or two in 
 ascertain how far Baron Levy merit the character he boast , and 
 how far his word might be his bond . he repair to young man whom 
 he esteem well judge on these point than Spendquick and 
 Borrowell , - young man who resemble the Merry Monarch , inasmuch as - 

  " they never say a foolish thing , 
  and never do a wise one . " 

 there be many such young man about town , - sharp and able in all affair 
 except their own . no one know the world well , nor judge of character 
 more truly , than your half - beggar roue . from all these Baron Levy 
 obtain much the same testimonial : he be ridicule as a would - be 
 dandy , but respect as a very responsible man of business , and rather 
 like as a friendly , accommodate specie of the Sir Epicure Mammon , 
 who very often do what be think handsome , liberal thing ; and , " in 
 short , " say one of these experienced referee , " he be the good fellow 
 go - for a money - lender ! you may always rely on what he promise , and 
 he be generally very forbearing and indulgent to we of good society ; 
 perhaps for the same reason that our tailor be , - to send one of we to 
 prison would hurt his custom . his foible be to be think a gentleman . 
 I believe , much as I suppose he love money , he would give up half his 
 fortune rather than do anything for which we could cut he . he allow a 
 pension of three hundred a year to Lord S - - - . true ; he be his man of 
 business for twenty year , and before then S - - - be rather a prudent 
 fellow , and have fifteen thousand a year . he have help on , too , many 
 a clever young man , - the good borough - monger you ever know . he like 
 have friend in parliament . in fact , of course he be a rogue ; but if 
 one want a rogue , one can not   find a pleasanter . I should like to see he 
 on the french stage , - a prosperous Macaire ; Le Maitre could hit he off 
 to the life . " 

 from information in these more fashionable quarter , glean with his 
 usual tact , Randal turn to a source less elevated , but to which he 
 attach more importance . Dick Avenel associate with the baron , - Dick 
 Avenel must be in his clutch . now Randal do justice to that 
 gentleman 's practical shrewdness . moreover , Avenel be by profession a 
 man of business . he must know more of Levy than these man of pleasure 
 could ; and as he be a plain - speak person , and evidently honest , in the 
 ordinary acceptation of the word , Randal do not doubt that out of Dick 
 Avenel he should get the truth . 

 on arrive in Eaton Square , and ask for Mr. Avenel , Randal be at 
 once usher into the drawing - room . the apartment be not in such 
 good , solid , mercantile taste as have characterize Avenel 's more humble 
 bachelor 's residence at Screwstown . the taste now be the Honourable 
 Mrs. Avenel 's ; and , truth to say , no taste could be bad . furniture 
 of all epoch heterogeneously clump together , - here a sofa a la 
 renaissance in Gobelin ; there a rosewood Console from Gillow ; a tall 
 mock - Elizabethan chair in black oak , by the side of a modern florentine 
 table of Mosaic marble ; all kind of colour in the room , and all at 
 war with each other ; very bad copy of the well - know picture in the 
 world in the most gaudy frame , and impudently label by the name of 
 their murder original , - " Raphael , " " Corregio , " " Titian , " " Sebastian 
 del Piombo . " nevertheless , there have be plenty of money spend , and 
 there be plenty to show for it . Mrs. Avenel be seat on her sofa a la 
 renaissance , with one of her child at her foot , who be employ 
 in read a new Annual in crimson silk binding . Mrs. Avenel be in an 
 attitude as if sit for her portrait . 

 polite society be most capricious in its adoption or rejection . you 
 see many a very vulgar person firmly establish in the beau monde ; 
 other , with very good pretension as to birth , fortune , etc . , either 
 rigorously exclude , or only permit a peep over the pale . the 
 Honourable Mrs. Avenel belong to family unquestionably noble , both 
 by her own descent and by her first marriage ; and if poverty have keep 
 she down in her early career , she now , at least , do not want wealth 
 to back her pretension . nevertheless , all the dispenser of fashion 
 concur in refuse their support to the Honourable Mrs. Avenel . one 
 might suppose it be solely on account of her plebeian husband ; but 
 indeed it be not so . many a woman of high family can marry a low - bear 
 man not so presentable as Avenel , and , by the help of his money , get the 
 fine world at her foot . but Mrs. Avenel have not that art . she be still 
 a very handsome , showy woman ; and as for dress , no duchess could be more 
 extravagant . yet these very circumstance have perhaps go against her 
 ambition ; for your quiet little plain woman , provoke no envy , slip 
 into coterie , when a handsome , flaunt lady - whom , once see in your 
 drawing - room , can be no more over - look than a scarlet poppy amidst 
 a violet bed - be pretty sure to be weed out as ruthlessly as a poppy 
 would be in a similar position . 

 Mr. Avenel be sit by the fire , rather moodily , his hand in his 
 pocket , and whistle to himself . to say truth , that active mind of his 
 be very much bored in London , at least during the fore part of the 
 day . he hail Randal 's entrance with a smile of relief , and rise and 
 post himself before the fire - a coat tail under each arm - he scarcely 
 allow randal to shake hand with Mrs. Avenel , and pat the child on 
 the head , murmur , " beautiful creature ! "   Randal be ever civil to 
 child , - that sort of wolf in sheep 's clothing always be ; do not   be 
 take in , o you foolish young mother !   - Dick , I say , scarcely allow 
 his visitor these preliminary courtesy , before he plunge far beyond 
 depth of wife and child into the political ocean . " thing now 
 be come right , - a vile oligarchy be to be destroy . british 
 respectability and british talent be to have fair play . " to have hear 
 he you would have think the day fix for the millennium ! " and what 
 be more , " say Avenel , bring down the fist of his right hand upon the 
 palm of his left , " if there be to be a new parliament , we must have 
 new man ; not wear - out old broom that never sweep clean , but man who 
 understand how to govern the country , Sir . I intend to come in MYSELF ! " 

 " yes , " say Mrs. Avenel , hook in a word at last , " I be sure , Mr. 
 Leslie , you will think I do right . I persuade Mr. Avenel that , with 
 his talent and property , he ought , for the sake of his country , to make 
 a sacrifice ; and then you know his opinion now be all the fashion , Mr. 
 Leslie ; formerly they would have be call shocking and vulgar ! " 

 thus say , she look with fond pride at Dick 's comely face , which at 
 that moment , however , be all scowl and frown . I must do justice to Mrs. 
 Avenel ; she be a weak woman , silly in some thing , and a cunning one in 
 other , but she be a good wife as wife go . scotch woman generally be . 
 " Bother ! " say Dick . " what do woman know about politic ? I wish you would 
 mind the child , - it be crumple up and play almighty smash with that 
 flim - flam book , which cost I one pound one . " 

 Mrs. Avenel submissively bow her head , and remove the Annual from 
 the hand of the young destructive ; the destructive set up a squall , as 
 destructive usually do when they do not   have their own way . Dick clap 
 his hand to his ear . " Whe - e - ew , I can not   stand this ; come and take a 
 walk , Leslie : I want stretch ! " he stretch himself as he speak , 
 first half - way up to the ceiling , and then fairly out of the room . 

 Randal , with his May Fair manner , turn towards Mrs. Avenel as if to 
 apologize for her husband and himself . 

 " Poor Richard ! " say she , " he be in one of his humour , - all man have 
 they . come and see I again soon . when do Almack 's open ? " 

 " Nay , I ought to ask you that question , - you who know everything that 
 go on in our set , " say the young serpent . any tree plant in " our 
 set , " if it have be but a crab - tree , would have tempt Mr. Avenel 's 
 Eve to jump at its bough . 

 " be you come , there ? " cry Dick , from the foot of the stair . 




 CHAPTER XX . 

 " I have just be at our friend Levy 's , " say Randal , when he and 
 Dick be outside the street door . " he , like you , be full of politic ; 
 pleasant man , - for the business he be say to do . " 

 " well , " say Dick , slowly , " I suppose he be pleasant , but make the good 
 of it - and still - " 

 " still what , my dear avenel ? "   randal here for the first time discard 
 the formal Mister . 

 MR . AVENEL . - " still the thing itself be not pleasant . " 

 RANDAL   with his soft hollow laugh . - " you mean borrow money upon 
 more than five per cent ? " 

 " oh , curse the percentage . I agree with Bentham on the Usury Laws , - no 
 shackle in trade for I , whether in money or anything else . that be not 
 it . but when one owe a fellow money even at two per cent , and ' t be not 
 convenient to pay he , why , somehow or other , it make one feel small ; 
 it take the British Liberty out of a man ! " 

 " I should have think you more likely to lend money than to borrow it . " 

 " well , I guess you be right there , as a general rule . but I tell you 
 what it be , sir ; there be too great a mania for competition get up 
 in this rotten old country of ours . I be as liberal as most man . I like 
 competition to a certain extent , but there be too much of it , sir , - too 
 much of it . " randal look sad and convince . but if Leonard have hear 
 Dick Avenel , what would have be his amaze ? Dick Avenel rail against 
 competition ! think there could be too much of it ! " of course heaven and 
 earth be come together , " say the spider , when the housemaid 's broom 
 invade its cobweb . Dick be all for sweep away other cobwebs ; but he 
 certainly think heaven and earth come together when he see a great 
 turk's - head besom poke up at his own . 

 Mr. Avenel , in his genius for speculation and improvement , have 
 establish a factory at Screwstown , the first which have ever eclipse 
 the church spire with its titanic chimney . it succeed well at first . 
 Mr. Avenel transfer to this speculation nearly all his capital . 
 " nothing , " quoth he , " pay such an interest . Manchester be get wear 
 out , - time to show what Screwstown could do . nothing like competition . " 
 but by - and - by a still great capitalist than Dick Avenel , find out 
 that Screwstown be at the mouth of a coal mine , and that Dick 's profit 
 be great , erect a still uglier edifice , with a still tall chimney . 
 and have be bring up to the business , and make his residence in 
 the town , while Dick employ a foreman and flourish in London , this 
 infamous competitor so manage , first to share , and then gradually to 
 sequester , the profit which Dick have hitherto monopolize , that no 
 wonder Mr. Avenel thought competition should have its limit . " the 
 tongue touch where the tooth ache , " as Dr. Riccabocca would tell 
 we . by little and little our Juvenile Talleyrand   I beg the eld great 
 man 's pardon   worm out from Dick this grievance , and in the grievance 
 discover the origin of Dick 's connection with the money - lender . 

 " but Levy , " say Avenel , candidly , " be a decentish chap in his 
 way , - friendly too . Mrs. A. find he useful ; bring some of your young 
 highflyer to her soiree . to be sure , they do not   dance , - stand all in 
 a row at the door , like mute at a funeral . not but what they have be 
 uncommon civil to I lately , Spendquick particularly . by - the - by , I dine 
 with he to - morrow . the aristocracy be behindhand , - not smart , sir , not 
 up to the march ; but when a man know how to take them , they beat the New 
 Yorkers in good manner . I will say that for they . I have no prejudice . " 

 " I never see a man with less ; no prejudice even against Levy . " 

 " no , not a bit of it ! every one say he be a Jew ; he say he be not . I 
 do not   care a button what he be . his money be English , - that be enough for 
 any man of a liberal turn of mind . his charge , too , be moderate . to be 
 sure , he know I shall pay they ; only what I do not   like in he be a sort 
 of way he have of mon - cher - ing and my - good - fellow - ing one , to do thing 
 quite out of the natural way of that sort of business . he know I have 
 get parliamentary influence . I could return a couple of member for 
 Screwstown , and one , or perhaps two , for Lansmere , where I have of late 
 be cook up an interest ; and he dictate to - no , not dictate - but 
 try to humbug I into put in his own man . however , in one respect , 
 we be likely to agree . he say you want to come into parliament . you 
 seem a smart young fellow ; but you must throw over that stiff red - tapist 
 of your , and go with Public Opinion , and - Myself . " 

 " you be very kind , Avenel ; perhaps when we come to compare opinion we 
 may find that we agree entirely . still , in Egerton 's present position , 
 delicacy to he - however , we will not discuss that now . but you really 
 think I might come in for Lansmere , - against the L'Estrange interest , 
 too , which must be strong there ? " 

 " it be very strong , but I have   smash it , I calculate . " 

 " would a contest there cost very much ? " 

 " well , I guess you must come down with the ready . but , as you say , 
 time enough to discuss that when you have square your account with 
 ' delicacy ; ' come to I then , and we will go into it . " 

 Randal , have now squeeze his orange dry , have no desire to waste his 
 time in brush up the rind with his coat - sleeve , so he unhook his 
 arm from Avenel 's , and , look at his watch , discover he should be 
 just in time for an appointment of the most urgent business , - hail a 
 cab , and drive off . 

 Dick look hipped and disconsolate at be leave alone ; he yawn very 
 loud , to the astonishment of three prim old maiden Belgravians who be 
 pass that way ; and then his mind begin to turn towards his factory 
 at Screwstown , which have lead to his connection with the baron ; and he 
 think over a letter he have receive from his foreman that morning , 
 inform he that it be rumour at Screwstown that Mr. Dyce , his 
 rival , be about to have new machinery on an improved principle ; and 
 that Mr. Dyce have already go up to town , it be suppose , with the 
 intention of conclude a purchase for a patent discovery to be apply 
 to the new machinery , and which that gentleman have publicly declare in 
 the corn - market " would shut up Mr. Avenel 's factory before the year be 
 out . " as this menacing epistle recur to he , Dick feel his desire to 
 yawn incontinently check . his brow grow very dark ; and he walk , with 
 restless stride , on and on , till he find himself in the Strand . he 
 then get into an omnibus , and proceed to the city , wherein he spend 
 the rest of the day look over machine and foundry , and try in 
 vain to find out what diabolical invention the over - competition of Mr. 
 Dyce have get hold of . " if , " say Dick Avenel to himself , as he return 
 fretfully homeward - " if a man like I , who have do so much for british 
 industry and go - a - head principle , be to be catawampously champ up 
 by a mercenary , selfish cormorant of a capitalist like that interlope 
 blockhead in drab breech , Tom Dyce , all I can say be , that the soon 
 this cursed old country go to the dog , the well pleased I shall be . 
 I wash my hand of it . " 




 CHAPTER XXI . 

 Randal 's mind be make up . all he have learn in regard to Levy have 
 confirm his resolve or dissipate his scruple . he have start from 
 the improbability that Pesehiera would offer , and the still great 
 improbability that Peschiera would pay he , L10,000 for such information 
 or aid as he could bestow in further the count 's object . but when 
 Levy take such proposal entirely on himself , the main question to 
 Randal become this , - could it be Levy 's interest to make so considerable 
 a sacrifice ? have the baron imply only friendly sentiment as his 
 motif , Randal would have feel sure he be to be take in ; but the 
 usurer 's frank assurance that it would answer to he in the long - run to 
 concede to randal term so advantageous , alter the case , and lead our 
 young philosopher to look at the affair with calm , contemplative eye . 
 be it sufficiently obvious that Levy count on an adequate return ? 
 might he calculate on reap help by the bushel if he sow it by the 
 handful ? the result of Randal 's cogitation be that the baron might 
 fairly deem himself no wasteful sower . in the first place , it be clear 
 that Levy , not without reasonable ground , believe that he could soon 
 replace , with exceed good interest , any sum he might advance to 
 Randal , out of the wealth which Randal 's prompt information might bestow 
 on Levy 's client , the count ; and secondly , Randal 's self - esteem be 
 immense , and could he but succeed in secure a pecuniary independence 
 on the instant , to free he from the slow drudgery of the Bar , or from a 
 precarious reliance on Audley Egerton , as a politician out of power , 
 his conviction of rapid triumph in public life be as strong as if 
 whisper by an angel or promise by a fiend . on such triumph , with 
 all the social position they would secure , Levy might well calculate for 
 repayment by a thousand indirect channel . Randal 's sagacity detect 
 that , through all the good - natured or liberal action ascribe to the 
 usurer , Levy have steadily pursue his own interest , he see that Levy 
 mean to get he into his power , and use his ability as instrument 
 for dig new mine , in which Baron Levy would claim the right 
 of large royalty . but at that thought Randal 's pale lip curl 
 disdainfully ; he confide too much in his own power not to think that 
 he could elude the grasp of the usurer , whenever it suit he to do 
 so . thus , on a survey , all conscience hush itself ; his mind rush 
 buoyantly on to anticipation of the future . he see the hereditary 
 estate regain , - no matter how mortgage , - for the moment still his 
 own , legally his own , yield for the present what would suffice for 
 competence to one of few want , and free his name from that title of 
 Adventurer , which be so prodigally give in rich old country to those 
 who have no estate but their brain . he think of Violante but as the 
 civilized trader think of a trifling coin , of a glass bead , which 
 he exchange with some barbarian for gold dust ; he think of Frank 
 Hazeldean marry to the foreign woman of beggar mean , and repute 
 that have know the breath of scandal , - marry , and live on post - obit 
 instalment of the casino property ; he think of the poor squire 's 
 resentment ; his avarice sweep from the land annex to Rood on to 
 the broad field of Hazeldean ; he think of Avenel , of Lansmere , of 
 parliament ; with one hand he grasp fortune , with the next power . " and 
 yet I enter on life with no patrimony   save a ruin hall and a barren 
 waste , - no patrimony but knowledge . I have but turn knowledge from 
 book to man ; for book may give fame after death , but man give we power 
 in life . " and all the while he thus ruminate , his act be speed his 
 purpose . though it be but in a miserable hack - cab that he erect airy 
 scaffolding round airy castle , still the miserable hack - cab be fly 
 fast , to secure the first foot of solid ground whereon to transfer the 
 mental plan of the architect to foundation of positive slime and 
 clay . the cab stop at the door of Lord Lansmere 's house . Randal 
 have suspect Violante to be there : he resolve to ascertain . randal 
 descend from his vehicle and ring the bell . the lodge - keeper opine 
 the great wooden gate . 

 " I have call to see the young lady stay here , - the foreign young 
 lady . " 

 Lady Lansmere have be too confident of the security of her roof to 
 condescend to give any order to her servant with regard to her guest , 
 and the lodge - keeper answer directly , - 

 " at home , I believe , sir . I rather think she be in the garden with my 
 lady . " 

 " I see , " say Randal ; and he do see the form of Violante at a distance . 
 " but , since she be walk , I will not disturb she at present . I will 
 call another day . " 

 the lodge - keeper bow respectfully , Randal jump into his cab : " to 
 Curzon Street , - quick ! " 




 CHAPTER XXII . 

 Harley have make one notable oversight in that appeal to Beatrice 's 
 well and gentler nature , which he entrust to the advocacy of 
 Leonard , - a scheme in itself very characteristic of Harley 's romantic 
 temper , and either wise or foolish , accord as his indulgent theory 
 of human idiosyncrasy in general , and of those peculiar to Beatrice 
 di Negra in especial , be the dream of an enthusiast , or the inductive 
 conclusion of a sound philosopher . 

 Harley have warn Leonard not to fall in love with the italian , - he have 
 forget to warn the italian not to fall in love with Leonard ; nor have 
 he ever anticipate the probability of that event . this be not to 
 be very much wonder at ; for if there be anything on which the 
 most sensible man be dull - eye , where those eye be not light by 
 jealousy , it be as to the probability of another male creature be 
 beloved . all , the least vain of the whisker gender , think it prudent 
 to guard themselves against be too irresistible to the fair sex ; and 
 each say of his friend , " good fellow enough , but the last man for that 
 woman to fall in love with ! " 

 but certainly there appear on the surface more than ordinary cause for 
 Harley 's blindness in the special instance of Leonard . 

 whatever Beatrice 's well quality , she be generally esteem worldly 
 and ambitious . she be pinch in circumstance , she be luxuriant and 
 extravagant ; how be it likely that she could distinguish any aspirant 
 of the humble birth and fortune of the young peasant - author ? as a 
 coquette , she might try to win his admiration and attract his fancy ; 
 but her own heart would surely be guard in the triple mail of pride , 
 poverty , and the conventional opinion of the world in which she live . 
 have Harley think it possible that Madame di Negra could stoop below 
 her station , and love , not wisely , but too well , he would rather have 
 think that the object would be some brilliant adventurer of fashion , 
 some one who could turn against herself all the art of deliberate 
 fascination , and all the experience bestow by frequent conquest . one 
 so simple as Leonard , so young and so new ! Harley L'Estrange would have 
 smile at himself , if the idea of that image subjugate the ambitious 
 woman to the disinterested love of a village maid have once cross his 
 mind . nevertheless , so it be , and precisely from those cause which 
 would have seem to Harley to forbid the weakness . 

 it be that fresh , pure heart , it be that simple , earnest sweetness , it 
 be that contrast in look , in tone , in sentiment , and in reasoning , to 
 all that have jade and disgust she in the circle of her admirer , - it 
 be all this that captivate Beatrice at the first interview with 
 Leonard . here be what she have confess to the sceptical Randal she 
 have dream and sigh for . her early youth have pass into abhorrent 
 marriage , without the soft , innocent crisis of human life , - virgin love . 
 many a wooer might have touch her vanity , please her fancy , excited 
 her ambition - her heart have never be awaken ; it wake now . the world , 
 and the year that the world have waste , seem to fleet away as a 
 cloud . she be as if restore to the blush and the sigh of youth , - the 
 youth of the italian maid . as in the restoration of our golden age 
 be the spell of poetry with we all , so such be the spell of the poet 
 himself on she . 

 oh , how exquisite be that brief episode in the life of the woman pal 
 with the " hack sight and sound " of worldly life ! how strangely happy 
 be those hour , when , lure on by her silent sympathy , the young 
 scholar speak of his early struggle between circumstance and impulse , 
 musing amidst the flower , and hearken to the fountain ; or of his 
 wandering in the desolate , lamp - light street , while the vision of 
 Chatterton 's glitter eye shone dread through the friendless shadow . 
 and as he speak , whether of his hope or his fear , her look dwelt 
 fondly on the young face , that vary between pride and sadness , - pride 
 ever so gentle , and sad ness ever so nobly touching . she be never 
 weary of gaze on that brow , with its quiet power ; but her lid drop 
 before those eye , with their serene , unfathomable passion . she feel , as 
 they haunt she , what a deep and holy thing love in such soul must 
 be . Leonard never speak to she of Helen - that reserve every reader can 
 comprehend . to nature like his , first love be a mystery ; to confide it 
 be to profane . but he fulfil his commission of interesting she in the 
 exile and his daughter , and his description of they bring tear to her 
 eye . she inly resolve not to aid Peschiera in his design on Violante . 
 she forget for the moment that her own fortune be to depend on the 
 success of those design . Levy have arrange so that she be not remind 
 of her poverty by creditor , - she know not how . she know nothing of 
 business . she give herself up to the delight of the present hour , and to 
 vague prospect of a future associate with that young image , - with that 
 face of a guardian angel that she see before she , fairest in the moment 
 of absence ; for in those moment come the life of fairy - land , when we 
 shut our eye on the world , and see through the haze of golden revery . 
 dangerous , indeed , to Leonard would have be the soft society of 
 Beatrice di Negra , have not his heart be wholly devoted to one object , 
 and have not his ideal of woman be from that object one sole and 
 indivisible reflection . but Beatrice guess not this barrier between 
 herself and he . amidst the shadow that he conjure up from his past 
 life , she behold no rival form . she see he lonely in the world , as 
 she be herself . and in his lowly birth , his youth , in the freedom from 
 presumption which characterize he in all thing   save that confidence 
 in his intellectual destiny which be the essential attribute of 
 genius , she but grow the bolder by the belief that , even if he love 
 she , he would not dare to hazard the avowal . 

 and thus , one day , yield , as she have ever be will not to yield , to the 
 impulse of her quick italian heart - how she never remember , in 
 what word she could never recall - she speak , she own her love , she 
 plead , with tear and blush , for love in return . all that pass be 
 to she as a dream , - a dream from which she wake with a fierce sense 
 of agony , of humiliation , - wake as the woman ' scorn . " no matter how 
 gratefully , how tenderly Leonard have reply , the reply be refusal . 

 for the first time she learn she have a rival ; that all he could give 
 of love be long since , from his boyhood , give to another . for the 
 first time in her life , that ardent nature know jealousy , its torturing 
 sting , its thirst for vengeance , its tempest of love hate . but , to 
 outward appearance , silent and cold she stand as marble . word that 
 seek to soothe fall on her ear unheeded : they be drown by the 
 storm within . Pride be the first feeling which dominate the war 
 element that rag in her soul . she tear her hand from that which 
 clasp her with so loyal a respect . she could have spurn the form 
 that knelt at her foot , not for love , but for pardon . she point to the 
 door with the gesture of an insult queen . she know no more till she 
 be alone . then come that rapid flash of conjecture peculiar to the 
 storm of jealousy ; that which seem to single from all nature the 
 one object to dread and to destroy ; the conjecture so often false , yet 
 receive at once by our conviction as the revelation of instinctive 
 truth . he to whom she have humble herself love another ; whom but 
 Violante , - whom else , young and beautiful , have he name in the record of 
 his life ? - none ! and he have seek to interest she , Beatrice di Negra , 
 in the object of his love ; hint at danger which Beatrice know too 
 well ; imply trust in Beatrice 's will to protect . blind fool that she 
 have be ! this , then , be the reason why he have come , day after day , 
 to Beatrice 's house ; this be the charm that have draw he thither ; 
 this - she press her hand to her burn temple , as if to stop the 
 torture of thought . suddenly a voice be hear below , the door open , 
 and randal Leslie enter . 




 CHAPTER XXIII . 

 punctually at eight o'clock that evening , Baron Levy welcome the new 
 ally he have secure . the pair din en tete a tete , discuss general 
 matter till the servant leave they to their wine . then say the 
 baron , rise and stir the fire - then say the baron , briefly and 
 significantly , 

 " well ! " 

 " as regard the property you speak of , " answer Randal , " I be willing 
 to purchase it on the term you name . the only point that perplex I 
 be how to account to Audley Egerton , to my parent , to the world , for 
 the power of purchase it . " 

 " true , " say the baron , without even a smile at the ingenious and truly 
 greek manner in which Randal have contrive to denote his meaning , and 
 conceal the ugliness of it - " true , we must think of that . if we could 
 manage to conceal the real name of the purchaser for a year or so , it 
 might be easy , - you may be suppose to have speculate in the Funds ; 
 or Egerton may die , and people may believe that he have secure to you 
 something handsome from the ruin of his fortune . " 

 " little chance of Egerton 's dying . " 

 " Humph ! " say the baron . " however , this be a mere detail , reserve for 
 consideration . you can now tell we where the young lady be ? " 

 " certainly . I could not this morning , - I can now . I will go with you to 
 the count . meanwhile , I have see Madame di Negra ; she will accept Frank 
 Hazeldean if he will but offer himself at once . " 

 " will he not ? " 

 " no ! I have be to he . he be overjoy at my representation , but 
 consider it his duty to ask the consent of his parent . of course they 
 will not give it ; and if there be delay , she will retract . she be 
 under the influence of passion on the duration of which there be no 
 reliance . " 

 " what passion ? love ? " 

 " love ; but not for Hazeldean . the passion that bring she to accept his 
 hand be pique and jealousy . she believe , in a word , that one who 
 seem to have gain the mastery over her affection with a strange 
 suddenness , be but blind to her charm because dazzle by Violante 's . 
 she be prepared to aid in all that can give she rival to Peschiera ; and 
 yet , such be the inconsistency of woman "   add the young philosopher , 
 with a shrug of the shoulder , " that she be also prepared to lose all 
 chance of secure he she love , by bestow herself on another ! " 

 " Woman , indeed , all over ! " say the baron , tap his snuff - box   Louis 
 Quinze , and regale his nostril with a scornful pinch . " but who be 
 the man whom the fair Beatrice have thus honour ? superb creature ! I have 
 some idea of she myself when I buy up her debt ; but it might have 
 embarrass I , in more general plan , as regard the count . all for the 
 good . who be the man ? not Lord L'Estrange ? " 

 " I do not think it be he ; but I have not yet ascertain . I have tell 
 you all I know . I find she in a state so excited , so unlike herself , 
 that I have no little difficulty in soothe she into confidence so far . 
 I could not venture more . " 

 " and she will accept Frank ? " 

 " have he offer to - day she would have accept he ! " 

 " it may be a great help to your fortune , mon cher , if Frank Hazeldean 
 marry this lady without his father 's consent . perhaps he may be 
 disinherit . you be next of kin . 

 " how do you know that ? " ask Randal , sullenly . 

 " it be my business to know all about the chance and connection of 
 any one with whom I do money matter . I do money matter with young Mr. 
 Hazeldean ; so I know that the hazeldean property be not entail ; and , 
 as the squire 's half - brother have no hazeldean blood in he , you have 
 excellent expectation . " 

 " do Frank tell you I be next of kin ? " 

 " I rather think so ; but I be sure you do . " 

 " I - when ? " 

 " when you tell I how important it be to you that Frank should marry 
 Madame di Negra . peste ! mon cher , do you think I be a blockhead ? " 

 " well , Baron , Frank be of age , and can marry to please himself . you 
 imply to I that you could help he in this . " 

 " I will try . see that he call at Madame di Negra 's tomorrow , at two 
 precisely . " 

 " I would rather keep clear of all apparent interference in this matter . 
 will you not arrange that he call on she ? and do not forget to entangle 
 he in a post - obit . " 

 " leave it to I . any more wine ? no ? - then let we go to the count 's . " 




 CHAPTER XXIV . 

 the next morning Frank Hazeldean be sit over his solitary 
 breakfast - table . it be long past noon . the young man have rise early , 
 it be true , to attend his military duty , but he have contract the 
 habit of breakfast late . one 's appetite do not come early when one 
 live in London , and never go to bed before daybreak . 

 there be nothing very luxurious or effeminate about Frank 's room , 
 though they be in a very dear street , and he pay a monstrous high 
 price for they . still , to a practised eye , they betray an inmate who 
 can get through his money , and make very little show for it . the 
 wall be cover with coloured print of racer and steeple - chase , 
 intersperse with the portrait of opera - dancer , all smirk and caper . 
 then there be a semi - circular recess cover with red cloth , and fit 
 up for smoking , as you might perceive by sundry stand full of turkish 
 pipe in cherry - stick and jessamine , with amber mouthpiece ; while a 
 great serpent hookah , from which Frank could no more have smoke than he 
 could have smoke out of the head of a boa constrictor , coil itself up 
 on the floor ; over the chimney - piece be a collection of moorish arm . 
 what use on earth ataghan and scimitar and damasquined pistol , that 
 would not carry straight three yard , could be to an officer in 
 his Majesty 's Guards be more than I can conjecture , or even Frank 
 satisfactorily explain . I have strong suspicion that this valuable 
 arsenal pass to Frank in part payment of a bill to be discount . at 
 all event , if so , it be an improvement on the bear that he have sell 
 to the hair - dresser . no book be to be see anywhere , except a Court 
 Guide , a Racing Calendar , an Army List , the Sporting Magazine complete 
  whole bind in scarlet morocco , at about a guinea per volume , and a 
 small book , as small as an Elzevir , on the chimney - piece , by the side of 
 a cigar - case . that small book have cost Frank more than all the rest put 
 together ; it be his Own Book , his book par excellence ; book make up by 
 himself , - his BETTING Book ! 

 on a centre table be deposit Frank 's well - brush hat ; a satinwood 
 box , contain kid - glove , of various delicate tint , from primrose to 
 lilac ; a tray full of card and three - cornered note ; an opera - glass , 
 and an ivory subscription - ticket to his opera stall . 

 in one corner be an ingenious receptacle for cane , stick , and 
 whip - I should not like , in these bad time , to have pay the bill for 
 they ; and mount guard by that receptacle , stand a pair of boot as 
 bright as Baron Levy 's , - " the force of brightness could no far 
 go . " Frank be in his dressing - gown , - very good taste , quite oriental , 
 guarantee to be true indian cashmere , and charge as such . nothing 
 could be more neat , though perfectly simple , than the appurtenance of 
 his breakfast - table : silver tea - pot , ewer , and basin , all fitting into 
 his dressing - box - for the which may Storr and Mortimer be now praise , 
 and some day pay ! Frank look very handsome , rather tired , and 
 exceedingly bored . he have be try to read the " Morning Post , " but 
 the effort have prove too much for he . 

 poor dear Frank Hazeldean ! - true type of many a poor dear fellow who 
 have long since go to the dog . and if , in this road to ruin , there 
 have be the least thing to do the traveller any credit by the way ! one 
 feel a respect for the ruin of a man like Audley Egerton . he be ruin 
 en roi ! from the wreck of his fortune he can look down and see stately 
 monument build from the stone of that dismantle edifice . in every 
 institution which attest the humanity of England be a record of the 
 princely bounty of the public man . in those object of party , for 
 which the proverbial sinew of war be necessary , in those reward for 
 service , which private liberality can confer , the hand of Egerton 
 have be open as with the heart of a king . many a rise member of 
 parliament , in those day when talent be bring forward through 
 the aid of wealth and rank , owe his career to the seat which Audley 
 Egerton 's large subscription have secure to he ; many an obscure 
 supporter in letter and the Press look back to the day when he have 
 be free from the jail by the gratitude of the patron . the city he 
 represent be embellish at his cost ; through the shire that hold his 
 mortgage land , which he have rarely ever visit , his gold have flow 
 as a Pactolus ; all that could animate its public spirit , or increase 
 its civilization , claim kindre with his munificence , and never have a 
 claim disallow . even in his grand , careless household , with its 
 large retinue and superb hospitality , there be something worthy of a 
 representative of that time - honour portion of our true nobility , 
 the untitled gentleman of the land . the Great Commoner have , indeed , 
 ' something to show " for the money he have disdain and squander . but 
 for Frank Hazeldean 's mode of get rid of the dross , when go , what 
 would be leave to tell the tale ? paltry print in a bachelor 's lodging ; a 
 collection of cane and cherry - stick ; half - a - dozen letter in ill - spelt 
 French from a figurante ; some long - legged horse , fit for nothing but to 
 lose a race ; that damnable Betting - Book ; and - sic transit gloria - down 
 sweep some hawk of a Levy , on the wing of an i o u , and not a feather 
 be leave of the pigeon ! 

 yet Frank Hazeldean have stuff in he , - a good heart , and strict honour . 
 Fool though he seem , there be sound sterling sense in some odd corner 
 of his brain , if one could but get at it . all he want to save he 
 from perdition be , to do what he have never yet do , - namely , pause and 
 think . but , to be sure , that same operation of thinking be not so easy 
 for folk unaccustomed to it , as people who think - think ! 

 " I can not   bear this , " say Frank , suddenly , and spring to his foot . 
 " this woman , I can not get she out of my head . I ought to go down to the 
 governor 's ; but then if he get into a passion , and refuse his consent , 
 where be I ? and he will , too , I fear . I wish I could make out what 
 randal advise . he seem to recommend that I should marry Beatrice at 
 once , and trust to my mother 's influence to make all right afterwards . 
 but when I ask , ' be that your advice ? ' he back out of it . well , I 
 suppose he be right there . I can understand that he be unwilling , good 
 fellow , to recommend anything that my father would disapprove . but 
 still - " 

 here Frank stop in his soliloquy , and do make his first desperate 
 effort to - think ! 

 now , o dear reader , I assume , of course , that thou art one of the class 
 to which thought be familiar ; and , perhaps , thou hast smile in disdain 
 or incredulity at that remark on the difficulty of thinking which 
 precede Frank Hazeldean 's discourse to himself . but art thou quite sure 
 that when thou hast try to think thou hast always succeed ? hast thou 
 not often be dupe by that pale visionary simulacrum of thought which 
 go by the name of revery ? honest old Montaigne confess that he do 
 not understand that process of sit down to think , on which some 
 folk express themselves so glibly . he could not think unless he have 
 a pen in his hand and a sheet of paper before he ; and so , by a manual 
 operation , seize and connect the link of ratiocination . very often 
 have it happen to myself when I have say to Thought peremptorily , 
 " Bestir thyself : a serious matter be before thee , ponder it well , think 
 of it , " that that same thought have behave in the most refractory , 
 rebellious manner conceivable ; and instead of concentrate its ray 
 into a single stream of light , have break into all the desultory tint 
 of the rainbow , colour senseless cloud , and run off into the 
 seventh heaven , so that after sit a good hour by the clock , with 
 brow as knit as if I be intent on square the circle , I have suddenly 
 discover that I might as well have go comfortably to sleep - I have 
 be do nothing but dream , - and the most nonsensical dream ! so when 
 Frank Hazeldean , as he stop at that meditative " but still " - and 
 lean his arm on the chimney - piece , and rest his face on his hand , 
 feel himself at the grave crisis of life , and fancy he be go 
 " to think on it , " there only rise before he a succession of shadowy 
 picture , - randal Leslie , with an unsatisfactory countenance , from which 
 he could extract nothing ; the squire , look as black as thunder in 
 his study at Hazeldean ; his mother try to plead for he , and 
 get herself properly scold for her pain ; and then off go that 
 will - o'-the - wisp which pretend to call itself Thought , and begin 
 play round the pale , charming face of Beatrice di Negra , in the 
 drawing - room at Curzon Street , and repeat , with small elfin voice , 
 Randal Leslie 's assurance of the precede day , " as to her affection for 
 you , Frank , there be no doubt of that ; she only begin to think you be 
 trifle with she . " and then there be a rapturous vision of a young 
 gentleman on his knee , and the fair pale face bath in blush , and 
 a clergyman stand by the altar , and a carriage - and - four with white 
 favour at the church - door ; and of a honeymoon , which would have 
 astonish as to honey all the bee of Hymettus . and in the midst of 
 these phantasmagoria , which compose what Frank fondly style , " make 
 up his mind , " there come a single man 's elegant rat - tat - tat at the 
 street door . 

 " one never have a moment for thinking , " cry Frank , and he call out to 
 his valet , " not at home . " 

 but it be too late . Lord Spendquick be in the hall , and presently 
 within the room . how d'ye do 's be exchange and hand shake . 

 LORD SPENDQUICK . - " I have a note for you , Hazeldean . " 

 FRANK   lazily . - " from whom ? " 

 LORD SPENDQUICK . - " Levy . just come from he , - never see he in such a 
 fidget . he be go into the city , - I suppose to see X. Y. dash off 
 this note for you , and would have send it by a servant , but I say I 
 would bring it . " 

 FRANK   look fearfully at the note . - " I hope he do not want his 
 money yet . ' private and confidential , ' - that look bad . " 

 SPENDQUICK . - " devilish bad , indeed . " 

 Frank open the note , and read , half aloud , " Dear Hazeldean - " 

 SPENDQUICK   interrupting .   - " good sign ! he always spendquick I when he 
 lend I money ; and ' t be ' my dear Lord ' when he want it back . capital 
 sign ! " 

 Frank read on , but to himself , and with a change countenance , 

  DEAR HAZELDEAN , - I be very sorry to tell you that , in consequence of 
  the sudden failure of a house at Paris with which I have large 
  dealing , I be press on a sudden for all the ready money I can 
  get . I do not   want to inconvenience you , but do try to see if you 
  can take up those bill of yours which I hold , and which , as you 
  know , have be due some little time . I have hit on a way of 
  arrange your affair ; but when I hint at it , you seem to 
  dislike the idea ; and Leslie have since tell I that you have strong 
  objection to give any security on your prospective property . so 
  no more of that , my dear fellow . I be call out in haste to try 
  what I can do for a very charming client of mine , who be in great 
  pecuniary distress , though she have for her brother a foreign count , 
  as rich as a Croesus . there be an execution in her house . I be 
  go down to the tradesman who put it in , but have no hope of 
  soften he ; and I fear there will be other before the day be 
  out . another reason for want money , if you can help I , mon 
  cher ! an execution in the house of one of the most brilliant woman 
  in London , - an execution in Curzon Street , May Fair ! it will be all 
  over the town if I can not   stop it . 

  your in haste , 
  LEVY . 

  P.S. - do not   let what I have say vex you too much . I should not 
  trouble you if Spendquick and Borrowell would pay I something . 
  perhaps you can get they to do so . 

 strike by Frank 's silence and paleness , Lord Spendquick here , in the 
 kind way possible , lay his hand on the young Guardsman 's shoulder . 
 and look over the note with that freedom which gentleman in 
 difficulty take with each other 's private and confidential 
 correspondence . his eye fall on the postscript . " oh , damn it , " cry 
 Spendquick , " but that be too bad , - employ you to get I to pay he ! 
 such horrid treachery . make yourself easy , my dear Frank ; I could never 
 suspect you of anything so unhandsome . I could as soon suspect myself 
 of - pay he - " 

 " Curzon Street ! count ! " mutter Frank , as if wake from a dream . " it 
 must be so . " to thrust on his boot , change his dressing - robe for a 
 frock - coat , snatch at his hat , glove , and cane , break from Spendquick , 
 descend the stair , a flight at a leap , gain the street , throw himself 
 into a cabriolet , - all this be do before his astound visitor could 
 even recover breath enough to ask " what be the matter ? " 

 leave thus alone , Lord Spendquick shake his head , - shake it twice , as 
 if fully to convince himself that there be nothing in it ; and then 
 re - arrange his hat before the look - glass , and draw on his glove 
 deliberately , he walk downstairs , and stroll into White 's , but with 
 a bewildered and absent air . stand at the celebrated bow - window for 
 some moment in muse silence , Lord Spendquick at last thus address 
 an exceedingly cynical , sceptical old roue , 

 " pray , do you think there be any truth in the story about people in 
 former time sell themselves to the devil ? " 

 " Ugh , " answer the rout , much too wise ever to be surprised . " have you 
 any personal interest in the question ? " 

 " I ! - no ; but a friend of mine have just receive a letter from Levy , and 
 he fly out of the room in the most ex - tra - ordi - na - ry manner , - just as 
 people do in those day when their time be up ! and Levy , you know , 
 be - " 

 " not quite as great a fool as the other dark gentleman to whom you would 
 compare he ; for Levy never make such bad bargain for himself . time up ! 
 no doubt it be . I should not like to be in your friend 's shoe . " 

 " Shoes ! " say Spendquick , with a sort of shudder ; " you never see a 
 neater fellow , nor one , to do he justice , who take more time in 
 dress than he do in general . and talk of shoe , he rush out 
 with the right boot on the left foot , and the left boot on the right . 
 very mysterious ! " and a third time Lord Spendquick shake his head , - and 
 a third time that head seem to he wondrous empty . 




 CHAPTER XXV . 

 Buy Frank have arrive in Curzon Street , leap from the cabriolet , 
 knock at the door , which be open by a strange - look man in a buff 
 waistcoat and corduroy small . Frank give a glance at this 
 personage , push he aside , and rush upstairs . he burst into the 
 drawing - room , - no Beatrice be there . a thin elderly man , with a 
 manuscript book in his hand , appear engage in examine the 
 furniture , and make an inventory , with the aid of Madame di Negra 's 
 upper servant . the thin man star at Frank , and touch the hat which 
 be on his head . the servant , who be a foreigner , approach Frank , and 
 say , in broken English , that his lady do not receive , - that she be 
 unwell , and keep her room . Frank thrust a sovereign into the servant 's 
 hand , and beg he to tell Madame di Negra . that Mr. Hazeldean 
 entreat the honour of an interview . as soon as the servant vanish 
 on this errand , Frank seize the thin man by the arm . " what be this ? - an 
 execution ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " for what sum ? " 

 " fifteen hundred and forty - seven pound . we be the first in 
 possession . " 

 " there be other , then ? " 

 " or else , sir , we should never have take this step . most painful to our 
 feeling , sir ; but these foreigner be here to day , and go to - morrow . 
 and - " 

 the servant re - enter . Madame di Negra would see Mr. Hazeldean . would 
 he walk upstairs ? Frank hasten to obey this summon . 

 Madame di Negra be in a small room which be fit up as a boudoir . 
 her eye show the trace of recent tear , but her face be compose , 
 and even rigid , in its haughty though mournful expression . Frank , 
 however , do not pause to notice her countenance , to hear her dignified 
 salutation . all his timidity be go . he see but the woman whom he 
 love in distress and humiliation . as the door close on he , he fling 
 himself at her foot . he catch at her hand , the skirt of her robe . 

 " oh , Madame di Negra ! - Beatrice ! " he exclaim , tear in his eye , and 
 his voice half - break by generous emotion ; " forgive I , forgive I ! 
 do not   see in I a mere acquaintance . by accident I learn , or , rather , 
 guess - this - this strange insult to which you be so unworthily 
 expose . I be here . think of I - but as a friend , - the true friend . 
 oh , Beatrice , " - and he bend his head over the hand he hold , - " I never 
 dare say so before , it seem presume to say it now , but I can not 
 help it . I love you , - I love you with my whole heart and soul ; to serve 
 you - if only but to serve you ! - I ask nothing else . " and a sob go from 
 his warm , young , foolish heart . 

 the Italian be deeply move . nor be her nature that of the mere sordid 
 adventuress . so much love and so much confidence ! she be not prepare 
 to betray the one , and entrap the other . 

 " rise , rise , " she say softly ; " I thank you gratefully . but do not 
 suppose that I - " 

 " hush ! hush ! - you must not refuse I . hush ! do not   let your pride speak . " 

 " no , it be not my pride . you exaggerate what be occur here . you 
 forget that I have a brother . I have send for he . he be the only one 
 I can apply to . ah , that be his knock ! but I shall never , never forget 
 that I have find one generous noble heart in this hollow world . " 

 Frank would have reply , but he hear the count 's voice on the stair , 
 and have only time to rise and withdraw to the window , try hard to 
 repress his agitation and compose his countenance . Count di Peschiera 
 enter , - enter as a very personation of the beauty and magnificence 
 of careless , luxurious , pampered , egotistical wealth , - his surtout , 
 trim with the costly sable , fling back from his splendid chest . 
 amidst the fold of the glossy satin that envelop his throat gleam 
 a turquoise , of such value as a jeweller might have keep for fifty year 
 before he could find a customer rich and frivolous enough to buy it . the 
 very head of his cane be a masterpiece of art , and the man himself , 
 so elegant despite his strength , and so fresh despite his year ! - it be 
 astonish how well man wear when they think of no one but themselves ! 

 " Pr - rr ! " say the count , not observe Frank behind the drapery of 
 the window ; " Pr - rr - it seem to I that you must have pass a very 
 unpleasant quarter of an hour . and now - Dieu I damne , quoi faire ! " 

 Beatrice point to the window , and feel as if she could have sink into 
 the earth for shame . but as the count speak in French , and Frank do not 
 very readily comprehend that language , the word escape he , though his 
 ear be shock by a certain satirical levity of tone . 

 Frank come forward . the count hold out his hand , and with a rapid change 
 of voice and manner , say , " one whom my sister admit at such a moment 
 must be a friend to I . " 

 " Mr. Hazeldean , " say Beatrice , with meaning , " would indeed have nobly 
 press on I the offer of an aid which I need no more , since you , my 
 brother , be here . " 

 " certainly , " say the count , with his superb air of grand seigneur ; " I 
 will go down and clear your house of this impertinent canaille . but I 
 think your affair be with Baron Levy . he should be here . " 

 " I expect he every moment . Adieu ! Mr. Hazeldean . " Beatrice extend she 
 hand to her young lover with a frankness which be not without a certain 
 pathetic and cordial dignity . restrain from further word by the 
 count 's presence , Frank bow over the fair hand in silence , and 
 retire . he be on the stair when he be join by Peschiera . 

 " Mr. Hazeldean , " say the latter , in a low tone , " will you come into the 
 drawing - room ? " 

 Frank obey . the man employ in his examination of the furniture be 
 still at his task : but at a short whisper from the count he withdraw . 

 " my dear sir , " say Peschiera , " I be so unacquainted with your english 
 law , and your mode of settle embarrassment of this degrading 
 nature , and you have evidently show so kind a sympathy in my sister 's 
 distress , that I venture to ask you to stay here , and aid I in 
 consult with Baron Levy . " 

 Frank be just express his unfeigned pleasure to be of the slight 
 use , when Levy 's knock resound at the streetdoor , and in another 
 moment the baron enter . 

 " Ouf ! " say Levy , wipe his brow , and sink into a chair as if he 
 have be engage in toil the most exhausting , - " ouf ! this be a very sad 
 business , - very ; and nothing , my dear count , nothing but ready money can 
 save we here . " 

 " you know my affair , Levy , " reply Peschiera , mournfully shake his 
 head , " and that though in a few month , or it may be week , I could 
 discharge with ease my sister 's debt , whatever their amount , yet at 
 this moment , and in a strange land , I have not the power to do so . the 
 money I bring with I be nearly exhausted . can you not advance the 
 requisite sum ? " 

 " impossible ! - Mr. Hazeldean be aware of the distress under which I 
 labour myself . " 

 " in that case , " say the count , " all we can do to - day be to remove my 
 sister , and let the execution proceed . meanwhile I will go among my 
 friend , and see what I can borrow from they . " 

 " alas ! " say Levy , rise and look out of the window - " alas ! - we 
 can not remove the marchesa , - the bad be to come . look ! - you see those 
 three man ; they have a writ against her person : the moment she set she 
 foot out of these door she will be arrest . " 

   at that date the law of mesne process exist still . 

 " arrest ! " exclaim Peschiera and Frank in a breath . " I have do my 
 good to prevent this disgrace , but in vain , " say the baron , look 
 very wretched . " you see these english tradespeople fancy they have no 
 hold upon foreigner . but we can get bail ; she must not go to prison - " 

 " Prison ! " echo Frank . he hasten to Levy and draw he aside . the 
 count seem paralyze by shame and grief . throw himself back on the 
 sofa , he cover his face with his hand . 

 " my sister ! " groan the count - " daughter to a Peschiera , widow to a 
 Di Negra ! " there be something affect in the proud woe of this grand 
 patrician . 

 " what be the sum ? " whisper Frank , anxious that the poor count 
 should not overhear he ; and indeed the count seem too stunned and 
 overwhelm to hear anything less loud than a clap of thunder ! 

 " we may settle all liability for L5,000 . nothing to Peschiera , who be 
 enormously rich . Entre nous , I doubt his assurance that he be without 
 ready money . it may be so , but - " 

 " five thousand pound ! how can I raise such a sum ? " 

 " you , my dear Hazeldean ? what be you talk about ? to be sure you 
 could raise twice as much with a stroke of your pen , and throw your own 
 debt into the bargain . but - to be so generous to an acquaintance ! " 

 " Acquaintance ! - Madame di Negra ! the height of my ambition be to claim 
 she as my wife ! " 

 " and these debt do not   startle you ? " 

 " if a man love , " answer Frank , simply , " he feel it most when the 
 woman he love be in affliction . and , " he add , after a pause , " though 
 these debt be fault , kindness at this moment may give I the power 
 to cure forever both her fault and my own . I can raise this money by a 
 stroke of the pen ! how ? " 

 " on the casino property . " 

 Frank draw back . 

 " no other way ? " 

 " of course not . but I know your scruple ; let we see if they can be 
 conciliated . you would marry Madame di Negra ; she will have L20,000 
 on her wedding - day . why not arrange that , out of this sum , your 
 anticipative charge on the casino property be pay at once ? thus , in 
 truth , it will be but for a few week that the charge will exist . the 
 bond will remain locked in my desk ; it can never come to your father 's 
 know ledge , nor wound his feeling . and when you marry   if you will but 
 be prudent in the mean while , you will not owe a debt in the world . " 

 here the count suddenly start up . 

 " Mr. Hazeldean , I ask you to stay and aid we by your counsel ; I see 
 now that counsel be unavaile . this blow on our House must fall ! I 
 thank you , Sir , - I thank you . farewell . Levy , come with I to my poor 
 sister , and prepare she for the bad . " 

 " count , " say Frank , " hear I . my acquaintance with you be but slight , 
 but I have long know and - and esteem your sister . Baron Levy have 
 suggest a mode in which I can have the honour and the happiness of 
 remove this temporary but painful embarrassment . I can advance the 
 money . " 

 " no , no ! " exclaim Peschiera . " how can you suppose that I will hear of 
 such a proposition ? your youth and benevolence mislead and blind you . 
 Impossible , sir , - impossible ! why , even if I have no pride , no delicacy 
 of my own , my sister 's fair fame - " 

 " would suffer indeed , " interrupt Levy , " if she be under such 
 obligation to any one but her affiance husband . nor , whatever my regard 
 for you , Count , could I suffer my client , Mr. Hazeldean , to make this 
 advance upon any less valid security than that of the fortune to which 
 Madame di Negra be entitle . " 

 " ha ! - be this indeed so ? you be a suitor for my sister 's hand , Mr. 
 Hazeldean ? " 

 " but not at this moment , - not to owe her hand to the compulsion of 
 gratitude , " answer gentleman Frank . " Gratitude ! and you do not know 
 her heart , then ? do not know - " the count interrupt himself , and go 
 on after a pause . " Mr. Hazeldean , I need not say that we rank among 
 the first Houses in Europe . my pride lead I formerly into the error 
 of dispose of my sister 's hand to one whom she do not love , merely 
 because in rank he be her equal . I will not again commit such an error , 
 nor would Beatrice again obey I if I seek to constrain she . where she 
 marry , there she will love . if , indeed , she accept you , as I believe 
 she will , it will be from affection solely . if she do , I can not 
 scruple to accept this loan , - a loan from a brother - inlaw - loan to I , 
 and not charge against her fortune ! that , sir , " turn to Levy , with 
 his grand air , " you will take care to arrange . if she do not accept you , 
 Mr. Hazeldean , the loan , I repeat , be not to be think of . pardon I , 
 if I leave you . this , one way or other , must be decide at once . " the 
 count incline his head with much stateliness , and then quit the 
 room . his step be hear ascend the stair . 

 " if , " say Levy , in the tone of a mere man of business - " if the count 
 pay the debt , and the lady 's fortune be only charge with your own , 
 after all , it will not be a bad marriage in the world 's eye , nor ought 
 it to be in a father 's . trust I , we shall get Mr. Hazeldean 's consent , 
 and cheerfully too . " 

 Frank do not listen ; he could only listen to his love , to his heart 
 beat loud with hope and with fear . 

 Levy sit down before the table , and draw up a long list of figure in a 
 very neat hand , - a list of figure on two account , which the post - obit 
 on the casino be destine to efface . 

 after a lapse of time , which to Frank seem interminable , the count 
 re - appear . he take Frank aside , with a gesture to Levy , who rise , and 
 retire into the drawing - room . 

 " my dear young friend , " say Peschiera , " as I suspect , my sister 's 
 heart be wholly your . stop ; hear I out . but , unluckily , I inform she 
 of your generous proposal ; it be most unguarded , most ill - judge in I , 
 and that have well - nigh spoil all ; she have so much pride and spirit ; 
 so great a fear that you may think yourself betray into an imprudence 
 which you may hereafter regret , that I be sure she will tell you that 
 she do not love you , she can not accept you , and so forth . lover like 
 you be not easily deceive . do not   go by her word ; but you shall see 
 her yourself and judge . come . " 

 follow mechanically by Frank , the count ascend the stair , and throw 
 open the door of Beatrice 's room . the marchesa 's back be turn ; but 
 Frank could see that she be weep . 

 " I have bring my friend to plead for himself , " say the count , in 
 French ; " and take my advice , sister , and do not throw away all prospect 
 of real and solid happiness for a vain scruple . heed I ! " he retire , 
 and leave Frank alone with Beatrice . 

 then the marchesa , as if by a violent effort , so sudden be her 
 movement , and so wild her look , turn her face to her wooer , and come 
 up to he , where he stand . 

 " oh , " she say , clasp her hand , " be this true ? you would save I 
 from disgrace , from a prison - and what can I give you in return ? my 
 love ! no , no . I will not deceive you . young , fair , noble as you be , I 
 do not love you as you should be love . go ; leave this house ; you do 
 not know my brother . go , go - while I have still strength , still virtue 
 enough to reject whatever may protect I from he ! whatever - may - oh , 
 go , go . " 

 " you do not love I ? " say Frank . " well , I do not   wonder at it ; you be 
 so brilliant , so superior to I . I will abandon hope , - I will leave you , 
 as you command I . but at least I will not part with my privilege to 
 serve you . as for the rest , shame on I if I could be mean enough to 
 boast of love , and enforce a suit , at such a moment . " 

 Frank turn his face and steal away softly . he do not arrest his step 
 at the drawing - room ; he go into the parlour , write a brief line to 
 Levy charge he quietly to dismiss the execution , and to come to 
 Frank 's room with the necessary deed ; and , above all , to say nothing 
 to the count . then he go out of the house and walk back to his 
 lodging . 

 that evening Levy come to he , and account be go into , and paper 
 sign ; and the next morning Madame di Negra be free from debt ; and 
 there be a great claim on the reversion of the casino estate ; and at 
 the noon of that next day , Randal be closet with Beatrice ; and before 
 the night come a note from Madame di Negra , hurry , blur with tear , 
 summon Frank to Curzon Street . and when he enter the marchesa 's 
 drawing - room , Peschiera be seat beside his sister ; and rise at 
 Frank 's entrance , say , " my dear brother - in - law ! " and place Frank 's 
 hand in Beatrice 's . 

 " you accept - you accept I - and of your own free will and choice ? " 

 and Beatrice answer , " Bear with I a little , and I will try to repay 
 you with all my - all my - " she stop short , and sob aloud . 

 " I never think she capable of such acute feeling , such strong 
 attachment , " whisper the count . 

 Frank hear , and his face be radiant . by degree Madame di Negra 
 recover composure , and she listen with what her young lover deem 
 a tender interest , but what , in fact , be mournful and humble 
 resignation , to his joyous talk of the future . to he the hour pass 
 by , brief and bright , like a flash of sunlight . and his dream when he 
 retire to rest be so golden ! but when he awake the next morning , he 
 say to himself , " what - what will they say at the Hall ? " at that same 
 hour Beatrice , bury her face on her pillow , turn from the loathsome 
 day , and could have pray for death . at that same hour , Giulio 
 Franzini , Count di Peschiera , dismiss some gaunt , haggard Italians , 
 with whom he have be in close conference , sally forth to reconnoitre 
 the house that contain Violante . at that same hour , Baron Levy be 
 seat before his desk , cast up a deadly array of figure , 
 head , " account with the Right Hon . Audley Egerton , M. P. , Dr. and 
 Cr . " - title - deed strew around he , and Frank Hazeldean 's post - obit 
 peep out fresh from the eld parchment . at that same hour , Audley 
 Egerton have just conclude a letter from the chairman of his committee 
 in the city he represent , which letter inform he that he have not a 
 chance of be re - elect . and the line of his face be as compose 
 be usual , and his foot rest as firm on the grim iron box ; but his hand 
 be press to his heart , and his eye be on the clock , and his voice 
 mutter , " Dr. F - should be here ! " and that hour Harley L'Estrange , who 
 the previous night have charm courtly crowd with his gay humour , be 
 pace to and fro the room in his hotel with restless stride and many a 
 heavy sigh ; and Leonard be stand by the fountain in his garden , 
 and watch the wintry sunbeam that sparkle athwart the spray ; 
 and Violante be lean on Helen 's shoulder , and try archly , yet 
 innocently , to lead Helen to talk of Leonard ; and Helen be gaze 
 steadfastly on the floor , and answer but by monosyllable ; and randal 
 Leslie be walk down to his office for the last time , and reading , 
 as he pass across the Green Park , a letter from home , from his sister ; 
 and then , suddenly crumple the letter in his thin pale hand , he look 
 up , beheld in the distance the spire of the great national Abbey ; 
 and recall the word of our hero Nelson , he mutter , " victory and 
 Westminster , but not the Abbey ! " and Randal Leslie feel that , within the 
 last few day , he have make a vast stride in his ambition , - his grasp 
 on the old Leslie land , Frank Hazeldean betroth , and possibly 
 disinherit ; and Dick Avenel , in the background , open against the 
 hat Lansmere interest that same seat in parliament which have first 
 welcome into public life Randal 's ruin patron . 

  " but some must laugh , and some must weep ; 
  thus run the world away ! " 




 BOOK ELEVENTH . 




 INITIAL chapter . 

 on the importance of HATE as an agent in civilized life . 

 it be not an uncommon crotchet amongst benevolent man to maintain that 
 wickedness be necessarily a sort of insanity , and that nobody would make 
 a violent start out of the straight path unless sting to such disorder 
 by a bee in his bonnet . certainly when some very clever , well - educate 
 person like our friend , Randal Leslie , act upon the fallacious 
 principle that " roguery be the good policy , " it be curious to see how 
 many point he have in common with the insane : what over - cunning , what 
 irritable restlessness , what suspicious belief that the rest of the 
 world be in a conspiracy against he , which it require all his wit 
 to baffle and turn to his own proper aggrandizement and profit . perhaps 
 some of my reader may have think that I have represent Randal as 
 unnaturally far - fetched in his scheme , too wire - draw and subtle in 
 his speculation ; yet that be commonly the case with very refining 
 intellect , when they choose to play the knave ; it help to disguise 
 from themselves the ugliness of their ambition , just as a philosopher 
 delight in the ingenuity of some metaphysical process , which end 
 in what plain man call " atheism , " who would be infinitely shock and 
 offend if he be call an atheist . 

 have premise thus much on behalf of the " Natural " in Randal Leslie 's 
 character , I must here fly off to say a word or two on the agency in 
 human life exercise by a passion rarely see without a mask in our 
 debonair and civilized age , - I mean Hate . 

 in the good old day of our forefather , when plain speak and hard 
 blow be in fashion , when a man have his heart at the tip of his 
 tongue , and four foot of sharp iron dangle at his side , Hate play 
 an honest , open part in the theatre of the world . in fact , when we read 
 history , Hate seem to have ' star it " on the stage . but now , where 
 be Hate ? who ever see its face ? be it that smile , good - temper 
 creature , that press you by the hand so cordially , or that dignified 
 figure of state that call you its " right honourable friend " ? be it that 
 bow , grateful dependent ; be it that soft - eyed Amaryllis ? ask not , 
 guess not : you will only know it to be hate when the poison be in your 
 cup , or the poniard in your breast . in the Gothic age , grim Humour 
 paint " the Dance of Death ; " in our polished century , some sardonic wit 
 should give we " the Masquerade of Hate . " 

 certainly , the counter - passion betray itself with ease to our gaze . 
 Love be rarely a hypocrite . but hate - how detect , and how guard against 
 it ? it lurk where you least suspect it ; it be create by cause that 
 you can the least foresee ; and Civilization multiply its variety , 
 whilst it favour its disguise : for Civilization increase the number 
 of contend interest , and Refinement render more susceptible to the 
 least irritation the cuticle of Self - love . but Hate come covertly 
 forth from some self - interest we have cross , or some self - love we 
 have wound ; and , dullard that we be , how seldom we be aware of our 
 offence ! you may be hat by a man you have never see in your life : you 
 may be hat as often by one you have load with benefit ; you may so 
 walk as not to tread on a worm ; but you must sit fast on your easy - chair 
 till you be carry out to your bi , if you would be sure not to tread 
 on some snake of a foe . but , then , what harm do the hate do we ? very 
 often the harm be as unseen by the world as the hate be unrecognize 
 by we . it may come on we , unawares , in some solitary byway of our life ; 
 strike we in our unsuspecting privacy ; thwart as in some bless hope 
 we have never tell to another ; for the moment the world see that it be 
 hate that strike we , its bad power of mischief be go . 

 we have a great many name for the same passion , - Envy , Jealousy , 
 Spite , Prejudice , Rivalry ; but they be so many synonym for the one old 
 heathen demon . when the death - give shaft of Apollo send the plague to 
 some unhappy Achaean , it do not much matter to the victim whether the 
 god be call Helios or Smintheus . 

 no man you ever meet in the world seem more raise above the malice 
 of Hate than Audley Egerton : even in the hot war of politic he have 
 scarcely a personal foe ; and in private life he keep himself so aloof 
 and apart from other that he be little know , save by the benefit the 
 waste of his wealth confer . that the hate of any one could reach the 
 austere statesman on his high pinnacle of esteem , - you would have smile 
 at the idea ! but Hate be now , as it ever have be , an actual power 
 amidst " the Varieties of life ; " and , in spite of bar to the door , and 
 policeman in the street , no one can be say to sleep in safety while 
 there wake the eye of a single foe . 




 CHAPTER II . 

 the glory of Bond Street be no more . the title of Bond Street Lounger 
 have fade from our lip . in vain the crowd of equipage and the blaze of 
 shop : the renown of Bond Street be in its pavement , its pedestrian . 
 art thou old enough , o reader ! to remember the Bond Street Lounger and 
 his incomparable generation ? for my part , I can just recall the decline 
 of the grand era . it be on its wane when , in the ambition of boyhood , I 
 first begin to muse upon high neck cloth and Wellington boot . but the 
 ancient habitue - the magni nomini umbrae , contemporary of Brummell 
 in his zenith , boon companion of George IV . in his regency - still 
 haunt the spot . from four to six in the hot month of June , they 
 saunter stately to and fro , look somewhat mournful even then , 
 forebode the extinction of their race . the Bond Street Lounger be 
 rarely see alone : he be a social animal , and walk arm in arm with 
 his fellow - man . he do not seem bear for the care of these ruder 
 time ; not make be he for an age in which Finsbury return member to 
 parliament . he love his small talk ; and never since then have talk be 
 so pleasingly small . your true Bond Street Lounger have a very dissipate 
 look . his youth have be spend with hero who love their bottle . 
 he himself have perhaps sup with Sheridan . he be by nature a 
 spendthrift : you see it in the roll of his walk . man who make money 
 rarely saunter ; man who save money rarely swagger . but saunter and 
 swagger both unite to stamp PRODIGAL on the Bond Street Lounger . and so 
 familiar as he be with his own set , and so amusingly supercilious with 
 the vulgar residue of mortal whose face be strange to Bond Street ! 
 but he be go . the world , though sad for his loss , still strive to 
 do its good without he ; and our young man , nowadays , attend to 
 model cottage , and incline to Tractarianism . still the place , to 
 an unreflecte eye , have its brilliancy and bustle ; but it be a 
 thoroughfare , not a lounge . and adown the thoroughfare , somewhat 
 before the hour when the throng be thick , pass two gentleman of an 
 appearance exceedingly out of keep with the place . - yet both have 
 the air of man pretend to aristocracy , - an old - world air of 
 respectability and stake in the country , and Church - and - stateism . the 
 burlier of the two be even rather a beau in his way . he have first 
 learn to dress , indeed , when Bond Street be at its acme , and Brummell 
 in his pride . he still retain in his garb the fashion of his youth ; 
 only what then have speak of the town , now betray the life of the 
 country . his neckcloth ample and high , and of snowy whiteness , set off 
 to comely advantage a face smooth - shaven , and of clear florid hue ; his 
 coat of royal blue , with button in which you might have see yourself 
 " veluti in speculum " , be rather jauntily button across a waist that 
 speak of lusty middle age , free from the ambition , the avarice , and the 
 anxiety that fret londoner into thread - paper ; his small - clothe , 
 of grayish drab , loose at the thigh and tight at the knee , be make by 
 Brummell 's own breech - maker , and the gaiter to match   thrust half - way 
 down the calf , have a manly dandyism that would have do honour to 
 the beau - ideal of a county member . the profession of this gentleman 's 
 companion be unmistakable , - the shovel - hat , the clerical cut of the 
 coat , the neckcloth without collar , that seem make for its accessory 
 the band , and something very decorous , yet very mild , in the whole mien 
 of this personage , all speak of one who be every inch the gentleman and 
 the parson . 

 " no , " say the portlier of these two person , - " no , I can not   say I like 
 Frank 's look at all . there be certainly something on his mind . however , 
 I suppose it will be all out this evening . " 

 " he din with you at your hotel , squire ? well , you must be kind to he . 
 we can not   put old head upon young shoulder . " 

 " I do not   object to his bead be young , " return the squire ; " but I 
 wish he have a little of Randal Leslie 's good sense in it . I see how 
 it will end ; I must take he back to the country ; and if he want 
 occupation , why , he shall keep the hound , and I will put he into 
 Brooksby farm . " 

 " as for the hound , " reply the parson , " hound necessitate horse ; and 
 I think more mischief come to a young man of spirit from the stable 
 than from any other place in the world . they ought to be expose from 
 the pulpit , those stable ! " add Mr. Dale , thoughtfully ; ' see what they 
 entail upon Nimrod ! but Agriculture be a healthful and noble pursuit , 
 honour by sacred nation , and cherish by the great man in 
 classical time . for instance , the Athenians be - " 

 " Bother the Athenians ! " cry the squire , irreverently ; " you need not go 
 so far back for an example . it be enough for a Hazeldean that his father 
 and his grandfather and his great - grandfather all farm before he ; 
 and a devilish deal well , I take it , than any of those musty old 
 Athenians , no offence to they . but I will tell you one thing , Parson , a 
 man to farm well , and live in the country , should have a wife ; it be 
 half the battle . " 

 " as to a battle , a man who be married be pretty sure of half , though 
 not always the well half , of it , " answer the parson , who seem 
 peculiarly facetious that day . " ah , Squire , I wish I could think 
 Mrs. Hazeldean right in her conjecture ! - you would have the prettiest 
 daughter - in - law in the three kingdom . and I do believe that , if I could 
 have a good talk with the young lady apart from her father , we could 
 remove the only objection I know to the marriage . those popish error - " 

 " ah , very true ! " cry the squire ; " that Pope stick hard in my gizzard . 
 I could excuse she be a foreigner , and not have , I suppose , a 
 shilling in her pocket - bless her handsome face ! - but to be worship 
 image in her room instead of go to the parish church , that will 
 never do . but you think you could talk she out of the Pope , and into the 
 family pew ? " 

 " why , I could have talk her father out of the Pope , only , when he have 
 not a word to say for himself , he bolt out of the window . youth be 
 more ingenuous in confess its error . " 

 " I own , " say the squire , " that both Harry and I have a favourite notion 
 of ours till this italian girl get into our head . do you know we 
 both take a great fancy to Randal 's little sister , - pretty , blushing , 
 english - face girl as ever you see . and it go to Harry 's good heart 
 to see she so neglect by that silly , fidgety mother of her , her hair 
 hang about her ear ; and I think it would be a fine way to bring 
 randal and Frank more together , and enable I to do something for Randal 
 himself , - a good boy with hazeldean blood in his vein . but Violante be 
 so handsome , that I do not   wonder at the boy 's choice ; and then it be our 
 fault , - we let they see so much of each other as child . however , I 
 should be very angry if Rickeybockey have be play sly , and run 
 away from the casino in order to give Frank an opportunity to carry on a 
 clandestine intercourse with his daughter . " 

 " I do not   think that would be like Riccabocca ; more like he to run 
 away in order to deprive Frank of the good of all occasion to court 
 Violante , if he so desire ; for where could he see more of she than at 
 the casino ? " 

 SQUIRE . - " that be well put . consider he be only a foreign doctor , 
 and , for aught we know , once go about in a caravan , he be a 
 gentleman - like fellow , that Rickeybockey . I speak of people as I find 
 they . but what be your notion about Frank ? I see you do not   think he be 
 in love with Violante , after all . out with it , man ; speak plain . " 

 parson . - " since you so urge I , I own I do not think he in love with 
 she ; neither do my Carry , who be uncommonly shrewd in such matter . " 

 SQUIRE . - " your Carry , indeed ! - as if she be half as shrewd as my 
 Harry . carry - nonsense ! " 

 parson   redden . - " I do not   want to make invidious remark ; but , Mr. 
 Hazeldean , when you sneer at my Carry , I should not be a man if I do 
 not say that - " 

 SQUIRE   interrupting . - " she be a good little woman enough ; but to 
 compare she to my Harry ! " 

 parson . - " I do not   compare she to your Harry ; I do not   compare she to any 
 woman in England , Sir . but you be lose your temper , Mr. Hazeldean ! " 
 SQUIRE . - " I ! " 

 parson . - " and people be star at you , Mr. Hazeldean . for decency 's 
 sake , compose yourself , and change the subject . we be just at the 
 Albany . I hope that we shall not find poor Captain Higginbotham as 
 ill as he represent himself in his letter . ah , be it possible ? no , it 
 can not be . look - look ! " 

 SQUIRE . - " where - what - where ? do not   pinch so hard . bless I , do you see 
 a ghost ? " 

 parson . - " there ! the gentleman in black ! " 

 SQUIRE . - " Gentleman in black ! what ! in broad daylight ! nonsense ! " 

 here the parson make a spring forward , and , catch the arm of the 
 person in question , who himself have stop , and be gaze intently on 
 the pair , exclaim , 

 " Sir , pardon I ; but be not your name Fairfield ? ah , it be Leonard , - it 
 be - my dear , dear boy ! what joy ! so alter , so improve , but still 
 the same honest face . squire , come here - your old friend , Leonard 
 Fairfield . " 

 " and he want to persuade I , " say the squire , shake Leonard 
 heartily by the hand , " that you be the Gentleman in Black ; but , 
 indeed , he have be in strange humour and tantrum all the morning . 
 well , Master Lenny ; why , you be grow quite a gentleman ! the world 
 thrive with you , eh ? I suppose you be head - gardener to some grandee . " 

 " not that , sir , " say Leonard , smile ; " but the world have thrive with 
 I at last , though not without some rough usage at start . ah , Mr. 
 Dale , you can little guess how often I have think of you and your 
 discourse on Knowledge ; and , what be more , how I have live to feel the 
 truth of your word , and to bless the lesson . " 

 parson   much touch and flattered . - " I expect nothing less from you , 
 Leonard ; you be always a lad of great sense , and sound judgment . so 
 you have think of my little discourse on Knowledge , have you ? " 

 SQUIRE . - " Hang knowledge ! I have reason to hate the word . it burn 
 down three rick of mine ; the fine rick you ever set eye on , Mr. 
 Fairfield . " 

 parson . - " that be not knowledge , Squire ; that be ignorance . " 

 SQUIRE . - " ignorance ! the deuce it be . I will just appeal to you , 
 Mr. Fairfield . we have be have sad riot in the shire , and the 
 ringleader be just such another lad as you be ! " 

 LEONARD . - " I be very much oblige to you , Mr. Hazeldean . in what 
 respect ? " 

 SQUIRE . - " why , he be a village genius , and always read some curse 
 little tract or other ; and get mighty discontent with King , Lords , and 
 Commons , I suppose , and go about talk of the wrong of the poor , 
 and the crime of the rich , till , by Jove , sir , the whole mob rise 
 one day with pitchfork and sickle , and smash go Farmer Smart 's 
 thrashing - machine ; and on the same night my rick be on fire . 
 we catch the rogue , and they be all try ; but the poor delude 
 labourer be let off with a short imprisonment . the village genius , 
 thank Heaven , be send pack to Botany Bay . " 

 LEONARD . - " but do his book teach he to burn rick and smash 
 machine ? " 

 parson . - " no ; he say quite the contrary , and declare that he have no 
 hand in those misdoing . " 

 SQUIRE . - " but he be prove to have excite , with his wild talk , the 
 booby who have ! ' Gad , sir , there be a hypocritical Quaker once , who 
 say to his enemy , ' I can not   shed thy blood , friend , but I will hold 
 thy head under water till thou art drown . ' and so there be a set 
 of demagogical fellow , who keep call out , ' farmer , this be an 
 oppressor , and Squire , that be a vampire ! but no violence ! do not   smash 
 their machine , do not   burn their rick ! moral force , and a curse on all 
 tyrant ! ' well , and if poor Hodge think moral force be all my eye , and 
 that the recommendation be to be read backwards , in the devil 's way of 
 read the Lord 's prayer , I should like to know which of the two ought 
 to go to Botany Bay , - Hodge , who come out like a man , if he think he 
 be wrong , or t ' other sneak chap , who make use of his knowledge to 
 keep himself out of the scrape ? " 

 parson . - " it may be very true ; but when I see that poor fellow at the 
 bar , with his intelligent face , and hear his bold clear defence , and 
 thought of all his hard struggle for knowledge , and how they have end , 
 because he forget that knowledge be like fire , and must not be throw 
 amongst flax , - why , I could have give my right hand to save he . and , 
 oh , Squire , do you remember his poor mother 's shriek of despair when 
 he be sentence to transportation for life - I hear it now ! and what , 
 Leonard - what do you think have mislead he ? at the bottom of all the 
 mischief be a tinker 's bag . you can not forget Sprott ? " 

 LEONARD . - " Tinker 's bag ! Sprott ! " 

 SQUIRE . - " that rascal , sir , be the hard follow to nab you could 
 possibly conceive ; as full of quip and quirk as an Old Bailey lawyer . 
 but we manage to bring it home to he . Lord ! his bag be choke - full of 
 tract against every man who have a good coat on his back ; and as if that 
 be not enough , cheek by jowl with the tract be lucifer , contrive 
 on a new principle , for teach my rick the theory of spontaneous 
 combustion . the labourer buy the lucifer - " 

 parson . - " and the poor village genius buy the tract . " 

 SQUIRE . - " all head with a motto , ' to teach the working class that 
 knowledge be power . ' so that I be right in say that knowledge have 
 burn my rick ; knowledge inflame the village genius , the village 
 genius inflame fellow more ignorant than himself , and they inflame my 
 stackyard . however , lucifer , tract , village genius , and Sprott be all 
 off to Botany Bay ; and the shire have go on much the well for it . so 
 no more of your knowledge for I , beg your pardon , Mr. Fairfield . 
 such uncommonly fine rick as mine be too ! I declare , Parson , you 
 be look as if you feel pity for Sprott ; and I see you , indeed , 
 whisper to he as he be take out of court . " 

 parson   look sheepish . - " indeed , Squire , I be only ask he what 
 have become of his donkey , an unoffending creature . " 

 SQUIRE . - " unoffending ! upset I amidst a thistle - bed in my own village 
 green ! I remember it . well , what do he say have become of the donkey ? " 

 parson . - " he say but one word ; but that show all the vindictiveness 
 of his disposition . he say it with a horrid wink , that make my 
 blood run cold . ' what be become of your poor donkey ? ' say I , and he 
 answer - " 

 SQUIRE . - " go on . he answer - " 

 parson . - " ' sausage . ' " 

 SQUIRE . - " sausage ! like enough ; and sell to the poor ; and that be what 
 the poor will come to if they listen to such revolutionize villain . 
 sausage ! Donkey sausage ! "   spit   - " ' t be bad as eat one 
 another ; perfect cannibalism . " 

 Leonard , who have be throw into grave thought by the history of Sprott 
 and the village genius , now press the parson 's hand , ask permission 
 to wait on he before Mr. Dale quit London ; and be about to 
 withdraw , when the parson , gently detain he , say , " no ; do not   leave 
 I yet , Leonard , - I have so much to ask you , and to talk about . I shall 
 be at leisure shortly . we be just now go to call on a relation 
 of the squire 's , whom you must recollect , I be sure , - Captain 
 Higginbotham - Barnabas Higginbotham . he be very poorly . " 

 " and I be sure he would take it kind in you to call too , " say the 
 squire , with great good - nature . 

 LEONARD . - " Nay , sir , would not that be a great liberty ? " 

 SQUIRE . - " Liberty ! to ask a poor sick gentleman how he be ? nonsense . and 
 I say , Sir , perhaps , as no doubt you have be live in town , and know 
 more of newfangled notion than I do , - perhaps you can tell we whether 
 or not it be all humbug , - that new way of doctor people . " 

 LEONARD . - " what new way , sir . there be so many . " 

 SQUIRE . - " be there ? folk in London do look uncommonly sickly . but 
 my poor cousin   he be never a Solomon   have get hold , he say , of a 
 homely - homely - what be the word , Parson ? " 

 parson . " homoeopathist . " 

 SQUIRE . - " that be it . you see the captain go to live with one Sharpe 
 Currie , a relation who have a great deal of money , and very little 
 liver ; - make the one , and leave much of the other in Ingee , you 
 understand . the captain have expectation of the money . very natural , I 
 dare say ; but Lord , sir , what do you think have happen ? Sharpe Currie 
 have do he . would not die , Sir ; get back his liver , and the captain 
 have lose his own . strange thing you ever hear . and then the 
 ungrateful old Nabob have dismiss the captain , say , ' he can not   bear 
 to have invalid about he ; ' and be go to marry , and I have no doubt 
 will have child by the dozen ! " 

 parson . - " it be in Germany , at one of the Spas , that Mr. Currie 
 recover ; and as he have the selfish inhumanity to make the captain 
 go through a course of water simultaneously with himself , it have 
 so chance that the same water that cure Mr. Currie 's liver have 
 destroy Captain Higginbotham 's . an english homoeopathic physician , 
 then stay at the Spa , have attend the captain hither , and declare 
 that he will restore he by infinitesimal dos of the same chemical 
 property that be find in the water which disease he . can there 
 be anything in such a theory ? " 

 LEONARD . - " I once know a very able , though eccentric homoeopathist , and 
 I be inclined to believe there may be something in the system . my friend 
 go to Germany ; it may possibly be the same person who attend the 
 captain . may I ask his name ? " 

 SQUIRE . - " Cousin Barnabas do not mention it . you may ask it of 
 himself , for here we be at his chamber . I say , Parson "   whispering 
 slyly , " if a small dose of what hurt the captain be to cure he , do not 
 you think the proper thing would be a - legacy ? ha ! ha ! " 

 parson   try not to laugh . - " Hush , squire . poor human nature ! we must 
 be merciful to its infirmity . come in , Leonard . " 

 Leonard , interested in his doubt whether he might thus chance again upon 
 Dr. Morgan , obey the invitation , and with his two companion follow 
 the woman , who " do for the captain and his room , " across the small 
 lobby , into the presence of the sufferer . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 whatever the disposition towards merriment at his cousin 's expense 
 entertain by the squire , it vanish instantly at the sight of the 
 captain 's doleful visage and emaciated figure . 

 " very good in you to come to town to see I , - very good in you , cousin , 
 and in you , too , Mr. Dale . how very well you be both look ! I be a sad 
 wreck . you might count every bone in my body . " 

 " hazeldean air and roast beef will soon set you up , my boy , " say 
 the squire , kindly . " you be a great goose to leave they , and these 
 comfortable room of your in the Albany . " 

 " they be comfortable , though not showy , " say the captain , with tear 
 in his eye . " I have do my good to make they so . new carpet , this 
 very chair -   morocco ! , that Japan cat   hold toast and muffin   - just 
 when - just when " -   the tear here break forth , and the captain fairly 
 whimper   - " just when that ungrateful , bad - hearted man write I word 
 ' he be - be die and lone in the world ; ' and - and - to think what I have 
 go through for he ; - and to treat I so ! Cousin William , he have grow 
 as hale as yourself , and - and - " 

 " cheer up , cheer up ! " cry the compassionate squire . " it be a very hard 
 case , I allow . but you see , as the old proverb say , " t be ill waiting 
 for a dead man 's shoe ; ' and in future - I do not   mean offence - but I 
 think if you would calculate less on the liver of your relation , it 
 would be all the well for your own . excuse I ! " 

 " Cousin William , " reply the poor captain , " I be sure I never 
 calculate ; but still , if you have see that deceitful man 's 
 good - for - nothing face - as yellow as a guinea - and have go through 
 all I have   go through , you would have feel cut to the heart , as I do . 
 I can not   bear ingratitude . I never could . but let it pass . will that 
 gentleman take a chair ? " 

 parson . - " Mr. Fairfield have kindly call with we , because he know 
 something of this system of homeeopathy which you have adopt , and may , 
 perhaps , know the practitioner . what be the name of your doctor ? " 

 CAPTAIN   look at his watch . - " that remind I "   swallow a 
 globule . " a great relief these little pill - after the physic I have 
 take to please that malignant man . he always try his doctor 's stuff 
 upon I . but there be another world , and a juster ! " 

 with that pious conclusion the captain again begin to weep . 

 " touch , " mutter the squire , with his forefinger on his forehead . 
 " you seem to have a good - tidy sort of a nurse here , Cousin Barnabas . I 
 hope she be pleasant , and lively , and do not   let you take on so . " 

 " Hist ! - do not   talk of she . all mercenary ; every bit of her fawn ! 
 would you believe it ? I give she ten shilling a week , besides all 
 that go down of my pat of butter and roll , and I overheard the 
 jade say to the laundress that ' I could not last long ; and she 
 would - expectation ! ' ah , Mr. Dale , when one think of the sinfulness there 
 be in this life ! but I will not think of it . no , I will not . let we change 
 the subject . you be ask my doctor 's name . it be - " 

 here the woman with " expectation " throw open the door , and suddenly 
 announce " DR . MORGAN . " 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 the parson start , and so do Leonard . 

 the homoeopathist do not at first notice either . with an unobservant 
 bow to the visitor , he go straight to the patient , and ask , " how go 
 the symptom ? " 

 Therewith the captain commence , in a tone of voice like a schoolboy 
 recite the catalogue of the ship in Homer . he have be evidently 
 con the symptom , and learn they by heart . nor be there a single 
 nook or corner in his anatomical organization , so far as the captain 
 be acquaint with that structure , but what some symptom or other be 
 drag therefrom , and expose to day . the squire listen with horror 
 to the morbific inventory , mutter at each dread interval , " bless I ! 
 Lord bless I ! what , more still ! death would be a very happy release ! " 
 meanwhile the doctor endure the recital with exemplary patience , note 
 down in the leaf of his pocketbook what appear to he the salient 
 point in this fortress of disease to which he have lay siege , and then , 
 draw forth a minute paper say , 

 " Capital , - nothing can be well . this powder must be dissolve in eight 
 tablespoonful of water ; one spoonful every two hour . " 

 " tablespoonful ? " 

 " tablespoonful . " 

 " ' nothing can be well , ' do you say , sir ? " repeat the squire , who in 
 his astonishment at that assertion apply to the captain 's description 
 of his suffering , have hitherto hang fire , - " nothing can be well ? " 

 " for the diagnosis , sir ! " reply Dr. Morgan . 

 " for the dog ' nose , very possibly , " quoth the squire ; " but for the 
 inside of Cousin Higginbotham , I should think nothing could be bad . " 

 " you be mistaken , sir , " reply Dr. Morgan . " it be not the captain 
 who speak here , - it be his liver . Liver , sir , though a noble , be an 
 imaginative organ , and indulge in the most extraordinary fiction . seat 
 of poetry and love and jealousy - the liver . never believe what it say . 
 you have no idea what a liar it be ! but - ahem - ahem . Cott - I think I have 
 see you before , sir . surely your name 's Hazeldean ? " 

 " William Hazeldean , at your service , Doctor . but where have you see 
 I ? " 

 " on the husting at Lansmere . you be speak on behalf of your 
 distinguished brother , Mr. Egerton . " 

 " hang it ! " cry the squire : " I think it must have be my liver that 
 speak there ! for I promise the elector that that half - brother of mine 
 would stick by the land , and I never tell a big lie in my life ! " 

 here the patient , remind of his other visitor , and afraid he be 
 go to be bore with the enumeration of the squire 's wrong , and 
 probably the whole history of his duel with Captain Dashmore , turn 
 with a languid wave of his hand , and say , " Doctor , another friend 
 of mine , the Rev. Mr. Dale , and a gentleman who be acquaint with 
 homoeopathy . " 

 " Dale ? what , more old friend ! " cry the doctor , rise ; and the parson 
 come somewhat reluctantly from the window nook , to which he have retire . 
 the parson and the homoeopathist shake hand . 

 " we have meet before on a very mournful occasion , " say the doctor , with 
 feeling . 

 the parson hold his finger to his lip , and glance towards Leonard . the 
 doctor star at the lad , but he do not recognize in the person before 
 he the gaunt , care - wear boy whom he have place with Mr. Prickett , until 
 Leonard smile and speak . and the smile and the voice suffice . 

 " Cott ! and it be the poy ! " cry Dr. Morgan ; and he actually catch 
 hold of Leonard , and give he an affectionate Welch hug . indeed , his 
 agitation at these several surprise become so great that he stop 
 short , draw forth a globule - " Aconite , - good against nervous shock ! " 
 and swallow it incontinently . 

 " Gad , " say the squire , rather astonish , " ' t be the first doctor I 
 ever see swallow his own medicine ! there must be something in it . " 

 the captain now , highly disgusted that so much attention be withdraw 
 from his own case , ask in a querulous voice , " and as to diet ? what 
 shall I have for dinner ? " 

 " a friend ! " say the doctor , wipe his eye . 

 " Zounds ! " cry the squire , retreat , " do you mean to say , that the 
 british law   to be sure they be very much change of late   allow you 
 to diet your patient upon their fellow - man ? why , Parson , this be bad 
 than the donkey sausage . " 

 " Sir , " say Dr. Morgan , gravely , " I mean to say , that it matter little 
 what we eat in comparison with care as to whom we eat with . it be well 
 to exceed a little with a friend than to observe the strict 
 regimen , and eat alone . talk and laughter help the digestion , and be 
 indispensable in affection of the liver . I have no doubt , sir , that it 
 be my patient 's agreeable society that tend to restore to health his 
 dyspeptic relative , Mr. Sharpe Currie . " 

 the captain groan aloud . 

 " and , therefore , if one of you gentleman will stay and dine with Mr. 
 Higginbotham , it will greatly assist the effect of his medicine . " 

 the captain turn an imploring eye , first towards his cousin , then 
 towards the parson . 

 " I ' m engage to dine with my son - very sorry , " say the squire . " but 
 Dale , here - " 

 " if he will be so kind , " put in the captain , " we might cheer the evening 
 with a game at whist , - double dummy . " now , poor Mr. Dale have set his 
 heart on dining with an old college friend , and have no stupid , prosy 
 double dummy , in which one can not have the pleasure of scold one 's 
 partner , but a regular orthodox rubber , with the pleasing prospect of 
 scold all the three other performer . but as his quiet life forbid 
 he to be a hero in great thing , the parson have make up his mind to be 
 a hero in small one . therefore , though with rather a rueful face , he 
 accept the captain 's invitation , and promise to return at six o'clock 
 to dine . meanwhile he must hurry off to the other end of the town , and 
 excuse himself from the pre - engagement he have already form . he now 
 give his card , with the address of a quiet family hotel thereon , to 
 Leonard , and not look quite so charmed with Dr. Morgan as he be 
 before that unwelcome prescription , he take his leave . the squire too , 
 have to see a new churn , and execute various commission for his 
 Harry , go his way   not , however , till Dr. Morgan have assure he 
 that , in a few week , the captain might safely remove to Hazeldean ; 
 and Leonard be about to follow , when Morgan hook his arm in his old 
 protege , and say , " but I must have some talk with you ; and you have to 
 tell I all about the little orphan girl . " 

 Leonard could not resist the pleasure of talk about Helen ; and he get 
 into the carriage , which be wait at the door for the homoeopathist . 

 " I be go in the country a few mile to see a patient , " say the 
 doctor ; ' so we shall have time for undisturbed consultation . I have 
 so often wonder what have become of you . not hear from Prickett , 
 I write to he , and receive from his heir an answer as dry as a bone . 
 poor fellow , I find that he have neglect his globule and quit the 
 globe . alas , ' pulvis et umbra sumus ! ' I could learn no tiding of you . 
 Prickett 's successor declare he know nothing about you . I hop 
 the good ; for I always fancy you be one who would fall on your 
 leg , - bilious - nervous temperament ; such be the man who succeed in 
 their undertaking , especially if they take a spoonful of chamomilla 
 whenever they be over - excited . so now for your history and the 
 little girl 's , - pretty little thing , - never see a more susceptible 
 constitution , nor one more suited to pulsatilla . " 

 Leonard briefly relate his own struggle and success , and inform the 
 good doctor how they have at last discover the nobleman in whom poor 
 Captain Digby have confide , and whose care of the orphan have justify 
 the confidence . 

 Dr. Morgan open his eye at hear the name of Lord L'Estrange . 
 " I remember he very well , " say he , " when I practise murder as an 
 allopathist at Lansmere . but to think that wild boy , so full of whim and 
 life and spirit , should become staid enough for a guardian to that dear 
 little child , with her timid eye and pulsatilla sensibility . well , 
 wonder never cease ! and he have befriend you too , you say . ah , he know 
 your family . " 

 " so he say . do you think , sir , that he ever know - ever see - my mother ? " 

 " eh ! your mother ? - Nora ? " exclaim the doctor , quickly ; and , as if 
 strike by some sudden thought , his brow meet , and he remain silent 
 and muse a few moment ; then , observe Leonard 's eye fix on he 
 earnestly , he reply to the question , 

 " no doubt he see she ; she be bring up at Lady Lansmere 's . do he not 
 tell you so ? " 

 " no . " a vague suspicion here dart through Leonard 's mind , but 
 as suddenly vanish . his father ! impossible . his father must have 
 deliberately wrong the dead mother . and be Harley L'Estrange a man 
 capable of such wrong ? and have he be Harley 's son , would not Harley 
 have guess it at once , and so guess , have own and claim he ? 
 besides , Lord L'Estrange look so young , - old enough to be Leonard 's 
 father ! - he could not entertain the idea . he rouse himself and say , 
 falteringly , 

 " you tell I you do not know by what name I should call my father . " 

 " and I tell you the truth , to the good of my belief . " 

 " by your honour , sir ? " 

 " by my honour , I do not know it . " 

 there be now a long silence . the carriage have long leave London , and be 
 on a high road somewhat lonely , and more free from house than most of 
 those which form the entrance to the huge city . Leonard gaze wistfully 
 from the window , and the object that meet his eye gradually seem 
 to appeal to his memory . yes ! it be the road by which he have first 
 approach the metropolis , hand in hand with Helen - and hope so busy at 
 his poet 's heart . he sigh deeply . he think he would willingly have 
 resign all he have win - independence , fame , all - to feel again the 
 clasp of that tender hand , again to be the sole protector of that gentle 
 life . 

 the doctor 's voice break on his revery . " I be go to see a very 
 interesting patient , - coat to his stomach quite wear out , sir , - man 
 of great learning , with a very inflame cerebellum . I can not   do he much 
 good , and he do I a great deal of harm . " 

 " how harm ? " ask Leonard , with an effort at some rejoinder . 

 " hit I on the heart , and make my eye water ; very pathetic 
 case , - grand creature , who have throw himself away . find he give over 
 by the allopathist , and in a high state of delirium tremen , 
 restore he for a time , take a great liking to he , - could not help 
 it , - swallow a great many globule to harden myself against he , would 
 not do , bring he over to England with the other patient , who all 
 pay I well   except Captain Higginbotham . but this poor fellow pay 
 I nothing , - cost I a great deal in time and turnpike , and board and 
 lodge . thank Heaven , I be a single man , and can afford it ! my poy , I 
 would let all the other patient go to the allopathist if I could but 
 save this poor , big , penniless , princely fellow . but what can one do 
 with a stomach that have not a rag of its coat leave ? stop "   the doctor 
 pull the check - string . " this be the stile . I get out here and go 
 across the field . " 

 that stile , those field - with what distinctness Leonard remember 
 they . ah , where be Helen ? could she ever , ever again be , his 
 child - angel ? 

 " I will go with you , if you permit , " say he to the good doctor . " and 
 while you pay your visit , I will saunter by a little brook that I think 
 must run by your way . " 

 " the Brent - you know that brook ? ah , you should hear my poor patient 
 talk of it , and of the hour he have spend angle in it , - you would not 
 know whether to laugh or cry . the first day he be bring down to 
 the place , he want to go out and try once more , he say , for his old 
 deluding demon , - a one - eyed perch . " 

 " Heavens ! " exclaim Leonard , " be you speak of John Burley ? " 

 " to be sure , that be his name , - John Burley . " 

 " oh , have it come to this ? cure he , save he , if it be in human power . 
 for the last two year I have seek his trace everywhere , and in 
 vain , the moment I have money of my own , a home of my own . poor , err , 
 glorious Burley ! take I to he . do you say there be no hope ? " 

 " I do not say that , " reply the doctor . " but art can only assist 
 Nature ; and though Nature be ever at work to repair the injury we do 
 to she , yet , when the coat of a stomach be all go , she get puzzle , 
 and so do I. you must tell I another time how you come to know Burley , 
 for here we be at the house , and I see he at the window look out 
 for I . " 

 the doctor open the garden gate of the quiet cottage to which poor 
 Burley have flee from the pure presence of Leonard 's child - angel . and 
 with heavy step , and heavy heart , Leonard mournfully follow , to behold 
 the wreck of he whose wit have glorify orgy , and ' set the table in a 
 roar . " alas , poor Yorick ! 




 CHAPTER V. 

 Audley Egerton stand on his hearth alone . during the short interval 
 that have elapse since we last see he , event have occur memorable 
 in english history , wherewith we have nought to do in a narrative 
 studiously avoid all party politic even when treat of 
 politician . the new minister have state the general programme of their 
 policy , and introduce one measure in especial that have lift they at 
 once to the dizzy height of popular power . but it become clear that this 
 measure could not be carry without a fresh appeal to the people . 
 a dissolution of parliament , as Audley 's sagacious experience have 
 foresee , be inevitable . and Audley Egerton have no chance of return for 
 his own seat , for the great commercial city identify with his name . 
 oh , sad , but not rare , instance of the mutability of that same popular 
 favour now enjoy by his successor ! the great commoner , the weighty 
 speaker , the expert man of business , the statesman who have seem a 
 type of the practical steady sense for which our middle class be 
 renowne , - he who , not three year since , might have have his honour 
 choice of the large popular constituency in the kingdom , - he , Audley 
 Egerton , know not one single town   free from the influence of private 
 property or interest   in which the obscure candidate , who bawl out 
 for the new liberal measure , would not have beat he hollow . where one 
 popular husting , on which that grave sonorous voice , that have still 
 so often the roar of faction , would not be drown amidst the hoot of 
 the scornful mob ? 

 true , what be call the close borough still exist ; true , many a 
 chief of his party would have be too proud of the honour of claim 
 Andley Egerton for his nominee . but the ex - minister 's haughty soul 
 shrink from this contrast to his past position . and to fight against 
 the popular measure , as member of one of the seat most denounce by the 
 people , - he feel it be a post in the grand army of party below his 
 dignity to occupy , and foreign to his peculiar mind , which require the 
 sense of consequence and station . and if , in a few month , those seat 
 be sweep away - be annihilate from the roll of parliament - where 
 be he ? moreover , Egerton , emancipate from the trammel that have bind 
 his will while his party be in office , desire , in the turn of event , 
 to be nominee of no man , - desire to stand at least freely and singly on 
 the ground of his own service , be guide by his own penetration ; no law 
 for action but his strong sense and his stout english heart . therefore 
 he have decline all offer from those who could still bestow seat in 
 parliament . seat that he could purchase with hard gold be yet open to 
 he . and the L5,000 he have borrow from Levy be yet untouched . 

 to this lone public man , public life , as we have see , be the all in 
 all . but now more than ever it be vital to his very want . around 
 he yawn ruin . he know that it be in Levy 's power at any moment to 
 foreclose on his mortgaged land ; to pour in the bond and the bill 
 which lie within those rosewood receptacle that line the fatal lair of 
 the sleek usurer ; to seize on the very house in which now move all the 
 pomp of a retinue that vie with the valetaille of duke ; to advertise 
 for public auction , under execution , " the costly effect of the right 
 Hon . Audley Egerton . " but , consummate in his knowledge of the world , 
 Egerton feel assure that Levy would not adopt these measure against 
 he while he could still tower in the van of political war , - while he 
 could still see before he the full chance of restoration to power , 
 perhaps to power still high than before , perhaps to power the high 
 of all beneath the throne . that Levy , whose hate he divine , though he 
 do not conjecture all its cause , have hitherto delay even a visit , 
 even a menace , seem to he to show that Levy still think he one 
 " to be help , " or , at least , one too powerful to crush . to secure 
 his position in parliament unshackle , unfallen , if but for another 
 year , - new combination of party might arise , new reaction take place , 
 in public opinion ! and , with his hand press to his heart , the stern 
 firm man mutter , " if not , I ask but to die in my harness , and that man 
 may not know that I be a pauper until all that I need from my country be 
 a grave . " 

 Scarce have these word die upon his lip ere two quick knock in 
 succession resound at the street door . in another moment Harley 
 enter , and , at the same time , the servant in attendance approach 
 Audley , and announce Baron Levy . 

 " beg the baron to wait , unless he would prefer to name his own hour to 
 call again , " answer Egerton , with the slight possible change of 
 colour . " you can say I be now with Lord L'Estrange . " 

 " I have hop you have do forever with that deluder of youth , " say 
 Harley , as soon as the groom of the chamber have withdraw . " I remember 
 that you see too much of he in the gay time , ere wild oat be sown ; 
 but now surely you can never need a loan ; and if so be not Harley 
 L'Estrange by your side ? " 

 EGERTON . - " my dear Harley ! doubtless he but come to talk to I of some 
 borough . he have much to do with those delicate negotiation . " 

 HARLEY . - " and I have come on the same business . I claim the priority . 
 I not only hear in the world , but I see by the paper , that Josiah 
 Jenkins , Esq . , know to fame as an orator who leave out his h 's , 
 and young Lord Willoughby Whiggolin , who be just make a Lord of the 
 Admiralty , because his health be too delicate for the army , be certain 
 to come in for the city which you and your present colleague will as 
 certainly vacate . that be true , be it not ? " 

 EGERTON . - " my old Committee now vote for Jenkins and Whiggolin ; and I 
 suppose there will not be even a contest . go on . " 

 " so my father and I be agree that you must condescend , for the sake of 
 old friendship , to be once more member for Lansmere . " 

 " Harley , " exclaim Egerton , change countenance far more than he have 
 do at the announcement of Levy 's portentous visit , " Harley , no , no ! " 

 " no ! but why ? wherefore such emotion ? " ask L'Estrauge , in surprise . 

 Audley be silent . 

 HARLEY . - " I suggest the idea to two or three of the late minister ; 
 they all concur in advise you to accede . in the first place , if 
 decline to stand for the place which tempt you from Lansmere , 
 what more natural than that you should fall back on that early 
 representation ? in the second place , Lansmere be neither a rotten 
 borough to be buy , nor a close borough , under one man 's nomination . 
 it be a tolerably large constituency . my father , it be true , have 
 considerable interest in it , but only what be call the legitimate 
 influence of property . at all event , it be more secure than a contest 
 for a large town , more dignified than a seat for a small . hesitate 
 still ? even my mother entreat I to say how she desire you to renew 
 that connection . " 

 " Harley , " again exclaim Egerton ; and fix upon his friend 's earnest 
 face eye which , when soften by emotion , be strangely beautiful 
 in their expression , - " Harley , if you could but read my heart at this 
 moment , you would - you would - " his voice falter , and he fairly bend 
 his proud head upon Harley 's shoulder ; grasp the hand he have catch 
 nervously , clingingly , " oh , Harley , if I ever lose your love , your 
 friendship , nothing else be leave to I in the world . " 

 " Audley , my dear , dear Audley , be it you who speak to I thus ? you , my 
 school friend , my life 's confidant , - you ? " 

 " I be grow very weak and foolish , " say Egerton , try to smile . " I 
 do not know myself . I , too , whom you have so often call ' stoic , ' 
 and liken to the Iron Man in the poem which you use to read by the 
 riverside at Eton . " 

 " but even then , my Audley , I know that a warm human heart   do what you 
 would to keep it down   beat strong under the iron rib . and I often 
 marvel now , to think you have go through life so free from the wilder 
 passion . Happier so ! " 

 Egerton , who have turn his face from his friend 's gaze , remain silent 
 for a few moment ; and he then seek to divert the conversation , and 
 rouse himself to ask Harley how he have succeed in his view upon 
 Beatrice , and his watch on the count . 

 " with regard to Peschiera , " answer Harley , " I think we must have 
 overrate the danger we apprehend , and that his wager be but an 
 idle boast . he have remain quiet enough , and seem devoted to play . his 
 sister have shut her door both on myself and my young associate during 
 the last few day . I almost fear that in spite of very sage warning of 
 mine , she must have turn his poet 's head , and that either he have meet 
 with some scornful rebuff to incautious admiration or that , he himself 
 have grow aware of peril , and decline to face it ; for he be very much 
 embarrassed when I speak to he respect she . but if the count be not 
 formidable , why , his sister be not need ; and I hope yet to get justice 
 for my italian friend through the ordinary channel . I have secure 
 an ally in a young austrian prince , who be now in London , and who have 
 promise to back , with all his influence , a memorial I shall transmit 
 to Vienna . - a propos , my dear Audley , now that you have a little 
 breathing - time , you must fix an hour for I to present to you my young 
 poet , the son of her sister . at moment the expression of his face be so 
 like her . " 

 " ay , ay , " answer Egerton , quickly , " I will see he as you wish , but 
 later . I have not yet that breathing - time you speak of ; but you say he 
 have prosper ; and , with your friendship , he be secure from fortune . I 
 rejoice to think so . " 

 " and your own protege , this Vandal Leslie , whom you forbid I to 
 dislike - hard task ! - what have he decide ? " 

 " to adhere to my fate . Harley , if it please Heaven that I do not live 
 to return to power , and provide adequately for that young man , do not 
 forget that he cling to I in my fall . " 

 " if he still cle to you faithfully , I will never forget it . I will 
 forget only all that now make I doubt he . but you talk of not live , 
 Audley ! Pooh ! your frame be that of a predestined octogenarian . " 

 " Nay , " answer Audley , " I be but utter one of those vague 
 generality which be common upon all mortal lip . and now farewell , - I 
 must see this baron . " 

 " not yet , until you have promise to consent to my proposal , and be 
 once more member for Lansmere . tut ! do not   shake your head . I can not be 
 deny . I claim your promise in right of our friendship , and shall be 
 seriously hurt if you even pause to reflect on it . " 

 " well , well , I know not how to refuse you , Harley ; but you have not be 
 to Lansmere yourself since - since that sad event . you must not revive 
 the old wound , - you must not go ; and - and , I own it , Harley , the 
 remembrance of it pain even I . I would rather not go to Lansmere . " 

 " ah , my friend , this be an excess of sympathy , and I can not listen to 
 it . I begin even to blame my own weakness , and to feel that we have no 
 right to make ourselves the soft slave of the past . " 

 " you do appear to I of late to have change , " cry Egerton , suddenly , 
 and with a brighten aspect . " do tell I that you be happy in the 
 contemplation of your new tie , - that I shall live to see you once more 
 restore to your former self . " 

 " all I can answer , Audley , " say L'Estrange , with a thoughtful brow , 
 " be , that you be right in one thing , - I be change ; and I be struggle 
 to gain strength for duty and for honour . adieu ! I shall tell my father 
 that you accede to our wish . " 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 when Harley be go , Egerton sink back on his chair , as if in extreme 
 physical or mental exhaustion , all the line of his countenance relaxed 
 and jade . 

 " to go back to that place - there - there - where - courage , courage ! what 
 be another pang ? " 

 he rise with an effort , and fold his arm tightly across his breast , 
 pace slowly to and fro the large , mournful , solitary room . gradually 
 his countenance assume its usual cold and austere composure , - the 
 secret eye , the guard lip , the haughty , collect front . the man of 
 the world be himself once more . 

 " now to gain time , and to baffle the usurer , " murmur Egerton , with 
 that low tone of easy scorn , which bespoke consciousness of superior 
 power and the familiar mastery over hostile nature . he ring the bell : 
 the servant enter . 

 " be Baron Levy still wait ? " 

 " yes , sir . " 

 " admit he . " Levy enter . 

 " I beg your pardon , Levy , " say the ex - minister , " for have so long 
 detain you . I be now at your command . " 

 " my dear fellow , " return the baron , " no apology between friend so 
 old as we be ; and I fear that my business be not so agreeable as to 
 make you impatient to discuss it . " 

 egerton   with perfect composure . - " I be to conclude , then , that you 
 wish to bring our account to a close . whenever you will , Levy . " 

 the BARON   disconcert and surprised . - " Peste ! mon cher , you take 
 thing coolly . but if our account be closed , I fear you will have but 
 little to live upon . " 

 EGERTON . - " I can continue to live on the salary of a Cabinet Minister . " 

 baron . - " possibly ; but you be no long a Cabinet Minister . " 

 EGERTON . - " you have never find I deceive - in a political prediction . 
 within twelve month   should life be spar to I   I shall be in office 
 again . if the same to you , I would rather wait till then formally and 
 amicably to resign to you my land and this house . if you grant that 
 reprieve , our connection can thus close without the eclat and noise 
 which may be invidious to you , as it would be disagreeable to I . but 
 if that delay be inconvenient , I will appoint a lawyer to examine your 
 account , and adjust my liability . " 

 the baron   soliloquize . - " I do not   like this . a lawyer ! that may be 
 awkward . " 

 egerton   observe the baron , with a curl on his lip . " well , Levy , how 
 shall it be ? " 

 the baron . - " you know , my dear fellow , it be not my character to be hard 
 on any one , least of all upon an old friend . and if you really think 
 there be a chance of your return to office , which you apprehend that an 
 esclandre as to your affair at present might damage , why , let we see 
 if we can conciliate matter . but , first , mon cher , in order to become a 
 minister , you must at least have a seat in parliament ; and pardon I the 
 question , how the deuce be you to find one ? " 

 EGERTON . - " it be find . " 

 the baron . - " ah , I forget the L5,000 you last borrow . " 

 EGERTON . - " no ; I reserve that sum for another purpose . " 

 the baron   with a forced laugh . - " perhaps to defend yourself against 
 the action you apprehend from I ? " 

 EGERTON . - " you be mistaken . but to soothe your suspicion I will tell 
 you plainly , that find any sum I might have insure on my life would 
 be liable to debt preincurre , and   as you will be my sole creditor 
 might thus at my death pass back to you ; and doubt whether , indeed , 
 any office would accept my insurance , I appropriate that sum to the 
 relief of my conscience . I intend to bestow it , while yet in life , upon 
 my late wife 's kinsman , Randal Leslie . and it be solely the wish to do 
 what I consider an act of justice , that have prevail with I to accept 
 a favour from the hand of Harley L'Estrange , and to become again the 
 member for Lansmere . " 

 the baron . - " ha ! - Lansmere ! you will stand for Lansmere ? " 

 egerton   wince . - " I propose to do so . " 

 the baron . - " I believe you will be oppose , subject to even a sharp 
 contest . perhaps you may lose your election . " 

 EGERTON . - " if so , I resign myself , and you can foreclose on my estate . " 

 the baron   his brow clearing . - " look you , Egerton , I shall be too happy 
 to do you a favour . " 

 egerton   with stateliness . - " Favour ! no , Baron Levy , I ask from you 
 no favour . dismiss all think of render I one . it be but a 
 consideration of business on both side . if you think it well that we 
 shall at once settle our account , my lawyer shall investigate they . if 
 you agree to the delay I request , my lawyer shall give you no trouble ; 
 and all that I have , except hope and character , pass to your hand 
 without a struggle . " 

 the baron . - " inflexible and ungracious , favour or not - put it as you 
 will - I accede , provide , first , that you allow I to draw up a fresh 
 deed , which will accomplish your part of the compact ; and secondly , that 
 we saddle the propose delay with the condition that you do not lose 
 your election . " 

 EGERTON . - " agree . have you anything furth to say ? " 

 the baron . - " nothing , except that , if you require more money , I be still 
 at your service . " 

 EGERTON . - " I thank you . no ; I shall take the occasion of my retirement 
 from office to reduce my establishment . I have calculate already , and 
 provide for the expenditure I need , up to the date I have specify , 
 and I shall have no occasion to touch the L5,000 that I still retain . " 

 " your young friend , Mr. Leslie , ought to be very grateful to you , " say 
 the baron , rise . " I have meet he in the world , - a lad of much promise 
 and talent . you should try and get he also into parliament . " 

 egerton   thoughtfully . - " you be a good judge of the practical 
 ability and merit of man , as regard worldly success . do you really 
 think Randal Leslie calculate for public life - for a parliamentary 
 career ? " 

 the baron . - " indeed I do . " 

 egerton   speak more to himself than Levy . - " Parliament without 
 fortune , - ' t be a sharp trial ; still he be prudent , abstemious , 
 energetic , persevere ; and at the onset , under my auspex and advice , 
 he might establish a position beyond his year . " 

 the baron . " it strike I that we might possibly get he into the next 
 parliament ; or , as that be not likely to last long , at all event , into 
 the parliament to follow , - not for one of the borough which will be 
 sweep away , but for a permanent seat , and without expense . " 

 EGERTON . - " ay , - and how ? " 

 the baron . - " give I a few day to consider . an idea have occur to I . 
 I will call again if I find it practicable . good - day to you , Egerton , 
 and success to your election for Lansmere . " 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 Peschiera have not be so inactive as he have appear to Harley and 
 the reader . on the contrary , he have prepare the way for his ultimate 
 design , with all the craft and the unscrupulous resolution which 
 belong to his nature . his object be to compel Riccabocca into 
 assenting to the count 's marriage with Violante , or , fail that , to 
 ruin all chance of his kinsman 's restoration . quietly and secretly 
 he have seek out , amongst the most needy and unprincipled of his 
 own countryman , those whom he could suborn to depose to Riccabocca 's 
 participation in plot and conspiracy against the austrian dominion . 
 these his former connection with the Carbonari enable he to track to 
 their refuge in London ; and his knowledge of the character he have to 
 deal with fit he well for the villanous task he undertake . he have , 
 therefore , already select out of these desperado a sufficient number 
 either to serve as witness against his kinsman , or to aid he in any 
 more audacious scheme which circumstance might suggest to his adoption . 
 meanwhile , he have   as Harley have suspect he would   set spy upon 
 Randal 's movement ; and the day before that young traitor confide to 
 he Violante 's retreat , he have at least get scent of her father 's . 

 the discovery that Violante be under a roof so honour , and seemingly 
 so safe , as Lord Lansmere 's , do not discourage this bold and desperate 
 adventurer . we have see he set forth to reconnoitre the house at 
 Knightsbridge . he have examine it well , and discover the quarter which 
 he judge favourable to a coup - de - main , should that become necessary . 

 Lord Lansmere 's house and ground be surround by a wall , the 
 entrance be to the high - road , and by a porter 's lodge . at the rear 
 there lie field cross by a lane or byroad . to these field a small 
 door in the wall , which be use by the gardener in pass to and from 
 their work , give communication . this door be usually keep lock ; 
 but the lock be of the rude and simple description common to such 
 entrance , and easily open by a skeleton key . so far there be no 
 obstacle which Peschiera 's experience in conspiracy and gallantry do 
 not disdain as trivial . but the count be not disposed to abrupt and 
 violent mean in the first instance . he have a confidence in his personal 
 gift , in his address , in his previous triumph over the sex , which make 
 he naturally desire to hazard the effect of a personal interview ; and 
 on this he resolve with his wonted audacity . Randal 's description of 
 Violante 's personal appearance , and such suggestion as to her character 
 and the motif most likely to influence her action as that young 
 lynx - eyed observer could bestow , be all that the count require of 
 present aid from his accomplice . 

 meanwhile we return to Violante herself . we see she now seat in 
 the garden at Knightsbridge , side by side with Helen . the place be 
 retire , and out of sight from the window of the house . 

 VIOLANTE . - " but why will you not tell I more of that early time ? you 
 be less communicative even than Leonard . " 

 HELEN   look down , and hesitatingly . - " indeed there be nothing to 
 tell you that you do not know ; and it be so long since , and thing be 
 so change now . " 

 the tone of the last word be mournful , and the word end with a 
 sigh . 

 VIOLANTE   with enthusiasm . - " how I envy you that past which you treat 
 so lightly ! to have be something , even in childhood , to the formation 
 of a noble nature ; to have bear on those slight shoulder half the load 
 of a man 's grand labour ; and now to see Genius move calm in its clear 
 career ; and to say inly , ' of that genius I be a part ! ' " 

 HELEN   sadly and humbly . - " a part ! oh , no ! a part ? I do not   understand 
 you . " 

 VIOLANTE . - " take the child Beatrice from Dante 's life , and should we 
 have a Dante ? what be a poet 's genius but the voice of its emotion ? all 
 thing in life and in Nature influence genius ; but what influence it 
 the most be its own sorrow and affection . " 

 Helen look softly into Violante 's eloquent face , and draw nearer to 
 she in tender silence . 

 violante   suddenly . - " yes , Helen , yes , - I know by my own heart how 
 to read your . such memory be ineffaceable . few guess what 
 strange self - weaver of our own destiny we woman be in our veri 
 childhood ! " she sink her voice into a whisper : " how could Leonard fail 
 to be dear to you , - dear as you to he , - dearer than all other ? " 

 HELEN   shrink back , and greatly disturb . - " hush , hush ! you must 
 not speak to I thus ; it be wicked , - I can not bear it . I would not have 
 it be so ; it must not be , - it can not ! " 

 she clasp her hand over her eye for a moment , and then lift she 
 face , and the face be very sad , but very calm . 

 VIOLANTE   twin her arm round Helen 's waist . - " how have I wound 
 you , - how offended ? forgive I , but why be this wicked ? why must it not 
 be ? be it because he be below you in birth ? " 

 HELEN . - " no , no , - I never think of that . and what be I ? do not   ask 
 I , - I can not answer . you be wrong , quite wrong as to I . I can only 
 look on Leonard as - as a brother . but - but , you can speak to he more 
 freely than I can . I would not have he waste his heart on I , nor 
 yet think I unkind and distant , as I seem . I know not what I say . 
 but - but - break to he - indirectly - gently - that duty in both forbid we 
 both to - to be more than friend - than - " 

 " Helen , Helen ! " cry Violante , in her warm , generous passion , " your 
 heart betray you in every word you say . you weep ; lean on I , whisper 
 to I ; why - why be this ? do you fear that your guardian would not 
 consent ? he not consent ? he who - " 

 HELEN . - " cease - cease - cease ! " 

 VIOLANTE . - " what ! you can fear Harley - Lord L'Estrange ? Fie ; you do not 
 know he . " 

 HELEN   rise suddenly . - " Violante , hold ; I be engaged to another . " 

 Violante rise also , and stand still , as if turn to stone ; pale as 
 death , till the blood come , at first slowly , then with suddenness from 
 her heart , and one deep glow suffuse her whole countenance . she catch 
 Helen 's hand firmly , and say in a hollow voice , 

 " Another ! engage to another ! one word , Helen , - not to he - not 
 to - Harley - to - " 

 " I can not say , - I must not . I have promise , " cry poor Helen , and 
 as Violante let fall her hand , she hurry away . Violante sit down 
 mechanically ; she feel as if stun by a mortal blow . she close her 
 eye and breathe hard . a deadly faintness seize she ; and when it 
 pass away , it seem to she as if she be no long the same being , 
 nor the world around she the same world , - as if she be but one 
 sense of intense , hopeless misery , and as if the universe be but one 
 inanimate void . so strangely immaterial be we really - we human being , 
 with flesh and blood - that if you suddenly abstract from we but single , 
 impalpable , airy thought , which our soul have cherish , you seem to 
 curdle the air , to extinguish the sun , to snap every link that connect 
 we to matter , and to benumb everything into death , except woe . 

 and this warm , young , southern nature but a moment before be so full of 
 joy and life , and vigorous , lofty hope . it never till now have know its 
 own intensity and depth . the virgin have never lift the veil from her 
 own soul of woman . 

 what , till then , have Harley L'Estrange be to Violante ? an ideal , a 
 dream of some imagine excellence , a type of poetry in the midst of the 
 common world . it have not be Harley the man , - it have be Harley the 
 Phantom . she have never say to herself , " he be identify with my love , 
 my hope , my home , my future . " how could she ? of such he himself have 
 never speak ; an internal voice , indeed , have vaguely , yet irresistibly , 
 whisper to she that , despite his light word , his feeling towards she 
 be grave and deep . o false voice ! how it have deceive she ! her quick 
 conviction seize the all that Helen have leave unsaid . and now suddenly 
 she feel what it be to love , and what it be to despair . so she sit , 
 crush and solitary , neither murmur nor weeping , only now and then 
 pass her hand across her brow , as if to clear away some cloud that 
 would not be disperse ; or heave a deep sigh , as if to throw off some 
 load that no time henceforth could remove . there be certain moment 
 in life in which we say to ourselves , " all be over ; no matter what else 
 change , that which I have make my all be go evermore - evermore ! " and 
 our own thought ring back in our ear , " evermore - evermore ! " 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 as Violante thus sit , a stranger , pass stealthily through the tree , 
 stand between herself and the evening sun . she see he not . he pause a 
 moment , and then speak low , in her native tongue , address she by the 
 name which she have bear in Italy . he speak as a relation , and excuse 
 his intrusion : " for , " say he , " I come to suggest to the daughter 
 the mean by which she can restore to her father his country and his 
 honour . " 

 at the word " father " Violante rouse herself , and all her love for that 
 father rush back upon she with double force . it do so ever , - we 
 love most our parent at the moment when some tie less holy be abruptly 
 break ; and when the conscience say , " there , at least , be a love that 
 have never deceive thee ! " 

 she see before she a man of mild aspect and princely form . peschiera 
  for it be he   have banish from his dress , as from his countenance , 
 all that betray the worldly levity of his character . he be act a 
 part , and he dress and look it . 

 " my father ! " she say , quickly , and in Italian . " what of he ? and who 
 be you , signor ? I know you not . " Peschiera smile benignly , and reply 
 in a tone in which great respect be soften by a kind of parental 
 tenderness , - " suffer I to explain , and listen to I while I speak . " 
 then , quietly seat himself on the bench beside she , he look into 
 her eye , and resume , - 

 " Doubtless you have hear of the Count di Peschiera ? " 

 VIOLANTE . - " I hear that name , as a child , when in Italy . and when she 
 with whom I then dwelt   my father 's aunt   fall ill and die , I be 
 tell that my home in Italy be go , that it have pass to the Count di 
 Peschiera , - my father 's foe ! " 

 PESCHTERA . - " and your father , since then , have teach you to hate this 
 fancy foe ? " 

 VIOLANTE . - " Nay , my father do but forbid I ever to breathe his name . " 

 PESCHIERA . - " alas ! what year of suffering and exile might have be 
 save your father , have he but be more just to his early friend and 
 kinsman , - nay , have he but less cruelly conceal the secret of his 
 retreat . fair child , I be that Giulio Franzini , that Count di Peschiera . 
 I be the man you have be tell to regard as your father 's foe . I be the 
 man on whom the Austrian Emperor bestow his land . and now judge if I 
 be , in truth , the foe . I have come hither to seek your father , in order 
 to dispossess myself of my sovereign 's gift . I have come but with one 
 desire , - to restore Alphonso to his native land , and to surrender the 
 heritage that be force upon I . " 

 VIOLANTE . - " my father , my dear father ! his grand heart will have room 
 once more . oh , this be noble enmity , true revenge ! I understand it , 
 signor , and so will my father , for such would have be his revenge on 
 you . you have see he ? " 

 PESCHIERA . - " no , not yet . I would not see he till I have see yourself ; 
 for you , in truth , be the arbiter of his destiny , as of mine . " 

 VIOLANTE . - " I , Count ? i - arbiter of my father 's destiny ? be it 
 possible ? " 

 peschiera   with a look of compassionate admiration , and in a tone yet 
 more emphatically parental . - " how lovely be that innocent joy ! but 
 do not indulge it yet . perhaps it be a sacrifice which be ask from 
 you , - a sacrifice too hard to bear . do not interrupt I . listen still , 
 and you will see why I could not speak to your father until I have 
 obtain an interview with yourself . see why a word from you may 
 continue still to banish I from his presence . you know , doubtless , 
 that your father be one of the chief of a party that seek to free 
 Northern Italy from the Austrians . I myself be at the onset a warm 
 participator in that scheme . in a sudden moment I discover that some 
 of its more active projector have couple with a patriotic enterprise 
 plot of a dark nature , and that the conspiracy itself be about to be 
 betray to the government . I wish to consult with your father ; but 
 he be at a distance . I learn that his life be condemn . not an 
 hour be to be lose . I take a bold resolve , that have expose I to his 
 suspicion and to my country 's wrath . but my main idea be to save he , 
 my early friend , from death , and my country from fruitless massacre . 

 " I withdraw from the intend revolt . I seek at once the head of the 
 austrian government in Italy , and make term for the life of Alphonso 
 and of the other more illustrious chief , which otherwise would have 
 be forfeit . I obtain permission to undertake myself the charge of 
 secure my kinsman in order to place he in safety , and to conduct 
 he to a foreign land , in an exile that would cease when the danger be 
 dispel . but unhappily he deem that I only seek to destroy he . he 
 flee from my friendly pursuit . the soldier with I be attack by an 
 intermeddle Englishman ; your father escape from Italy , conceal 
 his retreat ; and the character of his flight counteract my effort 
 to obtain his pardon . the government confer on I half his revenue , 
 hold the other half at its pleasure . I accept the offer in order to 
 save his whole heritage from confiscation . that I do not convey to he 
 what I pin to do , - namely , the information that I hold but in trust 
 what be bestow by the government , and the full explanation of what 
 seem blamable in my conduct , - be necessarily owe to the secrecy he 
 maintain . I could not discover his refuge ; but I never cease to plead 
 for his recall . this year only I have partially succeed . he can be 
 restore to his heritage and rank , on one proviso , - a guarantee for his 
 loyalty . that guarantee the government have name : it be the alliance 
 of his only child with one whom the government can trust . it be the 
 interest of all the italian nobility that the representation of a House 
 so great fall to a female should not pass away wholly from the direct 
 line , - in a word , that you should ally yourself with a kinsman . but one 
 kinsman , and he the next in blood , present himself . in short , Alphonso 
 regain all that he lose on the day in which his daughter give she 
 hand to Giulio Franzini , Count di Peschiera . ah , " continue the count , 
 mournfully , " you shriek , you recoil . he thus submit to your choice be 
 indeed unworthy of you . you be scarce in the spring of life , he be in 
 its wan autumn . youth love youth . he do not aspire to your love . 
 all that he can say be , love be not the only joy of the heart , - it be 
 joy to raise from ruin a beloved father ; joy to restore , to a land poor 
 in all but memory , a chief in whom it reverence a line of hero . 
 these be the joy I offer to you , - you , a daughter , and an italian 
 maid . still silent ? oh , speak to I ! " 

 certainly this Count Peschiera know well how woman be to be woo and 
 win ; and never be woman more sensitive to those high appeal which most 
 move all true earnest womanhood than be the young Violante . Fortune 
 favour he in the moment choose . Harley be wrench away from her 
 hope , and love a word erase from her language . in the void of the 
 world , her father 's image alone stand clear and visible . and she who 
 from infancy have so pin to serve that father , who at first learn to 
 dream of Harley as that father 's friend ! she could restore to he all 
 for which the exile sigh ; and by a sacrifice of self , - self - sacrifice , 
 ever in itself such a temptation to the noble ! still , in the midst of 
 the confusion and disturbance of her mind , the idea of marriage with 
 another seem so terrible and revolting , that she could not at once 
 conceive it ; and still that instinct of openness and honour , which 
 pervade all her character , warn even her inexperience that there be 
 something wrong in this clandestine appeal to herself . 

 again the count besought she to speak , and with an effort she say , 
 irresolutely , 

 " if it be as you say , it be not for I to answer you ; it be for my 
 father . " 

 " Nay , " reply Peschiera . " Pardon , if I contradict you . do you know so 
 little of your father as to suppose that he will suffer his interest 
 to dictate to his pride ? he would refuse , perhaps , even to receive my 
 visit , to hear my explanation ; but certainly he would refuse to buy 
 back his inheritance by the sacrifice of his daughter to one whom he have 
 deem his foe , and whom the mere disparity of year would incline the 
 world to say he have make the barter of his personal ambition . but if 
 I could go to he sanction by you ; if I could say , ' your daughter 
 overlook what the father might deem an obstacle , - she have consent 
 to accept my hand of her own free choice , she unite her happiness , 
 and blend her prayer with mine , ' - then , indeed , I could not fail of 
 success ; and Italy would pardon my error , and bless your name . 
 ah , Signorina , do not think of I save as an instrument towards the 
 fulfilment of duty so high and sacred ! think but of your ancestor , 
 your father , your native land , and reject not the proud occasion to 
 prove how you revere they all ! " 

 Violante 's heart be touch at the right chord . her head rise , the 
 colour come back to her pale cheek , she turn the glorious beauty of 
 her countenance towards the wily tempter . she be about to answer and to 
 seal her fate , when at that instant Harley 's voice be hear at a little 
 distance , and Nero come bound towards she , and thrust himself , with 
 rough familiarity , between she and Peschiera . the count draw back , and 
 Violante , whose eye be still fix on his face , start at the change 
 that pass there . one quick gleam of rage suffice in an instant to 
 light up the sinister secret of his nature , - it be the face of the 
 baffle gladiator . he have time but for few word . 

 " I must not be see here , " he mutter ; " but to - morrow , in these 
 garden , about this hour . I implore you , for the sake of your 
 father , - his hope , fortune , his very life , - to guard the secret of 
 this interview , - to meet I again . adieu ! " 

 he vanish amidst the tree , and be go , - noiselessly , mysteriously , 
 as he have come . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 the last word of Peschiera be still ring in Violante 's ear when 
 Harley appear in sight , and the sound of his voice dispel the vague 
 and dreamy stupor which have creep over her sens . at that voice there 
 return the consciousness of a mighty loss , the sting of an intolerable 
 anguish . to meet Harley there , and thus , seem impossible . she turn 
 abruptly away , and hurry towards the horse . Harley call to she by 
 name , but she would not answer , and only quicken her step . he pause 
 a moment in surprise , and then hasten after she . 

 " under what strange taboo be I place ? " say he , gayly , as he lay his 
 hand on her shrink arm . " I inquire for Helen , - she be ill , and can not 
 see I . I come to sun myself in your presence , and you fly I as if god 
 and man have set their mark on my brow . child ! child ! what be this ? you 
 be weep ? " 

 " do not stay I now , - do not speak to I , " answer Violante , through 
 she stifle sob , as she break from his hand and make towards the 
 house . 

 " have you a grief , and under the shelter of my father 's roof , - a grief 
 that you will not tell to I ? Cruel ! " cry Harley , with inexpressible 
 tenderness of reproach in his soft tone . 

 Violante could not trust herself to reply . ashamed of her self - betrayal , 
 soften yet more by his pleading voice , she could have pray to the 
 earth to swallow she . at length , check her tear by an heroic effort , 
 she say , almost calmly , " noble friend , forgive I . I have no grief , 
 believe I , which - which I can tell to you . I be but think of my 
 poor father when you come up ; alarm myself about he , it may be , with 
 vain , superstitious fear ; and so - even a slight surprise - your abrupt 
 appearance have suffice to make I thus weak and foolish ; but I wish to 
 see my father ! - to go home - home ! " 

 " your father be well , believe I , and please that you be here . no 
 danger threaten he ; and you , here , be safe . " 

 " I safe - and from what ? " 

 Harley muse irresolute . he incline to confide to she the danger which 
 her father have conceal ; but have he the right to do so against her 
 father 's will ? 

 " give I , " he say , " time to reflect , and to obtain permission to 
 intrust you with a secret which , in my judgment , you should know . 
 meanwhile , this much I may say , that rather than you should incur the 
 danger that I believe he exaggerate , your father would have give you a 
 protector - even in Randal Leslie . " 

 Violante start . 

 " but , " resume Harley , with a calm , in which a certain deep mournfulness 
 be apparent , unconsciously to himself , " but I trust you be reserve 
 for a fairer fate , and a nobler spouse . I have vow to live henceforth 
 in the common workday world . but for you , bright child , for you , I be a 
 dreamer still ! " 

 Violante turn her eye for one instant towards the melancholy speaker . 
 the look thrilled to his heart . he bow his face involuntarily . when he 
 look up , she have leave his side . he do not this time attempt to follow 
 she , but move away and plunge amidst the leafless tree . 

 an hour afterwards he re - enter the house , and again seek to see 
 Helen . she have now recover sufficiently to give he the interview he 
 request . 

 he approach she with a grave and serious gentleness . " my dear Helen , " 
 say he , " you have consent to be my wife , my life 's mild companion ; 
 let it be soon - soon - for I need you . I need all the strength of that 
 holy tie . Helen , let I press you to fix the time . " 

 " I owe you too much , " answer Helen , look down , " to have any will 
 but your . but your mother , " she add , perhaps cling to the idea of 
 some reprieve , - " your mother have not yet - " 

 " my mother - true . I will speak first to she . you shall receive from my 
 family all honour due to your gentle virtue . Helen , by the way , have 
 you mention to Violante the bond between we ? " 

 " No ; that is , I fear I may have unguardedly betray it , against Lady 
 Lansmere 's command too - but - but - " 

 " so , Lady Lansmere forbid you to name it to Violante ? this should not 
 be . I will answer for her permission to revoke that interdict . it be due 
 to Violante and to you . tell your young friend all . ah , Helen , if I be 
 at time cold or wayward , bear with I - bear with I ; for you love I , 
 do you not ? " 




 CHAPTER X. 

 that same evening Randal hear from Levy   at whose house he stay late 
 of that self - introduction to Violante which   thank to his skeleton 
 key   Peschiera have contrive to effect ; and the count seem more than 
 sanguine , - he seem assure as to the full and speedy success of his 
 matrimonial enterprise . " therefore , " say Levy , " I trust I may very soon 
 congratulate you on the acquisition of your family estate . " 

 " strange ! " answer Randal , ' strange that my fortune seem so bind up 
 with the fate of a foreigner like Beatrice di Negra and her connection 
 with Frank Hazeldean . " he look up at the clock as he speak , and add , 

 " Frank by this time have tell his father of his engagement . " 

 " and you feel sure that the squire can not be coax into consent ? " 

 " no ; but I feel sure that the squire will be so choleric at the first 
 intelligence , that Frank will not have the self - control necessary for 
 coax ; and , perhaps , before the squire can relent upon this point , 
 he may , by some accident , learn his grievance on another , which would 
 exasperate he still more . " 

 " ay , I understand , - the post - obit ? " Randal nod . 

 " and what then ? " ask Levy . 

 " the next of kin to the land of Hazeldean may have his day . " 

 the baron smile . 

 " you have good prospect in that direction , Leslie ; look now to another . 
 I speak to you of the borough of Lansmere . your patron , Audley Egerton , 
 intend to stand for it . " 

 Randal 's heart have of late be so set upon other and more avaricious 
 scheme , that a seat in parliament have sink into a secondary object ; 
 nevertheless his ambitious and all - grasp nature feel a bitter pang , 
 when he hear that Egerton thus interpose between himself and any 
 chance of advancement . 

 " so , " he mutter sullenly , - ' so this man , who pretend to be my 
 benefactor , squander away the wealth of my forefather , throw I 
 penniless on the world ; and , while still encourage I to exertion and 
 public life , rob I himself of - " 

 " no ! " interrupt Levy , " not rob you ; we may prevent that . the Lansmere 
 interest be not so strong in the borough as Dick Avenel 's . " 

 " but I can not stand against Egerton . " 

 " assuredly not , - you may stand with he . " 

 " how ? " 

 " Dick Avenel will never suffer Egerton to come in ; and though he can not , 
 perhaps , carry two of his own politic , he can split his vote upon 
 you . " 

 Randal 's eye flash . he see at a glance that if Avenel do not 
 overrate the relative strength of party , his seat could be secure . 

 " but , " he say , " Egerton have not speak to I on such a subject ; nor can 
 you expect that he would propose to I to stand with he , if he foresee 
 the chance of be oust by the very candidate he himself introduce . " 

 " neither he nor his party will anticipate that possibility . if he ask 
 you , agree to stand , - leave the rest to I . " 

 " you must hate Egerton bitterly , " say randal ; " for I be not vain enough 
 to think that you thus scheme but from pure love to I . " 

 " the motif of man be intricate and complicated , " answer Levy , with 
 unusual seriousness . " it suffice to the wise to profit by the action , 
 and leave the motif in shade . " 

 there be silence for some minute . then the two draw close towards 
 each other , and begin to discuss detail in their joint design . 

 Randal walk home slowly . it be a cold moonlit night . young idler 
 of his own year and rank pass he by on their way from the haunt of 
 social pleasure . they be yet in the first fair holiday of life . Life 's 
 holiday have go from he forever . graver man , in the various calling 
 of masculine labour - profession , trade , the state - pass he also . 
 their step might be sober , and their face careworn ; but no step have 
 the furtive stealth of his , no face the same contract , sinister , 
 suspicious gloom . only once , in a lonely thoroughfare , and on the 
 opposite side of the way , fall a footfall , and glance an eye , that 
 seem to betray a soul in sympathy with Randal Leslie 's . 

 and Randal , who have heed none of the other passenger by the way , 
 as if instinctively , take note of this one . his nerve crisp at 
 the noiseless slide of that form , as it stalk on from lamp to lamp , 
 keep pace with his own . he feel a sort of awe , as if he have behold 
 the wraith of himself ; and even as he glance suspiciously at the 
 stranger , the stranger glance at he . he be inexpressibly relieve 
 when the figure turn down another street and vanish . 

 that man be a felon , as yet undetected . between he and his kind there 
 stand but a thought , - a veil air - spin , but impassable , as the veil of 
 the image at Sais . 

 and thus move and thus look randal Leslie , a thing of dark and secret 
 mischief , within the pale of the law , but equally remove from man by 
 the vague consciousness that at his heart lie that which the eye of man 
 would abhor and loathe . Solitary amidst the vast city , and on through 
 the machinery of Civilization , go the still spirit of Intellectual 
 Evil . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 early the next morning Randal receive two note , one from Frank , 
 write in great agitation , beg Randal to see and propitiate his 
 father , whom he fear he have grievously offend ; and then run off , 
 rather incoherently , into protestation that his honour as well as his 
 affection be engage irrevocably to Beatrice , and that she , at least , 
 he could never abandon . 

 and the second note be from the squire himself - short , and far less 
 cordial than usual - request Mr. Leslie to call on he . 

 randal dress in haste , and go first to Limmer 's hotel . he find the 
 parson with Mr. Hazeldean , and endeavour in vain to soothe he . the 
 squire have not sleep all night , and his appearance be almost haggard . 

 " Oho ! Mr. young Leslie , " say he , throw himself back in his chair 
 as Randal enter , " I think you be a friend , - I think you be 
 Frank 's adviser . explain , sir ! explain ! " 

 " gently , my dear Mr. Hazeldean , " say the parson . " you do but surprise 
 and alarm Mr. Leslie . tell he more distinctly what he have to explain . " 

 SQUIRE . - " do you or do you not tell I or Mrs. Hazeldean that Frank 
 be in love with Violante Rickeybockey ? " 

 RANDAL   as in amaze . - " I ! never , sir ! I fear , on the contrary , that 
 he be somewhat enamoured of a very different person . I hint at that 
 possibility . I could not do more , for I do not know how far Frank 's 
 affection be seriously engage . and indeed , sir , Mrs. Hazeldean , 
 though not encourage the idea that your son could marry a foreigner 
 and a roman Catholic , do not appear to consider such objection 
 insuperable , if Frank 's happiness be really at stake . " 

 here the poor squire give way to a burst of passion , that involve 
 in one tempest Frank , Randal , Harry herself , and the whole race of 
 foreigner , Roman Catholics , and woman . while the squire be still 
 incapable of hear reason , the parson , take aside Randal , convince 
 himself that the whole affair , so far as Randal be concern , have its 
 origin in a very natural mistake ; and that while that young gentleman 
 have be hint at Beatrice , Mrs. Hazeldean have be think of 
 Violante . with considerable difficulty he succeed in convey this 
 explanation to the squire , and somewhat appease his wrath against 
 Randal . and the Dissimulator , seize his occasion , then express so 
 much grief and astonishment at learn that matter have go as far as 
 the parson inform he , - that Frank have actually propose to Beatrice , 
 be accept , and engage himself , before even communicate with his 
 father ; he declare so earnestly , that he could never conjecture such 
 evil , that he have have Frank 's positive promise to take no step without 
 the sanction of his parent ; he profess such sympathy with the 
 squire 's wound feeling , and such regret at Frank 's involvement , that 
 Mr. Hazeldean at last yield up his honest heart to his consoler , 
 and grip Randal 's hand , say , " well , well , I wrong you ; beg your 
 pardon . what now be to be do ? " 

 " why , you can not consent to this marriage , - impossible ! " reply Randal ; 
 " and we must hope , therefore , to influence Frank by his sense of duty . " 

 " that be it , " say the squire ; " for I will not give way . pretty pass thing 
 have come to , indeed ! a widow , too , I hear . artful jade ! thought , no 
 doubt , to catch a Hazeldean of Hazeldean . my estate go to an outlandish 
 papistical set of mongrel brat ! no , no , never ! " 

 " but , " say the parson , mildly , " perhaps we may be unjustly prejudice 
 against this lady . we should have consent to Violante ; why not to she ? 
 she be of good family ? " 

 " certainly , " say randal . 

 " and good character ? " 

 Randal shake his head , and sigh . the squire catch he roughly by the 
 arm - " answer the parson ! " cry he , vehemently . 

 " indeed , sir , I can not speak disrespectfully of the character of a 
 woman , - who may , too , become Frank 's wife ; and the world be ill - natured 
 and not to be believe . but you can judge for yourself , my dear Mr. 
 Hazeldean . ask your brother whether Madame di Negra be one whom he would 
 advise his nephew to marry . " 

 " my brother ! " exclaim the squire , furiously . " consult my distant 
 brother on the affair of my own son ? " 

 " he be a man of the world , " put in Randal . 

 " and of feeling and honour , " say the parson ; " and , perhaps , through 
 he , we may be enable to enlighten Frank , and save he from what 
 appear to be the snare of an artful woman . " 

 " meanwhile , " say Randal , " I will seek Frank , and do my good with he . 
 let I go now , - I will return in an hour or so . " 

 " I will accompany you , " say the parson . 

 " Nay , pardon I , but I think we two young man can talk more openly 
 without a third person , even so wise and kind as you . " 

 " let randal go , " growl the squire . and Randal go . he spend some 
 time with Frank , and the reader will easily divine how that time be 
 employ . as he leave Frank 's lodging , he find himself suddenly seize 
 by the squire himself . 

 " I be too impatient to stay at home and listen to the parson 's 
 prosing , " say Mr. Hazeldean , nervously . " I have shake Dale off . tell 
 I what have pass . oh , do not   fear , - I be a man , and can bear the bad . " 

 Randal draw the squire 's arm within his , and lead he into the adjacent 
 park . 

 " my dear sir , " say he , sorrowfully , " this be very confidential what 
 I be about to say . I must repeat it to you , because , without such 
 confidence , I see not how to advise you on the proper course to take . 
 but if I betray Frank , it be for his good , and to his own father ; - only 
 do not tell he . he would never forgive I ; it would forever destroy my 
 influence over he . " 

 " go on , go on , " gasp the squire ; ' speak out . I will never tell the 
 ungrateful boy that I learn his secret from another . " 

 " then , " say Randal , " the secret of his entanglement with Madame di 
 Negra be simply this : he find she in debt - nay , on the point of be 
 arrest - " 

 " debt ! arrest ! Jezebel ! " 

 " and in pay the debt himself , and save she from arrest , he 
 confer on she the obligation which no woman of honour could accept 
 save from an affiance husband . Poor Frank ! - if sadly take in , still we 
 must pity and forgive he ! " 

 suddenly , to Randal 's great surprise , the squire 's whole face brighten 
 up . 

 " I see , I see ! " he exclaim , slap his thigh . " I have it , I have 
 it ! ' t be an affair of money ! I can buy she off . if she take money from 
 he - the mercenary , paint baggage i - why , then , she will take it from 
 I . I do not   care what if cost - half my fortune - all ! I would be content 
 never to see Hazeldean Hall again , if I could save my son , my own son , 
 from disgrace and misery ; for miserable he will be , when he know he have 
 break my heart and his mother 's . and for a creature like that ! my boy , 
 a thousand hearty thank to you . where do the wench live ? I will go 
 to she at once . " and as he speak , the squire actually pull out his 
 pocketbook , and begin turn over and count the bank - note in it . 

 randal at first try to combat this bold resolution on the part of the 
 squire ; but Mr. Hazeldean have seize on it with all the obstinacy of his 
 straightforward english mind . he cut Randal 's persuasive eloquence off 
 in the midst . 

 " do not   waste your breath ! I have   settle it ; and if you do not   tell I 
 where she live , ' t be easily find out , I suppose . " 

 Randal muse a moment . " after all , " think he , " why not ? he will be 
 sure so to speak as to enlist her pride against himself , and to irritate 
 Frank to the utmost . let he go . " 

 accordingly he give the information require ; and , insist with great 
 earnestness on the squire 's promise not to mention to Madame di Negra 
 his knowledge of Frank 's pecuniary aid   for that would betray randal 
 as the informant ; and satisfy himself as he well might with the 
 squire 's prompt assurance , " that he know how to settle matter , without 
 say why or wherefore , as long as he open his purse wide enough , " 
 he accompany Mr. Hazeldean back into the street , and there leave 
 he , - fix an hour in the evening for an interview at Limmer 's , 
 and hint that it would be good to have that interview without the 
 presence of the parson . 

 " excellent good man , " say Randal , " but not with sufficient knowledge of 
 the world for affair of this kind , which you understand so well . " 

 " I should think so , " quoth the squire , who have quite recover his 
 good - humour . " and the parson be as soft as buttermilk . we must be firm 
 here , - firm , sir . " and the squire strike the end of his stick on the 
 pavement , nod to Randal , and go on to May Fair as sturdily and as 
 confidently as if to purchase a prize cow at a cattle - show . 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 " bring the light nearer , " say John Burley , - " nearer still . " 

 Leonard obey , and place the candle on a little table by the sick 
 man 's bedside . 

 Burley 's mind be partially wandering ; but there be method in his 
 madness . Horace Walpole say that " his stomach would survive all the 
 rest of he . " that which in Burley survive the last be his quaint , 
 wild genius . he look wistfully at the still flame of the candle : " it 
 live ever in the air ! " say he . 

 " what live ever ? " 

 Burley 's voice swell , " Light ! " he turn from Leonard , and 
 again contemplate the little flame . " in the fix star , in the 
 Will - o'-the - wisp , in the great sun that illumine half a world , or the 
 farthing rushlight by which the ragged student strain his eye , - still 
 the same flower of the element ! light in the universe , think in 
 the soul - ay , ay , go on with the simile . my head swim . extinguish the 
 light ! you can not ; fool , it vanish from your eye , but it be still in 
 the space . Worlds must perish , sun shrivel up , matter and spirit both 
 fall into nothingness , before the combination whose union make that 
 little flame which the breath of a babe can restore to darkness , 
 shall lose the power to form themselves into light once more . lose the 
 power ! - no , the necessity : it be the one must in creation . ay , ay , very 
 dark riddle grow clear now , - now when I could not cast up an addition 
 sum in the baker 's bill ! what wise man deny that two and two make 
 four ? do they not make four ? I can not   answer he . but I could answer a 
 question that some wise man have contrive to make much knottier . " he 
 smile softly , and turn his face for some minute to the wall . 

 this be the second night on which Leonard have watch by his bedside , 
 and Burley 's state have grow rapidly bad . he could not last many day , 
 perhaps many hour . but he have evince an emotion beyond mere delight 
 at see Leonard again . he have since then be calm , more himself . " I 
 fear I might have ruin you by my bad example , " he say , with a touch 
 of humour that become pathos as he add , " that idea prey on I . " 

 " no , no ; you do I great good . " 

 " say that , - say it often , " say Burley , earnestly ; " it make my heart 
 feel so light . " 

 he have listen to Leonard 's story with deep interest , and be fond 
 of talk to he of little Helen . he detect the secret at the young 
 man 's heart , and cheer the hope that lie there , amidst fear and 
 sorrow . Burley never talk seriously of his repentance ; it be not in 
 his nature to talk seriously of the thing which he feel solemnly . but 
 his high animal spirit be quench with the animal power that feed 
 they . now , we go out of our sensual existence only when we be no long 
 enthral by the Present , in which the sens have their realm . the 
 sensual being vanishe when Ave be in the past or the Future . the 
 Present be go from Burley ; he could no more be its slave and its 
 king . 

 it be most touching to see how the inner character of this man unfold 
 itself , as the leaf of the outer character fall off and wither , - a 
 character no one would have guess in he , an inherent refinement that 
 be almost womanly ; and he have all a woman 's abnegation of self . he 
 take the care lavish on he so meekly . as the feature of the old 
 man return in the stillness of death to the aspect of youth , - the line 
 efface , the wrinkle go , - so , in see Burley now , you see what he 
 have be in his spring of promise . but he himself see only what he have 
 fail to be , - power squander , life waste . " I once behold , " he say , 
 " a ship in a storm . it be a cloudy , fitful day , and I could see the 
 ship with all its mast fight bard for life and for death . then come 
 night , dark as pitch , and I could only guess that the ship fight on . 
 towards the dawn the star grow visible , and once more I see the ship : 
 it be a wreck , - it go down just as the star shine forth . " 

 when he have make that allusion to himself , he sit very still for some 
 time , then he spread out his waste hand , and gaze on they , and on 
 his shrunken limb . " good , " say he , laugh low ; " these hand be too 
 large and rude for handle the delicate webs of my own mechanism , 
 and these strong limb run away with I . if I have be a sickly , puny 
 fellow , perhaps my mind would have have fair play . there be too much of 
 brute body here ! look at this hand now ! you can see the light through 
 it ! good , good ! " 

 now , that evening , until he have retire to bed , Burley have be 
 unusually cheerful , and have talk with much of his old eloquence , if 
 with little of his old humour . amongst other matter , he have speak with 
 considerable interest of some poem and other paper in manuscript which 
 have be leave in the house by a former lodger , and which , the reader may 
 remember , Mrs. Goodyer have urge he in vain to read , in his last visit 
 to her cottage . but then he have her husband Jacob to chat with , and the 
 spirit bottle to finish , and the wild craving for excitement pluck his 
 thought back to his London revel . now poor Jacob be dead , and it be 
 not brandy that the sick man drink from the widow 's cruse ; and London 
 lie afar amidst its fog , like a world resolve back into nebula . so , 
 to please his hostess and distract his own solitary thought , he have 
 condescend   just before Leonard find he out   to peruse the memorial 
 of a life obscure to the world , and new to his own experience of coarse 
 joy and woe . " I have be make a romance , to amuse myself , from 
 their content , " say he . " they maybe of use to you , brother author . I 
 have tell Mrs. Goodyer to place they in your room . amongst those paper 
 be a sort of journal , - a woman 's journal ; it move I greatly . a man 
 get into another world , strange to he as the orb of Sirius , if he can 
 transport himself into the centre of a woman 's heart , and see the 
 life there , so wholly unlike our own . thing of moment to we , to it so 
 trivial ; thing trifle to we , to it so vast . there be this journal , 
 in its date remind I of stormy event in my own existence , and 
 grand doing in the world 's . and those date there , chronicle but the 
 mysterious , unrevealed record of some obscure , love heart ! and in 
 that chronicle , o Sir Poet , there be as much genius , vigour of thought , 
 vitality of be , pour and waste , as ever kind friend will say be 
 lavish on the rude outer world by big John Burley ! Genius , genius ! be 
 we all alike , then , save when we leash ourselves to some matter - of - fact 
 material , and float over the roar sea on a wooden plank or a herring 
 tub ? " and after he have utter that cry of a secret anguish , John Burley 
 have begin to show symptom of grow fever and disturb brain ; and 
 when they have get he into bed , he lie there mutter to himself , 
 until , towards midnight , he have ask Leonard to bring the light nearer 
 to he . 

 so now he again be quiet , with his face turn towards the wall ; and 
 Leonard stand by the bedside sorrowfully , and Mrs. Goodyer , who do not 
 heed Burley 's talk , and think only of his physical state , be dip 
 cloth into iced water to apply to his forehead . but as she approach 
 with these , and address he soothingly , Burley raise himself on his 
 arm , and wave aside the bandage . " I do not need they , " say he , in a 
 collect voice . " I be well now . I and that pleasant light understand 
 one another , and I believe all it tell I . Pooh , pooh , I do not rave . " 
 he look so smilingly and so kindly into her face , that the poor woman , 
 who love he as her own son , fairly burst into tear . he draw she 
 towards he , and kiss her forehead . 

 " peace , old fool , " say he , fondly . " you shall tell angler hereafter 
 how John Burley come to fish for the one - eyed perch which he never 
 catch ; and how , when he give it up at the last , his bait all gone , and 
 the line break amongst the weed , you comfort the baffled man . there 
 be many good fellow yet in the world who will like to know that poor 
 Burley do not die on a dunghill . kiss I . come , boy , you too . now , God 
 bless you , I should like to sleep . " his cheek be wet with the tear 
 of both his listener , and there be a moisture in his own eye , which , 
 nevertheless , beam bright through the moisture . 

 he lay himself down again , and the old woman would have withdraw the 
 light . he move uneasily . " not that , " he murmur , - " light to the last ! " 
 and put forth his wan hand , he draw aside the curtain so that the 
 light might fall full on his face . 

   every one remember that Goethe 's last word be say to have be , 
  " More light ; " and perhaps what have occur in the text may be 
  suppose a plagiarism from those word . but , in fact , nothing be 
  more common than the craving and demand for light a little before 
  death . let any consult his own sad experience in the last moment 
  of those whose gradual close he have watch and tend . what more 
  frequent than a prayer to open the shutter and let in the sun ? 
  what complaint more repeat and more touching than " that it be 
  grow dark " ? I once know a sufferer , who do not then seem in 
  immediate danger , suddenly order the sick room to be light up as if 
  for a gala . when this be tell to the physician , he say gravely , 
  " no bad sign . " 

 in a few minute he be asleep , breathe calmly and regularly as an 
 infant . 

 the old woman wipe her eye , and draw Leonard softly into the adjoining 
 room , in which a bed have be make up for he . he have not leave the house 
 since he have enter it with Dr. Morgan . " you be young , sir , " say she , 
 with kindness , " and the young want sleep . lie down a bit : I will call 
 you when he wake . " 

 " no , I could not sleep , " say Leonard . " I will watch for you . " 

 the old woman shake her head . " I must see the last of he , sir ; but I 
 know he will be angry when his eye open on I , for he have grow very 
 thoughtful of other . " 

 " ah , if he have but be , as thoughtful of himself ! " murmur Leonard ; 
 and he seat himself by the table , on which , as he lean his elbow , he 
 dislodge some paper place there . they fall to the ground with a dumb , 
 moaning , sigh sound . - 

 " what be that ? " say he , start . 

 the old woman pick up the manuscript and smooth they carefully . 

 " ah , sir , he bid I place these paper here . he think they might keep 
 you from fret about he , in case you would sit up and wake . and he 
 have a thought of I , too ; for I have so pin to find out the poor young 
 lady , who leave they year ago . she be almost as dear to I as he be ; 
 dearer perhaps until now - when - when I be about to lose he ! " 

 Leonard turn from the paper , without a glance at their content : they 
 have no interest for he at such a moment . the hostess go on , 

 " perhaps she be go to heaven before he ; she do not look like one 
 long for this world . she leave we so suddenly . many thing of her 
 besides these paper be still , here ; but I keep they air and dust , 
 and strew lavender over they , in case she ever come for they again . 
 you never hear tell of she , do you , sir ? " she add , with great 
 simplicity , and drop a half courtesy . 

 " of she - of whom ? " 

 " do not Mr. John tell you her name - dear , dear ; Mrs. Bertram . " 

 Leonard start ; the very name so impressed upon his memory by Harley 
 L'Estrange ! 

 " Bertram ! " he repeat . " be you sure ? " 

 " oh , yes , sir ! and many year after she have leave we , and we have hear no 
 more of she , there come a packet address to she here , from over sea , 
 sir . we take it in , and keep it , and John would break the seal , to know 
 if it would tell we anything about she ; but it be all in a foreign 
 language like , - we could not read a word . " 

 " have you the packet ? pray show it to I . it may be of the great 
 value . to - morrow will do - I can not think of that just now . poor Burley ! " 

 Leonard 's manner indicate that he wish to talk no more , and to be 
 alone . so Mrs. Goodyer leave he , and steal back to Burley 's room on 
 tiptoe : 

 the young man remain in deep revery for some moment . " Light , " he 
 murmur . " how often ' Light ' be the last word of those round whom the 
 shade be gather ! " he move , and straight on his view through the 
 cottage lattice there stream light indeed , - not the miserable ray light 
 by a human hand , but the still and holy effulgence of a moonlit heaven . 
 it lie broad upon the humble floor , pierce across the threshold of the 
 death chamber , and halt clear amidst its shadow . 

 Leonard stand motionless , his eye follow the silvery silent 
 splendour . 

 " and , " he say inly - " and do this large err nature , mar by its 
 genial fault , this soul which should have fill a land , as yon orb the 
 room , with a light that link earth to heaven - do it pass away into 
 the dark , and leave not a ray behind ? Nay , if the element of light be 
 ever in the space , and when the flame go out , return to the vital air , 
 so think once kindle life forever around and about we , a part of our 
 breathing atmosphere . many a thinker , many a poet , may yet illumine the 
 world , from the thought which yon genius , that will have no name , give 
 forth to wander through air , and recombine again in some new form of 
 light . " 

 thus he go on in vague speculation , seek , as youth enamour 
 of fame seek too fondly , to prove that mind never work , however 
 erratically , in vain , and to retain yet , as an influence upon earth , 
 the soul about to soar far beyond the atmosphere where the element that 
 make fame abide . not thus have the die man interpret the endurance of 
 light and think . 

 suddenly , in the midst of his revery , a loud cry break on his ear . he 
 shudder as he hear , and hasten forebodingly into the adjoining 
 room . the old woman be kneel by the bedside , and chafe Burley 's 
 hand , eagerly look into his face . a glance suffice to Leonard . all 
 be over . Burley have die in sleep , - calmly , and without a groan . 

 the eye be half open , with that look of inexpressible softness which 
 death sometimes leave ; and still they be turn towards the light ; 
 and the light burn clear . 

 Leonard close tenderly the heavy lid ; and as he cover the face , the 
 lip smile a serene farewell . 




 CHAPTER XIII . 

 we have see Squire Hazeldean   proud of the content of his pocketbook , 
 and his knowledge of the mercenary nature of foreign woman   set off on 
 his visit to Beatrice di Negra . randal thus left , muse lone in the 
 crowded street , resolve with astute complacency the probable result 
 of Mr. Hazeldean 's bluff negotiation ; and convince himself that one of 
 his vista towards Fortune be become more clear and clear , he turn , 
 with the restless activity of some founder of destine city in a new 
 settlement , to lop the bough that cumber and obscure the other . for 
 truly , like a man in a vast columbian forest , open entangled space , 
 now with the ready axe , now with the patient train that kindle the 
 slow fire , this child of civilized life go toil on against 
 surround obstacle , resolute to destroy , but ever scheme to 
 construct . and now Randal have reach Levy 's dainty business - room , and 
 be bury deep in discussion how to secure to himself , at the expense 
 of his patron , the representation of Lansmere , and how to complete the 
 contract which shall reannex to his forlorn inheritance some fragment 
 of its ancient wealth . 

 meanwhile , Chance fight on his side in the boudoir of May Fair . the 
 squire have find the marchesa at home , briefly introduce himself and 
 his business , tell she she be mistaken if she have fancy she have 
 take in a rich heir in his son ; that , thank Heaven , he could leave his 
 estate to his ploughman , should he so please , but that he be willing 
 to do thing liberally ; and whatever she think Frank be worth , he be 
 very ready to pay for . 

 at another time Beatrice would perhaps have laugh at this strange 
 address ; or she might , in some prouder moment , have fire up with all 
 a patrician 's resentment and a woman 's pride ; but now her spirit be 
 crush , her nerve shatter : the sense of her degraded position , of 
 her dependence on her brother , combine with her supreme unhappiness at 
 the loss of those dream with which Leonard have for a while charm 
 her weary wake life , - all come upon she . she listen ; pale and 
 speechless ; and the poor squire think he be quietly advance 
 towards a favourable result , when she suddenly burst into a passion 
 of hysterical tear ; and just at that moment Frank himself enter the 
 room . at the sight of his father , of Beatrice 's grief , his sense of 
 filial duty give way . he be madden by irritation , by the insult 
 offer to the woman he love , which a few trembling word from she 
 explain to he , - madden yet more by the fear that the insult have 
 lose she to he ; warm word ensue between son and father , to close with 
 the peremptory command and vehement threat of the last . 

 " come away this instant , sir ! come with I , or before the day be over , I 
 strike you out of my will ! " 

 the son 's answer be not to his father ; he throw himself at Beatrice 's 
 foot . 

 " forgive he ; forgive we both - " 

 " what ! you prefer that strange to I , - to the inheritance of 
 Hazeldean ! " cry the squire , stamp his foot . 

 " leave your estate to whom you will ; all that I care for in life be 
 here ! " 

 the squire stand still a moment or so , gaze on his son with a strange 
 bewildered marvel at the strength of that mystic passion , which none 
 not labour under its fearful charm can comprehend , which create the 
 sudden idol that no reason justifie , and sacrifice to its fatal shrine 
 alike the Past and the future . not trust himself to speak , the father 
 draw his hand across his eye , and dash away the bitter tear 
 that spring from a swell and indignant heart ; then he utter an 
 inarticulate sound , and , find his voice go , move away to the door , 
 and leave the house . 

 he walk through the street , bear his head very erect , as a proud 
 man do when deeply wound , and strive to shake off some affection 
 that he deem a weakness ; and his tremble nervous finger fumble at 
 the button of his coat , try to tighten the garment across his chest , 
 as if to confirm a resolution that still seek to struggle out of the 
 revolting heart . 

 thus he go on , and the reader , perhaps , will wonder whither ; and the 
 wonder may not lessen when he find the squire come to a dead pause in 
 Grosvenor Square , and at the portico of his " distant brother 's " stately 
 house . 

 at the squire 's brief inquiry whether Mr. Egerton be at home , the 
 porter summon the groom of the chamber ; and the groom of the 
 chamber , see a stranger , doubt whether his master be not engage , 
 but would take in the stranger 's card and see . 

 " ay , ay , " mutter the squire , " this be true relationship ! - my child 
 prefer a stranger to I ; why should I complain that I be a stranger in 
 a brother 's house ? Sir , " add the squire aloud , and very meekly - ' sir , 
 please to say to your master that I be William Hazeldean . " 

 the servant bow low , and without another word conduct the visitor 
 into the statesman 's library , and announce Mr. Hazeldean , close the 
 door . 

 Audley be seat at his desk , the grim iron box still at his foot , 
 but they be now closed and lock . and the ex - minister be no long 
 look over official document ; letter spread open before he of far 
 different nature ; in his hand there lie a long lock of fair silken hair , 
 on which his eye be fix sadly and intently . he start at the sound 
 of his visitor 's name , and the tread of the squire 's stalwart footstep ; 
 and mechanically thrust into his bosom the relic of young and warm 
 year , keep his hand to his heart , which beat loud with disease under 
 the light pressure of that golden hair . 

 the two brother stand on the great man 's lonely hearth , face each 
 other in silence , and note unconsciously the change make in each 
 during the long year in which they have never meet . 

 the squire , with his portly size , his hardy sunburned cheek , the 
 partial baldness of his unfurrowed open forehead , look his full 
 age , - deep into middle life . unmistakably he seem the pater familias , 
 the husband and the father , the man of social domestic tie . but about 
 Audley   really some few year junior to the squire , despite the line 
 of care on his handsome face , there still linger the grace of youth . 
 man of city retain youth long than those of the country , - a remark 
 which Buffon have not fail to make and to account for . neither do 
 Egerton betray the air of the married man ; for ineffable solitariness 
 seem stamp upon one whose private life have long be so stern a 
 solitude . no ray from the focus of home play round that reserve , 
 unjoyous , melancholy brow . in a word , Audley look still the man for 
 whom some young female heart might fondly sigh ; and not the less because 
 of the cold eye and compressed lip , which challenge interest even while 
 seem to repel it . 

 Audley be the first to speak , and to put forth the right hand , which 
 he steal slowly from its place at his breast , on which the lock of hair 
 still stir to and fro at the heave of the labour heart . " William , " 
 say he , with his rich deep voice , " this be kind . you be come to see 
 I , now that man say that I be fall . the minister you censure be no 
 more ; and you see again the brother . " 

 the squire be soften at once by this address . he shake heartily the 
 hand tender to he ; and then , turn away his head , with an honest 
 conviction that Audley ascribe to he a credit which he do not 
 deserve , he say , " no , no , Audley ; I be more selfish than you think I . 
 I have come - I have come to ask your advice , - no , not exactly that - your 
 opinion . but you be busy ? " 

 " sit down , William . old day be come over I when you enter ; day 
 early still return now , - day , too , that leave no shadow when their 
 sun be set . " 

 the proud man seem to think he have say too much . his practical nature 
 rebuke the poetic sentiment and phrase . he re - collect himself , and 
 add , more coldly , " you would ask my opinion ? what on ? some public 
 matter - some parliamentary bill that may affect your property ? " 

 " be I such a mean miser as that ? property - property ? what do property 
 matter , when a man be strike down at his own hearth ? property , indeed ! 
 but you have no child - happy brother ! " 

 " ay , ay ; as you say , I be a happy man ; childless ! have your son 
 displease you ? I have hear he well speak of , too . " 

 " do not   talk of he . whether his conduct be good or ill be my affair , " 
 resume the poor father , with a testy voice - jealous alike of Audley 's 
 praise or blame of his rebellious son . then he rise a moment , and make 
 a strong gulp , as if for air ; and lay his broad brown hand on his 
 brother 's shoulder , say , " Randal Leslie tell I you be wise , - a 
 consummate man of the world . no doubt you be so . and Parson Dale tell 
 I that he be sure you have warm feeling , - which I take to be a strange 
 thing for one who have live so long in London , and have no wife and no 
 child , a widower , and a member of parliament , - for a commercial city , 
 too . never smile ; it be no smile matter with I . you know a foreign 
 woman , call Negra or Negro ; not a blackymoor , though , by any 
 mean , - at least on the outside of she . be she such a woman as a plain 
 country gentleman would like his only son to marry - ay or no ? " 

 " no , indeed , " answer Audley , gravely ; " and I trust your son will 
 commit no action so rash . shall I see he , or she ? Speak , my dear 
 William . what would you have I do ? " 

 " nothing ; you have say enough , " reply the squire , gloomily ; and his 
 head sink on his breast . 

 Audley take his hand , and press it fraternally . " William , " say the 
 statesman , " we have be long estranged ; but I do not forget that when 
 we last meet , at - at Lord Lansmere 's house , and when I take you aside , 
 and say , ' William , if I lose this election , I must resign all chance of 
 public life ; my affair be embarrassed . I would not accept money from 
 you , - I would seek a profession , and you can help I there , ' you divine 
 my meaning , and say , ' take order ; the Hazeldean living be just vacant . 
 I will get some one to hold it till you be ordain . ' I do not forget 
 that . would that I have think early of so serene an escape from all 
 that then torment I ! my lot might have be far happy . " 

 the squire eye Audley with a surprise that break forth from his more 
 absorbing emotion . " Happier ! why , all thing have prosper with you ; 
 and you be rich enough now ; and - you shake your head . brother , be it 
 possible ! do you want money ? Pooh , not accept money from your mother 's 
 son ! - stuff ! " out come the squire 's pocketbook . Audley put it gently 
 aside . 

 " Nay , " say he , " I have enough for myself ; but since you seek and speak 
 with I thus affectionately , I will ask you one favour . should I die 
 before I can provide for my wife 's kinsman , Randal Leslie , as I could 
 wish , will you see to his fortune , so far as you can , without injury to 
 other , - to your own son ? " 

 " my son ! he be provide for . he have the casino estate - much good may it 
 do he ! you have touch on the very matter that bring I here . this 
 boy , Randal Leslie , seem a praiseworthy lad , and have hazeldean blood in 
 his vein . you have take he up because he be connect with your late 
 wife . why should I not take he up , too , when his grandmother be a 
 Hazeldean ? my main object in call be to ask what you mean to do for 
 he ; for if you do not mean to provide for he , why , I will , as in duty 
 bind . so your request come at the right time ; I think of alter my 
 will . I can put he into the entail , besides a handsome legacy . you be 
 sure he be a good lad , - and it will please you too , Audley ! " 

 " but not at the expense of your son . and stay , William : as to this 
 foolish marriage with Madame di Negra , - who tell you Frank mean to take 
 such a step ? " 

 " he tell I himself ; but it be no matter . randal and I both do all we 
 could to dissuade he ; and Randal advise I to come to you . " 

 " he have act generously , then , our kinsman Randal - I be glad to hear 
 it , " say Audley , his brow somewhat clearing . " I have no influence 
 with this lady ; but , at least , I can counsel she . do not consider the 
 marriage fix because a young man desire it . youth be ever hot and 
 rash . " 

 " your youth never be , " retort the squire , bluntly . 

 " you marry well enough , I be sure . I will say one thing for you : you 
 have be , to my taste , a bad politician - beg pardon - but you be 
 always a gentleman . you would never have disgrace your family and 
 marry a - " 

 " hush ! " interrupt Egerton , gently . " do not make matter bad than 
 they be . Madame di Negra be of high birth in her own country ; and if 
 scandal - " 

 " scandal ! " cry the squire , shrinking , and turn pale . " be you 
 speak of the wife of a Hazeldean ? at least she shall never sit by the 
 hearth at which now sit his mother ; and whatever I may do for Frank , 
 her child shall not succeed . no mongrel cross - breed shall kennel in 
 English Hazeldean . much oblige to you , Audley , for your good feeling ; 
 glad to have see you ; and hark ye , you startle I by that shake of 
 your head , when I speak of your wealth ; and from what you say about 
 Randal 's prospect , I guess that you London gentleman be not so 
 thrifty as we be . you shall let I speak . I say again , that I have some 
 thousand quite at your service . and though you be not a Hazeldean , 
 still you be my mother 's son ; and now that I be about to alter my will , 
 I can as well scratch in the name of Egerton as that of Leslie . Cheer 
 up , cheer up : you be young than I be , and you have no child ; so you 
 will live long than I shall . " 

 " my dear brother , " answer Audley , " believe I , I shall never live to 
 want your aid . and as to Leslie , add to the L5,000 I mean to give he an 
 equal sum in your will , and I shall feel that he have receive justice . " 

 observe that the squire , though he listen attentively , make no 
 ready answer , Audley turn the subject again to Frank ; and with the 
 adroitness of a man of the world , back by cordial sympathy in his 
 brother 's distress , he plead so well Frank 's lame cause , urge so 
 gently the wisdom of patience and delay , and the appeal to filial 
 feeling rather than recourse to paternal threat , that the squire grow 
 mollify in spite of himself , and leave his brother 's house a much less 
 angry and less doleful man . 

 Mr. Hazeldean be still in the Square , when he come upon Randal 
 himself , who be walk with a dark - whisker , showy gentleman , towards 
 Egerton 's house . randal and the gentleman exchange a hasty whisper , and 
 the former then exclaim , 

 " what , Mr. Hazeldean , have you just leave your brother 's house ? be it 
 possible ? " 

 " why , you advise I to go there , and I do . I scarcely know what I be 
 about . I be very glad I do go . hang politic ! hang the land interest ! 
 what do I care for either now ? " 

 " foil with Madame di Negra ? " ask Randal , draw the squire aside . 

 " never speak of she again ! " cry the squire , fiercely . " and as to that 
 ungrateful boy - but I do not   mean to behave harshly to he , - he shall 
 have money enough to keep she if he like , keep she from come to I , 
 keep he , too , from count on my death , and borrow post - obit on 
 the casino - for he will be do that next - no , I hope I wrong he there ; 
 I have be too good a father for he to count on my death already . 
 after all , " continue the squire , begin to relax , " as Audley say , 
 the marriage be not yet make ; and if the woman have take he in , he be 
 young , and his heart be warm . make yourself easy , my boy . I do not   forget 
 how kindly you take his part ; and before I do anything rash , I will at 
 least consult with his poor mother . " 

 Randal gnaw his pale lip , and a momentary cloud of disappointment 
 pass over his face . 

 " true , sir , " say he , gently ; " true , you must not be rash . indeed , I 
 be think of you and poor dear Frank at the very moment I meet you . it 
 occur to I whether we might not make Frank 's very embarrassment a 
 reason to induce Madame di Negra to refuse he ; and I be on my way to 
 Mr. Egerton , in order to ask his opinion , in company with the gentleman 
 yonder . " 

 " gentleman yonder . why should he thrust his long nose into my family 
 affair ? who the devil be he ? " 

 " do not   ask , sir . pray let I act . " 

 but the squire continue to eye askant the dark - whisker personage thus 
 interpose between himself and his son , and who wait patiently a 
 few yard in the rear , carelessly readjust the camellia in his 
 button - hole . 

 " he look very outlandish . be he a foreigner too ? " ask the squire at 
 last . 

 " no , not exactly . however , he know all about Frank 's embarrassment ; 
 and - " 

 " Embarrassments ! what , the debt he pay for that woman ? how do he raise 
 the money ? " 

 " I do not   know , " answer Randal ; " and that be the reason I ask Baron 
 Levy to accompany I to Egerton 's , that he might explain in private what 
 I have no reason - " 

 " Baron Levy ! " interrupt the squire . " Levy , Levy - I have hear of a 
 Levy who have nearly ruin my neighbour Thornhill , - a money - lender . 
 zound ! be that the man who know my son 's affair ? I will soon learn , 
 sir . " 

 Randal catch hold of the squire 's arm : " stop , stop ; if you really 
 insist upon learn more about Frank 's debt , you must not appeal to 
 Baron Levy directly , and as Frank 's father : he will not answer you . but 
 if I present you to he as a mere acquaintance of mine , and turn the 
 conversation , as if carelessly , upon Frank , why , since , in the London 
 world , such matter be never keep secret , except from the parent of 
 young man , I have no doubt he will talk out openly . " 

 " manage it as you will , " say the squire . 

 Randal take Mr. Hazeldean 's arm , and join Levy - " a friend of mine from 
 the country , Baron . " Levy bow profoundly , and the three walk slowly 
 on . 

 " by the by , " say Randal , press significantly upon Levy 's arm , 
 " my friend have come to town upon the somewhat unpleasant business of 
 settle the debt of another , - a young man of fashion , - a relation of 
 his own . no one , sir   turn to the squire , could so ably assist you 
 in such arrangement as could Baron Levy . " 

 baron   modestly , and with a moralize air . - " I have some experience in 
 such matter , and I hold it a duty to assist the parent and relation 
 of young man who , from want of reflection , often ruin themselves for 
 life . I hope the young gentleman in question be not in the hand of the 
 Jews ? " 

 RANDAL . - " Christians be as fond of good interest for their money as 
 ever the Jews can be . " 

 baron . - " grant , but they have not always so much money to lend . the 
 first thing , sir "   address the squire , - " the first thing for you to 
 do be to buy up such of your relation 's bill and note of hand as may 
 be in the market . no doubt we can get they a bargain , unless the young 
 man be heir to some property that may soon be his in the course of 
 nature . " 

 RANDAL . - " not soon - heaven forbid ! his father be still a young 
 man , - a fine healthy man , " lean heavily on Levy 's arm ; " and as to 
 post - obits - " 

 baron . - " post - obit on sound security cost more to buy up , however 
 healthy the obstruct relative may be . " 

 RANDAL . - " I should hope that there be not many son who can calculate , 
 in cold blood , on the death of their father . " 

 baron . - " ha , ha ! he be young , our friend Randal ; eh , sir ? " 

 RANDAL . - " well , I be not more scrupulous than other , I dare say ; and I 
 have often be pinch hard for money , but I would go barefoot rather 
 than give security upon a father 's grave ! I can imagine nothing more 
 likely to destroy natural feeling , nor to instil ingratitude and 
 treachery into the whole character , than to press the hand of a 
 parent , and calculate when that hand may be dust ; than to sit down with 
 stranger and reduce his life to the measure of an insurance - table ; 
 than to feel difficulty gather round one , and mutter in fashionable 
 slang , ' but it will be all well if the governor would but die . ' and he 
 who have accustom himself to the relief of post - obit must gradually 
 harden his mind to all this . " 

 the squire groan heavily ; and have randal proceed another sentence in 
 the same strain , the squire would have weep outright . " but , " continue 
 Randal , alter the tone of his voice , " I think that our young friend , 
 of whom we be talk just now , Levy , before this gentleman join we , 
 have the same opinion as myself on this head . he may accept bill , but 
 he would never sign post - obit . " 

 baron   who , with the apt docility of a manage charger to the touch of 
 a rider 's hand , have comprehend and comply with each quick sign of 
 Randal 's . - " Pooh ! the young fellow we be talk of ? nonsense . 
 he would not be so foolish as to give five time the percentage he 
 otherwise might . not sign post - obit ! of course he have sign one . " 

 RANDAL . - " Hist ! you mistake , you mistake ! " 

 SQUIRE   leave Randal 's arm and seize Levy 's . - " be you speak of 
 Frank Hazeldean ? " 

 baron . - " my dear sir , excuse I , I never mention name before 
 stranger . " 

 SQUIRE . - " stranger again ! man , I be the boy 's father speak out , sir , " 
 and his hand close on Levy 's arm with the strength of an iron vice . 

 baron . - " gently ; you hurt I , sir : but I excuse your feeling . randal , 
 you be to blame for lead I into this indiscretion ; but I beg 
 to assure Mr. Hazeldean , that though his son have be a little 
 extravagant - " 

 RANDAL . - " owe chiefly to the art of an abandon woman . " 

 baron . - " of an abandon woman ; - still he have show more prudence than 
 you would suppose ; and this very post - obit be a proof of it . a simple 
 act of that kind have enable he to pay off bill that be run on 
 till they would have ruin even the hazeldean estate ; whereas a charge 
 on the reversion of the Casino - " 

 SQUIRE . - " he have do it then ? he have sign a postobit ? " 

 RANDAL . - " no , no , Levy must be wrong . " 

 baron . - " my dear Leslie , a man of Mr. Hazeldean 's time of life can not 
 have your romantic boyish notion . he must allow that Frank have act 
 in this like a lad of sense - very good head for business have my young 
 friend Frank ! and the good thing Mr. Hazeldean can do be quietly to 
 buy up the post - obit , and thus he will place his son henceforth in his 
 power . " 

 SQUIRE . - " can I see the deed with my own eye ? " 

 baron . - " certainly , or how could you be induce to buy it up ? but on 
 one condition ; you must not betray I to your son . and , indeed , take my 
 advice , and do not   say a word to he on the matter . " 

 SQUIRE . - " let I see it , let I see it with my own eye ! his mother else 
 will never believe it - nor will i. " 

 baron . - " I can call on you this evening . " 

 SQUIRE . - " now , now ! " 

 baron . - " you can spare I , Randal ; and you yourself can open to Mr. 
 Egerton the other affair respect Lansmere . no time should be lose , 
 lest L'Estrange suggest a candidate . " 

 RANDAL   whispering . - " never mind I . this be more important . " 
  Aloud   - " go with Mr. Hazeldean . my dear kind friend "   to the squire , 
 " do not let this vex you so much . after all , it be what nine young man 
 out of ten would do in the same circumstance . and it be good you should 
 know it ; you may save Frank from further ruin , and prevent , perhaps , 
 this very marriage . " 

 " we will see , " exclaim the squire , hastily . " now , Mr. Levy , come . " 

 Levy and the squire walk on , not arm in arm , but side by side . randal 
 proceed to Egerton 's house . 

 " I be glad to see you , Leslie , " say the ex - minister . " what be it I have 
 hear ? my nephew , Frank Hazeldean , propose to marry Madame di Negra 
 against his father 's consent ? how could you suffer he to entertain an 
 idea so wild ? and how never confide it to I ? " 

 RANDAL . - " my dear Mr. Egerton , it be only to - day that I be inform of 
 Frank 's engagement . I have already see he , and expostulate in vain ; 
 till then , though I know your nephew admire Madame di Negra , I could 
 never suppose he harbour a serious intention . " 

 EGERTON . - " I must believe you , Randal . I will myself see Madame di 
 Negra , though I have no power , and no right , to dictate to she . I 
 have but little time for all such private business . the dissolution of 
 parliament be so close at hand . " 

 RANDAL   look down . - " it be on that subject that I wish to speak 
 to you , sir . you think of stand for Lansmere . well , Baron Levy have 
 suggest to I an idea that I could not , of course , even countenance , 
 till I have speak to you . it seem that he have some acquaintance with 
 the state of party in that borough . he be inform that it be not only 
 as easy to bring in two of our side as to carry one , but that it would 
 make your election still more safe not to fight single - handed against 
 two opponent ; that if canvass for yourself alone , you could not 
 carry a sufficient number of plumper vote ; that split vote would go 
 from you to one or other of the two adversary ; that , in a word , it 
 be necessary to pair you with a colleague . if it really be so , you of 
 course will learn well from your own Committee ; but should they concur 
 in the opinion Baron Levy have form , do I presume too much on your 
 kindness to deem it possible that you might allow I to be the second 
 candidate on your side ? I should not say this , but that Levy tell I you 
 have some wish to see I in parliament , amongst the supporter of your 
 policy . and what other opportunity can occur ? here the cost of carry 
 two would be scarcely more than that of carry one . and Levy say the 
 party would subscribe for my election ; you , of course , would refuse 
 all such aid for your own ; and indeed , with your great name , and 
 Lord Lansmere 's interest , there can be little beyond the strict legal 
 expense . " 

 as Randal speak thus at length , he watch anxiously his patron 's 
 reserve , unreveale countenance . 

 egerton   dryly . - " I will consider . you may safely leave in my hand any 
 matter connect with your ambition and advancement . I have before tell 
 you I hold it a duty to do all in my power for the kinsman of my late 
 wife , for one whose career I undertake to forward , for one whom honour 
 have compel to share in my own political revers . " 

 here Egerton ring the bell for his hat and glove , and walk into the 
 hall , pause at the street door . there beckon to Randal , he say , 
 slowly , " you seem intimate with Baron Levy ; I caution you against 
 he , - a dangerous acquaintance , first to the purse , next to the honour . " 

 RANDAL . - " I know it , sir ; and be surprise myself at the acquaintance 
 that have grow up between we . perhaps its cause be in his respect for 
 yourself . " 

 EGERTON . - " Tut . " 

 RANDAL . - " whatever it be , he contrive to obtain a singular hold over 
 one 's mind , even where , as in my case , he have no evident interest to 
 serve . how be this ? it puzzle I ! " 

 EGERTON . - " for his interest , it be most secured where he suffer it to 
 be least evident ; for his hold over the mind , it be easily account 
 for . he ever appeal to two temptation , strong with all man , - Avarice 
 and Ambition . good - day . " 

 RANDAL . - " be you go to Madame di Negra 's ? shall I not accompany you ? 
 perhaps I may be able to back your own remonstrance . " 

 EGERTON . - " no , I shall not require you . " 

 RANDAL . - " I trust I shall hear the result of your interview ? I feel so 
 much interested in it . Poor Frank ! " 

 Audley nod . " of course , of course . " 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 on enter the drawing - room of Madame di Negra , the peculiar charm 
 which the severe Audley Egerton have be ever repute to possess with 
 woman would have sensibly strike one who have hitherto see he chiefly 
 in his relation with man in the business - like affair of life . it be 
 a charm in strong contrast to the ordinary manner of those who be 
 emphatically call " lady ' man . " no artificial smile , no conventional , 
 hollow blandness , no frivolous gossip , no varnish either of ungenial 
 gayety or affected grace . the charm be in a simplicity that unbent more 
 into kindness than it do with man . Audley 's nature , whatever its 
 fault and defect , be essentially masculine ; and it be the sense 
 of masculine power that give to his voice a music when address the 
 gentler sex , and to his manner a sort of indulgent tenderness that 
 appear equally void of insincerity and presumption . 

 Frank have be go about half - an - hour , and Madame di Negra be scarcely 
 recover from the agitation into which she have be throw by the 
 affront from the father and the pleading of the son . 

 Egerton take her passive hand cordially , and seat himself by her side . 

 " my dear marchesa , " I say he , " be we then likely to be near 
 connection ? and can you seriously contemplate marriage with my young 
 nephew , Frank Hazeldean ? you turn away . ah , my fair friend , there be 
 but two inducement to a free woman to sign away her liberty at the 
 altar . I say a free woman , for widow be free , and girl be not . these 
 inducement be , first , worldly position ; secondly , love . which of these 
 motif can urge Madame di Negra to marry Mr. Frank Hazeldeani ? " 

 " there be other motif than those you speak of , - the need of 
 protection , the sense of solitude , the curse of dependence , gratitude 
 for honourable affection . but you man never know woman ! " 

 " I grant that you be right there , - we never do ; neither do woman ever 
 know man . and yet each sex contrive to dupe and to fool the other ! 
 listen to I . I have little acquaintance with my nephew , but I allow he 
 be a handsome young gentleman , with whom a handsome young lady in her 
 teen might fall in love in a ball - room . but you , who have know the 
 high order of our specie , you who have receive the homage of man , 
 whose thought and mind leave the small talk of drawing - room trifler 
 so poor and bald , you can not look I in the face and say that it be 
 any passion resemble love which you feel for my nephew . and as to 
 position , it be right that I should inform you that if he marry you 
 he will have none . he may risk his inheritance . you will receive no 
 countenance from his parent . you will be poor , but not free . you 
 will not gain the independence you seek for . the sight of a vacant , 
 discontent face in that opposite chair will be bad than solitude . 
 and as to grateful affection , " add the man of the world , " it be a 
 polite synonym for tranquil indifference . " 

 " Mr. Egerton , " say Beatrice , " people say you be make of bronze . do 
 you ever feel the want of a home ? " 

 " I answer you frankly , " reply the statesman , " if I have not feel it , 
 do you think I should have be , and that I should be to the last , the 
 joyless drudge of public life ? bronze though you call my nature , it 
 would have melt away long since like wax in the fire , if I have sit 
 idly down and dream of a home ! " 

 " but we woman , " answer Beatrice , with pathos , " have no public life , 
 and we do idly sit down and dream . oh , " she continue , after a short 
 pause , and clasp her hand firmly together , " you think I worldly , 
 grasping , ambitious ; how different my fate have be have I know a 
 home ! - know one whom I could love and venerate ; know one whose smile 
 would have develop the good that be once within I , and the fear of 
 whose rebuking or sorrowful eye would have correct what be evil . " 

 " yet , " answer Audley , " nearly all woman in the great world have have 
 that choice once in their life , and nearly all have throw it away . how 
 few of your rank really think of home when they marry ! how few ask to 
 venerate as well as to love ! and how many , of every rank , when the 
 home have be really gain , have wilfully lose its shelter , - some in 
 neglectful weariness , some from a momentary doubt , distrust , caprice , 
 a wild fancy , a passionate fit , a trifle , a straw , a dream ! true , you 
 woman be ever dreamer . Commonsense , common earth , be above or below 
 your comprehension . " 

 both now be silent . Audley first rouse himself with a quick , writhe 
 movement . " we two , " say he , smile half sadly , half cynically , - " we 
 two must not long waste time in talk sentiment . we know both 
 too well what life , as it have be make for we by our fault or our 
 misfortune , truly be . and once again , I entreat you to pause before 
 you yield to the foolish suit of my foolish nephew . rely on it , you will 
 either command a high offer for your prudence to accept ; or , if you 
 need must sacrifice rank and fortune , you , with your beauty and your 
 romantic heart , will see one who , at least for a fair holiday season 
  if human love allow no more , can repay you for the sacrifice . Frank 
 Hazeldean never can . " 

 Beatrice turn away to conceal the tear that rush to her eye . 

 " think over this well , " say Audley , in the soft tone of his mellow 
 voice . " do you remember that when you first come to England , I tell you 
 that neither wedlock nor love have any lur for I ? we grow friend upon 
 that rude avowal , and therefore I now speak to you like some sage of 
 old , wise because stand apart and aloof from all the affection and 
 tie that mislead our wisdom . nothing but real love - how rare it be ; have 
 one human heart in a million ever know it ? - nothing but real love can 
 repay we for the loss of freedom , the care and fear of poverty , the 
 cold pity of the world that we both despise and respect . and all these , 
 and much more , follow the step you would inconsiderately take , an 
 imprudent marriage . " 

 " Audley Egerton , " say Beatrice , lift her dark , moistened eye , " you 
 grant that real love do compensate for an imprudent marriage . you 
 speak as if you have know such love - you ! can it be possible ? " 

 " real love - I think that I know it once . look back with remorse , 
 I should doubt it now but for one curse that only real love , when lose , 
 have the power to leave evermore behind it . " 

 " what be that ? " 

 " a void here , " answer Egerton , strike his heart . 
 " Desolation ! - Adieu ! " 

 he rise and leave the room . 

 " be it , " murmur Egerton , as he pursue his way through the 
 street - " be it that , as we approach death , all the first fair feeling 
 of young life come back to we mysteriously ? thus I have hear , or read , 
 that in some country of old , child scatter flower precede a 
 funeral bier . " 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 and so Leonard stand beside his friend 's mortal clay , and watch , in 
 the ineffable smile of death , the last gleam which the soul have leave 
 there ; and so , after a time , he creep back to the adjoining room with a 
 step as noiseless as if he have fear to disturb the dead . weary as 
 he be with watch , he have no thought of sleep . he sit himself down by 
 the little table , and lean his face on his hand , muse sorrowfully . 
 thus time pass . he hear the clock from below strike the hour . in the 
 house of death the sound of a clock become so solemn . the soul that we 
 miss have go so far beyond the reach of time ! a cold , superstitious 
 awe gradually steal over the young man . he shiver , and lift his eye 
 with a start , half scornful , half defying . the moon be go ; the gray , 
 comfortless dawn gleam through the casement , and carry its raw , 
 chill light through the open doorway into the death - room . and there , 
 near the extinguished fire , Leonard see the solitary woman , weep low ; 
 and watch still . he return to say a word of comfort ; she press 
 his hand , but wave he away . he understand . she do not wish for other 
 comfort than her quiet relief of tear . again , he return to his 
 own chamber , and his eye this time fall upon the paper which he have 
 hitherto disregard . what make his heart stand still , and the blood 
 then rush so quickly through his vein ? why do he seize upon those 
 paper with so tremulous a hand , then lie they down , pause , as if 
 to nerve himself , and look so eagerly again ? he recognize the 
 handwriting , - those fair , clear character , so peculiar in their 
 woman - like delicacy and grace , the same as in the wild , pathetic poem , 
 the sight of which have make an era in his boyhood . from these page the 
 image of the mysterious Nora rise once more before he . he feel that he 
 be with a mother . he go back , and close the door gently , as if with 
 a jealous piety , to exclude each ruder shadow from the world of spirit , 
 and be alone with that mournful ghost . for a thought write in warm , 
 sunny life , and then suddenly rise up to we , when the hand that trace 
 and the heart that cherish it be dust , be verily as a ghost . it be a 
 likeness strike off of the fond human being , and survive it . far more 
 truthful than bust or portrait , it bid we see the tear flow , and the 
 pulse beat . what ghost can the churchyard yield to we like the writing 
 of the dead ? 

 the bulk of the paper have be once lightly sew to each other ; they 
 have come undo , perhaps in Burley 's rude hand , but their order 
 be easily apparent . Leonard soon see that they form a kind of 
 journal , - not , indeed , a regular diary , nor always relate to the 
 thing of the day . there be gap in time - no attempt at successive 
 narrative ; sometimes , instead of prose , a hasty burst of verse , gush 
 evidently from the heart ; sometimes all narrative be leave untold , 
 and yet , as it be , epitomize by a single burn line - a single 
 exclamation - of woe or joy ! everywhere you see record of a nature 
 exquisitely susceptible ; and , where genius appear , it be so artless , 
 that you do not call it genius , but emotion . at the onset the writer 
 do not speak of herself in the first person . the manuscript open with 
 description and short dialogue , carry on by person to whose name 
 only initial letter be assign , all write in a style of simple 
 innocent freshness , and breathing of purity and happiness , like a dawn 
 of spring . two young person , humbly bear , a youth and a girl , the last 
 still in childhood , each chiefly self - teach , be wander on Sabbath 
 evening among green dewy field , near the busy town , in which labour 
 awhile be still . few word pass between they . you see at once , though 
 the writer do not mean to convey it , how far beyond the scope of her 
 male companion fly the heavenward imagination of the girl . it be he 
 who question , it be she who answer ; and soon there steal upon you , 
 as you read , the conviction that the youth love the girl , and love in 
 vain . all in this writing , though terse , be so truthful ! Leonard , in the 
 youth , already recognize the rude imperfect scholar , the village bard , 
 Mark Fairfield . then there be a gap in description ; but there be short 
 weighty sentence , which show deepen thought , increase year , in 
 the writer . and though the innocence remain , the happiness begin to be 
 less vivid on the page . 

 now , insensibly , Leonard find that there be a new phase in the writer 's 
 existence . scene no long of humble , workday rural life surround she , 
 and a fair and more dazzling image succeed to the companion of the 
 Sabbath eve . this image Nora evidently love to paint , - it be akin to 
 her own genius ; it captivate her fancy ; it be an image that she   inborn 
 artist , and conscious of her art   feel to belong to a bright and 
 high school of the Beautiful . and yet the virgin 's heart be not 
 awaken , - no trace of the heart yet there ! the new image thus 
 introduce be one of her own year , perhaps ; nay , it may be young 
 still , for it be a boy that be describe , with his profuse fair curl , 
 and eye new to grief , and confront the sun as a young eagle 's ; with 
 vein so full of the wine of life , that they overflow into every joyous 
 whim ; with nerve quiveringly alive to the desire of glory ; with the 
 frank generous nature , rash in its laugh scorn of the world , which 
 it have not try . who be this boy ? it perplex Leonard . he fear to 
 guess . soon , less tell than imply , you see that this companionship , 
 however it chance , bring fear and pain on the writer . again   as 
 before , with Mark Fairfield , there be love on the one side and not on 
 the other ; with she there be affectionate , almost sisterly , interest , 
 admiration , gratitude , but a something of pride or of terror that keep 
 back love . 

 here Leonard 's interest grow intense . be there touch by which 
 conjecture grow certainty ; and he recognize , through the lapse of 
 year , the boy - lover in his own generous benefactor ? 

 fragment of dialogue now begin to reveal the suit of an ardent , 
 impassioned nature , and the simple wonder and strange alarm of a 
 listener who pity but could not sympathize . some great worldly 
 distinction of rank between the two become visible , - that distinction 
 seem to arm the virtue and steel the affection of the lowlier bear . 
 then a few sentence , half blot out with tear , tell of wound and 
 humble feeling , - some one invest with authority , as if the suitor 's 
 parent , have interfere , question , reproach , counsel . and it be 
 evident that the suit be not one that dishonour ; it woo to flight , 
 but still to marriage . 

 and now these sentence grow brief still , as with the decision of a 
 strong resolve . and to these there follow a passage so exquisite , that 
 Leonard weep unconsciously as he read . it be the description of a 
 visit spend at home previous to some sorrowful departure . he catch the 
 glimpse of a proud and vain , but a tender wistful mother , of a father 's 
 fonder but less thoughtful love . and then come a quiet soothe scene 
 between the girl and her first village lover , end thus : " so she put 
 M. 's hand into her sister 's , and say , ' you love I through the fancy , 
 love she with the heart , ' and leave they comprehend each other , and 
 betroth . " 

 Leonard sigh . he understand now how Mark Fairfield see , in the homely 
 feature of his unlettered wife , the reflection of the sister 's soul and 
 face . 

 a few word tell the final parting , - word that be a picture . the long 
 friendless highway , stretch on - on - towards the remorseless city , 
 and the door of home opening on the desolate thoroughfare , and the old 
 pollard - tree beside the threshold , with the raven wheeling round it and 
 call to their young . he too have watch that threshold from the same 
 desolate thoroughfare . he too have hear the cry of the raven . then 
 come some page cover with snatch of melancholy verse , or some 
 reflection of dreamy gloom . 

 the writer be in London , in the house of some high - bear 
 patroness , - that friendless shadow of a friend which the jargon of 
 society call " companion . " and she be look on the bright storm of 
 the world as through prison bar . poor bird , afar from the greenwood , 
 she have need of song , - it be her last link with freedom and nature . the 
 patroness seem to share in her apprehension of the boy suitor , whose 
 wild rash prayer the fugitive have resist ; but to fear lest the suitor 
 should be degrade , not the one whom he pursue , - fear an alliance 
 ill - suited to a high - bear heir . and this kind of fear sting the 
 writer 's pride , and she grow harsh in her judgment of he who thus 
 cause but pain where he proffer love . then there be a reference to 
 some applicant for her hand , who be press upon her choice ; and she be 
 tell that it be her duty so to choose , and thus deliver a noble family 
 from a dread that endure so long as her hand be free . and of this fear , 
 and of this applicant , there break out a petulant yet pathetic scorn . 
 after this the narrative , to judge by the date , pause for day and 
 week , as if the writer have grow weary and listless , - suddenly to 
 reopen in a new strain , eloquent with hope and with fear never know 
 before . the first person be abruptly assume , - it be the living " I " 
 that now breathe and move along the line . how be this ? the woman be 
 no more a shadow and a secret unknown to herself . she have assume the 
 intense and vivid sense of individual being ; and love speak loud in the 
 awakened human heart . 

 a personage not see till then appear on the page . and ever 
 afterwards this personage be only name as " he , " as if the one and sole 
 representative of all the myriad that walk the earth . the first notice 
 of this prominent character on the scene show the restless , agitated 
 effect produce on the writer 's imagination . he be invest with 
 a romance probably not his own . he be describe in contrast to the 
 brilliant boy whose suit she have fear , pity , and now seek to 
 shun , - describe with a grave and serious , but gentle mien , a voice that 
 impose respect , an eye and lip that show collect dignity of will . 
 alas ? the writer betray herself , and the charm be in the contrast , 
 not to the character of the early lover , but her own . and now , leave 
 Leonard to explore and guess his way through the gap and chasm of 
 the narrative , it be time to place before the reader what the narrative 
 alone will not reveal to Leonard . 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

 Nora Avenel have flee from the boyish love of Harley L'Estrange , 
 recommend by Lady Lansmere to a valetudinarian relative of her own , 
 Lady Jane Horton , as companion . but Lady Lansmere could not believe it 
 possible that the lowborn girl could long sustain her generous pride , 
 and reject the ardent suit of one who could offer to she the prospective 
 coronet of a countess . she continually urge upon Lady Jane the 
 necessity of marry Nora to some one of rank less disproportione to 
 her own , and empower that lady to assure any such wooer of a dowry far 
 beyond Nora 's station . Lady Jane look around , and see in the outskirt 
 of her limited social ring a young solicitor , a peer 's natural son , who 
 be on term of more than business - like intimacy with the fashionable 
 client whose distress make the origin of his wealth . the young man 
 be handsome , well - dress , and bland . Lady Jane invite he to 
 her house ; and , see he strike with the rare loveliness of Nora , 
 whisper the hint of the dower . the fashionable solicitor , who 
 afterwards ripen into Baron Levy , do not need that hint ; for , though 
 then poor , he rely on himself for fortune , and , unlike Randal , he have 
 warm blood in his vein . but Lady Jane 's suggestion make he sanguine 
 of success ; and when he formally propose , and be as formally refuse , 
 his self - love be bitterly wound . vanity in Levy be a powerful 
 passion ; and with the vain , hatred be strong , revenge be rankle . Levy 
 retire , conceal his rage ; nor do he himself know how vindictive 
 that rage , when it cool into malignancy , could become , until the 
 arch - fiend OPPORTUNITY prompt its indulgence and suggest its design . 

 Lady Jane be at first very angry with Nora for the rejection of a 
 suitor whom she have present as eligible . but the pathetic grace of 
 this wonderful girl have creep into her heart , and soften it even 
 against family prejudice ; and she gradually own to herself that Nora 
 be worthy of some one well than Mr. Levy . 

 now , Harley have ever believe that Nora return his love , and that 
 nothing but her own sense of gratitude to his parent , her own instinct 
 of delicacy , make she deaf to his prayer . to do he justice , wild and 
 headstrong as he then be , his suit would have cease at once have he 
 really deem it persecution . nor be his error unnatural ; for his 
 conversation , till it have reveal his own heart , could not fail to have 
 dazzle and delight the child of genius ; and her frank eye would have 
 show the delight . how , at his age , could he see the distinction between 
 the Poetess and the woman ? the poetess be charm with rare promise in 
 a soul of which the very error be the extravagance of richness 
 and beauty . but the woman - no ! the woman require some nature not yet 
 undeveloped , and all at turbulent , if brilliant , strife with its own 
 noble element , but a nature form and full - grown . Harley be a boy , 
 and Nora be one of those woman who must find or fancy an Ideal that 
 command and almost awe they into love . 

 Harley discover , not without difficulty , Nora 's new residence . he 
 present himself at Lady Jane 's , and she , with grave rebuke , forbid 
 he the house . he find it impossible to obtain an interview with Nora . 
 he write , but he feel sure that his letter never reach she , since 
 they be unanswered . his young heart swell with rage . he drop 
 threat , which alarm all the fear of Lady Lansmere , and even the 
 prudent apprehension of his friend , Audley Egerton . at the request 
 of the mother , and equally at the wish of the son , Audley consent to 
 visit at Lady Jane 's , and make acquaintance with Nora . 

 " I have such confidence in you , " say Lady Lansmere , " that if you once 
 know the girl , your advice will be sure to have weight with she . you 
 will show she how wicked it would be to let Harley break our heart and 
 degrade his station . " 

 " I have such confidence in you , " say young Harley , " that if you once 
 know my Nora , you will no long side with my mother . you will recognize 
 the nobility which nature only can create , you will own that Nora be 
 worthy a rank more lofty than mine ; and my mother so believe in your 
 wisdom , that , if you plead in my cause , you will convince even she . " 

 Audley listen to both with his intelligent , half - incredulous smile ; 
 and wholly of the same opinion as Lady Lansmere , and sincerely anxious 
 to save Harley from an indiscretion that his own notion lead he to 
 regard as fatal , he resolve to examine this boasted pearl , and to find 
 out its flaw . Audley Egerton be then in the prime of his earnest , 
 resolute , ambitious youth . the stateliness of his natural manner have 
 then a suavity and polish which , even in later and busy life , it never 
 wholly lose ; since , in spite of the briefer word and the colder look 
 by which care and power mark the official man , the minister have ever 
 enjoy that personal popularity which the indefinable , external 
 something , that win and please , can alone confer . but he have even 
 then , as ever , that felicitous reserve which Rochefoucauld have call 
 the " mystery of the body , " - that thin yet guardian veil which reveal 
 but the strong outline of character , and excite so much of interest 
 by provoke so much of conjecture . to the man who be bear with this 
 reserve , which be wholly distinct from shyness , the world give credit 
 for quality and talent beyond those that it perceive ; and such 
 character be attractive to other in proportion as these last be 
 gifted with the imagination which love to divine the unknown . 

 at the first interview , the impression which this man produce upon Nora 
 Avenel be profound and strange . she have hear of he before as the one . 
 whom Harley most love and look up to ; and she recognize at once 
 in his mien , his aspect , his word , the very tone of his deep tranquil 
 voice , the power to which woman , whatever her intellect , never 
 attain ; and to which , therefore , she impute a nobility not always 
 genuine , - namely , the power of deliberate purpose and self - collect , 
 serene ambition . the effect that Nora produce on Egerton be not less 
 sudden . he be startle by a beauty of face and form that belong to 
 that rarest order , which we never behold but once or twice in our life . 

 he be yet more amazed to discover that the aristocracy of mind could 
 bestow a grace that no aristocracy of birth could surpass . he be 
 prepare for a simple , blush village girl , and involuntarily he bow 
 low his proud front at the first sight of that delicate bloom , and that 
 exquisite gentleness which be woman 's sure passport to the respect of 
 man . neither in the first , nor the second , nor the third interview , 
 nor , indeed , till after many interview , could he summon up courage to 
 commence his mission , and allude to Harley . and when he do so at last 
 his word falter . but Nora 's word be clear to he . he see that 
 Harley be not love ; and a joy , which he feel as guilty , dart through 
 his whole frame . from that interview Audley return home greatly 
 agitated , and at war with himself . often , in the course of this story , 
 have it be hint that , under all Egerton 's external coldness and 
 measure self - control , lie a nature capable of strong and stubborn 
 passion . those passion break forth then . he feel that love have already 
 enter into the heart , which the trust of his friend should have 
 suffice to guard . 

 " I will go there no more , " say he , abruptly , to Harley . 

 " but why ? " 

 " the girl do not love you . cease then to think of she . " 

 Harley disbelieve he , and grow indignant . but Audley have every worldly 
 motive to assist his sense of honour . he be poor , though with the 
 reputation of wealth , deeply involve in debt , resolve to rise in 
 life , tenacious of his position in the world 's esteem . against a host 
 of counteracting influence , love fight single - handed . Audley 's be a 
 strong nature ; but , alas ! in strong nature , if resistance to temptation 
 be of granite , so the passion that they admit be of fire . 

 Trite be the remark that the destiny of our life often date from the 
 impulse of unguarded moment . it be so with this man , to an ordinary 
 eye so cautious and so deliberate . Harley one day come to he in great 
 grief ; he have hear that Nora be ill : he implore Andley to go once 
 more and ascertain . Audley go . Lady Jane Horton , who be suffer 
 under a disease which not long afterwards prove fatal , be too ill 
 to receive he . he be show into the room set apart as Nora 's . while 
 wait for her entrance , he turn mechanically over the leaf of an 
 album , which Nora , suddenly summon away to attend Lady Jane , have leave 
 behind she on the table . he see the sketch of his own feature ; he read 
 word inscribe below it , - word of such artless tenderness , and such 
 unhoping sorrow , word write by one who have be accustom to regard 
 her genius as her sole confidant , under Heaven ; to pour out to it , 
 as the solitary poet - heart be impel to do , thought , feeling , the 
 confession of mystic sigh , which it would never breathe to a living 
 ear , and , save at such moment , scarcely acknowledge to itself . Audley 
 see that he be beloved , and the revelation , with a sudden light , 
 consume all the barrier between himself and his own love . and at that 
 moment Nora enter . she see he bend over the book . she utter 
 a cry , spring forward , and then sink down , cover her face with her 
 hand . but Audley be at her foot . he forget his friend , his trust ; 
 he forget ambition , he forget the world . it be his own cause that he 
 plead , - his own love that burst forth from his lip . and when the two 
 that day part , they be betroth each to each . alas for they , and 
 ala for Harley ! and now this man , who have hitherto value himself as 
 the very type of gentleman , whom all his young contemporary have so 
 regard and so revere , have to press the hand of a confide friend , 
 and bid adieu to truth . he have to amuse , to delay , to mislead his 
 boy - rival , - to say that he be already subdue Nora 's hesitating 
 doubt , and that with a little time , she could be induce to consent to 
 forget Harley 's rank , and his parent 's pride , and become his wife . and 
 Harley believe in Egerton , without one suspicion on the mirror of his 
 loyal soul . 

 meanwhile , Audley , impatient of his own position , - impatient , as strong 
 mind ever be , to hasten what they have once resolve , to terminate a 
 suspense that every interview with Harley torture alike by jealousy 
 and shame , to pass out of the reach of scruple , and to say to himself , 
 " right - or wrong , there be no look back ; the deed be do , " - Audley , 
 thus hurry on by the impetus of his own power of will , press for 
 speedy and secret nuptial , - secret , till his fortune , then wavering , 
 be more assured , his career fairly commenced . this be not his 
 strong motive , though it be one . he shrink from the discovery of 
 his wrong to his friend , desire to delay the self - humiliation of such 
 announcement , until , as he persuade himself , Harley 's boyish passion 
 be over , have yield to the new allurement that would naturally beset 
 his way . stifle his conscience , Audley seek to convince himself that 
 the day would soon come when Harley could hear with indifference that 
 Nora Avenel be another 's . " the dream of an hour , at his age , " murmur 
 the eld friend ; " but at mine the passion of a life ! " he do not speak 
 of these latter motif for concealment to Nora . he feel that to own the 
 extent of his treason to a friend would lower he in her eye . he speak 
 therefore but slightingly of Harley , treat the boy 's suit as a thing 
 past and go . he dwell only on reason that compel self - sacrifice 
 on his side or her . she do not hesitate which to choose . and so , where 
 Nora love , so submissively do she believe in the superiority of the 
 lover , that she would not pause to hear a murmur from her own loftier 
 nature , or question the propriety of what he deem wise and good . 

 abandon prudence in this arch affair of life , Audley still 
 preserve his customary caution in minor detail . and this indeed be 
 characteristic of he throughout all his career , heedless in large 
 thing , wary in small . he would not trust Lady Jane Horton with his 
 secret , still less Lady Lansmere . he simply represent to the former 
 that Nora be no long safe from Harley 's determined pursuit under Lady 
 Jane 's roof , and that she have well elude the boy 's knowledge of 
 her movement , and go quietly away for a while , to lodge with some 
 connection of her own . 

 and so , with Lady Jane 's acquiescence , Nora go first to the house of 
 a very distant kinswoman of her mother 's , and afterwards to one that 
 Egerton take as their bridal home , under the name of Bertram . he 
 arrange all that might render their marriage most free from the chance 
 of premature discovery . but it so happen on the very morning of their 
 bridal , that one of the witness he select   a confidential servant of 
 his own   be seize with apoplexy . consider , in haste , where to find 
 a substitute , Egerton think of Levy , his own private solicitor , his 
 own fashionable money - lender , a man with whom he be then as intimate 
 as a fine gentleman be with the lawyer of his own age , who know all his 
 affair , and have help , from pure friendship , to make they as bad as 
 they be ! Levy be thus suddenly summon . Egerton , who be in great 
 haste , do not at first communicate to he the name of the intended 
 bride ; but he say enough of the imprudence of the marriage , and his 
 reason for secrecy , to bring on himself the strong remonstrance ; 
 for Levy have always reckon on Egerton 's make a wealthy 
 marriage , - leave to Egerton the wife , and hop to appropriate to 
 himself the wealth , all in the natural course of business . Egerton do 
 not listen to he , but hurry he on towards the place at which the 
 ceremony be to be perform ; and Levy actually see the bride before 
 he have learn her name . the usurer mask his rag emotion , and 
 fulfil his part in the rite . his smile , when he congratulate the 
 bride , might have shoot cold into her heart ; but her eye be cast on 
 the earth , see there but a shadow from heaven , and her heart be 
 blindly shelter itself in the bosom to which it be give evermore . 
 she do not perceive the smile of hate that barb the word of joy . 
 Nora never think it necessary later to tell Egerton that Levy have be 
 a refuse suitor . indeed , with the exquisite tact of love , she see that 
 such a confidence , the idea of such a rival , would have wound the 
 pride of her high - breed , well - bear husband . 

 and now , while Harley L'Estrange , frantic with the news that Nora have 
 leave Lady Jane 's roof , and purposely mislead into wrong direction , be 
 seek to trace her refuge in vain , now Egerton , in an assumed name , 
 in a remote quarter , far from the club , in which his word be oracular , 
 far from the pursuit , whether of pastime or toil , that have hitherto 
 engross his active mind , give himself up , with wonder at his own 
 surrender , to the only vision of fairyland that ever weigh down the 
 watchful eyelid of hard ambition . the world for a while shut out , he 
 miss it not . he know not of it . he look into two love eye that 
 haunt he ever after , through a stern and arid existence , and say 
 murmuringly , " why , this , then , be real happiness ! " often , often , in the 
 solitude of other year , to repeat to himself the same word , save that 
 for be , he then murmur be ! and Nora , with her grand , full heart , 
 all her luxuriant wealth of fancy and of thought , child of light and of 
 song , do she then never discover that there be something comparatively 
 narrow and sterile in the nature to which she have link her fate ? not 
 there could ever be sympathy in feeling , brilliant and shift as the 
 tint of the rainbow . when Audley press her heart to his own , could he 
 comprehend one fine throb of its beating ? be all the iron of his mind 
 worth one grain of the gold she have cast away in Harley 's love ? 

 do Nora already discover this ? surely no . Genius feel no want , 
 no repining , while the heart be content . genius in her paused and 
 slumber : it have be as the ministrant of solitude : it be need no 
 more . if a woman love deeply some one below her own grade in the mental 
 and spiritual order , how often we see that she unconsciously quit she 
 own rank , come meekly down to the level of the beloved , be afraid lest 
 he should deem she the superior , - she who would not even be the equal . 
 Nora know no more that she have genius ; she only know that she have love . 

 and so here , the journal which Leonard be read change its tone , 
 sink into that quiet happiness which be but quiet because it be so 
 deep . this interlude in the life of a man like Audley Egerton could 
 never have be long ; many circumstance conspire to abridge it . his 
 affair be in great disorder ; they be all under Levy 's management . 
 demand that have before slumber , or be mildly urge , grow menacing 
 and clamorous . Harley , too , return to London from his futile 
 research , and look out for Audley . Audley be force to leave his 
 secret Eden , and reappear in the common world ; and thenceforward it be 
 only by stealth that he come to his bridal home , - a visitor , no more the 
 inmate . but more loud and fierce grow the demand of his creditor , now 
 when Egerton have most need of all which respectability and position 
 and belief of pecuniary independence can do to raise the man who have 
 encumber his arm , and cripple his step towards fortune . he be 
 threaten with writ , with prison . Levy say " that to borrow more would 
 be but large ruin , " shrug his shoulder , and even recommend a 
 voluntary retreat to the King 's Bench . " no place so good for frightening 
 one 's creditor into compound their claim ; but why , " add Levy , 
 with covert sneer , " why not go to young L'Estrange , a boy make to be 
 borrow from ! " 

 Levy , who have know from Lady Jane of Harley 's pursuit of Nora , have 
 learn already how to avenge himself on Egerton . Audley could not apply 
 to the friend he have betray . and as to other friend , no man in town 
 have a great number . and no man in town know well that he should lose 
 they all if he be once know to be in want of their money . Mortified , 
 harass , torture , shun Harley , yet ever seek by he , fearful of 
 each knock at his door , Audley Egerton escape to the mortgaged remnant 
 of his paternal estate , on which there be a gloomy manor - house , long 
 uninhabited , and there apply a mind , afterwards renowne for its quick 
 comprehension of business , to the investigation of his affair , with a 
 view to save some wreck from the flood that swell momently around he . 

 and now - to condense as much as possible a record that run darkly on 
 into pain and sorrow - now Levy begin to practise his vindictive art ; 
 and the art gradually prevail . on pretence of assist Egerton in 
 the arrangement of his affair , which he secretly contrive , however , 
 still more to complicate , he come down frequently to Egerton Hall for 
 a few hour , arrive by the mail , and watch the effect which Nora 's 
 almost daily letter produce on the bridegroom , irritate by the 
 practical care of life . he be thus constantly at hand to instil into 
 the mind of the ambitious man a regret for the imprudence of hasty 
 passion , or to embitter the remorse which Audley feel for his treachery 
 to L'Estrange . thus ever bring before the mind of the harassed debtor 
 image at war with love , and with the poetry of life , he disattune it 
  so to speak   for the reception of Nora 's letter , all musical as they 
 be with such thought as the most delicate fancy inspire to the 
 most earnest love . Egerton be one of those man who never confide their 
 affair frankly to woman . Nora , when she thus write , be wholly in 
 the dark as to the extent of his stern prosaic distress . and so - and 
 so - Levy always near - type of the prose of life in its most cynic 
 form - so by degree all that redundant affluence of affection , with its 
 gush of grief for his absence , prayer for his return , sweet reproach 
 if a post fail to bring back an answer to the woman 's yearning 
 sigh , - all this grow , to the sensible , positive man of real life , 
 like sickly romantic exaggeration . the bright arrow shoot too high into 
 heaven to hit the mark set so near to the earth . ah , common fate of all 
 superior nature ! what treasure , and how wildly waste ! " by - the - by , " 
 say Levy , one morning , as he be about to take leave of Audley 
 and return to town , - " by - the - by , I shall be this evening in the 
 neighbourhood of Mrs. Egerton . " 

 EGERTON . - " say Mrs. Bertram ! " 

 LEVY . - " Ay ; will she not be in want of some pecuniary supply ? " 

 EGERTON . " my wife ! - not yet . I must first be wholly ruin before she 
 can want ; and if I be so , do you think I should not be by her side ? " 

 LEVY . - " I beg pardon , my dear fellow ; your pride of gentleman be so 
 susceptible that it be hard for a lawyer not to wound it unawares . your 
 wife , then , do not know the exact state of your affair ? " 

 EGERTON . - " of course not . who would confide to a woman thing in which 
 she could do nothing , except to tease one the more ? " 

 LEVY . - " true , and a poetess too ! I have prevent your finish your 
 answer to Mrs. Bertram 's last letter . can I take it - it may save a day 's 
 delay - that be , if you do not object to my calling on she this evening . " 

 egerton   sit down to his unfinished letter . - " object ! no . " 

 LEVY   look at his watch . - " be quick , or I shall lose the coach . " 

 egepton   seal the letter . - " there . and I should be oblige to you if 
 you would call ; and without alarm she as to my circumstance , you 
 can just say that you know I be much harass about important affair at 
 present , and so soothe the effect of my very short answer - " 

 LEVY . - " to those doubly - cross , very long letter , - I will . " 

 " Poor Nora , " say Egerton , sighing , ' she will think this answer brief 
 and churlish enough . explain my excuse kindly , so that they will serve 
 for the future . I really have no time and no heart for sentiment . the 
 little I ever have be well - nigh worry out of I . still I love she 
 fondly and deeply . " 

 LEVY . - " you must have do so . I never think it in you to sacrifice 
 the world to a woman . " 

 EGERTON . - " nor I either ; but , " add the strong man , conscious of that 
 power which rule the world infinitely more than knowledge , conscious of 
 tranquil courage , " but I have not sacrifice the world yet . this right 
 arm shall bear up she and myself too . " 

 LEVY . - " well say ! but in the mean while , for heaven 's sake , do not 
 attempt to go to London , nor to leave this place ; for , in that case , 
 I know you will be arrest , and then adieu to all hope of 
 parliament , - of a career . " 

 Audley 's haughty countenance darken ; as the dog , in his brave mode , 
 turn dismay from the stone pluck from the mire , so , when ambition 
 rear itself to defy mankind , whisper " disgrace and a jail , " - and , 
 lo , crestfallen , it slink away ! that evening Levy call on Nora , and 
 ingratiate himself into her favour by praise of Egerton , with indirect 
 humble apologetic allusion to his own former presumption , he prepare 
 the way to renew visit ; she be so lonely , and she so love to see 
 one who be fresh from see Audley , one who would talk to she of 
 he ! by degree the friendly respectful visitor thus steal into her 
 confidence ; and then , with all his panegyric on Audley 's superior 
 power and gift , he begin to dwell upon the young husband 's worldly 
 aspiration , and care for his career ; dwell on they so as vaguely to 
 alarm Nora , - to imply that , dear as she be , she be still but second 
 to Ambition . his way thus prepare , he next begin to insinuate his 
 respectful pity at her equivocal position , drop hint of gossip and 
 slander , fear that the marriage might be own too late to preserve 
 reputation . and then what would be the feeling of the proud Egerton 
 if his wife be exclude from that world whose opinion he so prize ? 
 insensibly thus he lead she on to express   though timidly   her own 
 fear , her own natural desire , in her letter to Audley . when could the 
 marriage be proclaim ? proclaim ! Audley feel that to proclaim such a 
 marriage at such a moment would be to fle away his last cast for fame 
 and fortune . and Harley , too , - Harley still so uncured of his frantic 
 love ! Levy be sure to be at hand when letter like these arrive . 

 and now Levy go far still in his determination to alienate these 
 two heart . he contrive , by mean of his various agent , to circulate 
 through Nora 's neighbourhood the very slander at which he have hint . 
 he contrive that she should be insult when she go abroad , outraged 
 at home by the sneer of her own servant , and tremble with shame at her 
 own shadow upon her abandon bridal hearth . 

 just in the midst of this intolerable anguish , Levy reappear . his 
 crowning hour be ripe . he intimate his knowledge of the humiliation 
 Nora have undergone , express his deep compassion , offer to intercede 
 with Egerton " to do her justice . " he use ambiguous phrase , that 
 shock her ear and torture her heart , and thus provoke she on to 
 demand he to explain ; and then , throw she into a wild state of 
 indefinite alarm , in which he obtain her solemn promise not to divulge 
 to Audley what he be about to communicate , he say , with villanous 
 hypocrisy of reluctant shame , " that her marriage be not strictly legal ; 
 that the form require by the law have not be comply with , that 
 Audley , unintentionally or purposely , have leave himself free to disown 
 the rite and desert the bride . " while Nora stand stunned and speechless 
 at a falsehood which , with lawyer - like show , he contrive to make 
 truth - like to her inexperience , he hurry rapidly on , to re - awake on 
 her mind the impression of Audley 's pride , ambition , and respect for 
 worldly position . " these be your obstacle , " say he ; " but I think I 
 may induce he to repair the wrong , and right you at last . " right at 
 last - oh , infamy ! 

 then Nora 's anger burst forth . she believe such a stain on Audley 's 
 honour ! 

 " but where be the honour when he betray his friend ? do you not know 
 that he be entrust by Lord L'Estrange to plead for he . how do he 
 fulfil the trust ? " 

 " plead for L'Estrange ! " Nora have not be exactly aware of this , - in the 
 sudden love precede those sudden nuptial , so little touching Harley 
  beyond Audley 's first timid allusion to his suit , and her calm and 
 cold reply   have be speak by either . 

 Levy resume . he dwell fully on the trust and the breach of it , and then 
 say : " in Egerton 's world , man hold it far more dishonour to betray 
 a man than to dupe a woman ; and if Egerton could do the one , why doubt 
 that he would do the other ? but do not look at I with those indignant 
 eye . put himself to the test ; write to he to say that the suspicion 
 amidst which you live have become intolerable , that they infect even 
 yourself , despite your reason , that the secrecy of your nuptial , his 
 prolong absence , his brief refusal , on unsatisfactory ground , to 
 proclaim your tie , all distract you with a terrible doubt . ask he , at 
 least   if he will not yet declare your marriage , to satisfy you that 
 the rite be legal . " 

 " I will go to he , " cry Nora , impetuously . 

 " go to he ! - in his own house ! what a scene , what a scandal ! could he 
 ever forgive you ? " 

 " at least , then , I will implore he to come here . I can not write such 
 horrible word ; I can not ! I can not ! go , go ! " Levy leave she , and hasten 
 to two or three of Audley 's most press creditor , - man , in fact , 
 who go entirely by Levy 's own advice . he bid they instantly surround 
 Audley 's country residence with bailiff . before Egerton could reach 
 Nora , he would thus be lodge in a jail . these preparation make , Levy 
 himself go down to Audley , and arrive , as usual , an hour or two 
 before the delivery of the post . 

 and Nora 's letter come ; and never be Audley 's grave brow more dark than 
 when he read it . still , with his usual decision , he resolve to obey 
 her wish , - ring the bell , and order his servant to put up a change of 
 dress , and send for post - horse . 

 Levy then take he aside , and lead he to the window . " look under yon 
 tree . do you see those man ? they be bailiff . this be the true reason 
 why I come to you to - day . you can not leave this house . " 

 Egerton recoil . " and this frantic , foolish letter at such a time ! " he 
 mutter , strike the open page , full of love in the midst of terror , 
 with his clenched hand . o Woman , Woman ! if thy heart be deep , and its 
 chord tender , beware how thou lov the man with whom all that pluck 
 he from the hard care of the workday world be frenzy or a folly ! he 
 will break thy heart , he will shatter its chord , he will trample out 
 from its delicate framework every sound that now make musical the 
 common air , and swell into unison with the harp of angel . 

 " she have before write to I , " continue Audley , pace the room 
 with angry , disorder stride , " ask I when our marriage can be 
 proclaim , and I think my reply would have satisfy any reasonable 
 woman . but now , now this be bad , immeasurably bad , - she actually 
 doubt my honour ! I , who have make such sacrifice , - actually doubt 
 whether I , Audley Egerton , an english gentleman , could have be base 
 enough to - " 

 " what ? " interrupt Levy , " to deceive your friend L'Estrange ? do not 
 she know that ? " 

 " Sir ! " exclaim Egerton , turn white . 

 " do not   be angry , - all be fair in love as in war ; and L'Estrange will live 
 yet to thank you for save he from such a misalliance . but you be 
 seriously angry : pray , forgive I . " 

 with some difficulty and much fawning , the usurer appease the storm 
 he have raise in Audley 's conscience . and he then hear , as if with 
 surprise , the true purport of Nora 's letter . 

 " it be beneath I to answer , much less to satisfy , such a doubt , " 
 say Audley . " I could have see she , and a look of reproach would have 
 suffice ; but to put my hand to paper , and condescend to write , ' I be 
 not a villain , and I will give you the proof that I be not ' - never ! " 

 " you be quite right ; but let we see if we can not reconcile matter 
 between your pride and her feeling . write simply this : ' all that you 
 ask I to say or to explain , I have instruct Levy , as my solicitor , to 
 say and explain for I ; and you may believe he as you would myself . ' " 

 " well , the poor fool , she deserve to be punish ; and I suppose that 
 answer will punish she more than a lengthy rebuke . - my mind be so 
 distract , I can not judge of these trumpery woman - fear and whim ; 
 there , I have write as you suggest . give she all the proof she need , 
 and tell she that in six month at furth , come what will , she shall 
 bear the name of Egerton , as henceforth she must share his fate . " 

 " why say six month ? " 

 " Parliament must be dissolve , and there must be a general election 
 before then . I shall either obtain a seat , be secure from a jail , have 
 win field for my energy , or - " 

 " or what ? " 

 " I shall renounce ambition altogether , ask my brother to assist I 
 towards whatever debt remain when all my property be fairly sell - they 
 can not be much . he have a living in his gift ; the incumbent be old , and , 
 I hear , very ill . I can take order . " 

 " sink into a country parson ! " 

 " and learn content . I have taste it already . she be then by my side . 
 explain all to she . this letter , I fear , be too unkind - but to doubt I 
 thus ! " 

 Levy hastily place the letter in his pocketbook ; and , for fear it 
 should be withdraw , take his leave . 

 and of that letter he make such use , that the day after he have give 
 it to Nora , she have leave the house , the neighbourhood ; flee , and not 
 a trace ! of all the agony in life , that which be most poignant and 
 harrowing , that which for the time most annihilate reason , and leave 
 our whole organization one lacerate , mangle heart , be the conviction 
 that we have be deceive where we place all the trust of love . the 
 moment the anchor snap , the storm come on , the star vanish behind the 
 cloud . 

 when Levy return , fill with the infamous hope which have stimulate 
 his revenge , - the hope that if he could succeed in change into 
 scorn and indignation Nora 's love for Audley , he might succeed also 
 in replace that broken and degraded idol , - his amaze and dismay be 
 great on hearing of her departure . for several day he seek her trace 
 in vain . he go to Lady Jane Horton 's , - Nora have not be there . he 
 tremble to go back to Egerton . surely Nora would have write to her 
 husband , and in spite of her promise , reveal his own falsehood ; but as 
 day pass , and not a clew be find , he have no option but to repair to 
 Egerton Hall , take care that the bailiff still surround it . 
 Audley have receive no line from Nora . the young husband be surprised , 
 perplexed , uneasy , but have no suspicion of the truth . 

 at length Levy be force to break to Audley the intelligence of Nora 's 
 flight . he give his own colour to it . Doubtless she have go to seek 
 her own relation , and , by their advice , take step to make her marriage 
 publicly know . this idea change Audley 's first shock into deep and 
 stern resentment . his mind so little comprehend Nora 's , and be ever 
 so disposed to what be call the common - sense view of thing , that he 
 see no other mode to account for her flight and her silence . odious to 
 Egerton as such a proceeding would be , he be far too proud to take 
 any step to guard against it . " let she do she bad , " say he , coldly , 
 mask emotion with his usual self - command ; " it will be but a nine 
 day ' wonder to the world , a fiercer rush of my creditor on their 
 hunt prey " 

 " and a challenge from Lord L'Estrange . " 

 " so be it , " answer Egerton , suddenly place his hand at his heart . 

 " what be the matter ? be you ill ? " 

 " a strange sensation here . my father die of a complaint of the heart , 
 and I myself be once tell to guard , through life , against excess of 
 emotion . I smile at such a warning then . let we sit down to business . " 

 but when Levy have go , and solitude reclose round that Man of the 
 Iron Mask , there grow upon he more and more the sense of a mighty loss . 
 Nora 's sweet love face start from the shadow of the forlorn wall . 
 her docile , yield temper , her generous , self - immolate spirit , come 
 back to his memory , to refute the idea that wrong she . his love , that 
 have be suspend for awhile by busy care , but which , if without much 
 refining sentiment , be still the master passion of his soul , flow 
 back into all his thought , - circumfuse the very atmosphere with a 
 fearful , soften charm . he escape under cover of the night from 
 the watch of the bailiff . he arrive in London . he himself seek 
 everywhere he could think of for his missing bride . Lady Jane Horton be 
 confine to her bed , die fast , incapable even to receive and reply to 
 his letter . he secretly send down to Lansmere to ascertain if Nora have 
 go to her parent . she be not there . the Avenels believe she still 
 with Lady Jane Horton . 

 he now grow most seriously alarm ; and in the midst of that alarm , Levy 
 secretly contrive that he should be arrest for debt ; but he be not 
 detain in confinement many day . before the disgrace get wind , the 
 writ be discharge , Levy baffle . he be free . Lord L'Estrange have 
 learn from Audley 's servant what Audley would have conceal from he 
 out of all the world . and the generous boy , who , besides the munificent 
 allowance he receive from the earl , be heir to an independent and 
 considerable fortune of his own , when he should attain his majority , 
 hasten to borrow the money and discharge all the obligation of his 
 friend . the benefit be confer before Audley know of it , or could 
 prevent . then a new emotion , and perhaps scarce less stinging than the 
 loss of Nora , torture the man who have smile at the warning of science ; 
 and the strange sensation at the heart be feel again and again . 

 and Harley , too , be still in search of Nora , - would talk of nothing but 
 she , and look so haggard and grief - worn . the bloom of the boy 's youth 
 be go . could Audley then have say , " she you seek be another 's ; your 
 love be raze out of your life ; and , for consolation , learn that your 
 friend have betray you " ? could Audley say this ? he do not dare . which 
 of the two suffer the most ? 

 and these two friend , of character so different , be so singularly 
 attach to each other , - inseparable at school , throw together in the 
 world , with a wealth of frank confidence between they , accumulate 
 since childhood . and now , in the midst of all his own anxious sorrow , 
 Harley still think and plan for Egerton . and self - accuse remorse , 
 and all the sense of painful gratitude , deepen Audley 's affection 
 for Harley into a devotion as to a superior , while soften it into a 
 reverential pity that yearn to relieve , to atone ; but how , - oh , how ? 

 a general election be now at hand , still no news of Nora . Levy keep 
 aloof from Audley , pursue his own silent search . a seat for the 
 borough of Lansmere be press upon Audley , not only by Harley , but his 
 parent , especially by the countess , who tacitly ascribe to Audley 's 
 wise counsel Nora 's mysterious disappearance . 

 Egerton at first resist the thought of a new obligation to his injured 
 friend ; but he burn to have it , some day , in his power to repay at 
 least his pecuniary debt : the sense of that debt humble he more 
 than all else . parliamentary success might at last obtain for he some 
 lucrative situation abroad , and thus enable he gradually to remove 
 this load from his heart and his honour . no other chance of repayment 
 appear open to he . he accept the offer , and go down to Lansmere . 
 his brother , lately marry , be ask to meet he ; and there also 
 be Miss Leslie the heiress , whom Lady Lansmere secretly hop her son 
 Harley would admire , but who have long since , no less secretly , give she 
 heart to the unconscious Egerton . 

 meanwhile , the miserable Nora - deceive by the art and representation 
 of Levy , act on the natural impulse of a heart so susceptible to 
 shame , fly from a home which she deem dishonour , fly from a 
 lover whose power over she she know to be so great that she dread lest 
 he might reconcile she to dishonour itself - have no thought save to hide 
 herself forever from Audley 's eye . she would not go to her relation , 
 to Lady Jane ; that be to give the clew , and invite the pursuit . an 
 italian lady of high rank have visit at Lady Jane 's , - take a great 
 fancy to Nora ; and the lady 's husband , have be oblige to precede 
 her return to Italy , have suggest the notion of engage some 
 companion ; the lady have speak of this to Nora and to Lady Jane Horton , 
 who have urge Nora to accept the offer , elude Harley 's pursuit , and go 
 abroad for a time . Nora then have refuse ; for she then have see Audley 
 Egerton . 

 to this italian lady she now go , and the offer be renew with the 
 most win kindness , and grasp at in the passion of despair . but the 
 Italian have accept invitation to english country - house before she 
 finally depart for the continent . meanwhile Nora take refuge in a 
 quiet lodging in a sequester suburb , which an english servant in the 
 employment of the fair foreigner recommend . thus have she first come 
 to the cottage in which Burley die . shortly afterwards she leave England 
 with her new companion , unknown to all , - to Lady Jane as to her parent . 

 all this time the poor girl be under a moral delirium , a confused 
 fever , haunt by dream from which she seek to fly . sound 
 physiologist agree that madness be rarest amongst person of the fine 
 imagination . but those person be , of all other , liable to a temporary 
 state of mind in which judgment sleep , - imagination alone prevail with 
 a dire and awful tyranny . a single idea gain ascendancy , expel all 
 other , present itself everywhere with an intolerable blinding glare . 
 Nora be at that time under the dread one idea , to fly from shame ! 

 but when the sea roll , and the dreary league interpose between 
 she and her lover ; when new image present themselves ; when the fever 
 slake , and reason return , - doubt break upon the previous despair . have 
 she not be too credulous , too hasty ? Fool , fool ! Audley have be so 
 poor a traitor ! how guilty be she , if she have wrong he ! and in the 
 midst of this revulsion of feeling , there stir within her another 
 life . she be destine to become a mother . at that thought her high 
 nature bow ; the last struggle of pride give way ; she would return 
 to England , see Audley , learn from his lip the truth , and even if the 
 truth be what she have be teach to believe , plead not for herself , 
 but for the false one 's child . 

 some delay occur in the then warlike state of affair on the 
 Continent before she could put this purpose into execution ; and on her 
 journey back , various obstruction lengthen the way . but she return 
 at last , and resought the suburban cottage in which she have last lodge 
 before quit England . at night , she go to Audley 's London house ; 
 there be only a woman in charge of it . Mr. Egerton be absent , 
 electioneer somewhere ; Mr. Levy , his lawyer , call every day for 
 any letter to be forward to he . Nora shrink from see Levy , shrank 
 from write even a letter that would pass through his band . if she 
 have be deceive , it have be by he , and wilfully . but parliament 
 be already dissolve ; the election would soon be over . Mr. Egerton 
 be expect to return to town within a week . Nora go back to Mrs. 
 Goodyer 's and resolve to wait , devour her own heart in silence . but 
 the newspaper might inform she where Audley really be ; the newspaper 
 be send for and con daily . 

 and one morning this paragraph meet her eye : - 

  the Earl and Countess of Lansmere be receive a distinguished 
  party at their country seat . among the guest be Miss Leslie , whose 
  wealth and beauty have excite such sensation in the fashionable 
  world . to the disappointment of numerous aspirant amongst our 
  aristocracy , we hear that this lady have , however , make she 
  distinguish choice in Mr. Audley Egerton . that gentleman be now a 
  candidate for the borough of Lansmere , as a supporter of the 
  Government ; his success be consider certain , and , accord to the 
  report of a large circle of friend , few new member will prove so 
  valuable an addition to the ministerial rank . a great career may 
  indeed be predict for a young man so esteemed for talent and 
  character , aid by a fortune so immense as that which he will 
  shortly receive with the hand of the accomplished heiress . 

 again the anchor snap , again the storm descend , again the star 
 vanish . Nora be now once more under the dominion of a single thought , 
 as she have be when she flee from her bridal home . then , it be to 
 escape from her lover , - now , it be to see he . as the victim stretch 
 on the rack implore to be lead at once to death , so there be moment 
 when the annihilation of hope seem more merciful than the torment of 
 suspense . 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

 when the scene in some long diorama pass solemnly before we , there be 
 sometimes one solitary object , contrasting , perhaps , the view of stately 
 city or the march of a mighty river , that halt on the eye for 
 a moment , and then glide away , leave on the mind a strange , 
 comfortless , undefined impression . 

 why be the object present to we ? in itself it seem comparatively 
 insignificant . it may have be but a broken column , a lonely pool with 
 a star - beam on its quiet surface , - yet it awe we . we remember it when 
 phantasmal picture of bright Damascus , or of colossal pyramid , of 
 bazaar in Stamboul , or lengthen caravan that defile slow amidst the 
 sand of Araby , have sate the wonder gaze . why be we detain in 
 the shadowy procession by a thing that would have be so commonplace 
 have it not be so lone ? some latent interest must attach to it . be it 
 there that a vision of woe have lift the wild hair of a Prophet ; there 
 where some Hagar have still the wail of her child on her indignant 
 breast ? we would fain call back the pageantry procession , fain see again 
 the solitary thing that seem so little worth the hand of the artist , 
 and ask , " why art thou here , and wherefore dost thou haunt we ? " 

 rise up , - rise up once more , by the broad great thoroughfare that 
 stretch onward and onward to the remorseless London ! rise up , rise up , 
 o solitary tree with the green leaf on thy bough , and the deep rent 
 in thy heart ; and the raven , dark bird of oman and sorrow , that build 
 their nest amidst the leaf of the bough , and drop with noiseless 
 plume down through the hollow rent of the heart , or be hear , it may 
 be in the grow shadow of twilight , call out to their young . 

 under the old pollard - tree , by the side of John Avenel 's house , there 
 cower , breathless and listening , John Avenel 's daughter Nora . now , 
 when that fatal newspaper paragraph , which lie so like truth , meet her 
 eye , she obey the first impulse of her passionate heart , - she tear 
 the wedding ring from her finger , she enclose it , with the paragraph 
 itself , in a letter to Audley , - a letter that she design to convey 
 scorn and pride - alas ! it express only jealousy and love . she could 
 not rest till she have put this letter into the post with her own hand , 
 address to , Audley at Lord Lansmere 's . Scarce have it leave she ere she 
 repent . what have she do , - resign the birth - right of the child 
 she be so soon to bring into the world , resign her last hope in her 
 lover 's honour , give up her life of life - and from belief in what ? - a 
 report in a newspaper ! no , no ; she would go herself to Lansmere ; to 
 her father 's home , - she could contrive to see Audley before that letter 
 reach his hand . the thought be scarcely conceive before obey . 
 she find a vacant place in a coach that start from London some hour 
 before the mail , and go within a few mile of Lansmere ; those last 
 mile she travel on foot . exhaust , fainting , she gain at last the 
 sight of home , and there halt , for in the little garden in front 
 she see her parent seat . she hear the murmur of their voice , and 
 suddenly she remember her altered shape , her terrible secret . how 
 answer the question , 

 " Daughter , where and who be thy husband ? " her heart fail she ; she 
 creep under the old pollard - tree , to gather up resolve , to watch , and to 
 listen . she see the rigid face of the thrifty , prudent mother , with the 
 deep line that tell of the care of an anxious life , and the chafe of 
 excitable temper and warm affection against the restraint of decorous 
 sanctimony and resolute pride . the dear stern face never seem to 
 she more dear and more stern . she see the comely , easy , indolent , 
 good - humour father ; not then the poor , paralytic sufferer , who could 
 yet recognize Nora 's eye under the lid of Leonard , but stalwart and 
 jovial , - first bat in the Cricket Club , first voice in the Glee Society , 
 the most popular canvasser of the Lansmere Constitutional True Blue 
 Party , and the pride and idol of the calvinistical prim wife ; never from 
 those pinch lip of hers have come forth even one pious rebuke to 
 the careless , social man . as he sit , one hand in his vest , his profile 
 turn to the road , the light smoke curl playfully up from the pipe , 
 over which lip , accustom to bland smile and hearty laughter , close 
 as if reluctant to be close at all , he be the very model of the 
 respectable retire trader in easy circumstance , and release from the 
 toil of make money while life could yet enjoy the delight of spend 
 it . 

 " well , old woman , " say John Avenel , " I must be off presently to see to 
 those three shaky voter in Fish Lane ; they will have do their work 
 soon , and I shall catch them at home . they do say as how we may have an 
 opposition ; and I know that old Smikes have go to Lonnon in search of 
 a candidate . we can not   have the Lansmere Constitutional Blues beat by a 
 Lonnoner ! ha , ha , ha ! " 

 " but you will be home before Jane and her husband Mark come ? how ever 
 she could marry a common carpenter ! " 

 " yes , " say John , " he be a carpenter ; but he have a vote , and that 
 strengthen the family interest . if Dick be not go to Amerikay , there 
 would be three on we . but Mark be a real good Blue ! a Lonnoner , indeed ! 
 a Yellow from Lonnon beat my Lord and the Blues ! ha , ha ! " 

 " but , John , this Mr. Egerton be a Lonnoner ! " 

 " you do not   understand thing , talk such nonsense . Mr. Egerton be the 
 blue candidate , and the blue be the Country Party ; therefore how can 
 he be a Lonnoner ? an uncommon clever , well - grow , handsome young man , 
 eh ! and my young Lord 's particular friend . " 

 Mrs. Avenel sigh . 

 " what be you sigh and shake your head for ? " 

 " I be think of our poor , dear , dear Nora ! " 

 " God bless she ! " cry John , heartily . 

 there be a rustle under the bough of the old hollow - hearte 
 pollard - tree . 

 " ha , ha ! Hark ! I say that so loud that I have startle the raven ! " 

 " how he do love she ! " say Mrs. Avenel , thoughtfully . " I be sure he 
 do ; and no wonder , for she look every inch a lady ; and why should not 
 she be my lady , after all ? " 

 " he ? who ? oh , that foolish fancy of yours about my young Lord ? a prudent 
 woman like you ! - stuff ! I be glad my little beauty be go to Lonnon , 
 out of harm 's way . " 

 " John , John , John ! no harm could ever come to my Nora . she be too pure 
 and too good , and have too proper a pride in she , to - " 

 " to listen to any young lord , I hope , " say John ; " though , " he add , 
 after a pause , ' she might well be a lady too . my Lord , the young one , 
 take I by the hand so kindly the other day , and say , ' have not you 
 hear from she - I mean Miss Avenel - lately ? ' and those bright eye of 
 his be as full of tear as - as - as yours be now . " 

 " well , John , well ; go on . " 

 " that be all . my Lady come up , and take I away to talk about the 
 election ; and just as I be go , she whisper , ' do not   let my wild boy 
 talk to you about that sweet girl of your . we must both see that she 
 do not come to disgrace . ' ' Disgrace ! ' that word make I very angry 
 for the moment . but my Lady have such a way with she that she soon put 
 I right again . yet , I do think Nora must have love my young Lord , only 
 she be too good to show it . what do you say ? " and the father 's voice 
 be thoughtful . 

 " I hope she will never love any man till she be married to he ; it be not 
 proper , John , " say Mrs. Avenel , somewhat starchly , though very mildly . 

 " ha , ha ! " laugh John , chuck his prim wife under the chin , " you 
 do not say that to I when I steal your first kiss under that very 
 pollard - tree - no house near it then ! " 

 " Hush , John , hush ! " and the prim wife blush like a girl . 

 " Pooh , " continue John , merrily , " I do not   see why we plain folk should 
 pretend to be more saintly and prudish - like than our better . there be 
 that handsome Miss Leslie , who be to marry Mr. Egerton - easy enough to 
 see how much she be in love with he , - could not keep her eye off from 
 he even in church , old girl ! ha , ha ! what the deuce be the matter with 
 the raven ? " 

 " they will be a comely couple , John . and I hear tell she have a power of 
 money . when be the marriage to be ? " 

 " oh , they say as soon as the election be over . a fine wedding we shall 
 have of it ! I dare say my young Lord will be bridesman . we will send for 
 our little Nora to see the gay doing ! " 

 out from the bough of the old tree come the shriek of a lost 
 spirit , - one of those strange , appalling sound of human agony which , 
 once hear , be never forget . it be as the wail of Hope , when SHE , 
 too , rush forth from the Coffer of Woes , and vanish into viewless 
 space ; it be the dread cry of Reason part from clay , and of Soul , 
 that would wrench itself from life ! for a moment all be still - and then 
 a dull , dumb , heavy fall ! 

 the parent gaze on each other , speechless : they steal close to the 
 pale , and look over . under the bough , at the gnarl root of the 
 oak , they see - gray and indistinct - a prostrate form . John open the 
 gate , and go round ; the mother creep to the road - side , and there stand 
 still . 

 " oh , wife , wife ! " cry John Avenel , from under the green bough , " it be 
 our child Nora ! our child ! our child ! " 

 and , as he speak , out from the green bough start the dark raven , 
 wheeling round and round , and call to their young ! 

 and when they have lay she on the bed , Mrs. Avenel whisper John to 
 withdraw for a moment ; and with set lip but tremble hand begin 
 to unlace the dress , under the pressure of which Nora 's heart heave 
 convulsively . and John go out of the room bewilder , and sit 
 himself down on the landing - place , and wonder whether he be awake or 
 sleep ; and a cold numbness creep over one side of he , and his head 
 feel very heavy , with a loud , booming noise in his ear . suddenly his 
 wife stand by his side , and say , in a very low voice , 

 " John , run for Mr. Morgan , - make haste . but mind - do not   speak to any one 
 on the way . quick , quick ! " 

 " be she die ? " 

 " I do not   know . why not die before ? " say Mrs. Avenel , between her tooth ; 
 " but Mr. Morgan be a discreet , friendly man . " 

 " a true blue ! " mutter poor John , as if his mind wander ; and rise 
 with difficulty , he star at his wife a moment , shake his head , and be 
 go . 

 an hour or two later , a little , cover , tax cart stop at Mr. 
 Avenel 's cottage , out of which step a young man with pale face and 
 spare form , dress in the Sunday suit of a rustic craftsman ; then a 
 homely , but pleasant , honest face bend down to he , smilingly ; and two 
 arm emerge from under covert of a red cloak extend an infant , which 
 the young man take tenderly . the baby be cross and very sickly ; it 
 begin to cry . the father hush , and rock , and toss it , with the air 
 of one to whom such a charge be familiar . 

 " he will be good when we get in , Mark , " say the young woman , as she 
 extract from the depth of the cart a large basket contain poultry 
 and home - make bread . 

 " do not   forget the flower that the squire 's gardener give we , " say Mark 
 the Poet . 

 without aid from her husband , the wife take down basket and nosegay , 
 settle her cloak , smooth her gown , and say , " very odd ! they do not 
 seem to expect we , Mark . how still the house be ! go and knock ; they 
 can not   ha ' go to bed yet . " 

 Mark knock at the door - no answer . a light pass rapidly across the 
 window on the upper floor , but still no one come to his summon . Mark 
 knock again . a gentleman dress in clerical costume , now come from 
 Lansinere Park , on the opposite side of the road , pause at the sound of 
 Mark 's second and more impatient knock , and say civilly , 

 " be you not the young folk my friend John Avenel tell I this morning 
 he expect to visit he ? " 

 " yes , please , Mr. Dale , " say Mrs. Fairfield , drop her courtesy . 
 " you remember I ! and this be my dear good man ! " 

 " what ! mark the Poet ? " say the curate of Lansmere , with a smile . " come 
 to write squib for the election ? " 

 " Squibs , sir ! " cry Mark , indignantly . 

 " Burns write squibs , " say the curate , mildly . 

 Mark make no answer , but again knock at the door . 

 this time , a man , whose face , even see by the starlight , be much 
 flushed , present himself at the threshold . 

 " Mr. Morgan ! " exclaim the curate , in benevolent alarm ; " no illness 
 here , I hope ? " 

 " Cott ! it be you , Mr. Dale ! - come in , come in ; I want a word with you . 
 but who the teuce be these people ? " 

 " Sir , " say Mark , push through the doorway , " my name be Fairfield , 
 and my wife be Mr. Avenel 's daughter ! " 

 " oh , Jane - and her baby too ! - Cood ! cood ! come in ; but be quiet , can not 
 you ? still , still - still as death ! " 

 the party enter , the door close ; the moon rise , and shine calmly on 
 the pale silent house , on the sleep flower of the little garden , on 
 the old pollard with its hollow core . the horse in the tax cart doze 
 unheeded ; the light still at time flit across the upper window . 
 these be the only sign of life , except when a bat , now and then 
 attract by the light that pass across the window , brush against 
 the pane , and then , dip downward , strike up against the nose of 
 the slumber horse , and dart merrily after the moth that flutter 
 round the raven 's nest in the old pollard . 




 CHAPTER XVIII . 

 all that day Harley L'Estrange have be more than usually mournful and 
 deject . indeed , the return to scene associate with Nora 's presence 
 increase the gloom that have settle on his mind since he have lose sight 
 and trace of she . Audley , in the remorseful tenderness he feel for his 
 injure friend , have induce L'Estrange towards evening to leave the 
 Park , and go into a district some mile off , on pretence that he 
 require Harley 's aid there to canvass certain important outvoter : the 
 change of scene might rouse he from his revery . Harley himself be 
 glad to escape from the guest at Lansmere . he readily consent to go . 
 he would not return that night . the outvoter lie remote and scatter , 
 he might be absent for a day or two . when Harley be go , Egerton 
 himself sink into deep thought . there be rumour of some unexpected 
 opposition . his partisan be alarmed and anxious . it be clear that 
 the Lansmere interest , if attack , be weak than the earl would 
 believe ; Egerton might lose his election . if so , what would become of 
 he ? how support his wife , whose return to he he always count on , and 
 whom it would then become he at all hazard to acknowledge ? it be 
 that day that he have speak to William Hazeldean as to the family 
 living . - " Peace , at least , " think the ambitious man , - " I shall have 
 peace ! " and the squire have promise he the rectory if need ; not 
 without a secret pang , for his Harry be already use her conjugal 
 influence in favour of her old school - friend 's husband , Mr. Dale ; 
 and the squire think Audley would be but a poor country parson , and 
 Dale - if he would only grow a little plumper than his curacy would 
 permit he to be - would be a parson in ten thousand . but while Audley 
 thus prepare for the bad , he still bring his energy to bear on 
 the more brilliant option ; and sit with his committee , look into 
 canvass - book , and discuss the character , politic , and local 
 interest of every elector , until the night be well - nigh go . when he 
 gain his room ; the shutter be unclosed , and he stand a few moment 
 at the window , gaze on the moon . at that sight , the thought of Nora , 
 lose and afar , steal over he . the man , as we know , have in his nature 
 little of romance and sentiment . seldom be it his will not to gaze upon 
 moon or star . but whenever some whisper of romance do soften his hard , 
 strong mind , or whenever moon or star do charm his gaze from earth , 
 Nora 's bright muse - like face , Nora 's sweet love eye , be see in 
 moon and star - beam , Nora 's low tender voice hear in the whisper of 
 that which we call romance , and which be but the sound of the mysterious 
 poetry that be ever in the air , would we but deign to hear it ! he turn 
 with a sigh , undressed , throw himself on his bed , and extinguish his 
 light . but the light of the moon would fill the room . it keep he awake 
 for a little time ; he turn his face from the calm , heavenly beam 
 resolutely towards the dull blind wall , and fall asleep . and , in the 
 sleep , he be with Nora , - again in the humble bridal - home . never in 
 his dream have she seem to he so distinct and life - like , - her 
 eye upturned to his , her hand clasp together , and rest on his 
 shoulder , as have be her graceful will not , her voice murmur meekly , 
 " have it , then , be my fault that we part ? forgive , forgive I ! " 
 and the sleeper imagine that he answer , " never part from I 
 again , - never , never ! " and that he bend down to kiss the chaste lip 
 that so tenderly seek his own . and suddenly he hear a knock 
 sound , as of a hammer , - regular , but soft , low , subdue . do you ever , 
 o reader , hear the sound of the hammer on the lid of a coffin in a house 
 of woe , - when the undertaker 's decorous hireling fear that the living 
 may hear how he part they from the dead ? such seem the sound to 
 Audley . the dream vanish abruptly . 

 he wake , and again hear the knock ; it be at his door . he sit up 
 wistfully ; the moon be go , it be morning . " who be there ? " he cry 
 peevishly . 

 a low voice from without answer , " hush , it be I ; dress quick ; let I 
 see you . " 

 Egerton recognize Lady Lansmere 's voice . alarmed and surprised , he 
 rise , dress in haste , and go to the door . Lady Lansmere be stand 
 without , extremely pale . she put her finger to her lip , and beckon he 
 to follow she . he obey mechanically . they enter her dressing - room , a 
 few door from his own chamber , and the countess close the door . 

 then lay her slight firm hand on his shoulder , she say , in 
 suppress and passionate excitement , 

 " oh , Mr. Egerton , you must serve I , and at once . Harley ! Harley ! save 
 my Harley ! go to he , prevent his come back here , stay with he ; give 
 up the election , - it be but a year or two lose in your life , you will 
 have other opportunity ; make that sacrifice to your friend . " 

 " speak - what be the matter ? I can make no sacrifice too great for 
 Harley ! " 

 " thank , I be sure of it . go then , I say , at once to Harley ; keep he 
 away from Lansmere on any excuse you can invent , until you can break the 
 sad news to he , - gently , gently . oh , how will he bear it ; how recover 
 the shock ? my boy , my boy ! " 

 " calm yourself ! explain ! break what news ; recover what shock ? " 

 " true ; you do not know , you have not hear . Nora Avenel lie yonder , in 
 her father 's house , - dead , dead ! " 

 Audley stagger back , clap his hand to his heart , and then drop 
 on his knee as if bow down by the stroke of heaven . 

 " my bride , my wife ! " he mutter . " Dead - it can not be ! " 

 Lady Lansmere be so startled at this exclamation , so stunned by a 
 confession wholly unexpected , that she remain unable to soothe , to 
 explain , and utterly unprepared for the fierce agony that burst from the 
 man she have ever see so dignified and cold , when he spring to his foot , 
 and all the sense of his eternal loss rush upon his heart . 

 at length he crush back his emotion , and listen in apparent 
 calm , and in a silence break but by quick gasp for breath , to Lady 
 Lansmere 's account . 

 one of the guest in the house , a female relation of Lady Lansmere 's , 
 have be take suddenly ill about an hour or two before ; the house have 
 be disturb , the countess herself arouse , and Mr. Morgan summon 
 as the family medical practitioner . from he she have learn that Nora 
 Avenel have return to her father 's house late on the previous evening , 
 have be seize with brain fever , and die in a few hour . 

 Audley listen , and turn to the door , still in silence . Lady Lansmere 
 catch he by the arm . " where be you go ? ah , can I now ask you 
 to save my son from the awful news , you yourself the sufferer ? and 
 yet - yet - you know his haste , his vehemence , if he learn that you be 
 his rival , her husband ; you whom he so trust ! what , what would be the 
 result ? - I tremble ! " 

 " tremble not , - I do not tremble ! let I go ! I will be back soon , and 
 then , " -   his lip writhe   - " then we will talk of Harley . " 

 Egerton go forth , stunned and dizzy . mechanically he take his way 
 across the park to John Avenel 's house . he have be force to enter that 
 house , formally , a day or two before , in the course of his canvass ; and 
 his worldly pride have receive a shock when the home , the birth , and the 
 manner of his bride 's parent have be bring before he . he have even 
 say to himself , " and be it the child of these person that I , Audley 
 Egerton , must announce to the world as wife ? " now , if she have be the 
 child of a beggar - nay , of a felon - now if he could but recall she to 
 life , how small and mean would all that dread world appear to he ! 
 too late , too late ! the dew be glisten in the sun , the bird be 
 sing overhead , life waken all around he - and his own heart feel 
 like a charnel - house . nothing but death and the dead there , - nothing ! he 
 arrive at the door : it be open : he call ; no one answer : he walk 
 up the narrow stair , undisturbed , unseen ; he come into the chamber of 
 death . at the opposite side of the bed be seat John Avenel ; but he 
 seem in a heavy sleep . in fact , paralysis have smite he ; but he know 
 it not ; neither do any one . who could heed the strong hearty man in 
 such a moment ? not even the poor anxious wife ! he have be leave there 
 to guard the house , and watch the dead , - an unconscious man ; numb , 
 himself , by the invisible icy hand ! Audley steal to the bedside ; he 
 lift the coverlid throw over the pale still face . what pass within 
 he during the minute he stay there who shall say ? but when he leave 
 the room , and slowly descend the stair , he leave behind he love and 
 youth , all the sweet hope and joy of the household human life , for 
 ever and ever ! 

 he return to Lady Lansmere , who await his come with the most 
 nervous anxiety . 

 " now , " say he , dryly , " I will go to Harley , and I will prevent his 
 return hither . " 

 " you have see the parent . good heaven ! do they know of your 
 marriage ? " 

 " no ; to Harley I must own it first . meanwhile , silence ! " 

 " silence ! " echo Lady Lansmere ; and her burn hand rest in 
 Audley 's , and Audley 's hand be as ice . 

 in another hour Egerton have leave the house , and before noon he be with 
 Harley . 

 it be necessary now to explain the absence of all the Avenel family , 
 except the poor stricken father . 

 Nora have die in give birth to a child , - die delirious . in her 
 delirium she have speak of shame , of disgrace ; there be no holy nuptial 
 ring on her finger . through all her grief , the first thought of Mrs. 
 Avenel be to save the good name of her lose daughter , the unblemished 
 honour of all the live Avenels . no matron long descend from 
 knight or king have keener pride in name and character than the poor , 
 punctilious calvinistic trader 's wife . " sorrow later , honour now ! " with 
 hard dry eye she muse and muse , and make out her plan . Jane Fairfield 
 should take away the infant at once , before the day dawn , and nurse 
 it with her own . Mark should go with she , for Mrs. Avenel dread the 
 indiscretion of his wild grief . she would go with they herself part of 
 the way , in order to command or reason they into guard silence . but 
 they could not go back to Hazeldean with another infant ; Jane must 
 go where none know she ; the two infant might pass as twin . and Mrs. 
 Avenel , though naturally a humane , kindly woman , and with a mother 's 
 heart to infant , look with almost a glad sternness at Jane 's puny 
 babe , and think to herself , " all difficulty would be over should there 
 be only one ! Nora 's child could thus pass throughout life for Jane 's ! " 

 fortunately for the preservation of the secret , the Avenels keep no 
 servant , - only an occasional drudge , who come a few hour in the day , 
 and go home to sleep . Mrs. Avenel could count on Mr. Morgan 's silence 
 as to the true cause of Nora 's death . and Mr. Dale , why should be reveal 
 the dishonour of a family ? that very day , or the next at furth , she 
 could induce her husband to absent himself , lest he should blab out the 
 tale while his sorrow be great than his pride . she alone would then 
 stay in the house of death until she could feel assured that all else 
 be hush into prudence . ay , she feel , that with due precaution , the 
 name be still safe . and so she awe and hurry Mark and his wife away , 
 and go with they in the cover cart , that hide the face of all three , 
 leave for an hour or two the house and the dead to her husband 's 
 charge , with many an admonition , to which he nod his head , and which 
 he do not hear . do you think this woman be unfeele and inhuman ? 
 have Nora look from heaven into her mother 's heart Nora would not have 
 think so . a good name when the burial stone close over dust be still 
 a possession upon the earth ; on earth it be indeed our only one ! well 
 for our friend to guard for we that treasure than to sit down and weep 
 over perishable clay . and weep ! - oh , stern mother , long year be leave 
 to thee for weeping ! no tear shed for Nora make such deep furrow on 
 the cheek as thine do ! yet who ever see they flow ? 

 Harley be in great surprise to see Egerton ; more surprised when Egerton 
 tell he that he find he be to be opposed , - that he have no chance of 
 success at Lansmere , and have , therefore , resolve to retire from the 
 contest . he write to the earl to that effect ; but the countess know 
 the true cause , and hint it to the earl ; so that , as we see at the 
 commencement of this history , Egerton 's cause do not suffer when 
 Captain Dashmore appear in the borough ; and , thank to Mr. Hazeldean 's 
 exertion and oratory , Audley come in by two vote , - the vote of John 
 Avenel and Mark Fairfield . for though the former have be remove a 
 little way from the town , and by medical advice , and though , on other 
 matter , the disease that have smite he leave he docile as a child 
  and he have but vague indistinct idea of all the circumstance 
 connect with Nora 's return , save the sense of her loss , yet he still 
 would hear how the Blues go on , and would get out of bed to keep his 
 word : and even his wife say , 

 " he be right ; well die of it than break his promise ! " the crowd give 
 way as the broken man they have see a few day before so jovial and 
 healthful be bring up in a chair to the poll , and say , with his 
 tremulous quavering voice , " I ' m a true Blue , - blue forever ! " 

 election be wondrous thing ! no man who have not see can guess how the 
 zeal in they triumph over sickness , sorrow , the ordinary private life 
 of we ! 

 there be forward to Audley , from Lansmere Park , Nora 's last letter . 
 the postman have leave it there an hour or two after he himself have go . 
 the wedding - ring fall on the ground , and roll under his foot . and 
 those burn , passionate reproach , all that anger of the wounded 
 dove , explain to he the mystery of her return , her unjust suspicion , 
 the cause of her sudden death , which he still ascribe to brain fever , 
 bring on by excitement and fatigue . for Nora do not speak of the 
 child about to be bear ; she have not remember it when she write , or she 
 would not have write . on the receipt of this letter , Egerton could not 
 remain in the dull village district , - alone , too , with Harley . he 
 say , abruptly , that he must go to London ; prevail on L'Estrange to 
 accompany he ; and there , when he hear from Lady Lansmere that the 
 funeral be over , he break to Harley , with lip as white as the dead , 
 and his hand press to his heart , on which his hereditary disease be 
 fasten quick and fierce , the dread truth that Nora be no more . the 
 effect upon the boy 's health and spirit be even more crushing than 
 Audley could anticipate . he only wake from grief to feel remorse . " for , " 
 say the noble Harley , " have it not be for my passion , my rash pursuit , 
 would she ever have leave her safe asylum , - ever even have leave she 
 native town ? and then - and then - the struggle between her sense of 
 duty and her love to I ! I see it all - all ! but for I she be live 
 still ! " 

 " oh , no ! " cry Egerton , his confession now rush to his lip . 

 " believe I , she never love you as you think . Nay , nay , hear I ! rather 
 suppose that she love another , flee with he , be perhaps married to 
 he , and - " 

 " hold ! " exclaim Harley , with a terrible burst of passion , - " you kill 
 her twice to I if you say that ! I can still feel that she live - life 
 here , in my heart - while I dream that she love I - or , at least , that 
 no other lip ever know the kiss that be deny to mine ! but if you tell 
 I to doubt that - you - you - " the boy 's anguish be too great for 
 his frame ; he fall suddenly back into Audley 's arm ; he have break a 
 blood - vessel . for several day he be in great danger ; but his eye be 
 constantly fix on Audley 's , with wistful intense gaze . " tell I , " 
 he mutter , at the risk of re - open the ruptured vein , and of the 
 instant loss of life , - " tell I , you do not mean that ! tell I you have 
 no cause to think she love another - be another 's ! " 

 " hush , hush ! no cause - none - none ! I mean but to comfort you , as I 
 think , - fool that I be ! - that be all ! " cry the miserable friend . 
 and from that hour Audley give up the idea of right himself in his 
 own eye , and submit still to be the live lie , - he , the haughty 
 gentleman ! 

 now , while Harley be still very weak and suffering , Mr. Dale come to 
 London , and call on Egerton . the curate , in promise secrecy to Mrs. 
 Avenel , have make one condition , that it should not be to the positive 
 injury of Nora 's live son . what if Nora be marry after all ? 
 and would it not be right , at least , to learn the name of the child 's 
 father ? 

 some day he might need a father . Mrs. Avenel be oblige to content 
 herself with these reservation . however , she implore Mr. Dale not to 
 make inquiry . what could they do ? if Nora be marry , her husband 
 would naturally , of his own accord , declare himself ; if seduce and 
 forsaken , it would but disgrace her memory   now save from stain   to 
 discover the father to a child of whose very existence the world as 
 yet know nothing . these argument perplex the good curate . but Jane 
 Fairfield have a sanguine belief in her sister 's innocence ; and all her 
 suspicion naturally point to Lord L'Estrange . so , indeed , perhaps ; 
 do Mrs. Avenel 's , though she never own they . of the correctness 
 of these suspicion Mr. Dale be fully convince ; the young lord 's 
 admiration , Lady Lansmere 's fear , have be too evident to one who have 
 often visit at the Park ; Harley 's abrupt departure just before Nora 's 
 return home ; Egerton 's sudden resignation of the borough before even 
 opposition be declare , in order to rejoin his friend , the very day of 
 Nora 's death , - all confirm his idea that Harley be the betrayer or 
 the husband . perhaps there might have be a secret marriage - possibly 
 abroad - since Harley want some year of his majority . he would , at 
 least , try to see and to sound Lord L'Estrange . prevent this interview 
 by Harley 's illness , the curate resolve to ascertain how far he could 
 penetrate into the mystery by a conversation with Egerton . there be 
 much in the grave repute which the latter have acquire , and the singular 
 and pre - eminent character for truth and honour with which it be 
 accompany , that make the curate resolve upon this step . accordingly ; 
 he see Egerton , mean only diplomatically to extract from the new 
 member for Lansmere what might benefit the family of the voter who have 
 give he his majority of two . 

 he begin by mention , as a touching fact , how poor John Avenel , bow 
 down by the loss of his child and the malady which have cripple his 
 limb and enfeeble his mind , have still rise from his bed to keep his 
 word . and Audley 's emotion seem to he so earnest and genuine , to 
 show so good a heart , that out by little and little come more : first , 
 his suspicion that poor Nora have be betray ; then his hope that 
 there might have be private marriage ; and as Audley , with his iron 
 self - command , show just the proper degree of interest , and no more , he 
 go on , till Audley know that he have a child . 

 " inquire no far ! " say the man of the world . " Respect Mrs. Avenel 's 
 feeling and wish , I entreat you ; they be the right one . leave 
 the rest to I . in my position - I mean as a resident of London - I 
 can quietly and easily ascertain more than you could , and provoke no 
 scandal ! if I can right this - this - poor -   his voice tremble   - right 
 the lost mother , or the live child , soon or later you will hear 
 from I ; if not , bury this secret where it now rest , in a grave which 
 slander have not reach . but the child - give I the address where it be 
 to be find - in case I succeed in find the father , and touch his 
 heart . " 

 " oh , Mr. Egerton , may I not say where you may find that father - who he 
 be ? " 

 " Sir ! " 

 " do not be angry ; and , after all , I can not ask you to betray any 
 confidence which a friend may have place in you . I know what you man 
 of high honour be to each other , even in sin . no , no , I beg pardon ; I 
 leave all in your hand . I shall hear from you then ? " 

 " or if not , why , then , believe that all search be hopeless . my friend ! 
 if you mean Lord L'Estrange , he be innocent . I - I - I -   the voice 
 falter   - am convince of it . " 

 the curate sigh , but make no answer . " oh , ye man of the world ! " 
 think he . he give the address which the member for Lansmere have ask 
 for , and go his way , and never hear again from Audley Egerton . he be 
 convince that the man who have show such deep feeling have fail in 
 his appeal to Harley 's conscience , or have judge it well to leave 
 Nora 's name in peace , and her child to her own relation and the care of 
 Heaven . 

 Harley L'Estrange , scarcely yet recover , hasten to join our army 
 on the continent , and seek the death which , like its half - brother , 
 rarely come when we call it . 

 as soon as Harley be go , Egerton go to the village to which Mr. 
 Dale have direct he , to seek for Nora 's child . but here he be lead 
 into a mistake which materially affect the tenor of his own life , and 
 Leonard 's future destiny . Mrs. Fairfield have be naturally order 
 by her mother to take another name in the village to which she have go 
 with the two infant , so that her connection with the Avenel family 
 might not be trace , to the provocation of inquiry and gossip . the grief 
 and excitement through which she have go dry the source of nutriment 
 in her breast . she put Nora 's child out to nurse at the house of a small 
 farmer , at a little distance from the village , and move from her first 
 lodge to be near to the infant . her own child be so sickly and 
 ailing , that she could not bear to intrust it to the care of an other . 
 she try to bring it up by hand ; and the poor child soon pin away 
 and die . she and Mark could not endure the sight of their baby 's grave ; 
 they hasten to return to Hazeldean , and take Leonard with they . from 
 that time Leonard pass for the son they have lose . 

 when Egerton arrive at the village , and inquire for the person whose 
 address have be give to he , he be refer to the cottage in which 
 she have last lodge , and be tell that she have be go some day , - the 
 day after her child be bury . her child bury ! Egerton stay to 
 inquire no more ; thus he hear nothing of the infant that have be put 
 out to nurse . he walk slowly into the churchyard , and stand for some 
 minute gaze on the small new mound ; then , press his hand on the 
 heart to which all emotion have be forbid , he re - enter his chaise 
 and return to London . the sole reason for acknowledge his marriage 
 seem to he now remove . Nora 's name have escape reproach . even 
 have his painful position with regard to Harley not constrain he to 
 preserve his secret , there be every motive to the world 's wise and 
 haughty son not to acknowledge a derogatory and foolish marriage , now 
 that none live whom concealment could wrong . 

 Audley mechanically resume his former life , - seek to resettle his 
 thought on the grand object of ambitious man . his poverty still 
 press on he ; his pecuniary debt to Harley sting and gall his 
 peculiar sense of honour . he see no way to clear his estate , to repay 
 his friend , but by some rich alliance . dead to love , he face this 
 prospect first with repugnance , then with apathetic indifference . Levy , 
 of whose treachery towards himself and Nora he be unaware , still hold 
 over he the power that the money - lender never lose over the man that 
 have owe , owe , or may owe again . Levy be ever urge he to propose , 
 to the rich Miss Leslie ; Lady Lansmere , willing to atone , as she 
 think , for his domestic loss , urge the same ; Harley , influence by 
 his mother , write from the continent to the same effect . 

 " manage it as you will , " at last say Egerton to Levy , ' so that I be not 
 a wife 's pensioner . " 

 " propose for I , if you will , " he say to Lady Lansmere , - " I can not 
 woo , - I can not talk of love . " 

 somehow or other the marriage , with all its rich advantage to the 
 ruin gentleman , be thus make up . and Egerton , as we have see , be 
 the polite and dignified husband before the world , - marry to a woman 
 who adore he . it be the common fate of man like he to be love too 
 well ! 

 on her death - bed his heart be touch by his wife 's melancholy 
 reproach , - " nothing I could do have ever make you love I ! " 

 " it be true , " answer Audley , with tear in his voice and eye ; " nature 
 give I but a small fund of what woman like you call ' love , ' and I 
 lavish it all away . " and he then tell she , though with reserve , some 
 portion of his former history ; and that soothe she ; for when she see 
 that he have love , and could grieve , she catch a glimpse of the human 
 heart she have not see before . she die , forgive he , and blessing . 

 Audley 's spirit be much affect by this new loss . he inly resolve 
 never to marry again . he have a vague thought at first of retrench his 
 expenditure , and make young Randal Leslie his heir . but when he first 
 see the clever Eton boy , his feeling do not warm to he , though his 
 intellect appreciate Randal 's quick , keen talent . he content himself 
 with resolve to push the boy , - to do what be merely just to the 
 distant kinsman of his late wife . always careless and lavish in money 
 matter , generous and princely , not from the delight of serve other , 
 but from a grand seigneur 's sentiment of what be due to himself and his 
 station , Audley have a mournful excuse for the lordly waste of the large 
 fortune at his control . the morbid function of the heart have become 
 organic disease . true , he might live many year , and die at last of some 
 other complaint in the course of nature ; but the progress of the disease 
 would quicken with all emotional excitement ; he might die suddenly - any 
 day - in the very prime , and , seemingly , in the full vigour , of his 
 life . and the only physician in whom he confide what he wish to 
 keep conceal from the world   for ambitious man would fain be think 
 immortal   tell he frankly that it be improbable that , with the wear 
 and tear of political strife and action , he could advance far into 
 middle age . therefore , no son of his succeed - his near relation 
 all wealthy - Egerton resign himself to his constitutional disdain 
 of money ; he could look into no affair , provide the balance in his 
 banker 's hand be such as become the munificent commoner . all else 
 he leave to his steward and to Levy . Levy grow rapidly rich , - very , very 
 rich , - and the steward thrive . 

 the usurer continue to possess a determined hold over the imperious 
 great man . he know Audley 's secret ; he could reveal that secret to 
 Harley . and the one soft and tender side of the statesman 's nature - the 
 sole part of he not dip in the ninefold Styx of practical prosaic 
 life , which render man so invulnerable to affection - be his remorseful 
 love for the school friend whom he still deceive . 

 here then you have the key to the locked chamber of Audley Egerton 's 
 character , the fortified castle of his mind . the envy minister , the 
 joyless man ; the oracle on the economy of an empire , the prodigal in 
 a usurer 's hand ; the august , high - crest gentleman , to whom prince 
 would refer for the casuistry of honour , the culprit tremble lest the 
 friend he well love on earth should detect his lie ! wrap thyself in the 
 decent veil that the Arts or the Graces weave for thee , o Human Nature ! 
 it be only the statue of marble whose nakedness the eye can behold 
 without shame and offence ! 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

 of the narrative just place before the reader , it be clear that 
 Leonard could gather only desultory fragment . he could but see that his 
 ill - fat mother have be unite to a man she have love with surpass 
 tenderness ; have be lead to suspect that the marriage be fraudulent ; 
 have go abroad in despair ; return repentant and hopeful ; have glean 
 some intelligence that her lover be about to be married to another , 
 and there the manuscript close with the blister leave on the page by 
 agonizing tear . the mournful end of Nora , her lonely return to die 
 under the roof of her parent , - this he have learn before from the 
 narrative of Dr. Morgan . 

 but even the name of her suppose husband be not reveal . of he 
 Leonard could form no conjecture , except that he be evidently of high 
 rank than Nora . Harley L'Estrange seem clearly indicate in the early 
 boy - lover . if so , Harley must know all that be leave dark to Leonard , 
 and to he Leonard resolve to confide the manuscript . with this 
 resolution he leave the cottage , resolve to return and attend the 
 funeral obsequie of his depart friend . Mrs. Goodyer willingly 
 permit he to take away the paper she have lend to he , and add 
 to they the packet which have be address to Mrs. Bertram from the 
 Continent . 

 Musing in anxious gloom over the record he have read , Leonard enter 
 London on foot , and bent his way towards Harley 's hotel ; when , just as 
 he have cross into Bond Street , a gentleman in company with Baron Levy , 
 and who seem , by the flush on his brow and the sullen tone of his 
 voice , to have have rather an irritate colloquy with the fashionable 
 usurer , suddenly catch sight of Leonard , and , abruptly quit Levy , 
 seize the young man by the arm . 

 " excuse I , sir , " say the gentleman , look hard into Leonard 's face , 
 " but unless these sharp eye of mine be mistaken , which they seldom 
 be , I see a nephew whom , perhaps , I behave to rather too harshly , but 
 who still have no right to forget Richard Avenel . " 

 " my dear uncle , " exclaim Leonard , " this be indeed a joyful surprise ; 
 at a time , too , when I need joy ! no ; I have never forget your 
 kindness , and always regret our estrangement . " 

 " that be well say ; give we your fist again . let I look at you - quite 
 the gentleman , I declare - still so good - look too . we Avenels always 
 be a handsome family . 

 " good - by , Baron Levy . need not wait for I ; I be not go to run away . 
 I shall see you again . " 

 " but , " whisper Levy , who have follow Avenel across the street , and 
 eyed Leonard with a quick , curious , search glance - " but it must be 
 as I say with regard to the borough ; or   to be plain   you must cash the 
 bill on the day they be due . " 

 " very well , sir , very well . so you think to put the screw upon I , as 
 if I be a poor little householder . I understand , - my money or my 
 borough ? " 

 " exactly so , " say the baron , with a soft smile . 

 " you shall hear from I . "   aside , as Levy stroll away   - " D - -d 
 tarnation rascal ! " 

 Dick Avenel then link his arm in his nephew 's , and strove for some 
 minute to forget his own trouble , in the indulgence of that curiosity 
 in the affair of another , which be natural to he , and in this 
 instance increase by the real affection which he have feel for Leonard . 
 but still his curiosity remain unsatisfie ; for long before Leonard 
 could overcome his habitual reluctance to speak of his success in 
 literature , Dick 's mind wander back to his rival at Screwstown , 
 and the curse of " over - competition , " - to the bill which Levy have 
 discount , in order to enable Dick to meet the crush force of a 
 capitalist large than himself , and the " tarnation rascal " who now 
 wish to obtain two seat at Lansmere , one for Randal Leslie , one for 
 a rich Nabob whom Levy have just catch as a client , and Dick , though 
 willing to aid Leslie , have a mind to the other seat for himself . 
 therefore Dick soon break in upon the hesitate confession of Leonard , 
 with exclamation far from pertinent to the subject , and rather for the 
 sake of vent his own grief and resentment than with any idea that 
 the sympathy or advice of his nephew could serve he . 

 " well , well , " say Dick , " another time for your history . I see you have 
 thrive , and that be enough for the present . very odd ; but just now I 
 can only think of myself . I be in a regular fix , sir . Screwstown be not 
 the respectable Screwstown that you remember it - all demoralize 
 and turn topsy - turvy by a demoniacal monster capitalist , with 
 steam - engine that might bring the fall of Niagara into your back 
 parlour , sir ! and as if that be not enough to destroy and drive into 
 almighty shiver a decent fair - play Britisher like myself , I hear he 
 be just in treaty for some patent infernal invention that will make his 
 engine do twice as much work with half as many hand ! that be the way 
 those unfeele ruffian increase our poor - rate ! but I will get up a 
 riot against he , I will ! do not   talk to I of the law ! what the devil 
 be the good of the law if it do not   protect a man 's industry , - a liberal 
 man , too , like I ! " here Dick burst into a storm of vituperation against 
 the rotten old country in general , and Mr. Dyce , the monster capitalist 
 of Screwstown , in particular . 

 Leonard start ; for Dick now name , in that monster capitalist , the 
 very person who be in treaty for Leonard 's own mechanical improvement 
 on the steam - engine . 

 " stop , uncle , stop ! why , then , if this man be to buy the contrivance 
 you speak of , it would injure you ? " 

 " injure I , sir ! I should be a bankrupt , - that be , if it succeed ; but 
 I dare say it be all a humbug . " 

 " no , it will succeed , - I will answer for that ! " 

 " you ! you have see it ? " 

 " why , I invent it ! " 

 Dick hastily withdraw his arm from Leonard 's . 

 " Serpent 's tooth ! " he say falteringly , ' so it be you , whom I warm at 
 my hearth , who be to ruin Richard Avenel ? " 

 " no ; but to save he ! come into the City and look at my model . if you 
 like it , the patent shall be yours ! " 

 " Cab , cab , cab , " cry Dick Avenel , stop a ' Ransom ; ' " jump in , 
 Leonard , - jump in . I will buy your patent , - that be , if it be worth a 
 straw ; and as for payment - " 

 " payment ! do not   talk of that ! " 

 " well , I will not , " say Dick , mildly ; " for ' t be not the topic of 
 conversation I should choose myself , just at present . and as for that 
 black - whisker alligator , the baron , let I first get out of those 
 rambustious , unchristian , filbert - shape claws of his , and then - but 
 jump in ! jump in ! and tell the man where to drive ! " 

 a very brief inspection of Leonard 's invention suffice to show Richard 
 Avenel how invaluable it would be to he . arm with a patent , of which 
 the certain effect in the increase of power and diminution of labour 
 be obvious to any practical man , Avenel feel that he should have no 
 difficulty in obtain such advance of money as he require , whether 
 to alter his engine , meet the bill discount by Levy , or carry on 
 the war with the monster capitalist . it might be necessary to admit into 
 partnership some other monster capitalist - what then ? any partner well 
 than Levy . a bright idea strike he . 

 " if I can just terrify and whop that infernal intruder on my own 
 ground for a few month , he may offer , himself , to enter into 
 partnership , - make the two concern a joint - stock friendly combination , 
 and then we shall flog the world . " 

 his gratitude to Leonard become so lively that Dick offer to bring his 
 nephew in for Lansmere instead of himself ; and when Leonard decline the 
 offer , exclaim , " well , then , any friend of your ; I be all for reform 
 against those high and mighty right honourable borough - monger ; and what 
 with loan and mortgage on the small householder , and a long course 
 of ' free and easie ' with the independent freeman , I carry one - seat 
 certain , perhaps both seat of the town of Lansmere , in my breech 
 pocket . " Dick then , appoint an interview with Leonard at his 
 lawyer 's , to settle the transfer of the invention , upon term which he 
 declare ' should be honourable to both party , " hurry off , to search 
 amongst his friend in the City for some monster capitalist , who alight 
 be induce to extricate he from the jaw of Levy and the engine of his 
 rival at Screwstown . " Mullins be the man , if I can but catch he , " say 
 Dick . " you have hear of Mullins ? - a wonderful great man ; you should see 
 his nail ; he never cut they ! three million , at least , he have scrap 
 together with those nail of his , sir . and in this rotten old country , 
 a man must have nail a yard long to fight with a devil like Levy ! 
 good - by , good - by , - goon - by , MY DEAR , nephew ! " 




 CHAPTER XX . 

 Harley L'Estrange be seat alone in his apartment . he have just put 
 down a volume of some favourite classic author , and he be rest 
 his hand firmly clench upon the book . ever since Harley 's return to 
 England , there have be a perceptible change in the expression of his 
 countenance , even in the very bearing and attitude of his elastic 
 youthful figure . but this change have be more marked since that last 
 interview with Helen which have be record . there be a compress , 
 resolute firmness in the lip , a decide character in the brow . to 
 the indolent , careless grace of his movement have succeed a certain 
 indescribable energy , as quiet and self - collect as that which 
 distinguish the determined air of Audley Egerton himself . in fact , if 
 you could have look into his heart , you would have see that Harley 
 be , for the first time , make a strong effort over his passion and 
 his humour ; that the whole man be nerve himself to a sense of duty . 
 " no , " he mutter , - " no ! I will think only of Helen ; I will think 
 only of real life ! and what   be I not engage to another   would that 
 dark - eyed italian girl be to I ? - what a mere fool 's fancy be this ! I 
 love again , - I , who through all the fair spring of my life have clung 
 with such faith to a memory and a grave ! come , come , come , Harley 
 L'Estrange , act thy part as man amongst man , at last ! accept regard ; 
 dream no more of passion . abandon false ideal . thou art no poet - why 
 deem that life itself can be a poem ? " 

 the door open , and the austrian prince , whom Harley have interest 
 in the cause of Violante 's father , enter , with the familiar step of a 
 friend . 

 " have you discover those document yet ? " say the prince . " I must now 
 return to Vienna within a few day ; and unless you can arm I with 
 some tangible proof of Peschiera 's ancient treachery , or some more 
 unanswerable excuse for his noble kinsman , I fear that there be no other 
 hope for the exile 's recall to his country than what lie in the hateful 
 option of give his daughter to his perfidious foe . " 

 " alas ! " say Harley , " as yet all research have be in vain ; and 
 I know not what other step to take , without arouse Peschiera 's 
 vigilance , and set his crafty brain at work to counteract we . my 
 poor friend , then , must rest content with exile . to give Violante to 
 the count be dishonour . but I shall soon be marry ; soon have a home , 
 not quite unworthy of their due rank , to offer both to father and to 
 child . " 

 " would the future Lady L'Estrange feel no jealousy of a guest so fair 
 as you tell I this young signorina be ? and would you be in no danger 
 yourself , my poor friend ? " 

 " Pooh ! " say Harley , colour . " my fair guest would have two father ; 
 that be all . pray do not jest on a thing so grave as honour . " 

 again the door open , and Leonard appear . 

 " welcome , " cry Harley , please to be no long alone under the 
 prince 's penetrate eye , - " welcome . this be the noble friend who share 
 our interest for Riccabocca , and who could serve he so well , if we 
 could but discover the document of which I have speak to you . " 

 " it be here , " say Leonard , simply ; " may it be all that you require ! " 

 Harley eagerly grasp at the packet , which have be send from Italy to 
 the suppose Mrs. Bertram , and , lean his face on his hand , rapidly 
 hurry through the content . 

 " Hurrah ! " he cry at last , with his face light up , and a boyish toss 
 of his right hand . " look , look , Prince , here be Peschiera 's own letter 
 to his kinsman 's wife ; his avowal of what he call his ' patriotic 
 design ; ' his entreaty to she to induce her husband to share they . 
 look , look , how he wield his influence over the woman he have once 
 woo ; look how artfully he combat her objection ; see how reluctant 
 our friend be to stir , till wife and kinsman both unite to urge he ! " 

 " it be enough,-quite enough , " exclaim the prince , look at the 
 passage in Peschiera 's letter which Harley point out to he . 

 " no , it be not enough , " shout Harley , as he continue to read the 
 letter with his rapid sparkling eye . " more still ! o villain , doubly 
 damned ! here , after our friend 's flight , here be Peschiera 's avowal 
 of guilty passion ; here , he swear that he have intrigue to ruin his 
 benefactor , in order to pollute the home that have shelter he . ah , see 
 how she answer ! thank Heaven her own eye be open at last , and she 
 scorn he before she die ! she be innocent ! I say so . Violante 's 
 mother be pure . poor lady , this move I ! have your emperor the heart of 
 a man ? " 

 " I know enough of our emperor , " answer the prince , warmly , " to know 
 that , the moment these paper reach he , Peschiera be ruin , and your 
 friend be restore to his honour . you will live to see the daughter , to 
 whom you would have give a child 's place at your hearth , the wealthy 
 heiress of Italy , - the bride of some noble lover , with rank only below 
 the supremacy of king ! " 

 " ah , " say Harley , in a sharp accent , and turn very pale , - " ah , I 
 shall not see she that ! I shall never visit Italy again ! - never see she 
 more , - never , after she have once quit this climate of cold iron care 
 and formal duty ! never , never ! " he turn his head for a moment , and 
 then come with quick step to Leonard . " but you , o happy poet ! no Ideal 
 can ever be lose to you . you be independent of real life . would that I 
 be a poet ! " he smile sadly . 

 " you would not say so , perhaps , my dear Lord , " answer Leonard , 
 with equal sadness , " if you know how little what you call ' the Ideal ' 
 replace to a poet the loss of one affection in the genial human world . 
 Independent of real life ! alas ! no . and I have here the confession of 
 a true poet - soul , which I will entreat you to read at leisure ; and when 
 you have read , say if you would still be a poet ! " 

 he take forth Nora 's manuscript as he speak . 

 " place they yonder , in my escritoire , Leonard ; I will read they later . " 

 " do so , and with heed ; for to I there be much here that involve my own 
 life , - much that be still a mystery , and which I think you can unravel ! " 

 " I ! " exclaim Harley ; and he be move towards the escritoire , in a 
 drawer of which Leonard have carefully deposit the paper , when once 
 more , but this time violently , the door be throw open , and Giacomo 
 rush into the room , accompany by Lady Lansmere . 

 " oh , my Lord , my Lord ! " cry Giacomo , in Italian , " the signorina ! the 
 signorina ! Violante ! " 

 " what of she ? Mother , Mother ! what of she ? speak , speak ! " 

 " she have go , - leave our house ! " 

 " left ! no , no ! " cry Giacomo . " she must have be deceive or force 
 away . the count ! the count ! oh , my good Lord , save she , as you once 
 save her father ! " 

 " hold ! " cry Harley . " give I your arm , Mother . a second such blow in 
 life be beyond the strength of man , - at least it be beyond mine . so , so ! 
 I be well now ! thank you , Mother . stand back , all of you ! give I 
 air . so the count have triumph , and Violante have flee with he ! explain 
 all , - I can bear it ! " 




 BOOK TWELFTH . 




 INITIAL chapter . 

 wherein the CAXTON FAMILY reappear . 

 " again , " quoth my father , - " again behold we ! we who greet the 
 commencement of your narrative , who absent ourselves in the midcourse 
 when we could but obstruct the current of event , and jostle personage 
 more important , - we now gather round the close . still , as the chorus to 
 the drama , we circle round the altar with the solemn but dubious 
 chant which prepare the audience for the completion of the appoint 
 destiny ; though still , ourselves , unaware how the skein be to be 
 unravel , and where the shear be to descend . " 

 so there they stand , the Family of Caxton , - all group round I , 
 all eager officiously to question , some over - anxious prematurely to 
 criticise . 

 " Violante can not   have voluntarily go off with that horrid count , " say 
 my mother ; " but perhaps she be deceive , like Eugenia by Mr. Bellamy , 
 in the novel of ' CAMILLA ' . " 

 " ha ! " say my father , " and in that case it be time yet to steal a hint 
 from Clarissa Harlowe , and make Violante die less of a broken heart than 
 a sullied honour . she be one of those girl who ought to be kill ! all 
 thing about her forebode an early tomb ! " 

 " dear , dear ! " cry Mrs. Caxton , " I hope not ! " 

 " Pooh , brother , " say the captain , " we have have enough of the tomb in 
 the history of poor Nora . the whole story grow out of a grave , and if 
 to a grave it must return - if , Pisistratus , you must kill somebody - kill 
 Levy . " 

 " or the count , " say my mother , with unusual truculence . " or randal 
 Leslie , " say Squills . " I should like to have a post - mortem cast of his 
 head , - it would be an instructive study . " 

 here there be a general confusion of tongue , all present conspiring 
 to bewilder the unfortunate author with their various and discordant 
 counsel how to wind up his story and dispose of his character . 

 " Silence ! " cry Pisistratus , clap his hand to both ear . " I can no 
 more alter the fate allot to each of the personage whom you honour 
 with your interest than I can change your own ; like you , they must 
 go where event lead there , urge on by their own character and the 
 agency of other . Providence so pervadingly govern the universe , 
 that you can not strike it even out of a book . the author may beget a 
 character , but the moment the character come into action , it escape 
 from his hand , - play its own part , and fulfil its own inevitable 
 doom . " 

 " besides , " say Squills , " it be easy to see , from the phrenological 
 development of the organ in those several head which Pisistratus have 
 allow we to examine , that we have see no creation of mere fiction , 
 but live person , whose true history have set in movement their various 
 bump of Amativeness , Constructiveness , Acquisitiveness , Idealty , 
 Wonder , Comparison , etc . they must act , and they must end , accord 
 to the influence of their crania . thus we find in Randal Leslie the 
 predominant organ of Constructiveness , Secretiveness , Comparison , and 
 Eventuality , while Benevolence , Conscientiousness , Adhesiveness , be 
 utterly nil . now , to divine how such a man must end , we must first see 
 what be the general composition of the society in which he move , in 
 short , what other gas be bring into contact with his phlogiston . 
 as to Leonard , and Harley , and Audley Egerton , survey they 
 phrenologically , I should say that - " 

 " hush ! " say my father , " Pisistratus have dip his pen in the ink , and 
 it seem to I easy for the wise man that ever live to account for 
 what other have do than to predict what they should do . phrenologist 
 discover that Mr. Thurtell have a very fine organ of Conscientiousness ; 
 yet , somehow or other , that err personage contrive to knock the 
 brain out of his friend 's organ of Individuality . therefore I rise to 
 propose a Resolution , - that this meeting be adjourn till Pisistratus 
 have complete his narrative ; and we shall then have the satisfaction of 
 know that it ought , accord to every principle of nature , science , 
 and art , to have be complete differently . why should we deprive 
 ourselves of that pleasure ? " 

 " I second the motion , " say the captain ; " but if Levy be not hang , I 
 shall say that there be an end of all poetical justice . " 

 " take care of poor Helen , " say Blanche , tenderly : " nor , that I would 
 have you forget Violante . " 

 " Pish ! and sit down , or they shall both die old maid . " frighten at 
 that threat , Blanche , with a deprecating look , draw her stool quietly 
 near I , as if to place she two protege in an atmosphere mesmerize to 
 matrimonial attraction ; and my mother set hard to work - at a new frock 
 for the baby . unsoftene by these undue female influence , Pisistratus 
 write on at the dictation of the relentless Fates . his pen be of iron , 
 and his heart be of granite . he be as insensible to the existence of 
 wife and baby as if he have never pay a house bill , nor rush from 
 a nursery at the sound of an infant squall . o blessed privilege of 
 Authorship ! 

  " o testudinis aureae 
  Dulcem quae strepitum , Pieri , tempera ! 
  o mutis quoque piscibus 
  Donatura cyeni , si libeat , sonum ! " 

   " o Muse , who dost temper the sweet sound of the golden shell of the 
  tortoise , and couldst also give , be it need , to silent fish 
  the song of the swan . " 




 CHAPTER II . 

 it be necessary to go somewhat back in the course of this narrative , and 
 account to the reader for the disappearance of Violante . 

 it may be remember that Peschiera , scar by the sudden approach of 
 Lord L'Estrange , have little time for further word to the young Italian , 
 than those which express his intention to renew the conference , and 
 press for her decision . but the next day , when he re - enter the garden , 
 secretly and stealthily , as before , Violante do not appear . and after 
 watch round the precinct till dusk , the count retreat , with an 
 indignant conviction that his art have fail to enlist on his side 
 either the heart or the imagination of his intended victim . he begin now 
 to revolve and to discuss with Levy the possibility of one of those 
 bold and violent measure , which be favour by his reckless daring 
 and desperate condition . but Levy treat with such just ridicule any 
 suggestion to abstract Violante by force from Lord Lansmere 's house , so 
 scout the notion of nocturnal assault , with the device of scale 
 window and rope - ladder , that the count reluctantly abandon that 
 romance of villany so unsuited to our sober capital , and which would no 
 doubt have terminate in his capture by the police , with the prospect of 
 committal to the House of Correction . 

 Levy himself find his invention at fault , and Randal Leslie be call 
 into consultation . the usurer have contrive that Randal 's scheme of 
 fortune and advancement be so base upon Levy 's aid and connivance , 
 that the young man , with all his desire rather to make instrument 
 of other man , than to be himself their instrument , find his superior 
 intellect as completely a slave to Levy 's more experienced craft , as 
 ever subtle Genius of air be subject to the vulgar Sorcerer of earth . 

 his acquisition of the ancestral acre , his anticipated seat in 
 parliament , his chance of oust Frank from the heritage of Hazeldean , 
 be all as string that pull he to and fro , like a puppet in the 
 sleek , filbert - nail finger of the smile showman , who could exhibit 
 he to the admiration of a crowd , or cast he away into dust and lumber . 

 Randal gnaw his lip in the sullen wrath of a man who bid his hour 
 of future emancipation , and lend his brain to the hire of the present 
 servitude , in mechanical acquiescence . the inherent superiority of the 
 profound young schemer become instantly apparent over the courage of 
 Peschiera and the practised wit of the baron . 

 " your sister , " say Randal , to the former , " must be the active agent in 
 the first and most difficult part of your enterprise . Violante can not 
 be take by force from Lord Lansmere 's , - she must be induce to leave 
 it with her own consent . a female be need here . woman can good decoy 
 woman . " 

 " admirably say , " quoth the count ; " but Beatrice have grow restive , and 
 though her dowry , and therefore her very marriage with that excellent 
 young Hazeldean , depend on my own alliance with my fair kinswoman , she 
 have grow so indifferent to my success that I dare not reckon on her 
 aid . between you and I , though she be once very eager to be marry , 
 she now seem to shrink from the notion ; and I have no other hold over 
 she . " 

 " have she not see some one , and lately , whom she prefer to poor Frank ? " 

 " I suspect that she have ; but I know not whom , unless it be that detest 
 L'Estrange . " 

 " ah , well , well . interfere with she no far yourself , but have all 
 in readiness to quit England , as you have before propose , as soon as 
 Violante be in your power . " 

 " all be in readiness , " say the count . " Levy have agree to purchase a 
 famous sailing - vessel of one of his client . I have engage a score or 
 so of determined outcast , accustom to the sea , - Genoese , Corsicans , 
 Sardinians , ex - Carbonari of the good sort , - no silly patriot , but 
 liberal cosmopolitan , who have iron at the disposal of any man 's gold . 
 I have a priest to perform the nuptial service , and deaf to any fair 
 lady 's ' no . ' once at sea , and wherever I land , Violante will lean on my 
 arm as Countess of Peschiera . " 

 " but Violante , " say Randal , doggedly , determine not to yield to the 
 disgust with which the count 's audacious cynicism fill even he - " but 
 Violante can not be remove in broad daylight at once to such a vessel , 
 nor from a quarter so populous as that in which your sister reside . " 

 " I have think of that too , " say the count ; " my emissary have find 
 I a house close by the river , and safe for our purpose as the dungeon 
 of Venice . " 

 " I wish not to know all this , " answer Randal , quickly ; " you will 
 instruct Madame di Negra where to take Violante . - my task limit itself 
 to the fair invention that belong to intellect ; what belong to force 
 be not in my province . I will go at once to your sister , whom I think I 
 can influence more effectually than you can ; though later I may give 
 you a hint to guard against the chance of her remorse . meanwhile as , the 
 moment Violante disappear , suspicion would fall upon you , show yourself 
 constantly in public surround by your friend . be able to account for 
 every hour of your time - " 

 " an alibi ? " interrupt the ci - devant solicitor . 

 " exactly so , Baron . complete the purchase of the vessel , and let the 
 count man it as he propose . I will communicate with you both as soon 
 as I can put you into action . to - day I shall have much to do ; it will be 
 do . " 

 as Randal leave the room , Levy follow he . 

 " what you propose to do will be well do , no doubt , " quoth the usurer , 
 link his arm in Randal 's ; " but take care that you do not   get yourself 
 into a scrape , so as to damage your character . I have great hope of you 
 in public life ; and in public life character be necessary , - that be , so 
 far as honour be concern . " 

 " I damage my character ! - and for a Count Peschiera ! " say Randal , 
 open his eye . " I ! what do you take I for ? " 

 the baron let go his hold . 

 " this boy ought to rise very high , " say he to himself , as he turn 
 back to the count . 




 CHAPTER III . 

 Randal 's acute faculty of comprehension have long since surmise the 
 truth that Beatrice 's view and temper of mind have be strangely and 
 suddenly alter by some such revolution as passion only can effect ; 
 that pique or disappointment have mingle with the motive which have 
 induce she to accept the hand of his rash young kinsman ; and that , 
 instead of the resigned indifference with which she might at one time 
 have contemplate any marriage that could free she from a position that 
 perpetually gall her pride , it be now with a repugnance , visible to 
 Randal 's keen eye , that she shrink from the performance of that pledge 
 which Frank have so dearly buy . the temptation which the count could 
 hold out to she to become his accomplice in design of which the fraud 
 and perfidy would revolt her well nature have cease to be of avail . a 
 dowry have grow valueless , since it would but hasten the nuptial from 
 which she recoil . Randal feel that he could not secure her aid , except 
 by work on a passion so turbulent as to confound her judgment . such 
 a passion he recognize in jealousy . he have once doubt if Harley be 
 the object of her love ; yet , after all , be it not probable ? he know , 
 at least , of no one else to suspect . if so , he have but to whisper , 
 " Violante be your rival . Violante remove , your beauty may find its 
 natural effect ; if not , you be an italian , and you will be at least 
 avenge . " he see still more reason to suppose that Lord L'Estrange be 
 indeed the one by whom he could rule Beatrice , since , the last time 
 he have see she , she have question he with much eagerness as to the 
 family of Lord Lansmere , especially as to the female part of it . randal 
 have then judge it prudent to avoid speak of Violante , and feign 
 ignorance ; but promise to ascertain all particular by the time he next 
 see the marchesa . it be the warmth with which she have thank he that 
 have set his busy mind at work to conjecture the cause of her curiosity 
 so earnestly arouse , and to ascribe that cause to jealousy . if Harley 
 love Violante   as Randal himself have before suppose , the little of 
 passion that the young man admit to himself be enlist in aid 
 of Peschiera 's scheme . for though Randal do not love Violante , he 
 cordially dislike L'Estrange , and would have go as far to render that 
 dislike vindictive , as a cold reasoner , intent upon worldly fortune , 
 will ever suffer mere hate to influence he . 

 " at the bad , " think Randal , " if it be not Harley , touch the chord of 
 jealousy , and its vibration will direct I right . " 

 thus soliloquizing , he arrive at Madame di Negra 's . 

 now , in reality the marchesa 's inquiry as to Lord Lansmere 's family 
 have their source in the misguided , restless , despairing interest with 
 which she still cling to the image of the young poet , whom Randal have 
 no reason to suspect . that interest have become yet more keen from the 
 impatient misery she have feel ever since she have plight herself 
 to another . a wild hope that she might yet escape , a vague regretful 
 thought that she have be too hasty in dismiss Leonard from her 
 presence , - that she ought rather to have court his friendship , and 
 contend against her unknown rival , - at time draw her wayward mind 
 wholly from the future to which she have consign herself . and , to 
 do her justice , though her sense of duty be so defective , and the 
 principle which should have guide her conduct be so lose to she 
 sight , still her feeling towards the generous Hazeldean be not so 
 hard and blunt but what her own ingratitude add to her torment ; and 
 it seem as if the sole atonement she could make to he be to find 
 an excuse to withdraw her promise , and save he from herself . she have 
 cause Leonard 's step to be watch ; she have find that he visit at 
 Lord Lansmere 's ; that he have go there often , and stay there long . 
 she have learn in the neighbourhood that Lady Lansmere have one or 
 two young female guest stay with she . surely this be the 
 attraction - here be the rival ! 

 Randal find Beatrice in a state of mind that answer his purpose ; 
 and first turn his conversation on Harley , and note that her 
 countenance do not change , by little and little he draw forth her 
 secret . 

 then say Randal , gravely , " if one whom you honour with a tender thought 
 visit at Lord Lansmere 's house , you have , indeed , cause to fear for 
 yourself , to hope for your brother 's success in the object which have 
 bring he to England ; for a girl of surpass beauty be a guest in 
 Lord Lansmere 's house , and I will now tell you that that girl be she 
 whom Count Peschiera would make his bride . " 

 as Randal thus speak , and see how his listener 's brow darken and her 
 eye flash , he feel that his accomplice be secure . Violante ! have not 
 Leonard speak of Violante , and with such praise ? have not his boyhood 
 be pass under her eye ? who but Violante could be the rival ? 
 Beatrice 's abrupt exclamation , after a moment 's pause , reveal to 
 randal the advantage he have gain . and partly by rouse her jealousy 
 into revenge , partly by flatter her love with assurance that , 
 if Violante be fairly remove from England , be the wife of Count 
 Peschiera , it would be impossible that Leonard could remain insensible 
 to her own attraction ; that he , Randal , would undertake to free she 
 honourably from her engagement to Frank Hazeldean , and obtain from her 
 brother the acquittal of the debt which have first fetter her hand to 
 that confide suitor , - he do not quit the marchesa until she have not 
 only promise to do all that randal might suggest , but impetuously urge 
 he to mature his plan , and hasten the hour to accomplish they . randal 
 then walk some minute musing and slow along the street , revolve 
 the next mesh in his elaborate and most subtle web . and here his craft 
 luminously devise its masterpiece . 

 it be necessary , during any interval that might elapse between 
 Violante 's disappearance and her departure from England , in order to 
 divert suspicion from Peschiera   who might otherwise be detain , that 
 some cause for her voluntary absence from Lord Lansmere 's should be at 
 least assignable ; it be still more necessary that randal himself should 
 stand wholly clear from any surmise that he could have connive at the 
 count 's design , even should their actual perpetrator be discover or 
 conjecture . to effect these object , Randal hasten to Norwood , and 
 obtain an interview with Riccabocca . in seem agitation and alarm , 
 he inform the exile that he have reason to know that Peschiera have 
 succeed in obtain a secret interview with Violante , and he fear 
 have make a certain favourable impression on her mind ; and speak as 
 if with the jealousy of a lover , he entreat Riccabocca to authorize 
 Randal 's direct proposal to Violante , and to require her consent to 
 their immediate nuptial . 

 the poor Italian be confound with the intelligence convey to he ; 
 and his almost superstitious fear of his brilliant enemy , conjoin 
 with his opinion of the susceptibility to outward attraction common 
 to all the female sex , make he not only implicitly credit , but 
 even exaggerate , the danger that Randal intimate . the idea of his 
 daughter 's marriage with Randal , towards which he have lately cool , he 
 now gratefully welcome . 

 but his first natural suggestion be to go , or send , for Violante , and 
 bring she to his own house . this , however , Randal artfully opposed . 

 " alas ! I know , " say he , " that Peschiera have discover your retreat , 
 and surely she would be far less safe here than where she be now ! " 

 " but , diavolo ! you say the man have see she where she be now , in spite 
 of all Lady Lansmere 's promise and Harley 's precaution . " 

 " true . of this Peschiera boast to I . he effect it not , of course , 
 openly , but in some disguise . I be sufficiently , however , in his 
 confidence - any man may be that with so audacious a braggart - to deter 
 he from renew his attempt for some day . meanwhile , I or yourself 
 will leave discover some surer home than this , to which you can 
 remove , and then will be the proper time to take back your daughter . 
 and for the present , if you will send by I a letter to enjoin she to 
 receive I as her future bridegroom , it will necessarily divert all 
 think at once from the count ; I shall be able to detect by the manner 
 in which she receive I , how far the count have overstate the effect 
 he pretend to have produce . you can give I also a letter to Lady 
 Lansmere , to prevent your daughter come hither . oh , sir , do not reason 
 with I . have indulgence for my lover 's fear . believe that I advise for 
 the good . have I not the keen interest to do so ? " 

 like many a man who be wise enough with pen and paper before he , and 
 plenty of time wherewith to get up his wisdom , Riccabocca be flurry , 
 nervous , and confuse when that wisdom be call upon for any ready 
 exertion . from the tree of knowledge he have take graft enough to 
 serve for a forest ; but the whole forest could not spare he a handy 
 walking - stick . the great folio of the dead Machiavelli lie useless 
 before he , - the live Machiavelli of daily life stand all puissant by 
 his side . the Sage be as supple to the Schemer as the Clairvoyant be to 
 the Mesmerist ; and the lean slight finger of Randal actually dictate 
 almost the very word that Riccabocca write to his child and her 
 hostess . 

 the philosopher would have like to consult his wife ; but he be ashamed 
 to confess that weakness . suddenly he remember Harley , and say , as 
 Randal take up the letter which Riccabocca have indite , 

 " there , that will give we time ; and I will send to Lord L'Estrange and 
 talk to he . " 

 " my noble friend , " reply Randal , mournfully , " may I entreat you not 
 to see Lord L'Estrange until at least I have plead my cause to your 
 daughter , - until , indeed , she be no long under his father 's roof ? " 

 " and why ? " 

 " because I presume that you be sincere when you deign to receive I as 
 a son - in - law , and because I be sure that Lord L'Estrange would hear with 
 distaste of your disposition in my favour . be I not right ? " 

 Riccabocca be silent . 

 " and though his argument would fail with a man of your honour and 
 discernment , they might have more effect on the young mind of your 
 child . think , I beseech you , the more she be set against I , the more 
 accessible she may be to the art of Peschiera . speak not , therefore , I 
 implore you , to Lord L'Estrange till Violante have accept my hand , or 
 at least until she be again under your charge ; otherwise take back your 
 letter , - it would be of no avail . " 

 " perhaps you be right . certainly Lord L'Estrange be prejudiced against 
 you ; or rather , he think too much of what I have be , too little of 
 what I be . " 

 " who can see you , and not do so ? I pardon he . " after kiss the hand 
 which the exile modestly seek to withdraw from that act of homage , 
 randal pocket the letter ; and , as if struggle with emotion , rush 
 from the house . 

 now , o curious reader , if thou wilt heedfully observe to what use 
 Randal Leslie put those letter , - what speedy and direct result he draw 
 forth from device which would seem to an honest simple understanding 
 the most roundabout , wire - draw waste of invention , - I almost fear 
 that in thine admiration for his cleverness , thou mayest half forget thy 
 contempt for his knavery . 

 but when the head be very full , it do not do to have the heart very 
 empty ; there be such a thing as be top - heavy ! 




 CHAPTER IV . 

 Helen and Violante have be converse together , and Helen have obey 
 her guardian 's injunction , and speak , though briefly , of her positive 
 engagement to Harley . however much Violante have be prepare for the 
 confidence , however clearly she have divine that engagement , however 
 before persuade that the dream of her childhood be flee forever , still 
 the positive truth , come from Helen 's own lip , be attend with that 
 anguish which prove how impossible it be to prepare the human heart for 
 the final verdict which slay its future . she do not , however , betray 
 her emotion to Helen 's artless eye ; sorrow , deep - seat , be seldom 
 self - betray . but , after a little while , she creep away ; and , forgetful 
 of Peschiera , of all thing that could threaten danger   what danger 
 could harm she more !   she glide from the house , and go her desolate 
 way under the leafless wintry tree . ever and anon she pause , ever 
 and anon she murmur the same word : " if she love he , I could be 
 console ; but she do not ! or how could she have speak to I 
 so calmly ! how could she very look have be so sad ! heartless ! 
 heartless ! " 

 then there come on she a vehement resentment against poor Helen , 
 that almost take the character of scorn or hate , - its excess startle 
 herself . " be I grow so mean ? " she say ; and tear that humble she 
 rush to her eye . " can so short a time alter one thus ? impossible ! " 

 randal Leslie ring at the front gate , inquire for Violante , and , 
 catch sight of her form as he walk towards the house , advance 
 boldly and openly . his voice startle she as she lean against one of 
 the dreary tree , still mutter to herself , - forlorn . " I have a letter 
 to you from your father , Signorina , " say randal ; " but before I give it 
 to your hand , some explanation be necessary . condescend , then , to hear 
 I . " Violante shake her head impatiently , and stretch forth her hand 
 for the letter . randal observe her countenance with his keen , cold , 
 search eye ; but he still withhold the letter , and continue , after a 
 pause , 

 " I know that you be bear to princely fortune ; and the excuse for my 
 address you now be , that your birthright be lose to you , at least 
 unless you can consent to a union with the man who have despoil you 
 of your heritage , - a union which your father would deem dishonour to 
 yourself and he . Signorina , I might have presume to love you , but I 
 should not have name that love , have your father not encourage I by 
 his assent to my suit . " 

 Violante turn to the speaker , her face eloquent with haughty surprise . 
 Randal meet the gaze unmove . he continue , without warmth , and in the 
 tone of one who reason calmly , rather than of one who feel acutely , 

 " the man of whom I speak be in pursuit of you . I have cause to believe 
 that this person have already intrude himself upon you . ah , your 
 countenance own it ; you have see Peschiera ? this house be , then , 
 less safe than your father deem it . no house be safe for you but a 
 husband 's . I offer to you my name , - it be a gentleman 's ; my fortune , 
 which be small ; the participation in my hope of the future , which be 
 large . I place now your father 's letter in your hand , and await your 
 answer . " randal bow slightly , give the letter to Violante , and retire 
 a few pace . 

 it be not his object to conciliate Violante 's affection , but rather to 
 excite her repugnance , or at least her terror , - we must wait to 
 discover why ; so he stand apart , seemingly in a kind of self - confident 
 indifference , while the girl read the following letter : 

  " my child , receive with favour Mr. Leslie . he have my consent to 
  address you as a suitor . circumstance of which it be needless now 
  to inform you render it essential to my very peace and happiness 
  that your marriage should be immediate . in a word , I have give my 
  promise to Mr. Leslie , and I confidently leave it to the daughter of 
  my House to redeem the pledge of her anxious and tender father . " 

 the letter drop from Violante 's hand . randal approach , and restore 
 it to she . their eye meet . Violante recoil . 

 " I can not marry you , " say she , passionately . 

 " indeed ? " answer Randal , dryly . " be it because you can not love I ? " 

 " yes . " 

 " I do not expect that you would as yet , and I still persist in my suit . 
 I have promise to your father that I would not recede before your first 
 unconsidered refusal . " 

 " I will go to my father at once . " 

 " do he request you to do so in his letter ? look again . pardon I , but 
 he foresee your impetuosity ; and I have another note for Lady Lansmere , 
 in which he beg her ladyship not to sanction your return to he   should 
 you so wish   until he come or send for you himself . he will do so 
 whenever your word have redeem his own . " 

 " and do you dare to talk to I thus , and yet pretend to love I ? " 

 Randal smile ironically . 

 " I pretend but to we d you . love be a subject on which I might have 
 speak formerly , or may speak hereafter . I give you some little time to 
 consider . when I next call , let I hope that we may fix the day for our 
 wedding . " 

 " never ! " 

 " you will be , then , the first daughter of your House who disobey a 
 father ; and you will have this additional crime ; that you disobey he 
 in his sorrow , his exile , and his fall . " 

 Violante wring her hand . 

 " be there no choice , no escape ? " 

 " I see none for either . listen to I . I love you , it be true ; but it be 
 not for my happiness to marry one who dislike I , nor for my ambition 
 to connect myself with one whose poverty be great than my own . I marry 
 but to keep my plighted faith with your father , and to save you from a 
 villain you would hate more than myself , and from whom no wall be 
 a barrier , no law a defence . one person , indeed , might perhaps have 
 preserve you from the misery you seem to anticipate with I ; that 
 person might defeat the plan of your father 's foe , - effect , it might 
 be , term which could revoke his banishment and restore his honour ; 
 that person be - " 

 " Lord L'Estrange ? " 

 " Lord L'Estrange ! " repeat Randal , sharply , and watch her pale 
 part lip and her change colour ; " Lord L'Estrange ! what could he do ? 
 why do you name he ? " 

 Violante turn aside . " he save my father once , " say she , feelingly . 

 " and have interfere , and trifle , and promise , Heaven know what , ever 
 since : yet to what end ? Pooh ! the person I speak of your father 
 would not consent to see , would not believe if he see she ; yet she be 
 generous , noble , could sympathize with you both . she be the sister of 
 your father 's enemy , the Marchesa di Negra . I be convinced that she 
 have great influence with her brother , - that she have know enough of his 
 secret to awe he into renounce all design on yourself ; but it be 
 idle now to speak of she . " 

 " no , no , " exclaim Violante . " tell I where she live - I will see she . " 

 " Pardon I , I can not obey you ; and , indeed , her own pride be now arouse 
 by your father 's unfortunate prejudice against she . it be too late to 
 count upon her aid . you turn from I , - my presence be unwelcome . I rid 
 you of it now . but welcome or unwelcome , later you must endure it - and 
 for life . " 

 Randal again bow with formal ceremony , walk towards the house , and 
 ask for Lady Lansmere . the countess be at home . randal deliver 
 Riccabocca 's note , which be very short , imply that he fear 
 Peschiera have discover his retreat , and request Lady Lansmere to 
 retain Violante , whatever her own desire , till her ladyship hear from 
 he again . 

 the countess read , and her lip curl in disdain . " strange ! " say she , 
 half to herself . 

 " strange ! " say Randal , " that a man like your correspondent should fear 
 one like the Count di Peschiera . be that it ? " 

 " Sir , " say the countess , a little surprised , ' strange that any man 
 should fear another in a country like ours ! " 

 " I do not   know , " say Randal , with his low soft laugh ; " I fear many man , 
 and I know many who ought to fear I ; yet at every turn of the street 
 one meet a policeman ! " 

 " yes , " say Lady Lansmere . " but to suppose that this profligate 
 foreigner could carry away a girl like Violante against her will , - a man 
 she have never see , and whom she must have be teach to hate ! " 

 " be on your guard , nevertheless , I pray you , madam ; ' where there be a 
 will there be a way ' ! " 

 Randal take his leave , and return to Madame di Negra 's . he stay with 
 she an hour , revisit the count , and then stroll to Limmer 's . 

 " randal , " say the squire , who look pale and worn , but who scorn 
 to confess the weakness with which he still grieve and yearn for his 
 rebellious son , " randal , you have nothing now to do in London ; can you 
 come and stay with I , and take to farming ? I remember that you show a 
 good deal of sound knowledge about thin sowing . " 

 " my dear sir , I will come to you as soon as the general election be 
 over . " 

 " what the deuce have you get to do with the general election ? " 

 " Mr. Egerton have some wish that I should enter parliament ; indeed , 
 negotiation for that purpose be now on foot . " 

 the squire shake his head . " I do not   like my half - brother 's politic . " 

 " I shall be quite independent of they , " cry randal , loftily ; " that 
 independence be the condition for which I stipulate . " 

 " glad to hear it ; and if you do come into parliament , I hope you will not 
 turn your back on the land ? " 

 " turn my back on the land ! " cry Randal , with devout horror . " oh , sir , 
 I be not so unnatural ! " 

 " that be the right way to put it , " quoth the credulous squire ; " it be 
 unnatural ! it be turn one 's back on one 's own mother . the land be a 
 mother - " 

 " to those who live by she , certainly , - a mother , " say Randal , gravely . 
 " and though , indeed , my father starve by she rather than life , and 
 Rood Hall be not like Hazeldean , still - i - " 

 " hold your tongue , " interrupt the squire ; " I want to talk to you . your 
 grandmother be a Hazeldean . " 

 " her picture be in the drawing - room at Rood . People think I very like 
 she . " 

 " indeed ! " say the squire . " the Hazeldeans be generally inclined to be 
 stout and rosy , which you be certainly not . but no fault of your . we 
 be all as Heaven make we . however , to the point . I be go to alter 
 my will , " -   say with a choke gulp . " this be the rough draft for the 
 lawyer to work upon . " 

 " pray , pray , sir , do not speak to I on such a subject . I can not bear to 
 contemplate even the possibility of - of - " 

 " my death ? ha , ha ! nonsense . my own son calculate on the date of it by 
 the insurance - table . ha , ha , ha ! a very fashionable son , eh ! ha , ha ! " 

 " Poor Frank ! do not let he suffer for a momentary forgetfulness of 
 right feeling . when he come to be married to that foreign lady , and be 
 a father himself , he - " 

 " Father himself ! " burst forth the squire . " Father to a swarm of 
 sallow - faced Popish tadpole ! no foreign frog shall hop about my 
 grave in Hazeldean churchyard . no , no . but you need not look so 
 reproachful , - I ' m not go to disinherit Frank . " 

 " of course not , " say Randal , with a bitter curve in the lip that 
 rebel against the joyous smile which he seek to impose on it . 

 " no ; I shall leave he the life - interest in the great part of 
 the property ; but if he marry a foreigner , her child will not 
 succeed , - you will stand after he in that case . but - now do not 
 interrupt I - but Frank look as if he would live long than you , so 
 small thank to I for my good intention , you may say . I mean to do 
 more for you than a mere barren place in the entail . what do you say to 
 marry ? " 

 " just as you please , " say randal , meekly . 

 " good . there be Miss Sticktorights disengage , - great heiress . her land 
 run onto Rood . at one time I think of she for that graceless puppy of 
 mine . but I can manage more easily to make up the match for you . there be 
 a mortgage on the property ; old Sticktorights would be very glad to pay 
 it off . I will pay it out of the hazeldean estate , and give up the right 
 of way into the bargain . you understand ? 

 " so come down as soon as you can , and court the young lady yourself . " 

 Randal express his thank with much grateful eloquence ; and he then 
 delicately insinuate , that if the squire ever do mean to bestow upon 
 he any pecuniary favour   always without injury to Frank , it would 
 gratify he more to win back some portion of the old estate of Rood , 
 than to have all the acre of the Sticktorights , however free from any 
 other incumbrance than the amiable heiress . 

 the squire listen to Randal with benignant attention . this wish the 
 country gentleman could well understand and sympathize with . he promise 
 to inquire into the matter , and to see what could be do with old 
 Thornhill . 

 Randal here let out that Mr. Thornhill be about to dispose of a large 
 slice of the ancient Leslie estate through Levy , and that he , Randal , 
 could thus get it at a more moderate price than would be natural , if Mr. 
 Thornhill know that his neighbour the squire would bid for the purchase . 

 " well say nothing about it either to Levy or Thornhill . " 

 " right , " say the squire . " no proprietor like to sell to another 
 proprietor , in the same shire , as largely acre as himself : it spoil 
 the balance of power . see to the business yourself ; and if I can help 
 you with the purchase   after that boy be marry , - I can attend to 
 nothing before , why , I will . " 

 Randal now go to Egerton 's . the statesman be in his library , settle 
 the account of his house - steward , and give brief order for the 
 reduction of his establishment to that of an ordinary private gentleman . 

 " I may go abroad if I lose my election , " say Egerton , condescend to 
 assign to his servant a reason for his economy ; " and if I do not lose 
 it , still , now I be out of office , I shall live much in private . " 

 " do I disturb you , sir ? " say Randal , enter . 

 " no ; I have just do . " 

 the house - steward withdraw , much surprised and disgusted , and meditate 
 the resignation of his own office , - in order , not like Egerton , to save , 
 but to spend . the house steward have private dealing with Baron Levy , 
 and be in fact the veritable X. Y. of the " Times , " for whom Dick Avenel 
 have be mistake . he invest his wage and perquisite in the discount 
 of bill ; and it be part of his own money that have   though unknown to 
 himself   swell the last l5,000 which Egerton have borrow from Levy . 

 " I have settle with our committee ; and , with Lord Lansmere 's consent , " 
 say Egerton , briefly , " you will stand for the borough , as we propose , 
 in conjunction with myself . and should any accident happen to I , - that 
 be , should I vacate this seat from any cause , - you may succeed to it , 
 very shortly perhaps . ingratiate yourself with the elector , and speak 
 at the public - house for both of we . I shall stand on my dignity , and 
 leave the work of the election to you . no thank , - you know how I hate 
 thank . good - night . " 

 " I never stand so near to fortune and to power , " say Randal , as he 
 slowly undressed . " and I owe it but to knowledge , - knowledge of man , 
 life , of all that book can teach we . " 

 so his slight thin finger drop the extinguisher on the candle , and 
 the prosperous Schemer lay himself down to rest in the dark . shutter 
 close , curtain draw - never be rest more quiet , never be room more 
 dark ! 

 that evening , Harley have din at his father 's . he speak much to Helen , 
 scarcely at all to Violante . but it so happen that when later , and 
 a little while before he take his leave , Helen , at his request , be 
 play a favourite air of his , Lady Lausmere , who have be seat 
 between he and Violante , leave the room , and Violante turn quickly 
 towards Harley . 

 " do you know the Marchesa di Negra ? " she ask , in a hurried voice . 

 " a little . why do you ask ? " 

 " that be my secret , " answer Violante , try to smile with her old 
 frank , childlike archness . " but , tell I , do you think well of she 
 than of her brother ? " 

 " certainly . I believe her heart to be good , and that she be not without 
 generous quality . " 

 " can you not induce my father to see she ? would you not counsel he to 
 do so ? " 

 " any wish of yours be a law to I , " answer Harley , gallantly . " you 
 wish your father to see she ? I will try and persuade he to do so . now , 
 in return , confide to I your secret . what be your object ? " 

 " leave to return to my Italy . I care not for honour , for rank ; and 
 even my father have cease to regret their loss . but the land , the native 
 land - oh , to see it once more ! oh , to die there ! " 

 " die ! you child have so lately leave heaven , that ye talk as if 
 ye could return there , without pass through the gate of sorrow , 
 infirmity , and age ! but I think you be content with England . why 
 so eager to leave it ? Violante , you be unkind to we , - to Helen , who 
 already love you so well . " as Harley speak , Helen rise from the piano , 
 and approach Violante , place her hand caressingly on the Italian 's 
 shoulder . Violante shiver , and shrunk away . the eye both of Harley 
 and Helen follow she . Harley 's eye be very grave and thoughtful . 

 " be she not change - your friend ? " say he , look down . 

 " yes , lately ; much change . I fear there be something on her mind , - I 
 know not what . " 

 " ah , " mutter Harley , " it may be so ; but at your age and her , nothing 
 rest on the mind long . Observe , I say the mind , - the heart be more 
 tenacious . " 

 Helen sigh softly , but deeply . 

 " and therefore , " continue Harley , half to himself , " we can detect when 
 something be on the mind , - some care , some fear , some trouble . but when 
 the heart close over its own more passionate sorrow , who can discover , 
 who conjecture ? yet you at least , my pure , candid Helen , - you might 
 subject mind and heart alike to the fabled window of glass . " 

 " oh , no ! " cry Helen , involuntarily . 

 " oh , yes ! do not let I think that you have one secret I may not know , 
 or one sorrow I may not share . for , in our relationship , that would be 
 deceit . " 

 he press her hand with more than usual tenderness as he speak , and 
 shortly afterwards leave the house . 

 and all that night Helen feel like a guilty thing , - more wretched even 
 than Violante . 




 CHAPTER V. 

 early the next morning , while Violante be still in her room , a letter 
 address to she come by the post . the direction be in a strange hand . 
 she open it , and read , in Italian , what be thus translate : - 

  I would gladly see you , but I can not call openly at the house in 
  which you live . perhaps I may have it in my power to arrange family 
  dissension , - to repair any wrong your father may have sustain . 
  perhaps I may be enable to render yourself an essential service . 
  but for all this it be necessary that we should meet and confer 
  frankly . meanwhile time press , delay be forbid . will you meet 
  I , an hour after noon , in the lane , just outside the private gate 
  of your garden ? I shall be alone , and you can not fear to meet one 
  of your own sex , and a kinswoman . ah , I so desire to see you ! 
  come , I beseech you . 

  BEATRICE . 

 Violante read , and her decision be take . she be naturally fearless , 
 and there be little that she would not have brave for the chance of 
 serve her father . and now all peril seem slight in comparison 
 with that which await she in Randal 's suit , back by her father 's 
 approval . randal have say that Madame di Negra alone could aid she in 
 escape from himself . Harley have say that Madame di Negra have generous 
 quality ; and who but Madame di Negra would write herself a kinswoman , 
 and sign herself " Beatrice " ? 

 a little before the appoint hour , she steal unobserved through the 
 tree , open the little gate , and find herself in the quiet , solitary 
 lane . in a few minute ; a female figure come up , with a quick , light 
 step ; and throw aside her veil , say , with a sort of wild , suppress 
 energy , " it be you ! I be truly tell . beautiful ! beautiful ! and oh ! what 
 youth and what bloom ! " 

 the voice drop mournfully ; and Violante , surprise by the tone , and 
 blushing under the praise , remain a moment silent ; then she say , with 
 some hesitation , 

 " you be , I presume , the Marchesa di Negra ? and I have hear of you 
 enough to induce I to trust you . " 

 " of I ! from whom ? " ask Beatrice , almost fiercely . " from Mr Leslie , 
 and - and - " 

 " go on ; why falter ? " 

 " from Lord L'Estrange . " 

 " from no one else ? " 

 " not that I remember . " 

 Beatrice sigh heavily , and let fall her veil . some foot - passenger now 
 come up the lane ; and see two lady , of mien so remarkable , turn 
 round , and gaze curiously . 

 " we can not talk here , " say Beatrice , impatiently ; " and I have so much 
 to say , so much to know . trust I yet more ; it be for yourself I speak . 
 my carriage wait yonder . come home with I , - I will not detain you an 
 hour ; and I will bring you back . " 

 this proposition startle Violante . she retreat towards the gate with 
 a gesture of dissent . Beatrice lay her hand on the girl 's arm , and 
 again lift her veil , gaze at she with a look half of scorn , half of 
 admiration . 

 " I , too , would once have recoil from one step beyond the formal line 
 by which the world divide liberty from woman . now see how bold I be . 
 child , child , do not trifle with your destiny . you may never again have 
 the same occasion offer to you . it be not only to meet you that I 
 be here ; I must know something of you , - something of your heart . why 
 shrink ? be not the heart pure ? " 

 Violante make no answer ; but her smile , so sweet and so lofty , humble 
 the questioner it rebuke . 

 " I may restore to Italy your father , " say Beatrice , with an altered 
 voice . " come ! " 

 Violante approach , but still hesitatingly . " not by union with your 
 brother ? " 

 " you dread that so much then ? " 

 " dread it ? no . why should I dread what be in my power to reject . but if 
 you can really restore my father , and by nobler mean , you may save I 
 for - " 

 Violante stop abruptly ; the marchesa 's eye sparkle . 

 " save you for - ah ! I can guess what you leave unsaid . but come , come ! 
 more stranger , see ; you shall tell I all at my own house . and if you 
 can make one sacrifice , why , I will save you all else . come , or farewell 
 forever ! " 

 Violante place her hand in Beatrice 's , with a frank confidence that 
 bring the accuse blood into the marchesa 's cheek . 

 " we be woman both , " say Violante ; " we descend from the same noble 
 House ; we have kneel alike to the same Virgin Mother ; why should I not 
 believe and trust you ? " 

 " why not ? " mutter Beatrice , feebly ; and she move on , with her head 
 bow on her breast , and all the pride of her step be go . 

 they reach a carriage that stand by the angle of the road . Beatrice 
 speak a word apart to the driver , who be an italian , in the pay of the 
 count ; the man nod , and open the carriage door . the lady enter . 
 Beatrice pull down the blind ; the man remount his box , and drive on 
 rapidly . Beatrice , lean back , groan aloud . Violante draw near to 
 her side . " be you in pain ? " say she , with her tender , melodious voice ; 
 " or can I serve you as you would serve I ? " 

 " child , give I your hand , and be silent while I look at you . be I ever 
 so fair as this ? never ! and what deep - what deep roll between she and 
 I ! " 

 she say this as of some one absent , and again sink into silence ; but 
 continue still to gaze on Violante , whose eye , veil by their long 
 fringe , droop beneath the gaze . 

 suddenly Beatrice start , exclaim , " no , it shall not be ! " and place 
 her hand on the check - string . 

 " what shall not be ? " ask Violante , surprise by the cry and the 
 action . Beatrice pause ; her breast heave visibly under her dress . 

 " stay , " she say slowly . " as you say , we be both woman of the same 
 noble House ; you would reject the suit of my brother , yet you have see 
 he ; his the form to please the eye , his the art that allure the fancy . 
 he offer to you rank , wealth , your father 's pardon and recall . if I 
 could remove the objection which your father entertain , prove that 
 the count have less wrong he than he deem , would you still reject the 
 rank and the wealth and the hand of Giulio Franzini ? " 

 " oh , yes , yes ; be his hand a king 's ! " 

 " still , then , as woman to woman - both , as you say , akin , and spring from 
 the same lineage - still , then , answer I , answer I , for you speak to 
 one who have love - be it not that you love another ? speak . " 

 " I do not know . Nay , not love , - it be a romance ; it be a thing 
 impossible . do not question , - I can not answer . " and the broken word 
 be choke by sudden tear . 

 Beatrice 's face grow hard and pitiless . again she lower her veil , and 
 withdraw her hand from the check - string ; but the coachman have feel the 
 touch , and halt . " drive on , " say Beatrice , " as you be direct . " 

 both be now long silent , - Violante with great difficulty recover 
 from her emotion , Beatrice breathe hard , and her arm fold firmly 
 across her breast . 

 meanwhile the carriage have enter London ; it pass the quarter in 
 which Madame di Negra 's house be situate ; it roll fast over a 
 bridge ; it whirl through a broad thoroughfare , then through defile of 
 lane , with tall blank dreary house on either side . on it go , and 
 on , till Violante suddenly take alarm . " do you live so far ? " she say , 
 draw up the blind , and gaze in dismay on the strange , ignoble 
 suburb . " I shall be miss already . oh , let we turn back , I beseech 
 you ! " 

 " we be nearly there now . the driver have take this road in order to 
 avoid those street in which we might have be see together , - perhaps 
 by my brother himself . listen to I , and talk of - of the lover whom 
 you rightly associate with a vain romance . ' impossible , ' - yes , it be 
 impossible ! " 

 Violante clasp her hand before her eye , and bow down her head . 
 " why be you so cruel ? " say she . " this be not what you promise . how 
 be you to serve my father , how restore he to his country ? this be what 
 you promise ! " 

 " if you consent to one sacrifice , I will fulfil that promise . we be 
 arrive . " 

 the carriage stop before a tall , dull house , divide from other 
 house by a high wall that appear to enclose a yard , and stand 
 at the end of a narrow lane , which be bound on the one side by the 
 Thames . in that quarter the river be crowd with gloomy , dark - look 
 vessel and craft , all lie lifeless under the wintry sky . 

 the driver dismount and ring the bell . two swarthy italian face 
 present themselves at the threshold . beatrice descend lightly , and 
 give her hand to Violante . " now , here we shall be secure , " say she ; 
 " and here a few minute may suffice to decide your fate . " 

 as the door close on Violante , who , now wake to suspicion , to alarm , 
 look fearfully round the dark and dismal hall , Beatrice turn : " let 
 the carriage wait . " 

 the Italian who receive the order bow and smile ; but when the two 
 lady have ascend the stair he re - open the street - door , and say to 
 the driver , " back to the count , and say , ' all be safe . ' " 

 the carriage drive off . the man who have give this order bar and 
 lock the door , and , take with he the huge key , plunge into the 
 mystic recess of the basement and disappear . the hall , thus left 
 solitary , have the grim aspect of a prison , - the strong door sheet with 
 iron , the rugged stone stair , light by a high window grime with the 
 dust of year , and jealously bar , and the wall themselves abut 
 out rudely here and there , as if against violence even from within . 




 CHAPTER VI . 

 it be , as we have see , without take counsel of the faithful Jemima 
 that the sage recluse of Norwood have yield to his own fear and 
 Randal 's subtle suggestion , in the concise and arbitrary letter which 
 he have write to Violante ; but at night , when churchyard give up the 
 dead , and conjugal heart the secret hide by day from each other , 
 the wise man inform his wife of the step he have take . and Jemima 
 then - who hold english notion , very different from those which prevail 
 in Italy , as to the right of father to dispose of their daughter 
 without reference to inclination or repugnance - so sensibly yet so 
 mildly represent to the pupil of Machiavelli that he have not go 
 exactly the right way to work , if he fear that the handsome count 
 have make some impression on Violante , and if he wish she to turn with 
 favour to the suitor he recommend , - that so abrupt a command could 
 only chill the heart , revolt the will , and even give to the 
 audacious Peschiera some romantic attraction which he have not before 
 possess , - as effectually to destroy Riccabocca 's sleep that night . and 
 the next day he send Giacomo to Lady Lansmere 's with a very kind letter 
 to Violante and a note to the hostess , pray the latter to bring his 
 daughter to Norwood for a few hour , as he much wish to converse 
 with both . it be on Giacomo 's arrival at Knightsbridge that Violante 's 
 absence be discover . Lady Lansmere , ever proudly careful of the 
 world and its gossip , keep Giacomo from betray his excitement to her 
 servant , and state throughout the decorous household that the young 
 lady have inform she she be go to visit some friend that morning , 
 and have no doubt go through the garden gate , since it be find open ; 
 the way be more quiet there than by the high - road , and her friend 
 might have therefore walk to meet she by the lane . Lady Lansmere 
 observe that her only surprise be that Violante have go early 
 than she have expect . have say this with a composure that compel 
 belief , Lady Lansmere order the carriage , and , take Giacomo with 
 she , drive at once to consult her son . 

 Harley 's quick intellect have scarcely recover from the shock upon his 
 emotion before Randal Leslie be announce . " ah , " say Lady Lansmere , 
 " Mr. Leslie may know something . he come to she yesterday with a note 
 from her father . pray let he enter . " 

 the austrian prince approach Harley . " I will wait in the next room , " 
 he whisper . " you may want I if you have cause to suspect Peschiera in 
 all this . " 

 Lady Lansmere be pleased with the prince 's delicacy , and , glance at 
 Leonard , say , " perhaps you , too , sir , may kindly aid we , if you would 
 retire with the prince . Mr. Leslie may be disinclined to speak of 
 affair like these , except to Harley and myself . " 

 " true , madam , but beware of Mr. Leslie . " 

 as the door at one end of the room close on the prince and Leonard , 
 Randal enter at the other , seemingly much agitated . 

 " I have just be to your house , Lady Lansmere . I hear you be here ; 
 pardon I if I have follow you . I have call at Knightsbridge to see 
 Violante , learn that she have leave you . I implore you to tell I how 
 or wherefore . I have the right to ask : her father have promise I her 
 hand . " Harley 's falcon eye have brighten tip at Randal 's entrance . it 
 watch steadily the young man 's face . it be cloud for a moment by 
 his knitted brow at Randal 's closing word ; but he leave it to Lady 
 Lansmere to reply and explain . this the countess do briefly . 

 randal clasp his hand . " and have she not go to her father 's ? be you 
 sure of that ? " 

 " her father 's servant have just come from Norwood . " 

 " oh , I be to blame for this ! it be my rash suit , her fear of it , her 
 aversion ! I see it all ! " Randal 's voice be hollow with remorse and 
 despair . " to save she from Peschiera , her father insist on her 
 immediate marriage with myself . his order be too abrupt , my own 
 wooing too unwelcome . I know her high spirit ; she have flee to escape 
 from I . but whither , if not to Norwood , - oh , whither ? what other 
 friend have she , what relation ? " 

 " you throw a new light on this mystery , " say Lady Lansmere ; " perhaps 
 she may have go to her father 's after all , and the servant may have 
 cross , but miss she on the way . I will drive to Norwood at once . " 

 " do so , - do ; but if she be not there , be careful not to alarm Riccabocca 
 with the news of her disappearance . caution Giacomo not to do so . he 
 would only suspect Peschiera , and be hurry to some act of violence . " 

 " do not you , then , suspect Peschiera , Mr. Leslie ? " ask Harley , 
 suddenly . 

 " ha ! be it possible ? yet , no . I call on he this morning with Frank 
 Hazeldean , who be to marry his sister . I be with he till I go on to 
 Knightsbridge , at the very time of Violante 's disappearance . he could 
 not then have be a party to it . " 

 " you see Violante yesterday . do you speak to she of Madame di Negra ? " 
 ask Harley , suddenly recall the question respect the marchesa 
 which Violante have address to he . 

 in spite of himself , Randal feel that he change countenance . " of Madame 
 di Negra ? I do not think so . yet I might . oh , yes , I remember now . she 
 ask I the marchesa 's address ; I would not give it . " 

 " the address be easily find . can she have go to the marchesa 's 
 house ? " 

 " I will run there , and see , " cry Randal , start up . " and I with you . 
 Stay , my dear mother . proceed , as you propose , to Norwood , and take Mr. 
 Leslie 's advice . spare our friend the news of his daughter 's loss - if 
 lose she be - till she be restore to he . he can be of no use mean 
 while . let Giacomo rest here ; I may want he . " 

 Harley then pass into the next room , and entreat the prince and 
 Leonard to await his return , and allow Giacomo to stay in the same room . 

 he then go quickly back to Randal . whatever might be his fear or 
 emotion , Harley feel that he have need of all his coolness of judgment 
 and presence of mind . the occasion make abrupt demand upon power which 
 have sleep since boyhood , but which now wake with a vigour that would 
 have make even randal tremble , could he have detect the wit , 
 the courage , the electric energy , mask under that tranquil 
 self - possession . Lord L'Estrange and Randal soon reach the marchesa 's 
 house , and learn that she have be out since morning in one of Count 
 Peschiera 's carriage . randal steal an alarmed glance at Harley 's face . 
 Harley do not seem to notice it . 

 " now , Mr. Leslie , what do you advise next ? " 

 " I be at a loss . ah , perhaps , afraid of her father , know how despotic 
 be his belief in paternal right , and how tenacious he be of his word 
 once pass , as it have be to I , she may have resolve to take refuge 
 in the country , perhaps at the Casino , or at Mrs. Dale 's , or Mrs. 
 Hazeldean 's . I will hasten to inquire at the coach - office . meanwhile , 
 you - " 

 " never mind I , Mr. Leslie . do what you think well . but , if your 
 surmise be just , you must have be a very rude wooer to the high - bear 
 lady you aspire to win . " 

 " not so ; but perhaps an unwelcome one . if she have indeed flee from I , 
 need I say that my suit will be withdraw at once ? I be not a selfish 
 lover , Lord L'Estrange . " 

 " nor I a vindictive man . yet , could I discover who have conspire against 
 this lady , a guest under my father 's roof , I would crush he into the 
 mire as easily as I set my foot upon this glove . good - day to you , Mr. 
 Leslie . " 

 Randal stand still for a few moment as Harley stride on ; then his lip 
 sneer as it mutter , " Insolent ! but do he love she ? if so , I be 
 avenge already . " 




 CHAPTER VII . 

 Harley go straight to Peschiera 's hotel . he be tell that the count 
 have walk out with Mr. Frank Hazeldean and some other gentleman who have 
 breakfast with he . he have leave word , in case any one call , that he 
 have go to Tattersall 's to look at some horse that be for sale . to 
 Tattersall 's go Harley . the count be in the yard lean against a 
 pillar , and surround by fashionable friend . Lord L'Estrange pause , 
 and , with an heroic effort at self - mastery , repress his rage . " I may 
 lose all if I show that I suspect he ; and yet I must insult and fight 
 he rather than leave his movement free . ah , be that young Hazeldean ? 
 a thought strike I ! " Frank be stand apart from the group round the 
 count , and look very absent and very sad . Harley touch he on the 
 shoulder , and draw he aside unobserved by the count . 

 " Mr. Hazeldean , your uncle Egerton be my dear friend . will you be a 
 friend to I ? I want you . " 

 " my Lord - " 

 " follow I . do not let Count Peschiera see we talk together . " 

 Harley quit the yard , and enter St. James 's Park by the little 
 gate close by . in a very few word he inform Frank of Violante 's 
 disappearance and of his reason for suspect the count . Frank 's first 
 sentiment be that of indignant disbelief that the brother of Beatrice 
 could be so vile ; but as he gradually call to mind the cynical 
 and corrupt vein of the count 's familiar conversation , the hint to 
 Peschiera 's prejudice that have be drop by Beatrice herself , and 
 the general character for brilliant and daring profligacy which even the 
 admirer of the count ascribe to he , Frank be compel to reluctant 
 acquiescence in Harley 's suspicion ; and he say , with an earnest 
 gravity very rare to he , 

 " believe I , Lord L'Estrange , if I can assist you in defeat a base 
 and mercenary design against this poor young lady , you have but to show 
 I how . one thing be clear , Peschicra be not personally engage in this 
 abduction , since I have be with he all day ; and - now I think of it - I 
 begin to hope that you wrong he ; for he have invite a large party of we 
 to make an excursion with he to Boulogne next week , in order to try his 
 yacht , which he could scarcely do if - " 

 " Yacht , at this time of the year ! a man who habitually reside at 
 Vienna - a yacht ! " 

 " Spendquick sell it a bargain , on account of the time of year and other 
 reason ; and the count propose to spend next summer in cruise about 
 the Ionian Isles . he have some property on those isle , which he have 
 never yet visit . " 

 " how long be it since he buy this yacht ? " 

 " why , I be not sure that it be already buy , - that be , pay for . 
 Levy be to meet Spendquick this very morning to arrange the matter . 
 Spendquick complain that Levy screw he . " 

 " my dear Mr. Hazeldean , you be guide I through the maze . where shall 
 I find Lord Spendquick ? " 

 " at this hour , probably in bed . here be his card . " 

 " thank . and where lie the vessel ? " 

 " it be off Blackwall the other day . I go to see it , ' the Flying 
 Dutchman , ' - a fine vessel , and carry gun . " 

 " Enough . now , heed I . there can be no immediate danger to Violante , so 
 long as Peschiera do not meet she , so long as we know his movement . 
 you be about to marry his sister . avail yourself of that privilege to 
 keep close by his side . refuse to be shake off . make what excuse 
 for the present your invention suggest . I will give you an excuse . be 
 anxious and uneasy to know where you can find Madame di Negra . " 

 " Madame di Negra ! " cry Frank . " what of she ? be she not in Curzon 
 Street ? " 

 " no ; she have go out in one of the count 's carriage . in all 
 probability the driver of that carriage , or some servant in attendance 
 on it , will come to the count in the course of the day ; and in order 
 to get rid of you , the count will tell you to see this servant , and 
 ascertain yourself that his sister be safe . pretend to believe what 
 the man say , but make he come to your lodging on pretence of write 
 there a letter for the marchesa . once at your lodging , and he will 
 be safe ; for I shall see that the officer of justice secure he . the 
 moment he be there , send an express for I to my hotel . " 

 " but , " say Frank , a little bewilder , " if I go to my lodging , how can 
 I watch the count ? " 

 " it will nor then be necessary . only get he to accompany you to your 
 lodging , and part with he at the door . " 

 " stop , stop ! you can not suspect Madame di Negra of connivance in a 
 scheme so infamous . pardon I , Lord L'Estrange ; I can not act in this 
 matter , - can not even hear you except as your foe , if you insinuate a 
 word against the honour of the woman I love . " 

 " brave gentleman , your hand . it be Madame di Negra I would save , as 
 well as my friend 's young child . think but of she , while you act as 
 I entreat , and all will go well . I confide in you . now , return to the 
 count . " 

 Frank walk back to join Peschiera , and his brow be thoughtful , and 
 his lip close firmly . Harley have that gift which belong to the genius 
 of Action . he inspire other with the light of his own spirit and the 
 force of his own will . Harley next hasten to Lord Spendquick , remain 
 with that young gentleman some minute , then repair to his hotel , 
 where Leonard , the prince , and Giacomo still await he . 

 " come with I , both of you . you , too , Giacomo . I must now see the 
 police . we may then divide upon separate mission . " 

 " oh , my dear Lord , " cry Leonard , " you must have have good news . you 
 seem cheerful and sanguine . " 

 " seem ! Nay , I be so ! if I once pause to despond - even to doubt - I 
 should go mad . a foe to baffle , and an angel to save ! whose spirit 
 would not rise high , whose wit would not move quick to the warm pulse 
 of his heart ? " 




 CHAPTER VIII . 

 Twilight be dark in the room to which Beatrice have conduct Violante . 
 a great change have come over Beatrice . humble and weeping , she kneel 
 beside Violante , hide her face , and implore pardon . and Violante , 
 strive to resist the terror for which she now see such cause as no 
 woman - heart can defy , still seek to soothe , and still sweetly assure 
 forgiveness . 

 Beatrice have learn , after quick and fierce question , which at last 
 compel the answer that clear away every doubt , that her jealousy 
 have be groundless , that she have no rival in Violante . from that moment 
 the passion that have make she the tool of guilt abruptly vanish , and 
 her conscience startle she with the magnitude of her treachery . perhaps 
 have Violante 's heart be wholly free , or she have be of that mere 
 commonplace , girlish character which woman like Beatrice be apt to 
 despise , the marchesa 's affection for Peschiera , and her dread of he , 
 might have make her try to persuade her young kinswoman at least to 
 receive the count 's visit , - at least to suffer he to make his own 
 excuse , and plead his own cause . but there have be a loftiness of 
 spirit in which Violante have first defy the mareliesa 's question , 
 follow by such generous , exquisite sweetness , when the girl perceive 
 how that wild heart be sting and madden , and such purity of mournful 
 candour when she have overcome her own virgin bashfulness sufficiently to 
 undeceive the error she detect , and confess where her own affection 
 be place , that Beatrice bow before she as mariner of old to some 
 fair saint that have allay the storm . 

 " I have deceive you ! " she cry , through her sob ; " but I will now save 
 you at any cost . have you be as I deem , - the rival who have despoil 
 all the hope of my future life , - I could without remorse have be 
 the accomplice I be pledge to be . but now you - oh , you , so good and 
 so noble - you can never , be the bride of Peschiera . Nay , start not ; he 
 shall renounce his design forever , or I will go myself to our emperor , 
 and expose the dark secret of his life . return with I quick to the 
 home from which I ensnare you . " 

 Beatrice 's hand be on the door while she speak . suddenly her face fall , 
 her lip grow white ; the door be lock from without . she call , - no 
 one answer ; the bell - pull in the room give no sound ; the window be 
 high and barred , - they do not look on the river , nor the street , but on 
 a close , gloomy , silent yard , high blank wall all round it ; no one to 
 hear the cry of distress , ring it ever so loud and sharp . 

 Beatrice divine that she herself have be no less ensnare than her 
 companion ; that Peschiera , distrustful of her firmness in evil , have 
 preclude she from the power of reparation . she be in a house only 
 tenant by his hireling . not a hope to save Violante from a fate that 
 now appal she seem to remain . thus , in incoherent self - reproach 
 and frenzied tear , Beatrice kneel beside her victim , communicate more 
 and more the terror that she feel , as the hour roll on , and the room 
 darken , till it be only by the dull lamp which gleam through the 
 grimy window from the yard without , that each see the face of the 
 other . 

 Night come on ; they hear a clock from some distant church strike 
 the hour . the dim fire have long since burn out , and the air become 
 intensely cold . no one break upon their solitude , - not a voice be hear 
 in the house . they feel neither cold nor hunger , - they feel but the 
 solitude , and the silence , and the dread of something that be to come . 

 at length , about midnight , a bell ring at the street door ; then there 
 be the quick sound of step , of sullen bolt withdraw , of low , 
 murmured voice . Light stream through the chink of the door to the 
 apartment , the door itself open . two Italians bear taper enter , 
 and the Count di Peschiera follow . 

 Beatrice spring up , and rush towards her brother . he lay his hand 
 gently on her lip , and motion to the Italians to withdraw . they 
 place the light on the table , and vanish without a word . 

 Peschiera then , put aside his sister , approach Violante . 

 " Fair kinswoman , " say he , with an air of easy but resolute assurance , 
 " there be thing which no man can excuse , and no woman can pardon , 
 unless that love , which be beyond all law , suggest excuse for the one , 
 and obtain pardon for the other . in a word , I have swear to win you , 
 and I have have no opportunity to woo . fear not ; the bad that can 
 befall you be to be my bride ! stand aside , my sister , stand aside . " 

 " Giulio Franzini , I stand between you and she ; you shall strike I to 
 the earth before you can touch even the hem of her robe ! " 

 " what , my sister ! you turn against I ? " 

 " and unless you instantly retire and leave she free , I will unmask you 
 to the emperor . " 

 " too late , mon enfant ! you will sail with we . the effect you may 
 need for the voyage be already on board . you will be witness to our 
 marriage , and by a holy son of the Church . then tell the emperor what 
 you will . " 

 with a light and sudden exertion of his strength , the count put away 
 Beatrice , and fall on his knee before Violante , who , draw to her full 
 height , death - like pale , but untrembling , regard he with unutterable 
 disdain . 

 " you scorn I now , " say he , throw into his feature an expression 
 of humility and admiration , " and I can not wonder at it . but , believe 
 I , that until the scorn yield to a kind sentiment , I will take no 
 advantage of the power I have gain over your fate . " 

 " power ! " say Violante , haughtily . " you have ensnare I into this 
 house , you have gain the power of a day ; but the power over my 
 fate , - no ! " 

 " you mean that your friend have discover your disappearance , and be 
 on your track . fair one , I provide against your friend , and I defy all 
 the law and police of England . the vessel that will bear you from these 
 shore wait in the river hard by . Beatrice , I warn you , - be still , 
 unhand I . in that vessel will be a priest who shall join our hand , but 
 not before you will recognize the truth , that she who fly with Giulio 
 Peschiera must become his wife or quit he as the disgrace of her House , 
 and the scorn of her sex . " 

 " o villain ! villain ! " cry Beatrice . 

 " Peste , my sister , gentle word . you , too , would marry . I tell no tale 
 of you . Signorina , I grieve to threaten force . give I your hand ; we 
 must be go . " 

 Violante elude the clasp that would have profane she , and dart 
 across the room , open the door , and close it hastily behind she . 
 Beatrice clung firmly to the count to detain he from pursuit . but just 
 without the door , close , as if listen to what pass within , stand a 
 man wrap from head to foot in a large boat cloak . the ray of the lamp 
 that beam on the man glitter on the barrel of a pistol which he hold 
 in his right hand . 

 " Hist ! " whisper the man in English , and pass his arm round she ; " in 
 this house you be in that ruffian 's power ; out of it , safe . ah , I be by 
 your side , - I , Violante ! " 

 the voice thrill to Violante 's heart . she start , look up , but 
 nothing be see of the man 's face , what with the hat and cloak , save a 
 mass of raven curl , and a beard of the same hue . 

 the count now throw open the door , drag after he his sister , who 
 still cling round he . 

 " ha , that be well ! " he cry to the man , in Italian . " bear the lady 
 after I , gently ; but if she attempt to cry out , why , force enough to 
 silence she , not more . as for you , Beatrice , traitress that you be , I 
 could strike you to the earth , but - no , this suffice . " he catch 
 his sister in his arm as he speak , and regardless of her cry and 
 struggle , spring down the stair . 

 the hall be crowd with fierce , swarthy man . the count turn to 
 one of they , and whisper ; in an instant the marchesa be seize and 
 gag . the count cast a look over his shoulder ; Violante be close 
 behind , support by the man to whom Peschiera have consign she , and 
 who be point to Beatrice , and appear warn Violante against 
 resistance . 

 Violante be silent , and seem resign . peschiera smile cynically , 
 and , precede by some of his hireling , who hold torch , descend a 
 few step that lead to an abrupt landing - place between the hall and the 
 basement story . there a small door stand open , and the river flow 
 close by . a boat be moor on the bank , round which group four man , 
 who have the air of foreign sailor . at the appearance of Peschiera , 
 three of these man spring into the boat , and get ready their oar . the 
 fourth carefully re - adjust a plank throw from the boat to the wharf , 
 and offer his arm obsequiously to Peschiera . the count be the first 
 to enter , and , hum a gay opera air , take his place by the helm . 
 the two female be next lift in , and Violante feel her hand 
 press almost convulsively by the man who stand by the plank . the rest 
 follow , and in another minute the boat bound swiftly over the wave 
 towards a vessel that lie several furlong adown the river , and apart 
 from all the mean craft that crowd the stream . the star struggle 
 pale through the foggy atmosphere ; not a word be hear within the 
 boat , - no sound save the regular splash of the oar . the count pause 
 from his lively tune , and gather round he the ample fold of his fur 
 pelisse , seem absorb in thought . even by the imperfect light of the 
 star , Peschiera 's face wear an air of sovereign triumph . the result 
 have justify that careless and insolent confidence in himself and in 
 fortune , which be the most prominent feature in the character of the 
 man , who , both bravo and gamester , have play against the world with 
 his rapi in one hand and cog dice in the other . Violante , once in 
 a vessel fill by his own man , be irretrievably in his power . even 
 her father must feel grateful to learn that the captive of Peschiera have 
 save name and repute in become Peschiera 's wife . even the pride of 
 sex in Violante herself must induce she to confirm what Peschiera , of 
 course , intend to state , - namely , that she be a willing partner in 
 a bridegroom 's scheme of flight towards the altar rather than the poor 
 victim of a betrayer , and receive his hand but from his mercy . he 
 see his fortune secure , his success envy , his very character 
 rehabilitate by his splendid nuptial . ambition begin to mingle with 
 his dream of pleasure and pomp . what post in the Court or the State too 
 high for the aspiration of one who have evince the most incontestable 
 talent for active life , - the talent to succeed in all that the will have 
 undertake ? thus muse the count , half - forgetful of the present , and 
 absorb in the golden future , till he be arouse by a loud hail from 
 the vessel and the bustle on board the boat , as the sailor catch at 
 the rope fling forth to they . 

 he then rise and move towards Violante . but the man who be still in 
 charge of she pass the count lightly , half - lead , half - carry his 
 passive prisoner . " Pardon , Excellency , " say the man , in Italian , " but 
 the boat be crowd , and rock so much that your aid would but disturb 
 our footing . " before Peschiera could reply , Violante be already on the 
 step of the vessel , and the count pause till , with elated smile , 
 he see she safely stand on the deck . Beatrice follow , and then 
 Peschiera himself ; but when the Italians in his train also throng 
 towards the side of the boat , two of the sailor get before they , and 
 let go the rope , while the other two ply their oar vigorously , 
 and pull back towards shore . the Italians burst into an amazed and 
 indignant volley of execration . " silence , " say the sailor who have 
 stand by the plank , " we obey order . if you be not quiet , we shall 
 upset the boat . we can swim ; Heaven and Monsignore San Giacomo pity you 
 if you can not ! " 

 meanwhile , as Peschiera leap upon deck , a flood of light pour upon 
 he from lift torch . that light stream full on the face and form 
 of a man of command stature , whose arm be around Violante , and whose 
 dark eye flash upon the count more luminously than the torch . on 
 one side this man stand the austrian prince ; on the other side   a cloak , 
 and a profusion of false dark lock , at his foot   stand Lord L'Estrange , 
 his arm fold , and his lip curve by a smile in which the ironical 
 humour native to the man be temper with a calm and supreme disdain . 
 the count strove to speak , but his voice falter . 

 all around he look ominous and hostile . he see many italian face , 
 but they scowl at he with vindictive hate ; in the rear be english 
 mariner , peer curiously over the shoulder of the foreigner , and 
 with a broad grin on their open countenance . suddenly , as the count 
 thus stand perplexed , cower , stupefy , there burst from all 
 the Italians present a hoot of unutterable scorn , " Il traditore ! il 
 traditore ! "   the traitor ! the traitor ! 

 the count be brave , and at the cry he lift his head with a certain 
 majesty . 

 at that moment Harley , raise his hand as if to silence the hoot , come 
 forth from the group by which he have be hitherto stand , and towards 
 he the count advance with a bold stride . 

 " what trick be this ? " he say , in French , fiercely . " I divine that it be 
 you whom I can single out for explanation and atonement . " 

 " Pardieu , Monsieur le Comte , " answer Harley , in the same language , 
 which lend itself so well to polished sarcasm and high - breed enmity , 
 " let we distinguish . Explanation should come from I , I allow ; but 
 atonement I have the honour to resign to yourself . this vessel - " 

 " be mine ! " cry the count . " those man , who insult I , should be in my 
 pay . " 

 " the man in your pay , Monsieur le Comte , be on shore , drink success 
 to your voyage . but , anxious still to procure you the gratification of 
 be amongst your own countryman , those whom I have take into my pay 
 be still well Italians than the pirate whose place they supply ; 
 perhaps not such good sailor ; but then I have take the liberty to add 
 to the equipment of a vessel which cost I too much to risk lightly , 
 some stout english seaman , who be mariner more practised than even 
 your pirate . your grand mistake , Monsieur le Comte , be in think that 
 the ' Flying Dutchman ' be yours . with many apology for interfere with 
 your intention to purchase it , I beg to inform you that Lord Spendquick 
 have kindly sell it to I . nevertheless , Monsieur le Comte , for the next 
 few week I place it - man and all - at your service . " 

 Peschiera smile scornfully . 

 " I thank your Lordship ; but since I presume that I shall no long have 
 the travel companion who alone could make the voyage attractive , I 
 shall return to shore , and will simply request you to inform I at what 
 hour you can receive the friend whom I shall depute to discuss that 
 part of the question yet untouched , and to arrange that the atonement , 
 whether it be due from I or yourself , may be render as satisfactory 
 as you have condescend to make the explanation . " 

 " let not that vex you , Monsieur le Comte ; the atonement be , in much , 
 make already ; so anxious have I be to forestall all that your nice 
 sense of honour would induce so complete a gentleman to desire . you have 
 ensnare a young heiress , it be true ; but you see that it be only to 
 restore she to the arm of her father . you have juggle an illustrious 
 kinsman out of his heritage ; but you have voluntarily come on board this 
 vessel , first , to enable his Highness the Prince Von - - - , of whose 
 rank at the Austrian Court you be fully aware , to state to your emperor 
 that he himself have be witness of the manner in which you interpret 
 his Imperial Majesty 's assent to your nuptial with a child of one of 
 the first subject in his italian realm ; and , next , to commence by an 
 excursion to the sea of the Baltic the sentence of banishment which I 
 have no doubt will accompany the same act that restore to the chief of 
 your House his land and his honour . " 

 the count start . 

 " that restoration , " say the austrian prince , who have advance to 
 Harley 's side , " I already guarantee . Disgrace that you be , Giulio 
 Franzini , to the noble of the Empire , I will not leave my royal master 
 till his hand strike your name from the roll . I have here your own 
 letter , to prove that your kinsman be dupe by yourself into the 
 revolt which you would have head as a catiline , if it have not well 
 suit your nature to betray it as a Judas . in ten day from this time , 
 these letter will be lay before the emperor and his Council . " 

 " be you satisfied , Monsieur le Comte , " say Harley , " with your 
 atonement so far ? if not , I have procure you the occasion to render it 
 yet more complete . before you stand the kinsman you have wrong . he 
 know now , that though , for a while , you ruin his fortune , you fail 
 to sully his hearth . his heart can grant you pardon , and hereafter his 
 hand may give you alm . Kneel then , Giulio Franzini , kneel at the foot 
 of Alphonso , Duke of Serrano . " 

 the above dialogue have be in French , which only a few of the Italians 
 present understood , and that imperfectly ; but at the name with which 
 Harley conclude his address to the count , a simultaneous cry from those 
 Italians break forth . 

 " Alphonso the Good ! Alphonso the Good ! Viva , viva , the good Duke of 
 Serrano ! " 

 and , forgetful even of the count , they crowd round the tall form of 
 Riccabocca , strive who should first kiss his hand , the very hem of his 
 garment . 

 Riccabocca 's eye overflow . the gaunt exile seem transfigure into 
 another and more kingly man . an inexpressible dignity invest he . he 
 stretch forth his arm , as if to bless his countryman . even that rude 
 cry , from humble man , exile like himself , console he for year of 
 banishment and penury . 

 " thank , thank , " he continue ; " thank ! some day or other , you will all 
 perhaps return with I to the beloved land ! " 

 the austrian prince bow his head , as if in assent to the prayer . 

 " Giulio Franzini , " say the Duke of Serrano , - for so we may now call the 
 threadbare recluse of the Casino , - " have this last villanous design of 
 yours be allow by Providence , think you that there be one spot on 
 earth on which the ravisher could have be save from a father 's arm ? 
 but now , Heaven have be more kind . in this hour let I imitate its 
 mercy ; " and with relax brow the duke mildly draw near to his guilty 
 kinsman . 

 from the moment the austrian prince have address he , the count have 
 preserve a profound silence , show neither repentance nor shame . 
 gather himself up , he have stand firm , glare round he like one at 
 bay . but as the duke now approach , he wave his hand , and exclaim , 
 " back , pedant ; back ; you have not triumph yet . and you , prate 
 German , tell your tale to our emperor . I shall be by his throne to 
 answer , - if , indeed , you escape from the meeting to which I will force 
 you by the way . " he speak , and make a rush towards the side of the 
 vessel . but Harley 's quick wit have foresee the count 's intention , and 
 Harley 's quick eye have give the signal by which it be frustrate . 
 seize in the gripe of his own watchful and indignant countryman , just 
 as he be about to plunge into the stream , Peschiera be drag back , 
 pinion clown . then the expression of his whole countenance change ; 
 the desperate violence of the inborn gladiator break forth . his great 
 strength enable he to break loose more than once , to dash more than 
 one man to the floor of the deck ; but at length , overpower by number , 
 though still struggle , all dignity , all attempt at presence of mind 
 gone , uttering curse the most plebeian , gnash his tooth , and foaming 
 at the mouth , nothing seem left of the brilliant Lothario but the 
 coarse fury of the fierce natural man . 

 then still preserve that air and tone of exquisite imperturbable 
 irony , which the high comedian might have seek to imitate in vain , 
 Harley bow low to the storm count . 

 " Adieu , Monsieur le Comte , adieu ! the vessel which you have honour I 
 by enter be bind to Norway . the Italians who accompany you be 
 send by yourself into exile , and , in return , they now kindly promise to 
 enliven you with their society , whenever you feel somewhat tired of 
 your own . conduct the count to his cabin . gently there , gently . Adieu , 
 Monsieur le Comte , adieu ! et bon voyage . " 

 Harley turn lightly on his heel , as Peschiera , in spite of his 
 struggle , be now fairly carry down to the cabin . 

 " a trick for the trickster , " say L'Estrange to the austrian prince . 
 " the revenge of a farce on the would - be tragedian . " 

 " More than that,-he be ruin . " 

 " and ridiculous , " quoth Harley . " I should like to see his look when 
 they land he in Norway . " Harley then pass towards the centre of the 
 vessel , by which , hitherto partially conceal by the sailor , who be 
 now busily occupy , stand Beatrice , - Frank Hazeldean , who have first 
 receive she on enter the vessel , stand by her side ; and Leonard , 
 a little apart from the two , in quiet observation of all that have pass 
 around he . Beatrice appear but little to heed Frank ; her dark eye 
 be lift to the dim starry sky , and her lip be move as if in 
 prayer ; yet her young lover be speak to she in great emotion , low 
 and rapidly . 

 " no , no , do not think for a moment that we suspect you , Beatrice . I will 
 answer for your honour with my life . oh , why will you turn from I ; why 
 will you not speak ? " 

 " a moment later , " say Beatrice , softly . " give I one moment yet . " she 
 pass slowly and falteringly towards Leonard , place her hand , that 
 tremble , on his arm , and lead he aside to the verge of the vessel . 
 Frank , startle by her movement , make a step as if to follow , and 
 then stop short and look on , but with a clouded and doubtful 
 countenance . Harley 's smile have go , and his eye be also watchful . 

 it be but a few word that Beatrice speak , it be but a sentence or so 
 that Leonard answer ; and then Beatrice extend her hand , which the 
 young poet bent over , and kiss in silence . she linger an instant ; 
 and even by the starlight , Harley note the blush that overspread her 
 face . the blush fade as Beatrice return to Frank . Lord L'Estrange 
 would have retire , - she sign to he to stay . 

 " my Lord , " she say , very firmly , " I can not accuse you of harshness 
 to my sinful and unhappy brother . his offence might perhaps deserve a 
 heavy punishment than that which you inflict with such playful scorn . 
 but whatever his penance , contempt now or poverty later , I feel that 
 his sister should be by his side to share it . I be not innocent if he be 
 guilty ; and , wreck though he be , nothing else on this dark sea of life 
 be now leave to I to cling to . Hush , my Lord ! I shall not leave this 
 vessel . all that I entreat of you be , to order your man to respect my 
 brother , since a woman will be by his side . " 

 " but , Marchesa , this can not be ; and - " 

 " Beatrice , Beatrice - and I ! - our betrothal ? do you forget I ? " cry 
 Frank , in reproachful agony . 

 " no , young and too noble lover ; I shall remember you ever in my prayer . 
 but listen . I have be deceive , hurry on , I might say , by other , 
 but also , and far more , by my own mad and blinded heart , - deceive , 
 hurry on , to wrong you and to belie myself . my shame burn into I 
 when I think that I could have inflict on you the just anger of your 
 family , link you to my own ruin fortune , - my own - " 

 " your own generous , love heart ! - that be all I ask ! " cry Frank . 

 " cease , cease ! that heart be mine still ! " tear gush from the 
 Italian 's eye . 

 " Englishman , I never love you ; this heart be dead to you , and it will 
 be dead to all else forever . farewell . you will forget I soon than 
 you think for , - soon than I shall forget you , as a friend , as a 
 brother - if brother have nature as tender and as kind as your ! now , my 
 Lord , will you give I your arm ? I would join the count . " 

 " stay ; one word , Madame , " say Frank , very pale , and through his set 
 tooth , but calmly , and with a pride on his brow which have never before 
 dignify its habitual careless expression , - " one word . I may not be 
 worthy of you in anything else , but an honest love , that never doubt , 
 never suspect , that would have clung to you though all the world be 
 against , - such a love make the mean man of worth . one word , frank 
 and open . by all that you hold most sacred in your creed , do you speak 
 the truth when you say that you never love I ? " 

 Beatrice bend down her head ; she be abash before this manly nature 
 that she have so deceive , and perhaps till then undervalue . 

 " Pardon , pardon , " she say , in reluctant accent , half - choke by the 
 rise of a sob . 

 at her hesitation , Frank 's face light as if with sudden hope . she 
 raise her eye , and see the change in he , then glance where Leonard 
 stand , mournful and motionless . she shiver , and add firmly , 

 " yes , pardon ; for I speak the truth , and I have no heart to give . it 
 might have be as wax to another , - it be of granite to you . " she 
 pause , and mutter inly , " Granite , and - break ! " 

 Frank say not a word more . he stand rooted to the spot , not even gaze 
 after Beatrice as she pass on , lean on the arm of Lord L'Estrange . 
 he then walk resolutely away , and watch the boat that the man be 
 now lower from the side of the vessel . Beatrice stop when she come 
 near the place where Violante stand , answer in agitated whisper her 
 father 's anxious question . as she stop , she lean more heavily upon 
 Harley . " it be your arm that tremble now , Lord L'Estrange , " say she , 
 with a mournful smile , and , quit he ere he could answer , she bow 
 down her head meekly before Violante . " you have pardon I already , " 
 she say , in a tone that reach only the girl 's ear , " and my last word 
 shall not be of the past . I see your future spread bright before I 
 under those steadfast star . love still ; hope and trust . these be the 
 last word of she who will soon die to the world . fair maid , they be 
 prophetic ! " 

 Violante shrink back to her father 's breast , and there hide her glowing 
 face , resign her hand to Beatrice , who press it to her bosom . 
 the marchesa then come back to Harley , and disappear with he in the 
 interior of the vessel . 

 when Harley again come on deck , he seem much flurried and disturb . 
 he keep aloof from the duke and Violante , and be the last to enter the 
 boat , that be now lower into the water . 

 as he and his companion reach the land , they see the vessel in 
 movement , glide slowly down the river . " Courage , Leonard , courage ! " 
 murmur Harley . " you grieve , and nobly . but you have shun the bad 
 and most vulgar deceit in civilized life ; you have not simulate love . 
 well that yon poor lady should be , awhile , the sufferer from a harsh 
 truth , than the eternal martyr of a flattering lie ! alas , my Leonard ! 
 with the love of the poet 's dream be link only the Graces ; with the 
 love of the human heart come the awful fate ! " 

 " my Lord , poet do not dream when they love . you will learn how the 
 feeling be deep in proportion as the fancy be vivid , when you read 
 that confession of genius and woe which I have leave in your hand . " 

 Leonard turn away . Harley 's gaze follow he with inquire interest , 
 and suddenly encounter the soft dark grateful eye of Violante . " the 
 Fates , the Fates ! " murmur Harley . 




 CHAPTER IX . 

 we be at Norwood in the sage 's drawing - room . Violante have long since 
 retire to rest . Harley , who have accompany the father and daughter to 
 their home , be still converse with the former . 

 " indeed , my dear Duke , " say Harley 

 " hush , hush ! diavolo , do not   call I Duke yet ; I be at home here once 
 more as Dr. Riccabocca . " 

 " my dear doctor , then , allow I to assure you that you overrate my claim 
 to your thank . your old friend , Leonard and Frank Hazeldean , must come 
 in for their share . nor be the faithful Giacomo to be forget . " 

 " continue your explanation . " 

 " in the first place , I learn , through Frank , that one Baron Levy , a 
 certain fashionable money - lender , and general ministrant to the 
 affair of fine gentleman , be just about to purchase a yacht from Lord 
 Spendquick on behalf of the count . a short interview with Spendquick 
 enable I to outbid the usurer , and conclude a bargain by which the 
 yacht become mine , - a promise to assist Spendquick in extricate 
 himself from the claw of the money - lender   which I trust to do by 
 reconcile he with his father , who be a man of liberality and sense 
 make Spendquick readily connive at my scheme for outwit the enemy . 
 he allow Levy to suppose that the count might take possession of 
 the vessel ; but affect an engagement , and stand out for term , 
 postpone the final settlement of the purchase - money till the next day . 
 I be thus master of the vessel , which I feel sure be destine to serve 
 Peschiera 's infamous design . but it be my business not to alarm the 
 count 's suspicion ; I therefore permit the pirate crew he have 
 get together to come on board . I know I could get rid of they when 
 necessary . meanwhile , Frank undertake to keep close to the count until 
 he could see and cage within his lodging the servant whom Peschiera 
 have commission to attend his sister . if I could but apprehend this 
 servant , I have a sanguine hope that I could discover and free your 
 daughter before Peschiera could even profane she with his presence . but 
 Frank , alas ! be no pupil of Machiavelli . perhaps the count detect his 
 secret thought under his open countenance , perhaps merely wish to 
 get rid of a companion very much in his way ; but , at all event , he 
 contrive to elude our young friend as cleverly as you or I could have 
 do , - tell he that Beatrice herself be at Roehampton , have borrow 
 the count 's carriage to go there , volunteer to take Frank to the 
 house , take he . Frank find himself in a drawing - room ; and after 
 wait a few minute , while the count go out on pretence of see 
 his sister , in pirouette a certain distinguished opera - dancer ! 
 meanwhile the count be fast back on the road to London , and Frank have 
 to return as he could . he then hunt for the count everywhere , and see 
 he no more . it be late in the day when Frank find I out with this 
 news . I become seriously alarmed . Peschiera might perhaps learn my 
 counter - scheme with the yacht , or he might postpone sailing until he have 
 terrify or entangle Violante into some - in short , everything be to 
 be dread from a man of the count 's temper . I have no clew to the place 
 to which your daughter be take , no excuse to arrest Peschiera , no 
 mean even of learn where he be . he have not return to Mivart 's . 
 the Police be at fault , and useless , except in one valuable piece 
 of information . they tell I where some of your countryman , whom 
 Peschiera 's perfidy have send into exile , be to be find . I 
 commission Giacomo to seek these man out , and induce they to man the 
 vessel . it might be necessary , should Peschiera or his confidential 
 servant come aboard , after we have expel or draw off the pirate 
 crew , that they should find Italians whom they might well mistake for 
 their own hireling . to these foreigner I add some english sailor 
 who have before serve in the same vessel , and on whom Spendquick assure 
 I I could rely . still these precaution only avail in case Peschiera 
 should resolve to sail , and defer till then all machination against 
 his captive . while , amidst my fear and uncertainty , I be struggle 
 still to preserve presence of mind , and rapidly discuss with the 
 austrian prince if any other step could be take , or if our sole 
 resource be to repair to the vessel and take the chance of what might 
 ensue , Leonard suddenly and quietly enter my room . you know his 
 countenance , in which joy or sadness be not betray so much by 
 the evidence of the passion as by variation in the intellectual 
 expression . it be but by the clear brow and the steady eye that I 
 see he have good tiding to impart . " 

 " ah , " say Riccabocca , - for so , obey his own request , we will yet 
 call the sage , - " ah , I early teach that young man the great lesson 
 inculcate by Helvetius . ' all our error arise from our ignorance or our 
 passion . ' without ignorance and without passion , we should be serene , 
 all - penetrate intelligence . " 

 " mopstick , " quoth Harley , " have neither ignorance nor passion ; but as 
 for their intelligence - " 

 " Pshaw ! " interrupt Riccabocca , - " proceed . " 

 " Leonard have part from we some hour before . I have commission he 
 to call at Madame di Negra 's , and , as he be familiarly know to her 
 servant , seek to obtain quietly all the information he could collect , 
 and , at all event , procure   what in my haste I have fail to do   the 
 name and description of the man who have drive she out in the morning , 
 and make what use he judge good of every hint he could gather or glean 
 that might aid our research . Leonard only succeed in learn the 
 name and description of the coachman , whom he recognize as one Beppo , 
 to whom she have often give order in his presence . none could say where 
 he then could be find , if not at the count 's hotel . Leonard go next 
 to that hotel . the man have not be there all the day . while revolve 
 what next he should do , his eye catch sight of your intended 
 son - in - law , glide across the opposite side of the street . one of those 
 luminous , inspire conjecture , which never occur to you philosopher , 
 have from the first guide Leonard to believe that Randal Leslie be 
 mix up in this villanous affair . " 

 " ha ! he ? " cry Riccabocca . " impossible ! for what interest , what 
 object ? " 

 " I can not tell , neither could leonard ; but we have both form the same 
 conjecture . brief : Leonard resolve to follow randal Leslie , and 
 track all his movement . he do then follow he , unobserved , - and at a 
 distance , first to Audley Egerton 's house , then to Eaton Square , thence 
 to a house in Bruton Street , which Leonard ascertain to be Baron 
 Levy 's . suspicious that , my clear sage ? " 

 " Diavolo , yes ! " say Riccabocca , thoughtfully . 

 " at Levy 's , Randal stay till dusk . he then come out , with his 
 cat - like , stealthy step , and walk quickly into the neighbourhood of 
 Leicester Square . Leonard see he enter one of those small hotel which 
 be appropriate to foreigner . wild , outlandish fellow be loiter 
 about the door and in the street . Leonard divine that the count or the 
 count 's confidant be there . " 

 " if that can be prove , " cry Riccabocca , " if Randal could have be 
 thus in communication with Peschiera , could have connive at such 
 perfidy , I be release from my promise . oh , to prove it ! " 

 " Proof will come later , if we be on the right track . let I go on . 
 while wait near the door of this hotel , Beppo himself , the very man 
 Leonard be in search of , come forth , and , after speak a few word 
 to some of the loitering foreigner , walk briskly towards Piccadilly . 
 Leonard here resign all further heed of Leslie , and give chase 
 to Beppo , whom he recognize at a glance . come up to he , he say 
 quietly , ' I have a letter for the Marchesa di Negra . she tell I I be 
 to send it to she by you . I have be search for you the whole day . ' 
 the man fall into the trap , and the more easily , because - as he since 
 own in excuse for a simplicity which , I dare say , weigh on his 
 conscience more than any of the thousand - and - one crime he may have 
 commit in the course of his illustrious life - he have be employ 
 by the marchesa as a spy upon Leonard , and , with an Italian 's acuman in 
 affair of the heart , detect her secret . " 

 " what secret ? " ask the innocent sage . 

 " her love for the handsome young poet . I betray that secret , in order to 
 give she some slight excuse for become Peschiera 's tool . she believe 
 Leonard to be in love with your daughter , and jealousy urge she to 
 treason . Violante , no doubt , will explain this to you . well , the man 
 fall into the trap . ' give I the letter , Signor , and quick . ' 

 " ' it be at a hotel close by ; come there , and you will have a guinea for 
 your trouble . ' 

 " so Leonard walk our gentleman into my hotel ; and have take he 
 into my dressing - room , turn the key and there leave he . on learn 
 this capture , the prince and myself hasten to see our prisoner . he be 
 at first sullen and silent ; but when the prince disclose his rank and 
 name   you know the mysterious terror the mean Italians feel for an 
 austrian magnate , his countenance change , and his courage fall . what 
 with threat and what with promise , we soon obtain all that we seek 
 to know ; and an offer bribe , which I calculate at ten time the 
 amount the rogue could ever expect to receive from his spendthrift 
 master , finally bind he cheerfully to our service , soul and body . thus 
 we learn the dismal place to which your noble daughter have be 
 so perfidiously ensnare . we learn also that the count have not yet 
 visit she , hop much from the effect that prolong incarceration 
 might have in weaken her spirit and induce her submission . 
 Peschiera be to go to the house at midnight , thence to transport she to 
 the vessel . Beppo have receive order to bring the carriage to Leicester 
 Square , where Peschiera would join he . the count   as Leonard surmise 
 have take skulk refuge at the hotel in which Randal Leslie have 
 disappear . the prince , Leonard , Frank   who be then in the hotel , and 
 myself hold a short council . should we go at once to the house , and , 
 by the help of the police , force an entrance , and rescue your daughter ? 
 this be a very hazardous resource . the abode , which , at various time , 
 have serve for the hiding - place of man haunt by the law , abound , 
 accord to our informant , in subterranean vault and secret passage , 
 and have more than one outlet on the river . at our first summon at the 
 door , therefore , the ruffian within might not only escape themselves , 
 but carry off their prisoner . the door be strong , and before our 
 entrance could be force , all trace of she we seek might be lose . 
 again , too , the prince be desirous of bring Peschiera 's guilty 
 design home to he , - anxious to be able to state to the emperor , and 
 to the great minister his kinsman , that he himself have witness the 
 count 's vile abuse of the emperor 's permission to we d your daughter . in 
 short , while I only think of Violante , the prince think also of her 
 father 's recall to his dukedom . yet , still to leave Violante in that 
 terrible house , even for an hour , a few minute , subject to the actual 
 presence of Peschiera , unguarde save by the feeble and false woman who 
 have betray and might still desert she - how contemplate that fearful 
 risk ? what might not happen in the interval between Peschiera 's visit 
 to the house and his appearance with his victim on the vessel ? an idea 
 flash on I : Beppo be to conduct the count to the house ; if I could 
 accompany Beppo in disguise , enter the house , myself be present ? - I 
 rush back to our informant , now become our agent ; I find the plan 
 still more feasible than I have at first suppose . Beppo have ask the 
 count 's permission to bring with he a brother accustom to the sea , 
 and who wish to quit England . I might personate that brother . you 
 know that the italian language , in most of its dialect and variety of 
 patois - Genoese , Piedmontese , Venetian - be as familiar tome as Addison 's 
 English ! alas ! rather more so . Presto ! the thing be settle . I feel my 
 heart , from that moment , as light as a feather , and my sense as keen as 
 the dart which a feather wing . my plan now be form in a breath , 
 and explain in a sentence . it be right that you should be present 
 on board the vessel , not only to witness your foe 's downfall , but to 
 receive your child in a father 's arm . Leonard set out to Norwood for 
 you , caution not to define too precisely for what object you be 
 want , till on board . 

 " Frank , accompany by Beppo   for there be yet time for these 
 preparation before midnight , repair to the yacht , take Giacomo by 
 the way . there our new ally , familiar to most of that piratical crew , 
 and sanction by the presence of Frank , as the count 's friend and 
 prospective brother - in - law , tell Peschiera 's hireling that they be to 
 quit the vessel , and wait on shore under Giacomo 's auspex till further 
 order ; and as soon as the deck be clear of these ruffian   save a 
 few leave to avoid suspicion , and who be afterwards safely stow down 
 in the hold , and as soon as Giacomo have lodge his convoy in a public 
 house , where he quit they drink his health over unlimited ration 
 of grog , your inestimable servant quietly ship on board the Italians 
 press into the service , and Frank take charge of the english sailor . 

 " the prince , promise to be on board in due time , then leave I to make 
 arrangement for his journey to Vienna by the dawn . I hasten to a 
 masquerade warehouse , where , with the help of an ingenious stagewright 
 artificer , I disguise myself into a most thorough - pace - look 
 cut - throat , and then wait the return of my friend Beppo with the most 
 perfect confidence . " 

 " yet , if that rascal have play false , all these precaution be lose . 
 Cospetto ! you be not wise , " say the prudent philosopher . 

 " very likely not . you would have be so wise , that by this time your 
 daughter would have be lose to you forever . " 

 " but why not employ the police ? " 

 " first , because I have already employ they to little purpose ; secondly , 
 because I no long want they ; thirdly , because to use they for 
 my final catastrophe would be to drag your name , and your daughter 's 
 perhaps , before a police court , - at all event , before the tribunal 
 of public gossip ; and lastly , because , have decide upon the proper 
 punishment , it have too much of equity to be quite consistent with law ; 
 and in forcibly seize a man 's person , and ship he off to Norway , 
 my police would have be sadly in the way . certainly my plan rather 
 savour of Lope de Vega than of Blackstone . however , you see success 
 atone for all irregularity . I resume : Beppo come back in time to 
 narrate all the arrangement that have be make , and to inform I that 
 a servant from the count have come on board just as our new crew be 
 assemble there , to order the boat to be at the place where we find 
 it . the servant it be deem prudent to detain and secure . Giacomo 
 undertake to manage the boat . 

 " I be nearly at the close of my story . sure of my disguise , I get on the 
 coach - box with Beppo . the count arrive at the spot appoint , and do 
 not even honour myself with a question or glance . ' your brother ? ' he 
 say to Beppo ; ' one might guess that ; he have the family likeness . not a 
 handsome race your ! drive on . ' 

 " we arrive at the house . I dismount to open the carriage - door . the 
 count give I one look . ' Beppo say you have know the sea . ' 

 " ' Excellency , yes . I be a Genoese . ' 

 " ' ha ! how be that ? Beppo be a Lombard . ' - admire the readiness with which 
 I redeem my blunder . 

 " ' Excellency , it please Heaven that Beppo should be bear in Lombardy , 
 and then to remove my respected parent to Genoa , at which city they 
 be so kindly treat that my mother , in common gratitude , be bind 
 to increase its population . it be all she could do , poor woman . you see 
 she do she good . ' 

 " the count smile , and say no more . the door open , I follow he ; 
 your daughter can tell you the rest . " 

 " and you risk your life in that den of miscreant ! noble friend ! " 

 " risk my life , - no ; but I risk the count 's . there be one moment 
 when my hand be on my trigger , and my soul very near the sin of 
 justifiable homicide . but my tale be do . the count be now on the 
 river , and will soon be on the salt sea , though not bind to Norway , 
 as I have first intend . I could not inflict that frigid voyage on his 
 sister . so the man have order to cruise about for six day , keep 
 aloof from shore , and they will then land the count and the marchesa , by 
 boat , on the french coast . that delay will give time for the prince to 
 arrive at Vienna before the count could follow he . " 

 " would he have that audacity ? " 

 " do he more justice ! audacity , faith ! he do not want for that . but I 
 dread not his appearance at Vienna with such evidence against he . 
 I dread his encounter the prince on the road , and force a duel , 
 before his character be so blast that the prince could refuse it ; and 
 the count be a dead shot of course , - all such man be ! " 

 " he will return , and you - " 

 " I ! oh , never fear ; he have have enough of I . and now , my dear 
 friend , - now that Violante be safe once more under your own roof ; 
 now that my honoured mother must long ere this have be satisfy by 
 Leonard , who leave we to go to she , that our success have be achieve 
 without danger , and , what she will value almost as much , without 
 scandal ; now that your foe be powerless as a reed float on the water 
 towards its own rot , and the Prince Von - - - -is perhaps about to enter 
 his carriage on the road to Dover , charge with the mission of restore 
 to Italy her worthy son , - let I dismiss you to your own happy 
 slumber , and allow I to wrap myself in my cloak , and snatch a short 
 sleep on the sofa , till yonder gray dawn have mellow into riper day . 
 my eye be heavy , and if you stay here three minute long , I shall be 
 out of reach of hearing , in the land of dream . Buona notte ! " 

 " but there be a bed prepare for you . " 

 Harley shake his head in dissent , and compose himself at length on the 
 sofa . 

 Riccabocca , bending , wrap the cloak round his guest , kiss he on 
 the forehead , and creep out of the room to rejoin Jemima , who still sit 
 up for he , nervously anxious to learn from he those explanation which 
 her considerate affection would not allow she to ask from the agitated 
 and exhausted Violante . " not in bed ! " cry the sage , on see she . 
 " have you no feeling of compassion for my son that be to be ? just , too , 
 when there be a reasonable probability that we can afford a son ? " 

 Riccabocca here laugh merrily , and his wife throw herself on his 
 shoulder , and cry for joy . 

 but no sleep fall on the lid of Harley L'Estrange . he start up when 
 his host have leave he , and pace the apartment , with noiseless but rapid 
 stride . all whim and levity have vanish from his face , which , by the 
 light of the dawn , seem death - like pale . on that pale face there be 
 all the struggle and all the anguish of passion . 

 " these arm have clasp she , " he murmur ; " these lip have inhale she 
 breath ! I be under the same roof , and she be save , - save evermore from 
 danger and from penury , and forever divide from I . courage , courage ! 
 oh , honour , duty ; and thou , dark memory of the past , - thou that didst 
 pledge love at least to a grave , - support , defend I ! can I be so weak ! " 

 the sun be in the wintry sky when Harley steal from the house . no 
 one be stir except Giacomo , who stand by the threshold of the door , 
 which he have just unbarred , feed the house - dog . " good - day , " say the 
 servant , smile . " the dog have not be of much use , but I do not   think 
 the padrone will henceforth grudge he a breakfast . I shall take he to 
 Italy , and marry he there , in the hope of improve the breed of our 
 native Lombard dog . " 

 " ah , " say Harley , " you will soon leave our cold shore . may sunshine 
 settle on you all ! " he pause , and look up at the close window 
 wistfully . 

 " the signorina sleep there , " say Giacomo , in a husky voice , " just over 
 the room in which you sleep . " 

 " I know it , " mutter Harley . " an instinct tell I of it . open the gate ; 
 I must go home . my excuse to your lord , and to all . " 

 he turn a deaf ear to Giacomo 's entreaty to stay till at least the 
 signorina be up , - the signorina whom he have save . without trust 
 himself to speak far , he quit the demesne , and walk with swift 
 stride towards London . 




 CHAPTER X. 

 Harley have not long reach his hotel , and be still seat before his 
 untasted breakfast , when Mr. Randal Leslie be announce . Randal , who 
 be in the firm belief that Violante be now on the wide sea with 
 Peschiera , enter , look the very personation of anxiety and fatigue . 
 for like the great Cardinal Richelieu , Randal have learn the art how 
 to make good use of his own delicate and somewhat sickly aspect . the 
 cardinal , when intent on some sanguinary scheme require unusual 
 vitality and vigour , contrive to make himself look a harmless sufferer 
 at death 's door . and Randal , whose nervous energy could at that moment 
 have whirl he from one end of this huge metropolis to the other , with 
 a speed that would have outstrip a prize pedestrian , now sink into 
 a chair with a jaded weariness that no mother could have see without 
 compassion . he seem since the last night to have gallop towards the 
 last stage of consumption . 

 " have you discover no trace , my Lord ? speak , speak ! " 

 " Speak ! certainly . I be too happy to relieve your mind , Mr. Leslie . what 
 fool we be ! ha , ha ! " 

 " Fools - how ? " falter Randal . 

 " of course ; the young lady be at her father 's house all the time . " 

 " eh ? what ? " 

 " and be there now . " 

 " it be not possible ! " say Randal , in the hollow , dreamy tone of a 
 somnambulist . " at her father 's house , at Norwood ! be you sure ? " 

 " sure . " 

 Randal make a desperate and successful effort at self - control . " Heaven 
 be praise ! " he cry . " and just as I have begin to suspect the count , 
 the marchesa ; for I find that neither of they sleep at home last night ; 
 and Levy tell I that the count have write to he , request the 
 baron to discharge his bill , as he should be for some time absent from 
 England . " 

 " indeed ! well , that be nothing to we , - very much to Baron Levy , if he 
 execute his commission , and discharge the bill . what ! be you go 
 already ? " 

 " do you ask such a question ? how can I stay ? I must go to Norwood , - must 
 see Violante with my own eye ! forgive my emotion - I - I - " 

 Randal snatch at his hat and hurry away . the low scornful laugh of 
 Harley follow he as he go . 

 " I have no more doubt of his guilt than Leonard have . Violante at 
 least shall not be the prize of that thin - lipped knave . what strange 
 fascination can he possess , that he should thus bind to he the two 
 man I value most , - Audley Egerton and Alphonso di Serrano ? both so wise 
 too ! - one in book , one in action . and both suspicious man ! while I , so 
 imprudently trustful and frank - ah , that be the reason ; our nature be 
 antipathetic ; cunning , simulation , falsehood , I have no mercy , no pardon 
 for these . woe to all hypocrite if I be a grand inquisitor ! " 

 " Mr. Richard Avenel , " say the waiter , throw open the door . 

 Harley catch at the arm of the chair on which he sit , and grasp 
 it nervously , while his eye become fix intently on the form of the 
 gentleman who now advance into the room . he rise with an effort . 

 " Mr. Avenel ! " he say falteringly . " do I hear your name aright ? 
 Avenel ! " 

 " Richard Avenel , at your service , my Lord , " answer Dick . " my family be 
 not unknown to you ; and I be not ashamed of my family , though my parent 
 be small Lansmere tradesfolk , and I be - ahem ! - a citizen of the 
 world , and well - to - do ! " add Dick , drop his kid glove into his 
 hat , and then place the hat on the table , with the air of an old 
 acquaintance who wish to make himself at home . Lord L'Estrange bow 
 and say , as he reseat himself   Dick be firmly seat already , 
 " you be most welcome , sir ; and if there be anything I can do for one of 
 your name - " 

 " thank you , my Lord , " interrupt Dick . " I want nothing of any man . a 
 bold word to say ; but I say it . nevertheless , I should not have presume 
 to call on your lordship , unless , indeed , you have do I the honour 
 to call first at my house , Eaton Square , no . - - I should not have 
 presume to call if it have not be on business , - public business , I may 
 say - national business ! " 

 Harley bow again . a faint smile flit for a moment to his lip , but , 
 vanishing , give way to a mournful , absent expression of countenance , as 
 he scan the handsome feature before he , and , perhaps , masculine and 
 bold though they be , still discover something of a family likeness 
 to one whose beauty have once be his ideal of female loveliness ; for 
 suddenly he stretch forth his hand , and say , with more than his usual 
 cordial sweetness , " business or not business , let we speak to each other 
 as friend , - for the sake of a name that take I back to Lansmere , to 
 my youth . I listen to you with interest . " 

 Richard Avenel , much surprised by this unexpected kindliness , and 
 touch , he know not why , by the soft and melancholy tone of Harley 's 
 voice , warmly press the hand hold out to he ; and seize with a rare 
 fit of shyness , colour and coughed and hem and look first down , 
 then aside , before he could find the word which be generally ready 
 enough at his command . 

 " you be very good , Lord L'Estrange ; nothing can be handsomer . I feel it 
 here , my Lord , " strike his buff waistcoat , - " I do , ' pon my honour . but 
 not to waste your time   time 's money , I come to the point . it be about 
 the borough of Lansmere . your family interest be very strong in that 
 borough ; but excuse I if I say that I do not   think you be aware that I 
 too have cook up a pretty considerable interest on the other side . no 
 offence , - opinion be free . and the popular tide run strong with we - I 
 mean with I - at the impending crisis , - that be , at the next election . 
 now , I have a great respect for the earl your father , and so have those 
 who bring I into the world - my father , John , be always a regular 
 good Blue , - and my respect for yourself since I come into this room 
 have go up in the market a very great rise indeed , - considerable . so I 
 should just like to see if we could set our head together , and settle 
 the borough between we two , in a snug private way , as public man ought 
 to do when they get together , nobody else by , and no necessity for that 
 sort of humbug , which be so common in this rotten old country . eh , my 
 Lord ? " 

 " Mr. Avenel , " say Harley , slowly , recover himself from the 
 abstraction with which he have listen to Dick 's early sentence , " I 
 fear I do not quite understand you ; but I have no other interest in the 
 next election for the borough of Lansmere than as may serve one whom , 
 whatever be your politic , you must acknowledge to be - " 

 " a humbug ! " 

 " Mr. Avenel , you can not mean the person I mean . I speak of one of the 
 first statesman of our time , - of Mr. Audley Egerton , of - " 

 " a stiff - neck , pompous - " 

 " my early and dear friend . " 

 the rebuke , though gently say , suffice to silence Dick for a moment ; 
 and when he speak again , it be in an altered tone . 

 " I beg your pardon , my Lord , I be sure . of course , I can say nothing 
 disrespectful of your friend , - very sorry that he be your friend . in 
 that case , I be almost afraid that nothing be to be do . but Mr. Audley 
 Egerton have not a chance . 

 " let I convince you of this . " and Dick pull out a little book , bind 
 neatly in red . 

 " Canvass book , my Lord . I be no aristocrat . I do not   pretend to carry a 
 free and independent constituency in my breech ' pocket . heaven forbid ! 
 but as a practical man of business , what I do be do properly . just 
 look at this book . 

 " well kept , eh ? name , promise , inclination , public opinion , and 
 private interest of every individual Lansmere elector ! now , as one man 
 of honour to another , I show you this book , and I think you will see 
 that we have a clear majority of at least eighty vote as against Mr. 
 Egerton . " 

 " that be your view of the question , " say Harley , take the book 
 and glance over the name catalogue and ticket therein . but his 
 countenance become serious as he recognize many name familiar to his 
 boyhood as those of important elector on the Lansmere side , and which 
 he now find transfer to the hostile . " but surely there be person 
 here in whom you deceive yourself , - old friend of my family , stanch 
 supporter of our party . " 

 " exactly so . but this new question have turn all old thing 
 topsy - turvy . no rely on any friend of your . no reliance except in 
 this book ! " say Dick , slap the red cover with calm but ominous 
 emphasis . 

 " now , what I want to propose be this : do not   let the Lansmere interest be 
 beat ; it would vex the old earl , - go to his heart , I be sure . " 

 Harley nod . 

 " and the Lansmere interest need not be beat , if you will put up another 
 man instead of this red - tapist .   Beg pardon .   you see I only want to get 
 in one man , you want to get in another . why not ? now , there be a smart 
 youth , - connection of Mr. Egerton 's , - randal Leslie . I have no objection 
 to he , though he be of your colour . withdraw Mr. Egerton , and I will 
 withdraw my second man before it come to the poll ; and so we shall 
 halve the borough slick between we . that be the way to do business , - eh , 
 my Lord ? " 

 " randal Leslie ! oh , you wish to bring in Mr. Leslie ? but he stand with 
 Egerton , not against he . " 

 " ah , " say Dick , smile as if to himself , ' so I hear ; and we could 
 bring he in over Egerton without say a word to you . but all our 
 family respect your , and so I have wish to do the thing handsome and 
 open . let the earl and your party be content with young Leslie . " 

 " Young Leslie have speak to you ? " 

 " not as to my come here . oh , no , that be a secret , - private and 
 confidential , my Lord . and now , to make matter still more smooth , I 
 propose that my man shall be one to your Lordship 's own heart . I find 
 you have be very kind to my nephew ; do you credit , my Lord , - a 
 wonderful young man , though I say it . I never guess there be so much 
 in he . yet all the time he be in my house , he have in his desk the very 
 sketch of an invention that be now save I from ruin , - from positive 
 ruin , - Baron Levy , the King 's Bench , and almighty smash ! now , such 
 a young man ought to be in parliament . I like to bring forward a 
 relation , - that be , when he do one credit ; ' t be human nature and 
 sacred tie - one 's own flesh and blood ; and besides , one hand rub the 
 other , and one leg help on the other , and relation get on well in 
 the world when they pull together ; that be , suppose that they be the 
 proper sort of relation , and pull one on , not down . I have once think 
 of stand for Lansmere myself , - think of it very lately . the country 
 want man like I , I know that ; but I have an idea that I have well see 
 to my own business . the country may , or may not , do without I , stupid 
 old thing that she be ! but my mill and my new engine - there be no doubt 
 that they can not do without I . in short , as we be quite alone , and , 
 as I say before , there be no kind of necessity for that sort of humbug 
 which exist when other people be present , provide elsewhere for Mr. 
 Egerton , whom I hate like poison , - I have a right to do that , I suppose , 
 without offence to your Lordship , - and the two younker , Leonard 
 Fairfield and Randal Leslie , shall be member for the free and 
 independent borough of Lansmere ! " 

 " but do Leonard wish to come into parliament ? " 

 " no , he say not ; but that be nonsense . if your Lordship will just 
 signify your wish that he should not lose this noble opportunity to 
 raise himself in life , and get something handsome out of the nation , I be 
 sure he owe you too much to hesitate , - ' specially when ' t be to his own 
 advantage . and besides , one of we Avenels ought to be in parliament ; and 
 if I have not the time and learning , and so forth , and he have , why , it 
 stand to reason that he should be the man . and if he can do something 
 for I one day - not that I want anything - but still a baronetcy or so 
 would be a compliment to British Industry , and be appreciate as such by 
 myself and the public at large , - I say , if he could do something of 
 that sort , it would keep up the whole family ; and if he can not , why , I will 
 forgive he . " 

 " Avenel , " say Harley , with that familiar and gracious charm of manner 
 which few ever could resist , " Avenel , if as a great personal favour to 
 myself - to I your fellow - townsman   I be bear at Lansmere   - if I ask 
 you to forego your grudge against Audley Egerton , whatever that grudge 
 be , and not oppose his election , while our party would not oppose your 
 nephew 's , could you not oblige I ? come , for the sake of dear Lansmere , 
 and all the old kindly feeling between your family and mine , say ' yes , 
 so shall it be . ' " 

 Richard Avenel be almost melt . he turn away his face ; but there 
 suddenly rise to his recollection the scornful brow of Audley Egerton , 
 the lofty contempt with which he , then the worshipful Mayor of 
 Screwstown , have be show out of the minister 's office - room ; and the 
 blood rush over his cheek , he stamp his foot on the floor , and 
 exclaim angrily , " no ; I swear that Audley Egerton should smart for his 
 insolence to I , as sure as my name be Richard Avenel ; and all the soft 
 soap in the world will not wash out that oath . so there be nothing for 
 it but for you to withdraw that man , or for I to defeat he . and I 
 would do so , ay , - and in the way that could most gall he , - if it cost 
 I half my fortune . but it will not cost that , " say Dick , cooling , " nor 
 anything like it ; for when the popular tide run in one 's favour , ' t 
 be astonish how cheap an election may be . it will cost he enough 
 though , and all for nothing , - bad than nothing . think of it , my Lord . " 

 " I will , Mr. Avenel . and I say , in my turn , that my friendship be as 
 strong as your hate ; and that if it cost I , not half , but my whole 
 fortune , Audley Egerton shall come in without a shilling of expense to 
 himself , should we once decide that he stand the contest . " 

 " very well , my Lord , - very well , " say Dick , stiffly , and draw on 
 his kid glove ; " we will see if the aristocracy be always to ride over 
 the free choice of the people in this way . but the people be rouse , 
 my Lord . the March of Enlightenment be commence , the Schoolmaster be 
 abroad , and the British Lion - " 

 " nobody here but ourselves , my dear avenel . be not this rather what you 
 call - humbug ? " 

 Dick start , star , colour , and then burst out laugh , " give we 
 your hand again , my Lord . you be a good fellow , that you be . and for 
 your sake - " 

 " you will not oppose Egerton ? " 

 " tooth and nail , tooth and nail ! " cry Dick , clap his hand to his 
 ear , and fairly run out of the room . 

 there pass over Harley 's countenance that change so frequent to 
 it , - more frequent , indeed , to the gay child of the world than those 
 of consistent temper and uniform habit might suppose . there be many a 
 man whom we call friend , and whose face seem familiar to we as our own ; 
 yet , could we but take a glimpse of he when we leave his presence , and 
 he sink back into his chair alone , we should sigh to see how often the 
 smile on the frank lip be but a bravery of the drill , only wear when 
 on parade . 

 what thought do the visit of Richard Avenel bequeath to Harley ? it 
 be hard to define they . 

 in his place , an Audley Egerton would have take some comfort from the 
 visit , would have murmur , " thank Heaven ! I have not to present to the 
 world that terrible man as my brother - in - law . " but probably Harley have 
 escape , in his revery , from Richard Avenel altogether . even as the 
 slight incident in the daytime cause our dream at night , but be 
 itself clean forget , so the name , so the look of the visitor , might 
 have suffice but to influence a vision , as remote from its casual 
 suggester as what we call real life be from that life much more real , 
 that we imagine , or remember , in the haunted chamber of the brain . for 
 what be real life ? how little the thing actually do around we affect 
 the spring of our sorrow or joy ; but the life which our dulness call 
 romance , - the sentiment , the remembrance , the hope , or the fear , that 
 be never see in the toil of our hand , never hear in the jargon on 
 our lip , - from that life all spin , as the spider from its entrail , 
 the web by which we hang in the sunbeam , or glide out of sight into the 
 shelter of home . 

 " I must not think , " say Harley , rouse himself with a sigh , " either of 
 past or present . let I hurry on to some fancied future . ' happy be 
 the marriage , ' say the french philosopher , and still say many a 
 sage , ' in which man ask only the mild companion , and woman but the calm 
 protector . ' I will go to Helen . " 

 he rise ; and as he be about to lock up his escritoire , he remember 
 the paper which Leonard have request he to read . he take they from 
 their deposit , with a careless hand , intend to carry they with he 
 to his father 's house . but as his eye fall upon the character , the hand 
 suddenly tremble , and he recoil some pace , as if strike by a violent 
 blow . then , gaze more intently on the writing , a low cry break from 
 his lip . he reseat himself , and begin to read . 




 CHAPTER XI . 

 randal - with many misgiving at Lord L'Estrange 's tone , in which he 
 be at no loss to detect a latent irony - proceed to Norwood . he find 
 Riccabocca exceedingly cold and distant ; but he soon bring that sage 
 to communicate the suspicion which Lord L'Estrange have instill 
 into his mind , and these Randal be as speedily enable to dispel . he 
 account at once for his visit to Levy and Peschiera . naturally he have 
 seek Levy , an acquaintance of his own , - nay , of Audley Egerton 's , - but 
 whom he know to be professionally employ by the count . he have 
 succeed in extract from the baron Peschiera 's suspicious change of 
 lodgment from Mivart 's Hotel to the purlieus of Leicester Square ; have 
 call there on the count , force an entrance , openly accuse he 
 of abstract Violante ; high word have pass between they , - even a 
 challenge . randal produce a note from a military friend of his , whom he 
 have send to the count an hour after quit the hotel . this note state 
 that arrangement be make for a meeting near Lord 's Cricket Ground , 
 at seven o'clock the next morning . randal then submit to Riccabocca 
 another formal memorandum from the same warlike friend , to the purport 
 that randal and himself have repair to the ground , and no count have 
 be forthcoming . it must be own that Randal have take all suitable 
 precaution to clear himself . such a man be not to blame for want of 
 invention , if he be sometimes doom to fail . 

 " I , then , much alarmed , " continue Randal , " hasten to Baron Levy , who 
 inform I that the count have write he word that he should be for 
 some time absent from England . rush thence , in despair , to your 
 friend Lord L'Estrange , I hear that your daughter be safe with you . 
 and though , as I have just prove , I would have risk my life against 
 so notorious a duellist as the count , on the mere chance of preserve 
 Violante from his suppose design , I be rejoice to think that she have 
 no need of my unskilful arm . but how and why can the count have leave 
 England after accept a challenge ? a man so sure of his weapon , 
 too , - repute to be as fearless of danger as he be blunt in conscience . 
 explain , - you who know mankind so well , - explain . I can not . " the 
 philosopher could not resist the pleasure of narrate the detection and 
 humiliation of his foe , the wit , ingenuity , and readiness of his 
 friend . so Randal learn , by little and little , the whole drama of the 
 precede night . he see , then , that the exile have all reasonable hope 
 of speedy restoration to rank and wealth . Violante , indeed ; would be 
 a brilliant prize , - too brilliant , perhaps , for Randal , but not to be 
 sacrifice without an effort . therefore wring convulsively the hand 
 of his meditated father - in - law , and turn away his head as if to 
 conceal his emotion , the ingenuous young suitor falter forth that 
 now Dr. Riccabocca be so soon to vanish into the Duke di Serrano , 
 he - randal Leslie of Rood , bear a gentleman , indeed , but of fall 
 fortune - have no right to claim the promise which have be give to he 
 while a father have cause to fear for a daughter 's future ; with the fear 
 cease the promise . Alight Heaven bless father and daughter both ! 

 this address touch both the heart and honour of the exile . randal 
 Leslie know his man . and though , before Randal 's visit , Riccabocca be 
 not quite so much a philosopher but what he would have be well please 
 to have find himself release , by proof of the young man 's treachery , 
 from an alliance below the rank to which he have all chance of early 
 restoration , yet no Spaniard be ever more tenacious of plighted word 
 than this inconsistent pupil of the profound florentine . and Randal 's 
 probity be now clear to he , he repeat , with stately formality , 
 his previous offer of Violante 's hand . 

 " but , " still falteringly sigh the provident and far - calculate 
 randal - " but your only child , your sole heiress ! oh , might not your 
 consent to such a marriage   if know before your recall   jeopardize your 
 cause ? your land , your principality , to devolve on the child of an 
 humble Englishman ! I dare not believe it . ah , would Violante be not 
 your heiress ! " 

 " a noble wish , " say Riccabocca , smile blandly , " and one that the 
 Fates will realize . cheer up ; Violante will not be my heiress . " 

 " ah , " cry Randal , draw a long breath - " ah , what do I hear ? " 

 " Hist ! I shall soon a second time be a father . and , to judge by the 
 unerring research of writer upon that most interesting of all 
 subject , parturitive science , I shall be the father of a son . he will , 
 of course , succeed to the title of Serrano . and Violante - " 

 " will have nothing , I suppose ? " exclaim Randal , try his good to 
 look overjoyed till he have get his paw out of the trap into which he 
 have so incautiously thrust they . 

 " Nay , her portion by our law - to say nothing of my affection - would far 
 exceed the ordinary dower which the daughter of London merchant bring 
 to the son of british peer . whoever marry Violante , provide I 
 regain my estate , must submit to the care which the poet assure we 
 ever attend on wealth . " 

 " oh ! " groan Randal , as if already bow beneath the care , and 
 sympathize with the poet . 

 " and now , let I present you to your betrothed . " although poor Randal 
 have be remorselessly hurry along what schiller call the " gamut 
 of feeling , " during the last three minute , down to the deep chord of 
 despair at the abrupt intelligence that his betrothed be no heiress 
 after all ; thence ascend to vibration of pleasant doubt as to the 
 unborn usurper of her right , accord to the prophecy of parturitive 
 science ; and lastly , swell into a concord of all sweet thought at 
 the assurance that , come what might , she would be a wealthy bride 
 than a peer 's son could discover in the matrimonial Potosi of Lombard 
 Street , - still the tormented lover be not there allow to repose 
 his exhausted though ravish soul . for , at the idea of personally 
 confront the destine bride - whose very existence have almost vanish 
 from his mind 's eye , amidst the golden shower that it see fall 
 divinely round she - Randal be suddenly remind of the exceeding 
 bluntness with which , at their last interview , it have be his policy to 
 announce his suit , and of the necessity of an impromptu falsetto suit 
 to the new variation that toss he again to and fro on the merciless 
 gamut . however , he could not recoil from her father 's proposition , 
 though , in order to prepare Riccabocca for Violante 's representation , 
 he confess pathetically that his impatience to obtain her consent and 
 baffle Peschiera have make he appear a rude and presumptuous wooer . the 
 philosopher , who be disposed to believe one kind of courtship to be 
 much the same as another , in case where the result of all courtship 
 be once predetermine , smile benignly , pat Randal 's thin cheek , 
 with a " Pooh , pooh , pazzie ! " and leave the room to summon Violante . 

 " if knowledge be power , " soliloquize Randal , " ability be certainly good 
 luck , as Miss Edgeworth show in that story of Murad the Unlucky , which 
 I read at Eton ; very clever story it be , too . so nothing come amiss to 
 I . Violante 's escape , which have cost I the count 's L10,000 , prove to 
 be worth to I , I dare say , ten time as much . no doubt she will have a 
 hundred thousand pound at the least . and then , if her father have no 
 other child , after all , or the child he expect die in infancy , why , 
 once reconcile to his government and restore to his estate , the law 
 must take its usual course , and Violante will be the great heiress 
 in Europe . as to the young lady herself , I confess she rather awe I ; I 
 know I shall be henpecke . well , all respectable husband be . there be 
 something scampish and ruffianly in not be henpecke . " here Randal 's 
 smile might have harmonize well with Pluto 's " iron tear ; " but , iron 
 as the smile be , the serious young man be ashamed of it . " what be I 
 about , " say he , half aloud , " chuckle to myself and waste time , when 
 I ought to be think gravely how to explain away my former cavalier 
 courtship ? such a masterpiece as I think it then ! but who could 
 foresee the turn thing would take ? let I think ; let I think . plague 
 on it , here she come . " 

 but Randal have not the fine ear of your more romantic lover ; and , to 
 his great relief , the exile enter the room unaccompanie by Violante . 
 Riccabocca look somewhat embarrassed . 

 " my dear Leslie , you must excuse my daughter to - day ; she be still 
 suffer from the agitation she have go through , and can not see you . " 

 the lover try not to look too delighted . 

 " Cruel ! " say he ; " yet I would not for world force myself on her 
 presence . I hope , Duke , that she will not find it too difficult to obey 
 the command which dispose of her hand , and intrust her happiness to my 
 grateful charge . " 

 " to be plain with you , Randal , she do at present seem to find it more 
 difficult than I foresaw . she even talk of - " 

 " another attachment - oh , heaven ! " 

 " Attachment , pazzie ! whom have she see ? no , a convent ! but leave it to 
 I . in a calm hour she will comprehend that a child must know no lot 
 more enviable and holy than that of redeem a father 's honour . and 
 now , if you be return to London , may I ask you to convey to young 
 Mr. Hazeldean my assurance of undye gratitude for his share in my 
 daughter 's delivery from that poor baffled swindler . " 

 it be noticeable that , now Peschiera be no long an object of dread to 
 the nervous father , he become but an object of pity to the philosopher , 
 and of contempt to the grandee . 

 " true , " say Randal , " you tell I Frank have a share in Lord L'Estrange 's 
 very clever and dramatic device . my Lord must be by nature a fine 
 actor , - comic , with a touch of melodrame ! poor Frank ! apparently he 
 have lose the woman he adore , - Beatrice di Negra . you say she have 
 accompany the count . be the marriage that be to be between she and 
 Frank break off ? " 

 " I do not know such a marriage be contemplate . I understand she to be 
 attach to another . not that that be any reason why she would not have 
 marry Mr. Hazeldean . express to he my congratulation on his escape . " 

 " Nay , he must not know that I have inadvertently betray his 
 confidence ; but you now guess , what perhaps puzzle you before , - namely , 
 how I come to be so well acquainted with the count and his movement . I 
 be so intimate with my relation Frank , and Frank be affiance to the 
 marchesa . " 

 " I be glad you give I that explanation ; it suffice . after all , the 
 marchesa be not by nature a bad woman , - that be , not bad than woman 
 generally be , so Harley say , and Violante forgive and excuse she . " 

 " Generous Violante ! but it be true . so much do the marchesa appear 
 to I possess of fine , though ill - regulate quality , that I always 
 consider she dispose to aid in frustrate her brother 's criminal 
 design . so I even say , if I remember right , to Violante . " 

 drop this prudent and precautionary sentence , in order to guard 
 against anything Violante might say as to that subtle mention of 
 Beatrice which have predispose she to confide in the marchesa , Randal 
 then hurry on , " but you want repose . I leave you the happy , the 
 most grateful of man . I will give your courteous message to Frank . " 




 CHAPTER XII . 

 curious to learn what have pass between Beatrice and Frank , and deeply 
 interested in all that could oust Frank out of the squire 's goodwill , 
 or aught that could injure his own prospect by tend to unite son and 
 father , Randal be not slow in reach his young kinsman 's lodging . it 
 might be suppose that have , in all probability , just secure so 
 great a fortune as would accompany Violante 's hand , Randal might be 
 indifferent to the success of his scheme on the Hazeldean exchequer . 
 such a supposition would grievously wrong this profound young man . 
 for , in the first place , Violante be not yet win , nor her father yet 
 restore to the estate which would defray her dower ; and , in the next 
 place , randal , like Iago , love villany for the genius it call forth 
 in he . the sole luxury the abstemious aspirer allow to himself be 
 that which be find in intellectual restlessness . untempte by wine , 
 dead to love , unamuse by pleasure , indifferent to the art , despise 
 literature save as mean to some end of power , Randal Leslie be 
 the incarnation of thought hatch out of the corruption of will . 
 at twilight we see thin airy spectral insect , all wing and nipper , 
 hovering , as if they could never pause , over some sullen mephitic pool . 
 just so , methink , hover over Acheron such gnat - like , noiseless soarer 
 into gloomy air out of stygian deep , as be the thought of spirit 
 like Randal Leslie 's . wing have they , but only the well to pounce 
 down , - draw their nutriment from unguarded material cuticle ; and just 
 when , madden , you strike , and exult exclaim , " Caught , by Jove ! " 
 wh - irr fly the diaphanous , ghostly larva , and your blow fall on your 
 own twice - offend cheek . 

 the young man who be acquaint with Randal say he have not a 
 vice ! the fact be that his whole composition be one epic vice , so 
 elaborately construct that it have not an episode which a critic could 
 call irrelevant . grand young man ! 

 " but , my dear fellow , " say Randal , as soon as he have learn from Frank 
 all that have pass on board the vessel between he and Beatrice , " I 
 can not believe this . ' never love you ' ? what be her object , then , in 
 deceive not only you , but myself ? I suspect her declaration be but 
 some heroical refinement of generosity . after her brother 's dejection 
 and probable ruin , she might feel that she be no match for you . then , 
 too , the squire 's displeasure ! I see it all ; just like she , - noble , 
 unhappy woman ! " 

 Frank shake his head . " there be moment , " say he , with a wisdom that 
 come out of those instinct which awake from the depth of youth 's 
 first great sorrow , - " moment when a woman can not feign , and there be 
 tone in the voice of a woman which man can not misinterpret . she do 
 not love I , - she never do love I ; I can see that her heart have be 
 elsewhere . no matter , - all be over . I do not   deny that I be suffer 
 an intense grief ; it gnaw like a kind of sullen hunger ; and I feel so 
 broken , too , as if I have grow old , and there be nothing leave worth 
 live for . I do not   deny all that . " 

 " my poor , dear friend , if you would but believe - " 

 " I do not   want to believe anything , except that I have be a great fool . 
 I do not   think I can ever commit such folly again . but I be a man . I 
 shall get the well of this ; I should despise myself if I could not . 
 and now let we talk of my dear father . have he leave town ? " 

 " leave last night by the mail . you can write and tell he you have give 
 up the marchesa , and all will be well again between you . " 

 " give she up ! Fie , Randal ! do you think I should tell such a lie ? she 
 give I up ; I can claim no merit out of that . " 

 " oh , yes ! I can make the squire see all to your advantage . oh , if it 
 be only the marchesa ! but , alas ! that curse postobit ! how could 
 Levy betray you ? never trust to usurer again ; they can not resist the 
 temptation of a speedy profit . 

 " they first buy the son , and then sell he to the father . and the squire 
 have such strange notion on matter of this kind . " 

 " he be right to have they . there , just read this letter from my mother . 
 it come to I this morning . I could hang myself if I be a dog ; but I be 
 a man , and so I must bear it . " 

 Randal take Mrs. Hazeldean 's letter from Frank 's tremble hand . the 
 poor mother have learn , though but imperfectly , Frank 's misdeed from 
 some hurried line which the squire have despatch to she ; and she write 
 as good , indulgent , but sensible , right - minded mother alone can write . 
 more lenient to an imprudent love than the squire , she touch with 
 discreet tenderness on Frank 's rash engagement with a foreigner , but 
 severely on his own open defiance of his father 's wish . her anger 
 be , however , reserve for that unholy post - obit . here the hearty genial 
 wife 's love overcome the mother 's affection . to count , in cold blood , on 
 that husband 's death , and to wound his heart so keenly , just where its 
 jealous , fatherly fondness make it most susceptible ! 

  " o Frank , Frank ! " write Mrs. Hazeldean , " be it not for this , be 
  it only for your unfortunate attachment to the italian lady , only 
  for your debt , only for the error of hasty , extravagant youth , I 
  should be with you now , my arm round your neck , kiss you , 
  chide you back to your father 's heart . but - but the thought that 
  between you and his heart have be the sordid calculation of his 
  death , - that be a wall between we . I can not come near you . I 
  should not like to look on your face , and think how my William 's 
  tear fall over it , when I place you , new bear , in his arm , and 
  bid he welcome his heir . what ! you a mere boy still , your father 
  yet in the prime of life , and the heir can not wait till nature 
  leave he fatherless . Frank ; Frank this be so unlike you . can 
  London have ruin already a disposition so honest and 
  affectionate ? - no ; I can not believe it . there must be some mistake . 
  clear it up , I implore you ; or , though as a mother I pity you , as a 
  wife I can not forgive . " 

 even Randal be affect by the letter ; for , as we know , even Randal 
 feel in his own person the strength of family tie . the poor squire 's 
 choler and bluffness have disguise the parental heart from an eye that , 
 however acute , have not be willing to search for it ; and randal , ever 
 affect through his intellect , have despise the very weakness on which 
 he have prey . but the mother 's letter , so just and sensible   allow 
 that the squire 's opinion have naturally influence the wife to 
 take what man of the world would call a very exaggerated view of 
 the every - day occurrence of loan raise by a son , payable only at 
 a father 's death , - this letter , I say , if exaggerate accord to 
 fashionable notion , so sensible if judge by natural affection , 
 touch the dull heart of the schemer , because approve by the quick 
 tact of his intelligence . 

 " Frank , " say he , with a sincerity that afterwards amaze himself , " go 
 down at once to Hazeldean ; see your mother , and explain to she how this 
 transaction really happen . the woman you love , and woo as wife , 
 in danger of an arrest , your distraction of mind , Levy 's counsel , your 
 hope to pay off the debt , so incur to the usurer , from the fortune 
 you would shortly receive with the marchesa . speak to your mother , - she 
 be a woman ; woman have a common interest in forgive all fault that 
 arise from the source of their power over we man , - I mean love . go ! " 

 " no , I can not go ; you see she would not like to look on my face . and I 
 can not repeat what you say so glibly . besides , somehow or other , as I be 
 so dependent upon my father , - and he have say as much , - I feel as if 
 it would be mean in I to make any excuse . I do the thing , and must 
 suffer for it . but I be a in - an - no - I ' m not a man here . " Frank burst 
 into tear . 

 at the sight of those tear , Randal gradually recover from his strange 
 aberration into vulgar and low humanity . his habitual contempt for his 
 kinsman return ; and with contempt come the natural indifference to the 
 suffering of the thing to be put to use . it be contempt for the worm 
 that make the angl fix it on the hook , and observe with complacency 
 that the vivacity of its wriggle will attract the bite . if the worm 
 could but make the angler respect , or even fear it , the barb would find 
 some other bait . few angler would impale an estimable silkworm , and 
 still few the angler who would finger into service a formidable 
 hornet . 

 " Pooh , my - dear Frank , " say randal ; " I have give you my advice ; you 
 reject it . well , what then will you do ? " 

 " I shall ask for leave of absence , and run away some where , " say Frank , 
 dry his tear . " I can not   face London ; I can not   mix with other . I want 
 to be by myself , and wrestle with all that I feel here - in my heart . 
 then I shall write to my mother , say the plain truth , and leave she to 
 judge as kindly of I as she can . " 

 " you be quite right . yes , leave town ! why not go abroad ? you have never 
 be abroad . new scene will distract your mind . run over to Paris . " 

 " not to Paris - I do not   want gayetie ; but I do intend to go abroad 
 somewhere , - any dull dismal hole of a place . good - by ! do not   think of I 
 any more for the present . " 

 " but let I know where you go ; and meanwhile I will see the squire . " 

 " say as little of I as you can to he . I know you mean most kindly , but 
 oh , how I wish there never have be any third person between I and my 
 father ! there : you may well snatch away your hand . what an ungrateful 
 wretch to you I be . I do believe I be the wicked fellow . what ! you 
 shake hand with I still ! my dear Randal , you have the good heart - God 
 bless you ! " Frank turn away , and disappear within his dressing - room . 

 " they must be reconcile now , soon or later , - squire and son , " say 
 randal to himself , as he leave the lodging . " I do not   see how I can 
 prevent that , - the marchesa be withdraw , - unless Frank do it for 
 I . but it be well he should be abroad , - something maybe make out 
 of that ; meanwhile I may yet do all that I could reasonably hope 
 to do , - even if Frank have marry Beatrice , - since he be not to be 
 disinherit . get the squire to advance the money for the thornhill 
 purchase , complete the affair ; this marriage with Violante will help ; 
 Levy must know that ; secure the borough ; - well thought of . I will go to 
 Avenel 's . by - the - by , by - the - by , the squire might as well keep I still 
 in the entail after Frank , suppose Frank die childless . this love 
 affair may keep he long from marry . his hand be very hot , - a hectic 
 colour ; those strong - look fellow often go off in rapid decline , 
 especially if anything prey on their mind , - their mind be so very 
 small . 

 " ah , the Hazeldean parson , - and with Avenel ! that young man , too , who 
 be he ? I have see he before some where . - my dear Mr. Dale , this be 
 a pleasant surprise . I think you have return to Hazeldean with our 
 friend the squire ? " 

 MR . DALE . - " the squire ! have he leave town , and without tell I ? " 

 RANDAL   take aside the parson . - " he be anxious to get back to Mrs. 
 Hazeldean , who be naturally very uneasy about her son and this foolish 
 marriage ; but I be happy to tell you that that marriage be effectually 
 and permanently break off . " 

 MR . DALE . - " how , how ? my poor friend tell I he have wholly fail to 
 make any impression on Frank , - forbid I to mention the subject . I be 
 just go to see Frank myself . I always have some influence with he . 
 but , Mr. Leslie , explain this very sudden and happy event . the marriage 
 break off ! " 

 RANDAL . - " it be a long story , and I dare not tell you my humble share in 
 it . Nay , I must keep that secret . Frank might not forgive I . Suffice 
 it that you have my word that the fair Italian have leave England , and 
 decidedly refuse Frank 's address . but stay , take my advice , do not 
 go to he ; you see it be not only the marriage that have offend the 
 squire , but some pecuniary transaction , - an unfortunate post - obit bond 
 on the casino property . Frank ought to be leave to his own repentant 
 reflection . they will be most salutary ; you know his temper , - he do not 
 bear reproof ; and yet it be well , on the other hand , not to let he 
 treat too lightly what have pass . let we leave he to himself for a few 
 day he be in an excellent frame of mind . " 

 MR . DALE   shake Randal 's hand warmly . - " you speak admirably - a 
 post - obit ! - so often as he have hear his father 's opinion on such 
 transaction . no , I will not see he ; I should be too angry - " 

 randal   lead the parson back , resume , after an exchange of 
 salutation with Avenel , who , meanwhile , have be confer with his 
 nephew . - " you should not be so long away from your rectory , Mr. Dale . 
 what will your parish do without you ? " 

 MR . DALE . - " the old fable of the wheel and the fly . I be afraid the 
 wheel roll on the same . but if I be absent from my parish , I be still 
 in the company of one who do I honour as an old parishioner . you 
 remember Leonard Fairfield , your antagonist in the Battle of the 
 stock ? " 

 MR . AVENEL . - " my nephew , I be proud to say , sir . " randal bow with 
 mark civility , Leonard with a reserve no less marked . 

 MR . AVENEL   ascribe his nephew 's reserve to shyness . - " you should be 
 friend , you two youngster . who know but you may run together in the 
 same harness ? ah , that remind I , Leslie , I have a word or two to say 
 to you . your servant , Mr. Dale . shall be happy to present you to 
 Mrs. Avenel . my card , - Eaton Square , number - . you will call on I 
 to - morrow , Leonard . and mind , I shall be very angry if you persist in 
 your refusal . such an opening ! " Avenel take Randal 's arm , while the 
 parson and Leonard walk on . 

 " any fresh hint as to Lansmere ? " ask Randal . 

 " yes ; I have now decide on the plan of contest . you must fight two and 
 two , - you and Egerton against I and   if I can get he to stand , as I 
 hope   my nephew , Leonard . " 

 " what ! " say Randal , alarmed ; " then , after all , I can hope for no 
 support from you ? " 

 " I do not   say that ; but I have reason to think Lord L'Estrange will 
 bestir himself actively in favour of Egerton . if so , it will be a very 
 sharp contest ; and I must manage the whole election on our side , and 
 unite all our shaky vote , which I can well do by stand myself in 
 the first instance , reserve it to after consideration whether I shall 
 throw up at the last ; for I do not   particularly want to come in , as I 
 do a little time ago , before I have find out my nephew . wonderful young 
 man ! with such a head , - will do I credit in the rotten old House ; and 
 I think I have good leave London , go to Screwstown , and look to my 
 business . no , if Leonard stand , I roust first see to get he in ; and 
 next , to keep Egerton out . it will probably , therefore , end in the 
 return of one and one or either side , as we think of before , - Leonard 
 on our side ; and Egerton sha'n't   be the man on the other . you 
 understand ? " 

 " I do , my dear Avenel . of course , as I before say , I can not   dictate to 
 your party whom they should prefer , - Egerton or myself . and it will be 
 obvious to the public that your party would rather defeat so eminent an 
 adversary as Mr. Egerton than a tyro in politic like I . of course I 
 can not scheme for such a result ; it would be misconstrue , and damage my 
 character . but I rely equally on your friendly promise . " 

 " promise ! no , I do not   promise . I must first see how the cat jump ; and 
 I do not   know yet how our friend may like you , nor how they can be 
 manage . all I can say be , that Audley Egerton sha'n't   be M.P. for 
 Lansmere . meanwhile , you will take care not to commit yourself in 
 speak so that our party can not   vote for you consistently ; they must 
 count on have you - when you get into the House . " 

 " I be not a violent party - man at present , " answer Randal , prudently . 
 " and if public opinion prove on your side , it be the duty of a statesman 
 to go with the time . " 

 " very sensibly say ; and I have a private bill or two , and some other 
 little job , I want to get through the House , which we can discuss 
 later , should it come to a frank understanding between we . we must 
 arrange how to meet privately at Lansmere , if necessary . I will see to 
 that . I shall go down this week . I think of take a hint from the free 
 and glorious land of America , and establish secret caucus . nothing 
 like them . " 

 " caucus ? " 

 " small sub - committee that spy on their man night and day , and do not 
 suffer they to be intimidate to vote the other way . " 

 " you have an extraordinary head for public affair , Avenel . you should 
 come into parliament yourself ; your nephew be so very young . " 

 " so be you . " 

 " yes ; but I know the world . do he ? " 

 " the world know he , though not by name , and he have be the making of 
 I . " 

 " how ? you surprise I . " 

 Avenel first explain about the patent which Leonard have secure 
 to he ; and next confide , upon honour , Leonard 's identity with the 
 anonymous author whom the parson have suppose to be Professor Moss . 

 Randal Leslie feel a jealous pang . what ! then - have this village boy , 
 this associate of John Burley   literary vagabond , whom he suppose 
 have long since go to the dog , and be bury at the expense of the 
 parish   - have this boy so triumph over birth , rearing , circumstance , 
 that , if Randal and Leonard have meet together in any public place , and 
 Leonard 's identity with the rise author have be reveal , every eye 
 would have turn from Randal to gaze on Leonard ? the common consent of 
 mankind would have acknowledge the supreme royalty of genius when it 
 once leave its solitude , and stride into the world . what ! be 
 this rude villager the child of Fame , who , without an effort , and 
 unconsciously , have inspire in the wearied heart of Beatrice di Negra 
 a love that randal know , by an instinct , no art , no craft , could ever 
 create for he in the heart of woman ? and now , do this same youth stand 
 on the same level in the ascent to power as he , the well - bear randal 
 Leslie , the accomplished protege of the superb Audley Egerton ? be they 
 to be rival in the same arena of practical busy life ? Randal gnaw his 
 quivering lip . 

 all the while , however , the young man whom he so envy be a prey to 
 sorrow deeply far than could ever find room or foot in the narrow 
 and stony heart of the unloving schemer . 

 as Leonard walk through the crowded street with the friend and 
 monitor of his childhood , confide the simple tale of his early 
 trial , - when , amidst the wreck of fortune and in despair of fame , the 
 child - angel smile by his side , like Hope , - all renown seem to he so 
 barren , all the future so dark ! his voice tremble , and his countenance 
 become so sad , that his benignant listener , divine that around the 
 image of Helen there clung some passionate grief that overshadow all 
 worldly success , draw Leonard gently and gently on , till the young man , 
 long yearn for some confidant , tell he all , - how , faithful through 
 long year to one pure and ardent memory , Helen have be see once more , 
 the child ripen to woman , and the memory reveal itself as love . 

 the parson listen with a mild and thoughtful brow , which expand into 
 a more cheerful expression as Leonard close his story . 

 " I see no reason to despond , " say Mr. Dale . " you fear that Miss 
 Digby do not return your attachment ; you dwell upon her reserve , her 
 distant , though kindly manner . cheer up ! all young lady be under the 
 influence of what phrenologist call the organ of Secretiveness , when 
 they be in the society of the object of their preference . just as you 
 describe Miss Digby 's manner to you , be my Carry 's manner to myself . " 

 the parson here indulge in a very appropriate digression upon female 
 modesty , which he wind up by assert that that estimable virtue 
 become more and more influence by the secretive organ , in proportion as 
 the favour suitor approach near and near to a definite proposal . 
 it be the duty of a gallant and honourable lover to make that proposal 
 in distinct and orthodox form , before it could be expect that a young 
 lady should commit herself and the dignity of her sex by the slight 
 hint as to her own inclination . 

 " next , " continue the parson , " you choose to torment yourself by 
 contrast your own origin and fortune with the altered circumstance 
 of Miss Digby , - the ward of Lord L'Estrange , the guest of Lady Lansmere . 
 you say that if Lord L'Estrange could have countenance such a union , 
 he would have adopt a different tone with you , - sound your heart , 
 encourage your hope , and so forth . I view thing differently . I 
 have reason to do so ; and from all you have tell I of this nobleman 's 
 interest in your fate , I venture to make you this promise , that if Miss 
 Digby would accept your hand , Lord L'Estrange shall ratify her choice . " 

 " my dear Mr. Dale , " cry Leonard , transport , " you make I that 
 promise ? " 

 " I do , - from what you have say , and from what I myself know of Lord 
 L'Estrange . go , then , at once to Knightsbridge , see Miss Digby , show 
 she your heart , explain to she , if you will , your prospect , ask she 
 permission to apply to Lord L'Estrange   since he have constitute 
 himself her guardian ; and if Lord L'Estrange hesitate , - which , if your 
 happiness be set on this union , I think he will not , - let I know , and 
 leave the rest to I . " 

 Leonard yield himself to the parson 's persuasive eloquence . indeed , 
 when he recall to mind those passage in the manuscript of the 
 ill - fat Nora , which refer to the love that Harley have once bear 
 to she , - for he feel convinced that Harley and the boy suitor of Nora 's 
 narrative be one and the same ; and when all the interest that Harley 
 have take in his own fortune be explain by his relationship to she 
  even when Lord L'Estrange have suppose it less close than he would now 
 discover it to be , the young man , reason by his own heart , could not 
 but suppose that the noble Harley would rejoice to confer happiness upon 
 the son of she , so beloved by his boyhood . 

 " and to thee , perhaps , o my mother ! " think Leonard , with swimming 
 eye - " to thee , perhaps , even in thy grave , I shall owe the partner 
 of my life , as to the mystic breath of thy genius I owe the first pure 
 aspiration of my soul . " 

 it will be see that Leonard have not confide to the parson his 
 discovery of Nora 's manuscript , nor even his knowledge of his real 
 birth ; for the proud son naturally shrink from any confidence that 
 implicate Nora 's fair name , until at least Harley , who , it be clear 
 from those paper , must have intimately know his father , should 
 perhaps decide the question which the paper themselves leave so terribly 
 vague , - namely , whether he be the offspring of a legal marriage , or 
 Nora have be the victim of some unholy fraud . 

 while the parson still talk , and while Leonard still muse and 
 listen , their step almost mechanically take the direction towards 
 Knightsbridge , and pause at the gate of Lord Lansmere 's house . 

 " go in , my young friend ; I will wait without to know the issue , " say 
 the parson , cheeringly . " go , and with gratitude to Heaven , learn how to 
 bear the most precious joy that can befall mortal man ; or how to submit 
 to youth 's sharp sorrow , with the humble belief that even sorrow be 
 but some mercy conceal . " 




 CHAPTER xiii . 

 Leonard be show into the drawing - room , and it so chance that Helen 
 be there alone . the girl 's soft face be sadly change , even 
 since Leonard have see it last ; for the grief of nature mild and 
 undemonstrative as her , gnaw with quick ravage ; but at Leonard 's 
 unexpected entrance , the colour rush so vividly to the pale cheek 
 that its hectic might be take for the lustre of bloom and health . she 
 rise hurriedly , and in great confusion falter out , " that she believe 
 Lady Lansmere be in her room , - she would go for she , " and move towards 
 the door , without seem to notice the hand tremulously hold forth to 
 she ; when Leonard exclaim in uncontrollable emotion which pierce to 
 her very heart , in the keen accent of reproach , - 

 " oh , Miss Digby - oh , Helen - be it thus that you greet I , - rather thus 
 that you shun I ? could I have foresee this when we two orphan stand 
 by the mournful bridge , - so friendless , so desolate , and so cling 
 each to each ? happy time ! " he seize her hand suddenly as he speak the 
 last word , and bow his face over it . 

 " I must not hear you . do not talk so , Leonard , you break my heart . let 
 I go , let I go ! " 

 " be it that I be grow hateful to you ; be it merely that you see my love 
 and would discourage it ? Helen , speak to I , - speak ! " 

 he draw she with tender force towards he ; and , hold she firmly 
 by both hand , seek to gaze upon the face that she turn from 
 he , - turn in such despair . 

 " you do not know , " she say at last , struggle for composure , - " you do 
 not know the new claim on I , my altered position , how I be bind , or 
 you would be the last to speak thus to I , the first to give I courage , 
 and bid I - bid I - " 

 " bid you what ? " 

 " feel nothing here but duty ! " cry Helen , draw from his clasp both 
 her hand , and place they firmly on her breast . 

 " Miss Digby , " say Leonard , after a short pause of bitter reflection , in 
 which he wrong , while he think to divine , her meaning , " you speak of 
 new claim on you , your altered position - I comprehend . you may retain 
 some tender remembrance of the past ; but your duty now be to rebuke my 
 presumption . it be as I think and fear . this vain reputation which 
 I have make be but a hollow sound , - it give I no rank , assure I no 
 fortune . I have no right to look for the Helen of old in the Helen of 
 to - day . be it so - forget what I have say , and forgive I . " 

 this reproach sting to the quick the heart to which it appeal . a flash 
 brighten the meek , tearful eye , almost like the flash of resentment ; 
 her lip writhe in torture , and she feel as if all other pain be 
 light compare with the anguish that Leonard could impute to her motif 
 which to her simple nature seem so unworthy of she , and so gall to 
 himself . 

 a word rush as by inspiration to her lip , and that word calm and 
 soothe she . 

 " Brother ! " she say touchingly , " brother ! " 

 the word have a contrary effect on Leonard . sweet as it be , tender as 
 the voice that speak it , it impose a boundary to affection , it come as 
 a knell to hope . he recoil , shake his head mournfully : " too late to 
 accept that tie , - too late even for friendship . henceforth - for long 
 year to come - henceforth , till this heart have cease to beat at your 
 name to thrill at your presence , we two - be stranger . " 

 " stranger ! well - yes , it be right - it must be so ; we must not meet . oh , 
 Leonard Fairfield , who be it that in those day that you recall to I , 
 who be it that find you destitute and obscure ; who , not degrade you 
 by charity , place you in your right career ; open to you , amidst the 
 labyrinth in which you be well - nigh lose , the broad road to knowledge , 
 independence , fame ? answer I , - answer ! be it not the same who rear , 
 shelter your sister orphan ? if I could forget what I have owe to 
 he , should I not remember what he have do for you ? can I hear of your 
 distinction , and not remember it ? can I think how proud she may be who 
 will one day lean on your arm , and bear the name you have already raise 
 beyond all the title of an hour , - can I think of this , and not remember 
 our common friend , benefactor , guardian ? would you forgive I , if I 
 fail to do so ? " 

 " but , " falter Leonard , fear mingle with the conjecture these word 
 call forth - " but be it that Lord L'Estrange would not consent to our 
 union ? or of what do you speak ? you bewilder I . " 

 Helen feel for some moment as if it be impossible to reply ; and the 
 word at length be drag forth as if from the depth of her very 
 soul . 

 " he come to I , our noble friend . I never dream of it . he do not tell 
 I that he love I . he tell I that he be unhappy , alone ; that in I , 
 and only in I , he could find a comforter , a soother - he , he ! and I have 
 just arrive in England , be under his mother 's roof , have not then once 
 more seen you ; and - and - what could I answer ? strengthen I , strengthen 
 I , you whom I look up to and revere . yes , yes , you be right . we must 
 see each other no more . I be betroth to another , - to he ! strengthen 
 I ! " 

 all the inherent nobleness of the poet 's nature rise at once at this 
 appeal . 

 " oh , Helen - sister - Miss Digby , forgive I . you need no strength from 
 I ; I borrow it from you . I comprehend you , I respect . banish all 
 thought of I . repay our common benefactor . be what he ask of you , - his 
 comforter , his soother ; be more , - his pride and his joy . happiness will 
 come to you , as it come to those who confer happiness and forget self . 
 God comfort you in the pass struggle ; God bless you , in the long 
 year to come . Sister , I accept the holy name now , and will claim it 
 hereafter , when I too can think more of other than myself . " 

 Helen have cover her face with her hand , sob ; but with that soft , 
 womanly constraint which press woe back into the heart . a strange 
 sense of utter solitude suddenly pervade her whole being , and by that 
 sense of solitude she know that he be go . 




 CHAPTER XIV . 

 in another room in that same house sit , solitary as Helen , a stern , 
 gloomy , brood man , in whom they who have well know he from his 
 childhood could scarcely have recognize a trace of the humane , 
 benignant , trustful , but wayward and vary Harley , Lord L'Estrange . 

 he have read that fragment of a memoir , in which , out of all the chasm 
 of his barren and melancholy past , there rise two malignant truth that 
 seem literally to glare upon he with mocking and demon eye . the 
 woman whose remembrance have darken all the sunshine of his life have 
 love another ; the friend in whom he have confide his whole affectionate 
 loyal soul have be his perfidious rival . he have read from the first 
 word to the last , as if under a spell that hold he breathless ; and when 
 he close the manuscript , it be without a groan or sigh ; but over his 
 pale lip there pass that wither smile , which be as sure an index 
 of a heart overcharge with dire and fearful passion , as the arrowy 
 flash of the lightning be of the tempest that be gather within the 
 cloud . 

 he then thrust the paper into his bosom , and , keep his hand over 
 they , firmly clench , he leave the room , and walk slowly on towards 
 his father 's house . with every step by the way , his nature , in the war 
 of its element , seem to change and harden into form of granite . 
 love , humanity , trust , vanish away . hate , revenge , misanthropy , 
 suspicion , and scorn of all that could wear the eye of affection , 
 or speak with the voice of honour , come fast through the gloom of his 
 thought , settle down in the wilderness , grim and menacing as the 
 harpy of ancient song - 

  " uncaeque manus , et pallida semper Ora . " 

  " hand arm with fang , and lip forever pale . " 

 thus the gloomy man have cross the threshold of his father 's house , and 
 silently enter the apartment still set apart for he . he have arrive 
 about an hour before Leonard ; and as he stand by the hearth , with his 
 arm fold on his breast , and his eye fix lead - like on the ground , 
 his mother come in to welcome and embrace he . he check her eager 
 inquiry after Violante , he recoil from the touch of her hand . 

 " hold , madam , " say he , startle her ear with the cold austerity of his 
 tone . " I can not heed your question , - I be fill with the question I 
 must put to yourself . you oppose my boyish love for Leonora Avenel . I 
 do not blame you , - all mother of equal rank would have do the same . 
 yet , have you not frustrate all frank intercourse with she , I might have 
 take refusal from her own lip , - survive that grief , and now be a 
 happy man . year since then have roll away , - roll over her quiet 
 slumber , and my restless wake life . all this time be you aware that 
 Audley Egerton have be the lover of Leonora Avenel ? " 

 " Harley , Harley ! do not speak to I in that cruel voice , do not look at 
 I with those hard eye ! " 

 " you know it , then , - you , my mother ! " continue Harley , unmove by her 
 rebuke ; " and why do you never say , ' Son , you be waste the bloom 
 and us of your life in sorrowful fidelity to a lie ! you be lavish 
 trust and friendship on a perfidious hypocrite . ' " 

 " how could I speak to you thus ; how could I dare to do so , see you 
 still so cherish the memory of that unhappy girl , still believe that 
 she have return your affection ? have I say to you what I know   but not 
 till after her death , as to her relation with Audley Egerton - " 

 " well ? you falter ; go on ; have you do so ? " 

 " would you have feel no desire for revenge ? might there not have be 
 strife between you , danger , bloodshe ? Harley , Harley ! be not such 
 silence pardonable in a mother ? and why deprive you too of the only 
 friend you seem to prize ; who alone have some influence over you ; who 
 concur with I in the prayer and hope , that some day you would find 
 a live partner worthy to replace this lose delusion , arouse your 
 faculty , - be the ornament your youth promise to your country ? for you 
 wrong Audley , - indeed you do ! " 

 " wrong he ! ah , let I not do that . proceed . " 

 " I do not excuse he his rivalship , nor his first concealment of it . but 
 believe I , since then , his genuine remorse , his anxious tenderness for 
 your welfare , his dread of lose your friendship - " 

 " stop ! it be doubtless Audley Egerton who induce you yourself to 
 conceal what you call his ' relation ' with she whom I can now so calmly 
 name , - Leonora Avenel ? " 

 " it be so , in truth ; and from motif that - " 

 " enough ! let I hear no more . " 

 " but you will not think too sternly of what be past ? you be about to 
 form new tie . you can not be wild and wicked enough to meditate what 
 your brow seem to threaten . you can not dream of revenge , - risk Audley 's 
 life or your own ? " 

 " tut , tut , tut ! what cause here for duel ? single combat be out of 
 date ; civilized man do not slay each other with sword and pistol . tut ! 
 revenge ! do it look like revenge , that one object which bring I 
 hither be to request my father 's permission to charge myself with the 
 care of Audley Egerton 's election ? what he value most in the world be 
 his political position ; and here his political existence be at stake . 
 you know that I have have through life the character of a weak , easy , 
 somewhat over - generous man . such man be not revengeful . hold ! you lay 
 your hand on my arm , - I know the magic of that light touch , Mother ; 
 but its power over I be go . Countess of Lansmere , hear I ! ever from 
 infancy   save in that frantic passion for which I now despise myself , I 
 have obey you , I trust , as a duteous son . now , our relative position 
 be somewhat altered . I have the right to exact - I will not say to 
 command - the right which wrong and injury bestow upon all man . Madam , 
 the injured man have prerogative that rival those of king . I now 
 call upon you to question I no more ; not again to breathe the name of 
 Leonora Avenel , unless I invite the subject ; and not to inform Audley 
 Egerton by a hint , by a breath , that I have discover - what shall I 
 call it ? - his ' pardonable deceit . ' promise I this , by your affection 
 as mother , and on your faith as gentlewoman ; or I declare solemnly , that 
 never in life will you look upon my face again . " 

 Haughty and imperious though the countess be , her spirit quail before 
 Harley 's brow and voice . 

 " be this my son , - this my gentle Harley ? " she say falteringly . " oh , put 
 your arm round my neck ; let I feel that I have not lose my child ! " 

 Harley look soften , but he do not obey the pathetic prayer ; 
 nevertheless , he hold out his hand , and turn away his face , say , in 
 a milder voice , " have I your promise ? " 

 " you have , you have ; but on condition that there pass no word between 
 you and Audley that can end but in the strife which - " 

 " strife ! " interrupt Harley . " I repeat that the idea of challenge and 
 duel between I and my friend from our school day , and on a quarrel 
 that we could explain to no second , would be a burlesque upon all that 
 be grave in the reality of life and feeling . I accept your promise and 
 seal it thus - " 

 he press his lip to his mother 's forehead , and passively receive she 
 embrace . 

 " hush , " he say , withdraw from her arm , " I hear my father 's voice . " 

 Lord Lansmere throw open the door widely , and with a certain 
 consciousness that a door by which an Earl of Lansmere enter ought to 
 be throw open widely . it could not have be open with more majesty 
 if a huissier or officer of the Household have stand on either side . the 
 countess pass by her lord with a light step , and escape . 

 " I be occupy with my architect in design for the new infirmary , of 
 which I shall make a present to our county . I have only just hear that 
 you be here , Harley . what be all this about our fair italian guest ? 
 be she not come back to we ? your mother refer I to you for 
 explanation . " 

 " you shall have they later , my dear father ; at present I can think only 
 of public affair . " 

 " public affair ! they be indeed alarming . I be rejoice to hear you 
 express yourself so worthily . an awful crisis , Harley ! and , gracious 
 Heaven ! I have hear that a low man , who be bear in Lansmere , but make 
 a fortune in America , be about to contest the borough . they tell I he 
 be one of the Avenels , - a bear Blue ; be it possible ? " 

 " I have come here on that business . as a peer you can not , of course , 
 interfere ; but I propose , with your leave , to go down myself to 
 Lansmere , and undertake the superintendence of , the election . it would 
 be well , perhaps , if you be not present ; it would give we more 
 liberty of action . " 

 " my dear Harley , shake hand ; anything you please . you know how I have 
 wish to see you come forward , and take that part in life which become 
 your birth . " 

 " ah , you think I have sadly waste my existence hitherto . " 

 " to be frank with you , yes , Harley , " say the earl , with a pride that 
 be noble in its nature , and not without dignity in its expression . " the 
 more we take from our country , the more we owe to she . from the moment 
 you come into the world as the inheritor of land and honour , you be 
 charge with a trust for the benefit of other , that it degrade one of 
 our order of gentleman not to discharge . " 

 Harley listen with a sombre brow , and make no direct reply . 

 " indeed , " resume the earl , " I would rather you be about to canvass 
 for yourself than for your friend Egerton . but I grant he be an example 
 that it be never too late to follow . why , who that have see you both 
 as youth , notwithstanding Audley have the advantage of be some 
 year your senior - who could have think that he be the one to become 
 distinguished and eminent , and you to degenerate into the luxurious 
 idler , averse to all trouble and careless of all fame ? you , with such 
 advantage , not only of high fortune , but , as every one say , of 
 superior talent ; you , who have then so much ambition , so keen a desire 
 for glory , sleep with Plutarch 's life under your pillow , and only , 
 my wild son , only too much energy . but you be a young man still ; it be 
 not too late to redeem the year you have throw away . " 

 " the year be nothing , - mere date in an almanac ; but the feeling , 
 what can give I back those ? - the hope , the enthusiasm , the - no matter ! 
 feeling do not , help man to rise in the world . Egerton 's feeling be 
 not too lively . what I might have be , leave it to I to remember ; let 
 we talk of the example you set before I , - of Audley Egerton . " 

 " we must get he in , " say the earl , sink his voice into a whisper . 
 " it be of more importance to he than I even think for . but you know 
 his secret . why do you not confide to I frankly the state of his 
 affair ? " 

 " his affair ? do you mean that they be seriously embarrassed ? this 
 interest I much . pray speak ; what do you know ? " 

 " he have discharge the great part of his establishment . that in itself 
 be natural on quit office ; but still it set people talk ; and it 
 have get wind that his estate be not only mortgage for more than they 
 be worth , but that he have be live upon the discount of bill ; in 
 short , he have be too intimate with a man whom we all know by sight , - a 
 man who drive the fine horse in London , and they tell I   but that 
 I can not believe   life in the familiar society of the young puppy 
 he snare to perdition . what be the man 's name ? Levy , be it not ? - yes , 
 Levy . " 

 " I have see Levy with he , " say Harley ; and a sinister joy light up 
 his falcon eye . " Levy - Levy - it be well . " 

 " I hear but the gossip of the club , " resume the earl ; " but they do say 
 that Levy make little disguise of his power over our very distinguished 
 friend , and rather parade it as a merit with our party   and , indeed , 
 with all man - for Egerton have personal friend in every party   that he 
 keep sundry bill lock up in his desk until Egerton be once more safe 
 in parliament . nevertheless if , after all , our friend be to lose his 
 election , and Levy be then to seize on his effect , and proclaim his 
 ruin , it would seriously damage , perhaps altogether destroy , Audley 's 
 political career . " 

 " so I conclude , " say Harley . " a Charles Fox might be a gamester , and 
 a William Pitt be a pauper . but Audley Egerton be not of their giant 
 stature ; he stand so high because he stand upon heap of respectable 
 gold . Audley Egerton , needy and impoverished , out of parliament , and , as 
 the vulgar slang have it , out at elbow , skulk from dun , perhaps in 
 the Bench - " 

 " no , no ; our party would never allow that ; we would subscribe - " 

 " bad than all , live as the pensioner of the party he aspire to 
 lead ! you say truly , his political prospect would be blast . a man 
 whose reputation lie in his outward respectability ! why , people would 
 say that Audley Egerton have be - a solemn lie ; eh , my father ? " 

 " how can you talk with such coolness of your friend ? you need say 
 nothing to interest I in his election - if you mean that . once in 
 parliament , he must soon again be in office , - and learn to live on 
 his salary . you must get he to submit to I the schedule of his 
 liability . I have a head for business , as you know . I will arrange his 
 affair for he . and I will yet bet five to one , though I hate wager , 
 that he will be prime minister in three year . he be not brilliant , it 
 be true ; but just at this crisis we want a safe , moderate , judicious , 
 conciliatory man ; and Audley have so much tact , such experience of the 
 House , such knowledge of the world , and , " add the earl , emphatically 
 sum up his eulogy , " he be so thorough a gentleman ! " 

 " a thorough gentleman , as you say , - the soul of honour ! but , my dear 
 father , it be your hour for riding ; let I not detain you . it be 
 settle , then ; you do not come yourself to Lansmere . you put the house 
 at my disposal , and allow I to invite Egerton , of course , and what 
 other guest I may please ; in short , you leave all to I ? " 

 " certainly ; and if you can not get in your friend , who can ? that borough , 
 it be an awkward , ungrateful place , and have be the plague of my life . 
 so much as I have spend there , too , - so much as I have do to its 
 trade ! " and the earl , with an indignant sigh , leave the room . 

 Harley seat himself deliberately at his writing - table , lean his 
 face on his hand , and look abstractedly into space from under knit 
 and lower brow . 

 Harley L'Estrange be , as we have see , a man singularly tenacious 
 of affection and impression . he be a man , too , whose nature be 
 eminently bold , loyal , and candid ; even the apparent whim and levity 
 which mislead the world , both as to his disposition and his power , 
 might be half ascribe to that open temper which , in its over - contempt 
 for all that seem to savour of hypocrisy , sport with form and 
 ceremonial , and extract humour , sometimes extravagant , sometimes 
 profound , from " the solemn plausibility of the world . " the shock 
 he have now receive smote the very foundation of his mind , and , 
 overthrow all the airier structure which fancy and wit have build 
 upon its surface , leave it clear as a new world for the operation of the 
 dark and more fearful passion . when a man of a heart so loving and 
 a nature so irregularly powerful as Harley 's suddenly and abruptly 
 discover deceit where he have most confide , it be not   as with the 
 calm pupil of that harsh teacher , experience   the mere withdrawal 
 of esteem and affection from the one offender ; it be , that trust in 
 everything seem go ; it be , that the injure spirit look back to the 
 Past , and condemn all its kindly virtue as folly that conduce 
 to its own woe ; and look on to the Future as to a journey beset with 
 smile traitor , whom it must meet with an equal simulation , or 
 crush with a superior force . the guilt of treason to man like these 
 be incalculable , - it rob the world of all the benefit they would 
 otherwise have lavish as they pass ; it be responsible for all the 
 ill that spring from the corruption of nature whose very luxuriance , 
 when the atmosphere be once taint , do but diffuse disease , - even as 
 the malaria settle not over thin and barren soil , not over waste that 
 have be from all time desolate , but over the place in which southern 
 sun have once ripen delightful garden , or the site of city , in 
 which the pomp of palace have pass away . 

 it be not enough that the friend of his youth , the confidant of his 
 love , have betray his trust , - be the secret and successful rival ; not 
 enough that the woman his boyhood have madly idolize , and all the while 
 he have seek her trace with pining , remorseful heart - believe she 
 but elude his suit from the emulation of a kindre generosity , desire 
 rather to sacrifice her own love than to cost to his the sacrifice of 
 all which youth rashly scorn and the world so highly estimate , - not 
 enough that all this while her refuge have be the bosom of another . 
 this be not enough of injury . his whole life have be waste on a 
 delusion ; his faculty and aim , the wholesome ambition of lofty 
 mind , have be arrest at the very onset of fair existence ; his 
 heart corrode by a regret for which there be no cause ; his conscience 
 charge with the terror that his wild chase have urge a too tender 
 victim to the grave , over which he have mourn . what year that might 
 otherwise have be to himself so serene , to the world so useful , have 
 be consume in objectless , barren , melancholy dream ! and all this 
 while to whom have his complaint be utter ? - to the man who know 
 that his remorse be an idle spectre and his faithful sorrow a mocking 
 self - deceit . every thought that could gall man 's natural pride , every 
 remembrance that could ste into revenge a heart that have love too 
 deeply not to be accessible to hate , conspire to goad those madden 
 Furies who come into every temple which be once desecrate by the 
 presence of the evil passion . in that sullen silence of the soul , 
 vengeance take the form of justice . change though his feeling towards 
 Leonora Avenel be , the story of her grief and her wrong embitter 
 still more his wrath against his rival . the fragment of her memoir leave 
 naturally on Harley 's mind the conviction that she have be the victim 
 of an infamous fraud , the dupe of a false marriage . his idol have not 
 only be steal from the altar , - it have be sully by the sacrifice ; 
 break with remorseless hand , and thrust into dishonour clay ; 
 mutilate , defame ; its very memory a thing of contempt to he who have 
 ravish it from worship . the live Harley and the dead Nora - both 
 call aloud to their joint despoiler , " restore what thou hast take 
 from we , or pay the forfeit ! " 

 thus , then , during the interview between Helen and Leonard , thus Harley 
 L'Estrange sit alone ! and as a rude irregular lump of steel , when 
 wheel round into rapid motion , assume the form of the circle it 
 describe , so his iron purpose , hurry on by his relentless passion , 
 fill the space into which he gaze with optical delusion , scheme 
 after scheme revolve and consummate the circle that clasp a foe . 




 CHAPTER XV . 

 the entrance of a servant , announce a name which Harley , in the 
 absorption of his gloomy revery , do not hear , be follow by that of a 
 person on whom he lift his eye in the cold and haughty surprise 
 with which a man much occupy greet and rebuke the intrusion of an 
 unwelcome stranger . 

 " it be so long since your Lordship have see I , " say the visitor , with 
 mild dignity , " that I can not wonder you do not recognize my person , and 
 have forget my name . " 

 " Sir , " answer Harley , with an impatient rudeness , ill in harmony with 
 the urbanity for which he be usually distinguish , - ' sir , your person 
 be strange to I , and your name I do not hear ; but , at all event , I be 
 not now at leisure to attend to you . excuse my plainness . " 

 " yet pardon I if I still linger . my name be Dale . I be formerly curate 
 at Lansmere ; and I would speak to your Lordship in the name and the 
 memory of one once dear to you , - Leonora Avenel . " 

 HARLEY   after a short pause . - " Sir , I can not conjecture your business . 
 but be seat . I remember you now , though year have alter both , and 
 I have since hear much in your favour from Leonard Fairfield . still let 
 I pray , that you will be brief . " 

 MR . DALE . - " may I assume at once that you have divine the parentage 
 of the young man you call Fairfield ? when I listen to his grateful 
 praise of your beneficence , and mark with melancholy pleasure 
 the reverence in which he hold you , my heart swell within I . I 
 acknowledge the mysterious force of nature . " 

 HARLEY . - " Force of nature ! you talk in riddle . " 

 MR . DALE   indignantly . - " oh , my Lord , how can you so disguise your 
 well self ? surely in Leonard Fairfield you have long since recognize 
 the son of Nora Avenel ? " 

 Harley pass his hand over his face . " ah , " think he , ' she live to 
 bear a son then , - a son to Egerton ! Leonard be that son . I should have 
 know it by the likeness , by the fond foolish impulse that move I to 
 he . this be why he confide to I these fearful memoir . he seek his 
 father , - he shall find he . " 

 MR . DALE   mistake the cause of Harley 's silence . - " I honour your 
 compunction , my Lord . oh , let your heart and your conscience continue to 
 speak to your worldly pride . " 

 HARLEY . - " my compunction , heart , conscience ! Mr. Dale , you insult I ! " 

 MR . DALE   sternly . - " not so ; I be fulfil my mission , which bid I 
 rebuke the sinner . Leonora Avenel speak in I , and command the guilty 
 father to acknowledge the innocent child ! " 

 Harley half rise , and his eye literally flash fire ; but he calm his 
 anger into irony . " ha ! " say he , with a sarcastic smile , ' so you suppose 
 that I be the perfidious seducer of Nora Avenel , - that I be the callous 
 father of the child who come into the world without a name . very well , 
 sir , take these assumption for grant , what be it you demand from I 
 on behalf of this young man ? " 

 " I ask from you his happiness , " reply Mr. Dale , imploringly ; and 
 yield to the compassion with which Leonard inspire he , and 
 persuade that Lord L'Estrange feel a father 's love for the boy whom 
 he have save from the whirlpool of London , and guide to safety and 
 honourable independence , he here , with simple eloquence , narrate all 
 Leonard 's feeling for Helen , - his silent fidelity to her image , though 
 a child 's , his love when he again behold she as a woman , the modest 
 fear which the parson himself have combat , the recommendation that Mr. 
 Dale have force upon he , to confess his affection to Helen , and plead 
 his cause . " anxious , as you may believe , for his success , " continue 
 the parson , " I wait without your gate till he come from Miss Digby 's 
 presence . and oh , my Lord , have you but see his face ! - such emotion and 
 such despair ! I could not learn from he what have pass . he escape 
 from I and rush away . all that I could gather be from a few 
 break word , and from those word I form the conjecture   it may be 
 erroneous   that the obstacle to his happiness be not in Helen 's heart , 
 my Lord , but seem to I as if it be in yourself . therefore , when he 
 have vanish from my sight , I take courage , and come at , once to you . 
 if he be your son , and Helen Digby be your ward , - she herself an orphan , 
 dependent on your bounty , - why should they be sever ? equal in year , 
 unite by early circumstance , congenial , it seem , in simple habit and 
 refined taste , - what should hinder their union , unless it be the want 
 of fortune ? and all man know your wealth , none ever question your 
 generosity . my Lord , my Lord , your look freeze I . if I have offend , 
 do not visit my offence on he , - on Leonard ! " 

 " and so , " say Harley , still control his rage , ' so this boy - whom , 
 as you say , I save from that pitiless world which have engulf many 
 a nobler genius - so , in return for all , he have seek to rob I of the 
 last affection , poor and lukewarm though it be , that remain to I 
 in life ? he presume to lift his eye to my affianced bride ! he ! and for 
 aught I know , steal from I her live heart , and leave to I her icy 
 hand ! " 

 " oh , my Lord , your affianced bride ! I never dream of this . I implore 
 your pardon . the very thought be so terrible , so unnatural ! the son to 
 woo the father 's ! oh , what sin have I fall into ! the sin be mine , - I 
 urge and persuade he to it . he be ignorant as myself . forgive he , 
 forgive he ! " 

 " Mr. Dale , " say Harley , rise , and extend his hand , which the 
 poor parson feel himself - unworthy to take , - " Mr. Dale , you be a good 
 man , - if , indeed , this universe of liar contain some man who do not 
 cheat our judgment when we deem he honest . allow I only to ask why you 
 consider Leonard Fairfield to be my son . " 

 " be not your youthful admiration for poor Nora evident to I ? remember 
 I be a frequent guest at Lansmere Park ; and it be so natural that you , 
 with all your brilliant gift , should captivate her refined fancy , her 
 affectionate heart . " 

 " natural - you think so , - go on . " 

 " your mother , as become she , separate you . it be not unknown to I 
 that you still cherish a passion which your rank forbid to be lawful . 
 poor girl ! she leave the roof of her protectress , Lady Jane . nothing 
 be know of she till she come to her father 's house to give birth to a 
 child , and die . and the same day that dawn on her corpse , you hurry 
 from the place . ah , no doubt your conscience smote you ; you have never 
 return to Lansmere since . " 

 Harley 's breast heave , he wave his hand ; the parson resume , 

 " whom could I suspect but you ? I make inquiry : they confirm my 
 suspicion . " 

 " perhaps you inquire of my friend , Mr. Egerton ? he be with I 
 when - when - as you say , I hurry from the place . " 

 " I do , my Lord . " 

 " and he ? " 

 " deny your guilt ; but still , a man of honour so nice , of heart so 
 feeling , could not feign readily . his denial do not deceive I . " 

 " honest man ! " say Harley ; and his hand grip at the breast over which 
 still rustle , as if with a ghostly sigh , the record of the dead . " he 
 know she have leave a son , too ? " 

 " he do , my Lord ; of course , I tell he that . " 

 " the son whom I find starve in the street of London ! Mr. Dale , 
 as you see , your word move I very much . I can not deny that he who 
 wrong , it may be with no common treachery , that young mother - for Nora 
 Avenel be not one to be lightly seduce into error - " 

 " indeed , no ! " 

 " and who then think no more of the offspring of her anguish and 
 his own crime - I can not deny that that man deserve some 
 chastisement , - should render some atonement . be I not right here ? answer 
 with the plain speech which become your sacred calling . " 

 " I can not say otherwise , my Lord , " reply the parson , pity what 
 appear to he such remorse . " but if he repent - " 

 " enough , " interrupt Harley . " I now invite you to visit I at Lansmere ; 
 give I your address , and I will apprise you of the day on which I will 
 request your presence . Leonard Fairfield shall find a father - I be 
 about to say , worthy of himself . for the rest - stay ; reseat yourself . 
 for the rest " - and again the sinister smile break from Harley 's eye and 
 lip - " I will not yet say whether I can , or ought to , resign to a young 
 and fair suitor the lady who have accept my own hand . I have 
 no reason yet to believe that she prefer he . but what think you , 
 meanwhile , of this proposal ? Mr. Avenel wish his nephew to contest 
 the borough of Lansmere , have urge I to obtain the young man 's consent . 
 true , that he may thus endanger the seat of Mr. Audley Egerton . what 
 then ? Mr. Audley Egerton be a great man , and may find another seat ; that 
 should not stand in the way . let Leonard obey his uncle . if he win the 
 election , why , he will be a more equal match , in the world 's eye , for 
 Miss Digby , that is , should she prefer he to myself ; and if she do not , 
 still , in public life , there be a cure for all private sorrow . that be 
 a maxim of Mr. Audley Egerton 's ; and he , you know , be a man not only 
 of the nice honour , but the deep worldly wisdom . do you like my 
 proposition ? " 

 " it seem to I most considerate , most generous . " 

 " then you shall take to Leonard the line I be about to write . " 

  LORD L'ESTRANGE to LEONARD FAIRFIELD . 

  I have read the memoir you intrust to I . I will follow up all 
  the clew that it give I . meanwhile I request you to suspend all 
  question ; forbear all reference to a subject which , as you may well 
  conjecture , be fraught with painful recollection to myself . at 
  this moment , too , I be compel to concentre my thought upon 
  affair of a public nature , and yet which may sensibly affect 
  yourself . there be reason why I urge you to comply with your 
  uncle 's wish , and stand for the borough of Lansmere at the 
  approach election . if the exquisite gratitude of your nature so 
  overrate what I may have do for you that you think you owe I 
  some obligation , you will richly repay they on the day in which I 
  bear you hail as member for Lansmere . rely on that generous 
  principle of self - sacrifice , which actuate all your conduct , 
  I shall count upon your surrender your preference to private 
  life , and enter the arena of that noble ambition which have 
  confer such dignity on the name of my friend Audley Egerton . he , 
  it be true , will be your opponent ; but he be too generous not to 
  pardon my zeal for the interest of a youth whose career I be vain 
  enough to think that I have aid . and as Mr. Randal Leslie stand 
  in coalition with Egerton , and Mr. Avenel believe that two 
  candidate of the same party can not both succeed , the result may be 
  to the satisfaction of all the feeling which I entertain for Audley 
  Egerton , and for you , who , I have reason to think , will emulate his 
  title to my esteem . 

  your , L'ESTRANGE . 

 " there , Mr. Dale , " say Harley , seal his letter , and give it into 
 the parson 's hand , - " there , you shall deliver this note to your friend . 
 but no ; upon second thought , since he do not yet know of your visit 
 to I , it be good that he should be still in ignorance of it . for should 
 Miss Digby resolve to abide by her present engagement , it be surely 
 kind to save Leonard the pain of learn that you have communicate 
 to I that rivalry he himself have conceal . let all that have pass 
 between we be keep in strict confidence . " 

 " I will obey you , my Lord , " answer the parson , meekly , startle to 
 find that he who have come to arrogate authority be now submit to 
 command ; and all at fault what judgment he could venture to pass upon 
 the man whom he have regard as a criminal , who have not even deny the 
 crime impute to he , yet who now impress the accuse priest with 
 something of that respect which Mr. Dale have never before concede but 
 to Virtue . could he have then but look into the dark and stormy heart , 
 which he twice misread ! 

 " it be well , - very well , " mutter Harley , when the door have close upon 
 the parson . " the viper and the viper 's brood ! so it be this man 's son 
 that I lead from the dire Slough of Despond ; and the son unconsciously 
 imitate the father 's gratitude and honour - ha , ha ! " suddenly the bitter 
 laugh be arrest ; a flash of almost celestial joy dart through the 
 war element of storm and darkness . if Helen return Leonard 's 
 affection , Harley L'Estrange be free ! and through that flash the face 
 of Violante shine upon he as an angel 's . but the heavenly light and 
 the angel face vanish abruptly , swallow up in the black abyss of the 
 rent and tortured soul . 

 " Fool ! " say the unhappy man , aloud , in his anguish - " fool ! what then ? 
 be I free , would it be to trust my fate again to falsehood ? if , in all 
 the bloom and glory of my youth , I fail to win the heart of a village 
 girl ; if , once more deluding myself , it be in vain that I have tend , 
 rear , cherish , some germ of woman 's human affection in the orphan 
 I save from penury , - how look for love in the brilliant princess , whom 
 all the sleek Lotharios of our gaudy world will surround with their 
 homage when once she alight on their sphere ! if perfidy be my 
 fate - what hell of hell , in the thought ! - that a wife might lay she 
 head in my bosom , and - oh , horror ! horror ! no ! I would not accept she 
 hand be it offer , nor believe in her love be it pledge to I . 
 stern soul of mine , wise at last , love never more , - never more believe 
 in truth ! " 




 CHAPTER XVI . 

 as Harley quit the room , Helen 's pale sweet face look forth from a 
 door in the same corridor . she advance towards he timidly . 

 " may I speak with you ? " she say , in almost inaudible accent ; " I have 
 be listen for your footstep . " 

 Harley look at she steadfastly . then , without a word , he follow she 
 into the room she have leave , and close the door . 

 " I , too , " say he , " mean to seek an interview with yourself - but later . 
 you would speak to I , Helen , - say on . ah , child , what mean you ? why 
 this ? " - for Helen be kneel at his foot . 

 " let I kneel , " she say , resist the hand that seek to raise she . 
 " let I kneel till I have explain all , and perhaps win your pardon . 
 you say something the other evening . it have weigh on my heart and my 
 conscience ever since . you say ' that I should have no secret from you ; 
 for that , in our relation to each other , would be deceit . ' I have have 
 a secret ; but oh , believe I ! it be long ere it be clearly visible to 
 myself . you honour I with a suit so far beyond my birth , my merit . 
 you say that I might console and comfort you . at those word , what 
 answer could I give , - I , who owe you so much more than a daughter 's 
 duty ? and I think that my affection be free , - that they would 
 obey that duty . but - but - but - " continue Helen , bow her head still 
 lowlier , and in a voice far fainter - " I deceive myself . I again see he 
 who have be all in the world to I , when the world be so terrible , and 
 then - and then - I tremble . I be terrify at my own memory , my own 
 thought . still I struggle to banish the past , resolutely , firmly . oh , 
 you believe I , do you not ? and I hop to conquer . yet ever since those 
 word of your , I feel that I ought to tell you even of the struggle . 
 this be the first time we have meet since you speak they . and now - now - I 
 have see he again , and - and - though not by a word could she you 
 have deign to woo as your bride encourage hope in another ; though 
 there - there where you now stand - he bid I farewell , and we part 
 as if forever , - yet - yet o Lord L'Estrange ! in return for your 
 rank , wealth , your still nobler gift of nature , what should I 
 bring ? - something more than gratitude , esteem ; reverence , - at least an 
 undivided heart , fill with your image , and your alone . and this I 
 can not give . pardon I , - not for what I say now , but for not say it 
 before . pardon I , o my benefactor , pardon I ! " 

 " Rise , Helen , " say Harley , with relax brow , though still unwilling 
 to yield to one soft and holier emotion . " rise ! " and he lift she up , 
 and draw she towards the light . " let I look at your face . there seem 
 no guile here . these tear be surely honest . if I can not be love , 
 it be my fate , and not your crime . now , listen to I . if you grant I 
 nothing else , will you give I the obedience which the ward owe to the 
 guardian , the child to the parent ? " 

 " yes , oh , yes ! " murmur Helen . 

 " then while I release you from all troth to I , I claim the right to 
 refuse , if I so please it , my assent to the suit of - of the person you 
 prefer . I acquit you of deceit , but I reserve to myself the judgment I 
 shall pass on he . until I myself sanction that suit , will you promise 
 not to recall in any way the rejection which , if I understand you 
 rightly , you have give to it ? " 

 " I promise . " 

 " and if I say to you , ' Helen , this man be not worthy of you ' " 

 " no , no ! do not say that , - I could not believe you . " Harley frown , but 
 resume calmly , " if , then , I say , ' ask I not wherefore , but I forbid 
 you to be the wife of Leonard Fairfield , I what would be your answer ? ' " 

 " ah , my Lord , if you can but comfort he , do with I as you will ! but do 
 not command I to break his heart . " 

 " oh , silly child , " cry Harley , laugh scornfully , " heart be not 
 find in the race from which that man spring . but I take your promise , 
 with its credulous condition . Helen , I pity you . I have be as weak as 
 you , bearded man though I be . some day or other , you and I may live 
 to laugh at the folly at which you weep now . I can give you no other 
 comfort , for I know of none . " 

 he move to the door , and pause at the threshold : " I shall not see you 
 again for some day , Helen . perhaps I may request my mother to join I 
 at Lansmere ; if so , I shall pray you to accompany she . for the present , 
 let all believe that our position be unchanged . the time will soon come 
 when I may - " 

 Helen look up wistfully through her tear . 

 " I may release you from all duty to I , " continue Harley , with 
 grave and severe coldness ; " or I may claim your promise in spite of the 
 condition ; for your lover 's heart will not be break . adieu ! " 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

 as Harley enter London , he come suddenly upon Randal Leslie , who be 
 hurry from Eaton Square , have not only accompany Mr. Avenel 
 in his walk , but go home with he , and spend half the day in that 
 gentleman 's society . he be now on his way to the House of Commons , at 
 which some disclosure as to the day for the dissolution of parliament 
 be expect . 

 " Lord L'Estrange , " say Randal , " I must stop you . I have be to 
 Norwood , and see our noble friend . he have confide to I , of course , 
 all that pass . how can I express my gratitude to you ! by what rare 
 talent , with what signal courage , you have save the happiness - perhaps 
 even the honour - of my plighted bride ! " 

 " your bride ! the duke , then , still hold to the promise you be 
 fortunate enough to obtain from Dr. Riccabocca ? " 

 " he confirm that promise more solemnly than ever . you may well be 
 surprised at his magnanimity . " 

 " no ; he be a philosopher , - nothing in he can surprise I . but he seem 
 to think , when I see he , that there be circumstance you might find 
 it hard to explain . " 

 " hard ! nothing so easy . allow I to tender to you the same explanation 
 which satisfy one whom philosophy itself have make as open to truth as 
 he be clear - sighted to imposture . " 

 " another time , Mr. Leslie . if your bride 's father be satisfied , what 
 right have I to doubt ? by the way , you stand for Lansmere . do I the 
 favour to fix your quarter at the Park during the election . you will , 
 of course , accompany Mr. Egerton . " 

 " you be most kind , " answer randal , greatly surprised . 

 " you accept ? that be well . we shall then have ample opportunity for 
 those explanation which you honour I by offer ; and , to make your 
 visit still more agreeable , I may perhaps induce our friend at Norwood 
 to meet you . good - day . " Harley walk on , leave randal motionless in 
 amaze , but torment with suspicion . what could such courtesy in Lord 
 L'Estrange portend ? surely no good . 

 " I be about to hold the balance of justice , " say Harley to himself . " I 
 will cast the light - weight of that knave into the scale . Violante never 
 can be mine ; but I do not save she from a Peschiera to leave 
 she to a Randal Leslie . ha , ha ! Audley Egerton have some human 
 feeling , - tenderness for that youth whom he have select from the world , 
 in which he leave Nora 's child to the jaw of Famine . through that side 
 I can reach at his heart , and prove he a fool like myself , where he 
 esteem and confide ! good . " 

 thus soliloquizing , Lord L'Estrange gain the corner of Bruton Street , 
 when he be again somewhat abruptly accost . 

 " my dear Lord L'Estrange , let I shake you by the hand ; for Heaven know 
 when I may see you again , and you have suffer I to assist in one good 
 action . " 

 " Frank Hazeldean , I be pleased indeed to meet you . why do you indulge in 
 that melancholy doubt as to the time when I may see you again ? " 

 " I have just get leave of absence . I be not well , and I be rather 
 hippe , so I shall go abroad for a few week . " 

 in spite of himself , the sombre , brood man feel interest and sympathy 
 in the dejection that be evident in Frank 's voice and countenance . 
 " another dupe to affection , " think he , as if in apology to 
 himself , - " of course , a dupe ; he be honest and artless - at present . " he 
 press kindly on the arm which he have involuntarily twin within his 
 own . " I conceive how you now grieve , my young friend , " say he ; " but you 
 will congratulate yourself hereafter on what this day seem to you an 
 affliction . " 

 " my dear Lord - " 

 " I be much old than you , but not old enough for such formal ceremony . 
 pray call I L'Estrange . " 

 " thank you ; and I should indeed like to speak to you as a friend . 
 there be a thought on my mind which haunt I . I dare say it be foolish 
 enough , but I be sure you will not laugh at I . you hear what Madame di 
 Negra say to I last night . I have be trifle with and mislead , but I 
 can not forget so soon how dear to I that woman be . I be not go to 
 bore you with such nonsense ; but from what I can understand , her 
 brother be likely to lose all his fortune ; and , even if not , he be a sad 
 scoundrel . I can not bear the thought that she should be so dependent 
 on he , that she may come to want . after all , there must be good in 
 she , - good in she to refuse my hand if she do not love I . a mercenary 
 woman so circumstanced would not have do that . " 

 " you be quite right . but do not torment yourself with such generous 
 fear . Madame di Negra shall not come to want , shall not be dependent on 
 her infamous brother . the first act of the Duke of Serrano , on regain 
 his estate , will be a suitable provision for his kinswoman . I will 
 answer for this . " 

 " you take a load off my mind . I do mean to ask you to intercede with 
 Riccabocca , - that is , the duke   it be so hard to think he can be a 
 duke !   - I , alas ! have nothing in my power to bestow upon Madame di 
 Negra . I may , indeed , sell my commission ; but then I have a debt which 
 I long to pay off , and the sale of the commission would not suffice even 
 for that ; and perhaps my father might be still more angry if I do sell 
 it . well , good - by . I shall now go away happy , - that be , comparatively . 
 one must bear thing like - a man ! " 

 " I should like , however , to see you again before you go abroad . I will 
 call on you . meanwhile , can you tell I the number of one Baron Levy ? he 
 live in this street , I know . " 

 " Levy ! oh , have no dealing with he , I advise , I entreat you ! he be the 
 most plausible , dangerous rascal ; and , for Heaven 's sake ! pray be warn 
 by I , and let nothing entangle you into - a post - OBIT ! " 

 " be re - assured , I be more accustomed to lend money than borrow it ; 
 and as to a post - obit , I have a foolish prejudice against such 
 transaction . " 

 " do not   call it foolish , L'Estrange ; I honour you for it . how I wish I 
 have know you early - so few man of the world be like you . even randal 
 Leslie , who be so faultless in most thing , and never get into a scrape 
 himself , call my own scruple foolish . however - " 

 " stay - randal Leslie ! what ! he advise you to borrow on a post - obit , and 
 probably share the loan with you ? " 

 " oh , no ; not a shilling . " 

 " tell I all about it , Frank . perhaps , as I see that Levy be mix up in 
 the affair , your information may be useful to myself , and put I on my 
 guard in deal with that popular gentleman . " 

 Frank , who somehow or other feel himself quite at home with Harley , 
 and who , with all his respect for Randal Leslie 's talent , have a vague 
 notion that Lord L'Estrange be quite as clever , and , from his year 
 and experience , likely to be a safe and more judicious counsellor , be 
 noway loath to impart the confidence thus press for . 

 he tell Harley of his debt , his first dealing with Levy , the unhappy 
 post - obit into which he have be hurry by the distress of Madame di 
 Negra ; his father 's anger , his mother 's letter , his own feeling of 
 mingle shame and pride , which make he fear that repentance would but 
 seem self - interest , his desire to sell his commission , and let its sale 
 redeem in part the post - obit ; in short , he make what be call a clean 
 breast of it . randal Leslie be necessarily mix up with this recital ; 
 and the subtle cross - questioning of Harley extract far more as to 
 that young diplomatist 's agency in all these melancholy concern than 
 the ingenuous narrator himself be aware of . 

 " so then , " say Harley , " Mr. Leslie assure you of Madame di Negra 's 
 affection , when you yourself doubt of it ? " 

 " yes ; she take he in , even more than she do I . " 

 " simple Mr. Leslie ! and the same kind friend ? - who be relate to you , 
 do you say ? " 

 " his grandmother be a Hazeldean . " 

 " Humph . the same kind relation lead you to believe that you could pay 
 off this bond with the marchesa 's portion , and that he could obtain the 
 consent of your parent to your marriage with that lady ? " 

 " I ought to have know well ; my father 's prejudice against foreigner 
 and Papists be so strong . " 

 " and now Mr. Leslie concur with you , that it be good for you to 
 go abroad , and trust to his intercession with your father . he have 
 evidently , then , gain a great influence over Mr. Hazeldean . " 

 " my father naturally compare I with he , - he so clever , so promising , 
 so regular in his habit , and I such a reckless scapegrace . " 

 " and the bulk of your father 's property be unentaile ; Mr. Hazeldean 
 might disinherit you ? " 

 " I deserve it . I hope he will . " 

 " you have no brother nor sister , - no relation , perhaps , after your 
 parent , near to you than your excellent friend Mr. Randal Leslie ? " 

 " No ; that be the reason he be so kind to I , otherwise I be the last 
 person to suit he . you have no idea how well - inform and clever he 
 be , " add Frank , in a tone between admiration and awe . 

 " my dear Hazeldean , you will take my advice , will you not ? " 

 " certainly . you be too good . " 

 " let all your family , Mr. Leslie include , suppose you to be go 
 abroad ; but stay quietly in England , and within a day 's journey of 
 Lansmere Park . I be oblige to go thither for the approach election . 
 I may ask you to come over . I think I see a way to serve you ; and if so , 
 you will soon hear from I . now , Baron Levy 's number ? " 

 " that be the house with the cabriolet at the door . how such a fellow can 
 have such a horse ! - ' t be out of all keep ! " 

 " not at all ; horse be high - spirit , generous , unsuspicious animal . 
 they never know if it be a rogue who drive they . I have your promise , 
 then , and you will send I your address ? " 

 " I will . strange that I feel more confidence in you than I do even in 
 Randal . do take care of Levy . " 

 Lord L'Estrange and Frank here shake hand , and Frank , with an anxious 
 groan , see L'Estrange disappear within the portal of the sleek 
 destroyer . 




 CHAPTER XVII . 

 Lord L'Estrange follow the spruce servant into Baron Levy 's luxurious 
 study . 

 the baron look greatly amazed at his unexpected visitor ; but he get 
 up , hand a chair to my Lord with a low bow . " this be an honour , " say 
 he . 

 " you have a charming abode here , " say Lord L'Estrange , look round . 
 " very fine bronze , - excellent taste . your reception - room above be , 
 doubtless , a model to all decorator ? " 

 " would your Lordship condescend to see they ? " say Levy , wonder , but 
 flatter . 

 " with the great pleasure . " 

 " light ! " cry Levy , to the servant who answer his bell . " light in 
 the drawing - room , - it be grow dark . " Lord L'Estrange follow the 
 usurer upstairs ; admire everything , - picture , drapery , Sevres china , 
 to the very shape of the downy fauteuil , to the very pattern of the 
 Tournay carpet . recline then on one of the voluptuous sofas , Lord 
 L'Estrange say smilingly , " you be a wise man : there be no advantage in 
 be rich , unless one enjoy one 's rich . " 

 " my own maxim , Lord L'Estrange . " 

 " and it be something , too , to have a taste for good society . small pride 
 would you have , my dear baron , in these room , luxurious though they 
 be , if fill with guest of vulgar exterior and plebeian manner . 
 it be only in the world in which we move that we find person who 
 harmonize , as it be , with the porcelain of Sevres , and these sofa 
 that might have come from Versailles . " 

 " I own , " say Levy , " that I have what some may call a weakness in a 
 parvenu like myself . I have a love for the beau monde . it be indeed a 
 pleasure to I when I receive man like your Lordship . " 

 " but why call yourself a parvenu ? though you be content to honour 
 the name of Levy , we , in society , all know that you be the son of a 
 long - descend english peer . child of love , it be true ; but the Graces 
 smile on those over whose birth Venus preside . Pardon my old - fashion 
 mythological simile , - they go so well with these room - Louis Quinze . " 

 " since you have touch on my birth , " say Levy , his colour rather 
 heightening , not with shame , but with pride , " I do not   deny that it have 
 have some effect on my habit and taste in life . in fact - " 

 " in fact , own that you would be a miserable man , in spite of all your 
 wealth , if the young dandy , who throng to your banquet , be to cut 
 you dead in the street ; if , when your high - step horse stop at 
 your club , the porter shut the door in your face ; if , when you lounge 
 into the opera - pit , handsome dog that you be , each spendthrift rake 
 in ' Fop 's Alley , ' who now wait but the scratch of your pen to endorse 
 billet doux with the charm that can chain to himself for a month some 
 nymph of the Ballet , spin round in a whirlwind of tulle , would 
 shrink from the touch of your condescending forefinger with more dread 
 of its contact than a bailiff 's tap in the thick of Pall Mall 
 could inspire ; if , reduce to the company of city clerk , parasite 
 lead - captain - " 

 " oh , do not   go on , my dear Lord , " cry Levy , laugh affectedly . 
 " impossible though the picture be , it be really appalling . cut I off 
 from May Fair and St. James 's , and I should go into my strong closet and 
 hang myself . " 

 " and yet , my dear baron , all this may happen if I have the whim just to 
 try ; all this will happen , unless , ere I leave your house , you concede 
 the condition I come here to impose . " 

 " my Lord ! " exclaim Levy , start up , and pull down his waistcoat 
 with nervous passionate finger , " if you be not under my own roof , I 
 would - " 

 " truce with mock heroic . sit down , sir , sit down . I will briefly state 
 my threat , more briefly my condition . you will be scarcely more prolix 
 in your reply . your fortune I can not touch , your enjoyment of it I 
 can destroy . refuse my condition , make I your enemy , - and war to the 
 knife ! I will interrogate all the young dupe you have ruin . I will 
 learn the history of all the transaction by which you have gain the 
 wealth that it please you to spend in court the society and share 
 the vice of man who - go with these room , Louis Quinze . not a roguery 
 of yours shall escape I , down even to your last notable connivance with 
 an italian reprobate for the criminal abduction of an heiress . all 
 these particular I will proclaim in the club to which you have gain 
 admittance , in every club in London which you yet hope to creep into ; 
 all these I will impart to some such authority in the Press as Mr. Henry 
 Norreys ; all these I will , upon the voucher of my own name , have so 
 publish in some journal of repute , that you must either tacitly 
 submit to the revelation that blast you , or bring before a court of 
 law action that will convert accusation into evidence . it be but by 
 sufferance that you be now in society ; you be exclude when one man 
 like I come forth to denounce you . you try in vain to sneer at my 
 menace - your white lip show your terror . I have rarely in life draw 
 any advantage from my rank and position ; but I be thankful that they 
 give I the power to make my voice respect and my exposure triumphant . 
 now , Baron Levy , will you go into your strong closet and hang yourself , 
 or will you grant I my very moderate condition ? you be silent . I will 
 relieve you , and state those condition . until the general election , 
 about to take place , be conclude , you will obey I to the letter in 
 all that I enjoin , - no demur and no scruple . and the first proof 
 of obedience I demand be , your candid disclosure of all Mr. Audley 
 Egerton 's pecuniary affair . " 

 " have my client , Mr. Egerton , authorize you to request of I that 
 disclosure ? " 

 " on the contrary , all that pass between we you will conceal from your 
 client . " 

 " you would save he from ruin ? your trusty friend , Mr. Egerton ! " say 
 the baron , with a livid sneer . 

 " wrong again , Baron Levy . if I would save he from ruin , you be 
 scarcely the man I should ask to assist I . " 

 " ah , I guess . you have learn how he - " 

 " guess nothing , but obey in all thing . let we descend to your business 
 room . " 

 Levy say not a word until he have reconducte his visitor into his den 
 of destruction , all gleam with spoliaria in rosewood . then he say 
 this : " if , Lord L'Estrange , you seek but revenge on Audley Egerton , you 
 need not have utter those threat . I too - hate the man . " 

 Harley look at he wistfully , and the nobleman feel a pang that he 
 have debase himself into a single feeling which the usurer could 
 share . nevertheless , the interview appear to close with satisfactory 
 arrangement , and to produce amicable understanding . for as the baron 
 ceremoniously follow Lord L'Estrange through the hall , his noble 
 visitor say , with marked affability , 

 " then I shall see you at Lansmere with Mr. Egerton , to assist in 
 conduct his election . it be a sacrifice of your time worthy of your 
 friendship ; not a step far , I beg . Baron , I have the honour to wish 
 you good - evening . " 

 as the street door open on Lord L'Estrange he again find himself 
 face to face with Randal Leslie , whose hand be already lift to the 
 knocker . 

 " ha , Mr. Leslie ! - you too a client of Baron Levy 's , - a very useful , 
 accommodate man . " 

 randal star and stammer . " I come in haste from the House of Commons 
 on Mr. Egerton 's business . do not   you hear the newspaper vendor cry 
 out ' Great News , Dissolution of Parliament ' ? " 

 " we be prepared . Levy himself consent to give we the aid of his 
 talent . kindly , obliging , clever person ! " randal hurry into Levy 's 
 study , to which the usurer have shrink back , and be now wipe his brow 
 with his scented handkerchief , look heated and haggard , and very 
 indifferent to Randal Leslie . 

 " how be this ? " cry Randal . " I come to tell you first of Peschiera 's 
 utter failure , the ridiculous coxcomb , and I meet at your door the 
 last man I think to find there , - the man who foil we all , Lord 
 L'Estrange . what bring he to you ? ah , perhaps his interest in 
 Egerton 's election ? " 

 " yes , " say Levy , sulkily . " I know all about Peschiera . I can not talk to 
 you now ; I must make arrangement for go to Lansmere . " 

 " but do not   forget my purchase from Thornhill . I shall have the money 
 shortly from a surer source than Peschiera . " 

 " the squire ? " 

 " or a rich father - in - law . " 

 in the mean while , as Lord L'Estrange enter Bond Street , his ear be 
 stun by vociferous cry from the Stentors employ by " Standard , " 
 " Sun , " and " Globe , " 

  - " Great News ! Dissolution of Parliament - Great News ! " the gas - lamp 
 be light ; a brown fog be gather over the street , blend 
 itself with the fall shade of night . the form of man loom large 
 through the mist . the light from the shop look red and lurid . 
 lounger usually careless as to politic be talk eagerly and 
 anxiously of King , Lords , Commons , " Constitution at stake , " " Triumph 
 of liberal opinion , " - accord to their several bias . hearing , and 
 scorn - unsocial , isolate - walk on Harley L'Estrange . with his 
 direr passion have be rouse up all the native power that make 
 they doubly dangerous . he become proudly conscious of his own great 
 faculty , but exult in they only so far as they could minister to the 
 purpose which have invoke they . 

 " I have constitute myself a fate , " he say inly ; " let the god be but 
 neutral , while I weave the mesh . then , as fate itself when it have 
 fulfil its mission , let I pass away into shadow , with the still and 
 lonely stride that none may follow , - 

  " ' oh , for a lodge in some vast wilderness . ' 

 " how weary I be of this world of man ! " and again the cry " Great 
 News - National Crisis - Dissolution of Parliament - Great News ! " ring 
 through the jostle throng . three man , arm - in - arm , brush by Harley , 
 and be stop at the crossing by a file of carriage . the man in 
 the centre be Audley Egerton . his companion be an ex - minister like 
 himself , and one of those great proprietor who be proud of be above 
 office , and vain of the power to make and unmake government . 

 " you be the only man to lead we , Egerton , " say this last personage . 
 " do but secure your seat , and as soon as this popular fever have pass 
 away , you must be something more than the leader of Opposition , - you 
 must be the first man in England . " 

 " not a doubt of that , " chime in the fellow ex - minister , a worthy man , 
 perfect red - tapist , but inaudible in the reporter ' gallery . " and your 
 election be quite safe , eh ? all depend on that . you must not be throw 
 out at such a time , even for a month or two . I hear that you will have 
 a contest - some townsman of the borough , I think . but the Lansmere 
 interest must be all - powerful ; and I suppose L'Estrange will come out 
 and canvass for you . you be not the man to have lukewarm friend ! " 

 " do not   be alarmed about my election . I be as sure of that as of 
 L'Estrange 's friendship . " 

 Harley hear , with a grim smile , and pass his hand within his vest , 
 lay it upon Nora 's memoir . 

 " what could we do in parliament without you ? " say the great proprietor , 
 almost piteously . 

 " rather what could I do without parliament ? public life be the only 
 existence I own . Parliament be all in all to I . but we may cross now . " 

 Harley 's eye glitter cold as it follow the tall form of the 
 statesman , tower high above all other passer - by . " ay , " he mutter , 
 " ay , rest as sure of my friendship as I be of thine ! and be Lansmere 
 our field of Philippi ! there where thy first step be make in the only 
 life that thou own'st as existence , shall the ladder itself rot from 
 under thy footing . there , where thy soft victim slunk to death from 
 the deceit of thy love , shall deceit like thine own dig a grave for thy 
 frigid ambition . I borrow thy quiver of fraud ; its still arrow shall 
 strike thee ; and thou too shalt say , when the barb pierce home , ' this 
 come from the hand of a friend . ' ay , at Lansmere , at Lansmere , shall 
 the end crown the whole ! go , and dot on the canvas the line for a 
 lengthen perspective , where my eye note already the vanish point 
 of the picture . " 

 then through the dull fog and under the pale gas - light Harley 
 L'Estrange pursue his noiseless way , soon distinguish no more amongst 
 the various , motley , quick - succeed group , with their infinite 
 sub - division of thought , care , and passion ; while , loud over all their 
 low murmur , or silent heart , be hear the tramp of horse and din of 
 wheel , and the vociferous discordant cry that have cease to attract and 
 interest in the ear it vex , " Great News , Great News - Dissolution of 
 Parliament - Great News ! " 




 CHAPTER XIX . 

 the scene be at Lansmere Park , - a spacious pile , commence in the reign 
 of Charles II . ; enlarge and alter in the reign of Anne . Brilliant 
 interval in the history of our National Manners , when even the courtier 
 dread to be dull , and Sir Fopling raise himself on tiptoe to catch 
 the ear of a wit ; when the name of Devonshire and Dorset , Halifax and 
 Carteret , Oxford and Bolingbroke , unite themselves , brotherlike , with 
 those of Hobbes and of Dryden , of Prior and Bentley , of Arbuthnot , Gay , 
 Pope , and Swift ; and still , wherever we turn , to recognize some ideal of 
 great Lord or fine Gentleman , the Immortals of Literature stand by his 
 side . 

 the wall of the room at Lansmere be cover with the portrait of 
 those who illustrate that time which Europe call the Age of Louis XIV . 
 a L'Estrange , who have live through the reign of four english prince 
  and with no mean importance through all   have collect those likeness 
 of noble contemporary . as you pass through the chamber - open one 
 on the other in that pomp of parade introduce with Charles II . from 
 the palace of France , and retain its mode till Versailles and the 
 Trianon pass , themselves , out of date - you feel you be in excellent 
 company . what saloon of our day , demean to tail coat and white 
 waistcoat , have that charm of high breeding which speak out from 
 the canvas of Kneller and Jervis , Vivien and Rigaud ? and withal , 
 notwithstanding lace and brocade - the frippery of artificial 
 costume - still those who give interest or charm to that day look from 
 their portrait like man , - rake or debonair , if you will , never 
 mince nor feminine . can we say as much of the portrait of Lawrence ? 
 gaze there on fair Marlborough ; what delicate perfection of feature , 
 yet how easy in boldness , how serene in the conviction of power ! so 
 fair and so tranquil he might have look through the cannon reek at 
 Ramillies and Blenheim , suggest to Addison the image of an angel 
 of war . ah , there , Sir Charles Sedley , the Lovelace of wit ! note 
 that strong jaw and marked brow ; do you not recognize the courtier who 
 scorn to ask one favour of the king with whom he live as an equal , 
 and who stretch forth the right hand of man to hurl from a throne the 
 king who have make his daughter - a countess ? 

   Sedley be so tenacious of his independence that when his affair 
  be most embarrassed , he refuse all pecuniary aid from Charles II . 
  his bitter sarcasm , in vindication of the part he take in the 
  deposition of James II . , who have corrupt his daughter , and make 
  her Countess of Dorchester , be well know . " as the king have make my 
  daughter a countess , the least I can do , in common gratitude , be to 
  assist in make his Majesty 's daughter - a queen ! " 

 perhaps , from his childhood thus surround by the haunt face - that 
 speak of their age as they look from the wall - that age and those 
 portrait be not without influence on the character of Harley 
 L'Estrange . the whim and the daring , the passion for letter and 
 reverence for genius , the mixture of levity and strength , the polish 
 saunter indolence , or the elastic readiness of energy once call 
 into action , - all might have find their prototype in the life which 
 those portrait rekindle . the deep sentiment , the more earnest 
 nature , which in Harley L'Estrange be commingle with the attribute 
 common to a former age , - these , indeed , be of his own . our age so 
 little comprehend , while it colour we from its atmosphere ! so full of 
 mysterious and profound emotion , which our ancestor never know ! - will 
 those emotion be understand by our descendant ? 

 in this stately house be now assemble , as Harley 's guest , many of 
 the more important personage whom the slow length of this story have 
 make familiar to the reader . the two candidate for the borough in the 
 true blue interest , - Audley Egerton and Randal Leslie ; and Levy , - chief 
 among the baron to whom modern society grant a seignorie of pillage , 
 which , have a baron of old ever venture to arrogate , burgess and 
 citizen , socman and bocman , villein and churl , would have burn he 
 alive in his castle ; the Duke di Serrano , still fondly cling to his 
 title of Doctor and pet name of Riccabocca ; Jemima , not yet with the 
 air of a duchess , but rob in very thick silk , as the chrysalis state 
 of a duchess ; Violante , too , be there , sadly against her will , and 
 shrink as much as possible into the retirement of her own chamber . 
 the Countess of Lansmere have desert her lord , in order to receive the 
 guest of her son ; my lord himself , ever bent on be of use in some 
 part of his country , and strive hard to distract his interest from 
 his plague of a borough , have go down into Cornwall to inquire into the 
 social condition of certain troglodyte who work in some mine which 
 the earl have lately have the misfortune to wring from the Court of 
 Chancery , after a lawsuit commence by his grandfather ; and a Blue Book , 
 issue in the past session by order of parliament , have especially 
 quote the troglodyte thus devolve on the earl as biped who be 
 in considerable ignorance of the sun , and have never be know to wash 
 their foot since the day when they come into the world , - their world 
 underground , chip off from the Bottomless Pit ! 

 with the countess come Helen Digby , of course ; and Lady Lansmere , who 
 have hitherto be so civilly cold to the wife elect of her son , have , 
 ever since her interview with Harley at Knightsbridge , clung to Helen 
 with almost a caress fondness . the stern countess be tame by fear ; 
 she feel that her own influence over Harley be go ; she trust to 
 the influence of Helen - in case of what ? - ay , what ? it be because 
 the danger be not clear to she that her bold spirit tremble : 
 superstition , like suspicion , be " as bat among bird , and fly by 
 twilight . " Harley have ridicule the idea of challenge and strife between 
 Audley and himself ; but still Lady Lansmere dread the fiery emotion 
 of the last , and the high spirit and austere self - respect which be 
 proverbial to the first . involuntarily she strengthen her intimacy 
 with Helen . in case her alarm should appear justify , what mediator 
 could be so persuasive in appease the angry passion , as one whom 
 courtship and betrothal sanctify to the gentle ? 

 on arrive at Lansmere , the countess , however , feel somewhat relieved . 
 Harley have receive she , if with a manner less cordial and tender 
 than have hitherto distinguish it , still with easy kindness and calm 
 self - possession . his bearing towards Audley Egerton still more reassure 
 she : it be not mark by an exaggeration of familiarity or friendship , 
 which would at once have excite her apprehension of some sinister 
 design , - nor ; on the other hand , do it betray , by covert sarcasm , an 
 ill - suppress resentment . it be exactly what , under the circumstance , 
 would have be natural to a man who have receive an injury from an 
 intimate friend , which , in generosity or discretion , he resolve to 
 overlook , but which those aware of it could just perceive have cool or 
 alienate the former affection . indefatigably occupy himself with 
 all the detail of the election , Harley have fair pretext for absent 
 himself from Audley , who , really look very ill , and almost wear out , 
 plead indisposition as an excuse for dispense with the fatigue of 
 a personal canvass , and , pass much of his time in his own apartment , 
 leave all the preparation for contest to his more active friend . it 
 be not till he have actually arrive at Lansmere that Audley become 
 acquaint with the name of his principal opponent . Richard Avenel ! the 
 brother of Nora ! rise up from obscurity , thus to stand front to front 
 against he in a contest on which all his fate be cast . Egerton 
 quail as before an appoint avenger . he would fain have retire from 
 the field ; he speak to Harley . 

 " how can you support all the painful remembrance which the very name of 
 my antagonist must conjure up ? " 

 " do you not tell I , " answer Harley , " to strive against such 
 remembrance , - to look on they as sickly dream ? I be prepared to brave 
 they . can you be more sensitive than I ? " 

 Egerton durst not say more . he avoid all further reference to the 
 subject . the strife rag around he , and he shut himself out from 
 it , - shut himself up in solitude with his own heart . strife enough 
 there ! once , late at night , he steal forth and repair to Nora 's grave . 
 he stand there , amidst the rank grass and under the frosty starlight , 
 long , and in profound silence . his whole past life seem to rise before 
 he ; and , when he regain his lonely room , and strove to survey the 
 future , still he could behold only that past and that grave . 

 in thus decline all active care for an election , to his prospect so 
 important , Audley Egerton be consider to have excuse , not only in 
 the state of his health , but in his sense of dignity . a statesman so 
 eminent , of opinion so well know , of public service so incontestable , 
 might well be spar the personal trouble that fall upon obscurer 
 candidate . and besides , accord to current report , and the judgment 
 of the Blue Committee , the return of Mr. Egerton be secure . but 
 though Audley himself be thus indulgently treat , Harley and the Blue 
 Committee take care to inflict double work upon Randal . that active 
 young spirit find ample material for all its restless energy . randal 
 Leslie be keep on his leg from sunrise to starlight . there do not 
 exist in the Three Kingdoms a constituency more fatiguing to a candidate 
 than that borough of Lansmere . as soon as you leave the High Street , 
 wherein , accord to immemorial usage , the blue canvasser be first 
 lead , in order to put he into spirit for the toil that await he 
  delectable , propitious , constitutional High Street , in which at least 
 two - third of the elector , opulent tradesman employ at the Park , 
 always vote for " my lord 's man , " and hospitably prepare wine and cake 
 in their tidy back - parlours !   - as soon as you quit this stronghold 
 of the party , labyrinth of lane and defile stretch away into the 
 farth horizon ; level ground be find nowhere ; it be all up hill and 
 down hill , - now rough , craggy pavement that blister the foot , and at 
 the very first tread upon which all latent corn shake prophetically ; 
 now deep , muddy rut , into which you sink ankle - deep , ooze slush 
 creep into the pore , and moisten the way for catarrh , rheum , 
 cough , sore throat , bronchitis , and phthisis ; black sewer and drain 
 Acherontian , run before the threshold , and so fill the home 
 behind with effluvia , that , while one hand clasp the grimy paw of 
 the voter , the other instinctively guard from typhus and cholera your 
 abhorrent nose . not in those day have mankind ever hear of a sanitary 
 reform ! and , to judge of the slow progress which that reform seem 
 to make , sewer and drain would have be much the same if they have . 
 scot - and - lot voter be the independent elector of Lansmere , with the 
 additional franchise of Freemen . universal suffrage could scarcely more 
 efficiently swamp the franchise of man who care a straw what become of 
 Great Britain ! with all Randal Leslie 's profound diplomacy , all his 
 art in talk over , deceive , and   to borrow Dick Avenel 's vernacular 
 phrase   " humbug " educate man , his eloquence fall flat upon mind 
 invulnerable to appeal , whether to State or to Church , to Reform or 
 to Freedom . to catch a Scot - and - lot voter by such frivolous 
 argument - randal Leslie might as well have try to bring down a 
 rhinoceros by a pop - gun charge with split pea ! the young man who so 
 firmly believe that " knowledge be power " be greatly disgusted . it be 
 here the ignorance that foil he . when he get hold of a man with some 
 knowledge , Randal be pretty sure to trick he out of a vote . 

 nevertheless , Randal Leslie walk and talk on , with most creditable 
 perseverance . the Blue Committee allow that he be an excellent 
 canvasser . they conceive a liking for he , mingle with pity . for , 
 though sure of Egerton 's return , they regard Randal 's as out of the 
 question . he be merely there to keep split vote from go to the 
 opposite side ; to serve his patron , the ex - minister ; shake the paw , and 
 smell the smell which the ex - minister be too great a man to shake 
 and to smell . but , in point of fact , none of that Blue Committee know 
 anything of the prospect of the election . Harley receive all the 
 report of each canvass - day . Harley keep the canvass - book lock up from 
 all eye but his own , or it might be Baron Levy 's , as Audley Egerton 's 
 confidential , if not strictly professional adviser , Baron Levy , the 
 millionaire , have long since retire from all acknowledge profession . 
 randal , however - close , observant , shrewd - perceive that he himself 
 be much strong than the Blue Committee believe ; and , to his infinite 
 surprise , he owe that strength to Lord L'Estrange 's exertion on 
 his behalf . for though Harley , after the first day , on which he 
 ostentatiously show himself in the High Street , do not openly canvass 
 with Randal , yet when the report be bring in to he , and he see the 
 name of the voter who give one vote to Audley , and withhold the other 
 from Randal , he would say to randal , dead beat as that young gentleman 
 be , " slip out with I , the moment dinner be over , and before you go the 
 round of the public - house ; there be some voter we must get for you 
 to - night . " and sure enough a few kindly word from the popular heir 
 of the Lansmere barony usually gain over the elector , from whom , 
 though Randal have prove that all England depend on their vote in his 
 favour , Randal would never have extract more than a " Wu'll , I shall 
 waute gin the Dauy coome ! " nor be this all that Harley do for the 
 young candidate . if it be quite clear that only one vote could be win 
 for the Blues , and the other be pledge to the Yellows , Harley would 
 say , " then put it down to Mr. Leslie , " - a request the more readily 
 concede , since Audley Egerton be consider so safe by the Blues , and 
 alone worth a fear by the Yellows . 

 thus Randal , who keep a snug little canvass - book of his own , become 
 more and more convinced that he have a well chance than Egerton , even 
 without the furtive aid he expect from Avenel ; and he could only 
 account for Harley 's peculiar exertion in his favour by suppose that 
 Harley , unpractise in election , and deceive by the Blue Committee , 
 believe Egerton to be perfectly safe , and seek , for the honour of the 
 family interest , to secure both the seat . 

 Randal 's public care thus deprive he of all opportunity of press 
 his courtship on Violante ; and , indeed , if ever he do find a moment 
 in which he could steal to her reluctant side , Harley be sure to seize 
 that very moment to send he off to canvass an hesitate freeman , or 
 harangue in some public - house . 

 Leslie be too acute not to detect some motive hostile to his wooing , 
 however plausibly veil in the guise of zeal for his election , in this 
 officiousness of Harley 's . but Lord L'Estrange 's manner to Violante be 
 so little like that of a jealous lover , and he be so well aware of her 
 engagement to Randal , that the latter abandon the suspicion he have 
 before conceive , that Harley be his rival . and he be soon lead to 
 believe that Lord L'Estrange have another , more disinterested , and 
 less formidable motive for thus stint his opportunity to woo the 
 heiress . 

 " Mr. Leslie , " say Lord L'Estrange , one day , " the duke have confide to 
 I his regret at his daughter 's reluctance to ratify his own promise ; 
 and know the warm interest I take in her welfare , for his sake and 
 her own ; believe , also , that some service to herself , as well as 
 to the father she so love , give I a certain influence over her 
 inexperienced judgment , he have even request I to speak a word to she 
 in your behalf ! " 

 " ah , if you would ! " say Randal , surprised . 

 " you must give I the power to do so . you be oblige enough to 
 volunteer to I the same explanation which you give to the duke , his 
 satisfaction with which induce he to renew or confirm the promise of 
 his daughter 's hand . should those explanation content I , as they do 
 he , I hold the duke bind to fulfil his engagement , and I be convince 
 that his daughter would , in that case , not be inflexible to your suit . 
 but , till such explanation be give , my friendship for the father , 
 and my interest in the child , do not allow I to assist a cause which , 
 however , at present suffer little by delay . " 

 " pray , listen at once to those explanation . " 

 " Nay , Mr. Leslie , I can now only think of the election . as soon as that 
 be over , rely on it you shall have the ample opportunity to dispel any 
 doubt which your intimacy with Count di Peschiera and Madame di Negra 
 may have suggest . - a propos of the election , here be a list of voter 
 you must see at once in Fish Lane . do not   lose a moment . " 

 in the mean while , Richard Avenel and Leonard have take up their 
 quarter in the hotel appropriate to the candidate for the yellow ; 
 and the canvass on that side be prosecute with all the vigour which 
 might be expect from operation conduct by Richard Avenel , and 
 back by the popular feeling . 

 the rival party meet from time to time in the street and lane , in 
 all the pomp of war , - banner streaming , fife resound   for band and 
 colour be essential proof of public spirit , and indispensable 
 item in a candidate 's bill , in those good old day . when they thus 
 encounter , very distant bow be exchange between the respective 
 chief ; but randal , contrive ever to pass close to Avenel , have ever 
 the satisfaction of perceive that gentleman 's countenance contract 
 into a knowing wink , as much as to say , " all right , in spite of this 
 tarnation humbug . " 

 but now that both party be fairly in the field , to the private art 
 of canvassing be add the public art of oratory . the candidate have 
 to speak , at the close of each day 's canvass , out from wooden box , 
 suspend from the window of their respective hotel , and which look 
 like den for the exhibition of wild beast . they have to speak at 
 meeting of Committees , meeting of elector , go the nightly round of 
 enthusiastic public - house , and appeal to the sense of an enlighten 
 people through wreath of smoke and odour of beer . 

 the alleged indisposition of Audley Egerton have spar he the 
 excitement of oratory , as well as the fatigue of canvassing . the 
 practise debater have limit the display of his talent to a concise , 
 but clear and masterly exposition of his own view on the lead public 
 question of the day , and the state of party , which , on the day after 
 his arrival at Lansmere , be deliver at a meeting of his general 
 Committee , in the great room of their hotel , and which be then print 
 and circulate amongst the voter . 

 randal , though he express himself with more fluency and 
 self - possession than be usually find in the first attempt of a public 
 speaker , be not effective in address an unlettered crowd ; for a 
 crowd of this kind be all heart - and we know that Randal Leslie 's heart 
 be as small as heart could be . if he attempt to speak at his 
 own intellectual level , he be so subtle and refining as to be 
 incomprehensible ; if he fall into the fatal error - not uncommon to 
 inexperienced orator - of try to lower himself to the intellectual 
 level of his audience , he be only elaborately stupid . no man can speak 
 too well for a crowd , - as no man can write too well for the stage ; but 
 in neither case should he be rhetorical , or case in period the dry 
 bone of reasoning . it be to the emotion or to the humour that the 
 speaker of a crowd must address himself ; his eye must brighten with 
 generous sentiment , or his lip must expand in the play of animate fancy 
 or genial wit . Randal 's voice , too , though pliant and persuasive in 
 private conversation , be thin and poor when strain to catch the ear 
 of a numerous assembly . the falsehood of his nature seem to come out 
 when he raise the tone which have be drill into deceit . man like 
 Randal Leslie may become sharp debater , admirable special pleader ; 
 they can no more become orator than they can become poet . educate 
 audience be essential to they , and the small the audience   that be , 
 the more the brain supersede the action of the heart   the well they 
 can speak . 

 Dick Avenel be generally very short and very pithy in his address . 
 he have two or three favourite topic , which always tell . he be a 
 fellow - townsman , - a man who have make his own way in life ; he want to 
 free his native place from aristocratic usurpation ; it be the battle 
 of the elector , not his private cause , etc . he say little against 
 Randal , - " Pity a clever young man should pin his future to two yard of 
 wear - out red tape ; " " he have well lay hold of the strong rope , which 
 the People , in compassion to his youth , be willing yet to throw out to 
 save he from sink , " etc . but as for Audley Egerton , " the gentleman 
 who would not show , who be afraid to meet the elector , who could only 
 find his voice in a hole - and - corner meeting , accustom all his venal 
 life to dark and nefarious job " - Dick , upon that subject , deliver 
 philippic truly Demosthenian . Leonard , on the contrary , never attack 
 Harley 's friend , Mr. Egerton ; but he be merciless against the youth who 
 have filch reputation from John Burley , and whom he know that Harley 
 despise as heartily as himself . and Randal do not dare to retaliate 
  though boil over with indignant rage , for fear of offend 
 Leonard 's uncle . Leonard be unquestionably the popular speaker of the 
 three . though his temperament be a writer 's , not an orator 's ; though 
 he abhor what he consider the theatrical exhibition of self , which 
 make what be call " delivery " more effective than idea ; though he have 
 little interest at any time in party politic ; though at this time 
 his heart be far away from the Blues and yellow of Lansmere , sad and 
 forlorn , - yet , force into action , the eloquence that be natural to his 
 conversation pour itself forth . he have warm blood in his vein ; 
 and his dislike to randal give poignancy to his wit , and barb his 
 argument with impassioned invective . in fact , Leonard could conceive no 
 other motive for Lord L'Estrange 's request to take part in the election 
 than that nobleman 's desire to defeat the man whom they both regard 
 as an impostor ; and this notion be confirm by some inadvertent 
 expression which Avenel let fall , and which make Leonard suspect that , 
 if he be not in the field , Avenel would have exert all his interest 
 to return Randal instead of Egerton . with Dick 's dislike to that 
 statesman Leonard find it impossible to reason ; nor , on the other hand , 
 could all Dick 's scolding or coaxing induce Leonard to divert his 
 siege on Randal to an assault upon the man who , Harley have often say , 
 be dear to he as a brother . 

 in the mean while , Dick keep the canvass - book of the yellow as closely 
 as Harley keep that of the Blues ; and in despite of many pouting fit 
 and gust of displeasure , take precisely the same pain for Leonard as 
 Harley take for Randal . there remain , however , apparently unshaken by 
 the effort on either side , a compact body of about a hundred and fifty 
 voter , chiefly freeman . would they vote Yellow ? would they vote Blue ? 
 no one could venture to decide ; but they declare that they would all 
 vote the same way . Dick keep his secret " caucus , " as he call they , 
 constantly nibble at this phalanx . a hundred and fifty voter ! - they 
 have the election in their hand ! never be hand so cordially shake , 
 so caressingly clung to , so fondly linger upon ! but the vote 
 still stick as firm to the hand as if a part of the skin , or of the 
 dirt , - which be much the same thing ! 




 CHAPTER XX . 

 whenever Audley join the other guest of an evening - while Harley be 
 perhaps closet with Levy and committeeman , and Randal be go the 
 round of the public - house - the one with whom he chiefly converse be 
 Violante . he have be strike at first , despite his gloom , less perhaps 
 by her extraordinary beauty than by something in the expression of 
 her countenance which , despite difference in feature and complexion , 
 remind he of Nora ; and when , by his praise of Harley , he draw she 
 attention , and win into her liking , he discover , perhaps , that the 
 likeness which have thus impress he come from some similarity 
 in character between the living and the lose one , - the same charming 
 combination of lofty thought and childlike innocence , the same 
 enthusiasm , the same rich exuberance of imagination and feeling . two 
 soul that resemble each other will give their likeness to the look 
 from which they beam . on the other hand , the person with whom Harley 
 most familiarly associate , in his rare interval of leisure , be Helen 
 Digby . one day , Audley Egerton , stand mournfully by the window of 
 the sit - room appropriate to his private use , see the two , whom he 
 believe still betroth , take their way across the park , side by side . 
 " pray Heaven , that she may atone to he for all ! " murmur Audley . " but 
 ah , that it have be Violante ! then I might have feel assure that the 
 Future would efface the Past , - and find the courage to tell he all . 
 and when last night I speak of what Harley ought to be to England , how 
 like be Violante 's eye and smile to Nora 's , when Nora listen in 
 delighted sympathy to the hope of my own young ambition . " with a 
 sigh he turn away , and resolutely sit down to read and reply to the 
 voluminous correspondence which cover the table of the busy public 
 man . for Audley 's return to parliament be consider by his political 
 party as secure , to he be transmit all the hope and fear of the 
 large and influential section of it whose member look up to he as 
 their future chief , and who in that general election   unprecedented for 
 the number of eminent man it be fat to expel from parliament , and the 
 number of new politician it be fat to send into it   draw their only 
 hope of regain their lose power from Audley 's sanguine confidence in 
 the reaction of that Public Opinion which he have hitherto so profoundly 
 comprehend ; and it be too clearly see , that the seasonable adoption 
 of his counsel would have save the existence and popularity of the 
 late Administration , whose most distinguished member could now scarcely 
 show themselves on the husting . 

 meanwhile Lord L'Estrange lead his young companion towards a green 
 hill in the centre of the park , on which stand a circular temple ; that 
 command a view of the country round for mile . they have walk in 
 silence till they gain the summit of the sloped and gradual ascent ; 
 and then , as they stand still , side by side , Harley thus speak , 

 " Helen , you know that Leonard be in the town , though I can not receive 
 he at the Park , since he be stand in opposition to my guest , 
 Egerton and Leslie . " 

 HELEN . - " but that seem to I so strange . how - how could Leonard do 
 anything that seem hostile to you ? " 

 HARLEY . - " would his hostility to I lower he in your opinion ? if he 
 know that I be his rival , do not rivalry include hate ? " 

 HELEN . - " oh , Lord L'Estrange , how can you speak thus ; how so wrong 
 yourself ? hate - hate to you ! and from Leonard Fairfield ! " 

 HARLEY . - " you evade my question . would his hate or hostility to I 
 affect your sentiment towards he ? " 

 HELEN   look down . - " I could not force myself to believe in it . " 

 HARLEY . - " why ? " 

 HELEN . - " because it would be so unworthy of he . " 

 HARLEY . - " poor child ! you have the delusion of your year . you deck a 
 cloud in the hue of the rainbow , and will not believe that its glory be 
 borrow from the sun of your own fancy . but here , at least , you be not 
 deceive . Leonard obey but my wish , and , I believe , against his own 
 will . he have none of man 's noble attribute , Ambition . " 

 HELEN . - " no ambition ! " 

 HARLEY . - " it be vanity that stir the poet to toil , - if toil the wayward 
 chase of his own chimera can be call . ambition be a more masculine 
 passion . " 

 Helen shake her head gently , but make no answer . 

 HARLEY . - " if I utter a word that profane one of your delusion , you 
 shake your head and be incredulous . pause : listen one moment to my 
 counsel , - perhaps the last I may ever obtrude upon you . lift your eye ; 
 look around . far as your eye can reach , nay , far beyond the line which 
 the horizon form in the landscape , stretch the land of my inheritance . 
 yonder you see the home in which my forefather for many generation 
 live with honour , and die lament . all these , in the course of 
 nature , might one day have be your own , have you not reject my 
 proposal . I offer you , it be true , not what be commonly call love ; 
 I offer you sincere esteem , and affection the more durable for their 
 calm . you have not be rear by the world in the low idolatry of rank 
 and wealth ; but even romance can not despise the power of serve other , 
 which rank and wealth bestow . for myself , hitherto indolence , and lately 
 disdain , rob fortune of these nobler attribute . but she who will share 
 my fortune may dispense it so as to atone for my sin of omission . 
 on the other side , grant that there be no bar to your preference for 
 Leonard Fairfield , what do your choice present to you ? those of his 
 kindre with whom you will associate be unrefined and mean . his sole 
 income be derive from precarious labour ; the most vulgar of all 
 anxiety - the fear of bread itself for the morrow - must mingle with 
 all your romance , and soon steal from love all its poetry . you think his 
 affection will console you for every sacrifice . folly ! the love of poet 
 be for a mist , a moonbeam , a denizen of air , a phantom that they call 
 an Ideal . they suppose for a moment that they have find that Ideal in 
 Chloe or Phyllis , Helen or a milkmaid . Bah ! the first time you come to 
 the poet with the baker 's bill , where fly the Ideal ? I know one more 
 brilliant than Leonard , more exquisitely gift by nature ; that one 
 be a woman ; she see a man hard and cold as that stone at your foot , - a 
 false , hollow , sordid worldling ; she make he her idol , beheld in he 
 all that history would not recognize in a Caesar , that mythology would 
 scarcely grant to an Apollo : to he she be the plaything of an hour ; 
 she die , and before the year be out he have marry for money ! I know 
 another instance , - I speak of myself . I love before I be your age . have 
 an angel warn I then , I would have be incredulous as you . how 
 that end , no matter : but have it not be for that dream of 
 maudlin delirium , I have live and act as other of my kind and my 
 sphere , - marry from reason and judgment , be now a useful and happy 
 man . pause , then . will you still reject I for Leonard Fairfield ? for 
 the last time you have the option , - I and all the substance of wake 
 life , Leonard Fairfield and the shadow of a fleeting dream . speak ! you 
 hesitate . Nay , take time to decide . " 

 HELEN . - " ah , Lord L'Estrange , you who have feel what it be to love , 
 how can you doubt my answer ; how think that I could be so base , so 
 ungrateful as take from yourself what you call the substance of wake 
 life , while my heart be far away , faithful to what you call a dream ? " 

 HARLEY . - " but can you not dispel the dream ? " 

 HELEN   her whole face one flush . - " it be wrong to call it dream ! it be 
 the reality of life to I . all thing else be as dream . " 

 HARLEY   take her hand and kiss it with respect . - " Helen , you have 
 a noble heart , and I have tempt you in vain . I regret your choice , 
 though I will no more oppose it . I regret it , though I shall never 
 witness your disappointment . as the wife of that man , I shall see and 
 know you no more . " 

 HELEN . - " oh , no ! do not say that . why ? wherefore ? " 

 HARLEY   his brow meeting . - " he be the child of fraud and of shame . 
 his father be my foe , and my hate descend to the son . he , too , the son , 
 filch from I - but complaint be idle . when the next few day be 
 over , think of I but as one who abandon all right over your action , 
 and be a stranger to your future fate . Pooh ! dry your tear : so long as 
 you love Leonard or esteem I , rejoice that our path do not cross . " 

 he walk on impatiently ; but Helen , alarmed and wonder , follow 
 close , take his arm timidly , and seek to soothe he . she feel that he 
 wrong Leonard , - that he know not how Leonard have yield all hope when 
 he learn to whom she be affiance . for Leonard 's sake she conquer 
 her bashfulness , and seek to explain . but at her first hesitating , 
 falter word , Harley , who with great effort suppress the emotion 
 which swell within he , abruptly leave her side , and plunge into the 
 recess of thick , farspreade grove , that soon wrap he from her 
 eye . 

 while this conversation occur between Lord L'Estrange and his ward , 
 the soi - disant Riccabocca and Violante be walk slowly through the 
 garden . the philosopher , unchanged by his brightening prospect , - so 
 far as the outer man be concern , - still characterize by the red 
 umbrella and the accustomed pipe , - take the way mechanically towards 
 the sunniest quarter of the ground , now and then glance tenderly at 
 Violante 's downcast , melancholy face , but not speak ; only , at each 
 glance , there come a brisker cloud from the pipe , as if obedient to a 
 full heave of the heart . 

 at length , in a spot which lie open towards the south , and seem to 
 collect all the gentle beam of the November sun , screen from the 
 pierce east by dense evergreen , and flank from the bleak north by 
 lofty wall , Riccabocca pause and seat himself . flower still bloom 
 on the sward in front , over which still flutter the wing of those 
 later and more brilliant butterfly that , unseen in the genial day 
 of our english summer , come with autumnal sky , and sport round the 
 mournful step of the come winter , - type of those thought which 
 visit and delight the contemplation of age , while the current yet 
 glide free from the iron ice , and the leaf yet linger on the bough ; 
 thought that associate the memory of the depart summer with 
 message from sun that shall succeed the winter , and expand colour the 
 most steeped in light and glory , just as the sky through which they 
 gleam be darken , and the flower on which they hover fade from the 
 surface of the earth , drop still seed , that sink deep out of sight 
 below . 

 " Daughter , " say Riccabocca , draw Violante to his side with caressing 
 arm , - " Daughter ! Mark how they who turn towards the south can still find 
 the sunny side of the land scape ! in all the season of life , how much 
 of chill or of warmth depend on our choice of the aspect ! sit down : let 
 we reason . " 

 Violante sit down passively , clasp her father 's hand in both her 
 own . reason ! harsh word to the ear of feeling ! " you shrink , " resume 
 Riccabocca , " from even the courtship , even the presence of the suitor in 
 whom my honour bind I to recognize your future bridegroom . " 

 Violante draw away her hand , and place they before her eye 
 shudderingly . 

 " but " continue Riccabocca , rather peevishly , " this be not listen to 
 reason . I may object to Mr. Leslie , because he have not an adequate rank 
 or fortune to pretend to a daughter of my house ; that would be what 
 every one would allow to be reasonable in a father ; except , indeed , " 
 add the poor sage , try hard to be sprightly , and catch hold of 
 a proverb to help he - " except , indeed , those wise enough to recollect 
 that admonitory say , ' Casa il figlio quando vuoi , e la figlia quando 
 puoi , ' -   marry your son when you will , your daughter when you can . 
 seriously , if I overlook those objection to Mr. Leslie , it be not 
 natural for a young girl to enforce they . what be reason in you be quite 
 another thing from reason in I . Mr. Leslie be young , not ill - look , 
 have the air of a gentleman , be passionately enamoured of you , and 
 have prove his affection by risk his life against that villanous 
 Peschiera , - that is , he would have risk it have Peschiera not be 
 ship out of the way . if , then , you will listen to reason , pray what 
 can reason say against Mr. Leslie ? " 

 " Father , I detest he ! " 

 " Cospetto ! " persist Riccabocca , testily , " you have no reason to detest 
 he . if you have any reason , child , I be sure that I should be the last 
 person to dispute it . how can you know your own mind in such a matter ? 
 it be not as if you have see anyone else you could prefer . not another 
 man of your own year do you even know , - except , indeed , Leonard 
 Fairfield , whom , though I grant he be handsomer , and with more 
 imagination and genius than Mr. Leslie , you still must remember as the 
 boy who work in my garden . ah , to be sure , there be Frank Hazeldean ; 
 fine lad , but his affection be pre - engaged . in short , " continue 
 the sage , dogmatically , " there be no one else you can , by any possible 
 caprice , prefer to Mr. Leslie ; and for a girl who have no one else in 
 her head to talk of detest a well - look , well - dress , clever young 
 man , be - a nonsense - ' Chi lascia il poco per haver l'assai ne l'uno , ne 
 l'altro avera mai ' - which may be thus paraphrase , - the young lady who 
 refuse a mortal in the hope of obtain an angel , lose the one , and 
 will never fall in with the other . so now , have thus show that the 
 dark side of the question be contrary to reason , let we look to the 
 brighter . in the first place - " 

 " oh , Father , Father ! " cry Violante , passionately , " you to whom I once 
 come for comfort in every childish sorrow do not talk to I with this 
 cutting levity . see , I lay my head upon your breast , I put my arm 
 around you ; and now , can you reason I into misery ? " 

 " child , child , do not be so wayward . strive , at least , against a 
 prejudice that you can not defend . my Violante , my darling , this be no 
 trifle . here I must cease to be the fond , foolish father , whom you can 
 do what you will with . here I be Alphonso , Duke di Serrano ; for here my 
 honour as noble and my word as man be involve . I , then , but a helpless 
 exile , no hope of fair prospect before I , tremble like a coward 
 at the wile of my unscrupulous kinsman , grasp at all chance to save 
 you from his snare , - self offer your hand to Randal Leslie , - offer , 
 promise , pledge it ; and now that my fortune seem assure , my rank in 
 all likelihood restore , my foe crush , my fear at rest , now , do it 
 become I to retract what I myself have urge ? it be not the noble , it 
 be the parvenu , who have only to grow rich , in order to forget those 
 whom in poverty he hail as his friend . be it for I to make the poor 
 excuse , never hear on the lip of an italian prince , ' that I can not 
 command the obedience of my child ; ' subject myself to the galling 
 answer , ' Duke of Serrano , you could once command that obedience , when , 
 in exile , penury , and terror you offer I a bride without a dower ' ? 
 Child , Violante , daughter of ancestor on whose honour never slander set 
 a stain , I call on you to redeem your father 's plighted word . " 

 " Father , must it be so ? be not even the convent open to I ? Nay , look 
 not so coldly on I . if you could but read my heart ! and oh ! I feel so 
 assured of your own repentance hereafter , - so assure that this man 
 be not what you believe he . I so suspect that he have be play 
 throughout some secret and perfidious part . " 

 " ha ! " interrupt Riccabocca , " Harley have perhaps infect you with that 
 notion . " 

 " no , no ! but be not Harley , be not Lord L'Estrange one whose opinion you 
 have cause to esteem ? and if he distrust Mr. Leslie - " 

 " let he make good his distrust by such proof as will absolve my word , 
 and I shall share your own joy . I have tell he this . I have invite 
 he to make good his suspicion , he put I off . he can not do so , " add 
 Riccabocca , in a dejected tone ; " randal have already so well explain 
 all that Harley deem equivocal . Violante , my name and my honour rest 
 in your hand . cast they away if you will ; I can not constrain you , and 
 I can not stoop to implore . Noblesse oblige ! with your birth you take 
 its duty . let they decide between your vain caprice and your father 's 
 solemn remonstrance . " 

 assume a sternness that he be far from feeling , and put aside 
 his daughter 's arm , the exile walk away . Violante pause a moment , 
 shiver , look round as if take a last farewell of joy and peace 
 and hope on earth , and then approach her father with a firm step , she 
 say , " I never rebel , Father ; I do but entreat . what you say be my 
 law now , as it have ever be ; and come what may , never shall you hear 
 complaint or murmur from I . poor Father , you will suffer more than I 
 shall . kiss I ! " 

 about an hour afterwards , as the short day close in , Harley , 
 return from his solitary wandering , after he have part from Helen , 
 encounter on the terrace , before the house , Lady Lansmere and Audley 
 Egerton arm in arm . 

 Harley have draw his hat over his brow , and his eye be fix on the 
 ground , so that he do not see the group upon which he come unawares , 
 until Audley 's voice startle he from his revery . 

 " my dear Harley , " say the ex - minister , with a faint smile , " you must 
 not pass we by , now that you have a moment of leisure from the care of 
 the election . and , Harley , though we be under the same roof , I see you 
 so little . " Lord L'Estrange dart a quick glance towards his mother , - a 
 glance that seem to say , " you lean on Audley 's arm ! have you keep 
 your promise ? " and the eye that meet his own reassure he . 

 " it be true , " say Harley ; " but you , who know that , once engage in 
 public affair , one have no heart leave for the tie of private life , will 
 excuse I . and this election be so important ! " 

 " and you , Mr. Egerton , " say Lady Lansmere , " whom the election most 
 concern , seem privileged to be the only one who appear indifferent to 
 success . " 

 " ay ; but you be not indifferent ? " say Lord L'Estrange , abruptly . 

 " no . how can I be so , when my whole future career may depend on it ? " 

 Harley draw Egerton aside . " there be one voter you ought at least to 
 call upon and thank . he can not be make to comprehend that , for the sake 
 of any relation , even for the sake of his own son , he be to vote against 
 the Blues , - against you ; I mean , of course , Nora 's father , John Avenel . 
 his vote and his son - in - law 's gain your majority at your first 
 election . " 

 EGERTON . - " call on John Avenel ! have you call ? " 

 HARLEY   calmly . - " yes . poor old man , his mind have be affect ever 
 since Nora 's death . but your name as the candidate for the borough at 
 that time , - the successful candidate for whose triumph the joy - bell 
 chime with her funeral knell , - your name bring up her memory ; and he 
 talk in a breath of she and of you . come , let we walk together to his 
 house ; it be close by the Park Lodge . " 

 the drop stand on Audley 's brow ! he fix his dark handsome eye , in 
 mournful amaze , upon Harley 's tranquil face . 

 " Harley , at last , then , you have forget the Past . " 

 " no ; but the Present be more imperious . all my effort be need to 
 requite your friendship . you stand against her brother , - yet her father 
 vote for you . and her mother say to her son , ' let the old man alone . 
 Conscience be all that be well alive in he ; and he think if he be to 
 vote against the Blues , he would sin against honour . ' ' an electioneering 
 prejudice , ' some sceptic would say . but you must be touch by this 
 trait of human nature , - in her father , too , - you , Audley Egerton , who 
 be the soul of honour . what ail you ? " 

 EGERTON . - " nothing ; a spasm at the heart ; my old complaint . well , I will 
 call on the poor man later , but not now , - not with you . Nay , nay , I will 
 not , - I can not . Harley , just as you join we , I be talk to your 
 mother . " 

 HARLEY . - " ay , and what of ? " 

 EGERTON . - " Yourself . I see you from my window walk with your 
 betrothed . afterwards I observe she come home alone ; and by the 
 glimpse I catch of her gentle countenance , it seem sad . Harley , do 
 you deceive we ? " 

 HARLEY . - " Deceive ! I ! how ? " 

 EGERTON . - " do you really feel that your intended marriage will bestow on 
 you the happiness , which be my prayer , as it must be your mother 's ? " 

 HARLEY . - " happiness , I hop so . but perhaps - " 

 EGERTON . - " perhaps what ? " 

 HARLEY . - " perhaps the marriage may not take place . perhaps I have a 
 rival ; not an open one , - a secret , stealthy wooer , in one , too , whom 
 I have love , serve , trust . question I not now . such instance of 
 treachery make one learn more how to prize a friendship honest , devoted , 
 faithful as your own , Audley Egerton . but here come your protege , 
 release awhile from his canvass , and your confidential adviser , Baron 
 Levy . he accompany Randal through the town to - day . so anxious be he to 
 see that that young man do not play false , and regard his own interest 
 before your ! would that surprise you ? " 

 EGERTON . - " you be too severe upon randal Leslie . he be ambitious , 
 worldly , have no surplus of affection at the command of his heart - " 

 HARLEY . - " be it randal Leslie you describe ? " 

 egerton   with a languid smile . - " yes , you see I do not flatter . but he 
 be bear and rear a gentleman ; as such he would scarcely do anything 
 mean . and , after all , it be with I that he must rise or fall . his 
 very intellect must tell he that . but again I ask , do not strive to 
 prepossess I against he . I be a man who could have love a son . I have 
 none . randal , such as he be , be a sort of son . he carry on my project 
 and my interest in the world of man beyond the goal of the tomb . " 

 Audley turn kindly to Randal . 

 " well , Leslie , what report of the canvass ? " 

 " Levy have the book , sir . I think we have gain ten fresh vote for you , 
 and perhaps seven for I . " 

 " let I rid you of your book , Baron Levy , " say Harley . just at this 
 time Riccabocca and Violante approach the house , both silent . the 
 Italian catch sight of Randal , and make he a sign to join they . the 
 young lover glance fearfully towards Harley , and then with alacrity 
 bound forward , and be soon at Violante 's side . but scarce have Harley , 
 surprise by Leslie 's sudden disappearance , remark the cause , than 
 with equal abruptness he abandon the whisper conference he have 
 commence with Levy , and hasten to Randal , lay hand on the young 
 man 's shoulder , exclaim , " ten thousand pardon to all three ! but I 
 can not allow this waste of time , Mr. Leslie . you have yet an hour before 
 it grow dark . there be three out - voter six mile off , influential 
 farmer , whom you must canvass in person with my father 's steward . 
 Hasten to the stable ; choose your own horse . to saddle , to saddle ! 
 Baron Levy , go and order my Lord 's steward , Mr. Smart , to join Mr. 
 Leslie at the stable ; then come back to I , - quick . what ! loitering 
 still , Mr. Leslie ! you will make I throw up your whole cause in disgust 
 at your indolence and apathy . " 

 alarm at this threat , Randal lift his accuse eye to heaven and 
 withdraw . 

 meanwhile Audley have draw close to Lady Lansmere , who be lean , in 
 thought , over the balustrade of the terrace . " do you note , " say Audley , 
 whispering , " how Harley spring forward when the fair Italian come in 
 sight ? trust I , I be right . I know little of the young lady , but I 
 have converse with she . I have gaze on the change in her face . if 
 Harley ever love again , and if ever love influence and exalt his mind , 
 wish with I that his choice may yet fall where I believe that his heart 
 incline it . " 

 LADY LANSMERE . - " ah , that it be so ! Helen , I own , be charming ; 
 but - but - Violante be equal in birth ! be you not aware that she be 
 engage to your young friend Mr. Leslie ? " 

 AUDLEY . - " Randal tell I so ; but I can not believe it . in fact , I have 
 take occasion to sound that fair creature 's inclination , and if I know 
 aught of woman , her heart be not with Randal . I can not believe she to be 
 one whose affection be so weak as to be easily constrain ; nor can 
 I suppose that her father could desire to enforce a marriage that be 
 almost a misalliance . randal must deceive himself ; and from something 
 Harley just let fall , in our painful but brief conversation , I suspect 
 that his engagement with Miss Digby be break off . he promise to tell 
 I more later . yes , " continue Audley , mournfully , " observe Violante 's 
 countenance , with its ever - vary play ; listen to her voice , to which 
 feeling seem to give the expressive music , and tell I whether you 
 be not sometimes remind of - of - in one word , there be one who , 
 even without rank or fortune , would be worthy to replace the image of 
 Leonora , and be to Harley - what Leonora could not ; for sure I be that 
 Violante love he . " 

 Harley , meanwhile , have linger with Riccabocca and Violante , speak 
 but on indifferent subject , obtain short answer from the first , 
 and none from the last , when the sage draw he a little aside , and 
 whisper , " she have consent to sacrifice herself to my sense of 
 honour . but , o Harley ! if she be unhappy , it will break my heart . either 
 you must give I sufficient proof of Randal 's unworthiness , to absolve 
 I from my promise , or I must again entreat , you to try and conciliate 
 the poor child in his favour . all you say have weight with she ; she 
 respect you as - a second father . " 

 Harley do not seem peculiarly flatter by that last assurance ; but 
 he be relieve from an immediate answer by the appearance of a man who 
 come from the direction of the stable , and whose dress , cover with 
 dust , and travel - stain , seem like that of a foreign courier . no 
 soon do Harley catch sight of this person , than he spring forward , 
 and accost he briefly and rapidly . 

 " you have be quick ; I do not expect you so soon . you discover the 
 trace ? you give my letter - " 

 " and have bring back the answer , my Lord , " reply the man , take the 
 letter from a leathern pouch at his side . Harley hastily break open 
 the seal , and glance over the content , which be comprise in a few 
 line . 

 " good . say not whence you come . do not wait here ; return at once to 
 London . " 

 Harley 's face seem so unusually cheerful as he rejoin the Italians , 
 that the duke exclaim , - 

 " a despatch from Vienna ? my recall ! " 

 " from Vienna , my dear friend ! not possible yet . I can not calculate 
 on hear from the prince till a day or two before the close of this 
 election . but you wish I to speak to Violante . join my mother yonder . 
 what can she be say to Mr. Egerton ? I will address a few word apart 
 to your fair daughter , that may at least prove the interest in her fate 
 take by - her second father . " 

 " Kindest of friend ! " say the unsuspecting pupil of Machiavelli , and 
 he walk towards the terrace . Violante be about to follow . Harley 
 detain she . 

 " do not go till you have thank I ; for you be not the noble Violante 
 for whom I take you , unless you acknowledge gratitude to any one who 
 deliver you from the presence of an admirer in Mr. Randal Leslie . " 

 VIOLANTE . - " ought I to hear this of one whom - whom - " 

 HARLEY . - " one whom your father obstinately persist in obtrude on your 
 repugnance ? yet , o dear child , you who , when almost an infant , ere yet 
 you know what snare and pitfall , for all who trust to another , lie 
 under the sward at our foot , even when deck the fairest with the 
 flower of spring ; you who put your small hand around my neck , and 
 murmur in your musical voice , ' save we , - save my father , ' - you at 
 least I will not forsake , in a peril bad than that which menace you 
 then , - a peril which affright you more than that which threaten 
 you in the snare of Peschiera . randal Leslie may thrive in his meaner 
 object of ambition ; those I fle to he in scorn : but you ! 
 the presume varlet ! " Harley pause a moment , half stifle with 
 indignation . he then resume , calmly , " trust to I , and fear not . I will 
 rescue this hand from the profanation of Randal Leslie 's touch ; and then 
 farewell , for life , to every soft emotion . before I expand the 
 welcome solitude . the innocent save , the honest right , the perfidious 
 stricken by a just retribution , - and then - what then ? why , at least I 
 shall have study Machiavelli with more effect than your wise father ; 
 and I shall lay he aside , need no philosophy to teach I never again 
 to be deceive . " his brow darken ; he turn abruptly away , leave 
 Violante lose in amaze , fear , and a delight , vague , yet more vividly 
 feel than all . 




 CHAPTER XXI . 

 that night , after the labour of the day , Randal have gain the 
 sanctuary of his own room , and seat himself at his table , to prepare 
 the head of the critical speech he would have now very soon to deliver 
 on the day of nomination , - critical speech when , in the presence of foe 
 and friend , reporter from London , and amidst all the jarring interest 
 that he seek to weave into the sole self - interest of Randal Leslie , 
 he would be call upon to make the formal exposition of his political 
 opinion . randal Leslie , indeed , be not one of those speaker whom 
 either modesty , fastidiousness , or conscientious desire of truth 
 predispose towards the labour of write composition . he have too much 
 cleverness to be in want of fluent period or ready commonplace , - the 
 ordinary material of oratorical impromptu ; too little taste for the 
 Beautiful to study what grace of diction will well adorn a noble 
 sentiment ; too obtuse a conscience to care if the popular argument 
 be purify from the dross which the careless flow of a speech wholly 
 extemporaneous rarely fail to leave around it . but this be no ordinary 
 occasion . elaborate study here be requisite , not for the orator , 
 but the hypocrite . hard task , to please the Blues , and not offend the 
 yellow ; appear to side with Audley Egerton , yet insinuate sympathy with 
 Dick Avenel ; confront , with polite smile , the young opponent whose 
 word have lodge arrow in his vanity , which rankle the more gallingly 
 because they have raise the skin of his conscience . 

 he have dip his pen into the ink and smooth the paper before he , 
 when a knock be hear at the door . 

 " come in , " say he , impatiently . Levy enter saunteringly . 

 " I be come to talk over matter with you , mon cher , " say the baron , 
 throw himself on the sofa . " and , first , I wish you joy of your 
 prospect of success . " 

 Randal postpone his meditated composition with a quick sigh , draw his 
 chair towards the sofa , and lower his voice into a whisper . " you think 
 with I , that the chance of my success - be good ? " 

 " Chance ! why , it be a rubber of whist , in which your partner give you 
 all the winning , and in which the adversary be almost sure to revoke . 
 either Avenel or his nephew , it be true , must come in ; but not both . two 
 parvenus aspiring to make a family seat of an earl 's borough ! Bah ! too 
 absurd ! " 

 " I hear from Riccabocca   or rather the Duke di Serrano   that this same 
 young Fairfield be greatly indebted to the kindness of Lord L'Estrange . 
 very odd that he should stand against the Lansmere interest . " 

 " Ambition , mon cher . you yourself be under some obligation to Mr. 
 Egerton . yet , in reality , he have more to apprehend from you than from 
 Mr. Fairfield . " 

 " I disown obligation to Mr. Egerton . and if the elector prefer I to 
 he   whom , by - the - by , they once burn in effigy , it be no fault 
 of mine : the fault , if any , will rest with his own dearest friend , 
 L'Estrange . I do not understand how a man of such clear sense as 
 L'Estrange undoubtedly possess , should be risk Egerton 's election 
 in his zeal for mine . nor do his formal courtesy to myself deceive I . 
 he have even imply that he suspect I of connivance with Peschiera 's 
 scheme on Violante . but those suspicion he can not support . for of 
 course , Levy , you would not betray I - " 

 " I ! what possible interest could I serve in that ? " 

 " none that I can discover , certainly , " say Randal , relax into a 
 smile . " and when I get into parliament , aid by the social position 
 which my marriage will give I , I shall have so many way to serve you . 
 no , it be certainly your interest not to betray I ; and I shall count on 
 you as a witness , if a witness can be require . " 

 " count on I , certainly , my dear fellow , " say the baron . " and I suppose 
 there will be no witness the other way . do for eternally be my poor 
 dear friend Peschiera , whose cigar , by - the - by , be matchless ; - I 
 wonder if there will be any for sale . and if he be not so do for , it 
 be not you , it be L'Estrange , that he would be tempt to do for ! " 

 " we may blot Peschiera out of the map of the future , " rejoin Randal . 
 " man from whom henceforth we have nothing to hope or to fear be to we 
 as the race before the deluge . " 

 " fine remark , " quoth the baron , admiringly . " Peschiera , though not 
 without brain , be a complete failure . and when the failure of one I 
 have try to serve be complete , the rule I have adopt through life be 
 to give he up altogether . " 

 " of course , " say randal . 

 " of course , " echo the baron . " on the other hand , you know that I like 
 push forward young man of mark and promise . you really be amazingly 
 clever ; but how come it you do not   speak well ? do you know , I doubt 
 whether you will do in the House of Commons all that I expect from 
 your address and readiness in private life . " 

 " because I can not talk trash vulgar enough for a mob ? Pooh ! I shall 
 succeed wherever knowledge be really power . besides , you must allow for 
 my infernal position . you know , after all , that avenel , if he can only 
 return himself or his nephew , still hold in his hand the choice of 
 the candidate upon our side . I can not attack he ; I can not attack his 
 insolent nephew - " 

 " Insolent ! - not that , but bitterly eloquent . he hit you hard . you be 
 no match for he , Randal , before a popular audience ; though , en petit 
 comite , the devil himself be hardly a match for you . but now to a 
 somewhat more serious point . your election you will win , your bride be 
 promise to you ; but the old Leslie land , in the present possession of 
 Squire Thornhill , you have not gain , - and your chance of gain they 
 be in great jeopardy . I do not like to tell you this morning , - it would 
 have spoil your temper for canvass ; but I have receive a letter 
 from Thornhill himself . he have have an offer for the property , which be 
 only l1000 short of what he ask . a city alderman , call Jobson , be the 
 bidder ; a man , it seem , of large mean and few word . the alderman have 
 fix the date on which he must have a definite answer ; and that date 
 fall on the - th , two day after that fix for the poll at Lansmere . 
 the brute declare he will close with another investment , if Thornhill 
 do not then come in to his term . now , as Thornhill will accept these 
 term unless I can positively promise he well , and as those fund on 
 which you calculate   have the marriage of Peschiera with Violante , and 
 Frank Hazeldean with Madame di Negra , take place   fail you , I see no 
 hope for your be in time with the money , - and the old land of the 
 Leslies must yield their rent to a jobson . " 

 " I care for nothing on earth like those old land of my forefather , " 
 say Randal , with unusual vehemence ; " I reverence so little amongst the 
 living , and I do reverence the dead . and my marriage will take place so 
 soon ; and the dower would so amply cover the paltry advance require . " 

 " yes ; but the mere prospect of a marriage to the daughter of a man whose 
 land be still sequester would be no security to a money - lender . " 

 " surely , " say Randal , " you , who once offer to assist I when my 
 fortune be more precarious , might now accommodate I with this loan , 
 as a friend , and keep the title - deed of the estate as - " 

 " as a money - lender , " add the baron , laugh pleasantly . " no , mon 
 cher , I will still lend you half the sum require in advance , but 
 the other half be more than I can afford as friend , or hazard as 
 money - lender ; and it would damage my character , - be out of all 
 rule , - if , the estate fall by your default of payment into my own 
 hand , I should appear to be the real purchaser of the property of my 
 own distressed client . but , now I think of it , do not Squire Hazeldean 
 promise you his assistance in this matter ? " 

 " he do so , " answer Randal , " as soon as the marriage between Frank 
 and Madame di Negra be off his mind . I mean to cross over to Hazeldean 
 immediately after the election . how can I leave the place till then ? " 

 " if you do , your election be lose . but why not write to the squire ? " 

 " it be against my maxim to write where I can speak . however , there be 
 no option ; I will write at once . meanwhile , communicate with Thornhill ; 
 keep up his hope ; and be sure , at least , that he do not close with 
 this greedy alderman before the day fix for decision . " 

 " I have do all that already , and my letter be go . now , do your part : 
 and if you write as cleverly as you talk , you would coax the money 
 out from a stonier heart than poor Mr. Hazeldean 's . I leave you now ; 
 good - night . " 

 Levy take up his candlestick , nod , yawn , and go . randal still 
 suspend the completion of his speech , and indite the follow 
 epistle : - 

  MY DEAR MR . HAZELDEAN , - I write to you a few hasty line on leave 
  town , to inform you that the match you so dreaded be break off , 
  and propose to defer particular till I could visit your kind and 
  hospitable roof , which I trust to do for a few hour during my 
  stay at Lansmere , since it be not a day 's journey hence to 
  Hazeldean . but I do not calculate on find so sharp a contest . 
  in no election throughout the kingdom do I believe that a more 
  notable triumph , or a more stunning defeat , for the great landed 
  interest can occur . for in this town - so dependent on agriculture - 
  we be oppose by a low and sordid manufacturer , of the most 
  revolutionary notion , who have , moreover , the audacity to force his 
  own nephew - that very boy whom I chastise for impertinence on your 
  village green , son of a common carpenter - actually the audacity , I 
  say , to attempt to force this peasant of a nephew , as well as 
  himself , into the representation of Lansmere , against the earl 's 
  interest , against your distinguished brother , - of myself I say 
  nothing . you should hear the language in which these two man 
  indulge against all your family ! if we be beat by such person 
  in a borough suppose to be so loyal as Lansmere , every one with a 
  stake in the country may tremble at such a prognostic of the ruin 
  that must await not only our old English Constitution , but the 
  existence of property itself . I need not say that on such an 
  occasion I can not spare myself . Mr. Egerton be ill too . all the 
  fatigue of the canvass devolve on I . I feel , my dear and revere 
  friend , that I be a genuine Hazeldean , fight your battle ; and 
  that think carry I through all . I can not , therefore , come to 
  you till the election be over ; and meanwhile you , and my dear Mrs. 
  Hazeldean , must be anxious to know more about the affair that so 
  preyed on both your heart than I have yet inform you , or can well 
  trust to a letter . be assure , however , that the bad be over ; the 
  lady have go abroad . I earnestly entreat Frank   who show I 
  Mrs. Hazeldean 's most pathetic letter to he   to hasten at once to 
  the Hall and relieve your mind . unfortunately he would not be 
  rule by I , but talk of go abroad too - not , I trust   nay , I 
  feel assured , in pursuit of Madame di Negra ; but still - in short , I 
  should be so glad to see you , and talk over the whole . could you 
  not come hither - I pray do . and now , at the risk of your thinking 
  that in this I be only consult my own interest   but no - your 
  noble english heart will never so misiudge I ! , I will add with 
  homely frankness , that if you could accommodate I immediately with 
  the loan you not long since so generously offer , you would save 
  those land once in my family from pass away from we forever . a 
  city alderman - one Jobson - be meanly take advantage of Thornhill 's 
  necessity , and drive a hard bargain for those land . he have 
  fix the - th inst . for Thornhill 's answer , and Levy   who be here 
  assist Mr. Egerton 's election   inform I that Thornhill will 
  accept his offer , unless I be provide with L10,000 beforehand ; the 
  other L10,000 , to complete the advance require , Levy will lend I . 
  do not be surprised at the usurer 's liberality ; he know that I be 
  about shortly to marry a very great heiress   you will be please 
  when you learn whom , and will then be able to account for my 
  indifference to Miss Sticktorights , and her dower will amply serve 
  to repay his loan and your own , if I may trust to your generous 
  affection for the grandson of a Hazeldean ! I have the less scruple 
  in this appeal to you , for I know bow it would grieve you that a 
  Jobson , who perhaps never know a grandmother , should foist your own 
  kinsman from the land of his father . of one thing I be 
  convince , - we squire and son of squire must make common cause 
  against those great moneyed capitalist , or they will buy we all out 
  in a few generation . the old race of country gentleman be already 
  much diminish by the grasp cupidity of such leviathan ; and if 
  the race be once extinct , what will become of the boast and strength 
  of England ? 

  your , my dear Mr. Hazeldean , with most affectionate and grateful 
  respect , 

  RANDAL leslie . 




 CHAPTER XXII . 

 nothing to Leonard could as yet be more distasteful or oppressive than 
 his share in this memorable election . in the first place , it chafe 
 the secret sore of his heart to be compel to resume the name of 
 Fairfeld , which be a tacit disavowal of his birth . it have be such 
 delight to he that the same letter which form the name of Nora 
 should weave also that name of Oran , to which he have give distinction , 
 which he have associate with all his nobler toil , and all his hope of 
 endure fame , - a mystic link between his own career and his mother 's 
 obscurer genius . it seem to he as if it be render to she 
 the honour accord to himself , - subtle and delicate fancy of the 
 affection , of which only poet would be capable , but which other 
 than poet may perhaps comprehend ! that early name of Fairfield be 
 connect in his memory with all the ruder employment , the meaner 
 trial of his boyhood ; the name of Oran , with poetry and fame . it be 
 his title in the ideal world , amongst all fair shape and spirit . in 
 receive the old appellation , the practical world , with its bitterness 
 and strife , return to he as at the utterance of a spell . but in 
 come to Lansmere he have no choice . to say nothing of Dick , and Dick 's 
 parent with whom his secret would not be safe , Randal Leslie know that 
 he have go by the name of Fairfield , - know his suppose parentage , and 
 would be sure to proclaim they . how account for the latter name without 
 set curiosity to decipher the anagram it involve , and perhaps 
 guide suspicion to his birth from Nora , to the injury of her memory , 
 yet preserve from stain ? 

 his feeling as connect with Nora - sharpen and deepen as they all 
 have be by his discovery of her painful narrative - be embitter still 
 more by come in contact with her parent . Old John be in the same 
 helpless state of mind and body as before , - neither bad nor well ; 
 but wake up at interval with vivid gleam of interest in the election 
 at the wave of a blue banner , at the cry of " Blue forever ! " it be the 
 old break - clown charger , who , doze in the meadow , start at the roll 
 of the drum . no persuasion Dick could employ would induce his father to 
 promise to vote even one Yellow . you might as well have expect the 
 old Roman , with his monomaniac cry against Carthage , to have vote for 
 choose Carthaginians for consul . but poor John , nevertheless , be 
 not only very civil , but very humble to Dick , - " very happy to oblige the 
 gentleman . " 

 " your own son ! " bawl Dick ; " and here be your own grandson . " 

 " very happy to serve you both ; but you see you be the wrong colour . " 

 then as he gaze at Leonard , the old man approach he with trembling 
 knee , stroke his hair , look into his face , piteously . " be thee my 
 grandson ? " he falter . " Wife , wife , Nora have no son , have she ? my memory 
 begin to fail I , sir ; pray excuse it ; but you have a look about the 
 eye that - " Old John begin to weep , and his wife lead he away . 

 " do not   come again , " she say to Leonard , harshly , when she return . 
 " he will not sleep all night now . " and then , observe that the tear 
 stand in Leonard 's eye , she add , in soften tone , " I be glad to see 
 you well and thriving , and to hear that you have be of great service 
 to my son Richard , who be a credit and an honour to the family , though 
 poor John can not vote for he or for you against his conscience ; and he 
 should not be ask , " she add , fire up ; " and it be a sin to ask it , 
 and he so old , and no one to defend he but I . but defend he I will 
 while I have life ! " 

 the poet recognize woman 's brave , loving , wife - like heart here , and 
 would have embrace the stern grandmother , if she have not draw back 
 from he ; and , as she turn towards the room to which she have lead she 
 husband , she say over her shoulder , - 

 " I be not so unkind as I seem , boy ; but it be well for you , and for 
 all , that you should not come to this house again , - well that you have 
 not come into the town . " 

 " Fie , Mother ! " say Dick , see that Leonard , bend his head , 
 silently walk from the room . " you should be prouder of your grandson 
 than you be of I . " 

 " prouder of he who may shame we all yet ? " 

 " what do you mean ? " 

 but Mrs. Avenel shake her head and vanish . 

 " never mind she , poor old soul , " say Dick , as he join Leonard at the 
 threshold ; ' she always have her temper . and since there be no vote to be 
 get in this house , and one can not   set a caucus on one 's own father , - at 
 least in this extraordinary rotten and prejudiced old country , which be 
 quite in its dotage , - we will not come here to be snub any more . bless 
 their old heart , nevertheless ! " 

 Leonard 's acute sensibility in all that concern his birth , deeply 
 wound by Mrs. Avenel 's allusion , which he comprehend well than 
 his uncle do , be also keep on the edge by the suspense to which he 
 be condemn by Harley 's continued silence as to the paper confide 
 to that nobleman . it seem to leonard almost unaccountable that Harley 
 should have read those paper , be in the same town with himself , and 
 yet volunteer no communication . at length he write a few line to Lord 
 L'Estrange , bring the matter that concern he so deeply before 
 Harley 's recollection , and suggest his own earnest interest in any 
 information that could supply the gap and omission of the desultory 
 fragment . Harley , in reply to this note , say , with apparent reason , 
 " that it would require a long personal interview to discuss the subject 
 refer to , and that such an interview , in the thick of the contest 
 between himself and a candidate oppose to the Lansmere party , would 
 be sure to get wind , be ascribe to political intrigue , be impossible 
 otherwise to explain , and embarrass all the interest confide to their 
 respective charge . that for the rest , he have not be unmindful of 
 Leonard 's anxiety , which must now mainly be to see justice do to the 
 dead parent , and learn the name , station , and character of the parent 
 yet survive . and in this Harley trust to assist he as soon as the 
 close of the poll would present a suitable occasion . " the letter be 
 unlike Harley 's former cordial tone : it be hard and dry . Leonard 
 respect L'Estrange too much to own to himself that it be unfeele . 
 with all his rich generosity of nature , he seek excuse for what he 
 decline to blame . perhaps something in Helen 's manner or word have lead 
 Harley to suspect that she still cherish too tender an interest in the 
 companion of her childhood ; perhaps under this coldness of expression 
 there lurk the burn anguish of jealousy . and , oh , Leonard so well 
 understand , and could so nobly compassionate even in his prosperous 
 rival , that torture of the most agonizing of human passion , in which 
 all our reasoning follow the distorted writhing of our pain . 

 and Leonard himself , amidst his other cause of disquiet , be at once 
 so gnaw and so humble by his own jealousy . Helen , he know , be still 
 under the same roof as Harley . they , the betrothed , could see each other 
 daily , hourly . he would soon hear of their marriage . she would be bear 
 afar from the very sphere of his existence , - carry into a lofty 
 region , accessible only to his dream . and yet to be jealous of one to 
 whom both Helen and himself be under such obligation debase he in 
 his own esteem , - jealousy here be so like ingratitude . but for Harley , 
 what could have become of Helen , leave to his boyish charge , - he who have 
 himself be compel , in despair , to think of send she from his 
 side , to be rear into smileless youth in his mother 's humble cottage , 
 while he face famine alone , gaze on the terrible river , from the 
 bridge by which he have once beg for very alm , - beg of that Audley 
 Egerton to whom he be now oppose as an equal ; or fly from the 
 fiend that glare at he under the lid of the haunt Chatterton ? no , 
 jealousy here be more than agony , - it be degradation , it be crime ! 
 but , all ! if Helen be happy in these splendid nuptial ! be he sure 
 even of that consolation ? Bitter be the thought either way , - that she 
 should wholly forget he , in happiness from which he stand exclude as a 
 thing of sin ; or sinfully herself remember , and be wretche ! 

 with that healthful strength of will which be more often proportion to 
 the susceptibility of feeling than the world suppose , the young man at 
 last wrench himself for awhile from the iron that have enter into his 
 soul , and force his thought to seek relief in the very object from 
 which they otherwise would have the most loathingly recoil . he arouse 
 his imagination to befriend his reason ; he strove to divine some motive 
 not explain by Harley , not to be refer to the mere defeat , by 
 counter - scheme , of the scheming Randal , nor even to be solve by 
 any service to Audley Egerton , which Harley might evolve from the 
 complicated mesh of the election , - some motive that could more 
 interest his own heart in the contest , and connect itself with Harley 's 
 promise aid in clear up the mystery of his parentage . Nora 's memoir 
 have clearly hint that his father be of rank and station far beyond 
 her own . she have throw the glow of her glorious fancy over the 
 ambition and the destine career of the lover in whom she have merge her 
 ambition as poetess , and her career as woman . possibly the father might 
 be more disposed to own and to welcome the son , if the son could achieve 
 an opening , and give promise of worth , in that grand world of public 
 life in which alone reputation take precedence of rank . possibly , too , 
 if the son thus succeed , and become one whom a proud father could with 
 pride acknowledge , possibly he might not only secure a father 's welcome , 
 but vindicate a mother 's name . this marriage , which Nora darkly hint 
 she have be lead to believe be fraudulent , might , after all , have 
 be legal , - the ceremony conceal , even till now , by worldly shame at 
 disparity of rank . but if the son could make good his own footing - there 
 where rank itself own its chief in talent - that shame might vanish . 
 these supposition be not improbable ; nor be they uncongenial to 
 Leonard 's experience of Harley 's delicate benignity of purpose . here , 
 too , the image of Helen ally itself with those of his parent , to 
 support his courage and influence his new ambition . true , that she be 
 lose to he forever . no worldly success , no political honour , could now 
 restore she to his side . but she might hear he name with respect in 
 those circle in which alone she would hereafter move , and in which 
 parliamentary reputation rank high than literary fame . and perhaps in 
 future year , when love , retain its tenderness , be purify from its 
 passion , they might thus meet as friend . he might without a pang take 
 her child on his knee , and say , perhaps in their old age , when he 
 have climb to a social equality even with her high - bear lord , " it 
 be the hope to regain the privilege bestow on our childhood , that 
 strengthen I to seek distinction when you and happiness forsook my 
 youth . " thus regard , the election , which have before seem to he so 
 poor and vulgar an exhibition of vehement passion for petty object , 
 with its trumpery of banner and its discord of trumpet , suddenly grow 
 into vivid interest , and assume dignity and importance . it be ever thus 
 with all mortal strife . in proportion as it possess , or be void of , 
 the diviner something that quicken the pulse of the heart , and elevate 
 the wing of the imagination , it present a mockery to the philosopher , 
 or an inspiration to the bard . feel that something , and no contest be 
 mean ! feel it not , and , like Byron , you may class with the slaughter of 
 Cannae that field which , at Waterloo , restore the landmark of nation ; 
 or may jeer with Juvenal at the dust of Hannibal , because he seek to 
 deliver Carthage from ruin , and free a world from Rome . 




 CHAPTER XXIII . 

 once then , grapple manfully with the task he have undertake , and 
 constrain himself to look on what Riccabocca would have call " the 
 southern side of thing , " whatever there be really great in principle 
 or honourable to human nature , deep below the sordid detail and pitiful 
 interest apparent on the face of the agitated current , come clear to 
 his vision . the ardour of those around he begin to be contagious : 
 the generous devotion to some cause apart from self , which pervade an 
 election , and to which the poor voter will often render sacrifice 
 that may be call sublime ; the warm personal affection which community 
 of zeal create for the defender of beloved opinion , - all concur to 
 dispel that indifference to party politic , and counteract that disgust 
 of their baser leaven , which the young poet have first conceive . he 
 even begin to look with complacency , for itself , on a career of toil and 
 honour strange to his habitual labour and intellectual ambition . he 
 throw the poetry of idea within he   as poet ever do   into the prose of 
 action to which he be hurry forward . he no long oppose Dick Avenel 
 when that gentleman represent how detrimental it would be to his 
 business at Screwstown if he devote to his country the time and the 
 acuman require by his mill and its steamengine ; and how desirable it 
 would be , on all account , that Leonard Fairfield should become the 
 parliamentary representative of the Avenels . " if , therefore , " say 
 Dick , " two of we can not come in , and one must retire , leave it to I 
 to arrange with the Committee that you shall be the one to persist . oh , 
 never fear but what all scruple of honour shall be satisfied . I 
 would not for the sake of the Avenels have a word say against their 
 representative . " 

 " but , " answer Leonard , " if I grant this , I fear that you have some 
 intention of suffer the vote that your resignation would release to 
 favour Leslie at the expense of Egerton . " 

 " what the deuce be Egerton to you ? " 

 " nothing , except through my gratitude to his friend Lord L'Estrange . " 

 " Pooh ! I will tell you a secret . Levy inform I privately that 
 L'Estrange will be well satisfied if the choice of Lansmere fall upon 
 Leslie instead of Egerton ; and I think I convince my Lord - for I see 
 he in London - that Egerton would have no chance , though Leslie might . " 

 " I must think that Lord L'Estrange would resist to the utmost any 
 attempt to prefer Leslie - whom he despise - to Egerton , whom he honour . 
 and , so thinking , I too would resist it , as you may judge by the 
 speech which have so provoke your displeasure . " 

 " let we cut short a yarn of talk which , when it come to liking and 
 disliking , might last to almighty crack : I will ask you to do nothing 
 that Lord L'Estrange do not sanction . will that satisfy you ? " 

 " certainly , provide I be assure of the sanction . " 

 and now , the important day precede the poll , the day in which the 
 candidate be to be formally nominate , and meet each other in all the 
 ceremony of declare rivalship , dawn at last . the town - hall be the 
 place select for the occasion ; and before sunrise , all the street 
 be resonant with music , and gay with banner . 

 Audley Egerton feel that he could not - without incur some 
 just sarcasm on his dread to face the constituency he have formerly 
 represent , and by the malcontent of which he have be burn in 
 effigy - absent himself from the townhall , as he have do from balcony 
 and hostel . painful as it be to confront Nora 's brother , and wrestle 
 in public against all the secret memory that knit the strife of the 
 present contest with the anguish that recall the first , - still the 
 thing must be do ; and it be the english habit of his life to face 
 with courage whatever he have to do . 




 CHAPTER XXIV . 

 the chief of the Blue party go in state from Lansmere Park ; the 
 two candidate in open carriage , each attend with his proposer and 
 seconder . other carriage be devoted to Harley and Levy , and the 
 principal member of the Committee . Riccabocca be seize with a fit of 
 melancholy or cynicism , and decline to join the procession . but just 
 before they start , as all be assemble without the front door , the 
 postman arrive with his welcome bag . there be letter for Harley , 
 some for Levy , many for Egerton , one for Randal Leslie . 

 Levy , soon hurry over his own correspondence , look , in the familiar 
 freedom wherewith he usually treat his particular friend , over 
 Randal 's shoulder . 

 " from the squire ? " say he . " ah , he have write at last ! what make he 
 delay so long ? Hope he relieve your mind ? " 

 " yes , " cry randal , give way to a joy that rarely light up 
 his close and secret countenance , - " yes , he do not write from 
 Hazeldean , - not there when my letter arrive , in London , could not rest 
 at the Hall , - the place remind he too much of Frank ; - go again to 
 town , on the receipt of my first letter concern the rupture of the 
 marriage , to see after his son , and take up some money to pay off his 
 post - obit . read what he say : - 

  " ' so , while I be about a mortgage - never do I guess that I should 
  be the man to encumber the hazeldean estate - I think I might as 
  well add L20,000 as L10,000 to the total . why should you be 
  indebte at all to that Baron Levy ? do not   have dealing with money- 
  lender . your grandmother be a Hazeldean ; and from a Hazeldean you 
  shall have the whole sum require in advance for those Rood land , - 
  good light soil some of they . as to repayment , we will talk of that 
  later . if Frank and I come together again , as we do of old , why , 
  my estate will be his some day , and he will not grudge the mortgage , 
  so fond as he always be of you ; and if we do not   come together , what 
  do I care for hundred or thousand , either more or less ? so I 
  shall be down at Lansmere the day after to - morrow , just in the thick 
  of your polling . beat the manufacturer , my boy , and stick up for 
  the land . tell Levy to have all ready . I shall bring the money 
  down in good bank - note , and a brace of pistol in my coat pocket to 
  take care of they in ease robber get scent of the note and attack 
  I on the road , as they do my grandfather sixty year ago , come 
  next Michaelmas . a Lansmere election put one in mind of pistol . 
  I once fight a duel with an officer in his Majesty 's service , R.N. , 
  and have a ball lodge in my right shoulder , on account of an 
  election at Lansmere ; but I have forgive Audley his share in that 
  transaction . remember I to he kindly . do not   get into a duel 
  yourself ; but I suppose manufacturer do not   fight , - not that I blame 
  they for that - far from it . ' " 

 the letter then run on to express surprise , and hazard conjecture , as to 
 the wealthy marriage which Randal have announce as a pleasing surprise 
 to the squire . 

 " well , " say Levy , return the letter , " you must have write as 
 cleverly as you talk , or the squire be a booby indeed . " 

 Randal smile , pocket his letter , and respond to the impatient call 
 of his proposer , spring lightly into the carriage . 

 Harley , too , seem pleased with the letter deliver to himself , and 
 now join Levy , as the candidate drive slowly off . 

 " have not Mr. Leslie receive from the squire an answer to that letter of 
 which you inform I ? " 

 " yes , my Lord , the squire will be here to - morrow . " 

 " to - morrow ? thank you for apprise I ; his room shall be prepare . " 

 " I suppose he will only stay to see Leslie and myself , and pay the 
 money . " 

 " aha ! pay the money . be it so , then ? " 

 " twice the sum , and , it seem , as a gift , which Leslie only ask as a 
 loan . really , my Lord , Mr. Leslie be a very clever man ; and though I be 
 at your command , I should not like to injure he . with such matrimonial 
 prospect , he could be a very powerful enemy ; and if he succeed in 
 parliament , still more so . " 

 " Baron , these gentleman be wait for you . I will follow by myself . " 




 CHAPTER XXV . 

 in the centre of the raise platform in the town - hall sit the mayor . 
 on either hand of that dignitary now appear the candidate of the 
 respective party , - to his right , Audley Egerton and Leslie ; to his 
 left , Dick Avenel and Leonard . 

 the place be as full as it could hold . row of grimy face peep in , 
 even from the upper window outside the building . the contest be one 
 that create intense interest , not only from public principle , but 
 local passion . Dick Avenel , the son of a small tradesman , stand 
 against the Right Honourable Audley Egerton , the choice of the powerful 
 Lansmere aristocratic party , - stand , too , with his nephew by his 
 side ; take , as he himself be will not to say , " the tarnation Blue Bull 
 by both its oligarchical horn ! " - there be a pluck and gallantry in the 
 very impudence of the attempt to convert the important borough - for one 
 member of which a great earl have hitherto strive , " with labour dire and 
 weary woe " into two family seat for the House of Avenel and the triumph 
 of the Capelocracy . 

 this alone would have excite all the spare passion of a country 
 borough ; but , besides this , there be the curiosity that attach to 
 the long - defer public appearance of a candidate so renowned as the 
 ex - minister , - a man whose career have commence with his success at 
 Lansmere , and who now , amidst the popular tempest that scatter his 
 colleague , seek to refit his vessel in the same harbour from which 
 it have first put forth . new generation have grow up since the name of 
 Audley Egerton have first flutter the dovecote in that Corioli . the 
 question that have then seem so important be , for the most part , 
 settle and at rest . but those present who remember Egerton in the 
 former day , be strike to see how the same characteristic of bear 
 and aspect which have distinguish his early youth revive their 
 interest in the mature and celebrated man . as he stand up for a few 
 moment , before he take his seat beside the mayor , glance over the 
 assembly , with its uproar of cheer and hiss , there be the 
 same stately erectness of form and steadfastness of look , the same 
 indefinable and mysterious dignity of external , that impose respect , 
 confirm esteem , or still dislike . the hiss involuntarily cease . 

 the preliminary proceeding over , the proposer and seconder commence 
 their office . 

 Audley be propose , of course , by the crack man of the party , - a 
 gentleman who live on his mean in a white house in the High Street , 
 have receive a University education , and be a cadet of a " County 
 Family . " this gentleman speak much about the Constitution , something 
 about Greece and Rome ; compare Egerton with William Pitt , also with 
 aristide ; and sit down , after an oration esteem classical by the 
 few , and pronounce prosy by the many . Audley 's seconder , a burly and 
 important maltster , strike a bold key . he dwell largely upon the 
 necessity of be represent by gentleman of wealth and rank , and 
 not by " upstart and adventurer . "   cheer and groan .   " look at the 
 candidate on the other side , it be an insult to the respectability 
 of Lansmere to suppose its constituent could elect a man who have no 
 pretension whatever to their notice , except that he have once be a 
 little boy in the town , in which his father keep a shop , - and a very 
 noisy , turbulent , dirty little boy he be ! " Dick smooth his spotless 
 shirt - front , and look dagger , while the blue laugh heartily , and 
 the yellow cry " Shame ! " " as for the other candidate on the same side , 
 he   the maltster   have nothing to say against he . - he be , no doubt , 
 seduce into presumption by his uncle and his own inexperience . it be 
 say that that candidate , Mr. Fairfield , be an author and a poet ; if 
 so , he be unknown to fame , for no bookseller in the town have ever even 
 hear of Mr. Fairfield 's work . then it be reply Mr. Fairfield have 
 write under another name . what would that prove ? either that he be 
 ashamed of his name , or that the work do he no credit . for his 
 part , he   the maltster   be an Englishman ; he do not like anonymous 
 scribbler ; there be something not right in whatever be conceal . a 
 man should never be afraid to put his name to what he write . but grant 
 that Mr. Fairfield be a great author and a great poet , what the borough 
 of Lansinere want be , not a member who would pass his time in 
 writing sonnet to Peggy or Moggy , but a practical man of business , - a 
 statesman , - such a man as Mr. Audley Egerton , a gentleman of ancient 
 birth , high standing , and princely fortune . the member for such a place 
 as Lansmere should have a proper degree of wealth . "   " hear , hear ! " from 
 the Hundred and Fifty Hesitators , who all stand in a row at the 
 bottom of the hall ; and " Gammon ! " " Stuff ! " from some revolutionary but 
 incorruptible yellow .   still the allusion to Egerton 's private fortune 
 have considerable effect with the bulk of the audience , and the maltster 
 be much cheer on conclude . Mr. Avenel 's proposer and seconder - the 
 one a large grocer , the other the proprietor of a new shop for ticketed 
 print , shawl , blanket , and counterpane , - a man , who , as he boast , 
 deal with the People for ready money , and no mistake , at least none 
 that he ever rectify - next follow . both say much the same 
 thing . Mr. Avenel have make his fortune by honest industry , be a 
 fellow - townsman , must know the interest of the town well than 
 stranger , upright public principle , never fawn on government , would 
 see that the people have their right , and cut down army , navy , and all 
 other job of a corrupt aristocracy , etc . Randal Leslie 's proposer , a 
 captain on half - pay , undertake a long defence of army and navy , from the 
 unpatriotic aspersion of the precede speaker , which defence divert 
 he from the due praise of Randal , until cry of " cut it short , " 
 recall he to that subject ; and then the topic he select for 
 eulogium be " amiability of character , so conspicuous in the urbane 
 manner of his young friend ; " " coincidence in the opinion of that 
 illustrious statesman with whom he be conjoin ; " " early tuition in the 
 good principle ; only fault , youth , - and that be a fault which would 
 diminish every day . " Randal 's seconder be a bluff yeoman , an outvoter 
 of weight with the agricultural elector . he be too straightforward 
 by half , - advert to Audley Egerton 's early desertion of question 
 espouse by land interest , hop he have have enough of the large town ; 
 and he   the yeoman   be ready to forgive and forget , but trust that 
 there would be no chance of burn their member again in effigy . as to 
 the young gentleman , whose nomination he have the pleasure to second , 
 do not know much about he ; but the Leslies be an old family in the 
 neighbouring county , and Mr. Leslie say he be nearly related to Squire 
 Hazeldean , - as good a man as ever stand upon shoe leather . he   the 
 yeoman   like a good breed in sheep and bullock ; and a good breed 
 in man he suppose be the same thing . he   the yeoman   be not for 
 abuse , - he be for King and Constitution . he should have no objection , 
 for instance , to have tithe lower , and the malt - tax repeal , - not 
 the least objection . Mr. Leslie seem to he a likely young chap , and 
 uncommon well - speak ; and , on the whole , for aught he   the yeoman 
 could see , would do quite as well in parliament as nine - tenth of the 
 gentleman send there . the yeoman sit down , little cheer by the Blues , 
 much by the Yellows , and with a dim consciousness that somehow or other 
 he have rather damage than not the cause of the party he have be choose 
 to advocate . Leonard be not particularly fortunate in his proposer , 
 a youngish gentleman , who , have try various calling , with signal 
 unsuccess , have come into a small independence , and set up for a literary 
 character . this gentleman undertake the defence of poet , as the 
 half - pay captain have undertake that of the army and navy ; and after 
 a dozen sentence speak through the nose , about the " moonlight of 
 existence , " and " the oasis in the desert , " suddenly break down , to the 
 satisfaction of his impatient listener . this failure be , however , 
 redeem by Leonard 's seconder , a master tailor , a practised speaker and 
 an earnest , think man , sincerely like and warmly admire Leonard 
 Fairfield . his opinion be deliver with brief simplicity , and 
 accompany by expression of trust in Leonard 's talent and honesty , 
 that be effective , because express with feeling . 

 these preparatory oration over , a dead silence succeed , and Audley 
 Egerton arise . 

 at the first few sentence , all feel they be in the presence of one 
 accustom to command attention , and to give to opinion the weight 
 of recognize authority . the slowness of the measured accent , the 
 composure of the manly aspect , the decorum of the simple gesture , - all 
 bespoke and all become the minister of a great empire , who have less 
 agitated assembly by impassioned eloquence , than compel their 
 silent respect to the view of sagacity and experience . but what might 
 have be formal and didactic in another be relieve in Egerton by 
 that air , tone , bear of gentleman , which have a charm for the most 
 plebeian audience . he have eminently these attribute in private life ; 
 but they become far more conspicuous whenever he have to appear in 
 public . the ' senatorius decor " seem a phrase coin for he . 

 Audley commence with notice of his adversary in that language of 
 high courtesy which be so become to superior station , and which 
 augur well for victory than the most pointed diatribe of hostile 
 declamation . incline his head towards Avenel , he express regret that 
 he should be oppose by a gentleman whose birth naturally endear 
 he to the town , of which he be a distinguished native , and whose 
 honourable ambition be in itself a proof of the admirable nature 
 of that Constitution , which admit the lowly to rise to its 
 distinction , while it compel the lofty to labour and compete for 
 those honour which be the most coveted , because they be derive 
 from the trust of their countryman , and dignify by the duty which 
 the sense of responsibility entail . he pay a passing but generous 
 compliment to the reputed ability of Leonard Fairfield ; and allude 
 with appropriate grace to the interest he have ever take in the success 
 of youth strive for place in the van of the new generation that 
 march on to replace the old , he imply that he do not consider 
 Leonard as oppose to himself , but rather as an emulous competitor for a 
 worthy prize with his " own young and value friend , Mr. Randal Leslie . " 
 " they be happy at their year ! " say the statesman , with a certain 
 pathos . " in the future they see nothing to fear , in the past they have 
 nothing to defend . it be not so with I . " and then , pass on to the 
 vague insinuation or bolder charge against himself and his policy 
 proffer by the precede speaker , Audley gather himself up , and 
 pause ; for his eye here rest on the reporter seat round the 
 table just below he ; and he recognize face not unfamiliar to his 
 recollection when metropolitan assembly have hang on the word which 
 fall from lip then privileged to advise a king . and involuntarily it 
 occur to the ex - minister to escape altogether from this contract 
 audience , - this election , with all its association of pain , - and 
 address himself wholly to that vast and invisible Public , to which those 
 reporter would transmit his idea . at this thought his whole manner 
 gradually change . his eye become fix on the farth verge of the 
 crowd ; his tone grow more solemn in their deep and sonorous swell . he 
 begin to review and to vindicate his whole political life . he speak of 
 the measure he have aid to pass , of his part in the law which now 
 rule the land . he touch lightly , but with pride , on the service 
 he have render to the opinion he have represent . he allude to his 
 neglect of his own private fortune ; but in what detail , however minute , 
 in the public business commit to his charge , could even an enemy 
 accuse he of neglect ? the allusion be no doubt intend to prepare the 
 public for the news that the wealth of Audley Egerton be go . finally , 
 he come to the question that then agitate the day ; and make a general 
 but masterly exposition of the policy which , under the change he 
 foresaw , he should recommend his party to adopt . 

 speak to the motley assembly in that town - hall , Audley 's speech 
 extend to a circle of interest too wide for their sympathy . but that 
 assembly he heed not , - he forget it . the reporter understand he , as 
 their fly pen follow word which they presume neither to correct 
 nor to abridge . Audley 's speech be address to the nation , - the speech 
 of a man in whom the nation yet recognize a chief , desire to clear 
 all misrepresentation from his past career ; calculate , if life be 
 spar to he , on destiny high than he have yet fulfil ; issue a 
 manifesto of principle to be carry later into power , and plant a 
 banner round which the divide section of a broken host might yet rally 
 for battle and for conquest . or perhaps , in the deep of his heart   not 
 even comprehend by reporter , nor to be divine by the public , the 
 uncertainty of life be more feel than the hope of ambition ; and the 
 statesman desire to leave behind he one full vindication of that 
 public integrity and honour , on which , at least , his conscience 
 acknowledge not a stain . 

 " for more than twenty year , " say Audley , in conclusion , " I have know 
 no day in which I have not live for my country . I may at time have 
 oppose the wish of the People , - I may oppose it now ; but , so far as I 
 can form a judgment , only because I prefer their welfare to their wish . 
 and if - as I believe - there have be occasion on which , as one amongst 
 man more renowned , I have amend the law of England , confirm she 
 safety , extend her commerce , uphold her honour , I leave the rest to 
 the censure of my enemy , and   his voice tremble   to the charity of my 
 friend . " 

 before the cheer that greet the close of this speech be over , 
 Richard Avenel arise . what be call " the more respectable part " of 
 an audience - namely , the well educate and well clad , even on the 
 Yellow side of the question - wince a little for the credit of their 
 native borough , when they contemplate the candidate pit against the 
 Great Commoner , whose lofty presence still fill the eye , and whose 
 majestic tone yet sound in the ear . but the vast majority on both 
 side , Blue and Yellow , hail the rise of Dick Avenel as a relief 
 to what , while it have awe their attention , have rather strain their 
 faculty . the yellow cheer and the Blues groan ; there be a 
 tumultuous din of voice , and a reel to and fro of the whole excited 
 mass of unwashed face and brawny shoulder . but Dick have as much pluck 
 as Audley himself ; and by degree , his pluck and his handsome feature , 
 and the curiosity to hear what he have to say , obtain he a hearing ; 
 and that hear Dick have once get , he contrive to keep . his 
 self - confidence be back by a grudge against Egerton , that attain to 
 the elevation of malignity . he have arm himself for this occasion with 
 an arsenal of quotation from Audley 's speech , take out of Hansard 's 
 Debates ; and , garble these text in the unfair and most ingenious 
 manner , he contrive to split consistency into such fragment of 
 inconsistency - to cut so many harmless sentence into such unpopular , 
 arbitrary , tyrannical segment of doctrine - that he make a very pretty 
 case against the enlightened and incorruptible Egerton , as shuffler and 
 trimmer , defender of job , and eulogist of Manchester massacre , etc . 
 and all tell the more because it seem court and provoke by the 
 ex - minister 's elaborate vindication of himself . have thus , as he 
 declare , " triumphantly convict the Right Honourable Gentleman out of 
 his own mouth , " Dick consider himself at liberty to diverge into what 
 he term " the just indignation of a freeborn Briton ; " in other word , 
 into every variety of abuse which bad taste could supply to acrimonious 
 feeling . but he do it so roundly and dauntlessly , in such true husting 
 style , that for the moment , at least , he carry the bulk of the crowd 
 along with he sufficiently to bear down all the resentful murmur of 
 the Blue Committee man , and the abashed shake of the head with which 
 the more aristocratic and well - breed among the yellow signify to each 
 other that they be heartily ashamed of their candidate . Dick conclude 
 with an emphatic declaration that the Right Honourable Gentleman 's day 
 be go by ; that the people have be pillage and plunder enough by 
 pompous red - tapist , who only think of their salary , and never go 
 to their office except to waste the pen , ink , and paper which they 
 do not pay for ; that the Right Honourable Gentleman have boast he have 
 serve his country for twenty year . serve his country ! - he should have 
 say serve she out !   much laughter .   pretty mess his country be in 
 now . in short , for twenty year the Right Honourable Gentleman have put 
 his hand into his country 's pocket . " and I ask you , " bawl Dick , 
 " whether any of you be a bit the well for all that he have take out 
 of they ! " the Hundred and fifty Hesitators shake their head . " Noa , 
 that we ben't ! " cry the Hundred and fifty , dolorously . " you hear THE 
 PEOPLE ! " say Dick , turn majestically to Egerton , who , with his arm 
 fold on his breast , and his upper lip slightly curve , sit like " Atlas 
 unremove , " - " you hear the PEOPLE ! they condemn you and the whole set of 
 you . I repeat here what I once vow on a less public occasion , ' as 
 sure as my name be Richard Avenel , you shall smart for ' - Dick 
 hesitate - ' smart for your contempt of the just right , honest 
 claim , and enlighten aspiration of your indignant countryman . the 
 schoolmaster be abroad , and the British Lion be arouse ! ' " 

 Dick sit down . the curve of contempt have pass from Egerton 's lip ; at 
 the name of Avenel , thus harshly speak , he have suddenly shade his face 
 with his hand . 

 but Randal Leslie next arose , and Audley slowly raise his eye , and 
 look towards his protege with an expression of kindly interest . 
 what well debut could there be for a young man warmly attach to an 
 eminent patron who have be coarsely assail , - for a political aspirant 
 vindicating the principle which that patron represent ? the blue , 
 palpitating with indignant excitement , all prepare to cheer every 
 sentence that could embody their sense of outrage , even the mean 
 amongst the yellow , now that Dick have conclude , dimly aware that 
 their orator have lay himself terribly open , and richly deserve   more 
 especially from the friend of Audley Egerton   whatever punish retort 
 could vibrate from the heart of a man to the tongue of an orator . a 
 well opportunity for an honest young debutant could not exist ; a more 
 disagreeable , annoying , perplexing , unmanageable opportunity for randal 
 Leslie , the malice of the Fates could not have contrive . how could 
 he attack Dick Avenel , - he who count upon Dick Avenel to win his 
 election ? how could he exasperate the Yellows , when Dick 's solemn 
 injunction have be , " say nothing to make the yellow not vote for you " ? 
 how could he identify himself with Egerton 's policy , when it be his 
 own policy to make his opponent believe he an unprejudiced , sensible 
 youth , who would come all right and all Yellow one of these day ? 
 demosthene himself would have have a sore throat bad than when he 
 swallow the golden cup of Harpalus , have demosthene be place in 
 so curse a fix . therefore Randal Leslie may well be excuse if he 
 stammer and boggle , if he be appal by a cheer when he say a 
 word in vindication of Egerton , and look cringe and pitiful when 
 he sneak out a counter civility to Dick . the Blues be sadly 
 disappoint , damp ; the yellow smirk and take heart . Audley 
 Egerton 's brow darken . Harley , who be on the platform , half see 
 behind the front row , a quiet listener , bent over and whisper dryly to 
 Audley , " you should have give a lesson beforehand to your clever young 
 friend . his affection for you overpower he ! " 

 Audley make no rejoinder , but tear a leaf out of his pocketbook , and 
 write , in pencil , these word , " say that you may well feel embarrassed 
 how to reply to Mr. Avenel , because I have especially request you not 
 to be provoke to one angry expression against a gentleman whose father 
 and brother - in - law give the majority of two by which I gain my first 
 seat in parliament ; then plunge at once into general politic . " he 
 place this paper in Randal 's hand , just as that unhappy young man be 
 on the point of a thorough breakdown . randal pause , take breath , read 
 the word attentively , and amidst a general titter ; his presence of 
 mind return to he ; he see a way out of the scrape , collect himself , 
 suddenly raise his head , and in tone unexpectedly firm and fluent , 
 enlarge on the text afford to he , - enlarge so well that he take 
 the audience by surprise , please the blue by an evidence of Audley 's 
 generosity , and touch the yellow by so affectionate a deference to 
 the family of their two candidate . then the speaker be enable to come 
 at once to the topic on which he have elaborately prepare himself , and 
 deliver a set harangue , very artfully put together , - temporize it 
 be true , and trim , but full of what would have be call admirable 
 tact and discretion in an old stager who do not want to commit himself 
 to anybody or to anything . on the whole , the display become creditable , 
 at least as an evidence of thoughtful reserve , rare in a man so young ; 
 too refining and scholastic for oratory , but a very good essay , - upon 
 both side of the question . randal wipe his pale forehead and sit down , 
 cheer , especially by the lawyer present , and self - content . it be 
 now Leonard 's turn to speak . keenly nervous , as man of the literary 
 temperament be , constitutionally shy , his voice tremble as he begin . 
 but he trust , unconsciously , less to his intellect than his warm heart 
 and noble temper ; and the warm heart prompt his word , and the 
 noble temper gradually dignify his manner . he take advantage of the 
 sentence which Audley have put into Randal 's mouth , in order to efface 
 the impression make by his uncle 's rude assault . " would that the right 
 Honourable Gentleman have himself make that generous and affect 
 allusion to the service which he have deign to remember , for , in that 
 case , he   Leonard   be confident that Mr. Avenel would have lose all the 
 bitterness which political contest be apt to engender in proportion to 
 the earnestness with which political opinion be entertain . happy 
 it be when some such milder sentiment as that which Mr. Egerton have 
 instruct Mr. Leslie to convey , precede the sharp encounter , and 
 remind antagonist , as Mr. Leslie have so emphatically do , that every 
 shield have two side , and that it be possible to maintain the one side 
 to be golden , without deny the truth of the champion who assert 
 the other side to be silver . " then , without appear to throw over 
 his uncle , the young speaker contrive to insinuate an apology on his 
 uncle 's behalf , with such exquisite grace and good feeling , that he be 
 loudly cheer by both party ; and even Dick do not venture to utter 
 the dissent which struggle to his lip . 

 but if Leonard deal thus respectfully with Egerton , he have no such 
 inducement to spare randal Leslie . with the intuitive penetration of 
 mind accustomed to analyze character and investigate human nature , 
 he detect the varnish insincerity of Randal 's artful address . his 
 colour rise , his voice swell , his fancy begin to play , and his wit 
 to sparkle , when he come to take to piece his young antagonist 's 
 rhetorical mosaic . he expose the falsehood of its affected moderation ; 
 he tear into shred the veil of word , with their motley woof of yellow 
 and blue , and show that not a single conviction could be discover 
 behind it . " Mr. Leslie 's speech , " say he , " put I in mind of a 
 ferry - boat ; it seem make for no purpose but to go from one side to the 
 other . " the simile hit the truth so exactly that it be receive with a 
 roar of laughter : even Egerton smile . " for myself , " conclude Leonard , 
 as he sum up his unspare analysis , " I be new to party warfare ; yet 
 if I be not oppose Mr. Leslie as a candidate for your suffrage , 
 if I be but an elector , - belong , as I do , to the people by my 
 condition and my labour , - I should feel that he be one of those 
 politician in whom the welfare , the honour , the moral elevation of the 
 people , find no fitting representative . " 

 Leonard sit down amidst great applause , and after a speech that raise 
 the yellow in their own estimation , and materially damage randal 
 Leslie in the eye of the Blues . randal feel this , with a writhing of 
 the heart , though a sneer on the lip . he glance furtively towards Dick 
 Avenel , on whom , after all , his election , in spite of the Blues , might 
 depend . Dick answer the furtive glance by an encouraging wink . randal 
 turn to Egerton , and whisper to he , " how I wish I have have more 
 practice in speak , so that I could have do you more justice ! " 

 " thank you , Leslie ; Mr. Fairfield have supply any omission of your , 
 so far as I be concern . and you should excuse he for his attack on 
 yourself , because it may serve to convince you where your fault as a 
 speaker lie . " 

 " where ? " ask Leslie , with jealous sullenness . 

 " in not believe a single word that you say , " answer Egerton , very 
 dryly ; and then turn away , he say aloud to his proposer , and with 
 a slight sigh , " Mr. Avenel maybe proud of his nephew ! I wish that young 
 man be on our side ; I could train he into a great debater . " 

 and now the proceeding be about to terminate with a show of hand , 
 when a tall , brawny elector in the middle of the hall suddenly arise , 
 and say he have some question to put . a thrill run through the 
 assembly , for this elector be the demagogue of the Yellows , - a fellow 
 whom it be impossible to put down , a capital speaker , with lung of 
 brass . " I shall be very short , " say the demagogue . and therewith , under 
 the shape of question to the two blue candidate , he commence a most 
 furious onslaught on the Earl of Lansmere , and the earl 's son , 
 Lord L'Estrange , accuse the last of the gross intimidation and 
 corruption , and cite instance thereof as exhibit towards various 
 elector in Fish Lane and the Back Slums , who have be turn from 
 Yellow promise by the base art of blue aristocracy , represent in the 
 person of the noble lord , whom he now dare to reply . the orator pause , 
 and Harley suddenly pass into the front of the platform , in token that 
 he accept the ungracious invitation . great as have be the curiosity 
 to hear Audley Egerton , yet great , if possible , be the curiosity to 
 hear Lord L'Estrange . absent from the place for so many year , heir to 
 such immense possession , with a vague reputation for talent that he 
 have never prove , - strange , indeed , if Blue and Yellow have not strain 
 their ear and hush their breath to listen . 

 it be say that the poet be bear , and the orator make , - a say only 
 partially true . some man have be make poet , and some man have be 
 bear orator . Most probably Harley L'Estrange have hitherto never 
 speak in public ; and he have not now speak five minute before all the 
 passion and humour of the assembly be as much under his command as 
 the key of the instrument be under the hand of the musician . he have 
 take from nature a voice capable of infinite variety of modulation , a 
 countenance of the most flexible play of expression ; and he be keenly 
 alive   as profound humourist be   equally to the ludicrous and the 
 graver side of everything present to his vigorous understanding . 
 Leonard have the eloquence of a poet , Audley Egerton that of a 
 parliamentary debater ; but Harley have the rare gift of eloquence in 
 itself , apart from the matter it convey or adorn , - that gift which 
 demosthene mean by his triple requisite of an orator , which have be 
 improperly translate " action , " but mean in reality " the acting , " " the 
 stage - play . " both Leonard and Audley speak well , from the good sense 
 which their speech contain ; but Harley could have talk nonsense , 
 and make it more effective than sense , - even as a kemble or Macready 
 could produce effect from the trash talk by " the Stranger , " which 
 your merely accomplished performer would fail to extract from the 
 beauty of Hamlet . the art of oratory , indeed , be ally more closely 
 to that of the drama than to any other ; and throughout Harley 's 
 whole nature there run , as the reader may have note   though quite 
 unconsciously to Harley himself , a tendency towards that concentration 
 of thought , action , and circumstance on a single purpose , which make 
 the world form itself into a stage , and gather various and scattered 
 agency into the symmetry and compactness of a drama . this tendency , 
 though it often produce effect that appear artificially theatrical , 
 be not uncommon with person the most genuine and single - minded . it be , 
 indeed , the natural inclination of quick energy spring from warm 
 emotion . hence the very history of nation in their fresh , vigorous , 
 half - civilized youth always shape itself into dramatic form ; while , as 
 the exercise of sober reason expand with civilization , to the injury of 
 the lively faculty and more intuitive impulse , people look to the 
 dramatic form of expression , whether in thought or in action , as if it 
 be the antidote to truth , instead of be its abstract and essence . 

 but to return from this long and somewhat metaphysical digression : 
 whatever might be the cause why Harley L'Estrange speak so wonderfully 
 well , there could be no doubt that wonderfully well he do speak . he 
 turn the demagogue and his attack into the most felicitous ridicule , 
 and yet with the most genial good - humour ; describe that virtuous 
 gentleman 's adventure in search of corruption through the pure region 
 of Fish Lane and the Back Slums ; and then sum up the evidence on 
 which the demagogue have found his charge , with a humour so caustic and 
 original that the audience be convulse with laughter . from laughter 
 Harley hurry his audience almost to the pathos of tear , - for he 
 speak of the insinuation against his father so that every son and every 
 father in the assembly feel move as at the voice of Nature . 

 a turn in a sentence , and a new emotion seize the assembly . Harley be 
 identify himself with the Lansmere elector . he speak of his pride in 
 be a Lansmere man , and all the Lansmere elector suddenly feel proud 
 of he . he talk with familiar kindness of old friend remember in 
 his schoolboy holiday , rejoice to find so many alive and prospering . 
 he have a felicitous word to each . 

 " dear old Lansmere ! " say he , and the simple exclamation win he the 
 heart of all . in fine , when he pause , as if to retire , it be amidst a 
 storm of acclamation . Audley grasp his hand , and whisper , " I be 
 the only one here not surprised , Harley . now you have discover your 
 power , never again let they slumber . what a life may be yours if you no 
 long waste it ! " Harley extricate his hand , and his eye glitter . he 
 make a sign that he have more to say , and the applause be hush . " my 
 right honourable friend chide I for the year that I have waste . 
 true ; my year have be waste , - no matter how nor wherefore ! but his ! 
 how have they be spend ? in such devotion to the public that those 
 who know he not as I do , have say that he have not one feeling leave to 
 spare to the obscurer duty and more limited affection , by which man 
 of ordinary talent and humble mind rivet the link of that social 
 order which it be the august destiny of statesmen - like he who now sit 
 beside I - to cherish and defend . but , for my part , I think that there 
 be no be so dangerous as the solemn hypocrite , who , because he 
 drill his cold nature into serve mechanically some conventional 
 abstraction , - whether he call it ' the Constitution ' or ' the 
 Public , ' - hold himself dispense from whatever , in the warm blood of 
 private life , win attachment to goodness , and confidence to truth . let 
 other , then , praise my right honourable friend as the incorruptible 
 politician . pardon I if I draw his likeness as the loyal sincere man , 
 who might say with the honest priest ' that he could not tell a lie to 
 gain heaven by it ! ' - and with so fine a sense of honour , that he would 
 hold it a lie merely to conceal the truth . " Harley then draw a brilliant 
 picture of the type of chivalrous honesty , - of the ideal which the 
 English attach to the phrase of " a perfect gentleman , " apply each 
 sentence to his Right honourable friend with an emphasis that seem 
 to burst from his heart . to all of the audience , save two , it be an 
 eulogium which the fervent sincerity of the eulogist alone save from 
 hyperbole . but Levy rub his hand , and chuckle inly ; and Egerton 
 hang his head , and move restlessly on his seat . every word that Harley 
 utter lodge an arrow in Audley 's breast . amidst the cheer that 
 follow this admirable sketch of the " loyal man , " Harley recognize 
 Leonard 's enthusiastic voice . he turn sharply towards the young 
 man : " Mr. Fairfield cheer this description of integrity , and its 
 application ; let he imitate the model set before he , and he may live 
 to hear praise as genuine as mine from some friend who have test his 
 worth as I have test Mr. Egerton 's . Mr. Fairfield be a poet : his 
 claim to that title be dispute by one of the speaker who precede 
 I ! - unjustly dispute ! Mr. Fairfield be every inch a poet . but , it have 
 be ask , ' be poet fit for the business of senate ? will they not 
 be write sonnet to Peggy and Moggy , when you want they to concentrate 
 their divine imagination on the detail of a beer bill ? ' do not let 
 Mr. Fairfield 's friend be alarm . at the risk of injury to the two 
 candidate whose cause I espouse , truth compel I to say , that poet , 
 when they stoop to action , be not less prosaic than the dull amongst 
 we ; they be sway by the same selfish interest , they be move by 
 the same petty passion . it be a mistake to suppose that any detail in 
 common life , whether in public or private , can be too mean to seduce 
 the exquisite pliance of their fancy . Nay , in public life , we may trust 
 they well than other man ; for vanity be a kind of second conscience , 
 and , as a poet have himself say , - 

  " ' who fear not to do ill , yet fear the name , 
  and free from conscience , be a slave to shame . ' 

 in private life alone we do well to be on our guard against these 
 child of fancy , for they so devote to the Muse all their treasury 
 of sentiment , that we can no more expect they to waste a thought on the 
 plain duty of man , than we can expect the spendthrift , who dazzle the 
 town , ' to fritter away his money in pay his debt . ' but all the world 
 be agree to be indulgent to the infirmity of those who be their 
 own deceiver and their own chastiser . poet have more enthusiasm , more 
 affection , more heart than other ; but only for fiction of their own 
 creating . it be in vain for we to attach they to ourselves by vulgar 
 merit , by commonplace obligation , strive and sacrifice as we may . they 
 be ungrateful to we , only because gratitude be so very unpoetical a 
 subject . we lose they the moment we attempt to bind . their love - 

  " ' light as air , at sight of human tie , 
  spread its light wing , and in a moment fly . ' 

 " they follow their own caprice , adore their own delusion , and , deeming 
 the form of humanity too material for their fantastic affection , 
 conjure up a ghost , and be chill to death by its embrace ! " 

 then , suddenly aware that he be pass beyond the comprehension of his 
 audience , and touch upon the bound of his bitter secret   for here he 
 be think , not of Leonard , but of Nora , Harley give a new and more 
 homely direction to his terrible irony , - turn into tell ridicule 
 the most elevated sentiment Leonard 's speech have convey , hasten on 
 to a rapid view of political question in general , defend Leslie 
 with the same apparent earnestness and latent satire with which he have 
 eulogize Audley , and conclude a speech which , for popular effect , 
 have never be equal in that hall , amidst a diapason of cheer that 
 threaten to bring down the rafter . 

 in a few minute more the proceeding be close , a show of hand 
 take . the show be declare by the Mayor , who be a thorough Blue , in 
 favour of the Right Hon . Audley Egerton and Randal Leslie , Esquire . 

 cry of " no , " " Shame , " " Partial , " etc . , a poll demand on behalf of 
 the other two candidate , and the crowd begin to pour out of the hall . 

 Harley be the first who vanish , retreat by the private entrance . 
 Egerton follow ; randal lingering , Avenel come up and shake hand with 
 he openly , but whisper privately , " meet I to - night in Lansmere Park , 
 in the oak copse , about three hundred yard from the turnstile , at 
 the town end of the park . we must see how to make all right . what a 
 confound humbug this have be ! " 




 CHAPTER XXVI . 

 if the vigour of Harley 's address have take by surprise both friend 
 and foe , not one in that assembly - not even the conscience - stricken 
 Egerton - feel its effect so deeply as the assailed and startle Leonard . 
 he be at first perfectly stun by sarcasm which he so ill deserve ; 
 nor be it till after the assembly have break up , that Leonard could 
 even conjecture the cause which have provoke the taunt and barb 
 its dart . evidently Harley have learn   but learn only in order to 
 misconceive and to wrong   Leonard 's confession of love to Helen Digby . 
 and now those imply accusation of disregard to the duty of common 
 life not only gall the young man 's heart , but outrage his honour . he 
 feel the generous indignation of manhood . he must see Lord L'Estrange 
 at once , and vindicate himself , - vindicate Helen ; for thus to accuse one 
 be tacitly to asperse the other . 

 extricate himself from his own enthusiastic partisan , Leonard go 
 straight on foot towards Lansmere House . the Park paling touch 
 close upon the town , with a shall turnstile for foot passenger . and as 
 Leonard , avail himself of this entrance , have advance some hundred 
 yard or so through the park , suddenly , in the midst of that very copse 
 in which Avenel have appoint to meet Leslie , he find himself face to 
 face with Helen Digby herself . 

 Helen start , with a faint cry . but Leonard , absorb in his own desire 
 to justify both , hail the sight , and do not pause to account for his 
 appearance , nor to soothe her agitation . 

 " Miss Digby ! " he exclaim , throw into his voice and manner that 
 respect which often so cruelly divide the past familiarity from the 
 present alienation , " Miss Digby , I rejoice to see you , - rejoice to ask 
 your permission to relieve myself from a charge that in truth wound 
 even you , while level but at I . Lord L'Estrange have just imply , in 
 public , that I - I - who owe he so much , who have honour he so 
 truly , that even the just resentment I now feel half seem to I the 
 ingratitude with which he charge I , have imply that - ah ! Miss Digby , 
 I can scarcely command word to say what it so humiliate I to have 
 hear . but you know how false be all accusation that either of we could 
 deceive our common benefactor . suffer I to repeat to your guardian what 
 I presume to say to you when we last meet , what you answer , and state 
 how I leave your presence . " 

 " oh , Leonard ! yes ; clear yourself in his eye . go ! unjust that he be , 
 ungenerous Lord L'Estrange ! " 

 " Helen Digby ! " cry a voice , close at hand . " of whom do you speak 
 thus ? " 

 at the sound of that voice Helen and Leonard both turn , and beheld 
 Violante stand before they , her young beauty render almost sublime 
 by the noble anger that light her eye , glow in her cheek , animate she 
 stately form . 

 " be it you who thus speak of Lord L'Estrange ? you , Helen Digby , - you ! " 

 from behind Violante now emerge Mr. Dale . " softly , child , " he say ; 
 and place one hand on Violante 's shoulder , he extend the other to 
 Leonard . " what be this ? come hither to I , Leonard , and explain . " 

 Leonard walk aside with the parson , and in a few sentence give vent 
 to his swell heart . 

 the parson share in Leonard 's resentment ; and have soon draw 
 from he all that have pass in his memorable interview with Helen , 
 exclaim , - 

 " enough ! do not yet seek Lord L'Estrange yourself ; I be go to see 
 he , - I be here at his request . his summon , indeed , be for to - morrow ; 
 but the squire have write I a hurried line , request I to meet 
 he at Lansmere tomorrow and proceed with he afterwards in search of 
 poor Frank , I think I might have little time for communication with 
 Lord L'Estrange , unless I forestall his invitation and come to - day . 
 well that I do so ! I only arrive an hour since , find he be go 
 to the town - hall , and join the young lady in the Park . Miss Digby , 
 think it natural that I might wish to say something in private to 
 my old young friend Violante , walk a few pace in advance . thus , 
 fortunately , I chance to be here , to receive your account , and I trust 
 to remove misunderstanding . Lord L'Estrange must now be return . I will 
 go back to the house . you , meanwhile , return to the town , I beseech you . 
 I will come to you afterwards at your inn . your very appearance in these 
 ground , even the brief word that have pass between Helen and you , 
 might only widen the breach between yourself and your benefactor . I 
 can not bear to anticipate this . go back , I entreat you . I will explain 
 all , and Lord L'Estrange shall right you ! that is , - that must be his 
 intention ! " 

 " be - must be his intention - when he have just so wrong I ! " 

 " yes , yes , " falter the poor parson , mindful of his promise to 
 L'Estrange not to reveal his own interview with that nobleman , and yet 
 not know otherwise how to explain or to soothe ; but still believe 
 Leonard to be Harley 's son , and remember all that Harley have so 
 pointedly say of atonement , in apparent remorse for crime , Mr. Dale 
 be wholly at a loss himself to understand why Harley should have thus 
 preface atonement by an insult . anxious , however , to prevent a meeting 
 between Harley and Leonard while both be under the influence of such 
 feeling towards each other , he make an effort over himself , and so 
 well argue in favour of his own diplomacy , that Leonard reluctantly 
 consent to wait for Mr. Dale 's report . 

 " as to reparation or excuse , " say he , proudly , " it must rest with Lord 
 L'Estrange . I ask it not . tell he only this , - that if the instant 
 I hear that she whom I love and hold sacred for so many year be 
 affiance to he , I resign even the very wish to call she mine - if 
 that be desertion of man 's duty , I be guilty . if to have pray 
 night and day that she who would have bless my lonely and toilsome 
 life may give some charm to his , not bestow by his wealth and his 
 greatness - if that be ingratitude , I be ungrateful ; let he still 
 condemn I . I pass out of his sphere , - a thing that have cross it a 
 moment , and be go . but Helen he must not blame , suspect ; even by a 
 thought . one word more . in this election , this strife for object 
 wholly foreign to all my habit , unsuited to my poverty , at war with 
 aspiration so long devoted to fair goal , though by obscurer path , 
 I obey but his will or whim , - at a moment too when my whole soul 
 sicken for repose and solitude . I have force myself at last to take 
 interest in what I have before loathe . but in every hope for the future , 
 every stimulant to ambition , Lord L'Estrange 's esteem still stand before 
 I . now , what do I here long ? all of his conduct , save his contempt 
 for myself , be an enigma . and sinless he repeat a wish , which I would 
 fain still regard as a law , I retire from the contest he have embitter ; 
 I renounce the ambition he have poison ; and , mindful of those humble 
 duty which he imply that I disdain , I return to my own home . " 

 the parson nod assent to each of these sentence ; and Leonard , 
 pass by Violante and Helen , with a salutation equally distant to 
 both , retrace his step towards the town . 

 meanwhile Violante and Helen have also be in close conference , and that 
 conference have suddenly endear each to the other ; for Helen , take 
 by surprise , agitated , overpower , have reveal to Violante that 
 confession of another attachment , which she have make to Lord L'Estrange , 
 the rupture of her engagement with the latter . Violante see that Harley 
 be free . Harley , too , have promise to free herself . by a sudden 
 flash of conviction , recall his word , look , she feel that she be 
 beloved , - deem that honour alone   while either be yet shackle   have 
 forbid he to own that love . Violante stand a be transform , 
 " blush celestial rosy red , " heaven at her heart , joy in her 
 eye , - she love so well , and she trust so implicitly ! then from 
 out the overflow of her own hope and bliss she pour forth such sweet 
 comfort to Helen , that Helen 's arm steal around she ; cheek touch 
 cheek , - they be as sister . 

 at another moment , Mr. Dale might have feel some amazement at the sudden 
 affection which have spring up between these young person ; for in 
 his previous conversation with Violante , he have , as he think , very 
 artfully , and in a pleasant vein , sound the young Italian as to her 
 opinion of her fair friend 's various good quality , and Violante 
 have rather shrink from the title of " friend ; " and though she have the 
 magnanimity to speak with great praise of Helen , the praise do not 
 sound cordial . but the good man be at this moment occupy in prepare 
 his thought for his interview with Harley ; he join the two girl 
 in silence , and , link an arm of each within his own , walk slowly 
 towards the house . as he approach the terrace he observe Riccabocca 
 and randal pace the gravel walk side by side . 

 Violante , press his arm , whisper , " let we go round the other way ; I 
 would speak with you a few minute undisturbed . " 

 Mr. Dale , suppose that Violante wish to dispense with the presence 
 of Helen , say to the latter , " my dear young lady , perhaps you will 
 excuse I to Dr. Riccabocca , - who be beckon to I , and no doubt very 
 much surprised to see I here , - while I finish what I be say to 
 Violante when we be interrupt . " 

 Helen leave they , and Violante lead the parson round through the 
 shrubbery , towards the side door in another wing of the house . 

 " what have you to say to I ? " ask Mr. Dale , surprise that she 
 remain silent . 

 " you will see Lord L'Estrange . be sure that you convince he of 
 Leonard 's honour . a doubt of treachery so grieve his noble heart that 
 perhaps it may disturb his judgment . " 

 " you seem to think very highly of the heart of this Lord L'Estrange , 
 child ! " say the parson , in some surprise . Violante blush , but go on 
 firmly , and with serious earnestness : " some word which he - that be , 
 Lord L'Estrange - say to I very lately , make I so glad that you be 
 here , - that you will see he ; for I know how good you be , and how wise , 
 dear , dear Mr. Dale ! he speak as one who have receive some grievous 
 wrong , which have abruptly sour all his view of life . he speak of 
 retirement , solitude , - he on whom his country have so many claim . I know 
 not what he can mean , unless it be that his - his marriage with Helen 
 Digby be break off . " 

 " break off ! be that so ? " 

 " I have it from herself . you may well be astonish that she could even 
 think of another after have know he ! " the parson fix his eye very 
 gravely on the young enthusiast . but though her cheek glow , there be 
 in her expression of face so much artless , open innocence , that Mr. Dale 
 content himself with a slight shake of the head , and a dry remark , - 

 " I think it quite natural that Helen Digby should prefer Leonard 
 Fairfield . a good girl , not mislead by vanity and ambition , - temptation 
 of which it behove we all to beware ; nor least , perhaps , young lady 
 suddenly bring in contact with wealth and rank . as to this nobleman 's 
 merit , I know not yet whether to allow or to deny they ; I reserve my 
 judgment till after our interview . this be all you have to say to I ? " 

 Violante pause a moment . " I can not think , " she say , half smile , - " I 
 can not think that the change that have occur in he , - for change he 
 be , - that his obscure hint as to injury receive , and justice to be 
 do , be cause merely by his disappointment with regard to Helen . but 
 you can learn that ; learn if he be so very much disappointed . Nay , I 
 think not ! " 

 she slip her slight hand from the parson 's arm , and dart away 
 through the evergreen . half conceal amidst the laurel , she turn 
 back , and Mr. Dale catch her eye , half arch , half melancholy ; its light 
 come soft through a tear . 

 " I do not   half like this , " mutter the parson ; " I shall give Dr. 
 Riccabocca a caution . " so mutter , he push open the side door , and 
 find a servant , beg admittance to Lord L'Estrange . 

 Harley at that moment be closet with Levy , and his countenance be 
 compose and fearfully stern . " so , so , by this time to - morrow , " say he , 
 " Mr. Egerton will be trick out of his election by Mr. Randal Leslie ! 
 good ! by this time to - morrow his ambition will be blast by the 
 treachery of his friend ! good ! by this time to - morrow the bailiff will 
 seize his person , - ruin , beggared , pauper , and captive , - all because 
 he have trust and be deceive ! good ! and if he blame you , prudent 
 Baron Levy , if he accuse smooth Mr. Randal Leslie , forget not to say , 
 ' we be both but the blind agent of your friend Harley L'Estrange . ask 
 he why you be so miserable a dupe . ' " 

 " and might I now ask your Lordship for one word of explanation ? " 

 " no , sir ! - it be enough that I have spar you . but you be never 
 my friend ; I have no revenge against a man whose hand I never even 
 touch . " 

 the baron scowl , but there be a power about his tyrant that cow he 
 into actual terror . he resume , after a pause , " and though Mr. Leslie 
 be to be member for Lansmere , - thank to you , - you still desire that I 
 should - " 

 " do exactly as I have say . my plan now never vary a hair 's breadth . " 

 the groom of the chamber enter . 

 " my Lord , the Reverend Mr. Dale wish to know if you can receive he . " 

 " Mr. Dale ! he should have come to - morrow . say that I do not expect 
 he to - day ; that I be unfortunately engage till dinner , which will be 
 early than usual . show he into his room ; he will have but little 
 time to change his dress . by the way , Mr. Egerton dine in his own 
 apartment . " 




 CHAPTER XXVII . 

 the lead member of the Blue Committee be invite to dine at the 
 Park , and the hour for the entertainment be indeed early , as there 
 might be much need yet of active exertion on the eve of a poll in a 
 contest expect to be so close , and in which the inflexible Hundred 
 and Fifty " Waiters upon Providence " still reserve their very valuable 
 vote . 

 the party be gay and animate , despite the absence of Audley Egerton , 
 who , on the plea of increase indisposition , have shut himself up in his 
 room the instant that he have return from the town - hall , and send word 
 to Harley that he be too unwell to join the party at dinner . 

 Randal be really in high spirit , despite the very equivocal success 
 of his speech . what do it signify if a speech fail , provide the 
 election be secure ? he be long for the appointment with Dick Avenel 
 which be to make " all right ! " the squire be to bring the money for the 
 purchase of the coveted land the next morning . Riccabocca have assure 
 he , again and again , of Violante 's hand . if ever Randal Leslie could be 
 call a happy man , it be as he sit at that dinner take wine with Mr. 
 Mayor and Mr. Alderman , and look , across the gleam silver plateau , 
 down the long vista into wealth and power . 

 the dinner be scarcely over , when Lord L'Estrauge , in a brief speech , 
 remind his guest of the work still before they ; and after a toast to 
 the health of the future member for Lansmere , dismiss the Committee 
 to their labour . 

 Levy make a sign to Randal , who follow the baron to his own room . 

 " Leslie , your election be in some jeopardy . I find , from the 
 conversation of those near I at dinner , that Egerton have make such way 
 amongst the blue by his speech , and they be so afraid of lose a man 
 who do they so much credit , that the Committee man not only talk of 
 withholding from you their second vote and of plump Egerton , but of 
 subscribe privately amongst themselves to win over that coy body of a 
 Hundred and Fifty , upon whom I know that avenel count in whatever vote 
 he may be able to transfer to you . " 

 " it would be very unhandsome in the Committee , which pretend to act for 
 both of we , to plump Egerton , " say Randal , with consistent anger ; " but 
 I do not   think they can get those Hundred and fifty without the most open 
 and exortant bribery , - an expense which Egerton will not pay , and which 
 it would be very discreditable to Lord L'Estrange or his father to 
 countenance . " 

 " I tell they flatly , " return Levy , " that , as Mr. Egerton 's agent , I 
 would allow no proceeding that might vitiate the election , but that I 
 would undertake the management of these man myself ; and I be go into 
 the town in order to do so . I have also persuade the lead Committee 
 man to reconsider their determination to plump Egerton ; they have 
 decide to do as L'Estrange direct , and I know what he will say . 
 you may rely on I , " continue the baron , who speak with a dog 
 seriousness , unusual to his cynical temper , " to obtain for you the 
 preference over Audley , if it be in my power to do so . meanwhile , you 
 should really see Avenel this very night . " 

 " I have an appointment with he at ten o'clock ; and judge by his 
 speech against Egerton , I can not doubt on his aid to I , if convince 
 by his poll - book that he be not able to return both himself and his 
 impertinent nephew . my speech , however sarcastically treat by Mr. 
 Fairfield , must at least have dispose the Yellow party to vote rather 
 for I than for a determined opponent like Egerton . " 

 " I hope so ; for your speech and Fairfield 's answer have damage you 
 terribly with the blue . however , your main hope rest on my power 
 to keep those hundred and fifty rascal from split their vote 
 on Egerton , and to induce they , by all mean short of bring myself 
 before a Committee of the House of Commons for positive bribery , - which 
 would hurt most seriously my present social position , - to give one vote 
 to you . I shall tell they , as I have tell the Committee , that Egerton be 
 safe , and will pay nothing ; but that you want the vote , and that 
 I - in short , if they can be buy upon tick , I will buy they . avenel , 
 however , can serve you well here ; for as they be all yellow at heart , 
 they make no scruple of hint that they want twice as much for vote 
 Blue as they will take for voting Yellow . and Avenel be a townsman , 
 and know their way , could contrive to gain they , and yet not bribe . " 

 RANDAL   shake his head incredulously . - " not bribe ! " 

 LEVY . - " Pooh ! not bribe so as to be find out . " there be a knock at the 
 door . a servant enter and present Mr. Egerton 's compliment to Baron 
 Levy , with a request that the baron would immediately come to his room 
 for a few minute . 

 " well , " say Levy , when the servant have withdraw , " I must go to 
 Egerton , and the instant I leave he I shall repair to the town . perhaps 
 I may pass the night there . " so say , he leave Randal , and take his way 
 to Audley 's apartment . 

 " Levy , " say the statesman , abruptly , upon the entrance of the baron , 
 " have you betray my secret - my first marriage - to Lord L'Estrange ? " 

 " no , Egerton ; on my honour , I have not betray it . " 

 " you hear his speech ! do you not detect a fearful irony under his 
 praise , or be it but - but - my conscience ? " add the proud man , through 
 his set tooth . 

 " really , " say Levy , " Lord L'Estrange seem to I to select for his 
 praise precisely those point in your character which any other of your 
 friend would select for panegyric . " 

 " ay , any other of my friend ! - what friend ? " mutter Egerton , 
 gloomily . then , rouse himself , he add , in a voice that have none 
 of its accustomed clear firmness of tone , " your presence here in this 
 house , Levy , surprise I , as I tell you at the first ; I could not 
 conceive its necessity . Harley urge you to come , - he with whom you be 
 no favourite ! you and he both say that your acquaintance with 
 Richard Avenel would enable you to conciliate his opposition . I can not 
 congratulate you on your success . " 

 " my success remain to be prove . the vehemence of his attack may be but 
 a feint to cover his alliance to - morrow . " 

 Audley go on without notice of the interruption . " there be a change 
 in Harley , - to I and to all ; a change , perhaps , not perceptible to 
 other - but I have know he from a boy . " 

 " he be occupy for the first time with the practical business of life . 
 that would account for a much great change than you remark . " 

 " do you see he familiarly , converse with he often ? " 

 " no , and only on matter connect with the election . occasionally , 
 indeed , he consult I as to Randal Leslie , in whom , as your special 
 protege , he take considerable interest . " 

 " that , too , surprise I . well , I be weary of perplex myself . this 
 place be hateful ; after to - morrow I shall leave it , and breathe in 
 peace . you have see the report of the canvass ; I have have no heart to 
 inspect they . be the election as safe as they say ? " 

 " if Avenel withdraw his nephew , and the vote thus release split off 
 to you , you be secure . " 

 " and you think his nephew will be withdraw ? poor young man ! defeat at 
 his age , and with such talent , be hard to bear . " Audley sigh . 

 " I must leave you now , if you have nothing important to say , " say the 
 baron , rise . " I have much to do , as the election be yet to be win , 
 and - to you the loss of it would be - " 

 " Ruin , I know . well , Levy , it be , on the whole , to your advantage that 
 I should not lose . there may be more to get from I yet . and , judge by 
 the letter I receive this morning , my position be render so safe by 
 the absolute necessity of my party to keep I up , that the news of my 
 pecuniary difficulty will not affect I so much as I once fear . 
 never be my career so free from obstacle , so clear towards the high 
 summit of ambition ; never , in my day of ostentatious magnificence , as 
 it be now , when I be prepared to shrink into a lodging , with a single 
 servant . " 

 " I be glad to hear it ; and I be the more anxious to secure your 
 election , upon which this career must depend , because - nay , I hardly 
 like to tell you - " 

 " speak on . " 

 " I have be oblige , by a sudden rush on all my resource , to consign 
 some of your bill and promissory note to another , who , if your person 
 should not be protect from arrest by parliamentary privilege , might be 
 harsh and - " 

 " traitor ! " interrupt Egerton , fiercely , all the compose contempt with 
 which he usually treat the usurer give way , ' say no more . how could 
 I ever expect otherwise ! you have foresee my defeat , and have plan 
 my destruction . presume no reply ! Sir , begone from my presence ! " 

 " you will find that you have bad friend than myself , " say the baron , 
 move to the door ; " and if you be defeat , if your prospect for 
 life be destroy , I be the last man you will think of blame . but 
 I forgive your anger , and trust that to - morrow you will receive those 
 explanation of my conduct which you be now in no temper to bear . I go 
 to take care of the election . " 

 leave alone , Audley 's sudden passion seem to forsake he . 

 he gather together , in that prompt and logical precision which the 
 habit of transact public business bestow , all his thought , and 
 sound all his fear ; and most vivid of every thought , and most 
 intolerable of every fear , be the belief that the baron have betray 
 he to L'Estrange . 

 " I can not bear this suspense , " he cry aloud and abruptly . " I will see 
 Harley myself . open as he be , the very sound of his voice will tell I 
 at once if I be a bankrupt even of human friendship . if that friendship 
 be secure , if Harley yet clasp my hand with the same cordial warmth , all 
 other loss shall not wring from my fortitude one complaint . " 

 he ring the bell ; his valet , who be wait in the anteroom , appear . 

 " go and see if Lord L'Estrange be engage . I would speak with he . " 

 the servant come back in less than two minute . 

 " I find that my Lord be now particularly engage , since he have give 
 strict order that he be not to be disturb . " 

 " engage ! on what , whom with ? " 

 " he be in his own room , sir , with a clergyman , who arrive , and din 
 here , to - day . I be tell that he be formerly curate of Lansmere . " 

 " Lansmere ! curate ! his name , his name ! not Dale ? " 

 " yes , sir , that be the name , - the Reverend Mr. Dale . " 

 " leave I , " say Audley , in a faint voice . " Dale ! the man who suspect 
 Harley , who call on I in London , speak of a child , - my child , - and 
 send I to find but another grave ! he closet with Harley , - he ! " 

 Audley sink back on his chair , and literally gasp for breath . few 
 man in the world have a more establish reputation for the courage that 
 dignifie manhood , whether the physical courage or the moral . but at 
 that moment it be not grief , not remorse , that paralyzed Audley , - it 
 be fear . the brave man see before he , as a thing visible and menacing , 
 the aspect of his own treachery , - that crime of a coward ; and into 
 cowardice he be stricken . what have he to dread ? nothing save the 
 accuse face of an injure friend , - nothing but that . and what more 
 terrible ? the only being , amidst all his pomp of partisan , who survive 
 to love he , the only be for whom the cold statesman feel the happy , 
 living , human tenderness of private affection , lose to he forever ! 
 he cover his face with both hand , and sit in suspense of something 
 awful , as a child sit in the dark , the drop on his brow , and his frame 
 trembling . 




 CHAPTER XXVIII . 

 meanwhile Harley have listen to Mr. Dale 's vindication of Leonard with 
 cold attention . 

 " Enough , " say he , at the close . " Mr. Fairfield   for so we will yet call 
 he   shall see I to - night ; and if apology be due to he , I will make 
 it . at the same time , it shall be decide whether he continue this 
 contest or retire . and now , Mr. Dale , it be not to hear how this young 
 man woo , or shrink from wooing , my affianced bride , that I avail 
 myself of your promise to visit I at this house . we agree that the 
 seducer of Nora Avenel deserved chastisement , and I promise that 
 Nora Avenel 's son should find a father . both these assurance shall be 
 fulfil to - morrow . and you , sir , " continue Harley , rise , his whole 
 form gradually enlarge by the dignity of passion , " who wear the garb 
 appropriate to the holy office of christian charity ; you who have 
 presume to think that , before the beard have darken my cheek , I could 
 first betray the girl who have be rear under this roof , then abandon 
 she , - sneak like a dastard from the place in which my victim come to 
 die , leave my own son , by the woman thus wrong , without thought or 
 care , through the perilous year of tempt youth , till I find he , by 
 chance , an outcast in a desert more dread than Hagar 's , - you , sir , who 
 have for long year thus judge of I , shall have the occasion to direct 
 your holy anger towards the rightful head ; and in I , you who have 
 condemn the culprit shall respect the judge . " 

 Mr. Dale be at first startle , and almost awed , by this unexpected 
 burst . but , accustom to deal with the stern and the darkest 
 passion , his calm sense and his habit of authority over those whose 
 soul be bar to he , nobly recover from their surprise . " my Lord , " 
 say he , " first , with humility I bow to your rebuke , and entreat your 
 pardon for my erring , and , as you say , my uncharitable opinion . 
 we dweller in a village and obscure pastor of a humble flock , we , 
 mercifully remove from temptation , be too apt , perhaps , to exaggerate 
 its power over those whose lot be cast in that great world which have 
 so many gate ever open to evil . this be my sole excuse if I be mislead 
 by what appear to I strong circumstantial evidence . but forgive I 
 again if I warn you not to fall into an error perhaps little light 
 than my own . your passion , when you clear yourself from reproach , 
 become you . but ah , my Lord , when with that stern brow and those 
 flash eye , you launch your menace upon another over whom you would 
 constitute yourself the judge , forgetful of the divine precept , 
 ' Judge not , ' I feel that I be listen no long to honest 
 self - vindication , - I feel that I be listen to fierce revenge ! " 

 " call it revenge , or what you will , " say Harley , with sullen firmness ; 
 " but I have be sting too deeply not to ste . Frank with all , till the 
 last few day , I have ever be . Frank to you , at least , even now , 
 this much I tell you : I pretend to no virtue in what I still hold to be 
 justice ; but no declamation nor homily tend to prove that justice 
 be sinful will move my resolve . as man I have be outraged , and as 
 man I will retaliate . the way and the mode , the true criminal and his 
 fitting sentence , you will soon learn , sir . I have much to do to - night ; 
 forgive I if I adjourn for the present all further conference . " 

 " no , no ; do not dismiss I . there be something , in spite of your present 
 language , which so command my interest ; I see that there have be so 
 much suffering where there be now so much wrath , - that I would save you 
 from the suffering bad than all , - remorse . oh , pause , my dear Lord , 
 pause and answer I but two question ; then I will leave your after 
 course to yourself . " 

 " say on , sir , " say Lord L'Estrange , touch , and with respect . 

 " first ; then , analyze your own feeling . be this anger merely to punish 
 an offender and to right the living , - for who can pretend to right the 
 dead ? or be there not some private hate that stir and animate and 
 confuse all ? " 

 Harley remain silent . Mr. Dale renew , 

 " you love this poor girl . your language even now reveal it . you speak 
 of treachery : perhaps you have a rival who deceive you ; I know not , 
 guess not , whom . but if you would strike the rival , must you not wound 
 the innocent son ? and , in present Nora 's child to his father , as 
 you pledge yourself to do , can you mean some cruel mockery that , under 
 seem kindness , imply some unnatural vengeance ? " 

 " you read well the heart of man , " say Harley ; " and I have own to you 
 that I be but man . pass on ; you have another question . " 

 " and one more solemn and important . in my world of a village , revenge be 
 a common passion ; it be the sin of the uninstructed . the savage deem 
 it noble ! but Christ 's religion , which be the sublime Civilizer , 
 emphatically condemn it . why ? because religion ever seek to ennoble 
 a man ; and nothing so debase he as revenge . look into your own heart , 
 and tell I whether , since you have cherish this passion , you have not 
 feel all sense of right and wrong confuse , - have not feel that whatever 
 would before have seem to you mean and base , appear now but just 
 mean to your heated end . revenge be ever a hypocrite : rage , at least , 
 strike with the naked sword ; but revenge , stealthy and patient , 
 conceal the weapon of the assassin . my Lord , your colour change . what 
 be your answer to my question ? " 

 " oh , " exclaim Harley , with a voice thrilling in its mournful anguish , 
 " it be not since I have cherish the revenge that I be change , that 
 right and wrong grow dark to I , that hypocrisy seem the atmosphere fit 
 for earth . no ; it be since the discovery that demand the vengeance . it 
 be useless , sir , " he continue impetuously , - " useless to argue with I . 
 be I to sit down , patient and impotent , under the sense of the wrong 
 which I have receive , I should feel , indeed , that debasement which you 
 ascribe to the gratification of what you term revenge . I should never 
 regain the self - esteem which the sentiment of power now restore to I ; 
 I should feel as if the whole world could perceive and jeer at my meek 
 humiliation . I know not why I have say so much , - why I have betray 
 to you so much of my secret mind , and stoop to vindicate my purpose . I 
 never mean it . again I say , we must close this conference . " Harley here 
 walk to the door , and open it significantly . 

 " one word more , Lord L'Estrange , - but one . you will not hear I . I be a 
 comparative stranger , but you have a friend , a friend dear and intimate , 
 now under the same roof . will you consent , at least , to take counsel 
 of Mr. Audley Egerton ? none can doubt his friendship for you ; none 
 can doubt that whatever he advise will be that which well become your 
 honour . what , my Lord , you hesitate , - you feel ashamed to confide to 
 your dear friend a purpose which his mind would condemn ? then I 
 will seek he , I will implore he to save you from what can but entail 
 repentance . " 

 " Mr. Dale , I must forbid you to see Mr. Egerton . what have pass between 
 we ought to be as sacred to you as a priest of Rome hold confession . 
 this much , however , I will say to content you : I promise that I will 
 do nothing that shall render I unworthy of Mr. Audley Egerton 's 
 friendship , or which his fine sense of honour shall justify he in 
 blaming . let that satisfy you . " 

 " ah , my Lord , " cry Mr. Dale , pausing irresolute at the doorway , and 
 seize Harley 's hand , " I should indeed be satisfied if you would submit 
 yourself to high counsel than mine , - than Mr. Egerton 's , than man 's . 
 have you never feel the efficacy of prayer ? " 

 " my life have be waste , " reply Harley , " and I dare not , therefore , 
 boast that I have find prayer efficacious . but , so far back as I can 
 remember , it have at least be my habit to pray to Heaven , night and 
 morning , until at least - until - " the natural and obstinate candour of 
 the man force out the last word , which imply reservation . he stop 
 short . 

 " until you have cherish revenge ? you have not dare to pray since ? 
 oh , reflect what evil there be within we , when we dare not come before 
 Heaven , - dare not pray for what we wish . you be move . I leave you to 
 your own thought . " Harley incline his head , and the parson pass he 
 by , and leave he alone , - startle indeed ; but be he soften ? as Mr. 
 Dale hurry along the corridor , much agitated , Violante steal from a 
 recess form by a large bay window , and link her arm in his , say 
 anxiously , but timidly : " I have be wait for you , dear Mr. Dale ; and 
 so long ! you have be with Lord L'Estrange ? " 

 " well ! " 

 " why do you not speak ? you have leave he comfort , happy ? " 

 " Happier ! no . " 

 " what ! " say Violante , with a look of surprise , and a sadness not 
 unmixe with petulance in her quick tone . " what ! do he then so grieve 
 that Helen prefer another ? " 

 despite the grave emotion that disturb his mind , Mr. Dale be strike 
 by Violante 's question , and the voice in which it be say . he love 
 she tenderly . " child , child , " say he , " I be glad that Helen have escape 
 Lord L'Estrange . Beware , oh , beware how he excite any gentler interest 
 in yourself . he be a dangerous man , - more dangerous for glimpse of a 
 fine original nature . he may well move the heart of the innocent and 
 inexperienced , for he have strangely creep into mine . but his heart be 
 swollen with pride and ire and malice . " 

 " you mistake ; it be false ! " cry Violante , impetuously . " I can not 
 believe one word that would asperse he who have save my father from a 
 prison , or from death . you have not treat he gently . he fancy he 
 have be wrong by Leonard , receive ingratitude from Helen . he have 
 feel the sting in proportion to his own susceptible and generous heart , 
 and you have chide where you should have soothe . poor Lord L'Estrange ! 
 and you have leave he still indignant and unhappy ? " 

 " foolish girl ! I have leave he meditate sin ; I have leave he afraid to 
 pray ; I have leave he on the brink of some design - I know not what - but 
 which involve more than Leonard in project of revenge ; I have leave he 
 so , that if his heart be really susceptible and generous , he will wake 
 from wrath to be the victim of long and unavaile remorse . if your 
 father have influence over he , tell Dr. Riccabocca what I say , and bid 
 he seek , and in his turn save , the man who save himself . he have not 
 listen to religion , - he maybe more docile to philosophy . I can not stay 
 here long , - I must go to Leonard . " 

 Mr. Dale break from Violante and hurry down the corridor ; Violante 
 stand on the same spot , stunned and breathless . Harley on the brink of 
 some strange sin ! Harley to wake , the victim of remorse ! Harley to be 
 save , as he have save her father ! her breast heave , her colour go 
 and come , her eye be raise , her lip murmur . she advance with 
 soft footstep up the corridor ; she see the light gleam from 
 Harley 's room , and suddenly they be darken , as the inmate of the 
 room shut to the door , with angry and impatient hand . 

 an outward act often betray the inward mind . as Harley have thus close 
 the door , so have he seek to shut his heart from the intrusion of 
 soft and holier thought . he have turn to his hearthstone , and 
 stand on it , resolve and harden . the man who have love with such 
 pertinacious fidelity far so many year could not at once part with 
 hate . a passion once admit to his breast , clung to it with such 
 rooted force ! but woe , woe to thee , Harley L'Estrange , if tomorrow 
 at this hour thou stand at the hearthstone , thy design accomplish , 
 know that , in the fulfilment of thy blind will , thou hast meet 
 falsehood with falsehood , and deception with deceit ! what though those 
 design now seem so consummate , so just , so appropriate , so exquisite a 
 revenge , - seem to thee the sole revenge wit can plan and civilized life 
 allow : wilt thou ever wash from thy memory the stain that will sully 
 thine honour ? Thou , too , profess friendship still , and mask 
 perfidy under smile ! grant that the wrong be great as thou deem it , - be 
 ten time great : the sense of thy meanness , o gentleman and soldier , 
 will bring the blush to thy cheek in the depth of thy solitude . Thou , 
 who now thinkest other unworthy a trustful love , wilt feel thyself 
 forever unworthy theirs . Thy seclusion will know not repose . the dignity 
 of man will forsake thee . Thy proud eye will quail from the gaze . Thy 
 step will no long spurn the earth that it tread on . he who have 
 once do a base thing be never again wholly reconcile to honour . and 
 woe - thrice woe , if thou learn too late that thou hast exaggerated thy 
 fancy wrong : that there be excuse , where thou se none ; that thy 
 friend may have err , but that his error be venial compare to thy 
 fancied retribution ! 

 thus , however , in the superb elation of conscious power , though lavish 
 on a miserable object , - a terrible example of what change one evil and 
 hateful thought , cherish to the exclusion of all other , can make 
 in the noble nature , stand , on the hearth of his father , and on the 
 abyss of a sorrow and a shame from which there could be no recall , the 
 determined and scornful man . 

 a hand be on the door , - he do not hear it ; a form pass the 
 threshold,-he do not see it ; a light step pause , a soft eye gaze . 
 Deaf and blind still to both . 

 Violante come on , gather courage , and stand at the hearth by his 
 side . 




 CHAPTER XXIX . 

 " LORD L'ESTRANGE , noble friend ! " 

 " you ! - and here - Violante ? be it I whom you seek ? for what ? good 
 heaven ! what have happen ? why be you so pale ; why tremble ? " 

 " have you forgive Helen ? " ask Violante , begin with evasive 
 question , and her cheek be pale no more . " Helen , the poor child ! I have 
 nothing in she to forgive , much to thank she for . she have be frank and 
 honest . " 

 " and Leonard - whom I remember in my childhood - you have forgive he ? " 

 " fair mediator , " say Harley , smile , though coldly , " happy be the man 
 who deceive another ; all plead for he . and if the man deceive can not 
 forgive , no one will sympathize or excuse . " 

 " but Leonard do not deceive you ? " 

 " yes , from the first . it be a long tale , and not to be tell to you ; but 
 I can not forgive he . " 

 " Adieu ! my Lord . Helen must , then , still be very dear to you ! " Violante 
 turn away . her emotion be so artless , her very anger so charming , 
 that the love , against which , in the prevalence of his later and dark 
 passion , he have so sternly struggle , rush back upon Harley 's breast ; 
 but it come only in storm . 

 " stay , but talk not of Helen ! " he exclaim . " ah , if Leonard 's sole 
 offence have be what you appear to deem it , do you think I could feel 
 resentment ? no ; I should have gratefully hail the hand that sever a 
 rash and ungenial tie . I would have give my ward to her lover with such 
 a dower as it suit my wealth to bestow . but his offence date from 
 his very birth . to bless and to enrich the son of a man who - Violante , 
 listen to I . we may soon part , and forever . other may misconstrue my 
 action ; you , at least , shall know from what just principle they spring . 
 there be a man whom I single out of the world as more than a brother . 
 in the romance of my boyhood I see one who dazzle my fancy , captivate 
 my heart . it be a dream of Beauty breathe into wake life . I 
 love , - I believe myself belove . I confide all my heart to this 
 friend , - this more than brother ; he undertake to befriend and to aid 
 my suit . on that very pretext he first see this ill - fat girl , see , 
 betray , destroy she ; leave I ignorant that her love , which I have 
 think mine , have be lavish so wildly on another ; leave I to believe 
 that my own suit she have flee , but in generous self - sacrifice , - for 
 she be poor and humbly bear ; that - oh , vain idiot that I be ! - the 
 self - sacrifice have be too strong for a young human heart , which have 
 break in the struggle ; leave I to corrode my spring of life in remorse ; 
 clasp my hand in mocking comfort , smile at my tear of agony - not one 
 tear himself for his own poor victim ! and suddenly , not long since , I 
 learn all this . and in the father of Leonard Fairfield , you behold 
 the man who have poison all the well - spring of joy to I . you weep ! 
 oh , Violante ! the Past he have blight and embitter , - that I could 
 forgive ; but the Future be blast too . for just ere this treason 
 be reveal to I , I have begin to awake from the torpor of my dreary 
 penance , to look with fortitude towards the duty I have slight , to 
 own that the pilgrimage before I be not barren . and then , oh then , I 
 feel that all love be not bury in a grave . I feel that you , have 
 fate so grant , might have be all to my manhood which youth only 
 see through the delusion of its golden mist . true , I be then bind 
 to Helen ; true , that honour to she might forbid I all hope . but still , 
 even to know that my heart be not all ash , that I could love again , 
 that that glorious power and privilege of our being be still mine , 
 seem to I so heavenly sweet . but then this revelation of falsehood 
 burst on I , and all truth seem blot from the universe . I be free 
 from Helen ; ah , freed , forsooth , - because not even rank and wealth , and 
 benefit and confide tenderness , could bind to I one human heart ! 
 free from she ; but between I and your fresh nature stand Suspicion as 
 an Upas tree . not a hope that would pass through the tainted air and fly 
 to you , but fall dead under the dismal bough . I love ! 

 " ha , ha ! I - I , whom the past have teach the impossibility to be love 
 again . no : if those soft lip murmur ' yes ' to the burn prayer that , 
 have I be free but two short week ago , would have rush from 
 the frank deep of my heart , I should but imagine that you deceive 
 yourself , - a girl 's first fleeting delusive fancy , - nothing more ! be 
 you my bride , Violante , I should but debase your bright nature by my own 
 curse of distrust . at each word of tenderness , my heart would say , ' how 
 long will this last ; when will the deception come ? ' your beauty , your 
 gift , would bring I but jealous terror , eternally I should fly from 
 the Present to the Future , and say . ' these hair will be gray , while 
 flattering youth will surround she in the zenith of her charm . ' why 
 then do I hate and curse my foe ? why do I resolve upon revenge ? I 
 comprehend it now . I know that there be something more imperious than 
 the ghost of the past that urge I on . gaze on you , I feel that it 
 be the dim sense of a mighty and priceless loss ; it be not the dead 
 Nora , - it be the live Violante . look not at I with those reproachful 
 eye : they can not reverse my purpose ; they can not banish suspicion from 
 my sickened soul ; they can not create a sunshine in the midst of this 
 ghastly twilight . go , go ; leave I to the sole joy that bequeath no 
 disappointment , the sole feeling that unite I to social man ; leave I 
 to my revenge . " 

 " revenge ! oh , cruel ! " exclaim Violante , lay her hand on his arm . 
 " and in revenge , it be your own life that you will risk ! " 

 " my life , simple child ! this be no contest of life against life . could I 
 bare to all the world my wrong for their ribald laughter , I should only 
 give to my foe the triumph to pity my frenzy , to shun the contest ; or 
 grant it , if I could find a second - and then fire in the air . and all 
 the world would say , ' Generous Egerton ! soul of honour ! ' " 

 " Egerton , Mr. Egerton ! he can not be this foe ? it be not on he you can 
 design revenge , - you who spend all your hour in serve his cause , you 
 to whom he trust so fondly , you who lean yesterday on his shoulder , 
 and smile so cheeringly in his face ? " 

 " do I ? Hypocrisy against hypocrisy , snare against snare : that be my 
 revenge . " 

 " Harley , Harley ! Cease , cease ! " 

 the storm of passion rush on unheede . 

 " I seem to promote his ambition but to crush it into the mire . I have 
 deliver he from the gentle gripe of an usurer , so that he shall hold 
 at my option alm or a prison - " 

 " Friend , friend ! hush , hush ! " 

 " I have make the youth he have rear and foster into treachery like 
 his own   your father 's precious choice , Randal Leslie   mine instrument 
 in the gall lesson how ingratitude can sting . his very son shall 
 avenge the mother , and be lead to his father 's breast as victor , with 
 Randal Leslie , in the contest that deprive sire and benefactor of all 
 that make life dear to ambitious egotism . and if , in the breast of 
 Audley Egerton , there can yet lurk one memory of what I be to he 
 and to truth , not his least punishment will be the sense that his own 
 perfidy have so change the man whose very scorn of falsehood have teach 
 he to find in fraud itself the power of retribution . " 

 " if this be not a terrible dream , " murmur Violante , recoil , " it be 
 not your foe alone that you will deprive of all that make life dear . 
 Act thus - and what , in the future , be leave to I ? " 

 " to you ? oh , never fear . I may give Randal Leslie a triumph over his 
 patron , but in the same hour I will unmask his villany , and sweep 
 he forever from your path . what in the future be leave to you ? - your 
 birthright and your native land ; hope , joy , love , felicity . could it be 
 possible that in the soft but sunny fancy which play round the heart 
 of maiden youth , but still send no warmth into its deep , - could it be 
 possible that you have honour I with a gentler thought , it will pass 
 away , and you will be the pride and delight of one of your own year , to 
 whom the vista of Time be haunt by no chill spectre , one who can 
 look upon that lovely face , and not turn away to mutter , ' too fair , too 
 fair for I ! ' " 

 " oh , agony ! " exclaim Violante , with sudden passion . " in my turn hear 
 I . if , as you promise , I be release from the dreadful thought that he , 
 at whose touch I shudder , can claim this hand , my choice be irrevocably 
 make . the altar which await I will not be those of a human love . but 
 oh , I implore you - by all the memory of your own life , hitherto , if 
 sorrowful , unsullied , by the generous interest you yet profess for 
 I , whom you will have twice save from a danger to which death be 
 mercy - leave , oh , leave to I the right to regard your image as I have 
 do from the first dawn of childhood . leave I the right to honour and 
 revere it . let not an act accompany with a meanness - oh that I should 
 say the word ! - a meanness and a cruelty that give the lie to your whole 
 life - make even a grateful remembrance of you an unworthy sin . when I 
 kneel within the wall that divide I from the world , oh , let I think 
 that I can pray for you as the noble be that the world contain ! 
 hear I ! hear I ! " 

 " Violante ! " murmur Harley , his whole frame heave with emotion , " bear 
 with I . do not ask of I the sacrifice of what seem to I the cause 
 of manhood itself , - to sit down , meek and patient , under a wrong that 
 debase I , with the consciousness that all my life I have be the 
 miserable dupe to affection I deem so honest , to regret that I 
 believe so holy . ah , I should feel more mean in my pardon than you can 
 think I in revenge ! be it an acknowledge enemy , I could open my arm 
 to he at your bidding ; but the perfidious friend ! - ask it not . my 
 cheek burn at the thought , as at the stain of a blow . give I but 
 to - morrow - one day - I demand no more - wholly to myself and to the past , 
 and mould I for the future as you will . Pardon , pardon the ungenerous 
 thought that extend distrust to you . I retract they ; they be 
 go , - dispel before those touching word , those ingenuous eye . at 
 your foot , Violante , I repent and I implore ! your father himself shall 
 banish your sordid suitor . before this hour to - morrow you will be free . 
 oh , then , then ! will you not give I this hand to guide I again into 
 the paradise of my youth ? Violante , it be in vain to wrestle with 
 myself , to doubt , to reason , to be wisely fearful ! I love , I love you ! I 
 trust again in virtue and faith . I place my fate in your keeping . " if 
 at time Violante may appear to have venture beyond the limit of strict 
 maiden bashfulness , much may be ascribe to her habitual candour , her 
 solitary rearing , and remoteness from the world , the very innocence of 
 her soul , and the warmth of heart which Italy give its daughter . but 
 now that sublimity of thought and purpose which pervade her nature , 
 and require only circumstance to develop , make she superior to all the 
 prompting of love itself . dream realize which she have scarcely dare 
 to own ; Harley free , Harley at her foot ; all the woman struggle at her 
 heart , mantle in her blush , still strong than love , strong than 
 the joy of be love again , be the heroic will , - will to save he , 
 who in all else rule her existence , from the eternal degradation to 
 which passion have blind his own confused and war spirit . 

 leave one hand in his impassioned clasp , as he still knelt before she , 
 she raise on high the other . " ah , " she say , scarce audibly , - " ah , if 
 heaven vouchsafe I the proud and blissful privilege to be ally to 
 your fate , to minister to your happiness , never should I know one fear 
 of your distrust . no time , no change , no sorrow - not even the loss of 
 your affection - could make I forfeit the right to remember that you have 
 once confide to I a heart so noble . but " - here her voice rise in its 
 tone , and the glow flee from her cheek - " but , o Thou the ever present , 
 hear and receive the solemn vow . if to I he refuse to sacrifice the sin 
 that would debase he , that sin be the barrier between we evermore ; 
 and may my life , devote to Thy service , atone for the hour in which 
 he belie the nature he receive from Thee ! Harley , release I ! I have 
 speak : firm as yourself , I leave the choice to you . " 

 " you judge I harshly , " say Harley , rise , with sullen anger ; " but at 
 least I have not the meanness to sell what I hold as justice , though the 
 bribe may include my last hope of happiness . " 

 " Meanness ! oh , unhappy , belove Harley ! " exclaim Violante , with such 
 a gush of exquisite reproachful tenderness , that it thrill he as 
 the voice of the parting guardian angel . " Meanness ! but it be that from 
 which I implore you to save yourself . you can not judge , you can not see . 
 you be dark , dark . lose Christian that you be , what bad than 
 heathen darkness to feign the friendship the well to betray ; to punish 
 falsehood by become yourself so false ; to accept the confidence even 
 of your bitter foe , and then to sink below his own level in deceit ? 
 and oh , bad than all - to threaten that a son - son of the woman you 
 profess to love - should swell your vengeance against a father ! no ! it 
 be not you that say this , - it be the fiend ! " 

 " enough ! " exclaim Harley , startle , conscience - stricken , and rush 
 into resentment , in order to escape the sense of shame . " enough ! you 
 insult the man you profess to honour . " 

 " I honour the prototype of gentleness and valour . I honour one who 
 seem to I to clothe with life every grand and generous image that be 
 bear from the soul of poet . destroy that ideal , and you destroy the 
 Harley whom I honour . he be dead to I forever . I will mourn for he 
 as his widow , faithful to his memory , weep over the thought of what 
 he be . " Sobs choke her voice ; but as Harley , once more melt , sprang 
 forward to regain her side , she escape with a yet quick movement , 
 gain the door , and dart down the corridor , vanish from his sight . 

 Harley stand still one moment , thoroughly irresolute , nay , almost 
 subdue . then sternness , though less rigid than before , gradually come 
 to his brow . the demon have still its hold in the stubborn and marvellous 
 pertinacity with which the man clung to all that once strike root at his 
 heart . with a sudden impulse that still withhold decision , yet speak 
 of sore - shake purpose , he stride to his desk , draw from it Nora 's 
 manuscript , and pass from his room . 

 Harley have mean never to have reveal to Audley the secret he 
 have gain until the moment when revenge be consummate . he have 
 contemplate no vain reproach . his wrath would have speak forth in 
 deed , and then a word would have suffice as the key to all . willing , 
 perhaps , to hail some extenuation of perfidy , though the possibility 
 of such extenuation he have never before admit , he determine on 
 the interview which he have hitherto so obstinately shun , and go 
 straight to the room in which Audley Egerton still sit , solitary and 
 fearful . 




 CHAPTER XXX . 

 Egerton hear the well - know step advance near and nearer up the 
 corridor , hear the door open and reclose ; and he feel , by one of those 
 strange and unaccountable instinct which we call foreboding , that the 
 hour he have dread for so many secret year have come at last . he nerve 
 his courage , withdraw his hand from his face , and rise in silence . 

 no less silent , Harley stand before he . the two man gaze on each 
 other ; you might have hear their breathing . 

 " you have see Mr. Dale ? " say Egerton , at length . " you know - " 

 " All ! " say Harley , complete the arrest sentence . Audley draw a long 
 sigh . " be it so ; but no , Harley , you deceive yourself ; you can not know 
 all , from any one living , save myself . " 

 " my knowledge come from the dead , " answer Harley , and the fatal 
 memoir drop from his hand upon the table . the leaf fall with a 
 dull , low sound , mournful and faint as might be the tread of a ghost , if 
 the tread give sound . they fall , those still confession of an obscure , 
 uncomprehended life , amidst letter and document eloquent of the strife 
 that be then agitate million , - the fleeting , turbulent fear and 
 hop that torture party and perplex a nation ; the stormy business 
 of practical public life , so remote from individual love and individual 
 sorrow . 

 Egerton 's eye see they fall . the room be but partially light . at 
 the distance where he stand , he do not recognize the character ; but 
 involuntarily he shiver , and involuntarily draw near . 

 " hold yet awhile , " say Harley . " I produce my charge , and then I leave 
 you to dispute the only witness that I bring . Audley Egerton , you take 
 from I the grave trust one man can confide to another . you know how 
 I love Leonora Avenel . I be forbid to see and urge my suit ; you have 
 the access to her presence which be deny to myself . I pray you 
 to remove scruple that I deem too generous , and to woo she not to 
 dishonour , but to be my wife . be it so ? answer . " 

 " it be true , " say Audley , his hand clench at his heart . " you see she 
 whom I thus love , - she thus confide to your honour . you woo she for 
 yourself . be it so ? " 

 " Harley , I deny it not . cease here . I accept the penalty ; I resign your 
 friendship ; I quit your roof ; I submit to your contempt ; I dare not 
 implore your pardon . cease ; let I go hence , and soon ! " 

 the strong man gasp for breath . Harley look at he steadfastly , then 
 turn away his eye , and go on . " Nay , " say he , " be that ALL ? you 
 woo she for yourself , - you win she . account to I for that life which 
 you wrench from mine . you be silent . I will take on myself your task ; 
 you take that life and destroy it . " 

 " spare I , spare I ! " 

 " what be the fate of she who seem so fresh from heaven when these 
 eye beheld she last ? a broken heart , a dishonour name , an early doom , 
 a forget gravestone ! " 

 " no , no - forget , - no ! " 

 " not forget ! Scarce a year pass , and you be married to another . 
 I aid you to form those nuptial which secure your fortune . you 
 have have rank and power and fame . peer call you the type of english 
 gentleman ; priest hold you as a model of christian honour . strip the 
 mask , Audley Egerton ; let the world know you for what you be ! " 

 Egerton raise his head , and fold his arm calmly ; but he say , with a 
 melancholy humility , " I bear all from you ; it be just . say on . " 

 " you take from I the heart of Nora Avenel . you abandon she , you 
 destroy . and her memory cast no shadow over your daily sunshine ; while 
 over my thought , over my life - oh , Egerton - Audley , Audley - how could 
 you have deceive I thus ! " here the inherent tenderness under all this 
 hate , the fount imbed under the harden stone , break out . Harley 
 be ashamed of his weakness , and hurry on , 

 " deceive , - not for an hour , a day , but through blighted youth , through 
 listless manhood , - you suffer I to nurse the remorse that should have 
 be your own ; her life slain , mine waste , - and shall neither of we 
 have revenge ? " 

 " revenge ! ah , Harley , you have have it ! " 

 " no , but I await it ! not in vain from the charnel have come to I the 
 record I produce . and whom do fate select to discover the wrong of 
 the mother , whom appoint as her avenger ? your son , - your own son ; your 
 abandon , nameless son ! " 

 " Son ! son ! " 

 " whom I deliver from famine , or from bad ; and who , in return , have 
 give into my hand the evidence which proclaim in you the perjure 
 friend of Harley L'Estrange , and the fraudulent seducer , under mock 
 marriage form - bad than all franker sin - of Leonora Avenel . " 

 " it be false ! false ! " exclaim Egerton , all his stateliness and all his 
 energy restore to he . " I forbid you to speak thus to I . I forbid you 
 by one word to sully the memory of my lawful wife ! " 

 " ah ! " say Harley , startle . " ah ! false ? prove that , and revenge be 
 over ! thank Heaven ! " 

 " prove it ! what so easy ? and wherefore have I delay the proof ; 
 wherefore conceal , but from tenderness to you , - dread , too - a selfish 
 but human dread - to lose in you the sole esteem that I covet ; the only 
 mourner who would have shed one tear over the stone inscribe with some 
 lie epitaph , in which it will suit a party purpose to proclaim the 
 gratitude of a nation . vain hope . I resign it ! but you speak of a son . 
 Alas , alas ! you be again deceive . I hear that I have a son , - year , 
 long year ago . I seek he , and find a grave . but bless you , Harley , 
 if you succour one whom you even erringly suspect to be Leonora 's 
 child ! " he stretch forth his hand as he speak . 

 " of your son we will speak later , " say Harley , strangely soften . " but 
 before I say more of he , let I ask you to explain ; let I hope that 
 you can extenuate what - " 

 " you be right , " interrupt Egerton , with eager quickness . " you would 
 know from my own lip at last the plain tale of my own offence against 
 you . it be due to both . patiently hear I out . " 

 then Egerton tell all , - his own love for Nora , his struggle against 
 what he feel as treason to his friend , his sudden discovery of Nora 's 
 love for he ; on that discovery , the overthrow of all his resolution ; 
 their secret marriage , their separation ; Nora 's flight , to which Audley 
 still assign but her groundless vague suspicion that their nuptial 
 have not be legal , and her impatience of his own delay in acknowledge 
 the rite . 

 his listener interrupt he here with a few question , the clear 
 and prompt reply to which enable Harley to detect Levy 's plausible 
 perversion of the fact ; and he vaguely guess the cause of the 
 usurer 's falsehood , in the criminal passion which the ill - fat bride 
 have inspire . 

 " Egerton , " say Harley , stifle with an effort his own wrath against 
 the vile deceiver both of wife and husband , " if , on read those 
 paper , you find that Leonora have more excuse for her suspicion and 
 flight than you now deem , and discover perfidy in one to whom you 
 trust your secret , leave his punishment to Heaven . all that you say 
 convince I more and more that we can not even see through the cloud , 
 much less guide the thunderbolt . but proceed . " 

 Audley look surprised and startle , and his eye turn wistfully 
 towards the paper ; but after a short pause he continue his recital . he 
 come to Nora 's unexpected return to her father 's house , her death , his 
 conquest of his own grief , that he might spare Harley the abrupt 
 shock of learn her decease . he have tear himself from the dead , in 
 remorseful sympathy with the living . he speak of Harley 's illness , so 
 nearly fatal , repeat Harley 's jealous word , " that he would rather 
 mourn Nora 's death , than take comfort from the thought that she have 
 love another . " he speak of his journey to the village where Mr. Dale 
 have tell he Nora 's child be place - " and , hear that child and 
 mother be alike gone , whom now could I right by acknowledge a bond 
 that I fear would so wring your heart ? " Audley again pause a moment , 
 and resume in short , nervous , impressive sentence . this cold , austere 
 man of the world for the first time bar his heart , - unconscious , 
 perhaps , that he do so ; unconscious that he reveal how deeply , 
 amidst State care and public distinction , he have feel the absence of 
 affection ; how mechanical be that outer circle in the fold of life 
 which be call a " career ; " how valueless wealth have grow - none to 
 inherit it . of his gnawing and progressive disease alone he do not 
 speak ; he be too proud and too masculine to appeal to pity for physical 
 ill . he remind Harley how often , how eagerly , year after year , month 
 after month , he have urge his friend to rouse himself from mournful 
 dream , devote his native power to his country , or seek the surer 
 felicity of domestic tie . " selfish in these attempt I might be , " say 
 Egerton ; " it be only if I see you restore to happiness that I could 
 believe you could calmly hear my explanation of the past , and on the 
 floor of some happy home grant I your forgiveness . I long to confess , 
 and I dare not . often have the word rush to my lip , - as often 
 some chance sentence from you repel I . in a word , with you be so 
 entwine all the thought and affection of my youth - even those 
 that haunt the grave of Nora - that I could not bear to resign your 
 friendship , and , surround by the esteem and honour of a world I care 
 not for , to meet the contempt of your reproachful eye . " 

 amidst all that Audley say , amidst all that admit of no excuse , 
 two predominant sentiment stand clear , in unmistakable and touching 
 pathos , - remorseful regret for the lost Nora , and self - accuse , 
 earnest , almost feminine tenderness for the friend he have deceive . 
 thus , as he continue to speak , Harley more and more forgot even the 
 remembrance of his own guilty and terrible interval of hate ; the gulf 
 that have so darkly yawn between the two close up , leave they still 
 stand side by side , as in their schoolboy day . but he remain 
 silent , listen , shade his face from Audley , and as if under some 
 soft but enthral spell , till Egerton thus close , 

 " and now , Harley , all be tell . you speak of revenge ? " 

 " revenge ! " mutter Harley , start . 

 " and believe I , " continue Egerton , " be revenge in your power , I 
 should rejoice at it as an atonement . to receive an injury in return 
 for that which , first from youthful passion , and afterwards from the 
 infirmity of purpose that conceal the wrong , I have inflict 
 upon you - why , that would soothe my conscience , and raise my lost 
 self - esteem . the sole revenge you can bestow take the form which most 
 humiliate I , - to revenge be to pardon . " 

 Harley groan ; and still hide his face with one hand , stretch forth 
 the other , but rather with the air of one who entreat than who accord 
 forgiveness . Audley take and press the hand thus extend . 

 " and now , Harley , farewell . with the dawn I leave this house . I 
 can not now accept your aid in this election . Levy shall announce my 
 resignation . randal Leslie , if you so please it , may be return in 
 my stead . he have ability which , under safe guidance , may serve his 
 country ; and I have no right to reject from vain pride whatever will 
 promote the career of one whom I undertake , and have fail , to serve . " 

 " ay , ay , " mutter Harley ; " think not of randal Leslie ; think but of 
 your son . " 

 " my son ! but be you sure that he still live ? you smile ; you - you - oh , 
 Harley , I take from you the mother , - give to I the son ; break my heart 
 with gratitude . your revenge be find ! " 

 Lord L'Estrange rise with a sudden start , gaze on Audley for a 
 moment , - irresolute , not from resentment , but from shame . at that moment 
 he be the man humble ; he be the man who fear reproach , and who 
 need pardon . Audley , not divine what be thus pass in Harley 's 
 breast , turn away . 

 " you think that I ask too much ; and yet all that I can give to the child 
 of my love and the heir of my name be the worthless blessing of a ruin 
 man . Harley , I say no more . I dare not add , ' you too love his mother ! 
 and with a deep and a nobler love than mine . ' " he stop short , and 
 Harley fling himself on his breast . 

 " Me - I - pardon I , Audley ! your offence have be slight to mine . you 
 have tell I your offence ; never can I name to you my own . rejoice that 
 we have both to exchange forgiveness , and in that exchange we be equal 
 still , Audley , brother still . look up ! look up ! think that we be boy 
 now as we be once , - boy who have have their wild quarrel , and who , the 
 moment it be over , feel dearer to each other than before . " 

 " oh , Harley , this be revenge ! it strike home , " murmur Egerton , and 
 tear gush fast from eye that could have gaze unwinking on the rack . 
 the clock strike ; Harley spring forward . 

 " I have time yet , " he cry . " much to do and to undo . you be save from 
 the grasp of Levy ; your election will be win ; your fortune in much may 
 be restore ; you have before you honour not yet achieve ; your career 
 as yet be scarce begin ; your son will embrace you to - morrow . let I 
 go - your hand again ! ah , Audley , we shall be so happy yet ! " 




 CHAPTER XXXI . 

 " there be a hitch , " say Dick , pithily , when Randal join he in the 
 oak copse at ten o'clock . " life be full of hitch . " 

 RANDAL . - " the art of life be to smooth they away . what hitch be this , my 
 dear avenel ? " 

 DICK . - " Leonard have take huff at certain expression of Lord 
 L'Estrange 's at the nomination to - day , and talk of retire from the 
 contest . " 

 RANDAL   with secret glee . - " but his resignation would smooth a 
 hitch , - not create one . the vote promise to he would thus be free , 
 and go to - " 

 DICK . - " the Right honourable Red - Tapist ! " 

 RANDAL . - " be you serious ? " 

 DICK . - " as an undertaker ! the fact be , there be two party among the 
 yellow as there be in the Church , - High Yellow and Low Yellow . Leonard 
 have make great way with the High Yellows , and have more influence with 
 they than I ; and the high Yellows infinitely prefer Egerton to 
 yourself . they say , ' politic apart , he would be an honour to the 
 borough . ' Leonard be of the same opinion ; and if he retire , I do not 
 think I could coax either he or the highflyer to make you any the 
 well by his resignation . " 

 RANDAL . - " but surely your nephew 's sense of gratitude to you would 
 induce he not to go against your wish ? " 

 DICK . - " Unluckily , the gratitude be all the other way . it be I who be 
 under obligation to he , - not he to I . as for Lord L'Estrange , I 
 can not   make head or tail of his real intention ; and why he should have 
 attack Leonard in that way puzzle I more than all , for he wish 
 Leonard to stand ; and Levy have privately inform I that , in spite 
 of my Lord 's friendship for the Right Honourable , you be the man he 
 desire to secure . " 

 RANDAL . - " he have certainly show that desire throughout the whole 
 canvass . " 

 DICK . - " I suspect that the borough - monger have get a seat for Egerton 
 elsewhere ; or , perhaps , should his party come in again , he be to be 
 pitchfork into the Upper House . " 

 randal   smile . - " ah , Avenel , you be so shrewd ; you see through 
 everything . I will also add that Egerton want some short respite from 
 public life , in order to nurse his health and attend to his affair , 
 otherwise I could not even contemplate the chance of the elector 
 prefer I to he , without a pang . " 

 DICK . - " Pang ! stuff - considerable . the oak - tree do not   hear we ! you want 
 to come into parliament , and no mistake . if I be the man to retire , - as 
 I always propose , and have get Leonard to agree to , before this 
 confound speech of L'Estrange 's , - come into parliament you will , for 
 the low yellow I can twist round my finger , provide the High Yellows 
 will not interfere ; in short , I could transfer to you vote promise to 
 I , but I can not   answer for those promise to Leonard . Levy tell I you 
 be to marry a rich girl , and will have lot of money ; so , of course , 
 you will pay my expense if you come in through my vote . " 

 RANDAL . - " my dear avenel , certainly I will . " 

 DICK . - " and I have two private bill I want to smuggle through 
 parliament . " 

 RANDAL . - " they shall be smuggle , rely on it . Mr. Fairfield be on 
 one side of the House , and I on the other , we two could prevent all 
 unpleasant opposition . private bill be easily manage , - with that tact 
 which I flatter myself I possess . " 

 DICK . - " and when the bill be through the House , and you have have time 
 to look about you , I dare say you will see that no man can go against 
 Public Opinion , unless he want to knock his own head against a stone 
 wall ; and that Public Opinion be decidedly yellow . " 

 RANDAL   with candour . - " I can not deny that Public Opinion be yellow ; 
 and at my age , it be natural that I should not commit myself to the 
 policy of a former generation . Blue be fast wear out . but , to return 
 to Mr. Fairfield : you do not speak as if you have no hope of keep he 
 straight to what I understand to be his agreement with yourself . surely 
 his honour be engage to it ? " 

 DICK . - " I do not   know as to honour ; but he have now take a fancy to 
 public life , - at least so he say no later than this morning before we 
 go into the hall ; and I trust that matter will come right . indeed , 
 I leave he with Parson Dale , who promise I that he would use all his 
 good exertion to reconcile Leonard and my Lord , and that Leonard should 
 do nothing hastily . " 

 RANDAL . - " but why should Mr. Fairfield retire because Lord L'Estrange 
 wound his feeling ? I be sure Mr. Fairfield have wound mine , but that 
 do not make I think of retire . " 

 DICK . - " oh , Leonard be a poet , and poet be quite as crotchety as 
 L'Estrange say they be . and Leonard be under obligation to Lord 
 L'Estrange , and think that Lord L'Estrange be pleased by his 
 standing ; whereas , now - in short , it be all greek to I , except that 
 Leonard have mount his high horse , and if that throw he , I be afraid 
 it will throw you . but still I have great confidence in Parson Dale , - a 
 good fellow who have much influence with Leonard . and though I think it 
 right to be above - board , and let you know where the danger lie , yet one 
 thing I can promise , - if I resign , you shall come in ; so shake hand on 
 it . " 

 RANDAL . - " my dear avenel ! and your wish be to resign ? " 

 DICK . - " certainly . I should do so a little time after noon , contrive 
 to be below Leonard on the poll . you know Emanuel Trout , the captain of 
 the Hundred and fifty ' waiter on Providence , ' as they be call ? " 

 RANDAL . - " to be sure I do . " 

 DICK . - " when Emanuel Trout come into the booth , you will know how the 
 election turn . as he vote , all the Hundred and Fifty will vote . now I 
 must go back . good - night . 

 " you will not forget that my expense be to be pay . point of honour . 
 still , if they be not pay , the election can be upset , - petition for 
 bribery and corruption ; and if they be pay , why , Lansmere may be your 
 seat for life . " 

 RANDAL . - " your expense shall be pay the moment my marriage give I 
 the mean to pay they , - and that must be very soon . " 

 DICK . - " So Levy say . and my little job - the private bill ? " 

 RANDAL . - " consider the bill pass and the job do . " 

 DICK . - " and one must not forget one 's country . one must do the good one 
 can for one 's principle . Egerton be infernally blue . you allow Public 
 opinion - be - " 

 RANDAL . - " Yellow . not a doubt of it . " 

 DICK . - " good - night . ha , ha ! humbug , eh ? " 

 RANDAL . - " Humbug ! between man like we , - oh , no . good - night , my dear 
 friend , I rely on you . " 

 DICK . - " yes ; but mind , I promise nothing if Leonard Fairfield do not 
 stand . " 

 RANDAL . - " he must stand ; keep he to it . your affair , your business , 
 your mill - " 

 DICK . - " very true . he must stand . I have great faith in Parson Dale . " 

 Randal glide back through the park . when he come on the terrace , he 
 suddenly encounter Lord L'Estrange . " I have just be privately into 
 the town , my dear Lord , and hear a strange rumour , that Mr. Fairfield 
 be so annoyed by some remark in your Lordship 's admirable speech , that 
 he talk of retire from the contest . that would give a new feature 
 to the election , and perplex all our calculation ; and I fear , in that 
 case , there might be some secret coalition between Avenel 's friend 
 and our Committee , whom , I be tell , I displease by the moderate speech 
 which your Lordship so eloquently defend , - a coalition by which Avenel 
 would come in with Mr. Egerton , whereas , if we all four stand , Mr. 
 Egerton , I presume , will be quite safe , - and I certainly think I have an 
 excellent chance . " 

 LORD L'ESTRANGE . - " so Mr. Fairfield would retire in consequence of my 
 remark ! I be go into the town , and I intend to apologize for those 
 remark , and retract they . " 

 RANDAL   joyously . - " noble ! " 

 Lord L'Estrange look at Leslie 's face , upon which the star gleam 
 palely . " Mr. Egerton have think more of your success than of his own , " 
 say he , gravely , and hurry on . 

 Randal continue on the terrace . perhaps Harley 's last word give he 
 a twinge of compunction . his head sink musingly on his breast , and he 
 pace to and fro the long gravel - walk , summon up all his intellect to 
 resist every temptation to what could injure his self - interest . 

 " skulk knave ! " mutter Harley . " at least there will be nothing to 
 repent , if I can do justice on he . that be not revenge . come , that must 
 be a fair retribution . besides , how else can I deliver Violante ? " 

 he laugh gayly , his heart be so light ; and his foot bound on as 
 fleet as the deer that he startle amongst the fern . 

 a few yard from the turnstile he overtake Richard Avenel , disguise in 
 a rough great - coat and spectacle . nevertheless , Harley 's eye detect 
 the yellow candidate at the first glance . he catch Dick familiarly by 
 the arm . " well meet ! I be go to you . we have the election to settle . " 

 " on the term I mention to your Lordship ? " say Dick , startle . " I 
 will agree to return one of your candidate ; but it must not be Audley 
 Egerton . " Harley whisper close in Avenel 's ear . 

 Avenel utter an exclamation of amazement . the two gentleman walk on 
 rapidly , and converse with great eagerness . 

 " certainly , " say Avenel , at length , stop short , " one would do a 
 great deal to serve a family connection , - and a connection that do 
 a man so much credit ; and how can one go against one 's own 
 brother - in - law , - a gentleman of such high standing , pull up the whole 
 family ! how pleased Mrs. Richard Avenel will be ! why the devil do not 
 I know it before ? and poor - dear - dear Nora . ah , that she be live ! " 
 Dick 's voice tremble . 

 " her name will be right ; and I will explain why it be my fault that 
 Egerton do not before acknowledge his marriage , and claim you as a 
 brother . come , then , it be all fix and settle . " 

 " no , my Lord ; I be pledge the other way . I do not   see how I can get 
 off my word - to randal Leslie . I be not over nice , nor what be call 
 Quixotic ; but still my word be give that if I retire from the election , 
 I will do my good to return Leslie instead of Egerton . " 

 " I know that through Baron Levy . but if your nephew retire ? " 

 " oh , that would solve all difficulty . but the poor boy have now a wish 
 to come into parliament ; and he have do I a service in the hour of 
 need . " 

 " leave it to I . and as to Randal Leslie , he shall have an occasion 
 himself to acquit you and redeem himself ; and happy , indeed , will it 
 be for he if he have yet one spark of gratitude , or one particle of 
 honour ! " 

 the two continue to converse for a few moment , Dick seem to forget 
 the election itself , and ask question of more interest to his heart , 
 which Harley answer so , that Dick wring L'Estrange 's hand with great 
 emotion , and mutter , " my poor mother ! I understand now why she would 
 never talk to I of Nora . when may I tell she the truth ? " 

 " to - morrow evening , after the election , Egerton shall embrace you all . " 

 Dick start , and say , " see Leonard as soon as you can , - there be 
 no time to lose , " plunge into a lane that lead towards the obscurer 
 recess of the town . Harley continue his way with the same light 
 elastic tread which   lose during his abnegation of his own nature   be 
 now restore to the foot , that seem loath to leave a print upon the 
 mire . 

 at the commencement of the High Street he encounter Mr. Dale and 
 Fairfield , walk slowly , arm - in - arm . 

 HARLEY . - " Leonard , I be come to you . give I your hand . forget for 
 the present the word that justly sting and offend you . I will do more 
 than apologize , - I will repair the wrong . excuse I , Mr. Dale , I have 
 one word to say in private to Leonard . " he draw Fairfield aside . 

 " Avenel tell I that if you be to retire from this contest , it would 
 be a sacrifice of inclination . be it so ? " 

 " my Lord , I have sorrow that I would fain forget ; and though I at first 
 shrunk from the strife in which I have be since engage , yet now a 
 literary career seem to I to have lose its old charm ; and I find that , 
 in public life , there be a distraction to the thought which embitter 
 solitude , that book fail to bestow . therefore , if you still wish I to 
 continue this contest , though I know not your motive , it will not be 
 as it be to begin it , - a reluctant and a painful obedience to your 
 request . " 

 " I understand . it be a sacrifice of inclination to begin the contest ; 
 it would be now a sacrifice of inclination to withdraw ? " 

 " honestly , yes , my Lord . " 

 " I rejoice to hear it , for I ask that sacrifice , - a sacrifice which you 
 will recall hereafter with delight and pride ; a sacrifice sweeter , if 
 I read your nature aright - oh , sweet far , than all which commonplace 
 ambition could bestow ! and when you learn why I make this demand , you 
 will say , ' this , indeed , be reparation for the word that wound my 
 affection , and wrong my heart . ' " 

 " my Lord , my Lord ! " exclaim Leonard , " the injury be repair already . 
 you give I back your esteem , when you so well anticipate my answer . 
 your esteem ! - life smile again . I can return to my more legitimate 
 career without a sigh . I have no need of distraction from thought 
 now . you will believe that , whatever my past presumption , I can pray 
 sincerely for your happiness . " 

 " Poet , you adorn your career ; you fulfil your mission , even at this 
 moment ; you beautify the world ; you give to the harsh form of Duty 
 the cestus of the Graces , " say Harley , try to force a smile to his 
 quivering lip . " but we must hasten back to the prose of existence . I 
 accept your sacrifice . as for the time and mode I must select in order 
 to insure its result , I will ask you to abide by such instruction as I 
 shall have occasion to convey through your uncle . till then , no word 
 of your intention , - not even to Mr. Dale . forgive I if I would rather 
 secure Mr. Egerton 's election than your . let that explanation suffice 
 for the present . what think you , by the way , of Audley Egerton ? " 

 " I think when I hear he speak and when he close with those touching 
 word , - imply that he leave all of his life not devoted to his country 
 ' to the charity of his friend , ' - how proudly , even as his opponent , I 
 could have clasp his hand ; and if he have wrong I in private life , 
 I should have think it ingratitude to the country he have so serve to 
 remember the offence . " 

 Harley turn away abruptly , and join Mr. Dale . 

 " leave Leonard to go home by himself ; you see that I have heal 
 whatever wound I inflict on he . " 

 parson . - " and , your well nature thus awaken , I trust , my dear Lord , 
 that you have altogether abandon the idea of - " 

 HARLEY . - " revenge ? - no . and if you do not approve that revenge 
 to - morrow , I will never rest till I have see you - a bishop ! " 

 MR . DALE   much shocked . - " my Lord , for shame ! " 

 HARLEY   seriously . - " my levity be but lip - deep , my dear Mr. Dale . but 
 sometimes the froth on the wave show the change in the tide . " 

 the parson look at he earnestly , and then seize he by both hand 
 with holy gladness and affection . 

 " return to the Park now , " say Harley , smile ; " and tell Violante , 
 if it be not too late to see she , that she be even more eloquent than 
 you . " 

 Lord L'Estrange bound forward . 

 Mr. Dale walk back through the park to Lansmere House . on the terrace 
 he find Randal , who be still pace to and fro , sometimes in the 
 starlight , sometimes in the shadow . 

 Leslie look up , and see Mr. Dale , the close astuteness of his 
 aspect return ; and step out of the starlight deep into the shadow , 
 he say , 

 " I be sorry to learn that Mr. Fairfield have be so hurt by Lord 
 L'Estrange 's severe allusion . pity that political difference should 
 interfere with private friendship ; but I hear that you have be to 
 Mr. Fairfield , - and , doubtless , as the peacemaker . perhaps you meet 
 Lord L'Estrange by the way ? he promise I that he would apologize and 
 retract . " 

 " good young man ! " say the unsuspecting parson , " he have do so . " 

 " and Mr. Leonard Fairfield will , therefore , I presume , continue the 
 contest ? " 

 " Contest - ah , this election ! I suppose so , of course . but I grieve that 
 he should stand against you , who seem to be dispose towards he so 
 kindly . " 

 " oh , " say Randal , with a benevolent smile , " we have fight before , you 
 know , and I beat he then . I may do so again ! " 

 and he walk into the house , arm - in - arm with the parson . Mr. Dale 
 seek Violante ; Leslie retire to his own room , and feel his election 
 be secure . 

 Lord L'Estrange have gain the thick of the street - pass group of 
 roar enthusiast - Blue and Yellow - now meet with a cheer , now follow 
 by a groan . just by a public - house that form the angle of a lane with 
 the High Street , and which be all ablaze with light and all alive with 
 clamour , he behold the graceful baron lean against the threshold , 
 smoke his cigar , too refined to associate its divine vapour with the 
 wreath of shag within , and chat agreeably with a knot of female , 
 who be either attract by the general excitement , or wait to see 
 husband , brother , father , or son , who be now join in the chorus 
 of " Blue forever ! " that ring from tap - room to attic of the illumined 
 hostelry . Levy , see Lord L'Estrange , withdraw his cigar from his 
 lip , and hasten to join he . " all the Hundred and Fifty be in 
 there , " say the baron , with a backward significant jerk of his thumb 
 towards the inn . " I have see they all privately , in ten at a time ; 
 and I have be tell the lady without that it will be good for the 
 interest of their family to go home , and let we lock up the Hundred 
 and fifty safe from the Yellows , till we bring they to the poll . but I 
 be afraid , " continue Levy , " that the rascal be not to be rely upon 
 unless I actually pay they beforehand ; and that would be disreputable , 
 immoral , - and , what be more , it would upset the election . besides , if 
 they be pay beforehand , query , be it quite sure how they will vote 
 afterwards ? " 

 " Mr. Avenel , I dare say , can manage they , " say Harley . " pray do nothing 
 immoral , and nothing that will upset the election . I think you might as 
 well go home . " 

 " home ! no , pardon I , my Lord ; there must be some head to direct the 
 Committee , and keep our captain at their post upon the doubtful 
 elector . a great deal of mischief may be do between this and the 
 morrow ; and I would sit up all night - ay , six night a week for the next 
 three month - to prevent any awkward mistake by which Audley Egerton can 
 be return . " 

 " his return would really grieve you so much ? " say Harley . 

 " you may judge of that by the zeal with which I enter into all your 
 design . " 

 here there be a sudden and wondrously loud shout from another inn , - a 
 Yellow inn , far down the lane , not so luminous as the Blue hostelry ; on 
 the contrary , look rather dark and sinister , more like a place for 
 conspirator or felon than honest , independent elector , - " avenel 
 forever ! Avenel and the yellow ! " 

 " excuse I , my Lord , I must go back and watch over my black sheep , if 
 I would have they blue ! " say Levy ; and he retreat towards the 
 threshold . but at that shout of " Avenel forever ! " as if at a signal , 
 various elector of the redoubte Hundred and Fifty rush from the Blue 
 hostelry , sweep past Levy , and hurry down the lane to the dark 
 little Yellow inn , follow by the female straggler , as small bird 
 follow an owl . it be not , however , very easy to get into that Yellow 
 inn ; Yellow Reformers , eminent for their zeal on behalf of purity of 
 election , be station outside the door , and only strain in one 
 candidate for admittance at a time . " after all , " think the baron , as 
 he pass into the principal room of the blue tavern , and propose the 
 national song of " Rule Britannia , " - " after all , Avenel hat Egerton as 
 much as I do , and both side work to the same end . " and thrum on the 
 table , he join with a fine lass in the famous line , 

  " for Britons never will be slave ! " 

 in the interim , Harley have disappear within the Lansmere Arms , which 
 be the headquarters of the Blue Committee . not , however , mount to 
 the room in which a few of the more indefatigable be continue their 
 labour , receive report from scout , give order , lay wager , 
 and very muzzy with british principle and spirit , Harley call aside 
 the landlord , and inquire if the stranger , for whom room have be 
 prepare , be yet arrive . an affirmative answer be give , and Harley 
 follow the host up a private stair , to a part of the house remote from 
 the room devote to the purpose of the election . he remain with this 
 stranger about half an hour , and then walk into the Committee - room , 
 get rid of the more excited , confer with the more sober , issue a few 
 brief direction to such of the leader as he feel he could most rely 
 upon , and return home as rapidly as he have quit it . 

 Dawn be gray in the sky when Harley seek his own chamber . to 
 gain it , he pass by the door of Violante 's . his heart suffuse with 
 grateful ineffable tenderness , he pause and kiss the threshold . when 
 he stand within his room   the same that he have occupy in his early 
 youth , he feel as if the load of year be lift from his bosom . the 
 joyous , divine elasticity of spirit , that in the morning of life spring 
 towards the Future as a bird soar into heaven , pervade his whole sense 
 of be . a greek poet imply that the height of bliss be the sudden 
 relief of pain : there be a nobler bliss still , - the rapture of the 
 conscience at the sudden release from a guilty thought . by the bedside 
 at which he have kneel in boyhood , Harley pause to kneel once more . the 
 luxury of prayer , interrupt since he have nourish scheme of which 
 his passion have blind he to the sin , but which , nevertheless , he 
 dare not confess to the All - Merciful , be restore to he . and yet , 
 as he bow his knee , the elation of spirit he have before feel forsook 
 he . the sense of the danger his soul have escape , the full knowledge of 
 the guilt to which the fiend have tempt , come dread before his clearing 
 vision ; he shudder in horror of himself . and he who but a few hour 
 before have deem it so impossible to pardon his fellow - man , now feel 
 as if year of useful and beneficent deed could alone purify his own 
 repentant soul from the memory of one hateful passion . 




 CHAPTER XXXII 

 but while Harley have thus occupy the hour of night with care for the 
 living , Audley Egerton have be in commune with the dead . he have take 
 from the pile of paper amidst which it have fall , the record of Nora 's 
 silence heart . with a sad wonder he see how he have once be love . 
 what have all which successful ambition have bestow on the lonely 
 statesman to compensate for the glorious empire he have lose , - such 
 realm of lovely fancy ; such world of exquisite emotion ; that infinite 
 which lie within the divine sphere that unite spiritual genius with 
 human love ? his own positive and earthly nature attain , for the 
 first time , and as if for its own punishment , the comprehension of that 
 loftier and more ethereal visitant from the heaven , who have once look 
 with a seraph 's smile through the prison - bar of his iron life ; that 
 celestial refinement of affection , that exuberance of feeling which 
 warm into such variety of beautiful idea , under the breath of the 
 earth - beautifier , Imagination , - all from which , when it be all his own , 
 he have turn half weary and impatient , and term the exaggeration 
 of a visionary romance , now that the world have lose they evermore , he 
 interpret aright as truth . truth they be , although illusion . even 
 as the philosopher tell we that the splendour of colour which deck the 
 universe be not on the surface whereon we think to behold it , but in our 
 own vision ; yet , take the colour from the universe , and what philosophy 
 can assure we that the universe have sustain no loss ? 

 but when Audley come to that passage in the fragment which , though but 
 imperfectly , explain the true cause of Nora 's flight ; when he see how 
 Levy , for what purpose he be unable to conjecture , have suggest to his 
 bride the doubt that have offend he , - assert the marriage to be a 
 fraud , draw from Audley 's own brief resentful letter to Nora proof of 
 the assertion , mislead so naturally the young wife 's scanty experience of 
 actual life , and madden one so sensitively pure into the conviction of 
 dishonour , - his brow darken , and his hand clench . he rise and go 
 at once to Levy 's room . he find it desert , inquire , learn that 
 Levy be go forth , and have leave word he might not be at home for the 
 night . Fortunate , perhaps , for Audley , fortunate for the baron , that 
 they do not then meet . revenge , in spite of his friend 's admonition , 
 might at that hour have be as potent an influence on Egerton as it have 
 be on Harley , and not , as with the latter , to be turn aside . 

 Audley come back to his room and finish the tragic record . he trace 
 the tremor of that beloved hand through the last torture of doubt and 
 despair ; he see where the hot tear have fall ; he see where the hand 
 have pause , the very sentence not conclude ; mentally he accompany 
 his - fated bride in the dismal journey to her maiden home , and beheld 
 she before he as he have last see , more beautiful even in death than 
 the face of live woman have ever since appear to he ; and as he bend 
 over the last word , the blank that they leave on the leaf , stretch 
 pale beyond the quiver of the character and the blister of the 
 tear , - pale and blank as the void which depart love leave behind 
 it , - he feel his heart suddenly stand still , its course arrest as the 
 record close . it beat again , but feebly , - so feebly ! his breath become 
 labour and pain , his sight grow dizzy ; but the constitutional firmness 
 and fortitude of the man clung to he in the stubborn mechanism of 
 habit , his will yet fight against his disease , life rally as the 
 light flicker up in the wan taper . 

 the next morning , when Harley come into his friend 's room , Egerton be 
 asleep . but the sleep seem much disturb ; the breathing be hard 
 and difficult ; the bed - clothe be partially throw off , as if in the 
 tossing of disturb dream ; the sinewy strong arm , the broad athletic 
 breast , be partly bare . strange that so deadly a disease within should 
 leave the frame such apparent power that , to the ordinary eye , the 
 sleeping sufferer seem a model of healthful vigour . one hand be 
 thrust with uneasy straining over the pillow , - it have its hold on 
 the fatal paper ; a portion of the leaf be visible ; and where the 
 character have be blur by Nora 's tear , be the trace , yet moist , 
 of tear perhaps more bitter . 

 Harley feel deeply affected ; and while he still stand by the bed , 
 Egerton sigh heavily and wake . he star round he , as if perplex 
 and confuse , till his eye rest on Harley , he smile and say , 

 " so early ! ah , I remember , it be the day for our great boat - race . we 
 shall have the current against we ; but you and I together - when do we 
 ever lose ? " 

 Audley 's mind be wander ; it have go back to the old Eton day . but 
 Harley think that he speak in metaphorical allusion to the present 
 more important contest . 

 " true , my Audley , - you and I together - when do we ever lose ? but will 
 you rise ? I wish you would be at the polling - place to shake hand with 
 your voter as they come up . by four o'clock you will be release , and 
 the election won . " 

 " the election ! how ! what ! " say Egerton , recover himself . " I 
 recollect now . yes , - I accept this last kindness from you . I always say 
 I would die in harness . public life - I have no other . ah , I dream again ! 
 oh , Harley my son , my son ! " 

 " you shall see he after four o'clock . you will be proud of each other . 
 but make haste and dress . shall I ring the bell for your servant ? " 

 " do , " say Egerton , briefly , and sink back . Harley quit the room , 
 and join Randal and some of the more important member of the Blue 
 Committee , who be already hurry over their breakfast . 

 all be anxious and nervous except Harley , who dip his dry toast 
 into his coffee , accord to his ordinary abstemious italian habit , 
 with serene composure . randal in vain try for an equal tranquillity . 
 but though sure of his election , there would necessarily follow a scene 
 try to the nerve of his hypocrisy . he would have to affect profound 
 chagrin in the midst of vile joy ; have to act the part of decorous 
 high - minded sorrow , that by some untoward chance , some unaccountable 
 cross - splitting , Randal Leslie 's gain should be Audley Egerton 's loss . 
 besides , he be flurry in the expectation of see the squire , and 
 of appropriate the money which be to secure the dear object of his 
 ambition . Breakfast be soon despatch . the committee - man , bustle for 
 their hat , and look at their watch , give the signal for departure ; 
 yet no Squire Hazeldean have make his appearance . Harley , step from 
 the window upon the terrace , beckon to Randal , who take his hat and 
 follow . 

 " Mr. Leslie , " say Harley , lean against the balustrade , and 
 carelessly pat Nero 's rough , honest head , " you remember that 
 you be good enough to volunteer to I the explanation of certain 
 circumstance in connection with the Count di Peschiera , which you give 
 to the Duke di Serrano ; and I reply that my thought be at present 
 engage on the election , but as soon as that be over , I should be very 
 willing to listen to any communication affect yourself and my old 
 friend the duke , with which you might be pleased to favour I . " 

 this address take Randal by surprise , and do not tend to calm his 
 nerve . however , he reply readily , 

 " upon that , as upon any other matter that may influence the judgment you 
 form of I , I shall be but too eager to remove a single doubt that , in 
 your eye , can rest upon my honour . " 

 " you speak exceedingly well , Mr. Leslie ; no man can express himself more 
 handsomely ; and I will claim your promise with the less scruple because 
 the duke be powerfully affect by the reluctance of his daughter 
 to ratify the engagement that bind his honour , in case your own be 
 indisputably clear . I may boast of some influence over the young lady , 
 since I assist to save she from the infamous plot of Peschiera ; and 
 the duke urge I to receive your explanation , in the belief that , if 
 it satisfy I , as it have satisfy he , I may conciliate his child in 
 favour of the address of a suitor who would have hazard his very 
 life against so redoubte a duellist as Peschiera . " 

 " Lord L'Estrange , " reply randal , bow , " I shall indeed owe you much 
 if you can remove that reluctance on the part of my betrothed bride , 
 which alone cloud my happiness , and which would at once put an end to 
 my suit , do I not ascribe it to an imperfect knowledge of myself , which 
 I shall devote my life to improve into confidence and affection . " 

 " no man can speak more handsomely , " reiterate Harley , as if with 
 profound admiration ; and indeed he do eye Randal as we eye some rare 
 curiosity . " I be happy to inform you , too , " continue L'Estrange , " that 
 if your marriage with the Duke of Serrano 's daughter take place - " 

 " if ! " echo Randal . 

 " I beg pardon for make an hypothesis of what you claim the right to 
 esteem a certainty , - I correct my expression : when your marriage with 
 that young lady take place , you will at least escape the rock on which 
 many young man of ardent affection have split at the onset of the grand 
 voyage . you will form no imprudent connection . in a word , I receive 
 yesterday a despatch from Vienna , which contain the full pardon and 
 formal restoration of Alphonso , Duke di Serrano . and I may add , that the 
 austrian government   sometimes misunderstood in this country   be bind 
 by the law it administer , and can in no way dictate to the duke , once 
 restore , as to the choice of his son - in - law , or as to the heritage that 
 may devolve on his child . " 

 " and do the duke yet know of his recall ? " exclaim Randal , his cheek 
 flush and his eye sparkle . 

 " no . I reserve that good news , with other matter , till after the 
 election be over . but Egerton keep we wait sadly . ah , here come his 
 valet . " 

 Audley 's servant approach . " Mr. Egerton feel himself rather more 
 poorly than usual , my Lord ; he beg you will excuse his go with 
 you into the town at present . he will come later if his presence be 
 absolutely necessary . " 

 " no . pray tell he to rest and nurse himself . I should have like he to 
 witness his own triumph , - that be all . say I will represent he at the 
 polling - place . gentleman , be you ready ? we will go on . " 

 the polling booth be erect in the centre of the marketplace . the 
 voting have already commence ; and Mr. Avenel and Leonard be already at 
 their post , in order to salute and thank the voter in their cause who 
 pass before they . randal and L'Estrange enter the booth amidst loud 
 hurrah , and to the national air of " see the Conquering Hero come . " the 
 voter defile in quick succession . those who vote entirely accord 
 to principle or colour - which come to much the same thing - and be 
 therefore above what be term " management , " flock in first , vote 
 straightforwardly for both blue or both yellow . at the end of the 
 first half - hour the yellow be about ten ahead of the Blues . then 
 sundry split vote begin to perplex conjecture as to the result ; and 
 Randal , at the end of the first hour , have fifteen majority over Audley 
 Egerton , two over Dick Avenel , Leonard Fairfield head the poll by 
 five . randal owe his place in the list to the voter that Harley 's 
 personal effort have procure for he ; and he be well pleased to see 
 that Lord L'Estrange have not withdraw from he a single promise so 
 obtain . this augur well for Harley 's ready belief in his appoint 
 " explanation . " in short , the whole election seem go just as he 
 have calculate . but by twelve o'clock there be some change in the 
 relative position of the candidate . Dick Avenel have gradually gain 
 ground , - pass Randal , pass even Leonard . he stand at the head 
 of the poll by a majority of ten . Randal come next . Audley be twenty 
 behind Randal , and Leonard four behind Audley . More than half the 
 constituency have poll , but none of the Committee on either side , nor 
 one of the redoubte corps of a hundred and fifty . 

 the poll now slacken sensibly . randal , look round , and long for 
 an opportunity to ask Dick whether he really mean to return himself 
 instead of his nephew , see that Harley have disappear ; and presently a 
 note be bring to he request his presence in the Committee - room . 
 Thither he hasten . 

 as he force his way through the bystander in the lobby , towards the 
 threshold of the room , Levy catch hold of he and whisper , " they 
 begin to fear for Egerton . they want a compromise in order to secure 
 he . they will propose to you to resign , if Avenel will withdraw 
 Leonard . do not   be entrap . L'Estrange may put the question to you ; 
 but - a word in your ear - he would be glad enough to throw over Egerton . 
 rely upon this , and stand firm . " 

 Randal make no answer , but , the crowd give way for he , enter the 
 room . Levy follow . the door be instantly close . all the Blue 
 Committee be assemble . they look heated , anxious , eager . Lord 
 L'Estrange , alone calm and cool , stand at the head of the long table . 
 despite his composure , Harley 's brow be thoughtful . " yes , " say he 
 to himself , " I will give this young man the fair occasion to prove 
 gratitude to his benefactor ; and if he here acquit himself , I will spare 
 he , at least , public exposure of his deceit to other . so young , he 
 must have some good in he , - at least towards the man to whom he owe 
 all . " 

 " Mr. Leslie , " say L'Estrange , aloud , " you see the state of the poll . 
 our Committee believe that , if you continue to stand , Egerton must be 
 beat . they fear that , Leonard Fairfield have little chance , the 
 yellow will not waste their second vote on he , but will transfer they 
 to you , in order to keep out Egerton . if you retire , Egerton will be 
 safe . there be reason to suppose that Leonard would , in that case , also 
 be withdraw . " 

 " you can hope and fear nothing more from Egerton , " whisper Levy . " he 
 be utterly ruin ; and , if he lose , will sleep in a prison . the bailiff 
 be wait for he . " 

 Randal be still silent , and at that silence an indignant murmur run 
 through the more influential member of the Committee . for , though 
 Audley be not personally very popular , still a candidate so eminent be 
 necessarily their first object , and they would seem very small to 
 the Yellows , if their great man be defeat by the very candidate 
 introduce to aid he , - a youth unknown . vanity and patriotism 
 both swell that murmur . " you see , young sir , " cry a rich , blunt 
 master - butcher , " that it be an honourable understanding that Mr. 
 Egerton be to be safe . you have no claim on we , except as fight 
 second to he . and we be all astonish that you do not   say at once , 
 ' Save Egerton , of course . ' excuse my freedom , sir . no time for palaver . " 

 " Lord L'Estrange , " say Randal , turn mildly from the butcher , " do 
 you , as the first here in rank and influence , and as Mr. Egerton 's 
 especial friend , call upon I to sacrifice my election , and what appear 
 to be the inclination of the majority of the constituent , in order to 
 obtain what be , after all , a doubtful chance of return Mr. Egerton in 
 my room ? 

 " I do not call upon you , Mr. Leslie . it be a matter of feeling or of 
 honour , which a gentleman can very well decide for himself . " 

 " be any such compact made between your Lordship and myself , when you 
 first give I your interest and canvass for I in person ? " 

 " certainly not . gentleman , be silent . no such compact be mention by 
 I . " 

 " neither be it by Mr. Egerton . whatever might be the understanding 
 speak of by the respected elector who address I , I be no party to 
 it . I be persuade that Mr. Egerton be the last person who would wish 
 to owe his election to a trick upon the elector in the midst of 
 the polling , and to what the world would consider a very unhandsome 
 treatment of myself , upon whom all the toil of the canvass have 
 devolve . " 

 again the murmur rise ; but Randal have an air so determined , that it 
 quell resentment , and obtain a continue , though most chilling and 
 half - contemptuous hearing . 

 " nevertheless , " resume Randal , " I would at once retire be I not under 
 the firm persuasion that I shall convince all present , who now seem to 
 condemn I , that I act precisely accord to Mr. Egerton 's own private 
 inclination . that gentleman , in fact , have never be amongst you , have 
 not canvass in person , have take no trouble , beyond a speech , that 
 be evidently mean to be but a general defence of his past political 
 career . what do this mean ? simply that his standing have be merely a 
 form , to comply with the wish of his party , against his own desire . " 

 the committee - man look at each other amazed and doubtful . randal saw 
 he have gain an advantage ; he pursue it with a tact and ability which 
 show that , in spite of his mere oratorical deficiency , he have in 
 he the element of a dexterous debater . " I will be plain with you , 
 gentleman . my character , my desire to stand well with you all , oblige I 
 to be so . Mr. Egerton do not wish to come into parliament at present . 
 his health be much break ; his private affair need all his time and 
 attention . I be , I may say , as a son to he . he be most anxious for 
 my success ; Lord L'Estrange tell I but last night , very truly , ' more 
 anxious for my success than his own . ' nothing could please he more 
 than to think I be serve in parliament , however humbly , those great 
 interest which neither health nor leisure will , in this momentous 
 crisis , allow himself to defend with his wonted energy . later , 
 indeed , no doubt , he will seek to return to an arena in which he be 
 so distinguished ; and when the popular excitement , which produce the 
 popular injustice of the day , be over , what constituency will not be 
 proud to return such a man ? in support and proof of what I have thus 
 say , I now appeal to Mr. Egerton 's own agent , - a gentleman who , 
 in spite of his vast fortune and the rank he hold in society , have 
 consent to act gratuitously on behalf of that great statesman . I ask 
 you , then , respectfully , Baron Levy , be not Mr. Egerton 's health much 
 break , and in need of rest ? " 

 " it be , " say Levy . 

 " and do not his affair necessitate his serious and undivided 
 attention ? " 

 " they do indeed , " quoth the baron . " gentleman , I have nothing to urge 
 in behalf of my distinguished friend as against the statement of his 
 adopt son , Mr. Leslie . " 

 " then all I can say , " cry the butcher , strike his huge fist on the 
 table , " be , that Mr. Egerton have behave d - -d unhandsome to we , and we 
 shall be the laugh - stock of the borough . " 

 " softly , softly , " say Harley . " there be a knock at the door behind . 
 excuse I . " 

 Harley quit the room , but only for a minute or two . on his return he 
 address himself to Randal . 

 " be we then to understand , Mr. Leslie , that your intention be not to 
 resign ? " 

 " unless your lordship actually urge I to the contrary , I should say , 
 let the election go on , and all take our chance . that seem to I the 
 fair , manly , ENGLISH   great emphasis on the last adjective , honourable 
 course . " 

 " be it so , " reply Harley ; " ' let all take their chance . ' Mr. Leslie , 
 we will no long detain you . go back to the polling - place , - one of the 
 candidate should be present ; and you , Baron Levy , be good enough to go 
 also , and return thank to those who may yet vote for Mr. Egerton . " 

 Levy bow , and go out arm - in - arm with Randal . " Capital , capital , " 
 say the baron . " you have a wonderful head . " 

 " I do not like L'Estrange 's look , nevertheless . but he can not   hurt I 
 now ; the vote he get for I instead of for Egerton have already poll . 
 the Committee , indeed , may refuse to vote for I ; but then there be 
 Avenel 's body of reserve . yes , the election be virtually over . when we 
 get back , Hazeldean will have arrive with the money for the purchase of 
 my ancestral property ; Dr. Riccabocca be already restore to the estate 
 and title of Serrano ; what do I care far for Lord L'Estrange ? 
 still , I do not like his look . " 

 " Pooh , you have do just what he wish . I be forbid to say more . 
 here we be at the booth . a new placard since we leave . how be the 
 number ? avenel forty ahead of you ; you thirty above Egerton ; and 
 Leonard Fairfield still last on the poll . but where be Avenel and 
 Fairfield ? " both those candidate have disappear , perhaps go to their 
 own Committee - room . 

 meanwhile , as soon as the door have close on Randal and the baron , 
 in the midst of the angry hubbub succeed to their departure , Lord 
 L'Estrange spring upon the table . the action and his look still every 
 sound . 

 " gentleman , it be in our hand to return one of our candidate , and to 
 make our own choice between the two . you have hear Mr. Leslie and Baron 
 Levy . to their statement I make but this reply , - Mr. Egerton be need 
 by the country ; and whatever his health or his affair , he be ready to 
 respond to that call . if he have not canvass , if he do not appear 
 before you at this moment , the service of more than twenty year plead 
 for he in his stead . which , then , of the two candidate do you choose 
 as your member , - a renowned statesman , or a beardless boy ? both have 
 ambition and ability ; the one have identify those quality with the 
 history of a country , and   as it be now allege to his prejudice   with 
 a devotion that have break a vigorous frame and injure a princely 
 fortune . the other evince his ambition by invite you to prefer he 
 to his benefactor , and prove his ability by the excuse he make for 
 ingratitude . choose between the two , - an Egerton or a Leslie . " 

 " Egerton forever ! " cry all the assembly , as with a single voice , 
 follow by a hiss for Leslie . 

 " but , " say a grave and prudent Committee - man , " have we really the 
 choice ? do not that rest with the yellow ? be not your Lordship too 
 sanguine ? " 

 " open that door behind ; a deputation from our opponent wait in the 
 room on the other side the passage . admit they . " 

 the Committee be hush in breathless silence while Harley 's order be 
 obey . and soon , to their great surprise , Leonard Fairfield himself , 
 attend by six of the principal member of the Yellow party , enter 
 the room . 

 LORD L'ESTRANGE . - " you have a proposition to make to we , Mr. Fairfield , 
 on behalf of yourself and Mr. Avenel , and with the approval of your 
 Committee ? " 

 LEONARD   advance to the table . - " I have . we be convinced that 
 neither party can carry both its candidate . Mr. Avenel be safe . the 
 only question be , which of the two candidate on your side it well 
 become the honour of this constituency to select . my resignation , which 
 I be about to tender , will free sufficient vote to give the triumph 
 either to Mr. Egerton or to Mr. Leslie . " 

 " Egerton forever ! " cry once more the excited blue . " yes , Egerton 
 forever ! " say Leonard , with a glow upon his cheek . " we may differ from 
 his politic , but who can tell we those of Mr. Leslie ? we may differ 
 from the politician , but who would not feel proud of the senator ? a 
 great and incalculable advantage be bestow on that constituency which 
 return to parliament a distinguished man . his distinction ennoble the 
 place he represent , it sustain public spirit , it augment the manly 
 interest in all that affect the nation . every time his voice hush the 
 assemble parliament , it remind we of our common country ; and even the 
 discussion amongst his constituent which his voice provoke , clear 
 their perception of the public interest , and enlighten themselves , 
 from the intellect which command their interest , and compel their 
 attention . Egerton , then , forever ! if our party must subscribe to the 
 return of one opponent , let all unite to select the worthy . my 
 Lord L'Estrange , when I quit this room , it will be to announce my 
 resignation , and to solicit those who have promise I their vote to 
 transfer they to Mr. Audley Egerton . " 

 amidst the uproarious huzzas which follow this speech , Leonard draw 
 near to Harley . " my Lord , I have obey your wish , as convey to I 
 by my uncle , who be engage at this moment elsewhere in carry they 
 into effect . " 

 " Leonard , " say Harley , in the same undertone , " you have insure to 
 Audley Egerton what you alone could do , - the triumph over a perfidious 
 dependent , the continuance of the sole career in which he have hitherto 
 find the solace or the zest of life . he must thank you with his own 
 lip . come to the Park after the close of the poll . there and then shall 
 the explanation yet needful to both be give and receive . " 

 here Harley bow to the assembly and raise his voice : " gentleman , 
 yesterday , at the nomination of the candidate , I utter remark that 
 have justly pain Mr. Fairfield . in your presence I wholly retract and 
 frankly apologize for they . in your presence I entreat his forgiveness , 
 and say , that if he will accord I his friendship , I will place he 
 in my esteem and affection side by side with the statesman whom he have 
 give to his country . " 

 Leonard grasp the hand extend to he with both his own , and then , 
 overcome by his emotion , hurry from the room ; while Blues and yellow 
 exchange greeting , rejoice in the compromise that would dispel all 
 party irritation , secure the peace of the borough , and allow quiet 
 man , who have detest each other the day before , and vow reciprocal 
 injury to trade and custom , the indulgence of all amiable and 
 fraternal feeling - until the next general election . 

 in the mean while the polling have go on slowly as before , but still to 
 the advantage of Randal . " not two - third of the constituency will poll , " 
 murmur Levy , look at his watch . " the thing be decide . Aha , Audley 
 Egerton ! you who once torture I with the unspeakable jealousy that 
 bequeath such implacable hate ; you who scorn my society , and call 
 I ' scoundrel , ' disdainful of the very power your folly place within my 
 hand , - aha , your time be up ! and the spirit that administer to your 
 own destruction stride within the circle to seize its prey ! " 

 " you shall have my first frank , Levy , " say Randal , " to enclose your 
 letter to Mr. Thornhill 's solicitor . this affair of the election be 
 over ; we must now look to what else rest on our hand . " 

 " what the devil be that placard ? " cry Levy , turn pale . 

 randal look , and right up the market - place , follow by an immense 
 throng , move , high over the head of all , a Yellow Board , that seem 
 march through the air , cometlike : - 

  two o'clock p.m. 

  resignation of FAIRFIELD . 

  - - - 

  YELLOWS ! 

  vote for 

  avenel and EGERTON . 

   sign   Timothy Alljack 

  Yellow Committee Room . 

 " what infernal treachery be this ? " cry randal , livid with honest 
 indignation . 

 " wait a moment ; there be Avenel ! " exclaim Levy ; and at the head of 
 another procession that emerge from the obscurer lane of the town , 
 walk , with grave majesty , the survive yellow candidate . Dick 
 disappear for a moment within a grocer 's shop in the broad part of 
 the place , and then culminate at the height of a balcony on the first 
 story , just above an enormous yellow canister , significant of the 
 profession and the politic of the householder . no soon do Dick , hat 
 in hand , appear on this rostrum , than the two procession halt below , 
 band cease , flag droop round their stave , crowd rush within 
 hearing , and even the poll clerk spring from the booth . randal and Levy 
 themselves press into the throng . Dick on the balcony be the Deus ex 
 machina . 

 " Freemen and elector ! " say Dick , with his most sonorous accent , 
 " find that the public opinion of this independent and enlighten 
 constituency be so evenly divide , that only one yellow candidate can be 
 return , and only one Blue have a chance , it be my intention last night 
 to retire from the contest , and thus put an end to all bickering and 
 ill - blood   hold your tongue there , can not   you ! . I say honestly , I 
 should have prefer the return of my distinguished and talented young 
 nephew - honourable relation - to my own ; but he would not hear of it , and 
 talk all our Committee into the erroneous but high - minded notion , that 
 the town would cry shame if the nephew ride into parliament by break 
 the back of the uncle . "   loud cheer from the mob , and partial cry of 
 " we will have you both ! " 

 " you will do no such thing , and you know it ; hold your jaw , " resume Dick , 
 with imperious good - humour . " let I go on , can not   you ? - time press . in 
 a word , my nephew resolve to retire , if , at two o'clock this day , there 
 be no chance of return both of we ; and there be none . now , then , the 
 next thing for the yellow who have not yet vote , be to consider how 
 they will give their second vote . if I have be the man to retire , 
 why , for certain reason , I should have recommend they to split with 
 Leslie , - a clever chap , and pretty considerable sharp . " 

 " hear , hear , hear ! " cry the baron , lustily . 

 " but I be bind to say that my nephew have an opinion of his own , - as an 
 independent Britisher , let he be twice your nephew , ought to have ; and 
 his opinion go the other way , and so do that of our Committee . " 

 " sell ! " cry the baron ; and some of the crowd shake their head , and 
 look grave , - especially those suspect of a wish to be buy . 

 " sell ! pretty fellow you with the nosegay in your buttonhole to talk of 
 sell ! you who want to sell your own client , - and you know it .   Levy 
 recoil .   why , gentleman , that be Levy the Jew , who talk of sell ! 
 and if he asperse the character of this constituency , I stand here to 
 defend it ! and there stand the parish pump , with a handle for the arm 
 of Honesty , and a spout for the lip of Falsehood ! " 

 at the close of this magniloquent period , borrow , no doubt , from some 
 great american orator , Baron Levy involuntarily retreat towards the 
 shelter of the polling - booth , follow by some frown yellow with 
 very menacing gesture . 

 " but the calumniator sneak away ; leave he to the reproach of his 
 conscience , " resume Dick , with a generous magnanimity . 

 " SOLD !   the word ring through the place like the blast of a trumpet 
 sell ! no , believe I , not a man who vote for Egerton instead 
 of Fairfield will , so far as I be concern , be a penny the 
 well -   chilling silence   - or   with a scarce perceivable wink 
 towards the anxious face of the Hundred and Fifty who fill the 
 background   - or a penny the bad .   loud cheer from the hundred and 
 Fifty , and cry of ' noble ! '   I do not   like the politic of Mr. Egerton . 
 but I be not only a politician , - I be a MAN ! the argument of our 
 respected Committee - person in business , tender husband , and devoted 
 father - have weight with I . I myself be a husband and a father . if a 
 needless contest be prolong to the last , with all the irritation 
 it engender , who suffer ? - why , the tradesman and the operative . 
 Partiality , loss of custom , tyrannical demand for house rent , notice 
 to quit , - in a word , the screw ! " 

 " hear , hear ! " and " give we the ballot ! " 

 " the ballot - with all my heart , if I have it about I ! and if we have the 
 Ballot , I should like to see a man dare to vote Blue .   loud cheer from 
 the Yellows .   but , as we have not get it , we must think of our family . 
 and I may add , that though Mr. Egerton may come again into office , yet 
  add Dick solemnly   I will do my good , as his colleague , to keep he 
 straight ; and your own enlightenment   for the schoolmaster be abroad 
 will show he that no minister can brave public opinion , nor quarrel 
 with his own bread and butter .   much cheer .   in these time the 
 aristocracy must endear themselves to the middle and working class ; and 
 a member in office have much to give away in the Stamps and Excise , in 
 the Customs , the Post Office , and other State department in this 
 rotten old - I mean this magnificent empire , by which he can benefit his 
 constituent , and reconcile the prerogative of aristocracy with the 
 claim of the people , - more especially in this case , the people of the 
 borough of Lausmere .   hear , hear ! 

 " and therefore , sacrifice party inclination   since it seem that 
 I can in no way promote they   on the Altar of General Good Feeling , I 
 can not oppose the resignation of my nephew , - honourable relation ! - nor 
 blind my eye to the advantage that may result to a borough so 
 important to the nation at large , if the elector think fit to choose my 
 Right honourable brother - I mean the right honourable blue candidate - as 
 my brother colleague . not that I presume to dictate , or express a wish 
 one way or the other ; only , as a Family Man , I say to you , Electors and 
 Freemen , have serve your country in return I , you have nobly win 
 the right to think of the little one at home . " 

 Dick put his hand to his heart , bow gracefully , and retire from the 
 balcony amidst unanimous applause . 

 in three minute more Dick have resume his place in the booth in his 
 quality of candidate . a rush of Yellow elector pour in , hot and fast . 
 up come Emanuel Trout , and , in a firm voice , record his vote , " Avenel 
 and Egerton . " every man of the Hundred and Fifty so poll . to each 
 question , " whom do you vote for ? " " Avenel and Egerton " knell on the 
 ear of randal Leslie with " damnable iteration . " the young man fold 
 his arm across his breast in dogged despair . Levy have to shake hand 
 for Mr. Egerton with a rapidity that take away his breath . he long to 
 slink away , - long to get at L'Estrange , whom he suppose would be 
 as wroth at this turn in the wheel of fortune as himself . but how , as 
 Egerton 's representative , escape from the continuous gripe of those 
 horny hand ? besides , there stand the parish pump , right in face of the 
 booth , and some huge truculent - look yellow loiter round it , as 
 if ready to pounce on he the instant he quit his present sanctuary . 
 suddenly the crowd round the booth recede ; Lord L'Estrange 's carriage 
 drive up to the spot , and Harley , step from it , assist out of the 
 vehicle an old , gray - haired , paralytic man . the old man star round 
 he , and nod smilingly to the mob . " I be here,-I'm come ; I be but a 
 poor creature , but I be a good Blue to the last ! " 

 " Old John Avenel , - fine old John ! " cry many a voice . 

 and John Avenel , still lean on Harley 's arm , totter into the booth , 
 and plump for " Egerton . " 

 " shake hand , Father , " say Dick , bend forward , " though you will not 
 vote for I . " 

 " I be a Blue before you be bear , " answer the old man , tremulously ; 
 " but I wish you success all the same , and God bless you , my boy ! " 

 even the poll - clerk be touch ; and when Dick , leave his place , be 
 see by the crowd assist Lord L'Estrange to place poor John again 
 in the carriage , that picture of family love in the midst of political 
 difference - of the prosperous , wealthy , energetic son , who , as a boy , 
 have play at marble in the very kennel , and who have rise in life 
 by his own exertion , and be now virtually M. P. for his native town , 
 tend on the break - down , aged father , whom even the interest of 
 a son he be so proud of could not win from the colour which he 
 associate with truth and rectitude - have such an effect upon the rude 
 of the mob there present , that you might have hear a pin fall , - till 
 the carriage drive away back to John 's humble home ; and then there rise 
 such a tempest of huzzas ! John Avenel 's vote for Egerton give another 
 turn to the vicissitude of that memorable election . as yet Avenel have 
 be ahead of Audley ; but a plumper in favour of Egerton , from Avenel 's 
 own father , set an example and give an excuse to many a Blue who have not 
 yet vote , and could not prevail on himself to split his vote between 
 Dick and Audley ; and , therefore , several lead tradesman , who , see 
 that Egerton be safe , have previously resolve not to vote at all , come 
 up in the last hour , plump for Egerton , and carry he to the head 
 of the poll ; so that poor John , whose vote , involve that of Mark 
 Fairfield , have secure the first opening in public life to the young 
 ambition of the unknown son - in - law , still contribute to connect with 
 success and triumph , but also with sorrow , and , it may be , with death , 
 the name of the high - bear Egerton and the humble Avenel . 

 the great town - clock strike the hour of four ; the return officer 
 declare the poll close ; the formal announcement of the result will 
 be make later . but all the town know that Audley Egerton and Richard 
 Avenel be the member for Lausmere . and flag stream , and drum beat , 
 and man shake each other by the hand heartily ; and there be talk of the 
 chairing to - morrow ; and the public - house be crowd ; and there be an 
 indistinct hubbub in street and alley , with sudden burst of uproarious 
 shouting ; and the cloud to the west look red and lurid round the sun , 
 which have go down behind the church tower , - behind the yew - tree that 
 overshadow the quiet grave of Nora Avenel . 




 CHAPTER XXXIII . 

 amidst the darken shadow of twilight , Randal Leslie walk through 
 Lansmere Park towards the house . he have slink away before the poll be 
 closed , - creep through bylane , and plunge into the leafless copse 
 of the earl 's stately pasture - ground . amidst the bewilderment of 
 his thought - at a loss to conjecture how this strange mischance have 
 befall he , incline to ascribe it to Leonard 's influence over Avenel , 
 but suspect Harley , and half doubtful of Baron Levy - he seek to 
 ascertain what fault of judgment he himself have commit , what wile he 
 have forget , what thread in his web he have leave ragged and incomplete . 
 he could discover none . his ability seem to he unimpeachable , - totus , 
 tere , atque rotunda . and then there come across his breast a sharp 
 pang , - sharp than that of baffled ambition , - the feeling that he have 
 be deceive and bubble and betray . for so vital a necessity to all 
 live man be truth , that the vile traitor feel amazed and wrong , 
 feel the pillar of the world shake , when treason recoil on himself . 
 " that Richard Avenel , whom I trust , could so deceive I ! " murmur 
 Randal , and his lip quiver . 

 he be still in the midst of the Park , when a man with a yellow cockade 
 in his hat , and run fast from the direction of the town , overtook 
 he with a letter , on deliver which the messenger , wait for no 
 answer , hasten back the way he have come . randal recognize Avenel 's 
 hand on the address , break the seal , and read as follow : 

   Private and Confidential . 

  DEAR leslie , - do not   be down - hearte , - you will know to - night or 
  to - morrow why I have have cause to alter my opinion as to the right 
  Honourable ; and you will see that I could not , as a Family Man , act 
  otherwise than I have do . though I have not break my word to 
  you , - for you remember that all the help I promise be dependent on 
  my own resignation , and would go for nothing if Leonard resign 
  instead , - yet I feel you must think yourself rather bamboozle . but 
  I have be oblige to sacrifice you , from a sense of Family Duty , 
  as you will soon acknowledge . my own nephew be sacrifice also ; and 
  I have sacrifice my own concern , which require the whole man of I 
  for the next year or two at Screwstown . so we be all in the same 
  boat , though you may think you be set adrift by yourself . but I 
  do not   mean to stay in parliament . I shall take the Chiltern 
  Hundreds , pretty considerable soon . and if you keep well with the 
  Blues , I will do my good with the yellow to let you walk over the 
  course in my stead . for I do not   think Leonard will want to stand 
  again . and so a word to the wise , - and you may yet be member for 
  Lansmere . 

  R. A. 

 in this letter , randal , despite all his acuteness , could not detect the 
 honest compunction of the writer . he could at first only look at the 
 bad side of human nature , and fancy that it be a paltry attempt 
 to stifle his just anger and ensure his discretion ; but , on second 
 thought , it strike he that Dick might very naturally be glad to be 
 release to his mill , and get a quid pro quo out of Randal , under the 
 comprehensive title , " repayment of expense . " perhaps Dick be not 
 sorry to wait until Randal 's marriage give he the mean to make the 
 repayment . Nay , perhaps Randal have be throw over for the present , 
 in order to wring from he well term in a single election . thus 
 reasoning , he take comfort from his belief in the mercenary motif of 
 another . true ; it might be but a short disappointment . before the next 
 parliament be a month old , he might yet take his seat in it as member 
 for Lansmere . but all would depend on his marriage with the heiress ; he 
 must hasten that . 

 meanwhile , it be necessary to knit and gather up all his thought , 
 courage , and presence of mind . how he shrink from return to Lansmere 
 House , - from face Egerton , Harley , all . but there be no choice . he 
 would have to make it up with the Blues , - to defend the course he have 
 adopt in the Committee - room . there , no doubt , be Squire Hazeldean 
 await he with the purchase - money for the land of Rood ; there 
 be the Duke di Serrano , restore to wealth and honour ; there be his 
 promise bride , the great heiress , on whom depend all that could 
 raise the needy gentleman into wealth and position . gradually , with the 
 elastic temper that be essential to a systematic schemer , Randal Leslie 
 pluck himself from the pain of brood over a plot that be defeat , 
 to prepare himself for consummate those that yet seem so near 
 success . after all , should he fail in regain Egerton 's favour , 
 Egerton be of use no more . he might rear his head , and face out what 
 some might call " ingratitude , " provide he could but satisfy the Blue 
 Committee . dull dog , how could he fail to do that ! he could easily 
 talk over the machiavellian sage . he should have small difficulty in 
 explain all to the content of Audley 's distant brother , the squire . 
 Harley alone - but Levy have so positively assure he that Harley be not 
 sincerely anxious for Egerton ; and as to the more important explanation 
 relative to Peschiera , surely what have satisfy Violante 's father ought 
 to satisfy a man who have no peculiar right to demand explanation at 
 all ; and if these explanation do not satisfy , the onus to disprove 
 they must rest with Harley ; and who or what could contradict Randal 's 
 plausible assertion , - assertion in support of which he himself could 
 summon a witness in Baron Levy ? thus nerve himself to all that could 
 task his power , Randal Leslie cross the threshold of Lansmere House , 
 and in the hall he find the baron await he . 

 " I can not   account , " say Levy , " for what have go so cross in this 
 confound election . it be L'Estrange that puzzle I ; but I know that 
 he hat Egerton . I know that he will prove that hate by one mode of 
 revenge , if he have lose it in another . but it be well , Randal , that 
 you be secure of Hazeldean 's money and the rich heiress 's hand ; 
 otherwise - " 

 " otherwise , what ? " 

 " I should wash my hand of you , mon cher ; for , in spite of all your 
 cleverness , and all I have try to do for you , somehow or other I 
 begin to suspect that your talent will never secure your fortune . a 
 carpenter 's son beat you in public speaking , and a vulgar mill - owner 
 trick you in private negotiation . decidedly , as yet , Randal Leslie , you 
 be - a failure . and , as you so admirably say , ' a man from whom we have 
 nothing to hope or fear we must blot out of the map of the future . ' " 

 Randal 's answer be cut short by the appearance of the groom of the 
 chamber . 

 " my Lord be in the saloon , and request you and Mr. Leslie will do he 
 the honour to join he there . " the two gentleman follow the servant up 
 the broad stair . 

 the saloon form the centre room of the suite of apartment . from its 
 size , it be rarely use save on state occasion . it have the chilly and 
 formal aspect of room reserve for ceremony . 

 Riccabocca , Violante , Helen , Mr. Dale , Squire Hazeldean , and Lord 
 L'Estrange be group together by the cold florentine marble table , 
 not litter with book and female work , and the endear sign of 
 habitation , that give a living smile to the face of home ; nothing 
 thereon save a great silver candelabrum , that scarcely light the 
 spacious room , and bring out the portrait on the wall as a part of 
 the assembly , look , as portrait do look , with search , curious 
 eye upon every eye that turn to they . 

 but as soon as Randal enter , the squire detach himself from the 
 group , and , come to the defeat candidate , shake hand with he 
 heartily . 

 " cheer up , my boy ; ' t be no shame to be beat . Lord L'Estrange say you 
 do your good to win , and man can do no more . and I be glad , Leslie , that 
 we do not   meet for our little business till the election be over ; for , 
 after annoyance , something pleasant be twice as acceptable . I have   the 
 money in my pocket . hush ! and I say , my dear , dear boy , I can not find 
 out where Frank be , but it be really all off with that foreign woman , 
 eh ? " 

 " yes , indeed , sir , I hope so . I will talk to you about it when we can be 
 alone . we may slip away presently , I trust . " 

 " I will tell you a secret scheme of mine and Harry 's , " say the squire , in 
 a still low whisper . " we , must drive that marchioness , or whatever 
 she be , out of the boy 's head , and put a pretty english girl into it 
 instead . that will settle he in life too . and I must try and swallow 
 that bitter pill of the post - obit . Harry make bad of it than I do , 
 and be so hard on the poor fellow that I have   be oblige to take his 
 part . I have   no idea of be under petticoat government , it be not the 
 way with the Hazeldeans . well , but to come back to the point : whom do 
 you think I mean by the pretty girl ? " 

 " Miss Sticktorights ? " 

 " Zounds , no ! - your own little sister , Randal . sweet pretty face ! Harry 
 like she from the first , and then you will be Frank 's brother , and your 
 sound head and good heart will keep he right . and as you be go to 
 be marry too   you must tell I all about that later , why , we shall 
 have two marriage , perhaps , in the family on the same day . " 

 Randal 's hand grasp the squire 's , and with an emotion of human 
 gratitude , - for we know that , hard to all else , he have natural feeling 
 for his fallen family ; and his neglect sister be the one be on 
 earth whom he might almost be say to love . with all his intellectual 
 disdain for honest simple Frank , he know no one in the world with whom 
 his young sister could be more secure and happy . transfer to the 
 roof , and improve by the active kindness , of Mrs. Hazeldean , bl 
 in the manly affection of one not too refined to censure her own 
 deficiency of education , what more could he ask for his sister , as he 
 picture she to himself , with her hair hang over her ear , and her 
 mind run into seed over some trashy novel . but before he could 
 reply , Violante 's father come to add his own philosophical consolation 
 to the squire 's downright comforting . 

 " who could ever count on popular caprice ? the wise of all age have 
 despise it . in that respect , Horace and Machiavelli be of the same 
 mind , " etc . " but , " say the duke , with emphatic kindness " perhaps your 
 very misfortune here may serve you elsewhere . the female heart be prone 
 to pity , and ever eager to comfort . besides , if I be recall to Italy , 
 you will have leisure to come with we , and see the land where , of all 
 other , ambition can be most readily forget , even " add the Italian 
 with a sigh - " even by her own son ! " 

 thus address by both Hazeldean and the duke , Randal recover his 
 spirit . it be clear that Lord L'Estrange have not convey to they 
 any unfavourable impression of his conduct in the Committee - room . while 
 Randal have be thus engage , Levy have make his way to Harley , who 
 retreat with the baron into the bay of the great window . 

 " well , my Lord , do you comprehend this conduct on the part of Richard 
 Avenel ? he secure Egerton 's return ! - he ! " 

 " what so natural , Baron Levy , - his own brother - in - law ? " the baron 
 start , and turn very pale . 

 " but how do he know that ? I never tell he . I mean indeed - " 

 " Meant , perhaps , to shame Egerton 's pride at the last by publicly 
 declare his marriage with a shopkeeper 's daughter . a very good revenge 
 still leave to you ; but revenge for what ? a word with you , now , Baron , 
 that our acquaintance be about to close forever . you know why I have 
 cause for resentment against Egerton . I do but suspect your ; will you 
 make it clear to I ? " 

 " my Lord , my Lord , " falter Baron Levy , " I , too , woo Nora Avenel as 
 my wife ; I , too , have a happy rival in the haughty worldling who do 
 not appreciate his own felicity ; I too - in a word , some woman inspire an 
 affection that mingle with the entire being of a man , and be fuse with 
 all the current of his life - blood . Nora Avenel be one of those woman . " 

 Harley be startle . this burst of emotion from a man so corrupt and 
 cynical arrest even the scorn he feel for the usurer . Levy soon 
 recover himself . " but our revenge be not baffle yet . Egerton , if not 
 already in my power , be still in your . his election may save he from 
 arrest , but the law have other mode of public exposure and effectual 
 ruin . " 

 " for the knave , yes , - as I intimate to you in your own house , - you who 
 boast of your love to Nora Avenel , and know in your heart that you be 
 her destroyer ; you who witness her marriage , and yet dare to tell she 
 that she be dishonour ! " 

 " my Lord - I - how could you know - I mean , how think that - that - " 
 falter Levy , aghast . 

 " Nora Avenel have speak from her grave , " reply Harley , solemnly . 
 " learn that , wherever man commit a crime , Heaven find a witness ! " 

 " it be on I , then , " say Levy , wrestle against a superstitious thrill 
 at his heart - " on I that you now concentre your vengeance ; and I must 
 meet it as I may . but I have fulfil my part of our compact . I have 
 obey you implicitly - and - " 

 " I will fulfil my part of our bond , and leave you undisturbed in your 
 wealth . " 

 " I know I might trust to your Lordship 's honour , " exclaim the usurer , 
 in servile glee . 

 " and this vile creature nurse the same passion as myself ; and but 
 yesterday we be partner in the same purpose , and influence by the 
 same thought ! " mutter Harley to himself . " yes , " he say aloud , " I 
 dare not , Baron Levy , constitute myself your judge . pursue your own 
 path , - all road meet at last before the common tribunal . but you be 
 not yet release from our compact ; you must do some good in spite of 
 yourself . look yonder , where randal Leslie stand , smile secure , 
 between the two danger he have raise up for himself . and as randal 
 Leslie himself have invite I to be his judge , and you be aware that 
 he cite yourself this very day as his witness , here I must expose the 
 guilty ; for here the innocent still live , and need defence . " 

 Harley turn away , and take his place by the table . " I have wish , " 
 say he , raise his voice , " to connect with the triumph of my early 
 and dearest friend the happiness of other in whose welfare I feel an 
 interest . to you , Alphonso , Duke of Serrano , I now give this despatch , 
 receive last evening by a special messenger from the Prince Von - - - , 
 announce your restoration to your land and honour . " 

 the squire star with open mouth . " Rickeybockey a duke ? why , Jemima 's a 
 duchess ! bless I , she be actually cry ! " and his good heart prompt 
 he to run to his cousin and cheer she up a bit . 

 Violante glance at Harley , and fling herself on her father 's breast . 
 randal involuntarily rise , and move to the duke 's chair . 

 " and you , Mr. Randal Leslie , " continue Harley , " though you have lose 
 your election , see before you at this moment such prospect of wealth 
 and happiness , that I shall only have to offer you congratulation to 
 which those that greet Mr. Audley Egerton may well appear lukewarm and 
 insipid , provide you prove that you have not forfeit the right to 
 claim that promise which the Duke di Serrano have accord to the 
 suitor of his daughter 's hand . some doubt rest on my mind , you have 
 volunteer to dispel they . I have the duke 's permission to address to 
 you a few question , and I now avail myself of your offer to reply to 
 they . " 

 " now , - and here , my Lord ? " say Randal , glance round the room , as if 
 deprecate the presence of so many witness . " now , - and here . nor be 
 those present so strange to your explanation as your question would 
 imply . Mr. Hazeldean , it so happen that much of what I shall say to Mr. 
 Leslie concern your son . " 

 Randal 's countenance fall . an uneasy tremor now seize he . 

 " my son ! Frank ? oh , then , of course , Randal will speak out . Speak , my 
 boy ! " 

 Randal remain silent . the duke look at his working face , and draw 
 away his chair . 

 " young man , can you hesitate ? " say he . " a doubt be express which 
 involve your honour . " 

 " 's death ! " cry the squire , also gaze on Randal 's cower eye and 
 quivering lip , " what be you afraid of ? " 

 " Afraid ! " say Randal , force into speech , and with a hollow 
 laugh - " afraid ? - I ? what of ? I be only wonder what Lord L'Estrange 
 could mean . " 

 " I will dispel that wonder at once . Mr. Hazeldean , your son displease 
 you first by his proposal of marriage to the Marchesa di Negra against 
 your consent ; secondly , by a post - obit bond grant to Baron Levy . do 
 you understand from Mr. Randal Leslie that he have oppose or favour 
 the said marriage , - that he have countenance or blame the say 
 post - obit ? " 

 " why , of course , " cry the squire , " that he have oppose both the one 
 and the other . " 

 " be it so , Mr. Leslie ? " 

 " my Lord - I - I - my affection for Frank , and my esteem for his respect 
 father - I - I - "   he nerve himself , and go on with firm voice   - " of 
 course , I do all I could to dissuade Frank from the marriage ; and as to 
 the post - obit , I know nothing about it . " 

 " so much at present for this matter . I pass on to the graver one , 
 that affect your engagement with the Duke di Serrano 's daughter . I 
 understand from you , Duke , that to save your daughter from the snare 
 of Count di Peschiera , and in the belief that Mr. Leslie share in 
 your dread of the count 's design , you , while in exile and in poverty , 
 promise to that gentleman your daughter 's hand ? when the probability 
 of restoration to your principality seem well - nigh certain , you 
 confirm that promise on learn from Mr. Leslie that he have , however 
 ineffectively , struggle to preserve your heiress from a perfidious 
 snare . be it not so ? " 

 " certainly . have I succeed to a throne , I could not recall the promise 
 that I have give in penury and banishment ; I could not refuse to he who 
 would have sacrifice worldly ambition in wed a penniless bride , the 
 reward of his own generosity . my daughter subscribe to my view . " 

 Violante tremble , and her hand be lock together ; but her gaze be 
 fix on Harley . 

 Mr. Dale wipe his eye , and thought of the poor refugee feeding on 
 minnow , and preserve himself from debt amongst the shade of the 
 Casino . 

 " your answer become you , Duke , " resume Harley . " but should it be 
 prove that Mr. Leslie , instead of woo the princess for herself , 
 actually calculate on the receipt of money for transfer she to 
 Count Peschiera ; instead of save she from the danger you dread , 
 actually suggest the snare from which she be deliver , - would you 
 still deem your honour engage to - " 

 " such a villain ? no , surely not ! " exclaim the duke . " but this be a 
 groundless hypothesis ! speak , Randal . " 

 " Lord L'Estrange can not insult I by deem it otherwise than a 
 groundless hypothesis ! " say Randal , strive to rear his head . 

 " I understand then , Mr. Leslie , that you scornfully reject such a 
 supposition ? " 

 " Scornfully - yes . and , " continue Randal , advance a step , ' since the 
 supposition have be make , I demand from Lord L'Estrange , as his equal 
  for all gentleman be equal where honour be to be defend at the cost 
 of life , either instant retractation - or instant proof . " 

 " that be the first word you have speak like a man , " cry the squire . " I 
 have stand my ground myself for a less cause . I have have a ball through 
 my right shoulder . " 

 " your demand be just , " say Harley , unmoved . " I can not give the 
 retractation , - I will produce the proof . " 

 he rise and ring the bell ; the servant enter , receive his whisper 
 order , and retire . there be a pause painful to all . randal , however , 
 run over in his fearful mind what evidence could be bring against 
 he - and foresaw none . the fold door of the saloon be throw open 
 and the servant announce - 

  the COUNT DI PESCHIERA . 

 a bombshell , descend through the roof could not have produce a more 
 startling sensation . erect , bold , with all the impose effect of his 
 form and bearing , the count stride into the centre of the ring ; and 
 after a slight bend of haughty courtesy , which comprehend all present , 
 rear up his lofty head , and look round , with calm in his eye and a 
 curve on his lip , - the self - assure , magnificent , high - breed Daredevil . 

 " Duke di Serrano , " say the count , in English , turn towards his 
 astounded kinsman , and in a voice that , slow , clear , and firm , seem to 
 fill the room , " I return to England on the receipt of a letter from my 
 Lord L'Estrange , and with a view , it be true , of claim at his hand 
 the satisfaction which man of our birth accord to each other , where 
 affront , from what cause soever , have be give or receive . Nay , fair 
 kinswoman , " - and the count , with a slight but grave smile , bow to 
 Violante , who have utter a faint cry , - " that intention be abandon . if 
 I have adopt too lightly the old courtly maxim , that ' all stratagem 
 be fair in love , ' I be bind also to yield to my Lord L'Estrange 's 
 argument , that the counter - stratagem must be fair also . and , after 
 all , it become I well to laugh at my own sorry figure in defeat , 
 than to confess myself gravely mortify by an ingenuity more successful 
 than my own . " the count pause , and his eye lighten with sinister 
 fire , which ill suit the raillery of his tone and the polished ease of 
 his bearing . " Ma foi ! " he continue , " it be permit I to speak thus , 
 since at least I have give proof of my indifference to danger , and my 
 good fortune when expose to it . within the last six year I have 
 have the honour to fight nine duel , and the regret to wound five , and 
 dismiss from the world four , as gallant and worthy gentleman as ever the 
 sun shine upon . " 

 " Monster ! " falter the parson . 

 the squire star aghast , and mechanically rub the shoulder which have 
 be lacerate by Captain Dashinore 's bullet . Randal 's pale face grow 
 yet more pale , and the eye he have fix upon the count 's hardy visage 
 quail and fall . 

 " but , " resume the count , with a graceful wave of the hand , " I have to 
 thank my Lord L'Estrange for remind I that a man whose courage be 
 above suspicion be privileged not only to apologize if he have injure 
 another , but to accompany apology with atonement . Duke of Serrano , it be 
 for that purpose that I be here . my Lord , you have signify your wish 
 to ask I some question of serious import as regard the duke and his 
 daughter ; I will answer they without reserve . " 

 " Monsieur le Comte , " say Harley , " avail myself of your courtesy , 
 I presume to inquire who inform you that this young lady be a guest 
 under my father 's roof ? " 

 " my informant stand yonder , - Mr. Randal Leslie ; and I call upon Baron 
 Levy to confirm my statement . " 

 " it be true , " say the baron , slowly , and as if overmaster by the tone 
 and mien of an imperious chieftain . 

 there come a low sound like a hiss from Randal 's livid lip . 

 " and be Mr. Leslie acquaint with your project for secure the person 
 and hand of your young kinswoman ? " 

 " certainly , - and Baron Levy know it . " the baron bow assent . " permit 
 I to add - for it be due to a lady nearly related to myself - that it 
 be , as I have since learn , certain erroneous representation make to 
 she by Mr. Leslie which alone induce that lady , after my own argument 
 have fail , to lend her aid to a project which otherwise she would 
 have condemn as strongly as , Duke di Serrano , I now with unfeigned 
 sincerity do myself condemn it . " 

 there be about the count , as he thus speak , so much of that personal 
 dignity which , whether natural or artificial , impose for the moment 
 upon human judgment , - a dignity so support by the singular advantage 
 of his superb stature , his handsome countenance , his patrician 
 air , - that the duke , move by his good heart , extend his hand to the 
 perfidious kinsman , and forget all the machiavellian wisdom which should 
 have tell he how little a man of the count 's harden profligacy 
 be likely to be influence by any purer motif , whether to frank 
 confession or to manly repentance . the count take the hand thus extend 
 to he , and bow his face , perhaps to conceal the smile which would 
 have betray his secret soul . Randal still remain mute , and pale 
 as death . his tongue clove to his mouth . he feel that all present be 
 shrink from his side . at last , with a violent effort , he falter 
 out , in broken sentence , 

 " a charge so sudden may well - may well confound I . but - but - who can 
 credit it ? both the law and commonsense pre - suppose some motive for a 
 criminal action ; what could be my motive here ? I - myself the suitor for 
 the hand of the duke 's daughter - I betray she ! absurd - absurd ! Duke , 
 Duke , I put it to your own knowledge of mankind whoever go thus 
 against his own interest - and - and his own heart ? " 

 this appeal , however feebly make , be not without effect on the 
 philosopher . " that be true , " say the duke , drop his kinsman 's hand ; 
 " I see no motive . " 

 " perhaps , " say Harley , " Baron Levy may here enlighten we . do you know 
 of any motive of self - interest that could have actuate Mr. Leslie in 
 assist the count 's scheme ? " 

 Levy hesitate . the count take up the word . " Pardieu ! " say he , in his 
 clear tone of determination and will - " pardieu ! I can have no doubt 
 throw on my assertion , least of all by those who know of its truth ; and 
 I call upon you , Baron Levy , to state whether , in case of my marriage 
 with the duke 's daughter , I have not agree to present my sister with 
 a sum , to which she allege some ancient claim , and which would have 
 pass through your hand ? " 

 " certainly , that be true , " say the baron . 

 " and would Mr. Leslie have benefit by any portion of that sum ? " 

 Levy pause again . 

 " speak , sir , " say the count , frown . 

 " the fact be , " say the baron , " that Mr. Leslie be anxious to complete 
 a purchase of certain estate that have once belong to his family , and 
 that the count 's marriage with the signora , and his sister 's marriage 
 with Mr. Hazeldean , would have enable I to accommodate Mr. Leslie with 
 a loan to effect that purchase . " 

 " what ! what ! " exclaim the squire , hastily button his breast - pocket 
 with one hand , while he seize Randal 's arm with the other - " my son 's 
 marriage ! you lend yourself to that , too ? do not   look so like a lash 
 hound ! speak out like a man , if man you be ! " 

 " lent himself to that , my good sir ! " say the count . " do you suppose 
 that the Marchesa di Negra could have condescend to an alliance with a 
 Mr. Hazeldean - " 

 " condescend ! a Hazeldean of Hazeldean ! " exclaim the squire , turn 
 fiercely , and half choke with indignation . " unless , " continue the 
 count , imperturbably , ' she have be compel by circumstance to do 
 that say Mr. Hazeldean the honour to accept a pecuniary accommodation , 
 which she have no other mode to discharge ? and here , sir , the family 
 of Hazeldean , I be bind to say , owe a great debt of gratitude to Mr. 
 Leslie ; for it be he who most forcibly represent to she the necessity 
 for this misalliance ; and it be he , I believe , who suggest to my 
 friend the baron the mode by which Mr. Hazeldean be well enable to 
 afford the accommodation my sister deign to accept . " 

 " Mode ! the post - obit ! " ejaculate the squire , relinquish his hold of 
 randal to lay his gripe upon Levy . 

 the baron shrug his shoulder . " any friend of Mr. Frank Hazeldean 's 
 would have recommend the same , as the most economical mode of raise 
 money . " 

 Parson Dale , who have at first be more shocked than any one present at 
 these gradual revelation of Randal 's treachery , now turn his eye 
 towards the young man , be so seize with commiseration at the sight of 
 Randal 's face , that he lay his hand on Harley 's arm , and whisper he , 
 " look , look at that countenance ! - and one so young ! spare he , spare 
 he ! " 

 " Mr. Leslie , " say Harley , in softened tone , " believe I that nothing 
 short of justice to the Duke di Serrano - justice even to my young friend 
 Mr. Hazeldean - have compel I to this painful duty . here let all 
 inquiry terminate . " 

 " and , " say the count , with exquisite blandness , ' since I have be 
 inform by my Lord L'Estrange that Mr. Leslie have represent as a 
 serious act on his part that personal challenge to myself , which I 
 understand be but a pleasant and amicable arrangement in our baffle 
 scheme , let I assure Mr. Leslie that if he be not satisfied with the 
 regret that I now express for the lead share I have take in these 
 disclosure , I be wholly at Mr. Leslie 's service . " 

 " peace , homicide , " cry the parson , shudder ; and he glide to 
 the side of the detected sinner , from whom all else have recoil in 
 loathing . 

 Craft against craft , talent against talent , treason against treason - in 
 all this Randal Leslie would have rise superior to Giulio di Peschiera . 
 but what now crush he be not the superior intellect , - it be the 
 sheer brute power of audacity and nerve . here stand the careless , 
 unblushe villain , make light of his guilt , carry it away from 
 disgust itself , with resolute look and front erect . there stand the 
 abler , subtler , profounder criminal , cower , abject , pitiful ; the 
 power of mere intellectual knowledge shiver into piece against the 
 brazen metal with which the accident of constitution often arm some 
 ignoble nature . 

 the contrast be strike , and imply that truth so universally feel , 
 yet so little acknowledge in actual life , that man with audacity 
 and force of character can subdue and paralyze those far superior to 
 themselves in ability and intelligence . it be these quality which 
 make Peschiera Randal 's master ; nay , the very physical attribute of 
 the count , his very voice and form , his bold front and unshrinke eye , 
 overpower the acuter mind of the refining schemer , as in a popular 
 assembly some burly Cleon cow into timorous silence every dissentient 
 sage . but Randal turn in sullen impatience from the parson 's whisper , 
 that breathe comfort or urge repentance ; and at length say , with 
 clear tone than he have yet muster , 

 " it be not a personal conflict with the Count di Peschiera that 
 can vindicate my honour ; and I disdain to defend myself against the 
 accusation of a usurer , and of a mam who - " 

 " Monsieur ! " say the count , draw himself up . 

 " a man who , " persist Randal , though he tremble visibly , " by his own 
 confession , be himself guilty of all the scheme in which he would 
 represent I as his accomplice , and who now , not clear himself , would 
 yet convict another - " 

 " Cher petit monsieur ! " say the count , with his grand air of disdain , 
 " when man like I make use of man like you , we reward they for a service 
 if render , or discard they if the service be not do ; and if I 
 condescend to confess and apologize for any act I have commit , 
 surely Mr. Randal Leslie might do the same without disparagement to 
 his dignity . but I should never , sir , have take the trouble to appear 
 against you , have you not , as I learn , pretend to the hand of the lady 
 whom I have hop , with less presumption , to call my bride ; and in this , 
 how can I tell that you have not trick and betray I ? be there 
 anything in our past acquaintance that warrant I to believe that , 
 instead of serve I , you seek but to serve yourself ? be that as it 
 may , I have but one mode of repair to the head of my house the wrong 
 I have do he , and that be by save his daughter from a derogatory 
 alliance with an impostor who have abet my scheme for hire , and who 
 now would filch for himself their fruit . " 

 " Duke ! " exclaim Randal . 

 the duke turn his back . randal extend his hand to the squire . " Mr. 
 Hazeldean - what ? you , too , condemn I , and unheard ? " 

 " Unheard ! - zounds , no ! if you have anything to say , speak truth , and 
 shame the devil . " 

 " I abet Frank 's marriage ! I sanction the post - obit ! oh ! " cry randal , 
 cling to a straw , " if Frank himself be but here ! " 

 Harley 's compassion vanish before this sustained hypocrisy . 

 " you wish for the presence of Frank Hazeldean ? it be just . " Harley 
 open the door of the inner room , and Frank appear at the entrance . 

 " my son ! my son ! " cry the squire , rush forward , and clasp Frank 
 to his broad , fatherly breast . 

 this affect incident give a sudden change to the feeling of the 
 audience , and for a moment Randal himself be forget . the young 
 man seize that moment . reprieve , as it be , from the glare of 
 contemptuous , accuse eye , slowly he creep to the door , slowly and 
 noiselessly , as the viper , when it be wound , drop its crest and 
 glide writhe through the grass . Levy follow he to the threshold , 
 and whisper in his ear , 

 " I could not help it , - you would have do the same by I . you see you 
 have fail in everything ; and when a man fail completely , we both 
 agree that we must give he up altogether . " 

 Randal say not a word , and the baron mark his shadow fall on the 
 broad stair , steal down , down , step after step , till it fade from 
 the stone . 

 " but he be of some use , " mutter Levy . " his treachery and his exposure 
 will gall the childless Egerton . some little revenge still ! " 

 the count touch the arm of the musing usurer , 

 " j'ai bien joue mon role , n'est ce pas ? " -   I have well play my part , 
 have I not ? 

 " your part ! ah , but , my dear count , I do not quite understand it . " 

 " Ma foi , you be passably dull . I have just be land in France , when 
 a letter from L'Estrange reach I . it be couch as an invitation , 
 which I interpret to - the duello . such invitation I never refuse . 
 I reply : I come hither , take my lodging at an inn . my Lord seek I 
 last night . 

 " I begin in the tone you may suppose . Pardieu ! he be clever , milord ! he 
 show I a letter from the Prince Von - - - , Alphonse 's recall , my own 
 banishment . he place before I , but with admirable suavity , the option 
 of beggary and ruin , or an honourable claim on Alphonso 's gratitude . and 
 as for that petit monsieur , do you think I could quietly contemplate my 
 own tool 's enjoyment of all I have lose myself ? Nay , more , if that young 
 Harpagon be Alphonso 's son - inlaw , could the duke have a whisperer at 
 his ear more fatal to my own interest ? to be brief , I see at a glance 
 my good course . I have adopt it . the difficulty be to extricate 
 myself as become a man de sang et de jeu . if I have do so , 
 congratulate I . Alphonso have take my hand , and I now leave it to he 
 to attend to my fortune , and clear up my repute . " 

 " if you be go to London , " say Levy , " my carriage , ere this , must be 
 at the door , and I shall be proud to offer you a seat , and converse with 
 you on your prospect . but , peste , mon cher , your fall have be from a 
 great height , and any other man would have break his bone . " 

 " strength be ever light , " say the count , smile ; " and it do not 
 fall ; it leap down and rebound . " 

 Levy look at the count , and blame himself for have disparage 
 Peschiera and overrate Randal . 

 while this conference go on , Harley be by Violante 's side . 

 " I have keep my promise to you , " say he , with a kind of tender 
 humility . " be you still so severe on I ? " 

 " ah , " answer Violante , gaze on his noble brow , with all a woman 's 
 pride in her eloquent , admire eye , " I have hear from Mr. Dale that 
 you have achieve a conquest over yourself , which make I ashamed to 
 think that I presume to doubt how your heart would speak when a moment 
 of wrath   though of wrath so just   have pass away . " 

 " no , Violante , do not acquit I yet ; witness my revenge   for I have not 
 foregone it , and then let my heart speak , and breathe its prayer that 
 the angel voice , which it now beat to hear , may still be its guardian 
 monitor . " 

 " what be this ? " cry an amazed voice ; and Harley , turn round , see 
 that the duke be by his side ; and , glance with ludicrous surprise , 
 now to Harley , now to Violante , " be I to understand that you - " 

 " have free you from one suitor for this dear hand , to become myself 
 your petitioner ! " 

 " Corpo di Bacco ! " cry the sage , almost embrace Harley , " this , 
 indeed , be joyful news . but I must not again make a rash pledge , - not 
 again force my child 's inclination . and Violante ; you see , be run 
 away . " 

 the duke stretch out his arm , and detain his child . he draw she 
 to his breast , and whisper in her ear . Violante blush crimson , and 
 rest her head on his shoulder . Harley eagerly press forward . 

 " there , " say the duke , join Harley 's hand with his daughter 's , " I 
 do not   think I shall hear much more of the convent ; but anything of this 
 sort I never suspect . if there be a language in the world for which 
 there be no lexicon nor grammar , it be that which a woman think in , but 
 never speak . " 

 " it be all that be leave of the language speak in paradise , " say 
 Harley . 

 " in the dialogue between Eve and the serpent , - yes , " quoth the 
 incorrigible sage . " but who come here ? - our friend Leonard . " 

 Leonard now enter the room ; but Harley could scarcely greet he , 
 before he be interrupt by the count . " Milord , " say Peschiera , 
 beckon he aside , " I have fulfil my promise , and I will now leave 
 your roof . Baron Levy return to London , and offer I a seat in his 
 carriage , which be already , I believe , at your door . the duke and his 
 daughter will readily forgive I if I do not ceremoniously bid 
 they farewell . in our altered position , it do not become I too 
 intrusively to claim kindre ; it become I only to remove , as I trust I 
 have do , a barrier against the claim . if you approve my conduct , you 
 will state your own opinion to the duke . " with a profound salutation the 
 count turn to depart ; nor do Harley attempt to stay he , but attend 
 he down the stair with polite formality . 

 " remember only , my Lord , that I solicit nothing . I may allow myself to 
 accept , - voilia tout . " he bow again , with the inimitable grace of the 
 old regime , and step into the baron 's travel carriage . 

 Levy , who have linger behind , pause to accost L'Estrange . " your 
 Lordship will explain to Mr. Egerton how his adopt son deserve his 
 esteem , and repay his kindness . for the rest , though you have buy up 
 the more pressing and immediate demand on Mr. Egerton , I fear that even 
 your fortune will not enable you to clear those liability which will 
 leave he , perhaps , a pauper ! " 

 " Baron Levy , " say Harley , abruptly , " if I have forgive Mr. Egerton , 
 can not you too forgive ? I he have wrong ; you have wrong he , and 
 more foully . " 

 " no , my Lord , I can not forgive he . you he have never humiliate , you he 
 have never employ for his want , and scorn as his companion . you have 
 never know what it be to start in life with one whose fortune be 
 equal to your own , whose talent be not superior . look you , Lord 
 L'Estrange , in spite of this difference between I and Egerton , that he 
 have squander the wealth that he gain without effort , while I 
 have convert the folly of other into my own ample revenue , the 
 spendthrift in his penury have the respect and position which million 
 can not bestow upon I . you would say that I be an usurer , and he be a 
 statesman . but do you know what I should have be , have I not be bear 
 the natural son of a peer ? can you guess what I should have be if 
 Nora Avenel have be my wife ? the blot on my birth , and the blight on my 
 youth , and the knowledge that he who be rise every year into the rank 
 which entitle he to reject I as a guest at his table - he whom the 
 world call the model of a gentleman - be a coward and a liar to the 
 friend of his youth , - all this make I look on the world with contempt ; 
 and , despise Audley Egerton , I yet hat he and envy . you , whom 
 he wrong , stretch your hand as before to the great statesman ; from my 
 touch you would shrink as pollution . my Lord , you may forgive he whom 
 you love and pity ; I can not forgive he whom I scorn and envy . Pardon my 
 prolixity . I now quit your house . " the baron move a step , then , turn 
 back , say with a wither sneer , - 

 " but you will tell Mr. Egerton how I help to expose the son he 
 adopt ! I think of the childless man when your Lordship imagine I 
 be but in fear of your threat . ha ! ha ! that will sting . " 

 the baron gnash his tooth as , hastily enter the carriage , he draw 
 down the blind . the post - boy crack their whip , and the wheel 
 roll away . 

 " who can judge , " think Harley , " through what mode retribution come 
 home to the breast ? that man be chastise in his wealth , ever gnaw by 
 desire for what his wealth can not buy ! " he rouse himself , clear his 
 brow , as from a thought that darken and trouble ; and , enter the 
 saloon , lay his hand upon Leonard 's shoulder , and look , rejoice , 
 into the poet 's mild , honest , lustrous eye . " Leonard , " say he , gently , 
 " your hour be come at last . " 




 CHAPTER XXXIV . 

 audely Egerton be alone in his apartment . a heavy sleep have come over 
 he , shortly after Harley and Randal have leave the house in the early 
 morning ; and that sleep continue till late in the day . all the while 
 the town of Lansmere have be distract in his cause , all the while so 
 many tumultuous passion have run riot in the contest that be to close 
 or re - open for the statesman 's ambition the Janus gate of political 
 war , the object of so many fear and hope , scheme and counter - scheme , 
 have slumber quietly as an infant in the cradle . he wake but in time to 
 receive Harley 's despatch , announce the success of his election ; and 
 add , " before the night you shall embrace your son . do not join we 
 below when I return . keep calm , - we will come to you . " 

 in fact , though not aware of the dread nature of Audley 's complaint , 
 with its warning symptom , Lord L'Estrange wish to spare to his friend 
 the scene of Randal 's exposure . 

 on the receipt of that letter Egerton rise . at the prospect of see 
 his son - Nora 's son - the very memory of his disease vanish . the poor , 
 weary , over - labour heart indeed beat loud , and with many a jerk and 
 spasm . he heed it not . the victory , that restore he to the sole life 
 for which he have hitherto care to live , be clean forget . nature 
 claim her own , - claim it in scorn of death , and in oblivion of 
 renown . 

 there sit the man , dress with his habitual precision , - the black 
 coat , button across the broad breast ; his countenance , so mechanically 
 habituate to self - control , still reveal little of emotion , though 
 the sickly flush come and go on the bronzed cheek , and the eye watch 
 the hand of the clock , and the ear hunger for a foot - tread along the 
 corridor . at length the sound be hear , - step , many step . he spring 
 to his foot , he stand on the hearth . be the hearth to be solitary no 
 more ? Harley enter first . Egerton 's eye rest on he eagerly for 
 a moment , and strain onward across the threshold . Leonard come 
 next , - Leonard Fairfield , whom he have see as his opponent ! he begin 
 to suspect , to conjecture , to see the mother 's tender eye in the son 's 
 manly face . involuntarily he open his arm ; but , Leonard remain 
 still , let they fall with a deep sigh , and fancy himself deceive . 

 " Friend , " say Harley , " I give to you a son prove in adversity , and who 
 have fight his own way to fame . Leonard , in the man to whom I pray you 
 to sacrifice your own ambition , of whom you have speak with such 
 worthy praise , whose career of honour you have promote , and whose life , 
 unsatisfie by those honour , you will soothe with your filial love , 
 behold the husband of Nora Avenel ! kneel to your father ! o Audley , 
 embrace your son ! " 

 " here , here ! " exclaim Egerton , as Leonard bend his knee , - " here to my 
 heart ! look at I with those eye ! - kindly , forgivingly : they be your 
 mother 's ! " his proud head sink on his son 's shoulder . 

 " but this be not enough , " say Harley , lead Helen , and place she by 
 Leonard 's side . " you must open your heart for more . take into its fold 
 my sweet ward and daughter . what be a home without the smile of woman ? 
 they have love each other from child . Audley , yours be the hand to 
 join , - yours be the lip to bless . " 

 Leonard start anxiously . " oh , sir ! - oh , my father ! - this generous 
 sacrifice may not be ; for he - he who have save I for this surpass 
 joy - he too love she ! " 

 " Nay , Leonard , " say Harley , smile , " I be not so neglectful of myself . 
 another home woo you , Audley . he whom you long so vainly seek to 
 reconcile to life , exchange mournful dream for happy duty , - he , 
 too , present you to his bride . love she for my sake , - for your own . she 
 it be , not I , who preside over this hallowed reunion . but for she , I 
 should have be a blinded , vindictive , guilty , repentant man ; and - " 
 Violante 's soft hand be on his lip . " thus , " say the parson , with mild 
 solemnity , " man find that the Saviour 's precept , ' let not the sun go 
 down upon thy wrath , ' and ' love one another , ' be clew that conduct we 
 through the labyrinth of human life , when the scheme of fraud and hate 
 snap asunder , and leave we lose amidst the maze . " 

 Egerton rear his head , as if to answer ; and all present be strike 
 and appal by the sudden change that have come over his countenance . 
 there be a film upon the eye , a shadow on the aspect ; the word 
 fail his lip ; he sink on the seat beside he . the left hand rest 
 droopingly upon the pile of public paper and official document , and 
 the finger play with they , as the bedridden die sufferer play with 
 the coverlid he will soon exchange for the winding - sheet . but his right 
 hand seem to feel , as through the dark , for the recovered son ; and 
 have touch what it seek , feebly draw Leonard near and nearer . 
 alas ! that blissful private life - that close centre round the core of 
 be in the individual man - so long miss and pin for , slip from 
 he , as it be , the moment it reappear ; hurry away , as the circle 
 on the ocean , which be scarce see ere it vanish amidst infinity . 
 suddenly both hand be still ; the head fall back . Joy have burst 
 asunder the last ligament , so fret away in unrevealing sorrow . afar , 
 their sound bear into that room , the joy - bell be peal triumph ; 
 mob roar out huzzas ; the weak cry of John Avenel might be blent in 
 those shout , as the drunken zealot reel by his cottage door , and 
 startle the screaming raven that wheel round the hollow oak . the 
 boom which be send from the wave on the surface of life , while the 
 deep be so noiseless in their march , be waft on the wintry air into 
 the chamber of the statesman it honour , and over the grass sigh low 
 upon Nora 's grave . but there be one in the chamber , as in the grave , 
 for whom the boom on the wave have no sound , and the march of the deep 
 have no tide . amidst promise of home , and union , and peace , and fame , 
 death stride into the household ring , and , seat itself , calm and 
 still , look life - like , - warm heart throb round it ; lofty hope 
 flutter upward ; love kneel at its foot ; Religion , with lift 
 finger , stand by its side . 




 FINAL CHAPTER . 

  SCENE - the Hall in the Old Tower of CAPTAIN ROLAND DE CAXTON . 

 " but you have not do ? " say Augustine Caxton . 

 PISISTRATUS . - " what remain to do ? " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " what ! why , the final chapter ! - the last news you can give 
 we of those whom you have introduce to our liking or dislike . " 

 PISISTRATUS . - " surely it be more dramatic to close the work with a 
 scene that complete the main design of the plot , and leave it to the 
 prophetic imagination of all whose flattering curiosity be still not 
 wholly satisfied , to trace the stream of each several existence , when 
 they branch off again from the lake in which their water converge , and 
 by which the sibyl have confirm and make clear the decree that ' conduct 
 be Fate . ' " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " more dramatic , I grant ; but you have not write a drama . 
 a novelist should be a comfortable , garrulous , communicative , gossip 
 fortune - teller ; not a grim , laconical , oracular sibyl . I like a novel 
 that adopt all the old - fashioned custom prescribe to its art by 
 the rule of the Masters , - more especially a novel which you style ' my 
 Novel ' par emphasis . " 

 CAPTAIN ROLAND . - " a most vague and impracticable title ' my novel ' ! it 
 must really be change before the work go in due form to the public . " 

 MR . SQUILLS . - " certainly the present title can not be even pronounce by 
 many without inflict a shock upon their nervous system . do you think , 
 for instance , that my friend , Lady Priscilla Graves - who be a great 
 novel - reader indeed , but hold all female writer unfeminine deserter 
 to the standard of Man - could ever come out with , ' pray , sir , have you 
 have time to look at - MY novel ? ' - she would rather die first . and yet 
 to be silent altogether on the late acquisition to the circulate 
 library would bring on a functional derangement of her ladyship 's 
 organ of speech . or how could pretty Miss Dulcet - all sentiment , it 
 be true , but all bashful timidity - appall Captain Smirke from propose 
 with , ' do not you think the parson 's sermon a little too dry in - MY 
 Novel ' ? it will require a face of brass , or at least a long course 
 of citrate of iron , before a respectable lady or unassuming young 
 gentleman , with a proper dread of be take for scribbler , could 
 electrify a social circle with ' the reviewer do not   do justice to the 
 excellent thing in - my Novel . ' " 

 CAPTAIN ROLAND . - " awful consequence , indeed , may arise from the 
 mistake such a title give rise to . Counsellor Digwell , for instance , a 
 lawyer of literary taste , but whose career at the Bar be long delay 
 by an unjust suspicion amongst the attorney that he have write a 
 ' Philosophical Essay ' - imagine such a man excuse himself for be 
 late at a dinner of bigwig , with ' I could not get away from - my novel ! ' 
 it would be his professional ruin ! I be not fond of lawyer in general , 
 but still I would not be a party to take the bread out of the mouth 
 of those with a family ; and Digwell have child , - the tenth an innocent 
 baby in arm . " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " as to Digwell in particular , and lawyer in general , they 
 be too accustomed to circumlocution to expose themselves to the danger 
 your kind heart apprehend ; but I allow that a shy scholar like myself , 
 or a grave college tutor , might be a little put to the blush , if he be 
 to blurt forth inadvertently with , ' do not   waste your time over trash 
 like - MY Novel . ' and that think present to we another and more 
 pleasing view of this critical question . the title you condemn place 
 the work under universal protection . live there a man or a woman so 
 dead to self - love as to say , ' what contemptible stuff be - MY Novel ' ? 
 would he or she not rather be impel by that strong impulse of an 
 honourable and virtuous heart , which move we to stand as well as we can 
 with our friend , to say , ' allow that there be really a good thing now 
 and then in - my novel . ' moreover , as a novel aspire to embrace most of 
 the interest or the passion that agitate mankind , - to generalize , as 
 it be , the detail of life that come home to we all , - so , in reality , 
 the title denote that if it be such as the author may not unworthily 
 call his novel , it must also be such as the reader , whoever he be , may 
 appropriate in part to himself , represent his own idea , express 
 his own experience , reflect , if not in full , at least in profile , 
 his own personal identity . thus , when we glance at the look - glass in 
 another man 's room , our likeness for the moment appropriate the mirror ; 
 and accord to the humour in which we be , or the state of our spirit 
 and health , we say to ourselves , ' bilious and yellow ! - I might as well 
 take care of my diet ! ' or , ' well , I ' ve   half a mind to propose to dear 
 Jane ; I be not such an ill - look dog as I think for ! ' still , whatever 
 result from that glance at the mirror , we never doubt that ' t be our 
 likeness we see ; and each say to the phantom reflection , ' thou art 
 myself , ' though the mere article of furniture that give the reflection 
 belong to another . it be my likeness if it be his glass . and a 
 narrative that be true to the Varieties of Life be every man 's novel , 
 no matter from what shore , by what river , by what bay , in what pit , 
 be extract the sand and the silex , the pearlash , the nitre , and 
 quicksilver which form its material ; no matter who the craftsman who 
 fashion its form ; no matter who the vendor that sell , or the customer 
 who buy : still , if I but recognize some trait of myself , ' t be my 
 likeness that make it ' my novel . ' " 

 MR . SQUILLS   puzzle , and therefore admire . - " subtle , sir , - very 
 subtle . fine organ of Comparison in Mr. Caxton 's head , and much call 
 into play this evening ! " 

 MR . CAXTON   benignly . - " finally , the author by this most admirable and 
 much signifying title dispense with all necessity of preface . he need 
 insinuate no merit , he need extenuate no fault ; for , by call his 
 work thus curtly ' MY Novel , ' he doth delicately imply that it be no use 
 wasting talk about fault or merit . " 

 PISISTRATUS   amazed . - " how be that , sir ? " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " what so clear ? you imply that , though a well novel may 
 be write by other , you do not expect to write a novel to which , 
 take as a novel , you would more decisively and unblushingly prefix that 
 voucher of personal authorship and identity convey in the monosyllable 
 ' my . ' and if you have write your good , let it be ever so bad , what can 
 any man of candour and integrity require more from you ? perhaps you will 
 say that , if you have live two thousand year ago , you might have call 
 it ' the novel , ' or the ' Golden Novel , ' as Lucius call his story ' the 
 Ass ; ' and Apuleius , to distinguish his own more elaborate Ass from all 
 ass precede it , call his tale ' the Golden Ass . ' but live in the 
 present day , such a designation - imply a merit in general , not 
 the partial and limited merit correspond only with your individual 
 ability - would be presumptuous and offensive . true , I here anticipate 
 the observation I see Squills be about to make - " 

 squill . - " I , Sir ? " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " you would say that , as Scarron call his work of fiction 
 ' the Comic Novel , ' so Pisistratus might have call his ' the serious 
 novel , ' or ' the Tragic Novel . ' but , Squills , that title would not have 
 be invite nor appropriate , and would have be expose to comparison 
 with Scarron , who be dead be inimitable . wherefore - to put the 
 question on the irrefragable basis of mathematic - wherefore as a b ' my 
 Novel ' be not equal to b C ' the Golden Novel , ' nor to D E ' the serious 
 or Tragic Novel , ' it follow that a b ' my novel ' be equal to P C 
 ' Pisistratus Caxton , ' and p C ' Pisistratus Caxton ' must therefore be 
 just equal , neither more nor less , to a b ' my novel , ' - which be to be 
 demonstrate . " my father look round triumphantly , and observe that 
 Squills be dumfounde , and the rest of his audience pose , he add 
 mildly , 

 " and so now , ' non quieta movere , ' proceed with the Final chapter , and 
 tell we first what become of that youthful Giles Overreach , who be 
 himself his own Marrall ? " 

 " ay , " say the captain , " what become of randal Leslie ? do he repent and 
 reform ? " 

 " Nay , " quoth my father , with a mournful shake of the head , " you can 
 regulate the warm tide of wild passion , you can light into virtue the 
 dark error of ignorance ; but where the force of the brain do but clog 
 the free action of the heart , where you have to deal , not with ignorance 
 mislead , but intelligence corrupt , small hope of reform ; for reform 
 here will need re - organization . I have somewhere read   perhaps in Hebrew 
 tradition   that of the two order of fall spirit , - the Angels of Love 
 and the Angels of Knowledge , - the first miss the star they have lose , 
 and wander back through the darkness , one by one , into heaven ; but the 
 last , light on by their own lurid splendour , say , ' wherever we go , 
 there be heaven ! ' and deep and low descending , lose their shape 
 and their nature , till , deform and obscene , the bottomless pit close 
 around they . " 

 MR . SQUILLS . - " I should not have think , Mr. Caxton , that a book - man 
 like you would be thus severe upon Knowledge . " 

 MR . CAXTON   in wrath . - " severe upon knowledge ! oh , Squills , Squills , 
 Squills ! Knowledge pervert be knowledge no long . vinegar , which , 
 expose to the sun , breed small serpent , or at good slimy eel , not 
 comestible , once be wine . if I say to my grandchild , ' do not   drink 
 that sour stuff , which the sun itself fill with reptile , ' do that 
 prove I a foe to sound sherry ? Squills , if you have but receive a 
 scholastic education , you would know the wise maxim that saith , ' all 
 thing the bad be corruption from thing originally design as the 
 good . ' have not freedom breed anarchy , and religion fanaticism ? and if I 
 blame Marat call for blood , or Dominic rack a heretic , be I severe 
 on the religion that canonize Francis de Sales , or the freedom that 
 immortalize Thrasybulus ? " 

 Mr. Squills , dread a catalogue of all the saint in the calendar , 
 and an epitome of Ancient history , exclaim eagerly , " enough , sir ; I be 
 convince ! " 

 MR . CAXTON . - " moreover , I have think it a natural stroke of art in 
 Pisistratus to keep Randal Leslie , in his progress towards the rot 
 of the intellect unwholesomely refine , free from all the salutary 
 influence that deter ambition from settle into egotism . neither in 
 his slovenly home , nor from his classic tutor at his preparatory school , 
 do he seem to have learn any truth , religious or moral , that might 
 give sap to fresh shoot , when the first rank growth be cut down by the 
 knife ; and I especially note , as illustrative of Egerton , no less than 
 of Randal , that though the statesman 's occasional hint of advice to 
 his protege be worldly wise in their way , and suggestive of honour as 
 befit the creed of a gentleman , they be not such as much influence 
 a shrewd reasoner like Randal , whom the example of the playground at 
 Eton have not serve to correct of the arid self - seeking , which look 
 to knowledge for no object but power . a man tempt by passion like 
 Audley , or seduce into fraud by a cold , subtle spirit like Leslie , 
 will find poor defence in the elegant precept , ' remember to act as 
 a gentleman . ' such moral embroidery add a beautiful scarf to one 's 
 armour ; but it be not the armour itself ! ten o'clock , as I live ! push 
 on , Pisistratus ! and finish the chapter . " 

 MRS . CAXTON   benevolently . - " do not   hurry . begin with that odious randal 
 Leslie , to oblige your father ; but there be other whom Blanche and I 
 care much more to hear about . " 

 Pisistratus , since there be no help for it , produce a supplementary 
 manuscript , which prove that , whatever his doubt as to the artistic 
 effect of a final chapter , he have foresee that his audience would not 
 be content without one . 

 Randal Leslie , late at noon the day after he quit Lansmere Park , 
 arrive on foot at his father 's house . he have walk all the way , and 
 through the solitude of the winter night ; but he be not sensible of 
 fatigue till the dismal home close round he , with its air of hopeless 
 ignoble poverty ; and then he sink upon the floor feel himself a 
 ruin amidst the ruin . he make no disclosure of what have pass to his 
 relation . miserable man , there be not one to whom he could confide , 
 or from whom he might hear the truth that connect repentance with 
 consolation ! after some week pass in sullen and almost unbroken 
 silence , be leave as abruptly as he have appear , and return to London . 
 the sudden death of a man like Egerton have even in those excited 
 time create intense , though brief sensation . the particular of the 
 election , that have be give in detail in the provincial paper , be 
 copy into the London journal , among those detail , Randal Leslie 's 
 conduct in the Committee - room , with many an indignant comment on 
 selfishness and ingratitude . the political world of all party form 
 one of those judgment on the great man 's poor dependant , which fix a 
 stain upon the character and place a barrier in the career of ambitious 
 youth . the important personage who have once notice Randal for Audley 's 
 sake , and who , on their subsequent and not long - defer restoration to 
 power , could have make his fortune , pass he in the street without 
 a nod . he do not venture to remind Avenel of the promise to aid he in 
 another election for Lansmere , nor dream of fill up the vacancy which 
 Egerton 's death have create . he be too shrewd not to see that all hope 
 of that borough be over , - he would have be hoot in the street and 
 pelt from the husting . forlorn in the vast metropolis as Leonard 
 have once be , in his turn he loiter on the bridge , and gaze on the 
 remorseless river . he have neither money nor connection , - nothing save 
 talent and knowledge to force his way back into the lofty world in 
 which all have smile on he before ; and talent and knowledge , that have 
 be exert to injure a benefactor , make he but the more despised . 
 but even now , Fortune , that have bestow on the pauper heir of Rood 
 advantage so numerous and so dazzling , out of which he have cheat 
 himself , give he a chance , at least , of present independence , by which , 
 with patient toil , he might have win , if not to the high place , at 
 least to a position in which he could have force the world to listen 
 to his explanation ; and perhaps receive his excuse . the L5,000 
 that Audley design for he , and which , in a private memorandum , the 
 statesman have entreat Harley to see safely rescue from the fang of 
 the law , be make over to Randal by Lord L'Estrange 's solicitor ; but 
 this sum seem to he so small after the loss of such gorgeous hope , 
 and the up - hill path seem so slow after such short cut to power , 
 that Randal look upon the unexpected bequest simply as an apology for 
 adopt no profession . Stung to the quick by the contrast between his 
 past and his present place in the english world , he hasten abroad . 
 there , whether in distraction from thought , or from the curiosity of a 
 restless intellect to explore the worth of thing yet untried , randal 
 Leslie , who have hitherto be so dead to the ordinary amusement of 
 youth , plunge into the society of damage gamester and third - rate 
 roue . in this companionship his very talent gradually degenerate , and 
 their exercise upon low intrigue and miserable project but abase his 
 social character , till , sink step after step as his fund decay , 
 he finally vanish out of the sphere in which even profligate still 
 retain the habit , and cle to the caste of gentleman . his father die ; 
 the neglect property of Rood devolve on Randal , but out of its scanty 
 proceed he have to pay the portion of his brother and sister , and 
 his mother 's jointure ; the surplus leave be scarcely visible in the 
 executor 's account . the hope of restore the home and fortune of his 
 forefather have long cease . what be the ruin hall and its bleak 
 waste , without that hope which have once dignify the wreck and the 
 desert ? he write from St. Petersburg , order the sale of the property . 
 no one great proprietor be a candidate for the unpromising investment ; 
 it be sell in lot among small freeholder and retired trader . a 
 builder buy the hall for its material . Hall , land , and name be 
 blot out of the map and the history of the county . 

 the widow , Oliver , and Juliet remove to a provincial town in another 
 shire . Juliet marry an ensign in a march regiment ; and die of 
 neglect after childbirth . Mrs. Leslie do not long survive she . Oliver 
 add to his little fortune by marriage with the daughter of a retail 
 tradesman , who have amass a few thousand pound . he set up a brewery , 
 and contrive to live without debt , though a large family and his own 
 constitutional inertness extract from his business small profit and 
 no saving . nothing of Randal have be hear of for year after the sale 
 of Rood , except that he have take up his residence either in Australia 
 or the United States ; it be not know which , but presume to be the 
 latter . still , Oliver have be bring up with so high a veneration of 
 his brother 's talent , that he cherish the sanguine belief that Randal 
 would some day appear , wealthy and potent , like the uncle in a 
 comedy ; lift rip the sunken family , and rear into graceful lady and 
 accomplished gentleman the clumsy little boy and the vulgar little 
 girl who now crowd round Oliver 's dinner - table , with appetite 
 altogether disproportione to the size of the joint . 

 one winter day , when from the say dinner - table wife and child have 
 retire , and Oliver sit sip his half - pint of bad port , and look 
 over unsatisfactory account , a thin terrier , lie on the threadbare 
 rug by the niggard fire , spring up and bark fiercely . Oliver lift 
 his dull blue eye , and see opposite to he , at the window , a human 
 face . the face be press close to the pane , and be obscure by the 
 haze which the breath of its lip draw forth from the frosty rime that 
 have gather on the glass . 

 Oliver , alarmed and indignant , suppose this intrusive spectator of his 
 privacy to be some bold and lawless tramper , step out of the room , 
 open the front door , and bade the stranger go about his business ; 
 while the terri still more inhospitably yelp and snap at the 
 stranger 's heel . then a hoarse voice say , " do not   you know I , Oliver ? 
 I be your brother randal ! call away your dog and let I in . " Oliver 
 star aghast ; he could not believe his slow sens , he could not 
 recognize his brother in the gaunt grim apparition before he ; but at 
 length he come forward , gaze into Randal 's face , and , grasp his hand 
 in amazed silence , lead he into the little parlour . not a trace of 
 the well - breed refinement which have once characterize Randal 's air and 
 person be visible . his dress bespoke the last stage of that terrible 
 decay which be significantly call the ' shabby genteel . " his mien be 
 that of the skulking , timorous , famished vagabond . as he take off his 
 greasy tattere hat , he exhibit , though still young in year , the 
 sign of premature old age . his hair , once so fine and silken , be of 
 a harsh iron - gray , bald in ragged patch ; his forehead and visage be 
 plough into furrow ; intelligence be still in the aspect , but an 
 intelligence that instinctively set you on your guard , - sinister , 
 gloomy , menacing . 

 Randal stop short all questioning . he seize the small modicum of 
 wine on the table , and drain it at a draught . " Poole , " say he , " have 
 you nothing that warm a man well than this ? " Oliver , who feel as if 
 under the influence of a frightful dream , go to a cupboard and take 
 out a bottle of brandy three - part full . randal snatch at it eagerly , 
 and put his lip to the mouth of the bottle . " ah , " say he , after a 
 short pause , " this comfort ; now give I food . " Oliver hasten himself 
 to serve his brother ; in fact , he feel ashamed that even the slipshod 
 maid - servant should see his visitor . when he return with such 
 provision as he could extract from the larder , Randal be seat by the 
 fire , spread over the ember emaciate bony hand , like the talon of 
 a vulture . 

 he devour the cold meat set before he with terrible voracity , and 
 nearly finish the spirit leave in the bottle ; but the last have no 
 effect in disperse his gloom . Oliver star at he in fear ; the 
 terrier continue to utter a low suspicious growl . 

 " you would know my history ? " at length say Randal , bluntly . " it be 
 short . I have try for fortune and fail , I be without a penny and 
 without a hope . you seem poor , - 

 " I suppose you can not much help I . let I at least stay with you for a 
 time , - I know not where else to look for bread and for shelter . " 

 Oliver burst into tear , and cordially bade his brother welcome . randal 
 remain some week at Oliver 's house , never stir out of the door , 
 and not seem to notice , though he do not scruple to use , the new 
 habiliment , which Oliver procure ready - make , and place , without 
 remark , in his room . but his presence soon become intolerable to the 
 mistress of the house , and oppressive even to its master . Randal , who 
 have once be so abstemious that he have even regard the most 
 moderate use of wine as incompatible with clear judgment and vigilant 
 observation , have contract the habit of drink spirit at all hour 
 of the day ; but though they sometimes intoxicate he into stupor , they 
 never unlock his heart nor enliven his sullen mood . if he observe 
 less acutely than of old , he could still conceal just as closely . 
 Mrs. Oliver Leslie , at first rather awed and taciturn , grow cold and 
 repelling , then pert and sarcastic , at last undisguisedly and vulgarly 
 rude . randal make no retort ; but his sneer be so gall that the wife 
 fly at once to her husband , and declare that either she or his brother 
 must leave the house . Oliver try to pacify and compromise , with 
 partial success ; and a few day afterwards , he come to Randal and say 
 timidly , " you see , my wife bring I nearly all I possess , and you 
 do not   condescend to make friend with she . your residence here must be 
 as painful to you as to I . but I wish to see you provide for ; and I 
 could offer you something , only it seem , at first glance , so beneath - " 

 " beneath what ? " interrupt Randal , witheringly . " what I be - or what I 
 be ? speak out ! " 

 " to be sure you be a scholar ; and I have hear you say fine thing 
 about knowledge and so forth ; and you will have plenty of book at your 
 disposal , no doubt ; and you be still young , and may rise - and - " 

 " Hell and torment ! be quick , - say the bad or the good ! " cry Randal , 
 fiercely . 

 " well , then , " say poor Oliver , still try to soften the intended 
 proposal , " you must know that our poor sister 's husband be nephew 
 to Dr. Felpem , who keep a very respectable school . he be not learn 
 himself , and attend chiefly to arithmetic and book - keeping , and such 
 matter ; but he want an usher to teach the classic , for some of the 
 boy go to college . and I have write to he , just to sound - I do not 
 mention your name till I know if you would like it ; but he will take my 
 recommendation . Board , lodge , L50 a year ; in short , the place be yours 
 if you like it . " randal shiver from head to foot , and be long 
 before he answer . " well , be it so ; I have come to that . ha , ha ! yes , 
 knowledge be power ! " he pause a few moment . " so , the old Hall be raze 
 to the ground , and you be a tradesman in a small country town , and my 
 sister be dead , and I henceforth be - John Smith ! you say that you do 
 not mention my name to the schoolmaster , - still keep it conceal ; 
 forget that I once be a Leslie . our tie of brotherhood cease when I 
 go from your hearth . Write , then , to your head - master , who attend 
 to arithmetic , and secure the rank of his usher in Latin and Greek 
 for - John Smith ! " 

 not many day afterwards , the protege of Audley Egerton enter on his 
 duty as usher in one of those large , cheap school , which comprise a 
 sprinkling of the son of gentry and clergyman design for the learn 
 profession , with a far large proportion of the son of trader , 
 intend , some for the counting - house , some for the shop and the till . 
 there , to this day , under the name of John Smith , live Randal Leslie . 

 it be probably not pride alone that induce he to persist in that 
 change of name , and make he regard as perpetual the abandonment of 
 the one that he take from his forefather , and with which he have once 
 identify his vault ambition ; for shortly after he have quit 
 his brother 's house , Oliver read in the weekly newspaper , to which he 
 bound his lore of the time in which he live , an extract from 
 an american journal , wherein certain mention be make of an english 
 adventurer who , amongst other alias , have assume the name of 
 Leslie , - that extract cause Oliver to start , turn pale , look round , 
 and thrust the paper into the fire . from that time he never attempt to 
 violate the condition Randal have impose on he , never seek to renew 
 their intercourse , nor to claim a brother . Doubtless , if the adventurer 
 thus signalize be the man Oliver suspect , whatever might be impute 
 to Randal 's charge that could have pal a brother 's cheek , it be none 
 of the more violent crime to which law be inexorable , but rather   in 
 that progress make by ingratitude and duplicity , with Need and necessity 
 urge they on   some act of dishonesty which may just escape from the 
 law , to sink , without redemption , the name . however this be , there be 
 nothing in Randal 's present course of life which forbode any deeper 
 fall . he have know what it be to want bread , and his former restlessness 
 subside into cynic apathy . 

 he lodge in the town near the school , and thus the debasing habit of 
 unsocial besotment be not bring under the eye of his superior . the 
 drain be his sole luxury ; if it be suspect , it be think to be his 
 sole vice . he go through the ordinary routine of tuition with average 
 credit ; his spirit of intrigue occasionally show itself in attempt 
 to conciliate the favour of the boy whose father be wealthy , who be 
 bear to high rank than the rest ; and he lay complicated scheme to 
 be ask home for the holiday . but when the scheme succeed , and the 
 invitation come , he recoil and shrink back , - he do not dare to show 
 himself on the border of the bright world he once hop to sway ; he 
 fear that he may be discover to be - a Leslie ! on such day , when his 
 taskwork be over , he shut himself up in his room , lock the door , and 
 drug himself into insensibility . 

 once he find a well - wear volume run the round of delighted 
 schoolboy , take it up , and recognize Leonard 's early popular work , 
 which have , many year before , seduce himself into pleasant thought and 
 gentle emotion . he carry the book to his own lodging , read it again ; 
 and when he return it to its young owner , some of the leaf be 
 stain with tear . alas ! perhaps but the maudlin tear of broken 
 nerve , not of the awakened soul , - for the leaf smell strongly of 
 whiskey . yet , after that re - perusal , Randal Leslie turn suddenly to 
 deep study than his habitual drudgery require . he revive and 
 increase his early scholarship ; he chalk the outline of a work of 
 great erudition , in which the subtlety of his intellect find field 
 in learn and acute criticism . but he have never proceed far in this 
 work . after each irregular and spasmodic effort , the pen drop from his 
 hand , and he mutter , " but to what end ? 

 " I can never now raise a name . why give reputation to - John Smith ? " 

 thus he drag on his life ; and perhaps , when he die , the fragment of 
 his learn work may be discover in the desk of the usher , and serve 
 as hint to some crafty student , who may filch idea and repute from the 
 dead Leslie , as Leslie have filch they from the live Burley . 

 while what may be call poetical justice have thus evolve itself from 
 the scheme in which Randal Leslie have waste rare intellect in baffle 
 his own fortune , no outward sign of adversity evince the punishment 
 of Providence on the head of the more powerful offender , Baron Levy . no 
 fall in the Funds have shake the sumptuous fabric , build from the ruin 
 house of other man . Baron Levy be still Baron Levy the millionaire ; but 
 I doubt if at heart he be not more acutely miserable than Randal Leslie 
 the usher . for Levy be a man who have admit the fiercer passion into 
 his philosophy of life ; he have not the pale blood and torpid heart which 
 allow the scotch adder to dose away its sense of pain . just as old age 
 begin to creep upon the fashionable usurer , he fall in love with a young 
 opera - dancer , whose light heel have turn the light head of half the 
 eligans of Paris and London . the craft of the dancer be proof against 
 all less bribe than that of marriage ; and Levy marry she . from 
 that moment his house , Louis Quinze , be more crowded than ever by the 
 high - bear dandy whose society he have long so eagerly court . that 
 society become his curse . the baroness be an accomplished coquette ; and 
 Levy   with whom , as we have see , jealousy be the predominant passion 
 be stretch on an eternal rack . his low estimate of human nature , his 
 disbelief in the possibility of virtue , add strength to the agony 
 of his suspicion , and provoke the very danger he dread . his 
 self - torture task be that of the spy upon his own hearth . his 
 banquet be haunt by a spectre ; the attribute of his wealth be as 
 the goad and the scourge of Nemesis . his gay cynic smile change into 
 a sullen scowl , his hair blanch into white , his eye be hollow with 
 one consume care . suddenly he leave his costly house , - leave London ; 
 abjure all the society which it have be the joy of his wealth 
 to purchase ; bury himself and his wife in a remote corner of the 
 province ; and there he still live . he seek in vain to occupy his day 
 with rural pursuit , - he to whom the excitement of a metropolis , with 
 all its corruption and its vice , be the sole source of the torpid 
 stream that he call " pleasure . " there , too , the fiend of jealousy 
 still pursue he : he prowl round his demesne with the haggard eye 
 and furtive step of a thief ; he guard his wife as a prisoner , for she 
 threaten every day to escape . the life of the man who have open the 
 prison to so many be the life of a jailer . his wife abhor he , and do 
 not conceal it ; and still slavishly he dot on she . accustomed to the 
 free liberty , demand applause and admiration as her right ; wholly 
 uneducated , vulgar in mind , coarse in language , violent in temper , the 
 beautiful Fury he have bring to his home make that home a hell . thus , 
 what might seem to the superficial most enviable , be to their possessor 
 most hateful . he dare not ask a soul to see how he spend his gold ; 
 he have shrink into a mean and niggardly expenditure , and complain 
 of reverse and poverty , in order to excuse himself to his wife for 
 debar she the enjoyment which she anticipate from the Money Bags 
 she have marry . a vague consciousness of retribution have awaken 
 remorse , to add to his other sting . and the remorse come from 
 superstition , not religion   send from below , not descend from above , 
 bring with it none of the consolation of a genuine repentance . he 
 never seek to atone , never dream of some redeem good action . his 
 riches flow around he , spread wide and wide - out of his own reach . 

 the Count di Peschiera be not deceive in the calculation which 
 have induce he to affect repentance , and establish a claim upon his 
 kinsman . he receive from the generosity of the Duke di Serrano an 
 annuity not disproportione to his rank , and no order from his court 
 forbid his return to Vienna . but , in the very summer that follow his 
 visit to Lansmere , his career come to an abrupt close . at Baden - Baden 
 he pay court to a wealthy and accomplished polish widow ; and his fine 
 person and terrible repute awe away all rival , save a young Frenchman , 
 as dare as himself , and much more in love . a challenge be give and 
 accept . Peschiera appear on the fatal ground , with his customary 
 sang - froid , hum an opera air , and look so diabolically gay that 
 his opponent 's nerve be affect in spite of his courage ; and the 
 Frenchman 's trigger go off before he have even take aim , to his own 
 ineffable astonishment , he shoot the count through the heart , dead . 

 Beatrice di Negra live for some year after her brother 's death in 
 strict seclusion , lodge within a convent , though she do not take 
 the veil , as she at first propose . in fact , the more she see of the 
 sisterhood , the more she find that human regret and human passion 
  save in some rarely gifted nature   find their way through the bar 
 gate and over the lofty wall . finally , she take up her abode in Rome , 
 where she be esteem for a life not only mark by strict propriety , 
 but active benevolence . she can not be prevail on to accept from the 
 duke more than a fourth of the annuity that have be bestow on her 
 brother ; but she have few want , save those of charity ; and when charity 
 be really active , it can do so much with so little gold ! she be not 
 know in the gayer circle of the city ; but she gather round her a 
 small society compose chiefly of artist and scholar , and be never so 
 happy as when she can aid some child of genius , - more especially if his 
 country be England . 

 the squire and his wife still flourish at Hazeldean , where Captain 
 Barnabas Higginbotham have take up his permanent abode . the captain be a 
 confirm hypochondriac ; but he brighten up now and then when he hear 
 of any illness in the family of Mr. Sharpe Currie , and , at such time , 
 be hear to murmur , " if those seven sickly child should go off , I 
 might still have very great - expectation , " - for the which he have be 
 roundly scold by the squire , and gravely preach at by the parson . 
 upon both , however , he take his revenge in a fair and gentlemanlike 
 way , three time a week , at the whist - table , the parson no long have 
 the captain as his constant partner , since a fifth now generally cut 
 in at the table , - in the person of that old enemy and neighbour , Mr. 
 Sticktorights . the parson , thus fight his own battle unallie to the 
 captain , observe with melancholy surprise that there be a long run of 
 luck against he , and that he do not win so much as he use to 
 do . fortunately that be the sole trouble - except Mrs. Dale 's " little 
 temper , " to which he be accustom - that ever disturb the serene tenor 
 of the parson 's life . we must now explain how Mr. Sticktorights come 
 to cut in at the hazeldean whist - table . Frank have settle at the Casino 
 with a wife who suit he exactly , and that wife be Miss Sticktorights . 
 it be two year before Frank recover the disappointment with which 
 the loss of Beatrice sadden his spirit , but sober his habit and 
 awake his reflection . an affection , however misplaced and ill - requite , 
 if honestly conceive and deeply feel , rarely fail to advance the 
 self - education of man . Frank become steady and serious ; and , on a visit 
 to Hazeldean , meet at a county ball Miss Sticktorights , and the two young 
 person be instantly attract towards each other , perhaps by the 
 very feud that have so long exist between their house . the marriage 
 settlement be nearly abandon , at the last moment , by a discussion 
 between the parent as to the Right of Way ; but the dispute be happily 
 appease by Mr. Dale 's suggestion that as both property would 
 be unite in the child of the propose marriage , all cause for 
 litigation would naturally cease , since no man would go to law with 
 himself . Mr. Sticktorights and Mr. Hazeldean , however , agree in the 
 precaution of insert a clause in the settlement   though all the 
 lawyer declare that it could not be of any legal avail , by which 
 it be declare , that if , in default of heritable issue by the say 
 marriage , the Sticktorights ' estate devolve on some distant scion of 
 the Sticktorights family , the right of way from the wood across the 
 waste land would still remain in the same state of delectable dispute 
 in which it then stand . there seem , however , little chance of a lawsuit 
 thus providently bequeath to the misery of distant generation , since 
 two son and two daughter be already play at hide - and - seek on 
 the terrace where Jackeymo once water the orange - tree , and in the 
 belvidere where Riccabocca have study his Machiavelli . 

 Jackeymo , though his master have assess the long arrear of his wage 
 at a sum which would enable he to have orange - grove and servant 
 of his own , still cling to his former duty , and practise his 
 constitutional parsimony . his only apparent deviation into profusion 
 consist in the erection of a chapel to his sainted namesake , to whom 
 he burn many a votive taper , - the taper be especially tall , and their 
 sconce be wreathe with garland , whenever a letter with the foreign 
 postmark bring good news of the absent Violante and her english lord . 

 Riccabocca be long before he reconcile himself to the pomp of his 
 principality and his title of Duke . Jemima accommodate herself much 
 more readily to greatness ; but she retain all her native Hazeldean 
 simplicity at heart , and be adore by the villager around she , 
 especially by the young of both sex , whom she be always ready to marry 
 and to portion , - convince , long ere this , of the redeemable quality 
 of the male sex by her reverence for the duke , who continue to satirize 
 woman and wedlock , and deem himself - thank to his profound experience 
 of the one , and his philosophical endurance of the other - the only happy 
 husband in the world . long still be it before the sage , who have be 
 so wisely anxious to rid himself of the charge of a daughter , could 
 wean his thought from the remembrance of her tender voice and love 
 eye , - not , indeed , till he seriously betook himself to the task of 
 educate the son with whom , accord to his scientific prognostic , 
 Jemima present he shortly after his return to his native land . 
 the sage begin betime with his italian proverb , full of hardhearte 
 worldly wisdom , and the boy be scarce out of the hornbook before he be 
 introduce to Machiavelli . but somehow or other the simple goodness 
 of the philosopher 's actual life , with his high - wrought patrician 
 sentiment of integrity and honour , so counteract the theoretical 
 lesson , that the Heir of Serrano be little likely to be make more wise 
 by the proverb , or more wicked by the Machiavelli , than those study 
 have practically make the progenitor , whose opinion his countryman 
 still shame with the title of " Alphonso the Good . " 

 the duke long cherish a strong curiosity to know what have become of 
 Randal . he never trace the adventurer to his closing scene . but once 
  year before Randal have creep into his present shelter   in a visit 
 of inspection to the hospital at Genoa , the duke , with his peculiar 
 shrewdness of observation in all matter except those which concern 
 himself , be remark to the officer in attendance , " that for one dull , 
 honest man whom fortune drive to the hospital or the jail , he have find , 
 on investigation of their antecedent , three sharp - witted knave who have 
 thereto reduced themselves " - when his eye fall upon a man asleep in 
 one of the sick ward ; and recognize the face , not then so change as 
 Oliver have see it , he walk straight up , and gaze upon Randal Leslie . 

 " an Englishman , " say the official . " he be bring hither insensible , 
 from a severe wound on the head , inflict , as we discover , by a 
 well - know chevalier d'industrie , who declare that the Englishman have 
 outwit and cheat he . that be not very likely , for a few crown 
 be all we could find on the Englishman 's person , and he have be 
 oblige to leave his lodging for debt . he be recover , but there be 
 fever still . " 

 the duke gaze silently on the sleeper , who be toss restlessly on 
 his pallet , and mutter to himself ; then he place his purse in the 
 official 's hand . " give this to the Englishman , " say he ; " but conceal 
 my name . it be true , it be true , the proverb be very true , " resume the 
 duke , descend the stair , " Piu pelli di volpi the di asini vanno in 
 Pellieciaria . "   More hide of fox than of ass find their way to the 
 tanner 's . 

 Dr. Morgan continue to prescribe globule for grief , and to administer 
 infinitesimally to a mind disease . practise what he prescribe , 
 he swallow a globule of caustic whenever the sight of a distressed 
 fellow - creature move he to compassion , - a constitutional tendency 
 which , he be at last convince , admit of no radical cure . for the rest , 
 his range of patient have notably expand ; and under his sage care 
 his patient unquestionably live as long - as Providence please . no 
 allopathist can say more . 

 the death of poor John Burley find due place in the obituary of 
 " literary man . " admirer , unknown before , come forward and subscribe 
 for a handsome monument to his memory in Kensall Green . they would have 
 subscribe for the relief of his widow and child , if he have leave 
 any . writer in magazine thrive for some month on collection of his 
 humorous saying , anecdote of his eccentricity , and specimen of 
 the eloquence that have lighten through the tobacco - reek of tavern 
 and club - room . Leonard ultimately make a selection from his scatter 
 writing which find place in standard library , though their subject 
 be either of too fugitive an interest , or treat in too capricious 
 a manner , to do more than indicate the value of the ore , have it be 
 purify from its dross and subject to the art of the mint . these 
 specimen could not maintain their circulation as the coin money of 
 Thought , but they be hoard by collector as rare curiosity . alas , 
 poor Burley ! 

 the Pompleys sustain a pecuniary loss by the crash of a railway 
 company , in which the colonel have be induce to take several share 
 by one of his wife 's most boasted " connection , " whose estate the say 
 railway propose to traverse , on pay l400 an acre , in that golden age 
 when railway company respect the right of property . the colonel be 
 no long able , in his own country , to make both end meet at Christmas . 
 he be now strain hard to achieve that feat in Boulogne , and have in 
 the process grow so red in the face , that those who meet he in his 
 morning walk on the pier , bargaining for fish , shake their head and 
 say , " Old Pompley will go off in a fit of apoplexy ; a great loss to 
 society ; genteel people the Pompleys ! and very highly ' connected . ' " 

 the vacancy create in the borough of Lansmere by Audley Egerton 's 
 death be fill up by our old acquaintance , Haveril Dashmore , who have 
 unsuccessfully contest that seat on Egerton 's first election . the 
 naval officer be now an admiral , and perfectly reconcile to the 
 Constitution , with all its alloy of aristocracy . 

 Dick Avenel do not retire from parliament so soon as he have 
 anticipate . he be not able to persuade Leonard , whose brief fever of 
 political ambition be now quench in the calm fountain of the Muse , 
 to supply his place in the senate , and he feel that the House of Avenel 
 need one representative . he contrive , however , to devote , for the 
 first year or two , much more of his time to his interest at Screwstown 
 than to the affair of his country , and succeed in baffle the 
 over - competition to which he have be subject by take the competitor 
 into partnership . have thus secure a monopoly at Screwstown , Dick , of 
 course , return with great ardour to his former enlightened opinion in 
 favour of free trade . he remain some year in parliament ; and though 
 far too shrewd to venture out of his depth as an orator , distinguish 
 himself so much by his exposure of " humbug " on an important Committee , 
 that he acquire a very high reputation as a man of business , and 
 gradually become so in request amongst all the member who move for 
 " Select Committees , " that he rise into consequence ; and Mrs. Avenel , 
 court for his sake , more than her own , obtain the wish of her 
 heart , and be receive as an acknowledge habituee into the circle 
 of fashion . amidst these circle , however , Dick find that his home 
 entirely vanish ; and when he come home from the House of Commons , 
 tired to death , at two in the morning , disgust at always hear that 
 Mrs. Avenel be not yet return from some fine lady 's ball , he form a 
 sudden resolution of cut Parliament , Fashion , and London altogether ; 
 withdraw his capital , now very large , from his business ; buy the 
 remain estate of Squire Thornhill ; and his chief object of ambition 
 be in endeavour to coax or bully out of their holding all the small 
 freeholder round , who have subdivide amongst they , into pole and 
 furlong , the fat inheritance of randal Leslie . an excellent justice 
 of the peace , though more severe than your old family proprietor 
 generally be ; a spirited landlord , as to encourage and make , at 
 a proper percentage , all permanent improvement on the soil , but 
 formidable to meet if the rent be not pay to the day , or the least 
 breach of covenant be heedlessly incur on a farm that he could let 
 for more money ; employ a great many hand in productive labour , but 
 exact rigorously from all the utmost degree of work at the small 
 rate of wage which competition and the poor - rate permit ; the young 
 and robust in his neighbourhood never stint in work , and the aged 
 and infirm , as lumber wear out , stow away in the workhouse , - Richard 
 Avenel hold himself an example to the old race of landlord ; and , take 
 altogether , he be no very bad speciman of the rural civilizer whom the 
 application of spirit and capital raise up in the new . 

 from the wreck of Egerton 's fortune , Harley , with the aid of his 
 father 's experience in business , could not succeed in save , for the 
 statesman 's sole child and heir , more than a few thousand pound ; and 
 but for the bond and bill which , when meditate revenge , he have 
 buy from Levy , and afterwards throw into the fire - pay dear 
 for that detestable whistle - even this surplus would not have be 
 forthcoming . 

 Harley privately pay out of his own fortune the L5,000 Egerton have 
 bequeath to Leslie ; perhaps not sorry , now that the stern duty of 
 expose the false wile of the schemer be fulfil , to afford some 
 compensation even to the victim who have so richly deserve his fate ; 
 and please , though mournfully , to comply with the solemn request of the 
 friend whose offence be forget in the remorseful memory of his own 
 project of revenge . 

 Leonard 's birth and identity be easily prove , and no one appear to 
 dispute they . the balance due to he as his father 's heir , together with 
 the sum Avenel ultimately pay to he for the patent of his invention , 
 and the dowry which Harley insist upon bestow on Helen , amount to 
 that happy competence which escape alike the anxiety of poverty , and 
  what to one of contemplative taste and retired habit be often more 
 irksome to bear   the show and responsibility of wealth . his father 's 
 death make a deep impression upon Leonard 's mind ; but the discovery that 
 he owe his birth to a statesman of so great a repute , and occupy a 
 position in society so conspicuous , contribute not to confirm , but to 
 still , the ambition which have for a short time divert he from his 
 more serene aspiration . he have no long to win a rank which might 
 equal Helen 's . he have no long a parent , whose affection might be good 
 win through pride . the memory of his early peasant life , and his 
 love for retirement , - in which habit confirm the constitutional 
 tendency , - make he shrink from what a more worldly nature would have 
 consider the enviable advantage of a name that secure the entrance 
 into the lofty sphere of our social world . he want not that name to 
 assist his own path to a rank far more durable than that which king can 
 confer . and still he retain in the work he have publish , and still 
 he propose to bestow on the work more ambitious that he have , in 
 leisure and competence , the facility to design with care , and complete 
 with patience , the name he have himself invent , and link with the 
 memory of the low - bear mother . therefore , though there be some 
 wonder , in drawing - room and club , at the news of Egerton 's first 
 unacknowledged marriage , and some curiosity express as to what the son 
 of that marriage might do , - and great man be prepared to welcome , and 
 fine lady to invite and bring out , the heir to the statesman 's grave 
 repute , - yet wonder and curiosity soon die away ; the repute soon pass 
 out of date , and its heir be soon forget . politician who fall short 
 of the high renown be like actor ; no applause be so vivid while 
 they be on the stage , no oblivion so complete when the curtain fall on 
 the last farewell . 

 Leonard see a fair tomb rise above Nora 's grave , and on the tomb be 
 engrave the word of WIFE , which vindicate her beloved memory . he 
 feel the warm embrace of Nora 's mother , no long ashame to own she 
 grandchild ; and even old John be make sensible that a secret weight 
 of sorrow be take from his wife 's stern silent heart . lean 
 on Leonard 's arm , the old man gaze wistfully on Nora 's tomb , and 
 muttering , " Egerton ! Egerton ! ' Leonora , the first wife of the right 
 Honourable Audley Egerton ! ' ha ! I vote for he . she marry the right 
 colour . be that the date ? be it so long since she die ? well , well ! I 
 miss she sadly . but wife say we shall both now see she soon ; and wife 
 once think we should never see she again , - never ; but I always know 
 well . thank you , sir . I be a poor creature , but these tear do not   pain 
 I , - quite otherwise . I do not   know why , but I be very happy . where be my 
 old woman ? she do not mind how much I talk about Nora now . oh , 
 there she be ! thank you , sir , humbly ; but I would rather lean on my old 
 woman , - I be more used to it ; and - wife , when shall we go to Nora ? " 

 Leonard have bring Mrs. Fairfield to see her parent , and Mrs. Avenel 
 welcome she with unlooked - for kindness . the name inscribe upon Nora 's 
 tomb soften the mother 's heart to her survive daughter . as poor John 
 have say , " she could now talk about Nora ; " and in that talk , she and the 
 child she have so long neglect discover how much they have in common . 
 so when , shortly after his marriage with Helen , Leonard go abroad , 
 Jane Fairfield remain with the old couple . after their death , which 
 be within a day of each other , she refuse , perhaps from pride , to take 
 up her residence with Leonard ; but she settle near the home which he 
 subsequently find in England . Leonard remain abroad for some year . 
 a quiet observer of the various manner and intellectual development of 
 living race , a rapt and musing student of the monument that revive 
 the dead , his experience of mankind grow large in silence , and his 
 perception of the Sublime and Beautiful brighten into tranquil art 
 under their native sky . 

 on his return to England he purchase a small house amidst the most 
 beautiful scene of Devonshire , and there patiently commence a work 
 in which he design to bequeath to his country his noble thought 
 in their fair form . some man well develop their idea by constant 
 exercise ; their thought spring from their brain ready - armed , and seek , 
 like the fabled goddess , to take constant part in the war of man . and 
 such be , perhaps , on the whole , the most vigorous and lofty writer ; 
 but Leonard do not belong to this class . sweetness and serenity be 
 the main characteristic of his genius ; and these be deepen by his 
 profound sense of his domestic happiness . to wander alone with Helen 
 by the bank of the murmurous river ; to gaze with she on the deep still 
 sea ; to feel that his thought , even when most silent , be comprehend 
 by the intuition of love , and reflect on that translucent sympathy so 
 yearn for and so rarely find by poet , - these be the Sabbaths of 
 his soul , necessary to fit he for its labour : for the Writer have this 
 advantage over other man , that his repose be not indolence . his duty , 
 rightly fulfil , be discharge to earth and man in other capacity 
 than those of action . if he be not see among those who act , he be 
 all the while mature some noiseless influence , which will guide or 
 illumine , civilize or elevate , the restless man whose noble action 
 be but the obedient agency of the thought of writer . call not , 
 then , the poet whom we place amidst the Varieties of Life , the sybarite 
 of literary ease , if , return on Summer eve , Helen 's light footstep 
 by his musing side , he greet his sequester home , with its trellis 
 flower smile out from amidst the lonely cliff in which it be 
 embed ; while lover still , though wed long , they turn to each 
 other , with such deep joy in their speak eye , grateful that the 
 world , with its various distraction and noisy conflict , lie so far 
 from their actual existence , - only unite to they by the happy link that 
 the writer weave invisibly with the heart that he move and the soul 
 that he inspire . no ! character and circumstance alike unfit Leonard 
 for the strife of the thronged literary democracy ; they lead towards the 
 development of the gentle and purer portion of his nature , - to the 
 gradual suppression of the more combative and turbulent . the influence 
 of the happy light under which his genius so silently and calmly grow , 
 be see in the exquisite harmony of its colour , rather than the 
 gorgeous diversity of their glow . his contemplation , intent upon 
 object of peaceful beauty , and undisturbe by rude anxiety and 
 vehement passion , suggest only kindre reproduction to the creative 
 faculty by which it be vivified ; so that the whole man be not only 
 a poet , but , as it be , a poem , - a live idyl , call into pastoral 
 music every reed that sigh and tremble along the stream of life . and 
 Helen be so suited to a nature of this kind , she so guard the ideal 
 existence in which it breathe ! all the little care and trouble of 
 the common practical life she appropriate so quietly to herself , - the 
 strong of the two , as should be a poet 's wife , in the necessary 
 household virtue of prudence and forethought . thus if the man 's genius 
 make the home a temple , the woman 's wisdom give to the temple the 
 security of the fortress . they have only one child , - a girl ; they call 
 her Nora . she have the father 's soul - light eye , and the mother 's warm 
 human smile . she assist Helen in the morning 's noiseless domestic 
 duty ; she sit in the evening at Leonard 's foot , while he read or 
 write . in each light grief of childhood she steal to the mother 's 
 knee ; but in each young impulse of delight , or each bright flash of 
 progressive reason , she spring to the father 's breast . Sweet Helen , 
 thou hast teach she this , take to thyself the shadow even of thine 
 infant 's life , and leave to thy partner 's eye only its rosy light ! 

 but not here shall this picture of Helen close . even the Ideal can only 
 complete its purpose by connection with the real ; even in solitude the 
 writer must depend upon mankind . 

 Leonard at last have complete the work , which have be the joy and the 
 labour of so many year , - the work which he regard as the flower of all 
 his spiritual being , and to which he have commit all the hope that 
 unite the creature of today with the generation of the future . the work 
 have go through the press , each line linger over with the elaborate 
 patience of the artist , loath to part with the thought he have sculpture 
 into form , while an improve touch can be impart by the chisel . he 
 have accept an invitation from Norreys . in the restless excitement 
  strange to he since his first happy maiden effort   he have go to 
 London . Unrecognized in the huge metropolis , he have watch to see if 
 the world acknowledge the new tie he have weave between its busy life and 
 his seclude toil . and the work come out in an unpropitious hour ; other 
 thing be occupy the public ; the world be not at leisure to heed 
 he , and the book do not penetrate into the great circle of reader . 
 but a savage critic have seize on it , and mangle , distort , deform 
 it , confound together defect and beauty in one mocking ridicule ; and 
 the beauty have not yet find an exponent , nor the defect a defender ; 
 and the publisher shake his head , point to groan shelf , and 
 delicately hint that the work which be to be the epitome of the sacred 
 life within life do not hit the taste of the day . Leonard think over 
 the year that his still labour have cost he , and know that he have 
 exhaust the rich mine of his intellect , and that long year will 
 elapse before he can recruit that capital of idea which be necessary to 
 sink new shaft and bring to light fresh ore ; and the deep despondency 
 of intellect , frustrate in its high aim , have seize he , and all 
 he have before do be involve in failure by the defeat of the crowning 
 effort . failure , and irrecoverable , seem his whole ambition as writer ; 
 his whole existence in the fair Ideal seem to have be a profitless 
 dream , and the face of the Ideal itself be obscure . and even Norreys 
 frankly , though kindly , intimate that the life of a metropolis be 
 essential to the healthful intuition of a writer in the intellectual 
 want of his age , since every great writer supply a want in his own 
 generation , for some feeling to be announce , some truth to be reveal . 
 and as this maxim be generally sound , as most great writer have live 
 in city , Leonard dare not dwell on the exception ; it be only success 
 that justify the attempt to be an exception to the common rule ; and 
 with the blunt manhood of his nature , which be not a poet 's , Norreys 
 sum up with , " what then ? one experiment have fail ; fit your life to 
 your genius , and try again . " try again ! easy counsel enough to the man 
 of ready resource and quick combative mind ; but to Leonard , how hard 
 and how harsh ! " fit his life to his genius ! " - renounce contemplation and 
 Nature for the jostle of Oxford Street ! would that life not scare away 
 the genius forever ? perplexed and despondent , though still struggle 
 for fortitude , he return to his home ; and there at his hearth await 
 the Soother , and there be the voice that repeat the passage most 
 beloved , and prophesy so confidently of future fame ; and gradually all 
 around smile from the smile of Helen . and the profound conviction that 
 Heaven place human happiness beyond the reach of the world 's contempt 
 or praise , circulate through his system and restore its serene calm . 
 and he feel that the duty of the intellect be to accomplish and perfect 
 itself , - to harmonize its sound into music that may be hear in heaven , 
 though it wake not an echo on the earth . if this be do , as with some 
 man , well amidst the din and the discord , be it so ; if , as with he , 
 well in silence , be it so too . and the next day he recline with Helen 
 by the seashore , gaze calmly as before on the measureless sunlit 
 ocean ; and Helen , look into his face , see that it be sunlit as the 
 deep . his hand steal within her own , in the gratitude that endear 
 beyond the power of passion , and he murmur gently , " blessed be the 
 woman who console . " 

 the work find its way at length into fame , and the fame send its voice 
 loud to the poet 's home . but the applause of the world have not a sound 
 so sweet to his ear , as , when , in doubt , humiliation , and sadness , the 
 lip of his Helen have whisper " Hope ! and believe ! " 

 side by side with this picture of Woman the Consoler , let I place the 
 companion sketch . Harley L'Estrange , shortly after his marriage with 
 Violante , have be induce , whether at his bride 's persuasion , or to 
 dissipate the shadow with which Egerton 's death still cloud his wed 
 felicity , to accept a temporary mission , half military , half civil , to 
 one of our colony . on this mission he have evince so much ability 
 and achieve so signal a success , that on his return to England he be 
 raise to the peerage , while his father yet live to rejoice that the 
 son who would succeed to his honour have achieve the nobler dignity 
 of honour not inherit , but win . high expectation be form of 
 Harley 's parliamentary success ; but he see that such success , to be 
 durable , must find itself on the knowledge of wearisome detail , and 
 the study of that practical business which jar on his taste , though 
 it suit his talent . Harley have be indolent for so many year , - and 
 there be so much to make indolence captivate to a man whose rank be 
 secure , who have nothing to ask from fortune , and who find at his home 
 no care from which he seek a distraction ; so he laugh at ambition in 
 the whim of his delightful humour , and the expectation form from 
 his diplomatic triumph die away . but then come one of those political 
 crisis , in which man ordinarily indifferent to politic rouse themselves 
 to the recollection that the experiment of legislation be not make upon 
 dead matter , but on the live form of a noble country ; and in both 
 Houses of Parliament the strength of party be put forth . 

 it be a lovely day in spring , and Harley be seat by the window of 
 his old room at Knightsbridge , - now glance to the lively green of 
 the bud tree ; now idle with Nero , who , though in canine old age , 
 enjoy the sun like his master ; now repeat to himself , as he turn 
 over the leaf of his favourite horace , some of those line that make 
 the shortness of life the excuse for seize its pleasure and 
 elude its fatigue , which form the staple morality of the polished 
 epicurean ; and Violante   into what glorious beauty her maiden bloom 
 have mature !   come softly into the room , seat herself on a low stool 
 beside he , lean her face on her hand , and look up at he 
 through her dark , clear , spiritual eye ; and as she continue to speak , 
 gradually a change come over Harley 's aspect , gradually the brow grow 
 thoughtful , and the lip lose their playful smile . there be no hateful 
 assumption of the would - be ' superior woman , " no formal remonstrance , no 
 lecture , no homily which grate upon masculine pride ; but the high theme 
 and the eloquent word elevate unconsciously of themselves , and the 
 Horace be lay aside , - a Parliamentary Blue Book have be , by some 
 marvel or other , conjure there in its stead ; and Violante now move 
 away as softly as she enter . Harley 's hand detain she . 

 " not so . share the task , or I quit it . here be an extract I condemn you 
 to copy . do you think I would go through this labour if you be not to 
 halve the success ? - halve the labour as well ! " 

 and Violante , overjoyed , kiss away the imply rebuke , and sit down 
 to work , so demure and so proud , by his side . I do not know if Harley 
 make much way in the Blue Book that morning ; but a little time after he 
 speak in the Lords , and surpass all that the most sanguine have hop 
 from his talent . the sweetness of fame and the consciousness of utility 
 once fully taste , Harley 's consummation of his proper destiny 
 be secure . a year later , and his voice be one of the influence of 
 England . his boyish love of glory revive , - no long vague and dreamy , 
 but ennoble into patriotism , and strengthen into purpose . one night , 
 after a signal triumph , he return home , with his father , who have 
 witness it , and Violante - who all lovely , all brilliant , though she 
 be , never go forth in her lord 's absence , to lower among fop and 
 flatterer the dignity of the name she so aspired to raise - sprang to 
 meet he . Harley 's eld son - a boy yet in the nursery - have be keep 
 up later than usual ; perhaps Violante have anticipate her husband 's 
 triumph , and wish the son to share it . the old earl beckon the 
 child to he , and lay his hand on the infant 's curly lock , say with 
 unusual seriousness , 

 " my boy , you may see troubled time in England before these hair be 
 as gray as mine ; and your stake in England 's honour and peace will be 
 great . Heed this hint from an old man who have no talent to make a 
 noise in the world , but who yet have be of some use in his generation . 
 neither sound title , nor wide land , nor fine ability , will give 
 you real joy , unless you hold yourself responsible for all to your God 
 and to your country ; and when you be tempt to believe that the gift 
 you may inherit from both entail no duty , or that duty be at war 
 with true pleasure , remember how I place you in your father 's arm , 
 and say , ' let he be as proud of you some day as I at this hour be of 
 he . ' " 

 the boy clung to his father 's breast , and say manfully , " I will try ! " 
 Harley bend his fair smooth brow over the young earnest face , and say 
 softly , " your mother speak in you ! " 

 then the old countess , who have remain silent and listen on her 
 elbow - chair , rise and kiss the earl 's hand reverently . perhaps in that 
 kiss there be the repentant consciousness how far the active goodness 
 she have often secretly undervalue have exceed , in its fruit , her own 
 cold unproductive power of will and mind . then pass on to Harley , 
 her brow grow elate , and the pride return to her eye . 

 " at last , " she say , lay on his shoulder that light firm hand , from 
 which he no long shrunk , - " at last , o my noble son , you have fulfil 
 all the promise of your youth ! " 

 " if so , " answer Harley , " it be because I have find what I then seek 
 in vain . " he draw his arm around Violante , and add , with half tender , 
 half solemn smile , " Blessed be the woman who exalt ! " 

 so , symbol forth in these twin and fair flower which Eve save for 
 Earth out of Paradise , each with the virtue to heal or to strengthen , 
 store under the leaf that give sweet to the air ; here , soothe the 
 heart when the world bring the trouble ; here , recruit the soul which 
 our sloth or our sens enervate , leave we Woman , at least in the place 
 Heaven assign to she amidst the multiform " Varieties of Life . " 

 farewell to thee , gentle reader ; and go forth to the world , o MY novel ! 


 the END . 
