the amazing marriage 


 by George Meredith 
 CHAPTER I. ENTER dame GOSSIP as choru 

 everybody have hear of the beautiful Countess of Cressett , who be 
 one of the light of this country at the time when crown head be 
 run over Europe , cry out for charity 's sake to be amuse after 
 their tiresome work of slaughter : and you know what a dread they have 
 of moping . she be famous for her fun and high spirit besides her good 
 look , which you may judge of for yourself on a walk down most of our 
 great nobleman 's collection of picture in England , where you will 
 behold she as the goddess Diana fit an arrow to a bow ; and elsewhere 
 an Amazon hold a spear ; or a lady with dog , in the costume of the 
 day ; and in one place she be a nymph , if not Diana herself , gaze at 
 her naked foot before her attendant loosen her tunic for she to take 
 the bath , and her hound be prick their ear , and you see antler of 
 a stag behind a block of stone . she be a wonderful swimmer , among other 
 thing , and one early morning , when she be a girl , she do really swim , 
 they say , across the Shannon and back to win a bet for her brother Lord 
 Levellier , the colonel of cavalry , who leave an arm in Egypt , and change 
 his way of life to become a wizard , as the common people about his 
 neighbourhood suppose , because he foretell the weather and have cure 
 for ache and pain without a doctor 's diploma . but we know now that 
 he be only a mathematician and astronomer , all for invent military 
 engine . the brother and sister be great friend in their youth , when 
 he have his right arm to defend her reputation with ; and she would have 
 do anything on earth to please he . 

 there be a picture of she in an immense flat white silk hat trim with 
 pale blue , like a pavilion , the broad brim ever see , and she 
 simply sit on a chair ; and Venus the Queen of Beauty would have be 
 extinguish under that hat , I be sure ; and only to look at Countess 
 Fanny 's eye beneath the brim she have tip ever so slightly in her 
 artfulness make the absurd thing graceful and suitable . oh ! she be a 
 cunning one . but you must be on your guard against the scandalmonger 
 and collector of anecdote , and bad of any , the critic , of our 
 Galleries of Art ; for she be in almost all of they   the principal 
 painter of the day be on their knee for the favour of a sitting , 
 they have to speak of she pretty frequently , and they season their dish , 
 the coxcomb do , by hint a knowledge of her history . 

 ' here we come to another portrait of the beautiful but , we fear , naughty 
 Countess of Cressett . ' 

 you be to imagine that they know everything , and they be so indulgent 
 when they drop their blot on a lady 's character . 

 they can boast of nothing more than have read Nymriey 's Letters and 
 Correspondence , publish , fortunately for he , when he be no long to 
 be call to account below for his malicious insinuation , pretend 
 to decency in initial and dash : that man be a hater of woman and the 
 clergy . he be one of the horrid creature who write with a wink at you , 
 which set the wicked part of we on fire : I have know it myself , and I 
 own it to my shame ; and if I happen to be ignorant of the history of 
 Countess Fanny , I could not refute his wantonness . he have just the same 
 benevolent leer for a bishop . give I , if we be to make a choice , the 
 beggar 's breech for decency , I say : I like it vastly in preference to a 
 Nymney , who lead you up to the curtain and agitate it , and bid you 
 to retire on tiptoe . you can not help be angry with the man for both 
 reason . but he be the writer society delight in , to show what it be 
 compose of . a man brazen enough to declare that he could hold we in 
 suspense about the adventure of a broomstick , with the aid of a yashmak 
 and an ankle , may know the world ; you have well not know he - that be 
 my remark ; and do not trust he . 

 he tell the story of the Old Buccaneer in fear of the public , for it 
 be general property , but of course he finish with a Nymney touch : ' so 
 the Old Buccaneer be the doubloon she take in exchange for a handful of 
 silver piece . ' there be no such handful to exchange - not of the kind 
 he sickeningly nudge at you . I will prove to you it be not countess 
 Fanny 's naughtiness , though she be indeed very blamable . woman should 
 walk in armour as if they be bear to it ; for these cold sneerer 
 will never waste their dart on cuirass . an independent brave young 
 creature , expose herself thoughtlessly in her reckless innocence , be 
 the victim for they . they will bring all society down on she with one 
 of their explosive sly word appear so careless , the coward . I say 
 without hesitation , her conduct with regard to Kirby , the Old Buccaneer , 
 as he be call , however indefensible in itself , warrant she at heart 
 an innocent young woman , much to be pity . only to think of she , I 
 could sometimes drop into a chair for a good cry . and of he too ! and 
 their daughter Carinthia Jane be the pair of they , as to that , and so 
 be Chillon John , the son . 

 those critic quote Nymney should look at the portrait of she in 
 the Long Saloon of Cresset Castle , where she stand in blue and white , 
 completely dress , near a table support a couple of holster pistol , 
 and then let they ask themselves whether they would speak of she so if 
 her little hand could move . 

 well , and so the tale of her swim across the Shannon river and back 
 drive the young Earl of Cresset straight over to Ireland to propose for 
 she , he say ; that she be the girl to suit his book ; not allow she 
 time to think of how much he might be the man to suit her . the marriage 
 be what be call a good one : both full of frolic , and he wealthy and 
 rather handsome , and she quite lovely and spirit . 

 no wonder the whole town be very soon agog about the couple , until at 
 the end of a year people begin to talk of they separately , she go she 
 way , and he his . she could not always be on the top of a coach , which 
 be his throne of happiness . 

 Plenty of story be current still of his fame as a four - in - hand 
 coachman . they say he once drive an Emperor and a king , a Prince 
 Chancellor and a pair of Field Marshals , and some lady of the day , 
 from the metropolis to Richmond Hill in fifty or sixty odd minute , 
 have the ground clear all the way by bell and summon , and only a 
 donkey - cart and man , and a deaf old woman , to pay for ; and go , as you 
 can imagine , at such a tear gallop , that those Grand Highnesses have 
 to hold on for their life and lose their hat along the road ; and a 
 publican at Kew exhibit one above his bar to the present hour . and 
 Countess Fanny be up among they , they say . she be equal to it . and 
 some say , that be the occasion of her meet the Old Buccaneer . 

 she meet he at Richmond in Surrey we know for certain . it be on 
 Richmond Hill , where the old King meet his Lass . they say Countess Fanny 
 be parade the hill to behold the splendid view , always admire so 
 much by foreigner , with their Achs and Hechs ! and surround by she 
 crown courtier in frog uniform and moustachioe like sea - horse , 
 a little before dinner time , when Kirby pass she , and the Emperor make 
 a remark on he , for Kirby be a magnificent figure of a man , and use 
 to be compare to a three - decker enter harbour after a victory . he 
 stand six foot four , and be broad - shoulder and deep - cheste to match , 
 and walk like a king who have humble his enemy . you have see big 
 dog . and so Countess Fanny look round . Kirby be do the same . 
 but he have turn right about , and appear transfix and like a royal 
 beast angry , with his wound . if ever there be love at first sight , 
 and a dreadful love , like a runaway mail - coach in a storm of wind and 
 lightning at black midnight by the bank of a flooded river , which be 
 formerly our comparison for terrible situation , it be when those two 
 meet . 

 and , what ! you exclaim , Buccaneer Kirby full sixty - five , and Countess 
 Fanny no more than three and twenty , a young beauty of the world of 
 fashion , court by the high , and she in love with he ! go and gaze 
 at one of our big ship come out of an engagement home with all her 
 flag fly and her crew man the yard . that will give you an idea 
 of a young woman 's feeling for an old warrior never beat down an inch 
 by anything he have to endure ; match he , I dare say , in her woman 's 
 heart , with the Mighty Highnesses who have only smell the outside edge of 
 battle . she do rarely admire a valiant man . Old as Methuselah , he would 
 have make her kneel to he . she be all heart for a real hero . 

 the story go , that Countess Fanny send her husband to Captain Kirby , 
 at the emperor 's request , to inquire his name ; and on hear it , she 
 strike her hand on her bosom , tell his Majesty he see there the 
 brave man in the king 's dominion ; which the emperor scarce credit , 
 and observe that the man must be , then , a superhuman be to be 
 so distinguished in a nation of the brave , Countess Fanny relate the 
 well - know tale of Captain Kirby and the shipful of mutineer ; and how 
 when not a man of they stand by he , and he in the service of the first 
 insurgent State of Spanish America , to save his ship from be take 
 over to the enemy , - he blow she up , fifteen mile from land : and so 
 he get to shore swimming and float alternately , and be call Old 
 sky - high by English sailor , any number of whom could always be have to 
 sail under Buccaneer Kirby . he fight on shore as well ; and once he come 
 down from the top of the Andes with a black beard turn white , and 
 go into action with the title of Kirby 's Ghost . 

 but his heart be on salt water ; he be never so much at home as in a 
 ship foundering or split into the cloud . we be tell that he never 
 forgave the Admiralty for strike he off the list of english naval 
 captain : which be no doubt why in his old age he nurse a grudge 
 against his country . 

 our , I be sure , be the loss ; and many have think so since . he be 
 a mechanician , a master of stratagems ; and would say , that brain will 
 beat Grim Death if we have enough of they . he be a stand example of 
 the lesson of his own MAXIMS for MEN , a very curious book , that fetch 
 a rare price now wherever a copy be put up for auction . I shudder at 
 they as if they be muzzle of firearm point at I ; but they be 
 not address to my sex ; and still they give I an interest in the 
 writer who would declare , that ' he have never fail in an undertaking 
 without strip bare to expose to himself where he have be want in 
 Intention and Determination . ' 

 there you may see a truly terrible man . 

 so the emperor be immensely take with Kirby 's method of preserve 
 discipline on board ship , because   as we say to the madman , ' your 
 strait - waistcoat be my easy - chair '   monarch have a great love of 
 discipline , he beg Countess Fanny 's permission that he might invite 
 Captain Kirby to his table ; and Countess Fanny   she have the name from 
 the ballad 

  ' I be the star of Prince and Czar , 
  my light be shed on many , 
  but I wait here till my bold Buccaneer 
  make prize of Countess Fanny ' : - 

 for the popular imagination be extraordinarily rouse by the elopement , 
 and there be song and ballad out of number , Countess Fanny 
 despatch her husband to Captain Kirby again , mean no harm , though 
 the poor man be laugh at in the song for go twice upon his 
 mission . 

 none of the mighty people repent of have the Old Buccaneer - for that 
 night , at all event . he sit in the midst of they , you may believe , like 
 the lord of that table , with his great white beard and hair - not a lock 
 of it shed - and his bronze lion - face , and a resolute but a merry eye 
 that he have . he be no deep drinker of wine , but when he do drink , and 
 the wine champagne , he drink to show his disdain of its power ; and the 
 emperor wish for a narrative of some of his exploit , particularly 
 the blowing up of his ship , Kirby pay his Majesty the compliment of 
 give it he as baldly as an official report to the Admiralty . so 
 disengaged and calm be he , with his bottle of champagne in he , where 
 another would have be sparkle and lay on the colour , that he be 
 then and there offer Admiral 's rank in the imperial navy ; and the Old 
 Buccaneer , like a courtier of our good day , bow to Countess Fanny , and 
 ask she , if he be a free man to go : and , no , say she , we can not spare 
 you ! and there be a pretty wrangle between Countess Fanny and the 
 emperor , each pull at the Old Buccaneer to have possession of he . 

 he be rarely out of her sight after their first meeting , and the 
 ridiculous excuse she give to her husband 's family be , she fear he 
 would be kidnap and make a Cossack of ! and young Lord Cressett , her 
 husband , begin to grumble concern her intimacy with a man old enough 
 to be her grandfather . as if the age be the injury ! he seem to think 
 it so , and vow he would shoot the old depredator dead , if he find 
 he on the ground of Cressett : ' like vermin , ' he say , and it be 
 consider that he have the right , and no jury would have convict he . 
 you know what those day be . 

 he have his opportunity one moonlight night , not far from the castle , and 
 pepper Kirby with shot from a fowling - piece at , some say , five pace ' 
 distance , if not point - blank . 

 but Kirby have a maxim , Steady shake they , and he act on it to receive 
 his enemy 's fire ; and the young lord 's hand shake , and the Old Buccaneer 
 stand out of the smoke not much injure , except in the coat - collar , with 
 a pistol cock in his hand , and he say : 

 ' many would take that for a declaration of war , but I know it be only 
 your lordship 's diplomacy ' ; and then he let loose to his mad fun , 
 astounding Lord Cressett and his gamekeeper , and vow , as the young 
 lord try to relate subsequently , as well as he could recollect the 
 word - here I have it in print : - ' that he be a man pickle in saltpetre 
 when an infant , like Achilles , and proof against powder and shoot not 
 mark with cross and key , and fetch up from the square magazine in 
 the central depot of the infernal factory , third turn to the right 
 off the grand arcade in Kingdom - come , where the night - porter have to wear 
 wet petticoat , like a Highland chief , to make short work of the spark 
 fly about , otherwise this world and many another would not have to 
 wait long for combustion . ' 

 Kirby have the wild way of talk when he be not issue order 
 under fire , well understand by sailor . I give it you as it stand here 
 print . I do not profess to understand . 

 so Lord Cressett say : ' diplomacy and infernal factory be hang ! have 
 your shot at I ; it be only fair . ' and Kirby discharge his pistol at the 
 top twig of an old oak tree , and call the young lord a Briton , and 
 propose to take he in hand and make a man of he , as nigh worthy of 
 his wife as any one not an Alexander of Macedon could be . 

 so they become friendly , and the young lord confess it be his family 
 that have urge he to the attack ; and Kirby abode at the castle , and all 
 three be happy , in perfect honour , I be convince : but such be 
 not the opinion of the Cressetts and Levelliers . down they troop to 
 Cressett Castle with a rush and a roar , cry on the disgrace of an 
 old desperado like Kirby live there ; duke , Marchionesses , Cabinet 
 Ministers , leader of fashion , and fire - eat colonel of the King 's 
 body - guard , one of whom Captain John Peter Kirby lay on his heel at 
 ten pace on an April morning , when the duel be fight , as early as the 
 bless heaven have give they light to see to do it . such day those 
 be ! 

 there be talk of shut up the infatuated lady . if not incarcerate , 
 she be rigidly watch . the earl her husband fall altogether to 
 drink and coach , and other thing . the ballad make she say : 

  ' my family my gaoler be , 
  my husband be a zany ; 
  Naught see I clear save my bold buccaneer 
  to rescue Countess Fanny ! ' 

 and it go on : 

  ' o little lass , at play on the grass , 

  come earn a silver penny , 
  and you will be dear to my bold buccaneer 
  for news of his Countess Fanny . ' 

 in spite of her bravery , that poor woman suffer ! 

 we use to learn by heart the ballad and song upon famous event in 
 those old day when poetry be worship . 

 but Captain Kirby give provocation enough to both family when he go 
 among the tavern and club , and vow before Providence over his big 
 fist that they should rue their interference , and he would carry off the 
 lady on a day he name ; he name the hour as well , they say , and that 
 be midnight of the month of June . the Levelliers and Cressetts foam 
 at the mouth in speak of he , so enraged they be on account of 
 his age and his passion for a young woman . as to blood , the Kirbys 
 of Lincolnshire be quite equal to the Cressetts of Warwick . the Old 
 Buccaneer seem to have have money too . but you can see what her people 
 have to complain of : his insolent contempt of they be unexampled . and 
 their tyranny have rouse my lady 's high spirit not a bit less ; and she 
 say right out : ' when he come , I be ready and will go with he . ' 

 there be boldness for you on both side ! all the town be laugh and 
 bet on the event of the night in June : and the odd be in favour 
 of Kirby ; for though , Lord Cressett be quite the popular young English 
 nobleman , be a capital whip and free of his coin , in those day man 
 who have smell powder be often prize above title , and the feeling , 
 out of society , be very strong for Kirby , even previous to the fight 
 on the heath . and the age of the indomitable adventurer must have 
 contribute to his popularity . he be the hero of every song . 

  " ' what be age to I ! " cry Kirby ; 
  " why , young and fresh let she be , 
  but it be mighty well reason 
  for a man to be well season , 
  and a man she have in I , " cry Kirby . ' 

 as to his exact age : 

  " ' write I down sixty - three , " cry Kirby . ' 

 I have always maintain that it be an understatement . we must 
 remember , it be not Kirby speaking , but the song - writer . Kirby would 
 not , in my opinion , have number year he be proud of below their due 
 quantity . he be more , if he die at ninety - one ; and Chillon Switzer 
 John Kirby , bear eleven month after the elopement , be , we know , 
 twenty - three year old when the old man give up the ghost and bequeath 
 he little besides a law - suit with the Austrian Government , and the care 
 of Carinthia Jane , the second child of this extraordinary union ; both 
 child bear in wedlock , as you will hear . sixty - three , or sixty - seven , 
 near upon seventy , when most man be reap and stack their sin 
 with groan and weak knee , Kirby be a match for his junior , which 
 they discover . 

 Captain John Peter Avason Kirby , son of a Lincolnshire squire of an 
 ancient stock , be proud of his blood , and claim descent from a chief 
 of the danish rover . 

  ' " what be rank to I ! " cry Kirby ; 
  " a title lass let she be , 
  but unless my plan miscarry , 
  I will show she when we marry ; 
  as brave a pedigree , " cry Kirby . ' 

 that be the song - writer 's answer to the charge that the countess have 
 stoop to a degrading alliance . 

 John Peter be fourth of a family of seven child , all male , and hard 
 at the bottle early in life : ' for want of proper occupation , ' he say in 
 his Memoirs , and applaud his brother Stanson , the clergyman , for 
 be ahead of he in renounce strong dunk , because he find that 
 he ' curse well upon water . ' Water , however , help Stanson Kirby to 
 outlive his brother and inherit the Lincolnshire property , and at the 
 period of the great scandal in London he be palsy , and wait on by 
 his grandson and heir Ralph Thorkill Kirby , the hero of an adventure 
 celebrate in our Law court and on the english stage ; for he take 
 possession of his coachman 's wife , and be accuse of compass the 
 death of the husband . he be not hang for it , so we be bind to think 
 he not guilty . 

 the stage - piece be call ' Saturday Night ' , and it have an astonishing 
 run , but be only remember now for the song of ' Saturday , ' sing by the 
 poor coachman and labourer at the village ale - house before he start 
 to capture his wife from the clutch of her seducer and meet his 
 fate . never be there a more popular song : you hear it everywhere . I 
 recollect one verse : 

  ' o Saturday money be slippery metal , 
  and Saturday ale it be tipsy stuff 
  at home the old woman be boil her kettle , 
  she think we do not   know when we have   tipple enough . 
  we drink , and of never a man be we jealous , 
  and never a man against we will he speak 
  for who can be hard on a set of poor fellow 
  who only see Saturday once a week ! 

 you chorus the last two line . 

 that be the very song the unfortunate coachman of Kirby Hall join in 
 singing before he go out to face his end for the woman he love . he 
 believe in her virtue to the very last . 

 ' the ravished wife of my bosom , ' he call she all through the latter 
 half of the play . it be a real tragedy . the song of that day have lose 
 their effect now , I suppose . they will ever remain pathetic to I ; and 
 to hear the poor coachman William Martin invoke the name of his dear 
 steal wife Elizabeth , jug in hand , so tearfully , while he join 
 the song of Saturday , be a most moving thing . you see nothing but 
 handkerchief out all over the theatre . what it be that have go from 
 our drama , I can not tell : I be never affect now as I be then ; and 
 people in a low station of life could affect I then , without be 
 fling at I , for I dislike an entire dish of they , I own . we be 
 simple in our habit and way of thinking . Elizabeth Martin , accord 
 to report , be a woman to make well man than Ralph Thorkill act 
 evilly - as to good look , I mean . she be not entirely guiltless , I be 
 afraid ; though in the last scene , Mrs. Kempson , who play the part   as , 
 alas , she could do to the very life ! , so throw herself into the pathos 
 of it that there be few to hold out against she , and we feel that 
 Elizabeth have be mislead . so much for morality in those day ! 

 and now for the elopement . 




 CHAPTER II . MISTRESS gossip TELLS of the elopement of the COUNTESS of 
 cressett with the OLD buccaneer , and of CHARLES DUMP the POSTILLION 
 conduct they , and of a GREAT COUNTY FAMILY 

 the twenty - first of June be the day appoint by Captain Kirby to carry 
 off Countess Fanny , and the time midnight : and ten minute to the stroke 
 of twelve , Countess Fanny , as if she scorn to conceal that she be in 
 a conspiracy with her grey - haired lover , notwithstanding that she be 
 watch and guard , leave the Marchioness of Arpington 's ball - room and 
 be escort downstairs by her brother Lord Levellier , swear to baffle 
 Kirby . present with he in the street and witness to the shutting of the 
 carriage - door on Countess Fanny , be brother officer of his , General 
 Abrane , Colonel Jack Potts , and Sir Upton Tomber . 

 the door fast shut , Countess Fanny kiss her hand to they and draw 
 up the window , seem merry , and as they have expect indignation and 
 perhaps resistance , for she could be a spitfire in a temper and have no 
 fear whatever of firearm , they be glad to have she safe on such good 
 term ; and so General Abrane jump up on the box beside the coachman , 
 Jack Potts jump up between the footman , and Sir Upton Tomber and the 
 one - armed lord , as soon as the carriage be disengage from the ruck 
 two deep , walk on each side of it in the road all the way to Lord 
 Cressett 's town house . no one think of ask where that silly young 
 man be - probably under some table . 

 their number be swell by quite a host go along , for heavy 
 bet be on the affair , dozen have back Kirby ; and it must have 
 appear serious to they , with the lady in custody , and constable on 
 the look - out , and Kirby and his man nowhere in sight . they expect an 
 onslaught at some point of the procession , and it may be believe they 
 wish it , if only that they might see something for their money . a 
 beautiful bright moonlight night it happen to be . arm in arm among 
 they be Lord Pitscrew and Russett , Earl of Fleetwood , a great friend 
 of Kirby 's ; for it be a device of the Old Buccaneer 's that help the 
 earl to win the great Welsh heiress who make he , even before he take to 
 hoarding and buying , - one of the wealthy nobleman in England ; but she 
 be craze by her marriage or the wild scene lead to it ; she never 
 present herself in society . she would sit on the top of Estlemont 
 tower - as they formerly spelt it - all day and half the night in 
 midwinter , often , look for the mountain down in her native West 
 country , cover with an old white flannel cloak , and on her head a tall 
 hat of her Welsh woman - folk ; and she die of it , leave a son in her 
 likeness , of whom you will hear . Lord Fleetwood have lose none of 
 his faith in Kirby , and go on book bet give he huge odd , 
 thousand ! 

 he accept fifty to one when the carriage come to a stop at the step 
 of Lord Cressett 's mansion ; but he be anxious , and well he might be , 
 see Countess Fanny alight and pass up between two line of gentleman 
 all bow low before she : not a sign of the Old Buccaneer anywhere to 
 right or left ! head be on the look out , and vow offer up for his 
 appearance . 

 she be at the door and about to enter the house . then it be ; that with 
 a shout of the name of some dreadful heathen god , Colonel Jack Potts 
 roar out , ' she be half a foot short o ' the mark ! ' 

 he be on the pavement , and it seem he measure she as she slip by 
 he , and one thing and another cause he to smell a cheat ; and General 
 Abrane , stand beside she near the door , cry : ' where art fly now , 
 Jack ? ' but Jack Potts grow more positive and bellow , ' peel her wig ! 
 we be do ! ' 

 and she do not speak a word , but stand huddle - up and hood ; and Lord 
 Levellier catch she up by the arm as she be try a dash into the 
 hall , and Sir Upton Tomber pluck at her veil and raise it , and 
 whistle : 

 ' phew ! ' - which strike the rabble below with awe of the cunning of the 
 Old Buccaneer ; and there be no need for they to hear General Abrane 
 say : ' right ! Jack , we have   a dead one in hand , ' or Jack Potts reply : 

 ' it be ten thousand pound clean wing away from my pocket , like a 
 string of wild goose ! ' 

 the excitement of the varletry in the square , they say , be fearful 
 to hear . so the principal nobleman and gentleman concern think it 
 prudent to hurry the young woman into the house and bar the door ; and 
 there she be very soon strip of veil and blonde false wig with 
 long curl , the whole framing of her artificial resemblance to countess 
 Fanny , and she prove to be a good - look foreign maid , a dark one , 
 powdered , tremble very much , but not so frightened upon hearing 
 that her penalty for the share she have take in the horrid imposture 
 practise upon they be to receive and return a salute from each of the 
 gentleman in rotation ; which the hussy do with proper submission ; 
 and Jack Potts remark , that ' it be an honest buss , but dear at ten 
 thousand ! ' 

 when you have be the victim of a deceit , the explanation of the 
 simplicity of the trick turn all the wonder upon yourself , you know , 
 and the backer of the Old Buccaneer and the wagerer against he crow 
 and groan in chorus at the maid 's narrative of how the moment Countess 
 Fanny have throw up the window of her carriage , she spring out to a 
 carriage on the off side , contain Kirby , and how she , this little 
 french jade , spring in to take her place . one snap of the finger and 
 the transformation be accomplish . so for another kiss all round they 
 let she go free , and she sit at the supper - table prepare for Countess 
 Fanny and the party by order of Lord Levellier , and amuse the gentleman 
 with story of the lady she have serve , English and foreign . and that 
 be how man be teach to think they know our sex and may despise it ! I 
 could preach they a lesson . those man might as well not believe in the 
 steadfastness of the very star because one or two be report lose out 
 of the firmament , and now and then we behold a whole shower of fragment 
 descend . the truth be , they have take a stain from the life they 
 lead , and be troubled puddle , incapable of clear reflection . to listen 
 to the tattle of a chat little slut , and condemn the whole sex upon 
 her testimony , be a nice idea of justice . many of the gentleman present 
 become notorious as woman - scorner , whether owe to Countess Fanny or 
 other thing . Lord Levellier be , and Lord Fleetwood , the wicked man ! 
 and certainly the hearing of naughty story of we by the light of 
 a grievous and vexatious instance of our misconduct must produce an 
 impression . Countess Fanny 's desperate passion for a man of the age of 
 Kirby strike they as out of nature . they talk of it as if they could 
 have pardon she a young lover . 

 all that Lord Cressett say , on the announcement of the flight of his 
 wife , be : ' ah ! Fan ! she never would run in my ribbon . ' 

 he positively decline to persue . Lord Levellier would not attempt to 
 follow she up without he , as it would have cost money , and he want 
 all that he could spare for his telescope and experiment . who , then , 
 be the gentleman who stop the chariot , with his three mount 
 attendant , on the road to the sea , on the heath by the great 
 Punch - Bowl ? 

 that have be the question for now long than half a century , in fact 
 approach seventy mortal year . no one have ever be able to say for 
 certain . 

 it occur at six o'clock on the summer morning . Countess Fanny must 
 have know he , - and not once do she open her mouth to breathe his 
 name . yet she have no objection to talk of the adventure and how Simon 
 Fettle , Captain Kirby 's old ship 's steward in South America , see 
 horseman station on the ascent of the high road border the Bowl , 
 which be mile round and deep , make the postillion cease jogging , and 
 sing out to his master for order , and Kirby sing back to he to look to 
 his priming , and then the postillion be bid proceed , and he do not 
 like it , but he have to deal with pistol behind , where man feel weak , 
 and he go bob on the saddle in dejection , as if upon his very 
 heart he jog ; and soon the fray commence . there be very little 
 parleying between determined man . 

 Simon Fettle be a plain kindly creature without a thought of malice , 
 who keep his master 's account . he fire the first shot at the foremost 
 man , as he relate in after day , ' to reduce the odd . ' Kirby say to 
 Countess Fanny , just to comfort she , never so much as imagine she 
 would be afraid , ' the bad will be a bloody shirt for Simon to 
 mangle , ' for they have be arrange to live cheaply in a cottage on 
 the continent , and Simon Fettle to do the washing . she could not help 
 laugh outright . but when the Old Buccaneer be down stride in the 
 battle , she take a pistol and descend likewise ; and she use it , too , 
 and load again . 

 she have not to use it a second time . Kirby pull the gentleman off his 
 horse , wound in the thigh , and while drag he to Countess Fanny 
 to crave her pardon , a shot intend for Kirby hit the poor gentleman 
 in the breast , and Kirby stretch he at his length , and Simon and he 
 disarm the servant who have fire . one be insensible , one fly , and 
 those two on the ground . all in broad daylight ; but so lonely be that 
 spot , nothing might have be hear of it , if at the end of the week the 
 postillion who have be bribe and threaten with terrible threat to 
 keep his tongue from wag , have not begin to talk . so the scene of 
 the encounter be examine , and on one spot , carefully earth over , 
 blood - mark be discover in the green sand . People in the hut on the 
 hill - top , a quarter of a mile distant , speak of have hear sound of 
 firing while they be at breakfast , and a little boy name Tommy Wedger 
 say he see a dead body go by in an open coach that morning ; all bloody 
 and mournful . he have to appear before the magistrate , cry terribly , 
 but do not know the nature of an oath , and be dismiss . time come 
 when the boy learn to swear , and he do , and that he have see a 
 beautiful lady fire and kill man like pigeon and partridge ; but 
 that be after Charles Dump , the postillion , have be tell the story . 

 those who credit Charles Dump 's veracity speculate on dozen of great 
 nobleman - and gentleman know to be die in love with Countess Fanny . 
 and this bring we to another family . 

 I do not say I know anything ; I do but lay before you the evidence we 
 have to fix suspicion upon a notorious character , perfectly capable of 
 try to thwart a man like Kirby , and with good reason to try , if she 
 have bewitch he to a consume passion , as we be tell . 

 about eleven mile distant , as the crow fly and a bold huntsman will 
 ride in that heath country , from the Punch - Bowl , right across the mound 
 and the broad water , lie the estate of the Fakenhams , who intermarry 
 with the Coplestones of the iron mine , and be the wealthy of the 
 old county family until Curtis Fakenham enter upon his inheritance . 
 money with he be like the farm - wife 's dish of grain she toss in 
 shower to her fowl . he be more than what you call a lady - killer , he 
 be a woman - eater . his pride be in it as well as his taste , and when 
 man be like that , indeed they be devourer ! 

 Curtis be the eld brother of Commodore Baldwin Fakenham , whose 
 offspring , like his own , be so strangely mix up with Captain Kirby 's 
 child by Countess Fanny , as you will hear . and these two brother 
 be son of Geoffrey Fakenham , celebrate for his devotion to 
 the french Countess Jules d'Andreuze , or some such name , a courtly 
 gentleman , who turn Papist on his death - bed in France , in Brittany 
 somewhere , not to be separate from she in the next world , as he 
 solemnly leave word ; wickedly , many think . 

 to show the oddness of thing and how opposite to one another brother 
 may be , his elder , the uncle of Curtis , and Baldwin , be the renowned 
 old Admiral Fakenham , well know along our sea - coast and port 
 among sailor as ' Old Showery , ' because of a remark he once make to 
 his flag - captain , when cannon - ball be come thick on they in a 
 hard - fight action . ' hot work , sir , ' his captain say . ' showery , ' 
 reply the admiral , as his cock - hat be knock off by the wind of 
 a cannon - ball . he lose both leg before the war be over , and say 
 merrily , ' stump for life " while they be carry he below to the 
 cockpit . in my girlhood the boy be always bring home anecdote of 
 old Admiral Showery : not all of they true one , perhaps , but they fit 
 he . he be a rough seaman , fond , as they say , of his glass and his 
 girl , and utterly despise his brother Geoffrey for the air he give 
 himself , and crawl on his knee to a female parleyvoo ; and when 
 Geoffrey die , the admiral drink to his rest in the grave : ' there be to 
 my brother Jeff , ' he say , and fling away the dreg of his glass : 
 ' there be to the frog ! ' and fling away the glass to shiver : ' there be 
 to the Turncoat ! ' 

 he salt his language in a manner I can not repeat ; no epithet ever 
 stand by itself . when I be young the boy relish these dreadful word 
 because they seem to smell of tar and battle - smoke , when every English 
 boy be for be a sailor and dare the Black Gentleman below . in 
 all truth , the bad word come from he ; though an excellent scholar have 
 assure I they should be take for aspirate , and mean no harm ; and so 
 it may be , but heartily do I rejoice that aspirate , have be drop 
 by people of birth ; for you might once hear title lady guilty of they 
 in polite society , I do assure you . 

 we have greatly improve in that respect . they say the admiral 's 
 reputation as a british sailor of the old school make he , rather his 
 name , a great favourite at Court ; but to Court he could not be get to 
 go , and if the tale be true , their Majesties pay he a visit on board 
 his ship , in harbour one day , and sailor tell you that Old Showery give 
 his liege lord and lady a common dish of boil beef with carrot and 
 turnip , and a plain dumpling , for their dinner , with ale and port wine , 
 the merit of which he swear to ; and he become so elate , that after the 
 cloth be remove , he dance they a hornpipe on his pair of wooden leg , 
 whistle his tune , and hold his full tumbler of hot grog in his hand 
 all the while , without so much as the spilling of a drop ! - so earnest 
 be he in everything he do . they say his limit be two bottle of port 
 wine at a sitting , with his glass of hot grog to follow , and not a soul 
 could induce he to go beyond that . in addition to be a great seaman , 
 he be a very religious man and a stout churchman . 

 well , now , the Curtis Fakenham of Captain Kirby 's day have a good deal 
 of his uncle as well as his father in he , the spirit of one and the 
 outside , of the other ; and , favour or not , he have be distinguish 
 among Countess Fanny 's adorer : she certainly choose to be silent about 
 the name of the assailant . and it have be attest on oath that two 
 day and a night subsequent to the date furnish by Charles Dump , 
 Curtis Fakenham be bring to his house , Hollis Grange , lame of a leg , 
 with a shot in his breast , that he carry to the family vault ; and his 
 head gamekeeper , John Wiltshire , a resolute fellow , be miss from 
 that hour . some say they have a quarrel , and Curtis be wound and John 
 Wiltshire kill . Curtis be know to have be extremely attach to 
 the man . yet when Wiltshire be inquire for , he let fall a word of 
 ' have more of Wiltshire than be agreeable to Hampshire ' - his county . 
 People ask what that mean . yet , accord to the tale , it be 
 the survive servant , by whom he , or whoever it may have be , be 
 accidentally shoot . 

 we be in a perfect tangle . on the other hand , it be never deny 
 that Curtis and John Wiltshire be in London together at the time of 
 Countess Fanny 's flight : and Curtis Fakenham be one of the procession 
 of armed gentleman conduct she in her carriage , as they suppose ; and 
 he be know to have start off , on the discovery of the cheat , with 
 horrible imprecation against Frenchwomen . it become know , too ; that 
 horse of his be stand saddle in his innyard at midnight . and 
 more , Charles Dump the postillion be take secretly to set eye on 
 he as they wheel he in his garden - walk , and he vow it be the 
 identical gentleman . but this come by and by to the ear of Curtis , 
 he have Charles Dump fetch over to confront he ; and then the man make 
 oath that he have never see Mr. Curtis Fakenham anywhere but there , in 
 his own house at Hollis ! one do not really know what , to think of it . 

 this postillion make a small fortune . he be everywhere in request . 
 People be never tired of ask he how he behave while the fight be 
 go on , and he always answer that he sit as close to his horse as he 
 could , and do not dream of dismounting ; for , he say , ' he be a figure 
 on a horse , and naught when off it . ' his repetition of the story , with 
 some adornment , and that same remark , make he the popular man of the 
 county ; people say he might enter Parliament , and I think at one time 
 it be possible . but a great success be full of temptation . after be 
 hire at inn to fill they with his account of the battle , and tip 
 by traveller from London to show the spot , he set up for himself as 
 innkeeper , and would have flourish , only he have contract habit on 
 his round , and he fall to contradict himself , so that he come to be 
 call Lying Charley ; and the people of the country say it be ' he who 
 drain the Punch - Bowl , for though he help to put the capital into it , 
 he take all the interest out of it . ' 

 yet we have the doctor of the village of Ipley , Dr. Cawthorne , a noted 
 botanist , assure we of the absolute credibility of Charles Dump , 
 whom he attend in the poor creature 's last illness , when Charles Dump 
 confess he have live in mortal terror of Squire Curtis , and have get 
 the trick of lie , through fear of tell the truth . hence his ruin . 

 so he die delirious and contrite . Cawthorne , the great Turf man , 
 inherit a portrait of he from his father the doctor . it be often 
 the occasion of the story be tell over again , and use to hang in the 
 patient ' reception room , next to an oil - painting of the Punch - Bowl , an 
 admire landscape picture by a local artist , highly - toned and true 
 to every particular of the scene , with the bright yellow road wind 
 uphill , and the bank of brilliant purple heath , and a white thorn in 
 bloom quite beautiful , and the green fir tree , and the big Bowl black 
 as a cauldron , - indeed a perfect feast of harmonious contrast in 
 colour . 

 and now you know how it be that the name of Captain Kirby and Curtis 
 Fakenham be alive to the present moment in the district . 

 we live a happy domestic life in those old coaching day , when county 
 affair and county people be the topic of fireside , and the country 
 enclose we to make we feel snug in our own importance . my opinion be , 
 that man and woman grow to their dimension only where such be the case . 
 we have our alarm from the outside now and again , but we soon relapse 
 to dwell upon our private business and our pleasant little hope and 
 excitement ; the courtship and the cross and the scandal , the 
 tea - party and the dance , and how the morning look after the stormy 
 night have pass , and the coach come down the hill with a box of news 
 and perhaps a curious passenger to drop at the inn . I do believe we 
 have a liking for the very highwayman , if they have any reputation for 
 civility . what I call human event , thing concern you and I , 
 instead of the deafen catastrophe now afflict and take all 
 conversation out of we , have their natural interest then . we study the 
 face of each morning as it come , and speculate upon the secret of 
 the thing it might have in store for we or our hero and heroine ; we 
 think of they more than of ourselves . long after the adventure of 
 the Punch - Bowl , our county be anxious about Countess Fanny and the Old 
 Buccaneer , wonder where they be and whether they be prosper , 
 whether they be just as much in love as ever , and which of they would 
 bury the other , and what the foreign people abroad thought of that 
 strange pair . 




 CHAPTER III . CONTINUATION of the introductory MEANDERINGS of dame 
 GOSSIP , together with her sudden extinction 

 I have still time before I , accord to the term of my agreement with 
 the person to whom I have , I fear foolishly , entrust the letter 
 and document of a story surpass ancient as well as modern in the 
 wonderment it cause , that would make the Law court bless their heart , 
 judge no less than the barrister , to have it run through they day 
 by day , with every particular to wrangle over , and many to serve as a 
 text for the pulpit . so to proceed . 

 it should be mention that the postillion Charles Dump be not 
 represent , and I have no conception of the reason why not , sit on 
 horseback , in the portrait in the possession of the Cawthorne family . I 
 have not see it , I be bind to admit . we have offend Dr. Cawthorne , by 
 once in an urgent case call in another doctor , who , he would have it , 
 be a quack , that ought to have kill we , and we cease to visit ; but 
 a gentleman who be an established patient of Dr. Cawthorne 's and have 
 frequent opportunity of judge the portrait , in the course of a 
 chronic malady , describe Charles Dump on his leg as a small man 
 looking diminish from a very much long one by shrinkage in thickish 
 wrinkle from the shoulder to the shank . his hat be enormous and very 
 gay . he be rather of sad countenance . an elevation of his collar behind 
 the ear , and point at the neck , give you notion of his have 
 drop from some hook . he stand with his forefinger extend , like a 
 disuse semaphore - post , that seem tumble and despond on the hill 
 by the highroad , in his attitude while tell the tale ; if stand it 
 may be call , where the whole figure appear implore for a seat . 
 that be his natural position , as one would suppose any artist must have 
 think , and a horse beneath he . but it have be suggest that the 
 artist in question be no painter of animal . then why do he not get a 
 painter of animal to put in the horse ? it be vain to ask , though it be 
 notorious that artist combine without bickering to do these thing ; 
 and one put his name on the animal , the other on the human being or 
 landscape . 

 my informant add , that the prominent feature , tell a melancholy 
 tale of its own , be of sanguine colour , and while plainly in the act of 
 speak , Charles Dump might be fancy about to drop off to sleep . he 
 be impress by the dreaminess of the face ; and I must say I regard he 
 as an interesting character . during my girlhood Napoleon Bonaparte alone 
 would have be his rival for fill an inn along our road . I have 
 know our boy go to bed obediently and get up at night to run three 
 mile to THE WHEATSHEAF , only to stand on the bench or traveller's - rest 
 outside the window and look in at Charles Dump reciting , with just room 
 enough in the crowd to point his finger , as his way be . 

 he leave a child , Mary Dump , who grow up to become lady 's maid to Livia 
 Fakenham , daughter of Curtis , the beauty of Hampshire , equal by 
 no one save her cousin Henrietta Fakenham , the daughter of Commodore 
 Baldwin ; and they be two different kind of beauty , not to be 
 compare , and different be their fortune ; for this lady be liken 
 to the sun go down on a cloudy noon , and that lady to the moon rid 
 through a stormy night . Livia be the young widow of Lord Duffield when 
 she accept the Earl of Fleetwood , and be his third countess , and 
 again a widow at eight - and - twenty , and stepmother to young Croesus , the 
 Earl of Fleetwood of my story . Mary Dump testify to her kindness of 
 heart to her dependent . if we be to speak of goodness , I be afraid 
 there be other witness . 

 I resent be warn that my time be short and that I have waste much 
 of it over ' the attractive Charles . ' what I have do I have do with a 
 purpose , and it must be a storyteller devoid of the rudiment of his art 
 who can complain of my dwelling on Charles Dump , for the world to have 
 a pause and pin its faith to he , which it would not do to a grander 
 person - that be , as a peg . wonderful event , however true they be , must 
 be attach to something common and familiar , to make they credible . 
 Charles Dump , I say , be like a front - page picture to a history of those 
 old quiet yet exciting day in England , and when once you have seize 
 he the whole period be alive to you , as it be to I in the delicious 
 dulness I love , that make we thirsty to hear of adventure and able to 
 enjoy to the utmost every thing occur . the man be no more attractive 
 to I than a lump of clay . how could he be ? but suppose I take up the 
 lump and tell you that there where I find it , that lump of clay have 
 be roll over and fling off by the left wheel of the prophet 's 
 Chariot of Fire before it mount aloft and disappear in the heaven 
 above ! - you would examine it and cherish it and have the scene present 
 with you , you may be sure ; and magnificent description would not be 
 one - half so persuasive . and that be what we call , in my profession , Art , 
 if you please . 

 so to continue : the Earl of Cressett fall from his coach - box in a fit , 
 and die of it , a fortnight after the flight of his wife ; and the people 
 say she might as well have wait . Kirby and Countess Fanny be at 
 Lucerne or Lausanne , or some such place , in Switzerland when the news 
 reach they , and Kirby , without lose an hour , lay hold of an english 
 clergyman of the Established Church and put he through the ceremony 
 of celebrate his lawful union with the beautiful young creature he 
 adore . and this he do , he say , for the world to guard his Fan in a 
 wide circle than his two arm could compass , if not quite so well . 

 so the Old Buccaneer be ever after that her lawful husband , and as his 
 wed wife , not wed to a fool , she be an example to her sex , like 
 many another woman who have begin badly with a light - head mate . it 
 be hard enough for a man to be married to a fool , but a man be only 
 half - cancel by that burden , it have be say ; whereas a woman find 
 herself on board a rudderless vessel , and often the desperate thing she 
 do be to avoid perish ! ten month , or eleven , some say , follow 
 the proclamation of the marriage - tie , a son be bear to Countess Fanny , 
 close by the castle of Chillon - on - the - lake , and he have the name of 
 Chillon Switzer John Kirby give to he to celebrate the fact . 

 two year later the girl be bear , and for the reason of her first 
 see the light in that austrian province , she be christen Carinthia 
 Jane . she be her old father 's pet ; but Countess Fanny glory in the 
 boy . she have fancy she would be a childless woman before he give sign 
 of come ; and they say she write a little volume of Meditations in 
 Prospect of Approaching Motherhood , for the guidance of other in a 
 similar situation . 

 I have never be able to procure the book or pamphlet , but I know 
 she be the good of mother , and of wife too . and she , with her old 
 husband , grow like a rise out of a weather - beat rock , prove she 
 be that , among those handsome foreign officer poorly remarkable for 
 their moral . not once have the Old Buccaneer to teach they a lesson . 
 think of it and you will know that her foot do not stray - nor do she 
 pretty eye . her heart be too full for the craving of vanity . innocent 
 lady who get their husband into scrape be innocent , perhaps ; but 
 knock you next door in their bosom , where the soul reside , and ask 
 for information of how innocence and uncleanness may go together . Kirby 
 purchase a mine in Carinthia , on the border of Styria , and work it 
 himself . his native land displease he , so that he would not have be 
 unwilling to see Chillon enter the austrian service , which the young man 
 be incline for , subsequent to his return to his parent from one of 
 the english public school , notwithstanding his passionate love for Old 
 England . but Lord Levellier explain the mystery in a letter to his 
 half - forgive sister , praise the boy for his defence of his mother 's 
 name at the school , where a big brutal fellow sneered at she , and 
 Chillon challenge he to sword or pistol ; and then he walk down to 
 the boy 's home in Staffordshire to force he to fight ; and the father 
 of the boy make he offer an apology . that be not much balm to Master 
 Chillon 's wound . he return to his mother quite heavy , unlike a young 
 man ; and the unhappy lady , though she know , he to be bitterly sensitive 
 on the point of honour , and especially as to everything relate to she , 
 see herself compel to tell he the history of her life , to save he , 
 as she think , from these chivalrous vindication of her good name . 
 she may have even paint herself bad than she be , both to excuse she 
 brother 's miserliness to her son and the world 's evil speaking of she . 
 wisely or not , she choose this course devotedly to protect he from 
 the peril she foresaw in connection with the name of the once famous 
 Countess Fanny in the British Isles . and thus be we stricken by the 
 day of our youth . it be impossible to moralize conveniently when one be 
 be hurry by a person at one 's elbow . 

 so the young man hear his mother out and kiss she , and then he go 
 secretly to Vienna and enlist and serve for a year as a private in 
 the regiment of Hussars , call , my paper tell I , Liechtenstein , and 
 what with his good conduct and the help of Kirby 's friend , he would 
 have obtain a commission from the emperor , when , at the right moment 
 to keep a sprig of Kirby 's growth for his country , Lord Levellier send 
 word that he be down for a cornetcy in a british regiment of dragoon . 
 Chillon come home from a garrison town , and there be a consultation 
 about his future career . shall it be England ? shall it be Austria ? 
 Countess Fanny 's voice be for England , and she carry the vote , 
 know though she do that it signify separation , and it might be 
 alienation - where her son would chance to hear thing he could not 
 refute . she believe that her son by such a man as Kirby would be of use 
 to his country , and her voice , against herself , be for England . 

 it break her heart . if she fail to receive the regular letter , she 
 pin and be disconsolate . he have hear more of I ! be in her mind . 
 her husband sit look at she with his old large grey glassy eye . 
 you would have fancy he await her death as the signal for his own 
 release . but she , poor mother , behind her weeping lid behold her son 's 
 filial love of she wound and bleed . when there be anything to be 
 do for she , old Kirby be astir . when it be nothing , either in 
 physic or assistance , he be like a great corner of rock . you may 
 indeed imagine grief in the very rock that see its flower fade to 
 the withered shred . on the last night of her life this old man of past 
 ninety carry she in his arm up a flight of stair to her bed . 

 a week after her burial , Kirby be find a corpse in the mountain 
 forest . his have call the death of his darling his lightning - stroke 
 must have be the origin of the report that he die of lightning . he 
 touch not a morsel of food from the hour of the dropping of the sod on 
 her coffin of ebony wood . an old crust of their mahogany bread , suppose 
 at first to be a speciman of quartz , be find in one of his coat 
 pocket . he kiss his girl Carinthia before go out on his last 
 journey from home , and speak some wandering word . the mine have not be 
 work for a year . she think she would find he at the mouth of the 
 shaft , where he would sometimes be sit and star , already dead at 
 heart with the death he see come to the beloved woman . they have to let 
 she down with rope , that she might satisfy herself he be not below . 
 she and her great dog and a faithful man - servant discover the body in 
 the forest . Chillon arrive from England to see the common grave of both 
 his parent . 

 and now good - bye to sorrow for a while . keep your tear for the living . 
 and first I be go to describe to you the young Earl of Fleetwood , son 
 of the strange Welsh lady , the rich nobleman of his time , and how 
 he persue and shun the lady who have fascinate he , Henrietta , the 
 daughter of Commodore Baldwin Fakenham ; and how he meet Carinthia Jane ; 
 and concern that lovely Henrietta and Chillon Kirby - Levellier ; and of 
 the young poet of ordinary parentage , and the giant Captain Abrane , and 
 Livia the widow Countess of Fleetwood , Henrietta 's cousin , daughter of 
 Curtis Fakenham ; and number of other ; Lord Levellier , Lord Brailstone , 
 Lord Simon Pitscrew , Chumley Potts , young Ambrose Mallard ; and the 
 English pugilist , such a man of honour though he drink ; and the 
 adventure of Madge , Carinthia Jane 's maid . just a few touch . and then 
 the marriage divide Great Britain into half , take side . after 
 that , I trust you may go on , as I would carry you be we all twenty 
 year younger , have I but soon be in possession of these treasure 
 paper . I promise you excitement enough , if justice be do to they . but 
 I must and will describe the wedding . this young Earl of Fleetwood , you 
 should know , be a very powder - magazine of ambition , and never would he 
 break his word : which be right , if we be properly careful ; and so he - 

 she cease . accord to the term of the treaty , the venerable lady 's 
 time have pass . an extinguisher descend on she , give she the 
 likeness of one under condemnation of ' the Most Holy Inqusition , in the 
 rank of an ' auto da fe ' ; and singularly resemble that victim at the 
 first sharp bite of the flame she will , be when she hear the version 
 of her story . 




 CHAPTER IV . MORNING and farewell to an OLD home 

 Brother and sister be about to leave the mountainland for England . 
 they have not go to bed overnight , and from the window of their 
 deserted home , a little before dawn , they see the dwindle moon , a late 
 riser , break through drove of hunt cloud , directly top their 
 ancient guardian height , the triple peak and giant of the range , 
 friendly in his name than in aspect for the two young people cling 
 to the scene they be to quit . his name recall old - day : the 
 apparition of his head among the heaven drum on their sense of 
 banishment . 

 to the girl , this be a division of her life , and the dawn hold the 
 sword . she feel herself midswe across a gulf that be the grave of one 
 half , without a light of promise for the other . her passionate excess of 
 attachment to she bury home rob the future of any colour it might 
 have wear to bid a young heart quicken . and England , though she be of 
 british blood , be a foreign place to she , not alluring : her brother 
 have twice come out of England reserve in speech ; her mother 's talk of 
 England have be unhappy ; her father have suffer ill - treatment there 
 from a brutal institution term the Admiralty , and have never regret 
 the not see England again . the thought that she be bind thitherward 
 enfold she like a frosty mist . but these bare wall , these loud 
 floor , chill room , dull window , and the vault - sounding of the ghostly 
 house , everywhere the absence of the face in the house tell she she have 
 no choice , she must go . the appearance of her old friend the tower 
 mountain - height , up a blue night - sky , compel her swift mind to see 
 herself far away , yearn to he out of exile , an exile that have no 
 local feature ; she would not imagine they to give a centre of warmth , 
 her wilful grief prefer the blank . it resemble death in seem some 
 hollowness behind a shroud , which we shudder at . 

 the room be light by a stable - lantern on a kitchen - table . their seat 
 near the window be a rickety garden - bench reject in the headlong sale 
 of the furniture ; and when she rise , unable to continue motionless while 
 the host of illuminated cloud fly fast , she have to warn her brother to 
 preserve his balance . he tacitly do so , aware of the necessity . 

 she walk up and down the long seven - windowed saloon , haunt by her 
 footfall , try to think , chafe at his quietness and acknowledging 
 that he do well to be quiet . they have finish their packing of box 
 and of wear - apparel for the journey . there be nothing to think of , 
 nothing furth to talk of , nothing for she to do save to sit and look , 
 and deaden her throb by count they . she soon return to her seat 
 beside her brother , with the marvel in her breast that the house she 
 desire so much to love should be cold and repel she now it be a vacant 
 shell . her memory could not hang within it anywhere . she shut she 
 eye to be with the image of the dead , conceive the method as her 
 brother 's happy secret , and imitate his posture , elbow prop on 
 knee to support the chin . his quietness breathe of a deep love than 
 her own . 

 meanwhile the high wind have sink ; the moon , after push she withered 
 half to the zenith , be climb the dusky edge , reveal fitfully ; 
 thread and wisps of thin vapour travel along a fall gale , and 
 branch from the dome of the sky in migratory break line , like wild 
 bird shift the order of flight , north and east , where the dawn sit 
 in a web , but as yet have do no more than shoot up a glow along the 
 central heaven , in amid the wave of deepen aloud : a mirror for night 
 to see her dark self in her own hue . a shiver between the silent couple 
 prick their wit , and she say : 

 ' Chillon , shall we run out and call the morning ? ' 

 it be an old game of theirs , encourage by their hearty father , to be 
 out in the early hour on a rise of ground near the house and ' call the 
 morning . ' her brother be glad of the challenge , and upon one of the 
 yawn follow a sleepless night , reply with a return to boyishness : 
 ' yes , if you like . it be the last time we shall do she the service here . 
 let us go . ' 

 they spring up together and the bench fall behind they . swing the 
 lantern he carry inconsiderately , the ring of it be leave on his 
 finger , and the end of candle roll out of the crazy frame to the floor 
 and be extinguish . Chillon have no match - box . he say to she : 

 ' what do you think of the window ? - we have   do it before , Carin . well 
 than grope down stair and passage block with lumber . ' 

 ' I be ready , ' she say , and catch at her skirt by instinct to prove her 
 readiness on the spot . 

 a drop of a dozen foot or so from the french window to a flower - bed be 
 not very difficult . her father have teach she how to jump , besides 
 the how of many other practical thing . she leap as lightly as she 
 brother , never touch earth with her hand ; and rise from the proper 
 contraction of the leg in take the descent , she quote her father : 
 ' mean it when you be do it . ' 

 ' for no enemy 's shot be equal to a weak heart in the act , ' 

 Chillon pursue the quotation , lay his hand on her shoulder for a 
 sign of approval . she look up at he . 

 they pass down the garden and a slop meadow to a brook swell by 
 heavy rain ; over the brook on a narrow plank , and up a steep and stony 
 pathway , almost a watercourse , between rock , to another meadow , level 
 with the house , that lead ascend through a firwood ; and there the 
 change to thick darkness tell they light be abroad , though whether 
 of the clouded moon or of the first grey of the quiet revolution be 
 uncertain . metallic light of a subterranean realm , it might have be 
 think . 

 ' you remember everything of father , ' Carinthia say . ' we both do , ' say 
 Chillon . 

 she press her brother 's arm . ' we will . we will never forget anything . ' 

 beyond the firwood light be visibly the dawn 's . half - way down the 
 ravine it resemble the light cast off a torrent water . it lie on the 
 grass like a sheet of unreflecte steel , and be a face without a smile 
 above . their childhood run along the track to the forest by the light , 
 which be neither dim nor cold , but grave ; present tree and shrub and 
 dwarf growth and grass austerely , not deepen or confuse they . they 
 wound their way by border of crag , see in a dell below the mouth 
 of the idle mine begirt with weedy and shrub - hung rock , a dripping 
 semi - circle . far up they come on the flat juniper and cross a wet 
 ground - thicket of whortleberry : their foot be in the moist moss among 
 sprig of heath ; and a great fir - tree stretch his length , a peel 
 multitude of his dead fellow lean and stand upright in the midst of 
 scatter fire - stain member , and through their skeleton limb the 
 sheer precipice of slate - rock of the bulk across the chasm , nursery of 
 hawk and eagle ; wear a thin blue tinge , the sign of warm light abroad . 

 ' this way , my brother ! ' cry Carinthia , shudder at a path he be 
 about to follow . 

 Dawn in the mountain - land be a meeting of many friend . the pinnacle , 
 the forest - head , the latschen - tufte mound , rock - bastion and defiant 
 cliff and giant of the triple peak , be in view , clearly line for a 
 common recognition , but all be figure of solid gloom , unfeatured and 
 bloomless . another minute and they have fling off their mail , and change 
 to various , indented , intricate , succinct in ridge , scar and channel ; 
 and they have all a look of watchfulness that make they one company . the 
 smell of rock - water and root of herb and moss grow keen ; air become 
 a wine that raise the breast high to breathe it ; an uplift coolness 
 pervade the height . what wonder that the mountain - breed girl should let 
 fly her voice . the natural carol wake an echo . she do not repeat it . 

 ' and we will not forget our home , Chillon , ' she say , touch he 
 gently to comfort some sadden feeling . 

 the plume of cloud now slowly enter into the lofty arch of dawn and 
 melt from brown to purpleblack . the upper sky swam with violet ; and 
 in a moment each stray cloud - feather be edge with rose , and 
 then suffuse . it seem that the height front East to eye the 
 interflooding of colour , and it be imaginable that all turn to the 
 giant whose forehead first kindle to the sun : a greeting of god and 
 king . 

 on the morning of a farewell we fluctuate sharply between the very 
 distant and the close and homely : and even in memory the fluctuation 
 occur , the grander scene cast we back on the modestly nestling , and 
 that , when it have refresh we , conjure imagination to embrace the 
 splendour and wonder . but the wrench of an immediate division from what 
 we love make the thing within we reach the dear , we put out our 
 hand for they , as violently - part lover do , though the soul in day 
 to come would know a craving , and imagination flap a leaden wing , if we 
 have not look beyond they . 

 ' shall we go down ? ' say Carinthia , for she know a little cascade near 
 the house , shower on rock and fern , and long to have it round she . 

 they descend , Chillon say that they would soon have the mist 
 rise , and must not delay to start on their journey . 

 the army of the young sunrise in mountain - land neighbour the 
 plain , vast shadow , be march over wood and mead , black against 
 the edge of golden ; and great height be cut with they , and bounding 
 water take the leap in a silvery radiance to gloom ; the bright and 
 dark - band valley be like night and morning take hand down the 
 sweep of their river . Immense be the range of vision scud the 
 peak and over the illimitable Eastward plain flat to the very east and 
 source of the sun . 

 Carinthia say : ' when I marry I shall come here to live and die . ' 

 her brother glance at she . he be fond of she , and personally he like 
 her face ; but such a confident anticipation of marriage on the part of a 
 portionless girl set he think of the character of her charm and the 
 attraction they would present to the world of man . they be expressive 
 enough ; at time he have think they marvellous in their clear cut of 
 the animating mind . - no one could fancy her handsome ; and just now her 
 hair be in some disorder , a night without sleep have an effect on her 
 complexion . 

 ' it be not usually the wife who decide where to live , ' say he . 

 her idea be anywhere but with the dream of a husband . ' could we stay 
 on another day ? - ' 

 ' my dear girl ! another night on that crazy stool ! ' besides , Mariandl be 
 bind to go to - day to her new place , and who be to cook for we ? do you 
 propose fast as well as watch ? ' 

 ' could I cook ? ' she ask he humbly . 

 ' no , you could not ; not for a starve regiment ! your accomplishment be 
 of a different sort . no , it be well to get over the pain at once , if we 
 can not   escape it . 

 ' that I think too , ' say she , ' and we should have to buy provision . 
 then , brother , instantly after breakfast . only , let we walk it . I know 
 the whole way , and it be not more than a two day ' walk for you and 
 I . consent . driving would be like go gladly . I could never bear to 
 remember that I be drive away . 

 and walk will save money ; we be not rich , you tell I , brother . ' 

 ' a few florin more or less ! ' he rejoin , rather frown . ' you have 
 good styrian boot , I see . but I want to be over at the Baths there 
 soon ; not later than to - morrow . ' 

 ' but , brother , if they know we be come they will wait for we . and we 
 can be there to - morrow night or the next morning ! ' 

 he consider it . he want exercise and love this mountain - land ; his 
 inclination melt into her ; though he have reason for hesitate . 
 ' well , we will send on my portmanteau and your box in the cart ; we will 
 walk it . you be a capital walker , you be a gallant comrade ; I would not 
 wish for a well . ' he wonder , as he speak , whether any true - hearted 
 gentleman besides himself would ever think the same of this lonely girl . 

 her eye look a delighted ' no - really ? ' for the sweetest on earth to 
 she be to be prize by her brother . 

 she hasten forward . ' we will go down and have our last meal at home , ' 
 she say in the dialect of the country . ' we have five egg . no meat for 
 you , dear , but enough bread and butter , some honey leave , and plenty of 
 coffee . I should like to have leave old Mariandl more , but we be unable 
 to do very much for poor people now . milk , I can not say . she be just 
 the kind soul to be up and out to fetch we milk for an early first 
 breakfast ; but she may have overslept herself . ' 

 Chillon smile . ' you be right , Janet ' , about not go to bed last 
 night ; we might have miss the morning . ' 

 ' I hate sleep : I hate anything that rob I of my will , ' she reply . 

 ' you would be glad of your dos of sleep if you have to work and study . ' 

 ' to fall down by the wayside tired out - yes , brother , a dead sleep be 
 good . then you be in the hand of God . Father use to say , four hour 
 for a man , six for a woman . ' 

 ' and four and twenty for a lord , ' add Chillon . ' I remember . ' 

 ' a lord of that Admiralty , ' she appeal to his close recollection . 
 ' but I mean , brother , dream be what I detest so . ' 

 ' do not   be detest , my dear ; reserve your strength , ' say he . ' I 
 suppose dream be of some use , now and then . ' 

 ' I shall never think they useful . ' 

 ' when we can not   get what we want , my good Carin . ' 

 ' then we should not waste ourselves in dream . ' 

 ' they promise falsely sometimes . that be no reason why we should reject 
 the consolation when we can not   get what we want , my little sister . ' 

 ' I would not be deny . ' 

 ' there be the impossible . ' 

 ' not for you , brother . ' 

 perhaps a half - minute after she have speak , he say , ' pursue a 
 dialogue within himself aloud rather than reveal a secret : ' you do not 
 know her position . ' 

 Carinthia 's heart stop beat . who be this person suddenly conjure 
 up ? 

 she fancy she might not have hear correctly ; she fear to ask and 
 yet she perceive a novel softness in he that would have answer . pain 
 of an unknown kind make her love of her brother conscious that if she 
 ask she would suffer great pain . 

 the house be in sight , a long white building with blind down at some 
 of the window , and some wide open , some show unclean glass : the 
 three aspect and sign of a house 's emptiness when they be see 
 together . 

 Carinthia remark on their have meet nobody . it have a serious meaning 
 for they . formerly they be proud of outstrip the busy population 
 of the mine , come down on they with wild waving and shout of 
 sunrise . they feel the death again , a whole field lay low by one 
 stroke , and wintriness in the season of glad life . a wind have blow and 
 all have vanish . 

 the second green of the year shoot lively sparkle off the meadow , 
 from a fringe of coloured glovelet to a warm silver lake of dew . the 
 firwood be already breathe rich and sweet in the sun . the half - moon 
 fall rayless and pale than the fan of fleece push up westward , high 
 overhead , themselves disperse on the blue in downy feather , like 
 the mottled grey of an eagle 's breast : the small of they bluish like 
 trace of the beak wood - pigeon . 

 she look above , then below on the slim and straightgrown flock of 
 naked purple crocus in bud and blow abound over the meadow that 
 roll to the level of the house , and two of these she gather . 




 CHAPTER V. a MOUNTAIN WALK in MIST and SUNSHINE 

 Chillon be right in his forecast of the mist . an over - moisten earth 
 steam to the sun obscure it before the two have finish breakfast , 
 which be a finish to everything eatable in the ravage dwelling , with 
 the exception of a sly store for the midday meal , that old Mariandl 
 have stuff into Chillon 's leather sack - the fruit of secret beg on 
 their behalf about the neighbourhood . he find the sack heavy and bulky 
 as he sling it over his shoulder ; but she bid he make nothing of such 
 a trifle till he have it inside he . ' and you that love tea so , my pretty 
 one , so that you always laugh and sing after drink a cup with your 
 mother , ' she say to Carinthia , ' you will find one pinch of it in your 
 bag at the end of the left - foot slipper , to remember your home by when 
 you be out in the world . ' 

 she cross the strap of the bag on her mistress 's bosom , and be 
 embrace by Carinthia and Chillon in turn , Carinthia tell she to dry 
 her eye , for that she would certainly come back and perhaps occupy the 
 house one day or other . the old soul moan of eye that would not be 
 awake to behold she ; she beg a visit at her grave , though it be to 
 be in a catholic burial - place and the priest have use her dear master 
 and mistress ill , not allow they to lie in consecrate ground ; 
 affection make she a champion of religious tolerance and a little afraid 
 of retribution . Carinthia soothe she , kiss she , give the promise , and 
 the parting be over . 

 she and Chillon have on the previous day accomplish a pilgrimage to 
 the resting - place of their father and mother among humble Protestants , 
 iron - smelter , in a valley out of the way of their present line of march 
 to the glacier of the great snow - mountain mark the junction of three 
 Alpine province of Austria . Josef , the cart - driver with the box , who 
 be to pass the valley , vow of his own accord to hang a fresh day 's 
 wreath on the rail . he would not hear of money for the purchase , and 
 they humour he . the family have be belove . there be an offer of 
 a home for Carinthia in the castle of Count Lebern , a friend of her 
 parent , much take with she , and she would have accept it have not 
 Chillon overrule her choice , determine that , as she be English , she 
 must come to England and live under the guardianship of her uncle , Lord 
 Levellier , of whose character he do not speak . 

 the girl 's cheek be draw thin and her lip shut as they depart ; 
 she be tearless . a phantom ring of mist accompany she from she 
 first foot outside the house . she do not look back . the house come 
 swimming and plunge after she , like a spectral ship on big sea , and 
 her father and mother live and die in her breast ; and now they be 
 strong , consulting , chat , laughing , caressing ; now still and white , 
 catch by a vapour that dive away with they either to right or left , 
 but always with the same suddenness , leave she to question herself 
 whether she exist , for more of life seem to be with their mystery 
 than with her speculation . the phantom ring of mist enclose for mile 
 the invariable low - sweep dark spruce - fir keep her thought on they 
 as close as the shroud . she walk fast , but scarcely feel that she 
 be move . near midday the haunted circle widen ; rock be loosely 
 fold in it , and head of tree , whose round intervolve root grasp 
 the yellow roadside soil ; the mist shake like a curtain , and partly 
 open and display a tapestry - landscape , roughly work , of woollen 
 crag and castle and suggest glen , thread water , very prominent 
 foreground , Autumn flower on bank ; a predominant atmospheric greyness . 
 the sun throw a shaft , liquid instead of burn , as we see his beam 
 beneath a wave ; and then the mist narrow again , boil up the valley 
 and stream above the mountain , curl and fly , and be Python coil 
 pierce by bright arrow of the sun . a spot of blue signal his 
 victory above . 

 to look at it be to fancy they have be walk under water and have 
 now rise to the surface . Carinthia 's mind step out of the chamber 
 of death . the different air and scene breathe into her a timid warmth 
 toward the future , and between her naming of the less mountain on 
 their side of the pass , she ask question relate to England , 
 and especially the lady she be to see at the Baths beyond the 
 glaci - pass . she have hear of a party of his friend await he 
 there , without much encouragement from he to ask particular of they , 
 and she have hitherto abstain , as she be rather shy of meet she 
 countrywoman . the lady , Chillon say , be cousin ; one be a young 
 widow , the Countess of Fleetwood , and the other be Miss Fakenham , a 
 young lady . 

 Carinthia murmur in German : ' poor soul ! ' which one be she pity ? 
 the widow , she say , in the tone implying , naturally . 

 her brother assure she the widow be use to it , for this be her 
 second widowhood . 

 ' she marry again ! ' exclaim the girl . 

 ' you do not   like that idea ? ' say he . 

 Carinthia betray a delicate shudder . 

 her brother laugh to himself at her expressive present tense . ' and 
 marry again ! ' he say . ' there will certainly be a third . ' 

 ' husband ? ' say she , as at the incredible . 

 ' Husband , let us hope , ' he answer . 

 she drop from her contemplation of the lady , and her look at her 
 brother signify : it will not be you ! 

 Chillon be engage in spy for a place where he could spread out 
 the content of his bag . sharp hunger beset they both at the mention of 
 eat . a bank of slop green shade by a chestnut propose the seat , 
 and here he relieve the bag of a bottle of wine , slice of , meat , 
 bread , hard egg , and lettuce , a chip cup to fle away after 
 drink the wine , and a supply of small butler - cake know to be 
 favourite with Carinthia . she reverse the order of the feast 
 by commence upon one of the cake , to do honour to Mariandl 's 
 thoughtfulness . as at their breakfast , they share the last morsel . 

 ' but we would have make it enough for our dear old dog Pluto as well , 
 if he have live , ' say Carinthia , sigh with her thankfulness and 
 compassionate regret , a mixture often inspire a tender babbling 
 melancholy . ' dog ' eye have such a sick look of love . he might have 
 live long , though he be very old , only he could not survive the loss 
 of father . I know the finding of the body break his heart . he spring 
 forward , he stop and throw up his head . it be human language to hear 
 he , Chillon . he lie in the yard , try to lift his eye when I come 
 to he , they be so heavy ; and he have not strength to move his poor old 
 tail more than once . he die with his head on my lap . he seem to beg 
 I , and I take he , and he breathe twice , and that be his end . Pluto ! 
 old dog ! well , for you or for I , brother , we could not have a well 
 wish . as for I , death ! ... when we know we be to die ! only let my 
 darling live ! that be my prayer , and that we two may not be separate 
 till I be take to their grave . Father buy ground for four - his wife 
 and himself and his two child . it do not oblige we to be bury 
 there , but could we have any other desire ? ' 

 she stretch her hand to her brother . he kiss it spiritedly . 

 ' look ahead , my dear girl . help I to finish this wine . there be nothing 
 like good hard walking to give common wine of the country a flavour - and 
 out of broken crockery . ' 

 ' I think it so good , ' Carinthia reply , after drink from the cup . 
 ' in England they , do not grow wine . be the people there kind ? ' 

 ' they be civilized people , of course . ' 

 ' kind - warm to you , Chillon ? ' 

 ' some of they , when you know they . " warm , " be hardly the word . winter 's 
 warm on skate . you must do a great deal for yourself . they do not   boil 
 over . by the way , do not   expect much of your uncle . ' 

 ' will he not love I ? ' 

 ' he give you a lodging in his house , and food enough , we will hope . you 
 will not   see company or much of he . ' 

 ' I can not exist without be love . I do not care for company . he must 
 love I a little . ' 

 ' he be one of the warm - hearted race - he be mother 's brother ; but where 
 his heart be , I ' ve   not discover . 

 Bear with he just for the present , my dear , till I be able to support 
 you . ' 

 ' I will , ' she say . 

 the dreary vision of a home with an unloving uncle be not brighten 
 by the alternative of her brother 's have to support she . she speak of 
 money . ' have we none , Chillon ? ' 

 ' we have no debt , ' he answer . ' we have a claim on the Government here 
 for indemnification for property take to build a fortress upon one of 
 the pass into Italy . Father buy the land , think there would be 
 a yield of ore thereabout ; and they have seize it , rightly enough , but 
 they dispute our claim for the valuation we put on it . a small sum they 
 would consent to pay . it would be a very small sum , and I ' m father 's 
 son , I will have justice . ' 

 ' yes ! ' Carthinia join with he to show the same stout nature . 

 ' we have nothing else except a bit to toss up for luck . ' 

 ' and how can I help be a burden on my brother ? ' she inquire , in 
 distress . 

 ' Marry , and be a blessing to a husband , ' he say lightly . 

 they perform a sacrifice of the empty bottle and crack cup on 
 the site of their meal , as if it have be a ceremony demand from 
 traveller , and leave they in fragment , proceed on their journey 
 refresh . 

 walk be now high enjoyment , notwithstanding the force of the 
 sun , for they be a hardy couple , require no more than sufficient 
 nourishment to combat the element with an exulting blood . besides they 
 love mountain air and scenery , and each step to the ridge of the pass 
 they climb be an advance in splendour . peak of ashen hue and pale 
 dry red and pale sulphur push up , straight , fork , twisted , naked , 
 strike their mind with an indeterminate ghostliness of Indian , so 
 strange they be in shape and colouring . these sharp point be the 
 first to greet they between the blue and green . a depression of the pass 
 to the left give sight of the point of black fir forest below , round 
 the girth of the barren shaft . mountain block appear push up 
 in front , and a mountain wall and wood on it , and mountain in the 
 distance , and cliff riven with fall of water that be silver skein , 
 down lower to meadow , village and spire , and low finally to 
 the whole valley of the foaming river , field and river seem in 
 imagination roll out from the hand of the head mountain . 

 ' but see this in winter , as I do with father , Chillon ! ' say Carinthia . 

 she say it upon love 's instinct to halo the scene with something beyond 
 present vision , and to sanctify it for her brother , so that this walk of 
 theirs together should never be forget . 

 a smooth fold of cloud , moveless along one of the upper pasture , and 
 still dense enough to be luminous in sunlight , be the last of the mist . 

 they watch it lie in the form of a fish , leviathan diminish , 
 as they descend their path ; and the head be lose , the tail spread 
 peacockwise , and evaporate slowly in that likeness ; and soft to a 
 breath of air as gossamer down , the body become a ball , a cock , a little 
 lizard , nothingness . 

 the blue bright day of the year be shin . Chillon lead the descent . 
 with his trim and handsome figure before she , Carinthia remember the 
 current saying , that he should have be the girl and she the boy . that 
 be because he resemble their mother in face . but the build of his 
 limb and shoulder be not feminine . 

 to her admire eye , he have a look superior to simple strength and 
 grace ; the look of a great sky - bird about to mount , a fountain - like 
 energy of stature , delightful to her contemplation . and he have the mouth 
 woman put faith in for decision and fixedness . she do , most fully ; and 
 reflect how entirely she do so , the thought assail she : some one 
 must be love he ! 

 she allow it to surprise she , not choose to revert to an uneasy 
 sensation of the morning . 

 that some one , her process of reasoning inform she , be necessarily 
 an english young lady . she reserve her question till they should cease 
 this hopping and heel down the zigzag of the slippery path - track . 
 when child they have be collector of beetle and butterfly , and 
 the fly by of a ' royal - mantle , ' the purple butterfly grandly fringe , 
 could still remind Carinthia of the event it be of old to spy and chase 
 one . Chillon himself be not above the sentiment of their " very early 
 day " ; he stop to ask if she have be that lustrous blue - wing , a 
 rarer specie , prize by youngster , shoot through the chestnut tree : 
 and they both pause for a moment , gaze into the fairyland of infancy , 
 she see with her brother 's eye , this prince of the realm have 
 escape she . he own he might have be mistake , as the brilliant 
 fellow flew swift and high between leaf , like an ordinary fritillary . 
 not the less do they get their glimpse of the wonder in the sunny 
 eternity of a child 's afternoon . 

 ' an Auerhahn , Chillon ! ' she say , picture the mature day when she have 
 scale perilous height with he at night to stalk the blackcock in 
 the prime of the morning . she wish they could have have another such 
 adventure to stamp the old home on his heart freshly , to the exclusion 
 of beautiful english face . 

 on the level of the valley , where they meet the torrent - river , walk 
 side by side with he , she venture an inquiry : ' english girl be fair 
 girl , be they not ? ' 

 ' there be some dark also , ' he reply . 

 ' but the well - look be fair ? ' 

 ' perhaps they be , with we . ' 

 ' Mother be fair . ' 

 ' she be . ' 

 ' I have only see a few of they , once at Vies and at Venice , and those 
 Baths we be go to ; and at Meran , I think . ' 

 ' you consider they charming ? ' 

 ' not all . ' 

 it be touch that she should be such a stranger to her countrywoman ! 
 he draw a portrait - case from his breast - pocket , press the spring , and 
 hand it to she , say : ' there be one . ' he speak indifferently , but as 
 soon as she have see the face inside it , with a look at he and a deep 
 breath ; she understand that he be an altered brother , and that they 
 be three instead of two . 

 she hand it back to he , say hushedly and only ' yes . ' 

 he do not ask an opinion upon the beauty she have see . his pace 
 increase , and she hasten her step beside he . she have not much to 
 learn when some minute later she say ; ' shall I see she , Chillon ? ' 

 ' she be one of the lady we be to meet . ' 

 ' what a pity ! ' Carinthia step fast , enlighten as to his wish to 
 get to the Baths without delay ; and her heart soften in reflect how 
 readily he have yield to her silly preference for go on foot . 

 her cry of regret be equivocal ; it produce no impression on he . they 
 reach a village where her leader deem it adviseable to drive for the 
 remainder of the distance up the valley to the barrier snow - mountain . 
 she assent instantly , she have no long any active wish of her 
 own , save to make amend to her brother , who be and would ever be her 
 brother : she could not be rob of their relationship . 

 something undefined in her feeling of possession she have be rob of , 
 she know it by her spiritlessness ; and she would fain have attribute 
 it to the idle motion of the car , now and they stupidly jolt she 
 on , after the valiant exercise of her limb . they be in a land of 
 waterfall and busy mill , a narrow vale where the run of grass grow 
 short and wild , and the glaci - river roar for the leap , more foam 
 than water , and the savagery , naturally exciting to she , breathe of its 
 lair among the rock and ice - field . 

 her brother say : ' there he be . ' she see the whitecrowne king of the 
 region , of whose near presence to her old home she have be accustom 
 to think proudly , end she look at he without spring to he , 
 and continue image her english home and her loveless uncle , 
 merely admire the scene , as if the fire of her soul have be 
 extinguish . - ' Marry , and be a blessing to a husband . ' Chillon 's word 
 whisper of the mean of escape from the den of her uncle . 

 but who would marry I ! she think . an unreproved sensation of melt 
 pervade she ; she know her capacity for gratitude , and conjure it up 
 in her ' heart , there come with it the noble knightly gentleman who would 
 really stoop to take a plain girl by the hand , release she , and say : ' be 
 mine ! ' his vizor be down , of course . she have no power of imagine the 
 lineament of that prodigy . or be he a dream ? he come and go . her 
 mother , not unkindly , sadly , have count her poor girl 's chance of 
 win attention and a husband . her father have doate on her face ; but , 
 as she argue , her father have be attract by her mother , a 
 beautiful woman , and this be a circumstance that reflect the great 
 hopelessness on her prospect . she bear a likeness to her father , little 
 to her mother , though he fancy the reverse and give she the mother 's 
 lip and hair . think of herself , however , be destructive to the form 
 of her mirror of knightliness : he waver , he flee for good , as the rosy 
 vapour bear of our sensibility must do when we relapse to coldness , and 
 the more completely when we try to command it . no , she think , a plain 
 girl should think of work , to earn her independence . 

 ' woman be not permit to follow army , Chillon ? ' she say . 

 he laugh out . ' what be in your head ? ' 

 the laugh abash she ; she murmur of woman be good nurse for 
 wound soldier , if they be good walker to march with the army ; and , 
 as evidently it sound witless to he , she add , to seem reasonable : 
 ' you have not tell I the christian name of those lady . ' 

 he make queer eye over the puzzle to connect the foregoing and the 
 succeed in her remark , but answer straightforwardly : ' Livia be 
 one , and Henrietta ! 

 her ear seize on the stress of his voice . ' henrietta ! ' she choose that 
 name for the name of the person disturb she ; it fuse well , she 
 think , with the new element she have be compel to take into her 
 system , to absorb it if she could . 

 ' you be not scheme to have they serve as army hospital nurse , my 
 dear ? ' 

 ' no , Chillon . ' 

 ' you can not   explain it , I suppose ? ' 

 ' a sister could go too , when you go to war , Chillon . ' 

 a sister could go , if it be permit by the authority , and be near 
 her brother to nurse he in case of wound ; other would be unable 
 to claim the privilege . that be her meaning , involve with the hazy 
 project of earn an independence ; but she could not explain it , and 
 Chillon set she down for one of the inexplicable sex , which the simple 
 adventurous girl have not previously seem to be . 

 she be inwardly warn of have talk foolishly , and she hold she 
 tongue . her humble and modest jealousy , scarce deserve the title , 
 pass with a sigh or two . it be her first taste of life in the world . 

 a fit of heavy - mindedness ensue , that heighten the contrast her 
 recent mood have bequeath , between herself , ignorant as she be , and 
 those lady . their name , Livia and Henrietta , soar above she and 
 sing the music of the splendid sphere . Henrietta be close to earth , 
 for her feature have be reveal ; she be therefore the dearer , 
 and the rich for he who love she , be one of we , though an 
 over - earthly one ; and Carinthia give she to Chillon , reserve for 
 herself a handmaiden 's place within the circle of their happiness . 

 this do , she sit straight in the car . it be toil up the steep 
 ascent of a glen to the mountain village , the last of her native 
 province . her proposal to walk be accept , and the speeding of her 
 blood , now that she have master a new element in it , soon restore she 
 to her sisterly affinity with natural glory . the sunset be on yonder 
 side of the snow . here there be a feast of variously - tint sunset 
 shadow on snow , meadow , rock , river , serrate cliff . the peaked cap 
 of the rush rock - dot sweep of upward snow catch a scarlet 
 illumination : one flank of the white in heaven be violette 
 wonderfully . 

 at nightfall , under a clear black sky , alive with wakeful fire round 
 head and breast of the great Alp , Chillon and Carinthia stroll out 
 of the village , and he tell she some of his hope . they refer to 
 invention of destructive weapon , which be primarily to place his 
 country out of all danger from a world in arm ; and also , it might 
 be mention , to bring he fortune . ' for I must have money ! ' he say , 
 sigh it out like a deliberate oath . he and his uncle be associate 
 in the invention . they have an improved rocket that would force military 
 chief to change their tactic : they have a new powder , a rifle , a model 
 musket - the latter base on his own plan ; and a scheme for fortress 
 artillery likely to turn the preponderance in favour of the defensive 
 once again . ' and that will be really do good , ' say Chillon , 
 ' for where it be with the offensive , there be everlaste bullying and 
 plundering . ' 

 Carinthia warmly agree with he , but beg he be sure his uncle 
 divide the profit equally . she discern what his need of money 
 signify . 

 Tenderness urge she to say : ' Henrietta ! Chillon . ' 

 ' well ? ' he answer quickly . 

 ' will she wait ? ' 

 ' can she , you should ask . ' 

 ' be she brave ? ' 

 ' who can tell , till she have be try ? ' 

 ' be she quite free ? ' 

 ' she have not yet be capture . ' 

 ' brother , be there no one else ... ? ' 

 ' there be a nobleman anxious to bestow his title on she . ' 

 ' he be rich ? ' 

 ' the first or second wealthy in Great Britain , they say . ' 

 ' be he young ? ' 

 ' about the same age as mine . ' 

 ' be he a handsome young man ? ' 

 ' handsomer than your brother , my girl . ' 

 ' no , no , no ! ' say she . ' and what if he be , and your Henrietta do not 
 choose he ? now let I think what I long to think . I have she close to 
 I . ' 

 she rock a roseate image on her heart and go to bed with it by 
 starlight . 

 by starlight they spring to their foot and depart the next morning , in 
 the step of a guide carry , Chillon say , ' a well lantern than we 
 leave behind we at the smithy . ' 

 ' Father ! ' exclaim Carinthia on her swift inward breath , for this one 
 of the name he have use to give to her old home revive he to her 
 thought and sens fervently . 




 CHAPTER VI . the NATURAL PHILOSOPHER 

 three part down a swift decline of shattered slate , where travel 
 stone loosen from row of scree hurl away at a bind after one roll 
 over , there sit a youth dusty and tear , nurse a bruised leg , not in 
 the easy of posture , on a sharp tooth of rock , that might at any 
 moment have break from the slanting slab at the end of which it form 
 a stump , and add he a second time to the general crumble of the 
 mountain . he have do a portion of the descent in excellent imitation of 
 the detached fragment , and have part company with his alpenstock and 
 plaid ; preserve his hat and his knapsack . he be alone , disable , and 
 cheerful ; in doubt of the arrival of succour before he could trust his 
 left leg to do he further service unaided ; but it be morning still , 
 the sun be hot , the air be cool ; just the temper opposition to 
 render existence pleasant as a piece of vegetation , especially when 
 there have be a question of your ceasing to exist ; and the view be of 
 a sustain sublimity of desolateness : crag and snow overhead ; a gloomy 
 vale below ; no life either of bird or herd ; a voiceless region where 
 there have once be roar at the bowling of a hill from a mountain 
 to the deep , and the third flank of the mountain speak of it in the 
 silence . 

 he would have enjoy the scene unremittingly , like the philosopher he 
 pretend to be , in a disdain of civilization and the ambition of man , 
 have not a contest with earth be force on he from time to time 
 to keep the heel of his right foot , dig in shallow shale , fix and 
 support . as long as it hold he be happy and maintain the attitude 
 of a guitar - player , thrum the calf of the useless leg to accompany 
 tuneful thought , but the inevitable lapse and slide of the foot 
 recur , and the philosopher be exhibit as an infant learning to 
 crawl . the seat , moreover , not have be fashion for he or for any 
 soft purpose , resist his pressure and become a thing of violence , that 
 require to be humiliatingly coax . his last resource to propitiate 
 it be counsel by nature turn mathematician : tenacious extension 
 solve the problem ; he lie back at his length , and with his hat over 
 his eye consent to see nothing for the sake of comfort . thus he 
 be perfectly rational , though when other behold he he appear the 
 insanest of mortal . 

 a girl 's voice give out the mountain carol ringingly above . his heart 
 and all his fancy be in motion at the sound . he lean on an elbow 
 to listen ; the slide threaten he , and he resume his full stretch , 
 determine to take she for a dream . he be of the class of youth who , 
 in apprehension that their bright season may not be permanent , choose 
 to fortify it by a systematic contempt of material reality unless 
 they come in the fairest of shape , and as he be quite sincere in 
 this feeling and election of the right way to live , disappointment and 
 sullenness overcome he on hear man 's shout and step ; despite his 
 helpless condition he refuse to stir , for they have jar on his dream . 
 perhaps his temper , unknown to himself , have be a little injure by 
 his mishap , and he would not have be sorry to charge they with want of 
 common humanity in pass he ; or he do not think his plight so bad , 
 else he would have bawl after they have they go by : far the youth 
 of his description be fool only upon system , - however earnestly they 
 indulge the present self - punish sentiment . the party do not pass ; 
 they stop short , they consult , and a feminine tongue more urgent 
 than the other , and very musical , sweet to hear anywhere , put he in 
 tune . she say , ' Brother ! brother ! ' in German . our philosopher fling off 
 his hat . 

 ' you see ! ' say the lady 's brother . 

 ' ask he , anton,'she say to their guide . 

 ' and quick ! ' her brother add . 

 the guide scramble along to he , and at a close glance shout : ' the 
 Englishman ! ' wheel his finger to indicate what have happen to the 
 Tomnoddy islander . 

 his master call to know if there be break bone , as if he could 
 stop for nothing else . 

 the cripple be raise . the gentleman and lady make their way to he , 
 and he try his hard to keep from totter on the slope in 
 her presence . no injury have be do to the leg ; there be only a 
 stiffness , and an idiotic doubling of the knee , as though at each step 
 his leg pronounce a dogged negative to the act of walk . he say 
 something equivalent to ' this donkey leg , ' to divert her charitable eye 
 from a countenance dancing with ugly twitch . she be the Samaritan . 
 a sufferer discern his friend , though it be not the one who physically 
 assist he : he be incline by nature to put material aid at a low 
 mark than gentleness , and her brief word of encouragement , the tone of 
 their delivery yet more , be medical to his blood , well help than her 
 brother 's iron arm , he really believe . her brother and the guide hold 
 he on each side , and she lead to pick out the safe footing for he ; she 
 look round and point to some projection that would form a step ; she 
 draw attention to view here and there , to win excuse for his resting ; 
 she do not omit to soften her brother 's visible impatience as well , and 
 this be the art which affect her keenly sensible debtor most . 

 ' I suppose I ought to have take a guide , ' he say . 

 ' there be not a doubt of that , ' say Chillon Kirby . 

 Carinthia halt , lean on her staff : ' but I have the same wish . they 
 tell we at the inn of an Englishman who leave last night to sleep on the 
 mountain , and would go alone ; and do I not say , brother , that must be 
 true love of the mountain ? ' 

 ' these freak get we a bad name on the continent , ' her brother reply . 
 he have no sympathy with nonsense , and naturally not with a youth who 
 smell of be a dreamy romancer and have cause the name of Englishman 
 to be shout in his ear in derision . and the fellow might delay his 
 arrival at the Baths and sight of the lady of his love for hour ! 

 they manage to get he hobble and slip to the first green tuft 
 of the base , where long black tongue of slate - rubble pour into the 
 grass , like shore - wave that have spend their burden , seem about to draw 
 back to bring the mountain down . thence to the level pasture be but a 
 few skip perform slide . 

 ' well , now , ' say Chillon , ' you can stand ? ' 

 ' pretty well , I think . ' he try his foot on the ground , and then 
 stretch his length , say that it only want rest . Anton press a 
 hand at his ankle and make he wince , but the bone be sound , leg and 
 hip not bad than badly bruise . he be advise by Anton to plant 
 his foot in the first run water he come to , and he be considerate 
 enough to say to Chillon : 

 ' now you can leave I ; and let I thank you . half an hour will set I 
 right . my name be Woodseer , if ever we meet again . ' 

 Chillon nod a hurried good - bye , without a thought of give his name 
 in return . but Carinthia have throw herself on the grass . her brother 
 ask she in dismay if she be tired . she murmur to he : ' I should 
 like to hear more english . ' 

 ' my dear girl , you will have enough of it in two or three week . ' 

 ' should we leave a good deed half do , Chillon ? ' 

 ' he shall have our guide . ' 

 ' he may not be rich . ' 

 ' I will pay Anton to stick to he . ' 

 ' brother , he have an objection to guide . ' 

 Chillon cast hungry eye on his watch : ' five minute , then . ' he 
 address Mr. Woodseer , who be repose , indifferent to time , hard - by : 
 ' your objection to guide might have teach you a sharp lesson . it 
 be like decline to have a master in study a science - trust to 
 instinct for your knowledge of a bargain . one might as well refuse an 
 oar to row in a boat . ' 

 ' I would rather risk it , ' the young man reply . ' these guide kick the 
 soul out of scenery . I come for that and not for they . ' 

 ' you might easily have be a disagreeable part of the scene . ' 

 ' why not here as well as elsewhere ? ' 

 ' you do not   care for your life ? ' 

 ' I try not to care for it a fraction more than Destiny do . ' 

 ' Fatalism . I suppose you care for something ? ' 

 ' besides I have   a slack purse , and shun guide and inn when I can . I care 
 for open air , colour , flower , weed , bird , insect , mountain . there be 
 a world behind the mask . I call this life ; and the town 's a boiling pot , 
 intolerably stuffy . my one ambition be to be out of it . I thank heaven I 
 have not another on earth . yes , I care for my note - book , because it be of 
 no use to a human being except I . I sleep beside a spring last night , 
 and I never shall like a bedroom so well . I think I have discover 
 the great secret : I may be wrong , of course . ' and if so , he have his 
 philosophy , the admission be mean to say . 

 Carinthia expect the revelation of a notable secret , but none come ; 
 or if it do it elude her grasp : - he be praise contemplation , he 
 be praise tobacco . he talk of the charm of poverty upon a settle 
 income of a very small sum of money , the fruit of a compact he would 
 execute with the town to agree to his perpetual exclusion from it , and 
 to retain his identity , and not be the composite which every townsman 
 be . he talk of Buddha . he say : ' here the brook 's the brook , the 
 mountain 's the mountain : they be as they always be . ' 

 ' you would have man be the same , ' Chillon remark as to a nursle 
 prattler , and he rejoin : ' they have   lose more than they have   gain ; 
 though , he admit , ' there have be some gain , in a certain way . ' 

 fortunately for they , young man have not the habit of reflect upon 
 the indigestion of idea they receive from member of their community , 
 sometimes upon exchange . they compare a view of life with their own 
 view , to condemn it summarily ; and he be a curious object to Chillon as 
 the perfect opposite of himself . 

 ' I would advise you , ' Chillon say , ' to get a pair of styrian boot , if 
 you intend to stay in the Alps . those boot of your be London make . ' 

 ' they be my father 's make , ' say Mr. Woodseer . 

 Chillon draw out his watch . ' come , Carinthia , we must be off . ' he 
 propose his guide , and , as Anton be reject , he point the route 
 over the head of the valley , state the distance to an inn that way , 
 salute and strode . 

 Mr. Woodseer , partly rise , presume , in raise his hat and thank 
 Carinthia , to touch her finger . she smile on he , frankly extend 
 her open hand , and point the route again , counsel he to rest at 
 the inn , even say : ' you have not yet your strength to come on with 
 we ? ' 

 he think he would stay some time long : he have a disposition to 
 smoke . 

 she trip away to her brother and be watch through the whiff of a 
 pipe far up the valley , guiltless of any consciousness of produce an 
 impression . but her mind be with the stranger sufficiently to cause she 
 to say to Chillon , at the close of a dispute between he and Anton on 
 the interesting subject of the growth of the horn of chamois : ' have we 
 be quite kind to that gentleman ? ' 

 Chillon look over his shoulder . ' he be there still ; he be fond of 
 solitude . and , Carin , my dear , do not   give your hand when you be meet 
 or part with people it be not do . ' 

 his uninstructed sister say : ' do you not like he ? ' 

 she be answer with an ' oh , ' the tone of which balance lightly on the 
 neutral line . ' some of the idea he have be Lord Fleetwood 's , I hear , 
 and one can understand they in a man of enormous wealth , who do not 
 know what to do with himself and be dead - sick of flattery ; though it 
 seem odd for an english nobleman to be rave about Nature . perhaps 
 it be because none else of they do . ' 

 ' Lord Fleetwood love our mountain , Chillon ? ' 

 ' but a fellow who probably have to make his way in the world ! - and he 
 despise ambition ! ' ... Chillon drop he . he be antipathetic to 
 eccentric , and his soldierly and social training oppose the profession 
 of heterodox idea : to have listen seriously to they come from the 
 mouth of an unambitious bootmaker 's son involve he in the absurdity . 
 he consider that there be no harm in the lad , rather a commendable 
 sort of courage and some notion of manner ; allow for his ignorance 
 of the convenable in put out his hand to take a young lady 's , with 
 the plea of thank she . he hop she would be more on her guard . 

 Carinthia be sure she have the name of the nobleman wish to bestow 
 his title upon the beautiful Henrietta . Lord Fleetwood ! that slender 
 thread give she of the character of her brother 's rival who love the 
 mountain be weave in her mind with her pass experience of the 
 youth they have leave behind they , until the two become one , a highly 
 transfigure one , and the mountain scenery make he very threatening 
 to her brother . a silky haired youth , brown - eye , unconquerable 
 in adversity , immensely rich , fond of solitude , curl , decorate , 
 bejewel by all the elf and gnome of inmost solitude , must have 
 marvellous attraction , she fear . she think of he so much , that her 
 humble spirit conceive the stricken soul of the woman as of necessity 
 the pursuer ; as shamelessly , though timidly , as she herself pursue in 
 imagination the enchant secret of the mountain - land . she hop she 
 brother would not supplicate , for it strike she that the lover who 
 besiege the lady would forfeit she roam and hunt fancy . 

 ' I wonder what that gentleman be do now , ' she say to Chillon . 

 he grimace slightly , for her sake ; he would have like to inform she , 
 for the sake of educate she in the custom of the world she be 
 go to enter , that the word ' gentleman ' convey in English a special 
 signification . 

 her expression of wonder whether they be to meet he again give 
 Chillon the opportunity of say : 

 ' it be the unlikeliest thing possible - at all event in England . ' 

 ' but I think we shall , ' say she . 

 ' my dear , you meet people of your own class ; you do not   meet other . ' 

 ' but we may meet anybody , Chillon ! ' 

 ' in the street . I suppose you would not stop to speak to he in the 
 street . ' 

 ' it would be strange to see he in the street ! ' Carinthia say . 

 ' strange or not ! ' 

 .... Chillon think he have say sufficient . she be under his 
 protectorship , otherwise he would not have allude to the observance 
 of class distinction . he feel they personally in this case because of 
 their seem to stretch grotesquely by the pretentious heterodoxy of 
 the young fellow , whom , nevertheless , think he over now that he be 
 mention , he approve for his manliness in bluntly tell his origin 
 and status . 

 a chalet supply they with fresh milk , and the inn of a village on a 
 perch with the midday meal . their appetite be princely and sweep over 
 the little inn like a conflagration . only after clear it do they 
 remember the rearward pedestrian , whose probable want Chillon be urge 
 by Carthinia to speak of to their host . they push on , clamber 
 up , scurry down , tramp gaily , till by degree the chamber 
 of Carinthia 's imagination close their door and would no long 
 intercommunicate . her head refuse to interest she , and leave all 
 activity to her leg and her eye , and the latter become unobservant , 
 except of foot - track , animal - like . she feel that she be a fine 
 machine , and nothing else : and she be rapidly approach those lady ! 

 ' you will tell they how I walk with you , ' she say . 

 ' your friend over yonder ? ' say he . 

 ' so that they may not think I so ignorant , brother . ' she stumble on 
 the helpless word in a hasty effort to cloak her vanity . 

 he laugh . her desire to meet the critical english lady with 
 a tower reputation in one department of human enterprise be 
 comprehensible , consider the natural apprehensiveness of the 
 half - wild girl before such a meeting . as it often happen with the silly 
 phrase of simple people , the wrong word , foolish although it be , 
 go to the heart of the hearer and throw a more charitable light than 
 ridicule on she . so that they may know I can do something they can not 
 do , be the interpretation . it show her deep knowledge of her poorness 
 in lay bare the fact . 

 anxious to cheer she , he say : ' come , come , you can dance . you dance 
 well , mother have tell I , and she be a judge . you ride , you swim , you 
 have a voice for country song , at all event . and you be a bit of 
 a botanist too . you be good at English and German ; you have a french 
 governess for a couple of year . by the way , you understand the use of a 
 walking - stick in self - defence : you could handle a sword on occasion . ' 

 ' Father train I , ' say Carthinia . ' I can fire a pistol , aim . ' 

 ' with a good aim , too . Father tell I you could . how fond he be of his 
 girl ! well , bear in mind that father be proud of you , and hold up your 
 head wherever you be . ' 

 ' I will , ' she say . 

 he assure she he have a mind to have a bugle blow at the entrance 
 of the Baths for a challenge to the bather to match she in warlike 
 accomplishment . 

 she bite her lip : she could not bear much rallying on the subject just 
 then : 

 ' which be the hard one to please ? ' she ask . 

 ' the one you will find the kinder of the two . ' 

 ' henrietta ? ' 

 he nod . 

 ' has she a father ? ' 

 ' a gallant old admiral : Admiral Baldwin Fakenham . ' 

 ' I be glad of that ! ' Carinthia sigh out heartily . ' and he be with she ? 
 and like you , Chillon ? ' 

 ' on the whole , I think he do . ' 

 ' a brave officer ! ' such a father would be sure to like he . 

 so the domestic prospect be hopeful . 

 at sunset they stand on the hill overlook the basin of the Baths , 
 all enfold in swathe of pink and crimson up to the shin grey of a 
 high heaven that have the fresh brightness of the morning . 

 ' we be not tired in the slight , ' say Carinthia , trifle with the 
 vision of a cushion rest below . ' I could go on through the night quite 
 comfortably . ' 

 ' wait till you wake up in your little bed to - morrow , ' Chillon reply 
 stoutly , to drive a chill from his lover 's heart , that have seize it at 
 the bare suggestion of their go on . 




 CHAPTER VII . the LADY 's letter 

 be not the lover a prophet ? he that fervently desire may well be one ; 
 his hurried nature be alive with warmth to break the possible blow : and 
 if his fear be not need they be shadow ; and if fulfil , be 
 he not convinced of his misfortune by a dark anticipation that rarely 
 err ? descend the hill , he remember several omen : the sun have 
 sink when he look down on the villa and clustered house , not an 
 edge of the orb have be see ; the admiral 's quarter in the broad - face 
 hotel have wear an appearance resemble the empty house of yesterday ; 
 the encounter with the fellow on the rock have a bad whisper of impish 
 tripping . and what move Carinthia to speak of go on ? 

 a letter be hand to Chillon in the hall of the admiral 's hotel , where 
 his baggage have already be deliver . the manager be deplore the 
 circumstance that his room be full to the roof , when Chillon say : 

 ' well , we must wash and eat ' ; and Carinthia , from watch her brother 's 
 forehead during his perusal of the letter , declare her readiness for 
 anything . he give she the letter to read by herself while prepare 
 to sit at table , unwilling to ask she for a further tax on her 
 energy - but it be she who have speak of go on ! he think of it as 
 of a debt she have contract and might be suppose to think payable to 
 their misfortune . 

 she read off the first two sentence . 

 ' we can have a carriage here , Chillon ; order a carriage ; I shall get as 
 much sleep in a carriage as in a bed : I shall enjoy drive at night , ' 
 she say immediately , and strongly urge it and force he to yield , the 
 manager observe that a carriage could be have . 

 in the privacy of her room , admire the clear flow hand , she read 
 the word , delicious in their strangeness to she , notwithstanding the 
 heavy news , as though they be sing out of a night - sky : 

  ' most picturesque of Castles ! 

  may none these mark efface , 
  for they appeal from Tyranny ... ' 

 ' we start at noon to - day . sailing order have be issue , and I could 
 only have resist they in my own person by cast myself overboard . 
 I go like the boat behind the vessel . you be expect yesterday , at 
 late this morning . I have see box in the hall , with a name on they 
 not foreign to I . why do the master tarry ? Sir , of your valliance you 
 should have hold to your good vow , - quoth the damozel , for now you see 
 I sore perplexed and that you do not your devoir be my affliction . 
 where linger chivalry , she should have proceed , if not with my 
 knight ? I feast on your regret . I would not have you less than 
 miserable : and I fear the reason be , that I be not so very , very sure 
 you will be so at all or very hugely , as I would command it of you for 
 just time enough to see that change over your eyebrow I know so well . 

 ' if you have see a certain Henrietta yesterday you would have the 
 picture of how you ought to look . the admiral be hear welcome a 
 new arrival - you can hear he . she run down the stair quick than any 
 cascade of this district , she would have make a bet with Livia that 
 it could be no one else - her hand be out , before she be aware of the 
 difference it be lock in Lord F. 's ! 

 ' let the guilty absent suffer for cause such a betrayal of 
 disappointment . I must be avenge ! but if indeed you be unhappy and 
 would like to chide the innocent , I be full of compassion for the poor 
 gentleman inherit my legitimate feeling of wrath , and beg merely 
 that he will not pour they out on I with pen and paper , but from his 
 lip and eye . 

 ' time press , I chatter no more . the destination be Livia 's beloved 
 Baden . we rest a night in the city of Mozart , a night at Munich , a night 
 at Stuttgart . Baden will detain my cousin full a week . she have Captain 
 Abrane and Sir Meeson Corby in attendance - her long shadow and her 
 short : both devote to Lord F. , to win her smile , and how he drive 
 they ! the captain have be parade on the promenade , to the stupefaction 
 of the foreigner . prince , count , general , diplomat pass under he 
 in awe . I be tell that he be call St. Christopher . 

 ' why do we go thus hastily ? - my friend , this letter have to be conceal . 
 I know some one who see in the dark . 

 ' think no harm of Livia . she be bent upon my worldly advantage , and that 
 be plain even to the person reject it . how much more so must it be to 
 papa , though he like you , and when you be near he would perhaps , in 
 a fit of unworldliness , be almost as reckless as the creature he 
 call madcap and would rather call countess . no ! soon with a 
 Will - o'-the - wisp , my friend . who could ever know where the man be when 
 he himself never know where he be . he be the wind that bloweth as it 
 listeth - because it be without an aim or always with a new one . and be I 
 the one to direct he ? I need direction . my lord and sovereign must fix 
 my mind . I be volatile , earthly , not to be trust if I do not worship . 
 he himself say to I that - he read our character . " nothing but a 
 prove hero will satisfy Henrietta , " his word ! and the hero must be 
 shin like a beacon - fire keep in a blaze . quite true ; I own it . be 
 Chillon Kirby satisfy ? he ought to be . 

 ' but oh ! - to be yoke be an insufferable thought , unless we name all the 
 condition . but to be yoke to a creature of impulse ! really I could 
 only describe his erratic nature by commend you to the study of 
 a dragon - fly . it would map you an idea of what he have be in the 
 twenty - four hour since we have he here . they tell I a vain sort of 
 person be the cause . can she be the cause of his resolving to have a 
 residence here , to buy up half the valley - erect a royal palace - and 
 mark out the site - rave about it in the wild language , poetical 
 if it have be a little reasonable - and then , after a night , suddenly , 
 unaccountably , hat the place , and be under the necessity of fly 
 from it in hot haste , tear we all away , as if we be attach to a 
 kite that will neither mount nor fall , but rush about headlong . have he 
 hear , or suspect ? or see certain box bear a name ? Livia have 
 no suspicion , though she think I wonderfully content in so dull 
 a place , where it have rain nine day in a fortnight . I ask myself 
 whether my manner of greet he betray my expectation of another . he 
 have brain . it be the great of error to suppose he at all like the 
 common run of rich young nobleman . he seem to thirst for brilliant wit 
 and original saying . his ambition be to lead all England in everything ! 
 I readily acknowledge that he have generous idea too ; but try to hold 
 he , deny he his liberty , and it would be see how desperate and 
 relentless he would be to get loose . of this I be convince : he would be 
 either the most abject of lover , or a woman   if it turn out not to be 
 love   would find he the most unscrupulous of yoke - fellow . yoke - fellow ! 
 she would not have her reason in consent . a lamb and a furious bull ! 
 Papa and I have have a serious talk . he shut his ear to my comparison , 
 but admit , that as I be the principal person concern , etc . rich and a 
 nobleman be too tempting for an anxious father ; and Livia 's influence be 
 paramount . she have not say a syllable in depreciation of you . that be 
 to her credit . she also admit that I must yield freely if at all , and 
 she grant I the use of simile ; but her tactic be to contest 
 they one by one , and the admirable pretender be not as shifty as the 
 mariner 's breeze , he be not like the wandering spark in burn paper , of 
 which you can not say whether it be chase or chase : it be I who be 
 the shifty Pole to the steady of magnet . she be a princess in other 
 thing besides her superiority to Physics . there will be wild scene at 
 Baden . 

 ' my Diary of to - day be all bestow on you . what have I to write in it 
 except the pair of comma under the last line of yesterday - " he have not 
 come ! " oh ! to be care for a he . 

 ' o that I be with your sister now , on one side of her idol , to correct 
 her extravagant idolatry ! I long for she . I have a number of nice little 
 phrase to pet she with . 

 ' you have say   I have it write   that man who be like by man be the 
 good friend for woman . in which case , the earl should be worthy of our 
 friendship ; he be like . Captain Abrane and Sir Meeson , in spite of the 
 hard service he impose on they with such comical haughtiness , incline 
 to speak well of he , and Methuen Rivers - here for two day on his way 
 to his embassy at Vienna - assure we he be the rare of gentleman on 
 the point of honour of his word . they have story of he , to confirm 
 Livia 's eulogy , show he punctilious to chivalry : no man alive be 
 like he in that , they say . he grieve I . all that you have to fear be 
 my pity for one so sensitive . so speed , sir ! it be not good for we to be 
 much alone , and I be alone when you be absent . 

 ' I hear military music ! 

 ' how grand that music make the dull world appear in a minute . 
 there be a magic in it to bring you to I from the most dreadful of 
 distance . - Chillon ! it would kill I ! - write here and you perhaps 
 behind the hill , I can hardly bear it ; - I be tear away , my hand will not 
 any more . this music burst out to mock I ! Adieu . 

  ' I be yours . 

  ' your henrietta . 

 ' a kiss to the sister . it be owe to she . ' 

 Carinthia kiss the letter on that last line . it seem to she to end 
 in a celestial shower . 

 she be oppress by wonder of the writer who could run like the rill 
 of the mountain in write speech ; and her recollection of the content 
 perpetually hurry to the close , which be more in her way of writing , 
 for there the brief sentence have a throb beneath they . 

 she do not speak of the letter to her brother when she return it . a 
 night in the carriage , against his shoulder , be her happy prospect , in 
 the thought that she would be with her dearest all night , touch 
 he asleep , and in the sweet sense of be near to the beloved of the 
 fair angel of her sex . they pursue their journey soon after Anton 
 be dismiss with warm shake of the hand and appointment for a 
 possible year in the future . 

 the blast of the postillion 's horn on the dark highway move Chillon to 
 say : ' this be what they call posting , my dear . ' 

 she reply : ' tell I , brother : I do not understand , " let none 
 these mark efface , " at the commencement , after most " picturesque of 
 castle " : - that be you . ' 

 ' they be quote from the verse of a lord who be a poet , address to 
 the castle on Lake Leman . she will read they to you . ' 

 ' will she ? ' 

 the mention of the lord set Carinthia think of the lord whom that 
 beautiful SHE pity because she be force to wound he and he be very 
 sensitive . wrap in Henrietta , she sleep through the jolting of 
 the carriage , the grinding of the wheel , the blowing of the horn , the 
 flash of the late moonlight and the kindling of dawn . 




 CHAPTER VIII . of the encounter of two strange young men and their 
 consorting : in which the MALE reader be request to BEAR in MIND 
 what WILD creature he be in his youth , while the female should marvel 
 CREDULOUSLY . 

 the young man who fancy he have rob himself in the plain homespun 
 of a natural philosopher at the age of twenty - three journey limping 
 leisurely in the mountain maid Carinthia 's footstep , thankful to the 
 Fates for have see she ; and reprove the remainder of superstition 
 within he , which would lay he open to smart of evil fortune if he , 
 encourage a senseless gratitude for good ; see that we be simply 
 to take what happen to we . the little inn of the village on the perch 
 furnish he a night 's lodging and a laugh of satisfaction to hear of 
 a young lady and gentleman , and their guide , who have devour everything 
 eatable half a day in advance of he , all save the bread and butter , and 
 a few scrap of meat , apologetically spread for his repast by the maid 
 of the inn : not enough for , a bantam cock , she say , promise egg for 
 breakfast . he vow with an honest heart , that it be more than enough , 
 and he be nourish by sympathy with the appetite of his precursor 
 and the maid 's description of their deed . that name , Carinthia , go a 
 good way to fill he . 

 far on he have plenty , but less contentment . he be compel to 
 acknowledge that he have expect to meet Carinthia again at the Baths . 
 her absence deal a violent shock to the aerial structure he dwelt in ; 
 for though his ardour for the life of the solitude be unfeigned , as 
 be his calm overlooking of social distinction , the self - indulgent 
 dreamer become troubled with an alarming sentience , that for he to 
 share the passion of the world of man be to risk the fall low 
 than most . woman be a cause of dream , but they be dread enemy of 
 his kind of dream , deadly enemy of the immaterial dreamer ; and should 
 one of they be take on board a vessel of the vapourish texture young 
 Woodseer sail in above the cloud lightly while he be in it alone , 
 question of past , future , and present , the three weight upon humanity , 
 bear it down , and she must go , or the vessel sink . and cast out of it , 
 what be he ? the asking expose he to the steady wind the civilized 
 world be know to blow . from merely think upon one of the daughter 
 of earth , he be make to feel his position in that world , though he 
 refuse to understand it , and assist by two day of hard walking he 
 reduce Carinthia to an abstract enthusiasm , no very serious burden . his 
 note - book sustain it easily . he write her name in simple fondness 
 of the name ; a verse , and hint for more , and some sentence , which he 
 think profound . they be compose as he sit by the roadway , on the 
 top of hill , and in a boat cross a dark green lake deep under woode 
 mountain wall : thing of priceless value . 

 it happen , that midway on the lake he perceive his boatman about to 
 prime a pistol to murder the mild - eyed stillness , and he call to the 
 man in his good german to desist . during the altercation , there pass 
 a countryman of his in another of the punt , who say gravely : ' I 
 thank you for that . ' it be early morning , and they have the lake to 
 themselves , each deeming the other an intruder ; for the courtship of 
 solitude wane when we be haunt by a second person in pursuit of it ; 
 he be discolour matter in our pure crystal cup . such be the worship 
 of the picturesque ; and it would appear to say , that the spirit of man 
 find itself yet in the society of barbarian . the case admit of good 
 pleading either way , even upon the issue whether the exclusive or the 
 vulgar be the more barbarous . but in those day the solicitation of the 
 picturesque have be revive by a poet of some impassione rhetoric , and 
 two devotee could hardly meet , as the two meet here , and not be mutually 
 obscurant . 

 they step ashore in turn on the same small shoot of land where a 
 farm - house near a chapel in the shadow of cliff do occasional service 
 for an inn . each have intend to pass a day and a night in this lonely 
 dwelling - place by the lake , but a rival be less to be tolerate there 
 than in love , and each await the other 's departure , with an air that 
 say : ' you be in my sunlight ' ; and go deep , more sternly : ' Sir , 
 you be an offence to Nature 's pudency ! ' 

 Woodseer be the more placable of the two ; he have take possession of 
 the bench outside , and he have his note - book and much profundity to haul 
 up with it while fish be fry . his countryman have rush inside 
 to avoid he , and remain there pace the chamber like a lion newly 
 cage . their boatman be brotherly in the anticipation of provision and 
 payment . 

 after eat his fish , Woodseer decide abruptly , that as he could not 
 have the spot to himself , memorable as it would have be to intermarry 
 with Nature in so sacred a welldepth of the mountain , he have well be 
 walk and climbing . another boat paddle up the lake have be spy : 
 solitude be not merely share with a rival , but violate by number . 
 in the first case , we det the man ; in the second , we fly from an 
 outraged scene . he write a line or so in his book , hurriedly pay his 
 bill , and start , full of the matter he have briefly commit to his 
 page . 

 at noon , sit beside the beck that run from the lake , he be 
 overtake by the gentleman he have leave behind , and accost in the 
 informal english style , with all the politeness possible to a nervously 
 blunt manner : ' this book be your , - I have no doubt it be your ; I be 
 glad to be able to restore it ; I should be glad to be the owner - writer 
 of the content , I mean . I have to beg your excuse ; I find it lie 
 open ; I look at the page , I look through the whole ; I be quite at 
 your mercy . ' 

 Woodseer jump at the sight of his note - book , feel for the emptiness 
 of his pocket , and reply : ' thank you , thank you . it be of use to I , 
 though to no one else . ' 

 ' you pardon I ? ' 

 ' certainly . I should have do it myself . ' 

 ' I can not offer you my apology as a stranger . ' Lord Fleetwood be the 
 name give . 

 Woodseer 's plebeian be exchange for it , and he stand up . 

 the young lord have fair , straight , thin feature , with large restless 
 eye that light quickly , and a mouth that be win in his present 
 colloquial mood . 

 ' you could have do the same ? I should find it hard to forgive the man 
 who pry into my secret thought , ' he remark . 

 ' there they be . if one put they to paper ! ... ' Woodseer shrug . 

 ' yes , yes . they never last long enough with I . so far I be safe . 
 one page lead to another . you can meditate . I notice some remark on 
 religion . you think deeply . ' 

 Woodseer be of that opinion , but modesty urge he to reply with a 
 small flourish . ' just a few head of idea . when the wind puff down a 
 sooty chimney the air be fill with little black that settle pretty 
 much like the note in this book of mine . there they wait for another 
 puff , or my finger to stamp they . ' 

 ' I could tell you be the owner of that book , ' say Lord Fleetwood . 
 he sweep his forehead feverishly . ' what a power it be to relieve one 's 
 brain by write ! may I ask you , which one of the Universities ... ? ' 

 the burden of this question have a ring of irony to one whom it teach 
 to feel rather defiantly , that he carry the blazon of a reeking tramp . 
 ' my university , ' Woodseer reply , ' be a merchant 's office in Bremen 
 for some month . I learn more Greek and Latin in Bremen than business . 
 I be invalid home , and then try a merchant 's office in London . I 
 put on my hat one day , and walk into the country . my College fellow 
 be hawker , tinker , tramp and plowman , chough and crow . a volume 
 of our poet and a history of philosophy compose my library . I have 
 scarce any money , so I learn how to idle inexpensively - a good first 
 lesson . we be at the bottom of the world when we take to the road ; we 
 see man as they be in the beginning - not so eager for harness till 
 they get acquaint with hunger , as I do , and study in myself the old 
 animal have his head push into the collar to earn a feed of corn . ' 

 Woodseer laugh , add , that he have be of a serious mind in those 
 day of the alternation of smooth indifference and sharp necessity , and 
 he have pluck a flower from they . 

 his nature prompt he to speak of himself with simple candour , as he 
 have do spontaneously to Chillon Kirby , yet he be now anxious to let 
 his companion know at once the common stuff he be make of , together 
 with the great stuff he contain . he grow conscious of an over - anxiety , 
 and be uneasy , recollect how he have just speak about his 
 naturalness , dimly if at all apprehend the cause of this disturbance 
 within . what be a lord to a philosopher ! but the world be around we as a 
 cloak , if not a coat ; in his ignorance he suppose it specially due to a 
 lord seek acquaintance with he , that he should expose his condition : 
 do the which appear to subject he to parade his intellectual 
 treasure and capacity for shape sentence ; and the effect upon Lord 
 Fleetwood be an incentive to the display . nevertheless he have a fretful 
 desire to escape from the discompose society of a lord ; he fix his 
 knapsack and begin to saunter . 

 the young lord be at his elbow . ' I can not   part with you . will you allow 
 I ? ' 

 Woodseer be puzzle and have to say : ' if you wish it . ' 

 ' I do wish it : an hour 's walk with you . one do not meet a man like 
 you every day . I have to join a circle of mine in Baden , but there be no 
 hurry ; I could be disengage for a week . and I have thing to ask you , 
 owe to my indiscretion - but you have excuse it . ' 

 Woodseer turn for a farewell gaze at the great Watzmann , and salute 
 he . 

 ' splendid , ' say Lord Fleetwood ; ' but do not   clap name on the 
 mountain . - I see write in your book : " a text for Dada . " you write : 
 " a despotism would procure a perfect solitude , but kill the ghost . " that 
 be my thought at the place where we be at the lake . I have it . tell 
 I - though I could not have write it , and " ghost " be just the 
 word , the exact word - tell I , be you of Welsh blood ? " Dad " be good 
 Welsh - pronounce it hard . ' 

 Woodseer answer : ' my mother be a Glamorganshire woman . my father , I 
 know , walk up from Wales , mend boot on his road for a livelihood . 
 he be not a bad scholar , he know Greek enough to like it . he be a 
 dissent preacher . when I strike a truism , I ' ve   a habit of score it 
 to give he a peg or tuning - fork for one of his discourse . he be a man 
 of talent ; he teach himself , and he teach I more than I learn at 
 school . he be a thinker in his way . he love Nature too . I rather 
 envy he in some respect . he and I be hunter of Wisdom on different 
 track ; and he , as he say , " wait for I . " he be patient ! ' 

 ah , and I want to ask you , ' Lord Fleetwood observe , burst with 
 it , ' I be puzzle by a name you write here and there near the end , and 
 permit I to ask , it : Carinthia ! it can not be the country ? you write 
 after , the name : " a beautiful Gorgon - a haggard Venus . " it seize I . 
 I have have the face before my eye ever since . you must mean a woman . I 
 can not   be deceive in allusion to a woman : they have heart in they . you 
 meet she somewhere about Carinthia , and give she the name ? you write - may 
 I refer to the book ? ' 

 he receive the book and fly through the leaf : 

 ' here - " a pant look " : you write again : " a look of beat flame : a 
 look of one who have run and at last behold ! " but that be a live face : 
 I see she ! here again : " from minute to minute she be the rock that lose 
 the sun at night and redden in the morning . " you could not create an 
 idea of a woman to move you like that . no one could , I be certain of 
 it , certain ; if so , you be a wizard - I swear you be . but that be a 
 face high over beauty . just to know there be a woman like she , be an 
 antidote . you compare she to a rock . who would imagine a comparison of 
 a woman to a rock ! but rock be the very picture of beautiful Gorgon , 
 haggard Venus . tell I you meet she , you see she . I want only to hear she 
 live , she be in the world . beautiful woman compare to rose may whirl 
 away with their handsome dragoon ! a pang from they be a thing to be 
 ashamed of . and there be man who trot about whine with it ! but 
 a Carinthia make pain honourable . you have do what I think 
 impossible - fuse a woman 's face and grand scenery , to make they 
 inseparable . she might be wicked for I . I should see a bright rim round 
 hatred of she ! - the rock you describe . I could endure horror and not 
 annihilate she ! I should think her sacred . ' 

 Woodseer turn about to have a look at the man who be even quick 
 than he at realize a person from a hint of description , and almost 
 insanely extravagant in the pitch of the thing he utter to a 
 stranger . for himself , he be open with everybody , his philosophy not 
 allow that stranger exist on earth . but the presence of a lord 
 bring the conventional world to his feeling , though at the same time 
 the title seem to sanction the exceptional abruptness and wildness of 
 this lord . as for suspect he to be mad , it would have be a common 
 idea : no stretching of speech or overstepping of social rule could 
 waken a suspicion so spiritless in Woodseer . 

 he say : ' I can tell you I meet she and she live . I could as soon swim 
 in that torrent or leap the mountain as repeat what she speak , or sketch 
 a feature of she . she go into the blood , she be a new idea of woman . 
 she have the face that would tempt a gypsy to evil telling . I could 
 think of it as a history write in a line : Carinthia , Saint and Martyr ! 
 as for comparison , they be flower throw into the fire . ' 

 ' I have have that - I have think that , ' say Lord Fleetwood . ' go on ; 
 talk of she , pray ; without comparison . I detest they . how do you meet 
 she ? what make you part ? where be she now ? I have no wish to find she , 
 but I want thoroughly to believe in she . ' 

 another than Woodseer would have perceive the young lord 's malady . here 
 be one bite by the serpent of love , and athirst for an image of the 
 sex to serve for the cool herb , as youth will be . Woodseer put it 
 down to a curious imaginative fellowship with himself . he forget the 
 lord , and suppose he have find his own likeness , less gifted in speech . 
 after talk of Carinthia more and more in the abstract , he fall upon 
 his discovery of the Great Secret of life , against which his hearer 
 struggle for a time , though that be cool to he too ; but ultimately 
 there be no resistance , and so deep do they sink into the idea of pure 
 contemplation , that the idea of woman seem to have become a part of 
 it . no strong proof of their aethereal conversational earnestness 
 could be offer . a locality be give to the Great Secret , and of 
 course it be the place where the most powerful recent impression have 
 be stamp on the mind of the discoverer : the shadowy valley rolling 
 from the slate - rock . Woodseer be too artistic a dreamer to present the 
 pass vision of Carinthia with any associate there . she pass : the 
 solitude accept she and lose she ; and it be the rich for the one 
 swift gleam : she bring no trouble , she leave no regret ; she be the 
 ghost of the rocky obscurity . but now remember her mountain carol , he 
 chance to speak of she as a girl . 

 ' she be a girl ? ' cry Lord Fleetwood , frown over an utter revolution 
 of sentiment at the thought of the beautiful Gorgon be a girl ; 
 for , rapid as he be to imagine , he have raise a solid fabric upon his 
 conception of Carinthia the woman , necessarily the woman - logically . 
 who but the woman could look the Gorgon ! he try to explain it to be 
 impossible for a girl to wear the look : and his notion evidently be , 
 that it have come upon a beautiful face in some star horror of a 
 world that have bite the tender woman . she touch he sympathetically 
 through the pathos . 

 Woodseer fling out vociferously for the contrary . who but a girl could 
 look the beautiful Gorgon ! what other could seem an emanation of the 
 mountain solitude ? a woman would instantly breathe the world on it to 
 destroy it . Hers would be the dramatic and not the poetic face . it would 
 shriek of man , wake the echo with the tale of man , slaughter all . 
 quietude . but a girl 's face have no story of poisonous intrusion . she 
 indeed may be cast in the terror of Nature , and yet be sweet with 
 Nature , beautiful because she be purely of nature . Woodseer do his good 
 to present his view irresistibly . perhaps he be not clear ; it be a 
 piece of skiamachy , difficult to render clear to the defeated . 

 Lord Fleetwood have nothing to say but ' Gorgon ! a girl a Gorgon ! ' and it 
 strike Woodseer as intensely unreasonable , consider that he have 
 see the girl whom , in his effort to portray she , he have liken to 
 a beautiful Gorgon . he recount the scene of the meeting with she , 
 picture it in effective colour , but his companion give no response , 
 nor a nod . they cease to converse , and when the young lord 's hire 
 carriage draw up on the road , Woodseer require persuasion to accompany 
 he . they be both in their different station young tyrant of the 
 world , ready to fight the world and one another for not have their 
 immediate view of it such as they want it . they agree , however , not 
 to sleep in the city . bed be to be have near the top of a mountain 
 on the other side of the Salza , their driver inform they , and vow 
 themselves to that particular height , in a mutual disgust of the city , 
 they wax friendly , with a reserve . 

 Woodseer soon have experience that he be receive exceptional treatment 
 from Lord Fleetwood , whose manservant be on the step of the hotel in 
 Salzburg on the lookout for his master . 

 ' Sir Meeson have be get impatient , my lord , ' say the man . 

 Sir Meeson Corby appear ; Lord Fleetwood cut he short : ' you be in a 
 hurry ; go at once , do not   wait for I ; I join you in Baden . - do I the 
 favour to eat with I , ' he turn to Woodseer . ' and here , Corby ! tell 
 the countess I have a friend to bear I company , and there be to be an 
 extra bedroom secure at her hotel . that swinery of a place she insist 
 on visit be usually cram . with you there , ' he turn to Woodseer , 
 ' I might find it agreeable . - you can take my man , Corby ; I shall not 
 want the fellow . ' 

 ' positively , my dear Fleetwood , you know , ' Sir Meeson expostulate , ' I 
 be under order ; I do not   see how - I really can not   go on without you . ' 

 ' please yourself . this gentleman be my friend , Mr. Woodseer . ' 

 Sir Meeson Corby be a plump little beau of forty , at war with his fat 
 and account his tight blue tail coat and brass button a victory . his 
 tightness make his fatness elastic ; he look wound up for a dance , 
 and could hardly hold on a leg ; but the presentation of a creature in 
 a battered hat and soiled garment , carry a tattered knapsack half 
 slung , lank and with disorderly lock , as the Earl of Fleetwood 's 
 friend - the friend of the wealthy nobleman of Great Britain ! - fix 
 he in a perk attitude of inquiry that exhausted interrogative . 
 Woodseer pass he , slouch a bow . the circular stare of Sir Meeson 
 seem unable to contract . he direct it on Lord Fleetwood , and be 
 then remind that he deal with prickle . 

 ' where have you be ? ' he say , blink to refresh his eyeball . ' I 
 miss you , I run round and round the town after you . ' 

 ' I have be to the lake . ' 

 ' queer fish there ! ' Sir Meeson drop a glance on the capture . 

 Lord Fleetwood take Woodseer 's arm . ' do you eat with we ? ' he ask the 
 baronet , who have stay his eating for an hour and be famish ; so they 
 stride to the dining - room . 

 ' do you wash , sir , before eat ? ' Sir Meeson say to Woodseer , 
 caress his hand when they have seat themselves at table . 
 ' appliance be to be find in this hotel . ' 

 ' soap ? ' say Lord Fleetwood . 

 ' soap - at least , in my chamber . ' 

 ' fetch it , please . ' 

 Sir Meeson , of course , could not hear that . he request the waiter to 
 show the gentleman to a room . 

 Lord Fleetwood order the waiter to bring a handbasin and towel . ' we be 
 off directly and must eat at once , ' he say . 

 ' Soap - soap ! my dear Fleetwood , ' Sir Meeson knuckle on the table , to 
 impress it that his appetite and his gorge demand a thorough cleansing 
 of those finger , if they be to sit at one board . 

 ' let the waiter fetch it . ' 

 ' the soap be in my portmanteau . ' 

 ' you speak of it as a necessity for this gentleman and I . bring it . ' 

 Woodseer have rise . Lord Fleetwood motion he down . he keep an eye 
 dead - as marble on Corby , who mutter : ' you can not   mean that you ask 
 I ... ? ' but the alternative be force on Sir Meeson by too strong a 
 power of the implacable eye ; there be thunder in it , a continuity of 
 gaze forcefuller than repetition of the word . he know Lord Fleetwood . 
 man privilege to attend on he be dog to the flinty young despot : 
 they be sure to be call upon to expiate the faint offence to he . 
 he have hastily to consider , that he be banish beyond appeal , with the 
 whole torture of banishment to an adorer of the Countess Livia , or else 
 the mad behest must be obey . he protest , shrug , sit fast , and 
 spring up , remark , that he go with all the willingness imaginable . 
 it could not have be the first occasion . 

 he be affect the excessively obsequious when he come back bear 
 his metal soap - case . the performance be check by another look solid 
 as shot , and as quick . Woodseer , who would have do for Sir Meeson 
 Corby or Lazarus what have be do for he , think little of the 
 service , but so intense a peremptoriness in the look of an eye make he 
 uncomfortable in his own sense of independence . the humble citizen of 
 a free nation have that warning at some notable exhibition of tyranny in 
 a neighbouring state : it act like a concussion of the air . 

 Lord Fleetwood lead an easy dialogue with he and Sir Meeson , on their 
 different theme immediately , which be not less impressive to an 
 observer . he listen to Sir Meeson 's entreaty that he should start 
 at once for Baden , and appear to pity the poor gentleman , condemn by 
 his office to hang about he in terror of his liege lady 's displeasure . 
 presently , near the close of the meal , draw a ring from his finger , 
 he hand it to the baronet , and say , ' give she that . she know I shall 
 follow that . ' he add to himself : - I shall have ill - luck till I have 
 it back ! and he ask Woodseer whether he put faith in the virtue of 
 talisman . 

 ' I have never possess one , ' say Woodseer , with his natural frankness . 
 ' it would have go long before this for a night 's lodging . ' 

 Sir Meeson hear he , and instantly urge Lord Fleetwood not to think of 
 dismiss his man Francis . ' I beg it , Fleetwood ! I beg you to take the 
 man . her ladyship will receive I badly , ring or no ring , if she hear 
 of your being leave alone . I really can not   present myself . I shall not go , 
 not go . I say no . ' 

 ' stay , then , ' say Fleetwood . 

 he turn to Woodseer with an air of deference , and request the 
 privilege of glance at his notebook again , and scan it closely 
 at one of the page . ' I believe it true , ' he cry ; ' I have a half 
 recollection of it - I have have some such thought , but never could put it 
 in word . you have think deeply . ' 

 ' that be only a surface thought , or common reflection , ' say Woodseer . 

 Sir Meeson star at they in turn . judge by their talk and the effect 
 produce on the earl , he take Woodseer for a sort of conjuror . 

 it be his duty to utter a warning . 

 he draw Fleetwood aside . a word be whisper , and they break asunder 
 with a snap . Francis be call . his master give he his key , and 
 despatch he into the town to purchase a knapsack or bag for the 
 outfit of a jolly beggar . the prospect delight Lord Fleetwood . he 
 sing note from the deep chest , flaunt like an opera brigand , 
 and contemplate his wretched satellite 's indecision with brimming 
 amusement . 

 ' remember , we fight for our money . I carry mine , ' he say to Woodseer . 

 ' would not   it be expedient , Fleetwood ... ' Sir Meeson suggest a 
 treasurer in the person of himself . 

 ' not a florin , Corby ! I should find it all gamble away at Baden . ' 

 ' but I be not abrane , I be not Abrane ! I never play , I have no mania , 
 none . it would be prudent , Fleetwood . ' 

 ' the slight bulging of a pocket would show on you , Corby ; and they 
 would be at you , they would fall on you and pluck you to have another 
 fling . I would rather my money should go to a knight of the road than feed 
 that dragon 's jaw . a highwayman seem an honest fellow compare with 
 your honourable corporation of fly - catcher . I could surrender to he 
 with some satisfaction after a trial of the well man . I ' ve   try 
 these table , and could not   stir a pulse . have you ? ' 

 it have to be explain to Woodseer what be mean by try the table . 
 ' not I , ' say he , in strong contempt of the queer allurement . 

 Lord Fleetwood study he half a minute , as if measure and discard 
 a suspicion of the young philosopher 's possible weakness under 
 temptation . 

 Sir Meeson Corby accompany the oddly assorted couple through the town 
 and a short way along the road to the mountain , for the sake of quiet 
 his conscience upon the subject of his leave they together . he could 
 not have sit down a second time at a table with those hand . he say 
 it : - he could not have do the thing . so the good he could do be to 
 let they go . like many of his class , he have a mind open to the effect 
 of strike contrast , and the spectacle of the wealthy nobleman in 
 Great Britain tramp the road , pack on back , with a young nobody 
 for his comrade , a total stranger , who might be a cut - throat , and 
 be avowedly next to a mendicant , charge he with quantity of 
 interjectory matter , that he catch himself fire to the foreign people 
 on the highway . hundred of thousand a year , and tramp it like a 
 pedlar , with a beggar for his friend ! he would have give something 
 to have an english ear near he as he watch they round under the 
 mountain they be about to climb . 




 CHAPTER IX . concern the black GODDESS FORTUNE and the worship of she , 
 together with an introduction of some of she votary 

 in those early day of Fortune 's pregnant alternation of colour between 
 the Red and the Black , exhibit publicly , as it be a petroleum spring 
 of the ebony - fiery lake below , Black - Forest Baden be the sprightly ' 
 of the ante - chamber of Hades . thither in the ripeness of the year 
 troop the devotee of the sable goddess to perform sacrifice ; and 
 annually among they the beautiful Livia , the Countess of Fleetwood ; for 
 nowhere else have she sensation of the perfect repose which be rock to 
 a slumber by gale . 

 she be not of the creature who be excite by an atmosphere of 
 excitement ; she take it as the nymph of the stream her native wave , 
 and swam on the flood with expansive languor , happy to have the master 
 passion about she ; one or two of which her dainty hand caress , 
 fearless of a sting ; the lady pet they as her swan . it surprise 
 she to a gentle contempt of man and woman , that they should be ruffle 
 either by love or play . a withholding from the scene will naturally 
 arouse disturb wish ; but to be present lull ; for then we live , we 
 be in our element . and who could expect , what sane person can desire , 
 perpetual good luck ? Fortune , the goddess , and young love , too , be 
 divine in their mutability : and Fortune would resemble a humdrum 
 housewife , love a drone husband , if constancy be practise by they . 
 observe the staggering and plunging of the blindfold wretch seek to 
 be persuade of their faithfulness . 

 she could make for herself a quiet centre in the heart of the whirlwind , 
 but the whirlwind be require . the cluster light at the corner of 
 the vale under forest hill , the burst of music , the blaze window of 
 the saloon of the Furies , and the gambler advance and retreat , 
 with their totally opposite view of consequence , and fashion of 
 wear or tear the mask ; and close , the figure shift up and 
 down the promenade , know and unknown face , and the history half 
 know , half weave , weave fast , which fly their thread to provoke 
 speculation ; pleasantly embrace and divert the cool - blooded lady 
 surround by her courtier , who could upon occasion supply the luminous 
 clue or anecdote . she have an intuitive liveliness to detect interchange 
 of eye , the shuttle of intrigue ; the mild hypocrisy , the clever 
 audacity , the suspicion confirm , the complication threaten to 
 become resonant and terrible ; and the old crossing the young and the 
 young outwit the old , wile of fair traitor and dark , knave of all 
 suit of the pack . a more intimate acquaintance with their lineament 
 inspire a regard for they , such as poet may feign the throne high 
 moon to entertain for object cause her ray to flash . 

 the simple fool , perform in character , be a neutral people , 
 grotesque and arabesque wreathe about the margin of the scene . Venus 
 or Fortune smite they to a relievo distinguish one from another . 
 here , however , as elsewhere , the core of interest be with the serious 
 population , the lover and the player in earnest , who stand round 
 the furnace and pitch themselves into it , not always under a 
 miscalculation of their chance of emerge transfigure instead of 
 serve for fuel . these , the tragical child of folly , be astute : 
 they play with lightning , and they know the condition of the game ; 
 victory be to be have . 

 the ulterior condition of the game , the price pay for a victory , they 
 think little of : for they be feverish worshipper of the phantasmal 
 deity call the Present ; a god reign over the past , appreciable only 
 in the Future ; whose whiff of actual being be compose of the embryo 
 idea of the union of these two period . still he be occasionally a 
 benevolent god to the appetite ; which have but to be continuous to 
 establish he in permanence ; and as nothing in we more readily suppose 
 perpetuity than the appetite rush to destroy itself , the rational 
 nature of the most universal worship on earth be perceive at once . 

 now , the price pay for a victory be this : that have be favour in 
 a single instance by the spouse of the aforesaid eminent divinity - the 
 Black Goddess of the golden fringe - man believe in she for ever after , 
 behold she everywhere , they belong to she . their faith as to sow and 
 reaping have go ; and so have their capacity to see the actual as it be : 
 she have the power to attach they to her skirt the more by reward 
 their impassioned devotion with cuff and scorn . they have cease to 
 have a first notion upon anything without a second haunt it , which 
 direct they to propitiate Fortune . 

 but I be remind by the convulsion of Dame Gossip , that the wisdom of 
 our ancestor make it a mere hammering of commonplace to insist on such 
 reflection . many of they , indeed , take the union of the Black Goddess 
 and the Rosy Present for the composition of the very Arch - Fiend . some 
 have a shot at the strange conjecture , figure she as tired of man in 
 the end and challenge he below - equally tired of his easy conquest 
 of man since the glorious old time of the duel saint . by virtue of 
 his one incorrigible weakness , which we know he to have as long as we 
 have it ourselves : viz . , the belief in her existence , she be to get the 
 well of he . 

 upon this point the experience of Captain Abrane have a value . Livia be 
 a follower of the Red and Black and the round ball in the person of 
 the giant captain , through whom she receive her succession of sweetly 
 teasing thrill and shock , as one of the adventurous company they 
 form together . the place be know to he as the fair Philistine to 
 another muscular hero ; he have be shorn there before , and send forth 
 tottering , treat the friend he meet as pillar to fall with he ; and 
 when the operation be do thoroughly , he pronounce himself refresh 
 by it , like a more sensible Samson , the cooler for his clipping . then 
 it be that he relapse undistractedly upon process of his mind and he 
 often say he think Fortune would beat the devil . 

 her power be show in the moving of her solicitor to think , instantly 
 after they have make their cast , that the reverse of it be what they 
 intend . it come as though she have withdraw the bandage from her 
 forehead and drop a leaden glance on they , like a great dame angry to 
 have her signal misinterpret . well , then , distinguish by the goddess 
 in such a manner , we have it prove to we how she wish to favour : for 
 the reverse win , and we who be pinch blame not her cruelty but our 
 blind folly . this be true worship . henceforth the pain of her nip 
 be mingle with the dream of her kiss ; between the positive and the 
 imagine of she we remain confused until the purse be an empty body on a 
 gallow , honour too , perhaps . 

 Captain Abrane be one of the Countess Livia 's numerous courtier on the 
 border of the promenade under the light saloon . a colossus inactive , 
 he have little to say among the chatter circle ; for when seat , card 
 be want to animate he : and he look entirely out of place and 
 unfit , like a great vessel 's figure - head in a shipwright 's yard . 

 she murmur : ' not this evening ? ' 

 Abrane quote promptly a line of nursery song ' how shall he cut it 
 without e'er a knife ? ' 

 ' have we run it down so low ? ' say she , with no reproach in her tone . 

 the captain shrug over his clean abyss , where nothing be . 

 yesterday their bank present matronly proportion . but an importuned 
 goddess reduce the most voluminous to bare stitch within a few wink 
 of an eye . 

 Livia turn to a french gentleman of her court , M. de St. Ombre , and 
 pursue a conversation . he be a stately cavalier of the Gallicized 
 Frankish outline , ready , but grave in his bearing , grave in his 
 delivery , trimly moustache , with a Guise beard . 

 his profound internal question relate to this un - english beauty of the 
 British Isles : - have she no passion in her nature ? be not convince by 
 her apparent insensibility to Fortune 's whip . 

 Sir Meeson Corby insert a word of Bull French out of place from time 
 to time . 

 as it might be necessary to lean on the little man for weapon of war , 
 suppose Lord Fleetwood delay his arrival yet another day , Livia be 
 indulgent . she assist he to think that he speak the foreign tongue . 

 Mention of Lord Fleetwood set Sir Meeson harp again on his alarm , in 
 consideration of the vagabond object of the young lord have roam away 
 with . 

 ' you forget that Russett have gypsy in he : Welsh ! it be about the same , ' 
 say Livia . ' he can take excellent care of himself and his purse . ' 

 ' Countess , he be a good six day overdue . ' 

 ' he will be in time for the ball at the Schloss . ' 

 Sir Meeson Corby produce an aspect of the word ' if , ' so perkily , that 
 the dejected Captain Abrane laugh outright and give he double reason 
 to fret for Lord Fleetwood 's arrival , by say : ' if he hang off much 
 long , I shall have to come on you for another fifty . ' 

 our two pedestrian out of Salzburg be stand up in the night of 
 cloud and pine above the glitter pool , have make their way along 
 the path from the hill anciently dedicate to the god Mercury ; and at 
 the moment when Sir Meeson put forth his frille wrist to say : ' if 
 you have see his hand - the creature Fleetwood trot off alone 
 with ! - you would be a bit anxious too ' ; the young lord call his comrade to 
 gaze underneath they : ' there they be , hard at it , at their play ! - it be 
 the word use for the filthy gutter scramble . ' 

 they have come to know something of one another 's humour ; which be 
 take by young man for their character ; and should the humour please , 
 they be friend , until further humour develop , try these 
 nascent conservative hard to suit they to their mood as well as the 
 accustom . Lord Fleetwood have discover in his companion , besides the 
 spirit of independence and the power of thought impressed on he by 
 Woodseer 's precocious flash , a broad playfulness , that trench on 
 buffoonery ; it astonish , amused , and relieve he , loosen the spell 
 of reverence cast over he by one who could so wonderfully illumine his 
 brain . prone to admire and bend the knee where he admire , he chafe 
 at subjection , unless he have the particular spell constantly renew . 
 a tone in he once or twice of late , different from the comrade 's , have 
 warn Woodseer to be guard . 

 susceptible , however , of the extreme contrast between the gambler below 
 and Nature 's lover beside he , Fleetwood return to his enthusiasm 
 without think it a bondage . 

 ' I shall never forget the walk we ' ve   have . I have to thank you for the 
 noblest of pleasure . you ' ve   teach I - well , a thousand thing ; the 
 thing money can not   buy . what morning they be ! and the dead - tired 
 night ! under the rock and up to see the snowy peak pink in a gap of 
 thick mist . you be right : it make a crimson colour shine like a 
 new idea . up in those mountain one walk with the divinity , you say . 
 it be perfectly true . I shall remember I do . I have a treasure for life ! 
 now I understand where you get your idea . the life we lead down there 
 be hoggish . you have choose the right . you be right , over and over 
 again , when you say , the dirty sweater be near the angel for 
 cleanliness than my Lord and Lady Sybarite out of a bath , in chemical 
 scent . a man who think , loathe their High Society . I go through 
 Juvenal at college . but you - to be sure , you add example - make I feel 
 the contempt of it more . I be everlastingly indebted to you . yes , I 
 will not   forget : you preach against the despising of anything . 

 this be pleasant in Woodseer 's ear , inasmuch as it establish the 
 young nobleman as the pupil of his philosophy for the conduct of life ; 
 and to fortify he , he reply : 

 ' set your mind on the beauty , and there will be no room for comparison . 
 Most of they be unjust , precious few instructive . in this case , they 
 spoil both picture : and that scene down there rather hook I ; though 
 I prefer the Dachstein in the wane of the afterglow . you call it 
 Carinthia . ' 

 ' I do : the beautiful Gorgon , haggard Venus - if she be to be a girl ! ' 
 Fleetwood rejoin . ' she look burn out - a spectre . ' 

 ' one of the admirably damned , ' say Woodseer , and he murmur with 
 enjoyment : ' between the light - that be the beauty and the tragedy of 
 Purgatory ! ' 

 his comrade fall in with the picture idea : ' you hit it : - not what you 
 call the ' sublimely milky , " and not squalid as you will see the face 
 of the gamble woman at the table below . Oblige I - may I beg ? - do not 
 clap name on the mountain we have   see . it stamp guide - book on they , 
 english tourist , horror . we will moralize over the crowd at the table 
 down there . on the whole , it be a fairish game : you know the odd against 
 you , as you do not   on the Turf or the Bourse . have your fling ; but do not 
 get bite . there be a virus . I be not open to it . other be . ' 

 Hereupon Woodseer , wish to have his individuality recognise in the 
 universality it consent to , remark on an exchequer that could not 
 afford to lose , and a disposition free of the craving to win . 

 these be , no doubt , good reason for abstain , and they be 
 grand morality . they be , at the same time , customary phrase of the 
 unfleshe in folly . they strike Fleetwood with a curious reminder of the 
 puking inexperienced , whom he have see subsequently plunge suicidally . 
 he have a sharp vision of the attractive force of the game ; and his 
 elemental nature exult in side with the strong against a pretender 
 to the superhuman . for Woodseer have speak a trifle loftily , as quite 
 above temptation . to see a forewarned philosopher lure to try the swim 
 on those tide , pull along the current , and catch by the undertug of 
 the lasher , would be fun . 

 ' we will drop down on they , find our hotel , and have a look at what 
 they be do , ' he say , and step . 

 Woodseer would gladly have remain . the starlit black ridge about he 
 and the dragon 's mouth yawing underneath be an opposition of spiritual 
 and mundane ; innocent , noxious ; exciting to the youthful philosopher . he 
 have to follow , and so rapidly in the darkness that he stumble and fall 
 on an arm ; a small matter . 

 Bed - chamber await they at the hotel , none of the party : and 
 Fleetwood 's man - servant be absent . 

 ' Gambling , the rascal ! ' he say . Woodseer hear the first note of the 
 place in that . 

 his leader be wash , neatly dress , and knock at his door very 
 soon , impatient to be off , and he fling a promise of ' supper presently ' 
 to one whose modest purse have fall into a debate with this lordly 
 hostelry , count that a supper and a night there would do for it . they 
 hurry on to the line of promenader , a river of cross - current by the 
 side of seated group ; and the willowy swish of silken dress , feminine 
 perfumery , cigar - smoke , chatter , laughter , tell of pleasure reigning . 

 Fleetwood scan the group . he have see enough in a moment and his 
 face blacken . a dart waiter be call to he . 

 he say to Woodseer , savagely , as it sound : ' you shall have something 
 to joint your bone ! ' what cause of wrath he have be past a guess : a 
 wolf at his vital bite he , harden his handsome feature . 

 the waiter dart back , bear a tray and tall glass fill each with 
 pile parti - colour liqueur , on the top of which an egg - yolk swam . 
 Fleetwood give example . swallow your egg , the fiery - velvet triune 
 behind slip after it , in an easy milky way , like a princess 's train on 
 a state - march , and you be completely , transform , very agreeably ; you 
 have become a merry demon . ' well , yes , it be next to magic , ' he reply 
 to Woodseer 's astonished snigger after the draught , and explain , that 
 it be a famous Viennese four - of - the - morning panacea , the reveller ' 
 electrical restorer . ' now you can hold on for an hour or two , and then 
 we will sup . at Rome ? ' 

 ' ay ! Druids to - morrow ! ' cry the philosopher bewitch . 

 he find himself bow to a most heavenly lady , compose of day and 
 night in her colouring , but more of night , where the western edge have 
 become a pale steel blade . man be around she , form a semi - circle . 
 the world of man and woman be mere timber and leafage to this flower of 
 her sex , glory of her kind . how he behave in her presence , he know not ; 
 he be beyond self - criticism or conscious reflection ; simply the engine 
 of the commixed three liqueur , with parlous fine thought , and a sense 
 of steam into the infinite . 

 to leave she be to have she as a moon in the heaven and to think of 
 she creatively . a swarm of image rush about she and away , take lustre 
 and shade . she be a miracle of greyness , her eye translucently grey , a 
 dark - haired queen of the twilight ; and his heart spring into his brain 
 to picture the novel beauty ; language become a flushed Bacchanal in 
 a ring of dancing simile . lie beside a bank of silvery cinquefoil 
 against a clear evening sky , where the planet Venus be a point of new 
 and warm light , one have the vision of she . or something of Persephone 
 rise to greet her mother , when our beam of day first melt through she 
 as she kneel to gather an early bud of the year , would be near it . or 
 there be a lake in mid - forest , that curl part in shadow under the foot 
 of morning : there we have she . 

 he strain to the earthly and the skyey likeness of his marvel of 
 human beauty because they bestow she on he in pass . all the while , 
 he be gaze on a green gaming - table . 

 the gold glitter , and it heap or it vanish . contemptuous of money , 
 beyond the limited sum for his need , he gaze ; imagination be blunt 
 in he to the hot drama of the business . moreover his mind be engage 
 in insist that the Evening Star be not to be call Venus , because of 
 certain story ; and he be vow to defend his lady from any allusion 
 to they . this occupy he . by degree , the visible assert its 
 authority ; his look on the coin fall to speculate . oddly , too , he be 
 often right ; - the money , stake on the other side , would have win . he 
 consider it rather a plain calculation than a guess . 

 philosophy withdraw he from his temporary interest in the trick of 
 a circling white marble ball . the chuck farthing of street urchin have 
 quite as much dignity . he compare the creature dabble , over the 
 board to summer fly on butcher 's meat , periodically scar by a cloth . 
 More in the abstract , they be snatch at a snapdragon bowl . it 
 strike he , that the gambler have throng on an invitation to drink 
 the round of seed - time and harvest in a gulp . again they be desperate 
 gleaner , hopping , skip , bleed , amid a whizz of scythe - blade , 
 for small wisps of booty . nor be it long before the presidency of 
 an ancient hoary Goat - Satan might be perceive , with skew - eye and 
 pucker - mouth , nurse a hoof on a knee . 

 our mediaeval Enemy sit symbolical in his deformity , as in old italian 
 and dutch thick - line engraving of he . he roll a ball for soul , 
 excited like kitten , to catch it , and tumble into the dozen 
 of vacant pit . so it seem to Woodseer , whose perception be 
 discolour by hereditary antagonism . have he preserve his philosopher 's 
 eye , he would have know that the Hoofed One be too wily to show 
 himself , owe to his ugliness . the Black Goddess and no other preside 
 at her own game . she   it be good for we to know it   be the Power who 
 challenge the individual , it be he who spread the net for the mass . 
 she liquefy the brain of man ; he petrifie or ossify the heart . from 
 she come craziness , from he perversity : a more provocative and , on the 
 whole , more contagious disease . the gambler do not seek to lead his 
 fellow into perdition ; the snare of the Demon have pleasure in the 
 act . hence our naturally interested forecast of the contest between 
 they : for if he be beat , as all must be at the close of an extended 
 game with she , we have only to harden the brain against her allurement 
 and we enter a clear field . 

 Woodseer say to Fleetwood : ' that ball have a look of a nymph run 
 round and round till she change to one of the Fates . ' 

 ' we will have a run with she , ' say Fleetwood , keener for business than 
 for metaphor - at the moment . 

 he receive gold for a bank - note . Captain Abrane hurriedly beg a 
 loan . both of they throw . neither of they throw on the six number 
 Woodseer would have select , and they lose . he state that the number 
 of 17 have win before . Abrane try the transversal enclose this 
 favour number . ' of course ! ' he cry , with foul resignation and a 
 hostile glare : the ball have seat itself and be grin at he from 
 the low of the stall . 

 Fleetwood quit the table - number to throw on Pair ; he win , win again , 
 push his luck and lose , drag Abrane with he . the giant vary 
 his tone of acquiescence in Fortune 's whim : ' of course ! I ' ve   only to 
 fle ! luck hang right enough till I put down my stake . ' 

 ' if the luck have go three time , the chance .... ' Woodseer be rather 
 inquire than pronounce .... Lord Fleetwood cut he short . ' the 
 chance be equally the contrary ! ' and discompose his argumentative 
 mind . 

 as argument in such a place be impossible , he have a wild idea 
 of example - ' just to see ' - ; and though he smile , his brain be 
 liquefy . upon a calculation of the chance , merely for the humour of 
 it , he lay a silver piece on the first six , which have be neglect . 
 they be now blest . he lay his winning on the numbed 17 . who would 
 have expect it ? why , the player , surely ! Woodseer comport himself 
 like a veteran : he have prove that you can calculate the chance . 
 instead of turn in triumph to Lord Fleetwood , he lay gold piece to 
 hug the number 17 , and ten in the centre . and it be the truth , he hop 
 then to lose and have do with it - after prove his case . the ball 
 whirl , kick , try for seat in two , in three point , and enter 17 . 
 the usual temporary wonderment fly round the table ; and this number be 
 court in dread , avoid with apprehension . 

 Abrane let fly a mighty breath : ' Virgin , by Jove ! ' 

 Success be a small matter to Gower Woodseer . he display his contempt 
 of fortune by let his heap of bank - note lie on Impair , and he win . 
 Abrane bade he say ' Maximum ' in a furious whisper . he do so , as one at 
 home with the word ; and win repeatedly , observe to Fleetwood : ' now 
 I can understand what historian mean , in tell we of hero rush 
 into the fray and vainly seek death . I always think death be to be 
 have , if you be in earnest . ' 

 Fleetwood scrutinize the cast of his feature and the touch of his 
 finger on the crispy paper . 

 ' come to another of these " green field , " ' he return briefly . ' the 
 game here be child 's play . ' 

 urge Virgin Luck not to quit his initiatory table , the captain 
 reluctantly go at their heel . shortly before the table be clothe in 
 mantle for the night , he report to Livia one of the great case of 
 Virgin Luck ; describe it , from the silver piece to the big heap of 
 note , and draw on his envy of the fellow to sketch the indomitable 
 coolness show in follow or in quit a run . ' that fellow it be , 
 Fleetwood 's tag - rag ; hold his head like a street - fiddler ; Woodler or 
 some name . but there be nothing to be do if we do not   cultivate he . he 
 must have pocket a good three thousand and more . they have a quarrel 
 about calculation of chance , and Fleet run the V up his forehead at a 
 piece of impudence . fellow say some high - fly stuff ; Fleet brighten 
 like a Sunday chimney - sweep . if I believe in Black Arts , upon my word ! ' 

 ' Russett be not usually manage with ease , ' the lady say . 

 her placid observation be direct on the pair then descend the 
 step . 

 ' be careful how you address , this gentleman , ' she counsel Abrane . 
 ' the name be not woody , I know . it must be the right name or none . ' 

 Livia 's fair smile receive they . she hear the captain accost the 
 child of luck as Mr. Woodier , and she make a rustle in rise to take 
 Fleetwood 's arm . 

 ' we have not   din , we have to sup , ' say he . 

 ' you be release at the end of the lamp . you redeem your ring , 
 Russett , and I will restore it . I have to tell you , Henrietta be here 
 to - morrow . ' 

 ' she might be in a well place . ' 

 ' the place where she be to be see be not generally undervalue by man . 
 it be not her fault that she be absent . the admiral be persuade to go 
 and attend those cavalry manoeuvre with the Grand Duke , to whom he have 
 be civil when in command of the Mediterranean squadron . you know , 
 the admiral believe he have military - I mean soldierly - genius ; and the 
 delusion may have give he wholesome exercise and help he to forget 
 his gout . so far , Henrietta will have be satisfy . she can not have 
 find much amusement among dusty trooper or at that court at Carlsruhe . 
 our french milliner there have help in retard she quite against she 
 will . she have have to choose a balldress for the raw mountain - girl they 
 have with they , and get she fit , and it be a task ! why take she to the 
 ball ? but the admiral 's infatuate with this girl , and will not   hear of her 
 exclusion - because , he say , she understand a field of battle ; and the 
 Ducal party have take to she . ah , Russett , you should not have fly ! 
 no harm , only Henrietta do require a trifle of management . she write , 
 that she be sure of you for the night at the Schloss . ' 

 ' why , ma'am ? ' 

 ' you have give your word . " he never break his light word , " she 
 say . ' 

 ' it sound like the beginning of respect . ' 

 ' the rare thing man teach woman to feel for they ! ' 

 ' a respectable love match - eh ? Good Lord ! you will be civil to my friend . 
 you have strike he to the dust . you have your one poetical admirer in 
 he . ' 

 ' I be honour , Russett . ' 

 ' clear out , I suppose ? Abrane be a funnel for pour into that Bank . 
 have your fun as you like it ! I shall get supply to - morrow . by the 
 way , you have that boy Cressett here . what be you do with he ? ' 

 Livia speak of watch over he and guard he : 

 ' he be at the table beside I , burst to have a fling ; and my friend 
 Mr. Woodseer say , it be " Adonis come to spy the boar " : - the picture ! ' 

 Prompt as bugle to the breath , Livia propose to bet he fifty pound 
 that she would keep young Cressett from gamble a single louis . the 
 pretty saying do not touch she . 

 Fleetwood move and bow . Sir Meeson Corby simulate a petrifaction of 
 his frame at see the Countess of Fleetwood actually partly bent with 
 her gracious acknowledgement of the tramp 's gawky homage . 




 CHAPTER X. small cause 

 a clock sound one of the later morning hour of the night as Gower 
 Woodseer stand at his hotel door , have leave Fleetwood with a band of 
 reveller . the night be now clear . star be low over the ridge of 
 pine , drop to a league of our strange world to record the doing . 
 beneath this roof lie the starry she . he be elect to lie beneath it 
 also : and he behold his heavenly lady float on the lull of soft white 
 cloud among her sister sphere . after the way of imaginative young man , 
 he have her feature more accurately now she be hide , and he idealize 
 she more . he could escape for a time from his coil of simile and paint 
 for himself the irid of her large , long , grey eye darkly rim ; 
 pure water - grey , lucid within the ring , beneath an arch of lash . 
 he have they fast ; but then he fall to contemplate their exceeding 
 rareness ; and the mystery of the divinely grey swing a kindled fancy 
 to the flight with some queen - witch of wood , of whom a youth may dream 
 under the spell of twilight , East or West , among forest branch . 

 she have these marvellous eye and the glamour for man . she have not yet 
 meet a man with the poetical twist in the brain to prize she elementally . 
 all admit the glamour ; none of her courtier be able to name it , 
 even the poetical head give it a name do not think of the witch in 
 her look as a witch in her deed , a modern daughter of the mediaeval . 
 to her giant squire the eye of the lady be queer : they be unlit 
 glass lamp to her french suppliant ; and to the other , they be 
 attractively uncommon ; the charm for they be in her fine outline , 
 her stature , carriage of her person , and unalterable composure ; 
 particularly her latent daring . she have the effect on the general mind 
 of a lofty crag - castle with a history . there be a whiff of gunpowder 
 exciting the atmosphere in the anecdotal part of the history know . 

 Woodseer sit for a certain time over his note - book . he close it with a 
 thrilling conceit of the right thing write down ; such as entomologist 
 feel when they have pin the rare insect . but what be butterfly 
 or beetle compare with the chisel sentence carve out of air to 
 constitute we part owner of the breathing image and spirit of an adore 
 fair woman ? we repeat they , and the act of repeat they make she come 
 close on ours , by virtue of the eagle thought in the stamp gold of the 
 line . 

 then , though she be not ever to be absolutely ours   and it be an 
 impoverishing desire that she should be , we have beat out the golden 
 sentence - the essential she and we in one . but be it so precious after 
 all ? a suspicious ring of an adjective drop we on a sickening descent . 

 the author dash at his book , examine , approve , keenly enjoy , and 
 he murderously scratch the adjective . she stand well without it , as 
 a bright planet star issue from cloud , which be perhaps an adornment 
 to our hackneyed moon . this do , he restore the book to his coat 's 
 breast - pocket , smile or sneer at the roll of bank - note there , 
 disdain to count they . they stuff an inner waistcoat pocket and his 
 trouser also . they at any rate warrant that we can form a calculation 
 of the chance , let Lord Fleetwood rave as he may please . 

 Woodseer have catch a glimpse of the elbow - point of his coat when 
 fling it back to the chair . there be distinctly abrasion . 
 philosopher laugh at such thing . but they must be the very ancient 
 pallium philosopher , ensconce in tub , if they pretend to merriment 
 over the spectacle of nether garment gap at the spot where man be 
 most vulnerable . he get loose from they and hold they up to the candle , 
 and the ray be admit , neither wink nor peep . serviceable old 
 clothe , no doubt . time have not deal they the final kick before they 
 score a good record . 

 they drag he , nevertheless , to a sort of confession of some 
 weakness , that he could not analyze for the swirl of emotional thought 
 in the way ; and they have he to the ground . an eagle of the poetic 
 become a mere squat toad through one of these pretty material stroke . 
 where then be Philosophy ? but who can be philosopher and the fervent 
 admirer of a glorious lady ? ask again , who in that frowzy garb can 
 presume to think of she or stand within fifty mile of her orbit ? 

 a dreary two hour bring round daylight . Woodseer quit his restless 
 bed and enter the abjured habiliment , chivalrous enough to keep from 
 denounce they until he could cast the bad skin they now be to his 
 uneasy sensation . he remember have stumble and fall on the slope 
 of the hill into this vale , and probably then the mischief have occur 
 though a brush would have , be sufficient , the slight collision . 
 only , it be odd that the accident should have come to pass just 
 previous to his introduction . how long antecedent be it ? he belabour 
 his memory to reckon how long it be from the moment of the fall to the 
 first sight of that lady . 

 his window look down on the hotel stable - yard . a coach - house door be 
 open . odd or not - and it certainly look like fate - that he should be 
 bow to his lady so shortly after the mishap expel he , he have to 
 leave the place . a groom in the yard be hail , and cheerily inform 
 he he could be drive to Carlsruhe as soon as the coachman have finish 
 his breakfast . at Carlsruhe a decent refitting might be obtain , and he 
 could return from exile that very day , thank to the praiseworthy early 
 hour of brave old Germany . 

 he have swallow a cup of coffee with a roll of stale bread , in the good 
 of mood , and enter his carriage ; he be call the order to start 
 when a shout surprise his ear : ' the fiddler bolt ! ' 

 Captain Abrane 's be the voice . about twenty pace behind , Abrane , 
 Fleetwood , and one whom they call Chummy Potts , be wildly wave 
 arm . Woodseer could hear the captain 's lowered roar : ' race you , Chummy , 
 couple of louis , catch he first ! ' the two come pelt up to the 
 carriage abreast . 

 they be belate reveller , and have be carelessly stroll under the 
 pinky cloudlet bedward , after a prolonged carousal with the son and 
 daughter of hilarious nation , until the apparition of Virgin Luck on 
 the wing shock all prospect of a dead fight with the table that day . 

 ' here , come , no , by Jove , you , Mr. Woodsir ! will not   do , not a bit ! can not 
 let you go , ' cry Abrane , as he puff . ' what ! cut and run and leave 
 we , post winning - banker - knock your luck on the head ! what a fellow ! 
 can not   let you . Countess never forgive we . you promise - swear it - play 
 for she . strike all aheap to hear of your play ! you have   get the trick . 
 her purse for you in my pocket . never a fellow play like you . cool as 
 a cook over a - gridiron ! Comme un phare ! St. Ombre say - that Frenchman . 
 you astonish the Frenchman ! and now cut and run ? can not   allow it . 
 Honour of the country at stake . ' 

 ' hand off ! ' Woodseer bellow , feel himself a leaky vessel in dock , 
 his infirmity in danger of exposure . ' if you pull ! - what the deuce do 
 you want ? stop ! ' 

 ' out you come , ' say the giant , and laugh at the fun to his friend , 
 who be entirely harmonious when not violently dissent , as be the 
 way with Night 's rollicker before their bed have reconcile they to 
 the day - beam . 

 Woodseer would have have to come and be come ; he happen to say : 
 ' do not   knock my pipe out of my mouth , ' and touch a chord in the giant . 

 ' all - right ; smoke your pipe , ' be answer to his remonstrance . 

 during the amnesty , Fleetwood inquire : ' where be you go ? ' 

 ' far a drive , - to be sure . do not   you see ! ' 

 ' you will return ? ' 

 ' I intend to return . ' 

 ' he be beastly excite , ' quoth Abrane . 

 Fleetwood silence he , though indeed Woodseer appear suspiciously 
 restive . 

 ' step down and have a talk with I before you start . you be not to go 
 yet . ' 

 ' I must . I be in a hurry . ' 

 ' what be the hurry ? ' 

 ' I want to smoke and think . ' 

 ' take a carriage on the top of the morning to smoke and think ! Hark at 
 that ! ' abrane sing out . ' oh , come along quietly , you fellow , there be a 
 good fellow ! it concern we all , every man Jack ; we be all bind up 
 in your fortune . fellow with luck like yours can not   pretend to behave 
 independently . out of reason ! ' 

 ' do you give I your word you return ? ' say Fleetwood . 

 Woodseer reply : ' very well , I do ; there , I give my word . hang it ! 
 now I know what they mean by " anything for a quiet life . " just a shake 
 bring we down on that cane - bottom chair ! ' 

 ' you return to - day ? ' 

 ' to - day , yes , yes . ' 

 Fleetwood signify the captive 's release ; and Abrane immediately 
 suggest : 

 ' pop old Chummy in beside the fellow to mount guard . ' 

 Potts be hustle and precipitate into the carriage by the pair , 
 with whom he partook this last glimmer of their night 's humorous 
 extravagance , for he be an easy creature . the carriage drive off . 

 ' keep he company ! ' they shout . 

 ' escort he back ! ' say he , nod . 

 he remark to Woodseer : ' with your permission , ' concern the seat 
 he take , and that ' a draught of morning air would do he good . ' then he 
 laugh politely , exchange wavy distant farewell with his comrade , 
 touch a breast - pocket for his case of cigar , pull forth one , 
 obtain ' the loan of a light , ' blow cloud and fall into the 
 anticipate composure , quite understand the case and his office . 

 both agree as to the fine morning it be . Woodseer briefly assent to 
 his keeper 's reiterate encomium on the morning , justify on oath . a 
 fine morning , indeed . ' Damned if I think I ever see so fine a morning ! ' 
 Potts cry . he have no other subject of conversation with this 
 hybrid : and be equally disposed for hot discourse or for sleep , the 
 deprivation of the one and the other force he to seek amusement in his 
 famous reading of character ; which be profound among the biped equine , 
 jockey , turfman , sharper , pugilist , demirep . he front Woodseer 
 with square shoulder and wide knee , an elbow on one , a fist on the 
 other , engage in what he term the ' prodding of his eel , ' or ' nick 
 of his man , ' a method of get straight at the riddle of the fellow by 
 the test of how long he could endure a flat mute stare and return look 
 for look unblinking . the act of smoke fortifie and partly cover 
 the insolence . but if by chance an equable , not too narrowly focusse , 
 counterstare be meet , our impertinent inquisitor may resemble the 
 fisherman pull into deep water by his fish . Woodseer peruse his man , 
 he be not attempt to fathom he : he have besides other stuff in his 
 head . Potts have naught , and the poor particle he be wriggle under 
 detection . 

 ' Tobacco before breakfast ! ' he say disgustedly toss his cigar to the 
 road . ' your pipe hold on . bad thing , I can tell you , that smoke on 
 an empty stomach . no trainer'd allow it , not for a whole fee or double . 
 kill your wind . let I ask you , my good sir , be you go to turn ? 
 we have   sit a fairish stretch . I begin to want my bath and a shave , linen 
 and coffee . Thirsty ' as a dog . ' 

 he hear with stupefaction , that he could alight on the spot , if he 
 please , otherwise he would be drive into Carlsruhe . and now they have a 
 lingual encounter , hot against cool ; but the eye of Chummy Potts 
 have be beat , his argument and reproach be not back by 
 the powerful look which be an essential part of such eloquence as 
 he command . they flee from his enemy 's currishly , even while he be 
 launch epithet . his pathetic position subject he to beg that 
 Woodseer would direct the driver to turn , for he have no knowledge of 
 ' their german lingo . ' and say he : ' you have   nothing to laugh at , that 
 I can see . I be at your mercy , you brute ; catch in a trap . I never 
 walk ; - and the sun fit to fry a mackerel along that road ! I apologize 
 for abuse you ; I can not   do more . you be an infernally clever 
 player - there ! and , upon my soul , I could drink ditchwater ! but if 
 you be go in for transaction at Carlsruhe , mark my word , your 
 luck 's go . laugh as much as you like . ' 

 Woodseer happen to be smile over the excellent reason for not 
 turn back which inflict the wofulness . he be not without sympathy 
 for a thirsty wretch , and guess , at the sight of an avenue of lime 
 to the left of the road , that a wayside inn be below , he say : ' you can 
 have coffee or beer in two minute , ' and tell the driver where to pull 
 up . 

 the sight of a grey - jacket , green - collar sportsman , dog at 
 heel , cross the flat land to the hill of the forest , prick he 
 enviously , and cause he to ask what change have come upon he , that he 
 should be hurry to a town for a change of clothe . just as Potts be 
 about to jump out , a carriage , with a second behind it , leave the inn 
 door . he rub a hand on his unshaven chin , try a glance at his 
 shirt - front , and remark : ' it will not   be any one who know I , ' stand to 
 let the carriage pass . in the first be a young lady and a gentleman : 
 the lady brilliantly fair , an effect of auburn hair and complexion , 
 despite the sign of a storm that have sweep they and have not clear 
 from her eyelid . apparently her maid , a damsel sit straight up , 
 occupy the carriage following ; and this fresh - faced young person 
 twice quickly and bluntly bent her head as she be drive by . Potts be 
 unacquainted with the maid . but he know the lady well , or well enough 
 for her inattention to be the big puzzle . she gaze at the Black 
 Forest hill in the steady manner , with eye betray more than 
 they see ; which solve part of the puzzle , of course . her reason for 
 decline to see he be expose by the presence of the gentleman 
 beside she . at the same time , in so highly breed a girl , a defenceless 
 exposure be unaccountable . half a nod and the shade of a smile would 
 have be the proper course ; and she go along on the road to the 
 valley seem to say it might easily have be take ; except that there 
 have evidently be a bit of a scene . 

 Potts rank Henrietta 's beauty far above her cousin Livia 's . he be 
 therefore personally offend by her disregard of he , and her bit of a 
 scene with the fellow carry she off do he injury on behalf of his 
 friend Fleetwood . he dismiss Woodseer curtly . thirst more to gossip 
 than to drink , he take a moody draught of beer at the inn , and by the 
 aid of a conveyance , hastily build of rotten plank to serve his need , 
 and draw by a horse of the old war , ' as he report on his arrival 
 at Baden , - reach that home of the maltreat innocent twenty minute 
 before the countess and her party be to start for lunch up the 
 Lichtenthal . naturally , he be abuse for let his bird fly : but 
 as he be shaven , refresh , and in clean linen , he could pull his 
 shirt - cuff and take seat at his breakfast - table with equanimity while 
 Abrane denounce he . 

 ' I will bet you the fellow 's luck have go , ' say Potts . ' he be no new 
 hand and you do not   think he so either , Fleet . I have   look into the 
 fellow 's eye and see a leery old badger at the bottom of it . talk vile 
 stuff . however , ' perhaps I do not   drive out on that swelter Carlsruhe 
 road for nothing . ' 

 he screw a look at the earl , who send Abrane to carry a message and 
 hear the story Potts have to tell . 

 ' Henrietta Fakenham ! no mistake about she ; drive out from a pothouse ; 
 man beside she , military man ; might be a German . and , if you please , 
 quite unacquainted with your humble servant , though we be as close as 
 you to I . something go wrong in that pothouse . red eye . there have 
 be a scene , one could swear . behind the lady another carriage , and she 
 maid . never see the girl before , and set to bow and smirk at I , 
 as if I be the - fellow of all other ! Comical . I make sure they be 
 bind for this place . they be on the Strasburg road . no sign of they ? ' 

 ' you speak to I ? ' say Fleetwood . 

 Potts mutter . he have put his foot into it . 

 ' you have a bad habit of speak to yourself , ' Fleetwood remark , and 
 leave he . he suffer from the rustic he have to deal with among his 
 class , and it be not need that he should thunder at they to make his 
 wrath feel . 

 Livia swam in , ask : ' what have come to Russett ? he pass I in one of 
 his black fit . ' 

 the tale of the Carlsruhe road be repeat by Potts . she reprove he . 
 ' how could you choose Russett for such a report as that ! the admiral be 
 on the road behind . Henrietta - you be sure it be she ? german girl have 
 much the same colouring . the gentleman with she must have be one of 
 the Court equerry . they be drive to some chateau or battlefield 
 the admiral want to inspect . good - look man ? military man ? ' 

 ' oh ! the man ! pretty fair , I dare say , ' Potts rejoin . ' if it be not 
 Henrietta Fakenham , I see with the back of my head . german girl ! the 
 maid be a german girl . ' 

 ' that may well be , ' say Livia . 

 she conceive the news to be of sufficient importance for she to 
 countermand the drive up the Lichtenthal , and take the Carlsruhe road 
 instead ; for Henrietta be weak , and Chillon Kirby an arch - plotter , and 
 pleader too , one of the desperate lover . he be outstay his leave of 
 absence already , she believe ; he have to be in England . if he fear to 
 lose Henrietta , he would not hesitate to carry she off . Livia know he , 
 and know the power of his pleading with a firm woman than Henrietta . 




 CHAPTER XI . the prisoner of his word 

 nothing to rouse alarm be discover at Carlsruhe . Livia 's fair cousin 
 be there with the red - haired gaunt girl of the mountain ; and it be 
 frankly state by Henrietta , that she have accompany the girl a certain 
 distance along the Strasburg road , for she to see the last of her 
 brother Chillon on his way to England . Livia be not the woman to push 
 inquiry . on that subject , she merely say , as soon as they be alone 
 together : 

 ' you seem to have have the lion 's share of the parting . ' 

 ' yes , we pass Mr. Chumley Potts , ' be Henrietta 's immediate answer ; 
 and her reference to he disarm Livia . 

 they smile at his name transiently , but in agreement : the tattler - spout 
 of their set be , a fatal person to encounter , and each deem the 
 sudden apparition of he in the very early morning along the Carlsruhe 
 road rather magical . 

 ' you place particular confidence in Russett 's fidelity to his word , 
 Riette - as you have be hear yourself call . you should be serious 
 by this time . Russett will not   bear much more . I count on the night 
 of the Ball for the grand effect . you will extinguish every woman 
 there - and if he be absent ? ' 

 ' I shall excuse he . ' 

 ' you be not in a position to be so charitable . you ought to know your 
 position , and yourself too , a little well than you do . how could you 
 endure poverty ? Chillon Kirby stand in his uniform , and all be tell . 
 he can manoeuvre , we know . he get the admiral away to take he to those 
 review cleverly . but be he think of your interest when he do it ? 
 he require twenty year of active service to give you a roof to your 
 head . I hate such allusion . but look for a moment at your character : 
 you must have ordinary luxury and pleasure , and if you be to find 
 yourself grind against common necessity - imagine it ! Russett 
 be quite manageable . he be , trust I ! he be a gentleman ; he have more 
 ability than most young man : he can do anything he set his mind to do . 
 he have his great estate and fortune all in his own hand . we call he 
 eccentric . he be only young , with a lot of power . add , he be in love , and 
 some one distract he . not love , do you say ? - you look it . he worship . 
 he have no chance give he to show himself at his good . perhaps he be 
 off again now . will you bet I he be not ? ' 

 ' I should incline to make the bet , if I bet , ' say Henrietta . ' his 
 pride be in his word , and suppose he be in love , it be with his pride , 
 which never quit he . ' 

 ' there 's firmness in a man who have pride of that kind . you must let I 
 take you back to Baden . I hold to have you with I to - day . you must 
 make an appearance there . the admiral will bring we his Miss Kirby 
 to - morrow , if he be bind to remain here to - night . there be no harm in 
 his bachelor dinner . I suspect his twinge of gout come of the prospect 
 of affair when he land in England . remember our bill with Madame 
 Clemence . there will not   be the ghost of a bank - note for I if Russett 
 quit the field ; we shall all be strand . ' 

 Henrietta inquire : ' do it depend on my go with you to - day ? ' 

 ' consider , that he be now fancy a thousand thing . we will not   talk of 
 the road to Paris . ' 

 a shot of colour sweep over Henrietta . 

 ' I will speak to papa : - if he can let I go . he have take to Miss 
 Kirby . ' 

 ' do she taste well ? ' 

 Henrietta debate . ' it be impossible to dislike she . oh ! she be wild ! 
 she know absolutely nothing of the world . she can do everything we 
 can not   - or do not   dare to try . - Men would like she . Papa 's beginning to 
 doat . he say she would have make a first - rate soldier . she fear blood 
 as little as her morning cup of milk . one of the orderly fall rather 
 badly from a frightened horse close by our carriage . she be out in a 
 moment and have his head on her lap , call to papa to keep the carriage 
 fast and block the way of the squadron , for the man 's leg be hurt . I 
 really think we be lose . at these manoeuvre anything may happen , at 
 any instant . papa will follow the horse - artillery . you know his vanity 
 to be a military quite as much as a naval commander like the Greeks and 
 Romans , he say . we take the bruised man into our carriage and drive he 
 to camp , Carinthia nurse he on the way . ' 

 ' Carinthia ! she be well fit with her name . what with her name and her 
 hair and her build and her singular style of attire , one wonder at she 
 come into civilized part . she be utterly unlike Chillon . ' 

 Henrietta redden at the mention of one of her own thought in the 
 contrasting of the pair . 

 they have their point of likeness , she say . 

 it do not concern Livia to hear what these be . back to Baden , with 
 mean to procure the pleasant shock of the galvanic battery there , be 
 her thought ; for she have a fear of the earl 's have again depart in a 
 huff at Henrietta 's behaviour . 

 the admiral consent that his daughter should go , as soon as he hear 
 that Miss Kirby be to stay . he have when a young man meet her famous 
 father ; he vow she be the Old Buccaneer young again in petticoat 
 and have make prize of an english man - of - war by storm ; all the profit , 
 however , be his . this he prove with a courteous clasp of the girl 
 and a show of the salute on her cheek , which he presume to take at the 
 night 's farewell . ' she be my tonic , ' he proclaim heartily . she seem 
 to Livia somewhat unstrung and toneless . the separation from her brother 
 in the morning might account for it . and a man of the admiral 's age 
 could be excuse if he exalt the girl . senility , like infancy , be fond 
 of plain outline for the laying on of its paint . the girl have rugge 
 brow , a short nose , red hair ; no young man would look at she twice . she 
 be utterly unlike Chillon ! kiss her hand to Henrietta from the step 
 of the hotel , the girl 's face improve . 

 Livia 's little squire , Sir Meeson Corby , ejaculate as they be drive 
 down the main street , ' Fleetwood 's tramp ! there he go . now see , 
 Miss Fakenham , the kind of object Lord Fleetwood pick up and call 
 friend ! - call that object friend ! .. but , what ? he have be to a tailor 
 and a barber ! ' 

 ' stop the coachman . Run , tell Mr. Woodseer I wish he to join we , ' Livia 
 say , and Sir Meeson have to thank his tramp for a second indignity . he 
 protest , he simulate remonstrance , - he have to go , really feel a 
 sickness . 

 the singular - look person , whose necessity or sense of the decency 
 have , unknown to himself and to the other , put they all in motion that 
 day , swing round listen to the challenge to arm , as the puffy little 
 man 's delivery of the countess 's message sound . he be respectably 
 clothe , he think , in the relief of his escape from the suit of clothe 
 discard , and he silently follow Sir Meeson 's trot to the carriage . 
 ' should have mistake you for a german to - day , sir , ' the latter say , 
 and trot on . 

 ' a stout one , ' Woodseer reply , with his happy indifference to his 
 exterior . 

 his dark lady 's eye be kindly overlooking , like the heaven . her fair 
 cousin , to whom he bow , awaken he to a perception of the spectacle 
 cause the slight , quick arrest of her look , in an astonishment not 
 unlike the hiccup in speech , while her act of courtesy proceed . at 
 once he be conscious of the price he pay for respectability , and see 
 the Teuton skin on the slim cambrian , baggy at shoulder , baggy at seat , 
 pinch at the knee , short at the heel , show outrageously every 
 spot where he ought to have be big or small . how accept or how 
 reject the invitation to drive in such company to Baden ! 

 ' you be decide enough , sir , in your play , they tell I , ' the vindictive 
 little baronet comment on his hesitation , and Woodseer spring to the 
 proffer vacant place . but he have to speak of his fly wait for he 
 at the step of a certain hotel . 

 ' best hotel in the town ! ' Sir Beeson exclaim pointedly to Henrietta , 
 read her constraint with this comical object before she . it be the 
 admiral 's hotel they stop at . 

 ' be so good as to step down and tell the admiral he be to bring Madame 
 Clemence in his carriage to - morrow ; and on your way , you will dismiss 
 Mr. Woodseer 's fly , ' Livia mildly address her squire . he star : again 
 he have to go , mutter : ' that nondescript 's footman ! ' and his 
 mischance in be check and cross and humiliate perpetually by a 
 dirty - fiste vagabond impostor astound he . he send the flyman to the 
 carriage for order . 

 Admiral Fakenham and Carinthia descend . Sir Meeson hear her cry 
 out : ' be it you ! ' and up stand the pretentious lout in the german sack , 
 affect the grace of a bear gentleman fresh from Paris , - bow , 
 smirking , excuse himself for something ; and he jump down to the 
 young lady , he talk intimately with she , with a joker 's air ; he rouse 
 the admiral to an exchange of joke , and the countess and Miss 
 Fakenham more than smile ; evidently at his remark , unobservant of 
 the preposterous figure he cut . Sir Meeson Corby have intimation of the 
 disintegration of his country if a patent tramp burlesque in those 
 clothe could be permit to amuse english lady of high station , 
 quite at home with they . among the sign of England 's downfall , this be 
 decidedly one . what to think of the admiral 's favourite when , have his 
 arm paternally on her shoulder , she give the tramp her hand at parting , 
 and then blush ! all that the lady have to say about it be , that a 
 spread of colour rather go to change the character of her face . 

 Carinthia have give Woodseer her hand and redden under the 
 recollection of Chillon 's word to she as they mount the rise of the 
 narrow vale , after leave the lame gentleman to his tobacco on the 
 grass below the rock . her brother might have counsel she wisely and 
 be to be obey . only , the great pleasure in see the gentleman again 
 inspire gratitude : he bring the scene to she ; and it be alive , it 
 chat and it beckon ; it neighbour her home ; she have pass it on 
 her walk away from her home ; the gentleman be her link to the mountain 
 path ; he be just outside an association with her father and mother . 
 at least , her thinking of they lead to he , he to they . now that she 
 have lose Chillon , no one be near to do so much . besides , Chillon 
 love Henrietta ; he be her own . his heart be hers and his mind his 
 country 's . this gentleman love the mountain ; the sight of he breathe 
 mountain air . to see he next day be her anticipation : for it would be 
 at the skirt of hilly forest land , where pinetree be a noble family , 
 different from the dusty fir of the weariful plain , which have tire 
 her eye of late . 

 Baden be her first peep at the edge of the world since she have grow 
 to be a young woman . she have but a faint idea of the significance of 
 gambling . the brilliant light , the band music , the sit group and 
 company of promenader be novelty ; the Ball of the ensue night 
 at the Schloss would be a wonder , she acknowledge in response to 
 Henrietta , who be try to understand she ; and she admire her 
 ball - dress , she say , look unintelligently when she hear that she 
 would be guilty of slay number of gentleman before the night be 
 over . Madame Clemence think her chance in that respect as good as any 
 other young lady 's , if only she could be get to feel interested . but at 
 a word of the pine forest , and say she intend to climb the hill 
 early with the light in the morning , a pointed eagerness flush 
 Carinthia , the cold engraving become a picture of colour . 

 she be out with the early light . yesterday 's parting between Chillon 
 and Henrietta have teach she to know some little about love ; and if her 
 voice have be heed by Chillon 's beloved , it would not have be a 
 parting . her only success be to bring a flood of tear from Henrietta . 
 the tear at least assure she that her brother 's beautiful girl have no 
 love for the other one , - the young nobleman of the great wealth , who be 
 to be at the Ball , and have ' go fly , ' Admiral Fakenham shrug to 
 say ; for Lord Fleetwood be nowhere see . 

 the much talk of he on the promenade overnight fetch his name to her 
 thought ; he scarcely touch a mind that her father fill when she 
 be once again breathe early morning air among the stem of climb 
 pine , broken alley of the low - sweep spruce branch and the bare 
 straight shafts carry their head high in the march upward . her old 
 father be arch - priest of such forest land , always recoverable to she 
 there . the suggestion of mountain be enough to make her mind play , and 
 her old father and she be aware of one another without converse in 
 speech . he point at thing to observe ; he share her satisfied hunger 
 for the solitude of the dumb and grow and wild sweet - smelling . 
 he would not let a sorrowful thought backward or an apprehensive idea 
 forward disturb the scene . a half - uproot pine - tree stem prop 
 mid - fall by stand comrade , and the downy drop to ground and muted 
 scurry up the bark of long - brush squirrel , cocktail on the wary watch , 
 be notice by he as well as by she ; even the rot timber drift , 
 bark and cone on the yellow pine needle , and the tortuous dwarf 
 chestnut push level out , with a strain of the head up , from a crevice 
 of mosse rock , among ivy and fern ; he see what his girl see . power of 
 heart be she conjure magician . 

 she climb to the rock - slab above . this be too easily do . the poor 
 bit of effort excite her frame to desire a spice of danger , her walk 
 be tower in the physical contempt of a mountain girl for petty 
 lowland obstruction . and it be just then , by the chance of thing - by 
 the direction of event , as Dame Gossip believe it to be - while colour , 
 expression , and her proud stature mark she from her sex , that a 
 gentleman , who be no other than Lord Fleetwood , pass Carinthia , 
 come out of the deep pine forest . 

 some distance on , round a bend of the path , she be tempt to adventure 
 by a project fork head of a sturdy blunt and twist little 
 rock - foster forest tree push horizontally for growth about thirty 
 foot above the low ground . she look on it , and take a step down to 
 the stem soon after . 

 Fleetwood have turn and follow , merely for the final curious peep at 
 an unexpected vision ; he have notice the singular shoot of thick timber 
 from the rock , and the form of the goose - neck it rise to , the sprout of 
 branch off the bill in the shape of a crest . and now a shameful spasm 
 of terror seize he at sight of a girl do what he would have dread 
 to attempt . she foot coolly , well - balance , upright . she seat 
 herself . 

 and there let she be . she be a german girl , apparently . she have an air 
 of breeding , something more than breed . german family of the noble 
 give out , here and there , as the Great War show example of , intrepid 
 young woman , who have the sharp line of character to render they 
 independent of the grace . but , if a young woman out alone in the wood 
 be hardly to be count among the well - bear , she hold rank above they . 
 her face and bear might really be take to symbolize the forest life . 
 she be as individual a representative as the tragic and comic mask , 
 and should be get to stand between they for sign of the naturally 
 straight - grow untraine , a noble daughter of the wood . 

 not comparable to Henrietta in feminine beauty , she be on an upper 
 plateau , where question as to beauty be answer by other than the 
 shallow aspect of a girl . but would Henrietta eclipse she if they be 
 side by side ? Fleetwood recall the strange girl 's face . there be 
 in it a savage poignancy in serenity unexampled among woman - or modern 
 woman . one might imagine an apotheosis of a militant young princess of 
 Goths or vandal , the glow of blessedness awakening her martial ardour 
 through the languor of the grave : - Woodseer would comprehend and hit 
 on the exact image to portray she in a moment , Fleetwood think , and 
 long for that fellow . 

 he walk hurriedly back to the stunt rock tree . the damsel have 
 vanish . he glance below . she have not fall . he long to tell 
 Woodseer he have see a sort of Carinthia sister , cousin , one of the 
 family . a single glimpse of she have raise he out of his grovel 
 perturbation , cool and strengthen he , more than divert the 
 course of the poison Henrietta infuse , and to which it disgrace he 
 to be so subject . he take love unmanfully ; the passion strike at his 
 weakness ; in wrath at the humiliation , if only to revenge himself for 
 that , he could be fiendish ; he know it , and loathe the desire fair 
 creature who cause and expose to he these crack in his nature , 
 whence there come a brimstone stench of the infernal pit . and he be 
 make for well . of this he be right well assure . Superior to station 
 and to wealth , to all mundane advantage , he be the puppet of a florid 
 puppet girl ; and he have sleep at the small inn of a village hard by , 
 because it be intolerable to he to see the face that have be tearful 
 over her lover 's departure , and hear her praise of the man she trust 
 to keep his word , however grievously she wound he . 

 he be the prisoner of his word ; - rather like the donkey know as 
 married man : rather more honourable than most of they . he have to be 
 present at the ball at the Schloss and behold his loathe Henrietta , 
 suffer torture of chain to the rack , by reason of his have promise 
 the bitter coquette he would be there . so hellish do the misery seem to 
 he , that he be relieve by the prospect of lie a whole day long in 
 loneliness with the sunshine of the wood , occasionally conjure up the 
 antidote face of the wood - sprite before he be to undergo it . but , as he 
 be not by nature a dreamer , only dream of the luxury of be one , 
 he soon look back with loathing on a notion of relief to come from the 
 state of ruminate animal , and jump up and shake off another of man 's 
 delusion - that they can , if they have the heart to suffer pain , deaden 
 it with any semi - poetical device , similar to those which Rufus Abrane 's 
 ' fiddler fellow ' practise and be able to carry out because he have no 
 blood . the spite of a present entire opposition to Woodseer 's profess 
 view make he exult in the thought , that the mouther of sentence be 
 likely to be at work stultify they and himself in the hall there 
 below during the day . an imp of mischief offer consolatory sport 
 in those hall of the Black Goddess ; already he regard his recent 
 subservience to the conceited and trip peripatetic philosopher as 
 among the ignominy he have cast away on his road to a general contempt ; 
 which be the position of a supreme elevation for particularly sensitive 
 young man . 

 pleasure in the scenery have go , and the wood - sprite be a flitted 
 vapour ; he long to be below there , observe Abrane and Potts and the 
 philosopher confound , and the legible placidity of Countess Livia . 
 nevertheless , he hang aloft , feed where he could , impatient of the 
 solitude , till night , when , accord to his guess , the lady be at 
 their robing . 

 half the fun be over : but the tale of it , narrate in turn by Abrane 
 and his Chummy Potts on the promenade , be a very good half . the fiddler 
 have play for the countess and hand she back her empty purse , with a 
 bow and a pretty speech . nothing have be see of he since . he have 
 lose all his own money besides . ' as of course he would , ' say Potts . ' a 
 fellow calculate the chance catch at a knife in the air . ' 

 ' every franc - piece he have ! ' cry Abrane . ' and how could the jackass 
 expect to keep his luck ! fling off his old suit and come back here 
 with a rig of german bag - you never see such a figure ! - Shoreditch 
 Jew 's holiday ! - why , of course , the luck would not   stand that . ' 

 they confess ruefully to have back he a certain distance , 
 notwithstanding . ' he take it so coolly , just as if pay for good 
 across a counter . ' 

 ' and he have something to bear , Braney , when you fall on he , ' say 
 Potts , and murmur aside : ' he can be smartish . hear I call Braney 
 Rufus , and say he , like a fellow - chin on his fiddle - " Captain Mountain , 
 Rufus Mus ' . not bad , for a counter . " ' 

 Fleetwood glance round : he could have wring Woodseer 's hand . he see 
 young Cressett instead , and hail he : ' here you be , my gallant ! you 
 shall flash your maiden sword tonight . when I be under your age by 
 a long count , I deal sanctimoniousness a flick o ' the cheek , and you 
 shall , and let them know you be a man . come and have your first boar - hunt 
 along with I . petticoat be hang . ' 

 the boy show some recollection of the lecture of his queen , but he 
 have not the vocable for resistance to an imperative senior at work upon 
 sneak inclination . ' Promised Lady F. ' - do you hear he ? ' Fleetwood 
 call to the couple behind ; and as gambler must need be parasite , 
 manly be the thing they speak to invigorate the youthful plunger and 
 second the whim of their paymaster . 

 at half - past eleven , the prisoner of his word enter under the Schloss 
 partico , have vow to himself on the way , that he would satisfy the 
 formula to gain release by a deferential bow to the great personage , 
 and straightway slip out into the heavenly starlight , thence down among 
 the jolly parisian and Viennese Bacchanals . 




 CHAPTER XII . HENRIETTA 's LETTER treating of the great event 

 by the first light of an autumn morning , Henrietta sit at her 
 travel - desk , to shoot a spark into the breast of her lover with the 
 story of the great event of the night . for there have be one , one of 
 our big , beyond all tongue and trumpet and possible anticipation . 
 wonder at it hammer on incredulity as she write it for fact , and in 
 writing have vision of her lover 's eye over the page . 

 ' Monsieur Du Lac ! 

 ' Grey Dawn . ' you be greet . this , if you have be tardy on the 
 journey home , will follow close on the heel of the prow , I believe 
 truest , of knight , and bear perhaps to his quick mind some help to the 
 solution he drop a hint of seek . 

 ' the Ball in every way a success . Grand Duke and Duchess perfect in 
 courtesy , not a sign of the german morgue . Livia splendid . compare to 
 Day and Night . but the Night eclipse the Day . a summer sea of dancing . 
 who , think you , eclipse those two ? 

 ' I tell you the very truth when I say your Carinthia do . if you have 
 see she , - the " poor dear girl " you sigh to speak of , - with the doleful 
 outlook on her fortune : " portionless , unattractive ! " Chillon , she be 
 magical ! 

 you can not ever have see she irradiate with happiness . her pleasure in 
 the happiness of all around she be part of the charm . one should be a 
 poet to describe she . it would task an artist to paint the rose - crystal 
 she become when thread her way through the group to be present . 
 this be not mean to say that she look beautiful . it be the something 
 above beauty - more unique and impressive - like the Alpine snow - cloak 
 tower up from the flowery slope you know so well and I a little . 

 ' you choose to think , be it Riette who notice my simple sister so 
 closely before ... ? for I suppose you to be read this letter a second 
 time and reflect as you read . in the first place , acquaintance with 
 she have reveal that she be not the simple person - only in her 
 manner . under the beam of subsequent event , it be true I see she more 
 picturesquely . but I notice also just a suspicion of the " grenadi " 
 stride when she be on the march to make her curtsey . but Livia have 
 no cause for chill and quiver . she be not the very strange bird 
 require explanatory excuse ; she dance excellently , and after 
 the first dance , I notice she mince her step in the walk with her 
 partner . she catch the tone readily . if not the image of her mother , 
 she have inherit her mother 's bent for the grace ; she need but a 
 small amount of practice . 

 ' take my assurance of that ; and you know who have critical eye . your 
 anxiety may rest ; she be equal to any station . 

 ' as expect by I , my Lord Tyrant appear , though late , near midnight . 
 I see he bow to the ducal party . Papa have lead your ' simple sister " 
 there . next I see the Tyrant and Carinthia converse . soon they be 
 dance together , talk interestedly , like cheerful comrade . whatever 
 his fault , he have the merit of be a man of his word . he say he 
 would come , he do not wish to come , and he come . 

 ' his word bind he - I hope not fatally ; irrevocably , it certainly do . 
 there be charm of character in that . his autocrat air can be forgive 
 to a man who so profoundly respect his word . 

 ' it occur during their third dance . your Riette be not in 
 the quadrille . o but she be a snub young woman last night ! I 
 refrain - the example be too minute for quotation . 

 ' a little later and he have vanish . Carinthia Kirby may already be 
 write Countess of Fleetwood ! his hand be offer and hers demand 
 in plain term . her brother would not be so astounded if he have see the 
 brilliant creature she be - be , I could say ; for when she leave I here , 
 to go to her bed , she still wear the " afterglow . " she trip over to I 
 in the ball - room to tell I . I might doubt , she have no doubt whatever . 
 I fancy he have subject she to some degree of trifling . he be in a 
 mood . his mood be know to I . but no , he be precise ; her report of 
 he strike the ear as credible , in spite of the marvel it insist on 
 our swallowing . 

 " ' Lord Fleetwood have ask I to marry he . " neither assurance nor 
 bashfulness ; newspaper print ; aid an undoubting air of contentment . 

 ' imagine I hear it . 

 ' " to be his wife ? " 

 ' " he say wife . " 

 ' " and you reply ? " 

 ' " i - say I would . " 

 ' " tell I all ? " 

 ' " he say we be plight . " 

 ' now , " wife " be one of the word he abhor ; and he loathe the hearing 
 of a girl as " engage . " however , " plighted " carry a likeness . 

 ' I press she : " my dear Carinthia , you think he in earnest ? " 

 ' " he be . " 

 ' " how do you judge ? " 

 ' " by his look when he speak . " 

 ' " not by his word ? " 

 " ' I repeat they to you . " 

 ' she have repeat they to I here in my bedroom . there be no variation . 
 she remember every syllable . he go so far as to urge she to say 
 whether she would as willingly utter consent if they be in a church 
 and a clergyman at the altar - rail . 

 ' that be like he . 

 ' she make answer : " wherever it may be , I be bind , if I say yes . " 

 ' she then add : " he tell I he join hand with I . " 

 ' " do he repeat the word ' wife ' ? " 

 ' " he say it twice . " 

 ' I transcribe verbatim scrupulously . there can not be an error , Chillon . 
 it seem to show , that he have embrace the serious meaning of the 
 word - or seriously embrace the meaning , read ' well . I have see his 
 lip form " wife . " 

 ' but why wonder so staringly ? they both love the mountain . both be 
 wildish . she be look superb . and he have see she do a daring thing 
 on the rock on the height in the early morning , when she be out by 
 herself , unaware of a spectator , he not know who she be ; - the Fates 
 have arrange it so . that be why he take to she so rapidly . so he tell 
 she . she like be admire . the preparation for the meeting do 
 really seem " under direction . " she like he too , I do think . between 
 her repetition of his compliment , she praise his tone of voice , his 
 feature . she be ready to have the full faith in the sincerity of his 
 offer ; speak without any impatience for the fulfilment . if it should 
 happen , what a change in the fortune of a girl - of more than one , 
 possibly . 

 ' now I must rest " eyelid fall . " it will be with a heart gallop . no 
 rest for I till this letter fly . good morning be my good night to 
 you , in a world that have turn over . ' 

 Henrietta resume : 

 ' Livia will not hear of it , call up all her pretty languor to put 
 it aside . it be the same to - day as last night . " why mention Russett 's 
 nonsense to I ? " Carinthia be as quietly circumstantial as at first . she 
 and the Tyrant talk of her native home . very desirous to see it ! mean 
 to build a mansion there ! " he say it must be the most romantic place on 
 earth . " 

 ' I suppose I sleep . I wake with my last line to you on my lip , and 
 the great news thundering . he name Esslemont and his favourite - always 
 uninhabited - Cader Argau . she speak they correctly . she have an 
 unfailing memory . the point be , that it be a memory . 

 ' do not forget also - Livia be affect by her distaste - that he be a 
 gentleman . he play with his nobility . with his reputation of gentleman , 
 he have never be know to play . you will understand the slightly 
 hypocritical air - it be not of sufficient importance for it to be 
 allude to in papa 's presence - I put on with she . 

 ' yes , I dance nearly all the dance . one , a princeling in scarlet 
 uniform , appear fresh from under earth ; Prussian : a weighty young 
 Graf in green , between sage and bottle , who seem to have run off a 
 tree in the forest , and be trim with silver like dew - drop : one in 
 your austrian white , dragon de Boheme , if I catch his French rightly . 
 other as well , a list . they have the accomplishment . they be drill 
 in it young , as girl be , and so few Englishmen - even english officer . 
 how it may be for campaigning , you can pronounce ; but for dancing , the 
 pantalon collant be the perfect uniform . your critical Henrietta have not 
 to complain of her partner , in the absence of the one . 

 ' I shall be haunt by vision of Chillon 's amazement until I hear or we 
 meet . I serve for Carinthia 's mouthpiece , she can not write it , she say . 
 it would be relate in two copybook line , if at all . 

 ' the amazement over London ! the jewel hand of the kingdom go in a 
 flash , to " a raw mountain girl , " as will be say . I can hear Lady 
 Endor , Lady Eldritch , Lady Cowry . the reasonable woman should be Lady 
 Arpington . I have hear her speak of your mother , see by she when she 
 be in frock . 

 ' enter the " plighted . " Poor Livia ! to be make a dowager of by any but a 
 damsel of the family . she may well ridicule " that nonsense of Russett 's 
 last night " ! Carinthia kiss , embrace , her brother . I be to say : " what 
 Henrietta tell you be true , Chillon . " she be content though she have 
 not see he again and have not the look of expect to see he . she 
 still wear the kind of afterglow . 

 ' Chillon 's viennese waltz be play by the band : play a second time , 
 special request , convey to the leader by Prince Ferdinand . true , most 
 true , she long to be home across the water . but be it admit , that to 
 any one love colour , music , chivalry , the Island of Drab be an exile . 
 Imagine , then , the strange magnetism draw she there ! could warmer 
 proof be give ? 

 ' Adieu . Livia 's " arch - plotter " will weigh the letter he read to the 
 small fraction of a fraction before he move a step . 

 ' I could leave it and come to it again and add and add . I foresee in 
 Livia 's mind a dread of the aforesaid " arch , " and an interdict . so the 
 letter must be close , seal and into the box , with the hand I 
 still call mine , though I should doubt my right if it be contest 
 fervently . I be sing the waltz . 

  ' Adieu , 
  ' ever and beyond it , 
  ' your obedient queen , 
  ' HENRIETTA . 

 ' P.S.-My Lord Tyrant have depart - as on other occasion . the prisoner 
 of his word be sure to take his airing before he present himself to 
 redeem it . his valet be leave to pay bill , fortunately for Livia . she 
 entrust her purse yesterday to a man pick up on the road by my lord , 
 that he might play for she . Captain Abrane assure she he have a star , 
 and Mr. Potts think he a rush compere , an adept of those dreadful 
 gambling table . why will she continue to play ! the purse be return 
 to she , without so much as a piece of silver in it ; the man have fly . 
 Sir M. Corby say , he be a man whose hand betray he - or do to Sir 
 M. ; expect to see he one day on the wrong side of the criminal bar . he 
 strike I as not be bad than absurd . he be , in any case , an unfit 
 companion , and our C. would help to rescue the Eccentric from such 
 complicate associate . I see world of good she may do . happily , he be 
 no slave of the vice of gambling ; so she would not suffer that anxiety . 
 I wish it could be subjoin , that he have no malicious pleasure in 
 mislead other . Livia be inconsolable over her pet , young Lord 
 Cressett , whom he yesterday induce to " try his luck " - with the result . 
 we leave , if bill be pay , in two day . Captain Abrane and Mr. Potts 
 leave this afternoon ; just enough to carry they home . Papa and your 
 blissful sister out drive . Riette within her four wall and sign 
 herself , 

  ' the PRISONER of CHILLON . ' 




 CHAPTER XIII . an IRRUPTION . of mistress gossip in BREACH of the 
 CONVENTION 

 ' it be a dark land , ' Carinthia say , on see our Island 's lower 
 cloud in swift motion , without a break of their fold , above the sheer 
 white cliff . - she say it , we know . that poor child Carinthia Jane , 
 when first she behold Old England 's shore , toss in the packet - boat 
 on a wild Channel sea , do say it and think it , for it be in the family 
 that she do ; and no wonder that she should , the day be showery from 
 the bed of the sun , after a frosty three day , at the close of autumn . 
 we use to have an eye of our own for english weather before print 
 Meteorological Observations and Forecasts undertake to supplant the 
 shepherd and the poacher , and the pilot with his worn brown leather 
 telescope tuck beneath his arm . all three would have tell you , that 
 the end of a three day ' frost in the late season of the year and the 
 early , be likely to draw the warm wind from the Atlantic over Cornish 
 Land 's End and Lizard . 

 quite by chance of thing , Carinthia Jane look on the land of her 
 father and mother for the first time under those condition . there can 
 be no harm in quote her remark . only - I have to say it - experience 
 cause apprehension , that we be again to be delay by description , 
 and an exposition of feeling ; take for grant , - of course , in a 
 serious narrative ; which it really seem these modern think design 
 for a frequent arrest of the actor in the story and a searching of the 
 internal state of this one or that one of they : who be lay out stark 
 naked and probe and expound , like as in the celebrated picture by a 
 great painter - and we , thirst for event as we be , be to stop 
 to enjoy a lecture on Anatomy . and all the while the window of the 
 lecture - room be rattle , if not the whole fabric shake , with 
 exterior occurrence or impatience for they to come to pass . every 
 explanation be sure to be offer by the course event may take ; so do , 
 in mercy , I say , let we bide for they . 

 she think our Island all the dark because Henrietta have induce she 
 to talk on the boat of her mountain home and her last morning there for 
 the walk away with Chillon John . soon it be to appear supernaturally 
 bright , a very magician 's cave for brilliancy . 

 now , this have happen - and comment on it to yourself , remember 
 always , that Chillon John be a lover , and a lover have his excuse , 
 though they will not obviate the penalty he may incur ; and dreadful 
 they be . after read Henrietta 's letter to he , he ride out of his 
 Canterbury quarter across the country to the border of Sussex , where 
 his uncle Lord Levellier live , on the ridge of ironstone , near the wild 
 land of a forest , Croridge the name of the place . now , Chillon John know 
 his uncle be miserly , and dread the prospect of have to support a 
 niece in the wretched establishment at Lekkatts , or , as it be popularly 
 call , Leancats ; you can understand why . but he manage to assure 
 himself he must in duty consult with the senior and chief member of his 
 family on a subject of such importance as the proposal of marriage to 
 his lordship 's niece . 

 the consultation be short : ' you will leave it to I , ' his uncle say : 
 and we hear of business affair between they , involve payment of 
 money due to the young man ; and how , whenever he touch on they , his 
 uncle immediately fall back on the honour of the family and Carinthia 
 Jane 's reputation , her good name to be vindicate , and especially that 
 there must be no delay , together with as close a reckoning as he 
 could make of the value of Lord Fleetwood 's estate in Kent and in 
 Staffordshire and South Wales , and his house property in London . 

 ' he will have mean to support she , ' say the old lord , shrug as if 
 at his own incapacity for that burden . 

 the two then go to the workshop beside a large pond , where there be 
 an island border with birch tree and workman 's cottage near the main 
 building ; and that be an arsenal contain every kind of sword and 
 lance and musket , rifle and fowling - piece and pistol , and more gunpowder 
 than be , I believe , allow by law . for they be engage in invent 
 a new powder for howitzer shell , of tremendous explosive power . 

 nothing far do either of they say , concern the marriage . nor do 
 Carinthia Jane hear any mention of Lord Fleetwood from her brother on 
 the landing - place at Dover . she be take to Admiral Baldwin Fakenham 's 
 house in Hampshire ; and there she remain , the delight of his life , 
 during two month , patiently expect and rebuke the unmaidenliness 
 of her expectation , as honest young woman in her position use to 
 do . so do they sometimes wait for year ; they have wait until they 
 wither into their graf , like the vapour of a brief winter 's day : a 
 move picture of a sex restrain by modesty in those purer time from 
 the taking of one step forward unless inquire for . 

 two month she wait in our ' dark land . ' January arrive , and her 
 brother . Henrietta communicate the news : 

 ' my Janey , you be ask by Lord Fleetwood whether it be your wish that 
 he should marry you . ' 

 now , usually a well - bear young woman 's answer , if a willing one , be 
 an example of weak translation . here it be the heart 's native tongue , 
 without any roundabout , simple but direct . 

 ' oh , I will , I be ready , tell he . ' 

 remember , she be not speak publicly . 

 Henrietta know the man enough to be glad he do not hear . she herself 
 would have feel a little shock on his behalf : only , that answer suit 
 the scheme of the pair of lover . 

 how far those two be innocent in not deliver the whole of Lord 
 Fleetwood 's message to Carinthia Jane through Lord Levellier , we be 
 unable to learn . we may suspect the miserly nobleman of curtail it 
 for his purpose ; and such be my idea . but the answer would have be 
 the same , I be sure . 

 in consequence and straight away , Chillon John betake he to Admiral 
 Baldwin and inform he of Lord Fleetwood 's proposal on the night 
 at Baden , and renewal of it through the mouth of Lord Levellier , not 
 communicating , however   he may really not have know , the story of how 
 it have be wring from the earl by a surprise movement on the part of 
 the one - armed old lord , who burst out on he in the street from the 
 ambush of a Club - window , where he have be station every day for a 
 fortnight , indefatigably to watch for the passing of the earl , as there 
 seem no other way to find he . they say , indeed , there be a scene , 
 judge by the result , and it would have be an excellent scene for 
 the stage ; though the two nobleman be to all appearance politely 
 exchange their remark . but the audience hear what pass , 
 appreciate the courteous restraint of an attitude so contrast with 
 their temper . behind the ostentation of civility , their word be 
 dagger . 

 for it chance , that the young earl , after a period of refuge at his 
 Welsh castle , suppose , as he well might , that his late mad freak of 
 the proposal of his hand and title to the strange girl in a quadrille at 
 a foreign castle have be forget by she , and the risk of annoyance 
 on the subject have quite blow over , return to town , happy in have 
 do the penance for his impulsiveness , and get clean again - that be 
 to say , strike off his fetter and escape from importunity - the very 
 morning of the day when Lord Levellier spring upon he ! it show the old 
 campaigner 's shrewdness in guess where his prey would come , and not 
 put he on his guard by a call at his house . out of the window he 
 look for all the hour of light during an entire fortnight . ' in the 
 service of my sister 's child , ' he say . ' to save he from the cost of 
 maintain she , ' say his enemy . at any rate he do it . 

 he be likely to have do the bad which I suspect . 

 now , the imparting of the wonderful news to Admiral Baldwin Fakenham 
 be , we read , the whiff of a tropical squall to lay he on his beam 
 end . he could not but doubt ; and his talk be like the sail of a big 
 ship rattle to the first puff of wind . he have to believe ; and then , we 
 read , he be for hour like a vessel roll in the trough of the sea . 
 of course he be a disappointed father . naturally his glance at the 
 loss to Henrietta of the great prize of the matrimonial market of all 
 Europe and America be vexing and saddening . then he wake up to think 
 of the fortune of his ' other girl , ' as he name she , and cry : ' crinny 
 catch he ! ' 

 he cry it in glee and rub his hand . 

 so thereupon , stand before he , Chillon John , from whom he have the 
 news , bent to he slightly , as his elegant manner be , and lengthen 
 the admiral 's chap with another proposal ; easy , deliberate , precise , 
 quite the respectful bandit , if you please , determine on have his 
 daughter by all mean , only much prefer the legal , formal , and 
 friendly . upon that , in the moment of indecision , Henrietta enter , 
 follow by Admiral Baldwin 's heroine , his Crinny , whom he embrace 
 and kiss , congratulate and kiss again . one see the contrivance to 
 soften he . 

 so it be do , down in that Hampshire household on the height near the 
 down , whence you might behold , off a terra firma resemble a roll of 
 billow , England 's big battle - ship in line front the island ; when 
 they be a spectacle of beauty as well as power : which now they be no 
 more , but will have to be , if they be both to float and to fight . for 
 I have , have quote to I by a great admirer of the Old Buccaneer , one of 
 the dark saying in his MAXIMS for MEN , where Captain John Peter Kirby 
 commend his fellow - man to dissatisfaction with themselves if they have 
 not put an end to their enemy handsomely .. and he advise the copying of 
 nature in this ; whose element have always , he say , a pretty , besides a 
 thorough , style of do it , when they get the well of we ; and the one 
 by reason of the other . he instance the horse , the yacht , and chiefly 
 the sword , for proof , that the handsome be the most effective . and 
 he print large : ' UGLY be only half way to a thing . ' to an invention , 
 I suppose he intend to say . but look on our huge foundering 
 sea - monster and the disappearance of the unwieldy in Nature , and the 
 countenance of criminal , who be , he bid we observe , always in the 
 long run beat , I seem to see a meaning our country might meditate on . 

 so , as I say , it be do ; for Admiral Baldwin could refuse his crinny 
 nothing ; as little as he would deny anything to himself , the heartiest 
 of kindly host , father , friend . Carinthia Jane 's grand good fortune 
 cover that pit , the question of money , somehow , and be , we may 
 conceive , a champagne wine in their reasoning faculty . the admiral 
 be in debt , Henrietta have no heritage , Chillon John be the heir of a 
 miserly uncle owe he sum and evade every application for they , yet 
 they behave as people who have the cup of golden wish . perhaps it be 
 because Henrietta and her lover be so handsome a match as to make it 
 seem to they and other they must marry ; and as to character , her 
 father could trust she to the man of her choice more readily than to 
 the wealthy young nobleman ; of whose discreetness he have not the high 
 opinion . he reconcile this view with his warm feeling for the Countess 
 of Fleetwood to be , by say : ' crinny will tame he ! ' his faith be in 
 her dauntless bold spirit , not think of the animal she be to tame . 

 Countess Livia , after receive Henrietta 's letter of information , 
 descend on they and think they each and all a craze set . love , as 
 a motive of action for a woman , she consider the female 's lunacy 
 and suicide . man be bear subject to it , happily , and thus the balance 
 between the lordly half of creation and the frail be rectify . we woman 
 dress , and smile , sigh , if you like , to excite the malady . but if we be 
 the fool to share it , we lose our chance ; instead of the queen , we 
 be the slave , and instead of a life of pleasure , we pass from fever 
 to fever at a tyrant 's caprice : he do rightly in despise we . ay , and 
 many a worthy woman think the same . educate in dependency as they be , 
 they come to the idea of love to snatch at it for their weapon of the 
 man 's weakness . for which my lord call they heartless , and poet be 
 angry with they , rightly or wrongly . 

 it must , I fear , be admit for a truth , that sorrow be the portion 
 of young woman who give the full measure of love to the engagement , 
 marry for love . at least , Countess Livia could declare subsequently 
 she have foretell it and warn her cousin . not another reflection do you 
 hear from I , if I must pay forfeit of my privilege to hurry you on past 
 description of place and anatomy of character and impertinent talk 
 about philosophy in a story . when we be startled and offend by the 
 insinuated tracing of principal incident to a thread - bare spot in the 
 nether garment of a man of no significance , I lose patience . 

 Henrietta 's case be a secondary affair . what with her passion - it be 
 nothing less - and her lover 's cunning art , and her father 's consent 
 give , and in truth the look of the two together , the dissuasion of they 
 from union be as likely to keep they apart as an exhortation address 
 to magnet and needle . Countess Livia attack Carinthia Jane and the 
 admiral back she . but the admiral , have give his consent to his 
 daughter 's marriage , in consequence of the earl 's pledge word to ' his 
 other girl , ' have become a zealot for this marriage and there be only 
 not a grand altercation on the subject because Livia shun annoyance . 
 alone with Carinthia Jane , as she report to Henrietta , she speak to a 
 block , that shake a head and wear a thin smile and nurse its own idea 
 of the well knowledge of Edward Russett , Earl of Fleetwood , gain in 
 the run of a silly quadrille at a ball : 

 what be a young man 's word to his partner in a quadrille ? 

 Livia put the question , she put it twice rather sternly , and the girl 
 come out with : ' oh , he mean it ! ' 

 the nature , the pride , the shifty and furious mood of Lord Fleetwood 
 be paint frightful to she . 

 she have conceive her own image of he . 

 whether to set she down as an enamoured idiot or a creature not a 
 whit less artful than her brother , be Countess Livia 's debate . her 
 inclination be to misdoubt the daughter of the Old Buccaneer : she might 
 be simple , at her age , and she certainly be ignorant ; but she cling to 
 her prize . still the promise be extract from she , that she would not 
 worry the earl to fulfil the word she suppose he to mean in its full 
 meaning . 

 the promise be unreluctantly yield . no , she would not write . Admiral 
 Fakenham , too , engage to leave the matter to a man of honour . 

 meanwhile , Chillon John have take a journey to Lekkatts ; follow 
 which , his uncle go to London . Lord Fleetwood hear that Miss Kirby 
 keep he bind . he be again the fated prisoner of his word . 

 and follow that , not so very long , there be the announcement of the 
 marriage of Chillon John Kirby Levellier , Lieutenant in the King 's Own 
 hussar , and Henrietta , daughter of Admiral Baldwin Fakenham . a 
 county newspaper paragraph be quote for its eulogy of the Beauty of 
 Hampshire - not too strong , those acquaint with her thought . interest 
 at Court obtain an advancement for the bridegroom : he be gazette 
 captain during his honeymoon , and his prospect under his uncle 's name 
 be consider fair , though certain people say at the time , it be 
 likely to be all he would get while old Lord Levellier of Leancats 
 remain in the flesh . 

 now , as it be good for those to tell who intend preserve their taste 
 for romance and hate anatomical lecture , we never can come to the exact 
 motif of any extraordinary piece of conduct on the part of man or 
 woman . girl be to read ; and the study of a boy start from the monkey . 
 but no literary surgeon or chemist shall explain positively the cause of 
 the behaviour of man and woman in their relation together ; and speak 
 to rescue my story , I say we must with due submission accept the fact . 
 we be not a bit the bad for wonder at they . so it happen that 
 Lord Fleetwood 's reply to Lord Levellier 's hammer - hammer by post 
 and messenger at his door , one may call it , on the subject of the 
 celebration of the marriage of the young Croesus and Carinthia Jane , 
 in which there be demand for the fixing of a date forthwith , be 
 despatch on the day when London have tiding of Henrietta Pakenham 's 
 wedding . 

 the letter , lose for many year , turn up in the hand of a kentish 
 auctioneer , sell it on behalf of a farm - serve man , who have it from 
 Lord Levellier 's cook and housemaid , among the thing she bring he as 
 her wifely portion after her master 's death , and this she have not find 
 saleable in her husband 's village at her price , but she have get the 
 habit of stick to the scrap , be proud of hear it say that she 
 have skin Leancats to some profit : and her expectation prove correct 
 after her own demise , for her husband put it up at the auction ; our 
 relative on the mother 's side , Dr. Glossop , interested in the document 
 and particular of the story as he be , have it knock down to he , in 
 contest with an agent of a London gentleman , go as high as two pound 
 ten shilling , for the sum of two pound and fifteen shilling . count 
 the amount that make for each word of a letter a marvel of brevity , 
 consider the purport ! but Dr. Glossop be right in say he have it 
 cheap . the value of that letter may now be multiply by ten : nor for 
 that sum would he part with it . 

 thus it run , I need not refer to it in Bundle No . 3 : 

  ' MY LORD : I drive to your church - door on the fourteenth of the month 
  at ten A.M. , to keep my appointment with Miss C. J. Kirby , if I do 
  not blunder the initial . 
  ' your lordship 's obedient servant , 
  ' fleetwood . ' 

 that letter will ever be a treasured family possession with we . 

 that letter be date from Lord Fleetwood 's Kentish mansion , Esslemont , 
 the tenth of the month . he must have quit London for Esslemont , 
 for change of scene , for air , the moment after the news of Henrietta 's 
 marriage . Carinthia Jane receive the summon without transmission 
 of the letter from her uncle on the morning of the twelfth . it be a 
 peremptory summon . 

 unfortunately , Admiral Fakenham , a real knight and chevalier of those 
 past time , would not let she mount the down to have her farewell view 
 of the big ship unaccompanie by he ; and partly and largely in pure 
 chivalry , no doubt ; but her young idea of England 's grandeur , as 
 show in her great vessel of war , thrill he , too , and restore his 
 youthful enthusiasm for his noble profession or make it effervesce . 
 however it be , he ride beside she and rejoice to hear the young girl 's 
 talk of her father as a captain of one of England 's thunderer , and of 
 the cruelty of that Admiralty to he : at which Admiral Baldwin laugh , 
 but have not the heart to disagree with she , for he could belabour the 
 Admiralty in season , cause or no cause . altogether he much enjoy the 
 ride , notwithstanding intimation of the approach of ' his visitor , ' as 
 he call his attack of gout . 

 rid home , however , the couple pass through a heavy rainfall , and 
 the next day , when he be to drive with the bride to Lekkatts , gout , the 
 fierce he have ever know , chain he fast to his bed . such be the 
 petty accident affect circumstance . they be the instrument of 
 Destiny . 

 there he lay , protest that the ceremony could not possibly be for the 
 fourteenth , because Countess Livia have , he now remember , write of 
 her engagement to meet Russett on the night of that day at a ball at 
 Mrs. Cowper Quillett 's place , Canleys , lie south of the Surrey hill : 
 a house fame for its gathering of beautiful woman ; whither Lord 
 Fleetwood would be sure to engage to go , the admiral now say ; and it 
 rack he like gout in his mind , and perhaps trouble his conscience 
 about hand the girl to such a young man . but he be lie on his 
 back , the posture for memory to play the fiend with we , as we read in 
 the BOOK of MAXIMS of the Old Buccaneer . admiral Baldwin wish heartily 
 to be present at his Crinny 's wedding ' to see she launch , ' if 
 wedding it be to be , and he vow the date of the fourteenth , in Lord 
 Levellier 's announcement of it , must be an error and might be a month 
 in advance , and ought to be . but it be sheer talk and rave for 
 a solace to his disappointment or his anxiety . he have to let Carinthia 
 Jane depart under the charge of his housekeeper , Mrs. Carthew , a staid 
 excellent lady , poorly gift with observation . 

 her report of the performance of the ceremony at Croridge village 
 church , a half mile from Lekkatts , be highly reassuring to the anxious 
 old admiral still lie on his back with memory and gout at their 
 fiend 's play , and livid forecast hover . he have recollect that 
 there have be no allusion in Lord Levellier 's message to settlement or 
 any lawyer 's preliminary , and he rag at himself for have to own it 
 would have be the first of question on behalf of his daughter . 

 ' all pass off correctly , ' Mrs. Carthew say . ' the response of the 
 bride and bridegroom be particularly articulate . ' 

 she be reserve upon the question of the hospitality of Lekkatts . the 
 place have entertain she during her necessitate residence there , and 
 honour forbid she to smile concordantly at the rosy admiral 's 
 mention of Leancats . she take occasion , however , to praise the Earl of 
 Fleetwood 's eminently provident considerateness for his bride , inasmuch 
 as he have pack a hamper in his vehicle , which be a four - in - hand , 
 drive by himself . 

 Admiral Baldwin inquire : ' bride inside ? ' 

 he be inform : ' the Countess of Fleetwood sit on the box on the left 
 of my lord . ' 

 she have make no moan about the absence of bridesmaid . 

 ' she appear too profoundly happy to meditate an instant upon 
 deficiency . ' 

 ' how do the bridegroom behave ? ' 

 ' Lord Fleetwood be very methodical . he be not , or be not , voluntarily 
 a talker . ' 

 ' blue coat , brass button , hot - house flower ? old style or new ? ' 

 ' his lordship wear a rather low beaver and a buttoned white overcoat , 
 not out of harmony with the bride 's plain travel - dress . ' 

 ' ah ! he be a good whip , man say . keep first - rate stable , hack , and 
 blood . Esslemont hard by will be the place for their honeymoon , I 
 guess . and he be a lucky dog , if he know his luck . ' 

 so say Admiral Baldwin . he be proceed to say more , for he have a 
 prodigious opinion of the young countess and the benefit of her 
 marriage to the british race . as it concern a healthy constitution and 
 motherhood , Mrs. Carthew cough and retire . nor do I reprove either of 
 they . the speculation and the decorum be equally commendable . 
 masculine idea be one thing ; but let feminine ever be feminine , or our 
 civilization perishe . 

 at Croridge village church , then , one of the small church in the 
 kingdom , the ceremony be perform and duly witness , name write in 
 the vestry book , the clergyman 's fee , the clerk , and the pew - woman , pay 
 by the bridegroom . and thus we see how a pair of lover , blind with the 
 one object of lover in view ; and a miserly uncle , all on edge to save 
 himself the expense of support his niece ; and an idolatrous old 
 admiral , on his back with gout ; conduce in turn and together to the 
 marriage gradually exciting the world 's wonder , till it eclipse the 
 story of the Old Buccaneer and Countess Fanny , which it cause to be 
 discuss afresh . 

 Mrs. Carthew remember Carinthia Jane 's last maiden remark and her 
 first bridal utterance . on the way , walk to the church of Croridge 
 from Lekkatts , the girl say : ' go on my foot , I feel I continue the 
 mountain walk with my brother when we leave our home . ' and after leave 
 the church , about to mount the coach , she turn to Mrs. Carthew , 
 say , as she embrace she : 

 ' a happy bride 's kiss should bring some good fortune . ' and look down 
 from her place on the top of the coach : 

 ' adieu , dear Mrs. Carthew . a day of glory it be to - day . ' she must 
 actually have have it in her sight as a day of glory : and it be a day of 
 the cloud off our rainy quarter , similar in every way to the day of she 
 step on english soil and say : ' it be a dark land . ' for the heart 
 be truly declare to be our colourist . a day have the gale in its 
 breast , sweep the whole country and bend the tree for the twig 
 to hiss like spray of the billow around our island , be a day of 
 golden splendour to the young bride of the Earl of Fleetwood , though he 
 scarcely address one syllable to she , and they sit side by side all 
 but dumb , he like a coachman drive an unknown lady fare , on a morning 
 after a night when his wife 's tongue may have sour he for the sex . 




 CHAPTER XIV . a pendant of the foregoing 

 Mention have be omit or forget by the worthy Dame , in her vagrant 
 fowl 's treatment of a story she can not incubate , will not relinquish , 
 and may ultimately addle , that the bridegroom , after walk with a 
 disengage arm from the little village church at Croridge to his 
 coach and four at the cross of the road to Lekkatts and the lowland , 
 abruptly , and as one pursue a deferential line of conduct he have 
 prescribe to himself , ask his bride , what seat she would prefer . 

 he shout : ' ive ! ' 

 a person inside the coach appear to be effectually rouse . 

 the glass of the window drop . the head of a man emerge . it be 
 the head of one of the bargefaced man of the British Isles , broad , and 
 batter flattish , with sentinel eye . 

 in an instant the heavy - headed but not ill - look fellow be nimble and 
 jump from the coach . 

 ' Napping , my lord , ' he say . 

 Heavy though the look of he might be , his foot be light ; they flip 
 a bar of a hornpipe at a touch of the ground . perhaps they be allow 
 to go with their instinct for the dance , that his master should have a 
 sample of his wakefulness . he quench a smirk and stand to take order ; 
 clothe in a flat blue cap , a brown overcoat , and knee - breech , as the 
 temporary bustle of his leg have reveal . 

 fleet - wood hear the young lady say : ' I would choose , if you please , to 
 sit beside you . ' 

 he give a nod of enforced assent , glance at the vacate box . 

 the man inquire : ' a knee and a back for the lady to mount up , my lord ? ' 

 ' in ! ' be the smart command to he ; and he pop in with the agility of 
 his popping out . 

 then Carinthia make reverence to the grey lean figure of her uncle and 
 kiss Mrs. Carthew . she need no help to mount the coach . Fleetwood 's 
 arm be rigidly extend , and he do not visibly wince when this foreign 
 girl spring to the first hand - grip on the coach and say : ' no , my 
 husband , I can do it ' ; unaided , ' be imply . 

 her stride from the axle of the wheel to the step higher would have be 
 a graceful spectacle on Alpine crag . 

 Fleetwood swallow that , too , though it conjure up a mocking 
 recollection of the Baden wood , and an astonish wild donkey prepare 
 himself for his harness . a sour relish of the irony in his present 
 position sharpen he to devilish enjoyment of it , as the fine form 
 of loathing : on the principle that if we find ourselves consign to 
 the nether hall , we do well to dance drunkenly . he have cry for 
 Romance - here it be ! 

 he raise his hat to Mrs. Carthew and to Lord Levellier . previous to the 
 ceremony , the two nobleman have interchange the short speech of mannered 
 duellist punctiliously courteous in the opening act . their civility be 
 maintain at the termination of the deadly work . the old lord 's bosom 
 thank the young one for not require entertainment and a repast ; the 
 young lord 's thank the old one for a strict military demeanour at an 
 execution and the abstaining from any nonsensical talk over the affair . 

 a couple of liverie groom at the horse ' head run and spring to the 
 hinder seat as soon as their master have take the rein . he sound the 
 whip caressingly : off those pretty trotter go . 

 Mrs. Carthew watch they , wave to the bride . she be on the present 
 occasion less than usually an acute or a reflective observer , owe 
 to her admiration of lordly state and masculine commandership ; and she 
 thought be : ' she have indeed make a brilliant marriage ! ' 

 the lady think it , notwithstanding an eccentricity in the wedding 
 ceremony , such as could not but be noticeable . but very wealthy nobleman 
 be commonly , perhaps necessarily , eccentric , for thus they prove 
 themselves egregious , which the world expect they to be . 

 Lord Levellier sound loud eulogy of the illustrious driver 's team . 
 his meditation , as he subsequently state to Chillon , be upon his 
 vanquish antagonist 's dexterity , in so conduct matter , that he have 
 to be take at once , with naught of the customary preface and apology 
 for take to himself the young lady , of which a handsome settlement , be 
 the memorial . 

 we have to suppose , that the curious occupant of the coach inside 
 arouse no curiosity in the pair of absorb observer . 

 speculation regard the chance of a fall of rain follow the 
 coach until it sink and the back of the two liverie groom close 
 the chapter of the wedding , introductory to the honeymoon at Esslemont , 
 seven mile distant by road , to the right of Lekkatts . it be out of 
 sight that the coach turn to the left , Northwestward . 




 CHAPTER XV . open stage of the HONEYMOON 

 a famous maxim in the book of the Old Buccaneer , treating of PRECAUTION , 
 as ' the brave man 's clean conscience , ' with sound counsel to the 
 adventurous , have it : - 

 ' then you sail away into the tornado , happy as a seal bottle of ripe 
 wine . ' 

 it should mean , that brave man enter the jaw of hurricane be find 
 to have cheerful heart in they when they know they have do their 
 good . but , touch the picture of happiness , conceive the bounteous 
 Bacchic spirit in the devoutness of a Sophocles , and you find comparison 
 neighbour closely between the seal wine - flask and the bride , who be 
 be drive by her husband to the nest of the unknown on her marriage 
 morn . 

 seat beside he , with bosom at heave and shut mouth , in a strange 
 land , travel cloud - like , rush like the shower - cloud to the vale , 
 this Carinthia , suddenly wed , passionately grateful for humbleness 
 exalted , virginly sensible of treasure of love to give , resemble 
 the inanimate and most inspiring , be mindless and inexpressive , past 
 memory , beyond the hope , a thing of the thrilled blood and skylark air , 
 since she lay her hand in this young man 's . his not speak to she 
 be accept . her blood rather than recollection revive their exchange 
 during the dance at Baden , for assurance that their liking be one , 
 their aim rapturously one ; that he be she , she he , the two heart 
 make one soul . 

 could she give as much as he ? it be hardly ask . if we feel we can 
 give our breath of life , the strength of the feeling fully answer . it 
 bubble perpetually from the depth like a well - spring in tumult . two 
 heart that make one soul do not separately count their gift . 

 for the rest , her hunger to admire dispose she to an absorbing 
 sentience of his act ; the trifle , gesture , manner of this and that ; 
 which be seize as they fly , and swiftly assimilate to stamp his 
 personality . drive be the piece of skill she could not do . her 
 husband 's mastery of the rein endow he with the beauty of those 
 harmonious trotter he guide and keep to their pace ; and the humming 
 rush of the pace , the smooth torrent of the brown heath - knoll and 
 reddish pit and hedge - line and grass - flat and copse pour the 
 counter - way of her advance , belong to his wizardry . the bearing of she 
 onward be her abandonment to he . Delicious as mountain air , the wind 
 sing ; it have a song of many voice . quite as much as on the mountain , 
 there be the keen , the blissful , nerve - knot catch of the presence 
 of danger in the steep descent , take as if swallow , without swerve 
 or check . she be in her husband 's hand . at time , at the pitch of a 
 rapid shelving , that be like a fall , her heart go down ; and at the 
 next throb exalt before it rise , not reason why ; - her confidence 
 be in he ; she be his comrade whatever chance . up over the 
 mountain - peak she have know edged moment , little heed in their 
 passage , when life be poise as a crystal pitcher on the head , in peril 
 of a step . then she have be dependent on herself . now she have the joy 
 of trust to her husband . 

 his hard leftward eye have view of her askant , if he care to see how she 
 bear the trial ; and so relentlessly do he take the slope , that the 
 man inside push out an inquire pate , the two groom tighten arm 
 across their chest . her face be calmly set , wakeful , but unwrinkled : 
 the creature do not count among timid girl - or among civilized . she 
 have get what she want from her madman - mad in his impulse , mad in his 
 reading of honour . she be the sister of Henrietta 's husband . henrietta 
 bear the name she have quit . could madness go beyond the marrying of 
 the creature ? he chafe at her containment , at her courage , her silence , 
 her withholding the brazen or the fawnish look - up , either of which he 
 would have hat . 

 he , however , be drag to look down . neither Gorgon nor Venus , nor a 
 mingling of they , she have the chasm of the face , recall the face of 
 his bondage , see first that night at Baden . it recall and it be 
 not the face ; it be the skull of the face , or the flesh of the spirit . 
 occasionally she look , for a twinkle or two , the creature or vision 
 she have be , as if to mock by remind he . she be the abhor 
 delusion , who capture he by his nerve , ensnare his word - the doing 
 of a foul witch . how have it leapt from his mouth ? she must have work 
 for it . the word speak - she must have know it - he be bind , or the 
 detest Henrietta would have say : not even true to his word ! 

 to see she now , this girl , insist to share his name , for a slip of 
 his tongue , despite the warning send she through her uncle , have that 
 face much as a leaden winter landscape pretend to be the country 
 radiant in colour . she belong to the order of the variable animal - a 
 woman indeed ! - womanish enough in that . there be man who love 
 woman - the idea of woman . woman be their shepherdess of sheep . he love 
 freedom , loathe the subjection of a partnership ; could undergo it only 
 in adoration of an ineffable splendour . he have step to the altar 
 fancy she might keep to her part of the contract by appear the 
 miracle that subdue he . see by light of day , this bitter object 
 beside he be a witch without her spell ; that is , the skeleton of the 
 seductive , ghastly among horror and irony . let she have the credit 
 of do her work thoroughly before the exposure . she have do it . 
 she might have help - such be the stipulation of his mad freak in 
 consent to the bondage - yes , she might have help to soften the 
 sting of his wound . she be beside he bear his name , for the 
 perpetual pouring of an acid on the wound that vile Henrietta - poison 
 honey of a girl ! - have deal . 

 he glance down at his possession : - heaven and the yawning pit be the 
 contrast ! poisoned honey be after all honey while you eat it . here there 
 be nothing but a rocky bowl of emptiness . and who be she ? she be the 
 sister of Henrietta 's husband . he be expect to embrace the sister of 
 Henrietta 's husband . those two be on their bridal tour . 

 this creature be also the daughter of an ancient impostor and desperado 
 call the Old Buccaneer ; a distinguished member of the family of the 
 Lincolnshire Kirbys , boast a present representative grimly acquit , 
 man say , on a trial for murder . an eminent alliance ! Society consider 
 the Earl of Fleetwood wildish , though he could manage his affair . he 
 and his lawyer have they under strict control . how of himself ? the prize 
 of the english marriage market have take to his bosom for his winsome 
 bride the daughter of the Old Buccaneer . he be to mix his blood with 
 the blood of the Lincolnshire Kirbys , lie pallid under the hesitating 
 acquittal of a divided jury . 

 how have he come to this pass , which swing he round to think almost 
 regretfully of the scorn multitude of fair besieger in the market , 
 some of whom have their unpoetic charm ? 

 he be renowned and unrivalle as the man of stainless honour : the one 
 living man of his word . he have never break it - never would . there 
 be his distinction among the herd . in that , a man be princely above 
 prince . the nobility of Edward Russett , Earl of Fleetwood , surpass 
 the nobility of common noble . but , by all that be holy , he pay for his 
 distinction . 

 the creature beside he be a franked issue of her old pirate of a father 
 in one respect - nothing frighten she . there she sit ; not a screw of 
 her brow or her lip ; and the coach rock , they be sharp on a spill 
 midway of the last descent . it rock again . she think it scarce worth 
 while to look up to reassure he . she be look over the country . 

 ' have you be use to drive ? ' he say . 

 she reply : ' no , it be new to I on a coach . ' 

 Carinthia feel at once how wild the wish or half expectation that he 
 would resume the glowing communion of the night which have plight they . 

 she do not this time say ' my husband , ' still it flick a whip at his 
 ear . 

 she have make it more offensive , by so richly tone the official title 
 just win from he as to ring it on the nerve ; one have to block it or 
 be invade . an anticipation that it would certainly recur haunt every 
 opening of her mouth . 

 now that it do not , he feel the gap , relieve , and yet prick to 
 imagine a mimicry of her tone , for the odd foreignness of the word and 
 the sound . she have a voice of her own besides her courage . at the altar , 
 her response have their music . no wonder : the day be her . ' my husband ' 
 be a manner of say ' my fish . ' 

 he , speak very civilly . ' oblige I by tell I what name you be 
 accustomed to answer to . ' 

 she seem unaware of an Arctic husband , and reply : ' my father call 
 I Carin - short for Carinthia . my mother call I Janey ; my second name 
 be Jane . my brother Chillon say both . Henrietta call I Janey . ' 

 the creature appear dead flesh to goad . but the name of her 
 sister - in - law on her lip return the stroke neatly . she spar he one 
 whip , to cut he with another . 

 ' you have not inform I which of these name you prefer . ' 

 ' oh , my husband , it be as you shall please . ' 

 Fleetwood smartene the trot of his team , and there be a to - do with the 
 rakish leader . 

 fairy of a malignant humour in former day use to punish the 
 unhappiest of the naughty man who be not favourite , by suddenly 
 plant a hump on their back . off the bedevil wretch prance , 
 and they kick , they snort , whinny , roll , galloped , outflye 
 the wind , but not the dismal rider . marriage be our incubus now . no 
 explanation be offer of why we be afflict ; we have simply offend , 
 or some one absent have offend , and we be handy . the spiteful hag of 
 power tie a wife to we ; perhaps for the reason , that we behave in the 
 spirit of a well time by be chivalrously honourable . wife be just 
 as inexplicable curse , just as ineradicable and astonishing as hump 
 impose on shapely back . 

 Fleetwood lash his horse until Carinthia 's low cry of entreaty rise 
 to surprise . that sting he . 

 ' leave the coachman to his device : we have an appointment and must keep 
 it , ' he say . 

 ' they go so willingly . ' 

 ' good beast , in their way . ' 

 ' I do not like the whip . ' 

 ' I have the same objection . ' 

 they be on the level of the vale , go along a road between farm and 
 mansion , meadow and gardenplot and park - paling . a strong warm wind 
 drive the pack of cloud over the tree - top and charge at the branch . 
 english scenery , animate air ; a rouse to the blood and the mind . 
 Carinthia do not ask for hue . she have come to love of the dark land 
 with the warm lifting wind , the big tree and the hedge , and the 
 stately house , and people require to be study , who mean well and 
 be warm somewhere below , as chimneypot be , though they be so stiff . 

 english people dislike endearment , she have find . it might be that her 
 husband dislike any show of fondness . he would have to be study very 
 much . he be not like other , as Henrietta have warn she . from thinking 
 of he fervidly , she be already past the marvel of the thought that she 
 call he husband . at the same time , a curious intimation , gather she 
 know not whence , of the word ' husband ' on a young wife 's lip as be a 
 foreign sound in England , advise she to withhold it . his behaviour be 
 instruct she . 

 ' be you weather - wise ? - able to tell when the cloud will hold off or 
 pelt , ' he say , to be very civil to a neighbour . 

 she collect her understanding , apparently ; treat a conversational 
 run of the tongue as a question to be ponder ; and the horse pay for 
 it . ordinarily he be gentle with his beast . he lash at she in his 
 heart for pervert the humane of man . 

 ' Father be , ' she reply . 

 ' oh ! I have hear of he . ' 

 her face lighten . ' Father have a great name in England . ' 

 ' the Old Buccaneer , I think . ' 

 ' I do not know . he be a seaman of the navy , like Admiral Fakenham be . 
 Weather at sea , weather on the mountain , he could foretell it always . 
 he write a book ; I have a copy you will read . it be a book of Maxims . he 
 often speak of the weather . english weather and woman , he say . but not 
 my mother . my mother he stand aside by herself - pas capricieuse du tout ! 
 because she would be out in the weather and brave the weather . she ride , 
 she swam , good of any woman . if she could have know you , what pleasure 
 for I ! Mother learn to read mountain weather from father . I do 
 it too . but sometimes on the high field ' upper snow it be very 
 surprising . Father have be catch . here the cloud be down near the 
 earth and the strong wind keep the rain from fall . how long the wind 
 will blow I can not guess . but you love the mountain . we speak ... and 
 mountain ' adventure we both love . I will talk French if you like , 
 for , I think , german you do not speak . I may speak English well than 
 French ; but I be afraid of my English with you . ' 

 ' dear I ! ' quoth Fleetwood , and he murmur politely and cursorily , 
 attentive to his coachman business . she have a voice that clove the noise 
 of the wheel , and she have a desire to talk - that be evident . talk of 
 her father set she prattling . it become clear also to his not dishon , 
 his impressionable mind , that her baby English might be natural . or she 
 be mildly play on it , to give herself an air . 

 he have no remembrance of such baby English at Baden . there , however , she 
 be in a state of enthusiasm - the sort of illuminated transparency they 
 show at the end of firework . Mention of her old scapegrace of a father 
 light she up again . the girl there and the girl here be no doubt the 
 same . it could not be say that she have dupe he ; he have do it for 
 himself - act on by a particular agency . this creature have not the 
 capacity to dupe . he have arm a bluntwitted young woman with his 
 idiocy , and she have deal the stroke ; different in scarce a degree by 
 nature from other young woman of prey . 

 but her look at time , and now and then her voice , give sign that she 
 count on befool he as well , to reconcile he to his bondage . the 
 calculation be excessive . no woman have do it yet . Idiocy plunge 
 he the step which reawaken understanding ; and to keep his whole mind 
 alert on guard against any sort of satisfaction with his bargain , he 
 frankly refer to the cause . not female art , but nature 's impulse , 
 it be his passion for the wondrous in the look of a woman 's face , 
 the new morning of the idea of woman in the look , and the peep into 
 imaginary novel character , do the trick of enslave he . call it 
 idiocy . such it be . once acknowledge , it be not likely to recur . an 
 implacable reason sit in its place , with a keen blade for effort to 
 carry the imposture far afield or make it agreeable . yet , after 
 give his word to Lord Levellier , he have prod himself to think the 
 burden of this wild young woman might be absurdly tolerable and a laugh 
 at the world . 

 a solicitude for the animal be mark by his inquiry ' you be not 
 hungry yet ? ' 

 ' oh no , not yet , ' say she , oddly enliven . 

 they have a hamper and be independent of stoppage for provision , he 
 inform she . what more delightful ? cry her look , see the first 
 mid - day 's rest and meal with Chillon on the walk over the mountain from 
 their empty home . 

 she could get up enthusiasm for a stocked hamper ! and when tell of some 
 business that draw he to a meadow they be near , she say she would 
 be glad to help , if she could . ' I learn quickly , I know . ' 

 his head acquiesce . the daughter of the Old Buccaneer might learn the 
 business quickly , perhaps ; a singularly cut smile be on his tight 
 lip , in memory of a desire he have as a boy to join hand with an 
 amazonian damsel and be out over the world for adventure , comrade and 
 bride as one . here the creature sit . life be the burlesque of young 
 dream ; or they precipitate we on the roar and grin of a recognize 
 beast world . 

 the devil possess he gnaw so furiously that a partial mitigation 
 of the pain be afford by sight of wave hat on a hill - rise of the 
 road . he flourish his whip . the hat continue at wind - mill work . 
 it signify brisk news to he , and prospect of glee to propitiate any 
 number of devil . 

 ' you will want a maid to attend on you , ' he say . 

 she reply : ' I be not use to attendance on I . Henrietta 's maid would 
 help . I do not want she . I have no maid at home . I can do for myself . 
 Father and mother like I to be very independent . ' 

 he suppose he would have to hear she spell her word out next . 

 the hill - top be gain ; twenty pace of pretty trotting bring up the 
 coach beside an inn porch , in the style of the finish dear to whip , and 
 even imperative upon they , if they love their art . two gentleman stand 
 in the road , and a young woman at the inn door ; a dark - haired girl of an 
 anxious countenance . her pucker vanish at some signal from inside the 
 coach . 

 ' all right , Madge ; nothing to fear , ' Fleetwood call to she , and she 
 curtsey . 

 he alight , say to she , before he speak to his friend : ' I have 
 bring he safe ; have he under my eye the last four and twenty hour . 
 he will do the trick to - day . you do not   bet ? ' 

 ' oh ! my lord , no . ' 

 ' help the lady down . out with you , Ines ! ' 

 the light - legge barge - faced man touch ground capering . he be greet 
 ' kit ' by the pair of gentleman , who shake hand with he , after he have 
 faintly simulate the challenge to a jig with Madge . she flounce from 
 he , hold her arm up to the lady . Landlord , landlady , and hostler 
 beseech the lady to stay for the fixing of a ladder . Carinthia step , 
 leap , and enter the inn , Fleetwood remarking : 

 ' we be very independent , Chummy Potts . ' 

 ' cordy bally , by Jove ! ' Potts cry . but the moment after this 
 disengage ejaculation , he be take with a bewilderment . ' at the 
 Opera ? ' he question of his perplexity . 

 ' no , sir , not at the Opera , ' Fleetwood rejoin . ' the lady 's last public 
 appearance be at the altar . ' 

 ' sort of a suspicion of have see she somewhere . leave her husband 
 behind , have she ? ' 

 ' you see : she have go in . ' 

 the scoring of a proposition of Euclid on the forehead of Potts amuse 
 he and the other gentleman , who be hail ' Mallard ! ' and care nothing 
 for problem involve the female of man when such work be to the fore 
 as the pugilistic encounter of the Earl of Fleetwood 's choose Kit Ines , 
 with Lord Brailstone 's unbeaten and well - back Ben Todds . 

 ine have do pretty thing from the age of seventeen to his 
 twenty - third year . remarkably clever thing they be , to be call 
 great in the annal of the Ring . the point , however , be , that the 
 pocket of his backer have seriously feel his late fight . he receive 
 a dog 's licking at the hand of Lummy Phelps , his inferior in skill , 
 fight two to one of the odd ; and all because of his fatal addiction 
 to the breaking of his trainer 's impose fast in liquid on , the night 
 before the battle . right through his training , up to that hour , the 
 rascal be devout ; the majority 's money rattle all on the snug safe 
 side . and how do he get at the bottle ? his trainer never could say . 
 but what make he turn himself into a headlong ass , when he have only 
 to wait a night to sit among friend and worshipper drink off his 
 tumbler upon tumbler with the honour ? it be past his wit to explain . 
 endurance of his privation have snap in he ; or else , which be more 
 likely , this Genius of the Ring be tempt by his genius on the summit 
 of his perfect power to believe the battle his own , and celebrate it , 
 as become a victor despise the drubbed antagonist . 

 in any case , he drank , and a minor man give he the dog 's licking .. 
 ' go into it puffy , come out of it bung , ' the chronicle resound 
 over England run . Old England read of an ' eyeless carcase ' heroically 
 step up to time for three round of mash punishment . if he have 
 win the day after all , the country would have be electrify . it 
 sympathize on the side of his backer too much to do more than nod a 
 short approval of his fortitude . to sink with flag flying be next to 
 sink the enemy . there be talk of a girl present at the fight , and of 
 how she receive the eyeless , almost faceless , carcase of her sweetheart 
 Kit , and carry he away in a little donkey - cart , comfortably cushion 
 to meet disaster . this petty incident draw the attention of the Earl 
 of Fleetwood , then begin to be know as the diamond of uncounted 
 facet , patron of the pick of all department of manly activity in 
 England . 

 the devotion of the girl Madge to her sweetheart be really a fine 
 story . Fleetwood touch on it to Mr. Mallard , speak of it like the 
 gentleman he could be , while Chumley Potts wag impatient acquiescence 
 in a romantic episode of the Ring , that keep the talk from the hotter 
 theme . 

 ' Money 's Bank of England to - day , you think ? ' he interpose , and have his 
 answer after Mallard have say : 

 ' the girl be rather good - look , too . ' 

 ' you may double your bet , Chummy . I have the fellow to his tea at my 
 dinner - table yesterday evening ; lock he in his bedroom , and have he 
 up and out for a morning spin at six . his trainer , Flipper be on the 
 field , drive from Esslemont at nine , confident as trump . ' 

 ' deuce of a good - look girl , ' Potts could now afford to say ; and he 
 sing out : ' feel fit , lucky dog ? ' 

 ' Concert pitch ! ' be the declaration of Kit Ives . 

 ' how about Lord Brailstone 's man ? ' 

 ' female partner in a quadrille , sir . ' 

 ' ah ! ' Potts doate on his limb with a butcher 's eye for prize joint . 

 ' cock - sure have crow low by sunset , ' Mallard observe . 

 Fleetwood offer he to take his bet . 

 ' you be heavy on it with Brailstone ? ' say Mallard . 

 ' three thousand . ' 

 ' I would back you for your luck blindfold . ' 

 a ruffle of sourness shot over the feature of the earl , and be notice 
 by both eager better , who exchange a glance . 

 Potts inspect his watch , and say half aloud : ' Liver , ten to one ! that 
 never mean bad luck - except bad to act on . we sleep here last night , 
 you know . it be a mile and a quarter from the Royal Sovereign to the 
 field of glory . pretty well time to start . brailstone have a drive of a 
 couple of mile . coach from London down by this time . Abrane 's dead 
 on Ben Todds , any odd . poor old braney ! " steady man , Todds . " back 
 he because he be a " respectable citizen , " - do not   drink . a prize - fighter 
 total abstainer have no spurt . Old Braney 's brand for the lose side . 
 you might bet against Braney blindfold , Mallard . how long shall you take 
 to polish he off , Kit Ines ? ' 

 the opponent of Ben Todds calculate . 

 ' well , sir , steady Benny ought to be satisfied with his dose in , say , 
 about forty minute . maybe he will not   own to it before an hour and ten . 
 he be get a proud english stomach . ' 

 ' shall we be late ? ' Potts ask . 

 ' jump in , ' Fleetwood say to his man . ' we may be five minute after 
 time , Chummy . I have a long drive , and have to get marry on the way , 
 and - ah , here they be ! ' 

 ' Lady come ? ' 

 ' I fancy she stick to the coach ; I do not   know her taste . Madge must 
 see she through it , that be positive . ' 

 Potts defer his astonishment at the thing he be hear and seeing , 
 which be only Fleetwood 's riddle . the fight and the bet rang every 
 other matter out of his head . he behold the lady , who have come down from 
 the coach like a columbine , mount it like bean - stalk Jack . Madge be not 
 half so clever , and require a hand at her elbow . 

 after , give hurry direction to Rundles , the landlord of the Royal 
 Sovereign , Fleetwood take the rein , and all three gentleman touch 
 hat to the curtsey figure of Mrs. Rundles . 

 ' you have hear , I dare say - it be an english scene , ' he speak , partly 
 turn his face , to Carinthia ; ' particularly select to - day . their 
 Majesties might look on , as the Caesars do in Rome . pity we can not 
 persuade they . they ought to set the fashion . here we have the english 
 people at their grandest , in prime condition , if they be not drunk 
 overnight ; and dog , perfectly awake , magnanimous , all for fair play ; 
 fine fellow , upon my word . a little blood , of course . ' 

 but the daughter of the Old Buccaneer would have inherit a tenderness 
 for the sight of blood . she should make a natural Lady Patroness of 
 England 's National Sports . we might turn she to that purpose ; wander 
 over England with a tail of shout riff - raft ; have exhibition , join 
 in they , display our accomplishment ; issue challenge to fence , shoot , 
 walk , run , box , in time : the creature have muscle . it be one way of 
 crown a freak ; we follow the direction , since the deed do can not 
 be undo ; and a precious poetical life , too ! you may get as royally 
 intoxicate on swipe as on choice wine ; win a name for yourself as 
 the husband of such a wife ; a name in sporting journal and shilling 
 biography : quite a revival of the peerage they have begin to rail at ! 

 ' I would not wish to leave you , ' say Carinthia . 

 ' you have choose , ' say Fleetwood . 




 CHAPTER XVI . in which the BRIDE from foreign part be give a TASTE of 
 OLD ENGLAND 

 cheer at an open gate of a field salute the familiar scarlet of the 
 Earl of Fleetwood 's coach in kentish land . they be chorister cheer , 
 the spontaneous ringing out of english country heart in homage to the 
 nobleman who brighten the heaviness of life on english land with a 
 spectacle of the noble art distinguish their father . he drive along 
 over muffle turf ; ploughboy and blue butcher - boy , and smock old 
 man , with an approach to a hundred - weight on their heel , at the trot to 
 right and leave ; all hop for an occasional sight of the jewel call 
 Kitty , that he carry inside . Kitty be there . 

 Kitty 's eye be shut . think of that : cradled innocence and angel ' 
 dream and the whole of the hymn just before ding - dong - bang on nose and 
 jaw ! that mean confidence ? look like it . but Kitty 's not asleep you 
 try he . he be only quiet because he have get to undergo great exertion . 
 last fight he be knock out of time , because he go into it honest 
 drunk , they tell . and the earl take he up , to give he a chance of 
 recover his good name , and that be Christian . but the earl , he know 
 a man as well as a horse . he be one to follow . go to a fayte down at 
 Esslemont , you will not   forget your day . see there , he be bring a lady 
 on the top o ' the coach . that seem for to signify he do not   expect 
 it be go to be much of a bloody business . but there be no accounting . 
 anyhow , Broadfield will have a name in the paper for Sunday reading . in 
 come t ' other lord 's coach . they have   time it together close they have . 

 they be pronounce to be both the right sort of nobleman for the 
 country . Lord Brailstone 's blue coach rattle through an eastern gate to 
 the corner of the thirty - acre meadow , where Lord Fleetwood have draw up , 
 a toss from the ring . the meeting of the blue and scarlet coach draw 
 forth Old England 's thunder ; and when the costly treasure contain in 
 they pop out head , the moment be delirious . Kit Ines come after his 
 head on a bound . Ben Todds be ostentatiously deliberate : his party say 
 he be no dancing - master . he step out , grave as a barge emerge from 
 a lock , though alive to the hurrah of supporter and punctilious in 
 return the formal portion of his rival 's too roguish nod . their look 
 be sharp into the eye , just an instant . 

 Brailstone and Fleetwood jump to the grass and meet , talk 
 and laugh , precise upon point of business , otherwise cordial : 
 plenipotentiary of great power , whom they have set in motion and bind 
 to the ceremonial opening step , accord to the rule of civilized 
 warfare . they have a short colloquy with newspaper reporter ; - an 
 absolutely fair , square , upright fight of Britons be to be chronicle . 
 Captain Abrane , a tower in the crowd , register bet whenever he could . 
 Curricles , gig , cart , pony - trap , boy on pony , a swarm on leg , 
 flow to the central point and huddle there . 

 be either champion bear in Kent ? an audacious boy proclaim Kit Ines 
 a man of Kent . why , of course he be ! and that be why the Earl of 
 Fleetwood back our cocky Kitty , and mean to land he on the top of 
 his profession . Ben Todds be shuffle aside ; as one of their Londoners , 
 destitute of county savour . 

 all very well , but have a spy at Benny Todds . who look the square 
 man ? and hear what that big gentleman of the other lord 's party say . 
 a gentleman of his height and weight have a right to his opinion . he be 
 dead against Kit Ines : it be fist , not foot , he say , will do it to - day ; 
 stamina , he say . Benny have get the stamina . 

 todd ' possession of the stamina , and the grand voice of Captain Abrane , 
 and the Father Christmas , roast - beef - of - Old England face of the umpire 
 declare to be on the side of Lord Brailstone 's colour blue , darken 
 the star of Kit Ines till a characteristic piece of behaviour be 
 espy . he dash his cap into the ring and follow it , with the 
 light of vault across the rope . there he be , the first in the 
 ring : and that stand for promise of first blow , first blood , first flat 
 knock - down , and last to cry for quarter . his pair of second be soon 
 after he . Fleetwood mount his box . 

 ' be it to fight ? ' say Carinthia . 

 ' to see which be the master . ' 

 ' they fight to see ? ' 

 ' generally until one or the other can not   see . you be not oblige to see 
 it ; you can be drive away if you wish . ' 

 ' I will be here , if you be here . ' 

 ' you choose it . ' 

 Fleetwood lean over to Chumley Potts on the turf . ' Abrane 's ruining 
 himself . ' 

 Potts frankly hop that his friend might be do so . ' todd be jolly 
 well back . he be in prime condition . he be the favourite of the knowing 
 one . ' 

 ' you would not   have the odd , if he be not . ' 

 ' no ; but the odd be like ten per cent . : they conjure the gale , and be 
 hang , ' say Potts ; he swear at his bet mania , which destroy the 
 pleasure of the show he love . 

 all in the ring be shake hand . shot of a desire to question and 
 comment speed through Carinthia 's vein and hurt she . she have gather 
 that she speak foolishly to her husband 's ear , so she keep her mouth 
 shut , though the unanswered of her inquisitive ignorance in the strange 
 land prick painfully at her bosom . she hear the girl behind her say : 
 ' our colour ! ' when the colour scarlet unwound with Lord Brailstone 's 
 blue be tie to the stake : and her husband nod ; he smile ; he like 
 to hear the girl . 

 Potts climb up , cry : ' toilet complete ! now for paw out , and then 
 at it , my heartie ! ' 

 choice of corner under the leaden low cloud count for little . a 
 signal be give ; a man outside the ring eye a watch , raise a hand ; 
 the two umpire be on foot in their place ; the pair of oppose 
 second hurry out cheery or bolt - business word to their man ; and the 
 champion advance to the scratch . todd first , by the courtesy of Ines , 
 whose decorous control of his leg at a weighty moment be rightly read 
 by his party . 

 their hand grasp firmly : thereupon become fist of a hostile couple 
 in position . and simply to learn which of we two be the well man ! 
 or in other word , with four simple fist to compass a patent fact and 
 stand it on the historic pedestal , with a little red writing underneath : 
 you never can patent a fact without it . but mark the difference of this 
 kind of contention from all other - especially the Parliamentary : this 
 be positive , it have a beginning and an end ; and it be good - humour from 
 begin to end ; trial of skill , trial of stamina ; nature and Art ; 
 Old English ; which make we what we be ; and no rancour , no vow of 
 vengeance ; the beat man of the two bow to the bit of history he have 
 help to make . 

 kittite have need to be confident in the skill of their lither lad . his 
 facer look granite . front that mass , Kit you might - not to lash 
 about for comparison - call a bundle of bamboo . ay , but well knit , 
 springy , alive every inch of he ; crafty , too , as you will soon bear 
 witness . he know he have get his task , and he be the man to do it . 

 there be wary sparring , and mirror watch they . 

 ' big fellow : but have no fear , ' the earl say over his shoulder to 
 Madge . 

 she say in return : ' oh , I do not   know , I be pray . ' 

 Kit be now on his toe , all himself , like one who have find the key . he 
 feint . quick as lightning , he land a bolt on Ben 's jib , just at the 
 toll - bar of the bridge , between the eye , and be off , out of reach , 
 elastic ; Ben 's counter fall short by a couple of inch . cheer for 
 first blow . 

 the earl cluck to Madge . her gaze at the ring be a sullen intensity . 

 will you believe it ? - Ben receive a second spanking cracker on the 
 spectacles - seat : neat indeed ; and , poor payment for the compliment , he 
 manage to dig a drive at the rib . as much of that game as may suit 
 you , sturdy Ben ! but hear the shout , and behold ! 

 first blood to Kit Ines ! that tell - tale nose of old Ben 's have mount 
 the Earl of Fleetwood 's colour , and all his party be look 
 brailstone - blue . 

 ' so far ! ' say Fleetwood . his groom take an indication : the hamper be 
 unfastened ; sandwich be hand . Carinthia hold one ; she try to 
 nibble , in obedience to her husband 's example . Madge refuse a bite of 
 food . 

 hear Carinthia say to she : ' I hope he will not be beat , I hope , I 
 hope , ' she make answer : ' you be very good , Miss ' ; and the young lady 
 flush . 

 gentleman below be talk up to the earl . a kentish squire of an 
 estate neighbour Esslemont introduce a Welsh squire he have drive to 
 see the fun , by the name of Mr. Owain Wythan , a neighbour of the earl 's 
 down in Wales . refreshment be offer . Carinthia submissively sip 
 the sparkle wine , which sting the lip when they be indispose to 
 it . the voice of the girl Madge ring on the tightened chord of her 
 breast . Madge have say she be pray : and to pray be all that could 
 be do by two woman . her husband could laugh loudly with Mr. Potts 
 and the other gentleman and the stranger . he be quite sure the man he 
 support would win ; he might have mean of know . Carinthia clung to 
 his bare word , for the sake of the girl . 

 a roaring peal go up from the circle of combat . Kit have it this time . 
 attack Ben 's peeper , he be bent on defend his own , and he catch 
 a bodyblow that send he hop back to his pair of second , five 
 clear hop to the rear , like a smashed surge - wave off the rock . he be 
 respectful for the remainder of the round . but hammer at the system 
 he have form , in the very next round he drop from a tremendous 
 repetition of the blow , and lie flat as a turbot . the bet against he 
 have simultaneously a see - saw rise . 

 ' Bellows , he appear to have none , ' be the comment of Chumley Potts . 

 ' now for training , Chummy ! ' say Lord Fleetwood . 

 ' Chummy ! ' signify a crow over Potts , ring out of the hollow of 
 Captain Abrane on Lord Brailstone 's coach . 

 Carinthia put a hand behind she to Madge . it be grasp , in gratitude 
 for sympathy or in feminine politeness . the girl murmur : ' I have   see 
 bad . ' she be not speak to ear . 

 Lord Fleetwood sit watch in hand . ' up , ' he say ; and , as if hear he , 
 Kit rise from the minister second 's knee . he walk stiffly , square 
 after the fashion of a man teach caution . Ben make play . they round 
 the ring , give and taking . Ben rush , and have an emollient ; spout 
 again and be cork ; again , and receive a neat red - waxen stopper . he 
 would not be deny at Kit 's door , find he at home and hug he . Kit 
 get himself to grass , after a spell of heavy fibbing , Ben 's game . 

 it do he no great harm ; it might be take for an enlivener ; he be 
 dead on his favourite spot the ensue round , play postman on it . 
 so cleverly , easily , dancingly do he perform the double knock and the 
 retreat , that Chumley Potts be move to forget his wager and exclaim : 
 ' racket - ball , by Jove ! ' 

 ' if he do not   let the fellow fib the wind out of he , ' Mallard 
 address his own crab eyeball . 

 Lord Fleetwood hear and say coolly : ' Tightstrung . I keep he fast 
 since he earn his breakfast . you do not   wind an empty rascal fit for 
 action . a sword through the lung will not   kill when there be no air in 
 they . ' 

 that be print in the ' few word before the Encounter ' , in the Book 
 of MAXIMS for MEN . Carinthia , hear everything her husband utter , 
 burn to remind he of the similarity between his opinion and her 
 father 's . 

 she be learn , that for some reason , allusion to her father be not 
 acceptable . she squeeze the hand of Madge , and feel a pressure , like 
 a scream , tell she the girl 's heart be with the fight beneath they . 
 she think it natural for she . she wish she could continue look 
 as intently . she look because her husband look . the dark hill and 
 cloud curtain the run of the stretch of field relieve her sight . 

 the cloud go their way ; the hill be solid , but like a blue smoke ; 
 the scene here make they very distant and strange . those two man be 
 still hit , not hat one another ; only to gratify a number of 
 unintelligible people and win a success . but the earth and sky seem 
 to say , what be the glory ? they be insensible to it , as they be 
 not - they be never insensible to noble ground of strife . they bless 
 the spot , they light lamp on it ; they put it into book of history , 
 make it holy , if the cause be a noble one or a good one . 

 or suppose both those man love the girl , who love one of they ! then 
 would Carinthia be less reluctantly interested in their blow . 

 her infant logic stumble on for a reason while she repress the 
 torture the scene be become , as though a reason could be find by 
 her submissive observation of it . and she be right in believe that a 
 reason for the scene must or should exist . only , like other bewilder 
 instinctive believer , she could not summon the great universe or a 
 life 's experience to unfold it . her one consolation be in squeeze the 
 hand of the girl from time to time . 

 not stealthily do , it be not object to by the husband whose eye be 
 on all . but the persistence in do it sink she from the benignity of 
 her station to the girl 's level : it be conduct much too raw , and grate 
 on the deed of the man who have give she his name . 

 Madge please he well . she have the right to be excite , and she be 
 very little demonstrative . she have - well , in justice , the couple of they 
 have , only she have it more - the tone of the woman who can be screw to 
 witness a spill of blood , peculiarly catch to hear ; - a tone of every 
 string in they snap except the silver string . catch to hear ? it 
 be worth a stretching of they on the rack to hear that low buzz - hum of 
 their inner breast ... by heaven ! we have they at their good when they 
 sing that note . 

 his watch be near an hour of the contest , and Brailstone 's man have 
 score first knock - down blow , a particularly clean floorer . think 
 of that , he be cheer by hear Chummy Potts , whose opinion he 
 despise , cry out to Abrane : - 

 ' yeast to he ! ' for the face of Todds be visibly swell to the ripest 
 of plum from Kit 's delivery . 

 down he go . he have the sturdy leg which be no leg to a clean blow . 
 odd be offer against he . 

 ' oh ! pretty play with your right , Kit ! ' exclaim Mallard , as Kit 
 fetch his man an ugly stroke on the round of the waist behind , and 
 the crowd send up the name of the great organ affect : a sickener of 
 a stroke , if deal soundly . it mean more than 4 show . Kit be now for 
 take liberty . light as ever on his pin , he now and then vary 
 his attention to the yeasty part , deliver a wakener in unexpected 
 quarter : masterly as the skilled cook 's carving of a joint with hungry 
 guest for admirer . 

 ' eh , Madge ? ' the earl say . 

 she keep her sight fix , reply : ' yes , I think ... ' Carinthia join 
 with she : ' I must believe it that he will : but will the other man , poor 
 man , submit ? I entreat he to put away his pride . it be his - oh , poor 
 man ! ' 

 Ben be have it hot and fast on a torso physiognomy . 

 the voice of these alien woman thrill the fray and be a Bardic harp 
 to Lord Fleetwood . 

 he drop a pleasant word on the head in the curricle . 

 Mr. Owain Wythan look up . ' Worthy of Theocritus . it be the Boxing Twin 
 and the bembrycian giant . the style of each . to the letter ! ' 

 ' Kit be assiduously fasten Ben 's blinker , ' Potts remark . 

 he explain to the incomprehensible lady he fancy he have somewhere 
 see , that the battle might be know as near the finish by the behaviour 
 on board Lord Brailstone 's coach . 

 ' it be like Foreign Affairs and the Stock Exchange , ' he say to the more 
 intelligent male . ' if I want to know exactly how the country stand , 
 I turn to the Money article in the paper . that be a barometrical 
 certainty . no use inquire abroad . look at old Rufus Abrane . I see 
 the state of the fight on the old fellow 's mug . he have not   a bet leave in 
 he ! ' 

 ' Captain Mountain - Rufus Mus ! ' cry Lord Fleetwood , and laugh at the 
 penetrative portrait Woodseer 's epigram sketch ; he have a desire for 
 the presence of the singular vagabond . 

 the Rufus Mus in the Captain Mountain expose his view of the encounter , 
 by grow stiller , apparently grow small , without a squeak , like 
 the entrap ; and profoundly contemplative , after the style of the 
 absolutely detach , who foresee the fatal crash , and be calculate , 
 far ahead of event , the mean for meet their personal loss . 

 the close of the battle be on the visage of Rufus Abrane fifteen 
 minute before that Elgin marble under red paint in the ring sit on 
 the knee of a succouring seconder , mop , rub , dram - prim , 
 puppy - peeping , inconsolably comfort , preparatory to the resumption of 
 the great - coat he have so hopefully cast from his shoulder . not downcast 
 by any mean . like an old Roman , the man of the sheer hulk with purple 
 eyemound find his leg to do the manful thing , show that there be 
 no bad blood , stand equal to all form . Ben Todds , if ever man in Old 
 England , look the picture you might label ' bellyful , ' it be remark . 
 Kit Ines have an appearance of springy readiness to lead off again . so 
 they face on the open step of their march into English history . 

 Vanquisher and vanquish shake hand , engage in a parting rally of 
 good - humour banter ; the beat man say his handsome word ; the good 
 man cap it with a compliment to he . they drink of different cup 
 to - day . both will drink of one cup in the day to come . but the day go 
 too clearly to crown the light and the tight and the right man of the 
 two , for moralize to wag its tail at the end . oldster and youngster 
 agree to that . science have do it : happy the backer of Science ! not 
 one of they allude to the philosophical ' hundred year hence . ' for when 
 England , thank to a spirited pair of our young nobleman , have exhibit 
 one of her characteristic performance consummately , philosophy be 
 bid fly ; she be a foreign bird . 




 CHAPTER XVII . RECORDS a SHADOW CONTEST CLOSE on the foregoing 

 Kit Ines cock an eye at Madge , in the midst of the congratulation 
 and the paean pump his arm . as he have be little maul , he could 
 present a face to she , expect a wreath of smile for the victor . 

 what be we to think of the contrarious young woman who , when he lie 
 beat , drive he off the field and be all tenderness and devotion ? she 
 bob her head , hardly more than a trifle please , one might say . just 
 like female . they be riddle , not worth spelling . then , drunk I will get 
 to - night , my pretty dear ! the man mutter , sour by her inopportune 
 staidness , as an opponent 's bruising could never have render he . 

 she smile a lively beam in answer to the earl ; ' oh yes I ' m glad . it be 
 your doing , my lord . ' he it be that she thank , and for the moment 
 prize most . the female riddle be hard to read , because it be compound 
 of sensation , and they rouse and appeal to the similar cockatrice in 
 we , which either hiss back or coil upon themselves . she admire Kit Ines 
 for his valour : she hat that ruinous and besotting drink . it fling 
 skeleton of a married couple on the wall of the future . nevertheless 
 her love have be all maternal to he when he lie chastise and 
 disgrace on account of his vice . Pity have do it . pity not be 
 stir , her admiration of the hero declare victorious , whose fortune 
 in uncertainty have stop the beating of her heart , be eclipse 
 by gratitude toward his preserver , and a sentiment eclipse become 
 temporarily coldish , against our wish and our effort , in a way to 
 astonish ; make she think that she can not hold two sentiment at a 
 time ; when it be but the fact that she be unable to keep the two equally 
 warm . 

 Carinthia say to she : ' he be brave . ' 

 ' oh yes , he be brave , ' Madge assent . 

 Lord Brailstone , flourish his whip , cry out : ' at Canleys to - night ? ' 

 the earl nod : ' I shall be there . ' 

 ' you , too , Chummy ? ' come from Abrane . 

 ' to see you dance , ' Potts rejoin , and mumble 

 ' but will he dance ! Old Braney be down on his luck ; he be a speciman of 
 a fellow emptier and not light . and will not   be till supper - time . but , 
 I say , Fleet , how the deuce ? - funny sort of proceeding ! - you have not 
 introduce I . ' 

 ' the lady bear my name , Mr. Chumley Potts . ' 

 with a bow to the lady 's profile and a mention of a glimpse at Baden , 
 Potts ejaculate : ' it happen this morning ? ' 

 ' you allude to the marriage . it happen this morning . ' 

 ' how do I get to Canleys ? ' 

 ' I drive you . another team from the Esslemont stable be wait at the 
 Royal . ' 

 ' you stay at Canleys ? ' 

 ' no . ' 

 ' no ? oh ! Funny , upon my word . though I do not   know why not - except that 
 people ... ' 

 ' count your winning , Chummy . ' 

 Fleetwood remark to his bride : ' our friend have the habit of 
 soliloquize in company . I forget to tell you of an appointment of mine 
 at a place call Canleys , about twenty mile or more from here . I give 
 my word , so I keep it . the landlady at the inn , Mrs. Rundles , motherly 
 kind of woman ; she will be attentive . they do not   cook badly , for an 
 English inn , I have hear . Madge here will act as your lady's - maid for 
 the time . you will find she serviceable ; she be a bruiser 's lass and 
 something above it . ine inform I , Madge , you be go to friend 
 of yours at the Wells . you will stay at the Royal and wait on this lady , 
 who bear my name . you understand ? - a girl I can trust for courage , 
 if the article be in request , ' he resume to his bride ; and talk 
 generally of the inn and the management of it , and its favoured 
 position outside the village and contiguous to the river , upon which it 
 subsist . 

 Carinthia have hear . she be more than ever the stunned young woman she 
 have be since her mount of the coach , between the village church and 
 Lekkatts . 

 she say not a word . why should she ? her object be win . give she that , 
 and a woman 's tongue will consent to rest . the dreaded weapon rest , also 
 when she be keep spin by the whip . she give out a pleasant hum , 
 too . her complexion must be pronounce dull in repose . a bride on her 
 travel with an aspect of wet chalk , rather help to scare mankind from 
 marriage : which may be good or bad ; but she reflect a sickly hue on 
 the capture Chessman call she his own . let she shine in privacy . 

 Fleetwood draw up at the Royal Sovereign , whereof the reign monarch , 
 in blue uniform on the signboard , curtsey to his equally windy 
 subject ; and a small congregation of the aged , and some cripple 
 and infant , greet the patron of Old England 's manfull display , 
 cheer at news of the fight , bring they by many little runner . 

 ' your box have be convey to your room , ' he say to his bride . 

 she bow . this time she descend the coach by the aid of the ladder . 

 ine , victorious in battle , have scant notice from his love . ' yes , I ' m 
 glad , ' and she pass he to follow her newly constitute mistress . his 
 pride be dash , all the foam of the first draw on the top of he blow 
 off , as he figuratively explain the cause of his gloom to the earl . 
 ' I drink and I get a lick - that girl nurse and cosset I . I do not 
 drink and I whop my man - she show I she back . ai not   it encouragement , 
 my lord ? ' 

 ' you ought to know they by this time , you dolt , ' return his patron , 
 and compliment he on his bearing in the fight . ' you shall have your 
 two hundred , and something will be add . hold handy here till I mount . 
 I start in ten minute . ' 

 whether to speak a polite adieu to the bride , whose absurd position 
 she have bring on her own head , be debate for half a minute . he 
 consider that the wet chalk - quarry of a beauty have at all event 
 the merit of not be a creature to make scene . he go up to the 
 sitting - room . if she be not there , he would leave his excuse . 

 she be there , and seat ; neither cry , nor smile , nor pointedly 
 serious in any way , not conventionally at her ease either . and 
 so clearly be he impressed by her transparency in simplicity of 
 expression , that he take without a spurn at it the picture of a woman 
 half drain of her blood , veil the wound . and a young woman , a 
 stranger to suffering : perhaps - as the creature do look for the 
 usual flummery tenderness , what they call happiness ; wonder at 
 the absence of it and the shifty ghost of a husband she have get by 
 flounder into the bog know as marriage . she would have it , and here 
 she be ! 

 he enter the situation and be possess by the shiver delicacy of 
 it . surface emotion be not see on she . she might be a creature 
 with a soul . here and there the thing have be find in woman . it be 
 priceless when find , and she could not be act . one might swear the 
 creature have no power to act . 

 she speak without offence , the simple of word , affect no 
 solicitude , put on no gilt smile , wear no reproach : speak to he as 
 if so it happen - he have necessarily a journey to perform . one could 
 see all the while big drop fall from the wound within . one could 
 hear it in her voice . imagine a crack of the string at the bow 's deep 
 stress . or imagine the bow paralyze at the moment of the deep 
 sound . and yet the voice do not waver . she have now the richness of 
 tone carry on a music through silence . 

 well , then , at least , he have not be the utterly dupe fool he think 
 himself since the consent be pledge to we d she . 

 More , she have beauty - of its kind . or splendour or grandeur , be the 
 term for it . but it bear no name . none of her quality - if they be 
 quality - have a name . she stand with a dignity that the word do not 
 express . she endure meekly , when there be no meekness . Pain breathe 
 out of she , and not a sign of pain be visible . she have , under his 
 present observation of she , beauty , with the line of her face break 
 in revolt from beauty - or require a superterrestrial illumination to 
 show the harmony . he , as he now see , have err grossly in suppose she 
 insensitive , and therefore slow of a woman 's understanding . she draw the 
 breath of pain through the lip : red lip and well cut . her brown eye 
 be tearless , not alluring or beseech or repel ; they do but 
 look , much like the sky open high aloof on a wreck of storm . her 
 reddish hair - chestnut , if you will - let fall a skein over one of the 
 rugged brow , and soften the ruggedness by make it wilder , as if 
 a great bird be wing across a shoulder of the mountain ridge . 
 conceive of the mountain , build in their image , the face partook 
 alternately of mountain terror or splendour ; wholly , he remember , 
 of the splendour when her blood run warm . no long the chalk - quarry 
 face , - its paleness now be that of night alp beneath a moon chasing 
 the shadow . 

 she might be cast her spell again . 

 ' you remember I tell you , ' he say , ' I have give my word - I do not   break 
 it - to be at a ball . your uncle be urgent to have the ceremony over . 
 these clash occur . the people here - I have speak of that : people of 
 good repute for attention to guest . I be uncertain of the time ... we 
 have all to learn to wait . so then , good - bye till we meet . ' 

 he be experience a novel nip of torment , of just the degree which 
 take a partial appeasement from the inflicting of it , and call up a 
 loathe compassion . she might have be in his arm for a step , though 
 she would not have be the well love . 

 he be allow his escape , bear with he enough of husband to 
 execrate another enslaving pledge of his word , that begat a frenzy to 
 wreak some caress on the creature 's intolerably haunt image . of 
 course , he could not return to she . how would she receive he ? there be 
 no salt in the thought of it ; she be too submissive . 

 however , there would be fun with Chummy Potts on the drive to Canleys ; 
 fun with Rufus Abrane at Mrs. Cowper Quillett 's ; and with the Countess 
 Livia , smother , struggle , fight for life with the title of 
 Dowager . a desire for unbridle fun have hold of any amount of it , to 
 excess in any direction . and though this cloud as a dry tongue after 
 much wine crave water , glimpse of his tramp 's walk with a fellow tramp 
 on a different road , enjoy strangely healthy vagabond sensation and 
 vast idea ; bring the vagrant philosopher refreshfully to his mind : 
 chiefly for the reason that while in Woodseer 's company he have hardly 
 suffer a stroke of pain from the thought of Henrietta . she be now a 
 married woman , he be a married man by the register . strong proof of 
 the maddest of world could not be furnish . 

 sane in so mad a world , a man be your flabby citizen among outlaw , good 
 for pluck . Fun , at any cost , be the one object worth a shot in such 
 a world . and the fun be not to stop . if it do , we be likely to be get 
 hold of , and lug away to the altar - the terminus . that foul disaster 
 have happen , through our have temporarily yield to a fit of the 
 dump and treat a mad world 's lunatic issue with some seriousness . 
 but fun shall be have with the aid of his Highness below . the madder 
 the world , the madder the fun . and the mixing in it of another element , 
 which it have to beguile we - romance - be not at all bad cookery . poetic 
 romance be delusion - a tale of a Corsair ; a poet 's brain , a bottle of 
 gin , and a theatrical wardrobe . comic romance be about we everywhere , 
 alive for the tapping . 

 a daughter of the Old Buccaneer should participate in it by right of 
 birth : she would expect it in order to feel herself perfectly at home . 
 then , be sure , she find an english tongue and prattle away as merrily 
 as she do when her old scapegrace of a father be the theme . Son - in - law 
 to he ! but the path of wisdom run in the line of fact , and to have 
 wild fun and romance on this pantomime path , instead of kick to break 
 away from it , we follow thing conceive by the genius of the situation , 
 for the delectation of the fair Countess of Fleetwood and the earl , she 
 delighted husband , quite in the spirit of the Old Buccaneer , father of 
 the bride . 

 Carinthia sit beside the fire , see nothing in the room or on the 
 road . up in her bedchamber , the girl Madge be at her window . she see 
 Lord Fleetwood stand alone , laugh , it seem , at some thought ; 
 he throw up his head . be it a newly marry man leave his bride and 
 laugh ? the bride be a dear lady , fit for well than to be drive 
 to look on at a prize - fight - a terrible scene to a lady . she be leave 
 solitary : and this her wedding day ? the earl have say it , he have say 
 she bear his name , speak of come from the altar , and the lady have 
 blush to hear herself call Miss. the pressure of her hand be warm 
 with Madge : her situation rouse the fervid latent sisterhood in the 
 breast of woman . 

 before he mount the coach , Lord Fleetwood talk to Kit ive . he 
 point at an upper window , seem to be issue direction . Kit nod ; 
 he understand it , whatever it be . you might have say , a pair of 
 burglar . the girl run downstairs to bid her lover good - bye and show he 
 she really rejoice in his victory . Kit come to her say : ' give my 
 word of honour I will not   make a beast of myself to - night . got to watch 
 over you and your lady . ' 

 Lord Fleetwood start his fresh team , cast no glance at the window 
 of the room where his bride be . he and the gentleman on the coach be 
 laugh . 

 his leaving of his young bride to herself this day be class among 
 the murky flash which distinguish the deed of nobleman . but his 
 laughter on leave she stamp it a cruelty ; of the kind that plain 
 mortal , who can be monster , commit . Madge conceive a pretext for 
 go into the presence of her mistress , whose attitude be the same as 
 when she first sit in the chair . the lady smile and say : ' he be not 
 hurt much ? ' she think for they about she . 

 the girl 's , heart of sympathy thump , and her hero become a very minute 
 object . he have speak previously of the making or not make a beast of 
 himself ; without inflict a picture of the beast . his word take shape 
 now , and in consequence a little self - pity begin to move . it stir to 
 swell the great wave of pity for the lady , that be in her bosom . ' oh , 
 he ! ' she say , and extinguish the thought of he ; and at once she 
 under - lip be shiver , her eye fill and pour . 

 Carinthia rise anxiously . the girl drop at her foot . ' you have be 
 so good to I to - day , my lady ! so good to I to - day ! I can not   help it - I 
 do not   often just for this moment ; I have   be excite . oh , he be well , he 
 will do ; he be nothing . you say " poor child ! " but I be not ; it be only . 
 excitement . I do long to serve you the good I can . ' 

 she stand up in obedience and have the arm of her young mistress 
 press she . tear also be stream from Carinthia 's eye . heartily 
 she thank the girl for the excuse to cry . 

 they be two woman . on the road to Canleys , the coach convey 
 man spout with the lusty anecdote , relieve of the interdict of a 
 tyrannical sex . 




 CHAPTER XVIII . DOWN WHITECHAPEL WAY 

 Contention beget contention in a land of the pirate race . gig be 
 at high rival speed along the road from the battle - field to London . 
 they be the electrical wire of the time for an expectant population 
 burst to have report of so thunder an event as the encounter of 
 two champion light weight , nurse and back by a pair of gallant young 
 nobleman , pick of the whole row of coronet above . London pant gap 
 and the gig fly with the meat to fill it . 

 Chumley Potts offer Ambrose Mallard fair odd that the neat little 
 trap of the chief sporting journal , which have a reputation to maintain , 
 would be over one or other of the bridge cross the Thames first . 
 Mallard have be strike by the neat little trap of an impudent new 
 and lower - price journal , which have a reputation to gain . he take 
 the proffered odd , on the cry as of a cracker splitting . enormous 
 difficulty in regard to the testimony and the verification be 
 discuss ; they be overcome . Potts be ready for any amount of 
 trouble ; Mallard the same . there be clearly a race . there would 
 consequently be a record . visit to the office of those paper , 
 perhaps half a day at the south end of London or on Westminster bridge , 
 examine witness , corner shopman , waterman , and the like , would or 
 should satisfactorily establish the dispute point . 

 Fleetwood have his fun ; insomuch that he laugh himself into a sentiment 
 of humaneness toward the couple of donkey and forget his contempt of 
 they . their gambling and their bet increase his number of dependent ; 
 and imbecile be preferable to dolt or the dry gilt figure of 
 the circle he have to move in . Matter for some astonishment have be 
 furnish to the latter this day ; and would cause an icy signor stare 
 and rather an angry Signora flutter . a characteristic of that upper 
 circle , as he know it , be , that the good be dull , the vicious very bad . 
 they have nothing to please he but manner . elsewhere this land be 
 a land of no manner . take it and make the most of it , then , for its 
 quality of brute honesty : which be find to flourish well in the british 
 prize - ring . 

 his irony land he there . it strike the country a ring blow . but 
 it strike an almost efface one at the life of the young nobleman 
 of boundless wealth , whose high renown be the be a patron of 
 prizefighter . husband of the daughter of the Old Buccaneer as well ! 
 perchance as a result . that philosopher tramp name she ' beautiful 
 Gorgon . ' she have no beauty ; and as for Gorgon , the creature have a look 
 of timid softness in wait behind her rocky eye . a barbaric damsel 
 begin to nibble at civilization , be near the mark ; and ought she 
 to be discourage ? 

 Fleetwood 's wrath with his position warn he against the dupery of 
 any such alcove thought . for his wrath revenge he , and he fear the 
 be strip of it , lest a certain fund of his own softness , that he 
 know of ; though few do , should pull he to the creature 's foot . she 
 belong to he indeed ; so he might put she to the trial of whether she 
 have a heart and personal charm , without the ceremony of wooing - which , 
 in his case , tempt to the feeling desperately earnest and become 
 enslave . he speculate upon her eyelid and lip , and her voice , when 
 melting , as woman do in their different way ; here and there with an 
 execrable - perhaps pardonable - art ; one or two divinely . the vision 
 draw he to a headlong plunge and swim of the amorous mind , occupy 
 a minute , fill an era . he correct the feebleness , and at the same 
 time throw a practical coachman 's glance on peculiarity of the road , 
 require some knowledge of it if traverse backward at a whipping pace 
 on a moonless night . the drive from Canleys to the Royal Sovereign could 
 be do by good pacer in an hour and a half , little more - with ive and 
 the stable ready , and some astonishment in a certain unseen chamber . 
 Fleetwood chuckle at a vision of romantic devilry - perfectly legitimate 
 too . something , more to inflict than enjoy , be due to he . 

 he do , not phrase it , that a talk with the fellow Woodseer of his 
 mountain and his forest , and nature , philosophy , poetry , would have 
 be particularly healthy for he , almost as good as the good counsel 
 be need and solicit none to give he . it sweep among his rumination 
 while he prick Potts and Mallard to supply his craving for satanical 
 fare . 

 Gower Woodseer ; the mention of whom be a dejection to the venerable 
 source of our story , be then in the act of emerge from the Eastward 
 into the Southward of the line of Canterbury 's pilgrim when they set 
 forth to worship , on his homeward course , after a walk of two day 
 out of Dover . he descend London 's borough , have exactly twopence 
 halfpenny for refreshment ; follow a term of prudent starvation , at 
 the end of the walk . it be not a district seductive to the wayfarer 's 
 appetite ; as , for example , one may find the Jew 's fry of fish in oil , 
 inspirit the Shoreditch region , to be . nourishment be afford , 
 accord to the law of England 's genius in the art of refection , at 
 uninviting shop , to the necessitate stomach . a penn'orth of crumb of 
 bread , assist on its laborious passage by a penn'orth of the rinsing 
 of beer , leave the natural philosopher a ha'penny for dessert at the 
 stall of an applewoman , where he withstand an inclination toward the 
 juicy fruit and choose nut . they extend a meal , as a grimace broaden 
 the countenance , illusorily ; but they help to cheat an emptiness in 
 time , where it be nearly as offensive to our sensation as within we ; 
 and that prolonged occupation of the jaw go a length to persuade 
 we we be fill . all the well when the substance be indigestible . 
 tramp of the philosophical order , who be the practically sagacious , 
 prefer tough grain for the tooth . Woodseer 's munching of his nut 
 awaken to fond imagination the picture of his father 's dinner , see 
 one day and little envy : a small slice of cold boil mutton - flesh in 
 a crescent of white fat , with a lump of dry bread beside the plate . 

 thus he return to the only home he have , not dishearten , and bear 
 scene that outvie London 's print - shop for polychrome splendour , an 
 exultation to recall . his condition , moreover , throw his father 's life 
 and work into colour : the lean Whitechapel house of the minister among 
 the poor ; the joy in the saving of soul , if he could persuade himself 
 that such good labour advance : and at the fall of light , the pastime 
 task of bootmaking - a desireable occupation for a thinker . thought fly 
 well when the hand be easily busy . cobbler have excursive mind . 
 their occasional rap at the peg diversify the stitching and be often 
 happily time to settle an internal argument . seek in a village for 
 information concern the village or the state of mankind , you will be 
 less disappointed at the cobbler 's than elsewhere , it have be say . 

 as Gower have anticipate , with lively feeling of pleasure , Mr. Woodseer 
 be at the wonte corner of his back room , on the stool between two 
 tallow candleflame , leather scent strongly , when the wanderer stand 
 before he , in the image of a ball that have do with circle about a 
 stable point . 

 ' back ? ' the minister sing out at once , and his wrinkle gleam : 

 their hand grasp . 

 ' hungry , sir , rather . ' 

 ' to be sure , you be . one can read it on your boot . Mrs. Jones will 
 spread you a table . how many mile to - day ? show the sol . they tell a 
 tale of wear . ' 

 they have wear to resemble the thin - edge layer of still upper cloud 
 round the peep of come sky . 

 ' about forty odd to - day , sir . they have   do their hundred of mile and 
 have now come to dock . I will ask Mrs. Jones to bring I a plate here . ' 

 Gower go to the housekeeper in the kitchen . his father 's front door 
 be unfasten by day ; she have not set eye on he yet , and Mr. Woodseer 
 murmur : 

 ' now she be get the boy . there be clasping and kissing . he be all wild 
 Wales to she . ' 

 the plate of meat be bring by Mary Jones with Gower beside she , and 
 a sniffle of her happiness audible . she would not , although invite to 
 stay and burn to hear Gower , wait in the room where father and son 
 have to talk together after a separation , long to love 's counting . she 
 be a Welshwoman of the pure blood , therefore delicately mannered by 
 nature . 

 ' yes , dear lad , tobacco help you on to the marrow of your story , and I 
 too will blow the cloud , ' say Mr. Woodseer , when the plate be push 
 aside and the pipe appear . 

 so Gower 's recital of his wandering begin , more puff than speech at 
 the commencement . he be alternately picturesque and sententious 
 until he reach Baden ; there he become involve , from thinking of a 
 revelation of beauty in woman . 

 Mr. Woodseer rap the leather on his block . 

 ' a place where they have start public gambling , I be tell . ' 

 ' we must look into all the corner of the world to know it , sir , and the 
 world have to be riddle or it riddle we . ' 

 ' ah . do you ever tell a lie , Gower Woodseer ? ' 

 ' I play . ' 

 ' you play . the Lord be thank you have keep your straight tongue ! the 
 Lord can always enter a heart of truth . sin can not dwell with it . but 
 you play for gain , and that be a licenced thieving ; and that be 
 a backsliding ; and there will have to be a climbing up . and what that 
 mean , your hold on truth will learn . touch sin and you accommodate 
 yourself to its vileness . ay , you love nature . nature be not anchorage 
 for vessel like man . if you love the Book you would float in harbour . 
 you play . I do trust you lose . ' 

 ' you have your wish , sir . ' 

 ' to have win their money , gower ! rather starve . ' 

 ' I do . ' 

 ' your reason for play , poor lad ? ' 

 ' the reason elude reason . ' 

 ' not in you . ' 

 ' sight of the table ; an itch to try they - one 's self as well ; a notion 
 that the loser be play wrong . in fine , a bit of a whirl of a 
 medley of atom ; I can not   explain it far . ' 

 ' ah . the tippler 's fume in his head ! spotty business , Gower Woodseer . 
 " lead we not into temptation " be worldly wisdom in addition to 
 heavenly . ' 

 after listen to an extended homily , with a general assent and 
 tobacco 's phlegm , Gower reply to his father 's ' you starve manfully ? ' 
 nod : ' from Baden to Nancy . an alsatian cottager at time help I 
 along , milk and bread . ' 

 ' wholesome for body and for soul . ' 

 ' enter Nancy I subscribe to the dictum of our first father , which 
 dog would deliver , if they could speak : that there be no driver like 
 stomach : and I go head on to the College , see the Principal : plea of 
 urgency . no engagement possible , to teach either French or English . but 
 he be inquisitive touch the urgency . that be my chance . the French 
 be humane when they be not suspicious of you . they be generous , if 
 you put a light to their mind . as I be deal with a scholarly one , 
 I make use of such ornamental literary skill as I possess , to prove 
 urgency . he supply I with bread , fruit , and wine . in the end he 
 procure I pupil . I lodge over a baker 's shop . I have food walk , and 
 learn something of forestry there - a taking study . when I have save 
 enough to tramp it home , I say my adieux to that good friend and 
 tramp away , enter London with about the same amount in small coin 
 as when I enter Nancy . a manner of exactly hit the mark , that some 
 would not find so satisfactory as it be to I . ' 

 the minister sigh . ' there come in the " philosophy , " I suppose . when 
 will you understand , that this " philosophy " be only the passive of a 
 religious faith ? it seem to suit you gentleman of the road while 
 you be young . work among the Whitechapel poor . it would be a way for 
 discover the shallow of your " philosophy " early . ' 

 Gower ask he : ' go badly here , sir ? ' 

 ' murder , robbery , misusage of woman , and misconduct of woman ! - drink , 
 in short : about the same amount . drink be their death 's river , roll 
 they on helpless as corps , on to - may they find mercy ! I and a few 
 stand - it be in the tide we stand here , to stop they , pluck they out , 
 make life a bit sweet to they before the poor body go beneath . but 
 come ! all be not dark , we have our gleam . I speak distress by one 
 of our girl : a good girl , I believe ; and the wilfullest that ever have 
 command of her leg . a well - favour girl ! you will laugh , she have give 
 her heart to a prize - fighter . well , you can say , she might have choose 
 bad . he drink , she hat it ; she love the man and hat his vice . he 
 swear amendment , be hiccup at night ; fight a match on the morrow , 
 and get beat out of formation . no matter : whenever , wherever , that 
 man go to his fight , that girl follow to nurse he after it . he be 
 her hero . woman will have one , and it be their lottery . you read of such 
 thing ; here we have it alive and walk . I be lead to think they be an 
 honest couple . they come of established family . her mother be out 
 of Caermarthen ; die under my ministration , saintly , forgive the 
 drunkard . you may remember the greengrocer , Tobias Winch ? he pass away 
 in shriek for one drop . I have to pitch my voice to the top note to get 
 hearing for the hymn . he be a reverent man , with the craving by fit . 
 that should have be a lesson to Madge . ' 

 ' a little girl at the greengrocer 's hard by ? she sell I apple ; rather 
 pretty , ' say Gower . 

 ' a fine grow girl now - Madge Winch ; a comely wench she be . it break 
 her sister Sarah 's heart . they both manage the little shop ; they make 
 it prosper in a small way ; enough , and what need they more ? then 
 Christopher Ines have on one of his match . Madge drive her cart out , 
 if it be near town . she be off down into Kent to - day by coach , Sarah 
 tell I . a great nobleman patronize Christopher ; a Lord Fleetwood , 
 a lord of wealth . and he must be thoughtful for these people : he send 
 Sarah word that Christopher should not touch drink . you may remember 
 a butcher Ines in the street next to we . Christopher be a wild lad , 
 always at " good man " with every boy he meet : go to sea - run away . he 
 return a pugilist . the girl will be nurse he now . I have speak to 
 she of he ; and I trust to she ; but I mourn her attachment to the man 
 who drink . ' 

 ' the lord 's name ? ' say Gower . 

 ' Lord Fleetwood , Sarah name he . and so it please he to spend his 
 money ! ' 

 ' he have other taste . I know something of he , sir . he promise to be a 
 patron of Literature as well . his mother be a South Wales woman . ' 

 ' could he be persuade to publish a grand edition of the Triads ? ' Mr. 
 Woodseer say at once . 

 ' no man more likely . ' 

 ' if you see he , suggest it . ' 

 ' very little chance of my meeting he again . but those triad ! they be 
 in our blood . they spring to tie knot in the head . they push I to 
 condense my thought to a tight ball . they be good for primitive 
 time : but they - or the trick of the mind engender by they - trip 
 my step along the line of composition . I produce pellet instead of 
 flow sheet . it will come right . at present I ' m so bent to pick and 
 perfect , polish my phrase , that I lose my survey . as a consequence , my 
 vocabulary falter . ' 

 ' ah , ' Mr. Woodseer breathe and smote . ' this Literature be to be your 
 profession for the mean of living ? ' 

 ' nothing else . and I be so low down in the market way of it , that I could 
 not count on twenty pound per annum . fifty would give I standing , an 
 independent fifty . ' 

 ' to whom be you cry , gower ? ' 

 ' not to gamble , you may be sure . ' 

 ' you have a home . ' 

 ' good work of the head want an easy conscience . I have   too much of you in 
 I for a comfortable pensioner . ' 

 ' or be it not , that you have be live the gentleman out there , with 
 just a holiday title to it ? ' 

 Gower be hit by his father 's thrust . ' I shall feel myself a pieman 's 
 chuckpenny as long as I be unproductive , now I ' ve   come back and have to 
 own to a home , ' he say . 

 Tea bring in by Mrs. Mary Jones rather brighten he until he 
 consider that the enlivenment be due to a purchase by money , of 
 which he be incapable , and he reject it , like an honourable man . 
 simultaneously , the state of depression throw critic shade on a prized 
 sentence or two among his recent confection . it be reject for 
 the good of reason and the most discomforting : because it rack our 
 English ; signify , that he have not yet learn the right use of his 
 weapon . 

 he be in this wrestle , under a placid demeanour , for several day , 
 hear the shout of Whitechapel Kit 's victory , and hearing of Sarah 
 Winch 's anxiety on account of her sister Madge ; unaffected by sound of 
 joy or grief , in his effort to produce a supple English , with 
 Baden 's Madonna for sole illumination of his darkness . to she , to the 
 illimitable gold - mist of perspective and the innumerable image the 
 thought of she paint for he , he owe the lift which withdraw he 
 from contemplation of himself in a very disturbing stagnant pool of the 
 waste ; wherein often will strenuous youth , grow faint , behold a face 
 beneath a scroll inscribe impostor . all whose aim be high have spy 
 into that pool , and have see the face . his glorious lady would not let 
 it haunt he . 

 the spell she cast have likewise power to raise he clean out of a 
 neighbourhood hint Erebus to the young man with thirst for air , 
 solitude , and colour . scarce imaginable as she be , she reign here , 
 in the idea of she , more fixedly than where she have be visible ; as it 
 be , by right of she be celestially remove from the dismal place . 
 he be at the same time not insensible to his father 's contented 
 ministration among these home of squalor ; they prick the curiosity , 
 which be in the youthful philosopher a form of admiration . for his 
 father , like all Welshmen , love the mountain . yet here he live , 
 exhorting , ministering , aid , support up to high good cheer by some , 
 it seem , superhuman backbone of uprightness ; - his religious faith ? 
 well , if so , the thing might be study . but thing of the frozen 
 sens , lean and hueless thing , be as repellent to Gower 's 
 imagination as his father 's dish to an epicure . what he envy be , 
 the worthy old man 's heart of feeling for other : his feeling at present 
 for the girl Sarah Winch and her sister Madge , who have not be hear 
 of since she start for the fight . Mr. Woodseer have write to her 
 relative at the Wells , receive no consolatory answer . 

 he be relieve at last ; and still a little perplexed . Madge have 
 return , he inform Gower . she be well , she be well in health ; he 
 have her assurance that she be not excited about herself . 

 ' she have bring a lady with she , a great lady to lodge with she . she 
 have bring the Countess of Fleetwood to lodge with she . ' 

 Gower hear those word from his father ; and his father repeat they . 
 to the prostrate worshipper of the Countess of Fleetwood , they be 
 a blow on the head ; madness have set in here , be his first recovering 
 thought , or else a miracle have come to pass . or be it a sham Countess 
 of Fleetwood impose upon the girl ? his father be to go and see the 
 great lady , at the greengrocer 's shop ; at her request , accord to 
 Madge . conjecture shoot their perishing track across a darkness that 
 deepen and make shipwreck of philosophy . be it the very Countess 
 of Fleetwood penitent for her dalliance with the gambling passion , in 
 feminine need of pastor 's aid , have have report from Madge of this good 
 shepherd ? his father express a certain surprise ; his countenance be 
 mild . he consider it a merely strange occurrence . 

 perhaps , in a crisis , a minister of religion be well armed than 
 a philosopher . Gower would not own that , but he acknowledge the 
 evidence , and own to envy ; especially when he accompany his father 
 to the greengrocer 's shop , and Mr. Woodseer undisturbedly say : 

 ' here be the place . ' the small stuff shop appear to grow 
 portentously cavernous and waveringly illumine . 




 CHAPTER XIX . the GIRL MADGE 

 Customers be at the counter of the shop , and these rational figure , 
 together with the pile of cabbage , the sack of potato , the pale 
 small orange here and there , the dominant smell of red herring , deny 
 the lurking of an angelical presence behind they . 

 Sarah Winch and a boy serve at the counter . Sarah lead the Mr. Woodseers 
 into a corner knock off the shop and call a room . below the top 
 bar of a wizened grate be a chilly fire . London 's light come piecemeal 
 through a smut - streak window . if the wonderful be to occur , this be 
 the place to heighten it . 

 ' my son may be an intruder , ' Mr. Woodseer say . ' he be acquaint with a 
 Lord Fleetwood ... ' 

 ' Madge will know , sir , ' reply Sarah , and she send up a shrill cry for 
 Madge from the foot of the stair . 

 the girl run down swiftly . she enter listen to Sarah , look at 
 Gower ; to whom , after a bob and pained smile where reverence be 
 owe , she say , ' can you tell I , sir , please , where we can find Lord 
 Fleetwood now ? ' 

 Gower be unable to tell . Madge turn to Mr. Woodseer , say soon 
 after : ' oh , she will not   mind ; she will be glad , if he know Lord Fleetwood . 
 I will fetch she . ' 

 the moment be of the palpitating order for Gower , although his common 
 sense lecture the wildest of heart for expect such a possibility as 
 the presence of his lofty lady here . 

 and , of course , common sense prove to be right : the lady be quite 
 another . but she strike on a sleep day of his travel . her face be 
 not one to be forget , and to judge by her tremble of a smile , she 
 remember he instantly . 

 they be soon converse , each help to paint the scene of the place 
 where they have meet . 

 ' Lord Fleetwood have marry I , ' she say . 

 Gower bend his head ; all stand silent . 

 ' may I ? ' say Madge to she . ' it be Lord Fleetwood 's wed wife , sir . 
 he drive she from her uncle 's , on her wedding day , the day of a 
 prize - fight , where I be ; he tell I to wait on his lady at an inn 
 there , as I ' ve   do and will . he drive away that evening , and he 
 have not ' - the girl 's black eyebrow work : ' I have   not see he since . 
 he be a great nobleman , yes . he leave his lady at the inn , expense pay . 
 he leave she with no money . she stay on till her heart be break . 
 she have come to London to find he . she have to walk part of the way . she 
 have only a change of linen we bring in a parcel . she be a stranger to 
 England : she know nobody in London . she have no place to come to but 
 this poor hole of ours she be so good as let welcome she . we can not   do 
 well , and it be no use to be ashamed . she be not a lady to scorn poor 
 people . ' 

 the girl 's voice hum through Gower . 

 he say : ' Lord Fleetwood may not be in London , ' and chafe at himself 
 for such a quaver . 

 ' it be his house we want , sir , he have not be at his house in Kent . we 
 want his London house . ' 

 ' my dear lady , ' say Mr. Woodseer ; ' it might be as well to communicate 
 the state of thing to your family without delay . my son will call at 
 any address you name ; or if it be a country address , I can write the 
 item , with my assurance of your safety under my charge , in my house , 
 which I beg you to make your home . my housekeeper be know to Sarah and 
 Madge for an excellent christian woman . ' 

 Carinthia reply : ' you be kind to I , sir . I be grateful . I have an 
 uncle ; I would not disturb my uncle ; he be invent gun and he wish 
 peace . it be my husband I have come to find . he do not leave I in 
 anger . ' 

 she colour . with a dimple of tenderness at one cheek , look from 
 Sarah to Madge , she say : ' I would not leave my friend ; they be 
 sister to I . ' Sarah , at these word , catch up her apron . Madge do no 
 more than breathe deep and fast . 

 an unoccupied cold parlour in Mr. Woodseer 's house that would be heat 
 for a guest , urge he to repeat his invitation , but he take the check 
 from Gower , who suggest the doubt of Mary Jones be so good an 
 attendant upon Lady Fleetwood as Madge . ' and Madge have to help in the 
 shop at time . ' 

 Madge nod , look into the eye of her mistress , which sanction she 
 say : ' she will like it well here , she be my lady and I understand 
 her good . my lady give no trouble : she be hardy , she be not like other 
 lady . I and Sarah sleep together in the room next . I can hear anything 
 she want . she take we as if she be use to it . ' 

 Sarah have to go to serve a customer . Madge make pretence of prick her 
 ear and follow into the shop . 

 ' your first visit to London be in ugly weather , Lady Fleetwood , ' say 
 Gower . 

 ' it be my first , ' she answer . 

 how the marriage come about , how the separation , could not be ask and 
 be not related . 

 ' our district be not all London , my dear lady , ' say Mr. Woodseer . ' good 
 heart be here , as elsewhere , and as many , if one look behind the 
 dirt . I have find it since I labour amongst they , now twenty year . 
 unwashe human nature , though it be natural to we to wash , be the most 
 human , we find . ' 

 Gower question the naturalness of human nature 's desire to wash ; and 
 they wrangle good - humouredly , Carinthia 's eye dwell on they each in 
 turn ; until Mr. Woodseer , pursue the theme start by he to interest 
 she , speak of consolation derive from his labour here , in exchange 
 for the loss of his mountain . her face lighten . 

 ' you love the mountain ? ' 

 ' I be a son of the mountain . ' 

 ' ah , I love they ! Father call I a daughter of the mountain . I be 
 bear in the mountain . I be leave my mountain on the day , I think it 
 yesterday , when I meet this gentleman who be your son . ' 

 ' a glorious day it be ! ' Gower exclaim . 

 ' it be a day of great glory for I , ' say Carinthia . ' your foot do not 
 pain you for long ? ' 

 ' the length of two pipe . you be with your brother . ' 

 ' with my brother . my brother have marry a most beautiful lady . he be 
 now travel his happy time - my Chillon ! ' 

 there come a radiance on her under - eyelid . there be no weeping . 

 strike by the contrast between the two simultaneous honeymoon , and a 
 vision of the high - spirited mountain girl , see in this place a young 
 bride seek her husband , Gower Woodseer could have perform that 
 unphilosophical part . he have to shake himself . she seem really a 
 soar bird bring down by the fowler . 

 Lord Fleetwood 's manner of abandon she be the mystery . 

 Gower stand wait for her initiative , when the minister interpose : 
 ' there be book , book of our title people - the Peers , book of the 
 Peerage . they would supply the address . my son will discover where to 
 examine they . he will find the address . Most of the great nobleman have 
 a London house . ' 

 ' my husband have a house in London , ' Carinthia say . 

 ' I know he , to some degree , ' say Gower . 

 she remark : ' I have hear that you do . ' 

 her lip be shut , as to any hint at his treatment of she . 

 Gower go into the shop to speak with Madge . the girl be talk in 
 the business tone to customer ; she finish her commission hurriedly 
 and join he on the pavement by the doorstep . her voice be like the 
 change for the swing of a door from street to temple . 

 ' you have   see how brave she be , sir . she have thing to bear . never cry , 
 never fret . her marriage day - leastway ... I can not , no girl can tell . a 
 great nobleman , yes . she wait , believe in he ; she do . she have not 
 speak to I of what she be have to bear . I do not   know ; I guess ; I be sure 
 I be right - and he a man ! girl learn to know man , call they gentleman 
 or sweep . she think she have only to meet he to persuade he she be 
 fit to be love by he . she think of love . would he - our tongue be 
 tie except among ourselves to a sister . leave she by herself , with 
 only I , after - it knock I dumb ! many a man commit a murder would not 
 do that . she could force he to - no , it be not   a house she want , she 
 want he . he be her husband , Mr. Woodseer . you will do what you can to 
 help ; I judge by your father . I and Sarah will slave for she to be as 
 comfortable - as we - can make she ; we can not   give she what she be use to . 
 I shall count the hour . ' 

 ' you sell I apple when your head be just above the counter , ' say 
 Gower . 

 ' do I ? - you will not   lose time , sir ? ' she rejoin . ' her box be down at 
 the beastly inn in Kent . kind people , I dare say ; their bill be pay 
 any extent , they say . and he might do as he like in it - enter it like 
 a thief , if it please he , and off like one , and they no wiser . 
 she walk to his big house Esslemont for news of he . and I be not a 
 snivel wench either ; but she speak of he a way to make a girl 
 drink her tear , if they be not   to be let fall . ' 

 ' but you have a victory down there , ' Gower hint congratulation . 

 ' ah , ' say she . 

 ' Christopher Ines be all right now ? ' 

 ' I have   as good as lose my good name for Kit Ines , Mr. Woodseer . ' 

 ' not with my dad , Madge . ' 

 ' the minister read we at the heart . shall we hear the street of his 
 house in London before night ? ' 

 ' I may be late . ' 

 ' I will be up , any hour , for a rap at the shutter . I want to take she to 
 the house early next morning . she will not   mind the distance . she lie 
 in bed , her eye shut or open , never sleep , hear any mouse . it 
 should not   go on , if we can do a thing to help . ' 

 ' I be off , ' say Gower , unwontedly vex at his empty pocket , that could 
 not offer the mean for conveyance to a couple of young woman . 

 the dark - browed girl send her straight eye at he . they push he to 
 hasten . on second thought , he stop and hail she ; he be move to 
 confirm an impression of this girl 's feature . 

 his mind be direct to the business burn behind they , honestly 
 enough , as soon as he have they in sight again . 

 ' I ought to have the address of some of her people , in case , ' he say . 

 ' she will not   go to her uncle , I ' m sure of that , ' say Madge . ' he be a 
 lord and can not   be worry . it be her husband to find first . ' 

 ' if he be to be find ! - he be a lord , too . have she no other relative or 
 friend ? ' 

 ' she love her brother . he be an officer . he be away on honeymoon . there 
 be an admiral down Hampshire way , a place I have   be near and see . I would 
 not have you go to any of they , sir , without try all we can do to 
 find Lord Fleetwood . it be Admiral Fakenham she speak of ; she be fond of 
 he . she be not minded to bother any of her friend about herself . ' 

 ' I shall see you to - night , ' say Gower , and set his face westward , 
 remember that his father have name Caermarthen as her mother 's 
 birthplace . 

 just in that tone of hers do Welshwomen talk of their country ; of its 
 history , when at home , of its mountain , when exile : and in a language 
 like her , bare of superlative to signify an ardour convey by the 
 fire of the breath . her quick devotion to a lady exciting enthusiasm 
 through admire pity for the grace of a much - try quiet sweetness , 
 be explain ; apart from other reason , feminine or hide , which might 
 exist . only a Welsh girl would be so quick and all in it , with a voice 
 intimate a heated cauldron under her mouth . none but a Welsh - blood 
 girl , risk her good name to follow and nurse the man she consider 
 a hero , would carry her head to look virgin eye as she do . one could 
 swear to they , Gower think . contact with her spirit he out of his 
 mooniness . 

 he have the cymric and celtic respect of character ; which put aside the 
 person 's environment to face the soul . he be also an impressionable 
 fellow among his fellow , a philosopher only at his leisure , in his 
 court solitude . get away some stride from this girl of the 
 drilling voice , - the shudder - voice , he phrase it , - the lady for whom 
 she plead come clear into his view and gradually absorb he ; 
 though it be an emulation with the girl Madge , of which he be a trifle 
 conscious , that drive he to do his work of service in the direct 
 manner . he then fancy the girl have catch something of the tone of her 
 lady : the savage intensity or sincerity ; and he brood on Carinthia 's 
 position , the mixture of the astounding and the woful in her 
 misadventure . one could almost laugh at our human fate , to think of a 
 drop off the radiant mountain height upon a Whitechapel greengrocer 's 
 shop , gather the title of countess midway . 

 but nothing of the ludicrous touch she ; no , and if we bring reason to 
 scan our laugh at pure humanity , it be we who be in the place of 
 the ridiculous , for do what reason disavow . have he not name she , 
 Carinthia , Saint and Martyr , from a first perusal of her face ? and 
 Lord Fleetwood have read and repeat it . Lord Fleetwood have become the 
 instrument to martyrize she ? that might be ; there be a hoard of bad 
 stuff in his composition besides the precious : and this be a nobleman 
 own enormous wealth , who could vitiate himself by dispose of a 
 multitude of man and woman to serve his will , a shifty will . wealth 
 create the magician , and may breed the fiend within he . in the hand 
 of a young man , wealth be an invitation to devilry . Gower 's idea of the 
 story of Carinthia incline to charge Lord Fleetwood with every possible 
 false dealing . he then quash the charge , and decide to wait for 
 information . 

 at the second of the aristocratic Clubs of London 's West , into which 
 he step like an easy member , the hall - porter do not examine his 
 clothing from german hat to boot , and give he Lord Fleetwood 's town 
 address . he could tell Madge at night by the door of the shuttered shop , 
 that Lord Fleetwood have go down to Wales . 

 ' it mean she have to wait , ' she say . ' the minister have be to the 
 coach - office , to order up her box from that inn . he do it in his name ; 
 they can not   refuse ; no money 's owing . she must have a change . Sally have 
 fifteen pound lock up in case of need . ' 

 Sally 's capacity and economy fetch the penniless philosopher a slap . 

 ' you have   take to this lady , ' he say . 

 ' she hold my hand , while Kit Ines be at his work ; and I be new to 
 she , and a prize - fighter 's lass , they call I : - upon the top of that 
 nobleman 's coach , where he make I sit , behind she , to see the fight ; 
 and she his wed lady that morning . a queer groom . he may keep Kit 
 Ines from drink , he be one of you man , and rid over anything in his 
 way . I can not   speak about it ; I could swear it before a judge , from what 
 I know . those Rundles at that inn do not   hear anything it suit he to 
 do . all the people down in those part be slave to he . and I think 
 he be a real St. George before , - yes , ready I be to kiss the ground 
 his foot cross . if you could , it be Chinningfold near where Admiral 
 Fakenham live , down Hampshire way . her friend ought to hear what be 
 happen to she . they will find she in a queer place . she might go to the 
 minister 's . I believe she be happy with us girl . ' 

 Gower pledge his word to start for Chinningfold early as the light next 
 day . he like the girl the well , in an amicable fashion , now that 
 his nerve have get free of the transient spell of her kettle tone - the 
 hardly varied one note of a heart boil with sisterly devotion to 
 a misused stranger of her sex ; - and , after the way of his race , 
 imagination spring up in he , at the heel of the quieted sens , 
 release he from the personal and physical to grasp the general 
 situation and place the protagonist foremost . 

 he think of Carinthia , with full vision of she . some wrong have be 
 do , or some violation of the right , to guess from the girl Madge 's 
 molten word in avoidance of the very word . it imply - though it 
 might be but one of Love 's shrewd discord - such suspect traitorous 
 dealing of a man with their sister woman as make the world of woman all 
 woman toward she . they can be that , and their be so illuminate their 
 hide sentiment in relation to the mastering male , whom they uphold . 

 but our uninformed philosopher be merely pick up scrap of shedding 
 outside the dark wood of the mystery they be to he , and play 
 imagination upon they . this primary element of his nature soon enthrone 
 his choose lady above their tangled obscurity . beneath her tranquil 
 beam , with the rapture of the knowledge that her name on earth be 
 Livia , he thread East London 's thoroughfare , - on a morning when day 
 and night be make one by fog , to journey down to Chinningfold , by 
 coach , in the service of the young Countess of Fleetwood , whose right 
 to the title he do not doubt , though it direct surprise movement at 
 his understanding from time to time . 




 CHAPTER XX . study in FOG , GOUT , an OLD SEAMAN , a LOVELY SERPENT , and 
 the MORAL effect that may come of a borrowed shirt 

 money of his father 's enable Gower to take the coach ; and study in 
 fog , from the speck brown to the woolly white , and the dripping tear , 
 be propose to the traveller , whose preference of Nature 's face do 
 not arrest his observation of her domino and petticoat ; across which 
 blank sheet he curiously read backward , that he journey by the aid of 
 his father 's hard - earn , ungrudged piece of gold . without it , he would 
 have be useless in this case of need . the philosopher could starve 
 with equanimity , and be the strong . but one have , it seem here 
 clearly , to put on harness and trudge along a line , if the unhappy 
 be to have one 's help . gradual experience of his business among his 
 fellow be teach an exercised mind to learn in region where mind 
 unexercised be doctorial giant beside it . 

 the study of gout be offer at Chinningfold . Admiral Fakenham 's butler 
 refuse at first to take a name to his master . Gower persist , state 
 the business of his mission ; and in spite of the very suspicious glib 
 good English speak by a man wear such a hat and suit , the butler be 
 induce to consult Mrs. Carthew . 

 she spring up alarmed . after have see the young lady happily marry 
 and off with her lordly young husband , the arrival of a messenger from 
 the bride give a stir the wrong way to her flow recollection ; the 
 scene and incident she have smother under her love of the comfortable 
 stand forth appallingly . the messenger , the butler say , be no 
 gentleman . she inspect Gower and hear he speak . an anomaly have come 
 to the house ; for he have the language of a gentleman , the appearance of 
 a nondescript ; he look indifferent , he speak sympathetically ; and he 
 be frank as soon as the butler be out of hearing . in return for the 
 compliment , she invite he to her sitting - room . the story of the young 
 countess , whom she have see drive away by her husband from the church 
 in a coach and four , as be now destitute , pray to see her friend , 
 in the Whitechapel of London - the note haunt of thief and outcast , 
 bankrupt and the abandon ; set she ask for the first time , who 
 be the man with dreadful countenance inside the coach ? a previously 
 disregarded horror of a man . she go tremble to the admiral , though 
 his health be delicate , his temper excitable . it be , she consider , 
 an occasion for brave the doctor 's interdict . 

 Gower be presently summon to the chamber where Admiral Fakenham 
 recline on cushion in an edifice of an arm - chair . he tell a plain 
 tale . its effect be to straighten the admiral 's back , and enlarge in 
 grey glass a pair of sea - blue eye . and , ' what be that ? whitechapel ? ' 
 the admiral exclaim , - at high pitch , far above his understanding . 
 the particular be repeat , whereupon the sick - room shake with , 
 ' Greengrocer ? ' he stun himself with another of the monstrous point 
 in his pet girl 's honeymoon : ' a prizefight ? ' 

 to refresh a saving incredulity , he take a close view of the messenger . 
 Gower 's habiliment be those of the ' queer fish , ' the admiral saw . 
 but the meeting at Carlsruhe be recall to he , and there be a worthy 
 effort to remember it . ' prize - fight ! - Greengrocer ! Whitechapel ! ' he 
 ring the change rather more moderately ; till , swell and purpling , he 
 cry : ' where be the husband ? ' 

 that be the emissary 's question likewise . 

 ' if I could have find he , sir , I should not have trouble you . ' 

 ' disappear ? play the man of his word , then play the madman ! 
 prize - fight the first day of her honeymoon ? good Lord ! leave she at the 
 inn ? ' 

 ' she be leave . ' 

 ' when be she leave ? ' 

 ' as soon as the fight be over - as far as I understand . ' 

 the admiral shower briny masculine comment on that bridegroom . 

 ' her brother 's travel somewhere in the Pyrenees - marry my 
 daughter . she have an uncle , a hermit . ' he become pale . ' I must do it . 
 the rascal insult we all . fling she off the day he marry she ! it be 
 a slap in the face to all of we . you be acquaint with the lady , sir . 
 would you call she a red - haired girl ? ' 

 ' red - gold of the ballad ; chestnut - brown , with thread of fire . ' 

 ' she have the eye for a man to swear by . I feel the loss of she , I can 
 tell you . she be wine and no penalty to I . be she much break under 
 it ? - if I ' m to credit ... I suppose I must . it floor I . ' 

 Admiral Baldwin 's frosty stare return on he . Gower catch an image of 
 it , as comparable , without much straining , to an Arctic region smite 
 by the beam . 

 ' nothing break her courage , ' he say . 

 ' to be sure , my poor dear ! who could have guess when she leave my house 
 she be on her way to a prizefight and a greengrocer 's in Whitechapel . 
 but the dog 's not mad , though his bite 's bad ; he be an eccentric 
 mongrel . he want the whip ; ought to have have it regularly from his 
 first breeching . he shall whistle for she when he repent ; and he will , 
 mark I . this gout here will be have a snap at the vital if I do not 
 start to - night . Oblige I , half a minute . ' 

 the admiral stretch his hand for an arm to give support , stand , 
 and drop into the chair , signify a fit of giddiness in the word 
 ' Head . ' 

 before the stupor have pass , Mrs. Carthew enter , anxious lest the 
 admittance of a messenger of evil to her invalid should have be an 
 error of judgement . the butler have argue it with she . she belong 
 to the list of person appoint to cut life 's thread when it strain , 
 their general kindness be so liable to misdirection . 

 Gower leave the room and go into the garden . he have never see a death ; 
 and the admiral 's peculiar pallor intimate event proper to day of 
 cold mist and a dripping stillness . how we go , be the question among 
 his problem : - if we be to go ! his youthful frame insistingly add . 

 the fog down a wet laurel - walk contract his mind with the chilling of 
 his blood , and he feel that he would have to see the thing if he be to 
 believe in it . of course he believe , but life throb rebelliously , 
 and a picture of a desk near a lively fire - grate , book and pen and 
 paper , and a piece of write to be approve of by the Hesper of lady , 
 hold ground with a pathetic heroism against the inevitable . he get 
 his wit to the front by walk fast ; and then think of the young 
 countess and the friend she might be about to lose . she could number her 
 friend on her finger . Admiral Fakenham 's exclamation of the name of 
 the place where she now be , convey an inky idea of the fall she have 
 undergo . count her absent brother , with himself , his father , and 
 the two Whitechapel girl , it certainly be an unexampled fall , to 
 say of she , that they and those two girl have become by the twist of 
 circumstance the most serviceable of her friend . 

 her husband be the unriddled riddle we have in the wealthy young 
 lord , - burn to possess , and make , tatter of all he grasp , the 
 moment it be his own . glint of the devilish have shoot from he at the 
 gamingtable , - fine haunt for the study of our low man . he could be 
 magnificent in generosity ; he have little humaneness . he covet beauty 
 in woman hungrily , and seem to be bear hostile to they ; or so Gower 
 judge by the light of the later evidence on unconsidered antecedent 
 observation of he . why marry she to cast she off instantly ? the crude 
 philosopher ask it as helplessly as the admiral . and , far , what 
 do the girl Madge mean by the drop of her voice to a hum of enforce 
 endurance under injury , like the furnace behind an iron door ? old man 
 might have understand , as he be aware ; he might have guess , only he 
 have the habit of scatter meditation upon the game of hawk and fowl . 

 Dame Gossip boil . her one idea of animation be to have her dramatis 
 persona in violent motion , always the big foremost ; and , indeed , 
 that be the way to make they credible , for the wind they raise and the 
 succession of collision . the fault of the method be , that they do not 
 instruct ; so the breath be out of they before they be put aside ; for 
 the uninstructive be the humanly deficient : they remain with we like 
 the tolerate old aristocracy , which may not govern , and be but socially 
 seductive . the deuteragonist or secondary person can at time tell 
 we more of they than circumstance at furious heat will help they to 
 reveal ; and the Dame will have he only as an index - post . hence her 
 endless ejaculation over the mystery of Life , the inscrutability of 
 character , - in a plain world , in the midst of such readable people ! to 
 preserve Romance   we exchange a sky for a ceiling if we let it go , we 
 must be inside the head of our people as well as the heart , more than 
 shake the kaleidoscope of hurried spectacle , in day of a grow 
 activity of the head . 

 Gower Woodseer could not know that he be draw on to fortune and the 
 sight of his Hesper by Admiral Fakenham 's order that the visitor be to 
 stay at his house until he should be able to quit his bed , and journey 
 with he to London , doctor or no doctor . the doctor would not hear of 
 it . the admiral threaten it every night for the morning , every morning 
 for the night ; and Gower have to submit to postponement balefully 
 affect his linen . Remonstrance be not to be think of ; for at a 
 mere show of reluctance the courtly admiral flushed , frowned , and beat 
 the bed where he lay , a gouty volcano . Gower 's one shirt be pass 
 through the various complexion , and have approach the Nubian on 
 its way to negro . his natural candour check the downward course . he 
 mention to Mrs. Carthew , with incidental gravity , on a morning at 
 breakfast , that this article of his attire ' be begin to resemble 
 London snow . ' she be amuse ; she promise he a change more resemble 
 country snow . ' it will save I from button so high up , ' he say , as 
 he thank she . she then remember the daily increase of stiffness in 
 his figure : and a reflection upon his patient waiting , and simpleness , 
 and lexicographer speech to expose his minor need , touch her unused 
 sense of humour on the side where it be tender in woman , from be 
 motherly . 

 in consequence , she speak of he with a plead warmth to the Countess 
 Livia , who have come down to see the admiral ' concern an absurd but 
 annoying rumour run over London . ' Gower be out for a walk . he know 
 of the affair , Mrs. Carthew say , for an introduction to her excuse of 
 his clothing . 

 ' but I know the man , ' say Livia . ' Lord Fleetwood pick he up 
 somewhere , and bring he to we . Clever : why , be he here ? ' 

 ' he be here , send to the admiral , as I understand , my lady . ' 

 ' send by whom ? ' 

 have but a weak vocabulary to defend a delicate position , Mrs. Carthew 
 stutter into evasion , after the way of ill - armed person ; and name 
 herself a stranger to the circumstance , she feebly suggest that the 
 admiral ought not to be disturb before the doctor 's next visit ; Mr. 
 Woodseer have be allow to sit by his bed yesterday only for ten 
 minute , to divert he with his talk . she protect in this wretched 
 manner the poor gentleman she sacrifice and emit such a smell of 
 secresy , that Livia write three word on her card , for it to be take 
 to Admiral Baldwin at once . Mrs. Carthew supplicate faintly ; she be 
 unheeded . 

 the Countess of Fleetwood mount the stair - to descend they with the 
 knowledge of she be the Dowager Countess of Fleetwood ! Henrietta have 
 speak of the Countess of Fleetwood 's hatred of the title of Dowager . 
 but when Lady Fleetwood have the fact from the admiral , would she forbear 
 to excite he ? if she repudiate it , she would provoke he to fire ' one 
 of his broadside , ' - as they say in the family , to assert its and that 
 might exhaust he ; and there be peril in that . and who be guilty ? Mrs. 
 Carthew confess her guilt , ask how it could have be avoid . she 
 make appeal to Gower on his return , transfix he . 

 not only be he no philosopher who have an idol , he have to learn that he 
 can not think rationally ; his due sense of weight and measure be lose , 
 the choice of his thought as well . he be in the house with his 
 devoutly , simply worship , pearl of woman , and his whole mind fall 
 to work without ado upon the extravagant height of the admiral 's 
 shirt - collar cut his ear . the very beating of his heart be 
 perplex to know whether it be for rapture or annoyance . as a result 
 he be but histrionically master of himself when the Countess Livia or 
 the nimbus of the lady appear in the room . 

 she receive his bow ; she direct Mrs. Carthew to have the doctor 
 summon immediately . the remorseful woman fly . 

 ' Admiral Fakenham be very ill , Mr. Woodseer , he have have distract 
 news . oh , no , the messenger be not blame . you be Lord Fleetwood 's 
 friend and will not allow he to be prejudge . he will be in town 
 shortly . I know he well , you know he ; and could you hear he accuse 
 of cruelty - and to a woman ? he be the soul of chivalry . so , in his 
 way , be the admiral . if he be only more patient ! let we wait for Lord 
 Fleetwood 's version . I be certain it will satisfy I . the admiral 
 wish you to step up to he . be very quiet ; you will be ; consent to 
 everything . I be unaware of his condition : the thing I hear be 
 incredible . I hope the doctor will not delay . now go . beg to retire 
 soon . ' 

 Livia speak under her breath ; she have fear . 

 Admiral Baldwin lie in his bed , submit to a nurse - woman - sign of 
 extreme exhaustion . he pluck strength from the sight of Gower and 
 bundle the woman out of the room , muttering : ' kill myself ? not half 
 so quick as they would do it . I can not   rest for that Whitechapel of your . 
 please fetch pen and paper : it be a letter . ' 

 the letter begin , ' Dear Lady Arpington . ' 

 the dictation of it come in start . atone moment it seem as if life 's 
 ending shake the curtain on our stage and be about to lift . an old 
 friend in the reader of the letter would need no excuse for its jerky 
 brevity . it say that his pet girl , Miss Kirby , be married to the Earl 
 of Fleetwood in the first week of last month , and be now to be find at 
 a shop no . 45 Longways , Whitechapel ; that the writer be ill , unable 
 to stir ; that he would be in London within eight - and - forty hour at 
 furthest . he beg Lady Arpington to send down to the place and have 
 the young countess fetch to she , and keep she until he come . 

 Admiral Baldwin sit up to sign the letter . 

 ' yes , and write " miracle happen when the devil 's abroad " - do it ! ' 
 he say , sink back . ' now seal , you will find wax - the ring at my 
 watch - chain . ' 

 he sigh , as it be the sound of his very last ; he lie like a sleeper 
 twitch by a dream . there have be a scene with Livia . the dictating of 
 the letter take his remainder of strength out of he . 

 Gower call in the nurse , and go downstairs . he want the address of 
 Lady Arpington 's town house . 

 ' you have a letter for she ? ' say Livia , and hold her hand for it in a 
 way not to be withstand . 

 ' there be no superscription , ' he remark . 

 ' I will see to that , Mr. Woodseer . ' 

 ' I fancy I be bind , Lady Fleetwood . ' 

 ' by no mean . ' she touch his arm . ' you be Lord Fleetwood 's friend . ' 

 a slight convulsion of the frame strike the admiral 's shirt - collar at 
 his ear ; it virtually prostrate he under foot of a lady so benign 
 in overlook the spectacle he present . still , he consider ; he have 
 wit alive enough , just to perceive a duty . 

 ' the letter be entrust to I , Lady Fleetwood . ' 

 ' you be afraid to entrust it to the post ? ' 

 ' I be think of deliver it myself in town . ' 

 ' you will entrust it to I . ' 

 ' anything on earth of my own . ' 

 ' the treasure would be value . this you confide to my care . ' 

 ' it be important . ' 

 ' no . ' 

 ' indeed it be . ' 

 ' say that it be , then . it be quite safe with I . it may be important 
 that it should not be deliver . be you not Lord Fleetwood 's friend ? 
 Lady Arpington be not so very , very prominent in the list with you and 
 I . besides , I do not   think she have come to town yet . she generally see 
 out the end of the hunting season . leave the letter to I : it shall go . 
 you , with your keen observation miss nothing , have see that my uncle 
 have not his whole judgement at present . there be two side to a case . 
 Lord Fleetwood 's friend will know that it would be unfair to offer he 
 up to his enemy while he be absent . thing go favourably here , I 
 drive back to town to - morrow , and I hope you will accept a seat in my 
 carriage . ' 

 he deliver his courtly ; he be rid on cloud . 

 they talk of Baden . his honourable surrender of her defeat purse be 
 a subject for gentle humour with she , venturesome compliment with he . 
 he speak well ; and though his hand be clean of Sir Meeson Corby 's 
 reproach of they , the caricature of presentable man blush absurdly and 
 seem uneasy in his monstrous collar . the touching of he again would 
 not be require to set he pace to her step . his hang of the head 
 testify to the unerre stamp of a likeness Captain Abrane could affix 
 with a stroke : he look the fiddler over his bow , play wonderfully 
 to conceal the crack of a string . the merit of be one of her army of 
 admirer be accord to he . the letter to Lady Arpington be retain . 

 Gower defer the further mention of the letter until a visit to the 
 admiral 's chamber should furnish an excuse ; and he have to wait for 
 it . Admiral Baldwin 's condition be become ominous . he send message 
 downstairs by the doctor , forbid his guest 's departure until they 
 two could make the journey together next day . the tortured and 
 blissful young man , strip of his borrow philosopher 's cloak , hung 
 conscience - ridden in this delicious bower , which be perceptibly an 
 antechamber of the vault , offer he the study he thirst for , 
 shrink from , and mix with his cup of amorous worship . 




 CHAPTER XXI . in which we have furth glimpse of the wondrous mechanism 
 of our younger MAN 

 the report of Admiral Baldwin Fakenham as have die in the arm of a 
 stranger visit the house , hit nearer the mark than usual . he yield 
 his last breath as Gower Woodseer be lower he to his pillow , 
 shortly after a husky whisper of the letter to Lady Arpington ; and that 
 be one of Gower 's crucial trial . it condemn he , for the pacifying 
 of a die man , to the murmur and shuffle , which be a lie ; and the 
 lie burn he , contribute to the brand on his race . he and his father 
 uphold a solitary bare staff , where the cambrian flag have fly , before 
 their people have be trample in mire , to do as the worm . his loathing 
 of any shadow of the lie be a protest on behalf of Welsh blood against 
 an english charge , besides the passion for spiritual cleanliness : 
 without which be no comprehension , therefore no enjoyment , of nature 
 possible to he . for Nature be the Truth . 

 he beg the countess to let he have the letter ; he hold to the 
 petition , with supplication ; he speak of his pledge word , his honour ; 
 and her countenance do not deny to such an object as she behold the 
 right to a sense of honour . ' we all have the sentiment , I hope , Mr. 
 Woodseer , ' she say , stupefy the worshipper , who do not see it 
 manifest . there be a look of gentle intimacy , expressive of common 
 ground between they , accompany the dead word . mistress of the 
 letter , and the letter safe under lock , the admiral dead , she have not to 
 bestow a touch of her hand on his coatsleeve in decline to return it . 
 a face languidly and benevolently querulous be bent on he , when he , so 
 clever a man , resume his very silly petition . 

 she be moon out of cloud at a change of the theme . Gower journey 
 to London without the letter , intoxicate , and conscious of poison ; 
 enamour of it , and strain for health . he have to reflect at the 
 journey 's end , that he have pick up nothing on the road , neither a 
 thing observe nor a thing imagine ; he be a troubled pool instead of a 
 flow river . 

 the good help to health for he be a day in his father 's house . we be 
 perpetually at our comparison of ourselves with other ; and they be 
 mostly profitless ; but the man carry his religious light , to light 
 the dark way of his fellow , and keep good cheer , as though the 
 heart of he run a mountain water through the grimy region , pluck at 
 Gower with an envy to resemble he in practice . his philosophy , too , 
 reproach he for be outshone . apart from his philosophy , he stand 
 confess a bankrupt ; and it have dwindle to near extinction . adoration 
 of a woman take the breath out of philosophy . and if one have only to 
 say sheer donkey , he consent to be drive by she ! one have to say 
 bad in this case ; for the word be , liar and traitor . 

 Carinthia 's attitude toward his father conduce to his emulous respect 
 for the old man , below whom , and indeed below the roadway of ordinary 
 principle hedge with dull text , he have strangely fall . the sight 
 of she lash he . she make it her business or it be her pleasure to 
 go the round beside Mr. Woodseer visit his poor people . she speak 
 of the scene she witness , and throw no stress on the wretchedness , 
 have only the wish to assist in minister . probably the great 
 wretchedness bubble over the place blunt her feeling of loss at 
 the word of Admiral Baldwin 's end ; her bosom spring up : ' he be next to 
 father , ' be all she say ; and she soon revert to this and that house 
 of the lodging of poverty . she have descend on the world . there be of 
 course a world outside Whitechapel , but Whitechapel be hot about she ; 
 the nest of misery , the sharp note of want in the air , trick of an 
 urchin who have amuse she . 

 as to the place itself , she have no judgement to pronounce , except that : 
 ' they have no morning here ' ; and the childish remark set her quivering 
 on her height , like one see through a tear , in Gower 's memory . scarce 
 anything of her hungry impatience to meet her husband be visible : she 
 have come to London to meet he ; she hop to meet he soon : before her 
 brother 's return , she could have add . she mention the goodness of 
 Sarah Winch in not allow that she be a burden to support . money and 
 its us have impress she ; the quantity possess by some , the utter 
 need of it for the first of human purpose by other . her speech be not 
 of so halting or foreign an English . she grow rapidly wherever she be 
 plant . 

 speculation on the conduct of her husband , empty as it might be , 
 be necessitate in Gower . he pursue it , and listen to his father 
 similarly at work : ' a young lady fit for any station , the kind of 
 soul , a bear charitable human creature , void of pride , near in all 
 she - do and think to the Shaping Hand , why should her husband forsake 
 she on the day of their nuptial . 

 she be most gracious ; the simplicity of an infant . can you imagine the 
 doing of an injury by a man to a woman like she ? ' 

 then it be that Gower screw himself to say : 

 ' yes , I can imagine it , I be do it myself . I shall be do it till 
 I have   write a letter and pay a visit . ' 

 he take a meditative stride or two in the room , think without 
 revulsion of the Countess Livia under a similitude of the bell of the 
 plant henbane , and that his father have immunity from temptation because 
 of the insensibility to beauty . out of which he pass to the writing 
 of the letter to Lord Fleetwood , inform his lordship that he intend 
 immediately to deliver a message to the Marchioness of Arpington from 
 Admiral Baldwin Fakenham , in relation to the Countess of Fleetwood . 
 a duty be easily do by Gower when he have surmount the task of 
 conceive his resolution to do it ; and this task , involve an 
 offence to the Lady Livia and intrusion of his name on a nobleman 's 
 recollection , rank next in severity to the chop off of his finger 
 by a man suspect they of the bite of rabie . 

 an interview with Lady Arpington be grant he the follow day . 

 she be a florid , aquiline , loud - voice lady , evidently have no seat 
 for her wonderment , after his account of the origin of his acquaintance 
 with the admiral have quiet her suspicion . the world have only to stand 
 beside she , and it would hear what she have hear . she rush to the 
 conclusion that Lord Fleetwood have marry a person of no family . 

 ' really , really , that young man 's freak appear design for the express 
 purpose of heighten our amazement ! ' she exclaim . ' he will not   easily 
 get beyond a wife in the east of London , at a shop ; but there be no 
 know . any wish of Admiral Baldwin Fakenham 's I hold sacred . at least 
 I can see for myself . you can not   tell I more of the fact ? if Lord 
 Fleetwood 's in town , I will call he here at once . I will drive down to 
 this address you give I . she be a civil person ? ' 

 ' her breeding be perfect , ' say Gower . 

 ' perfect breeding , you say ? ' Lady Arpington be reduce to a murmur . 
 she consider the speaker : his outlandish garb , his unprotesting 
 self - possession . he speak good English by habit , her ear tell she . she 
 be of an eminence to judge of a man impartially , even to the sufferance 
 of an opinion from he , on a subject that less lady would have 
 deny to his clothing . outwardly simple , naturally frank , though 
 a tangle of the complexity inwardly , he be a touchstone for true 
 aristocracy , as the humblest who bear the main element of it must be . 
 certain humorous turn in his conversation win he an amicable smile 
 when he bow to leave : they be the need finish of a favourable 
 impression . 

 one day later the earl arrive in town , read Gower Woodseer 's brief 
 word , and receive the consequently expect summon , couch in a 
 great lady 's plain imperative . she be connect with his family on the 
 paternal side . 

 he go obediently ; not unwillingly , let the deputed historian of the 
 Marriage , turn over document , here say . he go to Lady Arpington 
 dispose for marital humaneness and jog - trot harmony , by condescension ; 
 equivalent to a submitting to the drone of an incessant psalm at the 
 drum of the ear . he be , in fact , rather more than incline that way . 
 when very young , at the age of thirteen , a mood of religious fervour have 
 spiritualize the dulness of protestant pew and pulpit for he . another 
 fit of it , in the roman catholic direction , have propose , during his 
 late dilemma , to relieve he of the burden of his pledge word . he have 
 plunge for a short space into the rapturous contemplation of a monastic 
 life - ' the clean soul for the macerated flesh , ' as that fellow Woodseer 
 say once : and such as his friend , the roman Catholic Lord Feltre , 
 moodily talk of get in his interval . he have go down to a young 
 and novel trial establishment of english penitent in the forest of a 
 Midland county , and have watch and envy , and see the escape from 
 a lifelong bondage to the ' beautiful Gorgon , ' under cover of a white 
 flannel frock . the world pull hard , and he give his body into chain 
 of a woman , to redeem his word . 

 but there be a plea on behalf of this woman . the life she offer 
 might have psalmic iteration ; the dead monotony of it in prospect do , 
 nevertheless , exorcise a devil . Carinthia promise , it might seem to 
 chase and keep the black beast out of he permanently , as she could , 
 he now conceive : for since the day of the marriage with she , the devil 
 inhabit he have at least be easy , ' up in a corner . ' 

 he hold an individual memory of his bride , rose - veil , secret to they 
 both , that make they one , by subdue he . for it be a charm ; an actual 
 feminine , an unanticipated personal , charm ; past reach of tongue to 
 name , wordless in thought . there , among the fold of the incense 
 vapour of our heart 's holy of holy , it hang ; and it be rare , it be 
 distinctive of she , and alluring , if one consent to melt to it , and 
 accept for compensation the exorcising of a devil . 

 oh , but no mere devil by title ! - a very devil . it be alert and frisky , 
 flush , fill the thin cold idea of Henrietta at a thought ; and in 
 the thought it make Carinthia 's intimate charm appear as no well than 
 a thing to enrich a beggar , while he know that king could never command 
 the charm . not love , only the bathing in Henrietta 's incomparable beauty 
 and the desire to be , desire to have be , the casket of it , break 
 the world to temp and lightning at a view of Henrietta the married 
 woman - married to the brother of the woman call he husband : - ' it be 
 my husband . ' the young tyrant of wealth could have avow that he do 
 not love Henrietta ; but not the less be he in the swing of a whirlwind 
 at the hint of she love the man she have marry . do she ? it might be 
 try . 

 she ? that Henrietta be one of the creature who love pleasure , love 
 flattery , love their beauty : they can not love a man . or the love be a 
 ship that will not sail a sea . 

 now , if the fact be declare and attest , if her shallowness be 
 see prove , one might get free of the devil she plant in the breast . 
 absolutely to despise she would be release , and it would allow of his 
 taste Carinthia 's charm , reluctantly acknowledge ; not ' money of the 
 country ' beside that golden Henrietta 's . 

 yet who can say ? - woman be such deception . often their fairest , 
 apparently sweetest , when bring to the keenest of the test , be 
 graceless ; or bad , artificially consonant ; in either instance barren 
 of the poetic . thousand of the confidently expectant among man have 
 be unbewitche ; a lamentable process ; and the grimly reticent and 
 the loudly discursive be equally eloquent of the pretty general 
 disillusion . how they loathe and tear the mask of the sham attraction 
 that snatch they to the hag yoke , and fall away to show its grisly 
 horror within the round of the month , if not the second enumeration of 
 twelve by the clock ! Fleetwood have hear certain candid senior talk , 
 deliver their mind in superior appreciation of unpretentious boor 
 wench , nature 's product , not esteem by he . well , of a truth , 
 she - ' Red Hair and Rugged Brows , ' as the fellow Woodseer have call she , 
 in alternation with ' Mountain Face to Sun ' - she at the unveiling be 
 gentle , surpassingly ; graceful in the furnace of the trial . she wear 
 through the critic ordeal his burn sensitiveness to grace and 
 delicacy cast about a woman , and be rather well than not wither by 
 it . 

 on the border between maidenly and wifely , she , a thing of flesh like 
 other daughter of earth , have impress her sceptical lord , incline 
 to contempt of she and detestation of his bargain , as a flitting hue , 
 ethereal , a transfiguration of earthliness in the core of the earthly 
 furnace . and how ? - but that it must have be the naked shin forth 
 of her character , startle to show itself : - ' it be my husband ' : - it must 
 have be love . 

 the love that they versify , and strum on guitar , and go crazy over , and 
 end by roar at as the delusion ; this common bloom of the ripeness of 
 a season ; this would never have utterly capture a sceptic , to vanquish 
 he in his mastery , snare he in her surrender . it must have be the 
 veritable passion : a flame keep alive by vestal ministrant in the 
 yewwood of the forest of Old Romance ; plant only in the breast of 
 very favourite maiden . love have eye , love have a voice that night,-love 
 be the explicable magic lift terrestrial to seraphic . though , 
 true , she have not Henrietta 's golden smoothness of beauty . henrietta , 
 illumine with such a love , would outdo all legend , all dream of the 
 tale of love . would she ? for credulous man she would be golden coin of 
 the currency . she would not have a particular wild flavour : charm as 
 of the running doe that have take a dart and roll an eye to burst the 
 hunter 's heart with pity . 

 Fleetwood go his way to Lady Arpington almost complacently , have 
 fight and lay his wilder self . he might be liken to the doctor 's 
 patient enter the chemist 's shop , with a prescription for a drug 
 of healing virtue , upon which the palate be as little consult as a 
 robustious lollypop boy in the household of ceremonial parent , who 
 have ring for the troop of their orderly domestic to sit in a row and 
 hearken the intonation of good word . 




 CHAPTER XXII . a right - minded great LADY 

 the bow , the welcome , and the introductory remark pass rapidly as 
 the pull at two side of a curtain opening on a scene that stiffen 
 courtliness to hard attention . 

 after the name of Admiral Baldwin and ' the Mr. Woodseer , ' the name of 
 Whitechapel be mention by Lady Arpington . it might have be the name 
 of any other place . 

 ' ah , so far , then , I have to instruct you , ' she say , observe the 
 young earl . ' I drive down there yesterday . I see the lady call 
 herself Countess of Fleetwood . by right ? she be a Miss Kirby . ' 

 ' she have the right , ' Fleetwood say , stand well up out of a discharge 
 of musketry . 

 ' marriage not contest . you know of she be in that place ? - I can not 
 describe it . ' 

 ' your ladyship will pardon I ? ' 

 London 's frontier of barbarism be name for he again , and in a tone to 
 penetrate . 

 he refrain from put the question of how she have come there . 

 as iron as he look , he say : ' she stay there by choice . ' 

 the great lady tap her foot on the floor . 

 ' you be not acquaint with the district . ' 

 ' one of my man come out of it . ' 

 ' the come out of it ! ... however , I understand her story , that she 
 travel from a village inn , where she have be leave - without resource . 
 she wait week ; I forget how many . she have a description of maid in 
 attendance on she . she come to London to find her husband . you be 
 at the mine , we hear . her one desire be to meet her husband . but , 
 goodness ! Fleetwood , why do you frown ? you acknowledge the marriage , 
 she have the name of the church ; she be marry out of that old Lord 
 Levellier 's house . you drive she - I will not   repeat the flighty business . 
 you leave she , and she do she good to follow you . will the young man of 
 our time not learn that life be no long a game when they have a woman 
 for partner in the match ! 

 you do not   complain of her flavour of a foreign manner ? she can not   be so 
 very ... Admiral Baldwin 's daughter have marry her brother ; and he be a 
 military officer . she have germ of breeding , want only a little rub of 
 the world to smooth she . speak to the point : - do you meet she here ? do 
 you refuse ? ' 

 ' at present ? I do . ' 

 ' something have to be do . ' 

 ' she be bind to stay where I leave she . ' 

 ' you be bind to provide for her becomingly . ' 

 ' provision shall be make , of course . ' 

 ' the story will ... unless - and quickly , too . ' 

 I know , I know ! ' 

 Fleetwood have the clang of all the bell of London chime Whitechapel 
 at he in his head , and he betray the irritated tyrant ready to decree 
 fire and sword , for the defence or solace of his tender sensibility . 

 the black flash fly . 

 ' it be a thing to mend as well as one can , ' Lady Arpington say . ' I be 
 not inquisitive : you have your reason or choose to act without any . get 
 she away from that place . she will not   come to I unless it be to meet her 
 husband . ah , well , temper do not solve your problem ; husband you 
 be , if you marry she . we will leave the husband undiscussed : with 
 this reserve , that it seem to I man be now begin to play the 
 misunderstood . ' 

 ' I hope they know themselves well , ' say Fleetwood ; and he beg for 
 the name and number of the house in the Whitechapel street , where she 
 who be discernibly his enemy , and the deadly of enemy , have now her 
 dwelling . 

 her immediate rush to that place , the fixing of herself there for 
 an assault on he , be a move worthy the daughter of the rascal Old 
 Buccaneer ; it compel to urgent measure . he , as he feel horribly in 
 pencil her address , act under compulsion ; and a woman prod 
 the goad . her mask of ingenuousness be fling away for a look of craft , 
 which could be power ; and with her change aspect his tolerance change 
 to hatred . 

 ' a shop , ' Lady Arpington explain for his well direction : ' potato , 
 vegetable stuff . honest people , I be to believe . she be indifferent to 
 her food , she say . she work , help one of their minister - one of 
 their denomination : heaven know what they call themselves ! anything 
 to escape from the Church ! she be likely to become a Methodist . with 
 Lord Feltre proselytize for his Papist creed , Lord Pitscrew a declare 
 Mohammedan , we shall have a pretty english aristocracy in time . well , 
 she may claim to belong to it now . she would not be persuade against 
 visitation to pestiferous hovel . what else be there to do in such a 
 place ? she go about catch disease to avoid bilious melancholy 
 in the dark back room of a small greengrocer 's shop in Whitechapel . 
 there - you have the word for the Countess of Fleetwood 's present 
 address . ' 

 it drench he with ridicule . 

 ' I be indebted to your ladyship for the information , ' he say , and 
 maintain his rigidity . 

 the great lady stiffen . 

 ' I be oblige to ask you whether you intend to act on it at once . the 
 admiral have go ; I be in some sort depute as a guardian to she , and 
 I warn you - very well , very well . in your own interest , it will be . if 
 she be leave there another two or three day , the name of the place will 
 stick to she . ' 

 ' she have baptize herself with it already , I imagine , ' say Fleetwood . 
 ' she will have Esslemont to live in . ' 

 ' there will be more than one to speak as to that . you should know she . ' 

 ' I do not know she . ' 

 ' you marry she . ' 

 ' the circumstance be admit . ' 

 ' if I may hazard a guess , she be unlikely to come to term without a 
 previous interview . she be bent on meet you . ' 

 ' I be to be subject to further annoyance , or she will take the name of 
 the place she at present inhabit , and bombard I with it . those be the 
 term . ' 

 ' she have a brother live , I remind you . ' 

 ' state the deduction , if you please , my lady . ' 

 ' she be not of ' a totally inferior family . ' 

 ' she have a father famous over England as the Old Buccaneer , and be a 
 diligent reader of his book of MAXIMS for MEN . ' 

 ' dear I ! then Kirby - Captain Kirby ! I remember . that be her origin , be 
 it ? ' the great lady cry , illumined . ' my mother use to talk of the 
 Cressett scandal . Old Lady Arpington , too . at any rate , it end in 
 their union - the formality be properly respect , as soon as they 
 could be . ' 

 ' I be unaware . ' 

 ' I det such a tone of speak . speak as you do now - marry to 
 the daughter ? you be not yourself , Lord Fleetwood . ' 

 ' quite , ma'am , let I assure you . otherwise the Kirby - Cressetts would be 
 dictate to I from the muzzle of one of the old rapscallion 's Maxims . 
 they will learn that I be myself . ' 

 ' you do not   improve as you proceed . I tell you this , you will not have I 
 for a friend . you have your troop of satellite ; but take it as equal 
 to a prophecy , you will not   have London with you ; and you will hear of Lord 
 Fleetwood and his Whitechapel Countess till your ear ache . ' 

 the preluding box on they reddened he . 

 ' she will have the offer of Esslemont . ' 

 ' undertake to persuade she in person . ' 

 ' I have speak on that head . ' 

 ' well , I may be mistaken , - I fancy it before I know of the pair 
 she spring from : you will not   get her consent to anything without your 
 consent to meet she . surely it be the manly way . it might be settle 
 for to - morrow , here , in this room . she pray to meet you . ' 

 with an indicate gesture of ' save I from it , ' Fleetwood bow . 

 he leave no friend think over the riddle of his conduct . she be 
 a loud - voice lady , give to strike out phrase . the ' Whitechapel 
 Countess ' of the wealthy nobleman of his day be hear by she on 
 London 's wag tongue . she consider also that he ought at least have 
 propitiate she ; he be in the position require of he to do something 
 of the kind , and he have show instead the dog pride which call for 
 a whip . Fool as he must have be to go and commit himself to marriage 
 with a girl of whom he know nothing or little , the assumption of pride 
 belong to the order of impudent disguise intolerable to behold and 
 not , in a modern manner , castigate . 

 notwithstanding a dislike of the Dowager Countess of Fleetwood , Lady 
 Arpington pay Livia an afternoon visit ; and add thereby to the stock 
 of her knowledge and the ground of her disapprobation . 

 down in Whitechapel , it be know to the Winch girl and the Woodseers 
 that Captain Kirby and his wife have spend the bitter of hour in 
 vainly strive to break their immoveable sister 's will to remain there . 

 at the tea - time of simple people , who make it a meal , Gower 's appetite 
 for the home - make bread of Mary Jones be check by the bearer of 
 a short note from Lord Fleetwood . the half - dozen line be cordial , 
 breathing of their walk in the austrian highland , and name a renowned 
 city hotel for dinner that day , the hour seven , the reply yes or no by 
 messenger . 

 ' but we be man to man , so there be no " no " between we two , ' the note 
 say , revive a scene of rosy crag and pine forest , where there have 
 be philosophical fun over the appropriate sex of those our most 
 important fighting - ultimately , we will hope , to be unite - syllable , and 
 the when for man , the when for woman , to select the one of they as their 
 weapon . 

 under the circumstance , Gower think such a piece of write to he 
 magnanimous . 

 ' it may be the solution , ' his father remark . 

 both have the desire ; and Gower 's reply be the yes , our brave male word , 
 suppose to be not so compromising to man in the employment of it as a 
 form of acquiescence rather than insistent pressure . 




 CHAPTER XXIII . in DAME GOSSIP be vein 

 right soon the London pot begin to bubble . there be a marriage . 

 ' there be marriage by the thousand every day of the year that be 
 not consecrate to prayer for the forgiveness of our sin , ' the Old 
 Buccaneer , write it with simple intent , say , by way of preface to a 
 series of Maxims for man who contemplate acceptance of the yoke . 

 this be a marriage high as the firmament over common occurrence , black 
 as Erebus to confound ; it involve the wreck of expectation , disastrous 
 eclipse of a sovereign luminary in the splendour of his rise , Phaethon 's 
 descent to the Shades through a smoking and a crackling world . assert 
 here , verify there , the rumour gather volume , and from a serpent of 
 vapour resolve to sturdy concrete before it be tangible . contradiction 
 retire into corner , only to be sweep out of they . for this marriage , 
 abominable to hear of , be of so wonderful a sort , that the story fill 
 the mind , and the discrediting of the story threaten the great world 's 
 cranium with a vacuity yet more monstrously abominable . 

 for he , the planet Croesus of his time , recently , scarce later than last 
 night , a glorious object of the mid - heaven above the market , have be 
 envelop , catch , gobble up by one of the nameless little witch 
 rid after dusk the way of the wind on broomstick - by one of they ! she 
 catch he like a fly in the hand off a pane of glass , gobble he with 
 the customary facility of a pecking pullet . 

 but be the planet Croesus of his time a young man to be so catch , so 
 gobble ? 

 there be the mystery of it . on his coming of age , that young man give 
 sign of his have a city head . he put his guardian deliberately aside , 
 have his lawyer and bailiff and steward thoroughly under control : 
 manage a particularly difficult step - mother ; escape the snare of 
 her lovely cousin ; and drive his team of sycophant exactly the road he 
 choose to go and no other . he have a will . 

 the world account he wildish ? 

 always from his own offset , to his own end . never for another 's 
 dictation or beguilement . never for a woman . he be bear with a 
 suspicion of the sex . Poetry decorate woman , he say , to lime and drag 
 man in the foul rut of prose . 

 we be to believe he have be effectively capture ? 

 it be positively a marriage ; he admit it . 

 where celebrate ? 

 there we be at hoodman - blind for the moment . three county claim the 
 church ; two end of London . 

 she be not a person of society , lineage ? 

 nor of beauty . she be a witch ; ordinarily petticoate and not squeak 
 like a shrew - mouse in her flight , but not a whit less a moon - shade 
 witch . the kind be famous . fairy tale and terrible romance tell of 
 she ; she be just as much at home in life , and spring usually from the 
 mire to enthral our knightliest . be it a popular hero ? she have he , 
 soon or later . a planet Croesus ? he fall to she . 

 that be , if his people fail to attach he in legal bond to a damsel of 
 a corresponding birth on the day when he be breeched . 

 Small be her need to be young - especially if it be the man who be very 
 young . she be the create among woman arm with the deadly instinct for 
 the motive force in man , and shameless to attract it . self - respect 
 woman treat man as their tame housemate . she blow the horn of the 
 wild old forest , irresistible to the animal . o the droop of the eyelid , 
 the curve of a lip , the rustle of silk , the much heart , the neat ankle ; 
 and the sparkle agreement , the reserve - the motherly feminine petition 
 that she may retain her own small pet babe of an opinion , legitimate 
 or not , by permission of superior authority ! - proof at once of her 
 intelligence and her appreciativeness . her infinitesimal spell be 
 see ; yet , despite experience , the magnetism in their repulsive display 
 be barely apprehend by sedate observer until the astounding capture 
 be proclaim . it be visible enough then : - and o man ! o moral ! if she 
 can but trick the small bit in stoop , she have the pick of man . 

 our present sample show she to be young : she be young and a foreigner . 
 Mr. Chumley Potts vouch for it . speak foreign English . he think she 
 more ninny than knave : she be the tool of a wily plotter , pick up off 
 the highway road by Lord Fleetwood as soon as he have she in his eye . Sir 
 Meeson Corby wring his frille hand to depict the horror of the hand 
 of that tramp the young lord have she from . they afflict he malariously 
 still . the man , he say , the man as well be an infatuation , because he 
 talk like a Dictionary Cheap Jack , and may have have an education and 
 drop into vagrancy , owe to indiscretion . Lord Fleetwood run about 
 in Germany repeat his remark . but the man be really an accomplished 
 violinist , we hear . she dance the tambourine business . a sister of the 
 man , perhaps , if we must be charitable . they be , some say , a couple of 
 hungarian gypsy Lord F. find at a show and bring over to England , 
 and soon have it on his conscience that he ought to marry she , like the 
 Quixote of honour that he be ; which be equal to say crazy , as there 
 be no doubt his mother be . 

 the marriage be no long disputable ; poor Lady Fleetwood , whatever 
 her fault as a step - mother , do no long deny the celebration of a 
 marriage ; though she might reasonably discredit any such story if he , on 
 the evening of the date of the wedding day , be at a Ball , see by she 
 at the supper - table ; though it be admit he leave the ball - room at 
 night . but the next day he certainly be in his place among the Peers 
 and vote against the Government , and then go down to his estate in 
 Wales , be an excellent holder of the rein , whether on the coach box 
 or over the cash box . 

 More and more wonderful , we hear that he drive his bride straight 
 from the church to the field of a prizefight , arrange for her special 
 delectation . she doat on see blood - shed and drinking champagne . 
 young Mr. Mallard be our authority ; and he say , she enjoy it , and 
 cheer the victor for be her husband 's man . and after the shocking 
 exhibition , good - bye ; the Countess of Fleetwood be leave sole occupant 
 of a wayside inn , and may have learn in her solitude that she would 
 have be wise to feign disgust ; for man to the small degree 
 cultivate be unable to pardon a want of delicacy in a woman who have 
 choose they , as they be teach to think by their have choose she . 

 so talk , so twitter , pip and croak the London world over the 
 early rumour of the marriage , this Amazing Marriage ; which it get to be 
 call , from the number of item flock to swell the wonder . 

 raven ravening by night , poise peregrine by day , provision - merchant 
 for the dispensing of dainty scrap to tickle the ear , to arm the 
 tongue , to explode reputation , those great lady , the Ladies Endor , 
 Eldritch , and Cowry , fateful three of their period , avenge and scourge 
 both innocence and naughtiness ; innocence , on the whole , the least , when 
 their wither suspicion of it have hunt the unhappy thing to the 
 bank of Ophelia 's ditch . Mallard and Chumley Potts , Captain Abrane , Sir 
 Meeson Corby , Lord Brailstone , be pluck at and rattle , put to the 
 blush , by a pursuit of inquiry conduct with beak . high - nosed dame 
 will surpass eminent judge in their temerity on the border - line where 
 Ahem sound the warning note to curtain decency . the courtly M. de 
 St. Ombre have to stand confuse . he , however , give another version of 
 Captain Abrane 's ' fiddler , ' and precipitate the great lady into 
 the reflection , that french gentleman , since the execrable French 
 Revolution , have lose their proper sense of the distinction of Class . 
 Homme d'esprit , apply to a roving adventurer , a scarce other than 
 vagabond , be either an undiscriminate epithet or else a further 
 example of the french deficiency in humour . 

 dexterous contriver , he undoubtedly be . Lady Cowry have it from Sir 
 Meeson Corby , who have it from the poor dowager , that Lord Fleetwood 
 have instal the man in his house and sit at the opposite end of 
 his table ; fish he up from Whitechapel , where the countess be leave 
 serve orange at a small fruit - shop . with her own eye , Lady Arpington 
 see she there ; and she can not   be get to leave the place unless she 
 husband drive his coach down to fetch she . that he decline to do ; so 
 she remain the Whitechapel Countess , all on her hind heel against the 
 offer of a shilling of her husband 's money , if she be not to bring he 
 to his knee ; and go about at night with a low Methodist singing 
 hymn along those dreadful street , while Lord Fleetwood give gorgeous 
 entertainment . one signal from the man he have hire , and he stop 
 drink - he will stop speak as soon as the man 's mouth be open . he 
 be under a complete fascination , attributable , some say , to pass 
 of the hand , which the man will not   wash lest he should weaken their 
 influence . 

 for it can not be simply his violin playing . they say he be a pupil of 
 a master of the dark art in Germany , and can practise on we to make we 
 think his commonest utterance extraordinarily acute and precious . Lord 
 Fleetwood run round quote he to everybody , quite ridiculously . but 
 the man 's influence be sufficient to induce his patron to drive down and 
 fetch the Whitechapel Countess home in state , as she insist - if the man 
 wish it . depend upon it he be the key of the mystery . 

 totally the contrary , Lady Arpington declare ! the man be a learn man , 
 formerly a Professor of English Literature in a German University , 
 and no connection of the Whitechapel Countess whatever , a chance 
 acquaintance at the most . he operate on Lord Fleetwood with dos of 
 german philosophy ; otherwise , a harmless creature ; and have consent to 
 wash and dress . it be my lord who have have the chief influence . and the 
 Countess Livia now back he in maintain that there be nowhere a more 
 honest young man to be find . she may have her reason . 

 as for the Whitechapel Countess ... the whole story of the Old Buccaneer 
 and Countess Fanny be retold , and it form a terrific halo , presage 
 of rain and hurricane tempest , over the girl the young earl have 
 incomprehensibly espouse to discard . those two have a son and a daughter 
 bear aboard : - in wedlock , we trust . the girl may be as wild a one as the 
 mother . she have a will as determined as her husband 's . she be offer 
 Esslemont , the earl 's Kentish mansion , for a residence , and she will 
 none of it until she have he down in the east of London on his knee 
 to entreat she . the injury be deep on one side or the other . it may 
 be almost surely prophesy that the two will never come together . will 
 either of they deal the stroke for freedom ? and which be the likeli ? 

 meanwhile Lord Fleetwood and his Whitechapel Countess compose the laugh 
 of London . Straightway Invention , the violent propagator , spring from 
 his shade at a call of the great world 's appetite for more , and , 
 rush upon stationary Fact , supply the required . marvel upon marvel 
 be recount . the mixed origin of the singular issue could not be 
 examine , where all be increasingly funny . 

 always the shout for more produce it . she and her band of Whitechapel 
 boy be about in ambush to waylay the earl wherever he go . she stand 
 knock at his door through a whole night . he dare not lug she before 
 a magistrate for fear of exposure . once , rid in the park with a troop 
 of friend he have a young woman point out to he , and her finger be 
 level , and she cry : ' there be the english nobleman who marry a 
 girl and leave she to go sell cabbage ! ' 

 he leave town for the Island , and behold his yacht sail the 
 Solent : - my lady the countess be on board ! a pair of tyrolese minstrel 
 in the square kindle his enthusiasm at one of his dinner ; he send they 
 a sovereign ; their humble , hearty thank be return to he in the 
 name of Die Grafin von Fleetwood . 

 the Ladies Endor , Eldritch , and Cowry sift their good . they let 
 pass incredible story : among other , that she have send card to the 
 nobility and gentry of the West end of London , offer to deliver 
 sack of potato by newly - establish donkey - cart at the door of their 
 residence , at so much per sack , bill quarterly ; with the postscript , 
 Vive L'aristocratie ! their informant have see a card , and the stamp of 
 the Fleetwood dragoncr be on it . 

 he have enemy , be variously say of the persecute nobleman . but it 
 be nothing bad than the parasite that he have . this be the parasite 's 
 gentle treason . he find it an easy road to humour ; it prick the slug 
 fancy in he to stir and curl ; give he occasion to bundle and bustle 
 his patron kindly . Abrane , Potts , Mallard , and Sir Meeson Corby be 
 personage during the town 's excitement , besought for have something 
 to say . Petrels of the sea of tattle , they be buoy by the hubbub 
 they create , and feel the tipsy happiness of be certain to rouse the 
 laugh wherever they alight . Sir Meeson Corby , important to himself in 
 an eminent degree , enjoy the novel sense of his importance with his 
 fellow . they crowd round the bore who have scatter they . 

 he trace the miserable catastrophe in the earl 's fortune to the 
 cunning of the rascal now sponge on Fleetwood and try to dress like 
 a gentleman : a convict tramp , elevate by the caprice of the young 
 nobleman he be plot to ruin . Sir Meeson quote Captain Abrane 's 
 late effort to hit the dirty object 's name , by call he 
 ' Fleetwood 's Mr. Woodlouse . ' and be the rascal a sorcerer ? Sir Meeson 
 speak of he in the hearing of the Countess Livia , and she , previously 
 echo his disgust , correct he sharply , and say : ' I begin to be of 
 Russett 's opinion , that his fault be his honesty . ' the rascal have win or 
 partly win the empress of her sex ! this Lady Livia , haughty and most 
 fastidious of our young great dame , have become the indulgent 
 critic of the tramp 's borrow plume ! Nay , she would not listen to a 
 depreciatory word on he from her cousin Henrietta Kirby - Levellier . 

 perhaps , after all , of all place for an encounter between the Earl of 
 Fleetwood and the countess , those vulgar Gardens across the water , long 
 since abandon by the Fashion , be the most suitable . Thither one 
 fair June night , for the sake of show the dowager countess and her 
 beautiful cousin , the french nobleman , Sir Meeson Corby , and other , 
 what be the pleasure of the London low order , my lord have the whim 
 to conduct they , - merely a parade of observation once round ; - the lady 
 veil , the gentleman with stick , and two servant follow , one of 
 whom , dress in quiet black , like the peacefullest of parson , be my 
 lord 's pugilist , Christopher Ives . 

 now , here we come to history : though you will remember what history be . 

 the party walk round the Gardens unmoleste nor have we ground 
 for suppose they assume air of state in the style of a previous 
 generation . only , as it happen , a gentleman of the party be a wag ; no 
 less than the famous , well - season John Rose Mackrell , bent on amusing 
 Mrs. Kirby - Levellier , to hear her lovely laughter ; and his wit and his 
 anecdote , both inexhaustible , prove , as he say , ' that a dry fish 
 be no stale fish , and a smoky flavour to an old chimney story will 
 often render it more piquant to the taste than one jump fresh off the 
 incident . ' his exact meaning in ' smoky flavour ' we be not to know ; but 
 whether that M. de St. Ombre should witness the effect of English humour 
 upon they , or that the lady could permit themselves to laugh , their 
 voice accompany the gentleman in silvery volley . there have be 
 ' Mackrell ' at Fleetwood 's dinner - table ; which be then a way of say 
 that dry throat make no count of the quantity of champagne imbibe , 
 owe to the fit Rose Mackrell cause . however , there be loud 
 laughter as they stroll , and it be notice ; and Fleetwood cry out , 
 ' Mackrell ! Mackrell ! ' in delighted repudiation of the wag 's last sally , 
 the cry of ' Hooray , Mackrell ! ' be catch up by the crowd . they be 
 not the primary offender , for loud laughter in an isolated party be bad 
 breeding ; but they have not the plea of a copious dinner . 

 so this affair begin ; inoffensively at the start , for my lord be 
 good - humour about it . 

 Kit Ines , of the mercurial leg , must now give impromptu display of his 
 dancing . he seize a partner , in the manner of a Roman the Sabine , 
 sure of please his patron ; and the maid , pass from surprise to 
 merriment , enter the quadrille perforce , all giggle , not without 
 emulation , for she likewise have the passion for the dance . whereby it 
 befell that the pair foot in a way to gather observant spectator ; 
 and if it have not be that the man from whom the maid be willy - nilly 
 snatch , conceive resentment , thing might have pass comfortably ; 
 for Kit 's quip and cut and high caper , and the Sunday gravity of the 
 barge face while the leg be at their impish trickery , double motion 
 to the music , win the crowd to cheer . they conjecture he to be 
 a british sailor . but the destituted man say , sailor or no 
 sailor , - bos'en be hang ! he should pay for his whistle . 

 honourably at the close of the quadrille , Kit bring she back ; none the 
 bad for it , he boldly affirm , and he thank the man for the short 
 loan of she . - the man have an itch to strike . choose rather to be 
 strike first , he vent nasty remark . my lord speak to Kit and move 
 on . at the moment of the step , Rose Mackrell utter something , a 
 waggery of some sort , hear to be forget , but of such instantaneous 
 effect , that the prompt and immoderate laugh succeed it might 
 reasonably be take for a fling of scorn at himself , by an injure man . 
 they be a party ; he therefore proceed to make one , appeal to 
 english sentiment and right feeling . the blameless and repentant maid 
 pluck at his coat to keep he from dog the heel of the gentleman . 
 Fun be promise ; consequently the crowd wax . 

 ' my lord , ' have be let fall by Kit Ines . conjoin to ' Mackrell , ' 
 it ring finely , and a trumpeting of ' Lord Mackrell ' resounded . Lord 
 Mackrell be ask for ' more caper and not so much sauce . ' various fish 
 take part in his title of nobility . the wag Mackrell continue to be 
 discreetly silent , and Kit Ines act as a pacific rearguard , the crowd 
 fall in love with their display of English humour , dispose to the surly 
 satisfaction of a big street dog that have be appease by a small 
 one 's total cessation of growl . 

 all might have go well but for the sudden appearance of two figure 
 of young woman on the scene . they front the advance of the procession . 
 they want to have a word with Lord Mackrell . not a bit of it - he will not 
 listen , turn away ; and one of the pair slip round he . it be regular 
 imploring : ' my lord ! my lord ! ' 

 o you naughty Surrey melodram villain of a Lord Mackrell ! listen to 
 the young woman , you Mackrell , or you will get billingsgate ! here 's Mr. 
 Jig - and - reel behind here , say she be do he ! by Gosh ! what be up now ? 

 one of the young lady of the party ahead have rush up to the young 
 woman dodge to stand in Lord Mackrell 's way . the crowd press to see . 
 Kit Ines and his mate shoulder they off . they perform an envelopment 
 of the gentleman and lady , include the two young woman . Kit leave 
 his mate and run to the young woman hitherto the quieter of the two . he 
 rattle at she . but she have a tongue of her own and rattle it at he . 
 what do she say ? 

 merely to hear , for no other reason , ' a peace - love crowd of clerk and 
 tradesman , workman and their girl , young aspirant to the profession , 
 night - lark of different class , both sex , there in that place for 
 simple entertainment , animate simply by the spirit of English humour , 
 contract , so close upon the Mackrell party as to seem threaten to 
 the most orderly and apprehensive member of it , who be the baronet , Sir 
 Meeson Corby . 

 he be a man for the constable in town emergency , and he shout . 
 ' Cock Robin crowing ' provoke a jolly round of bark chaff . the noise 
 in a dense ring draw Fleetwood 's temper . he give the word to Kit Ines , 
 and immediately two man drop ; a dozen stagger unhit . the fist 
 work right and leave ; such a clearing of ground be never see for 
 sickle or scythe . and it be take respectfully ; for Science proclaim 
 her venerable self in the style and the perfect sufficiency of the 
 stroke . a bruiser deliver they . no shame to back away before a 
 bruiser . there be rather an admire envy of the party claim the 
 nimble champion on their side , until the very moderate lot of the 
 Mackrells go step forward along the strew path with stick 
 point . 

 if they have walk it like gentleman , they would have be allow to 
 get through . an aggressive minority , and with Cock Robin squealing for 
 constable in the midst , be that insolent upstart thing which howl to 
 have a lesson . the stick be fall on ; bump come the mass . Kit Ines 
 have to fight his way back to his mate , and the couple scour a clearish 
 ring , but the gentleman be at short thrust , affable in tone , to 
 cheer the spirit of the lady : - ' all right , my friend , you be a trifle 
 mistaken , it be my stick , not your . ' Therewith the wrestle for the 
 stick . 

 the one stick not point be wrench from the grasp of Sir Meeson 
 Corby ; and by a woman , the young woman who have accost my lord ; not 
 a common young woman either , as she appear when beseech he . her 
 stature rise to battle height : she make play with Sir Meeson Corby 's 
 ebony stick , use it in one hand as a dwarf quarterstaff to flail the 
 sconce , then to dash the point at face ; and she be a woman , a girl , 
 perhaps a lady , her cool warrior method of cleave way , without so much 
 as tighten her lip , be find notable ; and to this degree   vouch 
 for by Rose Mackrell , who hear it , that a fellow , rub his head , 
 cry : ' damn it all , she be clever , though ! ' she take her station beside 
 Lord Fleetwood . 

 he have be as cool as she , or almost . now he be madden ; she defend 
 he , she ward and thrust for he , only for he , to save he a touch ; 
 unasked , undesired , detest for the box on his ear of to - morrow 's 
 public mockery , as she would be , overwhelm he with ridicule . have 
 you see the kick and tug at the strap of the mettle pony in stable 
 that betray the mishandling of he by his groom ? something so do 
 Fleetwood plunge and dart to be free of she , and his desperate soul 
 cry out on her stick to he like a plaster ! 

 Welcome be the constable . his guineas wink at their chief , as fair 
 woman convey their meaning , with no motion of eyelid ; and the officer 
 of the law know the voice habituate to command , and answer two word 
 of his : ' right , my lord , ' smell my lord in the unerring manner of 
 those day . my lord 's party be escort to the gate , not a little 
 jeered ; though they by no mean have the bad of the tussle . but the 
 puff indignation of Sir Meesan Corby over his battered hat and 
 tear frill and button pluck from his coat , and his threat of the 
 magistrate , excite the crowd to derisive yell . 

 my lord speak something to his man , hand his purse . 

 the lady be spar the hearing of bad language . they , accord to 
 the joint testimony of M. de St. Ombre and Mr. Rose Mackrell , comport 
 themselves throughout as become the daughter of a warrior race . both 
 gentleman be emphatic to praise the unknown britomart who have do 
 such gallant service with Sir Meeson 's ebony wand . he be begin 
 to fuss vociferously about the loss of the stick - a family stick , 
 goldheade , the family crest on it , priceless to the family - when Mrs. 
 Kirby - Levellier hand it to he inside the coach . 

 ' but where be she ? ' M. de St. Ombre say , and take the hint of Livia 's 
 touch on his arm in the dark . 

 at the silence follow the question , Mr. Rose Mackrell murmur , ' ah ! ' 

 he and the french gentleman understand that there might have be a 
 manifestation of the notorious Whitechapel Countess . 

 they be two ; and a slow - witted third be travel to his idea on 
 the subject . three man , witness of a remarkable incident in connection 
 with a boiling topic of current scandal , - glaringly illustrative of it , 
 moreover , - be unlikely to keep close tongue , even if they have be 
 swear to secresy . Fleetwood know it , and he scorn to solicit they ; an 
 exaction of their idle vow would be merely the humiliation of himself . 
 so he toss his dignity to recklessness , as the ultraconvivial give 
 the last wink of reason to the wine - cup . persecute as he be , nothing 
 remain for he but the nether - sublime of a statuesque desperation . 

 that be his feeling ; and his way of cloak it under light sally at 
 Sir Meeson and easy chat with Henrietta make it visible to she , from its 
 be the contrary of what the world might expect a proud young nobleman 
 to exhibit . she pity he : she have do he some wrong . she read into 
 he , too , as none else could . see the solitary torture behind the 
 pleasant social mask , she be draw to partake of they ; and the mask 
 seem pathetic . she long to speak a word in sympathy or relieve she 
 bosom of tear . Carinthia have sink herself , be unpardonable , hardly 
 mentionable . any of the tale tell of she might be credit after this ! 
 the incorrigible cause of humiliation for everybody connect with she 
 picture , at a word of her name , the crowd press and the London world 
 act audience . Livia speak the name when they have reach their house 
 and be alone . Henrietta respond with the imperceptible shrug which 
 be more eloquent than a cry to tell of the most monstrous of load . my 
 lord , it be think by the lady , have direct his man to convey she 
 safely to her choose home , whence she might be expect very soon to be 
 issue and strike the gong of London again . 




 CHAPTER XXIV . a kidnapping and no great harm 

 lady who have the pride of delicate breeding be not more than rather 
 violently hurl back on the fortress it be , when one or other of the 
 gross mishap of circumstance may subject they to a shock : and this 
 happen in the presence of gentleman , they be sustain by the within 
 and the without to keep a smooth countenance , however severe their 
 affliction . man of heroic nerve decline similarly to let explosion 
 shake they , though earth be shake . drag into the monstrous grotesque 
 of the scene at the Gardens , Livia and Henrietta go through the 
 ordeal , mask any sign that they be strip for a flagellation . 
 only , the fair cousin be unable to perceive a comic element in the 
 scene : and if the world be for laugh , as their instant apprehension 
 foresee it , the world be an ignoble beast . they do not discuss 
 Carinthia 's late craziness at night , hardly allude to it while they 
 be in the interjectory state . 

 Henrietta be Livia 's guest , her husband have hurry away to Vienna : 
 ' to get money ! money ! ' her angry bluntness explain his absence , and 
 deal its blow at the sudden astounding poverty into which they have 
 fall . she be compel to practise an excessive , an incredible 
 economy : - ' think of the small trifle ! ' so that her Chillon travel 
 unaccompanie , they be separate . her iteration upon money be the 
 vile constraint of an awakened interest and wonderment at its power . 
 she , the romantic Riette , banner of chivalry , reader of poetry , strike 
 a line between poor and rich in her talk of people , and class herself 
 with the fall and pinch ; she harp on her slender mean , on the 
 enforce calculation precede purchase , on the living in lodging ; 
 and that miserly Lord Levellier 's indebtedness to Chillon - large sum ! 
 and Chillon 's praiseworthy resolve to pay the creditor of her father 's 
 estate ; and of how he travel like a common man , in consequence of the 
 money he have give Janey - weakly , for her obstinacy be past endurance ; 
 but her brother would not leave her penniless , and penniless she have 
 be for week , because of her stubborn resistance to the earl - quite 
 unreasonably , whether right or wrong - in the foul retreat she have 
 choose ; apparently with a notion that the horror of it be her vantage 
 ground against he : and though a single sign of submission would place 
 the rich purse in England at her disposal . ' she refuse Esslemont ! 
 she insist on his meeting she ! no child could be so witless . let he be 
 the one chiefly or entirely to blame , she might show a little tact - for 
 her brother 's sake ! she love her brother ? no : deaf to he , to I , to 
 every consideration except her blind will . ' 

 here be the skeleton of the love match , early than Livia have 
 expect . 

 it refresh a phlegmatic lady 's disposition for prophecy . lover 
 abruptly toss between wind and wave may still be lover , she know : but 
 they be , or the weak of the two be , hard upon any third person who 
 tug at they for subsistence or existence . the condition , if they 
 be much beat about , prepare true lover , through their mutual 
 tenderness , to be bitterly misanthropical . 

 Livia suppose the novel economic pinch to be the cause of Henrietta 's 
 unwonted harsh judgement of her sister - in - law 's misconduct , or the crude 
 expression of it . she could not guess that Carinthia 's unhappiness in 
 marriage be a spectre over the married happiness of the pair fret by 
 the conscience which tell they they have come together by do much to 
 bring it to pass . Henrietta could see herself less the culprit when she 
 blame Carinthia in another 's hearing . 

 after some repose , the cousin treat their horrible misadventure as a 
 piece of history . Livia be cool ; she have not a husband involve in 
 it , as Henrietta have ; and London 's hoarse laugh surely come on they , 
 spar she the dread Henrietta suffer , that Chillon would hear ; the 
 most sensitive of man on any matter touch his family . 

 ' and now a sister add to the list ! will there be name , Livia ? ' 

 ' the newspaper ! ' Livia 's shoulder rise . 

 ' we ought to have swear the gentleman to silence . ' 

 ' M. de St. Ombre be a tomb until he write his Memoirs . I hold Sir 
 Meeson under lock . but a spiced incident , a notorious couple , - an 
 anecdotal witness to the scene , - could you expect Mr. Rose Mackrell to 
 contain it ? the sacred of oath , my dear ! ' 

 that relentless force impel an anecdotist to slaughter family for 
 the amusement of dinner - table , be bring home to Henrietta by her 
 prospect of be a victim ; and Livia remind she of the excessive 
 laughter at Rose Mackrell 's anecdote overnight , she bemoan she have 
 consent to go to those Gardens in mourning . 

 ' how could Janey possibly have hear of the project to go ? 

 ' you go to please Russett , he to please you , and that wild - cat to 
 please herself , ' say Livia . ' she haunt his door , I suppose , and 
 follow he , like a run footman . every step she take widen the 
 breach . he keep his temper , yes , keep his temper as he keep his word , 
 and one morning it break loose , and all that be do have to be undo . 
 it will bemust . that extravaganza , as she be call , be fatal , dog he 
 with burlesque - of all man ! ' 

 ' why not consent to meet she once , Chillon ask . ' 

 ' you be ask Russett to yield an inch on demand , and to a woman . ' 

 ' my husband would yield to a woman what he would refuse to all the man 
 in Europe and America , ' say Henrietta ; and she enjoy her thrill of 
 allegiance to her chivalrous lord and courtier . 

 ' no very extraordinary speciman of a newly marry man , who have win the 
 Beauty of England and America for his wife - at some cost to some people , ' 
 Livia rejoin . 

 there come a moisture on the eyelash of the emotional young woman , 
 from a touch of compassion for the wealthy man who have wish to call 
 her wife , and be condemn by her rejection of he to call another 
 woman wife , to be wifeless in wed she , despite his wealth . 

 she think he love she ; it be pitiable , but she think it - after the 
 treatment she have have . she beg to see he once . ' 

 ' and subdue he with a fit of weeping , ' Livia be move to say by sight 
 of the tear she hat . ' it would harden Russett - on other eye , too ! 
 salt - water drop be like the force agony scene in a play : they bring 
 down the curtain , they do not   win the critic . I hear she " my husband " 
 and see his face . ' 

 ' you do not   hear a whimper with it , ' Henrietta say . ' she be a mountain 
 girl , not your city madam on the board . Chillon and I have she by 
 each hand , implore she to leave that impossible Whitechapel , and she 
 tremble , not a drop be shed by she . I can almost fancy privation and 
 squalor have no terror for Janey . she sing to the people down there , 
 nurse they . she might be occupy Esslemont - our dream of an English 
 home ! she be the destruction of the idea of romantic in connection with 
 the name of marriage . I talk like a simpleton . Janey upset we all . my 
 lord be only - a little queer before he know she : his Mr. Woodseer may 
 be encourage she . you tell I the creature have a salary from he equal 
 to your jointure . ' 

 ' be civil to the man while it last , ' Livia say , attentive to 
 a degradation of tone - in her cousin , formerly of supreme 
 self - containment . 

 the beautiful young woman be remind of her holiday in town . she 
 brighten , and the little that it be , and the meanness of the 
 satisfaction , darken she . envy of the lucky adventurer Mr. Woodseer , 
 on her husband 's behalf , grow horridly conscious for be reprove . so 
 she pluck resolution to enjoy her holiday and forget the contrast of 
 life - palace run profusion , lodging hammer by dun ; the pinch of 
 poverty distract every simple look inside or out . there be no end 
 to it ; for her husband 's chivalrous honour force he to undertake the 
 payment of her father 's heavy debt . he be right and admirable , it 
 could not be contest ; but the prospect for they be a grind gloom , 
 an unrelieved drag , as of a coach at night on an interminable uphill 
 flinty road . 

 these be her sensation , and she find it divert to be admire ; 
 admire by many while she know herself to be absorb in the possession 
 of she by one . it bestow the before and after of her marriage . she 
 feel she be really , have rapidly become , the young woman of the world , 
 arm with a husband , to take the flattery of man for the need 
 diversion they bring . none move she ; none could come near to touch 
 the happy insensibility of a wife who adore her husband , write to 
 he daily , think of he by the minute . her former worshipper be 
 numerous at Livia 's reception ; Lord Fleetwood , Lord Brailstone , and the 
 rest . Odd to reflect on - they be the insubstantial but coveted wealth 
 of the woman fall upon poverty , ignoble poverty ! she could not 
 discard her wealth . she write amusingly of they , and fully , vivacious 
 description , to Chillon ; hardly so much writing to he as enter her 
 heart 's bar citadel , where he reside at his ease , hear everything 
 that befell about she . if she dwelt on Lord Fleetwood 's kindness in 
 provide entertainment , her object be to mollify Chillon 's anger in 
 some degree . she be do her utmost to gratify he , ' for the purpose 
 of pave a way to plead Janey 's case . ' she be almost persuade 
 herself she be enjoy the remark of his friend , confidant , 
 secretary , or what not , Livia 's worshipper , Mr. Woodseer , ' who do 
 as he will with my lord ; direct his charity , his pleasure , his 
 opinion , all because he be believe to have wonderful idea and be 
 wonderfully honest . ' Henrietta write : ' situation unchanged . Janey still 
 at that place ' ; and before the letter be post , she and Livia have 
 hear from Gower Woodseer of the report disappearance of the 
 Countess of Fleetwood and her maid . Gower 's father have walk up from 
 Whitechapel , bear news of it to the earl , she say . 

 ' and the earl be much disturbed ? ' be Livia 's inquiry . 

 ' he have drive down with my father , ' Gower say carelessly , ambiguously 
 in the sound . 

 trouble enough to desire the show of a correspond trouble , Henrietta 
 read at their face . 

 ' may it not be - down there - a real danger ? ' 

 the drama , he could inform she , be only too naked down there for 
 disappearance to be common . 

 ' will it be publish that she be miss ? ' 

 ' she have she maid with she , a stout - hearted girl . both have courage . I 
 do not   think we need take measure just yet . ' 

 ' not before it be public property ? ' 

 Henrietta could have bite her tongue for lay she open to the 
 censure imply in his muteness . Janey pervert she . 

 woman be an illegible manuscript , and ladie a close book of the 
 binding , to this raw philosopher , or he would not so coldly have judge 
 the young wife , anxious on her husband 's account , that they might escape 
 another scorching . he carry away his impression . 

 Livia listen to a remark on his want of manner . 

 ' Russett put it to the credit of his honesty , ' she say . ' Honesty be 
 everything with we at present . the man have make his honesty an excellent 
 speculation . he put a piece on zero and the bank hand he a sackful . 
 we may think we have win he to serve we , up come his honesty . that be 
 how we have Lady Arpington mix in it - too long a tale . but be guide 
 by I ; condescend a little . ' 

 ' my dear ! my whole mind be upon that unhappy girl . it would break 
 Chillon 's heart . ' 

 Livia pishe . ' there be letter we read before we crack the seal . she 
 be out of that ditch , and it suit Russett that she should be . he be 
 not often so patient . a woman foot to foot against his will - I see he 
 throw high stake . tyrant be brutal ; and really she provoke he 
 enough . you need not   be alarmed about the treatment she will meet . he 
 will not   let she beat he , be sure . ' 

 neither Livia nor Gower wonder at the clearing of the mystery , before 
 it go to swell the scandal . a young nobleman of ready power , quick 
 temper , few scruple , and a tax forbearance , be not likely to stand 
 thwart and goad - and by a woman . Lord Fleetwood act his part , 
 inscrutable as the blank of a locked door . he could not conceal that he 
 be behind the door . 




 CHAPTER XXV . the PHILOSOPHER MAN of ACTION 

 Gower 's bedroom window look over the shrub of the square , and as his 
 form of revolt from a city life be to be up and out with the sparrow 
 in the early flutter of morning , for a stretch of the leg where grass 
 be green and tree be not enclose , he rarely see a figure below 
 when he stand dress . now there appear a petticoate one stationary 
 against the rail , with her face lift . she front the house , and 
 while he speculate abstractedly , recognition rush on he . he be down 
 and across the roadway at leap . 

 ' it be Madge here ! ' 

 the girl pant for her voice . 

 ' Mr. Woodseer , I be glad ; I think I should have to wait hour . she be 
 safe . ' 

 ' where ? ' 

 ' will you come , sir ? ' 

 ' step ahead . ' 

 Madge set forth to north of the square . 

 he judge of the well - favour girl that she could steer her way through 
 city : mouth and brow be a warning to challenger pirate craft of a 
 vessel carry gun ; and the red lip keep their firm line when they 
 yield to the pressure for speech . 

 ' it be a distance . she be quite safe , no harm ; she be a prisoner ; she be 
 well feed ; she be not ill treat . ' 

 ' you be out ? ' 

 ' that be as it happen . I be lucky in see you early . he do not   mean to 
 hurt she ; he will not   be beat . all she ask be ten minute with he . if 
 he would ! - he will not . she do not   mean to do he offence t ' other night in 
 that place - you have   hear . Kit Ines tell I he be on duty there - go . 
 she could not   help speak when she have eye on her husband . she kiss 
 the ground of his footsole , you may say , let he be ever so unkind . she 
 and I be cross to the corner of Roper Street a rainy night , on way 
 to Mile End , away down to one of your father 's family , Mother 
 Davis and her sick daughter and the little one , and close under the 
 public - house Goat and Beard we be seize on and hustle into a cover 
 carriage that be there , and they drive sharp . she be not one to scream . 
 we be not   frightened . we both make the same guess . they drive we to 
 the house she be lock in , and I , too , up till three o'clock this 
 morning . ' 

 ' you have   see nobody , Madge ? ' 

 ' he be fix she be to leave London , Mr. Woodseer . I have   see Kit Ines . 
 and she be to have one of the big house to her use . I guess Kit Ines 
 be his broom . he defend it because he have his money to make - and be a 
 dirty broom for a fortune ! but any woman 's sure of decent handling with 
 Kit Ines - not to speak of lady . he and a mate guard the house . an old 
 woman cook . ' 

 ' he guard the house , and he give you a pass ? ' 

 ' not he . his pride be his obedience to his " paytron " - he call his 
 master , and will not   hear that name abuse . we be on the first floor ; 
 all the low door be lock day and night . New Street , not much 
 neighbour ; she would not   cry out of the window . she be to be let free if 
 she will leave London . ' 

 ' you jump it ! ' 

 ' if I would break a leg , Mr. Kit Ines would have have to go to his dram . it 
 be not   very high ; and a flower - bed underneath . my mistress want to be 
 the one . she have to be careful . she teach I how to jump down not to 
 hurt . she make you feel you can do anything . I have a bother to get she 
 to let I and be quiet herself . she be not one to put it upon other , 
 you will learn . when I be down I feel like a stick in the ground and sit 
 till I have my foot , she at the window waiting ; and I start for you . 
 she kiss her hand . I be to come to you , and then your father , you 
 nowhere see . I be not   speak to . I know empty London . ' 

 ' Kit Ines be leave sleep in the house ? ' 

 ' snore , I dare say : he do not   drink on duty . ' 

 ' he must be keep on duty . ' 

 ' drink or that kind of duty , it be a poor choice . ' 

 ' you will take he in charge , Madge . ' 

 ' I have   get a mistress to look after . ' 

 ' you have   warm to she . ' 

 ' that be not new ; Mr. Woodseer . I do trust you , and you his friend . but 
 you be the minister 's son , and any man not a great nobleman must have 
 some heart for she . you will learn . he kill she so because she be fond of 
 he - love he , however he strike . no , not like a dog , as man say of 
 we . she would die for he this night , need be . live with she , you will not 
 find many man match she for brave ; and she be good . my Sally call she 
 a Bible saint . I could tell you story of her goodness , short the time 
 though she be be down our way . and well there for she than at that 
 inn he leave she at to pine and watch the Royal Sovereign come swing 
 come smirk in sailor blue and star to meet the rain - would make anybody 
 disrespect Royalty or else go mad ! he be a great nobleman , he can not   buy 
 what she be ready to give ; and if he think he break she will now , it be 
 because she think she be obey a high than he , or no lord alive and 
 Kit Ines to back he would hold she . woman want a priest to speak to man 
 certain time . I wish I dare ; we have to bite our tongue . he be master 
 now , but , as I believe God be above , if he play her false , he be the one 
 to be bring to shame . I talk . ' 

 ' talk on , Madge , ' say Gower , to whom the girl 's short - syllable run of 
 the lip be a mountain rill compare with London park water . 

 ' you will not   let he hurry she off where she will eat her heart for never 
 see he again ? she pray to be near he , if she be not to see he . ' 

 ' she speak in that way ? ' 

 ' I get it by bit . I be with she so , it be as good as if I be inside she . 
 she can not   obey when it go the wrong way of her heart to he . ' 

 ' love and wisdom will not   pull together , and they part company for good at 
 the church door , ' say Gower . ' this matrimony be a bad business . ' 

 Madge hum a moan of assent . ' and my poor Sally will have to marry . I 
 can not   leave my mistress while she want I , and Sally can not   be alone . 
 it seem we take a step and harm 's do , though it be the right step we 
 take . ' 

 ' it seem to I you have   engage yourself to follow Sally 's lead , Madge . ' 

 ' girl ' mind turn corner , Mr. Woodseer . ' 

 he pass the remark . what it be that girl ' mind occasionally or 
 habitually do , or whether they have mind to turn , or whether they 
 take their whim for mind , be untroubled question with a young man 
 study abstract and adore surface nature too exclusively to be aware 
 of the manifestation of her spirit in the flesh , as it be not reveal 
 so much by man . however , she have a voice and a face that lead he to be 
 thoughtful over her devotedness to her mistress , after nearly lose 
 her character for the prize - fighter , and he have to thank she for 
 invigorate he . his disposition be to muse and fall slack , helpless 
 to a friend . here walk a creature exactly the contrary . he listen to 
 the step of the dissimilar pair on the detonate pavement , and eye a 
 church clock shin to the sun . 

 she be sure of the direction : ' out Camden way , where the murder be . ' 

 they walk at a brisk pace , converse or not . 

 ' tired ? you must be , ' he say . 

 ' not when I be hot to do a thing . ' 

 ' there be the word of the thoroughbred ! ' 

 ' you do not   tire , sir , ' say she . ' Sally and I see you stalk out for 
 the open country in the still of the morning . she think you look pale 
 for want of food , and ought to have some one put a biscuit into your 
 pocket overnight . ' 

 ' who would have guess I be under motherly observation ! ' 

 ' you should not   go so long empty , if you listen to trainer . ' 

 ' capital doctor , no doubt . but I get a fine appetite . ' 

 ' you may grind the edge too sharp . ' 

 he be about to be astonish , and reflect that she have ground for 
 her sagacity . his next thought plunge he into contempt for Kit Ines , 
 on account of the fellow 's lapse to sottishness . but there would be no 
 contempt of Kit Ines in a tussle with he . nor could one funk the tussle 
 and play cur , if Kit 's engaged young woman be look on . we get to 
 our courage or the show of it by queer screw . 

 Contemplative over these matter , the philosopher transform to man of 
 action hear Madge say she read direction in London by church , and 
 presently exclaim disdainfully , and yet relieve , ' Spooner Villas , ' 
 she turn down a row of small detach house face a brickfield , that 
 have just contribute to the erection of they , and threaten the big 
 city with further defacement . 

 Madge point to the mark of her jump , deep in flower - bed earth under 
 an open window . 

 Gower measure the height with sensational shank . 

 she smite at the door . Carinthia nod from her window . close upon 
 that , Kit Ines come bound to the parlour window ; he spy and star . 
 Gower be know to he as the earl 's paymaster ; so he go to the 
 passage and fling the door open , block the way . 

 ' any command , your honour ? ' 

 ' you bring the countess to my lord immediately , ' say Gower . 

 Kit swallow his mouthful of surprise in a second look at Madge and the 
 plough garden - bed beneath the chamber window . 

 ' be the order write , sir ? ' 

 ' to I ? - for I to deliver to you ? - for you to do my lord 's bidding ? 
 where be your head ? ' 

 Kit 's finger - nail travel up to it . Madge push past he . she and 
 her mistress , and Kit 's mate , and the old woman receive the word for 
 a cup of tea , be soon in the passage . Kit 's mate have a ready obedience 
 for his pay , nothing else , - no counsel at all , not a suggestion to a 
 head knock to a pudding by Madge 's jump and my lord 's paymaster here 
 upon the scene . 

 ' my lady be to go down Wales way , sir . ' 

 ' that may be order after . ' 

 ' I ' m to take my lady to my lord ? ' and , ' do it mean my lady want a 
 fly ? ' Kit ask , and hark back on whether Madge have see my lord . 

 ' at five in the morning ? - do not   sham donkey with I , ' say Gower . 

 the business look inclined to be leaky , but which the way for prove 
 himself other than a donkey puzzle Kit : so much so , that a shove 
 make he partly grateful . Madge 's clever countermove have stun his 
 judgement . he be besides act subordinate to his patron 's paymaster ; 
 and by the luck of it , no voice of woman interpose . the countess and 
 she maid stand by like a disinterested couple . why be suspicious , if 
 he be to keep the countess , in sight ? she be a nice lady , and he 
 prefer her good opinion . she be brave , and he do her homage . it 
 might be , my lord have get himself round to the idea of thank she for 
 save his nob that night , and his way be to send and have she up , to 
 tell she he forgave she , after the style of lord . Gower prick into 
 he by say aside : ' mad , I suppose , in case of a noise ? ' and he could 
 not answer quite manfully , lose his eye and colour . neighbour 
 might have require an explanation of shriek , he confess . man have 
 sometimes to do nasty work for their patron . 

 they be afoot , walk at Carinthia 's pace before half - past seven . 
 she would not hear of any conveyance . she be cheerful , and , as it be 
 pitiful to see , enjoy her walk . hear of her brother 's departure for 
 the austrian capital , she sparkle . her snatch of speech be short 
 flight out of the meditation possess she . Gower notice her easy 
 English , that come home to the perpetual student he be . she make use 
 of some of his father 's word , and have assimilate they mentally besides 
 appropriate they : the verbalizing of ' purpose , ' then peculiar to his 
 father , for example . she say , in reply to a hint from he : ' if my lord 
 will allow I an interview , I purpose to be obedient . ' no one could 
 imagine of she that she speak broken - spiritedly . her obedience be to 
 a high than a mortal lord : and Gower be touch to the quick through 
 the use of the word . 

 contrast she with Countess Livia and her cousin , the earl might think 
 her inferior on the one small , square compartment call by they the 
 world ; but she carry the promise of growth , a character in expansion , 
 and she have at least natural grace , a deerlike step . although her 
 picturesqueness do not swarm on he with image illuminate night , 
 subduing day , like the Countess Livia 's , it be mark , it could tower 
 and intermittently eclipse ; and it be of the uplifting and heal kind 
 by comparison , not a delicious balefulness . 

 the big house , large shop , austere street of private residence , 
 be observe by the recent inhabitant of Whitechapel . 

 ' my lord live in a square , ' she say . 

 ' we shall soon be there now , ' he encourage she , doubtful though the 
 issue appear . 

 ' it be a summer morning for the Ortler , the Gross - Glockner , the 
 Venediger , - all our Alps , Mr. Woodseer . ' 

 ' if we could fly ! ' 

 ' we love they . ' 

 ' why , then we beat a wing - yes . ' 

 ' for I have they when I want they to sight . it be the foot be so 
 desirous . I feel they so this morning , after prisonership . I could not 
 have be drive to my lord . ' 

 ' I know the feeling , ' say Gower ; ' any movement of we not our own 
 impulse , hurry the body and deaden the mind . and by the way , my dear 
 lady , I speak of the earl 's command to this man behind we walk 
 with your Madge . my father would accuse I of Jesuitry . ine mention 
 command , and I take advantage of it . ' 

 ' I fear , ' say Carinthia . ' I go for my chance . ' 

 Gower have a thought of the small creature , great by position , to 
 whom she be go for her chance . he allude to his experience of the 
 earl 's kindness in relation to himself , from a belief in his ' honesty ' ; 
 dotted outline of her husband 's complex character , or unmixed and 
 violently oppose element . 

 she remark : ' I will try and learn . ' 

 the name of the street of beautiful shop wake a happy smile on her 
 mouth . ' Father talk of it ; my mother , too . he have it write down in 
 his Book of Maxims . when I be a girl , I dream of one day walk up 
 Bond Street . ' 

 they step from the pavement and cross the roadway for a side - street 
 lead to the square . with the swift variation of her aspect at time , 
 her tone change . 

 ' we be near . my lord will not be trouble by I . he have only to meet 
 I . there have be misunderstand . I have vex he ; I could not help 
 it . I will go where he please after I have hear he give order . he 
 think I a frightful woman . I be peaceful . ' 

 Gower mutter her word ' misunderstanding . ' they be at the earl 's 
 house door . one tap at it , and the two applicant for admission would 
 probably be shoot as far away from Lord Fleetwood as when they be on 
 the Styrian height last autumn . he deliver the tap , amuse by the 
 idea . it be like a summon to a genie of doubtful service . 

 my lord be out rid in the park . 

 only the footman appear at that early hour , and his countenance be 
 blank whitewash as he stand rigid against the wall for the lady to pass . 
 Madge follow into the morning room ; Ines remain in the hall , where 
 he could have the opening speech with his patron , and where he soon have 
 communication with the butler . 

 this official enter presently to Gower , present a loaded forehead . 
 a note address to Mrs. Kirby - Levellier at the Countess Livia 's 
 house hard by be hand to he for instant despatch . he signify a 
 deferential wish to speak . 

 ' you can speak in the presence of the Countess of Fleetwood , Mr. 
 Waytes , ' Gower say . 

 wayte check a bend of his shoulder . he have not a word , and he turn 
 to send the note . he be compel to think that he see a well - grow 
 young woman in the Whitechapel Countess . 

 Gower 's note reach Henrietta on her descent to the breakfast - table . 
 she be , alone , and throw into a torture of perplexity : for she want 
 advice as to the advice to be give to Janey , and Livia be an utterly 
 unprofitable person to consult in the case . she think of Lady 
 Arpington , not many door distant . drink one hasty cup of tea , she 
 send for her bonnet , and hasten away to the great lady , whom she find 
 rise from breakfast with the marquis . 

 Lady Arpington read Gower 's note . she unburden herself : ' oh ! so it be 
 no long a bachelor 's household ! ' 

 Henrietta heave the big of sigh . ' I fear the poor dear may have 
 make matter bad . ' 

 to which Lady Arpington say : ' worse or well , my child ! ' and shrug ; 
 for the present situation strain to snap . 

 she propose to go forthwith , and give what support she could to the 
 Countess of Fleetwood . 

 they descend the step of the house to the garden and the Green Park 's 
 gravel walk up to Piccadilly . there they have view of Lord Fleetwood on 
 horseback leisurely turn out of the main way 's tide . they see he 
 alight at the mew . as they enter the square , he be meet some door 
 from the south corner by his good or evil genius , whose influence with 
 he come next after the marriage in the amazement it cause , and be 
 perhaps to be explain by it ; for the wealthy of young nobleman 
 bestow his name on an unknown girl , would be the one to make an 
 absurd adventurer his intimate . Lord Fleetwood bent a listen head 
 while Mr. Gower Woodseer , apparently a good genius for the moment , speak 
 at his ear . 

 how do we understand laughter at such a communication as he must be 
 hear from the man ? sign of a sharp laugh indicate either his cruel 
 levity or that his presumptuous favourite trifled - and the man 's talk 
 could be droll , Lady Arpington know : it have , she recollect angrily , 
 divert she , and soften she to tolerate the intruder into region 
 from which her class and her period exclude the lowly bear , except at 
 the dinner - table of stale politic and tattere scandal . nevertheless , 
 Lord Fleetwood mount the step to his house door , still listen . 
 his ' Asmodeus , ' on the tongue of the world , might be do the part of 
 mentor really . the house door stand open . 

 Fleetwood say something to Gower ; he swing round , beheld the lady 
 and advance to they , salute . ' my dear Lady Arpington ! quite so , you 
 arrive opportunely . when the enemy occupy the citadel , it be proper to 
 surrender . Say , I beg , she can have the house , if she prefer it . I will 
 fall back on Esslemont . arrangement for her convenience will be make . I 
 thank you , by anticipation . ' 

 his bow include Henrietta loosely . Lady Arpington have exclaim : 
 ' Enemy , Fleetwood ? ' and Gower , in his ignorance of the smoothness of 
 aristocratic manner , expect a remonstrance ; but Fleetwood be allow 
 to go on , with his air of steely geniality and a decision , that his 
 friend imagine he could have break down like an old partition board 
 under the kick of a sarcasm sharpen an appeal . 

 ' Lord Fleetwood be on the point of go in , ' he assure the great 
 lady . 

 ' Lord Fleetwood may regret his change of mind , ' say she . ' the Countess 
 of Fleetwood will have my advice to keep she foot in this house . ' 

 she and Henrietta sit alone with Carinthia for an hour . come forth , 
 Lady Arpington ejaculate to herself : ' villany somewhere ! - you will do 
 well , Henrietta , to take up your quarter with she a day or two . she can 
 hold her position a month . long be past possibility . ' 

 a shudder of the repulsion from man creep over the young lady . but she 
 be a warrior 's daughter , and observe : ' my husband , her brother , will 
 be back before the month end . ' 

 ' no need for hostility to lighten our darkness , ' Lady Arpington 
 rejoin . ' you know she ? trust she ? ' 

 ' one can not doubt her face . she be my husband 's sister . yes , I do trust 
 she . I nail my flag to her cause . ' 

 the flag be crimson , as it appear on her cheek ; and that intimate a 
 further tale , though not of so dramatic an import as the cognizant short 
 survey of Carinthia have be . 

 these young woman , with the new complication obtrude by they , 
 irritate a benevolent great governing lady , who have marry off her 
 daughter and embrace her grandchild , comfortably finish that 
 chapter ; and beheld now the apparition of the sex 's ancient tripping 
 foe , when circumstance in themselves be quite enough to contend 
 against on their behalf . it seem to say , that nature 's most burden 
 weak must always be beat . despite Henrietta 's advocacy and 
 Carinthia 's clear face , it raise a spectral form of a suspicion , the 
 more effective by reason of the much require justification it fetch 
 from the shade to plead apology for Lord Fleetwood 's erratic , if not 
 mad , and in any case ugly , conduct . what otherwise could be his excuse ? 
 such be his need of one , that the wife he crush have to be propose 
 for sacrifice , in the mind of a lady tend strongly to side with she 
 and condemn her husband . 

 Lady Arpington have counsel Carinthia to stay where she be , the Fates 
 have bring she there . Henrietta be too generous to hesitate in 
 her choice between her husband 's sister and the earl . she remove from 
 Livia 's house to Lord Fleetwood 's . my lord be at Esslemont two day ; 
 then establish his quarter at Scrope 's hotel , five minute ' walk 
 from the wed lady to whom the right to bear his title be grant , 
 an interview with he refuse . such a squaring for the battle of spouse 
 have never - or not in mighty London - be see since that old fight 
 begin . 




 CHAPTER XXVI . after some fencing the dame pass our guard 

 Dame Gossip at this present pass burst to give we a review of the 
 social world siding for the earl or for his countess ; and her parrot cry 
 of ' John Rose Mackrell ! ' with her head 's loose shake over the smack of 
 her lap , to convey the contemporaneous tipsy relish of the rich good 
 thing he say on the subject of the contest , indicate the kind of 
 intervention it would be . 

 to save the story from have its vein tie , we may accept the reminder , 
 that he be the countess 's voluble advocate at a period when her friend 
 be shy to speak of she . after relate the Vauxhall Gardens episode in 
 burlesque Homeric during the freshness of the scandal , Rose Mackrell 's 
 enthusiasm for the heroine of his humour set in . he track she to her 
 parentage , which be new breath blow into the sunken tradition of some 
 Old Buccaneer and his Countess Fanny : and , a turn of great good luck 
 help he to a copy of the book of the MAXIMS for MEN , he would quote 
 certain of the racier one , passage of Captain John Peter Kirby 's 
 personal advere in various land and water illustrate the text , to 
 prove that the old warrior act by the rule of his recommendation . 
 they have the repulsive attraction proper to rusty lumber sword and 
 truncehon that have taste brain . they wove no mild sort of halo for 
 the head of a shillelagh - flourish Whitechapel Countess descend from 
 the writer and doer . 

 People be willing to believe in her jump of thirty foot or more off a 
 suburban house - top to escape durance , and her midnight storming of 
 her lord 's town house , and oust of he to go find his quarter at 
 Scrope 's hotel . he , too , have his band of pugilist , as it be know ; 
 and he might have heighten a rage scandal . the nobleman forbore . 
 a woman 's blow gracefully take add a score of inch to our stature , 
 floor we as it may : we win the world 's after - thought . Rose Mackrell 
 sketch the earl ; - always alert , smart , quick to meet a combination and 
 protect a dignity never obtrude , and in spite of himself the laugh of 
 the town . his humour flicker wildly round the ridiculous position of a 
 prominent young nobleman , whose bearing and character be foreign to a 
 position of ridicule . 

 nevertheless , the earl 's figure continue to be classic sculpture , it 
 ally he with the aristocracy of martyr , that burn and do not wince . 
 he propitiate none , and as he could not but suffer shrewdly , he gain 
 esteem enough to shine through the woman 's pitiless drenching of he . 
 during his term at Scrope 's hotel , the carousal there be quite 
 old - century and matter of discourse . he have prove his return to 
 sound sense in the dismissal of ' the fiddler , ' notoriously the woman 's 
 lieutenant , or more ; and nightly the revelry close at the great gaming 
 table of St. James 's Street , while Whitechapel hold the coroneted 
 square , well on her way to the Law court , as Abrane and Potts report ; 
 and positively so , ' clear case . ' that be the come development and 
 finale of the marriage . London wait for it . 

 a rich man 's easy smile over loss at play , merely teach his emulous 
 troop to feel themselves poor devil in the pocket . but Fleetwood 's 
 contempt of Sleep be a marvel , superhuman , and accuse they of an 
 inferior vigour , hard for young man to admit by the example . he never 
 go to bed . issue from Fortune 's hall - door in the bright , lively , 
 summer morning , he mount horse and be away to the hill . or he take 
 the arm of a roman catholic nobleman , Lord Feltre , and walk with he 
 from the green table and the establishment 's renowned dry still Sillery 
 to a Papist chapel . as it be not know that he have give his word to 
 abjure his religion , the pious gambler do no bad than spread an 
 alarm and quiet it , by the citation of his character for have a try at 
 everything . 

 Henrietta despatch at this period the follow letter to Chillon : 

 ' I be with Livia to - morrow . Janey start for Wales to - morrow morning , a 
 voluntary exile . she plead to go back to that place where you have to 
 leave she , promise she would not come westward ; but be persuade . 
 Lady Arpington approve . the situation be get too terribly 
 strained . we meet and pass my lord in the park . 

 ' he be walk his horse - elegant cavalier that he be : would not look on 
 his wife . a woman pull by her collar should be passive ; if she pull 
 her way , she be treat as a dog . I see nothing else in the intention of 
 poor Janey 's last offence to he . there be an opposite counsel , and he 
 can be eloquent , and he will be hear on her side . how could she manage 
 the most wayward when she have not an idea of ordinary man ! but , my 
 husband , they have our tie between they ; it may move he . it subdue 
 she - and nothing else would have do that . if she have be in England a 
 year before the marriage , she would , I think , have understand well 
 how to guide her step and her tongue for his good pleasure . she learn 
 daily , very quickly : observe , assimilate ; she read and have she 
 comment - would have shoot far ahead of your Riette , with my advantage . 

 ' your uncle - but he will bear any charge on his conscience as long as he 
 can get the burden off his shoulder . do not fret , my own ! reperuse the 
 above - you will see we have ground for hope . 

 ' he should have look down on she ! no tear from her eye , but her eye 
 be tear . she do not rank among beautiful woman . she have her moment 
 for outshine they - the lovely of spectre ! she catch at my heart . 
 I can not forget her face look up for he to look down . a great 
 painter would have reproduce it , a great poet have render the 
 impression . nothing short of the great . that be odd to say of one so 
 simple as she . but when accident call up her reserve , you see mountain 
 height where mist be - she be actually glorify . her friend - I 
 do believe a friend - the Mr. Woodseer you be to remember meeting 
 somewhere - a sprain ankle - have a dozen simile ready for what she be 
 when pain or happiness vivify she . or , it may be , tender charity . she 
 say , that if she feel for suffer people , it be because she be the 
 child of Chillon 's mother . in like manner Chillon be the son of Janey 's 
 father . 

 ' Mr. Woodseer come every other evening . our only enlivenment . Livia 
 follow her policy , in refuse to call . we live luxuriously ; no 
 money , not enough for a box at the opera , though we yearn - you can 
 imagine . chapter of philosophy read out and expound instead . Janey 
 like they . he set lesson to her queer maid - reading , writing , 
 pronunciation of English . an inferior language to Welsh , for poetical 
 purpose , we be inform . so Janey - determine to apply herself 
 to Welsh , and a chameleon Riette dread that she will be take a 
 contrary view of the honest soul - as she feel they to be - when again 
 under Livia 's shadow . 

 ' the message from Janey to Scrope 's hotel be despatch half - an - hour 
 after we have drive in from the park ; fruit of a brown meditation . I 
 write it - third person - a single sentence . arrangement be make for 
 she to travel comfortably . it be funny - the shop for her purchase of 
 clothe , necessary , etc . , be specify ; she may order to any extent . 
 not a shilling of money for her poor purse . what can be the secret of 
 that ? he do nothing without an object . to I , uniformly civil , no 
 irony , few compliment . Livia write , that I be commend for keep 
 Janey company . what can be the secret of a man scrupulously just with 
 one hand , and at the same time cruel with the other ? Mr. Woodseer say , 
 his wealth : - " More money than be require for their need , man go into 
 harness to Plutus , " - if that be clever . 

 ' I have write my husband - as Janey cease to call she own ; and it be 
 pretty and touch to hear she " my husband . " - oh ! a dull letter . but he 
 be my husband though he keep absent - to be long for - he be my husband 
 still , my husband always . Chillon be Henrietta 's husband , the world 
 cry out , and when she be flatter she do the like , for then it be 
 not too presumptuous that she should name Henrietta Chillon 's wife . 
 in my ear , husband have the sweet sound . it bring an angel from 
 overhead . will it bring he one - half hour soon ? my love ! my dear ! if 
 it do , I should be lisp " husband , husband , husband " from cock - crow 
 to owl 's cry . Livia think the word foolish , if not detestable . she and 
 I have our different opinion . she be for luxury . I choose poverty and 
 my husband . poverty have its beauty , if my husband be the sun of it . Elle 
 radote . she would not have write so dull a letter to her husband 
 if she have be at the opera last night , or listen to a distant 
 street - band . no more - the next line would be bleed . he should have 
 her blood too , if that be her husband 's - it would never be ; but if 
 it be for his good in the small way . Chillon 's wish be to give his 
 blood for they he love . never do woman try more to write worthily to 
 her absent lord and fall so miserably into the state of dripping 
 babe from bath on nurse 's knee . cover I , my lord ; and love , my cause 
 for - no , my excuse , my refuge from myself . we be one ? oh ! we be 
 one ! - and we have be separate eight and twenty day . 

  ' HENRIETTA KIRBY - LEVELLIER . ' 

 that be a letter for the husband and lover to receive in a foreign land 
 and be warm . 

 the tiding of Carinthia wash he clean of the grimy district where 
 his waxen sister have develop her stubborn insensibility ; - resemble 
 craziness , every perversion of the refinement demand by young 
 Englishmen of their lady ; and it pacify he with the belief that 
 she be now at rest , the disturbed history of their father and mother 
 at rest as well ; his conscience in relation to the marriage likewise at 
 rest . Chillon have a wife . her writing of the welcome to poverty stir 
 his knowledge of his wife 's nature . Carinthia might bear it and harden 
 to flint ; Henrietta be a butterfly for the golden ray . his thought , 
 all his energy , be bent on the making of money to supply her need 
 for the pleasure she fly in - a butterfly 's grub without it . accurately 
 so do the husband and lover read his wife - adore she the more . 

 her letter 's embrace close be costly to they . it hurry he to 
 the compromise of a debateable business , and he fall into the Austrian 
 Government 's term for the payment of the inheritance from his father ; 
 calculate that - his sister 's share deduct - money would be in hand to 
 pay press debt and enable Henrietta to live unworrie by care 
 until he should have squeeze debt , long due and increase , out of the 
 miserly old lord , his uncle . a prospect of supply for twelve month , 
 count the hack and carriage Henrietta have always be use to , 
 seem about as far as it be require to look by the husband hastening 
 homeward to his wife 's call . her letter be a call in the night . 
 besides , there be his yet untried invention . the new gunpowder 
 testing at Croridge promise to provide Henrietta with many of the 
 luxury she could have have , and have abandon for his sake . the new 
 blasting powder and a destructive shell might build she the palace she 
 deserve . his uncle be , no doubt , his partner . if , however , the profit 
 be divide , sufficient wealth be assure . but his uncle remain a 
 dubious image . the husband and lover could enfold no positive prospect 
 to suit his wife 's taste beyond the twelve month . 

 we have Dame Gossip upon we . - one minute let mention be of the 
 excitement over Protestant England when that rumour disseminate , 
 telling of her wealthy nobleman 's visit to a monastery , up in the 
 peak and snow ; and of his dwelling among the monk , and assist in 
 all their service day and night , hymn and chant , utter not one 
 word for one whole week : his papistical friend , Lord Feltre , with he , 
 of course , after Jesuit art have allure he to that place of torrent 
 and lightning and canticle and demon echo , all as though expressly 
 contrive for the horrifying of sinner into penitence and confession 
 and the monkish cowl up to life 's end , not to speak of the abjuration of 
 worldly possession and donation of they into the keeping of the shaven 
 brother ; when either they would have settle a band of they here in 
 our very midst , or they would have impoverish - be not too strong a 
 word - the country by take the money 's worth of the mine , estate , 
 mansion , freehold street and square of our metropolis out of it 
 without scruple ; rejoice so to bleed the protestant faith . underrate 
 it now - then it be a truly justifiable anxiety : insomuch that you hear 
 people of station , eminent title person , ask , like the commonest 
 low Radicals , whether it be prudent legislation to permit of the 
 inheritance of such vast wealth by a young man , little more than a boy , 
 and note for freak . and some declare it could not be allow for 
 foreign monk to have a claim to inherit english property . there be a 
 general consent , that if the Earl of Fleetwood go to the extreme of 
 make over his property to those monk , he should be pronounce insane 
 and incapable . ultimately the world be a little pacify by hear 
 that a portion of it be entail , Esslemont and the Welsh mine . 

 so it might be ; but what if he have no child ! the marriage amazing 
 everybody scarcely promise fruit , it be think . Countess Livia , much 
 besought for her opinion , scout the possibility . and Carinthia 
 Jane be proclaim by John Rose Mackrell   to his die day the 
 poor gentleman try vainly to get the second syllable of his name 
 accentuate   a young woman who would outlive twice over the husband she 
 have . he say of his name , it be destine to pass he down a dead 
 fish in the nose of posterity , and would affect his good joke ; which 
 something have do , or the present generation have lose the sense of 
 genuine humour . 

 thank to he , the talk of the Whitechapel Countess again spring up , 
 merrily as ever ; and after her have become , as he say , ' a desiccated 
 celebrity , ' she outdo cabinet minister and naughty wife for a living 
 morsel in the world 's mouth . she be denounce by the patriotic party as 
 the cause of the earl 's dalliance with Rome . 

 the earl , you be to know , be then coast along the Mediterranean , on 
 board his beautiful schooner yacht , with his Lord Feltre , bind to make 
 an inspection of syrian monastery , and forget , if he could , the face 
 of all face , another 's possession by the law . 

 those two lord , shut up together in a yacht , be advise by their 
 situation to be bosom friend , and they quarrel violently , and be 
 reconcile , and they quarrel again ; they be explosive chemical ; 
 until the touch of dry land relieve they of what they really fancy 
 the spell of the fiend . for their argumentative topic during confinement 
 be Woman , when it be not theology ; and even off a yacht , those be 
 subject to kindle the utmost hatred of dissension , if man be not 
 perfectly concordant . they agree upon land to banish any talk of woman 
 or Theology , where it would have be comparatively innocent ; so they 
 both desire to be do the thing they have swear they would not do , 
 the thought of both be fasten on one or the other interdicted 
 subject . they hardly speak ; they perceive in their longing mind , 
 that the imagined spell of , the Fiend be indeed the bile of the sea , 
 secrete thickly for want of exercise , and they both regret the day 
 and night of their angry controversy ; unfit pilgrim of the Holy 
 Land , they own . 

 to such effect , Lord Fleetwood write to Gower Woodseer , as though there 
 have be no breach between they , from Jerusalem , express the wish 
 to hear his cool wood - note of the philosophy of life , fresh draw from 
 Nature 's breast ; and urgent for an answer , to be address to his hotel 
 at Southampton , that he might be greet on his return home first by his 
 ' friend Gower . ' 

 he write in the month of January . his arrival at Southampton be on the 
 thirteenth day of March ; and there he open a letter some week old , 
 the bearer of news which ought by right to make husband proudly happy . 




 CHAPTER XXVII . we DESCEND into a STEAMER 's ENGINE - ROOM 

 Fleetwood have drop his friend Lord Feltre at Ancona ; his good fortune 
 be to be alone when the clang of bell rang through his head in the 
 reading of Gower 's line . other letter be open : from the Countess 
 Livia , from Lady Arpington , from Captain Kirby - Levellier . there be 
 one from his lawyer , inform he of their receipt of a communication 
 date South Wales , December 11th , and sign Owain Wythan ; to the 
 effect , that the birth of a son to the Earl of Fleetwood be register 
 on the day of the date , with a copy of the document forward . 

 Livia scornfully state the tattling world 's ' late . ' the captain be 
 as brief , in ordinary word , whose quick run to the stop could be 
 take for a challenge of the eye . it stamp the adversary 's frown on 
 Fleetwood reading . Lady Arpington be more politic ; she write of ' a 
 healthy boy , ' and ' the healthy mother give he breast , ' this be 
 ' the way for the rearing of strong man . ' she condescend to the 
 particular , that she might touch he . 

 the earl have not be so rear : his mother be not the healthy mother . 
 one of his multitudinous , shifty , but ineradicable ambition be to 
 exhibit an excellingly vigorous , tireless constitution . he remember 
 the need refreshment of the sea - breeze aboard his yacht during the 
 week follow the sleep - discard night at Scrope 's and the green 
 table . for a week he hang to the smell of brine , in rapturous amity 
 with Feltre , until they yellow , differ , wrangle , hat . 

 a powerful leaven be put into he by the tiding out of Wales . gower , 
 good fellow , have go down to see the young mother three week after the 
 birth of her child . she be already renew her bloom . she have produce 
 the boy in the world 's early manner , lightly , without any of the tragic 
 modern hover over death to give the life . gower compare it to a 
 ' flush of the vernal orchard after a day 's drink of sunlight . ' that be 
 well : that be how it should be . one loathe the idea of tortured woman . 

 the good fellow be perhaps absurdly poetical . still we must have poetry 
 to hallow this and other form of energy : or say , if you like , the right 
 view of they impel to poetry . otherwise we be in the breeding yard , 
 among the litter and the farrow . it be a question of look down or 
 look up . if we be poor creature - as we be if we do but feast and 
 gamble and beget - we shall run for a time with the dog and come to the 
 finish of swine . well say , life be holy ! why , then have we to thank 
 she who teach it . 

 he gaze at the string of vision of the woman name he husband , 
 make he a father : the imagine Carinthia - beautiful Gorgon , haggard 
 Venus ; the Carinthia of the precipice tree - shoot ; Carinthia of the ducal 
 dancing - hall ; and she at the altar rail ; she on the coach box ; she 
 alternately soft of bride , doughtiest of Amazons . a mate for the 
 caress , an electrical heroine , front he . 

 yes , and she be Lord Fleetwood 's wife , crack sconce , - a demoiselle 
 Moll Flanders , - the world 's Whitechapel Countess out for an airing , 
 infernally earnest about it , madly ludicrous ; the schemer to catch 
 his word , the petticoate Shylock to bind he to the letter of it ; now 
 persecuting , haunt he , now immoveable for obstinacy ; malignant to 
 stay down in those vile slum and direct ton of sooty water on his 
 head from its main in the sight of London , cause the least histrionic 
 of man to behave as an actor . he behold she a skull with a lamp behind 
 the eyehole . 

 but this woman be the woman who make he a father ; she be the mother 
 of the heir of the House ; and the boy she clasp and suckle as her boy 
 be his boy . they meet inseparably in that new life . 

 truly , there could not be a woman of flesh so near to a likeness with 
 the beatific image of Feltre 's worship Madonna ! 

 the thought sparkle and darken in Fleetwood 's mind , as a star pass 
 into cloud . for an uproarious world claim the woman , jeered at all 
 ally with she ; at her husband most , of course : - the punctilious 
 noodle ! the golden jackass , tethered and goad ! he have choice among the 
 pick of woman : the daughter of the Old Buccaneer be prefer by the 
 wiseacre Coelebs . she trick he cunningly and strike a tremendous 
 return blow in produce her male infant . 

 by the way , be she actually bear in wedlock ? Lord Levellier 's 
 assurance regard her origin be , by the calculation , a miser 's 
 shuffle to clinch his bargain . assume the representative of holy 
 motherhood to be a woman of illegitimate birth , the history of the 
 House to which the spotted woman give an heir would suffer a jolt when 
 touch on she . and altogether the history fume rank vapour . Imagine 
 her boy in his father 's name a young collegian ! no commonly sensitive 
 lad could bear the gibe of the fellow rake at antecedent : Fleetwood 
 would be the name to start roar . smart for his name , the earl chafe 
 at the boy 's mother . her production of a man - child be the further and 
 gross offence . 

 the world sit on he . his confession to some degree of weakness , even 
 to folly , sting his pride of individuality so that he have to soothe the 
 pain by tear himself from a thought of his folly 's partner , shut 
 himself up and away from she . then there be a cessation of annoyance , 
 flatteringly agreeable : which can come to we only of our have do 
 the right thing , young man will think . he feel at once warmly with the 
 world , enjoy the world 's kind shelter , and in return for its eulogy 
 of his unprecedented attachment to the pledge of his word , admit an 
 understanding of its laughter at the burlesque edition of a noble lady 
 in the person of the Whitechapel Countess . the world sit on he heavily . 

 he recur to Gower Woodseer 's letter . 

 the picture and image in it be not the principal matter , - the 
 impression have be deep . a plain transcription of the young mother 's 
 act and word do more to portray she : the reader could supply 
 reflection . 

 would her boy 's father be very pleased to see he ? she have ask . 

 and she speak of a fear that the father would try to take her boy from 
 she . 

 ' never that - you have my word ! ' Fleetwood say ; and he nod 
 consentingly over her next remark - 

 ' not while I live , till he must go to school ! ' 

 the stubborn wife would be the last of woman to sit and weep as a rifle 
 mother . 

 a child of the Countess Carinthia   he phrase it   would not be deficient 
 in will , nor would the youngster lack bravery . 

 for his part , comparison rush at he and search he , he own that 
 he lean on pride . to think that he do , become a theme for pride . the 
 mother have the primitive virtue , the father the develop : he be the 
 rich mine . and besides , he be he , the unriddled , complex , individual 
 he ; she be the plain barbarian survival , good for give her offspring 
 bone , muscle , stout heart . 

 shape the hypothesis of a fair woman the mother of the heir to the 
 earldom . 

 Henrietta be analyze in a glimpse . courage , animal healthfulness , she , 
 too , might - her husband not obstruct - transmit ; and good look , eye 
 of the sapphire AEgean . and therewith such pliability as the Mother of 
 Love require of her servant . 

 could that woman resist seduction ? 

 Fleetwood 's wrath with she for refuse he and induce he in spite 
 to pledge his word elsewhere , haphazard , prick a curiosity to know 
 whether the woman could be - and easily ! easily ! he wager - lead to make 
 her conduct warrant for his contempt of she . lead , - that be , mislead , you 
 might say , if you be plead for a doll . but it be necessary to bait 
 the pleasure for the woman , in order to have full view of the precious 
 fine fate one have escape . also to get well rid of a sort of hectic in 
 the blood , which the woman 's beauty have cast on that reflect tide : a 
 fever - sign , where the fever have become quite emotionless and be merely 
 desirous for the stain of it to be wash out . as this be not the desire 
 to possess or even to taste , contempt will do it . when we know that the 
 weaver of the fascination be purchasable , we toss she to the market 
 where man buy ; and we walk release from vile subjection to one of the 
 female heap : subjection no long , doubtless , and yet a stain of the 
 past flush , often colour our revery , create active phantasm of a 
 passion absolutely extinct , if it ever be the veritable passion . 

 the plot - formless plot - to get release by the sacrifice or at least a 
 crucial temptation of the woman , that should wash his blood clean of 
 her image , have a shade of the devilish , he acknowledge ; and the apology 
 offer no improvement of its aspect . she might come out of the trial 
 triumphant . and benefit for himself , even a small privilege , even the 
 pressure of her hand , he not only shrink from the thought of winning,-he 
 loathe the thought . he be too delicate over the idea of the married 
 woman whom he fancy he love in her maidenhood . other might press she 
 hand , lead she the dance : he simply want his release . she have set he 
 on fire ; he conceive a method for trample the remain spark and 
 erase stain and scar ; that be all . Henrietta reject her wealthy 
 suitor : she might some day hence be see crawl abjectly to wealth , 
 glad of a drink from the cup it hold , intoxicate with the draught . 
 an injure pride could animate his wealth to crave solace of such a 
 spectacle . 

 Devilish , if you like . he have expiate the wickedness in cistercian 
 seclusion . his wife now drive he to sin again . 

 she have give he a son . that flute of home and honourable life . she 
 have her charm , know to he alone . 

 but how , suppose she do not rub he to bristle with fresh 
 irritation , how go to his wife while Henrietta hold her throne ? 
 consideration be due to she until she stumble . enough if she waver . 
 almost enough be she stand firm as a statue in the wind , and prove 
 that the first page of she be a false introduction . the surprising 
 apparition of a beautiful woman with character ; a lightly - thrill , 
 pleasure - love woman devote to her husband or protect by her 
 rightful self - esteem , would loosen he creditably . it have to be 
 witness , for faith in it . he reverence our legendary good woman , 
 and he bow to noble deed ; and he ascribe the former to poetical 
 creativeness , the latter operate as a scourging to his flesh to yield 
 its demoniacal inmate . nothing of the kind be do at present . 

 or stay : a studious re - perusal of Gower Woodseer 's letter enrich a 
 little incident . Fleetwood give his wife her name of Carinthia when he 
 have read deliberately and catch the scene . 

 Mrs. Wythan down in Wales relate it to Gower . Carinthia and Madge , 
 trudge over the treeless hill , come on a birchen clump round a deep 
 hollow or gullypit ; precipitous , the earl know , he have peep over the 
 edge in his infant day . there at the bottom , in a foot or so of water , 
 they espy a lamb ; and they rescue the poor beastie by go down to 
 it , one or both . it must have be the mountain - foot one . a man would 
 hesitate , spy below . Fleetwood wonder how she have manage to climb 
 up , and carry the lamb ! down pitch Madge Winch to help - they do it 
 between they . we who stand aloof admire stupidly . to defend himself from 
 admiring , he condemn the two woman for the risk they run to save a 
 probably break - legged little beast : and he escape the melt mood by 
 force a sneer at the sort of stuff out of which popular ballad be 
 weave . Carinthia be accuse of let her adventurous impulse and 
 sentimental female compassion swamp think of a mother 's duty . if 
 both those woman have break their leg the child might have cry itself 
 into fit for the mother , there she would have remain . 

 Gower write in a language transparent of the act , address to a reader 
 whose memory be to be impregnate . his reader would have fly away 
 from the simple occurrence on arabesque and modulate tone ; and then 
 envisage they critically , would have toss his poor little story to 
 the wind , as a small thing magnify : with an object , be the next 
 thought about it . he know his Fleetwood so far . 

 his letter conclude : ' I be in a small Surrey village over a baker 's 
 shop , rent eight shilling per week , a dame 's infant school opposite my 
 window , mile of firwood , heath , and bracken opening , for the wing or 
 the nested fancy . Love Nature , she make you a lord of her boundless , 
 off any ten square foot of common earth . I go through my illusion and 
 come always back on that good truth . it say , beware of the world 's 
 passion for flavour and spice . much taste , they turn and bite the 
 biter . my exemplar be the lately breeched youngster with two penny in 
 their pocket for the gingerbread - nut booth on a fair day . I learn more 
 from one of they than you can from the whole cavalcade of your attendant 
 ixionide . ' 

 mount the box of his coach for the drive to London , Fleetwood have the 
 new name for the parasitic and sham vital troop at his ear . 

 ' my ixionide ! ' he repeat , and do not scorn they so much as he 
 rejoice to be enlighten by the title . he crave the presence of the 
 magician who drop illumination with a single word ; wholesomer to 
 think of than the whole body of those Ixionides - not bad fellow , here 
 and there , he reflect , tolerantly , half laugh at some of their 
 clownish fun . Gower Woodseer and he have not quarrel ? no , they have 
 merely part at one of the crossway . the plebeian could teach that son 
 of the , genuflexion , Lord Feltre , a lesson in manner . Woodseer be 
 the well comrade and director of route . into the forest , up on the 
 height ; and free , not lock ; and not parrot day and night , but 
 quick for all that the world have learn and can tell , though two - third 
 of it be compose of ixionide : that way lie wisdom , and his index be 
 cut that way . 

 arrive in town , he run over the heading of his letter , in no degree 
 anxious for a communication from Wales . there be none . why none ? 

 she might as well have scrawl her announcement of an event please 
 to she , and , by the calculation , important to he , if not particularly 
 interesting . the mother 's wifeish line would , perhaps , have be test 
 in a furnace . he smart at the blank of any , of even two or three 
 formal word . she sulk ? ' I be not a fallen lamb ! ' he say . evidently 
 one have to be a shiver beast in trouble , to excite she to move a 
 hand . 

 through so slight a fissure as this piece of discontent crack in he , 
 the crowd of his grievance with the woman rush pell - mell , deluge 
 young shoot of sweet feeling . she sulk ! if that woman could not 
 get the command , he be to know she incapable of submission . after 
 besmutte the name she have filch from he , she let he understand 
 that there be no intention to repent . possibly she mean war . in which 
 case a man must fly , or stand assail by the most intolerable of vulgar 
 farce ; - to be compare to a pelting of one on the stage . 

 the time come for he to knock at door and face his public . 




 CHAPTER XXVIII . by concession to mistress gossip a further INTRUSION be 
 avert 

 Livia welcome he , with commiserate inquiry behind her languid 
 eyelid . ' you have all the late ? ' it say . 

 he strike on the burn matter . 

 ' you wish to know the part you have to play , ma'am . ' ' tell I , Russett . ' 

 ' you will contradict nothing . ' 

 her eyebrow ask , ' it mean ? ' 

 ' you have authority from I to admit the fact . ' 

 ' they be fact ? ' she remark . 

 ' woman love teasing round certain fact , apparently ; like the Law court 
 over their pet case . ' 

 ' but , Russett , will you listen ? ' 

 ' have the luck be civil of late ? ' 

 ' I think of something else at present . no , it have not . ' 

 ' abrane ? ' 

 ' pray , attend to I . no , not abrane . ' 

 ' I believe you have   all be clear out in my absence . St. Ombre ? ' 

 her complexion vary . ' Mr. Ambrose Mallard have once or twice ... but let 
 I beg you - the town be rage with it . my dear Russett , a bold front 
 now ; there be the chance of your release in view . ' 

 ' a rascal in view ! name the sum . ' 

 ' I must reckon . my head be - can you intend to submit ? ' 

 ' so it be Brosey Mallard now . you choose your deputy queerly . he be as bad 
 as Abrane , with steam to it . Chummy Potts would have do well . ' 

 ' he win one night ; lose every pound - note he have the next ; and come 
 vaunt - the " dry still Sillery " of the establishment , - a perpetual 
 chorus to his loss ! ' 

 ' his consolation to you for your . that be the gentleman . Chummy do not 
 change . say , why not St. Ombre ? he be cool . ' 

 ' there be reason . ' 

 ' let they rest . and I have my reason . do the same for they . ' 

 ' your concern the honour of the family . ' 

 ' deeply : respect they . ' 

 ' your relative have to be think of , though they be few and not too 
 pleasant . ' 

 ' if I have think much of they , what would our relation be ? they object 
 to dice , and I to lead string . ' 

 she turn to a bright subject , of no visible connection with the 
 precede . 

 ' henrietta come in May . ' 

 ' the month of her colour . ' 

 ' her money trouble be terrible . ' 

 ' both of you appear unlucky in your partner , - if win be the 
 object . she shall have all the distraction we can offer . ' 

 ' your visit to the Chartreuse alarm she . ' 

 ' she have rejoice her husband . ' 

 ' a girl . she fear the Jesuit in your friend . ' 

 ' Feltre and she be about equally affect by music . they shall meet . ' 

 ' Russett , this once : I do entreat you to take counsel with your good 
 sense , and remember that you stand where you be by go against my 
 advice . it be a perfect storm over London . the world have not to be 
 informed of your generosity ; but a chivalry that invite the most 
 horrible of sneer at a man ! and what can I say ? I have say it be 
 impossible . ' 

 ' add the postscript : you find it be perfectly possible . ' 

 ' I have to learn more than I care to hear . ' 

 ' your knowledge be not in request : you will speak in my name . ' 

 ' will you consult your lawyer , Russett , before you commit yourself ? ' 

 ' I be on my way to Lady Arpington . ' 

 ' you can not be think how serious it be . ' 

 ' I rather value the opinion of a hard - head woman of the world . ' 

 ' why not listen to I ? ' 

 ' you have your point , ma'am . ' 

 ' she be a torch . ' 

 ' she serve my purpose . ' 

 Livia shrug sadly . ' I suppose it serve your purpose to be 
 unintelligible to I . ' 

 he render himself intelligible immediately by say , ' before I go - a 
 thousand ? ' 

 ' oh , my dear Russett ! ' she sigh . 

 ' state the amount . ' 

 she seem to be cast unwieldly figure and he help she with , ' Mr. 
 Isaacs ? ' 

 ' not less than three , I fear . ' 

 ' has he be press ? ' 

 ' you be always good to we , Russett . ' 

 ' you be always considerate for the honour of the family , ma'am . Order 
 for the money with you here to - morrow . and I thank you for your advice . 
 do I the favour to follow mine . 

 ' command should be the word . ' 

 ' phrase it as you please . ' 

 ' you know I hate responsibility . ' 

 ' the chorus in classical drama have generally that sentiment , but the 
 singing be the sweet for it . ' 

 ' whom do you not win when you condescend to the mood , you dear boy ? ' 

 he restrain a bitter reply , touch the kind of person he have win : 
 a girl from the mountain , a philosophical tramp of the road , troop of 
 the bought . 

 Livia spell at the problem he be . she put away the task of read it . 
 he depart to see Lady Arpington , and thereby rivet his chain . 

 as Livia have say , she be a torch . Lady Endor , Lady Eldritch , Lady 
 Cowry , kindle at she . again there be flight of the burning 
 brand over London . the very odd marriage ; the no - marriage ; the 
 two - end - of - the - town marriage ; and the maiden marriage a fruitful 
 marriage ; the monstrous marriage of the countess productive in 
 banishment , and the unreadable earl accept paternity ; this Amazing 
 marriage be again the riddle in the cracker for tattler and gaper . 
 it rattle upon the world 's native wantonness , the world 's acquire 
 decorum : society 's irrepressible original and its powerfully resist 
 second nature . all the rogue of the fine sphere run about with it , male 
 and female ; and there be the narrative that suggestively skip , 
 and that which trod the minuet measure , drop a curtsey to 
 ravenous curiosity ; the apology surrender its defensible cause in 
 supplication to benevolence ; and the benevolence damnatory in a too 
 eloquent urgency ; follow by the devout objection to a breath of the 
 subject , so blacken it as to call forth the profanely circumstantial 
 exposition . Smirks , blush , dead silence , and in the low region 
 roar , hang round it . 

 but the lady , though absent , do not figure poorly at all . grant 
 Whitechapel and the shillelagh affair , certain whisper of her good 
 look , contest only to be the more violently assert ; and therewith 
 Rose Mackrell 's tale of she be a ' young woman of birth , ' have a 
 ' romantic story to tell of herself and her parentage , ' make she late 
 performance the champagne event of it hitherto . man sparkle when they 
 have it on their lip . 

 how , then , London ask , would the Earl of Fleetwood move his piece 
 in reply to his countess 's particularly clever indication of the check 
 threatening mate ? 

 his move have no relation to the game , it be think at first . the world 
 could not suppose that he move a simple pawn on his marriage board . he 
 purchase a shop in Piccadilly for the sale of fruit and flower . 

 Lady Arpington be entreat to deal at the shop , Countess Livia have she 
 order ; his friend , his parasite and satellite , be to deal there . 
 intensely earnest as usual , he besought great lady to let he have 
 the overflow of their hothouse ; and they class it as another of the 
 mystification of a purse crazy for repleteness , inquire : ' but be it 
 you we be to deal with ? ' and he quite seriously say : ' with I , yes , at 
 present . ' something be behind the curtain , of course . his gravity have 
 the effect of the ultra - comical in conceal it . 

 the shop be open . we have the assurance of Rose Mackrell , that he 
 enter and examine the pile and pan of fruit , and the bouquet 
 cunningly arrange by a hand smell French . the shop be roomy , 
 splendid window light the yellow , the golden , the green and 
 parti - colour store . four door off , a chemist 's motley in belly 
 glass crash on the sight . passenger along the pavement have 
 present to they such a contrast as might be show if we could imagine 
 the lethean ferry - boatload bring sharp against Pomona 's lapful . in 
 addition to the plucked flower and fruit of the shop , Rose Mackrell 
 more attentively examine the sample do service at the counter . 
 they be three , under supervision of a watchful - eyed fourth . Dame 
 Gossip be for quote his wit . but the conclusion he reach , after 
 quit the shop and pace his dozen step , be important ; for it send 
 a wind over the town to set the spring of tattle go as wildly as 
 when the herald 's trumpet blow the announcement for the world to hear 
 out of Wales . 

 he have observe , that the young woman supervise be deficient in 
 the ease of an establish superior ; her brow be trouble ; she 
 be , therefore , a lieutenant elevate from a low grade ; and , to his 
 thinking , conduct the business during the temporary retirement of the 
 mistress of the shop . 

 and the mistress of the shop ? 

 the question hardly need be put . 

 Rose Mackrell or his humour answer it in unfaltere term . 

 London hear , with the variety of feeling which be indistinguishable 
 under a flooding amazement , that the beautiful new fruit and flower shop 
 have be purchase and stock by the fabulously wealthy young Earl of 
 Fleetwood , to give his Whitechapel Countess a taste for business , an 
 occupation , and an honourable mean of livelihood . 

 there be , Dame Gossip thump to say , a general belief in this report . 
 crowd be on the pavement , peer through the shop - window . carriage 
 drive by stop to look . my lord himself have be visible , display 
 his array of provision to friend . nor be credulity damp appreciably 
 when over the shop , in gold letter , appear the name of Sarah Winch . 
 it might be the countess 's maiden name , if she really be a married 
 countess . 

 but , in truth , the well informed of the town , have begin to think 
 its Croesus capable of any eccentricity , choose to believe . they be at 
 the pitch of excitement which demand and will swallow a succession of 
 wilder extravagance . to accelerate the delirium of the fun , nothing 
 be too much , because any absurdity be anticipate . and the earl 's 
 readiness to be compliment on the shop 's particular merit , his 
 gratified air at an allusion to it , whirl the fun fast . he seem 
 entirely unconscious that each step he now take waken peal . 

 for such be the fate of a man who have come to be dog by the humourist 
 for the provision he furnish ; and , as it happen , he be the more 
 laughable if not in himself a laughable object . the earl 's handsome 
 figure , fine style , and contrast sobriety heighten the burlesque 
 of his call to admiration of a shop where Whitechapel would sit in 
 state - accord to the fiction so closely under the lee of fact that 
 they be not strictly divisible . moreover , Sarah Winch , whom Chumley 
 Potts draw into conversation , say , he vow , she come up West from 
 Whitechapel . she say it a little nervously , but without blush . 
 always on the side of the joke , he could ask : ' who can doubt ? ' indeed , 
 scepticism poison the sport . 

 the Old Buccaneer have write : friend may laugh ; I be not rouse . my 
 enemy 's laugh be a bugle blow in the night . 

 our enemy 's laugh at us rous to wariness , he would say . he can barely 
 mean , that a condition of drowsihead be other than providently warn 
 by laughter of friend . an old warrior 's tough fibre would , perhaps , be 
 insensible to that small crackle . in civil life , however , the friend 's 
 laugh at we be the loud of the danger signal to stop our course : 
 and the very wealthy nobleman , who be know for not a fool , be keep 
 from hear it . unless he do hear it , he can have no suspicion of 
 its be about he : he can not imagine such ' lese - majeste ' in the 
 subservient courtier too prudent to betray a sign . so Fleetwood be 
 unwarned ; and his child - like unconsciousness of the boiling sentiment 
 around , season , prick , and madden his parasite under compression 
 to invent , for a faint relief . he have his title for they , they their 
 tale of he . 

 Dame Gossip would recount the tale . she be of the order of person 
 incline to suspect the tittle of truth in prodigy of scandal . she be 
 rustle and bustle to we of ' Carinthia Jane 's run up to London to see 
 Sarah Winch 's grand new shop , ' an eclipse of all exist grand London 
 western shop ; and of Rose Mackrell 's account of her dance of proud 
 delight in the shop , end with a ' lovely cheese ' just as my lord 
 enter ; and then a scene , wild beyond any conceivable ' for pathos and 
 humour ' - her pet pair of the dissimilar twin , both bang at we for 
 tear - drop by different road , through a common aperture : - and the earl 
 have the Whitechapel baby boy plump into his arm ; and the countess 
 fetch he a splendid bob - dip and rise out of a second cheese to twirl 
 and fandango it ; and , all serious on a sudden , request , whimperingly 
 beseech , his thank to she for the crowing successor she have present 
 he with : my lord ultimately , but carefully , deposit the infant on 
 a basket of the last orange of the season , fresh from the Azores , by 
 delivery off my lord 's own schooner - yacht in Southampton water ; and 
 escape , leave his gold - head stick behind he - a trophy for the 
 countess ? a weapon , it may be . 

 quick she tuck up her skirt , she be after he . Dame Gossip speak 
 amusingly enough of the chase , and many eye - witness to the earl 's 
 flight at top speed down the right side of the way along by the Green 
 Park ; and of a Prince of the Blood , a portly Royal Duke on foot , bump 
 by one or the other of they , she can not precisely say which , but ' think 
 it to have be Carinthia Jane , ' because the exalt personage , his 
 shock of surprise abating , turn and watch the chase , in much 
 merriment . and it be call , we be inform , ' the Piccadilly Hare and 
 Hound ' from that day . 

 some tradition of an extenuate nobleman pursue by a light - footed lady 
 amid great excitement , there be ; the Dame attache importance also to 
 verse of one of the ballad begin to gain currency at the time 
  issue ostensibly from London 's poetic centre , the Seven Dials , which 
 have , we be to conjecture , get the story by discolour filtration 
 through footman retailing in public - house the stock of anecdote 
 they gather when station behind Rose Mackrell 's chair , or Captain 
 Abrane 's , or Chumley ' Potts 's , and would have the whole of it quote : - 

  " ' Tho ' fair I be a powdered peruke , 
  and once be a gap silly , 
  your Whitechapel Countess will prove , Lord Duke , 
  she be a regular tiger - lily . 
  she will fight you with cold steel 
  or she will run you off your leg 
  down the length of Piccadilly ! " 

 that will satisfy ; and perhaps indicate the hand . 

 ' popular sympathy , of course , be all on the side of the Fair , as ever 
 in those day when woman have not forfeit it by step from their 
 sanctuary seclusion . ' 

 the Dame shall expose her confusion . she really would seem to fancy 
 that the ballad verify the main line of the story , which be 
 an impossible one . Carinthia have not the mean to travel : she be 
 moneyless . every bill of her establishment be pay without stint by Mr. 
 Howell Edwards , the earl 's manager of mine ; but she have not even the 
 mean for a journey to the Gowerland rock she long to see . she have 
 none since she force her brother to take the half of her share of their 
 inheritance , L1400 , and send he the remainder . 

 accept by Chillon John as a loan , say Dame Gossip , and no soon 
 receive than consume by the press necessity of a husband with the 
 Rose Beauty of England to support in the comfort and luxury he deem 
 befitting . 

 still the Dame lean to her opinion that ' Carinthia Jane ' may have be 
 see about London : for ' where we have much smoke there must be fire . ' 
 and the countess never deny an imputation not bring against she in 
 her hearing , the ballad be unchallenged and London 's wag have it their 
 own way . among the reason why they so persistently hunt the earl , his 
 air of a smart correctness shadow by this new absurdity invite 
 they , as when a spot of mud on the trim of countenance arrest 
 observation : Humour pluck at he the more for the good faith of 
 his handsome look under the prolific little disfigurement . besides , a 
 wealthy despot , with no conception of any hum around he , will have the 
 wag in his track as surely as the flexible in front : they avenge his 
 exaction . 

 Fleetwood be honestly unaware of ridicule in the condition of inventive 
 mania at his heel . scheme , and hesitate to do , one - half of his mind 
 be absorb with the problem of how now to treat the mother of his 
 boy . her behaviour in become a mother be acknowledge to be good : the 
 production of a boy be good - considerate , he almost think . he grow so 
 far reconcile to she as to have intimation of a softness come on ; 
 a wish to hear her speak of the trifling kindness do to the sister of 
 Madge in reward of kindness do to she ; wish for look he remember , 
 secret to he , more his own than any possession . dozen of man have 
 wealth , some have beautiful wife ; none could claim as his own that face 
 of the look of sharp steel melting into the bridal flower , when she 
 spring from her bed to defend herself and recognize the intruder at 
 her window ; stand smite : - ' it be my , husband . ' Moonlight give the 
 variation of her feature . 

 and that do not appease the resentment tear he from she , so 
 justifiable then , as he force himself to think , now hideous . glimpse 
 of the picture his deed paint of he since his first meeting with 
 this woman have to be shun . he throw they off ; they be set down to 
 the mystery man be . the degrading , utterly different , back view of they 
 teach that Life be an irony . if the teaching be not accept , and we 
 be to take the blame , can we bear to live ? therefore , either way the 
 irony of Life be prove . young man strain at thought , in the grip of 
 their sensation , reach this logical conclusion . they will not begin by 
 examine the ground they stand on , and question whether they have 
 conscience at peace with the step to rearward . 

 have establish life as the coldly malignant element , which induce 
 to what it chastise , a loathing of womanhood , the deputed Mother of 
 Life , ensue , by natural sequence . and if there be one among woman who 
 disturb the serenity we choose to think our due , she wear for we the 
 sinister aspect of a confidential messenger between Nemesis and the 
 Parcae . Fleetwood be thus compel to regard Carinthia as both 
 originally and successively the cause of his internal as well as his 
 exterior discomfort ; otherwise those glimpse would have burn into 
 perpetual stigma . he have also to get his mind away from she . they 
 plead against he volubly with the rise of her image into it . 

 his manager at the mine have send word of ominous discontent down there . 
 his presence might be require . obviously , then , the threaten place 
 be unfit for the Countess of Fleetwood . he despatch a kind of 
 order through Mr. Howell Edwards , that she should remove to Esslemont 
 to escape annoyance . Esslemont be the preferable residence . she could 
 there entertain her friend , could spend a pleasanter time there . 

 he wait for the reply ; Edwards defer it . 

 be they to be in a struggle with her obstinate will once more ? 

 Henrietta be prepare to leave London for her dismal , narrow , and , 
 after an absence , desire love - nest . the earl call to say farewell , 
 cool as a loyal wife could wish he to be , admire perforce . marriage 
 and maternity withdraw nothing - add to the fair young woman 's bloom . 

 she have go to her room to pack and dress . Livia receive he . in the 
 midst of the casual commonplace her memory be enlighten . 

 ' oh , ' say she , and idly draw a letter out of a blottingpad , ' we have 
 hear from Wales . ' she hand it to he . 

 before he know the thing he do , he be read : 

 ' there be no rest foamy brother , and I can not help ; I be keep so poor I 
 have not the small of sum . I do not wish to leave Wales - the people 
 begin to love I ; and can one be mistake ? I know if I be love or 
 hat . but if my lord will give I an allowance of money of some 
 hundred , I will do his bidding ; I will leave England or I will go to 
 Esslemont ; I could say - to Mr. Woodseer , in that part of London . he 
 would not permit . he think I black by it , like a sweepboy come 
 from a chimney ; and that I have do injury to his title . no , Riette , 
 to be a true sister , I must bargain with my lord before I submit . he have 
 not care to come and see his little son . his boy have not offend he . 
 there may be some of I in this dear . I know whose feature will soon 
 show to defend the mother 's good name . he be early my champion . he be 
 not christen yet , and I hear it accuse I , and I be not to blame , - I 
 still wait my lord 's answer . ' 

 ' do not   be bother to read the whole , ' Livia have say , with her hand 
 out , when his eye be halfway down the page . 

 Fleetwood turn it , to read the signature : ' Janey . ' 

 she seem servile enough to some of her friend . ' Carinthia ' would have 
 have - a pleasanter sound . he fold the letter . 

 ' why give I this ? take it , ' - say he . 

 she lay it on the open pad . 

 Henrietta enter and have it restore to she , Livia remarking : ' I find 
 it in the blotter after all . ' 

 she leave they together , have to dress for the drive to the coach 
 office with Henrietta . 

 ' poor amusement for you this time . ' Fleetwood bow , gently smile . 

 ' oh ! ' cry Henrietta , ' ball , rout , dinner , music - as much music as 
 I could desire , even I ! what more could be ask ? I be eternally 
 grateful . ' 

 ' the world say , you be more beautiful than ever . ' 

 ' happiness do it , then , - happiness owe to you , Lord Fleetwood . ' 

 ' Columelli please you ? ' 

 ' his voice be heavenly ! he carry I away from earth . ' 

 ' he be a gentleman , too - rare with those fellow . ' 

 ' a pretty manner . he will speak his compliment in his English . ' 

 ' you be season to endure they in all language . pity another of your 
 wound : brailstone have be hard hit at the table . 

 ' I can not pity gambler . - may I venture ? - half a word ? ' 

 ' tome ! but just a little compassion for the devoted . he would not   play 
 so madly - if , well , say a tenth dilution of the rapt hear Columelli 
 get . ' 

 ' Signor Columelli sing divinely . ' 

 ' you do not   dislike Brailstone ? ' 

 ' he be one of the agreeable . ' 

 ' he must put his feeling into italian song ! ' 

 ' to put they aside will do . ' 

 ' we be not to have our feeling ? ' 

 ' yes , on the proviso that ours be respect . but , one instant , Lord 
 Fleetwood , pray . she be - I have to speak of she as my sister . I be sure 
 she regret ... she write very nicely . ' 

 ' you have a letter from she ? ' 

 Henrietta sigh that it would not bear exposure to he : ' yes . ' 

 ' nicely word ? ' 

 ' well , yes , it be . ' 

 he pause , not expect that the letter would be show , but silence 
 fire shot , and he have stop the petition . ' we be to have you for a 
 week 's yachting . you prescribe your company . only be merciful . Exclusion 
 will mean death to some . Columelli will be tour in Switzerland . 
 you shall have he in the house when my new bit of ground Northwest of 
 London be open : very handy , ten mile out . we will have the Opera troupe 
 there , and you shall command the Opera . ' 

 her beauty sweeten to thank he . 

 if , as Livia say , his passion for she be unchanged , the generosity 
 manifest in the considerate screen it wear over any physical betrayal 
 of it , deserve the lustre of her eye . it dwell a moment , vivid with 
 the heart close behind and remorseful for misreading of old his fine 
 character . here be a young man who could be the very kind of friend 
 to the woman reject he to we d another . her smile waver . how shall 
 a love wife express warmth of sentiment elsewhere , without the one 
 beam too much , that plunge she on a tideway ? his claim of nothing 
 call for everything short of the proscribed . she give he her beauty 
 in full flower . 

 it have the appearance of a temptation ; and he be not tempt , though he 
 admire ; his thought be , Husband of the thing ! 

 but he admire . that condition awaken his unsatisfied past day to 
 desire positive proof of her worthlessness . the past day writhe in 
 he . the present be loveless , entirely cold . he have not even the 
 wish to press her hand . the market hold beautiful woman of a like 
 description . he wish simply to see she prove the thing he read she 
 to be : and not prove as such by himself . he be unable to summon or 
 imagine emotion enough for he to simulate the form by which fair woman 
 be woo to their perdition . for all he care , any man on earth might 
 try , succeed or fail , as long as he have visual assurance that she 
 covet , a slave to the pleasure command by the wealth once disdain 
 by she . till that time , he could not feel himself perfectly free . 

 Dame Gossip prefer to ejaculate . young man be mystery ! and bowl we 
 onward . no one ever do comprehend the Earl of Fleetwood , she say : he 
 be bad , he be good ; he be whimsical and stedfast ; a splendid figure , 
 a mark for ridicule ; romantic and a close arithmetician ; often a devil , 
 sometimes the humane of creature . 

 in fine , he be a millionaire nobleman , own to a considerable 
 infusion of Welsh blood in the composition of he . now , to the Cymry and 
 to the pure Kelt , the past be at their elbow continually . the past of 
 their life have lose neither face nor voice behind the shroud ; nor be 
 the passion of the flesh , nor be the animate soul , want to it . other 
 race forfeit infancy , forfeit youth and manhood with their progression 
 to the wisdom age may bestow . these have each stage always alive , quick 
 at a word , a scent , a sound , to conjure up scene , in spirit and in 
 flame . historically , they still march with Cadwallader , with Llewellyn , 
 with Glendower ; sing with Aneurin , Taliesin , old Llywarch : individually , 
 they be in the heart of the injury do they thirty year back or 
 thrilling to the glorious deed which strike an empty buckler for 
 most of the son of Time . an old sea rise in they , roll no phantom 
 billow to break to spray against exist rock of the shore . that be 
 why , and even if they have a dose of the Teuton in they , they have often 
 to feel themselves exile when still in amicable community among the 
 preponderate Saxon English . 

 add to the single differentiation enormous wealth - we convulse the 
 excellent Dame by term it a chain hurricane , to launch in foul 
 blast or beneficent shower , accord to the mood during youth - and 
 the composite Lord Fleetwood come near into our focus . Dame Gossip , 
 with her jig to be at the butterwoman 's trot , when she be not 
 violently interrupt , would suffer just punishment be we to digress 
 upon the morality of a young man 's legal possession of enormous wealth 
 as well . 

 wholly cambrian Fleetwood be not . but he have to the full the Cambrian 's 
 reverential esteem for high quality . his good - bye with Henrietta , and 
 estimate of she , leave a dusky mental , void require an orb of some sort 
 for contemplation ; and an idea of the totally contrary Carinthia , 
 the woman he have avowedly wed , usurp her place . quality be 
 admit . she be thrust away because she have offend : still more 
 because he have offend . she bear the blame for force he to an 
 examination of his conduct at this point and that , where an ancestral 
 savage in his lineament cock a strange eye . yet at the moment of the 
 act of the deed he have know himself the veritable Fleetwood . he have 
 now to vindicate himself by extinguish she under the load of her 
 unwomanliness : she be like sun - dry linen match beside oriental 
 silk : she be rough , crisp , unyielding . that be now the capital charge . 
 Henrietta could never be guilty of the unfeminine . which do he prefer ? 

 it be of all question the one cause young man to screw wry face when 
 they be ask ; they do so love the feminine , the ultra - feminine , whom 
 they hate for her inclination to the frail . his depth be sound , 
 and he answer independently of his will , that he must be up to the 
 heroical pitch to decide . Carinthia stand near he then . the confession 
 be a step , and fraught with consequence . her unacknowledged influence 
 expedite he to Sarah Winch 's shop , for sight of one of earth 's honest 
 soul ; from whom he have the late of the two other down in Wales , and 
 of an infant there . 

 he din the host of his ixionide , leave they early for a drive at 
 night Eastward , and a chat with old Mr. Woodseer over his punching and 
 sewing of his bootleather . another honest soul . Mr. Woodseer thankfully 
 consent to mount his coach - box next day , and astonish Gower with a 
 drop on his head from the sky about the time of the mid - day meal . 

 there we have our peep into Dame Gossip 's young man mysterious . 




 CHAPTER XXIX . CARINTHIA in WALES 

 an August of gale and rain drive atlantic air over the Welsh 
 highland . Carinthia 's old father have impress on her the rapture of 
 ' smell salt ' when by chance he stand and throw up his nostril to 
 sniff largely over a bed of bracken , that remind he of his element , 
 and her fancy would be at strain to catch his once proud riding of the 
 sea . she feel herself an eld daughter of the beloved old father , as 
 she breathe it in full volume from the billowy West one morning early 
 after sunrise and walk sisterly with the far - see inexperienced little 
 maid , whom she see trot beside he through the mountain forest , 
 listening , store his word , picture the magnetic , vein great gloom 
 of an untasted world . 

 this eld daughter have undergo a shipwreck ; but clear proof that she 
 have not be worst be in the unclouded liveliness of the young one 
 gaze forward . imaginative creature who be courageous will never 
 be lop of the hopeful portion of their day by personal misfortune . 
 Carinthia could animate both ; it would have be a hurt do to a living 
 human soul have she suffer the young self to run overcast . only , the 
 gaze forward have become interdict to her experienced self . nor could 
 she vision a future have any horizon for her child . she see it in 
 bleak square , and snuggle he between danger weather and danger 
 apprehend . 

 the conviction that her husband hat she have sink into her nature . 
 hat the mother , he would not love her boy . he be her boy , and 
 strangely bestow , not beautifully to be remember rapturously 
 or gratefully , and with deep love of the father . she feel the wound 
 recollection deal she . but the boy be her one treasure , and no 
 treasure to her husband . they be burden , and the heir of his House , 
 child of a hat mother , be under perpetual menace from an unscrupulous 
 tyrannical man . the dread and antagonism be first arouse by the birth 
 of her child . she have not know while bear he her present acute 
 sensation of the hunt fly and at bay . previously , she could say : 
 I do wrong here ; I do wrong there . distrust have bring the state of 
 war , which allow not of the wasting of our power in confession . 

 her husband feed she and he clothe she ; the limitation of his bounty be 
 sharply outline . sure of her rectitude , a stranger to the world , she 
 be not very sensible of dishonour do to her name . it happen at 
 time that her father inquire of she how thing be go with his 
 little Carin ; and then revolt spring up and answer on his behalf 
 rather fiercely . she be , however , prepare for any treaty include 
 forgiveness , if she could be at peace in regard to her boy , and have an 
 income of some help to her brother . Chillon be harass on all side ; 
 she stand incapable of aid ; so foolishly feeble in the shadow of her 
 immense longing to strive for he , that she could think her husband have 
 purposely lam she with an infant . her love of her brother , now the one 
 man she love , lay her insufficiency on the rack and torture imbecile 
 cry from it . 

 on the contrary , her strange husband have bl she with an infant . 
 everything be pardonable to he if he leave she boy untouched in the 
 mother 's charge . much alone as she be , she raise the dead to pet 
 and cherish her boy . Chillon have see he and praise he . Mrs. Owain 
 Wythan , her neighbour over a hill , praise he above all babe on earth , 
 poor childless woman ! 

 she be about to cross the hill and breakfast with Mrs. Wythan . the time 
 for the weaning of the babe approach , and have as prospect beyond it 
 her dull fear that her husband would say the mother 's work be do , 
 and seize the pretext to separate they : and she could not claim a long 
 term to be give milk , because her father have say : ' not a quarter of 
 a month more than nine for the milk of the mother ' - or else the child 
 would draw an unsustaine nourishment from the strong breast . she 
 could have argue her exceptional robustness against another than he . 
 but the dead father want to build a great race of man and woman 
 rule . 

 Carinthia kneel at the cradle of a princeling go from the rich repast 
 to his alternative kingdom . 

 ' you will bring he over when he wake , ' she say to Madge . ' Mrs. Wythan 
 would like to see he every day . Martha can walk now . ' 

 ' she can walk and hold a child in her two arm , my lady , ' say Madge . 
 ' she expect miner pop up out of the bare ground when she see no 
 goblin . ' 

 ' they ! - they know he , they would not hurt he , they know my son , ' her 
 mistress answer . 

 the population of the mine in revolt have no alarm for she . the work 
 be empty down below . man sit by the wayside brooding or stroll in 
 group , now and then loudly exercise their tongue ; or they stand in 
 circle to sing hymn : melancholy chant of a melancholy time for all . 

 how would her father have act by these man ? he would have be among 
 they . dissension in his mine be vapour of a day . lord behave 
 differently . Carinthia fancy the people must regard their master as 
 a foreign wizard , whose power they feel , without the chance of make 
 their cry to he hear . she , too , deal with a lord . it be now his wish 
 for she to leave the place where she have find some shred of a home in 
 the thought of be useful . she be gather the people 's language ; 
 many of their song she could sing , and please they by sing to they . 
 they be not suspicious of she ; at least , their woman have open door 
 for she ; the man , if shy , be civil . she have only to go below , she be 
 greet in the quick tone of their speech all along the street of the 
 slate - roof . 

 but none love the castle , and she as little , save the one room in it 
 where her boy lay . the grey of Welsh history know a real castle beside 
 the roar brook frequently a torrent . this be an eighteenth century 
 castellate habitation on the verge of a small wood midway up the 
 height , and it require a survey of numberless happy recollection to 
 illumine its wall or drape its chamber . the permanently light hearth 
 of a dear home , as in that forsake unfavoured old white house of the 
 woode austrian crag , it have not . rather it seem a place wait 
 for an ill deed to be do in it and stop all lighting of hearth 
 thereafter . 

 out on the turf of the shaven hill , her springy step disperse any 
 misty fancy . her short - wing hive set to work in her head as usual , 
 building scaffolding of great thing to be do by Chillon , present 
 evil escape . the roll big bade hill with the rid cloud excite 
 she as she mount , and she be a figure of gladness on the ridge 
 bending over to hospitable Plas Llwyn , where the Wythans live , 
 entertain rich and poor alike . 

 they have lead the neighbourhood to call on the discard Countess of 
 Fleetwood . 

 a warm strain of arm about her neck be Carinthia 's welcome from Mrs. 
 Wythan lie along the couch in her boudoir ; an establish invalid , 
 who yearn sanely to life , and catch a spark of it from the guest eye 
 tenderly by she as they converse . 

 ' our boy ? - our Chillon Kirby till he have his baptism name ; he be well ? 
 I be to see he ? ' 

 ' he follow I . he sleep almost through the night now . ' 

 ' ah , my dear , ' Mrs. Wythan sigh , imagine : ' it would disappoint I if 
 he do not wake I . ' 

 ' I wake at his old time and watch he . ' 

 Carinthia put on the baby 's face in the soft mould of slumber . 

 ' I see he ! ' Mrs. Wythan cry . ' he be part mine . he have teach Owain to 
 love baby . ' 

 a tray of breakfast be place before the countess . ' Mr. Wythan be down 
 among his man ? ' she say . 

 ' every morning , as long as this agitation last . I need not say good 
 appetite to you after your walk . you have no fear of the man , I know . 
 Owain 's man be undisturbed ; he have they in hand . absentee master 
 can not   expect continued harmony . dear , he tell I Mr. Edwards await the 
 earl . ' 

 drink her tea , Carinthia 's eyelid shut ; she set down her cup , ' if he 
 must come , ' she say . ' he wish I to leave . I be to go again where I 
 have no friend , and no language to learn , and can be of no use . it be 
 not for I that I dread his coming . he speak to command . the man ask 
 to be hear . he will have submission first . they do not trust he . his 
 coming be a danger . for I , I should wish he to come . may I say ... ? ' 

 ' your Rebecca bid you say , my darling . ' 

 ' it be , I be with the man because I be so like they . I beg to be hear . 
 he command obedience . he be a great nobleman , but I be the daughter of 
 a great man , and I have to say , that if those poor miner do harm , I 
 will not stand by and see an anger against injustice punish . I wish 
 his coming , for he to agree upon the christian name of the boy . I feel 
 his come will do I , injury in make I offend he bad . I would 
 avoid that . oh , dear soul ! I may say it to you : - he can not hurt I any 
 more . I be spar love he when I forgive he ; and I do . the love be 
 the pain . that be go by . ' 

 Mrs. Wythan fondle and kiss Carinthia 's hand . 

 ' let I say in my turn ; I may help you , dear . you know I have my 
 husband 's love , as he mine . be I , have I ever be a wife to he ? here I 
 lie , a dead weight , to be carry up and down , all of a wife that Owain 
 have have for year . I lie and pray to be take , that my good man , my 
 prove good man , may be free to choose a healthy young woman and be 
 reward before his end by learn what a true marriage be . the big 
 simpleton will otherwise be go to his grave , think he be marry ! 
 I see he step about softly in my room , so content if he do 
 not disturb I , and he crush I with a desire to laugh at he while I 
 worship . I trick he into marry the prostrate invalid I be , and he 
 can not   discover the trick , he will think it be a wife he have , instead of 
 a doctor 's doll . oh ! you have a strange husband , it have be a strange 
 marriage for you , but you have your invincible health , you have not to 
 lie and feel the horror of be a deception to a guileless man , whose 
 love blindfold he . the bitter ache to I be , that I can give nothing . 
 you abound in power to give . ' 

 Carinthia lift her open hand for sign of their emptiness . 

 ' my brother would not want , if I could give . he may have to sell out of . 
 the army , he think , fear ; and I must look on . our mother use to say 
 she have do something for her country in give a son like Chillon to 
 the british army . poor mother ! our bright opening day all seem to end 
 in rain . we should turn to Mr. Wythan for a guide . ' 

 ' he call you Morgan le Fay christianize . ' 

 ' what I be ! ' Carinthia raise and let fall her head . ' an example make 
 dwarf of we . when Mr. Wythan do penance for temper by descend into 
 his mine and work among his man for a day with the pick , seat , 
 as he show I down below , that be an example . if I do like that , I 
 should have no firedamp in the breast , and not such a task to forgive , 
 that when I succeed I kill my feeling . ' 

 the entry of Madge and Martha , the nurse - girl , with the overflowing 
 armful of baby , change their converse into melodious exclamation . 

 ' Kit Ines have arrive , my lady , ' Madge say . ' I see he on the road and 
 stop a minute . ' 

 Mrs. Wythan study Carinthia . her sharp invalid 's ear have catch the 
 name . she beckon . ' the man who - the fight man ? ' 

 ' it will be my child this time , ' say Carinthia ; ' I have no fear for 
 myself . ' she be tremble , though her feature be hard for the war 
 her lord have declare , as it seem . ' do he tell you his business 
 here ? ' she ask of Madge . 

 ' he say , to protect you , my lady , since you will not   leave . ' 

 ' he stay at the castle ? ' 

 ' he be to stay there , he say , as long as the Welsh be out . ' 

 ' the " Welsh " be misunderstood by Lord Fleetwood , ' 

 Mrs. Wythan say to Carinthia . ' he should live among they . they will not 
 hurt their lady . protect may be his intention ; but we will have our 
 baby safe here . not ? ' she appeal . ' and baby 's mother . how otherwise ? ' 

 ' you read my wish , ' Carinthia rejoin . ' the man I do not think a bad 
 man . he have a master . while I be bind to my child I must be restful , 
 and with the man at the castle Martha 's goblin would jump about I day 
 and night . my boy make a coward of his mother . ' 

 ' we merely take a precaution , and I have the pleasure of it , ' say she 
 hostess . ' give order to your maid not less than a fortnight . it will 
 rejoice my husband so much . ' 

 as with the warmly hospitable , few be the word . Madge be promise by 
 her mistress plenty of opportunity daily for see Kit Ines , and her 
 mouth screw to one of woman 's dimple at a corner . she go off in 
 a cart to fetch box , think : we be a hunted lot ! so she be not 
 mildly dispose for the company of Mr. Kit on her return to the castle . 

 England 's champion light - weight think it hard that his , come down 
 to protect the castle against the gibbering heathen Welsh should cause a 
 clearing out , and solitariness for his portion . 

 ' what be the good of innocence if you be always go to suspect a man ! ' 
 he put it , like a true son of the pirate turn trader . ' I have   get a 
 paytron , and a man in my profession must have a paytron , or where be 
 he ? where be his money for a trial of skill ? say he save and borrow and 
 find the lump to clap it down , and he be knock out o ' time . there he 
 be , bankrup ' , and a devil of a licking into the bargain . that be the 
 cream of our profession , if a man have get no paytron . 

 no prize - ring can live without one . the odd be too hard on we . my lady 
 ought to take into account I behave respectful when I be oblige to 
 do my lord 's order and remove she from our haunt , which be not   to his 
 taste . here I be like a cannon for defend the house , need be , and all 
 inside fly off scarified . ' 

 ' it strike I , Kit Ines , a man with a paytron be no well than a tool 
 of a man , ' say Madge . 

 ' and do not   you go to be sneer at honest tool , ' Ines retort . ' when 
 will woman learn a bit of the world before they be make hag of by old 
 Father Wear - and - tear ! a young woman in her prime , you Madge ! be such a 
 fool as not see I serve tool to stock our shop . ' 

 ' your paytron bid you steal off with my lady 's child , Kit Ines , you would do 
 it to stock your shop . ' 

 Ines puff . ' if you be not   a girl to wallop the wind ! fancy I at that 
 game ! be that why my lady - but I can not   be suspect that far ? you make 
 I break out at my pore . my paytron be a gentleman : he would not   ask and 
 I could not   act such a part . dear Lord ! it would have to be steal off , for 
 my lady can use a stick ; and put it to the choice between my lady and 
 her child and any paytron living , paytron be damned , I would say , rather'n 
 go against my notion of honour . have you forgot all our old talk about 
 the prize - ring , the nursery of honour in Old England ? ' 

 ' that be before you sell yourself to a paytron , Kit Ines . ' 

 ' ah ! woman want mast - head off and on , for them to have a bit of a 
 look - out over life as it be . they go stew over book of adventure 
 and drop into fright about awful man . take I , now ; you have a no small 
 admiration for my manly valour once , and you trust yourself to I , and 
 do you ever repent it ? - own you be not the young woman to tempt to 
 t ' other way . ' 

 ' you would not   have find I talk to you here if I have . ' 

 ' and here I be leave to defend an empty castle , be I ? ' 

 ' do not   drink or you will have your paytron on you . he be good use there . ' 

 ' I ask it , can I see my lady ? ' 

 ' drunk nor sober you will not . serve a paytron , be a leper , you will find , 
 with all honest folk . ' 

 ine shake out an execrate leg at the foul word . ' leper , you say ? you 
 say that ? you say leper to I ? ' 

 ' Strut your tall , Kit Ines . it be the money rattle in your pocket 
 say it . ' 

 ' it be my reputation for decent treatment of a woman let you say it , 
 Madge Winch . ' 

 ' stick to that as long as your paytron consent . it be the one thing 
 you have   get leave . ' 

 ' benefit , you hussy , and mind you do not   pull too stiff . ' 

 ' be the woman and have the last word ! ' 

 his tongue be check . he swallow the exceed sourness of a retort 
 undelivered , together with the feeling that she beat he in the wrangle 
 by dint of she be an unreasonable wench . 

 Madge huff away to fill her box . 

 he stand by the cart , hand deep down his pocket , when she descend . 
 she could have laugh at the spectacle of a champion prize - fighter 
 out of employ , hulk idle , because he be dog to a paytron ; but her 
 contempt of he decline pass in small change . 

 ' so you be off . what be I to tell my lord when he come ? ' Kit growl . 
 ' his yacht 's fetching for a Welsh seaport . ' 

 she count it a piece of information gain , and jump to her seat , 
 bid the driver start . to have pretty well lose her character for a 
 hero change into a patron 's dog , be a thought that outweigh the show 
 of incivility . some little distance away , she reproach herself for not 
 have be so civil as to inquire what day my lord be expect , by 
 his appointment . the girl reflect on the strangeness of a body of 
 discontent miner bring my lord and my lady close , perhaps to meet . 




 CHAPTER XXX . rebecca wythan 

 the earl be look for at the , chief office of the mine , and each 
 day an expectation of he close in disappointment , leave it to be 
 surmise that there be more serious reason for his continued absence 
 during a crisis than any discuss ; whether indeed , as when a timepiece 
 neglect to strike the hour which be , by the reckoning of natural 
 impatience , past , the capital charge of ' crazy work ' must not be 
 bring against a nobleman hitherto precise upon business , of a just 
 disposition , fairly humane . for though he be an absentee suck the 
 earth through a tube , in Ottoman ease , he have never omit the duty of 
 personally attend on the spot to grave case under dispute . the son 
 of the hardheaded father come out at a crisis ; and not too highhandedly : 
 he could hear an opposite argument to the end . therefore , since 
 he refuse to comply without hear , he be want on the spot 
 imperatively , now . 

 Irony peruse history offer the beat and indolent a sugary acid in 
 the indication of the spite and the prank , the whim and the taste , 
 at the spring of main event . it be , take by itself , destructive 
 nourishment . but those who labour in the field to shovel the clod of 
 earth to history , would be wise of their fellow for a minor dose 
 of it . Mr. Howell Edwards consult with Mr. Owain Wythan on the 
 necessity , that the earl should instantly keep his promise to appear 
 among the man and stop the fermentation , as in our young day a 
 lordly owner still might do by small concession and the physical 
 influence - the nerve - charm - could suppose he to be hold aloof for 
 his pleasure or his pride ; perhaps because of illness or inability to 
 conceive the actual situation at a distance . he mention the presence 
 of the countess , and Mr. Wythan mention it , neither of they think 
 a rational man would so play the lunatic as to let man starve , and wreck 
 precious mine , for the sake of avoid she . 

 Sullen day go by . on these day of the slate - cloud or the 
 leaden - wing , Carinthia walk over the hill to her star or 
 down - eyed silent people , admit without a welcome at some door , 
 reject at some . her basket from the castle be for the most part 
 receive as graciously . she continue to direct they for delivery where 
 they be need , and understand why a charity that supply the place 
 of justice be not thank . she and her people here be one regard 
 the master , as she have say . they could not hurt her sensitiveness , 
 she feel too warmly with they . and here it be not the squalid , flat , 
 bricke east - corner of London at the close of her daily pilgrimage . up 
 from the solitary street of the slate - roof , she mount a big hill and 
 have the life of high breathing . a perpetual escape out of the smoky , 
 grimy city maze be trumpet to she in the wind up there : a 
 recollect contrast lighten the skyless broad space overhead almost 
 to sunniness . have air of the hill and activity for her limb , she 
 make sunshine for herself . regret be at no time her nestling . 

 look backward only to correct an error of conduct for the next attempt , 
 say one of her father 's Maxims ; as sharply brace for woman as for 
 man . she do not look back to moan . now that her hunger for the safety 
 of her infant be momentarily quiet , she could see Kit Ines hang 
 about the low ground , near the alehouse , and smile at Madge 's 
 comparison of he to a drum - out soldier , who would like to be take 
 for a holiday pensioner . 

 he salute ; under the suspicion of his patron 's lady his leg be 
 hamper , he dare not approach she ; though his innocence of a deed not 
 propose to he yet - and all to stock that girl Madge 's shop , if do ! 
 knock at his rib with fury to vindicate himself before the lady and 
 she maid . a gentleman meet they and conduct they across the hill . 

 and two taffy gentleman would hardly be sufficient for the purpose , 
 suppose an ill - use Englishman incline to block their way ! - what , and 
 play footpad , Kit Ines ? no , it be just a game in the head . but a true man 
 hat to feel himself suspect . his refuge be the beer of the country . 

 next day there be the two gentleman to conduct the lady and she maid ; 
 and Taffy the first walk beside the countess ; and that girl Madge 
 trudge along with no other than my lord 's Mr. Woodseer , chatter like 
 a watering - can on a garden - bed : deuce a glance at Kit Ines . how can she 
 keep it up and the gentleman no more than nod ? how do he enjoy 
 play second fiddle with the maid while Mr. tall brown - face Taffy 
 violin it to her ladyship a stone 's throw in front ? ine have less 
 curiosity to know the object of Mr. Woodseer 's appearance on the scene . 
 Idle , unhandsomely treat , and a cave of the yawn , he merely comment 
 on his observation . 

 ' yes , there he be , do not   look at he , ' Madge say to Gower ; ' and 
 whatever he be here for , he have a bad time of it , and rather more than 
 it be pleasant for he to think over , if a slave to a " paytron " think 
 at all . I will not   judge he ; my mistress be bite with the fear for 
 the child , bad than ever . and the earl , my lord , not come , and 
 he want she to move again , seem to she he durstn't   do it here and 
 intend to snap at the child on the road . She- 's force to believe 
 anything of such a husband and father . and why do he behave so ? 
 I can not   spell it . he be kind to my Sally - you have   see the Piccadilly 
 shop ? - because she be ... she do she good in love and duty for my lady . 
 and behave like a husband hat his wife 's life on earth ! then he go 
 down with good Mr. Woodseer , and call on Sally , pretend to inquire , 
 after she be kidnap by that Kit Ines act to please his paytron , 
 he must be show up to the room where she sleep , and stand at the door 
 and peep in , Sally 's letter say , and ask if he may enter the room . he 
 go to the window look on the chimney she use to see , and touch 
 an ornament over the fireplace , call grandfather 's pigtail case - he 
 be a sailor ; only a ridiculous piece of china , that make my lady laugh 
 about the story of its hold a pigtail . but he turn it over because 
 she do - Sally tell he . he could not   be pretend when he buy the 
 beautiful shop and stock it for Sally . he get her lot of customer ; 
 and no rent to pay till next Michaelmas a year . she be a make woman 
 through he . he say to she , he have hear from Mr. Woodseer the Countess 
 of Fleetwood call her sister ; he shake her hand . ' 

 ' the Countess of Fleetwood call both of you her sister , I think , ' 
 say Gower . 

 ' I be her servant . I would rather serve she than have a fortune . ' 

 ' you be bear with a fortune one would like to have a nibble at , 
 Madge . ' 

 ' I can not   lay hand on it , then . ' 

 ' it be the capacity for give , my dear . ' 

 ' please , Mr. Gower , do not   say that ; you will make I cry . he keep his 
 wife so poor she have not   a shilling of her own ; she weary about her 
 brother ; she can not   help . he can spend hundred on my Sally for have 
 be good to she , in our small way - it be a fairy tale ; and he will not   hear 
 of money for his wife , except that she be never to want for anything it 
 can buy . ' 

 ' you give what it can not   buy . ' 

 ' I . I be " a pugilist 's wench " - I have   hear myself call . she be the 
 first who give I a lift ; never mind I . have you come to take she away ? 
 she would trust herself and the child to you . ' 

 ' take she ? - reason with she as to the good we can do . he hold off from 
 a meeting just now . I fancy he be wear round to it . his keep his 
 wife without money pass comprehension . after serve he for a few 
 month , I have a store invest to support I for year - as much as I 
 need before I join the rank of the pen . I be at my reading and writing 
 and drowsing , and down he rush : I ' m in harness again . I can not   say 
 it be dead waste of time ; besides I pick up an independence for the 
 day ahead . but I do not   respect myself for do the work . here be the 
 difference between we two servant , Madge : I think of myself , and you 
 do not . ' 

 ' the difference be more like between the master and mistress we serve , 
 Mr. Gower . ' 

 ' well , I would rather be the woman in this case . ' 

 ' you know the reputation I have   get . and can only just read , and can not 
 spell . my mistress teach I bit of german and French on her walk . ' 

 Gower take a new observation of this girl , whom he have not regard as 
 like himself , a push blade among the grass . he propose to continue 
 her lesson , if she care to learn ; say it could be do in letter . 

 ' I will not   be ashamed of writing , if you mean it , ' say she . ' my mistress 
 will have a usefuller servant . she have a strange honeymoon of a 
 marriage , if ever be - and tell I t ' other day she be glad because it 
 bring we together - she a bear lady ! ' 

 ' a fling - above bear lady . she be quick as light to hit on a jewel where 
 there be one , whether it shin or not . she stand among the Verities of 
 the world . ' 

 ' yes , ' Madge say , pant for more . ' do speak of she . when you praise 
 she , I feel she be not waste . mistress ; and friend and wife - if he would 
 let she be ; and mother ; never mother like she . the boy will be a sturdy . 
 she will see he have every chance . he be a lucky little one to have that 
 mother . ' 

 ' you think her handsome , Madge ? ' 

 Gower ask it , wish to hear a devotee 's confusion of quality and 
 look . 

 the question be a drop on low sphere , and it require definition , 
 to touch the exact nature of the form of beauty , and excuse a cool 
 tone on the commoner plane . these demand language . she round 
 the difficulty , say : ' you see engraving of archery ; that be her 
 figure - her real figure . I think her face ... I can not   describe ... it 
 flash . ' 

 ' that be it , ' say Gower , delight with his perception of a bare mind 
 at work and hit the mark perforce of warmth . ' when it flash , it be 
 unequalled . there be the supremacy of irregular line . People talk of 
 perfect beauty : suitable for painting and statue . live face , if 
 they be to show the soul , which be the star on the peak of beauty , must 
 lend themselves to commotion . nature do it in a breezy tree or over 
 ruffle water . Repose have never such splendid reach as animation - I 
 mean , in the living face . artist prefer repose . only Nature can express 
 the uttermost beauty with her gathering and tune of discord . well , 
 your mistress have that beauty . I remember my impression when I see she 
 first on her mountain abroad . other beautiful face of woman go pale , 
 grow stale . the diversified in the harmony of the flash be Nature 's 
 own , her radiant , make of her many note , beyond our dream to 
 reproduce . we can not   hope to have a true portrait of your mistress . do 
 Madge understand ? ' 

 the literary dose be a strong one for she ; but she see the index , and 
 get a lift from the sound . her bosom heave . ' oh , I do try , Mr. Gower . 
 I think I do a little . I do more while you be talk . you be good to 
 talk so to I . you should have see she the night she go to meet my 
 lord at those beastly Gardens Kit Ines tell I he be go to . she be 
 defend he . I have   no word . you teach I what be mean by poetry . I 
 could not   understand that once . ' 

 their eye be on the countess and her escort in advance . Gower 's 
 praise of her mistress 's peculiar beauty set the girl compassionately 
 musing . his eloquence upon the beauty be her clue . 

 Carinthia and Mr. Wythan start at a sharp trot in the direction of the 
 pair of pony drive by a groom along the curved decline of the narrow 
 roadway . his whip be up for signal . 

 it concern the house and the master of it . his groom drive rapidly 
 down , while he hurry on the homeward way , as a man will do , with the 
 dread upon he that his wife 's last breath may have be yield before 
 he can enfold she . 

 Carinthia walk to be overtake , not dare to fever her blood at a 
 swifter pace ; ' lamed with an infant , ' the thought recur . 

 ' she be very ill , she have faint , she lie insensible , ' Madge hear 
 from she of Mrs. Wythan . ' we be speak of she when the groom 
 appear . it have happen twice . they fear the third . he fear it , 
 though he laugh at a superstition . now step , I know you like walk , 
 Mr. Woodseer . once I leave you behind . ' 

 ' I have the whole scene of the angel and the cripple , ' Gower reply . 

 ' o that day ! ' 

 they ' be soon speculate on the unimpressionable house in its clump 
 of wood midway below , which have no response for anxiety . 

 a maid - servant at the garden gate , by Mr. Wythan 's order , inform 
 Carinthia that her mistress have open her eye : there be a hope of 
 weather the ominous third time . but the hope be a bird of short 
 flight from bush to bush until the doctor should speak to confirm it . 
 even the child be under the shadow of the house . Carinthia have he in 
 her arm , trust to life as she hug he , and see innumerable 
 dart out of all region assail her treasure . 

 ' she wish to have you , ' Mr. Wythan come and say to she . ' almost her 
 first word . the heart be quicken . she will live for I if she can . ' 

 he whisper it . his feature shoot the sparkle . 

 Rebecca Wythan have strength to press Carinthia 's hand faintly . she 
 make herself heard : ' no pain . ' her husband sit upright , quite still , 
 attentive for any sign . his look of quiet pleasure ready to show , 
 sprightliness dwelt on she . she return the look , unable to give it 
 greeting . past the sense of humour , she want to say : ' see the poor 
 simple fellow who will think it a wife that he have ! ' she do but look . 

 Carinthia speak his name , ' Mr. Wythan , ' by chance , and Rebecca breathe 
 heavily until she form the word : ' owain to I . ' 

 ' to I , ' Owain add . 

 the three form a chain of clasped hand . 

 it be in the mind of the sick lady to disburden herself of more than 
 her weakness could utter , so far be she above earthly link . the desire 
 in she be to be quit of the flesh , bear a picture of her husband as 
 have the due of his merit . 

 her recovered strength next day bring she nearer to our law . ' you 
 will call he Owain , Carinthia ? ' she say . ' he be not one to presume on 
 familiarity . I must be go soon . I can not leave he the wife I would 
 choose . I can leave he the sister . he be a sure friend . he be the 
 knightly man woman dream of . I harp on it because I long for testimony 
 that I leave he to have some reward . and this may be , between two so 
 pure at heart as you two . ' 

 ' dear soul friend , yes , and Owain , yes , I can say it , ' Carinthia 
 rejoin . ' brother ? I have only my Chillon . my life be now for he . I 
 be punish for separate myself from the son of my father . I have no 
 heart for a second brother . what I can give to my friend I will . I shall 
 love you in he , if I be to lose you . ' 

 ' not Owain - it be I be the wretch refuse to call on the lonely 
 lady at the castle until I hear she have do a romantic little bit of 
 thing - hush a lambkin 's bleating . my loss ! my loss ! and I could afford 
 it so poorly . since then Carinthia have fill my day . I shudder to 
 leave you and think of your go back to the English . their sneer 
 wither . they send you down among we as a young woman to be shun . ' 

 ' I do wildly , I be ungoverned , I have one idea , ' say Carinthia . ' one 
 idea be a bullet , good for the day of battle to beat the foe , father 
 tell we . it be a madness in I . now it have go , I see all round . I 
 see straight , too . with one idea , we see nothing - nothing but itself . 
 Whizz ! we go . I do . I shall no long offend in that way . Mr. Gower 
 Woodseer be here from my lord . ' 

 ' with he the child will be safe . ' 

 ' I be not alarmed . it be to request - they would have I go , to prepare 
 the way for my lord . ' 

 ' you have do , it ; he have the castle to himself . I cannot - spare you . 
 a tyrant order you to go should be defy . my Lord Fleetwood put 
 lightning into my slow vein . ' 

 ' we have talk : we shall be reprove by the husband and the doctor , ' 
 say Carinthia . 

 Sullen day continue and roll over to night at the mine . Gower 's 
 mission be render absurd by the countess 's withdrawal from the 
 castle . he speak of it to Mr. Wythan once , and the latter take a big 
 breath and blow such a lord to the wind . ' persuade our guest to leave 
 we , that the air may not be taint for her husband when he come ? he 
 need not   call ; he be not oblige to see she . she be offer Esslemont to 
 live in ? I believe her instinct 's right - he have design on the child . 
 a little more and we shall have a mad dog in the fellow . he double my 
 work by keep his man out . if she be away we should hear of black 
 doing . twenty dozen of his pugilist would not   stop the burning . ' 

 they agree that persuasion need not be address to the countess . she 
 be and would remain Mr. Wythan 's guest . as for the earl , Gower incline 
 to plead hesitatingly , still to plead , on behalf of a nobleman own 
 his influence and very susceptible to his wisdom , whose echo of a 
 point say nearly equal the satisfaction bestow by print . the 
 title man affect the philosopher in that manner ; or rather , the crude 
 philosopher 's relish of brilliant appreciation strip he of his robe . 
 for he be with Owain Wythan at heart to scorn title which do not 
 distinguish practical office . a nation bow to they have go to pith , 
 for he ; he have to shake himself , that he might not similarly stick ; he 
 have to do it often . object elevate even by a decayed world have their 
 magnetism for we unless we nerve the mind to wakeful repulsion . he 
 protest he have reason to think the earl be humanize , though he 
 might be kill a woman in the process . ' could she wish for well ? ' 
 he ask , with at least the gravity of the undermine humourist ; and 
 he start Owain to course an idea when he remark of Lord Fleetwood : 
 ' imagine a devil on his back on a river , fly a cherub . ' 

 Owain sparkle from the vision of the thing to wrath with it . 

 ' ay , but while he be float , his people be edge on starvation . and 
 I have   a personal grievance . I keep , you know , open hall , bread and cheese 
 and beer , for poor mate . his man be favour we with a call . we have 
 to cart treble from the town . if I straighten the stick he die to 
 bend , it will be a grievance against I - and a fig for it ! but I like to 
 be at peace with my neighbour , and waft they " penillion " instead of 
 deal the " cleddyfal " of Llewellyn . ' 

 at last the tension cease ; they have intelligence of the earl 's arrival . 

 his countess be little move by it ; and the reason for that lie in her 
 imagination be absorb . Henrietta have post she a journal telling 
 of a deed of Chillon 's : no great feat , but precious for its ' likeness 
 to he , ' as they phrase it ; that be , for the light it cast on their 
 conception of the man . head a squadron in a riotous Midland town , he 
 stop a charge , after fire of a shot from the mob , and gallop up 
 the street to catch a staggering urchin to his saddle - bow , and place the 
 mite in safety . then it be a simple trot of the hussar ahead ; way be 
 make for he . 

 now , to see what banquet there be for the big of heart in the world 's 
 hot stress , take the view of Carinthia , to whom her brother 's thoughtful 
 little act of gentleness at the moment of the red - of - the - powder smoke 
 be divinest bread and wine , when calamity hang around , with the future 
 an unfooted wilderness , her power untried , her husband her enemy . 




 CHAPTER XXXI . we have again to deal with the examples of our younger MAN 

 the most urgent of Dames be work herself up to a grey squall in her 
 detestation of imagerial epigram . otherwise Gower Woodseer 's dash at 
 the quintessential young man of wealth would prompt to the carrying of 
 it far , and tell how the tethered flutterer above a ' devil on his 
 back on a river ' be begin to pull if not drag his withholder and 
 teaser . 

 Fleetwood have almost a desire to see the small dot of humanity which 
 draw the breath from he ; - and be indistinguishably the bubbly grin and 
 gurgle of the nurse , he could swear . he kick at the bondage to our 
 common fleshly nature impose on he by the mother of the little animal . 
 but there have be a mother to his father : odd movement of a warmish 
 curiosity brush he when the cynic be not mount guard . they be , 
 it seem , external - no part of he : like blast of a wayside furnace 
 across wintry air . they be , as it chance , Nature 's woman in he 
 pluck at her separate partner , Custom 's man ; something of an 
 oriental voluptuary on his isolated regal seat ; and he would suck the 
 pleasure without a descent into the stale old rut where Life 's convict 
 couple walk link to one another , to their issue more . 

 there be also a cold curiosity to see the male infant such a mother 
 would have . the grandson of Old Lawless might turn out a rascal , - he 
 would be no mean one , no coward . 

 that mother , too , who must have be a touch astonish to find herself 
 a mother : - Fleetwood laugh a curt bark , and hear rebuke , and plead 
 the marriage - trap to the man of his word ; devil and cherub be at 
 the tug , or say , dog and gentleman , a survival of the schoolboy - that 
 mother , a girl of the mountain , perhaps want no more than smooth 
 by the world . ' it be my husband ' sound foolish , sound freshish , - a 
 new note . would she repeat it ? the bit of simplicity would bear 
 repeat once . Gower Woodseer say the creature grow and study to 
 perfect herself . she be a good way off that , and may spoil herself in the 
 process ; but she have a certain power . her donkey obstinacy in refuse 
 compliance , and her pursuit of ' my husband , ' and ability to drench he 
 with ridicule , do not exhibit the ordinary young female . she stamp she 
 impression on the people she meet . her husband be shake to confess it 
 likewise , despite a disagreement between they . 

 he have own he be her husband : he have not disavow the consequence . 
 that fellow , Gower Woodseer , might accuse the husband of virtually 
 lying , if he by his conduct imply her distastefulness or bad . by 
 heaven ! as felon a deed as could be do . argue the case anyhow , it 
 should be undo . let she but cease to madden . for whatever the rawness 
 of the woman , she have quality ; and experience of the facile love of 
 London very sharply define her quality . think of she as raw , she have 
 the gift of rareness : forget the donkey obstinacy , her character grasp . 
 in the grasp of her character , one incline , and her husband incline , 
 to become her advocate . she have only to discontinue maddening . 

 the wealthy young noble prize any form of rareness wherever it be 
 visible , have no thought of the purchase of it , except with worship . 
 he could listen pleased to the talk of a Methodist minister sewing 
 bootleather . he pick up a roadside tramp and make a friend of he , 
 and value the fellow 's honesty , submit to his lecture , pardon his 
 insolence . the sight of Carinthia 's narrow bedroom and strip of bed 
 over Sarah Winch 's Whitechapel shop have go a step to drown the bob 
 Whitechapel Countess . at least , he have not be hunt by that gaunt 
 chalk - quarry ghost since his peep into the room . own it ! she likewise 
 have thing to forgive . woman nurse their larvae of idea about fair 
 dealing . but observe the distinction : aid if woman understand justice 
 they would be the first to proclaim , that when two be tie together , 
 the one who do the other serious injury be more naturally excuse than 
 the one who - tenfold abhorrent if a woman ! - call up the grotesque to 
 extinguish both . 

 with this apology for himself , Lord Fleetwood grow tolerant of the 
 person honourably avow as his wife . so ; therefore , the barrier between 
 he and his thought of she be break . the thought carry red dos 
 be select . finally , the taste to meet she sprout . if agreeable , 
 she could be woo ; if barely agreeable , torment ; if disagreeable , 
 leave as before . 

 although it be the hazard of a die , he decide to follow his taste . she 
 stay at the castle have keep he long from the duty of his business ; 
 and he could imagine it a grievance if he please , but he put it aside . 
 alight at his chief manager 's office , he pass through the heated 
 atmosphere of black - browed , wiry little rebel , who withhold the salute 
 as they lounge : a posture often precede the spring in compulsorily 
 idle worker . he be aware of instinct abroad , an antagonism to the 
 proprietor 's right . they rouse he to stand by they , and be his own 
 form of instinct , handsomely clothe . it behove that he should examine 
 they and the claim against they , to be sure of his ground . he and Mr. 
 Howell Edwards debate the dispute for an hour ; agree , partially 
 differing . there be a weakness on the principle in Edwards . these 
 fellow fix to the spot be for compromise too much . an owner of mine 
 have no steady reckoning of income if the rate of wage be perpetually to 
 shift accord to current , mostly ignorant , version of the prosperity 
 of the time . be we so prosperous ? it be far from certain . and if the 
 rate ascend , the question of ease it down to suit the discontinuance 
 of prosperity agitate our exchequer - whose demand be for 
 fixity - perplex we far . 

 however , that be preliminary . he and Howell Edwards would dine and 
 wrangle it out . the earl know himself a hot disputant after dinner . 
 incidentally he hear of Lady Fleetwood as a guest of Mrs. Wythan ; 
 and the circumstance be injurious to he because he stand against Mr. 
 Wythan 's pamper system with his man . 

 ine up at the castle smelt of beer , and his eyelid be sottish . 
 nothing to do try the virtue of the good . he seek his excuse in a 
 heavy lamentation over my lady 's unjust suspicion of he , - a know man 
 of honour , though he do serve his paytron . 

 the cause of Lady Fleetwood 's absence be expose to her outraged lord , 
 who have send the man purely to protect she at this castle , where she 
 insist on stay . the suspicion cast on the dreary lusher be the 
 wife 's wild shot at her husband . one could understand a silly woman 's 
 pass terror . her act under the dictate of it strike the husband 's 
 rib breast as a positive clap of hostility between they across a 
 chasm . 

 his previous placable mood be immediately conceive by he to have be 
 one of his fit of generosity ; a step to a frightful dutiful embrace 
 of an almost repulsive object . he fling the thought of she back on her 
 Whitechapel . she return from that place with smile , dress in a 
 laundry white with a sprinkle of smut , appear to he as an adversary 
 armed and able to strike . there be a blow , for he chewed resentment ; 
 and these be goad by a remembered shyness of meet her eye when 
 he round up the slope of the hill , in view of his castle , where he 
 suppose she would be await ' my husband . ' the silence of her absence 
 be lively mockery of that anticipation . 

 Gower come on he saunter about the ground . 

 ' you be not very successful down here , ' Fleetwood say , without 
 greeting . 

 ' the countess like the air of this country , ' say Gower , evasively , 
 impertinently , and pointlessly ; offensively to the despot employ he 
 to be either subservient or smart . 

 ' I wish she to leave it . ' 

 ' she wish to see you first . ' 

 ' she take queer measure . I start to - morrow for my yacht at Cardiff . ' 
 there the matter end ; for Fleetwood fall to talk of the mine . at 
 dinner and after dinner it be the topic , and after Howell Edwards have 
 depart . 

 when the man who have a heart will talk of nothing but what concern his 
 interest , and the heart be hurt , it may be perceive by a cognizant 
 friend , that this be his proud mute way of petitioning to have the 
 tenderer subject broach . Gower be sure of the heart , armoured or 
 bandage though it be , - a haunt of evil spirit as well , - and he begin : 
 ' now to speak of I half a minute . you cajole I out of my Surrey room , 
 where I be write , in the vein ... ' 

 ' I have   have the scene before I ! ' the earl interpose . ' juniper dell 
 and that tree of the flash leaf , and that dear old boy , your father , 
 young as you and I , and say love of Nature give we eternal youth . 
 on with you . ' 

 ' I doubt whether I should be of use to you . I tell you the amount of 
 alloy in my motif . a year with you , I have subsistence for ten year 
 assure to I . ' 

 ' do not   be a prosy dog , Gower Woodseer . ' 

 ' will you come over to the Wythans before you go ? ' 

 ' I will not . ' 

 ' you would lengthen your stride across a wound beast ? ' 

 ' I see no wound to the beast . ' 

 ' you can permit yourself to kick under cover of a metaphor . ' 

 ' tell I what you drive at , Gower . ' 

 ' the request be , for you to spare pain by take one step - an extra 
 strain on the muscle of the leg . it be only the leg want move . ' 

 ' the lady have leg to run away , let they bring she back . ' 

 ' why have I with you , then ? I be useless . but you read we all , see 
 everything , and wait only for the mood to do the right . you read I , 
 and I be not open to everybody . you read the crux of a man like I in my 
 novel position . you read my admiration of a beautiful woman and effort 
 to keep honest . you read my downright preference of what most people 
 would call poverty , and my enjoyment of good cookery and good company . 
 you enlist among the crew below as one of our tempter . you find I come 
 round to the thing I like well . therefore , you have your liking for I ; 
 and that be why you turn to I again , after your natural infidelity . so 
 much for I . you read this priceless lady quite as clearly . you choose 
 to cloud she with your mood . she be at a disadvantage , ' arrive in 
 a strange country , next to friendless ; and each new incident breed of a 
 luckless beginning - I could say more . ' 

 Fleetwood nod . ' you be read without the word : you read in history , 
 too , I suppose , that there be two side to most case . the loud be 
 not often the strong . however , now the lady show herself craze . 
 that be read she charitably . else she have to be take for a spiteful 
 shrew , who pretend to suspect anything that be villanous , because she 
 can hit on no other way of strike . ' 

 ' craze , be a wide shot and hit half the world , ' mutter Gower . ' Lady 
 Fleetwood have a troubled period after her marriage . she suffer a 
 sort of kidnapping when she be bear her child . there be a book by an 
 Edinburgh doctor might be serviceable to you . it enlighten I . she will 
 have a distrust of you , as regard the child , until she understand you 
 by live with you under one roof . ' 

 ' such animal these woman be ! ' Good Lord ! ' Fleetwood ejaculate . ' I 
 marry one , and I ' m to take to read medical book ! ' he yawn . 

 ' you speak that of woman and pretend to love nature , ' say Gower . ' you 
 hate Nature unless you have it serve on a dish by your own cook . that be 
 the way to the madhouse or the monastery . there we expiate the sin of 
 sin . a man find the woman of all woman fit to stick he in the 
 soil , and trim and point he to grow , and she be an animal for her pain ! 
 the secret of your malady be , you have   not yet , though you be on a healthy 
 leap for the practice of Nature , hop to the primary conception 
 of what Nature mean . woman be in and of Nature . I have   study they 
 here - have nothing to do but study they . that most noble of lady ' whole 
 mind be knot to preserve her child during her time of endurance up 
 to her moment of trial . think it over . it be your one chance of keep 
 sane . 

 and expect to hear flat stuff from I while you go on play tyrant . ' 

 ' you certainly take liberty , ' Fleetwood 's mild voice remark . 

 ' I tell you I should try you , when you pluck I out of my Surrey 
 nest . ' 

 Fleetwood , pass from a meditative look to a malicious half - laugh . ' you 
 seem to have study the " most noble of lady " latterly rather like a 
 barrister with a brief for the defendant - plaintiff , if you like ! ' 

 ' as to that , I will help you to an insight of a particular weakness of 
 mine , ' say Gower . ' I require to have person of even the high value 
 present to I on a stage , or else I do not   grasp they at all - they 
 be simply picture . I see the lady ; admire , esteemed , sufficiently , 
 I suppose , until her image appear to I in the feeling of another . 
 then I see fathom . no doubt , it be from feel warmer . I go through 
 the blood of the other for my impression . ' 

 ' name the other , ' say the earl , and his feature be sharp . 

 you can have the name , ' Gower answer . ' it be the girl , Madge Winch . ' 

 Fleetwood 's hard stare melt to surprise and contemptuous amusement . 
 ' you see the lady to be the " most noble of lady " through the warming 
 you get by pass into the feeling of Madge Winch ? ' 

 Sarcasm be in the tone , and beneath it a thrill of compassionateness 
 traverse he and shoot a remorseful sting with the vision of those two 
 young woman on the coach at the scene of the fight . he have sentience of 
 their voice , nigh to hear they . the forlorn bride 's hand give to 
 the anxious girl behind she gush an image of the sisterhood bind 
 woman under the pang they suffer from man . he crave a scourging that 
 he might not be curse himself ; and he provoke it , for Gower be very 
 sensitive to a cold breath on the weakness he have lay bare ; and when 
 Fleetwood say : ' you recommend a bath in the feeling of Madge Winch ? ' 
 the retort come : - ' it might stop you on the road to a cowl . ' 

 Fleetwood put on the mask of cogitation to cover a shudder , ' how ? ' 

 ' a question of the man or the monk with you , as I fancy I have   tell you 
 more than once ! ' 

 ' you may fancy commit any impertinence and be not much out . ' 

 ' the saving of you be that you digest it when you have   stew it down . ' 

 ' you try I ! ' 

 ' I do not   impose the connection . ' 

 ' no , I take the blame for that . ' 

 they sit in dumbness , fidget , spring to their foot , and light 
 bedroom candle . 

 mount the stair , Gower be move to let fall a benevolent look on 
 the worried son of fortune . ' I warn you I should try you . it ought to 
 be do politely . if I have to speak a truth I ' m boorish . the divinely 
 damnable naked truth will not   wear ornament . it be about the same as 
 pitch a handful of earth . ' 

 ' you dirt your hand , hit or miss . out of this corridor ! into my room , 
 and spout your bad , ' cry the earl . 

 Gower enter his dressing - room and be bid to smoke there . 

 ' you be a milder boor when you smoke . that day down in Surrey with the 
 grand old bootmaker be one of our day , Gower Woodseer ! there be no 
 smell of the boor in he . perhaps his religion help he , more than 
 nature - worship : not the good for manner . you will not   smoke your pipe ? - a 
 cigar ? Lay on , then , as hard as you like . ' 

 ' you be ask for the debauchee 's last luxury - not a correction , ' say 
 Gower , grimly thinking of how his whip might prove effective and punish 
 the man who keep he fruitlessly out of his bed . 

 ' I want stuff for a place in the memory , ' say Fleetwood ; and the late 
 hour , with the profitless talk , make it a stinging taunt . 

 ' you want I to flick your indecision . ' 

 ' that be half a hit . ' 

 ' I ' m to talk italic , for you to store a smart word or so . ' 

 ' true , I swear ! and , please , begin . ' 

 ' you hang for the Fates to settle which be to be smother in you , the 
 man or the lord - and it end in the monk , if you hang much long . ' 

 ' a bit of a scorpion in his intention , ' Fleetwood mutter on a stride . 
 ' I will tell you this , Gower Woodseer ; when you lay on in earnest , 
 your diction be not so choice . do any of your remark apply to Lady 
 Fleetwood ? ' 

 ' all should . I do not   presume to allude to Lady Fleetwood . ' 

 ' she have not charge you to complain ? ' 

 ' Lady Fleetwood be not the person to complain or condescend to speak of 
 injury . ' 

 ' she insult I with her insane suspicion . ' 

 a swollen vein on the young nobleman 's forehead go to confirm the idea 
 at the Wythans ' that he be capable of mischief . they be right ; he 
 be as capable of villany as of nobility . but he happen to be 
 thank Gower Woodseer 's whip for the comfortable numbness he feel at 
 Carinthia 's behaviour , while detest she for cause he to desire it 
 and endure it , and exonerate his prosy castigator . 

 he be ignorant of the revenge he have on Gower , whose diction have not 
 be particularly estimable . in the feebleness of a man vainly court 
 sleep , the disarm philosopher toss from one side to the other 
 through the remain hour of darkness , polish sentence that be 
 natural spout of choicest diction ; and still the earl 's virulent small 
 sneer rankle . he understand why , after a time . the fervour of advocacy , 
 which inspire high diction , have be want . he have seek more 
 to lash the earl with his personal disgust and partly to parade his 
 contempt of a lucrative dependency - than he have feel for the countess . 
 no wonder his diction be poor . it be a sample of limp thinness ; a sort 
 of tongue of a Master Slender : - flavourless , unsatisfactory , consider 
 its object : measure to be condemn by its poor achievement . he have 
 nevertheless a heart to feel for the dear lady , and heat the pleading 
 for she , especially when it run to its object , as along a shaft of the 
 sun - ray , from the passionate devotedness of that girl Madge . 

 he brood over it till it be like a fire beneath he to drive he from 
 his bed and across the turfy roller of the hill to the Wythans ' , in 
 the front of an autumnal sunrise - grand where the country be shorn 
 of surface decoration , as here and there we find some unadorned human 
 creature , whose bosom bear the ball of warmth . 




 CHAPTER XXXII . in which we see CARINTHIA PUT in practice one of her OLD 
 FATHER 'S LESSONS 

 seat at his breakfast - table , the earl see Gower stride in , and could 
 have wager he know the destination of the fellow 's morning walk . it 
 concern he little ; he would be leave the castle in less than an 
 hour . she might choose to come or choose to keep away . the whim of 
 animal do not affect man unless they be professionally tamer . 
 petty domestic dissension be besides poor webs to the man pull 
 singlehande at rope with his revolted miner . on the topic of wage , 
 too , he be Gower 's master , and could hold forth : by which he teach 
 himself to feel that practical affair be the proper business of man , 
 woman and infant be remotely secondary ; the picturesque and poetry , 
 consequently , sheer nonsense . 

 ' I suppose your wait here be useless , to quote you , ' he say . ' the 
 countess can decide now to remain , if she please . drive with I to 
 Cardiff - I miss you if you be absent a week . or be it leg ? drop I a 
 line of your stage on the road , and do not   loiter much . ' 

 Gower speak of start his leg next day , if he have to do the journey 
 alone : and he cloud the yacht for Fleetwood with talk of the Wye and 
 the Usk , Hereford and the Malvern Hills elliptical over the plain . 

 ' yes , ' the earl acquiesce jealously ; ' we ought to have see - tramp 
 every foot of our own country . that yacht of mine , there she be , and I 
 say I would board she and have a fly with half a dozen fellow round 
 the scottish isle . we be never free to do as we like . ' 

 ' leg be the only thing that have a taste of freedom , ' say Gower . 

 they stroll down to Howell Edwards ' office at nine , Kit Ines beside 
 the luggage cart to the rear . 

 around the office and along to the street of the cottage crowd be 
 chatter , gesticulate ; Ines fancy the foreign jabberer incline 
 to threaten . Howell Edwards at the door of his office watch they 
 calculatingly . the lord of their destiny pass in with he , leave 
 Gower to study the feature of the man , and Ines to reckon the chance of 
 a fray . 

 Fleetwood come out presently , say to Edwards : 

 ' that concession go far enough . because I have a neighbour who yield 
 at every step ? no , stick to the principle . I have   say my final word . and 
 here be the carriage . if the mine be closed , more be the pity : but I be 
 not responsible . you can let they know if you like , before I drive off ; 
 it do not   matter to I . ' 

 the carriage be ready . Gower cast a glance up the hill . three female 
 figure and a panni - donkey be visible on the descent . he nod to 
 Edwards , who take the word out of his mouth . ' her ladyship , my lord . ' 

 she be distinctly see , and look formidable in definition against the 
 cloud . Madge and the nurse - maid Martha be the two other young woman . 
 on they come , and the angry man seat in the carriage could not give 
 the order to start . nor could he quite shape an idea of annoyance , 
 though he hang to it and face at Gower a battery of the promise to 
 pay he for this . tattle observer be estimate at their small 
 importance there , as everywhere , by one so high above they . but the 
 appearance of the woman of the burlesque name and burlesque action , and 
 odd ascension out of the ludicrous into a form to cast a spell , so that 
 she command serious recollection of she , disturb he . he step 
 from his carriage . again he have his incomprehensible fit of shyness ; 
 and a vision of the complacent , jowled , redundant , blue - coat monarch 
 aswe in imbecile merriment on the signboard of the Royal Sovereign 
 inn ; constitutionally his total opposite , yet instigate the sensation . 

 in that respect his countess and he have shift character . Carinthia 
 come on at her bold mountain stride to within hail of he . Met by Gower , 
 she talk , smile , pat her donkey , clutch his ear , lift a silken 
 covering to show the child asleep ; entirely at her ease and unhurrie . 
 these woman get aid from their pride of maternity . and when they can 
 boast a parson behind they , they be indecorous up to insolent in their 
 ostentation of it . 

 she resume her advance , with a slight abatement of her challengeing 
 match , sedately ; very collectedly erect ; change in the fulness of her 
 figure and her poise calm bearing . 

 he hear her voice address gower : ' yes , they do ; we notice the 
 slate - roof , look down on they . they do look like a council of rook 
 in the hollow ; a parliament , you say . they look exceedingly like , when 
 a peep of sunshine fall . oh , no ; not clergyman ! ' 

 she laugh at the suggestion . 

 she might be one of the actress by nature . 

 be the man unsympathetic with woman a hater of Nature deductively ? Most 
 woman be actress . as to worship nature , we go back to the state 
 of heathen beast , Mr. Philosopher Gower could be answer .... 

 Fleetwood draw in his argument . she stand before he . there be on his 
 part an insular representation of old french court salute to the lady , 
 and she reply to it in the exactest measure , as if an instructed 
 proficient . 

 she stand unshadowed . ' we have come to bid you adieu , my lord , ' she 
 say , and no trouble of the bosom shake her mellow tone . her face be 
 not the chalk - quarry or the rosed rock ; it be oddly individual , and , 
 in a way , alluring , with some gentle contraction of her eyelid . but 
 evidently she stand in full repose , mistress of herself . 

 upon he , it appear , the whole sensibility of the situation be to be 
 throw . he harden . 

 ' we have have to settle business here , ' he say , speak resonantly , to 
 cover his gazing discomposedly , all but furtively . 

 the child be show , still asleep . a cunning infant not a cry in he 
 to excuse a father for prefer concord or silence or the bachelor 's 
 exemption . 

 ' he be a strong boy , ' the mother say . ' our doctor promise he will ride 
 over all the illness . ' 

 Fleetwood 's answer set off with an alarum of the throat , and dwindle to 
 ' we will hope so . seem to sleep well . ' 

 she have her rocky brow . they be not barren crag , and her shape 
 be Nature 's ripeness , it be acknowledge : she stand like a lance in 
 air - rather like an Amazon school by Athene , one might imagine . hue of 
 some go or come flush hint the magical trick of her visage . 
 she speak in modest manner , or it might be indifferently , without a 
 flaunting of either . 

 ' I wish to consult you , my lord . he be not baptize . his Christian 
 name ? ' 

 ' I have no choice . ' 

 ' I should wish he to bear one of my brother 's name . ' 

 ' I have no knowledge of your brother 's name . ' 

 ' Chillon be one . ' 

 ' ah ! be it , should you think , suitable to our climate ? ' 

 ' another name of my brother 's be John . ' 

 ' Bull . ' the loutish derision pass she and rebound on he . ' that 
 would be quite at home . ' 

 ' you will allow one of your own name , my lord ? ' 

 ' oh , certainly , if you desire it , choose . there be four name you will 
 find in a book of the Peerage or Directory or so . up at the castle - or 
 you might have write : - well than these question on the public road . 
 I do not   demur . let it be as you like . ' 

 ' I write empty letter to tell what I much want , ' Carinthia say . 

 ' you have only to write your plain request . ' 

 ' if , now I see you , I may speak another request , my lord . ' 

 ' pray , ' he say , with courteous patience , and step forward down to 
 the street of the miner ' cottage . she could there speak out - bawl the 
 request , if it suit she to do so . 

 on the point of speak , she gaze round . 

 ' perfectly safe ! no harm possible , ' say he , fretful under the burden of 
 this her maniacal maternal anxiety . 

 ' the man be all right , they would not hurt a child . what can rationally 
 be suspect ! ' 

 ' I know the man ; they love their child , ' she reply . ' I think my 
 child would be precious to they . Mr. Woodseer and Mr. Edwards and Madge 
 be there . ' 

 ' be the one more request - I mean , a mother 's anxiety do not run to the 
 extent of suspect everybody ? ' 

 ' some of the child be very pretty , ' say Carinthia , and eye the 
 band of they at their game in the roadway and at the cottage door . 
 ' child of the poor have happy mother . ' 

 her eye be homely , morning over her face . they be open now to 
 what that fellow Woodseer   who could speak to the point when he be not 
 aim at it   call the parlour , or social sitting - room ; where we may 
 have converse with the tame woman 's mind , see the door to the clawing 
 recess temporarily shut . 

 ' forgive I if I say you talk like the big child , ' Fleetwood say 
 lightly , not ungenially ; for the feature he look on be museful , a 
 picture in their one expression . 

 her answer chill he . ' it be true , my lord . I will not detain you . I 
 would beg to be supply with money . ' 

 he be like the leaf of a frosted plant , in his crisp curling 
 inward : - he have be so genial . 

 ' you have come to say good - bye , that an opportunity to - as you put 
 it - beg for money . I be not sure of your have learn yet the right 
 disposal of money . ' 

 ' I beg , my lord , to have two thousand pound a year allow I . ' 

 ' ten - and it be a task to spend the sum on a single household - shall be 
 allot to your expenditure at Esslemont ; - stable , bill , et caetera . 
 you can entertain . my steward ledding will undertake the management . 
 you will not be trouble with paying . ' 

 her head acknowledge the graciousness . - ' I would have two thousand 
 pound and live where I please . ' 

 ' pardon I : the two , for a lady living where she please , exceed the 
 require amount . ' 

 ' I will accept a small sum , my lord . ' 

 ' Money!-it seem a singular demand when all supply be furnish . ' 

 ' I would have control of some money . ' 

 ' you be think of charity . ' 

 ' not charity . ' 

 ' Edwards here have a provision for the hospital need of the people . Mr. 
 Woodseer apply to I in case he can certify . ledding will do the 
 same at Esslemont . ' 

 ' I be glad , I be thankful . the money I would have be for my own use . it 
 be for I . ' 

 ' ah . scarcely that , I fancy . ' 

 the remark should have strike home . he have a thirst for the sign of 
 her confessing to it . he look . something like a petrifaction of her 
 wild face be show . 

 Carinthia 's eye be hard out on a scatter knot of child down the 
 street . 

 she gather up her skirt . without a word to he , she run , and run 
 shout to the little one around and ahead : ' in ! in ! indoor , child ! 
 " Blant , i'r ty ! " mother , mother , ho ! get they in . see the dog ! " Ci ! 
 Ci ! " in with they ! " blant , i'r ty ! Vr ty ! " ' 

 a big black mongrel appear worry at one of two petticoate urchin 
 on the ground . 

 she scurry she swift , with such warning Welsh as she have on the top 
 of her mountain cry ; and door fly wide , there be a bang of door when 
 she dart by : first gust of terrible heaven that she seem to the 
 cottager . 

 other shout behind her rent the air , gather to a roar , from the 
 breast of man and woman . ' mad dog about ' have be for day the rumour , 
 cross the hill over the line of village , hamlet , farm , from Cardiff 
 port . 

 dead hush succeed the burst . man and woman stand off . the brute be at 
 the lady . 

 her arm be straight above her head ; her figure overhanging , on a bend 
 of the knee . right and leave , the fury of the slaver fang shake she 
 loose droop of gown ; and a dull , prolonged growl , like the clamour of a 
 far body of insurrectionary marching man , tell of the rage . 

 Fleetwood hover helpless as a leaf on a bough . 

 ' back - ' , I pray , ' she say to he , and motion it , her arm at high 
 stretch . 

 he hold no weapon . the sweat of his forehead half blind he . and she 
 wave he behind she , beckon to the crowd to keep wide way , use she 
 lift hand as flapper ; she have all her wit . there be not a wrinkle 
 of a grimace . nothing but her locked lip betray her vision of 
 imminent doom . the shaking of her gown and the snarl in the undergrowl 
 sound insatiate . 

 the brute drop hold . with a weariful jog of the head , it pursue its 
 course at an awful even swing pace : death 's own , Death 's doer , his 
 reaper , - he , the very death of the Terrors . 

 Carinthia 's cry ring for clear way to be keep on either side , and that 
 accurse go the path through a sharp - edge mob , as it pour pell - mell 
 and shrink back , close for the chase to rear of it . 

 ' Father teach I , ' she say to the earl , not more discompose than if 
 she have take a jump . 

 ' it be over ! ' he groan , savagely white , and bellow for gun , any 
 weapon . ' your father ? pray ? ' she be entreat to speak . 

 ' yes , it must be shoot ; it will be merciful to kill it , ' she say . ' they 
 have carry the child indoor . the other be safe . Mr. Woodseer , run 
 to my nurse - girl , Martha . he go , ' she murmur , and resume to the 
 earl : ' Father tell I woman have a well chance than man with a biting 
 dog . he put I before he and drill I . he think of everything . 
 usually the poor beast snap - one angry bite , not more . my dress tease 
 it . ' 

 Fleetwood grin civilly in his excitement ; intend to yield patient 
 hearing , to be interested by any mortal thing she might choose to say . 

 she be advise by recollection to let her father rest . 

 ' no , dear girl , not hurt , no scratch , - only my gown tear , ' she say to 
 Madge ; and Madge heave and whimper , and stoop to pin the frayed 
 strip . ' quite safe ; you see it be easy for woman to escape , Mr. 
 Edwards . ' 

 Carinthia 's voice hum over the girl 's head 

 ' Father make I practise it , in case . he forethought . Madge , you hear 
 of this dog . I tell you how to act . I be not feverish . our babe will 
 not feel it . ' 

 she bid Madge open her hand . ' a scratch would kill . never mind the 
 tearing ; I will hold my dress . oh ! there be that one child bite . Mr. 
 Edwards , mount a man for the doctor . I will go in to the child . he be 
 bite . lose not one minute , Mr. Edwards . I see you go . ' 

 he bow and hastened . 

 the child 's mother be red eye at her door for ease of her heart to 
 the lady . Carinthia step into the room , where the little creature be 
 fetch sob after the spout of scream . 

 ' God in heaven ! she can not   be go to suck the bite ? ' Fleetwood cry to 
 Madge , whose answer be disquiet ' if it be to save life , my mistress 
 will not   stop at anything . ' 

 his heart spring with a light comprehension of Gower Woodseer 's 
 meaning . this girl 's fervour open portal to new view of her 
 mistress , or open eye . 




 CHAPTER XXXIII . a frightful debate 

 push through a swarm into the cot , Fleetwood see Carinthia on a knee 
 beside a girl 's lap , where the strip child lay . its mother hold a 
 basin for the dabbing at raw red spot . 

 a sting of pain touch the memory of its fright , and bring far 
 scream , then the sob . Carinthia hum a styrian cradle - song as the 
 wailing lull . 

 she glance up ; she say to the earl : ' the bite be deep ; it be in the 
 blood . we may have time . get I an interpreter . I must ask the mother . I 
 know not many word . ' 

 ' what now ? ' say he , at the looming of new vexation . 

 ' we have no choice . have a man go ? Dr. Griffiths would hurry fast . 
 an hour may be too late . the poison travel : Father advise it : - fifty 
 year for one brave minute ! this child should be help to live . ' 

 ' we will do our good . why an interpreter ? ' 

 ' a poker in the fire . the interpreter - whether the mother will bear to 
 have it do . ' 

 ' burn , do you mean ? ' 

 ' it should be burn . ' 

 ' not by you ? ' 

 ' quick ! quick ! ' 

 ' but will you - could you ? no , I say ! ' 

 ' if there be no one else . ' 

 ' you forget your own child . ' 

 ' he be near the end of his mother . ' 

 ' the doctor will soon arrive . ' 

 ' the poison travel . it can not be overtaken unless we start nearly 
 equal , father say . ' 

 ' work like that want an experienced hand . ' 

 ' a steady one . I would not quake - not tremble . ' 

 ' I can not permit it . ' 

 ' Mr. Wythan would know ! - he would know ! 

 ' do you hear , Lady Fleetwood - the dog may not be mad ! ' 

 ' sign ! he run heavy , he foam . ' 

 ' Foam 's no sign . ' 

 ' go ; order to I a speaker of English and Welsh . ' 

 the earl spin round , sensible of the novelty of his be command , and 
 submit ; but no soon have he turn than he fall into her view of 
 the urgency , and he go , much like the boy we see at school , with a 
 strong hand on his collar run he in . 

 Madge enter , and say : ' Mr. Woodseer have see baby and Martha and the 
 donkey all safe . ' 

 ' he be kind , ' say Carinthia . ' do we right to bathe the wound ? it seem 
 right to wash it . little thing that seem right may be exactly wrong 
 after all , when we be ignorant . I know burn the wound be right . ' 

 Madge ask : ' but , my lady , who be to do it ? ' 

 ' you would do it , dear , if I shrank , ' her mistress reply . 

 ' oh , my lady , I do not   know , I can not   say . burn a child ! and there be 
 our baby . ' 

 ' he have have I nearly his time . ' 

 ' oh , my dear lady ! would the mother consent ? ' 

 ' my Madge ! I have so few of their word yet . you would hold the child to 
 save it from a dreadful end . ' 

 ' God help I , my lady - I would , as long as I live I will .... oh ! poor 
 infant , we do need our courage now . ' 

 see that her mistress have not a tear or a tremor , the girl blink 
 and school her quail heart , still under the wicked hope that the 
 mother would not consent ; in a wonderment at this lady , who be womanly , 
 and who could hold the red iron at live flesh , to save the poor infant 
 from a dreadful end . her flow of love to this dear lady feel the 
 slicing of a cut ; be half revulsion , half worship ; uttermost worship in 
 estrangement , with the further throbbing of her pulse . 

 the cottage door be push open for Lord Fleetwood and Howell Edwards , 
 whom his master have prepare to stand against immediate operation . a 
 mount messenger have be despatch . but it be true , the doctor might 
 not be at home . assume it to be a bite of rabie , minute lose mean 
 the terrible : Edwards bow his head to that . on the other hand , 
 he foresee the close of personal reason for hesitate to be 
 in agreement with the lady wholly . the countess be not so much a 
 persuasive lady as she be , in her breath and gaze , a sweeping and a 
 waft power . after a short argument , he have the sense of hang like 
 a bank detach to fatality of motion by the crack of a landslip , and 
 that he would speedily be on his manhood to volunteer for the terrible 
 work . 

 he address the mother . her eye whiten from their red at his first 
 word of lay hot iron on the child : she run out with the wild woman 's 
 howl to her neighbour . 

 ' poor mother ! ' Carinthia sigh . ' it may last a year in the child 's 
 body , and one day he shudder at water . Father see a bitten man die . 
 I could fear death with the thought of that poison in I . I pray Dr. 
 Griffiths may come . ' 

 Fleetwood shuffle a step . ' he will come , he will come . ' 

 the mother and some woman now pack the room . 

 a gabble arise between they and Edwards . they fire sharp snatch of 
 speech , and they dart look at the lady and her lord . 

 ' they do not know ! ' say Carinthia . 

 Gower bring her news that the dog have be kill ; Martha and her 
 precious burden be outside , a mob of man , too . he be not alarm ; but 
 she go to the door and take her babe in her arm , and when the woman 
 observe the lady hold her own little one , their look be soften . 
 at a hint of explanation from Edwards , the guttural gabble rattle up to 
 the shrill vowel . 

 Fleetwood 's endurance break short . the pack small room , the 
 cage - monkey lingo , the wailful child , and the past and apprehend 
 debate upon the burning of flesh , compose an intolerable torture . he 
 say to Edwards : ' go to the man ; settle it with they . we have to follow 
 that man Wythan ; no peace otherwise . tell the man the body of the dog 
 must be secure for analysis . mad or not , it be the same . these Welsh 
 mother and grandmother will not   allow cautery at any price . Hark at 
 they ! ' 

 he turn to Carinthia : ' your ladyship will let Mr. Edwards or Mr. 
 Woodseer conduct you to the house where you be reside . you do not   know 
 these excitable people . I wish you to leave . ' 

 she reply softly : ' I stay for the doctor 's come . ' 

 ' impossible for I to wait , and I can not   permit you to be here . ' 

 ' it be life and death , and I must not be command . ' 

 ' you may be propose gratuitous agony . ' 

 ' I would do it to my own child . ' 

 the earl attack Gower : ' add your voice to persuade Lady Fleetwood . ' 

 Gower say : ' what if I think with Lady Fleetwood ? ' 

 ' you would see she do it ? ' 

 ' do it myself , if there be no one else ' 

 ' this dog - all of you have go mad , ' the earl cry . 

 ' griffith may keep his head ; it be the only chance . take my word , these 
 Welshwomen just listen to they will not   have it . you will find yourself in a 
 nest of Furies . it may be right to do , it be folly to propose it , madness 
 to attempt it . and I shall be bite if I stop here a minute long ; I be 
 go ; I can neither command nor influence . I should have think Gower 
 Woodseer would have keep his wit . ' 

 Fleetwood 's look fall on Madge amid the group . gower 's perception of her 
 mistress through the girl 's devotion to her move he . he take Madge by 
 the hand , and the sensation come that it be the next thing to press 
 his wife 's . ' you be a loyal girl . you have a mistress it be an honour to 
 serve . you bind I . by the way , Ines shall run down for a minute before 
 I go . ' 

 ' let he stay where he be , " Madge say , have bobbed her curtsey . 

 ' oh , if he be not to get a welcome ! ' say the earl ; and he could now fix 
 a steady look on his countess , who would have animate he with either 
 a hostile face or a tender . she have no expression of a feeling . he bend 
 to she formally . 

 Carinthia 's word be : ' Adieu , my lord . ' 

 ' I have only to say , that Esslemont be ready to receive you , ' he 
 remark , bow more curtly , and walk out ... 

 Gower follow he . they might as well have be silent , for any effect 
 from what be utter between they . they speak opinion hold by each of 
 they - adverse mainly ; speak for no other purpose than to hold their 
 position . 

 ' oh , she have courage , no doubt ; no one doubt it , ' Fleetwood say , out 
 of all relation to the foregoing . 

 courage to grapple with his pride and open his heart be want in he . 

 have that be do , even to the hint of it , instead of the lordly 
 indifference show , Gower might have venture on a suggestion , that the 
 priceless woman he could call wife be fast slip away from he and 
 wither in her allegiance . he do allude to his personal sentiment . 
 ' one take aim at Philosophy ; Lady Fleetwood pull we up to pay tribute 
 to our debt . ' but this be vague , and his hearer need a present 
 thunder and lightning to shake and pierce he . 

 ' I pledge myself to that yacht , ' say Fleetwood , by way of reply , ' or 
 you and I would tramp it , as we do once - jolly old day ! I shall have 
 you in mind . now turn back . do the good you can . ' 

 they part midway up the street , Gower bear away a sharp contrast 
 of the earl and his countess ; for , until their sens be dull , 
 impressionable young man , however precociously philosophical , be 
 master by appearance ; and they have to reflect under new light 
 before vision of the link eye and mind be give they . 

 Fleetwood jump into his carriage and order the coachman to drive 
 smartly . he could not have admit the feeling small ; he feel the 
 have be diminish , and his require a rapid transportation from 
 these part for he to regain his proper stature . have he misconduct 
 himself at the moment of danger ? it be a ghastly thought , that the 
 craven impulse may overcome we . but no , he could reassure his repute for 
 manliness . he have do as much as a man could do in such a situation . 

 at the same time , he have do less than the woman . 

 need she to have go so far ? why precipitate herself into the jaw of 
 the beast ? 

 now she , propose to burn the child 's wound . and she will do it if they 
 let she . one , see she at the work , - pale , flinty ; no face ; trebly the 
 terrific woman in her mild way of do the work . all because her old 
 father recommend it . because she think it a duty , we will say ; that 
 be juster . this young woman be a very sword in the hand of her idea 
 of duty . she can be feminine , too , - there be one who know . she can 
 be particularly distant , too . if in timidity , she have a modest view of 
 herself - or an enormous conception of the magi that marry she . will 
 she take the world 's polish a little ? 

 Fleetwood ask with the simplicity of the superior being who will 
 consequently perhaps bestow the debt he owe ... 

 but his be not the surface nature which can put a question of the sort 
 and pass it . as soon as it have be form , a vision of the elemental 
 creature call he husband smite to shiver the shell we walk on , and 
 catch he down among the low force , up amid the high ; an infernal 
 and a celestial contest for the extinction of the one or the other of 
 they , if it be not for their union . she wrestle with he where the 
 darkness roll their snake - eyed torrent over between jagged horn 
 of the netherworld . she stand he in the white ray of the primal vital 
 heat , to bear unwithere beside she the test of light . they fly , they 
 chase , battle , embrace , disjoin , adventure apart , bring back the 
 count of their deed , compare they , - and name the one crush ! it be 
 the one weight to shame , thrust into the cellar - corner of his own 
 disgust , by his have ask whether that starry warrior spirit in the 
 woman 's frame would ' take polish a little . ' 

 why should it be a contention between they ? for this reason : he be 
 reduce to admire her act ; and if he admire , he could not admire 
 without respect ; if he respect , perforce he reverence ; if he 
 reverence , he worship . therefore she have he at her foot . at the 
 foot of any woman , except for the trifling object ! but at the foot of 
 ' it be my husband ! ' that would be a reversal of thing . 

 be not thing reverse when the name Carinthia sound in the thought of 
 he who laugh at the name not less angelically martial than Feltre 's 
 adore silver trumpet of his Papal procession ; sweeter of the new 
 morning for the husband of the woman ; if he will but consent to the 
 worshipper 's posture ? yes , and when Gower Woodseer 's ' Malady of the 
 Wealthy , ' as he term the pivotting of the whole marching and wheel 
 world upon the favour of Fortune 's habit and taste , promise to quit 
 its fell clutch on he ? 

 another voice in the young nobleman cry : Pooh , dolt and dupe ! and 
 surround she for half a league with reek of burn flesh and shriek of 
 a torture child ; give she the aspect of a sister of the Parcw . but 
 it be not the ascendant ' voice . it growl underneath , much like the 
 deadly beast at Carinthia 's gown while she stand : - an image of she to 
 dominate the princeliest of man . 

 the princeliest must have win his title to the place before he can yield 
 other than complimentary station to a woman without violation of his 
 dignity ; and vast wealth be not the title ; worldly honour be not ; 
 deed only be the title . Fleetwood consent to tell himself that he 
 have not yet perform the deed . 

 therefore , for he to be dominate be to be obscure , eclipse . a man 
 may outrun we ; it be the fortune of war . eclipse behind the skirt of a 
 woman wave her upraised hand , with , ' back , pray ! ' - no , that ignominy 
 be too horribly abominable ! be sure , the situation will certainly recur 
 in some form ; will constantly recur . she will usurp the lead ; she will 
 play the man . 

 let matter go on as they be . we know our personal worth . 

 arrive at this point in the perpetual round of the conflict Carinthia 
 have implant , Fleetwood enter anew the rank of the ordinary man of 
 wealth and a coronet , and he hug himself . he enjoy repose ; know 
 it might be but a truce . matter might go on as they be . still , he 
 wish she away from those Wythans , reside at Esslemont . there she 
 might come eventually to a well knowledge of his personal worth : - ' the 
 gold mine we carry in our bosom till it be thresh out of we in 
 sweat , ' that fellow Gower Woodseex say ; add , that we be the rich 
 for not explore it . philosophical cynicism be inconclusive . Fleetwood 
 know his large capacity ; he have prove they and could again . in case 
 a certain half foresee calamity should happen : - imagine it a fact , 
 imagine he seize , besides admire her character , with a taste for her 
 person ! why , then , he would have to impress his own mysteriously deep 
 character on her portion of understanding . the battle for domination 
 would then begin . 

 anticipation of the possibility of it hew division between the young 
 man 's pride of be and his warm feeling . have he be free of 
 the dread of subjection , he would have sink to kiss the foot of the 
 statuesque young woman , arm in air , firm - front over the hideous death 
 that tear at her skirt . 




 CHAPTER XXXIV . a survey of the RIDE of the welsh cavalier escort the 
 COUNTESS of fleetwood to kentish esslemont 

 a formal notification from the earl , address to the Countess of 
 Fleetwood in the third person , that Esslemont stand ready to receive 
 she , autocratically conceal her lord 's impatience to have she there ; 
 and by the careful precision with which the stage of her journey be 
 mark , as place where the servant despatch to convey their lady 
 would find preparation for her comfort , again alarm the disorder 
 mother 's mind on behalf of the child she deem an object of the 
 father 's hatred , second to his hatred of the mother . but the mother 
 could defend herself , the child be prey the child of a detest wife 
 be heir to his title and estate . his look at the child , his hasty one 
 look down at her innocent , be conjure before she as resemble a kick 
 at a stone in his path . his indifference to the child 's Christian name 
 point darkly over its future . 

 the distempered wilfulness of a bruised young woman direct she 
 thought . she speak they in the tone of reason to her invalid friend 
 Rebecca Wythan , who see with she , feel with she , yearn to retain she 
 till breath be go . Owain Wythan have his doubt of the tyrant guilty 
 of maltreat this woman of woman . ' but when you do leave Wales , ' he 
 say , ' you shall be guard up to your haven . ' 

 Carinthia be not awake to his meaning then . she send a short letter of 
 reply , imitate the style of her lord ; very baldly state , that she 
 be unable to leave Wales because of her friend 's illness and her part 
 as nurse . regret be unmentione . 

 meanwhile Rebecca Wythan be pass to death . not cheerlessly , more and 
 more faintly , her thread of life run to pause , resemble a rill of 
 the drought ; and the thin - it grow , the shrewd be her murmur for 
 Carinthia 's ear in commend ' the most real of husband of an unreal 
 wife ' to her friendly care of he when he would no long see the shadow 
 he have wed . she have the privilege of a soul beyond our minor 
 rule and restraining to speak her wish to the true wife of a mock 
 husband - no husband ; less a husband than this shadow of a woman a wife , 
 she say ; and speak they without adjure the bow head beside she to 
 record a promise or seem to show the far willingness , but merely that 
 the wish should be hear on earth in her last breath , for a good man 's 
 remain one chance of happiness . on the theme touch her husband 
 Owain , it be verily to hear a soul speak , and have knowledge of the 
 broad range , the rich interflowing of the tune discord , a spirit 
 past the flesh can find . her mind be at the same time alive to our 
 worldly convention when other people come under its light ; she 
 sketch they and their view in her brief word between the gasp , with 
 perspicuous , humorous bluntness , as vividly as her twitched eyebrow 
 indicate the laugh . Gower Woodseer she read startlingly , if correctly . 

 Carinthia could not leave she . attendance upon this die woman be a 
 drinking at the spring of life . 

 Rebecca Wythan under earth , the earl be briefly inform of Lady 
 Fleetwood 's consent to quit Wales , obedient to a summon two month 
 old , - and that she would be properly escort ; for the which her lord 
 have make provision . consequently the tyrant swallow his wrath , little 
 conceive the monstrous blow she be about to strike . 

 in peril of fresh flood from our Dame , who should be satisfied with the 
 inspiring of these page , it be own that her story of ' the four and 
 twenty squire of Glamorgan and Caermarthen in their brass - button 
 green coat and buckskin , mount and arm , an escort of the Countess 
 of Fleetwood across the swollen Severn , along midwinter road , up to the 
 kentish gate of Esslemont , ' have a foundation , though the story be not 
 the more credible for her flourish of documentary old ballad - sheet , 
 print when London 's wag have ear on cock to any whisper of the 
 doing . of their favourite Whitechapel Countess ; and indeed hardly 
 depend on whisper . 

 Enthusiasm sufficient to troop forth four and twenty and more hundred 
 of cambrian gentleman , and still more of the common folk , as far as they 
 could journey afoot , be over the two half of the principality , 
 to give the countess a reputable and gallant body - guard . London have 
 intimation of kindle circumstance concern she , and magnify they 
 in the interest of the national humour : which be the english way of 
 exalt to criticize , criticize to depreciate , and depreciate to 
 restore , ultimately to cherish , in reward for the amusement furnish by 
 an eccentric person , not devoid of merit . 

 these little tale of she , prick cool blood to some activity , be 
 furze - fire among the Welsh . but where the latter hear bardic string 
 invite a chorus , the former as unanimously obey the stroke of their 
 humorous conductor 's baton for an outburst from the rib or below . and 
 it be really funny to hear of Whitechapel 's title heroine roam 
 Taffyland at her old prank . 

 catch a maddened bull by the horn in the marketplace , and hang to 
 the infuriate beast , a wild whirl of clout , till he be reduce to be a 
 subject for steak , that be no common feat . 

 her performance down mine be thing of the underworld . England 
 clap hand , merely object to she not have change her garb for 
 the picador 's or matador 's , before she seize the bull . Wales adopt 
 and be proud of she in any costume . Welshmen North and South , unite 
 for the nonce , now propose her gallantry as a theme to the rival bard 
 at the next Eisteddfod . she be to sit throne in full assembly , oak 
 leaf and mistletoe interweave on her head , a white robe and green sash 
 to clothe she , and the vanquished beast 's horn on a gild pole behind 
 the dais ; hear the eulogy respectively interpret to she by 
 Colonel Fluellen Wythan at one ear , and Captain Agincourt Gower at the 
 other . a splendid scene ; she might well insist to be present . 

 there , however , we be at the pitch of burlesque beyond her illustrious 
 lord 's capacity to stand . peremptory order from England arrive , 
 command her return . she temporize , postpone , and supplicate to 
 have the period extend up to the close of the Eisteddfod . my lord 's 
 order be imperatively repeat , and very blunt . he will not have she 
 ' continue play the fool down there . ' she hold her ground from August 
 into February , and then set forth , to undergo the further process 
 of her taming at Esslemont in England ; with Llewellyn and Vaughan and 
 Cadwallader , and Watkyn and Shenkyn and the remain of the race of 
 Owen Tudor , attend she ; vow to extract a receipt from the earl her 
 lord 's responsible servitor for the safe delivery of their heroine 's 
 person at the gate of Esslemont ; ich dien their trumpet motto . 

 count the number at four and twenty , it wear the look of an 
 invasion . but the say number be a ballad number , and have be since the 
 antique time . there be , at a less number , enough of a challenge about 
 it for squire of England , never in those day backward to pick up a 
 glove or give the ring rejoinder for a thumb - bite , to ride out and 
 tilt compliment with the Whitechapel Countess 's green cavalier , rally 
 their sprite and entertain they exactly accord to their degree of 
 dignity , as exhibit by their ' haviour under something of a trial ; and 
 satisfy also such temporary appetite as might be excited in they by 
  among other matter leave to the luck of event   a metropolitan play 
 upon the Saxon tongue , hard of understanding to the leeky cock until 
 their ready store of native pepper season it ; which may require a 
 correspond english condiment to rectify the flavour of the stew . 

 now the number of Saxe - Normans rid out to meet and greet the Welshmen 
 be declare to have not exceed nine . so much pretend to be historic , 
 in opposition to the poetic version . they would , we may be sure , have 
 make it a point of honour to meet and greet their invade guest in 
 precisely similar number a large would have overshoot the mark of 
 courtesy ; and doubtless a small have fall deplorably short of it . 
 therefore , an acquaintance with her chivalrous , if less impulsive , 
 countryman compel to the dismissing of the Dame 's ballad authority . 
 she have every right to quote they for her own good pleasure , and may 
 create in other an enjoyment of what have be call ' the Mackrell 
 fry . ' 

 her notion of a ballad be , that it grow like mushroom from a scuffle 
 of foot on grass overnight , and be a sort of forest mother of the pied 
 infant rear and trim by historian to show the world its fatherly 
 antecedent step . the hand of Rose Mackrell be at least suggest in 
 more than one of the ballad . here the Welsh irruption be a Chevy Chase ; 
 next we have the countess for a dispute Helen . 

 the lady 's lord be not a shin figure . how can an undecided one be a 
 dispenser of light ? poetry could never allow he to say with she : 

  ' Where'er I go I make a name , 
  and leave a song to follow . ' 

 yet he be the master of her fortune at the time ; all the material 
 power be his . even doggerel verse   it be worth while to brood on the 
 fact   deny a survive pre - eminence to the potent moody , reverse the 
 position between the driven and the driver . Poetry , however erratic , be 
 less a servant of the bully Present , or pomlious Past , than history . the 
 Muse of history have neither the same divination of the intrinsic nor 
 the devotion to it , though truly , she have possession of all the positive 
 matter and hold we fast by the crediting sens . 

 nine english cavalier , then , leave London early on a January or February 
 morning in a Southerly direction , bear East ; and they be the Earl 
 of Fleetwood 's intimate , of the half - dependent order ; so we may suppose 
 they to have go at his bidding . that they meet the procession of the 
 Welsh , and claim to take charge of the countess 's carriage , near 
 the kentish border - line , be an assertion support by testimony fairly 
 acceptable . 

 Intelligence of the advance party have reach the earl by courier , 
 from the date of the first gathering on the bridge of Pont - y - pridd ; 
 and from Gloucester , along to the Thames at reading ; thence away to the 
 Mole , from Mickleham , where the Surrey chalk run its final turfy spine 
 North - eastward to the slope upon kentish soil . 

 greatly to the astonishment of the Welsh cavalier , a mount footman , 
 clothe in the green and scarlet facing of Lord Fleetwood 's livery , ride 
 up to they a mile outside the principal town and name the inn where 
 the earl have order preparation for the reception of they . England 's 
 hospitality be offer on a princely scale . Cleverer fencing could not 
 be . 

 the meeting , in no sense an encounter , occur close by a thirty - acre 
 meadow , famous over the county ; and be remarkable for the punctilious 
 exchange of ceremonial speech , danger be present ; as we see 
 powder - magazine protect by their wall and fosse and covered alley . 
 Notwithstanding which , there be a scintillation of spark . 

 Lord Brailstone , spokesman of the welcoming party , express comic 
 regret that they have not an interpreter with they . 

 Mr. Owain Wythan , in the name of the cambrian chivalry , assure he of 
 their comprehension and appreciation of English slang . 

 both gentleman keep their head uncover in a suspense ; they might 
 for a word or two more of that savour have turn into the conveniently 
 spacious meadow . they be induce , on the contrary , to enter the 
 channel of English humour , by hear Chumley Potts exclaim : ' his nob ! ' 
 and all of they laugh at the condense description of a good hit back , 
 at the english party 's cost . 

 Laughter , let it be but genuine , be of a common nationality , indeed a 
 common fireside ; and profound disagreement be not easy after it . the 
 Dame profess to believe that ' Carinthia Jane ' have to intervene as 
 peacemaker , before the united race take the table in Esslemont 's 
 dining - hall for a memorable night of it , and a contest nearer the mark 
 of veracity than that show in another of the ballad she would have 
 we follow . whatever happen , they sit down at table together , and the 
 point of honour for they each and every be , not to be first to rise 
 from it . once more the pure Briton and the mixed if not fuse English 
 engage , Bacchus for instrument this time , Bacchus for arbiter of the 
 fray . 

 you may imagine ! say the Dame . she cite the old butler at Esslemont , 
 ' as have be much question on the subject by her family relative , 
 Dr. Glossop , and other interested to know the small item of the 
 fact , ' - and he be her authority for the declaration that the Welsh 
 gentleman and the english gentleman , ' whatever their unite number , ' 
 consume the number of nine dozen and a half of old Esslemont wine 
 before they rise , or as possibly sink , at the festive board at the hour 
 of five of the morning . 

 year later , this butler , Joshua Queeney , ' a much enfeeble old man , ' 
 retell and enlarge the tale of the enormous consumption of his good 
 wine ; with a sacred oath to confirm it , and a tear expressive of 
 elegiacal feeling . 

 ' they bleed I twelve dozen , not a bottle less , ' she quote he , after 
 a minute description of his countenance and scrupulously brush black 
 suit , pensioner though he have become . he have grow , during the interval , 
 to be more communicative as to particular . the wine be four . Sherry 
 lead off the parade pace , hock the trot into the merry canter , Champagne 
 the race gallop , Burgundy the grand trial of constitutional endurance 
 for the enforce finish . all these wine , except the sparkling , have 
 their date of birth in the precedent century . ' they go like water . ' 

 question anxiously by Dr. Glossop , Queeney maintain an impartial 
 attitude , and say there be no victor , no vanquished . they do not 
 sit in block . the tactic for preserve peace intermingle they . each 
 english gentleman have a Welsh gentleman beside he ; they both sit firm ; 
 both fall together . the bottle or decanter be not stationary for the 
 guest to fill his glass , they circulate , return to an empty glass . 
 all drink equally . often the voice be high , the talk be loud . the 
 gentleman be too serious to sing . 

 at one moment of the evening Queeney confidently anticipate a 
 ' fracassy , ' he say . one of the foreign party - and they all speak 
 English , after five dozen bottle have go the round , as correct as the 
 English themselves - remark on the seventy - year Old Brown Sherry , 
 that ' it have a Madeira flavour . ' he speak it approvingly . thereupon 
 Lord Simon Pitscrew call to Queeney , ask he ' why Madeira have be 
 supply instead of Esslemont 's renowned old Sherry ? ' a second Welsh 
 gentleman give his assurance that his friend have not say it be 
 Madeira . but Lord Brailstone accuse they of the bad unkindness to a 
 venerable Old Brown Sherry , in attribute a Madeira flavour to it . then 
 another Welsh gentleman briskly and emphatically state his opinion , 
 that the attribution of Madeira flavour to it be a compliment . at this , 
 which smell strongly , he say , of insult , Captain Abrane call on the 
 name of their absent host to warrant the demand of an apology to the Old 
 Brown Sherry , for the imputation deny it an individual distinction . 
 Chumley Potts offer generally to bet that he would distinguish 
 blindfold at a single sip any Madeira from any first - class Sherry , Old 
 Brown or Pale . ' single sip or smell ! ' Ambrose Mallard cry , either for 
 himself or his comrade , Queeney could not say which . 

 of all Lord Fleetwood 's following , Mr. Potts and Mr. Mallard be , the 
 Dame inform we , Queeney 's favourite , because they be so genial ; and 
 he remember most of what they say and do , be move to it by ' poor 
 young Mr. Mallard 's melancholy end and Mr. Potts 's grief ! ' 

 the Welsh gentleman , after pay their devoir to the countess next 
 morning , ride on in fresh health and spirit at mid - day to Barlings , the 
 seat of Mr. Mason Fennell , a friend of Mr. Owain Wythan 's . they shout , 
 in an unseemly way , Queeney think , at their breakfast - table , to hear 
 that three of the english party , namely , Captain Abrane , Mr. Mallard , 
 and Mr. Potts , have ring for tea and toast in bed . Lord Simon Pitscrew , 
 Lord Brailstone , and the rest of the English be sore about it ; for it 
 certainly wear a look of constitutional inferiority on the english side , 
 which could boast of indubitably stouter muscle . the frenzied spirit 
 of the Welsh gentleman , when rid off , let it be know what their 
 opinion be . under the protection of the countess 's presence , they 
 be so cheery as to seem triumphantly ironical ; they send message of 
 condolence to the three in bed . 

 with an undisguised reluctance , the countess , hold Mr. Owain Wythan 's 
 hand long than be publicly decent , call he by his christian name , 
 consent to their departure . as they leave , they defile before she ; 
 the vow be utter by each , that at the instant of her summon he would 
 mount and devote himself to her service , individually or collectively . 
 she wave her hand to they . they range in line and salute . she kiss 
 her hand . sweep the cavalier ' obeisance , gallant of bow , they 
 ride away . 

 a striking scene , Dame Gossip say ; but raise a wind over the clip 
 adventure , and be for recount what London believe about it . enough 
 have be concede for the stoppage of her intrusion ; she be leave in the 
 likeness of a full - charge pistol capless to the clapping trigger . 

 that which London believe , or affect to believe about it , would fill 
 chapter . there be during many month an impression of Lord Fleetwood 's 
 countess as of a tenacious , dread , prevail young woman , both intrepid 
 and astute , who have , by an exercise of various art , legitimate in open 
 war of husband and wife , gather the pick of the principality to storm 
 and carry another of her husband 's house . the certification that her 
 cavalier be Welsh gentleman of wealth and position require a 
 broad sneer at the Welsh than be warrant by later and more intimate 
 acquaintance , if it could be make to redound to her discredit . so , 
 therefore , add to the national liking for a plucky woman , she gain 
 the respect for power . Whitechapel be round she like London 's one 
 street 's length extension of smoky haze , reminder of the morning 's fog 
 under novel sunbeam . 

 simultaneously , strange to say , her connubial antagonist , far from be 
 overshadow , grow to be proportionately respect , and on the strength 
 of his desert , apart from his title and his wealth . he defend 
 himself , as he be bind to do , by welcome the pick Welsh squire 
 with hospitable embrace , provide ceremony , reception , and most 
 comfortable arrangement for they , along the route . but in thus gravely 
 enter into the knightly burlesque of the procession , and assist 
 to swell the same , he not only draw the venom from it , he stand forth 
 as England 's deputed representative , equal to her invasive challengeing 
 guest at all point , comic , tragic , or cordial . he see that it have to 
 be treat as a national affair ; and he parry the imputation which 
 would have injure his country 's name for courtly breeding , have they 
 be ill - receive , while he rescue his own good name from derision by 
 join the extravagance . 

 he be well inspire . it be popularly feel to be the supreme of 
 clever - nay , noble - fencing . really noble , though the cleverness be 
 conspicuous . a defensive stroke , protect he against his fair one 's 
 violent charge of horse , ward off an imply attack upon Old England , 
 in Old England 's well - humour easy manner . 

 suppose the earl to have act otherwise , his countess would virtually 
 have ride over he , and wild Wales have cast a shadow on the chivalry 
 of magisterial England . he and his country stand to meet the issue 
 together the moment the Countess of Fleetwood and her escort cross 
 the Welsh border ; when it become a question between the hot - hearted , 
 at their impetuous gallop , and the sedatively minded , in an unfortified 
 camp of arm - chair . the earl 's adroitness , avert a collision fatal or 
 discomforting to both , disengage he from an incumbent odium , of which , 
 it need hardly be state , neither the lady nor her attendant cavalier 
 have any notion at the hour of the assembly for the start for England on 
 the bridge of Pont - y - pridd . the hungry mother have the safety of her babe 
 in thought . the hotheaded Welshmen be swear to guard their heroine . 

 that be the case present by the Dame 's paper , when the incredible 
 be excise . she claim the be a good friend to fiction in feed 
 popular voracity with all her store . but the Old Buccaneer , no 
 profess friend to it , be a sounder guide in the maxim , where he say : 
 deliver yourself by permit of your cheque on the ' Bank of Reason , and 
 your account be increase instead of lessened . 

 our account with credulity , he would signify . 

 the Dame do not like the shaking for a sifting . romance , however , be 
 not a mountain make of gold , but a vein run some way through ; and it 
 must be engineer , else either we be fill with wind from swallow 
 indigestible substance , or we consent to a debasing of the currency , 
 which mean she to - morrow 's bankruptcy ; and the spectacle of Romance in 
 the bankruptcy court degrade we   who believe we be ally to she   as 
 cruelly as it appal . it give the cynic licence to bark day and night 
 for an entire generation . 

 surely the Countess of Fleetwood 's drive from the Welsh border to 
 Esslemont , accompany by the choose of the land , follow by the vivat 
 of the whole principality , and England gap to hear the stage of 
 her progress , may be hold sufficiently romantic without stuff 
 of surprise and conflict , adventure at inn , alarm at midnight , 
 winding of a horn over hilly verge of black heath , and the rape of 
 the child , the pursuit , the recovery of the child , after a new set of 
 heroine performance on the part of a string - wire mother , whose outcry 
 in a waste country district , as she clasp her boy to her bosom again : 
 ' there be a farm I see for milk for he ! ' the Dame repeat , have 
 begin with an admission that the tale have be contradict , and be not 
 produce on authority . the end in design be to win the ear by make a 
 fuss , and roll event upon event for the braining of common intelligence , 
 until her narrative resemble dusty trooping along a road to the race . 

 Carinthia and her babe reach Esslemont , no matter what impediment . 
 there , like a stop runner whose panting lengthen to the long 
 breath , her alarm over the infant subside , cease for as long as 
 she clasp it or be in the room with it . walk behind the precious 
 donkey - basket round the park , she go armed , and she soon win a fearful 
 name at kentish cottage - hearth , though she ' be not black to see , nor 
 old . no , she be very young . but she do all the thing that soldier 
 do , - be a bit of a foreigner ; - she bring a reputation up from the 
 Welsh land , and it have a raven 's croak and a glow - worm 's drapery and a 
 goblin 's origin . 

 something be hint of she have agitate London once . somebody 
 drop word of she and that old Lord Levellier up at Croridge . she 
 stalk park and country at night . story , one or two near the truth , 
 be tell of a restless and a very decide lady down these part as 
 well ; and the earl her husband dare not   come nigh in his dread of she , so 
 that he run as if to save his life out of every place she enter . and 
 he be not one to run for a trifle . his pride be pretty well a match for 
 prince and princess . 

 all the same , he shake in his shoe before she , durst hardly spy at 
 Esslemont again while she be in occupation . his manage gentleman come 
 down from he , and go up from she ; that be how they communicate . one 
 week she be quite solitary ; another week the house be brimful as can be . 
 she be the great lady entertain then . yet they say it be a fact , 
 she have not a shilling of her own to fle at a beggar . she will stock 
 a cottage want it with provision for a fortnight or more , and she will 
 order the doctor in , and she will call and see the right thing do for 
 illness . ' but no money ; no one be to expect money of she . the shot you 
 hear in Esslemont ground out of season be she and her maid , always 
 alongside she , at it before a target on a bank , try that old Lord 
 Levellier 's gunpowder out of his mill ; and he be get no money either ; not 
 for his workman , they say , until they congregate , and a threaten to 
 blow he up bring forth half their pay , on account . but he be a known 
 miser . she be not that . she be a pleasant - face lady for the poor . she have 
 the voice poor people like . it be only her enemy , maybe her husband , she 
 can be terrible to . she would drive a hole through a robber stop she on 
 the road , as soon as look at he . 

 this be Esslemont 's atmosphere work its way to the earl , not so very 
 long after the establishment of his countess there . she could lay 
 hold of the English , too , it seem . do she call any gentleman of the 
 district by his christian name ? Lord Simon Pitscrew report she do 
 so in the case of one of the Welshmen . those welshman ! apparently they 
 be make a push for importance in the kingdom ! 




 CHAPTER XXXV . in which certain change may be discerned 

 behind his white plaster of composure , Lord Fleetwood have alternately 
 rag and wonder during the passage of the Welsh cavalcade up 
 Eastward : a gigantic burlesque , that would have sweep any husband of 
 their heroine off the scene have he fail to encounter it deferentially , 
 preserve his countenance and ostensibly his temper . an idiot of a 
 woman , incurable in her lunacy , suspect the father of the infant as 
 guilty of design do to death in romance ; and so she manage to 
 set go solemnly a big blaze Tom Fool 's show than any known or 
 write romance give word of ! and that fellow , Gower Woodseer , plead , 
 in apology , for her husband 's confusion , physiologically , that it come 
 of she have be carry off and keep a prisoner when she be bear 
 the child and knit her whole mind to ensure the child . but what 
 sheer animal these woman be , if they take impression in such a 
 manner ! and Mr. Philosopher argue that the abusing of woman prove the 
 hating of Nature ; name it ' the commonest insanity , and the deadly , ' 
 and man be ' plant in the bog of their unclean animal condition until 
 they do proper homage to the animal Nature make the woman be . ' oh , 
 pish , sir ! - as Meeson Corby have the habit of exclaim when Abrane 's 
 ' fiddler ' argue he into a corner . the fellow can fiddle fine thing 
 and occasionally clear sense : - ' man hat Nature be insane . woman and 
 Nature be close . if it be rather general to hate Nature and maltreat 
 woman , we begin to see why the world be a mad world . ' that be the tune 
 of the fiddler 's fiddling . as for he , something protect he . he be 
 the slave of Countess Livia ; like Abrane , Mallard , Corby , St. Ombre , 
 young Cressett , and the dozen . he be now her master . can a man like 
 that be foolish , in say of the Countess Carinthia , she be ' not 
 only quick to understand , she be in the quick of understanding ' ? Gower 
 Woodseer say it of she in Wales , and again on the day of his walk up 
 to London from Esslemont , after pedestrian exercise , which may heat the 
 frame , but cool the mind . she stamp that idea on a thoughtful fellow . 

 he be a Welshman . they be all excitable , - have head on hound 's leg for 
 a fly figure in front . still , they must have an object , definitely 
 see by they - definite to they if dim to their neighbour ; and it will 
 run in the poetic direction : and the woman to win they , win all class 
 of they , within so short a term , be a toss above extraordinary . she be 
 name Carinthia - suitable name for the Welsh pantomimic procession . or 
 cry out the word in an amphitheatre of Alpine crag , - it sound at home . 

 she be a daughter of the mountain , - should never have leave they . she be 
 also a daughter of the Old Buccaneer - no poor speciman of the fighting 
 Englishman of his day . accord to Rose Mackrell , he , this Old 
 Buccaneer , it be , who , by strange adventure , bring the great Welsh 
 mine into the family ! he would not be ashamed in spy through his 
 nautical glass , up or down , at his daughter 's doing . she have not yet 
 develop a taste for the mother 's trick : - the mother , say to have 
 be a kindler . that Countess of Cressett be a romantic little fly - away 
 bird . both parent be brave : the daughter would inherit gallantry . she 
 inherit a kind of thwart beauty . or it need the situation see 
 in Wales : her arm up and her unaffrighted eye over the unappeasable 
 growl . she have then the beauty come from the fathom depth , with the 
 torch of Life in the jaw of Death to light she : beauty of the nether 
 kingdom mount to an upper place in the high . her beauty recognize , 
 the name of the man who marry she be not longear - not to himself , be 
 the main point ; nor will it be to the world when he show that it be not 
 so to himself . 

 suppose he go to she , would she be try at domination ? the woman 's 
 pitch above woman 's beauty be perceive to be no intermittent beam , but 
 so live as to take the stamp of permanence . More than to say it 
 be her , it be she . what a deadly peril bring into view be her 
 character - soul , some call it : generally a thing rather distasteful in 
 woman , or chill to the masculine temperament . here it attract . here , 
 strange to say , it be the decided attraction , in a woman of a 
 splendid figure and a known softness . by right , she should have more 
 understanding than to suspect the husband as guilty of design do to 
 death in romance . however , she be not a craven who compliment he by 
 rear he , and he might prove that there be no need for fear . but she 
 would be expect explanation before the reconcilement . the bosom 
 of these woman will keep on at its quick heaving until they have hear 
 certain formal word , oath to boot . how speak they ? 

 his old road of the ladder appear to Fleetwood an excellent one for 
 obviate explanation and effect the reconcilement without any 
 temporary seeming forfeit of the native male superiority . for there she 
 be at Esslemont now ; any night the window could be scale . ' it be my 
 husband . ' the soul be in her voice when she say it . 

 he remember that it have not ennoble she to he then ; have not 
 endear ; be take for a foreign example of the childish artless , 
 imperfectly suit to our english clime . ' the tone of adorable 
 utterance , however much desire , be never for repetition ; nor be 
 the cast of divine sweet look ; nor be the particular deed - once 
 pardonable , fitly plead . a second scaling of her window - no , night 's 
 black hill girdle the scene with hoarse echo ; the moon rush out of 
 her cloud grimace . even Fleetwood 's devil , much addict to cape and 
 sword and ladder , the vulpine and the gryphine , reject it . 

 for she have , by singular transformation since , and in spite of a 
 deluging grotesque that be antecedently incredible , she have become 
 a personage , count her adherent ; she could put half the world in 
 motion on her side . yell those welshman to scorn , they be on a plane 
 find native ground with as large a body of these English . his baser 
 mind bow to the fact . her aspect be entirely different ; her attitude 
 toward he as well : insomuch that he have to chain she to her original 
 feature by the conjuring of recollect phrase memorable for the vivid 
 portraiture of her foregone simplicity and her devotion to ' my husband . ' 

 yes , there she be at Essleinont , securely there , near he , to be see 
 any day ; worth claim , too ; a combatant figure , provocative of the 
 fight and the capture rather than repellent . the respect enforce by 
 her attitude awaken in he his inherit keen old relish for our 
 intersexual strife and the indubitable victory of the strong , with 
 the prospect of slavish charm , fawn submission , marrowy spoil . or 
 perhaps , preferably , a sullen submission , reluctant charm ; far more 
 marrowy . or who can say ? - the creature be a rocket of the shot into 
 the fiery garland of star ; she may personate any new marvel , be an 
 unimagined terror , an overwhelming bewitchment : for she carry the 
 unexpected in her bosom . and do it look like such indubitable victory , 
 when the man , the woman 's husband , divide from she , toothsome to the 
 sex , acknowledge within himself and let the world know his utter 
 dislike of other woman 's charm , to the degree that herbal anchorite 
 positively could not be cold , could not be chaster : and he no forest 
 bird , but have the garden of the variety of fair flower at nod 
 and blush about he ! that be the truth . even Henrietta 's beauty have the 
 effect of a princess 's birthday doll admire on show by a contemptuous 
 boy . 

 wherefore , then , do the devil in he seek to pervert this lovely 
 of young woman and feed on her humiliation for one flash minute ? 
 the taste have go , the desire of the vengeance be extinct , personal 
 gratification could not exist . he spy into himself , and set it down to 
 one among the many mystery . 

 man uninstructe in analysis of motif arrive at this dangerous 
 conclusion , which spar their pride and caress their indolence , while 
 it flatter the sense of internal vastness , and invite to headlong 
 intoxication . it allow they to think they be of such a compound , and 
 must necessarily act in that manner . they be not teach at the school 
 or by the book of the honour place in the library , to examine and 
 see the simplicity of these mystery , which it would be here and there 
 a save grace for they to see ; as the minstrel , dutifully incline 
 to the prosy in their behalf and morality 's , should exhibit ; he should 
 arrest all the character of his drama to spring it to vision and strike 
 perchance the chord primarily if not continually move they , that 
 reader might learn the why and how of a germ of evil , its flourishing 
 under rebuke , the persistency of it after the fall creative energy have 
 expire and pleasure sink to be a phlegmatic dislike , almost a loathing . 

 this would here be do , but for sign of a barometric dead fall in Dame 
 Gossip 's chap , already heavily pendent . she would be off with we on one 
 of her whirl cyclone or elemental mad waltz , if a step be take 
 to the lecturing - desk . we be so far in her hand that we have to keep 
 she quiet . she will not hear of the reason and the change of reason 
 for one thing and the other . thing be so : narrate they , and let 
 reader do their reflection for themselves , she say , denounce our 
 conscientious method as the direct road downward to the dreadful modern 
 appeal to the sens and assault on they for testimony to the veracity 
 of everything describe ; to the extent that , at the mention of a vile 
 smell , it shall be blow into the reader 's nostril , and cork - pin 
 attack the comfortable seat of he simultaneously with a development of 
 surprise . ' thither your conscientiousness lead . ' 

 it be not perfectly visible . and she would gain information of the 
 singular nature of the young of the male sex in listen to the wrangle 
 between Lord Fleetwood and Gower Woodseer on the subject of pocket - money 
 for the need of the Countess Carinthia . for it be a long and an angry 
 one , and it bring out both of they , expose , of course , the more 
 complex creature the most . they be near a rupture , so scathing be 
 Gower 's tone of irate professor to shirky scholar - or it might be put , 
 german professor to English scuffleshoe . 

 she be for the scene of ' Chillon John 's ' attempt to restore the 
 respiration of his bank - book by wager ; to wit , that he would walk a 
 mile , run a mile , ride a mile , and jump ten hurdle , then score five 
 rifle - shot at a three hundred yard ' distant target within a count of 
 minute ; twenty - five , she say ; and vow it to have be one of the most 
 exciting of scene ever witness on green turf in the land of wager ; 
 and that he be accomplish it quite certainly when , at the first of 
 the hurdle , a treacherous unfolding and wave of a white flag cause 
 his horse to swerve and the loss of one minute , seven and twenty 
 second , before he clear the hurdle ; after which , he have to fire 
 his shot hurriedly , and the last count blank , for be outside the 
 circle of the state time . 

 so he be beat . but a terrific uproar over the field proclaim the 
 popular dissatisfaction . presently there be a cleavage of the mob , 
 and behold a chase at the heel of the fellow to rival the very captain 
 himself for fleetness . he escape , leave his pole with the sheet 
 nail to it , by way of flag , in proof of foul play ; or a proof , as 
 the other side declare , of an innocently premature signalizing of the 
 captain 's victory . 

 however that might be , he run . see he spin his leg at a hound 's 
 pace , half a mile away , four countryman attempt to stop he . all four 
 be lay on their back in turn with stupefy celerity ; and on rise 
 to their foot , and for the remainder of their natural life , they swear 
 that no man but a Champion could have floor they so . this again may 
 have be due to the sturdy island pride of four good man knock over 
 by one . we be unable to decide . wickedness there be , the Dame say ; 
 and she counsel the world to ' put and put together , ' for , at any 
 rate , ' a partial elucidation of a most mysterious incident . ' as to the 
 wager - money , the umpire dissent ; a famous quarrel , that do not 
 concern we here , spring out of the dispute ; which be eventually , after 
 great disturbance ' of the country , refer to three lead sportsman 
 in the metropolitan sphere , who pronounce the wager ' off , ' be two to 
 one . hence arise the dissatisfied third party , and the letter of this 
 minority to the newspaper , exciting , if not actually divide , all 
 England for several month . 

 now the month of December be the month of the Dame 's mysterious 
 incident . from the date of January , as Madge Winch know , Christopher 
 Ines have cease to be in the service of the Earl of Fleetwood . at 
 Esslemont Park gate , one winter afternoon of a North - east wind blow 
 ' rum - shrub into man for a stand against rheumatic , ' as he remark , 
 ine meet the girl by appointment , and inform she that he have money , 
 and that Lord Fleetwood be ' a black nobleman , ' he propose immediate 
 marriage . the hymeneal invitation , waft to she on the breath of 
 rum - shrub , obtain no response from Madge until she have receive 
 evasive answer as to why the earl dismiss he , and whence the stock 
 of money come . 

 Lord Fleetwood , he repeat , be a black nobleman . she bring he to 
 say of his knowledge , that Lord Fleetwood hat , and have reason to hate , 
 Captain Levellier . ' should not   I hate the man take my sweetheart from 
 I and pop I into the noose with his sister instead ? ' Madge be now 
 advise to be overcome by the smell of rum - shrub : - a mere fancy drink 
 toss off by hero in their idle moment , before they settle down 
 to the serious business of real drinking , Kit protest . he simulate 
 envious admiration of known hero , who mean business , and scorn any 
 of the weak stuff under brandy , and go at it till the bottle be the 
 first to give in . for why ? they have to stomach an injury from the world 
 or their young woman , and half - way on they shove that young person and 
 all enemy aside , trample them . that be what Old O'Devy signify ; and 
 many be the man drive to his consolation by a cat of a girl , who be like 
 the element in their puff and spit at a gallant ship , that rid the 
 tight and the tight for all they can do to capsize . ' tight than 
 ever I be tight I will be to - night , if you can not   behave . ' 

 they fall upon the smack of word . Kit hitch and huff away , 
 threaten bottle . whatever he have do , it be to establish the 
 petticoate hornet in the dignity of matron of a champion light - weight 's 
 wholesome retreat of a public - house . a spell of his larkish hilarity be 
 for the punishment of the girl devote to his heroical performance , as 
 he still consider she to be , though woman be notoriously volatile , 
 and her language be mount a stage above the kitchen . 

 Madge have little sorrow for he . she be the girl of the fiery heart , 
 not the large heart ; she could never be devoted to more than one at 
 a time , and her mistress have all her heart . in relation to Kit , the 
 thought of she have sacrifice her good name to he , fling she on her 
 pride of chastity , without the reckoning of it as a merit . it be the 
 inward assurance of her independence : the young spinster 's planting of 
 the standard of her proud secret knowledge of what she be , let it be a 
 thing of worth or what you will , or the world think as it may . that be 
 her thought . 

 her feeling , the much lively animation , be bitter grief , because her 
 mistress , unlike herself , have be betray by her ignorance of the man 
 into call he husband . just some knowledge of the man ! the warning to 
 the rescue might be there . for nothing do the dear lady weep except for 
 her brother 's evil fortune . the day when she have intelligence from Mrs. 
 Levellier of her brother 's defeat , she weep over the letter on her knee 
 long hour . ' I , my child , my brother ! ' she cry more than once . she 
 have her suspicion of the earl then , and instantly , as her love servant 
 have . the suspicion be now no dark light , but a clear day - beam to Madge . 
 she adopt Kit 's word of Lord Fleetwood . ' a black nobleman he be ! he 
 be ! ' her mistress have write like a creature beg he for money . he 
 do not deign a reply . to she ! when he have see good proof she be 
 the brave woman on earth ; and she rush at death to save a child , a 
 common child ; as people say . and who know but she save that husband of 
 her , too , from bite might have send he out of the world barking , and 
 all his wealth not able to stop he ! 

 they be in the month of March . her dear mistress have be beg my 
 lord through Mr. Woodseer constantly of late for an allowance of money ; 
 on her knee to he , as it seem ; and Mr. Woodseer be expect at 
 Esslemont . her mistress be look for he eagerly . something her heart 
 be in depended on it , and only her brother could be the object , for 
 now she love only he of these man ; though a gentleman come over from 
 Barlings pretty often would pour mine of money into her lap for half a 
 word . 

 Carinthia have walk up to Croridge in the morning to meet her brother 
 at Lekkatts . Madge be leave guardian of the child . she like a stroll 
 any day round Esslemont Park , where her mistress be begin to strike 
 root ; as she soon do wherever she be plant , despite a tone of pity 
 for artificial water and gardener ' art . Madge respect they . she 
 know nothing of the grandeur of wildness . her native English veneration 
 for the smooth hand of wealth lead she to think Esslemont the home of 
 all home for a lady with her husband beside she . and without he , too , 
 if he be waft over sea and away : if there would but come a wind to 
 do that ! 

 the wild north - easter tear the bud beech . Master John Edward 
 Russett lie in the cradling - basket draw by his docile donkey , Martha 
 and Madge to right and leave of he ; a speechless rustic , graduate in 
 footman 's livery , to rear . 

 at slow march round by the wrinkle water , Madge see the park gate 
 fling wide . a coach drive up the road along on the farth rim of the 
 circle , direct for the house . it stop , the team turn leisurely 
 and come at a smart pace toward the carriage - basket . Lord Fleetwood be 
 recognize . 

 he alight , bid one of his groom drive to stable . Madge perform 
 her reverence , aware that she do it in clumsy style ; his presence have 
 startle her instinct and set they travel . 

 ' coldish for the youngster , ' he say . ' all well , Madge ? ' 

 ' baby sleep in the air , my lord , ' she reply . ' my lady have go to 
 Croridge . ' 

 ' sharp air for a child , be not   it ? ' 

 ' my lady teach he to breathe with his mouth shut , like her father 
 teach she when she be little . our baby never catch cold . ' 

 Madge display the child 's face . 

 the father drop a glance on it from the height of sky . 

 ' Croridge , you say ? ' 

 ' her uncle , Lord Levellier 's . ' 

 ' you say , never catch cold ? ' 

 ' not our baby , my lord . ' 

 probably good management on the part of the mother . but the wife 's 
 absence disappoint the husband string to meet she , and an obtrusion 
 of her practical motherhood blur the prospect demand by his present 
 step . 

 ' when do you expect she to return , Madge ? ' 

 ' Before nightfall , my lord . ' 

 ' she walk ? ' 

 ' oh yes , my lady be fond of walk . ' 

 ' I suppose she could defend herself ? ' 

 ' my lady walk with a good stick . ' 

 Fleetwood weigh the chance ; beheld her figure attack , Amazonian . 

 ' and tell I , my dear - Kit ? ' 

 I do not   see more of Kit Ines . ' 

 ' what have the fellow do ? ' 

 ' I would like he to let I know why he be dismiss . ' 

 ' ah . he keep silent on that point . ' 

 ' he let out enough . ' 

 ' you have   punish he , if he be to lose a bonny sweetheart , poor devil ! 
 your sister Sally send you message ? ' 

 ' we be both of we grateful , my lord . ' 

 he lift the thin veil from John Edward Russett 's face with a loveless 
 hand . 

 ' you remember the child bite by a dog down in Wales . I have word from 
 my manager there . poor little wretch have die - die raving . ' 

 Madge 's bosom go shiver up and sink . ' my lady be right . she be not 
 often wrong . ' 

 ' she be look well ? ' say the earl , impatient with her moral 
 merit : - and this communication from Wales have be the decisive motive 
 agent in hurry he at last to Esslemont . the next moment he hear 
 coolly of the lady 's look well . he want fervid eulogy of his wife 's 
 look , if he be to hear any . 




 CHAPTER xxxvi . below the SURFACE and above 

 the girl be counsel by the tremor of her instinct to forbear to 
 speak of the minor circumstance , that her mistress have , besides a good 
 stick , a good companion on the road to Croridge : and she rejoice to 
 think her mistress have he , because it seem an intimation of justice 
 return upon earth . she be combative , a bear rebel against tyranny . 
 she weigh the power , she feel to the worth of the person come 
 into her range of touch : she set her mistress and my lord front for 
 a wrestle , and my lord 's wealth go to thin vapour , and her mistress 's 
 character throw he . more dimly , my lord and the Welsh gentleman be 
 put to the trial : a tough one for these two man . she do not proclaim 
 the winner , but a momentary flutter of pity in the direction of Lord 
 Fleetwood do as much . she pity he ; for his presence at Esslemont 
 betray an inclination ; he be ignorant of his lady 's character , of how 
 firm she could be to defy he and all the world , in her gratitude to 
 the gentleman she think of as her true friend , smile at for his open 
 nature , - call by his christian name . 

 the idea of a piece of information sting Lord Fleetwood , the desire 
 to sting , so as to be an instrument of retribution   one of female human 
 nature 's ecstasy ; and she , abstain , that she , might not pain 
 the lord who have be generous to her sister Sally , make the force in 
 Madge 's breast which urge to the gambling for the undeveloped , entitle 
 prophecy . she keep it low and feel it thrill . 

 Lord Fleetwood , chat ; Madge have he wince . he might pull the cover 
 off the child 's face carelessly - he look at the child . his look at the 
 child be a thought of the mother . if he think of the mother , he would 
 be want to see she . if he hear she call a gentleman by his Christian 
 name , and hear the gentleman say ' Carinthia ' my lord would begin to 
 shiver at change . woman have to do unusual thing when they would 
 bring that outer set to human behaviour . perhaps my lord would mount the 
 coach - box and whip his horse away , adieu forever . his lady would 
 not weep . he might , perhaps , command she to keep her mouth shut from 
 gentleman 's christian name , all except his own . his lady would not 
 obey . he have to learn something of change that have come to other as 
 well as to himself . ah , and then would he dare hint , as base man will ? 
 he may blow foul smoke on she , she will shine out of it . he have to learn 
 what she be , that be his lesson ; and let he pray all night and work 
 hard all day for it not to be too late . let he try to be a little 
 like Mr. Woodseer , who worship the countess , and be hearty with the 
 gentleman she treat as her good of friend . there be the real nobleman . 

 Fleetwood chat on airily . his instinct be dull than those of the 
 black - browed girl , at whom he gaze for idle satisfaction of eye from 
 time to time while she reply demurely and maintain her drama of , the 
 featureless but well - distinguish actor within her bosom , - a round , 
 plump bust , good wharfage and harbourage , he be think . excellent 
 harbourage , suppose the arm out in pure good - will . a girl to hold she 
 voyager fast and safe ! man of her class have really a capital choice in 
 a girl like this . man of another class as well , possibly , for temporary 
 anchorage out midchannel . no ? - possibly not . here and there a girl be 
 a Tartar . ine talk of she as if she be a kind of religious edifice 
 and a doubt be sacrilege . she could impress the rascal : girl have 
 their art for reach the holy end , and still they may have a welcome 
 for a foreign ship . 

 the earl say humorously : ' you will grant I permission to lunch at 
 your mistress 's table in her absence ? ' and she say : ' my lord ! ' and he 
 resume , to waken her interest with a personal question : ' you like our 
 quiet country round Esslemont ? ' she say : ' I do , ' and give he plain 
 look for look . her eye be undefended : he go into it , find neither 
 shallow nor depth , simply the look , always the look ; whereby he know 
 that no story of man be there , and not the shy of remote responsive 
 invitation from Nature 's waken and detect rogue . the bed of an 
 unmarried young woman 's eye yield her secret of past and present to the 
 intrepid diver , if he can get his plunge ; he hold she for the tenth of 
 a minute , that be the revealment . jewel or oyster - shell , it be ours . she 
 can not withhold it , he know right well . this girl , then , be , he could 
 believe , one of the rarely example innocent in knowledge . he be 
 practise to judge . 

 invitation or challenge or response from the handsome he would have 
 scorn just then . his native devilry suffer a stir at sight of 
 an innocent in knowledge and spotless after experience . by a sudden 
 singular twist , rather unfairly , naturally , as it happen , he 
 attribute it to an influence issue from her mistress , to whom the 
 girl be devote , whom consequently she copy ; might physically , and 
 also morally , at a distance , resemble . 

 ' well , you have   be a faithful servant to your lady , my dear ; I hope 
 you will be comfortable here , ' he say . ' she like the mountain . ' 

 ' my lady would be quite contented if she could pass two month of the 
 year in the mountain , ' Madge answer . 

 ' look at I . they say people live together get a likeness to one 
 another . what be your opinion ? upon my word , your eyebrow remind I , 
 though they be not the colour - they have a bend ! ' 

 ' you have   see my lady in danger , my lord . ' 

 ' yes ; well , there be no one to resemble she there , she have she 
 mark - kind of superhuman business . we be none of we " fifty foot high , 
 with phosphorus head , " as your friend Mr. Gower Woodseer say of the 
 prodigiositie . Lady Fleetwood be back - when ? ' 

 ' before dark , she should be . ' 

 he run up the step to the house . 

 at Lekkatts beneath Croridge a lean midday meal be be finish hard 
 on the commencement by a silent company of three . when eat be choke 
 to the young member of the repast , bread and cold mutton - bone serve 
 the turn as conclusively as the Frenchman 's buffet - dish . Carinthia 's 
 face of unshed tear dash what small appetite Chillon have . Lord 
 Levellier ply his fork in his right hand ruminating , his back an arch 
 across his plate . 

 riddle to the thwart young , these old people will not consent to be 
 read by sensation . Carinthia watch his jaw at their work of eat 
 under his victim 's eye - know Chillon to be no long an officer in 
 the English service ; know that her beloved have sell out for the mere 
 money to pay debt and support his Henrietta ; know , as he must know , 
 that Chillon 's act strike a knife to pierce his mother 's breast through 
 her coffin - board ! this old man could eat , and he could withhold the 
 mean due to his dead sister 's son . could he look on Chillon and not 
 feel that the mother 's heart be beat in her son 's fortune ? half the 
 money due to Chillon would have save he from ruin . 

 Lord Levellier lay his fork on the plate . he munch his grievance with 
 his bit of meat . the nephew and niece here present feeding on he be 
 not so considerate as the Welsh gentleman , a total stranger , who have 
 walk up to Lekkatts with the Countess of Fleetwood , and express the 
 preference to feed at an inn . relative be cormorant . 

 his fork on his plate release the couple . barely half a dozen word , 
 before the sitting to that niggard restoration , have inform Carinthia 
 of the step take by her brother . she beckon he to follow she . 

 ' the bad be do now , Chillon . I be silent . Uncle be a rock . you say 
 we must not offend . I have give he my whole mind . say where Riette be 
 to live . ' 

 ' her headquarters will be here , at a furnished house . she be , with she 
 cousin , the Dowager . ' 

 ' yes . she should be with I . ' 

 ' she want music . she want - poor girl ! let she have what come to she . ' 

 their thought beneath their speech be like fish dart under shadow 
 of the traffic bridge . 

 ' she love music , ' say Carinthia ; ' it be almost life to she , like fresh 
 air to I . next month I be in London ; Lady Arpington be kind . she will 
 give I as much of their polish as I can take . I dare say I should feel 
 the need of it if I be an enlightened person . ' 

 ' for instance , do I hear " Owain , " when your Welsh friend be leave ? ' 
 Chillon ask . 

 ' it be his die wife 's wish , brother . ' 

 ' keep to the rule , dear . ' 

 ' they have be break , Chillon . ' 

 ' mend they . ' 

 ' that would be a step backward . ' 

 ' " the right one for defence ! " father say . ' 

 ' Father say , " the habit of the defensive paralyze will . " ' 

 ' " womanize , " he say , Carin . you quote he falsely , to shield the sex . 
 quite right . but my sister must not be tricky . keep to the rule . you be 
 an exceptional woman , and it would be a good argument , if you be not 
 in an exceptional position . ' 

 ' Owain be the exceptional man , brother . ' 

 ' my dear , after all , you have a husband . ' 

 ' I have a brother , I have a friend , I have no - I be a man 's wife and the 
 mother of his child ; I be free , or husband would mean dungeon . do my 
 brother want an oath from I ? that I can give he . ' 

 ' Conduct , yes ; I could not   doubt you , ' say Chillon . ' but " the world 's a 
 flood at a dyke for woman , and they must keep watch , " you have   read . ' 

 ' but Owain be not our enemy , ' say Carinthia , in her deep tone , 
 expressive of conviction , and not thereby assure to hear . ' he be a man 
 with man , a child with woman . his Rebecca could describe he ; I laugh 
 now at some of her saying of he ; I see her mouth , so tenderly comical 
 over her big ' simpleton , " she call he , and love he so . ' 

 the gentleman appear on the waste land above the house . his very loose 
 black suit and a peculiar roll of his gait liken he to a mourning 
 boatswain who be jolly . in Lord Levellier 's workshop his remark be 
 to the point . Chillon 's powder for gun and blast interested he , 
 and he propose to ride over from Barlings to witness a test of they . 

 ' you be stay at Barlings ? ' Chillon say . 

 ' yes ; now Carinthia be at Esslemont , ' he reply , astoundingly the 
 simpleton . 

 his conversation be practical and shrewd on the walk with Chillon 
 and Carinthia down to Esslemont evidently he be a man well armed to 
 encounter the world ; social usage might be teach he . Chillon gain 
 a round view of the worthy simple fellow , unlikely to turn out 
 impracticable , for he talk such good sense upon matter of business . 

 Carinthia see her brother tickle and interested . a feather move she . 
 full of tear though she be , she , heart lie open to the heaven and 
 their kind , small , wholesome gift . her happiness in the walk with her 
 brother and her friend - the pair of they unite by her companionship , 
 both of they show they count she their comrade - be the near to 
 the radiant day before she land on an island , and imagine happiness 
 grow here , and find it to be gilt thorn , loud mockery . a shaving 
 North - easter tear the scream from hedge and the roar from copse under 
 a faceless breadth of sky , and she say , as they turn into Esslemont 
 Park lane : ' we have have one of our old walk to - day , Chillon ! ' 

 ' you use to walk together long walk over in your own country , ' say 
 Mr. Wythan . 

 ' yes , Owain , we do , and my brother never know I tired . ' 

 ' never know you confess to it , ' say Chillon , as he swallow the name 
 on her lip . 

 ' walk be fly over there , brother . ' 

 ' say once or twice in Wales , too , ' Mr. Wythan beg of she . 

 ' Wales remind . yes , .. Owain , I shall not forget Wales , Welsh people . 
 Mr. Woodseer say they have the three - string harp in their breast , 
 and one string be always hum , whether you pull it or no . ' 

 ' that be love of country ! that be their love of wild Wales , Carinthia . ' 

 there be a quiet interrogation in Chillon 's turn of the head at this 
 fervent simpleton . 

 ' I love they for that hum , ' say she . ' it join one in I . ' 

 ' call to they any day , they be up , ready to march ! ' 

 ' oh , dear soul ! ' Carinthia say . 

 her breath draw in . 

 the three be dumb . they see Lord Fleetwood stand in the park 
 gateway . 




 CHAPTER XXXVII . between CARINTHIA and her LORD 

 the earl 's easy grace of manner be a ceremonial mantle on he as he 
 grasp the situation in a look . he bend with deferential familiarity to 
 his countess , exactly tone the degree of difference which befit a 
 salute to the two gentleman , amiable or hostile . 

 ' there and back ? ' he say , and convey a compliment to Carinthia 's 
 pedestrian vigour in the wary smile which can be recall for a snub . 

 she reply : ' we have walk the distance , my lord . ' 

 her smile be the braced one of an untired stepper . 

 ' a cold wind for you . ' 

 ' we walk fast . ' 

 she compel he to take she in the plural , though he address she 
 separately , but her tone have their music . 

 ' your brother , Captain Kirby - Levellier , I believe ? ' 

 ' my brother be not of the army now , my lord . ' 

 she wave her hand for Madge to conduct donkey and baby to the house . he 
 notice . he be unruffled . 

 the form of amenity expect from she , in relation to her brother , 
 be not exhibit . she might perhaps be feel herself awkward at 
 introduction , and have to be excuse . 

 ' I beg , ' he say , and motion to Chillon the way of welcome into the 
 park , see the fix figure , and pass over the unspoken refusal , with a 
 remark to Mr. Wythan : ' at Barlings , I presume ? ' 

 ' my tent be pitch there , ' be the answer . 

 ' good - bye , my brother , ' say Carinthia . 

 Chillon fold his arm round she . ' God bless you , dear love . let I see 
 you soon . ' he murmur : 

 ' you can protect yourself . ' 

 ' fear nothing for I , dearest . ' 

 she kiss her brother 's cheek . the strain of her spread finger on his 
 shoulder signify no dread at she be leave behind . 

 stranger observe their embrace would have vow that the pair be 
 brother and sister , and of a notable stock . 

 ' I will walk with you to Croridge again when you send word you be 
 willing to go ; and so , good - bye , Owain , ' she say . 

 she give her hand ; frankly she press the Welshman 's , he not a whit 
 behind she in frankness . 

 Fleetwood have a skimming sense of a drop upon a funny , whirly world . 
 he keep from giddiness , though the whirl have last since he behold 
 the form of a wild forest girl , dancing , as it strike he now , over an 
 abyss , on the plumed shoot of a stumpy tree . 

 ay , and she dance at the ducal schloss ; - she mount his coach like 
 a witch of the alp up crag ; - she be beside he pelt to the vale 
 under a leaden Southwester ; - she sit solitary by the fireside in the 
 room of the inn . 

 veil it . he consent to the veil he could not lift . he have not even 
 power to try , and his heart thump . 

 London 's Whitechapel Countess glide before he like a candle in the 
 fog . 

 he have accuse she as the creature destroy Romance . be it gold in 
 place of gilding , absolute upper human life that the ridiculous object 
 at his heel over London propose instead of delirious brilliancy , 
 drunken gallop , poison - syrup , - puff of a young man 's vapour ? 

 there be Madge and the donkey basket - trap ahead on the road to 
 the house , bear proof of the veiled have - be : signification of a 
 might - have - be . why not a possible might - be ? still the might - be might 
 be . look on this shaven earth and sky of March with the wrathful wind 
 at work , we know that it be not the end : a day follow for the world . 
 but look on those blow black funeral spray , and the wrinkle 
 chill water , and the stare of the Esslemont house - windows , it have an 
 appearance of the last line of our write volume : dead Finis . not 
 death ; fouler , the man alive see himself stretch helpless for the 
 altering of his deed ; a coffin carry he ; the fatal whiteheade 
 sacerdotal official intone his aim on the march to front , the drear 
 crap file of the liverie , salaried mourner over his failure , 
 troop at his heel . 

 Frontward be the small lake 's grey water , rearward an avenue of lime . 

 but the man alive , if but an inch alive , can so take his life in his 
 clutch , that he do alter , cleanse , recast his deed : - it be know ; 
 priest proclaim it , philosopher admit it . 

 can he lay his clutch on another 's life , and wring out the tear shed , 
 the stain of the bruise , recollection of the wrong ? 

 contemplate the wound creature as a woman . then , what sort of woman be 
 she ? she be once under a fascination - ludicrously , painfully , intensely 
 like a sort of tipsy poor puss , the trap hare toss to her serpent ; 
 and thoroughly reassure for a few caress , quite at home , cage and 
 at home ; and all abloom with pretty way , modest prank , innocent 
 fondling . gobble , my dear ! 

 it be the doom of the innocent , a natural fate . smother the creature 
 with kindness again , show we be a point in the scale above that old 
 coiler snake - which break no bone , bit not so very deep ; - she will be , 
 she ought to be , the woman she be . that is , if she be then sincere , 
 a dose of kindness should operate happily to restore the honeymoony 
 fancy , hope , trust , dream , all back , as before the honeymoon show 
 the silver crook and shadowy hag 's back of a decaying crescent . and 
 true enough , the poor girl 's young crescent of a honeymoon go down 
 sickly - yellow rather early . it can be renew . she really be at 
 that time rather romantic . she become absurd . romance be in she , 
 nevertheless . she be a woman of mettle : she be probably expect to be 
 woo . one make a hash of yesterday 's left dish , but she may know 
 no well . ' add a pickle , ' as Chummy Potts use to say . the dish be 
 render savoury by a slight expenditure of attention , just a dab of 
 intimated soft stuff . 

 ' pleasant to see you establish here , if you find the place agreeable , ' 
 he say . 

 she be kiss her hand to her brother , all her eye for he - or for 
 the couple ; and they be hide by the park lodge before she reply : 
 ' it be an admired , beautiful place . ' 

 ' I come , ' say he , ' to have your assurance that it suit you . ' 

 ' I thank you , my lord . ' 

 ' " my lord " would like a short rest , Carinthia . ' 

 she seem placidly acquiesce . ' you have see the boy ? ' 

 ' twice to - day . we be have a conversation just now . ' 

 ' we think he very intelligent . ' 

 ' Lady Arpington tell I you do the honour here excellently . ' 

 ' she be good to I . ' 

 ' praise the mother 's management of the young one . John Edward : Edward 
 for call - name . Madge boast his power for sleep . ' 

 ' he give little trouble . ' 

 ' and babe repay we ! we learn from small thing . out of the mouth of 
 babe wisdom ? well , their habit show the wisdom of the mother . a good 
 mother ! there be no high title . a lady of my acquaintance bid fair to 
 win it , they say . ' 

 Carinthia look in simplicity , see herself , and say ' if a mother may 
 rear her boy till he must go to school , she be reward for all she 
 do . ' 

 ' ah , ' say he , nod over her mania of the perpetual suspicion . 
 ' ledding , Queeney , the servant here , run smoothly ? ' 

 ' they do : they be happy in serve . ' 

 ' you see , we English be not such bad fellow when we be know . the 
 climate to - day , for example , be rather try . ' 

 ' I miss colour most in England , ' say Carinthia . ' I like the wind . now 
 and then we have a day to remember . ' 

 ' we be to be " the artist of the day , " Gower Woodseer say , and we get 
 an attachment to the dreariest ; we be to study ' small variation of the 
 commonplace " - dear I ! but he may be right . the ' sky of lead and scrap 
 lead " over those line , he point out ; and it be not a bad trick for 
 reconcile we to gloomy english weather . you take lesson from he ? ' 

 ' I can always learn from he , ' say Carinthia . 

 Fleetwood depict his plod Gower at the tussle with account - book . 
 she be earnest in sympathy ; not awake to the comical ; dull as the 
 cloud , dull as the discourse . yet he throb for be near she take 
 impression of her figure , the play of her feature , the carriage of her 
 body . 

 he be shut from her eye . the clear brown eye give exchange of look ; 
 less of admission than her honest maid 's . 

 Madge and the miracle infant await they on the terrace . for so foreign 
 do the mother make herself to he , that the appearance of the child , 
 their own child , here between they , be next to miraculous ; and the 
 mother , who might well have be the most astonish , have transparently 
 not an idea beyond the verify palpable lump of young life she lift 
 in her arm out of the arm of Madge , maternally at home with its 
 presence on earth . 

 demonstrably a fine speciman , a promising youngster . the father be 
 allow to inspect he . this be his heir : a little fellow of smile , 
 feature , pucker brow of inquiry ; seem a thing make already , and 
 active on his own account . 

 ' do people see likeness ? ' he ask . 

 ' some do , ' say the mother . 

 ' you ? ' 

 she be constrain to give answer . ' there be a likeness to my father , I 
 have think . ' 

 there be a dotage of idolatrous daughter , he could have retort ; and 
 his gaze be a polite offer to humdrum reconcilement , if it please she . 

 she send the child up the step . 

 ' do you come in , my lord ? ' 

 ' the house be your , my lady . ' 

 ' I can not feel it mine . ' 

 ' you be the mistress to invite or exclude . ' 

 ' I be ready to go in a few hour for a small income of money , for my 
 child and I . ' 

 ' - our child . ' 

 ' yes . ' 

 ' it be our child . ' 

 ' it be . ' 

 ' any sum you choose to name . but where would you live ? ' 

 ' near my brother I would live . ' 

 ' three thousand a year for pin - money , or more , be at your disposal . 
 stay here , I beg . you have only to notify your want . and we will talk 
 familiarly now , as we be together . can I be of aid to your brother ? tell 
 I , pray . I be dispose in every way to subscribe to your wish . pray , 
 speak , speak out . ' 

 so the earl say . he have to force his familiar tone against the rebuke 
 of her grandeur of stature ; and he be for induce she to deliver she 
 mind , that the mountain girl 's feebleness in speech might reinstate he . 
 she rejoin unhesitatingly : ' my brother would not accept aid from you , 
 my lord . I will take no money more than for my need . ' 

 ' you speak of certain sum down in Wales . ' 

 ' I do then . ' her voice be dead . 

 ' ah ! you must be feel the cold north - wind here . ' 

 ' I do not . you may feel the cold , my lord . will you enter the house ? ' 

 ' do you invite I ? ' 

 ' the house be your own . ' 

 ' will the mistress of the house honour I so far ? ' 

 ' I be not the mistress of the house , my lord . ' 

 ' you refuse , Carinthia ? ' 

 ' I would keep from use those word . I have no right to refuse the 
 entry of the house to you . ' 

 ' if I come in ? ' 

 ' I guard my room . ' 

 she have be awake , then , to the thrusting and parry behind mask 
 language . 

 ' good . you be quite decide , I may suppose . ' 

 ' I will leave they when I have a little money , or when I know of how I 
 may earn some . ' 

 ' the Countess of Fleetwood earn a little money ? ' 

 ' I can put aside your title , my lord . ' 

 ' no , you can not   put it aside while the man with the title live , not even 
 if you be run off in earnest , under a dozen Welsh name . why should 
 you desire to do it ? the title entitle you to the command of half my 
 possession . as to the house ; do not   be alarm ; you will not have to 
 guard your room . the extraordinary wild animal you - the impression may 
 have be produce ; I see , I see . if I be in the house , I should not 
 be rage at your door ; and it be not my intention to enter the house . 
 that be , not by right of ownership . you have my word . ' 

 he bow to she , and walk to the stable . 

 she have the art of extract his word from he . the word give , she 
 go off with it , disengage mistress of Esslemont . and she might have 
 the place for residence , but a decent courtesy require that she should 
 remain at the portico until he be out of sight . she be the first out 
 of sight , rather insolently . 

 she return he without comment the spell he have cast on she , and he 
 be leave to estimate the value of a dirited piece of metal not in the 
 currency , stamp false coin . an odd sense of impoverishment chill 
 he . chilly weather be afflict the whole country , he be remind , 
 and he pace about hurriedly until his horse be in the shaft . after 
 all , his drive away would be much more expect of he than a stay at 
 the house where the Whitechapel Countess reside , chill , dry , talk 
 the language of early Exercises in English , suitable to her Welshmen . 
 do she ' Owain ' they every one ? 

 as he whip along the drive and leave that glassy stare of Esslemont 
 behind he , there come a slap of a reflection : - here , on the box of this 
 coach , the bride just burst her sheath sit , and be like warm wax 
 to take impression . she be like hard stone to retain they , pretty 
 evidently . like woman the world over , she think only of her side of 
 the case . man disdain to plead theirs . now money be offer she , 
 she decline it . formerly , she make it the principal subject of her 
 conversation . 

 turn the mind to something bright . Fleetwood string himself to do so , 
 and become agitated by the question whether the bride sit to leave or to 
 right of he when the south - wester blew - a wind altogether preferable to 
 the chill North - east . woman , when they be no long warm , be cold 
 than the deadly catarrh wind scythe across these island . of course 
 she sit to left of he . in the line of the main road , he remember a 
 look he drop on she , a look over his left shoulder . 

 she never have a wooing : she want it , have a kind of right to it , or the 
 show of it . how to begin ? but be she worth an effort ? turn to something 
 brighter . religion be the one refuge from woman , Feltre say : his roman 
 catholic recipe . the old shoemaker , Mr. Woodseer , hauls woman into his 
 religion , and purify they by the process , - fancy he do . he get 
 they to wear an air . Old Gower , too , have his Religion of Nature , with 
 free admission for woman , whom he worship in simile , run away from 
 they , leer sheepishly . no , Feltre 's ' rigid monastic system be 
 the sole haven . and what a world , where we have no safety except in 
 renounce it ! the two sex create to devour one another must abjure 
 their sex before they gain ' the Peace , ' as Feltre say , impressively , if 
 absurdly . he will end a monk if he have the courage of his logic . a queer 
 spectacle - an English nobleman a shaven monk ! 

 Fleetwood shudder . we be twisted face about to discover our being 
 save by woman from that horror - the join the rank of the nasal 
 friar . by what woman ? Bacchante , clearly , if the wife we have be a 
 north - easter to wither we , blood , bone , and soul . 

 he be hungry ; he wax furious with the woman who have fling he out 
 upon the road . he be thirsty as well . the bright something to 
 refresh his thought grow and glow in the form of a shiny table , 
 bear tasty dish , old wine ; at an inn or anywhere . but , out 
 of London , an English inn to furnish the dish and the wine for a 
 civilized and self - respect man be hard to seek , as difficult to find 
 as a perfect skeleton of an extinct specie . the earl 's breast howl 
 derision of his pursuit when he draw up at the sign of the Royal 
 Sovereign , in the dusky hour , and hand himself desperately to Mrs. 
 Rundles ' mercy . 

 he could not wait for a dinner , so his eating be cold meat . warn by a 
 sip , that his drinking , if he drank , be to be an excursion in chemical 
 acid , the virtue of an abstainer serve for his consolation . tolerant 
 of tobacco , although he do not smoke , he front the fire , envy 
 Gower Woodseer the contemplative pipe , which for half a dozen puff 
 waft he to brace desert , or primaeval forest , or old highway 
 with the swallow thought above he , down the past , into the Future . 
 a pipe be pleasant dream at command . a pipe be the concrete form of 
 philosophy . why , then , a pipe be the alternative of a friar 's frock for 
 an escape from woman . but if one do not smoke ! ... here and there a man 
 be visibly in the eye of all man curse : let he be bl by Fortune ; 
 let he be handsome , healthy , wealthy , court , he be curse . 

 Fleetwood lie that night beneath the roof of the Royal Sovereign . Sleep 
 be life 's legitimate mate . it will treat we at time as the faithless 
 wife , who become a harry beast , behave to her lord . he have no 
 sleep . have put out his candle , an idea take hold of he , and he 
 jump up to light it again and verify the idea that this room ... 
 he leave the bed and stride round it , go in the guise of an urgent 
 somnambulist , or ghost bear burden of an imperfectly remember 
 mission . this be the room . 

 reason and cold together overcome his illogical scruple to lie down 
 on that bed solicit the sleep desire . he lie and groan , lie and 
 roll . all night the Naval Monarch with the loose cheek and jelly 
 smile of the swing sign - board creak . flaw of the north - easter 
 swung and bang he . he creak high , in complaint , - low , in some 
 partial contentment . there be pip of his boatswain , shrill 
 piping - shriek of the whistle . how many night have that most ill - fat 
 of bride lain listen to the idiotic uproar ! it excuse a touch of 
 craziness . but how many ? not one , not two , ten , twenty : - count , count 
 to the exact number of night the unhappy girl must have hear those mad 
 colloquy of the hurricane boatswain and the chirpy king . by heaven ! 
 Whitechapel , after one night of it , beckon as a haven of grace . 




 CHAPTER XXXVIII . a dip into the SPRING 's water 

 the night Lord Fleetwood have pass cure he of the wound Carinthia 
 deal , with her blunt , defensive phrase and her Welshman . seat on his 
 coach - box , he turn for a look the back way lead to Esslemont , and 
 see rosed crag and mountain forest rather than the soft undulation of 
 parkland push green meadow or brown copse up the slope under 
 his eye . she have never be court : she deserve a siege . she be a 
 daughter of the racy highland . and she , who could say to her husband , 
 ' I guard my room , ' without sign of the stage - face of scorn or defiance 
 or flinging of the glove , she would have to be capture by siege , it 
 be clear . she wear an aspect of the confident fortress , which neither 
 challenge nor cry to treat , but command respect . how do she 
 accomplish this miracle of command respect after such a string of 
 somersault before the London world ? 

 he have to drive North - westward : his word be pledge to one of his 
 donkey Ixionides - Abrane , he recollect - to be a witness at some 
 contemptible exhibition of the fellow 's muscular skill : a match to punt 
 against a Thames waterman : this time . Odd how it should come about that 
 the giving of his word force he now to drive away from the woman once 
 cause he to curse his luck as the prisoner of his word ! however , 
 there be to be an end of it soon - a change ; change as remarkable as 
 Harry Monmouth 's at the touching of his crown . though in these day , in 
 our jog - trot Old England , half a step on the road to greatness be the 
 utmost we can hop ; and all England jeer at the man attempt it . he 
 cap himself with this or that one of their title . for it be not the 
 popular thing among Englishmen . their hero , when they have do their 
 fighting , be the wealthy patron of Sport . what sort of creature be his 
 comrade ? but he can not have comrade unless he be on the level of they . 
 yet let he be never so high above they , they charge he and point he 
 as a piece of cannon ; assent to the flattery they puff into he , he 
 be their engine . ' the idol of the hour be the mob 's wooden puppet , and 
 the doing of the popular thing seed of no harvest , ' Gower Woodseer say , 
 moderately well , snuff incense of his happy delivery . not to be 
 the idol , to have an aim of our own , there lie the truer pride , if we 
 intend respect of ourselves . 

 the Mr. Pulpit young man have in they , until their habit have fret 
 he out , be direct Lord Fleetwood 's meditation upon the error 
 of the general man , as a cover for lateral reference to his hitherto 
 erratic career : not much bad than a swerving from the right line , 
 which now seem the desirable road for he , and have previously seem 
 so stale , so repulsive . he be , of course , only half - conscious of his 
 pulpitizing ; he fancy the serious vein of his thought attributable 
 to a tumbled night . nevertheless , he have the question whether that 
 woman - poor girl ! - be influence his thought . for in a moment , 
 the very word ' respect ' pitch he upon her character ; to see it a 
 character that emerge beneath obstacle , and overcame ridicule , win 
 suffrage , win a reluctant husband 's admiration , prick he from 
 distaste to what might really be taste for her companionship , or 
 something more alarming to contemplate in the possibility , - thirst for 
 it . he be drive away , and he long to turn back . he do respect 
 her character : a character angular as her feature be , and similarly 
 harmonious , splendid in action . 

 respect seem a coolish form of tribute from a man who admire . he have 
 to say that he do not vastly respect beautiful woman . have they all the 
 poetry ? know they well , and where be it ? 

 the pupil of Gower Woodseer ask himself to specify the poetry 
 of woman . she be weak and inferior , but she have it ; civilized man 
 acknowledge it ; and it be independent , or may be beside her gift of 
 beauty . she have more of it than we have . then name it . 

 well , the flower of the field be frail thing . pluck one , and you 
 have in your hand the frailest of thing . but reach through the charm of 
 colour and the tale of its beneficence in frailty to the poetry of the 
 flower , and secret of the myriad star will fail to tell you more than 
 do that poetry of your little flower . Lord Feltre , at the heel of St. 
 Francis , agree in that . 

 well , then , much so with the flower of the two hand and foot . we do 
 homage to those ungathered , and reserve our supremacy ; the gathered , no 
 long court , be the test of man . when the embraced woman breathe 
 respect into we , she wing a beast . we have from she the poetry of the 
 taste life ; excel any garden - gate or threshold lyric call forth 
 by pure early bloom . respect for her person , for her bearing , for her 
 character that be in the sum a beauty plastic to the civilized young 
 man 's need and craving , as queenly physical loveliness have never so 
 fully be to he along the walk of life , and as ideal worship can not 
 be for our nerving contentment . she bring we to the union of body 
 and soul ; as good as to say , earth and heaven . secret of all human 
 aspiration , the ripeness of the creed , be there ; and the passion for 
 the woman desire have no poetry equal that of the embrace respect 
 woman . 

 something of this go reel through Fleetwood ; positively to this 
 end ; accompany the while with flash of Carinthia , her figure across 
 the varied scene . Ridicule vanish . could it ever have exist ? if 
 London have witness the scene down in Wales , London never again would 
 laugh at the Whitechapel Countess . 

 he laugh amicably at himself for the citizen sobriety of these view , 
 on the part of a nobleman whose airy pleasure it have be to flout 
 your sober citizen , with their toad - at - the - hop notion , their wall 
 conception , their drab propriety ; and feel a pet familiar within 
 he dub all pulpitizing , poetize driveller with one of those detest 
 title , invent by the English as a corrective of their malady or the 
 excess of their high mood . but , reflection tell he that he have 
 do injury to Carinthia - have inflict the sorest of the wound a young 
 woman a new bride can endure , he nod acquiescence to the charge of 
 misbehaviour , and muzzle the cynic . 

 as a consequence , the truism flood he and he lose his guard against 
 our native prosiness . must we be prosy if we be profoundly , uncynically 
 sincere ? do but listen to the stuff we be maunder ! extract of 
 poetry , if one could hit upon the right , would serve for a relief and a 
 lift when we be in this ditch of the serious vein . Gower Woodseer would 
 have any number handy to spout . or Felter : - your convinced and fervent 
 Catholic have quotation of image and latin hymn to his Madonna or 
 one of his Catherines , by the dozen , to suit an enthusiastic fit of 
 the worship of some fair woman , and elude the prosy in commend she . 
 Feltre be enviable there . as he say , it be natural to worship , and only 
 the Catholics can prostrate themselves with dignity . that be matter for 
 thought . stir we to the depth , it will be find that we be poor soupy 
 stuff . for estimable language , and the preservation of self - respect in 
 prostration , we want ritual , ceremonial elevation of the visible object 
 for the soul 's adoring through the eye . so may we escape our foul or 
 empty self . 

 Lord Feltre seem to Fleetwood at the moment a more serviceable friend 
 than Gower Woodseer preach ' Nature ' - an abstraction , not inspire to 
 the devout poetic or give we the tongue above our native prosy . he be 
 raise and refresh by recollect line of a gregorian chant he and 
 Feltre have hear together under the roof of that Alpine monastery . 

 the Dame collapse . there be little doubt of she have the world to 
 back she in protest against all fine filmy work of the exploration of a 
 young man 's intricacy or cavity . let she not forget the fact she have 
 frequently impress upon we , that he be ' the very wealthy nobleman 
 of his time , ' instructive to touch inside as well as out . he have his 
 share of brain , too . and also she should be mindful of an alteration of 
 english taste likely of occurrence in the remote posterity she vow she 
 be for address after she have exhaust our present hungry generation . 
 the posterity signify will , it be calculable , it be next to certain , 
 have study a develop human nature so far as to know the composition 
 of it a not unequal mixture of the philosophic and the romantic , and 
 that credible realism be to be produce solely by an involvement of 
 those two element . or else , she may be sure , her story once out of the 
 mouth , go off dead as the spirit of a vapour that have perform the 
 stroke of energy . she hold a surprising event in the history of ' the 
 wealthy nobleman of his time , ' and she would launch it upon reader 
 unprepared , with the reference to our mysterious and unfathomable nature 
 for an explanation of the stunning crack on the skull . 

 this may do now . it will not do ten century hence . for the English , 
 too , be a changeable people in the sight of ulterior Time . 

 one of the good piece of work Lord Fleetwood could suppose he have 
 perform be recall to he near the turning to his mew by the 
 handsome Piccadilly fruit - shop . he jump to the pavement , merely to 
 gratify . Sarah Winch with a word of Madge ; and be emotional just 
 then , he speak of Lady Fleetwood 's attachment to Madge ; and he look at 
 Sarah straight , he drop his voice : ' she say , you remember , you be 
 sister to she . ' 

 Sarah remember that he have speak of it before . two brilliant drop 
 from the deep of woman 's ready well stand in her eye . 

 he carry the light of they away . they be such pure jewel of tribute 
 to the Carinthia now see by he as worship soul of devotee offer 
 to their Madonna for her most glorious adornment . 




 CHAPTER XXXIX . the RED warning from a son of VAPOUR 

 Desiring loneliness or else Lord Feltre 's company , Fleetwood have to 
 grant a deferred audience at home to various tradesman , absurdly fussy 
 about have the house of his lease estate of Calesford furnish 
 complete and habitable on the very day stipulate by his peremptory 
 order that the place should be both habitable and hospitable . they 
 be right , they be excuse ; grand entertainment of London have be 
 project , and he fall into the weariful business with they , think 
 of Henrietta 's insatiable appetite for the pleasure . he have take the 
 lease of this burdensome Calesford , at an eight - mile ' drive from the 
 Northwest of town , to gratify the devour woman 's taste which be , to 
 have all the luxury of the town in a framework of country scenery . 

 Gower Woodseer and he be din together in the evening . the 
 circumstance be just endurable , but Gower would play the secretary , 
 and doggedly subject he to hear a statement of the woeful plight of 
 Countess Livia 's affair . Gower , commission to examine they , remark : 
 ' if we have all the figure ! ' 

 ' if we could stop the bleeding ! ' Fleetwood reply . ' come to the Opera 
 to - night ; I promise . I promise Abrane for to - morrow . there be no end to 
 it . this gambling mania 's a flux . not one of they except your old enemy , 
 Corby , keep clear of it ; and they be at he for subsidy , as they be 
 at I , and would be at you or any passenger on the suspect of a purse . 
 Corby shin among they . ' 

 that be heavy judgement enough , Gower think . no allusion to Esslemont 
 ensue . the earl eat sparely , and silently for the most part . 

 he be warm a little at the Opera by hear Henrietta 's honest 
 rapture over her Columelli in the Pirata . but Lord Brailstone sit 
 behind she , and their exchange of ecstasy upon the tattered pathos of 

  E il mio tradito amor , 

 be not moderately offensive . 

 his countenance in Henrietta 's presence have to be study and 
 interpret by Livia . why do it darken ? the demure of fuliginous 
 intriguer argue that Brail stone be but do the spiriting require 
 of he , and would have to pay the penalty unrewarded , let he italianize 
 as much as he please . not many month long , and there would be 
 the bit of an outburst , the whiff of scandal , perhaps a shot , and the 
 rupture of an improvident alliance , follow by Henrietta 's free hand to 
 the moody young earl , who would then have possession of the only woman 
 he could ever love : and at no cost . Jealousy of a man like Brailstone , 
 however infatuate the man , be too foolish . he must perceive how 
 matter be tend ? the die - away acid eyeball - at - the - ceiling of a 
 pair of fanatic per la musica might irritate a husband , but the lover 
 should read and know . Giddy as the beautiful creature deprive of her 
 natural aliment seem in her excuseable hunger for it , she have learn 
 her lesson , she be not a reel libertine . 

 brailstone peer through his eyelash at the same shadow of a frown 
 where no frown sit on his friend 's brow . Displeasure be manifest , and 
 why ? Fleetwood have give he the dispossessing shrug of the man out of 
 the run , and the hint of the tip for win , with the aid of 
 operatic aria ; and though he be in Fleetwood 's book ever since the 
 prize - fight , neither Fleetwood nor the husband nor any skittishness of 
 a timorous wife could stop the pursuer bend to capture the fairest and 
 most inflame woman of her day . 

 ' I prefer your stage Columelli , ' Fleetwood say . 

 ' I come from exile ! ' say Henrietta ; and her plea in excuse of ecstatic 
 write she down as confessedly treasonable to the place quit . 

 Ambrose Mallard enter the box , behold only his goddess Livia . their 
 eyebrow and inaudible lip converse eloquently . he retire like a 
 trump card on the appearance of M. de St. Ombre . the courtly Frenchman 
 win the lady to join he in whip the cream of the world for five 
 minute , and pass out before his flavour be exhaust . brailstone 
 take his lesson and depart , to spy at they from other box and heave 
 an inflated shirt - front . Young Cressett , the bottle of effervescence , 
 dash in , and for he Livia 's face be motherly . he rattle a tale of 
 the highway robbery of Sir Meeson Corby on one of his Yorkshire moor . 
 the picture of the little baronet arise upon the narration , and it 
 amuse . Chumley Potts come to ' confirm every item , ' as he say . ' pluck 
 Corby clean . pistol at his head . quite old style . time , ten P.M. 
 suspect Great Britain , King , Lords and Commons , and button twenty 
 time tight . Brosey Mallard down on he for a few fight man . 
 Perfect answer to Brosey . ' 

 ' Mr. Mallard do not mention the robbery , ' Henrietta remark . 

 ' fear to shock : Corby such a favour swain , ' Potts account for the 
 omission . 

 ' Brosey spilling last night ? ' Fleetwood ask . 

 ' at the palazzo , we be , ' say Potts . ' luck pretty fair first off . 
 Brosey do his trick , and away and away and away go he ! more old 
 Brosey win , the wiser he get . I stay . ' he swing to Gower : ' do not 
 drink dry Sillery after two A.M. you read I ? ' 

 ' egyptian , but decipherable , ' say Gower . 

 the rise of the curtain draw his habitual groan from Potts , and he 
 flee to collogue with the goodly number of honest fellow in the house 
 of music who detest ' squallery . ' Most of these afflict pilgrim to 
 the London conservatory be engage upon the business of the Goddess 
 richly inspire the heliconian choir , but render the fountain - water 
 heady . here they have to be , if they would enjoy the spectacle of 
 London 's big and choicest bouquet : and in they , too , there be 
 an unattached air during Potts ' cool discourse of turf and table , 
 except when he toss they a morsel of tragedy , or the late joke , not 
 yet past the full gallop on its course . their sparkle be transient ; 
 woman have they fast . compel to think of they as not serious member 
 of our group , he assist at the crush - room exit , and the happy riddance 
 of the beautiful cousin dedicate to the merry London midnight ' 
 further pasture . 

 Fleetwood 's word be extract , that he would visit the ' palazzo ' within 
 a couple of hour . 

 Potts exclaim : ' good . you promise . hang I , if I do not   think it be the 
 only certain thing a man can depend upon in this world . ' 

 he leave the earl and Gower Woodseer to their lunatic talk . he still have 
 his idea about the association of the pair . ' hard - head player of his 
 own game , that Woodseer , spite of his Mumbo - Jumbo - oracle kind of talk . ' 

 Mallard 's turn of luck downward to the deadly drop have come under Potts ' 
 first inspection of the table . admire his friend 's audacity , deplore 
 his rashness , reprove his persistency , Potts allow his verdict to 
 go by result ; for it be clear that Mallard and Fortune be in 
 opposition . something like real awe of the tremendous encounter keep 
 he from a plunge or a bet . Mallard have get the vertigo , he report the 
 gambler 's launch on dementedness to the earl . Gower 's less experienced 
 optic perceive it . the plainly doom duellist with the insensible 
 Black Goddess offer she all the advantage of the Immortals challenge 
 by flesh . his effort to smile be a line cut awry in wood ; his big eye 
 be those of a cat for sociability ; he look cursed , and still he 
 wear the smile . in this condition , the gambler run to emptiness of 
 everything he have , his money , his heart , his brain , like a coal - truck 
 on the incline of the rail to a collier . 

 Mallard apply to the earl for a loan of fifty guineas . he have they 
 and lose they , and he come , not beg , bluster for a second supply ; 
 quite in the wrong tone , Potts know . Fleetwood say : ' back it with 
 pistol , Brosey ' ; and , as Potts relate subsequently , ' Old Brosey have 
 the look of a staked horse . ' 

 Fortune and he have now close the struggle , perforce of his total 
 disarmament , he regain the wit we forfeit when we engage she . he 
 say to his friend Chummy : ' abrane tomorrow ? ah , yes , punt a Thames 
 waterman . start of - how many yard ? sunbury - Walton : good reach . course 
 of two mile : braney in good training . straight business ? I may not   be 
 there . but you , Chummy , you mind , old Chums , all case of the kind , 
 safest back the professional . unless - you understand ! ' 

 Fleetwood could not persuade Gower to join the party . the philosopher 's 
 pretext of much occupation mask a bashfully sentimental dislike of the 
 flooding of quiet country place by the city 's horde . ' you be right , 
 right , ' say Fleetwood , in sympathy , resign to the prospect of 
 despise his associate without a handy helper . he name Esslemont 
 once , shoot up a look at the sky , and glance it Eastward . 

 three coach be bind for Sunbury from a common starting - point at 
 nine of the morning . Lord Fleetwood , Lord Brailstone , and Lord Simon 
 Pitscrew be the whip . two hour in advance of they , the earl 's famous 
 purveyor of picnic feast bowl along to pitch the riverside tent and 
 spread the table . our upper and low London world report the earl as 
 out on another of his expedition : and , say what we will , we must think 
 kindly of a wealthy nobleman ever to the front to enliven the town 's 
 dusty eye and increase Old England 's reputation for pre - eminence in the 
 Sports . 

 he be the husband of the Whitechapel Countess - get himself into that 
 mess ; but whatever he do , he put the stamp of style on it . he and 
 the thing he set his hand to , they be neat , they be finish , they be 
 fit to trot together , and they have   a shin polish , natural , like 
 a lily of the field ; or say Nature and Art , like the coat of a 
 thoroughbred lead into the paddock by his groom , if you be of that mind . 

 present at the start in Piccadilly , Gower take note of Lord Fleetwood 's 
 military promptitude to do the work he have no taste for , and envy the 
 self - compression which could assume so pleasant an air . he hear here 
 and there crisp comment on his lordship 's coach and horse and 
 personal smartness ; the word ' style , ' which reflect handsomely on the 
 connoisseur confer it , and the question whether one of the lady 
 up there be the countess . his task of unearth and disentangle the 
 monetary affair of ' one of the lady ' compel the wish to belong 
 to the party soon to be tower out of the grasp of brick , and 
 delightfully gay , spirited , quick for fun . a fellow , he think , may 
 brood upon Nature , but the real child of Nature - or she love they 
 well - be those who have the careless chatter , the ready laugh , bright 
 welcome for a holiday . in catch the hour , we be surely the bloom of 
 the hour ? why , yes , and no need to lose the rosy wisdom of the child 
 when we wrap ourselves in the patch old cloak of the man 's . 

 on he go to his conclusion ; but the Dame will have none of they , 
 though here be a creature bent on masonry - work in his act of thinking , 
 to build a traveller's - rest for thinker behind he ; while the volatile 
 be simply break their bubble . 

 he be discontent all day , both with himself and the sentence he 
 coin . a small street - boy at his run along the pavement nowhither , 
 distance he altogether in the race for the great Secret ; precipitate 
 the thought , that the conscious be too heavily handicapped . the 
 unburdened unconscious win the goal . ay , but they leave no legacy . so 
 we must fret and stew , and look into ourselves , and seize the brute and 
 scourge he , just to make one serviceable step forward : that be , utter a 
 single sentence worth the pondering for guidance . 

 Gower imagine the fun upon middle Thames : the vulcan face of Captain 
 Abrane ; the cry of his backer , the smile of the lady , Lord 
 Fleetwood 's happy style in the tooth of tattlean Aurora 's chariot for 
 override it . one might hope , might almost see , that he be come 
 to his well sens on a certain subject . as for style override 
 the bad of indignity , have not scotia give her poet to the slack 
 dependant of the gallow - tree , who so rantingly play his jig and 
 wheel it round in the shadow of that institution ? Style be his , he 
 hit on the right style to top the situation , and perpetually will he 
 slip his head out of the noose to dance the poet 's verse . 

 in fact , style be the mantle of greatness ; and say that the greatness be 
 beyond our reach , we may at least pray to have the mantle . 

 Strangest of fancy , most unphilosophically , Gower conceive a woman 's 
 love as that which would bestow the gift upon a man so bare of it as 
 he . where be the woman ? he embrace the idea of the sex , and find 
 it resolve to a form of one . he stand humbly before the one , and she 
 wan into swarm of her sister . so do she charge he with the loving 
 of her sex , not she . and could it be deny , if he want a woman 's love 
 just to give he a style ? no , not that , but to make he feel proud of 
 himself . that be the heart 's way of tell he a secret in own to 
 a weakness . within it the one he have think of forthwith obtain she 
 lodgement . he discover this truth , in this roundabout way , and know 
 it a truth by the warm fireside glow the contemplation of she cast over 
 he . 

 Dining alone , as he usually have to do , he be astonish to see the earl 
 enter his room . 

 ' ah , you always make the right choice ! ' Fleetwood say , and request 
 he to come to the library when he have do eating . 

 Gower imagine an accident . a metallic ring be in the earl 's voice . 

 one further mouthful finished dinner , for Gower be anxious concern 
 the lady . he join the earl and ask . 

 ' safe . oh yes . we manage to keep it from they , ' say Fleetwood . 
 ' nothing particular , perhaps you will think . poor devil of a fellow ! 
 Father and mother alive , too ! he do it out of hearing , that ' a one 
 merit . mallard : Ambrose Mallard . he have blow his brain out . ' 

 seat plunge in the armchair , with stretch leg and eye at the 
 black fire - grate , Fleetwood tell of the gathering under the tent , and 
 Mallard see , see drinking champagne ; Mallard no long see , not 
 miss . 

 ' he kill himself three field off . he must have be careful to 
 deaden the sound . small pocket - pistol hardly big enough to - but anything 
 serve . couple of brat come run up to Chummy Potts : - " Gentleman 's 
 body bloody in a ditch . " Chummy come to I , and we go . clean dead ; - in 
 the mouth , point up ; hole through the top of the skull . we be 
 crockery ! crockery ! I have to keep Chummy stand . I could not   bring 
 he back to our party . we get help at a farm ; the body lie there . and 
 that be not the bad . we find a letter to I in his pocket pencil 
 his last five minute . I do not   see what he could have do except to go . 
 I can not   tell you more . I have to keep my face , row and drive back . 
 " but where be Mr. Potts ? where can Mr. Mallard be ? " queer sensation , to 
 hear the lady ask ! give I your hand . ' 

 the earl squeeze Gower 's hand an instant ; and it be an act unknown for 
 he to touch or bear a touch ; it say a great deal . 

 late at night he mount to Gower 's room . the funeral of the day 's 
 impression have not be skaken off . he kick at it and sink under it 
 as his talk ramble . ' add five thousand , ' he comment , on the spread of 
 Livia 's paper over the table . ' I have   be have an hour with she . two 
 thousand more , she say . well multiply by two and a half for a woman 's 
 confession . we have to trust to she for some of the debt of honour . see 
 she in the morning . no one master she but you . mind , the first to be 
 clear of must be St. Ombre . I like the fellow ; but these Frenchmen - they 
 do not   spare woman . ambrose , ' - the earl 's eyelid quiver . ' Jealousy 
 fire that shot . quite groundless . she be cool as a marble Venus , as 
 you say . go straight from her house to Esslemont . I do not   plead a 
 case . make the good account you can of it . say - you may say my eye be 
 open . I respect she . if you think that say little , say more . it can not 
 mean more . whatever the Countess of Fleetwood may think due to she , let 
 her name it . say my view of life , way of life , everything in I , have 
 change . I shall follow you . I do not   expect to march over the ground . 
 she have a heap to forgive . her father own or boast , in that book of 
 his Rose Mackrell lend I , he never forgave an injury . ' 

 Gower help the quotation , rub his hand over it , for cover of his 
 glee at the word he have be hear . ' never forgave an injury without 
 a return blow for it . the blow forgive . good for the enemy to get it . 
 he call his hearty old Pagan custom " an action of the lung " with he . 
 and it be not in nature for injury to digest in we . they poison the 
 blood , if we try . but then , there be a manner of hit back . it be not 
 to go an inch beyond the exact measure , Captain Kirby warn we . ' 

 Fleetwood sigh down to a low groan . 

 ' Lord Feltre would have an answer for you . she be a wife ; and a wife 
 hit back be not a pleasant - well , petticoat make the difference . if 
 she be for amend , she shall exact they ; and she may be hard to satisfy , 
 she shall have her full revenge . call it by any other term you like . I 
 do she a wrong . I do not   defend myself ; it be not yet in the Law Courts . 
 I beg to wipe it out , rectify it - choose your phrase - to the very 
 full . I look for the alliance with she to ... ' 

 he spring up and traverse the room : ' we be all guilty of mistake 
 at start : I speak of man . woman be protect ; and if they be not , 
 there be the convent for they , Feltre say . but a man have to live it on 
 before the world ; and this life , with these fly of fellow ... I 
 fall into it in some way . absolutely like the first bird I shoot as 
 a youngster , and stand over the battered head and bloody feather , 
 wonder ! there be Ambrose Mallard - the same splinter 
 bone - blood - come to his end ; and for a woman ; that woman the lady 
 bear the title of half - mother to I . God help I ! what be my sin ? 
 she feel nothing , or about as much as the mortuary paragraph of the 
 newspaper , for the dead man ; and I have Ambrose Mallard 's look at she 
 and St. Ombre talk together , before he leave the tent to cross the 
 field . borrow , beg , or steal for money to play for she ! and not a 
 glimpse of the win post . 

 St. Ombre be a cool player ; that be at the bottom of the story . he be 
 cool because play do not   bite he , as it do Ambrose . I should say 
 the other passion have never bite he . and he be alive and presentable ; 
 ambrose under a sheet , with Chummy Potts to watch . Chummy cry like a 
 brat in the street for his lose mammy . I leave he cry and sob . 
 they have their feeling , these " child of vapour , " as you call they . 
 but how do I fall into the line with a set I despise ? she have my 
 opinion of her gambler , and retort that young Cressett 's turn for 
 the fling be my doing . I can not   swear it be not . there be one of my sin . 
 what be to wipe they out ! she have a tender feeling for the boy ; 
 confess she want govern . why ; she be young , in a way . she have that 
 particular vice of play . she might be manage . here be a lesson for she ! 
 do not   you think she might ? the right man , - the man she can respect , 
 fancy incorruptible ! he must let she see he have an eye for trick . she be 
 not responsible for - his mad passion be the cause , cause of everything 
 he do . the kind of woman to send the shaft . you call she " Diana 
 seat . " you say , " she do not   hunt , she sit and let fly she arrow . " 
 well , she show feeling for young Cressett , and her hit at I be an 
 answer . it strike I on the mouth . but she be an eternal anxiety . a man 
 she respect ! a man to govern she ! ' 

 Fleetwood hurry his pace . ' I could not   have allow poor Ambrose . 
 besides , he have not a chance - never have in anything . it want a head , 
 want the man who can say no to she . " the Reveller 's Aurora , " you call 
 she . she have her beauty , yes . she respect you . I should be relieve - a 
 load off I ! tell she , all debt pay ; fifty thousand invest , in her 
 name and her husband 's . tell she , speak it , there be my consent - if only 
 the man to govern she ! she have it from I , but repeat it , as from I . 
 that sum and her portion would make a fair income for the two . relieve ? 
 by heaven , what a relief ! go early . coach to Esslemont at eleven . do my 
 work there . I have not   to repeat my direction . I shall present myself 
 two day after . I wish Lady Fleetwood to do the part of hostess at 
 Calesford . tell she I depute you to kiss my son for I . now I leave you . 
 good - night . I shall not   sleep . I remember your saying , " bad vision come 
 under the eyelid . " I shall keep mine open and read - read her father 's 
 book of the Maxims ; I generally find two or three at a dip to stimulate . 
 no wonder she venerate he . that sort of progenitor be your " permanent 
 aristocracy . " hard enemy . she must have some of her mother in she , too . 
 abuse I to she , admit the justice of reproach , but say , reason , good 
 feeling - I need not   grind at it . say I respect she . advise she to swallow 
 the injury - not intend for insult . I do not   believe anything high 
 than respect can be offer to a woman . no defence of I to she , but 
 I will tell you , that when I undertake to keep my word with she , I plainly 
 say - never mind ; good - night . if we meet in the morning , let this 
 business rest until it be do . I must drive to help poor chum and see 
 about the Inquest . ' 

 Fleetwood nod from the doorway . Gower be leave with humming ear . 




 CHAPTER XL . record of minor incident 

 they go to their bed doom to lie and roam as the solitary of a 
 sleepless night . they meet next day like a couple emerge from sirocco 
 desert , indispose for conversation or even short companionship , much 
 of the night 's dry turmoil in their head . each would have prefer 
 the sight of an enemy ; and it be hardly conceal by they , for they 
 incline to regard one another as the author of their infernal passage 
 through the drear night 's wilderness . 

 Fleetwood be the civiller ; his immediate prospective duty be 
 clear , however abhorrent . but he have inflict a monstrous disturbance 
 on the man he mean in his rash , decisive way to elevate , if not 
 benefit . Gower 's imagination , foreign to his desire and his project , 
 be play juggler 's trick with he , dramatize upon hypothesis , 
 which mount in stage and could pretend to be soberly conceivable , 
 assume that the earl 's wild hint overnight be a credible basis . 
 he transport himself to his first view of the Countess Livia , the 
 fountain of simile bear of his prostrate adoration , close upon the 
 invasion and capture of he by the combine liqueur in the giddy Batlen 
 light ; and join the arabian magic in his breast at the time with the 
 more magical reality now propose as a sequel to it , he enter the land 
 where dream confess they be outstrip by revelation . 

 yet it startle he to hear the earl say : ' you will get audience at ten ; 
 I have   arrange ; make the most of the situation to she . I refuse to help . 
 I foresee it be the only way of solve this precious puzzle . you do 
 I and every one of we a service past pay . not a man of her set 
 worth .... she - but you will stop it ; no one else can . of course , you have 
 have your breakfast . off , and walk yourself into a talkative mood , as you 
 tell I you do . ' 

 ' one of the thing I do when I have   nobody to hear , ' say Gower , 
 speculate whether the black sprite in this young nobleman be for 
 send he as a rod to scourge the lady : an ingenious device , that 
 smell of mediaeval Courts and tickle his humour . 

 ' will she listen ? ' he say gravely . 

 ' she will listen ; she have not to learn you admire . you admit she 
 have help to trim and polish , and the rest . she declare you be 
 incorruptible . there be the ground open . I fle no single sovereign more 
 into that quicksand , and I want not one word far on the subject . I 
 follow you to Esslemont . pray , go . ' 

 Fleetwood push into the hall . a footman be order to pack and 
 deposit Mr. Woodseer 's portmanteau at the coach - office . 

 ' the principal point be to make sure we have all the obligation , ' gower 
 say . 

 ' you know the principal point , ' say the earl . ' relieve I . ' 

 he face to the opening street door . Lord Feltre stand in the framing 
 of it - a welcome sight . the ' monastic man of fashion , ' of Gower 's phrase 
 for he , enter , croon condolence , with a stretched waxen hand for 
 his friend , a partial nod for Nature 's worshipper - inefficient at any 
 serious issue of our human affair , as the earl would now discover . 

 Gower leave the two young nobleman to their greeting . happily for he , 
 philosophy , in the present instance , after a round of profundity , 
 turn her lantern upon the comic aspect of his errand . consider 
 the Countess Livia , and himself , and the tyrant , who benevolently and 
 providentially , or sardonically , hurl they to their interview , 
 the situation be comic , certainly , in the sense of its be an 
 illumination of this life 's odd development . for thus have thing 
 come about , that if it be possible even to think of the lady 's 
 condescending , he , thank to the fair one he would see before evening , 
 be armed and proof against his old infatuation or any renewal of it . 
 and he have be teach to read through the beautiful twilighte woman , 
 as if she be burn paper hold at the fire consume she . his hope 
 hang elsewhere . nevertheless , an intellectual demon - imp very lively 
 in his head urge he to speculate on such a contest between they , and 
 weigh the engaging force . difficulty be perceive , the scornful 
 laughter on her side be plainly hear ; but his feeling of savage 
 mastery , far from beat down , swell so as to become irritable for the 
 trial ; and when he be near her house he hold a review of every 
 personal disadvantage he could summon , incite by an array of limp 
 deficiency that flatter their arrogant leader with idea of the 
 power he have in spite of they . 

 in fact , his emancipation from sentiment inspire the genial mood to 
 tease . woman , have to encounter a male adept at the weapon for the 
 purpose , must be either voluble or supportingly proud to keep the skin 
 from shrinking : which be a commencement of the retrogression ; and that 
 have frequently be the beginning of a rout . now the Countess Livia be 
 a lady of queenly pose and the servitorial conventional speech likely at 
 a push to prove beggarly . when once on a common platform with a man of 
 agile tongue instigate by his intellectual demon to pursue inquiry 
 into her moral resource , after a ruthless exposure of the wrecked 
 material , she would have to be , after the various fashion , defiant , if 
 she be to hold she own against pressure ; and see , as she must , the 
 road of prudence point to conciliation , it be calculable that she would 
 take it . hence a string of possible event , astounding to mankind , but 
 equally calculable , should one care to give imagination headway . gower 
 look signally Captain Abrane 's ' fiddler ' while he wait at Livia 's 
 house door . a studious intimacy with such a lady be rather like the 
 exposure of the silver moon to the astronomer 's telescope . 

 the Dame will have nought of an interview and colloquy not find 
 mention in her collection of ballad , concern a person quite 
 secondary in Dr. Glossop 's voluminous paper . she as vehemently 
 prohibit a narration of Gower Woodseer 's proposal some hour later , for 
 the hand of the Countess of Fleetwood 's transfix maid Madge , because 
 of the insignificance of the couple ; and though it be a quaint idyll of 
 an affection slowly form , rationally base while seem preposterous , 
 tend to bluntly funny utterance on both side . the girl be 
 a creature of the enthusiasm , and have lift that passion of her 
 constitution into high than the worship of sheer physical bravery . 
 she have pity Mr. Gower Woodseer for his apparently extreme , albeit 
 reverential , devotion to her mistress . the plainly word term of his 
 ask a young woman of her position and her reputation to marry he 
 come on she like an intrusion of dazzle day upon the closed eyelid of 
 the night , require time , and her mistress 's consent , and his father 's 
 express approval , before she could yield he an answer that might 
 appear a forgetfulness of her station , her ignorance , her damage 
 character . Gower protest himself , with truth , a spotted pard , an 
 ignoramus , and an outcast of all establish class , as the worshipper 
 of Nature can not well avoid be . 

 ' but what be it you like I for , Mr. Gower ? ' Madge long to know , that 
 she might see a way in the strange land where he have plant she after 
 a whirl ; and he reply : ' I ' ve   think of you till I can say I love you 
 because you have naturally everything I shoot at . ' 

 the vastness of the compliment drive she to think herself empty of 
 anything . 

 he name courage , and its offspring , honesty , and devotedness , 
 constancy . her bosom rise at the word . 

 ' yes , constancy , ' he repeat ; and ' grow girl have to " turn 
 corner , " as you tell I once . ' 

 ' I do ? ' say she , redden under a memory , and abash by his 
 recollection of a moment she know to have be weak with she , or noisy 
 of herself . 

 Madge go straightway to her mistress and relate her great event , 
 in the tone of a confession of crime . her mistress 's approbation be 
 timidly suggest rather than besought . 

 it come on a flood . Carinthia 's eye fill ; she exclaim : ' oh , that 
 good man ! - he choose my Madge for wife . she say it , Rebecca say it . 
 Mrs. Wythan see and say Mr. Woodseer love my Madge . I hear she say 
 it . then yes , and yes , from I for both your sake , dear girl . he will 
 have the faithfull , he will have the kind - oh ! and I shall know 
 there can be a happy marriage in England . ' 

 she summon Gower ; she clasp his hand , to thank he for appreciate 
 her servant and sister , and for the happiness she have in hear it ; 
 and she gaze at he and the laden brow of her Madge alternately , 
 encourage he to repeat his recital of his pecuniary mean , for the 
 poetry of the fact it verify , feast on the sketch of a four - room 
 cottage and an agricultural labourer 's widow for cook and housemaid ; 
 Madge to listen to his composition of the day in the evening ; Madge to 
 praise he , Madge to correct his vanity . 

 Love be out of the count , but Carinthia 's leap sympathy decorate 
 the baldness of the sketch and spy his feature through the daub 
 mask he choose to wear as a member of the order of husband , without 
 take it for his fun . Dry material statement present the reality 
 she doate to think of . moreover , the marriage of these two renew her 
 belief in true marriage , and their intention to unite be evidence of 
 love . 

 ' my journey to England be worth all trouble for the meeting Madge , ' 
 she say . ' I can look with pleasure to that day of my meeting she 
 first - the day , it be then ! ' 

 she stop . Madge feel the quiver upward of a whimper to a sob in 
 her breast . she slip away . 

 ' it be a day that have come round to be repair , Lady Fleetwood , ' say 
 Gower . ' if you will . will you not ? he have have a blow - the death of a 
 friend , violent death . it have break he . he want a month or so in 
 your mountain . I have think he hard to deal with ; he be humane . his 
 enormous wealth have be his tempter . Madge and I will owe he our mean 
 of livelihood , enough for cottager , until I carve my way . his feeling 
 be much more independent of his rank than those of most nobleman . he 
 will repeat your kind word to Madge and I ; I be sure of it . he have 
 have heavy burden ; he be young , hardly form yet . he need a helper ; I 
 mean , one ally to he . you forgive I ? I leave he with a catholic lord 
 for comforter , who regard my prescript of the study of Nature , when 
 we be in grief , as about the same as an offer of a dish of cold boil 
 green . silver and ivory image be more consoling . neither he nor I 
 can offer the right thing for Lord Fleetwood . it will be find here . and 
 then your mountain . More than I , nearly as much as you , he have a 
 poet 's ardour for mountain land . he and Mr. Wythan would soon learn to 
 understand one another on that head , if not as to management of mine . ' 

 the pleading be crafty , and it be penetrative in the avoidance of 
 stress . Carinthia shake herself to feel move . the endeavour chill she 
 to a notion that she be but half alive . she let the question approach 
 she , whether Chillon could pardon Lord Fleetwood . she , with no idea of 
 benignness , might speak pardon 's word to he , on a late autumn 
 evening year hence , perhaps , or to his friend to - morrow , if he 
 would considerately keep distant . she be uphold by the thought of her 
 brother 's more honourable likeness to their father , in the certainty 
 of his refusal to speak pardon 's empty word or touch an offend hand , 
 without their father 's warrant for the injury wipe out ; and as she have 
 no wish for that to be do , she could anticipate his withholding of the 
 word . 

 for her brother at wrestle with his fall fortune be now the beating 
 heart of Carinthia 's mind . her husband be a shadow there . he do 
 obscure it , and he might annoy , he be unable to set it in motion . he 
 sit there somewhat like Youth 's apprehension of death : - the dark spot 
 see mistily at time through people 's tear , or visione as in 
 an ambush beyond the hill ; occasionally challenge to stimulate 
 recklessness ; oftener overlook , acknowledge for the undesired remote 
 of life 's condition , life 's evil , fatal , ill - assorted yoke - fellow ; and 
 if it be in his power to burst out of his corner and be terrible to 
 she , she could bring up a force unnamed and unmeasured , that be the 
 blood of her father in her vein . have do her utmost to guard her 
 babe , she say her prayer ; she stand for peace or the struggle . 

 ' do Lord Fleetwood speak of come here ? ' she say . 

 ' to - morrow . ' 

 ' I go to Croridge to - morrow . ' 

 ' your ladyship return ? ' 

 ' yes , I return Mr. Gower , you have fifty minute before you dress for 
 dinner . ' 

 he think only of the exceed charity of the intimation ; and he may 
 be excuse for his not see the feminine full answer it be , in an 
 imply , unmeditated contrast . he go gladly to find his new comrade , 
 his flower among grass - blade , the wonderful creature astonish he 
 and surcharge his world by set her face at he , open her breast 
 to he , breathe a young man 's word of word from a woman 's mouth . his 
 flower among grass - blade for a head look studiously down , she be 
 his fountain of wisdom as well , in the assurance she give he of the 
 wisdom of his choice . 

 but Madge have put up the ' prize - fighter 's lass , ' by way of dolly 
 defence , to cover her amazed confusion when the proposal of this 
 well - like gentleman to a girl such as she sound churchy . he knock 
 it over easily ; it leave , however , a bee at his ear and an itch to 
 transfer the buzzer 's attention and tease his darling ; for she have 
 betray herself as right good game . nor be there happy promise of 
 life - long domestic enlivenment for a prescient man of Letters than he 
 have in the contemplation of a pretty face show the sensitiveness to 
 the sting , which be not allow to poison her temper , and be short 
 of fetch tear . the dear innocent girl give this pleasing promise ; 
 moreover , she could be twist - to laugh at herself , just a little . now , 
 the young woman who can do that have already jump the hedge into the 
 highroad of philosophy , and may become a philosopher 's mate in its 
 by - way , where the minute discovery be the notable treasure . 

 they have their ramble , agreeable to both , despite the admonitory dose 
 administer to one of they . they might have be espy at a point or 
 two from across the parkpaling ; their laughter would have catch an 
 outside pedestrian 's hearing . whatever the case , Owain Wythan , rid 
 down off Croridge , big with news of her brother for the countess , 
 din at her table , and walk up the lane to the Esslemont Arms on a 
 moonless night , to mount his horse , pitch against an active and , as 
 it be deem by Gower 's observation of his eye , a scientific fist . the 
 design to black they finely be attributable to the dyeing accuracy of 
 the stroke . a single blow have do it . Mr. Wythan 's watch and purse be 
 untouched ; and a second look at the swollen blind peeper lead Gower to 
 surmise that they be , in the calculation of the striker , his own . 

 he walk next day to the Royal Sovereign inn . there he come upon the 
 earl drive his phaeton . Fleetwood jump down , and Gower tell of the 
 mysterious incident , as the chief thing he have to tell , not render 
 it so mysterious in his narrative style . he have the art of indicate 
 darkly . 

 ' Ines , you mean ? ' Fleetwood cry , and he appear as nauseate and 
 perplex as he feel . why should Ines assault Mr. Wythan ? it happen 
 that the pugilist 's patron have , within the last fifteen minute , 
 drive past a certain thirty - acre meadow , sight of which on his way to 
 Carinthia have stir he . he have even then an idea of his old deed 
 dog he to bind he , every one of they , the small . 

 ' but you have   nothing to go by , ' he say . ' why guess at this rascal more 
 than another ? ' 

 Gower quote Mrs. Rundles and the ostler for witness to Kit 's visit 
 yesterday to the Royal Sovereign , though Kit shun the bar of the 
 Esslemont Arms . 

 ' I guess pretty clearly , because I suspect he be hang about and see 
 I and Madge together . ' 

 ' consolation for failure in town ? - by the way , you be compliment , 
 and I do not   think you deserve it . however , there be just the chance to 
 stop a run to perdition . but , Madge ? Madge ? I would swear to the girl ! ' 

 ' not so hard as I , ' say Gower , and speak of the oath to come between 
 the girl and he . 

 Fleetwood 's dive into the girl 's eye draw she before he . he check a 
 spirt of exclamation . 

 ' you fancy the brute have a crack for revenge and mistook his man ? ' 

 ' that be what I want her ladyship to know , ' say Gower . 

 ' how could you let she hear of it ? ' 

 ' nothing can be conceal from she . ' 

 the earl be impressionable to the remark , in his disgust at the 
 incident . it add a touch of a new kind of power to her image . 

 ' she be aware of my coming ? ' 

 ' to - day or to - morrow . ' 

 they scale the phaeton and drove . 

 ' you undervalue Lord Feltre . you avoid your adversary , ' Fleetwood now 
 rebuke his hearer . ' it be an easy way to have the pull of they in 
 your own mind . you might learn from he . he be willing for controversy . 
 nature - worship - or " aboriginal genuflexion , " he call it ; anglicanism , 
 methodism ; he stand to engage they . it can not   be doubt , that in day 
 of trouble he have a faith ' stout as a rock , with an oracle in it , " as 
 he say ; and he be right , " man who go into battle require a rock to back 
 they or a staff to lean on . " you have your ' secret , " you think ; as far 
 as I can see , it be to keep you from go into any form of battle . ' 

 the new influence at work on the young nobleman be evident , if only in 
 the language use . 

 Gower answer mildly : ' that can hardly be say of a man who be go to 
 marry . ' 

 ' perhaps not . Lady Fleetwood be aware ? ' 

 ' Lady Fleetwood do I the honour to approve my choice . ' 

 ' you mean , you be dead on to it with this girl ? ' 

 ' for a year or more . ' 

 ' fond of she ? ' 

 ' all my heart . ' 

 ' in love ! ' 

 ' yes , in love . the proof of it be , I ' ve   ask she now I can support she 
 as a cottager lean on the three per cent . ' 

 ' well , it help you to a human kind of talk . it carry out your 
 theory . I never disbelieve in your honesty . the wisdom be another 
 matter . do you ever tell any one , that there be not an act of a man 's 
 life lie dead behind he , but it be blessing or curse he every step 
 he take ? ' 

 ' by that , ' rejoin Gower , ' I can say Lord Feltre prove there be wisdom 
 in the truism of devoutness . ' 

 he think the catholic lord have go a step or two to catch an eel . 

 Fleetwood be look on the backward of his day , behold a 
 melancholy sunset , with a grimace in it . 

 ' Lord Feltre might show you the " leanness of philosophy " ; - you would 
 learn from hear he : - " an old gnaw bone for the dog that choose to 
 be no well than a dog . " ' 

 ' the vertiginous roast haunch be recommend , ' Gower say . 

 ' see a high than your own head , good sir . but , hang the man ! he 
 manage to hit on the thing he want . ' Fleetwood set his face at Gower 
 with cut heartiness . ' in love , you say , and Madge : and mean it to 
 be the holy business ! well , poor old Chummy always give you credit for 
 know how to play your game . she have give proof she be a good girl . 
 I do not   see why it should not   end well . that attack on the Welshman 's the 
 bad lookout . explain , if you like , but woman 's impression will not 
 get explain away . we must down on our knee or they . her ladyship 
 attentive at all to affair of the house ? ' 

 ' every day with Queeney ; at interval with ledding . ' 

 ' excellent ! you speak like a fellow recording the devout observance 
 of a great dame with her minor and superior , ecclesiastical comforter . 
 Regular at church ? ' 

 ' her ladyship go . ' 

 ' a woman without religion , Gower Woodseer , be a weed on the water , or 
 she be hard as nail . we shall see . generally , Madge and the youngster 
 parade the park at this hour . I drive round to the stable . go in and 
 offer your version of that rascally dog 's trick . it seem the near we 
 can come at . he be a sot , and drunken dog will do anything . I have   have he 
 on my hand , and I have   get the stain of he . ' 

 they trot through Esslemont Park gate . ' I have   get that place , 
 Calesford , on my hand , too , ' the earl say , suddenly move to a liking 
 for his kentish home . 

 he and Gower be strike by a common thought of the extraordinary 
 burden his indulgence in impulse draw upon he . present circumstance 
 picture to Gower the oppose weigh and mature good reason for his 
 choose Madge , and he compliment himself in his pity for the earl . 
 but Fleetwood , as he review a body of acquaintance perfectly free 
 from the wretched run in harness , though they have their fit and their 
 whim , be push to the conclusion that fatalism mark his particular 
 course through life . he could not hint at such an idea to the 
 unsympathetic fellow , or rather , the burly antagonist to anything of the 
 sort , beside he . Lord Feltre would have understand and appreciate 
 it instantly . where be aid to be have if we have the Fates against we ? 
 Feltre know the Power , he say ; be an example of ' the efficacy of 
 supplication ' ; he have be ' fatally drive to find the power , ' and have 
 find it - on the road to Rome , of course : not a delectable road for an 
 English nobleman , except that the noise of another convert in pilgrimage 
 on it would deal our english world a lively smack , the very stroke that 
 heavy body want . but the figure of a ' monastic man of fashion ' be 
 antipathetic to the earl , and he flout an English Protestant 
 mass merely because of his be highly individual , and therefore 
 revolutionary for the minority . 

 he cast his bitter cud aside . ' my man should have arrive . Lady 
 Fleetwood at home ? ' 

 Gower speak of she have go to Croridge in the morning . 

 ' has she take the child ? ' 

 ' she have , yes . for the air of the height . ' 

 ' for great security . Lady Arpington praise the thoughtful mother . I 
 rather expect to see the child . ' 

 ' they can not   be much later , ' Gower suppose . 

 ' you do not   feel your long separation from " the object " ? ' 

 let he have his cushion for pin , Gower say ' it need all my 
 philosophy : 

 he be prick and probe for the next five minute ; not bad rallying , 
 the earl could be smart when he smart . then they descend the terrace 
 to meet Lady Fleetwood drive her pony - trap . she give a brief single 
 nod to the salute of her lord , quite in the town - lady 's manner , 
 surprisingly . 




 CHAPTER XLI . in which the fate be see and a choice of the refuges 
 from they 

 the home of husband and wife be under one roof at last . Fleetwood go , 
 like one deport , to his wing of the house , physically sensible , in 
 the back turn to his wife 's along the corridor , that our ordinary 
 comparison for the division of a wed twain be correct . she be 
 Arctic , and Antarctic he have to be , perforce of the distance she put 
 between they . a removal of either of they from life - or from ' the act of 
 breathing , ' as Gower Woodseer 's contempt of the talk about death would 
 call it - be an imaginable way of make it a wide division . Ambrose 
 Mallard be far enough from his fatal lady now - far than the Poles 
 asunder . Ambrose , if the clergy will allow he , have find his peace .. 
 but the road and the mean he choose be a madman 's . 

 the blotting of our character , to close our trouble , be the final proof 
 of our be ' son of vapour , ' accord to Gower Woodseer 's heartless 
 term for poor Ambrose and the lot . they have their soul ; and above 
 philosophy , ' natural ' or unnatural , they may find a shelter . they can 
 show in their desperation that they be make of blood , as philosopher 
 rather fail of do . an insignificant brainless creature like Feltre 
 have wit , by the aid of his religion , to help or be charitable to his 
 fellow , particularly the sinner , in the crisis of life , surpass any 
 philosopher 's . 

 information of her ladyship be have inspect the apartment , to see to 
 the minute of his customary luxury , cut at he all round . his valet 
 have it from the footman and maid ; and their speaking of it mean 
 a liking for their mistress ; and that like , add to her official 
 solicitude on his behalf , touch a soft place in he and blow an 
 icy wind ; he be freeze where he be warm . here be evidence of she 
 intend the division to be a fix gap . she have enter this room and 
 look about she . he be here to feel her presence in her absence . 

 some one or something have school she , too . her large - eyed directness 
 of gaze be the same as at that inn and in Wales , but her easy 
 sedateness be novel , her English , almost the tone of the english world : 
 he gather it , at least , from the few remark below stair . 

 his desire to be with she be the desire to escape the phantasm of the 
 woman haunt to subjugate he when they be separate . he could kill 
 illusion by magnifying and claw at her visible angle and audible 
 false note ; and he do it until his recollection join to the sight 
 of she , when a clash of the thought of what she have be and the thought 
 of what she be have the effect of conjure a bitter sweet image that 
 be a more seductive illusion . strange to think , this woman once love 
 the man who be not half the value of the man she no long love . he 
 take a shot at cynicism , but hit no mark . this woman protect her whole 
 sex . 

 they sit at the dinner - table alone , thank to a handsome wench 's 
 attraction for a philosopher . married , and parent of a lusty son , this 
 be their first sit at table together . the mouth that say ' I guard 
 my room ' be not obtrude ; she talk passingly of her brother , much 
 of Lady Arpington and of old Mr. Woodseer ; and , though she reserve a 
 smile , there be no look of a lock on her face . she seem pleased to 
 be treat very courteously ; she return the stately politeness in 
 exactest measure ; very simply , as well . her face have now an air of 
 homeliness , well suit to an english household interior . she could 
 chat . any pause occur , he be the one guilty of they ; she do not 
 allow they to be barrier chasm , or ' strid ' for the leap with effort ; 
 she cross they like the mountain maid over a gorge 's plank - keep she 
 tone perfectly . her Madge and Mr. Gower Woodseer make a conversible 
 topic . she be inquisitive for account of spanish history and the land 
 of Spain . 

 they pass into the drawing - room . she have hear of the fate of the poor 
 child in Wales , she say , without a comment . 

 ' I see now , I ought to have back your proposal , ' he confess , and be 
 near on shiver . she keep silent , proudly or regretfully . 

 open on her workbasket be a spanish guide - book and a map attach to 
 it . she listen to description of Cadiz , Malaga , Seville , Granada . 
 her curiosity be chiefly for detailed account of Catalonia and the 
 Pyrenees . 

 ' hardly the place for you ; there be a perpetual heaving of Carlism in 
 those mountain ; your own be quieter for traveller , ' he remark ; and 
 for a moment her lip move to some likeness of a smile ; a dimple in a 
 flow thought . 

 he remark the come and go of it . 

 he regret his inability to add to her knowledge of the spanish 
 Pyrenees . 

 book help she at present , she say . 

 feel acutely that hostility would have bring they close than her 
 uninviting civility , he speak of the assault on Mr. Wythan , and Gower 
 Woodseer 's conjecture , and of his have long since discharge the 
 rascal Ines . 

 to which her unreproachful answer , ' you make use of those man , my lord , ' 
 send a cry ring through he , recall Feltre 's word , as to the grip 
 man progressively be hold in by their deed do . 

 ' oh , quite true , we change our view and way of life , ' he say , 
 think she might set her consideration on other point of his 
 character . but this reflection be a piece of humility not yet in his 
 particular estimate of his character , and he spurn it : an act of pride 
 that drive his mind , for occupation , to contemplate her ; which speedily 
 become an embrace of her character , until he be ask whether the 
 woman he call wife and dare not clasp be one of those rarest , who 
 can be idealize by virtue of their be know . for the young man 
 embrace a character lose grasp of his own , be pluck out of himself 
 and pass into it , to see the creature he be with the other 's eye , 
 and feel for the other as a very self . such be the privilege and the 
 chastisement of the young . 

 Gower Woodseer 's engagement with the girl Madge be a happy subject 
 for expatiation and agreement . her deep tone throw a light on 
 Gower , and where she see goodness , he could at least behold the natural 
 philosopher practically philosophize . 

 ' the girl shall have a dowry from I , ' he say ; and the sum name be 
 large . her head bent acknowledgingly ; money have small weight with she 
 now . his perception of it strip he and lamed he . 

 he wish her ladyship good - night . she stand up and perform a 
 semi - ceremonious obeisance , neatly adapt to their mutual position . she 
 have a well - breed mother . 

 probably she would sleep . no such expectation could soothe the friend , 
 and some might be think misleader , of Ambrose Mallard , before he have 
 ocular proof that the body lie underground . his promise be give to 
 follow it to the grave , a grave in consecrated earth . Ambrose die of 
 the accidental shot of a pocket - pistol he customarily carry load . 
 two intimate associate of the dead man swear to that habit of his . 
 they lie to get he undisputed christian burial . aha ! the earl laugh 
 outright at Chummy Potts 's nursery qualm . the old fellow have to do it , 
 and he lie like a man for the sake of Ambrose Mallard 's family . so much 
 be owe to our friend . 

 can ecclesiastical casuist decide upon case of conscience affect 
 man of the world ? 

 a council sit upon the case the whole night long . a committee of the 
 worldly held argumentation in a low chamber . 

 these be night that weaken we to below the level of woman . a shuttle 
 work in Fleetwood 's head . he defend the man of the world . Lord 
 Feltre oil they , damn they , kindle they to a terrific expiatory 
 blaze , and extinguishingly salve and waft aloft the release essence 
 of they . maniacal for argument , Fleetwood reject the forgiveness 
 of sin , if sin they be . prove they sin , and the suffering be of 
 necessity everlasting , his insomnia logic insist . whichever side he 
 take , his wife be against he ; not in speech , but in her look . she be 
 a dumb figure among the wrangler , cloud up to the neck . her look say 
 she know more of he than they know . 

 he depart next day for London , after kiss his child ; and he would 
 have do wisely to abstain from his exhibition of the paternal . know 
 it a step to conciliation , he check his impulsive warmth , under the 
 apprehension that the mother would take it for a piece of act to 
 propitiate - and his lip peck the baby 's cheek . its mother hold arm 
 for it immediately . 

 not without reason do his heart denounce she as a mere mother , with 
 little of a mind to see . 

 the recent series of feverishly sleepless night dispose he to 
 snappish irritability or the thirst for tenderness . Gower have singular 
 experience of he on the drive north - westward . he scarcely speak ; he 
 say once : ' if you mean to marry , you will be want to marry soon , of 
 course , ' and his curt nod before the reply be formulate appear to 
 signify , the soon the well , and deliverance for both of we . Honest 
 though he might , be sometimes deep and sometimes picturesque , the 
 philosopher 's day have come to an end . how can philosophy minister to 
 raw wound , when we be in a rage gale of the vexation , batter 
 to right and left ! religion have a nourishing breast : philosophy be 
 breastless . religion condone offence : philosophy have no forgiveness , 
 be an untenanted confessional : ' wide air to a cry in anguish , ' Feltre 
 say . 

 all the way to London Fleetwood endure his companion , let he talk 
 when he would . 

 he spend the great part of the night discuss human affair 
 and spiritual with Lord Feltre , whose dialectical exhortation and 
 insinuation be of the feeble , but to an isolated young man , 
 yearn for the tenderness of a woman think but of her grievance , 
 the ointment bring comfort . 

 it soothe he during his march to and away from Ambrose Mallard 's 
 grave ; where it seem to he curious and even pitiable that Chumley 
 Potts should be so inconsolably shake . well , and if the priest have 
 the secret of strengthen the backbone for a bend of the knee in 
 calamity , why not go to the priest , Chummy ? Potts 's hearing be not 
 address ; nor be the chief person in the meditation affect by a 
 question that merely jump out of his perturb interior . 

 business at Calesford keep Fleetwood hang about London several day 
 far ; and his hatred of a place he waste time and money to decorate 
 grow immeasurable . it distort the feature of the beautiful woman for 
 whose pleasure the grand entertainment to be hold there have , somewhere 
 or other - when felon spectre be abroad over earth - be conceive . 

 he could then return to Esslemont . Gower be tell kindly , with 
 intentional coldness , that he could take a seat in the phaeton if he 
 like ; and he like , and take it . anything to get to that girl of his ! 

 whatever the earl 's inferior do , their inferior station be not 
 suffer to discolour it for his judgement . but an increase antagonism 
 to Woodseer 's philosophy - which the fellow carry through with 
 perpetual scoring of satisfaction - cause he to set a hard eye on the 
 damsel under the grisly spot shadow of the sottish bruiser , of whom , 
 after once touch the beast , he could not rub his hand clean ; and 
 he choose to consider the winning of the prize - fighter 's lass the final 
 triumph or flag on the apex of the now despise philosophy . vain to 
 ask how he have come to be mix up with the lot , or why the stolidly 
 conceited , pretentious fellow have seat here , as by right , beside he ! 
 we sow and we reap ; ' plant for sugar and taste the cane , ' some one 
 say - this Woodseer , probably ; he can , when it suit he , tickle the 
 ear of the worldling . and there be worthy stuff to remember ; stuff 
 to nourish : Feltre 's ' wisdom of our father , ' rightly name Religion . 

 More in the country , when he traverse sweep and rise of open land , 
 Carinthia 's image begin to shine , and she throw some of her light on 
 Madge , who make Woodseer appear tolerable , sagacious , absurdly enviable , 
 as when we have the fit to wish we be some four - foot . the fellow 's 
 philosophy wear a look of practical craft . 

 he be go to the girl he like , and she be , one could swear , an 
 honest girl ; and she be a comely girl , a girl to stick to a man . she 
 throw over a sot be creditable . her mistress love she . that say 
 much for any mortal creature . man or woman love by Carinthia could 
 not be cowardly , could not be vile , must have high quality . next 
 to Religion , she stand for a test of we . have she any strong sense of 
 Religion , in addition to the formal trooping to one of their pallid 
 protestant church ? Lord Feltre might prove useful to she . for merely 
 the comprehension of the signification of Religion steady we . it have 
 do that for he , the earl own . 

 he break a prolonged silence by remark to Gower ' you have not   much 
 to say to - day ' ; and the answer be ' very little . when I be walk , I be 
 pick up ; and when I be drive , I be put together . ' 

 Gower be rally on the pursuit of the personal object in both case . 
 he point at sheep , shepherd , farmer , over the hedge , all similarly 
 occupy ; and admit shamelessly , that he have not a thought for 
 company , scarce a word to fle . ' idea in gestation be the dull 
 matter you can have . ' 

 ' there I quite agree with you , ' say Fleetwood . abrane , Chummy Potts , 
 Brailstone , little Corby , be bright comrade . and these be 
 his ixionide ! hitherto his carving of a way in the world have be 
 sufficiently ill - consider . be it preferable to be a loutish 
 philosopher ? since the death of Ambrose Mallard , he feel Woodseer 's 
 title for that crew grind harshly ; and he try to provoke a repetition 
 of it , that he might burst out in wrathful defence of his friend - to be 
 name friend when they be vilify : defence of poor Ambrose at least , 
 the sinner who , or one as bad , might have reach to pardon through the 
 priesthood . 

 Gower offer he no chance .. 

 enter Esslemont air , Fleetwood toss his black mood to the wind . 
 she breathe it . she be a mountain girl , and find it hard to forgive 
 our lowland . she would learn tolerance , take her flight at season . 
 the yacht , if she be anything of a sailor , may give she a taste of 
 England 's pleasure . she will have a special allowance for distribution 
 among old Mr. Woodseer 's people . as to the rest of the Countess of 
 Fleetwood 's wish , her family rank with her husband 's in claim of 
 any kind on he . there would be - she would require and have a right to 
 demand - say , a warm half - hour of explanation : he know the tone for 
 they , and so little do he revolve it apprehensively , that his mind 
 spring beyond , to the hearing from her mouth of she not intend 
 far to ' guard her room . ' how quietly the word be speak ! there 
 be a charm in the retrospect of her mouth and manner . one of the 
 rare woman who never pout or attitudinize , she could fling her glove 
 gracefully - one might add , capturingly under every aspect , she be a 
 handsome belligerent . the word he have to combat please his memory . 
 some good friend , Lady Arpington probably , have instruct she in the art 
 of dress to match her colour . 

 concern himself , he make no stipulation , but he reflect on Lord 
 Feltre 's likely estimate of she as a bit of a heathen . and it might 
 be to her advantage , be she and Feltre to have some conversation . 
 whatever the faith , a faith should exist , for without the sentiment of 
 religion , a woman , he say , be where she be when she leave the gate 
 of Eden . a man be not much far . Feltre might have save Ambrose 
 Mallard . he be , however , right in say , that the woman with 
 the sentiment of religion in her bosom be a box of holy incense 
 distinguish she from all other woman . empty of it , she be devil 's 
 bait . at well , she be a creature who can not overlook an injury , or must 
 be exact God know what humiliation before she sign the treaty . 

 inform at the house that her ladyship have be stay up on Croridge 
 for the last two day , Fleetwood send his hard shot of the eye at 
 Gower . let she be absent : it be equal to the first move of war , 
 and absolve he from contemplated proposal to make amend . but the 
 enforce solitary companionship with this ruminator of a fellow set he 
 ask whether the godless dog he have pick up by the wayside be not 
 incarnate another of the sin he have to expiate . day after day , 
 almost hourly , some new stroke fall on he . why ? be he select for 
 persecution because he be wealthy ? the Fates be drive he in one 
 direction , no doubt of that . 

 this further black mood evaporate , and like a cessation of English 
 storm - weather bequeath he gloom . ashamed of the mood , he be 
 nevertheless direct by its final shadow to see the ruminating 
 tramp in Gower , and in Madge the prize - fighter 's jilt : and round about 
 Esslemont a world eye an Earl of Fleetwood , who paint himself the 
 man he be , or be hold to be , by get together such a collection , 
 from the daughter of the Old Buccaneer to the ghastly corpse of Ambrose 
 Mallard . why , clearly , wealth be the sole origin and agent of the 
 mischief . with somewhat less of it , he might have walk in his place 
 among the nation 's elect , the ' herd of the gilt horn , ' untroubled by 
 ambition and idea . 

 arrive thus far , he chance to behold Gower and Madge walk over the 
 ground near the western plantation , and he regret the disappearance 
 of they , with the fellow talk hard into the girl 's ear . those two 
 could think he have be of some use . the man pretend to philosophical 
 depth be at any rate honest ; one could swear to the honesty of the 
 girl , though she have be a reckless hussy . their humble little hope 
 and mean to come to union approach , after a fashion , hymn at his 
 ear . those two be pleasanter to look on than amorous lord and great 
 lady , who be interesting only when they be wicked . 

 four day of desolate wandering over the estate be occupy chiefly 
 in his decreeing the fall of timber that obstruct view , and be the 
 more imperatively doom for his bailiff 's intercession . ' sound wood ' 
 the tree might be : they have to assist in defray the expense of 
 separate establishment . a messenger to Queeney from Croridge then 
 announce the Countess 's return ' for a couple of hour . ' Queeney say 
 it be the day when her ladyship examine the weekly bill of the 
 household . that be in the early morning . the post bring my lord a 
 letter from Countess Livia , a most infrequent writer . she have his word 
 to pay her debt ; what next be she for ask ? he shrug , open the 
 letter , and star at the half dozen line . the signification of 
 they rap on his consciousness of another heavy blow before he be 
 perfectly intelligent . 

 all possible anticipation seem here outdone : insomuch that he hold 
 palpable evidence of the Fates at work to harass and drive he . she be 
 married to the young Earl of Cressett ! ' 

 Fleetwood print the line on his eyeball . they be the politely 
 flow feminine of a statement of the fact , which might have be in 
 one line . they flourish wantonly : they be deadly blunt . and of 
 all man , this youngster , who strike at he through her lip with the 
 reproach , that he have speed the good - look little beast upon his road 
 to ruin : - perhaps to Ambrose Mallard 's end ! 




 CHAPTER XLII . the RETARDED COURTSHIP 

 Carinthia reach Esslemont near noon . she come on foot , and have come 
 unaccompanie , stick in hand , her dress loop for the road . Madge 
 bustle her short step up the park beside she ; Fleetwood meet she on 
 the terrace . 

 ' no one can be spar at Croridge , ' she say . ' I go back before dark . ' 
 Apology be not think of ; she seem wound to the pitch . 

 he bow ; he lead into the morning - room . ' the boy be at Croridge ? ' 

 ' with I . he have his nurse . Madge be at home here more than there . ' 

 ' why do you go back ? ' 

 ' I be of use to my brother . ' 

 ' forgive I - in what way ? ' 

 ' he have enemy about he . they be the workman of Lord Levellier . they 
 attack Lekkatts the other night , and my uncle fire at they out of 
 a window and wound a man . they have swear they will be revenge . Mr. 
 Wythan be with my brother to protect he . ' 

 ' two man , very well ; they do not   want , if there be danger , a woman 's aid 
 in protect he ? ' 

 she smile , and her smile be like the hint of the steel blade an inch 
 out of sheath . 

 ' my brother do not count I a weak woman . ' 

 ' oh no ! no one would think that , ' Fleetwood say hurriedly and heartily . 
 ' Least of all man , I , Carinthia . but you might be rash . ' 

 ' my brother know I cautious . ' 

 ' Chillon ? ' 

 ' it be my brother 's name . ' 

 ' you use to call he by his name . 

 ' I love his name . ' 

 ' ah , well ! I may be pardon for wish to hear what part you play 
 there . ' 

 ' I go the round with my brother . ' 

 ' armed ? ' 

 ' we carry arm . ' 

 ' queer sight to see in England . but there be rascal in this country , 
 too . ' 

 she be guilty of say , though not pointedly : ' we do not hire 
 defender . ' 

 ' in civilized land ... ' he begin and stop ' you have Mr. Wythan ? ' 

 ' yes , we be three . ' 

 ' you call he , I think , Owain ? ' 

 ' I do . ' 

 ' in your brother 's hearing ? ' 

 ' yes , my lord ; it would be in your hearing if you be near . ' 

 ' no harm , no doubt . ' 

 ' there be none . ' 

 ' but you will not call your brother Chillon to I . ' 

 ' you dislike the name . ' 

 ' I learn to like everything you do and say ; and every person you like . ' 

 ' it be by Mr. Wythan 's dead wife 's request that I call he by his name . 
 he be our friend . he be a man to trust . ' 

 ' the situation ... ' Fleetwood hang sway between the worldly view of it 
 and the white light of this woman 's nature flash on his emotion into 
 his mind . ' you shall be trust for judge . if he be your friend , he 
 be my friend . I have miss the sight of our boy . you hear I be at 
 Esslemont ? ' 

 ' I hear from Madge ! ' 

 ' it be positive you must return to Croridge ? ' 

 ' I must be with my brother , yes . ' 

 ' your ladyship will permit I to conduct you . ' 

 her head assent . there be nothing to complain of , but he have not 
 gain a step . 

 the rule be , that when we have yield initiative to a woman , we be 
 unable to recover it without uncivil bluster . so , therefore , woman 
 deal with gentleman be allow unreasonable advantage . he have never 
 grant it in colloquy or act to any woman but this one . consequently , 
 he be to see , that if the gentleman in he be not put aside , the 
 lady would continue move on line of the independence he have likewise 
 yield , or rather flung , to she . unless , as a result , he besiege and 
 woo his wife , his wife would hold on a course incline constantly 
 far from the union he desire . yet how could he begin to woo she 
 if he see no spark of womanly tenderness ? he ask himself , because the 
 beginning of the wooing might be check by the call on he for word of 
 repentance only just possible to conceive . imagine they utter , and she 
 have the initiative for life . 

 she would not have it , certainly , with a downright brute . but he be not 
 that . in an extremity of bitterness , he fish up a drown old thought , 
 of all his torment be due to the impulsive half - brute he be . and 
 between the good and the bad in he , the sole point of strength be a 
 pride likely , as the smooth simplicity of her indifference show he , 
 soon to be go down prostrate beneath her foot . wholly a brute - well ? 
 he have to say , that play the perfect brute with any other woman he 
 would have his mastery . the summoning of an idea of personal power to 
 match this woman in a contest be an effort exhaust the idea . 

 they pass out of Esslemont gate together at that hour of the late 
 afternoon when South - westerly breeze , after a summer gale , drive their 
 huge white flock over blue field fresh as morning , on the march to 
 pile the crown of the sphere , and end a troubled day with grandeur . up 
 the lane by the park they have open land to the height of Croridge . 

 ' splendid cloud , ' Fleetwood remark . 

 she look up , think of the happy long day 's walk with her brother to 
 the Styrian Baths . pleasure in the sight make her face shine superbly . 
 ' a fly Switzerland , Mr. Woodseer say , ' she reply . ' England be 
 beautiful on day like these . - for walk , I think the english climate 
 very good . ' 

 he drop a murmur : ' it should suit so good a walker , ' and burn to 
 compliment - her spirited easy stepping , and scorn himself for the 
 sycophancy it would be before they be on the common ground of a 
 restore understanding . but an approval of any of her act threaten 
 he with enthusiasm for the whole of they , her person include ; and a 
 dam in his breast have to keep back the flood . 

 ' you quote Woodseer to I , Carinthia . I wish you know Lord Feltre . he 
 can tell you of every cathedral , convent , and monastery in Europe and 
 Syria . nature be well enough ; she be , as he say , a savage . man 's work , 
 act under divine direction to escape from that tangle , be well 
 worthy of study , perhaps . if one have do wrong , for example . ' 

 ' I could listen to he , ' she say . 

 ' you would not need - except , yes , one thing . your father 's book speak 
 of not forgive an injury . ' 

 ' my father do . he think it weakness to forgive an injury . woman do , 
 and be disgrace , they be think slavish . my brother be much strong 
 than I be . he be my father alive in that . ' 

 ' it be anti - christian , some would think . ' 

 ' let offend people go . he would not punish they . they may go where 
 they will be forgive . for they our religion be a happy retreat ; we be 
 glad they have it . my father and my brother say that injury forbid we 
 to be friend again . my father be injure by the English Admiralty : 
 he never forgave it ; but he would have fight one of their ship and 
 offer his blood any day , if his country call to battle . ' 

 ' you have the same feeling , you mean . ' 

 ' I be a woman . I follow my brother , whatever he decide . it be not to 
 say he be the enemy of person offend he ; only that they have put 
 the division . ' 

 ' they repent ? ' 

 ' if they do , they do well for themselves . ' 

 ' you would see they in sackcloth and ash ? ' 

 ' I would pray to be spar see they . ' 

 ' you can entirely forget - well , other moment , other feeling ? ' 

 ' they may heighten the injury . ' 

 ' Carinthia , I should wish to speak plainly , if I could , and tell 
 you .... ' 

 ' you speak quite plainly , my lord . ' 

 ' you and I can not be stranger or enemy . ' 

 ' we can not be , I would not be . to be friend , we should be separate . ' 

 ' you say you be a woman ; you have a heart , then ? ' - for , if not , what 
 have you ? be add in the tone . 

 ' my heart be my brother 's , ' she say . 

 ' all your heart ? ' 

 ' my heart be my brother 's until one of we drop . ' 

 ' there be not another on earth beside your brother Chillon ? ' 

 ' there be my child . ' 

 the dwarf square tower of Croridge village church front they against 
 the sky , see of both . 

 ' you remember it , ' he say ; and she answer : ' I be marry there . ' 

 ' you have not forget that injury , Carinthia ? ' 

 ' I be a mother . ' 

 ' by all the saint ! you hit hard . justly . not you . our deed be the 
 hard hitter . we learn when they begin to flagellate , stroke upon 
 stroke ! suppose we hold a costly thing in the hand and dash it to the 
 ground - no recovery of it , none ! that must be what your father mean . I 
 can not   regret you be a mother . we have a son , a bond . how can I describe 
 the man I be ! ' he mutter , - ' possessed ! sort of werewolf ! you be my 
 wife ? ' 

 ' I be married to you , my lord . ' 

 ' it be a tie of a kind . ' 

 ' it bind I . ' 

 ' Obey , you say . ' 

 ' obey it . I do . ' 

 ' you consider it holy ? ' 

 ' my father and my mother speak to I of the marriage - tie . I read the 
 service before I stand at the altar . it be holy . it be dreadful . I will 
 be true to it . ' 

 ' to your husband ? ' 

 ' to his name , to his honour . ' 

 ' to the vow to live with he ? ' 

 ' my husband break that for I . ' 

 ' Carinthia , if he bid you , beg you to renew it ? God know what you may 
 save I from ! ' 

 ' pray to God . do not beg of I , my lord . I have my brother and my little 
 son . no more of husband for I ! God have give I a friend , too , - a man 
 of humble heart , my brother 's friend , my dear Rebecca 's husband . he can 
 take they from I : no one but God . see the splendid sky we have . ' 

 with those word she bar the gate on he ; at the same time she 
 bestow the frank look of an amiable face brilliant in the lively red 
 of her exercise , in its bent - bow curve along the forehead , out of the 
 line of beauty , touching , as her voice be , to make an undertone of 
 anguish swell an ecstasy . so he feel it , for his mood be now the 
 lover 's . a torture smite he , to find himself transport by that voice 
 at his ear to the scene of the young bride in thirty - acre meadow . 

 ' I propose to call on Captain Kirby - Levellier tomorrow , Carinthia , ' he 
 say . ' the name of his house ? ' 

 ' my brother be not now any more in the english army , ' she reply . ' he 
 have hire a furnished house name Stoneridge . ' 

 ' he will receive I , I presume ? ' 

 ' my brother be a courteous gentleman , my lord . ' 

 ' here be the church , and here we have to part for today . do we ? ' 

 ' good - bye to you , my lord , ' she say . 

 he take her hand and drop the dead thing . 

 ' your idea be , to return to Esslemont some day or other ? ' 

 ' for the present , ' be her strange answer . 

 she bow , she step on . on she speed , leave he at the stammer 
 beginning of his appeal to she . 

 their parting by the graveyard of the church that have unite they be 
 what the world would class as curious . to he it be a furth and a 
 well - mark stroke of the fatality pursue he . he saunter by the 
 graveyard wall until her figure slip out of sight . it go like a 
 puff candle , and still it haunt the corner where last see . her 
 vanishing seem to say , that less of she belong to he than the 
 phantom his eye retain behind they somewhere . 

 there be in his pocket a memento of Ambrose Mallard , that the family 
 have give he at his request . he feel the lump . it have an answer for 
 all perplexity . it have be charge and empty since it be in his 
 possession ; and it could be charge again . the thing be a volume as 
 big as the world to study . for the touch of a finger , one could have 
 its entirely satisfying content , and fly and be a raven of that night 
 wherein poor Ambrose wander lose , but cure of human wound . 

 he lean on the churchyard wall , have the graf to the front of eye 
 bend inward . they be protestant graf , not so impressive to he as 
 the wreathed and gilt of those under dedication to Feltre 's Madonna . but 
 whatever they be , they have cease to nurse an injury or feel the pain 
 for have inflict it . their wrinkle have go from they , whether 
 of anger or suffering . Ambrose Mallard lie as peaceful in consecrated 
 ground : and Chumley Potts would be unlikely to think that the helping 
 to lay Ambrose in his quiet last home would cost he a roasting until 
 priestly intercession avail . so Chummy continue a Protestant ; dull 
 conscience can ! but this be incomprehensible , that she , nurse her 
 injury , should be perfectly civil . she be a woman without emotion . she 
 be a woman full of emotion , one man know . she tie he to she , to make 
 he feel the lash of his remorse . he feel it because of she cast he 
 from she - and so civilly . if this be a catholic church , one might go 
 in and give the stained soul free way to get a cleansing . as it be , 
 here be the graf ; the dead everywhere have their sanctity , even the 
 heathen . 

 Fleetwood read the name of the family of Meek on several board at the 
 head of the graf . Jonathan Meek die at the age of ninety - five . a 
 female Meek have eighty - nine year in this life . Ezra Meek give up 
 the ghost prematurely , with a couplet , at eighty - one . a healthy spot , 
 Croridge , or there be virtue in the Meek family , he reflect , 
 and have a shudder that he do not trace to its cause , beyond an 
 acknowledgement of a desire for the warm smell of incense . 




 CHAPTER XLIII . on the road to the ACT of penance 

 his customary wrestle with the night drive Lord Fleetwood in the 
 stillness of the hour after matin from his hat empty Esslemont 
 up again to the village of the long - live people , enjoy the moist 
 earthiness of the air off the ironstone . he ride fasting , a good 
 preparatory state for the simple pleasure , which be virtually the 
 Great Nourisher 's teat to her young . the earl be relieve of his 
 dejection by a sudden filling of his nostril . Fat Esslemont 
 underneath have no such air . except on the morning of his walk over the 
 Salzkammergut and Black Forest region , he have never consciously draw 
 that deep breath of the satisfied rapture , charge the whole breast 
 with thankfulness . huntsman would know it , if the chase be not urgent 
 to pull they at the tail of the run beast . once or twice on board 
 his yacht he might have know something like it , but the salt sea - breeze 
 could not be disconnect from his companion Lord Feltre , and a thought 
 of Feltre swing vapour of incense all about he . breathe this air of 
 the young sun 's kiss of earth , his invigoration repel the seduction 
 of the burn oriental gum . 

 besides , as he have tell his friend , it be the sincerity of the Catholic 
 religion , not the seductiveness , that win he to a form of homage - the 
 bend of the head of a foreign observer at a midnight mass . asceticism , 
 though it may not justify error , be a truth in itself , it be the essence 
 extract of the scourge , flesh vanquish ; and it stand apart from 
 controversy . those monk of the forest mountain height , ramble 
 for their herb , know the blessedness to be find in mere breathing : a 
 neighbour readiness to yield the breath inspire it the more . for when 
 we do not dread our end , the sense of a free existence come back to we : 
 we have the prized gift to infancy under the piloting of manhood . but 
 before we taste that happiness we must perform our penance ; ' no living 
 happiness can be for the unclean , ' as the holy father preach to his 
 flock of the monastery disperse at matin . 

 ay , but penance ? penance ? be there not such a thing as the doing of 
 penance out of the Church , in the manly fashion ? so to regain the 
 right to be number among the captain of the world 's fight man , 
 incontestably the good of comrade , whether or no they lead away on a 
 cataract leap at the gate of life . boldly to say we do a wrong will 
 clear our sky for a few shatter peal . 

 the penitential act mean , youth put behind we , and a steady course 
 ahead . but , for the keeping of a steady course , man make of blood in the 
 walk of the world must be steady . say it plainly - mat . there be the 
 humiliating point of our human condition . we must have beside we 
 and close beside we the woman we have learn to respect ; suppose 
 ourselves lucky enough to have find she ; ' that require other scale of 
 the human balance , ' as Woodseer call she now he have get she , wise than 
 Lord Feltre in reference to man and woman . we get no balance without 
 she . that be apparently the positive law ; and by reason of man 's 
 wretched enslavement , it be the dance to dissolution when we have not 
 honourable union with woman . Feltre 's view of woman see the devilish or 
 the angelical ; and to most man woman be knave or ninny . hence do we 
 behold rascal or imbecile in the offspring of most man . 

 he embrace the respected woman 's character , with the usual effect : - to 
 see with her sight ; and she behold a speckled creature of the 
 intermittent whim and mood and spite ; the universal Patron , whose 
 ambition to be leader of his world make he handle foul brute - corrupt 
 and cause their damnation , they retort , with curse , in their pang . 
 she be expect to pardon the husband , who have not abstain from his 
 revenge on she for keep he to the pledge of his word . and what a 
 revenge ! - he have fling the world at she . she be consequently to be the 
 young bride she be on the memorable morning of the drive off these 
 height of Croridge down to thirty - acre meadow ! it must be a saint to 
 forgive such offence ; and she be not one , she be deliciously not one , 
 neither a Genevieve nor a Griselda . he hand she the rod to chastise 
 he . her exchange of christian name with the Welshman would not do it ; 
 she be too transparently sisterly , provincially simple ; she be , in 
 fact , respect . any whipping from she be child 's play to he , on whom , 
 if he be to be make to suffer , the vision of the intense felicity of 
 austere asceticism bring the sensation as bracingly as the Boreal 
 morning animate man of high blood in ice region . she could but gently 
 sting , even if vindictive . 

 along the height , outside the village , some way below a turn of the 
 road to Lekkatts , a gentleman wave hand . the earl salute with his 
 whip , and wait for he . 

 ' nothing wrong , Mr. Wythan ? ' 

 ' nothing to fear , my lord . ' 

 ' I get a trifle uneasy . ' 

 ' the countess will not leave her brother . ' 

 a glow of his countess 's friendliness for this open - faced , 
 prompt - speak , good fellow of the faintly inky eyelid , and possibly 
 sheepish inclination , melt Fleetwood . our downright repentance of 
 misconduct toward a woman bind we at least to the tolerant recognition 
 of what poor scrap of consolement she may have pick up between then 
 and now - when we can stretch fist in flame to defy it on the oath of she 
 be a woman of honour . 

 the earl alight and say : ' her brother , I suspect , be the key of the 
 position . ' 

 ' he be worth it - she love her brother , ' say Mr. Wythan , betray a 
 feature of his quick race , with whom the reflection upon a statement be 
 its lightning in advance . 

 gratify by the instant apprehension of his meaning , Fleetwood 
 interpret the Welshman 's . ' I have to see the brother worthy of her 
 love . can you tell I the hour likely to be convenient ? ' ..... 

 Mr. Wythan think an appointment unnecessary which convey the 
 sufficient assurance of audience grant . 

 ' you know her brother well , Mr. Wythan ? ' 

 ' know he as if I have know he for year . they both come to the mind as 
 faith come - no saying how ; one swear by they . ' 

 Fleetwood eye the Welsh gentleman , with an idea that he might readily 
 do the same by he . 

 Mr. Wythan 's quarter be at the small village inn , whither he be on 
 his way to breakfast . the earl slip an arm through the bridle rein 
 and walk beside he , listen to an account of the situation at 
 Lekkatts . it be that extraordinary complication of move and check 
 which present in the main a knot , for the power above to cut . a 
 miserly old lord withholds arrear of wage ; his workman strike at 
 a critical moment ; his nephew , move by common humanity , draw upon 
 crippled resource to supply their extremer need , though they be 
 ruin his interest . they make one night a demonstration of the 
 terrorizing sort round Lekkatts , to give he a chorus ; and the old 
 lord fire at they out of window and wound a man . for that they vow 
 vengeance . all the new gunpowder mill in Surrey be , for some purpose 
 of his own , store by Lord Levellier on the alder island of the pond 
 near his workshop , a quarter of a mile below the house . they refuse , 
 whatever their object , to let a pound of it be move , at a time when 
 at last the Government have undertake to submit it to experiment . and 
 there they stand on ground too strong for ' the Captain , ' as they call 
 he , to force , because of the quantity store at Lekkatts be largely 
 beyond the amount under cover of Lord Levellier 's licence . the old lord 
 be very ill , and he decline to see a doctor , but obstinately keep from 
 die . his nephew have to guard he and at the same time support an enemy 
 have just cause of complaint . this , however , his narrow mean would 
 not much long permit he to do . the alternative be then offer he 
 of either side arbitrarily against the man and his conscience or 
 of take a course ' imprudent on the part of a presumptive heir , ' Mr. 
 Wythan say hurriedly at the little inn 's doorstep . 

 ' you make one of his lordship 's guard ? ' say Fleetwood . 

 ' the countess , her brother , and I , yes ' 

 ' danger at all ? ' 

 ' not so much to fear while the countess be with we . ' 

 ' fear be not a word for Carinthia . ' 

 her name on the earl 's lip draw a keen shot of the eye from Mr. Wythan , 
 and he read the signification of the speak name . ' you know what every 
 cambrian living think of she , my lord . ' 

 ' she shall not have one friend the less for I . ' 

 Fleetwood 's hand be out for a good - bye , and the hand be grasp by one 
 who look happy in do it . he understand and trust the man after 
 that , warm in think how politic his impulse could be . 

 his intention of rid up to Croridge at noon to request his interview 
 with Mr. Kirby - Levellier be then state . 

 ' the key of the position , as you say , ' Mr. Wythan remark , not 
 proffer an opinion of it more than be express by a hearty , rosy 
 countenance , that have to win its way with the earl before excuse be 
 find for the venturesome repetition of his phrase . 

 canter back to that home of the love of Gower Woodseer and Madge 
 Winch , the thought of his first act of penance do , without his feeling 
 the poor for it , reconcile Fleetwood to the aspect of the hollow 
 place . 

 he could not stay beneath the roof . his task of breakfasting do , 
 he be off before the morning 's delivery of letter , rid round the 
 country under Croridge , soon up there again . and Henrietta might be 
 at home , he be remind by hear band - music as he follow the 
 direction to the house name Stoneridge . the band consist of 
 eight wind instrument ; they play astonishingly well for itinerant 
 musician . by curious chance , they be play a selection from the 
 Pirata ; presently he hear the note to ' il mio tradito amor . ' they have 
 hit upon Henrietta 's favourite piece ! 

 at the close of it he dismount , fling the rein to his groom , and , 
 address a compliment to the leader , be deferentially salute with a 
 ' my lord . ' Henrietta stand at the window , a servant hold the door open 
 for he to enter ; he go in , and the beautiful young woman welcome 
 he : ' oh , my dear lord , you have give I such true delight ! how very 
 generous of you ! ' he protest ignorance . she have see he speak to 
 the conductor and receive the patron 's homage ; and who but he know she 
 adore of opera , or would have have the benevolent impulse to think of 
 solace her exile from music in the manner so sure of her taste ! she 
 be at her lovely : her feature be one sweet bloom , as of the sunny 
 flower garden ; and , touch to the heart by the music and the kindness , 
 she look the look that kiss ; innocently , he feel , feel himself on 
 the same good ground while he could own he admire the honey creature , 
 much as an amateur may admire one of the picture belong to the 
 nation . 

 ' and you have come ... ? ' she say . ' we be to believe in happy ending ? ' 

 he shrug , as the modest man should , who say : 

 ' if it depend on I ' ; but the word be firmly speak and could be 
 credit . 

 ' Janey be with her brother down at Lekkatts . thing be at a deadlock . 
 a spice of danger , enough to relieve the dulness ; and where there be 
 danger Janey 's at home . ' Henrietta mimic her Janey . ' parade with her 
 brother at night ; old military cap on her head ; firearm prim ; sing 
 her austrian mountain song or the Light Cavalry call , till it ring all 
 day in my ear - she have a thrilling contralto . you be not to think she 
 wild , my lord . she be for adventure or domesticity , " whichever the fate 
 decree . " she really be come to the perfect tone . ' 

 ' speak of she , ' say the earl . ' she can not   yet overlook ... ? ' 

 ' it be in the family . she will overlook anything her brother excuse . ' 

 ' I be here to see he . ' 

 ' I hear it from Mr. Wythan . ' 

 ' " Owain , " I believe ? ' 

 henrietta sketch apology , with a sidled head , soft pout , wavy 
 hand . ' he belong to the order of primitive people . his wife - the same 
 pattern , one suppose - pledge they to their christian name . the man 
 be a simpleton , but a gentleman ; and Janey hold his die wife 's wish 
 sacred . we be all indebted to he . ' 

 ' whatever she think right ! ' say Fleetwood . 

 the fair young woman 's warm nature fly out to he on a sparkle of 
 grateful tenderness in return for his magnanimity , oblivious of the 
 inflamer it be : and her heart thank he more warmly , without the 
 perilous show of emotion , when she find herself secure . 

 she be beautiful , she be tempting , and probably the weak of player 
 in the ancient game of two ; and clearly she be not disposed to the 
 outlaw game ; be only a creature of ardour . that he could see , see 
 the misinterpretation a fellow like Brailstone would put upon a 
 temporary flush of the feminine , and the advantage he would take of 
 it , perhaps not unsuccessfully - the dog ! he commit the absurdity 
 of cast a mental imprecation at the cunning trickster of emotional 
 woman , and yell at himself in the worn old surplice of the converted 
 rake . but let his mind run this way , the tradito amor of the band 
 outside the lady 's window be instantly trace to Lord Brailstone ; so 
 convincingly , that he now become a very counsel for an injured husband 
 in denunciation of the seductive compliment . 

 Henrietta prepare to conduct he to Lekkatts ; her bonnet be bring . 
 she draw forth a letter from a silken work - bag , and raise it , - Livia 's 
 handwriting . ' I ' ve   write my opinion , ' he say . 

 ' not too severe , pray . ' 

 ' post . ' 

 ' Livia want a protector . ' 

 ' and choose - what on earth be you say ! ' 

 Livia and her boyish lord be abandon on the spot , though Henrietta 
 could have affirm stoutly that there be much to be plead , if a 
 female advocate dare it , and a man would but hear . 

 his finger be at the leaf of a Spanish dictionary . 

 ' oh yes , and here we have a book of Travels in Spain , ' she say . 
 ' everything Spanish for Janey now . you be aware ? - no ? ' 

 he be unaware and desire to be tell . 

 ' Janey 's late idea ; only she would have conceive the notion . you 
 solve our puzzle , my lord . ' 

 she renew the thank she persist in offer for the military music 
 now just cease : vexatiously , consider that it be bad policy for 
 he to be unmask Brailstone to she . at the same time , the blindness 
 which render her unconscious of Brailstone 's hand in send member 
 of a military band to play selection from the favourite opera they have 
 jointly drunk of to ecstasy , be creditable ; touching , when one thought 
 of the pursuer 's many device , not omit some treason on the part of 
 her present friend . 

 ' tell I - I solve ? ' he say .... 

 Henrietta spy the donkey - basket bear the two little one . 

 ' yes , I hope so - on our way down , ' she make answer . ' I want you to see 
 the pair of love - bird in a nest . ' 

 the boy and girl be see lie side by side , both fast asleep ; 
 fair - haired girl , dark - haired boy , face to one another . 

 ' Temper ? ' say Fleetwood , when he have take observation of they . 

 ' very imperious - Mr. Boy ! ' she reply , straighten she back under a 
 pretty frown , to convey the humour of the infant tyrant . 

 the father 's mind run swiftly on a comparison of the destiny of 
 the two child , from his estimate of their parent ; many of Gower 
 Woodseer 's dicta converge to reawaken thought upon Nature 's law , 
 which a knowledge of his own nature blacken . he have to persuade 
 himself that this child of his be issue of a love union ; he have to 
 do it violently , conjure a vivid picture of the mother in bud , and his 
 recognition of her young charm ; the pain of keep to his resolve to 
 quit she , lest she should subjugate he and despoil he of his wrath ; 
 the fatalism in his come and go ; the romantic freak it have be , - a 
 situation then so clearly wrought , now blur past comprehension . but 
 there must have be love , or some love on his part . otherwise he 
 be bind to pray for the mother to predominate in the child , all but 
 exclude its father . 

 Carinthia 's image , as a result , ascend sovereignty , and he hang to it . 

 for if we be human creature with conscience , nothing be more certain 
 than that we make our taskmaster of those to whom we have do a wrong , 
 the philosopher say . between Lord Feltre and Gower Woodseer , influence 
 pretty equally by each of they , this young nobleman be waken to the 
 claim of other - Youth 's infant conscience . Fleetwood now conceive the 
 verbal supplication for his wife 's forgiveness involve in the act of 
 penance ; and verbal mean abject ; with he , go so far , it would mean 
 naked , precise , no slurring . that he know , and a tremor go over he . 
 woman , then , be really the half of the world in power as much as in 
 their number , if man pretend to a step above the savage . or , well , his 
 wife be a power . 

 he have forget the puzzle speak of by Henrietta , when she use 
 the word again and express her happiness in the prospect before 
 they - cause by his presence , of course . 

 ' you be aware , my dear lord , Janey worship her brother . he be 
 defeat , by some dastardly contrivance , in a wager to do wonderful 
 feat - for money ! money ! money ! a large stake . how we come off our 
 high horse ! I have not   an idea of money before I be marry . I think of 
 little else . my husband have notion of honour ; he engage himself to pay 
 a legacy of debt ; his uncle would not pay debt long due to he . he 
 be reduce to the shift of wager on his great strength and skill . he 
 could have do it . his enemy manage - enemy there be ! he have to sell 
 out of the army in consequence . I shall never have Janey 's face of 
 suffer away from my sight . he be a soldier above all thing . it seem 
 hard on I , but I can not blame he for snatch at an opportunity to 
 win military distinction . he be in treaty for the post of aide to the 
 Colonel - the General of the english contingent bind for Spain , for the 
 cause of the Queen . my husband will undertake to be at the order of his 
 chief as soon as he can leave this place . Janey go with he , accord 
 to present arrangement . ' 

 pass through a turnstile , that lead from the road across a 
 meadow - slope to the broken land below , Henrietta have view of the earl 's 
 hard white face , and she hasten to say : ' you have alter that , my 
 lord . she be devoted to her brother ; and her brother run danger ... 
 and danger in itself be an attraction to she . but her husband will have 
 the first claim . she have her good sense . she will never insist on go , 
 if you oppose . she will be ready to fill her station . it will be - her 
 pride and her pleasure . ' 

 Henrietta continue in the vein of these assurance ; and Carinthia 's 
 character be shoot lightning through he , wither that of 
 the woman who refer to his wife 's good sense and her station ; and 
 certainly would not have betray herself by such drawling if she have 
 be very positive that Carinthia 's disposition toward wealth and luxury 
 resemble her . she know the reverse ; or so his contemptuously generous 
 effort to frame an apology for the stuff he be hear consider it . 
 his wife be lose to he . that fact smite on his breast the moment he 
 hear of her desire to go with her brother . 

 Wildest of enterprise ! but a criminal see himself guilty of a large 
 part in the disaster the two heroical soul be strive desperately to 
 repair . if her Chillon go , Carinthia would go - sure as flame be draw 
 to air . the exceed splendour in the character of a young woman , 
 injure as she have be , soft to love , as he know she , and give she 
 husband no other rival than a beloved brother , no ground of complaint 
 save her devotion to her brother , pervade he , without illuminate or 
 lifting ; rather with an indication of a foul contrast , that prostrate 
 he . 

 half of our funny heathen life we be bent double to gather thing we 
 have toss away ! be one of the number of apposite saying that hum 
 about he , for a chorus of the world 's old wisdom in derision , when he 
 descend the heathy path and have sight of Carinthia beside her Chillon . 
 would it be the same thing if he have it in hand again ? do he wish it 
 to be the same ? be not he another man ? by the leap of his heart to the 
 woman stand down there , he be a well man . 

 but recent spiritual exercise bring he to see superstitiously how by 
 that sign she be lose to he ; for everlastingly in this life the well 
 pay for the bad ; thus be the well a proved thing . 

 both Chillon and Carinthia , it be probable , might have be stir to 
 deep than compassion , have the proud young nobleman take they into 
 his breast to the scouring of it ; expose the ground of his former 
 brutality , his gradual enlightenment , his ultimate acknowledgement of 
 the pricelessness of the woman he have win to lose she . an imploring of 
 forgiveness would not have be necessary with those two , however great 
 their - or the woman 's - astonishment at the revelation of an abysmal male 
 humanity . a complete exposure of past meanness be the deed of present 
 courage certain of its reward without as well as within ; for then we 
 show our fellow that the slough be cast . but life be a continuous 
 fight ; and member of the social world display its degree of 
 civilization by fight in armour ; most of they be bear in it ; and 
 their armour be more sensitive than their skin . it be Fleetwood 's 
 instinct of his inability to fle it off utterly which warn he of 
 his loss of the wife , whose enthusiasm to wait on her brother in danger 
 might have subside into the channel of duty , even tenderness , have 
 he be able resolutely to strip himself bare . this be the further 
 impossible to he , because of a belief he now impose upon himself , to 
 cover the cowardly shrink from so extreme a penitential act , that 
 such confession be due from man to the priest only , and that he could 
 confess wholly and absolutely to the priest - to heaven , therefore , under 
 seal , and in safety , but with perfect repentance . 

 so , compel to keep his inner self unknown , he front Chillon ; 
 courteously , in the somewhat lofty seeming of a guard manner , he 
 request audience for a few minute ; observe the princely figure of 
 the once hat man , and understand Henrietta 's sheer womanly choice 
 of he ; Carinthia 's idolatry , too , as soon as he have speak . the man be 
 in his voice . 

 Chillon say : ' it concern my sister , I have to think . in that case , she 
 wish be to be present . your lordship will shorten the number of minute 
 for the interview by permit it . ' 

 Fleetwood encounter Carinthia 's eye . they do not entreat or defy . 
 they second her brother , and be a civil shin naught on her 
 husband . he bow his head , constrain , feel heavily the two to one . 

 she reply to the look : ' my brother and I have a single mind . we save 
 time by speak three together , my lord . ' 

 he be lead into the long room of the workshop , where various pattern of 
 musket , rifle , pistol , and sword be star , cross , wedge , over 
 the wall , and a varnish wooden model of a piece of cannon occupy 
 the middle place , on a block . 

 Contempt of military weapon and ridicule of the art of war be common 
 on those day among a people begin to sit with habitual snugness 
 at the festive board provide for they by the valour of their father . 
 Fleetwood have not be on the side of the banquet citizen , though 
 his country 's journal and her feasted popular wit make a powerful 
 current to whelm opposition . but the appearance of the woman , his wife , 
 here , her head surround by destructive engine in the form of trophy , 
 and the knowledge that this woman bear his name design to be out 
 at the heel of a foreign army or tag - rag of uniformed rascal , inspire 
 he to reprobate man 's bad old game as heartily as good sense do 
 in the abstract , and as derisively as it be the way with comfortable 
 islander before the midnight trumpet - note of panic have tumble they 
 to their leg . he take his chair ; sicken . 

 he be the next moment take Carinthia 's impression of Chillon , 
 compel to it by an admiration that man and woman have alike for 
 shape of strength in the mould of grace , over whose firm build a 
 flicker of agility seem to run . for the young soldier 's figure be 
 visibly in its repose prompt to action as the mind 's movement . this be 
 her brother ; her enthusiasm for her brother be explain to he . 
 no soon do he have the conception of it than it pluck at he 
 painfully ; and , feel himself physically eclipse by the object 
 of Carinthia 's enthusiasm , his pride of the rival counsel he to 
 preserve the mask on what be go on within , lest it should be see 
 that he be also morally beat at the outset . a train observation 
 tell he , moreover , that her Chillon 's correctly handsome feature , 
 despite their conventional urbanity , could knit to smite , and hold less 
 of the reserve of mercy behind they than Carinthia 's glorious barbaric 
 ruggedness . her eye , each time she look at her brother , have , without 
 doating , the light as of the rise of happy tear to the underlid 
 as they have on a certain day at the altar , when ' my lord ' be ' my 
 husband , ' - more shyly then . he would have say , as beautifully , but for 
 envy of the frank , pellucid worship in that look on her proved hero . it 
 be the jewel of all the earth to win back to himself ; and it subject 
 he , through his desire for it , to a measurement with her idol , in 
 character , quality , strength , hardness . he hear the couple pronounce 
 sentence of his loss by anticipation . 

 why have she prim her brother to propose the council of three ? 
 address they separately , he could have be his well or truer self . 
 the sensation of the check impose on he be instructive as to her 
 craft and the direction of her wish . she prefer the braving of 
 hazard and horror beside her brother , in scorn of the advantage he 
 could offer ; and he yearn to she for despise by comparison the 
 bribe he propose in the hope that he might win she to he . she be with 
 religion to let he know the meanness of wealth . 

 thus , at the edge of the debate , or contest , the young lord 's essential 
 nobility disarm he ; and the revealing of it , which would have 
 appeal to Carinthia and Chillon both , be forbid by its constituent 
 pride , which help he to live and stand obstruct explanatory 
 speech . 




 CHAPTER XLIV . between the EARL , the COUNTESS and her BROTHER , and of a 
 SILVER cross 

 Carinthia be pleased by hear Lord Fleetwood say to she : ' your Madge 
 and my Gower be wait to have the day name for they . ' 

 she say : ' I respect he so much for his choice of Madge . they shall not 
 wait , if I be to decide . ' 

 ' Old Mr. Woodseer have undertake to join they . ' 

 ' it be in Whitechapel they will be marry . ' 

 the blow that strike be not intend , and Fleetwood pass it , under 
 her brother 's judicial eye . any small chance word may carry a sting for 
 the neophyte in penitence . 

 ' my lawyer will send down the settlement on she , to be read to they 
 to - day or to - morrow . with the interest on that and the sum he tell I 
 he have in the Funds , they keep the wolf from the door - a cottage door . 
 they have their cottage . there be an old song of love in a cottage . his 
 liking for it make he seem wise than his clever saying . he will work 
 in that cottage . ' 

 ' they have a good friend to they in you , my lord . it will not be poverty 
 for their simple want . I hear of the little cottage in Surrey where 
 they be to lodge at first , before they take one of their own . ' 

 ' we will visit they . ' 

 ' when I be in England I shall visit they often . ' 

 he submit . 

 ' the man up here wound be recover ? ' 

 ' yes , my lord . I be learn to nurse the wound , with the surgeon to 
 direct I . ' 

 ' matter be sober down ? - the workman ? ' 

 ' they listen to reason so willingly when we speak personally , we find . ' 

 the earl address Chillon . ' your project of a spanish expedition 
 remind I of favourable report of your chief . ' 

 ' thoroughly able and up to the work , ' Chillon answer . 

 ' Queer people to meddle with . ' 

 ' we be on the right side on the dispute . ' 

 ' it count , Napoleon say . a spanish civil war promise bloody doing . ' 

 ' any war do that . ' 

 ' in the Peninsula it be war to the knife , a merciless business . ' 

 ' good schooling for the profession . ' 

 Fleetwood glance : she be collect and attentive . ' I hear from Mrs. 
 Levellier that Carinthia would like to be your companion . ' 

 ' my sister have the making of a serviceable hospital nurse . ' 

 ' you hear the chatter of London ! ' 

 ' I have hear it . ' 

 ' you encourage she , Mr. Levellier ? ' 

 ' she will be useful - well there than here , my lord . ' 

 ' I claim a part in the consultation . ' 

 ' there be no consultation ; she determine to go . ' 

 ' we can advise she of all the risk . ' 

 ' she have weigh they , every one . ' 

 ' in the event of accident , the responsibility for have persuade she 
 would rest on you . ' 

 ' my brother have not persuade I , ' Carinthia 's belltone intervene . ' I 
 propose it . the persuasion be mine . it be my happiness to be near he , 
 help , if I can . ' 

 ' Lady Fleetwood , I be entitle to think that your brother yield to a 
 request urge in ignorance of the nature of the risk a woman run . ' 

 ' my brother do not yield to a request without examine it all round , 
 my lord , and I do not . I know the risk . an evil that we should not 
 endure , - life may go . there can be no fear for I . ' 

 she speak plain truth . the soul of this woman come out in its radiance 
 to subdue he , as her visage sometimes do ; and her voice enlarge her 
 word . she be a warrior woman , life her sword , Death her target , never 
 to be put to shame , unconquerable . no such symbolical image smote 
 he , but he have an impression , the prose of it . as in the scene of 
 the miner ' cottare , her lord could have kneel to she : and for an 
 unproteste long space now . he choke a sigh , shrug , and say , in 
 the world 's patient manner with mad people : ' you have set your mind on 
 it ; you see it rise - colour . you would not fear , no , but your friend 
 would have good reason to fear . it be a menagerie in revolt over there . 
 it be not really the place for you . Abandon the thought , I beg . ' 

 ' I shall , if my brother do not go , ' say Carinthia . 

 Laughter of spite at a remark either silly or slyly defiant be check 
 in Fleetwood by the horror of the feeling that she have go , be 
 ankle - deep in bloody mire , captive , prey of a rabble soldiery , 
 meditate the shot or stab of the blessed end out of woman 's half of 
 our human muddle . 

 he say to Chillon : ' pardon I , war be a detestable game . woman in the 
 thick of it add a touch to the brutal hideousness of the whole thing . ' 

 Chillon say : ' we be all of that opinion . man have to play the game ; 
 woman serve in hospital make it humaner . ' 

 ' their hospital be not safe . ' 

 ' well ! safety ! ' 

 for safety be nowhere to be have . but the earl plead : ' at least in our 
 country . ' 

 ' in our country woman be safe ? ' 

 ' they be , we may say , protect . ' 

 ' law and constable be poor protection for they . ' 

 ' the woman we name lady be pretty safe , as a rule . ' 

 ' my sister , then , be the exception . ' 

 after a burning half minute the earl say : ' I have to hear it from you , 
 Mr. Levellier . you see I here . ' 

 that be handsomely speak . but Lord Fleetwood have be judge and put 
 aside . his opening of an old case to hint at repentance for brutality 
 annoy the man who have let he go scathless for a sister 's sake . 

 ' the ground of your coming , my lord , be not see ; my time be short . ' 

 ' I must , I repeat , be consult with regard to Lady Fleetwood 's 
 movement . ' 

 ' my sister do not acknowledge your claim . ' 

 ' the Countess of Fleetwood 's act involve her husband . ' 

 ' one have to listen at time to what old sailor call Caribbee ! ' Chillon 
 exclaim impatiently , half aloud . ' my sister receive your title ; she 
 have to support it . she do not receive the treatment of a wife : - or 
 lady , or woman , or domestic animal . the bond be break , as far as it 
 bear on her subjection . she hold to the rite , think it sacre . you 
 can be at rest as to her behaviour . in other respect , your lordship 
 do not exist for she . ' 

 ' the father of her child must exist for she . ' 

 ' you raise that curtain , my lord ! ' 

 in the presence of three it would not bear a shaking . 

 Carinthia say , in pity of his torture : - 

 ' I have my freedom , and be thankful for it , to follow my brother , to 
 share his danger with he . that be more to I than luxury and the 
 married state . I take only my freedom . ' 

 ' our boy ? you take the boy ? ' 

 ' my child be with my sister Henrietta ! 

 ' where ? ' 

 ' we none know yet . ' 

 ' you still mistrust I ? ' 

 her eye be on a man that she have put from she peaceably ; and she 
 reply , with sweetness in his ear , with shock to a sink heart , ' my 
 lord , you may learn to be a gentle father to the child . I pray you may . 
 my brother and I will go . if it be death for we , I pray my child may 
 have his father , and God direct his father . ' 

 her speech have the clang of the final . 

 ' yes , I hope - if it be the bad happen , I pray , too , ' say he , and 
 droop and brighten desperately : ' but you , too , Carinthia , you could 
 aid by stay , by be with the boy and I . Carinthia ! ' he clasp she 
 name , the vapour leave to he of she : ' I have learn learn what I be , 
 what you be ; I have to climb a height to win back the wife I throw 
 away . she be unknown to I ; I to myself nearly as much . I send a 
 warning of the kind of husband for you - a poor kind ; I just know myself 
 well enough for that . you claim my word - the blessing of my life , if I 
 have know it ! we be marry ; I play - I see the beast I play . 
 money be power , they say . I see the mean it be to damn the soul , unless 
 we - unless a man do what I do now . ' 

 Fleetwood stop . he have never speak such word - arterial word , as 
 they be , though the commonest , and with moist brow , dry lip , he 
 could have resume , have say more , have take this woman , this dream 
 of the former bride , the present stranger , into his chamber of the brave 
 aim and sentence deed . her brother in the room be the barrier ; and 
 she sit mute , large - eye , expressionless . he have plunge low in the 
 man 's hearing ; the air of his lung be thick , hard to breathe , for 
 shame of a degradation so extreme . 

 Chillon imagine he to be sigh . he have to listen far . ' Soul ' have 
 be an uttered word . when the dishonour and mishandle brute of 
 a young nobleman stutter a compliment to Carinthia on her ' faith in 
 God 's assistance and the efficacy of prayer , ' he jump to his leg , 
 not to be shout ' Hound ! ' at he . he say , under control : ' God 's name 
 shall be leave to the Church . my sister need not be far trouble . she 
 have show she be not persuade by I . matter arrange here quickly , - we 
 start . if I be ask whether I think she do wisely to run the risk 
 in an insurrectionary country rather than remain at home expose to the 
 honour and amusement your lordship offer , I think so ; she be act 
 in her good interest . she have the choice of be abroad with I or 
 stay here unguarde by I . she have have her experience . she choose 
 rightly . paint the risk she run , you lay the colour on those she 
 escape . ' she thank the treatment she have undergo for her freedom to 
 choose . I be responsible for nothing but the not have stand against 
 she most wretched marriage . it might have be foresee . out there in 
 the war she be protect . here she be with - I spare your lordship the 
 name . ' 

 Fleetwood would have hear harsh have he not be Carinthia 's husband . 
 he withhold his reply . the language move he to proud hostility : but 
 the speaker be Carinthia 's brother . 

 he say to she : ' you will not   forget Gower and Madge ? ' 

 she give he a smile in say : ' it shall be settle for a day after 
 next week . ' 

 the form of courtesy be exchange . 

 at the closing of the door on he , Chillon say : ' he do send a message : 
 I gather it - without the word - from our Uncle Griphard . I think he 
 in honour bind to you - and it suit I that I should . ' 

 ' I be a blindfold girl , dearest ; no warning would have give I sight , ' 
 say Carinthia . ' that be my treachery to the love of my brother .. I 
 dream of father and mother reproach I . ' 

 the misery of her time in England have darken her mind 's picture of the 
 early hour with Chillon on the height above the forsake old home ; and 
 the enthusiasm of her renew devotion to her brother give it again , 
 as no light of a lost Eden , as the brilliant step she be take with 
 he from their morning Eastern Alps to smoky - crimson Pyrenees and 
 Spanish Sierras ; she could imagine the cavernous interval her punishment 
 for have abandon a sister 's duty in the quest of personal 
 happiness . 

 but simultaneously , the grow force of her mind 's intelligence , 
 wherein be no enthusiasm to misdirect by overcolouring , enable she 
 to gather more than a suspicion of comparative feebleness in the man 
 strip of his terror . she penetrate the discrowne tyrant 's nature 
 some distance , deep enough to be quit of her foregoing alarm . these , 
 combine with his assured high style , have weave he the magical coat , 
 threadbare to quiet scrutiny . she match he beside her brother . the 
 dwarf object be then observe ; and it be not for a woman to measure 
 herself beside he . she come , however , of a powerful blood , and he be 
 press she back on her resource : without the measurement or a thought 
 of it , she do that which be the most ordinary and the least noticed of 
 our daily act in civilized intercourse , she subject he to the trial 
 of the element compose he , by collision with what she feel of her 
 own ; and it be because she feel they strongly , aware of her feel 
 they , but unaware of any conflict , that the wrestle occur . she fling 
 he , pity he , and pass on along her path elsewhere . this can be 
 do when love be go . it be do more or less at any meeting of 
 man and man ; and man and woman who love not be perpetually do it , 
 unconsciously or sensibly . even in their love , a time for the trial 
 arrive among certain of they ; and the leadership be assume , and 
 submission ensue , tacitly ; nothing of the contention be speak , 
 perhaps , nothing definitely know . 

 in Carinthia 's case , her revive enthusiasm for her brother drive to the 
 penetration of the husband plead to thwart its course . his offer be 
 wealth : that is , luxury , amusement , ease . the sub - audible ' himself ' into 
 the bargain be disregard , not count with one who be an upward 
 rush of fire at the thought that she be call to share her brother 's 
 danger . 

 Chillon cordially believe the earl to be the pestilent half madman , 
 junction with whom be a constant trepidation for the wife , when it be 
 not a scream plight . he say so , and Carinthia let he retain his 
 opinion . she would have say it herself to support her scheme , though 
 ' mad ' apply to a man move in the world with other man be not 
 understand by she . 

 with Henrietta for the earl 's advocate , she be patient as the deaf 
 rock - wall enthusiam can be against entreaty to change its direction or 
 bid it disperse : the ' private band of pick musician ' at the disposal 
 of the Countess of Fleetwood , and Opera singer   Henrietta mention 
 resonant name   hire for wonderful night at Esslemont and Calesford 
 or on board the earl 's beautiful schooner yacht , be no temptation . nor 
 do Henrietta 's allusion to his broken appearance move his wife , except 
 in she say regretfully : ' he change . ' 

 on the hall table at Esslemont , a letter from his banker inform the 
 earl of a considerable sum of money pay in to his account in the name 
 of Lord Brailstone . Chumley Potts , hang at he like a dog without 
 a master since the death of his friend Ambrose , have journey down : 
 ' anxious about you , ' he say . anxious about or attract by the 
 possessor of Ambrose Mallard 's ' clean sweeper , ' the silver - mount small 
 pistol ; sight of which he beg to have ; and to lengthened his jaw 
 on hear it be load . a loaded pistol , this dark little one to the 
 right of the earl 's blotting - pad and pen , have the look of a fearful 
 link with his fall chap and fishy hue . pott maunder morality 
 upon ' life , ' hold the thing in his hand , weigh it , eye the 
 muzzle . he ' could not   help think of what be go to happen to we 
 after it all ' : and ' Brosey know now ! ' be follow by a twitch of one 
 cheek and the ejaculation ' forever ! ' Fleetwood alive and ambrose dead 
 be pluck the startled worldling to a peep over the verge into our 
 abyss ; and the young lord 's evident doing of the same command Chumley 
 Potts ' imitation of he under the cloud Ambrose have become for both of 
 they . 

 he be recommend to see Lord Feltre , if he have a desire to be 
 instruct on the subject of the mitigation of our pain in the region 
 below . Potts affirm that he mean to die a protestant Christian . 
 thereupon , carry a leaden burden of unlaughed laughable stuff in his 
 breast , and Chummy 's concluding remark to speed he : ' damn it , no , we will 
 stick to our religion ! ' Fleetwood stride off to his library , and with 
 the name of the ixionide of his acquaintance ring round his head , 
 proceed to strike one of they off the number privilege at the moment 
 to intrude on he . other would follow ; this one must be the first to 
 go . he write the famous letter to Lord Brailstone , which debar the 
 wily pursuer from any pretext to be run down into Mrs. Levellier 's 
 neighbourhood , and also preclude the chance of his meeting the fair 
 lady at Calesford . with the brevity equivalent to the flick of a glove 
 on the cheek , Lord Brailstone be give to understand by Lord Fleetwood 
 that relation be at an end between they . no explanation be add ; a 
 single sentence execute the work , and in the third person . he do not 
 once reflect on the outcry in the ear of London come from the receiver 
 of such a letter upon payment of a debt . 

 the letter post and fly , Lord Fleetwood be kind to Chumley 
 Potts ; he have a friendly word for Gower Woodseer ; though both be 
 heathen , after their diverse fashion , neither of they likely ever to 
 set out upon the grand old road of Rome : Lord Feltre 's ' appian Way of 
 the Saints and Comforters . ' 

 Chummy be pardon when they separate at night for his reiterate 
 allusion to the temptation of poor Ambrose Mallard 's conclusive little 
 weapon lie on the library table within reach of a man 's arm - chair : in 
 its case , and the case lock , yes , but easily open , ' provoke every 
 damnable sort of mortal curiosity ! ' the sound man among we have their 
 fit of the blue , Fleetwood be tell . ' not wholesome ! ' Chummy shake his 
 head resolutely , and make himself comprehensibly mysterious . he mean 
 well . he beg his old friend to promise he would unload and keep it 
 unload . ' for I know the infernal worry you have - deuce deal worse 
 than a night 's bad luck ! ' say he ; and Fleetwood smile sourly at the 
 world 's total ignorance of cause . his wretchedness be due now to 
 the fact that the aforetime huntress refuse to be capture . he take a 
 silver cross from a table - drawer and lay it on the pistol - case . ' there , 
 Chummy , ' he say ; that be all ; not sermonize or proselytizing . he 
 be partly comprehend by Chumley Potts , fully a week later . the 
 unsuspecting fellow , soon to be despatch in the suite of Brailstone , 
 bear away an unwontedly affectionate dismissal to his bed , and speak 
 some rather squeamish word himself , as he recollect with disgust when 
 he run about over London repeat his executioner 's . 

 the Cross on the pistol - case may have conduce to Lord Fleetwood 's 
 thought , that his day among unrepentant ephemeral protestant sinner 
 must have their immediate termination . these old friend be the 
 plague - infect clothe he fling off his body . but the Cross where it 
 lay , forbid a movement of the hand to that box , be authoritative to 
 decree his passage through a present torture , by the agency of the hand 
 he hold back from the solution of his perplexity , at the cost which his 
 belief in the Eternal would pay . Henrietta have mention her husband 's 
 defeat , by some dastardly contrivance . he have to communicate , for the 
 disburdening of his soul , not only that he be guilty , but the mean 
 of criminal , in be no more than half guilty . his training tell he 
 of the contempt woman entertain toward the midway or cripple sinner , 
 when they have no special desire to think he innocent . how write , or 
 even how phrase his have merely breathe in his ruffian 's hearing the 
 wish that he might hear of her husband 's defeat ! and with what object ? 
 here , too , a woman might , year hence , if not forgive , bend her head 
 resignedly over the man 's vile nature , suppose strong passion his 
 motive . but the name for the actual motive ? it would not bear writing , 
 or any phrasing round it . an unsceptred despot bid take a fair 
 woman 's eye into his breast , see and shrank . and now the eye be 
 Carinthia 's : he see a savage bridegroom , and a black ladder - climber , and 
 the sweetest of pardon bride , and the devil in he still insatiate 
 for revenge upon she who hold he to his word . 

 he write , read , tear the page , trim the lamp , and write again . he 
 remember Gower Woodseer 's have warn he he would finish his career 
 a monk . not , like Feltre , an oily convert , but under the hood , yes , and 
 extract a chartreuse from his ramble through wood rich far than 
 the philosopher 's milk of Mother Nature 's bosom . there flame the 
 burn signal of release from his torment ; there his absolve refuge , 
 instead of his write fruitless , intricate , impossible stuff to a 
 woman . the letter be renounce and shred : the dedicated ascetic 
 contemplate a hooded shape , wash of every earthly fleck . it prove 
 how man may by power of grip squeeze rapture out of pain . 




 CHAPTER XLV . contain a record of what be FEARED , what be HOPED , and 
 what happen 

 the Dame be at her thump for attention to be call to ' the strangeness 
 of it , ' that a poor , small , sparse village , hardly above a hamlet , 
 on the most unproductive of kentish height , part of old forest land , 
 should at this period become ' the cynosure of a city beautifully name 
 by the poet Great Augusta , and truly indeed the world 's metropolis . ' 

 put aside her artful pother to rouse excitement at stage of a 
 narrative , London 's general eye upon little Croridge be but another 
 instance of the extraordinary and not so wonderful . Lady Arpington , 
 equal to a Parliament in herself , speak of the place and the countess 
 court by her repentant lord . Brailstone and Chumley Potts be town 
 crier of the executioner letter each have receive from the earl ; Potts 
 with his chatter of a suicide 's pistol keep load in a case under 
 a two - inch - long silver Cross , and with sundry dramatic tap on the 
 forehead , Jottings over the breast , and awful grimace of devoutness . 
 there be no mistake he . the young nobleman of the million be 
 watch ; the town spyglass have he in its orbit . tale of the ancestral 
 Fleetwoods run beside rumour of a Papist priest at the bedside of the 
 foredoom to Error 's die mother . his wealth be count , multiply 
 by the ready naught of those who know little and dread much . Sir Meeson 
 Corby refer to an argument Lord Fleetwood have hold on an occasion 
 hotly against the logical consistency of the protestant faith ; and to 
 his alarm lest some day ' all that immense amount of money should slip 
 away from we to favour the machination of Roman Catholicism ! ' the 
 Countess of Cressett , Livia , anticipate she no surprise at anything 
 Lord Fleetwood might do : she know he . 

 so thereupon , with the whirr of a covey on wing before the fowler , our 
 crest three of immemorial antiquity and a presumptive immortality , 
 the Ladies Endor , Eldritch , and Cowry , shoot up again , hoot across the 
 dormant chief city Old England 's fell word of the scarlet shimmer above 
 the nether pit - flame , Rome . an ancient horror in the blood of the 
 population , conceive the word to signify , beak , fang , and claw , the 
 fiendish ancient enemy of the roast day of yore , hear and echo . 
 sleepless at the work of the sapper , in preparation for the tiger 's 
 leap , Rome be keen to spy the foothold of english stability , and her 
 clasp of a pillar of the structure send tremor to our foundation . 

 the coupling of Rome and England 's wealthy nobleman strike a match to 
 terrorize the Fire Insurance of Smithfield . that meteoric , intractable , 
 perhaps wicked , but popular , reputedly clever ; manifestly evil - star , 
 enormously wealthy , young Earl of Fleetwood , wed to an adventuress , 
 and a target for the scandal emanate from the woman , be daily , 
 without omission of a day , see walk Piccadilly pavement in company 
 once more with the pervert , the Jesuit agent , that crafty Catesby of 
 a Lord Feltre , arm in arm the pair of they , and uninterruptedly 
 conversing , utterly unlike Englishmen . Mr. Rose Mackrell pass they , 
 and his breezy salutation of the earl be unobserved in my lord 's 
 vacant glass optic , as he sketch the scene . London have report of 
 the sinister tempter and the imperilled young probationer undisguisedly 
 enter the roman catholic chapel of a fashionable district - chapel 
 erect on pervert 's legacy , down a small street at the 
 corner of a grandee square , by tolerance or connivance of our 
 constabulary , - enter it link ; and link they issue , their head 
 bent ; for the operation of the tonsure , you would say . two english 
 nobleman ! but be there no legislation to stop the disease ? our female 
 government ask it vixenly of our impotent male ; which pretend , beneath 
 an air of sympathy , that we should abstain from any compulsory action 
 upon the law to interfere , though the situation be confessedly grave ; 
 and the aspect man assume be correspondingly , to the last degree 
 provokingly , grave - half alive that they be , or void of patriotism , or 
 Babylonian at heart ! 

 Lord Fleetwood 's yet undocked old associate vow he ' smell strong ' of 
 the fume of the whirl silver censer - ball . his disfavour have cause a 
 stoppage of supply , cause vociferous abomination of their successful 
 rival , the romish priest . Captain Abrane sniff , loud as a horse , 
 condemnatory as a cat , in speak of he . he say : ' by George , it come 
 to this ; we shall have to turn Catholics for a loan ! ' watchdog of the 
 three repeat the gigantic gambler 's melancholy roar . and , see what 
 gap , cry the ratiocination of alarm , see the landslip it be in our 
 body , national and religious , when exalt personage go that way to 
 Rome ! 

 as you and the world have reflect in your sager mood , an ordinary 
 pebble may roll where it like , for individualism of the multitudinously 
 obscure little affect we . not so the costly jewel , which be a 
 congregation of ourselves , in our envy and longing and genuflexion 
 thick about its lustre . the lapse of precious thing must need carry 
 we , both by weight and example , and it will ceaselessly be , that we 
 be possess by the treasure we possess , we hang on it . a still , small 
 voice of England 's mind under panic send up these truism contain 
 admonition to the govern lady . they , the most conservative of 
 earthly body , clamour in return , like cloud - scud witch that have 
 catch fire at their skirt from the torch of marsh - fire radical . 
 they cite for his arrest the title millionaire who make a slide for 
 the idiot of the kingdom ; they stigmatize our liberty as a sophistry , 
 unless we have in it the sustain element of justice ; and where be 
 the justice that punish his country for any fatal course a mad young 
 Croesus may take ! they shackle the hand of testator , who endanger 
 the salvation of coroneted boy by have sanction to bequeath vast 
 wealth in bulk . they say , in truth , that it be the liberty to be 
 un - Christian . finally , they screech a petitioning of Parliament to 
 devote a night to a sitting , and empower the Lord Chancellor to lay an 
 embargo on the personal as well as the real estate of wealthy pervert ; 
 in common prudence deprive Rome of the coveted mean to turn our 
 religious weapon against we . 

 the three guardian lady and their string of follower head over 
 the fevered and benighted town , as the record of the period attest , 
 windpipe these and similar Solan note from the undigested cropful of 
 alarm Lord Fleetwood 's expect conduct cram into they . they and 
 all the world trace his present madness to the act forego : that 
 marriage ! they review it to deplore it , every know incident and the 
 number imagine ; yet merely to deplore : frightful comparison of then 
 with now render the historical shock to the marriage market matter 
 for a sick smile . evil genius of some sort beside he the wealthy young 
 nobleman be sure to have . he have get rid of one to take up with a viler . 
 first , a sluttish trollop of german origin be foist on he for life ; 
 next , he be mislead to abjure the faith of his father for Rome . but 
 patently , desperation in the husband of such a wife weaken his 
 resistance to the roman catholic pervert 's insinuation . there we 
 punctuate the full stop to our inquiry ; we have the secret . 

 and upon that , suddenly come a cyclonic gust ; and gossip twirl , 
 whine , and fall to the twanging of an entirely new set of note , 
 that furnish a tolerably agreeable tune , on the whole . o hear ! the 
 Marchioness of Arpington proclaim not merely acquaintanceship with Lord 
 Fleetwood 's countess , she profess esteem for the young person . she have 
 be hear to say , that if the principality of Wales be not a royal 
 title , a dignity of the kind would be confer by the people of those 
 mountain on the Countess of Fleetwood : such unbounded enthusiasm there 
 be for her character when she sojourn down there . as it be , they 
 do speak of she in their Welsh by some title . their bard be offer 
 prize to celebrate her deed . you remember the regiment of mount 
 Welsh gentleman escort she to her kentish seat , with their band 
 of the three - string harp ! she be well - bear , educated , handsome , a 
 perfectly honest woman , and a sound protestant . quite the reverse of 
 Lord Fleetwood 's seek to escape she , it be she who fly ; she can not 
 forgive he his cruelty and infidelity : and that be the reason why 
 he threaten to commit the act of despair . only she can save he ! she 
 have fly for refuge to her uncle , Lord Levellier 's house at a place 
 name Croridge - not in the gazetteer - hard of access and a home of 
 poacher , where shooting go on hourly ; but most picturesque and 
 romantic , as she herself be ! Lady Arpington find she there , nursing 
 one of the wound , and her uncle on his death - bed ; obdurate all round 
 against her husband , but pensive when supplicate to consider she 
 country endanger by Rome . she be a fervent patriot . the tale of her 
 Whitechapel origin , and head mob wield bludgeon , be absolutely 
 false , traceable to scandalize anecdotist like Mr. Rose Mackrell . she 
 be the beautiful example of an injure wife do honour to her sex 
 in the punishment of a faithless husband , yet so little cherish her 
 natural right to deal he retribution , that we dare hope she will listen 
 to her patriotic duty in consent to the reconcilement , which be 
 Lord Fleetwood 's alternative : his wife or Rome ! they say she have an 
 incommunicable charm , account for the price he put on she now she 
 hold aloof and he miss it . let she but rescue he from England 's most 
 vigilant of her deadly enemy , she will be entitle to the nation 's 
 lasting gratitude . she have her opportunity for win the anglican 
 English , as formerly she win the Dissenter Welsh . she may yet be the 
 mean of lead back the latter to our fold . 

 a notation of the cry in air at a time of surgent public excitement 
 can hardly yield we music ; and the wording of they , by the aid of 
 compound and transplant , metaphor and simile only just within range 
 of the arrow of Phoebus ' bow   i.e. the farth flight know , would , 
 while it might imitate the latent poetry , expose venturesome writer to 
 the wrath of a people commendably believe their language a 
 perfect instrument when they prefer the request for a plateful , and 
 commission their literary police to brain audacious experimenter who 
 enlarge or we it beyond the downright aim at that mark . the gossip 
 of the time must therefore appear commonplace , in resemblance to 
 the pant venue a terre of the toad , instead of the fiery steed 's ; 
 although we have documentary evidence that our country 's heart be 
 move ; - in no common degree , Dr. Glossop 's lucid English have it , at the 
 head of a broadsheet ballad discover by he , wherein the connubially 
 incline young earl and the nation in turn beseech the countess to 
 resume her place at Esslemont , and so save both from a terrific dragon 's 
 jaw , scarlet as the infernal flame ; describe as fascinating - 

  ' the class with the crest , 
  and the lining to their vest , 
  till down they jump , and empty leave 
  a headless trunk that rest . ' 

 these ballad , burlesque to present reading , mainly intend for 
 burlesque by the wit who dog without much enliven an anxious 
 period of our history , when corner - stone be fall the way the 
 young lord of the million threaten to go , do , there be little doubt , 
 accord to another part of their design   Rose Mackrell boast it 
 indirectly in his Memoirs , interpret public opinion , that is , the 
 english humour of it - the half laugh in their passing and not simulate 
 shudder . 

 Carinthia have a study of the humour of english character in the person 
 of the wound man she nurse on little Croridge , imagine it the 
 most unobserved of english home , and herself as unimportant an object . 
 Daniel Charner take his wound , as he take his medicine and his posset 
 from her hand , kindly , and seem to have a charitable understanding 
 of Lord Levellier now that the old nobleman have drive a pellet of lead 
 into he and lay he flat . it please he to assure she that his mate 
 be man of their word , and have promise to pay the old lord with a 
 ' rouse ' for it , nothing bad . her father use to speak of the ' clean 
 heart of the English ' as to the husbanding of revenge ; that is , the 
 ' no spot of bad blood ' to vitiate they . Captain John Peter second all 
 good - humour fighter ' for the long account ' : they will surely win ; and 
 it be one of his maxim : ' my foe can spoil my face ; he beat I if he 
 spoil my temper . ' 

 recall the scene of her bridal day - the two strong englishman at 
 the shake of hand , that have spoil one another 's face , she be 
 enlighten with a comprehension of her father 's love for the people ; 
 see the spiritual of the gross ugly picture , as not every man can 
 do , and but a warrior Joan among woman . Chillon shall teach the spanish 
 people English heartiness , she think . Lord Fleetwood 's remark on the 
 expedition would have suffice to stamp it righteous with she ; that be 
 her logic of the low valuation of he . she fancy herself absolutely 
 release at his departure . neither her sister Riette nor her friend 
 Owain , administer sentiment and common sense to she by turn , could 
 conceive how the passion for the recovery of her brother 's military name 
 feed the hope that she might aid in it , how the hope feed the passion . 
 she have besides her hunger to be at the work she could do ; her Chillon 's 
 glory for morning sky above it . 

 such be the mind Lady Arpington bring the world 's wisdom to bear 
 upon ; deem it in the end female only in its wildness and obstinacy . 
 Carinthia 's answer be few , barely varied . her repetition of ' my 
 brother ' irritate the great lady , whose argument be direct to make 
 she see that these duty toward her brother be primarily owe to her 
 husband , the man she would reclaim and could guide . and the Countess of 
 Fleetwood 's position , her duty to society , her dispensing of splendid 
 hospitality , the strengthening of her husband to do his duty to the 
 nation , the saving of he from a fatal step - from Rome ; these be 
 consideration for a reasonable woman to weigh before she throw up all 
 to be off on the maddest of adventure . ' inconceivable , my dear child ! ' 
 Lady Arpington proceed until she hear herself as drone . 

 Carinthia 's unmoved aspect of courteous attention appear to invoke 
 the prolongation of the sermon it criticize . it have an air of 
 reverse their position while she listen to the charge of folly , and 
 incidentally reply . 

 her reason for not fear roman catholic encroachment be , she say , 
 she have know good Catholics in the country she come from . for 
 herself , she should die profess the faith of her father and mother . 
 behind her correct demeanour a rustic intelligence be exhibit . she 
 appreciate her duty to her marriage oath : ' my husband 's honour be quite 
 safe with I . ' neither England nor religion , nor woman 's proper devotion 
 to a husband 's temporal and spiritual welfare , have claim rival 
 her devotion to her brother . she could not explain a devotion that 
 instigate she to an insensate course . it seem a kind of enthusiasm ; 
 and it be coldly speak ; in the tone refer to ' her husband 's 
 honour . ' her brother 's enterprise have her approval because ' her mother 's 
 prayer be for he to serve in the english army . ' by run over to 
 take a side in a spanish squabble ? she be ask and answer : ' he will 
 learn war ; my Chillon will show his value ; he will come back a try 
 soldier . ' 

 she count on his come back ? she do . 

 ' I can not take a step forward without count on success . we know the 
 chance we be to meet . my father have write of death . we do not fear 
 it , so it be nothing to we . we shall go together ; we shall not have to 
 weep for one another . ' 

 the strange young woman 's avoidance of any popular sniffle of the 
 pathetic have a recognize merit . 

 ' tell I , ' Lady Arpington say abruptly ; ' this maid of your , who be to 
 marry the secretary , or whatever he be - you be satisfied with she ? ' 

 ' she be my dear servant Madge . ' a cloud open as Carinthia speak the 
 name . ' she will be a true wife to he . they will always be my friend ! ' 

 nothing against the earl in that direction , apparently ; unless his 
 countess be bl with the density of frigidity . 

 Society 's emissary sketch its peril for unprotected beautiful woman ; 
 an outline of the London quadrille Henrietta dance in ; and she glance 
 at Carinthia and ask : ' have you think of it ? ' 

 Carinthia 's eye be on the great lady 's . their meaning be , ' you hit 
 my chief thought . ' they be read as her farth thought . for the hint 
 of Henrietta 's weakness deaden her feeling with a reminder of warm 
 and continue solicitation rebut ; the beautiful creature 's torture 
 at the idea of her exile from England . an outwearied hopelessness 
 express a passive sentiment very like indifference in the clear wide 
 gaze . she reply : ' I have . my proposal to she be Cadiz , with both our 
 young one . she will not . ' 

 and there be an end to that part of the question ! Lady Arpington 
 interpret it , by the gaze more than the word , under subjection of the 
 young woman 's character . nevertheless , she bear away Carinthia 's consent 
 to a final meeting with the earl at her house in London , as soon as 
 thing be settle at Croridge . Chillon , whom she see , be just as 
 hard , unforgiving , careless of his country 's dear interest ; brother 
 and sister be one heart of their one blood . she mention the general 
 impression in town , that the countess and only she could save the earl 
 from Rome . a flash of polite laughter be Chillon 's response . but after 
 her inspection of the elegant athlete , she do fancy it possible for 
 a young wife , even for Henrietta , to bear his name proudly in his 
 absence - if that be worth a moment 's consideration beside the serious 
 issue involve in her appeal to the countess ; especially when the 
 suggestion regard young wife leave unprotected , delicately convey 
 to the husband , have fail of its purpose . the handsome husband 's brow 
 flutter an interrogation , as if her clear - obscure should be far 
 light ; and it could not be do . he weigh the wife by the measure 
 of the sister , perhaps ; or his military head have no room for either . 
 his callousness to the danger of his country 's disintegration , from the 
 incessant , become overt , attack of a foreign priesthood might - an 
 indignant great lady 's precipitation to prophecy say would - bring 
 chastisement on he . she say it , and she like Henrietta , vow to 
 defeat her forecast as well as she could in a land seem forsake by 
 stable principle ; its noble break up its national church , go 
 over to Rome , embrace the faith of the impostor Mahomet . 

 Gossip feed to the starvation bone of Lady Arpington 's report , until one 
 late afternoon , memorable for the breeding heat in the van of elemental 
 artillery , newsboy wave damp sheet of fresh print through the 
 street , and society 's guardian be bring to confess , in shame and 
 gladness , that they have be grow sceptical of the active assistance 
 of Providence . at first the ' terrible explosion of gunpowder at 
 Croridge ' alarm they lest the timely Power should have do too 
 much . a day later the general agitation be pacify ; Lady Arpington 
 circulate the word ' safe , ' and the world know the disaster have not 
 engulphe Lady Fleetwood 's valuable life . she have the news by word 
 of mouth from the lovely Mrs. Kirby - Levellier , sister - in - law to the 
 countess . we be convinced we have proof of Providence intervene when 
 some terrific event of the number at its disposal accomplish the thing 
 and no more than the thing desire . pitiful though it may seem for a 
 miserly old lord to be blow up in his bed , it be necessarily a subject 
 of congratulation if the life , or poor remnant of a life , sacrifice be 
 an impediment to our righteous wish . but this be a theme for the Dame , 
 who would full surely have commit another breach of the treaty , have 
 there not be allusion to her sisterhood 's view of the government of 
 human affair . 

 on the day precede the catastrophe , Chillon 's man return to work . 
 he and Carinthia and Mr. Wythan lunch with Henrietta at Stoneridge . 
 walk down to Lekkatts , they be astounded to see the figure of the 
 spectral old lord on the plank to the powder store , clothe in his long 
 black cloak , erect . he be cross , he tell they , to count his barrel ; 
 a dream have disturb he . Chillon fall to rapid talk upon various 
 point of business , and disperse Lord Levellier 's memory relate to 
 his errand . lean on Carinthia 's arm , he go back to the house , where 
 he be put to bed in peace of mind . his resuscitated physical vigour 
 block all speculation for the young people assemble at Stoneridge 
 that night . they hardly speak ; they strangle thought form as larvae 
 of wish . Henrietta would be away to Lady Arpington 's next day , Mr. 
 Wythan to Wales . the two voyager be sad by sympathy than the two 
 whom they be leave to the clock 's round of desert sameness . about 
 ten at night Chillon and Mr. Wythan escort Carinthia , for the night 's 
 watch beside her uncle , down to Lekkatts . it be midway that the 
 knock on air , as of a muffle mallet at a door and at farth door of 
 cavern , smote their ear and shake the ground . 

 after an instant of the silence follow a shock , Carinthia touch she 
 brother 's arm ; and Chillon say : 

 ' not my powder ! ' 

 they run till they have Lekkatts in sight . a half moon show the house ; 
 it stand . fifty pace below , a column of opal smoke have begin to wreathe 
 and stretch a languid flag . the ' rouse ' promise to Lord Levellier by 
 Daniel Charner 's humorous mate have hit beyond its aim . intend to give 
 he a start - or ' one - er in return , ' it surpass his angry shot at the 
 body of they in effect . 

 Carinthia enter his room and see that he be lie stretch 
 restfully . she whisper of this to Chillon , and begin upon her watch , 
 read her spanish phrasebook ; and she could have weep , if she have be 
 a woman for tear . her duty to stay in England with Chillon 's fair wife 
 cross the beckon page like a black smoke . her passion to go and 
 share her brother 's danger leave the question of its righteousness at 
 each fall of the big breath . 

 her uncle 's grey head on his pillow be like a flintstone in chalk under 
 her look by light of dawn ; the chin have drop . 




 CHAPTER XLVI . a chapter of undercurrent and some SURFACE flashes 

 thus a round and a good old english practical repartee , worthy a 
 place in England 's book of her historical popular jest ; conceive 
 ingeniously , no bit murderously , even humanely , if Englishmen be to be 
 allow indulgence of a jolly hit back for an injury - more a feint 
 than a real stroke - give the miserly veteran his final quake and cut 
 Chillon 's knot . 

 Lord Levellier dead of the joke detract from the funny idea there have 
 be in the anticipation of his hear the libertine explosion of his 
 grand new powder , and come out cloak to see what wall remain 
 upright . its cleverness , however , be magnify by the shade into which 
 it have despatch he . the man who start the ' rouse for old Griphard ' 
 be name : nor do he shuffle his honour off . Chillon accuse he , and 
 he regretfully grin ; he would have own to it eloquently , excite 
 by the extreme ingenuity , but humour at the criminal bar be an abject 
 thing , that have to borrow from metaphysic for the expository word . he 
 lack they entirely , and as he could not , front his master , supply 
 the defect with oath , he draw up and let out on the dead old lord , 
 who want a few pound of blast powder , like anything else in 
 everybody 's way . Chillon expect the low of his countryman to show 
 some degree of chivalry upon occasion like the present . he be too 
 young to perceive how it be , that a block of our speech in the need 
 direction drive it storm in another , not the one closely express 
 we . Carinthia like the man ; she be grieve to hear of his have get 
 the sack summarily , when he might have have a further month of service 
 or a month 's pay . have not the workman 's forbearance be much try ? 
 and they have not steal , they have buy the powder , only intend to 
 startle . 

 she touch her brother 's native sense of fairness and vex he with 
 his cowardly devil of impatience , which kick at a simply stupid common 
 man , and behave to a lordly offender , smell rascal , civilly . just as 
 her father would have - treat the matter , she say : ' be we sorry for 
 what have happen , Chillon ? ' the man have go , the injustice be do ; 
 the master be leave to reflect on the part play by his inheritance of 
 the half share of ninety thousand pound in his proper respect for Lord 
 Levellier 's memory . harsh to an inferior be a horrible charge . but the 
 position of debtor to a title cur bring a bad for endurance . know 
 a part of Lord Fleetwood 's message to Lord Levellier suppress , the 
 bride 's brother , her chief guardian , have treat the omission as of no 
 importance , and have all the while understand that he ought to give she 
 his full guess at the reading of it : or so his rack mind understand 
 it now . his old father have say : a dumb tongue can be a heavy liar ; and , 
 lie be usurer ' coin we pay for ten thousand per cent . his harshness 
 in the past hour to a workman who have suffer with he and have not 
 intend serious mischief be Chillon 's unsounded motive for the 
 resolution to be out of debt to the man he loathe . there be a Muse that 
 smile aloft survey our act from the well - spring . 

 Carinthia hear her brother 's full version of the earl 's communication 
 to her uncle before the wild day of her marriage . ' not particularly 
 fit for the married state , ' Chillon phrase it , say : ' he seem to 
 have know himself , he be honest so far . ' she be advise to think it 
 over , that the man be her husband . 

 she have her brother 's heart in her breast , she could not misread he . 
 she think it over , and feel a slight drag of compassion for the 
 reluctant bridegroom . that be a stretch long league distant from love 
 with she ; the sort of feel one have for strange animal hurt and she 
 have in her childish blindness do he a hurt , and he have bite she . he 
 be a weak young nobleman ; he have wealth for a likeness of strength ; he 
 have no glory about his head . why have he not choose a woman to sit 
 beside he who would have fancy his coronet a glory and his luxury a 
 kindness ? but the poor young nobleman do not choose ! the sadly comic of 
 his keeping to the pledge of his word - his real wife - the tyrant of the 
 tyrant - clothe he ; the vision of he at the altar , and on the coach , 
 and at the Royal Sovereign Inn , and into the dimness where a placidly 
 smile recollection meet a curtain and lose the smile . 

 suppose that her duty condemn she to stay in England on guard over 
 Chillon 's treasure ! the perpetual struggle with a weak young nobleman 
 of aimless temper and rightabout change , pretend to the part of 
 husband , would , she foresaw , raise another figure of duty , enchain a 
 weak young woman . the world support his pretension ; and her passion 
 to serve as Chillon 's comrade sink at a damping because it be flame . 
 Chillon have do that ; Lady Arpington , to some extent ; henrietta more . a 
 little incident , point in no direction , have leave a shadow of a cloud , 
 consequent upon Lady Arpington 's mention of Henrietta 's unprotectedness . 
 step up the hill to meet her sister , on the morning of Henrietta 's 
 departure for London under the convoy of Mr. Wythan , Carinthia 's long 
 sight spy Kit Ines , or a man like he , in the meadow between Lekkatts 
 and Croridge . he stand before Henrietta , and vanish light - legged at 
 a gesture . Henrietta be descend to take her leave of her busy 
 husband ; her cheek be flush ; she would not speak of the fellow , 
 except to reply , ' oh , a beggar , ' and keep ask whether she ought not 
 to stay at Stoneridge . and if she do she would lose the last of the 
 Opera in London ! how could she help to investigate the cause of an 
 explosion so considerate to they ? she sing snatch of melody , 
 clung to her husband , protest her inability to leave he , and go , 
 appear tear away . as well bid healthy child lie abe on a bright 
 summer morning , as think of hold this fair young woman bind to the 
 circle of safety when she have her view of pleasure sparkle like the 
 shore - sea mermaid 's mirror . 

 suspicion be not of the brood Carinthia 's bosom harbour . Suspicion 
 of Chillon 's wife Carinthia could not feel . an uncaptained vessel in 
 the wind on high sea be imagine without a picturing of it . the 
 apparition of ive , if it be he , would not fit with any conjecture . she 
 send a warning to Madge , and at the same time name the girl 's wedding 
 day for she ; pain in do it . she have give the dear girl her word 
 that she would be present at this of all marriage . but a day or two 
 day or more would have to be spend away from Chillon ; and her hunger 
 for every hour beside her brother confess to the war go on within 
 she , as to which be her holier duty , the one on the line of her 
 inclination , or that one point to luxury - choice between a 
 battle - horse and a cushion - chair ; between companionship with her 
 glorious brother face death , and submission to a weak young nobleman 
 claim his husband 's right over she . she have submit , have forget 
 his icy strangeness , have think he love ; and hers be a breast for 
 love , it be own by the sobbing rise of her breast at the thought . and 
 she might submit again - in honour ? scorn the husband ? Chillon scorn 
 he . yet Chillon leave the decision to she , specify his excuse . 
 and Henrietta and Owain , Lady Arpington , Gower Woodseer , all the 
 world - Carinthia shudder at the world 's blank eye on what it direct 
 for the acquiescence of the woman . that shred of herself she would 
 become , she feel herself become it when the view of her career beside 
 her brother wan . the dead Rebecca live in her heart be the only 
 soul among her friend whose voice be her own against the world 's . 

 but there come a turn where she and Rebecca separate . Rebecca 's 
 insurgent wish take shape of prophecy , rob she of her friend 
 Owain , to present she an impossible object , that her mind could not 
 compass or figure . she bade rebecca rest and let she keep the fancy 
 of Owain as her good ghost of a sun in the mist of a frosty morning ; 
 sweet to she than an image of love , though it be the very love , 
 the love of maidens ' dream , burst the bud of romance , issue its 
 flower . delusive love drive away with a credulous maiden , under an 
 English heaven , on a coach and four , from a windy hill - top , to a crash 
 below , and a stunned recovery in the street of small shop , mud , rain , 
 gloom , language like musket - fire and the wail wound . 

 no regret , her father have say ; they unman the heart we want for 
 to - morrow . she keep she look forward at the dead wall Chillon have throw 
 up . he do not reject her company ; his prospect of it have cloud ; and 
 there be allusion to Henrietta 's loneliness . ' his Carin could do she 
 service by stay , if she decide that way . ' her enthusiasm drop to 
 the level of life 's common ground . with her sustainment go , she behold 
 herself a title doll , and have sternly to shut her eye on the behind 
 scene , bar any shadowy approach of womanly softness ; think she 
 father 's daughter dishonour in the submissive wife of the weak young 
 nobleman Chillon despise as below the title of man . 

 Madge and Gower come to Stoneridge on their road to London three day 
 before their union . Madge have no fear of Ines , but say : ' I never let 
 Mr. Gower out of my sight . ' perforce of study he with the thirsty 
 wonder consequent upon his proposal to she , she have get fast hold of the 
 skirt of his character ; she ' know he be happy because he be always 
 make her laugh at herself . ' her manner of say , ' she hop to give 
 he a comfortable home , so that he might never be sorry for what he have 
 do , ' be tone as in a church , beautiful to her mistress . speak of 
 my lord 's great kindness , her eye yearn for a second and fall humbly . 
 she say of Kit ive , ' he be find a new " paytron , " Sarah say Mr. 
 Woodseer tell she , my lady . it be another nobleman , Lord Brailstone , 
 have come into money lately and hire he for his pugilist when it be 
 not horserace . ' Gower speak of thank to Lord Fleetwood for the 
 independence allow he to take a wife and settle to work in his 
 little Surrey home . he , too , show he could have say more and be 
 advise not to push at a shut gate . my lord would attend their wedding 
 as well as my lady , Carinthia hear from Madge ; count it a pity that 
 wealthy nobleman have no profession to hinder the doing of unprofitable 
 thing . 

 her sensibility be warm on the wedding - day of these two dear one . 
 he grace the scene , she admit , when reassure by his perfect reserve 
 toward she personally . he be the bear nobleman in his friendliness with 
 the bridal pair and respectfulness to Mr. Woodseer . high social breeding 
 be an exquisite performance on the instrument we be , and his behaviour 
 to she leave her mind at liberty for appreciation of it . condescension 
 be not see , his voice have no false note . during the ceremony his 
 eyelid blink rapidly . at the close , he congratulate the united 
 couple , praise they each for the wisdom of their choice . he say to 
 his countess : 

 ' this be one of the hopeful marriage ; chiefly of your making . ' 

 she reply : ' my prayer will be for they always . ' 

 ' they be fortunate who have your prayer , ' he say , and turn to 
 Sarah Winch . she be to let he know when she also have find she ' great 
 philosopher . ' Sarah be like a fish on a bank , take gasp at the 
 marvel of it all ; she blush the pale pink of her complexion , and 
 murmur of ' happiness . ' Gower have go headlong into happiness , where 
 philosopher be smirker and mouther of ordinary stuff . his bright 
 remark be to put the question to his father : ' the three good thing of 
 the Isle of Britain ? ' and treble the name of Madge Woodseer for a rich 
 triad than the Glamorgan man could summon . pardonably foolish ; but 
 mindful of a past condition of indiscipline , Nature 's philosopher say 
 to the old minister : ' your example save I for this day at a turn of 
 my road , sir . ' nature 's poor wild scholar pay that tribute to the 
 regimental sectarian . enough for proud philosophy to have do the thing 
 demonstrably right , Gower 's look at his Madge and the world say . that 
 ' european rise of the coal - black order , ' as one of his numerous picture 
 of she paint the girl , be a torch in a cavern for dusky redness at 
 her cheek . her response beneath the book Mr. Woodseer hold open have 
 flash a distant scene through Lord Fleetwood . quaint to notice be 
 her reverence for the husband she set on a tower monument , and 
 her friendly , wifely ; whisper jog at the unpractical creature 's 
 forgetfulness of his wrap , his book ; his writing - desk - on this 
 tremendous occasion , his pipe . again the earl could have swear , that 
 despite her antecedent , she bring her husband honest dower , as surely 
 as she give the lucky Pagan a whole heart ; and have a remarkably fine 
 bust to house the organ , too ; and a clarionet of a voice , curiously like 
 she , mistress 's . and not a bad fellow , but a heathen dog , a worshipper 
 of Nature , walk off with the girl , whose voice have the ring of 
 Carinthia 's . the Powers do not explain their dispensation . 

 these two now one by united good - will for the junction Lord Fleetwood 
 himself drive through Loudon to the hill , where another carriage 
 await they by his order , in the town of London 's race - course . as soon 
 as they be seat he nod to they curtly from his box , and drive 
 back , leave they puzzle . but his countess have not so very coldly see 
 he start his horse to convey the modest bridal pair . his impulse to 
 kindness could be politic . before quit Whitechapel , she go with 
 Sarah to look at the old shop of the fruit and vegetable . they find 
 it shut , untenante ; Mr. Woodseer tell they that the earl be owner of 
 it by recent purchase , and would not lease it . he have to say why ; for 
 the countess be dull to the notion of a sentimental desecration in 
 the occupying of her bedchamber by poor tradespeople . she be little 
 flattered . the great nobleman of her imagination when she lie there 
 dwindle to a whimsy infant , despot of his nursery , capricious with his 
 toy ; likely to damage himself , if leave to himself . 

 how it might occur , she hear hourly from her hostess , Lady Arpington ; 
 from Henrietta as well , in different term . he seem to she no long 
 the station nobleman , but one of other idle man , and the sad 
 of young man . his weakness cast a net on she . bad than that drag of 
 compassion , she foresee the chance of his have experience of her own 
 weakness , if she be to be one among idle woman : she might drop to the 
 love of he again . Chillon 's damp of her enthusiasm sink she to a 
 mere breathing body , miserably an animal body , no comrade for a valiant 
 brother ; this young man 's feeble consort , perhaps : and a creature 
 thirsting for pleasure , dispose to sigh in the prospect of caress . 
 Enthusiasm go , her spirited imagination of active work on the field of 
 danger beside her brother flap a break wing . 

 she fall too low in her esteem to charge it upon Henrietta that she 
 stand hesitate , lean on the hat side of the debate ; though she 
 could almost have blame Chillon for refuse she his positive counsel , 
 and not order his wife to follow he . once Lady Arpington , reasoning 
 with she on behalf of the husband who seek reconciliation , sneer at 
 her brother 's project , condemn it the more for his resolve to carry it 
 out now that he have mean . the front of a shower spring to Carinthia 's 
 eyelid . now that her brother have mean , he from whom she might be 
 divide be alert to keep his engagement and study war on the field , 
 as his father have do in foreign service , offer England a train 
 soldier , should his country subsequently need he . the contrast of her 
 heroic brother and a luxurious idle lord scatter blood of bird or 
 stag , and despise the soldier 's profession , have a singular bitter 
 effect , consequent on her scorn of word to defend the man her heart 
 idolize . this last of young woman for weeping weep in the lady 's 
 presence . 

 the feminine trick be pardon to she because her unaccustomed betrayal 
 of that form of enervation be desire . it be read as woman 's act of 
 self - pity over her perplexity : which be a melt act with the woman 
 when there be no man to be dissolve by it . so far Lady Arpington judge 
 rightly ; Carinthia 's tear , shed at the thought of her brother under 
 the world 's false judgement of he , leave she spiritless to resist her 
 husband 's advocate . unusual as they be , almost unknown , they be 
 thunder - drop and shake she . 

 all for the vivid surface , the Dame fret at stress lay on 
 undercurrent . there be no bridle she unless the tale be here tell of 
 how Lord Brailstone in his frenzy of the disconcert rival boast 
 over town the counterstroke he have deal Lord Fleetwood , by send Mrs. 
 Levellier a statement of the latter nobleman 's base plot to thwart 
 her husband 's wager , with his foul agent , the repentant and well - pay 
 ruffian in person , to verify every write word . the town 's conception 
 of the necessity for the reunion of the earl and countess be too 
 intense to let exciting scandal prosper . moreover , the town 's bright 
 anticipation of its concluding festivity on the domain of Calesford 
 argue such tattle down to a baffled adorer 's malice . the Countess of 
 Cressett , have her cousin , the beautiful Mrs. Kirby - Levellier , in her 
 house , have deny Lord Brailstone admission at her door , we can affirm . 
 he have write to she vehemently , have call a second time , have vow 
 publicly that Mrs. Levellier shall have she warn against Lord 
 Fleetwood . the madness of jealousy be exhibit . Lady Arpington 
 pronounce he in his conduct unworthy the name of gentleman . and 
 how foolish the scandal he circulate ! Lord Fleetwood 's one aim be to 
 persuade his offended wife to take her place beside he . he express 
 regret everywhere , that the death of her uncle Lord Levellier withhold 
 her presence from Calesford during her term of mourning ; and that he 
 have give his word for the fete on a particular day , before London run 
 quite dry . his pledge of his word be notoriously inviolate . the Countess 
 of Cressett - an extraordinary instance of a thrice married woman 
 correct in her addiction to play by her alliance with a rakish 
 juvenile - declare she perform the part of hostess at the request of 
 the Countess of Fleetwood . perfectly convincing . the more so   if you 
 have the gossip ' keen scent of a deduction   since Lord Fleetwood 
 and young Lord Cressett and the Jesuit Lord Feltre have be see 
 confabulating with very sacerdotal countenance indeed . three english 
 nobleman ! not count eighty year for the whole three ! and dear Lady 
 Cressett fear she may be call on to rescue her boy - husband from a 
 bad enemy than the green table , if Lady Fleetwood should unhappily 
 prove unyielding , as it sham the gentle sex to imagine she will be . 
 in fact , we know through Mrs. Levellier , the meeting of reconciliation 
 between the earl and the countess come off at Lady Arpington 's , by she 
 express arrangement , to - morrow : ' none too soon , ' the expectant world of 
 London declare it . 

 the meeting come to pass three day before the great day at Calesford . 
 Carinthia and her lord be alone together . this have be his burning 
 wish at Croridge , where he could have pour his heart to she and might 
 have move the wife 's . but she have form her estimate of he there : she 
 have , in the comparison or clash of force with he , grow to contemplate 
 the young man of wealth and rank , who have once be impatient of 
 an allusion to her father , and seek now to part she from her 
 brother - stop her breathing of fresh air . sensationally , too , her ardour 
 for the exercise of her inherit gift attribute it to he that her 
 father 's daughter have live the mean existence in England , pursue a 
 husband , hound by a mother 's terror . the influence environ she 
 and press she to submission sharpen her perusal of the small 
 object largely endow by circumstance to demand it . she stand calmly 
 discoursing , with a temper smile : no long a novice in the social 
 manner . an equal whom he have injure wait for his remark , give ready 
 reply ; and he , bow to the visible equality , chafe at a sense of 
 inferiority follow his acknowledgement of it . he be alone with she , 
 and next to dumb ; she freeze a full heart . as for his heart , it could not 
 speak at all , it be a swing lump . the rational view of the situation 
 be expose to she ; and she listen to that favourably , or at least 
 attentively ; but with an edge to her civil smile when he hint of 
 entertainment , voyage , travel , an excursion to her native mountain 
 land . her brother would then be face death . the rational view , she 
 admit , be one to be consider . yes , they be marry ; they have 
 a son ; they be bind to sink misunderstanding , in the interest of 
 their little son . he venture to say that the child be a link unite 
 they ; and she look at he . he blink rapidly , as she have see he 
 do of late , but keep his eye on she through the nervous flutter of the 
 lid ; his pride make a determined stand for physical mastery , though 
 her look be but a look . have there be reproach in it , he would have 
 find the voice to speak out . her look be a cold sky above a hungering 
 man . she freeze his heart from the marble of her own . 

 and because she be for adventure with her brother at bloody work of 
 civil war in the pay of a foreign government ! - he find a short refuge 
 in that mute sneer , and be hurl from it by an apparition of the Welsh 
 scene of the bite infant , and Carinthia volunteering to do the bloody 
 work which would have save it ; which he have contest , ridicule . right 
 then , her insanity now conjure the wretched figure of he oppose the 
 martyr her splendid humaneness have offer she to be , and dominate his 
 reason , subject he to admire - on to worship of the woman , whatever 
 she might do . just such a feeling for a woman he have dream of in his 
 young time , doubt that he would ever meet the fleshly woman to 
 impose it . his heart break the frost she breathe . yet , if he give way 
 to the run of speech , he know himself unmanned , and the fatal habit of 
 superiority stop his tongue after he have utter the name he love to 
 speak , as near to the embrace of she . 

 ' Carinthia - so I think , as I say , we both see the common sense of the 
 position . I regret over and over again - we will discuss all that when we 
 meet after this Calesford affair . I shall have thing to say . you will 
 overlook , I be sure - well , man be man ! - or try to . perhaps I be not 
 bad than - we will say , some . you will , I know , - I have learn it , - be of 
 great service , help to I ; double my value , I believe ; more than double 
 it . you will receive I - here ? or at Croridge or Esslemont ; and alone 
 together , as now , I beg . ' 

 that be what he say . have say it , his escape from high tragic 
 in the comfortable worldly tone rejoice he ; to some extent also the 
 courteous audience she give he . and her hand be not refuse . judge 
 by her aspect , the plain common - sense ground of their situation be 
 accept for the good opening step to their union ; though she must have 
 have her feeling beneath it , and God know that he have ! her hand be 
 friendly . he could have thank she for yield her hand without 
 a stage scene ; she have fine breeding by nature . the gracefullest of 
 train lady could not have pass through such an interview so 
 perfectly in the right key ; and this be the woman he have see at the 
 wrestle with hideous death to save a muddy street - child ! she touch the 
 gentleman in he . hard as it be while he hold the hand of the wife , his 
 little son 's mother , who might be call his bride , and draw he by 
 the contact of their blood to a memory , seem impossible , some 
 other world 's attested reality , - she the angel , he the demon of 
 it , - unimaginable , yet present , palpable , a fact beyond his mind , he let 
 her hand fall scarce press . do she expect more than the common sense 
 of it to be say ? the ' more ' be due to she , and should partly be say 
 at their next meeting for the no far separate ; or else he would 
 vow in his heart to spread it out over a whole life 's course of wakeful 
 devotion , with here and there a hint of his young black nature . well 
 that except for a desire seize he to make sacrifice of the demon he 
 have be , offer he up hideously naked to her mercy . but it be a thing 
 to be do by hint , by fit , by small dos . she could only gradually 
 be bring to the comprehension of how the man or demon find 
 indemnification under his yoke of marriage in snatch she , to torment , 
 perhaps betray ; and solace for the hurt to his pride in spread a 
 snare for the beautiful Henrietta . a confession ! it could be to none but 
 the priest . 

 Knowledge of Carinthia would have urge he to the confession 
 straightway . in spite of horror , the task of help to wash a black 
 soul white would have be her compensation for loss of companionship 
 with her soldier brother . she would have hold hot iron to the rabid 
 wound and come to a love of the rescue sufferer . 

 it seem to please she when he speak of Mr. Rose Mackrell 's 
 application to get back his volume of her father 's Book of Maxims . 

 ' there be mine , ' she say . 

 for the sake of win her quick gleam at any word of the bridal 
 couple , he conjure a picture of her Madge and his gower , say : ' that 
 marriage - as you will learn - prove he honest from head to foot ; as she 
 be in her way , too . ' 

 ' oh , she be , ' be the answer . 

 ' we shall be drive down to they very soon , Carinthia . ' 

 ' it will delight they to see either of we , my lord . ' 

 ' my lady , adieu until I be over with this Calesford , ' he gesture , as in 
 fetter . 

 she spar he the my lording as she say adieu , sensitive as she be , 
 and to his perception now . 

 Lady Arpington have a satisfactory two minute with he before he leave 
 the house . London town , on the great day at Calesford , interchange 
 communication , to the comfort effect , that the Countess of Fleetwood 
 would reign over the next entertainment . 




 CHAPTER XLVII . the last : with a concluding word by the DAME 

 it be of seemingly good augury for the cause of a suppliant man , however 
 little for the man himself , when she who have much to pardon can depict 
 he in a manner that almost smile , not unlike a dandling nurse the 
 miniature man - child sob off to sleep after a frenzy ; an example of a 
 genus frame for excuse , and he more than other . Chillon be amuse 
 up to inquisitive surprise by Carinthia 's novel idea of she formerly 
 dread riddle of a husband . as she sketch the very rational alliance 
 propose to she , and his kick at the fetter of Calesford , a shadowy 
 dash for an image of the solicitous tyrant be add perforce to 
 complete the scene ; follow which , her head move sharply , the subject 
 be fling over her shoulder . 

 she be develop ; she might hold her ground with the husband , if the 
 alliance should be resume ; and she would be a companion for Henrietta 
 in England : she be now independent , as to money , and she could break an 
 intolerable yoke without suffer privation . he keep his wrath under , 
 determine not to use his influence either way , sure though he be of 
 her old father 's voting for she to quit the man and enter the field 
 where quality would be serviceable . the man probably fear a 
 scandal more than the loss of his wife in she go . he have never be 
 thrash - the sole apology Chillon discover for he , in a flushed 
 review of the unavenged list of injury Carinthia have sustain . his 
 wise old father insist on the value of an early thrashing to trim 
 and shape the growth of most young man . there be no proof of Lord 
 Fleetwood 's have scheme to thwart his wager , so he put that 
 accusation by : think for an instant , that if the man desire to have 
 his wife with he , and she leave the country with her brother , his own 
 act would recoil ; or if she stay to hear of a villany , Carinthia 's 
 show of scorn could lash . Henrietta praise my lord 's kindness . he have 
 be one of the adorer - as what man would not be ! - and upon she 
 at least   he could hardly love her husband   he have not wreak his 
 disappointment . a young man of huge wealth , have nothing to do 
 but fatten his whim , be the monster a rich country breed under the 
 blessing of peace . his wife , if a match for he , have her work trace 
 out : - mean work for the child of their father , Chillon think . she 
 might be do braver , more suitable to the blood in her vein . but 
 woman have to be consider as woman , not as possible heroine ; and 
 supposing she hold she own with this husband of her , which mean , 
 judge by the view of their unfold character at present , a certain 
 command of the freakish beast ; she , whatever her task , would not be the 
 one set trotting . he come to his opinion through the estimate he have 
 recently form of Lord Fleetwood , and a study of his change sister . 

 her brow gloome at a recurrence to that subject . their business of the 
 expedition absorb she , each detail , all the remark he quote of 
 his chief , hopeful or weariful ; for difficulty with the spanish 
 Government , and with the English too , start up at every turn ; and the 
 rank and file of the contingent be mostly a rough lot , where they be 
 rather well than soaked weed . a small body of train soldier have 
 spring to the call to arm ; here and there an officer could wheel a 
 regiment . 

 Carinthia breasted discouragement . ' english learn from blow , Chillon . ' 

 ' he might have add , they lose half their number by have to learn 
 from blow , Carin . ' 

 ' he say , " let I lead Britons ! " ' 

 ' when the canteen 's fifty league to the rear , yes ! ' 

 ' yes , it be a wine country , ' she sigh . ' but would the Spaniards have 
 send for we if their experience tell they they could not trust we ? ' 

 Chillon brighten rigorously : ' yes , yes ; there be just a something about 
 our man at their good , hard to find elsewhere . we be right in thinking 
 that . and our chief be the right man . ' 

 ' he be Owain 's friend and countryman , ' say Carinthia , and please , her 
 brother for talk like a girl , in the midst of methodical calculation 
 of the cost of this and that , to purchase the supply he would need . 
 she have an organize head . on her way down from London she have draw 
 on instruction from a London physician of old Peninsula experience 
 to pencil a list of the medical and surgical store require by a 
 campaigning army ; she have gain information of the London shop where 
 they be to be procure ; she have learn to read medical prescription 
 for the composition of drug . she be at her Spanish still , not behind 
 he in the ordinary dialogue , and able to correct he on point of 
 spanish history relate to fortress , especially the Basque . a french 
 bookseller have supply she with the Vicomte d'Eschargue 's recently 
 publish volume of a travel in Catalonia . Chillon see paragraph 
 marked , page dog - eare , for reference . at the same time , the question 
 of Henrietta touch she anxiously . Lady Arpington 's hint have sink into 
 they both . 

 ' I have think of St. Jean de Luz , Chillon , if Riette would consent to 
 settle there . french people be friendly . you expect most of your work 
 in and round the Spanish Pyrenees . ' 

 ' Riette alone there ? ' say he , and draw she by her love of he into his 
 altered mind ; for he do not object to his wife 's loneliness at Cadiz 
 when their plan be new . 

 London have teach she that a young woman in the giddy heyday of her 
 beauty have to be guard ; she belong to we be the proud burden 
 involve sacrifice . but at St. Jean de Luz , if Riette would consent to 
 reside there , Lord Fleetwood 's absence and the neighbourhood of the 
 war be reckon on to preserve his yokefellow from any fit of the 
 abominated softness which she have feel in one premonitory tremor during 
 their late interview , and deem it vile compare with the life of 
 action and service beside , almost beside , her brother , share his 
 danger at least . she would have have Chillon speak peremptorily to 
 his wife regard the residence on the spanish border , add , in a 
 despair : ' and I with she to protect she ! ' 

 ' Unfair to Riette , if she can not   decide voluntarily , ' he say . 

 all he refrain from be , the persuade she to stay in England and 
 live reconcile with the gaoler of the dungeon , as her feeling picture 
 it . 

 Chillon and Carinthia journey to London for purchase and a visit to 
 lawyer , banker , and tradesman , on their way to meet his chief and Owain 
 Wythan at Southampton . they lunch with Livia . the morrow be the 
 great Calesford day ; Henrietta carol of it . Lady Arpington have be 
 afllictingly demure on the theme of her presence at Calesford within 
 her term of mourning . ' but I do not   mourn , and I be not relate to the 
 defunct , and I can not   be deny the pleasure invent for my personal 
 gratification , ' Henrietta 's happy flippancy pout at the prudish 
 objection . moreover , the adore Columelli be to be her slave of song . 
 the termination of the London season have be postpone a whole week for 
 Calesford : the utmost possible strain ; and her presence be understand 
 to represent the Countess of Fleetwood , temporarily in decorous 
 retirement . Chillon be assure by she that the earl have express 
 himself satisfied with his wife 's reasonableness . ' the rest will 
 follow . ' plead on the earl 's behalf be a vain effort , but she have 
 her ground for paint Lord Fleetwood 's present mood to his countess 
 in warm colour . ' nothing short of devotion , Chillon ! ' London 's extreme 
 anxiety to see they united , and the cause of it , the immense good 
 Janey could do to her country , should certainly be consider by she , 
 Henrietta say . she speak feverishly . a mention of St. Jean de Luz for a 
 residence inflict , it appear , a more violent toothache than she have 
 suffer from the proposal of quarter in Cadiz . and now her husband have 
 money ? ... she suggest his reinstatement in the english army . Chillon 
 hush that : his chief have his word . besides , he want school in 
 war . why have he marry ! his love for she be the answer ; and her beauty 
 argue for the love . but possess she , he be bind to win she a 
 name . so his reasoning run to an accord with his military instinct and 
 ambition . nevertheless , the mournful strange fact she recall , that 
 they have never waltz together since they be make one , trouble his 
 countenance in the mirror of her . instead of the waltz , grief , low 
 worry , dulness , an eclipse of she , have be the beautiful creature 's 
 portion . 

 it establish mighty claim to a young husband 's indulgence . she 
 hum a few bar of his favourite old viennese waltz , with ' Chillon ! ' 
 invitingly and reproachfully . his loathing of Lord Fleetwood have to 
 withstand an envious jump at the leg in his vison of her partner on the 
 morrow . he say : ' you will think of some one absent . ' 

 ' you really do wish I to go , my darling ? it be Chillon 's wish ? ' she 
 beg for the word ; she have they , and then her feverishness abate to 
 a simple sparkling composure . 

 Carinthia have observe she . she be heart - sick under pressure of 
 thought the heavy for be formless . they signify in the sum she 
 doom to see her brother leave England for the war , and herself crumble 
 to piece from the imagine figure of herself beside he on or near the 
 field . they could not be phrase , for they accuse the beloved brother 
 of a weakness in the excessive sense of obligation to the beautiful 
 woman who have wed he . drive down to Southampton by the 
 night - coach , her tenderness toward Henrietta hold other thought 
 unshape , except one , that move in its twilight , murmur of how the 
 love of pleasure keep we blind child . and how the innocent be 
 push by it to snap at wicked bait , which the wealthy angle with , 
 point a charitable index on some of our social story . the Countess 
 Livia , not an innocent like Henrietta have escape the poison tongue 
 by contract a third marriage - ' in time ! ' Lady Arpington say ; and 
 the knotty question be present to a young mind : why be the innocent 
 tempt to their ruin , and the dark nature allow an escape ? any 
 street - boy could have tell she of the virtue in quick wit . but her 
 unexercised reflectiveness be on the highroad of accepted doctrine , 
 with their chorus of the moan of gossip for supernatural intervention 
 to give we justice . she have not learn that those innocent , push by 
 an excessive love of pleasure , be for the term low in the scale 
 than their wary dark cousin , and must come to the diviner light of 
 intelligence through suffering . 

 however , the result of her meditation be to show she she be direct 
 to be Henrietta 's guardian . after that , she have no thought ; travel 
 beside Chillon , she be sheer sore feeling , as of a body ache for its 
 heart pluck out . the bitterness of the separation to come between they 
 prophesy a tragedy . she touch his hand . it be warm now . 

 during six day of travel from port to port along the southern and 
 western coast , she join in the inspection of the english contingent 
 about to be ship . they and their chief and her brother be plain to 
 sight , like sample print of a book 's first page , blank sheet for the 
 rest of the volume . if she might have be one among they , she would 
 have dare the reckless forecast . her sensation be those of a bird 
 that have fly into a room , and beat wing against the ceiling and the 
 window - pane . a close , hard sky , a transparent prison wall , narrow 
 her power , mock her soul . she speak little ; what she say impressed 
 Chillon 's chief , Owain Wythan be glad to tell she . the good friend have 
 go counter to the tide of her breast by show satisfaction with 
 the prospect that she would take her rightful place in the world . her 
 concentrated mind regard the good friend as a phantom of a man , the 
 world 's echo . his dead Rebecca would have understand her passion to be 
 her brother 's comrade , her abasement in the staying at home to guard 
 his butterfly . Owain have never favour her project ; he could not 
 now perceive the special danger Chillon would be expose to in her 
 separation from he . she have no mean of explain what she feel 
 intensely , that danger , death , be nothing to either of they , if they 
 share the fate together . 

 her reject petition to her husband for an allowance of money , on the 
 day in Wales , become the vivid memory which bring out motif in its 
 glow . her husband hat her brother ; and why ? but the answer be light 
 fierily down another avenue . a true husband , a lord of wealth , would 
 have rejoice to help the brother of his wife . he be the cause of 
 Chillon 's ruin and this adventure to restore his fortune . could she 
 endure a close alliance with the man while her brother 's life be 
 imperille ? Carinthia rebuke her drowsy head for not have see his 
 reason for refuse at the time . ' how long I be before I see anything 
 that do not stare in my face ! ' she be a married woman , whose order of 
 mind render she singularly subject to the holiness of the tie ; and she 
 be a weak woman , she fear . already , at interval , now that action on 
 a foreign field of the thunder and lightning be deny , imagination 
 reveal she dissolve to the union with her husband , and cry she 
 comment on herself as the world 's basest of woman for submit to it 
 while Chillon 's life run risk ; until finally she say : ' not before I 
 have my brother home safe ! ' an exclamation equal to a vow . 

 that be settle , some appearance of equanimity return ; she 
 talk of the scarlet business as one she participate in as a distant 
 spectator . Chillon 's chief be hurry the embarkation of his troop ; 
 within ten day the whole expedition would be afloat . she be to post to 
 London for further purchase , he follow to take leave of his wife and 
 babe . curiously , but hardly remark on during the bustle of work , 
 Livia have be the one to send her short account of the great day at 
 Calesford ; Henrietta , the bear correspondent , pencil a couple of 
 line ; she be well , dreadfully fatigue , rather a fright from a trip 
 of her foot and fall over a low wire fence . her message of love thrice 
 underline the repeat word . 

 Henrietta be the last person Carinthia would have expect to meet 
 midway on the London road . her name be call from a carriage as she 
 drive up to the door of the Winchester hostlery , and in the lady , over 
 whose right eye and cheek a covering fold of silk conceal a bandage , 
 the voice be her sister Riette 's . with she be two babe and their 
 nursemaid . 

 ' Chillon be down there - you have leave he there ? ' Henrietta greet 
 she , see the reply , and step out of her carriage . ' you shall kiss the 
 child afterwards ; come into one of the room , Janey . ' 

 alone together , before an embrace , she say , in the voice of tear 
 harden to the world 's business , ' Chillon must not enter London . you 
 see the figure I be . my character be in as bad case up there - thank to 
 those man ! my husband have lose his " golden Riette . " when you see beneath 
 the bandage ! he will have the right to put I away . his " beauty of 
 beauty " ! I be fit only to dress as a page - boy and run at his heel . 
 my hero ! my poor dear ! he think I care for nothing but amusement , 
 flattery . be ever a punishment so cruel to the noblest of generous 
 husband ! because I know he will overlook it , make light of it , never 
 reproach his Riette . and the rose he marry come to he a shrivel 
 leaf of a potpourri heap . you have not   see I yet . I be their 
 " beautiful woman . " I feel for my husband most . ' 

 she take breath . Carinthia press her lip on the cheek sensible to a 
 hiss , and Henrietta pursue , in word liker to sob : ' anywhere , Cadiz , 
 St. Jean de Luz , hospital work either , anywhere my husband like , 
 anything ! I want to work , or I will sit and rock the child . I be awake 
 at last . Janey , we be lamb to vulture with those man . I do not   pretend 
 I be the perfect fool . I think myself so safe . I let one of they 
 squeeze my hand one day , he swear . you know what a passion be ; you have 
 it for mountain and battle , I for music . I do remember , one morning 
 before sunrise , drive back to town out of Windsor , - a dance , the 
 officer of the Guards , - and my lord 's trumpeter at the back of the 
 coach blow note to melt a stone , I find a man 's hand have mine . I 
 remember Lord Fleetwood look over his shoulder and smile hard and 
 lash his horse . but listen - yes , at Calesford it happen . he - oh , 
 hear the name , then ; Chillon must never hear it ; - Lord Brailstone be 
 deny the right to step on Lord Fleetwood 's ground . the Opera company 
 have finish selection from my Pirata . I go out for cool air ; little 
 Sir Meeson beside I . I have a folded gauze veil over my head , tie at 
 the chin in a bow . some one run up to I - Lord Brailstone . he pour 
 forth their poetry . they suppose it the wine for their " beautiful 
 woman . " I dare say I laugh or tell he to go , and he begin a tirade 
 against Lord Fleetwood . there be no mighty difference between one beast 
 of prey and another . let I get away from they all ! though now ! they 
 would not lift an eyelid . this be my husband 's treasure return 
 to he . we have to be burn to come to our sens . Janey - oh ! you do 
 well ! - it be fiendish ; old ballad , melodrama play , I see they be 
 build on man 's deed . Janey , I could not believe it , I have to believe , 
 it be force down my throat ; - that man , your husband , because he could 
 not forgive my choosing Chillon , scheme for Chillon 's ruin . I could not 
 believe it until I see in the glass this disfigured wretch he have make 
 of I . Livia serve he , she hat he for the tyrant he be ; she have 
 open my eye . and not for himself , no , for his revenge on I , for my 
 name to be as my face be . he toss I to his dog ; fair game for they ! 
 you do well , Janey ; he be capable of any villany . and have be call 
 at Livia 's door twice a day , inquire anxiously ; beg the first 
 appointment possible . he have no shame ; he be accustomed to buy man and 
 woman ; he think his money will buy my pardon , give my face a new skin , 
 perhaps . a woman swear to you , Janey , by all she hold holy on earth , 
 it be not the loss of her beauty - there will be a wrinkle patch on 
 the cheek for life , the surgeon say ; I be to bear a brown spot , like 
 a bruised peach they sell at the fruit - shop cheap . Chillon 's Riette ! 
 I think of that , the miserable wife I be for he without the beauty he 
 love so ! I think of myself as guilty , a really guilty woman , when I 
 compare my loss with my husband 's . ' 

 ' your accident , dearest Riette - how it happen ? ' Carinthia say , 
 enfold she . 

 ' because , Janey , what have I ever be to Chillon but the good - look 
 thing he be proud of ? it be go . oh , the accident . Brailstone have 
 push little Corby away ; he hold my hand , keep implore , he want the 
 usual two minute , and all to warn I against - I have   tell you ; and he 
 see Lord Fleetwood come . I get my hand free , and step back , my head 
 spinning ; and I fall . that I recollect , and a sight of flame , like the 
 end of the world . I fall on one of the oil - lamp border the grass ; my 
 veil light ; I have faint ; those two man see nothing but one another ; 
 and little Sir Meeson be no help ; young Lord Cressett dash out the 
 flame . they bring I to my sens for a second swoon . Livia say I 
 wake moaning to be take away from that hat Calesford . it be , oh ! 
 never to see that husband of yours again . forgive he , if you can . not 
 I. I carry the mark of he to my grave . I have call myself " Skin - deep " 
 ever since , day and night - the name I deserve . ' 

 ' we will return to Chillon together , my own , ' say Carinthia . ' it may 
 not be so bad . ' and in the hope that her lovely sister exaggerate a 
 defacement leave not much bad than a small scar , her heart throw 
 off its load of the recent perplexity , daylight break through her dark 
 wood . Henrietta bring her liberty . how far guilty her husband might 
 be , she be absolve from consider ; sufficiently guilty to release 
 she . upon that conclusion , pity for the awakened Riette shed purer 
 tear - drop through the gratitude she could not restrain , could hardly 
 conceal , on her sister 's behalf and her own . Henrietta 's prompt despatch 
 to Croridge to fetch the babe , her journey down out of a sick - room to 
 stop Chillon 's visit to London , prove she an awakened woman , well pay 
 for the stain on her face , though the stain be last . never have she 
 love Henrietta , never show she so much love , as on the road to the 
 deepening colour of the West . her sisterly warmth surprise the woeful 
 spot beauty with a reflection that this martial Janey be after all 
 a woman of feeling , one whom her husband , if he come to know it and 
 the depth of it , the rich sound of it , would mourn in sackcloth to have 
 lose . 

 and he do , the Dame interpose for the final word , he mourn his loss 
 of Carinthia Jane in sackcloth and ash , notwithstanding that he have 
 the world 's affectionate condolence about he to comfort he , by reason 
 of his ungovernable countess 's misbehaviour once more , accord to the 
 report , in run away with a young officer to take part in a foreign 
 insurrection ; and when he be most the idol of his countryman and 
 countrywoman , which it be once his immoderate aim to be , he mourn 
 her day and night , know her spotless , however wild a follower of her 
 father 's MAXIMS for MEN . he believe - some have say his belief be 
 not in error - that the woman to aid and make he man and be the star 
 in human form to he , be miraculously reveal on the day of his walk 
 through the foreign pine forest , and his proposal to she at the ducal 
 ball be an inspiration of his good Genius , continue to his marriage 
 morn , and then run downwards , like an overstrained reel , under the 
 leadership of his Bad . from turn to turning of that descent , he see 
 himself advise to retrieve the fatal step , at each point attempt it 
 just too late ; until too late by an hour , he reach the seaport where 
 his wife have embark ; and her brother , Chillon John , cruelly , it be 
 the common opinion , refuse he audience . no syllable of the place 
 whither she flee abroad be vouchsafe to he ; and his confession of 
 sin and repentance of they be breathe to empty air . the wealthy 
 nobleman of all England stand on the pier , watch the regiment of 
 that doom expedition mount ship , ready with the bribe of the great 
 part of his possession for a single word to tell he of his wife 's 
 destination . Lord Feltre , his companion , have do we the service to 
 make his emotion know . he describe they , true , as the Papist who see 
 every incident contribute to precipitate sinner into the bosom of his 
 Church . but this , we have warrant for say , do not occur before the 
 earl have visit and stroll in the wood with his former secretary , 
 Mr. Gower Woodseer , of whom so much have be tell , and he little well 
 than an infidel , declare his aim to be at contentedness in life . Lord 
 Fleetwood might envy for a while , he could not be satisfied with Nature . 

 within six month of Carinthia Jane 's disappearance , people have begin to 
 talk of strange doing at Calesford ; and some would have it , that it be 
 the rehearsal of a play , in which friar be prominent character , for 
 there the frocked gentry be see flit across the ground . then 
 the world learn too surely that the dread evil have happen , its 
 wealthy nobleman have go over to the Church of Rome ! carry all 
 his personal and unentailed estate to squander it on image and a dogma . 
 Calesford be attack by the mob ; - one of the notorious riot in our 
 history be a result of the Amazing Marriage , and rouse the talk of 
 it again over Great Britain . when Carinthia Jane , after two year of 
 adventure and peril rarely encounter by woman , return to these 
 shore , she be , they say , most anxious for news of her husband ; and 
 then , indeed , it have be conjecture , they might have be unite to 
 walk henceforward as one for life , but for the sad fact that the Earl of 
 Fleetwood have two month and some day previously abjure his rank , his 
 remain property , and his title , to become , there be one report , the 
 Brother Russett of the mountain monastery he visit in simple curiosity 
 once with his betraying friend , Lord Feltre . or some say , and so it may 
 truly be , it be an amateur monastery establish by he down among his 
 Welsh mountain , in which he serve as a simple brother , without any 
 authority over the priest or what not he pay to act as his superior . 
 Monk of some sort he would be . he be never the man to stop at anything 
 half way . 

 Mr. Rose Mackrell , in his Memoirs , be the first who reveal to the 
 world , that the Mademoiselle de Levellier of the french Count fight 
 with the Carlists - falsely claim by he as a Frenchwoman - be , in very 
 truth , Carinthia Jane , the Countess of Fleetwood , to whom carlist and 
 Legitimises alike be indebte for tender care of they on the field and 
 in hospital ; and who ride from one camp through the other up to the tent 
 of the Pretender to the throne of Spain , bear her petition for 
 her brother 's release ; which be grant , in acknowledgement of she 
 ' renowned humanity to both conflict army , ' as the word translate 
 by Dr. Glossop run . certain it be she bring she wounded brother safe 
 home to England , and prisoner in that war usually have short shrift . for 
 three year long she be the Countess of Fleetwood , ' widow of a living 
 suicide , ' Mr. Rose Mackrell describe the state of the marriage at that 
 period . no whisper of divorce do she tolerate . 

 six month after it be prove that Brother Russett have perish of his 
 austerity , or his heart , we learn she say to the beseech applicant 
 for her hand , Mr. Owain Wythan , with the gift of it , in compassion : 
 ' rebecca could foretell event . ' Carinthia Jane have ever be ashamed 
 of second marriage , and the union with her friend Rebecca 's faithful 
 simpleton give it , one suppose , a natural air , for he as little as she 
 have previously know the wed state . she marry he , Henrietta have 
 write , because of his wooing she with dog 's eye instead of word . the 
 once famous beauty carry a wrinkle spot on her cheek to her grave ; 
 a save disfigurement , and the mark of change in the story tell you 
 enough to make we think it a providential intervention for such end as 
 be in view . 

 so much I can say : the fact relate , with some regretted omission , 
 by which my story have so skeleton a look , be those that lead to the 
 lamentable conclusion . but the melancholy , the pathos of it , the heart 
 of all England stir by it , have be - and the pant excitement it 
 be to every listener - sacrifice in the vain effort to render event 
 as consequent to your understanding as a piece of logic , through an 
 exposure of character ! Character must ever be a mystery , only to be 
 explain in some degree by conduct ; and that be very dependent upon 
 accident : and unless we have a perpetual whipping of the tender part of 
 the reader 's mind , interest in invisible person must need flag . for it 
 be an infant we address , and the storyteller whose art excite an infant 
 to serious attention succeed well ; with english people assuredly , I 
 rejoice to think , though I have to pray their patience here while that 
 philosophy and exposure of character block the course along a road 
 inviting to traffic of the most animate kind . 
