THE ORDEAL of RICHARD FEVEREL 



 by George Meredith 


 CHAPTER I 

 some year ago a book be publish under the title of " The Pilgrim 's Scrip . " it consist of a selection of original aphorism by an anonymous gentleman , who in this bashful manner give a bruised heart to the world . 
 he make no pretension to novelty . " our new thought have thrill dead bosom , " he write ; by which avowal it may be see that youth have manifestly go from he , since he have cease to be jealous of the ancient . there be a half - sigh float through his page for those day of intellectual coxcombry , when idea come to we affect the embrace of virgin , and swear to we they be our alone , and no one else have they ever visit : and we believe they . 
 for an example of his idea of the sex he say : 
 " I expect that Woman will be the last thing civilize by Man . " 
 some excitement be produce in the bosom of lady by so monstrous a scorn of they . 
 one adventurous person betake herself to the Heralds ' College , and there ascertain that a Griffin between two Wheatsheaves , which stand on the title - page of the book , form the crest of Sir Austin Absworthy Bearne Feverel , Baronet , of Raynham Abbey , in a certain western county fold Thames : a man of wealth and honour , and a somewhat lamentable history . 
 the outline of the baronet 's story be by no mean new . he have a wife , and he have a friend . his marriage be for love ; his wife be a beauty ; his friend be a sort of poet . his wife have his whole heart , and his friend all his confidence . when he select Denzil Somers from among his college chum , it be not on account of any similarity of disposition between they , but from his intense worship of genius , which make he overlook the absence of principle in his associate for the sake of such brilliant promise . Denzil have a small patrimony to lead off with , and that he dissipate before he leave college ; thenceforth he be dependent upon his admirer , with whom he live , fill a nominal post of bailiff to the estate , and launch forth verse of some satiric and sentimental quality ; for be incline to vice , and occasionally , and in a quiet way , practise it , he be of course a sentimentalist and a satirist , entitle to lash the age and complain of human nature . his early poem , publish under the pseudonym of Diaper Sandoe , be so pure and bloodless in their love passage , and at the same time so bite in their moral tone , that his reputation be great among the virtuous , who form the large portion of the English book - buying public . election - season call he to ballad - poetry on behalf of the Tory party . Dialer possess undoubted fluency , but do tittle , though Sir Austin be ever expect much of he . 
 a languish , inexperienced woman , whose husband in mental and in moral stature be more than the ordinary height above she , and who , now that her first romantic admiration of his lofty bearing have wear off , and her fretful little refinement of taste and sentiment be not instinctively respond to , be throw into no wholesome household collision with a fluent man , fluent in prose and rhyme . Lady Feverel , when she first enter on her duty at Raynham , be jealous of her husband 's friend . by degree she tolerate he . in time he touch his guitar in her chamber , and they play Rizzio and Mary together . 
  " for I be not the first who find 
  the name of Mary fatal ! " 
 say a subsequent sentimental alliterative love - poem of Diaper 's . 
 such be the outline of the story . but the baronet could fill it up . he have open his soul to these two . he have be noble love to the one , and to the other perfect Friendship . he have bid they be brother and sister whom he love , and live a Golden Age with he at Raynham . in fact , he have be prodigal of the excellence of his nature , which it be not good to be , and , like Timon , he become bankrupt , and fall upon bitterness . 
 the faithless lady be of no particular family ; an orphan daughter of an admiral who educate she on his half - pay , and her conduct strike but at the man whose name she bore . 
 after five year of marriage , and twelve of friendship , Sir Austin be leave to his loneliness with nothing to ease his heart of love upon save a little baby boy in a cradle . he forgive the man : he put he aside as poor for his wrath . the woman he could not forgive ; she have sin every way . simple ingratitude to a benefactor be a pardonable transgression , for he be not one to recount and crush the culprit under the heap of his good deed . but she he have raise to be his equal , and he judge she as his equal . she have blacken the world 's fair aspect for he . 
 in the presence of that world , so different to he now , he preserve his wonte demeanor , and make his feature a flexible mask . Mrs. Doria Forey , his widow sister , say that Austin might have retire from his parliamentary career for a time , and give up gaiety and that kind of thing ; her opinion , found on observation of he in public and private , be , that the light thing who have take flight be but a feather on her brother 's Feverel - heart , and his ordinary course of life would be resume . there be time when common man can not bear the weight of just so much . Hippias Feverel , one of his brother , think he immensely improve by his misfortune , if the loss of such a person could be so designated ; and see that Hippias receive in consequence free quarter at Raynham , and possession of the wing of the Abbey she have inhabit , it be profitable to know his thought . if the baronet have give two or three blaze dinner in the great hall he would have deceive people generally , as he do his relative and intimate . he be too sick for that : fit only for passive acting . 
 the nursemaid wake in the night beheld a solitary figure darken a lamp above her little sleeping charge , and become so used to the sight as never to wake with a start . one night she be strangely arouse by a sound of sobbing . the baronet stand beside the cot in his long black cloak and travel cap . his finger shade a lamp , and redden against the fitful darkness that ever and anon go leap up the wall . she could hardly believe her sens to see the austere gentleman , dead silent , drop tear upon tear before her eye . she lie stone - still in a trance of terror and mournfulness , mechanically count the tear as they fall , one by one . the hidden face , the fall and flash of those heavy drop in the light of the lamp he hold , the upright , awful figure , agitated at regular interval like a piece of clockwork by the low murderous catch of his breath : it be so piteous to her poor human nature that her heart begin wildly palpitate . involuntarily the poor girl cry out to he , " oh , sir ! " and fall a - weeping . Sir Austin turn the lamp on her pillow , and harshly bid she go to sleep , stride from the room forthwith . he dismiss she with a purse the next day . 
 once , when he be seven year old , the little fellow wake up at night to see a lady bend over he . he talk of this the neat day , but it be treat as a dream ; until in the course of the day his uncle Algernon be drive home from Lobourne cricket - ground with a broken leg . then it be recollect that there be a family ghost ; and , though no member of the family believe in the ghost , none would have give up a circumstance that testify to its existence ; for to possess a ghost be a distinction above title . 
 Algernon Feverel lose his leg , and cease to be a gentleman in the Guards . of the other uncle of young Richard , Cuthbert , the sailor , perish in a spirited boat expedition against a slaving negro chief up the Niger . some of the gallant lieutenant 's trophy of war decorate the little boy 's play - shed at Raynham , and he bequeath his sword to Richard , whose hero he be . the diplomatist and beau , Vivian , end his fluttering from flower to flower by make an improper marriage , as be the fate of many a beau , and be strike out of the list of visitor . Algernon generally occupy the baronet 's disused town - house , a wretched being , divide his time between horse and card exercise : possess , it be say , of the absurd notion that a man who have lose his balance by lose his leg may regain it by stick to the bottle . at least , whenever he and his brother Hippias get together , they never fail to try whether one leg , or two , stand the bottle well . much of a puritan as Sir Austin be in his habit , he be too good a host , and too thorough a gentleman , to impose they upon his guest . the brother , and other relative , might do as they would while they do not disgrace the name , and then it be final : they must depart to behold his countenance no more . 
 Algernon Feverel be a simple man , who feel , subsequent to his misfortune , as he have perhaps dimly fancy it before , that his career lie in his leg , and be now irrevocably cut short . he teach the boy boxing , and shooting , and the art of fence , and superintend the direction of his animal vigour with a melancholy vivacity . the remain energy of Algernon 's mind be devoted to animadversion on swift bowling . he preach it over the county , struggle through laborious literary composition , address to sporting newspaper , on the Decline of Cricket . it be Algernon who witness and chronicle young Richard 's first fight , which be with young Tom Blaize of Belthorpe Farm , three year the boy 's senior . 
 Hippias Feverel be once think to be the genius of the family . it be his ill luck to have strong appetite and a weak stomach ; and , as one be not altogether fit for the battle of life who be engage in a perpetual contention with his dinner , Hippias forsook his prospect at the Bar , and , in the embrace of dyspepsia , compile his ponderous work on the Fairy Mythology of Europe . he have little to do with the Hope of Raynham beyond what he endure from his juvenile trick . 
 a venerable lady , know as Great - Aunt Grantley , who have money to bequeath to the heir , occupy with Hippias the background of the house and share her candle with he . these two be seldom see till the dinner hour , for which they be all day prepare , and probably all night remembering , for the Eighteenth Century be an admirable trencherman , and cast age aside while there be a dish on the table . 
 Mrs. Doris Foray be the eld of the three sister of the baronet , a florid affable woman , with fine tooth , exceedingly fine light wavy hair , a Norman nose , and a reputation for understand man ; and that , with these practical creature , always mean the art of manage they . she have marry an expectant young son of a good family , who decease before the fulfilment of his prospect ; and , cast about in her mind the future chance of her little daughter and sole child , Clare , she mark down a probability . the far sight , the deep determination , the resolute perseverance of her sex , where a daughter be to be provide for and a man to be overthrow , instigate she to invite herself to Raynham , where , with that daughter , she fix herself . 
 the other two Feverel lady be the wife of Colonel Wentworth and the widow of Mr. Justice Harley : and the only thing remarkable about they be that they be mother of son of some distinction . 
 Austin Wentworth 's story be of that wretched character which to be comprehend , that justice should be deal he , must be tell out and openly ; which no one dare now do . 
 for a fault in early youth , redeem by he nobly , accord to his light , he be condemn to undergo the world 's harsh judgment : not for the fault for its atonement . 
 " marry his mother 's housemaid , " whisper Mrs. Doria , with a ghastly look , and a shudder at young man of republican sentiment , which he be repute to entertain . " ' the compensation for injustice , ' say the ' Pilgrim 's scrip , ' be , that in that dark Ordeal we gather the worthy around we . " 
 and the baronet 's fair friend , Lady Blandish , and some few true man and woman , hold Austin Wentworth high . 
 he do not live with his wife ; and Sir Austin , whose mind be bent on the future of our specie , reproach he with be barren to posterity , while knave be propagate . 
 the principal characteristic of the second nephew , Adrian Harley , be his sagacity . he be essentially the wise youth , both in counsel and in action . 
 " in action , " the " Pilgrim 's Scrip " observe , " wisdom go by majority . " 
 Adrian have an instinct for the majority , and , as the world invariably find he enlisted in its rank , his appellation of wise youth be acquiesce in without irony . 
 the wise youth , then , have the world with he , but no friend . nor do he wish for those troublesome appendage of success . he cause himself to be require by people who could serve he ; fear by such as could injure . not that he go out of the way to secure his end , or risk the expense of a plot . he do the work as easily as he eat his daily bread . Adrian be an epicurean ; one whom Epicurus would have scourge out of his garden , certainly : an epicurean of our modern notion . to satisfy his appetite without rashly stake his character , be the wise youth 's problem for life . he have no intimate except Gibbon and Horace , and the society of these fine aristocrat of literature help he to accept humanity as it have be , and be ; a supreme ironic procession , with laughter of Gods in the background . why not laughter of mortal also ? Adrian have his laugh in his comfortable corner . he possess peculiar attribute of a heathen God . he be a disposer of man : he be polished , luxurious , and happy at their cost . he live in eminent self - content , as one lie on soft cloud , lapt in sunshine . nor Jove , nor Apollo , cast eye upon the maid of earth with cooler fire of selection , or pursue they in the covert with more sacred impunity . and he enjoy his reputation for virtue as something additional . steal fruit be say to be sweet ; undeserved reward be exquisite . 
 the good of it be , that Adrian make no pretence . he do not solicit the favourable judgment of the world . nature and he attempt no other concealment than the ordinary mask man wear . and yet the world would proclaim he moral , as well as wise , and the pleasing converse every way of his disgrace cousin Austin . 
 in a word , Adrian Harley have master his philosophy at the early age of one - and - twenty . many would be glad to say the same at that age twice - tell : they carry in their breast a burden with which Adrian 's be not load . Mrs. Doria be nearly right about his heart . a singular mishap   at his birth , possibly , or before it   have unseat that organ , and shake it down to his stomach , where it be a much light , nay , an inspire weight , and encourage he merrily onward . throne there it look on little that do not arrive to gratify it . already that region be a trifle prominent in the person of the wise youth , and carry , as it be , the flag of his philosophical tenet in front of he . he be charming after dinner , with man or with woman : delightfully sarcastic : perhaps a little too unscrupulous in his moral tone , but that his moral reputation belie he , and it must be set down to generosity of disposition . 
 such be Adrian Harley , another of Sir Austin 's intellectual favourite , choose from mankind to superintend the education of his son at Raynham . Adrian have be destine for the Church . he do not enter into order . he and the baronet have a conference together one day , and from that time Adrian become a fixture in the Abbey . his father die in his promising son 's college term , bequeath he nothing but his legal complexion , and Adrian become stipendiary officer in his uncle 's household . 
 a playfellow of Richard 's occasionally , and the only comrade of his age that he ever see , be Master Ripton Thompson , the son of Sir Austin 's solicitor , a boy without a character . 
 a comrade of some description be necessary , for Richard be neither to go to school nor to college . Sir Austin consider that the school be corrupt , and maintain that young lad might by parental vigilance be keep pretty secure from the Serpent until Eve side with he : a period that might be defer , he say . he have a system of education for his son . how it work we shall see . 




 CHAPTER II 

 October , shine royally on Richard 's fourteenth birthday . the brown beechwood and golden birch glow to a brilliant sun . bank of moveless cloud hang about the horizon , mound to the west , where sleep the wind . promise of a great day for Raynham , as it prove to be , though not in the manner mark out . 
 already archery - booth and cricketing - tent be rise on the low ground towards the river , whither the lad of Bursley and Lobourne , in boat and in cart , shout for a day of ale and honour , jogged merrily to match themselves anew , and pluck at the lining laurel from each other 's brow , line manly Britons . the whole park be begin to be astir and resound with holiday cry . Sir Austin Feverel , a thorough good Tory , be no game - preserver , and could be popular whenever he choose , which Sir Males Papworth , on the other side of the river , a fast - handed Whig and terror to poacher , never could be . half the village of Lobourne be see troop through the avenue of the park . fiddler and gipsy clamour at the gate for admission : white smock , and slate , surmount by hat of serious brim , and now and then a scarlet cloak , smacking of the old country , dot the grassy sweep to the level . 
 and all the time the star of these festivity be recede far and far , and eclipse himself with his reluctant serf Ripton , who keep ask what they be to do and where they be go , and how late it be in the day , and suggest that the lad of Lobourne would be call out for they , and Sir Austin require their presence , without get any attention pay to his misery or remonstrance . for Richard have be request by his father to submit to medical examination like a boor enlisting for a soldier , and he be in great wrath . 
 he be fly as though he would have fly from the shameful thought of what have be ask of he . by - and - by he communicate his sentiment to Ripton , who say they be those of a girl : an offensive remark , remember which , Richard , after they have borrow a couple of gun at the bailiff 's farm , and Ripton have fire badly , call his friend a fool . 
 feel that circumstance be make he look wonderfully like one , Ripton lift his head and retort defiantly , " I be not ! " 
 this angry contradiction , so very uncalled for , annoyed Richard , who be still smart at the loss of the bird , owe to Ripton 's bad shot , and be really the injure party . he , therefore bestow the abusive epithet on Ripton anew , and with increase of emphasis . 
 " you shall not   call I so , then , whether I be or not , " say Ripton , and suck his lip . 
 this be become personal . Richard send up his brow , and star at his defier an instant . he then inform he that he certainly should call he so , and would not object to call he so twenty time . 
 " do it , and see ! " return Ripton , rock on his foot , and breathe quick . 
 with a gravity of which only boy and other barbarian be capable , Richard go through the entire number , stress the epithet to increase the defiance and avoid monotony , as he progress , while Ripton bob his head every time in assent , as it be , to his comrade 's accuracy , and as a record for his profound humiliation . the dog they have with they gaze at the extraordinary performance with interrogating wag of the tail . 
 twenty time , duly and deliberately , Richard repeat the obnoxious word . 
 at the twentieth solemn iteration of Ripton 's capital shortcoming , Ripton deliver a smart back - hander on Richard 's mouth , and square precipitately ; perhaps sorry when the deed be do , for he be a kind - hearted lad , and as Richard simply bow in acknowledgment of the blow he think he have go too far . he do not know the young gentleman he be deal with . Richard be extremely cool . 
 " shall we fight here ? " he say . 
 " anywhere you like , " reply Ripton . 
 " a little more into the wood , I think . we may be interrupt . " and Richard lead the way with a courteous reserve that somewhat chill Ripton 's ardour for the contest . on the skirt of the wood , Richard throw off his jacket and waistcoat , and , quite collect , wait for Ripton to do the same . the latter boy be flushed and restless ; old and broad , but not so tight - limbed and well - set . the Gods , sole witness of their battle , bet dead against he . Richard have mount the white cockade of the Feverels , and there be a look in he that ask for tough work to extinguish . his brow , slightly line upward at the temple , converge to a knot about the well - set straight nose ; his full grey eye , open nostril , and plant foot , and a gentlemanly air of calm and alertness , form a spirited picture of a young combatant . as for Ripton , he be all abroad , and fight in school - boy style that be , he rush at the foe head foremost , and strike like a windmill . he be a lumpy boy . when he do hit , he make himself feel ; but he be at the mercy of science . to see he come dash in , blink and puff and whirl his arm abroad while the felling blow go straight between they , you perceive that he be fight a fight of desperation , and know it . for the dreaded alternative glare he in the face that , if he yield , he must look like what he have be twenty time calumniously call ; and he would die rather than yield , and swing his windmill till he drop . poor boy ! he drop frequently . the gallant fellow fight for appearance , and down he go . the Gods favour one of two party . Prince Turnus be a noble youth ; but he have not Pallas at his elbow . Ripton be a capital boy ; he have no science . he could not prove he be not a fool ! when one come to think of it , Ripton do choose the only possible way , and we should all of we have considerable difficulty in prove the negative by any other . Ripton come on the unerre fist again and again ; and if it be true , as he say in short colloquial gasp , that he require as much beat as an egg to be beat thoroughly , a fortunate interruption alone save our friend from resemble that substance . the boy hear summon voice , and beheld Mr. Morton of Poer Hall and Austin Wentworth step towards they . 
 a truce be sound , jacket be catch up , gun shoulder , and off they trot in concert through the depth of the wood , not stop till that and half - a - dozen field and a larch plantation be well behind they . 
 when they halt to take breath , there be a mutual study of face . Ripton 's be much discolour , and look fiercer with its natural war - paint than the boy feel . nevertheless , he square up dauntlessly on the new ground , and Richard , whose wrath be appease , could not refrain from ask he whether he have not really have enough . 
 " never ! " shout the noble enemy . 
 " well , look here , " say Richard , appeal to common sense , " I be tired of knock you down . I will say you be not a fool , if you will give I your hand . " 
 Ripton demur an instant to consult with honour , who bid he catch at his chance . 
 he hold out his hand . " there ! " and the boy grasp hand and be fast friend . Ripton have gain his point , and Richard decidedly have the good of it . so , they be on equal ground . both , could claim a victory , which be all the well for their friendship . 
 Ripton wash his face and comfort his nose at a brook , and be now ready to follow his friend wherever he choose to lead . they continue to beat about for bird . the bird on the Raynham estate be find singularly cunning , and repeatedly elude the aim of these prime shot , so they push their expedition into the land of their neighbor , in search of a stupider race , happily oblivious of the law and condition of trespass ; unconscious , too , that they be poach on the demesne of the notorious Farmer Blaize , the free - trade farmer under the shield of the Papworths , no worshipper of the Griffin between two Wheatsheaves ; destine to be much ally with Richard 's fortune from begin to end . Farmer Blaize hat poacher , and , especially young chap poach , who do it mostly from impudence . he hear the audacious shot pop right and leave , and go forth to have a glimpse at the intruder , and observe their size , swear he would teach my gentleman a thing , lord or no lord . 
 Richard have bring down a beautiful cock - pheasant , and be exult over it , when the farmer 's portentous figure burst upon they , crack an avenge horsewhip . his salute be ironical . 
 " havin' good sport , gentleman , be ye ? " 
 " just bag a splendid bird ! " radiant Richard inform he . 
 " oh ! " Farmer Blaize give an admonitory flick of the whip . 
 " just let I clap eye on't , then . " 
 " say , please , " interpose Ripton , who be not blind to doubtful aspect . 
 Farmer Blaize throw up his chin , and grin grimly . 
 " please to you , sir ? why , my chap , you look as if ye do not   much mind what come t'yer nose , I reckon . you look an old poacher , you do . tall ye what ' tis ' ! " he change his banter to business , " that bird 's mine ! now you jest hand he over , and sheer off , you dam young scoundrel ! I know ye ! " and he become exceedingly opprobrious , and utter contempt of the name of Feverel . 
 Richard open his eye . 
 " if you want to be horsewhip , you will stay where y'are ! " continue the farmer . " Giles Blaize never stand nonsense ! " 
 " then we will stay , " quoth Richard . 
 " good ! so be't ! if you will have't , have't , my man ! " 
 as a preparatory measure , Farmer Blaize seize a wing of the bird , on which both boy fling themselves desperately , and secure it minus the pinion . 
 " that be your game , " cry the farmer . " here be a taste of horsewhip for ye . I never stand nonsense ! " and sweetch go the mighty whip , well sway . the boy try to close with he . he keep his distance and lash without mercy . black blood be make by Farmer Blaize that day ! the boy wriggle , in spite of themselves . it be like a relentless serpent coiling , and bite , and sting their young vein to madness . probably they feel the disgrace of the contortion they be make to go through more than the pain , but the pain be fierce , for the farmer lay about from a practised arm , and do not consider that he have do enough till he be well breathe and his ruddy jowl inflame . he pause , to receive the remainder of the cock - pheasant in his face . 
 " take your beastly bird , " cry Richard . 
 " Money , my lad , and interest , " roar the farmer , lash out again . 
 shameful as it be to retreat , there be but that course open to they . they decide to surrender the field . 
 " look ! you big brute , " Richard shake his gun , hoarse with passion , " I would have shoot you , if I have be load . mind if I come across you when I be load , you coward , I will fire ! " the un - english nature of this threat exasperate Farmer Blaize , and he press the pursuit in time to bestow a few farewell stripe as they be escape tight - breeched into neutral territory . at the hedge they parley a minute , the farmer to inquire if they have have a mortal good tanning and be satisfied , for when they want a further instalment of the same they be to come for it to Belthorpe Farm , and there it be in pickle : the boy meantime explode in menace and threat of vengeance , on which the farmer contemptuously turn his back . Ripton have already stock an armful of flint for the enjoyment of a little skirmishing . Richard , however , knock they all out , say , " no ! gentleman do not   fle stone ; leave that to the blackguard . " 
 " just one shy at he ! " plead Ripton , with his eye on Farmer Blaize 's broad mark , and his whole mind drunken with a sudden revelation of the advantage of light troop in opposition to heavy . 
 " no , " say Richard , imperatively , " no stone , " and march briskly away . Ripton follow with a sigh . his leader 's magnanimity be wholly beyond he . a good spanking mark at the farmer would have relieve Master Ripton ; it would have do nothing to console Richard Feverel for the ignominy he have be compel to submit to . Ripton be familiar with the rod , a monster much despoiled of his terror by intimacy . birch - fever be past with this boy . the horrible sense of shame , self - loathing , universal hatred , impotent vengeance , as if the spirit be steep in abysmal blackness , which come upon a courageous and sensitive youth condemn for the first time to taste this piece of fleshly bitterness , and suffer what he feel be a defilement , Ripton have weather and forget . he be seasoned wood , and take the world pretty wisely ; not reckless of castigation , as some boy become , nor oversensitive as to dishonour , as his friend and comrade beside he be . 
 Richard 's blood be poison . he have the fever on he severely . he would not allow stone - flinging , because it be a habit of his to discountenance it . mere gentlemanly consideration have scarce shield Farmer Blaize , and certain very ungentlemanly scheme be come to ghastly head in the tumult of his brain ; reject solely from their glare impracticability even to his young intelligence . a sweeping and consummate vengeance for the indignity alone should satisfy he . something tremendous must be do ; and do without delay . at one moment he think of kill all the farmer 's cattle ; next of kill he ; challenge he to single combat with the arm , and accord to the fashion of gentleman . but the farmer be a coward ; he would refuse . then he , Richard Feverel , would stand by the farmer 's bedside , and rouse he ; rouse he to fight with powder and ball in his own chamber , in the cowardly midnight , where he might tremble , but dare not refuse . 
 " Lord ! " cry simple Ripton , while these hopeful plot be rag in his comrade 's brain , now sparkle for immediate execution , and anon lapsing disdainfully dark in their chance of fulfilment , " how I wish you would have let I notch he , Ricky ! I be a safe shot . I never miss . I should feel quite jolly if I have spank he once . we should have have the beat of he at that game . I say ! " and a sharp thought draw Ripton 's idea nearer home , " I wonder whether my nose be as bad as he say ! where can I see myself ? " 
 to these exclamation Richard be deaf , and he trudge steadily forward , face but one object . 
 after tear through innumerable hedge , leap fence , jump dyke , penetrate brambly copse , and get dirty , ragged , and tired , Ripton awake from his dream of Farmer Blaize and a blue nose to the vivid consciousness of hunger ; and this grow with the rapidity of light upon he , till in the course of another minute he be endure the extreme of famine , and venture to question his leader whither he be be conduct . Raynham be out of sight . they be a long way down the valley , mile from Lobourne , in a country of sour pool , yellow brook , rank pasturage , desolate heath . solitary cow be see ; the smoke of a mud cottage ; a cart pile with peat ; a donkey graze at leisure , oblivious of an unkind world ; geese by a horse - pond , gabble as in the first loneliness of creation ; uncooked thing that a famishing boy can not possibly care for , and must despise . Ripton be in despair . 
 " where be you go to ? " he inquire with a voice of the last time of ask , and halt resolutely . 
 Richard now break his silence to reply , " anywhere . " 
 " anywhere ! " Ripton take up the moody word . " but be not   you awfully hungry ? " he gasp vehemently , in a way that show the total emptiness of his stomach . 
 " no , " be Richard 's brief response . 
 " not hungry ! " Ripton 's amazement lend he increase vehemence . " why , you have not   have anything to eat since breakfast ! not hungry ? I declare I be starve . I feel such a gnawing I could eat dry bread and cheese ! " 
 Richard sneer : not for reason that would have actuate a similar demonstration of the philosopher . 
 " come , " cry Ripton , " at all event , tell we where you be go to stop . " 
 Richard face about to make a querulous retort . the injured and hapless visage that meet his eye disarm he . the lad 's nose , though not exactly of the dread hue , be really become discolour . to upbraid he would be cruel . Richard lift his head , survey the position , and exclaim " here ! " drop down on a withered bank , leave Ripton to contemplate he as a puzzle whose every new move be a bad perplexity . 




 CHAPTER III 

 among boy there be law of honour and chivalrous code , not write or formally teach , but intuitively understand by all , and invariably act upon by the loyal and the true . the race be not nearly civilized , we must remember . thus , not to follow your leader whithersoever he may think proper to lead ; to back out of an expedition because the end of it frown dubious , and the present fruit of it be discomfort ; to quit a comrade on the road , and return home without he : these be trick which no boy of spirit would be guilty of , let he come to any description of mortal grief in consequence . well so than have his own conscience denounce he sneak . some boy who behave boldly enough be not trouble by this conscience , and the eye and the lip of their fellow have to supply the deficiency . they do it with just as haunting , and even more horrible pertinacity , than the inner voice , and the result , if the probation be not very severe and searching , be the same . the leader can rely on the faithfulness of his host : the comrade be swear to serve . Master Ripton Thompson be naturally loyal . the idea of turn off and forsake his friend never once cross his mind , though his condition be desperate , and his friend 's behaviour that of a Bedlamite . he announce several time impatiently that they would be too late for dinner . his friend do not budge . Dinner seem nothing to he . there he lie plucking grass , and pat the old dog 's nose , as if incapable of conceive what a thing hunger be . Ripton take half - a - dozen turn up and down , and at last fling himself down beside the taciturn boy , accept his fate . 
 now , the chance that work for certain purpose send a smart shower from the sink sun , and the wet send two stranger for shelter in the lane behind the hedge where the boy recline . one be a travel tinker , who light a pipe and spread a tawny umbrella . the other be a burly young countryman , pipeless and tentless . they salute with a nod , and begin recount for each other 's benefit the daylong - doing of the weather , as it have affect their individual experience and follow their prophecy . both have anticipate and foretold a bit of rain before night , and therefore both welcome the wet with satisfaction . a monotonous betweenwhile kind of talk they keep drone , in harmony with the still hum of the air . from the weather theme they fall upon the blessing of tobacco ; how it be the poor man 's friend , his company , his consolation , his comfort , his refuge at night , his first thought in the morning . 
 " well than a wife ! " chuckle the tinker . " no curtain - lecturin ' with a pipe . your pipe an't   a shrew . " 
 " that be it ! " the other chime in . " your pipe doan't   mak ' ye out wi ' all the cash Saturday evenin ' . " 
 " take one , " say the tinker , in the enthusiasm of the moment , hand a grimy short clay . speed - the - Plough fill from the tinker 's pouch , and continue his praise . 
 " Penny a day , and there y'are , prim ! well than a wife ? ha , ha ! " 
 " and you can get rid of it , if ye want for to , and when ye want , " add tinker . 
 " so ye can ! " speed - the - Plough take he up . " and ye doan't   want for to . leastway , t'other case . I mean pipe . " 
 " and , " continued tinker , comprehend he perfectly , " it do not   bring repentance after it . " 
 " not nohow , master , it doan't ! and " speed - the - Plough cock his eye " it doan't   eat up half the victual , your pipe doan't . " 
 here the honest yeoman gesticulate his keen sense of a clincher , which the tinker acknowledge ; and have , so to speak , seal up the subject by say the good thing that could be say , the two smoke for some time in silence to the drip and patter of the shower . 
 Ripton solace his wretchedness by watch they through the briar hedge . he see the tinker stroke a white cat , and appeal to she , every now and then , as his missus , for an opinion or a confirmation ; and he think that a curious sight . speed - the - Plough be stretch at full length , with his boot in the rain , and his head amidst the tinker 's pot , smoking , profoundly contemplative . the minute seem to be take up alternately by the grey puff from their mouth . 
 it be the tinker who renew the colloquy . say he , " Times be bad ! " 
 his companion assent , " sure - ly ! " 
 " but it somehow come round right , " resume the tinker . " why , look here . where be the good o ' moping ? I see it all come round right and tight . now I travel about . I have   get my beat . ' casion call I t'other day to Newcastle ! eh ? " 
 " coal ! " ejaculate Speed - the - Plough sonorously . 
 " coal ! " echo the tinker . " you ask what I go there for , mayhap ? never you mind . one see a mort o ' life in my trade . not for coal it be not . and I do not   carry them there , neither . anyhow , I come back . London 's my mark . say I , I will see a bit o ' the sea , and step aboard a collier . we be as nigh wreck as the prophet Paul . " 
 " a who be he ? " the other wish to know . 
 " read your Bible , " say the tinker . " we pitch and toss ' tain't   that game at sea ' tis on land , I can tell ye ! I think , down we be a - going say your prayer , Bob Tiles ! that be a night , to be sure ! but God be above the devil , and here I be , ye see . " speed - the - Plough lurch round on his elbow and regard he indifferently . " d'ye call that doctrin ' ? he bean't   al'ays , or I shoo'n't   be scrapin ' my heel wi ' nothing to do , and , what be warse , nothing to eat . why , look heer . luck 's luck , and bad luck be the con - trary . Varmer Bollop , t'other day , have 's rick burn down . next night his gran'ry 's burn . what do he tak ' and go and do ? he take and go and hang unsel ' , and turn we out of his employ . God warn't   above the devil then , I think , or I can not   make out the reckonin ' . " 
 the tinker clear his throat , and say it be a bad case . 
 " and a darn'd bad case . I will tak ' my oath on't ! " cry Speed - the - Plough . " well , look heer ! Heer 's another darn'd bad case . I thresh for Varmer Blaize Blaize o ' Beltharpe afore I go to Varmer Bollop . Varmer Blaize miss pilkin . he swear our chap steal pilkin . ' twarn't   I steal them . what do he tak ' and go and do ? he take and tarn we off , I and another , neck and crop , to scuffle about and starve , for all he keer . God warn't   above the devil then , I think . not nohow , as I can see ! " 
 the tinker shake his head , and say that be a bad case also . 
 " and you can not   mend it , " add Speed - the - Plough . " it be bad , and there it be . but I will tell ye what , master . bad want payin ' for . " he nod and wink mysteriously . " bad have its wage as well 's honest work , I be thinkin ' . Varmer Bollop I do not   owe no grudge to : Varmer Blaize I do . and I shud like to stick a Lucifer in his rick some dry windy night . " speed - the - Plough screw up an eye villainously . " he want hittin ' in the wind , jest where the pocket be , master , do Varmer Blaize , and he will cry out ' o Lor ' ! ' Varmer Blaize will . you will not   get the well o ' Varmer Blaize by no mean , as I make out , if ye doan't   hit into he jest there . " 
 the tinker send a rapid succession of white cloud from his mouth , and say that would be take the devil 's side of a bad case . speed - the - Plough observe energetically that , if Farmer Blaize be on the other , he should be on that side . 
 there be a young gentleman close by , who think with he . the hope of Raynham have lend a careless half - compel attention to the forego dialogue , wherein a common labourer and a travel tinker have propound and discuss one of the most ancient theory of transmundane dominion and influence on mundane affair . he now start to his foot , and come tear through the briar hedge , call out for one of they to direct they the near road to Bursley . the tinker be kindle preparation for his tea , under the tawny umbrella . a loaf be set forth , oh which Ripton 's eye , stick in the edge , fasten ravenously . speed - the - Plough volunteer information that Bursley be a good three mile from where they stand , and a good eight mile from Lobourne . 
 " I will give you half - a - crown for that loaf , my good fellow , " say Richard to the tinker . 
 " it be a bargain ; " quoth the tinker , " eh , missus ? " 
 his cat reply by hump she back at the dog . 
 the half - crown be toss down , and Ripton , who have just succeed in free his limb from the briar , prickly as a hedgehog , collar the loaf . 
 " those young squire be sharp - set , and no mistake , " say the tinker to his companion . " come ! we will to Bursley after them , and talk it out over a pot o ' beer . " speed - the - Plough be nothing loath , and in a short time they be follow the two lad on the road to Bursley , while a horizontal blaze shoot across the autumn and from the western edge of the rain - cloud . 




 CHAPTER IV 

 Search for the miss boy have be make everywhere over Raynham , and Sir Austin be in grievous discontent . none have see they save Austin Wentworth and Mr. Morton . the baronet sit construe their account of the flight of the lad when they be hail , and resolve it into an act of rebellion on the part of his son . at dinner he drink the young heir 's health in ominous silence . Adrian Harley stand up in his place to propose the health . his speech be a fine piece of rhetoric . he warm in it till , after the Ciceronic model , inanimate object be personify , and Richard 's table - napkin and vacant chair be invoke to follow the step of a peerless father , and uphold with his dignity the honour of the Feverels . Austin Wentworth , whom a soldier 's death compel to take his father 's place in support of the toast , be tame after such magniloquence . but the reply , the thank which young Richard should have deliver in person be not forthcoming . Adrian 's oratory have give but a momentary life to napkin and chair . the company of honour friend , and aunt and uncle , remotest cousin , be glad to disperse and seek amusement in music and tea . Sir Austin do his utmost to be hospitable cheerful , and request they to dance . if he have desire they to laugh he would have be obey , and in as hearty a manner . 
 " how triste ! " say Mrs. Doria Forey to Lobourne 's curate , as that most enamoured automaton go through his pace beside she with professional stiffness . 
 " one who do not suffer can hardly assent , " the curate answer , bask in her beam . 
 " ah , you be good ! " exclaim the lady . " look at my Clare . she will not dance on her cousin 's birthday with anyone but he . what be we to do to enliven these people ? " 
 " alas , madam ! you can not do for all what you do for one , " the curate sigh , and wherever she wander in discourse , draw she back with silken string to gaze on his enamoured soul . 
 he be the only gratified stranger present . the other have design on the young heir . Lady Attenbury of Longford House have bring her highly - polished speciman of market - ware , the Lady Juliana Jaye , for a first introduction to he , think he have arrive at an age to estimate and pine for her black eye and pretty pert mouth . the Lady Juliana have to pair off with a dapper Papworth , and her mama be subject to the gallantry of Sir Miles , who talk land and steam - engine to she till she be sick , and have to be impertinent in self - defence . Lady Blandish , the delightful widow , sit apart with Adrian , and enjoy his sarcasm on the company . by ten at night the poor show end , and the room be dark , dark as the prognostic multitudinously hint by the disappointed and chilled guest concern the probable future of the hope of Raynham . Little Clare kiss her mama , curtsy to the linger curate , and go to bed like a very good girl . immediately the maid have depart , little Clare deliberately exchange night , attire for that of day . she be note as an obedient child . her light be allow to burn in her room for half - an - hour , to counteract her fear of the dark . she take the light , and steal on tiptoe to Richard 's room . no Richard be there . she peep in far and far . a trifling agitation of the curtain shoot she back through the door and along the passage to her own bedchamber with extreme expedition . she be not much alarmed , but feel guilty she be on her guard . in a short time she be prowl about the passage again . Richard have slight and offend the little lady , and be to be ask whether he do not repent such conduct toward his cousin ; not to be ask whether he have forget to receive his birthday kiss from she ; for , if he do not choose to remember that , Miss Clare would never remind he of it , and to - night should be his last chance of a reconciliation . thus she meditate , sit on a stair , and presently hear Richard 's voice below in the hall , shout for supper . 
 " Master Richard have return , " old Benson the butler toll out intelligence to Sir Austin . 
 " well ? " say the baronet . 
 " he complain of be hungry , " the butler hesitate , with a look of solemn disgust . 
 " let he eat . " 
 Heavy Benson hesitate still more as he announce that the boy have call for wine . it be an unprecedented thing . Sir Austin 's brow be portend an arch , but Adrian suggest that he want possibly to drink his birthday , and claret be concede . 
 the boy be in the vortex of a partridge - pie when Adrian stroll in to they . they have now change character . Richard be uproarious . he drink a health with every glass ; his cheek be flush and his eye brilliant . Ripton look very much like a rogue on the tremble of detection , but his honest hunger and the partridge - pie shield he awhile from Adrian 's scrutinize glance . Adrian see there be matter for study , if it be only on Master Ripton 's betraying nose , and sit down to hear and mark . 
 " good sport , gentleman , I trust to hear ? " he begin his quiet banter , and provoke a loud peal of laughter from Richard . 
 " ha , ha ! I say , Rip : ' havin' good sport , gentleman , be ye ? ' you remember the farmer ! your health , parson ! we have not   have our sport yet . we be go to have some first - rate sport . oh , well ! we have not   much show of bird . we shoot for pleasure , and return they to the proprietor . you be fond of game , parson ! Ripton be a dead shot in what Cousin Austin call the Kingdom of ' would - have - do ' and ' might - have - be . ' up go the bird , and cry Rip , ' I have   forget to load ! ' oh , ho ! Rip ! some more claret . do just leave that nose of yours alone . your health , Ripton Thompson ! the bird have not   the decency to wait for he , and so , parson , it be their fault , and not Rip 's , you have not   a dozen brace at your foot . what have you be do at home , Cousin Rady ? " 
 " Playing Hamlet , in the absence of the Prince of Denmark . the day without you , my dear boy , must be dull , you know . " 
  " ' he speak : can I trust what he say be sincere ? 
  there be an edge to his smile that cut much like a sneer . ' 
 " Sandoe 's poem ! you know the couplet , Mr. Rady . why should not   I quote Sandoe ? you know you like he , Rady . but , if you have   miss I , I be sorry . Rip and I have have a beautiful day . we have   make new acquaintance . we have   see the world . I be the monkey that have see the world , and I be go to tell you all about it . first , there be a gentleman who take a rifle for a fowling - piece . next , there be a farmer who warn everybody , gentleman and beggar , off his premise . next , there be a tinker and a ploughman , who think that God be always fight with the devil which shall command the kingdom of the earth . the tinker 's for God , and the ploughman " 
 " I will drink your health , Ricky , " say Adrian , interrupting . 
 " oh , I forgot , parson ; I mean no harm , Adrian . I be only tell what I have   hear . " 
 " no harm , my dear boy , " return Adrian . " I be perfectly aware that Zoroaster be not dead . you have be listen to a common creed . drink the fire - worshipper , if you will . " 
 " here be to Zoroaster , then ! " cry Richard . " I say , rippy ! we will drink the fire - worshipper to - night will not   we ? " 
 a fearful conspiratorial frown , that would not have disgrace Guido Fawkes , be dart back from the plastic feature of Master Ripton . 
 Richard give his lung loud play . 
 " why , what do you say about blaize , rippy ? do not   you say it be fun ? " 
 another hideous and silence frown be Ripton 's answer . Adrian match the innocent youth , and know that there be talk under the table . " see , " think he , " this boy have taste his first scraggy morsel of life today , and already he talk like an old stager , and have , if I mistake not , be act too . my respected chief , " he apostrophize Sir Austin , " combustible be only the more dangerous for compression . this boy will be ravenous for Earth when he be let loose , and very soon make his share of it look as foolish as yonder game - pie ! " a prophecy Adrian keep to himself . 
 Uncle Algernon shamble in to see his nephew before the supper be finish , and his more genial presence bring out a little of the plot . 
 " look here , uncle ! " say Richard . " would you let a churlish old brute of a farmer strike you without make he suffer for it ? " 
 " I fancy I should return the compliment , my lad , " reply his uncle . 
 " of course you would ! so would I. and he shall suffer for it . " the boy look savage , and his uncle pat he down . 
 " I have   box his son ; I will box he , " say Richard , shout for more wine . 
 " what , boy ! be it old Blaize have be put you up ! " 
 " never mind , uncle ! " the boy nod mysteriously . 
 ' look there ! ' adrian read on Ripton 's face , he say ' never mind , ' and let it out ! 
 " do we beat to - day , uncle ? " 
 " yes , boy ; and we would beat they any day they bowl fair . I would beat they on one leg . there be only Watkins and Featherdene among they worth a farthing . " 
 " we beat ! " cry Richard . " then we will have some more wine , and drink their health . " 
 the bell be rung ; wine order . presently come in heavy Benson , to say supply be cut off . one bottle , and no more . the Captain whistle : Adrian shrug . 
 the bottle , however , be procure by Adrian subsequently . he like study intoxicated urchin . 
 one subject be at Richard 's heart , about which he be reserve in the midst of his riot . too proud to inquire how his father have take his absence , he burn to hear whether he be in disgrace . he lead to it repeatedly , and it be constantly evade by Algernon and Adrian . at last , when the boy declare a desire to wish his father good - night , Adrian have to tell he that he be to go straight to bed from the supper - table . Young Richard 's face fall at that , and his gaiety forsook he . he march to his room without another word . 
 Adrian give Sir Austin an able version of his son 's behaviour and adventure ; dwell upon this sudden taciturnity when he hear of his father 's resolution not to see he . the wise youth see that his chief be mollify behind his moveless mask , and go to bed , and Horace , leave Sir Austin in his study . long hour the baronet sit alone . the house have not its usual influx of Feverels that day . Austin Wentworth be stay at Poer Hall , and have only come over for an hour . at midnight the house breathe sleep . Sir Austin put on his cloak and cap , and take the lamp to make his round . he apprehend nothing special , but with a mind never at rest he constitute himself the sentinel of Raynham . he pass the chamber where the Great - Aunt Grantley lay , who be to swell Richard 's fortune , and so perform her chief business on earth . by her door he murmur , " good creature ! you sleep with a sense of duty do , " and pace on , reflect , " she have not make money a demon of discord , " and bless she . he have his thought at Hippias 's somnolent door , and to they the world might have subscribe . 
 a monomaniac at large , watch over sane people in slumber ! think Adrian Harley , as he hear Sir Austin 's footfall , and truly that be a strange object to see . where be the fortress that have not one weak gate ? where the man who be sound at each particular angle ? ay , meditate the recumbent cynic , more or less mad be not every mother 's son ? favourable circumstance good air , good company , two or three good rule rigidly adhere to keep the world out of Bedlam . but , let the world fly into a passion , and be not Bedlam the safe abode for it ? 
 Sir Austin ascend the stair , and bent his step leisurely toward the chamber where his son be lie in the left wing of the Abbey . at the end of the gallery which lead to it he discover a dim light . doubt it an illusion , Sir Austin accelerate his pace . this wing have aforetime a bad character . notwithstanding what year have do to polish it into fair repute , the Raynham kitchen stick to tradition , and preserve certain story of ghost see there , that effectually blacken it in the susceptible mind of new house - maid and under - crook , whose fear would not allow the sinner to wash his sin . Sir Austin have hear of the tale circulate by his domestic underground . he cherish his own belief , but discourage theirs , and it be treason at Raynham to be catch traduce the left wing . as the baronet advance , the fact of a light burning be clear to he . a slight descent bring he into the passage , and he behold a poor human candle stand outside his son 's chamber . at the same moment a door close hastily . he enter Richard 's room . the boy be absent . the bed be unpressed : no clothe about : nothing to show that he have be there that night . Sir Austin feel vaguely apprehensive . have he go to my room to await I ? think the father 's heart . something like a tear quiver in his arid eye as he meditate and hop this might be so . his own sleeping - room face that of his son . he stride to it with a quick heart . it be empty . Alarm dislodge anger from his jealous heart , and dread of evil put a thousand question to he that be answer in air . after pace up and down his room he determine to go and ask the boy Thompson , as he call Ripton , what be know to he . 
 the chamber assign to Master Ripton Thompson be at the northern extremity of the passage , and overlook Lobourne and the valley to the West . the bed stand between the window and the door . six Austin find the door ajar , and the interior dark . to his surprise , the boy Thompson 's couch , as reveal by the ray of his lamp , be likewise vacant . he be turn back when he fancy he hear the sibilation of a whispering in the room . Sir Austin cloak the lamp and trod silently toward the window . the head of his son Richard and the boy Thompson be see crouch against the glass , hold excited converse together . Sir Austin listen , but he listen to a language of which he possess not the key . their talk be of fire , and of delay : of expected agrarian astonishment : of a farmer 's huge wrath : of violence exercise upon gentleman , and of vengeance : talk that the boy jerk out by fit , and that come as broken link of a chain impossible to connect . but they awake curiosity . the baronet condescend to play the spy upon his son . 
 over Lobourne and the valley lie black night and innumerable star . 
 " how jolly I feel ! " exclaim Ripton , inspire by claret ; and then , after a luxurious pause " I think that fellow have pocket his guinea , and cut his lucky . " 
 Richard allow a long minute to pass , during which the baronet wait anxiously for his voice , hardly recognize it when he hear its altered tone . 
 " if he have , I will go ; and I will do it myself . " 
 " you would ? " return Master Ripton . " well , I be hang ! I say , if you go to school , would not   you get into row ! perhaps he have not   find the place where the box be stick in . I think he funk it . I almost wish you have not   do it , upon my honour eh ? look there ! what be that ? that look like something . I say ! do you think we shall ever be find out ? " 
 Master Ripton intone this abrupt interrogation verb seriously . 
 " I do not   think about it , " say Richard , all his faculty bent on sign from Lobourne . 
 " well , but , " Ripton persist , ' suppose we be find out ? " 
 " if we be , I must pay for it . " 
 Sir Austin breathe the well for this reply . he be begin to gather a clue to the dialogue . his son be engage in a plot , and be , moreover , the leader of the plot . he listen for further enlightenment . 
 " what be the fellow 's name ? " inquire Ripton . 
 his companion answer , " Tom Bakewell . " 
 " I will tell you what , " continue Ripton . " you let it all clean out to your cousin and uncle at supper . how capital claret be with partridge - pie ! what a lot I eat ! do not   you see I frown ? " 
 the young sensualist be in an ecstasy of gratitude to his late refection , and the slight word recall he to it . Richard answer he : 
 " yes ; and feel your kick . it do not   matter . Rady 's safe , and uncle never blab . " 
 " well , my plan be to keep it close . you be never safe if you do not . I never drink much claret before , " Ripton be off again . " will not   I now , though ! claret 's my wine . you know , it may come out any day , and then we be do for , " he rather incongruously append . 
 Richard only take up the business - thread of his friend 's ramble chatter , and answer : 
 " you have   get nothing to do with it , if we be . " 
 " have not   I , though ! I do not   stick - in the box but I be an accomplice , that be clear . besides , " add Ripton , " do you think I should leave you to bear it all on your shoulder ? I be not   that sort of chap , Ricky , I can tell you . " 
 Sir Austin think more highly of the boy Thompson . still it look a detestable conspiracy , and the altered manner of his son impress he strangely . he be not the boy of yesterday . to Sir Austin it seem as if a gulf have suddenly open between they . the boy have embark , and be on the water of life in his own vessel . it be as vain to call he back as to attempt to erase what Time have write with the Judgment Blood ! this child , for whom he have pray nightly in such a fervour and humbleness to God , the danger be about he , the temptation thick on he , and the devil on board pilot . if a day have do so much , what would year do ? be prayer and all the watchfulness he have expend of no avail ? 
 a sensation of infinite melancholy overcome the poor gentleman a thought that he be fight with a fate in this beloved boy . 
 he be half disposed to arrest the two conspirator on the spot , and make they confess , and absolve themselves ; but it seem to he well to keep an unseen eye over his son : Sir Austin 's old system prevail . 
 Adrian characterize this system well , in say that Sir Austin wish to be providence to his son . 
 if immeasurable love be perfect wisdom , one human being might almost impersonate Providence to another . alas ! love , divine as it be , can do no more than lighten the house it inhabit must take its shape , sometimes intensify its narrowness can spiritualize , but not expel , the old lifelong lodger above - stair and below . 
 Sir Austin decide to continue quiescent . 
 the valley still lie black beneath the large autumnal star , and the exclamation of the boy be become fevere and impatient . by - and - by one insist that he have see a twinkle . the direction he give be out of their anticipation . again the twinkle be announce . both boy start to their foot . it be a twinkle in the right direction now . 
 " he be do it ! " cry Richard , in great heat . " now you may say old Blaize'll soon be old Blazes , Rip . I hope he be asleep . " 
 " I be sure he be snore ! look there ! he be alight fast enough . he be dry . he will burn . I say , " Ripton re - assume the serious intonation , " do you think they will ever suspect we ? " 
 " what if they do ? we must brunt it . " 
 " of course we will . but , I say ! I wish you have not   give they the scent , though . I like to look innocent . I can not   when I know people suspect I . Lord ! look there ! be not   it just begin to flare up ! " 
 the farmer 's ground be indeed gradually stand out in sombre shadow . 
 " I will fetch my telescope , " say Richard . Ripton , somehow not like to be leave alone , catch hold of he . 
 " no ; do not   go and lose the good of it . here , I will throw open the window , and we can see . " 
 the window be fling open , and the boy instantly stretch half their body out of it ; Ripton appear to devour the rise flame with his mouth : Richard with his eye . 
 opaque and statuesque stand the figure of the baronet behind they . the wind be low . dense mass of smoke hang amid the dart snake of fire , and a red malign light be on the neighbouring leafage . no figure could be see . apparently the flame have nothing to contend against , for they be make terrible stride into the darkness . 
 " oh ! " shout Richard , overcome by excitement , " if I have my telescope ! we must have it ! let I go and fetch it ! I will ! " 
 the boy struggle together , and Sir Austin step back . as he do so , a cry be hear in the passage . he hurry out , close the chamber , and come upon little Clare lie senseless along the door . 




 CHAPTER v 

 in the morning that follow this night , great gossip be interchange between Raynham and Lobourne . the village tell how Farmer Blaize , of Belthorpe Farm , have his Pick feloniously set fire to ; his stable have catch fire , himself have be all but roast alive in the attempt to rescue his cattle , of which number have perish in the flame . Raynham counterbalance arson with an authentic ghost see by Miss Clare in the left wing of the Abbey the ghost of a lady , dress in deep mourning , a scar on her forehead and a bloody handkerchief at her breast , frightful to behold ! and no wonder the child be frighten out of her wit , and lie in a desperate state await the arrival of the London doctor . it be add that the servant have all threaten to leave in a body , and that Sir Austin to appease they have promise to pull down the entire left wing , like a gentleman ; for no decent creature , say Lobourne , could consent to live in a haunted house . 
 Rumour for the nonce have a strong spice of truth than usual . poor little Clare lie ill , and the calamity that have befall Farmer Blaize , as regard his rick , be not much exaggerated . Sir Austin cause an account of it be give he at breakfast , and appear so scrupulously anxious to hear the exact extent of injury sustain by the farmer that heavy Benson go down to inspect the scene . Mr. Benson return , and , act under Adrian 's malicious advice , frame a formal report of the catastrophe , in which the farmer 's breech figure , and certain cool application to a part of the farmer 's person . Sir Austin peruse it without a smile . he take occasion to have it read out before the two boy , who listen very demurely , as to ordinary newspaper incident ; only when the report particularize the garment damage , and the unwonted distressing position Farmer Blaize be reduce to in his bed , indecorous fit of sneeze lay hold of Master Ripton Thompson , and Richard bite his lip and burst into loud laughter , Ripton join he , lose to consequence . 
 " I trust you feel for this poor man , " say Sir Austin to his son , somewhat sternly . he see no sign of feeling . 
 it be a difficult task for Sir Austin to keep his old countenance toward the hope of Raynham , know he the accomplice - incendiary , and believe the deed to have be unprovoked and wanton . but he must do so , he know , to let the boy have a fair trial against himself . be it say , moreover , that the baronet 's possession of his son 's secret flatter he . it allow he to act , and in a measure to feel , like providence ; enable he to observe and provide for the movement of creature in the dark . he therefore treat the boy as he commonly do , and Richard see no change in his father to make he think he be suspect . 
 the youngster 's game be not so easy against Adrian . Adrian do not shoot or fish . voluntarily he do nothing to work off the destructive nervous fluid , or whatever it may be , which be in man 's nature ; so that two culprit boy once in his power be not likely to taste the gentle hand of mercy ; and Richard and Ripton pay for many a trout and partridge spar . at every minute of the day Ripton be throw into sweat of suspicion that discovery be imminent , by some stray remark or message from Adrian . he be as a fish with the hook in his gill , mysteriously catch without have nibble ; and dive into what depth he would he be sensible of a summon force that compel he perpetually towards the gasp surface , which he seem inevitably approach when the dinner - bell sound . there the talk be all of Farmer Blaize . if it drop , Adrian revive it , and his caress way with Ripton be just such as a keen sportsman feel toward the creature that have own his skill , and be make its appearance for the world to acknowledge the same . Sir Austin see the manoeuvre , and admire Adrian 's shrewdness . but he have to check the young natural lawyer , for the effect of so much mask examination upon Richard be grow baneful . this fish also feel the hook in his gill , but this fish be more of a pike , and lie in different water , where there be old stump and black root to wind about , and defy alike strong pulling and delicate handling . in other word , Richard show symptom of a disposition to take refuge in lie . 
 " you know the ground , my dear boy , " Adrian observe to he . " tell I ; do you think it easy to get to the rick unperceive ? I hear they suspect one of the farmer 's turn - off hand . " 
 " I tell you I do not   know the ground , " Richard sullenly reply . 
 " not ? " Adrian counterfeit courteous astonishment . " I think Mr. Thompson say you be over there yesterday ? " 
 Ripton , glad to speak the truth , hurriedly assure Adrian that it be not he have say so . 
 " not ? you have good sport , gentleman , have not   you ? " 
 " oh , yes ! " mumble the wretched victim , redden as they remember , in Adrian 's slightly drawled rusticity of tone , Farmer Blaize 's first address to they . 
 " I suppose you be among the fire - worshipper last night , too ? " persist Adrian . " in some country , I hear , they manage their good sport at night - time , and beat up for game with torch . it must be a fine sight . after all , the country would be dull if we have not   a rip here and there to treat we to a little conflagration . " 
 " a rip ! " laugh Richard , to his friend 's disgust and alarm at his daring . " you do not   mean this Rip , do you ? " 
 " Mr. Thompson fire a rick ? I should as soon suspect you , my dear boy . you be aware , young gentleman , that it be rather a serious thing eh ? in this country , you know , the landlord have always be the pet of the Laws . by the way , " Adrian continue , as if diverge to another topic , " you meet two gentleman of the road in your exploration yesterday , Magians . now , if I be a magistrate of the county , like Sir Miles Papworth , my suspicion would light upon those gentleman . a tinker and a ploughman , I think you say , Mr. Thompson . not ? well , say two plowman . " 
 " more likely two tinker , " say Richard . 
 " oh ! if you wish to exclude the ploughman be he out of employ ? " 
 Ripton , with Adrian 's eye inveterately fix on he , stammer an affirmative . 
 " the tinker , or the ploughman ? " 
 " the ploughm " Ingenuous Ripton look about , as if to aid himself whenever he be able to speak the truth , beheld Richard 's face blacken at he , and swallow back half the word . 
 " the ploughman ! " Adrian take he up cheerily . " then we have here a ploughman out of employ . give a ploughman out of employ , and a rick burn . the burning of a rick be an act of vengeance , and a ploughman out of employ be a vengeful animal . the rick and the ploughman be advance to a juxtaposition . Motive be establish , we have only to prove their proximity at a certain hour , and our ploughman voyage beyond sea . " 
 " be it transportation for rick - burning ? " inquire Ripton aghast . 
 Adrian speak solemnly : " they shave your head . you be manacle . your diet be sour bread and cheese - paring . you work in string of twenty and thirty . arson be brand on your back in an enormous a. Theological work be the sole literary recreation of the well - conduct and deserving . consider the fate of this poor fellow , and what an act of vengeance bring he to ! do you know his name ? " 
 " how should I know his name ? " say Richard , with an assumption of innocence painful to see . 
 Sir Austin remark that no doubt it would soon be know , and Adrian perceive that he be to quiet his line , marvel a little at the baronet 's blindness to what be so clear . he would not tell , for that would ruin his influence with Richard ; still he want some present credit for his discernment and devotion . the boy get away from dinner , and , after deep consultation , agree upon a course of conduct , which be to commiserate with Farmer Blaize loudly , and make themselves look as much like the public as it be possible for two young malefactor to look , one of whom already feel Adrian 's enormous a devour his back with the fierceness of the Promethean eagle , and isolate he forever from mankind . Adrian relish their novel tactic sharply , and lead they to length of lamentation for Farmer Blaize . do what they might , the hook be in their gill . the farmer 's whip have reduce they to bodily contortion ; these be decorous compare with the spiritual writhing they have to perform under Adrian 's manipulation . Ripton be fast become a coward , and Richard a liar , when next morning Austin Wentworth come over from Poer Hall bring news that one Mr. Thomas Bakewell , yeoman , have be arrest on suspicion of the crime of Arson and lodge in jail , await the magisterial pleasure of Sir Miles Papworth . Austin 's eye rest on Richard as he speak these terrible tiding . the hope of Raynham return his look , perfectly calm , and have , moreover , the presence of mind not to look at Ripton . 




 CHAPTER VI 

 as soon as they could escape , the boy get together into an obscure corner of the park , and there take counsel of their extremity . 
 " whatever shall we do now ? " ask Ripton of his leader . 
 scorpion girt with fire be never in a more terrible prison - house than poor Ripton , around whom the rag element he have assist to create seem to be draw momently narrow circle . 
 " there be only one chance , " say Richard , come to a dead halt , and fold his arm resolutely . 
 his comrade inquire with the utmost eagerness what that chance might be . 
 Richard fix his eye on a flint , and reply : " we must rescue that fellow from jail . " 
 Ripton gaze at his leader , and fall back with astonishment . " my dear Ricky ! but how be we to do it ? " 
 Richard , still peruse his flint , reply : " we must manage to get a file in to he and a rope . it can be do , I tell you . I do not   care what I pay . I do not   care what I do . he must be get out . " 
 " bother that old Blaize ! " exclaim Ripton , take off his cap to wipe his frenzied forehead , and bring down his friend 's reproof . 
 " never mind old Blaize now . talk about let it out ! look at you . I be ashamed of you . you talk about Robin Hood and King Richard ! why , you have not   an atom of courage . why , you let it out every second of the day . whenever Rady begin speak you start ; I can see the perspiration roll down you . be you afraid ? and then you contradict yourself . you never keep to one story . now , follow I . we must risk everything to get he out . mind that ! and keep out of Adrian 's way as much as you can . and keep to one story . " 
 with these sage direction the young leader march his companion - culprit down to inspect the jail where Tom Bakewell lie groan over the result of the super - mundane conflict , and the victim of it that he be . 
 in Lobourne Austin Wentworth have the reputation of the poor man 's friend ; a title he earn more largely ere he go to the reward God alone can give to that supreme virtue . Dame Bakewell , the mother of Tom , on hearing of her son 's arrest , have run to comfort he and render he what help she could ; but this be only sigh and tear , and , oh deary I ! which only perplex poor Tom , who bid she leave an unlucky chap to his fate , and not make himself a thunder villain . whereat the dame beg he to take heart , and he should have a true comforter . " and though it be a gentleman that be come to you , Tom for he never refuse a poor body , " say Mrs. Bakewell , " it be a true Christian , Tom ! and the Lord know if the sight of he may not   be the saving of you , for he be light to look on , and a sermon to listen to , he be ! " 
 Tom be not prepossess by the prospect of a sermon , and look a sullen dog enough when Austin enter his cell . he be surprised at the end of half - an - hour to find himself engage in man - to - man conversation with a gentleman and a Christian . when Austin rise to go Tom beg permission to shake his hand . 
 " take and tell young master up at the Abbey that I an't   the chap to peach . he will know . he be a young gentleman as'll make any man do as he want them ! he be a mortal wild young gentleman ! and I be a Ass ! that be where ' tis . but I an't   a blackguard . tell he that , sir ! " 
 this be how it come that austin eyed young Richard seriously while he tell the news at Raynham . the boy be shy of Austin more than of Adrian . why , he do not know ; but he make it a hard task for Austin to catch he alone , and turn sulky that instant . Austin be not clever like Adrian : he seldom divine other people 's idea , and always go the direct road to his object ; so instead of beat about and set the boy on the alert at all point , cram to the muzzle with lie , he just say , " Tom Bakewell tell I to let you know he do not intend to peach on you , " and leave he . 
 Richard repeat the intelligence to Ripton , who cry aloud that Tom be a brick . 
 " he shall not   suffer for it , " say Richard , and ponder on a thick rope and sharp file . 
 " but will your cousin tell ? " be Ripton 's reflection . 
 " he ! " Richard 's lip express contempt . " a ploughman refuse to peach , and you ask if one of our family will ? " 
 Ripton stand for the twentieth time reprove on this point . 
 the boy have examine the outer wall of the jail , and arrive at the conclusion that Tom 's escape might be manage if Tom have spirit , and the rope and file could be anyway reach to he . but to do this , somebody must gain admittance to his cell , and who be to be take into their confidence ? 
 " try your cousin , " Ripton suggest , after much debate . 
 Richard , smiling , wish to know if he mean Adrian . 
 " no , no ! " Ripton hurriedly reassure he . " Austin . " 
 the same idea be knock at Richard 's head . 
 " let us get the rope and file first , " say he , and to Bursley they go for those implement to defeat the law , Ripton procure the file at one shop and Richard the rope at another , with such masterly cunning do they lay their measure for the avoidance of every possible chance of detection . and well to assure this , in a wood outside Bursley Richard strip to his shirt and wound the rope round his body , taste the torture of anchorite and penitential friar , that nothing should be risk to make Tom 's escape a certainty . Sir Austin see the mark at night as his son lie asleep , through the half - open fold of his bed - gown . 
 it be a severe stroke when , after all their stratagem and trouble , Austin Wentworth refuse the office the boy have zealously design for he . time press . in a few day poor Tom would have to face the redoubtable Sir Miles , and get commit , for rumour of overwhelming evidence to convict he be rife about Lobourne , and Farmer Blaize 's wrath be unappeasable . again and again young Richard beg his cousin not to see he disgrace , and to help he in this extremity . Austin smile on he . 
 " my dear Ricky , " say he , " there be two way of get out of a scrape : a long way and a short way . when you have   try the roundabout method , and fail , come to I , and I will show you the straight route . " 
 Richard be too entirely bent upon the roundabout method to consider this advice more than empty word , and only grind his tooth at Austin 's unkind refusal . 
 he impart to Ripton , at the eleventh hour , that they must do it themselves , to which Ripton heavily assent . 
 on the day precede poor Tom 's doomed appearance before the magistrate , Dame Bakewell have an interview with Austin , who go to Raynham immediately , and seek Adrian 's counsel upon what be to be do . homeric laughter and nothing else could be get out of Adrian when he hear of the doing of these desperate boy : how they have enter Dame Bakewell 's small of retail shop , and purchase tea , sugar , candle , and comfit of every description , till the shop be clear of customer : how they have then hurry she into her little back - parlour , where Richard have tear open his shirt and reveal the coil of rope , and Ripton display the point of a file from a serpentine recess in his jacket : how they have then tell the astonished woman that the rope she see and the file she see be instrument for the liberation of her son ; that there exist no other mean on earth to save he , they , the boy , have unsuccessfully attempt all : how upon that Richard have try with the utmost earnestness to persuade she to disrobe and wind the rope round her own person : and Ripton have air his eloquence to induce she to secrete the file : how , when she resolutely object to the rope , both boy begin back the file , and in an evil hour , she fear , say Dame Bakewell , she have reward the gracious permission give she by Sir Miles Papworth to visit her son , by tempt Tom to file the Law . though , thank be to the Lord ! Dame Bakewell add , Tom have turn up his nose at the file , and so she have tell young Master Richard , who swear very bad for a young gentleman . 
 " boy be like monkey , " remark Adrian , at the close of his explosion , " the grave actor of farcical nonsense that the world possess . may I never be where there be no boy ! a couple of boy leave to themselves will furnish rich fun than any troop of train comedian . no : no art arrive at the artlessness of nature in matter of comedy . you can not   simulate the ape . your antic be dull . they have not   the charming inconsequence of the natural animal . lack at these two ! think of the shift they be put to all day long ! they know I know all about it , and yet their serenity of innocence be all but unruffled in my presence . you be sorry to think about the end of the business , Austin ? so be I ! I dread the idea of the curtain go down . besides , it will do Ricky a world of good . a practical lesson be the good lesson . " 
 " sink deepest , " say Austin , " but whether he learn good or evil from it be the question at stake . " 
 Adrian stretch his length at ease . 
 " this will be his first nibble at experience , old Time 's fruit , hateful to the palate of youth ! for which season only hath it any nourishment ! experience ! you know Coleridge 's capital simile ? Mournful you call it ? well ! all wisdom be mournful . ' tis therefore , coz , that the wise do love the Comic Muse . their own high food would kill they . you shall find great poet , rare philosopher , night after night on the broad grin before a row of yellow light and mouthing mask . why ? because all be dark at home . the stage be the pastime of great mind . that be how it come that the stage be now down . an age of rampant little mind , my dear Austin ! how I hate that can not of yours about an Age of Work you , and your Mortons , and your parson Brawnley , rank radical all of you , base materialist ! what do Diaper Sandoe sing of your age of Work ? listen ! 
  ' an age of betty tit for tat , 
  an age of busy gabble : 
  an age that be like a brewer 's vat , 
  ferment for the rabble ! 

  ' an age that be chaste in Love , but lax 
  to virtuous abuse : 
  whose gentleman and lady wax 
  too dainty for their us . 

  ' an age that drive an Iron Horse , 
  of Time and Space defiant ; 
  exult in a Giant 's Force , 
  and tremble at the Giant . 

  ' an Age of Quaker hue and cut , 
  by Mammon misbegotten ; 
  see the mad Hamlet mouth and strut ! 
  and mark the king of Cotton ! 

  ' from this unrest , lo , early wreck'd , 
  a Future stagger crazy , 
  Ophelia of the Ages , deck'd 
  with woeful weed and daisy ! ' " 
 Murmuring , " get your parson Brawnley to answer that ! " Adrian change the resting - place of a leg , and smile . the Age be an old battle - field between he and Austin . 
 " my parson Brawnley , as you call he , have answer it , " say Austin , " not by hop his good , which would probably leave the age to go mad to your satisfaction , but by do it . and he have and will answer your Diaper Sandoe in well verse , as he confute he in a well life . " 
 " you do not   see Sandoe 's depth , " Adrian reply . " consider that phrase , ' Ophelia of the Ages ' ! be not Brawnley , like a dozen other lead spirit I think that be your term just the metaphysical Hamlet to drive her mad ? she , poor maid ! ask for marriage and smile babe , while my lord lover stand question the Infinite , and rant to the Impalpable . " 
 Austin laugh . " marriage and smile babe she would have in abundance , if Brawnley legislate . wait till you know he . he will be over at Poer Hall shortly , and you will see what a Man of the Age mean . but now , pray , consult with I about these boy . " 
 " oh , those boy ! " Adrian toss a hand . " be there boy of the age as well as man ? not ? then boy be well than man : boy be for all age . what do you think , Austin ? they have   be study Latude 's Escape . I find the book open in Ricky 's room , on the top of Jonathan Wild . Jonathan preserve the secret of his profession , and teach they nothing . so they be go to make a latude of Mr. Tom Bakewell . he be to be Bastille Bakewell , whether he will or no . let they . let the wild colt run free ! we can not   help they . we can only look on . we should spoil the play . " 
 Adrian always make a point of feed the fretful beast Impatience with pleasantry a not congenial diet ; and Austin , the most patient of human being , begin to lose his self - control . 
 " you talk as if Time belong to you , Adrian . we have but a few hour leave we . work first , and joke afterwards . the boy 's fate be be decide now . " 
 " so be everybody 's , my dear Austin ! " yawn the epicurean . 
 " yes , but this boy be at present under our guardianship under yours especially . " 
 " not yet ! not yet ! " Adrian interject languidly . " no get into scrape when I have he . the leash , young hound ! the collar , young colt ! I be perfectly irresponsible at present . " 
 " you may have something different to deal with when you be responsible , if you think that . " 
 " I take my young prince as I find he , coz : a Julian , or a Caracalla : a Constantine , or a Nero . then , if he will play the fiddle to a conflagration , he shall play it well : if he must be a disputatious apostate , at any rate he shall understand logic and man , and have the habit of say his prayer . " 
 " then you leave I to act alone ? " say Austin , rise . 
 " without a single curb ! " Adrian gesticulate an acquiesced withdrawal . " I be sure you would not , still more certain you can not , do harm . and be mindful of my prophetic word : Whatever be do , old Blaize will have to be buy off . there be the affair settle at once . I suppose I must go to the chief to - night and settle it myself . we can not   see this poor devil condemn , though it be nonsense to talk of a boy be the prime instigator . " 
 Austin cast an eye at the complacent languor of the wise youth , his cousin , and the little that he know of his fellow tell he he might talk forever here , and not be comprehend . the wise youth 's two ear be stuff with his own wisdom . one evil only Adrian dread , it be clear the action of the law . 
 as he be move away , Adrian call out to he , " stop , Austin ! there ! do not   be anxious ! you invariably take the glum side . I have   do something . never mind what . if you go down to Belthorpe , be civil , but not obsequious . you remember the tactic of Scipio Africanus against the Punic elephant ? well , do not   say a word in thine ear , coz : I have   turn Master Blaize 's elephant . if they charge , ' twill bye a feint , and back to the destruction of his serried rank ! you understand . not ? well , ' tis as well . only , let none say that I sleep . if I must see he to - night , I go down know he have not get we in his power . " the wise youth yawn , and stretch out a hand for any book that might be within his reach . Austin leave he to look about the ground for Richard . 




 CHAPTER VII 

 a little laurel - shade temple of white marble look out on the river from a knoll border the Raynham beechwood , and be dub by Adrian Daphne 's Bower . to this spot Richard have retire , and there Austin find he with his head bury in his hand , a picture of desperation , whose last shift have be defeat . he allow Austin to greet he and sit by he without lift his head . perhaps his eye be not presentable . 
 " where be your friend ? " Austin begin . 
 " Gone ! " be the answer , sound cavernous from behind hair and finger . an explanation presently follow , that a summon have come for he in the morning from Mr. Thompson ; and that Mr. Ripton have depart against his will . 
 in fact , Ripton have protest that he would defy his parent and remain by his friend in the hour of adversity and at the post of danger . Sir Austin signify his opinion that a boy should obey his parent , by give order to Benson for Ripton 's box to be pack and ready before noon ; and Ripton 's alacrity in take the baronet 's view of filial duty be as little feigned as his offer to Richard to throw filial duty to the wind . he rejoice that the Fates have agree to remove he from the very hot neighbourhood of Lobourne , while he grieve , like an honest lad , to see his comrade leave to face calamity alone . the boy part amicably , as they could hardly fail to do , when Ripton have swear fealty to the Feverals with a warmth that make he declare himself bond , and due to appear at any stated hour and at any stated place to fight all the farmer in England , on a mandate from the heir of the house . 
 " so you be leave alone , " say Austin , contemplate the boy 's shapely head . " I be glad of it . we never know what be in we till we stand by ourselves . " 
 there appear to be no answer forthcoming . vanity , however , reply at last , " he be not   much support . " 
 " remember his good point now he be go , Ricky . " 
 " oh ! he be staunch , " the boy grumble . 
 " and a staunch friend be not always to be find . now , have you try your own way of rectify this business , Ricky ? " 
 " I have do everything . " 
 " and fail ! " 
 there be a pause , and then the deep - toned evasion 
 " Tom Bakewell be a coward ! " 
 " I suppose , poor fellow , " say Austin , in his kind way , " he do not   want to get into a deep mess . I do not   think he be a coward . " 
 " he be a coward , " cry Richard . " do you think if I have a file I would stay in prison ? I would be out the first night ! and he might have have the rope , too a rope thick enough for a couple of man his size and weight . Ripton and I and Ned Markham swing on it for an hour , and it do not   give way . he be a coward , and deserve his fate . I have   no compassion for a coward . " 
 " nor I much , " say Austin . 
 Richard have raise his head in the heat of his denunciation of poor Tom . he would have hide it have he know the thought in Austin 's clear eye while he face they . 
 " I never meet a coward myself , " Austin continue . " I have hear of one or two . one let an innocent man die for he . " 
 " how base ! " exclaim the boy . 
 " yes , it be bad , " Austin acquiesce . 
 " bad ! " Richard scorn the poor contempt . " how I would have spurn he ! he be a coward ! " 
 " I believe he plead the feeling of his family in his excuse , and try every mean to get the man off . I have read also in the confession of a celebrated philosopher , that in his youth he commit some act of pilfering , and accuse a young servant - girl of his own theft , who be condemn and dismiss for it , pardon her guilty accuser . " 
 " what a coward ! " shout Richard . " and he confess it publicly ? " 
 " you may read it yourself . " 
 " he actually write it down , and print it ? " 
 " you have the book in your father 's library . would you have do so much ? " 
 Richard falter . no ! he admit that he never could have tell people . 
 " then who be to call that man a coward ? " say Austin . " he expiate his cowardice as all who give way in moment of weakness , and be not coward , must do . the coward choose to think ' God do not see . ' I shall escape . ' he who be not a coward , and have succumb , know that God have see all , and it be not so hard a task for he to make his heart bare to the world . bad , I should fancy it , to know myself an impostor when man praise I . " 
 Young Richard 's eye be wander on Austin 's gravely cheerful face . a keen intentness suddenly fix they , and he drop his head . 
 " so I think you be wrong , Ricky , in call this poor Tom a coward because he refuse to try your mean of escape , " Austin resume . " a coward hardly object to drag in his accomplice . and , where the person involve belong to a great family , it seem to I that for a poor plough - lad to volunteer not to do so speak he anything but a coward . " 
 Richard be dumb . altogether to surrender his rope and file be a fearful sacrifice , after all the time , trepidation , and study he have spend on those two save instrument . if he avow Tom 's manly behaviour , Richard Feverel be in a totally new position . whereas , by keep Tom a coward , Richard Feverel be the injured one , and to seem injure be always a luxury ; sometimes a necessity , whether among boy or man . 
 in Austin the magian conflict would not have last long . he have but a blind notion of the fierceness with which it rag in young Richard . happily for the boy , Austin be not a preacher . a single instance , a can not phrase , a fatherly manner , might have wreck he , by arouse ancient or latent opposition . the bear preacher we feel instinctively to be our foe . he may do some good to the wretch that have be strike down and lie gasp on the battlefield : he rouse antagonism in the strong . Richard 's nature , leave to itself , want little more than an indication of the proper track , and when he say , " tell I what I can do , Austin ? " he have fight the good half of the battle . his voice be subdue . Austin put his hand on the boy 's shoulder . 
 " you must go down to Farmer Blaize . " 
 " well ! " say Richard , sullenly divine the deed of penance . 
 " you will know what to say to he when you be there . " 
 the boy bite his lip and frowned . " ask a favour of that big brute , Austin ? I can not ! " 
 " just tell he the whole case , and that you do not   intend to stand by and let the poor fellow suffer without a friend to help he out of his scrape . " 
 " but , Austin , " the boy plead , " I shall have to ask he to help off Tom Bakewell ! how can I ask he , when I hate he ? " 
 Austin bid he go , and think nothing of the consequence till he get there . 
 Richard groan in soul . 
 " you have   no pride , Austin . " 
 " perhaps not . " 
 " you do not   know what it be to ask a favour of a brute you hate . " 
 Richard stick to that view of the case , and stick to it the fast the more imperatively the urgency of a movement dawn upon he . 
 " why , " continue the boy , " I shall hardly be able to keep my fist off he ! " 
 " surely you have   punish he enough , boy ? " say Austin . 
 " he strike I ! " Richard 's lip quiver . " he dare not come at I with his hand . he strike I with a whip . he will be tell everybody that he horsewhip I , and that I go down and beg his pardon . beg his pardon ! a Feverel beg his pardon ! oh , if I have my will ! " 
 " the man earn his bread , Ricky . you poach on his ground . he turn you off , and you fire his rick . " 
 " and I will pay he for his loss . and I will not   do any more . " 
 " because you will not   ask a favour of he ? " 
 " no ! I will not ask a favour of he . " 
 Austin look at the boy steadily . " you prefer to receive a favour from poor Tom Bakewell ? " 
 at Austin 's enunciation of this obverse view of the matter Richard raise his brow . dimly a new light break in upon he . " Favour from Tom Bakewell , the ploughman ? how do you mean , Austin ? " 
 " to save yourself an unpleasantness you permit a country lad to sacrifice himself for you ? I confess I should not have so much pride . " 
 " Pride ! " shout Richard , sting by the taunt , and set his sight hard at the blue ridge of the hill . 
 not know for the moment what else to do , Austin draw a picture of Tom in prison , and repeat Tom 's volunteer statement . the picture , though his intention be far from design it so , have to Richard , whose perception of humour be infinitely keener , a horrible chaw - bacon smack about it . vision of a grinning lout , open from ear to ear , unkempt , coarse , splay - footed , rise before he and afflict he with the strange sensation of disgust and comicality , mix up with pity and remorse a sort of twisted pathos . there lie Tom ; hobnail Tom ! a bacon - munching , reckless , beer - swill animal ! and yet a man ; a dear brave human heart notwithstanding ; capable of devotion and unselfishness . the boy 's well spirit be touch , and it kindle his imagination to realize the abject figure of poor clodpole Tom , and surround it with a halo of mournful light . his soul be alive . feeling he have never know stream in upon he as from an ethereal casement , an unwonted tenderness , an embrace humour , a consciousness of some ineffable glory , an irradiation of the feature of humanity . all this be in the bosom of the boy , and through it all the vision of an actual hob - nail Tom , coarse , unkempt , open from ear to ear ; whose presence be a finger of shame to he and an oppression of clodpole ; yet toward whom he feel just then a love - kindness beyond what he feel for any live creature . he laugh at he , and weep over he . he prize he , while he shrink from he . it be a genial strife of the angel in he with constituent less divine ; but the angel be uppermost and lead the van extinguish loathing , humanize laughter , transfigured pride pride that would persistently contemplate the corduroy of gap Tom , and cry to Richard , in the very tone of Adrian 's ironic voice , " behold your benefactor ! " 
 Austin sit by the boy , unaware of the sublimer tumult he have stir . little of it be perceptible in Richard 's countenance . the line of his mouth be slightly draw ; his eye hard set into the distance . he remain thus many minute . finally he jump to his leg , say , " I will go at once to old Blaize and tell he . " 
 Austin grasp his hand , and together they issue out of Daphne 's Bower , in the direction of Lobourne . 




 CHAPTER VIII 

 Farmer Blaize be not so astonished at the visit of Richard Feverel as that young gentleman expect he to be . the farmer , seat in his easy - chair in the little low - roof parlour of an old - fashioned farm - house , with a long clay pipe on the table at his elbow , and a veteran pointer at his foot , have already give audience to three distinguished member of the Feverel blood , who have come separately , accord to their accustomed secretiveness , and with one object . in the morning it be Sir Austin himself . shortly after his departure , arrive Austin Wentworth ; close on his heel , Algernon , know about Lobourne as the Captain , popular wherever he be know . Farmer Blaize recline in considerable elation . he have bring these great people to a pretty low pitch . he have welcome they hospitably , as a british yeoman should ; but not budge a foot in his demand : not to the baronet : not to the captain : not to good young Mr. Wentworth . for Farmer Blaize be a solid Englishman ; and , on hear from the baronet a frank confession of the hold he have on the family , he determine to tighten his hold , and only relax it in exchange for tangible advantage compensation to his pocket , his wounded person , and his still more wounded sentiment : the total indemnity be , in round figure , three hundred pound , and a speak apology from the prime offender , young Mister Richard . even then there be a reservation . provide , the farmer say , nobody have be tamper with any of his witness . in that ease Farmer Blaize declare the money might go , and he would transport Tom Bakewell , as he have swear he would . and it go hard , too , with an accomplice , by law , add the farmer , knock the ash leisurely out of his pipe . he have no wish to bring any disgrace anywhere ; he respect the inmate of Raynham Abbey , as in duty bind ; he should be sorry to see they in trouble . only no tampering with his witness . he be a man for Law . Rank be much : money be much : but Law be more . in this country Law be above the sovereign . to tamper with the Law be treason to the realm . 
 " I come to you direct , " the baronet explain . " I tell you candidly what way I discover my son to be mix up in this miserable affair . I promise you indemnity for your loss , and an apology that shall , I trust , satisfy your feeling , assure you that to tamper with witness be not the province of a Feverel . all I ask of you in return be , not to press the prosecution . at present it rest with you . I be bind to do all that lie in my power for this imprison man . how and wherefore my son be prompt to suggest , or assist in , such an act , I can not explain , for I do not know . " 
 " Hum ! " say the farmer . " I think I do . " 
 " you know the cause ? " Sir Austin star . " I beg you to confide it to I . " 
 " ' least , I can pretty nigh neighbour it with a gue , " say the farmer . " we an't   good friend , Sir Austin , I and your son , just now not to say cordial . I , ye see , Sir Austin , I be a man as do not   like young gentleman a - poachin ' on his ground without his permission , in special when bird be plentiful on their own . it appear he do like it . consequently I have to flick this whip as they feller at the race : all in this ' ere Ring 's mine ! as much as to say ; and who be be hit , he be have fair warnin ' . I be sorry for't , but that be just the case . " 
 Sir Austin retire to communicate with his son , when he should find he . 
 Algernon 's interview pass off in ale and promise . he also assure Farmer Blaize that no Feverel could be affect by his proviso . 
 no less do Austin Wentworth . the farmer be satisfied . 
 " Money 's safe , I know , " say he ; " now for the ' pology ! " and Farmer Blaize thrust his leg far out , and his head far back . 
 the farmer naturally reflect that the three separate visit have be conspire together . still the baronet 's frankness , and the baronet be not have reserve himself for the third and final charge , puzzle he . he be consider whether they be a deep , or a shallow lot , when young Richard be announce . 
 a pretty little girl with the rose of thirteen spring in her cheek , and abundant beautiful bright tress , trip before the boy , and loiter shyly by the farmer 's arm - chair to steal a look at the handsome new - comer . she be introduce to Richard as the farmer 's niece , Lucy Desborough , the daughter of a lieutenant in the Royal Navy , and , what be well , though the farmer do not pronounce it so loudly , a real good girl . 
 neither the excellence of her character , nor her rank in life , tempt Richard to inspect the little lady . he make an awkward bow , and sit down . 
 the farmer 's eye twinkle . " her father , " he continue , " fight and fall for his coontry . a man as fight for 's coontry be a right to hould up his head ay ! with any in the land . Desb'roughs o ' Dorset ! d'ye know that family , Master Feverel ? " 
 Richard do not know they , and , by his air , do not desire to become acquainted with any offshoot of that family . 
 " she can make pudden and pie , " the farmer go on , regardless of his auditor 's gloom . " she be a lady , as good as the good of them . I do not   care about their be Catholics the Desb'roughs o ' Dorset be gentleman . and she be good for the pianer , too ! she strum to I of evenin 's . I be for the old tune : she be for the new . Gal - like ! while she be with I she shall be teach thing use'l . she can parley - voo a good ' un and foot it , as it go ; be in France a couple of year . I prefer the singin ' of ' t to the talkin ' of ' t. Come , Luce ! toon up eh ? ye wun't ? that song abort the Viffendeer a female " Farmer Blaize volunteer the translation of the title " who wear the you guess what ! and march along with the french sojer : a pretty brazen bit o ' good , I sh'd fancy . " 
 Mademoiselle Lucy correct her uncle 's French , but object to do more . the handsome cross boy have almost take away her voice for speech , as it be , and sing in his company she could not ; so she stand , a hand on her uncle 's chair to stay herself from fall , while she wriggle a dozen various shape of refusal , and shake her head at the farmer with fixed eye . 
 " Aha ! " laugh the farmer , dismiss she , " they soon learn the difference ' twixt the young ' un and the old ' un . go along , Luce ! and learn yer lesson for to - morrow . " 
 reluctantly the daughter of the Royal Navy glide away . her uncle 's head follow she to the door , where she dally to catch a last impression of the young stranger 's lower face , and dart through . 
 Farmer Blaize laugh and chuckle . " she an't   so fond of her uncle as that , every day ! not that she an't   a good nurse the kind little soul you would meet of a winter 's walk ! she will read t ' ye , and make drink , and sing , too , if ye like it , and she will not   be tired . a obstinate good ' un , she be ! bless she ! " 
 the farmer may have design , by these eulogy of his niece , to give his visitor time to recover his composure , and establish a common topic . his diversion only irritated and confuse our shame - eat youth . Richard 's intention have be to come to the farmer 's threshold : to summon the farmer thither , and in a loud and haughty tone then and there to take upon himself the whole burden of the charge against Tom Bakewell . he have stray , during his passage to Belthorpe , somewhat back to his old nature ; and his be compel to enter the house of his enemy , sit in his chair , and endure an introduction to his family , be more than he bargain for . he commence blink hard in preparation for the horrible dose to which delay and the farmer 's cordiality add inconceivable bitter . Farmer Blaize be quite at his ease ; nowise in a hurry . he speak of the weather and the harvest : of recent doing up at the Abbey : glance over that year 's cricketing ; hop that no future Feverel would lose a leg to the game . Richard see and hear Arson in it all . he blink hard as he near the cup . in a moment of silence , he seize it with a gasp . 
 " Mr. Blaize ! I have come to tell you that I be the person who set fire to your rick the other night . " 
 an odd consternation form about the farmer 's mouth . he change his posture , and say , " ay ? that be what ye're come to tell I sir ? " 
 " yes ! " say Richard , firmly . 
 " and that be all ? " 
 " yes ! " Richard reiterate . 
 the farmer again change his posture . " then , my lad , ye've   come to tell I a lie ! " 
 Farmer Blaize look straight at the boy , undismaye by the dark flush of ire he have kindle . 
 " you dare to call I a liar ! " cry Richard , start up . 
 " I say , " the farmer renew his first emphasis , and smack his thigh thereto , " that be a lie ! " 
 Richard hold out his clench fist . " you have twice insult I . you have strike I : you have dare to call I a liar . I would have apologize I would have ask your pardon , to have get off that fellow in prison . yes ! I would have degrade myself that another man should not suffer for my deed " 
 " quite proper ! " interpose the farmer . 
 " and you take this opportunity of insult I afresh . you be a coward , sir ! nobody but a coward would have insult I in his own house . " 
 " sit ye down , sit ye down , young master , " say the farmer , indicate the chair and cool the outburst with his hand . " sit ye down . do not   ye be hasty . if ye have not   be hasty t'other day , we sh'd a be friend yet . sit ye down , sir . I sh'd be sorry to reckon you out a liar , Mr. Feverel , or anybody o ' your name . I respect yer father though we be opp'site politic . I be willin ' to think well o ' you . what I say be , that as you say an't   the trewth . mind ! I do not   like you none the bad for't . but it an't   what be . that be all ! you know it as well 's I ! " 
 Richard , disdain to show sign of be pacify , angrily reseat himself . the farmer speak sense , and the boy , after his late interview with Austin , have become capable of perceive vaguely that a tower passion be hardly the justification for a wrong course of conduct . 
 " come , " continue the farmer , not unkindly , " what else have you to say ? " 
 here be the same bitter cup he have already once drain brimming at Richard 's lip again ! alas , poor human nature ! that empty to the dreg a dozen of these evil drink , to evade the single one which destiny , less cruel , have insist upon . 
 the boy blink and toss it off . 
 " I come to say that I regret the revenge I have take on you for your strike I . " 
 Farmer Blaize nod . 
 " and now ye've   do , young gentleman ? " 
 still another cupful ! 
 " I should be very much oblige , " Richard formally begin , but his stomach be turn ; he could but sip and sip , and gather a distaste which threaten to make the penitential act impossible . " very much oblige , " he repeat : " much oblige , if you would be so kind , " and it strike he that have he speak this at first he would have give it a wording more persuasive with the farmer and more worthy of his own pride : more honest , in fact : for a sense of the dishonesty of what he be say cause he to cringe and simulate humility to deceive the farmer , and the more he say the less he feel his word , and , feel they less , he inflate they more . " so kind , " he stammer , ' so kind "   fancy a Feverel ask this big brute to be so kind !   " as to do I the favour "   I the favour !   " to exert yourself "   it be all to please Austin   " to endeavour to hem ! to "   there be no say it !  
 the cup be full as ever . Richard dash at it again . 
 " what I come to ask be , whether you would have the kindness to try what you could do "   what an infamous shame to have to beg like this !   " do to save do to ensure whether you would have the kindness " it seem out of all human power to gulp it down . the draught grow more and more abhorrent . to proclaim one 's iniquity , to apologize for one 's wrongdoing ; thus much could be do ; but to beg a favour of the offended party that be beyond the self - abasement any Feverel could consent to . Pride , however , whose inevitable battle be against itself , draw aside the curtain of poor Tom 's prison , cry a second time , " behold your Benefactor ! " and , with the word burn in his ear , Richard swallow the dose : 
 " well , then , I want you , Mr. Blaize , if you do not   mind will you help I to get this man bakewell off his punishment ? " 
 to do Farmer Blaize justice , he wait very patiently for the boy , though he could not quite see why he do not take the gate at the first offer . 
 " oh ! " say he , when he hear and have ponder on the request . " Hum ! ha ! we will see about it t'morrow . but if he be innocent , you know , we shall not   mak'n guilty . " 
 " it be I do it ! " Richard declare . 
 the farmer 's half - amuse expression sharpen a bit . 
 " so , young gentleman ! and you be sorry for the night 's work ? " 
 " I shall see that you be pay the full extent of your loss . " 
 " Thank'ee , " say the farmer drily . 
 " and , if this poor man be release to - morrow , I do not   care what the amount be . " 
 Farmer Blaize deflect his head twice in silence . " Bribery , " one motion express : " Corruption , " the other . 
 " now , " say he , lean forward , and fix his elbow on his knee , while he count the case at his finger ' end , " excuse the liberty , but wishin ' to know where this ' ere money be to come from , I sh'd like jest t'ask if so be Sir Austin know o ' this ? " 
 " my father know nothing of it , " reply Richard . 
 the farmer fling back in his chair . " lie number two , " say his shoulder , sour by the british aversion to be plot at , and not deal with openly . 
 " and ye've   the money ready , young gentleman ? " 
 " I shall ask my father for it . " 
 " and he will hand't out ? " 
 " certainly he will ! " 
 Richard have not the slight intention of ever let his father into his counsel . 
 " a good three hundred pound , ye know ? " the farmer suggest . 
 no consideration of the extent of damage , and the size of the sum , affect young Richard , who say boldly , " he will not object when I tell he I want that sum . " 
 it be natural Farmer Blaize should be a trifle suspicious that a youth 's guarantee would hardly be give for his father 's readiness to disburse such a thumping bill , unless he have previously receive his father 's sanction and authority . 
 " Hum ! " say he , " why not ' a tell he before ? " 
 the farmer throw an objectionable shrewdness into his query , that cause Richard to compress his mouth and glance high . 
 Farmer Blaize be positive ' twas a lie . 
 " Hum ! Ye still hold to't you fire the rick ? " he ask . 
 " the blame be mine ! " quoth Richard , with the loftiness of a patriot of old Rome . 
 " Na , na ! " the straightforward Briton put he aside . " ye did't , or ye do not   do't . do ye do't , or no ? " 
 Thrust in a corner , Richard say , " I do it . " 
 Farmer Blaize reach his hand to the bell . it be answer in an instant by little Lucy , who receive order to fetch in a dependent at Belthorpe go by the name of the Bantam , and make her exit as she have enter , with her eye on the young stranger . 
 " now , " say the farmer , " these be my principle . I be a plain man , Mr. Feverel . above board with I , and you will find I handsome . try to circumvent I , and I be a ugly customer . I will show you I have   no animosity . your father pay you apologize . that be enough for I ! let Tom Bakewell fight't out with the Law , and I will look on . the Law be not   on the spot , I suppose ? so the Law be not   much witness . but I be . leastwise the Bantam be . I tell you , young gentleman , the Bantam saw't ! it be no moral use whatever your denyin ' that ev'dence . and where be the good , sir , I ask ? what come of ' t ? whether it be you , or whether it be Tom Bakewell be not   all one ? if I hold back , be not   it sim'lar ? it be the trewth I want ! and here't come , " add the farmer , as Miss Lucy usher in the Bantam , who present a curious figure for that rare divinity to enliven . 




 CHAPTER IX 

 in build of body , gait and stature , Giles Jinkson , the Bantam , be a tolerably fair representative of the Punic elephant , whose part , with diverse anticipation , the general of the Blaize and Feverel force , from oppose rank , expect he to play . gile , surname the Bantam , on account of some forget sally of his youth or infancy , move and look elephantine . it suffice that Giles be well feed to assure that Giles be faithful if uncorrupted . the farm which supply to he ungrudge provender have all his vast capacity for work in willing exercise : the farmer who hold the farm his instinct reverence as the fountain source of beef and bacon , to say nothing of beer , which be plentiful at Belthorpe , and good . this Farmer Blaize well know , and he reckon consequently that here be an animal always to be rely on a sort of human composition out of dog , horse , and bull , a cut above each of these quadruped in usefulness , and cost proportionately more , but on the whole worth the money , and therefore invaluable , as everything worth its money must be to a wise man . when the stealing of grain have be make known at Belthorpe , the Bantam , a fellow - thresher with Tom Bakewell , have share with he the shadow of the guilt . Farmer Blaize , if he hesitate which to suspect , do not debate a second as to which he would discard ; and , when the Bantam say he have see Tom secrete pilkin in a sack , Farmer Blaize choose to believe he , and off go poor Tom , tell to rejoice in the clemency that spar his appearance at Sessions . 
 the Bantam 's small sleepy orbit see many thing , and just at the right moment , it seem . he be certainly the first to give the clue at Belthorpe on the night of the conflagration , and he may , therefore , have see poor Tom retreat stealthily from the scene , as he aver he do . Lobourne have its say on the subject . Rustic Lobourne hint broadly at a young woman in the case , and , moreover , tell a tale of how these fellow - thresher have , in noble rivalry , one day turn upon each other to see which of the two thresh the good ; whereof the Bantam still bear mark , and malice , it be say . however , there he stand , and tug his forelock to the company , and if Truth really have conceal herself in he she must have be hard set to find her unlikeliest hiding - place . 
 " now , " say the farmer , marshal forth his elephant with the confidence of one who deliver his ace of trump , " tell this young gentleman what ye see on the night of the fire , Bantam ! " 
 the Bantam jerk a bit of a bow to his patron , and then swing round , fully obscure he from Richard . 
 Richard fix his eye on the floor , while the Bantam in rude Doric commence his narrative . know what be to come , and thoroughly nerve to confute the main incident , Richard barely listen to his barbarous locution : but when the recital arrive at the point where the Bantam affirm he have see " T'm Baak'll wi 's owen hoy , " Richard face he , and be amazed to find himself be mutely address by a series of intensely significant grimace , sign , and wink . 
 " what do you mean ? why be you make those face at I ? " cry the boy indignantly . 
 Farmer Blaize lean round the Bantam to have a look at he , and behold the stolid mask ever give to man . 
 " Bain't   makin ' no face at nobody , " growl the sulky elephant . 
 the farmer command he to face about and finish . 
 " a see t'm Baak'll , " the Bantam recommence , and again the contortion of a horrible wink be direct at Richard . the boy might well believe this churl be lie , and he do , and be embolden to exclaim 
 " you never see Tom Bakewell set fire to that rick ! " 
 the Bantam swear to it , grimace an accompaniment . 
 " I tell you , " say Richard , " I put the lucifer there myself ! " 
 the suborned elephant be stagger . he mean to telegraph to the young gentleman that he be loyal and true to certain gold piece that have be give he , and that in the right place and at the right time he should prove so . why be he thus suspect ? why be he not understand ? 
 " a thowt I see ' un , then , " mutter the Bantam , try a middle course . 
 this bring down on he the farmer , who roar , " Thought ! ye think ! what d'ye mean ? speak out , and do not   be thinkin ' . think ? what the devil 's that ? " 
 " how could he see who it be on a pitch - dark night ? " Richard put in . 
 " Thought ! " the farmer bellow louder . " thought Devil take ye , when ye take ye oath on't . Hulloa ! what be ye screwin ' yer eye at Mr. Feverel for ? I say , young gentleman , have you speak to this chap before now ? " 
 " I ? " reply Richard . " I have not see he before . " 
 Farmer Blaize grasp the two arm of the chair he sit on , and glare his doubt . 
 " come , " say he to the Bantam , ' speak out , and ha ' do wi't . say what ye see , and none o ' yer thought . damn yer thought ! ye see Tom Bakewell fire that there rick ! " the farmer point at some musk - pot in the window . " what business ha ' you to be a - thinkin ' ? you be a witness ? Thinkin ' an't   ev'dence . what will ye say to morrow before magistrate ! mind ! what you say today , you will stick by to - morrow . " 
 thus adjure , the Bantam hitch his breech . what on earth the young gentleman mean he be at a loss to speculate . he could not believe that the young gentleman want to be transport , but if he have be pay to help that , why , he would . and consider that this day 's evidence rather bind he down to the morrow 's , he determine , after much ploughing and harrow through obstinate shock of hair , to be not altogether positive as to the person . it be possible that he become thereby more a mansion of truth than he previously have be ; for the night , as he say , be so dark that you could not see your hand before your face ; and though , as he express it , you might be mortal sure of a man , you could not identify he upon oath , and the party he have take for Tom Bakewell , and could have swear to , might have be the young gentleman present , especially as he be ready to swear it upon oath . 
 so end the Bantam . 
 no soon have he cease , than Farmer Blaize jump up from his chair , and make a fine effort to lift he out of the room from the point of his toe . he fail , and sink back groan with the pain of the exertion and disappointment . 
 " they be liar , every one ! " he cry . " Liars , perj'rers , briber , and c'rrupter ! stop ! " to the Bantam , who be slink away . " you have   do for yerself already ! you swear to it ! " 
 " a din't ! " say the Bantam , doggedly . 
 " you swear to't ! " the farmer vociferate afresh . 
 the Bantam play a tune upon the handle of the door , and still affirm that he do not ; a double contradiction at which the farmer absolutely rag in his chair , and be hoarse , as he call out a third time that the Bantam have swear to it . 
 " Noa ! " say the Bantam , duck his poll . " Noa ! " he repeat in a low note ; and then , while a sombre grin betoken idiotic enjoyment of his profound casuistical quibble work at his jaw : 
 " not up'n o - ath ! " he add , with a twitch of the shoulder and an angular jerk of the elbow . 
 Farmer Blaize look vacantly at Richard , as if to ask he what he think of England 's peasantry after the sample they have there . Richard would have prefer not to laugh , but his dignity give way to his sense of the ludicrous , and he let fly a shout . the farmer be in no laugh mood . he turn a wide eye back to the door , " lucky for'm , " he exclaim , see the Bantam have vanish , for his finger itch to break that stubborn head . he grow very puffy , and address Richard solemnly : 
 " now , look ye here , Mr. Feverel ! you have   be a - tampering with my witness . it be no use denyin ' ! I say y ' ' ave , sir ! you , or some of ye . I do not   care about no Feverel ! my witness there have be bribe . the Bantam 's be bribe , " and he shiver his pipe with an energetic thump on the table " bribe ! I know it ! I could swear to't ! " 
 " upon oath ? " Richard inquire , with a grave face . 
 " ay , upon oath ! " say the farmer , not observe the impertinence . 
 " I would take my Bible oath on't ! he be be corrupt , my principal witness ! oh ! it be dam cunnin ' , but it will not   do the trick . I will transport Tom Bakewell , sure as a gun . he shall travel , that man shall . sorry for you , Mr. Feverel sorry you have not   see how to treat I proper you , or your . money will not   do everything no ! it will not . it will c'rrupt a witness , but it will not   clear a felon . I would ha ' ' souse you , sir ! you be a boy and'll learn well . I ask no more than payment and apology ; and that I would ha ' take content always provide my witness be not   tamper with . now you must stand yer luck , all o ' ye . " 
 Richard stand up and reply , " very well , Mr. Blaize . " 
 " and if , " continue the farmer , " Tom Bakewell do not   drag you into't after ' m , why , you be safe , as I hope ye'll be , sincere ! " 
 " it be not in consideration of my own safety that I seek this interview with you , " say Richard , head erect . 
 " Grant ye that , " the farmer respond . " Grant ye that ! yer bold enough , young gentleman come of the blood that should be ! if y ' have only ha ' spoke trewth ! I believe yer father believe every word he say . I do wish I could ha ' say as much for Sir Austin 's son and heir . " 
 " what ! " cry Richard , with an astonishment hardly to be feign , " you have see my father ? " 
 but Farmer Blaize have now such a scent for lie that he could detect they where they do not exist , and mumble gruffly , 
 " ay , we know all about that ! " 
 the boy 's perplexity save he from be irritated . who could have tell his father ? an old fear of his father come upon he , and a touch of an old inclination to revolt . 
 " my father know of this ? " say he , very loudly , and star , as he speak , right through the farmer . " who have play I false ? who would betray I to he ? it be Austin ! no one know it but Austin . yes , and it be Austin who persuade I to come here and submit to these indignity . why could not   he be open with I ? I shall never trust he again ! " 
 " and why not you with I , young gentleman ? " say the farmer . " I sh'd trust you if ye have . " 
 Richard do not see the analogy . he bow stiffly and bade he good afternoon . 
 Farmer Blaize pull the bell . " company the young gentleman out , Lucy , " he wave to the little damsel in the doorway . " do the honour . and , Mr. Richard , ye might ha ' make a friend o ' I , sir , and it be not too late so to do . I be not cruel , but I hate lie . I whip my boy Tom , big than you , for not bein ' above board , only yesterday , ay ! make ' un stand within swing o ' this chair , and take 's measure . now , if ye'll come down to I , and speak trewth before the trial if it be only five minute before't ; or if Sir Austin , who be a gentleman , will say there be be no tamperin ' with any o ' my witness , his word for't well and good ! I will do my good to help off Tom Bakewell . and I be glad , young gentleman , you have   get a conscience about a poor man , though he be a villain . good afternoon , sir . " 
 Richard march hastily out of the room , and through the garden , never so much as deign a glance at his wistful little guide , who hang at the garden gate to watch he up the lane , wonder a world of fancy about the handsome proud boy . 




 CHAPTER X 

 to have determine upon an act something akin to heroism in its way , and to have fulfil it by lie heartily , and so subvert the whole structure build by good resolution , seem a sad downfall if we forget what human nature , in its green weedy spring , be compose of . Young Richard have quit his cousin Austin fully resolve to do his penance and drink the bitter cup ; and he have drink it ; drain many cup to the dreg ; and it be to no purpose . still they float before he , brim , trebly bitter . away from Austin 's influence , he be almost the same boy who have slip the guinea into Tom Bakewell 's hand , and the lucifer into Farmer Blaize 's rick . for good seed be long ripen ; a good boy be not make in a minute . enough that the seed be in he . he chafe on his road to Raynham at the scene he have just endure , and the figure of Belthorpe 's fat tenant burn like hot copper on the tablet of his brain , insufferably condescend , and , what be bad , in the right . Richard , obscure as his mind 's eye be by wounded pride , see that clearly , and hat his enemy for it the more . 
 Heavy Benson 's tongue be knell dinner as Richard arrive at the Abbey . he hurry up to his room to dress . accident , or design , have lay the book of Sir Austin 's aphorism open on the dressing - table . hastily comb his hair , Richard glance down and read 
  " the Dog returneth to his vomit : the Liar must eat his lie . " 
 Underneath be interject in pencil : " the Devil 's mouthful ! " 
 Young Richard run downstairs feel that his father have strike he in the face . 
 Sir Austin mark the scarlet stain on his son 's cheekbone . he seek the youth 's eye , but Richard would not look , and sit con his plate , an abject copy of Adrian 's succulent air at that employment . how could he pretend to the relish of an epicure when he be painfully endeavour to masticate the Devil 's mouthful ? 
 Heavy Benson sit upon the wretched dinner . Hippias usually the silent member , as if awaken by the unnatural stillness , become sprightly , like the goatsucker owl at night and speak much of his book , his digestion , and his dream , and be spar both by Algernon and Adrian . one inconsequent dream he relate , about fancy himself quite young and rich , and find himself suddenly in a field crop razor around he , when , just as he have , by step dainty as those of a french dancing - master , reach the middle , he to his dismay beheld a path clear of the blood , thirsty steel - crop , which he might have take at first have he look narrowly ; and there he be . 
 Hippias 's brother regard he with eye that plainly say they wish he have remain there . Sir Austin , however , draw forth his note - book , and jot down a reflection . a composer of aphorism can pluck blossom even from a razor - prop . be not Hippias 's dream the very counterpart of Richard 's position ? he , have he look narrowly , might have take the clear path : he , too , have be make dainty step till he be surround by the grinning blade . and from that text Sir Austin preach to his son when they be alone . Little Clare be still too unwell to be permit to attend the dessert , and father and son be soon closet together . 
 it be a strange meeting . they seem to have be separate so long . the father take his son 's hand ; they sit without a word pass between they . Silence say most . the boy do not understand his father : his father frequently thwart he : at time he think his father foolish : but that paternal pressure of his hand be eloquent to he of how warmly he be belove . he try once or twice to steal his hand away , conscious it be melt he . the spirit of his pride , and old rebellion , whisper he to be hard , unbending , resolute . hard he have enter his father 's study : hard he have meet his father 's eye . he could not meet they now . his father sit beside he gently ; with a manner that be almost meekness , so he love this boy . the poor gentleman 's lip move . he be pray internally to God for he . 
 by degree an emotion awake in the boy 's bosom . love be that blessed wand which win the water from the hardness of the heart . Richard fight against it , for the dignity of old rebellion . the tear would come ; hot and struggle over the dam of pride . shamefully fast they begin to fall . he could no long conceal they , or check the sob . Sir Austin draw he near and nearer , till the beloved head be on his breast . 
 an hour afterwards , Adrian Harley , Austin Wentworth , and Algernon Feverel be summon to the baronet 's study . 
 Adrian come last . there be a style of affable omnipotence about the wise youth as he sling himself into a chair , and make an arch of the point of his finger , through which to gaze on his blunder kinsman . careless as one may be whose sagacity have foresee , and whose benevolent effort have forestall , the point of danger at the threshold , Adrian cross his leg , and only intrude on their introductory remark so far as to hum half audibly at interval , 
  " Ripton and Richard be two pretty man , " 
 in parody of the old ballad . Young Richard 's red eye , and the baronet 's ruffle demeanour , tell he that an explanation have take place , and a reconciliation . that be well . the baronet would now pay cheerfully . Adrian sum and consider these matter , and barely listen when the baronet call attention to what he have to say : which be elaborately to inform all present , what all present very well know , that a rick have be fire , that his son be implicate as an accessory to the fact , that the perpetrator be now imprison , and that Richard 's family be , as it seem to he , bind in honour to do their utmost to effect the man 's release . 
 then the baronet state that he have himself be down to Belthorpe , his son likewise : and that he have find every disposition in Blaize to meet his wish . 
 the lamp which ultimately be sure to be lift up to illumine the act of this secretive race begin slowly to dispread its ray ; and , as statement follow statement , they see that all have know of the business : that all have be down to Belthorpe : all save the wise youth Adrian , who , with due deference and a sarcastic shrug , object to the proceeding , as put they in the hand of the man Blaize . his wisdom shine forth in an oration so persuasive and aphoristic that have it not be base on a plea against honour , it would have make Sir Austin waver . but its basis be expediency , and the baronet have a well aphorism of his own to confute he with . 
 " Expediency be man 's wisdom , Adrian Harley . do right be God 's . " 
 Adrian curb his desire to ask Sir Austin whether an attempt to counteract the just work of the law be do right . the direct application of an aphorism be unpopular at Raynham . 
 " I be to understand then , " say he , " that Blaize consent not to press the prosecution . " 
 " of course he will not , " Algernon remark . " confound he ! he will have his money , and what do he want besides ? " 
 " these agricultural gentleman be delicate customer to deal with . however , if he really consent " 
 " I have his promise , " say the baronet , fondle his son . 
 Young Richard look up to his father , as if he wish to speak . he say nothing , and Sir Austin take it as a mute reply to his caress ; and caress he the more . Adrian perceive a reserve in the boy 's manner , and as he be not quite satisfied that his chief should suppose he to have be the only idle , and not the most acute and vigilant member of the family , he commence a cross - examination of he by ask who have last speak with the tenant of Belthorpe ? 
 " I think I see he last , " murmur Richard , and relinquish his father 's hand . 
 Adrian fasten on his prey . " and leave he with a distinct and satisfactory assurance of his amicable intention ? " 
 " no , " say Richard . 
 " not ? " the Feverels join in astounded chorus . 
 Richard sidle away from his father , and repeat a shamefaced " no . " 
 " be he hostile ? " inquire Adrian , smooth his palm , and smile . 
 " yes , " the boy confess . 
 here be quite another view of their position . adrian , generally patient of result , triumph strongly at have evoke it , and turn upon Austin Wentworth , reprove he for induce the boy to go down to Belthorpe . Austin look grieve . he fear that Richard have fade in his good resolve . 
 " I think it his duty to go , " he observe . 
 " it be ! " say the baronet , emphatically . 
 " and you see what come of it , sir , " Adrian strike in . " these agricultural gentleman , I repeat , be delicate customer to deal with . for my part I would prefer be in the hand of a policeman . we be decidedly collar by Blaize . what be his word , Ricky ? give it in his own Doric . " 
 " he say he would transport Tom Bakewell . " 
 Adrian smooth his palm , and smile again . then they could afford to defy Mr. Blaize , he inform they significantly , and make once more a mysterious allusion to the Punic elephant , bid his relative be at peace . they be attach , in his opinion , too much importance to Richard 's complicity . the man be a fool , and a very extraordinary arsonite , to have an accomplice at all . it be a thing unknown in the annal of rick - burning . but one would be severe than law itself to say that a boy of fourteen have instigate to crime a full - grow man . at that rate the boy be ' father of the man ' with a vengeance , and one might hear next that ' the baby be father of the boy . ' they would find common sense a more benevolent ruler than poetical metaphysics . 
 when he have do , Austin , with his customary directness , ask he what he mean . 
 " I confess , adrian , " say the baronet , hear he expostulate with Austin 's stupidity , " I for one am at a loss . I have hear that this man , Bakewell , choose voluntarily not to inculpate my son . seldom have I hear anything that so gratify I . it be a view of innate nobleness in the rustic 's character which many a gentleman might take example from . we be bind to do our utmost for the man . " and , say that he should pay a second visit to Belthorpe , to inquire into the reason for the farmer 's sudden exposition of vindictiveness , Sir Austin rise . 
 before he leave the room , Algernon ask Richard if the farmer have vouchsafe any reason , and the boy then speak of the tampering with the witness , and the Bantam 's " not upon oath ! " which cause Adrian to choke with laughter . even the baronet smile at so cunning a distinction as that involve in swear a thing , and not swear it upon oath . 
 " how little , " he exclaim , " do one yeoman know another ! to elevate a distinction into a difference be the natural action of their mind . I will point that out to Blaize . he shall see that the idea be native bear . " 
 Richard see his father go forth . adrian , too , be ill at ease . 
 " this trot down to Belthorpe spoil all , " say he . " the affair would pass over to - morrow Blaize have no witness . the old rascal be only stand out for more money . " 
 " no , he be not , " Richard correct he . " it be not that . I be sure he believe his witness have be tamper with , as he call it . " 
 " what if they have , boy ? " Adrian put it boldly . " the ground be cut from under his foot . " 
 " Blaize tell I that if my father would give his word there have be nothing of the sort , he would take it . my father will give his word . " 
 " then , " say Adrian , " you have well stop he from go down . " 
 Austin look at Adrian keenly , and question he whether he think the farmer be justify in his suspicion . the wise youth be not to be entrap . he have only be give to understand that the witness be tolerably unstable , and , like the Bantam , ready to swear lustily , but not upon the Book . how give to understand , he choose not to explain , but he reiterate that the chief should not be allow to go down to Belthorpe . 
 Sir Austin be in the lane lead to the farm when he hear step of some one run behind he . it be dark , and he shake off the hand that lay hold of his cloak , roughly , not recognize his son . 
 " it be I , sir , " say Richard panting . " pardon I . you must not   go in there . " 
 " why not ? " say the baronet , put his arm about he . 
 " not now , " continue the boy . " I will tell you all to - night . I must see the farmer myself . it be my fault , sir . I - I lie to he the Liar must eat his lie . oh , forgive I for disgrace you , sir . I do it I hope I do it to save Tom Bakewell . let I go in alone , and speak the truth . " 
 " go , and I will wait for you here , " say his father . 
 the wind that bow the old elm , and shiver the dead leaf in the air , have a voice and a meaning for the baronet during that half - hour 's lonely pacing up and down under the darkness , await his boy 's return . the solemn gladness of his heart give nature a tongue . through the desolation fly overhead the wailing of the Mother of Plenty across the bare - sweep land he catch intelligible sign of the beneficent order of the universe , from a heart newly confirm in its grasp of the principle of human goodness , as manifest in the dear child who have just leave he ; confirm in its belief in the ultimate victory of good within we , without which nature have neither music nor meaning , and be rock , stone , tree , and nothing more . 
 in the dark , the dead leaf beat on his face , he have a word for his note - book : " there be for the mind but one grasp of happiness : from that uppermost pinnacle of wisdom , whence we see that this world be well design . " 




 CHAPTER XI 

 of all the chief actor in the Bakewell Comedy , Master Ripton Thompson await the fearful morning which be to decide Tom 's fate , in dolefull mood , and suffer the grave mental terror . Adrian , on part with he , have take casual occasion to speak of the position of the criminal in modern Europe , assure he that International Treaty now do what Universal Empire have aforetime do , and that among atlantic barbarian now , as among the Scythians of old , an offender would find precarious refuge and an emissary haunt he . 
 in the paternal home , under the roof of Law , and remove from the influence of his conscienceless young chief , the staggering nature of the act he have put his hand to , its awful felonious aspect , overwhelmed Ripton . he see it now for the first time . " why , it be next to murder ! " he cry out to his amazed soul , and wander about the house with a prickly skin . thought of America , and commence life afresh as an innocent gentleman , have cross his disorder brain . he write to his friend Richard , propose to collect disposable fund , and embark , in case of Tom 's break his word , or of accidental discovery . he dare not confide the secret to his family , as his leader have sternly enjoin he to avoid any weakness of that kind ; and , be by nature honest and communicative , the restriction be painful , and melancholy fall upon the boy . Mama Thompson attribute it to love . 
 the daughter of parchment rally he concern Miss Clare Forey . his hourly letter to Raynham , and silence as to everything and everybody there , his nervousness , and unwonted propensity to sudden inflammation of the cheek , be set down for sure sign of the passion . Miss Letitia Thompson , the pretty and least parchmenty one , destine by her Papa for the heir of Raynham , and perfectly aware of her brilliant future , up to which she have , since Ripton 's departure , dress and grimace , and study cadence   the latter with such success , though not yet fifteen , that she languish to she maid , and melt the small factotum footman   Miss Letty , whose insatiable thirst for intimation about the young heir Ripton could not satisfy , torment he daily in revenge , and once , quite unconsciously , give the lad a fearful turn ; for after dinner , when Mr. Thompson read the paper by the fire , preparatory to sleep at his accustomed post , and Mama Thompson and her submissive female brood sit task the swift intricacy of the needle , and emulate they with the tongue , Miss Letty steal behind Ripton 's chair , and introduce between he and his book the latin initial letter , large and illuminated , of the theme she suppose to be absorb he , as it do herself . the unexpected vision of this accuse Captain of the Alphabet , this resplendent and haunt a. front he bodily , throw Ripton straight back in his chair , while Guilt , with her ancient indecision what colour to assume on detection , fly from red to white , from white to red , across his fallen chap . Letty laugh triumphantly . amor , the word she have in mind , certainly have a connection with Arson . 
 but the delivery of a letter into Master Ripton 's hand , furnish she with other and likeli appearance to study . for scarce have Ripton plunge his head into the missive than he give way to violent transport , such as the healthy - minded little damsel , for all her languish cadence , deem she really could express be a downright declaration to be make to she . the boy do not stop at table . quickly recollect the presence of his family , he rush to his own room . and now the girl 's ingenuity be tax to gain possession of that letter . she succeed , of course , she be a huntress with few scruple and the game unguarde . with the eye of amazement she read this foreign matter : 
 " Dear Ripton , if Tom have be commit I would have shoot old Blaize . do you know my father be behind we that night when Clare see the ghost and hear all we say before the fire burst out . it be no use try to conceal anything from he . well as you be in an awful state I will tell you all about it . after you leave Ripton I have a conversation with Austin and he persuade I to go down to old Blaize and ask he to help off Tom . I go for I would have do anything for Tom after what he say to Austin and I defy the old churl to do his bad . then he say if my father pay the money and nobody have tamper with his witness he would not mind if Tom do get off and he have his chief witness in call the Bantam very like his master I think and the Bantam begin wink at I tremendously as you say , and say he have swear he see Tom Bakewell but not upon oath . he mean not on the Bible . he could swear to it but not on the Bible . I burst out laugh and you should have see the rage old Blaize be in . it be splendid fun . then we have a consultation at home Austin Rady my father Uncle Algernon who have come down to we again and your friend in prosperity and adversity R.D.F. my father say he would go down to old Blaize and give he the word of a gentleman we have not tamper with his witness and when he be go we be all talk and Rady say he must not see the farmer . I be as certain as I live that it be Rady bribe the Bantam . well I run and catch up my father and tell he not to go in to old Blaize but I would and eat my word and tell he the truth . he wait for I in the lane . never mind what pass between I and old Blaize . he make I beg and pray of he not to press it against Tom and then to complete it he bring in a little girl a niece of his and say to I , she be your good friend after all and tell I to thank she . a little girl twelve year of age . what business have she to mix herself up in my matter . depend upon it Ripton , wherever there be mischief there be girl I think . she have the insolence to notice my face , and ask I not to be unhappy . I be polite of course but I would not look at she . well the morning come and Tom be have up before Sir Miles Papworth . it be Sir Miles gout give we the time or Tom would have be have up before we could do anything . Adrian do not want I to go but my father say I should accompany he and hold my hand all the time . I shall be careful about get into these scrape again . when you have do anything honourable you do not mind but get among policeman and magistrate make you ashamed of yourself . Sir Miles be very attentive to my father and I and dead against Tom . we sit beside he and Tom be bring in , Sir Miles tell my father that if there be one thing that show a low villain it be rick - burning . what do you think of that . I look he straight in the face and he say to I he be do I a service in get Tom commit and clear the country of such fellow and Rady begin laugh . I hate Rady . my father say his son be not in haste to inherit and have estate of his own to watch and Sir Miles laugh too . I think we be discover at first . then they begin the examination of Tom . the Tinker be the first witness and he prove that Tom have speak against old Blaize and say something about burn his rick . I wish I have stand in the lane to Bursley with he alone . our country lawyer we engage for Tom cross - question he and then he say he be not ready to swear to the exact word that have pass between he and Tom . I should think not . then come another who swear he have see Tom lurk about the farmer 's ground that night . then come the Bantam and I see he look at Rady . I be tremendously excited and my father keep press my hand . just fancy my be bring to feel that a word from that fellow would make I miserable for life and he must perjure himself to help I . that come of give way to passion . my father say when we do that we be call in the devil as doctor . well the Bantam be tell to state what he have see and the moment he begin Rady who be close by I begin to shake and he be laugh I know though his face be as grave as Sir Miles . you never hear such a rigmarole but I could not laugh . he say he think he be certain he have see somebody by the rick and it be Tom Bakewell who be the only man he know who have a grudge against Farmer Blaize and if the object have be a little big he would not mind swear to Tom and would swear to he for he be dead certain it be Tom only what he see look small and it be pitch - dark at the time . he be ask what time it be he see the person steal away from the rick and then he begin to scratch his head and say supper - time . then they ask what time he have supper and he say nine o'clock by the clock and we prove that at nine o'clock Tom be drink in the ale - house with the Tinker at Bursley and Sir Miles swear and say he be afraid he could not commit Tom and when he hear that Tom look up at I and I say he be a noble fellow and no one shall sneer at Tom while I live . mind that . well Sir Miles ask we to dine with he and Tom be safe and I be to have he and educate he if I like for my servant and I will . and I will give money to his mother and make she rich and he shall never repent he know I . I say Rip . the Bantam must have see I . it be when I go to stick in the lucifer . as we be all go home from Sir Miles 's at night he have lot of red - faced daughter but I do not dance with they though they have music and be full of fun and I do not care to I be so delighted and almost let it out . when we leave and ride home Rady say to my father the Bantam be not such a fool as he be think and my father say one must be in a state of great personal exaltation to apply that epithet to any man and Rady shut his mouth and I give my pony a clap of the heel for joy . I think my father suspect what Rady do and do not approve of it . and he need not have do it after all and might have spoil it . I have be oblige to order he not to call I Ricky for he stop short at Rick so that everybody know what he mean . my dear Austin be go to South America . my pony be in capital condition . my father be the clever and good man in the world . Clare be a little well . I be quite happy . I hope we shall meet soon my dear Old Rip and we will not get into any more tremendous scrape will we . I remain , 
  " your swear friend , 

  " RICHARD DORIA FEVEREL . " 
 " P.S. I be to have a nice River Yacht . good - bye , Rip . mind you learn to box . mind you be not to show this to any of your friend on pain of my displeasure . 
 " N.B. Lady B. be so angry when I tell she that I have not come to she before . she would do anything in the world for I . I like she next well to my father and Austin . good - bye old Rip . " 
 poor little Letitia , after three perusal of this ingenuous epistle , where the law of punctuation be so disregarded , resign it to one of the pocket of her brother Ripton 's good jacket , deeply smite with the careless composer . and so end the last act of the Bakewell Comedy , in which the curtain close with Sir Austin 's point out to his friend the beneficial action of the System in it from begin to end . 




 CHAPTER XII 

 Laying of ghost be a public duty , and , as the mystery of the apparition that have frighten little Clare be never solve on the stage of event at Raynham , where dread walk the Abbey , let we go behind the scene a moment . morally superstitious as the baronet be , the character of his mind be oppose to anything like spiritual agency in the affair of man , and , when the matter be make clear to he , it shake off a weight of weakness and restore his mental balance ; so that from this time he go about more like the man he have once be , grasp more thoroughly the great truth , that this World be well design . Nay , he could laugh on hear Adrian , in reminiscence of the ill luck of one of the family member at its first manifestation , call the uneasy spirit , Algernon 's Leg . 
 Mrs. Doria be outraged . she maintain that her child have see . not to believe in it be almost to rob she of her personal property . after satisfactorily study his old state of mind in she , Sir Austin , move by pity , take she aside one day and show she that her Ghost could write word in the flesh . it be a letter from the unhappy lady who have give Richard birth , brief cold line , simply tell he his house would be disturb by she no more . cold line , but pen by what heart - break abnegation , and underlie they with what anguish of soul ! like most who deal with he , Lady Feverel think her husband a man fatally stern and implacable , and she act as silly creature will act when they fancy they see a fate against they : she neither petition for her right nor claim it : she try to ease her heart 's yearning by stealth , and , now she renounce all . Mrs. Doria , not want in the family tenderness and softness , shudder at he for accept the sacrifice so composedly : but he bid she to think how distract to this boy would be the sight of such relation between mother and father . a few year , and as man he should know , and judge , and love she . " let this be her penance , not inflict by I ! " Mrs. Doria bow to the System for another , not opine when it would be her turn to bow for herself . 
 far behind the scene we observe Rizzio and Mary grow old , much disenchanted : she discrowne , dishevel , he with gouty finger on a greasy guitar . the Diaper Sandoe of promise lend his pen for small hire . his fame have sink ; his bodily girth have sensibly increase . what he can do , and will do , be still his theme ; meantime the juice of the juniper be in requisition , and it seem that those small hire can not be perform without it . return from her wretched journey to her wretcheder home , the lady have to listen to a mild reproof from easy - go diaper , a reproof so mild that he couch it in blank verse : for , seldom write metrically now , he take to talk it . with a fluent sympathetic tear , he explain to she that she be damage her interest by these proceeding ; nor do he shrink from undertaking to elucidate wherefore . plume a smile upon his succulent mouth , he tell she that the poverty she live in be utterly unbefitte her gentle nurture , and that he have reason to believe could assure she that an annuity be on the point of be grant she by her husband . and Diaper break his bud of a smile into full flower as he deliver this information . she learn that he have apply to her husband for money . it be hard to have one 's prop of self - respect cut away just when we be suffer a martyr 's agony at the stake . there be a five minute ' tragic colloquy in the recess behind the scene , totally tragic to Diaper , who have fondly hop to bask in the warm sun of that annuity , and re - emerge from his state of grub . the lady then write the letter Sir Austin hold open to his sister . the atmosphere behind the scene be not wholesome , so , have lay the Ghost , we will return and face the curtain . 
 that infinitesimal dose of the World which Master Ripton Thompson have furnish to the System with such instantaneous and surprising effect be consider by Sir Austin to have work well , and to be for the time quite sufficient , so that Ripton do not receive a second invitation to Raynham , and Richard have no special intimate of his own age to rub his excessive vitality against , and want none . his hand be full enough with Tom Bakewell . moreover , his father and he be heart in heart . the boy 's mind be open , and turn to his father affectionately reverent . at this period , when the young savage grow into high influence , the faculty of worship be foremost in he . at this period Jesuits will stamp the future of their chargeling flock ; and all who bring up youth by a System , and watch it , know that it be the malleable moment . boy possess any mental or moral force to give they a tendency , then predestinate their career ; or , if under supervision , take the impress that be give they : not often to cast it off , and seldom to cast it off altogether . 
 in Sir Austin 's note - book be write : " between simple Boyhood and Adolescence the Blossoming Season on the threshold of Puberty , there be one Unselfish Hour say , Spiritual seed - time . " 
 he take care that good seed should be plant in Richard , and that the most fruitful seed for a youth , namely , Example , should be of a kind to germinate in he the love of every form of nobleness . 
 " I be only strive to make my son a Christian , " he say , answer they who persist in expostulate with the System . and to these instruction he give an aim : " first be virtuous , " he tell his son , " and then serve your country with heart and soul . " the youth be instruct to cherish an ambition for statesmanship , and he and his father read history and the speech of british orator to some purpose ; for one day Sir Austin find he lean cross - legged , and with his hand to his chin , against a pedestal support the bust of Chatham , contemplate the hero of our Parliament , his eye stream with tear . 
 People say the baronet carry the principle of Example so far that he only retain his boozing dyspeptic brother Hippias at Raynham in order to exhibit to his son the woeful retribution nature wreak upon a life of indulgence ; poor Hippias have now become a walking complaint . this be unjust , but there be no doubt he make use of every illustration to disgust or encourage his son that his neighbourhood afford he , and do not spare his brother , for whom Richard entertain a contempt in proportion to his admiration of his father , and be for fly into penitential extreme which Sir Austin have to soften . 
 the boy pray with his father morning and night . 
 " how be it , sir , " he say one night , " I can not   get Tom Bakewell to pray ? " 
 " do he refuse ? " Sir Austin ask . 
 " he seem to be ashamed to , " Richard reply . " he want to know what be the good ? and I do not   know what to tell he . " 
 " I be afraid it have go too far with he , " say Sir Austin , " and until he have have some deep sorrow he will not find the divine want of Prayer . Strive , my son , when you represent the people , to provide for their education . he feel everything now through a dull impenetrable rind . culture be half - way to heaven . tell he , my son , should he ever be bring to ask how he may know the efficacy of Prayer , and that his prayer will be answer , tell he   he quote the Pilgrim 's Scrip : 
 " ' who rise from Prayer a well man , his prayer be answer . ' " 
 " I will , sir , " say Richard , and go to sleep happy . 
 Happy in his father and in himself , the youth now live . Conscience be begin to inhabit he , and he carry some of the freightage know to man ; though in so crude a form that it overweighe he , now on this side , now on that . 
 the wise youth Adrian observe these further progressionary development in his pupil , soberly cynical . he be under Sir Austin 's interdict not to banter he , and ease his acrid humour inspire by the sight of a felonious young rick - burner turning saint , by grave affectation of sympathy and extreme accuracy in mark the not widely - distant date of his various change . the Bread - and - water phase last a fortnight : the Vegetarian   an imitation of his cousin Austin , little well than a month : the religious , somewhat long : the religious - propagandist   when he be for convert the heathen of Lobourne and Burnley , and the domestic of the Abbey , include Tom Bakewell , long still , and hard to bear ; he try to convert Adrian ! all the while Tom be be exercise like a raw recruit . Richard have a drill - sergeant from the near barrack down for he , to give he a proper pride in himself , and march he to and fro with immense satisfaction , and nearly break his heart try to get the round - shoulder rustic to take in the rudiment of letter : for the boy have unbounded hope for Tom , as a hero in grain . 
 Richard 's pride also be cast aside . he affect to be , and really think he be , humble . Whereupon Adrian , as by accident , impart to he the fact that man be animal , and he an animal with the rest of they . 
 " I an animal ! " cry Richard in scorn , and for week he be as trouble by this rudiment of self - knowledge as Tom by his letter . Sir Austin have he instruct in the wonder of anatomy , to restore his self - respect . 
 seed - Time pass thus smoothly , and adolescence come on , and his cousin Clare feel what it be to be of an opposite sex to he . she too be grow , but nobody care how she grow . outwardly even her mother seem absorb in the sprouting of the green off - shoot of the Feverel tree , and Clare be his handmaiden , little mark by he . 
 Lady Blandish honestly love the boy . she would tell he : " if I have be a girl , I would have have you for my husband . " and he with the frankness of his year would reply : " and how do you know I would have have you ? " cause she to laugh and call he a silly boy , for have he not hear she say she would have have he ? terrible word , he know not then the meaning of ! 
 " you do not   read your father 's Book , " she say . her own copy be bind in purple velvet , gilt - edge , as decorative lady like to have holy book , and she carry it about with she , and quote it , and   Adrian remark to Mrs. Doria   hunt a noble quarry , and deliberately aim at he therewith , which Mrs. Doria choose to believe , and regret her brother would not be on his guard . 
 " see here , " say Lady Blandish , press an almondy finger - nail to one of the Aphorisms , which instance how age and adversity must clay - enclose we ere we can effectually resist the magnetism of any human creature in our path . " can you understand it , child ? " 
 Richard inform she that when she read he could . 
 " well , then , my squire , " she touch his cheek and run her finger through his hair , " learn as quick as you can not to be all hither and yon with a hundred different attraction , as I be before I meet a wise man to guide I . " 
 " be my father very wise ? " Richard ask . 
 " I think so , " the lady emphasize her individual judgment . 
 " do you " Richard break forth , and be stop by a beating of his heart . 
 " do I what ? " she calmly query . 
 " I be go to say , do you I mean , I love he so much . " 
 Lady Blandish smile and slightly colour . 
 they frequently approach this theme , and always retreat from it ; always with the same beating of heart to Richard , accompany by the sense of a grow mystery , which , however , do not as yet generally disturb he . 
 life be make very pleasant to he at Raynham , as it be part of Sir Austin 's principle of education that his boy should be thoroughly joyous and happy ; and whenever Adrian send in a satisfactory report of his pupil 's advancement , which he do pretty liberally , diversion be plan , just as prize be give to diligent school - boy , and Richard be suppose to have all his desire gratify while he attend to his study . the System flourish . tall , strong , bloomingly healthy , he take the lead of his companion on land and water , and have more than one bondsman in his service besides Ripton Thompson the boy without a Destiny ! perhaps the boy with a destiny be grow up a trifle too conscious of it . his generosity to his occasional companion be princely , but be exercise something too much in the manner of a prince ; and , notwithstanding his contempt for baseness , he would overlook that more easily than an offence to his pride , which demand an utter servility when it have once be render susceptible . if Richard have his follower he have also his feud . the Papworths be as subservient as Ripton , but young Ralph Morton , the nephew of Mr. Morton , and a match for Richard in numerous promising quality , comprise the noble science of fisticuff , this youth speak his mind too openly , and moreover would not be snub . there be no middle course for Richard 's comrade between high friendship or absolute slavery . he be deficient in those cosmopolite habit and feeling which enable boy and man to hold together without care much for each other ; and , like every insulate mortal , he attribute the deficiency , of which he be quite aware , to the fact of his possess a superior nature . Young Ralph be a lively talker : therefore , argue Richard 's vanity , he have no intellect . he be affable : therefore he be frivolous . the woman like he : therefore he be a butterfly . in fine , young Ralph be popular , and our superb prince , deny the privilege of despise , end by detest he . 
 early in the day of their contention for leadership , Richard see the absurdity of affect to scorn his rival . Ralph be an Eton boy , and hence , be robust , a swimmer and a cricketer . a swimmer and a cricketer be nowhere to be scorn in youth 's republic . find that manoeuvre would not do , Richard be prompt once or twice to entrench himself behind his great wealth and his position ; but he soon abandon that also , partly because his chilliness to ridicule tell he he be expose himself , and chiefly that his heart be too chivalrous . and so he be drag into the list by Ralph , and experience the luck of champion . for cricket , and for diving , Ralph bear away the belt : Richard 's middle - stump totter before his ball , and he could seldom pick up more than three egg underwater to Ralph 's half - dozen . he be beat , too , in jump and run . why will silly mortal strive to the painful pinnacle of championship ? or why , once have reach they , not have the magnanimity and circumspection to retire into private life immediately ? sting by his defeat , Richard send one of his dependent papworth to Poer Hall , with a challenge to Ralph Barthrop Morton ; match himself to swim across the Thames and back , once , trice , or thrice , within a less time than he , Ralph Barthrop Morton , would require for the undertaking . it be accept , and a reply return , equally formal in the trumpeting of christian name , wherein Ralph Barthrop Morton acknowledge the challenge of Richard Doria Feverel , and be his man . the match come off on a midsummer morning , under the direction of Captain Algernon . Sir Austin be a spectator from the cover of a plantation by the river - side , unknown to his son , and , to the scandal of her sex , Lady Blandish accompany the baronet . he have invite her attendance , and she , obey her frank nature , and know what the Pilgrim 's Scrip say about prude , at once agree to view the match , please he mightily . for be not here a woman worthy the Golden Ages of the world ? one who could look upon man as a creature divinely make , and look with a mind neither tempt , nor taunt , by the Serpent ! such a woman be rare . Sir Austin do not discompose she by utter his praise . she be conscious of his approval only in an increase gentleness of manner , and something in his voice and communication , as if he be speak to a familiar , a very high compliment from he . while the lad be stand ready for the signal to plunge from the steep decline of greensward into the shin water , Sir Austin call upon she to admire their beauty , and she do , and even advance her head above his shoulder delicately . in so do , and just as the start be give , a bonnet become visible to Richard . Young Ralph be heel in air before he move , and then he drop like lead . he be beat by several length . 
 the result of the match be unaccountable to all present , and Richard 's friend unanimously press he to plead a false start . but though the youth , with full confidence in his well style and equal strength , have back himself heavily against his rival , and have lose his little river - yacht to Ralph , he would do nothing of the sort . it be the Bonnet have beat he , not Ralph . the Bonnet , typical of the mystery that cause his heart those violent palpitation , be his dear , detestable enemy . 
 and now , as he progress from mood to mood , his ambition turn towards a field where Ralph could not rival he , and where the Bonnet be etherealize , and reign glorious mistress . a cheek to the pride of a boy will frequently divert he to the path where lie his subtle power . Richard give up his companion , servile or antagonistic : he relinquish the material world to young Ralph , and retire into himself , where he be grow to be lord of kingdom where Beauty be his handmaid , and history his minister and Time his ancient harper , and sweet Romance his bride ; where he walk in a realm vaster and more gorgeous than the great Orient , people with the hero that have be . for there be no princely wealth , and no lofty heritage , to equal this early one that be make bountifully common to so many , when the ripen blood have put a spark to the imagination , and the earth be see through rosy mist of a thousand fresh - awakened nameless and aimless desire ; pant for bliss and take it as it come ; make of any sight or sound , perforce of the enchantment they carry with they , a key to infinite , because innocent , pleasure . the passion then be gambol cub ; not the ravage glutton they grow to . they have their tooth and their talon , but they neither tear nor bite . they be in counsel and fellowship with the quickened heart and brain . the whole sweet system move to music . 
 something akin to the indication of a change in the spirit of his son , which be now see , Sir Austin have mark down to be expect , as due to his plan . the blush of the youth , his long vigil , his clinging to solitude , his abstraction , and downcast but not melancholy air , be matter for rejoice to the prescient gentleman . " for it come , " say he to Dr. Clifford of Lobourne , after consult he medically on the youth 's behalf and be assure of his soundness , " it come of a thoroughly sane condition . the blood be healthy , the mind virtuous : neither instigate the other to evil , and both be perfect toward the flower of manhood . if he reach that pure in the untainted fulness and perfection of his natural power I be indeed a happy father ! but one thing he will owe to I : that at one period of his life he know paradise , and could read God 's handwriting on the earth ! now those abomination whom you call precocious boy your little pet monster , doctor ! and who can wonder that the world be what it be ? when it be full of they as they will have no divine time to look back upon in their own life , how can they believe in innocence and goodness , or be other than son of selfishness and the Devil ? but my boy , " and the baronet drop his voice to a key that be touch to hear , " my boy , if he fall , will fall from an actual region of purity . he dare not be a sceptic as to that . whatever his darkness , he will have the guide light of a memory behind he . so much be secure . " 
 to talk nonsense , or poetry , or the dash between the two , in a tone of profound sincerity , and to enunciate solemn discordance with receive opinion so seriously as to convey the impression of a spiritual insight , be the peculiar gift by which monomaniac , have first persuade themselves , contrive to influence their neighbour , and through they to make conquest of a good half of the world , for good or for ill . Sir Austin have this gift . he speak as if he see the truth , and , persist in it so long , he be accredit by those who do not understand he , and silence they that do . 
 " we shall see , " be all the argument leave to Dr. Clifford , and other unbeliever . 
 so far certainly the experiment have succeed . a comelier , bracer , well boy be nowhere to be meet . his promise be undeniable . the vessel , too , though it lie now in harbour and have not yet be prove by the buffet of the element on the great ocean , have make a good trial trip , and get well through stormy weather , as the record of the Bakewell Comedy witness to at Raynham . no augury could be hopefull . the Fates must indeed be hard , the Ordeal severe , the destiny dark , that could destroy so bright a spring ! but , bright as it be , the baronet relax nothing of his vigilant supervision . he say to his intimate : " every act , every fostered inclination , almost every thought , in this Blossoming Season , bear its seed for the Future . the live Tree now require incessant watchfulness . " and , act up to his light , Sir Austin do watch . the youth submit to an examination every night before he seek his bed ; professedly to give an account of his study , but really to recapitulate his moral experience of the day . he could do so , for he be pure . any wildness in he that his father note , any remoteness or richness of fancy in his expression , be set down as incidental to the Blossoming Season . there be nothing like a theory for bind the wise . Sir Austin , despite his rigid watch and ward , know less of his son than the servant of his household . and he be deaf , as well as blind . adrian think it his duty to tell he that the youth be consume paper . Lady Blandish likewise hint at his moon propensity . Sir Austin from his lofty watch - tower of the System have foresee it , he say . but when he come to hear that the youth be write poetry , his wounded heart have its reason for be much disturbed . 
 " surely , " say Lady Blandish , " you know he scribble ? " 
 " a very different thing from write poetry , " say the baronet . " no Feverel have ever write poetry . " 
 " I do not   think it be a sign of degeneracy , " the lady remark . " he rhyme very prettily to I . " 
 a London phrenologist , and a friendly Oxford Professor of poetry , quiet Sir Austin 's fear . 
 the phrenologist say he be totally deficient in the imitative faculty ; and the Professor , that he be equally so in the rhythmic , and instance several console false quantity in the few effusion submit to he . add to this , Sir Austin tell Lady Blandish that Richard have , at his good , do what no poet have ever be know to be capable of do : he have , with his own hand , and in cold blood , commit his virgin manuscript to the flame : which make Lady Blandish sigh forth , " poor boy ! " 
 kill one 's darling child be a painful imposition . for a youth in his Blossoming Season , who fancy himself a poet , to be request to destroy his first - bear , without a reason   though to pretend a reason cogent enough to justify the request be a mockery , be a piece of abhorrent despotism , and Richard 's blossom wither under it . a strange man have be introduce to he , who traverse and bisect his skull with sagacious stiff finger , and crush his soul while , in an infallible voice , declare he the animal he be make he feel such an animal ! not only his blossom wither , his being seem to draw in its shoot and twig . and when , couple thereunto   the strange man have depart , his work do , his father , in his tender manner , state that it would give he pleasure to see those same precocious , utterly valueless , scribbling among the cinder , the last remain mental blossom spontaneously fall away . Richard 's spirit stand bare . he protest not . enough that it could be wish ! he would not delay a minute in do it . desire his father to follow he , he go to a drawer in his room , and from a clean - linen recess , never suspect by Sir Austin , the secretive youth draw out bundle after bundle : each neatly tie , name , and number : and pitch they into flame . and so farewell my young ambition ! and with it farewell all true confidence between Father and Son . 




 CHAPTER XIII 

 it be now , as Sir Austin have write it down , the Magnetic Age : the Age of violent attraction , when to hear mention of love be dangerous , and to see it , a communication of the disease . People at Raynham be put on their guard by the baronet , and his reputation for wisdom be severely criticize in consequence of the injunction he think fit to issue through butler and housekeeper down to the low household , for the preservation of his son from any visible symptom of the passion . a footman and two housemaid be believe to have be dismiss on the report of heavy Benson that they be in or incline to the state ; upon which an undercook and a dairymaid voluntarily throw up their place , aver that " they do not want no young man , but to have their sex spy after by an old wretch like that , " indicate the ponderous butler , " be a little too much for a christian woman , " and then they be ungenerous enough to glance at Benson 's well - know marital calamity , hint that some man meet their desert . so intolerable do heavy Benson 's espionage become , that Raynham would have grow depopulated of its womankind have not Adrian interfere , who point out to the baronet what a fearful arm his butler be wield . Sir Austin acknowledge it despondently . " it only show , " say he , with a fine spirit of justice , " how all but impossible it be to legislate where there be woman ! " 
 " I do not object , " he add ; " I hope I be too just to object to the exercise of their natural inclination . all I ask from they be discreetness . " 
 " ay , " say Adrian , whose discreetness be a marvel . 
 " no gadding about in couple , " continue the baronet , " no kissing in public . such occurrence no boy should witness . whenever people of both sex be throw together , they will be silly ; and where they be high - feed , uneducated , and barely occupy , it must be look for as a matter of course . let it be know that I only require discreetness . " 
 Discreetness , therefore , be instruct to reign at the Abbey . under Adrian 's able tuition the fairest of its domestic acquire that virtue . 
 Discreetness , too , be enjoin to the upper household . Sir Austin , who have not previously appear to notice the case of Lobourne 's hopeless curate , now desire Mrs. Doria to interdict , or at least discourage , his visit , for the appearance of the man be that of an embodied sigh and groan . 
 " really , Austin ! " say Mrs. Doria , astonish to find her brother more awake than she have suppose , " I have never allow he to hope . " 
 " let he see it , then , " reply the baronet ; " let he see it . " 
 " the man amuse I , " say Mrs. Doria . " you know , we have few amusement here , we inferior creature . I confess I should like a barrel - organ well ; that remind one of town and the opera ; and besides , it play more than one tune . however , since you think my society bad for he , let he stop away . " 
 with the self - devotion of a woman she grow patient and sweet the moment her daughter Clare be speak of , and the business of her life in view . Mrs. Doria 's maternal heart have betroth the two cousin , Richard and Clare ; have already behold they espoused and fruitful . for this she yield the pleasure of town ; for this she immure herself at Raynham ; for this she bear with a thousand folly , exaction , inconvenience , thing abhorrent to she , and heaven know what form of torture and self - denial , which be smilingly endure by that great of voluntary martyr a mother with a daughter to marry . Mrs. Doria , an amiable widow , have surely marry but for her daughter Clare . the lady 's hair no woman could possess without feel it her pride . it be the daily theme of her lady's - maid , a natural aureole to her head . she be gay , witty , still physically youthful enough to claim a destiny ; and she sacrifice it to accomplish her daughter 's ! sacrifice , as with heroic scissor , hair , wit , gaiety let we not attempt to enumerate how much ! more than may be say . and she be only one of thousand ; thousand who have no portion of the hero 's reward ; for he may reckon on applause , and condolence , and sympathy , and honour ; they , poor slave ! must look for nothing but the opposition of their own sex and the sneer of our . o , Sir Austin ! have you not be so blinded , what an Aphorism might have spring from this point of observation ! Mrs. Doria be coolly tell , between sister and brother , that during the magnetic Age her daughter 's presence at Raynham be undesirable . instead of nursing offence , her sole thought be the mountain of prejudice she have to contend against . she bow , and say , Clare want sea - air she have never quite recover the shock of that dreadful night . how long , Mrs. Doria wish to know , might the Peculiar Period be expect to last ? 
 " that , " say Sir Austin , " depend . a year , perhaps . he be enter on it . I shall be most grieve to lose you , Helen . Clare be now how old ? " 
 " Seventeen . " 
 " she be marriageable . " 
 " marriageable , Austin ! at seventeen ! do not   name such a thing . my child shall not be rob of her youth . " 
 " our woman marry early , Helen . " 
 " my child shall not ! " 
 the baronet reflect a moment . he do not wish to lose his sister . 
 " as you be of that opinion , Helen , " say he , " perhaps we may still make arrangement to retain you with we . would you think it advisable to send Clare she should know discipline to some establishment for a few month ? " 
 " to an asylum , Austin ? " cry Mrs. Doria , control her indignation as well as she could . 
 " to some select superior seminary , Helen . there be such to be find . " 
 " Austin ! " Mrs. Doria exclaim , and have to fight with a moisture in her eye . " unjust ! absurd ! " she murmur . the baronet think it a natural proposition that Clare should be a bride or a schoolgirl . 
 " I can not leave my child . " Mrs. Doria tremble . " where she go , I go . I be aware that she be only one of our sex , and therefore of no value to the world , but she be my child . I will see , poor dear , that you have no cause to complain of she . " 
 " I think , " Sir Austin remark , " that you acquiesce in my view with regard to my son . " 
 " yes generally , " say Mrs. Doria , and feel culpable that she have not before , and could not then , tell her brother that he have set up an Idol in his house an Idol of flesh ! more retributive and abominable than wood or brass or gold . but she have bow to the Idol too long she have too entirely bind herself to gain her project by subserviency . she have , and she dimly perceive it , commit a great fault in tactic , in teach her daughter to bow to the Idol also . love of that kind Richard take for tribute . he be indifferent to Clare 's soft eye . the parting kiss he give she be ready and cold as his father could desire . Sir Austin now grow eloquent to he in laudation of manly pursuit : but Richard think his eloquence barren , his attempt at companionship awkward , and all manly pursuit and aim , life itself , vain and worthless . to what end ? sigh the blossomless youth , and cry aloud , as soon as he be relieve of his father 's society , what be the good of anything ? whatever he do whichever path he select , lead back to Raynham . and whatever he do , however wretched and wayward he show himself , only confirm Sir Austin more and more in the truth of his prevision . Tom Bakewell , now the youth 's groom , have to give the baronet a report of his young master 's proceeding , in common with Adrian , and while there be no harm to tell , Tom speak out . " he do ride like fire every day to Pig 's Snout , " name the high hill in the neighbourhood , " and stand there and stare , never movin ' , like a mad ' un . and then hoam agin all slack as if he have be beat in a race by somebody . " 
 " there be no woman in that ! " muse the baronet . " he would have ride back as hard as he go , " reflect this profound scientific humanist , " have there be a woman in it . he would shun vast expanse , and seek shade , concealment , solitude . the desire for distance betoken emptiness and undirected hunger : when the heart be possess by an image we fly to wood and forest , like the guilty . " 
 Adrian 's report accuse his pupil of an extraordinary access of cynicism . 
 " exactly , " say the baronet . " as I foresaw . at this period an insatiate appetite be accompany by a fastidious palate . nothing but the quintessence of existence , and those in exhaustless supply , will satisfy this craving , which be not to be satisfy ! hence his bitterness . life can furnish no food fitting for he . the strength and purity of his energy have reach to an almost divine height , and roam through the Inane . poetry , love , and such - like , be the drug earth have to offer to high nature , as she offer to low one debauchery . ' tis a sign , this sourness , that he be subject to none of the empiricism that be afloat . now to keep he clear of they ! " 
 the Titans have an easy task in storm Olympus . as yet , however , it could not be say that Sir Austin 's System have fail . on the contrary , it have rear a youth , handsome , intelligent , well - breed , and , observe the lady , with acute emphasis , innocent . where , they ask , be such another young man to be find ? 
 " oh ! " say Lady Blandish to Sir Austin , " if man could give their hand to woman unsoile how different would many a marriage be ! she will be a happy girl who call Richard husband . " 
 " Happy , indeed ! " be the baronet 's caustic ejaculation . " but where shall I meet one equal to he , and his match ? " 
 " I be innocent when I be a girl , " say the lady . 
 Sir Austin bow a reserved opinion . 
 " do you think no girl innocent ? " 
 Sir Austin gallantly think they all so . 
 " no , that you know they be not , " say the lady , stamp . " but they be more innocent than boy , I be sure . " 
 " because of their education , madam . you see now what a youth can be . perhaps , when my system be publish , or rather to speak more humbly when it be practise , the balance may be restore , and we shall have virtuous young man . " 
 " it be too late for poor I to hope for a husband from one of they , " say the lady , pouting and laugh . 
 " it be never too late for beauty to waken love , " return the baronet , and they trifle a little . they be approach Daphne 's Bower , which they enter , and sit there to taste the coolness of a descend midsummer day . 
 the baronet seem in a humour for dignified fooling ; the lady for serious converse . 
 " I shall believe again in Arthur 's knight , " she say . " when I be a girl I dream of one . " 
 " and he be in quest of the San Greal ? " 
 " if you like . " 
 " and show his good taste by turn aside for the more tangible San Blandish ? " 
 " of course you consider it would have be so , " sigh the lady , ruffle . 
 " I can only judge by our generation , " say Sir Austin , with a bend of homage . 
 the lady gather her mouth . " either we be very mighty or you be very weak . " 
 " both , madam . " 
 " but whatever we be , and if we be bad , bad ! we love virtue , and truth , and lofty soul , in man : and , when we meet those quality in they , we be constant , and would die for they die for they . ah ! you know man but not woman . " 
 " the knight possess such distinction must be young , I presume ? " say Sir Austin . 
 " Old , or young ! " 
 " but if old , they be scarce capable of enterprise ? " 
 " they be love for themselves , not for their deed . " 
 " ah ! " 
 " yes ah ! " say the lady . " intellect may subdue woman make slave of they ; and they worship beauty perhaps as much as you do . but they only love for ever and be mat when they meet a noble nature . " 
 Sir Austin look at she wistfully . 
 " and do you encounter the knight of your dream ? " 
 " not then . " she lower her eyelid . it be prettily do . 
 " and how do you bear the disappointment ? " 
 " my dream be in the nursery . the day my frock be lengthen to a gown I stand at the altar . I be not the only girl that have be make a woman in a day , and give to an ogre instead of a true knight . " 
 " Good God ! " exclaim Sir Austin , " woman have much to bear . " 
 here the couple change character . the lady become gay as the baronet grow earnest . 
 " you know it be our lot , " she say . " and we be allow many amusement . if we fulfil our duty in produce child , that , like our virtue , be its own reward . then , as a widow , I have wonderful privilege . " 
 " to preserve which , you remain a widow ? " 
 " certainly , " she respond . " I have no trouble now in patch and piece that rag the world call a character . I can sit at your foot every day unquestione . to be sure , other do the same , but they be female eccentric , and have cast off the rag altogether . " 
 Sir Austin draw near to she . " you would have make an admirable mother , madam . " 
 this from Sir Austin be very like positive wooing . 
 " it be , " he continue , " ten thousand pity that you be not one . " 
 " do you think so ? " she speak with humility . 
 " I would , " he go on , " that heaven have give you a daughter . " 
 " would you have think she worthy of Richard ? " 
 " our blood , madam , should have be one ! " 
 the lady tap her toe with her parasol . " but I be a mother , " she say . " Richard be my son . yes ! Richard be my boy , " she reiterate . 
 Sir Austin most graciously append , " call he ours , madam , " and hold his head as if to catch the word from her lip , which , however , she choose to refuse , or defer . they make the coloured West a common point for their eye , and then Sir Austin say : 
 " as you will not say ' ours , ' let I . and , as you have therefore an equal claim on the boy , I will confide to you a project I have lately conceive . " 
 the announcement of a project hardly savour of a come proposal , but for Sir Austin to confide one to a woman be almost tantamount to a declaration . so Lady Blandish think , and so say her soft , deep - eyed smile , as she peruse the ground while listen to the project . it concern Richard 's nuptial . he be now nearly eighteen . he be to marry when he be five - and - twenty . meantime a young lady , some year his junior , be to be seek for in the home of England , who would be every way fit by education , instinct , and blood on each of which qualification Sir Austin unreservedly enlarge to espouse so perfect a youth and accept the honourable duty of assist in the perpetuation of the Feverels . the baronet go on to say that he propose to set forth immediately , and devote a couple of month , to the first essay in his Coelebite search . 
 " I fear , " say Lady Blandish , when the project have be fully unfold , " you have lay down for yourself a difficult task . you must not be too exact . " 
 " I know it . " the baronet 's shake of the head be piteous . 
 " even in England she will be rare . but I confine myself to no class . if I ask for blood it be for untainted , not what you call high blood . I believe many of the middle class be frequently more careful more pure - blooded than our aristocracy . show I among they a God - fear family who educate their child I should prefer a girl without brother and sister as a christian damsel should be educate say , on the model of my son , and she may be penniless , I will pledge she to Richard Feverel . " 
 Lady Blandish bite her lip . " and what do you do with Richard while you be absent on this expedition ? " 
 " oh ! " say the baronet , " he accompany his father . " 
 " then give it up . his future bride be now pinafore and bread - and - buttery . she romp , she cry , she dream of play and pudding . how can he care for she ? he think more at his age of old woman like I . he will be certain to kick against she , and destroy your plan , believe I , Sir Austin . " 
 " ay ? ay ? do you think that ? " say the baronet . 
 Lady Blandish give he a multitude of reason . 
 " ay ! true , " he mutter . " Adrian say the same . he must not see she . how could I think of it ! the child be naked woman . he would despise she . naturally ! " 
 " naturally ! " echo the lady . 
 " then , madam , " and the baronet rise , " there be one thing for I to determine upon . I must , for the first time in his life , leave he . " 
 " will you , indeed ? " say the lady . 
 " it be my duty , have thus bring he up , to see that he be properly mat , not wreck upon the quicksand of marriage , as a youth so delicately train might be ; more easily than another ! Betrothed , he will be safe from a thousand snare . I may , I think , leave he for a term . my precaution have save he from the temptation of his season . " 
 " and under whose charge will you leave he ? " Lady Blandish inquire . 
 she have emerge from the temple , and stand beside Sir Austin on the upper step , under a clear summer twilight . 
 " Madam ! " he take her hand , and his voice be gallant and tender , " under whose but your ? " 
 as the baronet say this , he bend above her hand , and raise it to his lip . 
 Lady Blandish feel that she have be woo and ask in wedlock . she do not withdraw her hand . the baronet 's salute be flatteringly reverent . he deliberate over it , as one go through a grave ceremony . and he , the scorner of woman , have choose she for his homage ! Lady Blandish forget that she have take some trouble to arrive at it . she receive the exquisite compliment in all its unique honey - sweet : for in love we must deserve nothing or the fine bloom of fruition be go . 
 the lady 's hand be still in durance , and the baronet have not recover from his profound inclination , when a noise from the neighbouring beechwood startle the two actor in this courtly pantomime . they turn their head , and behold the hope of Raynham on horseback survey the scene . the next moment he have gallop away . 




 CHAPTER XIV 

 all night Richard toss on his bed with his heart in a rapid canter , and his brain bestride it , traverse the rich untasted world , and the great Realm of Mystery , from which he be now restrain no long . month he have wander about the gate of the Bonnet , wonder , sigh , knock at they , and get neither admittance nor answer . he have the key now . his own father have give it to he . his heart be a lightning steed , and bear he on and on over limitless region bath in superhuman beauty and strangeness , where cavalier and lady lean whisper upon close green sward , and knight and lady cast a splendour upon savage forest , and tilt and tourney be hold in golden court light to a glorious day by lady ' eye , one pair of which , dimly visioned , constantly distinguishable , follow he through the boskage and dwelt upon he in the press , beam while he bend above a hand glitter white and fragrant as the frosted blossom of a May night . 
 awhile the heart would pause and flutter to a shock : he be in the act of consummate all earthly bliss by press his lip to the small white hand . only to do that , and die ! cry the Magnetic Youth : to fle the Jewel of Life into that one cup and drink it off ! he be intoxicate by anticipation . for that he be bear . there be , then , some end in existence , something to live for ! to kiss a woman 's hand , and die ! he would leap from the couch , and rush to pen and paper to relieve his swarm sensation . Scarce be he seat when the pen be dash aside , the paper send fly with the exclamation , " have I not swear I would never write again ? " Sir Austin have shut that safety - valve . the nonsense that be in the youth might have pour harmlessly out , and its urgency for ebullition be so great that he be repeatedly oblivious of his oath , and find himself seat under the lamp in the act of composition before pride could speak a word . possibly the pride even of Richard Feverel have be swamp if the act of composition be easy at such a time , and a single idea could stand clearly foremost ; but myriad be demand the first place ; chaotic host , like rank of stormy billow , press impetuously for expression , and despair of reduce they to form , quite as much as pride , to which it please he to refer his incapacity , throw down the powerless pen , and send he pant to his outstretche length and another headlong career through the rosy - girdle land . 
 toward morning the madness of the fever abate somewhat , and he go forth into the air . a lamp be still burn in his father 's room , and Richard think , as he look up , that he see the ever - vigilant head on the watch . instantly the lamp be extinguish , the window stand cold against the hue of dawn . 
 strong pull be an excellent medical remedy for certain class of fever . Richard take to it instinctively . the clear fresh water , burnish with sunrise , sparkle against his arrowy prow ; the soft deep shadow curl smile away from his gliding keel . overhead solitary morning unfold itself , from blossom to bud , from bud to flower ; still , delicious change of light and colour , to whose influence he be heedless as he shoot under willow and aspen , and across sheet of river - reach , pure mirror to the upper glory , himself the sole tenant of the stream . somewhere at the fount of the world lie the land he be row toward ; something of its shadow light might be discern here and there . it be not a dream , now he know . there be a secret abroad . the wood be full of it ; the water roll with it , and the wind . oh , why could not one in these day do some high knightly deed which should draw down lady ' eye from their heaven , as in the day of Arthur ! to such a meaning breathe the unconscious sigh of the youth , when he have pull through his first feverish energy . 
 he be off Bursley , and have lapse a little into that musing quietude which follow strenuous exercise , when he hear a hail and his own name call . it be no lady , no fairy , but young Ralph Morton , an irruption of miserable masculine prose . heartily wish he abe with the rest of mankind , Richard row in and jump ashore . Ralph immediately seize his arm , say that he desire earnestly to have a talk with he , and drag the Magnetic Youth from his water - dream , up and down the wet mow grass . that he have to say seem to be difficult of utterance , and Richard , though he barely listen , soon have enough of his old rival 's gladness at see he , and exhibit sign of impatience ; whereat Ralph , as one who branch into matter somewhat foreign to his mind , but of great human interest and importance , put the question to he : 
 " I say , what woman 's name do you like good ? " 
 " I do not   know any , " quoth Richard , indifferently . " why be you out so early ? " 
 in answer to this , Ralph suggest that the name of Mary might be consider a pretty name . 
 Richard agree that it might be ; the housekeeper at Raynham , half the woman cook , and all the housemaid enjoy that name ; the name of Mary be equivalent for woman at home . 
 " yes , I know , " say Ralph . " we have lot of Marys . it be so common . oh ! I do not   like Mary well . what do you think ? " 
 Richard think it just like another . 
 " do you know , " Ralph continue , throw off the mask and plunge into the subject , " I would do anything on earth for some name one or two . it be not Mary , nor Lucy . Clarinda 's pretty , but it be like a novel . Claribel , I like . name begin with ' Cl ' I prefer . the ' Cl 's ' be always gentle and lovely girl you would die for ! do not   you think so ? " 
 Richard have never be acquaint with any of they to inspire that emotion . indeed these urgent appeal to his fancy in feminine name at five o'clock in the morning slightly surprise he , though he be but half awake to the outer world . by degree he perceive that Ralph be change . instead of the lusty boisterous boy , his rival in manly science , who speak straightforwardly and act up to his speech , here be an abashed and blush - persecute youth , who sue piteously for a friendly ear wherein to pour the one idea possess he . gradually , too , Richard apprehend that Ralph likewise be on the frontier of the Realm of Mystery , perhaps far toward it than he himself be ; and then , as by a sympathetic stroke , be reveal to he the wonderful beauty and depth of meaning in feminine name . the theme appear novel and delicious , fit to the season and the hour . but the hardship be , that Richard could choose none from the number ; all be the same to he ; he love they all . 
 " do not   you really prefer the ' Cl 's ' ? " say Ralph , persuasively . 
 " not well than the name end in ' a ' and ' y , ' Richard reply , wish he could , for Ralph be evidently ahead of he . 
 " come under these tree , " say Ralph . and under the tree Ralph unbosom . his name be down for the army : Eton be quit for ever . in a few month he would have to join his regiment , and before he leave he must say goodbye to his friend .... would Richard tell he Mrs. Forey 's address ? he have hear she be somewhere by the sea . Richard do not remember the address , but say he would willingly take charge of any letter and forward it . 
 Ralph dive his hand into his pocket . " here it be . but do not   let anybody see it . " 
 " my aunt 's name be not Clare , " say Richard , peruse what be compose of the exterior formula . " you have   address it to clare herself . " 
 that be plain to see . 
 " Emmeline Clementina Matilda Laura , Countess Blandish , " Richard continue in a low tone , transfer the name , and play on the musical string they be to he . then he say : " name of lady ! how they sweeten their name ! " 
 he fix his eye on Ralph . if he discover anything far he say nothing , but bade the good fellow good - bye , jump into his boat , and pull down the tide . the moment Ralph be hide by an abutment of the bank , Richard peruse the address . for the first time it strike he that his cousin Clare be a very charming creature : he remember the look of her eye , and especially the last reproachful glance she give he at parting . what business have Ralph to write to she ? do she not belong to Richard Feverel ? he read the word again and again : Clare Doria Forey . why , Clare be the name he like good nay , he love it . Doria , too she share his own name with he . away go his heart , not at a canter now , at a gallop , as one who sight the quarry . he feel too weak to pull . Clare Doria Forey oh , perfect melody ! slide with the tide , he hear it flute in the bosom of the hill . 
 when nature have make we ripe for love , it seldom occur that the Fates be behindhand in furnish a temple for the flame . 
 above green - flash plunge of a weir , and shake by the thunder below , lily , golden and white , be sway at anchor among the reed . meadow - sweet hung from the bank thick with weed and trail bramble , and there also hang a daughter of earth . her face be shade by a broad straw hat with a flexible brim that leave her lip and chin in the sun , and , sometimes nod , send forth a light of promise eye . across her shoulder , and behind , flow large loose curl , brown in shadow , almost golden where the ray touch they . she be simply dress , befit decency and the season . on a close inspection you might see that her lip be stain . this bloom young person be regale on dewberry . they grow between the bank and the water . apparently she find the fruit abundant , for her hand be make pretty progress to her mouth . fastidious youth , which revolt at woman plump her exquisite proportion on bread - and - butter , and would   we must suppose   joyfully have her scraggy to have her poetical , can hardly object to dewberry . indeed the act of eat they be dainty and induce musing . the dewberry be a sister to the lotus , and an innocent sister . you eat : mouth , eye , and hand be occupy , and the undrugged mind free to roam . and so it be with the damsel who kneel there . the little skylark go up above she , all song , to the smooth southern cloud lie along the blue : from a dewy copse dark over her nodding hat the blackbird flute , call to she with thrice mellow note : the kingfisher flash emerald out of green osier : a bow - wing heron travel aloft , seek solitude a boat slip toward she , contain a dreamy youth ; and still she pluck the fruit , and eat , and muse , as if no fairy prince be invade her territory , and as if she wish not for one , or know not her wish . surround by the green shaven meadow , the pastoral summer buzz , the weir - fall 's thunder white , amid the breath and beauty of wild flower , she be a bit of lovely human life in a fair setting ; a terrible attraction . the Magnetic Youth lean round to note his proximity to the weir - pile , and behold the sweet vision . Stiller and stiller grow nature , as at the meeting of two electric cloud . her posture be so graceful , that though he be make straight for the weir , he dare not dip a scull . just then one entice dewberry catch her eye . he be float by unheeded , and see that her hand stretch low , and could not gather what it seek . a stroke from his right bring he beside she . the damsel glance up dismayed , and her whole shape tremble over the brink . Richard spring from his boat into the water . press a hand beneath her foot , which she have thrust against the crumble wet side of the bank to save herself , he enable she to recover her balance , and gain safe earth , whither he follow she . 




 CHAPTER XV 

 he have land on an island of the still - vex bermoothe . the world lie wreck behind he : Raynham hang in mist , remote , a phantom to the vivid reality of this white hand which have draw he thither away thousand of league in an eye - twinkle . Hark , how Ariel sing overhead ! what splendour in the heaven ! what marvel of beauty about his enchanted brow ! and , o you wonder ! Fair Flame ! by whose light the glory of be be now first see .... Radiant Miranda ! Prince Ferdinand be at your foot . 
 or be it Adam , his rib take from his side in sleep , and thus transform , to make he behold his Paradise , and lose it ? ... 
 the youth look on she with as glow an eye . it be the First Woman to he . 
 and she mankind be all caliban to she , save this one princely youth . 
 so to each other say their change eye in the moment they stand together ; he pale , and she blush . 
 she be indeed sweetly fair , and would have be hold fair among rival damsel . on a magic shore , and to a youth educate by a System , string like an arrow draw to the head , he , it might be guess , could fly fast and far with she . the soft rise in her cheek , the clearness of her eye , bear witness to the body 's virtue ; and health and happy blood be in her bearing . have she stand before Sir Austin among rival damsel , that Scientific Humanist , for the consummation of his system , would have throw she the handkerchief for his son . the wide summer - hat , nod over her forehead to her brow , seem to flow with the flow heavy curl , and those fire - thread mellow curl , only half - curl , wave of hair call they , ripple at the end , go like a sunny red - veined torrent down her back almost to her waist : a glorious vision to the youth , who embrace it as a flower of beauty , and read not a feature . there be curious feature of colour in her face for he to have read . her brow , thick and brownish against a soft skin show the action of the blood , meet in the bend of a bow , extend to the temple long and level : you see that she be fashion to peruse the sight of earth , and by the pliability of her brow that the wonderful creature use her faculty , and be not go to be a statue to the gazer . under the dark thick brow an arch of lash shoot out , give a wealth of darkness to the full frank blue eye , a mystery of meaning more than brain be ever mean to fathom : rich , henceforth , than all mortal wisdom to Prince Ferdinand . for when nature turn artist , and produce contrast of colour on a fair face , where be the Sage , or what the Oracle , shall match the depth of its light look ? 
 Prince Ferdinand be also fair . in his slim boat - attire his figure look heroic . his hair , rise from the parting to the right of his forehead , in what his admire Lady Blandish call his plume , fall away slant silkily to the temple across the nearly imperceptible upward curve of his brow there feel more than see , so slight it be and give to his profile a bold beauty , to which his bashful , breathless air be a flattering charm . an arrow draw to the head , capable of fly fast and far with she ! he lean a little forward , drink she in with all his eye , and young Love have a thousand . then truly the System triumph , just ere it be to fall ; and could Sir Austin have be content to draw the arrow to the head , and let it fly , when it would fly , he might have point to his son again , and say to the world , " match he ! " such keen bliss as the youth have in the sight of she , an innocent youth alone have power of soul in he to experience . 
 " o woman ! " say the Pilgrim 's Scrip , in one of its solitary outburst , " Women , who like , and will have for hero , a rake ! how soon be you not to learn that you have take bankrupt to your bosom , and that the putrescent gold that attract you be the slime of the Lake of sin ! " 
 if these two be Ferdinand and Miranda , Sir Austin be not prospero , and be not present , or their fate might have be different . 
 so they stand a moment , change eye , and then Miranda speak , and they come down to earth , feel no less in heaven . 
 she speak to thank he for his aid . she use quite common simple word ; and use they , no doubt , to express a common simple meaning : but to he she be utter magic , cast spell , and the effect they have on he be manifest in the incoherence of his reply , which be too foolish to be chronicle . 
 the couple be again mute . suddenly Miranda , with an exclamation of anguish , and innumerable light and shadow play over her lovely face , clap her hand , cry aloud , " my book ! my book ! " and run to the bank . 
 Prince Ferdinand be at her side . " what have you lose ? " he say . 
 " my book ! " she answer , her delicious curl swing across her shoulder to the stream . then turn to he , " oh , no , no ! let I entreat you not to , " she say ; " I do not so very much mind lose it . " and in her eagerness to restrain he she unconsciously lay her gentle hand upon his arm , and take the force of motion out of he . 
 " indeed , I do not really care for the silly book , " she continue , withdraw her hand quickly , and redden . " pray , do not ! " 
 the young gentleman have kick off his shoe . no soon be the spell of contact break than he jump in . the water be still trouble and discolour by his introductory adventure , and , though he duck his head with the spirit of a dabchick , the book be miss . a scrap of paper float from the bramble just above the water , and look as if fire have catch its edge and it have fly from one adverse element to the other , be all he could lay hold of ; and he return to land disconsolately , to hear Miranda 's murmured mixing of thank and pretty expostulation . 
 " let I try again , " he say . 
 " no , indeed ! " she reply , and use the awful threat : " I will run away if you do , " which effectually restrain he . 
 her eye fall on the fire - stain scrap of paper , and brighten , as she cry , " there , there ! you have what I want . it be that . I do not care for the book . no , please ! you be not to look at it . give it I . " 
 before her playfully imperative injunction be fairly speak , Richard have glance at the document and discover a Griffin between two Wheatsheaves : his crest in silver : and below o wonderment immense ! his own handwriting ! 
 he hand it to she . she take it , and put it in her bosom . 
 who would have think , that , where all else perish , Odes , Idyls , Lines , Stanzas , this one sonnet to the star should be miraculously reserve for such a starry fate pass beatitude ! 
 as they walk silently across the meadow , Richard strove to remember the hour and the mood of mind in which he have compose the notable production . the star be invoke , as see and foresee all , to tell he where then his love recline , and so forth ; Hesper be complacent enough to do so , and describe she in a couplet 
  " through sunset 's amber see I shin fair , 
  as her blue eye shine through her golden hair . " 
 and surely no word could be more prophetic . here be two blue eye and golden hair ; and by some strange chance , that appear like the working of a divine finger , she have become the possessor of the prophecy , she that be to fulfil it ! the youth be too charge with emotion to speak . Doubtless the damsel have less to think of , or have some trifling burden on her conscience , for she seem to grow embarrassed . at last she draw up her chin to look at her companion under the nodding brim of her hat   and the action give she a charmingly freakish air , cry , " but where be you go to ? you be wet through . let I thank you again ; and , pray , leave I , and go home and change instantly . " 
 " wet ? " reply the magnetic muser , with a voice of tender interest ; " not more than one foot , I hope . I will leave you while you dry your stocking in the sun . " 
 at this she could not withhold a shy laugh . 
 " not i , but you . you would try to get that silly book for I , and you be dripping wet . be you not very uncomfortable ? " 
 in all sincerity he assure she that he be not . 
 " and you really do not feel that you be wet ? " 
 he really do not : and it be a fact that he speak truth . 
 she purse her dewberry mouth in the most comical way , and her blue eye lighten laughter out of the half - close lid . 
 " I can not help it , " she say , her mouth opening , and sound harmonious bell of laughter in his ear . " pardon I , will not   you ? " 
 his face take the same soft smile curve in admiration of she . 
 " not to feel that you have be in the water , the very moment after ! " she musically interject , see she be excuse . 
 " it be true , " he say ; and his own gravity then touch he to join a duet with she , which make they no long feel stranger , and do the work of a month of intimacy . well than sentiment , laughter open the breast to love ; open the whole breast to his full quiver , instead of a corner here and there for a solitary arrow . hail the occasion propitious , o british young ! and laugh and treat love as an honest God , and dabble not with the sentimental rouge . these two laugh , and the soul of each cry out to other , " it be I it be I. " 
 they laugh and forget the cause of their laughter , and the sun dry his light river clothing , and they stroll toward the blackbird 's copse , and stand near a stile in sight of the foam of the weir and the many - coloured ring of eddy stream forth from it . 
 Richard 's boat , meanwhile , have contrive to shoot the weir , and be swing , bottom upward , broadside with the current down the rapid backwater . 
 " will you let it go ? " say the damsel , eye it curiously . 
 " it can not   be stop , " he reply , and could have add : " what do I care for it now ! " 
 his old life be whirl away with it , dead , drown . his new life be with she , alive , divine . 
 she flap low the brim of her hat . " you must really not come any far , " she softly say . 
 " and will you go , and not tell I who you be ? " he ask , grow bold as the fear of lose she come across he . " and will you not tell I before you go " his face burn " how you come by that that paper ? " 
 she choose to select the easy question for answer : " you ought to know I ; we have be introduce . " Sweet be she win off - hand affability . 
 " then who , in heaven 's name , be you ? tell I ! I never could have forget you . " 
 " you have , I think , " she say . 
 " impossible that we could ever have meet , and I forget you ! " 
 she look up at he . 
 " do you remember Belthorpe ? " 
 " Belthorpe ! Belthorpe ! " quoth Richard , as if he have to touch his brain to recollect there be such a place . " do you mean old Blaize 's farm ? " 
 " then I be old Blaize 's niece . " she trip he a soft curtsey . 
 the magnetize youth gaze at she . by what magic be it that this divine sweet creature could be ally with that old churl ! 
 " then what what be your name ? " say his mouth , while his eye add , " o wonderful creature ! how come you to enrich the earth ? " 
 " have you forgot the Desboroughs of Dorset , too ? " she peer at he from a side - bend of the flap brim . 
 " the Desboroughs of Dorset ? " a light break in on he . " and have you grow to this ? that little girl I see there ! " 
 he draw close to she to read the near feature of the vision . she could no more laugh off the pierce fervour of his eye . her volubility flutter under his deeply wistful look , and now neither voice be high , and they be mutually constrain . 
 " you see , " she murmur , " we be old acquaintance . " 
 Richard , with his eye still intently fix on she , return , " you be very beautiful ! " 
 the word slip out . perfect simplicity be unconsciously audacious . her overpowering beauty strike his heart , and , like an instrument that be touch and answer to the touch , he speak . 
 Miss Desborough make an effort to trifle with this terrible directness ; but his eye would not be gainsay , and check her lip . she turn away from they , her bosom a little rebellious . praise so passionately speak , and by one who have be a damsel 's first dream , dream of nightly many long night , and clothe in the virgin silver of her thought in bud , praise from he be coin the heart can not reject , if it would . she quicken her step . 
 " I have offend you ! " say a mortally wound voice across her shoulder . 
 that he should think so be too dreadful . 
 " oh no , no ! you would never offend I . " she give he her whole sweet face . 
 " then why why do you leave I ? " 
 " because , " she hesitate , " I must go . " 
 " no . you must not go . why must you go ? do not go . " 
 " indeed I must , " she say , pull at the obnoxious broad brim of her hat ; and , interpret a pause he make for his assent to her rational resolve , shyly look at he , she hold her hand out , and say , " good - bye , " as if it be a natural thing to say . 
 the hand be pure white white and fragrant as the frosted blossom of a Maynight . it be the hand whose shadow , cast before , he have last night bent his head reverentially above , and kiss resign himself thereupon over to execution for payment of the penalty of such daring by such bliss well reward . 
 he take the hand , and hold it , gaze between her eye . 
 " good - bye , " she say again , as frankly as she could , and at the same time slightly compress her finger on his in token of adieu . it be a signal for his to close firmly upon her . 
 " you will not go ? " 
 " pray , let I , " she plead , her sweet brow sue in wrinkle . 
 " you will not go ? " mechanically he draw the white hand nearer his thumping heart . 
 " I must , " she falter piteously . 
 " you will not go ? " 
 " oh yes ! yes ! " 
 " tell I . do you wish to go ? " 
 the question be a subtle one . a moment or two she do not answer , and then forswore herself , and say , yes . 
 " do you you wish to go ? " he look with quiver eyelid under her . 
 a fainter yes respond . 
 " you wish wish to leave I ? " his breath go with the word . 
 " indeed I must . " 
 her hand become a close prisoner . 
 all at once an alarming delicious shudder go through her frame . from he to she it course , and back from she to he . forward and back love 's electric messenger rush from heart to heart , knock at each , till it surge tumultuously against the bar of its prison , cry out for its mate . they stand tremble in unison , a lovely couple under these fair heaven of the morning . 
 when he could get his voice it say , " will you go ? " 
 but she have none to reply with , and could only mutely bend upward her gentle wrist . 
 " then , farewell ! " he say , and , drop his lip to the soft fair hand , kiss it , and hang his head , swing away from she , ready for death . 
 Strange , that now she be release she should linger by he . strange , that his audacity , instead of the executioner , bring blush and timid tenderness to his side , and the sweet word , " you be not angry with I ? " 
 " with you , o beloved ! " cry his soul . " and you forgive I , fair charity ! " 
 " I think it be rude of I to go without thank you again , " she say , and again proffer her hand . 
 the sweet heaven - bird shiver out his song above he . the gracious glory of heaven fall upon his soul . he touch her hand , not move his eye from she , nor speak , and she , with a soft word of farewell , pass across the stile , and up the pathway through the dewy shade of the copse , and out of the arch of the light , away from his eye . 
 and away with she go the wild enchantment . he look on barren air . but it be no more the world of yesterday . the marvellous splendour have sow seed in he , ready to spring up and bloom at her gaze ; and in his bosom now the vivid conjuration of her tone , her face , her shape , make they leap and illumine he like fitful summer lightning ghost of the vanish sun . 
 there be nothing to tell he that he have be make love and declare it with extraordinary rapidity ; nor do he know it . soft flushed cheek ! sweet mouth ! strange sweet brow ! eye of soft fire ! how could his ripe eye behold you , and not plead to keep you ? Nay , how could he let you go ? and he seriously ask himself that question . 
 to - morrow this place will have a memory the river and the meadow , and the white fall weir : his heart will build a temple here ; and the skylark will be its high - priest , and the old blackbird its glossy - gown chorister , and there will be a sacred repast of dewberry . to - day the grass be grass : his heart be chase by phantom and find rest nowhere . only when the most tender freshness of his flower come across he do he taste a moment 's calm ; and no soon do it come than it give place to keen pang of fear that she may not be his for ever . 
 Erelong he learn that her name be Lucy . Erelong he meet Ralph , and discover that in a day he have distance he by a sphere . he and Ralph and the curate of Lobourne join in their walk , and raise classical discussion on lady ' hair , finger a thousand delicious lock , from those of Cleopatra to the Borgia 's . " fair ! fair ! all of they fair ! " sigh the melancholy curate , " as be those woman form for our perdition ! I think we have in this country what will match the italian or the Greek . " his mind flutter to Mrs. Doria , Richard blush before the vision of Lucy , and Ralph , whose heroine 's hair be a dark luxuriance , dissent , and claim a noble share in the slaughter of man for dark - haired wonder . they have no mutual confidence , but they be singularly kind to each other , these three child of instinct . 




 CHAPTER XVI 

 Lady Blandish , and other who profess an interest in the fortune and future of the systematized youth , have occasionally mention name of family whose alliance accord to apparent calculation , would not degrade his blood : and over these name , secretly preserve on an open leaf of the note - book , Sir Austin , as he near the metropolis , distantly drop his eye . there be name historic and name mushroomic ; name that the Conqueror might have call in his muster - roll ; name that have be , clearly , toss into the upper stratum of civilized lifer by a millwheel or a merchant - stool . against they the baronet have write M. or Po . or Pr . signifying , Money , Position , Principles , favour the latter with special bracket . the wisdom of a worldly man , which he could now and then adopt , determine he , before he commence his round of visit , to consult and sound his solicitor and his physician thereanent ; lawyer and doctor be the rat who know good the merit of a house , and on what sort of foundation it may be stand . 
 Sir Austin enter the great city with a sad mind . the memory of his misfortune come upon he vividly , as if no year have intervene , and it be but yesterday that he find the letter tell he that he have no wife and his son no mother . he wander on foot through the street the first night of his arrival , look strangely at the shop and show and bustle of the world from which he have divorce himself ; feel as destitute as the poor vagrant . he have almost forget how to find his way about , and come across his old mansion in his effort to regain his hotel . the window be alight sign of merry life within . he star at it from the shadow of the opposite side . it seem to he he be a ghost gaze upon his living past . and then the phantom which have stand there mock while he feel as other man the phantom , now flesh and blood reality , seize and convulse his heart , and fill its unforgive crevice with bitter ironic venom . he remember by the time reflection return to he that it be Algernon , who have the house at his disposal , probably give a card - party , or something of the sort . in the morning , too , he remember that he have divorce the world to we d a system , and must be faithful to that exact Spouse , who , now alone of thing on earth , could fortify and recompense he . 
 Mr. Thompson receive his client with the dignity and emotion due to such a rent - roll and the unexpectedness of the honour . he be a thin stately man of law , garb as one who give audience to acred bishop , and carry on his countenance the stamp of paternity to the parchment skin , and of a virtuous attachment to port wine sufficient to increase his respectability in the eye of moral Britain . after congratulate Sir Austin on the fortunate issue of two or three suit , and be assure that the baronet 's business in town have no concern therewith , Mr. Thompson venture to hope that the young heir be all his father could desire he to be , and hear with satisfaction that he be a pattern to the youth of the Age . 
 " a difficult time of life , Sir Austin ! " say the old lawyer , shake his head . " we must keep our eye on they keep awake ! the mischief be do in a minute . " 
 " we must take care to have see where we plant , and that the root be sound , or the mischief will do itself in site of , or under the very spectacle of , supervision , " say the baronet . 
 his legal adviser murmur " exactly , " as if that be his own idea , add , " it be my plan with Ripton , who have have the honour of an introduction to you , and a very pleasant time he spend with my young friend , whom he do not forget . Ripton follow the Law . he be article to I , and will , I trust , succeed I worthily in your confidence . I bring he into town in the morning ; I take he back at night . I think I may say that I be quite content with he . " 
 " do you think , " say Sir Austin , fix his brow , " that you can trace every act of his to its motive ? " 
 the old lawyer bend forward and humbly request that this might be repeat . 
 " do you " Sir Austin hold the same searching expression " do you establish yourself in a radiating centre of intuition : do you base your watchfulness on so thorough an acquaintance with his character , so perfect a knowledge of the instrument , that all its movement even the eccentric one be anticipate by you , and provide for ? " 
 the explanation be a little too long for the old lawyer to entreat another repetition . wink with the painful deprecation of a deaf man , Mr. Thompson smile urbanely , cough conciliatingly , and say he be afraid he could not affirm that much , though he be happily enable to say that Ripton have bear an extremely good character at school . 
 " I find , " Sir Austin remark , as sardonically he relax his inspecting pose and mien , " there be father who be content to be simply obey . now I require not only that my son should obey ; I would have he guiltless of the impulse to gainsay my wish feel I in he strong than his undeveloped nature , up to a certain period , where my responsibility end and his commence . man be a self - act machine . he can not cease to be a machine ; but , though self - act , he may lose the power of self - guidance , and in a wrong course his very vitality hurry he to perdition . Young , he be an organism ripen to the set mechanic diurnal round , and while so he need all the angel to hold watch over he that he grow straight and healthy , and fit for what machinal duty he may have to perform " ... 
 Mr. Thompson agitate his eyebrow dreadfully . he be utterly lose . he respect Sir Austin 's estate too much to believe for a moment he be listen to downright folly . yet how otherwise explain the fact of his excellent client be incomprehensible to he ? for a middle - aged gentleman , and one who have be in the habit of advise and managing , will rarely have a notion of accuse his understanding ; and Mr. Thompson have not the slight notion of accuse his . but the baronet 's condescension in come thus to he , and speak on the subject near his heart , might well affect he , and he quickly settle the case in favour of both party , pronounce mentally that his honoured client have a meaning , and so deep it be , so subtle , that no wonder he experience difficulty in give it fitly significant word . 
 Sir Austin elaborate his theory of the Organism and the mechanism , for his lawyer 's edification . at a recurrence of the word " healthy " Mr. Thompson catch he up : 
 " I apprehend you ! oh , I agree with you , Sir Austin ! entirely ! allow I to ring for my son Ripton . I think , if you condescend to examine he , you will say that regular habit , and a diet of nothing but law - reading for other form of literature I strictly interdict have make he all that you instance . " 
 Mr. Thompson 's hand be on the bell . Sir Austin arrest he . 
 " permit I to see the lad at his occupation , " say he . 
 our old friend Ripton sit in a room apart with the confidential clerk , Mr. Beazley , a veteran of law , now little well than a document , look already sign and seal , and shortly to be deliver , who enjoin nothing from his pupil and companion save absolute silence , and sound his praise to his father at the close of day when it have be rigidly observe not care , or consider , the finished dry old document that he be , under what kind of spell a turbulent commonplace youth could be charm into stillness for six hour of the day . Ripton be suppose to be devoted to the study of Blackstone . a tome of the classic legal commentator lie extend outside his desk , under the partially lift lid of which nestle the assiduous student 's head law be thus bring into direct contact with his brain - pan . the office - door open , and he hear not ; his name be call , and he remain equally moveless . his method of take in Blackstone seem absorbing as it be novel . 
 " compare note , I daresay , " whisper Mr. Thompson to Sir Austin . " I call that study ! " 
 the confidential clerk rise , and bow obsequious senility . 
 " be it like this every day , Beazley ? " Mr. Thompson ask with parental pride . 
 " Ahem ! " the old clerk reply , " he be like this every day , sir . I could not ask more of a mouse . " 
 Sir Austin step forward to the desk . his proximity rouse one of Ripton 's sens , which blow a pall to the other . down go the lid of the desk . Dismay , and the ardour of study , flash together in Ripton 's face . he slouch from his perch with the air of one who mean rather to defend his position than welcome a superior , the right hand in his waistcoat pocket fumble a key , the left catch at his vacant stool . 
 Sir Austin put two finger on the youth 's shoulder , and say , lean his head a little on one side , in a way habitual to he , " I be glad to find my son 's old comrade thus profitably occupy . I know what study be myself . but beware of prosecute it too excitedly ! come ! you must not be offend at our interruption ; you will soon take up the thread again . besides , you know , you must get accustomed to the visit of your client . " 
 so condescend and kindly do this speech sound to Mr. Thompson , that , see Ripton still preserve his appearance of disorder and sneak defiance , he think fit to nod and frown at the youth , and desire he to inform the baronet what particular part of Blackstone he be absorb in master at that moment . 
 Ripton hesitate an instant , and blunder out , with dubious articulation , " the Law of Gravelkind . " 
 " what law ? " say Sir Austin , perplexed . 
 " gravelkind , " again rumble Ripton 's voice . 
 Sir Austin turn to Mr. Thompson for an explanation . the old lawyer be shake his law - box . 
 " Singular ! " he exclaim . " he will make that mistake ! what law , sir ? " 
 Ripton read his error in the sternly painful expression of his father 's face , and correct himself . " Gavelkind , sir . " 
 " ah ! " say Mr. Thompson , with a sigh of relief . " Gravelkind , indeed ! Gavelkind ! an old kentish " he be go to expound , but Sir Austin assure he he know it , and a very absurd law it be , add , " I should like to look at your son 's note , or remark on the judiciousness of that family arrangement , if he have any . " 
 " you be make note , or refer to they , as we enter , " say Mr. Thompson to the suck lawyer ; " a very good plan , which I have always enjoin on you . be you not ? " 
 Ripton stammer that he be afraid he hide not any note to show , worth see . 
 " what be you do then , sir ? " 
 " make note , " mutter Ripton , look incarnate subterfuge . 
 " exhibit ! " 
 Ripton glance at his desk and then at his father ; at Sir Austin , and at the confidential clerk . he take out his key . it would not fit the hole . 
 " Exhibit ! " be peremptorily call again . 
 in his praiseworthy effort to accommodate the keyhole , Ripton discover that the desk be already unlocked . Mr. Thompson march to it , and hold the lid aloft . a book be lie open within , which Ripton immediately hustle among a mass of paper and toss into a dark corner , not before the glimpse of a coloured frontispiece be catch by Sir Austin 's eye . 
 the baronet smile , and say , " you study Heraldry , too ? be you fond of the science ? " 
 Ripton reply that he be very fond of it extremely attach , and throw a further pile of paper into the dark corner . 
 the note have be less conspicuously place , and the search for they be tedious and vain . paper , not legal , or the fruit of study , be find , that make Mr. Thompson more intimate with the condition of his son 's exchequer ; nothing in the shape of a remark on the Law of Gavelkind . 
 Mr. Thompson suggest to his son that they might be among those scrap he have throw carelessly into the dark corner . Ripton , though he consent to inspect they , be positive they be not there . 
 " what have we here ? " say Mr. Thompson , seize a neatly fold paper address to the Editor of a law publication , as Ripton bring they forth , one by one . Forthwith Mr. Thompson fix his spectacle and read aloud : 
  " to the Editor of the ' Jurist . ' 
 " Sir , in your recent observation on the great case of Crim " 
 Mr. Thompson hem'd ! and stop short , like a man who come unexpectedly upon a snake in his path . Mr. Beazley 's foot shuffle . Sir Austin change the position of an arm . 
 " it be on the other side , I think , " gasp Ripton . 
 Mr. Thompson confidently turn over , and intone with emphasis . 
 " to Absalom , the son of David , the little Jew usurer of Bond Court , Whitecross Gutters , for his introduction to Venus , I o u five pound , when I can pay . 
  " sign : RIPTON THOMPSON . " 
 underneath this fictitious legal instrument be discreetly append : 
 " Mem . document not bind . " 
 there be a pause : an awful under - breath of sanctify wonderment and reproach pass round the office . Sir Austin assume an attitude . Mr. Thompson shed a glance of severity on his confidential clerk , who parry by throw up his hand . 
 Ripton , now fairly bewilder , stuff another paper under his father 's nose , hop the outside perhaps would satisfy he : it be mark " Legal Considerations . " Mr. Thompson have no idea of spar or shield his son . in fact , like many man whose self - love be wound by their offspring , he feel vindictive , and be ready to sacrifice he up to a certain point , for the good of both . he therefore open the paper , expect something bad than what he have hitherto see , despite its formal heading , and he be not disappointed . 
 the " Legal Considerations " relate to the Case regarding , which Ripton have conceive it imperative upon he to address a letter to the Editor of the " Jurist , " and be indeed a great case , and an ancient ; revive apparently for the special purpose of display the forensic ability of the Junior Counsel for the Plaintiff , Mr. Ripton Thompson , whose assistance the Attorney - General , in his opening statement , congratulate himself on securing ; a rather unusual thing , due probably to the eminence and renown of that youthful gentleman at the Bar of his country . so much be see from the copy of a report purport to be extract from a newspaper , and prefix to the Junior Counsel 's remark , or Legal Considerations , on the conduct of the Case , the admissibility and non - admissibility of certain evidence , and the ultimate decision of the judge . 
 Mr. Thompson , senior , lift the paper high , with the spirit of one prepare to do execution on the criminal , and in the voice of a town - crier , vary by a bitter accentuation and satiric sing - song tone , deliberately read : 
  " VULCAN v. MARS . 
 " the Attorney - General , assist by Mr. Ripton Thompson , appear on behalf of the Plaintiff . Mr. Serjeant Cupid , Q.C. , and Mr. Capital Opportunity , for the Defendant . " 
 " oh ! " snap Mr. Thompson , senior , peer venom at the unfortunate Ripton over his spectacle , " your note be on that issue , sir ! thus you employ your time , sir ! " 
 with another side - shot at the confidential clerk , who retire immediately behind a strong entrenchment of shrug , Mr. Thompson be push by the devil of his rancour to continue read : 
 " this case be too well known to require more than a partial summary of particular " ... 
 " Ahem ! we will skip the particular , however partial , " say Mr. Thompson . " ah ! what do you mean here , sir , but enough ! I think we may be excuse your Legal Considerations on such a case . this be how you employ your law - study , sir ! you put they to this purpose ? Mr. Beazley ! you will henceforward sit alone . I must have this young man under my own eye . Sir Austin ! permit I to apologize to you for subject you to a scene so disagreeable . it be a father 's duty not to spare he . " 
 Mr. Thompson wipe his forehead , as brute might have do after pass judgment on the scion of his house . 
 " these paper , " he go on , flutter Ripton 's precious lucubration in a wave judicial hand , " I shall retain . the day will come when he will regard they with shame . and it shall be his penance , his punishment , to do so ! stop ! " he cry , as Ripton be noiselessly shut his desk , " have you more of they , sir ; of a similar description ? rout they out ! let we know you at your bad . what have you there in that corner ? " 
 Ripton be understand to say he devote that corner to old brief on important case . 
 Mr. Thompson thrust his trembling finger among the old brief , and turn over the volume Sir Austin have observe , but without much remark it , for his suspicion have not rise to print . 
 " a Manual of Heraldry ? " the baronet politely , and it may be ironically , inquire , before it could well escape . 
 " I like it very much , " say Ripton , clutch the book in dreadful torment . 
 " allow I to see that you have our arm and crest correct . " the baronet proffer a hand for the book . 
 " a Griffin between two wheatsheave , " cry Ripton , still clutch it nervously . 
 Mr. Thompson , without any notion of what he be do , draw the book from Ripton 's hold ; whereupon the two senior lay their grey head together over the title - page . it set forth in attractive character beside a coloured frontispiece , which embody the promise display there , the entrancing adventure of Miss Random , a strange young lady . 
 have there be a Black Hole within the area of those law region to consign Ripton to there and then , or an Iron Rod handy to mortify his sinful flesh , Mr. Thompson would have use they . as it be , he content himself by look Black Holes and Iron Rods at the detected youth , who sit on his perch insensible to what might happen next , collapse . 
 Mr. Thompson cast the wicked creature down with a " Pah ! " he , however , take she up again , and stride away with she . Sir Austin give Ripton a forefinger , and kindly touch his head , say , " good - bye , boy ! at some future date Richard will be happy to see you at Raynham . " 
 undoubtedly this be a great triumph to the System ! 




 CHAPTER XVII 

 the conversation between solicitor and client be resume . 

 " be it possible , " quoth Mr. Thompson , the moment he have usher his client into his private room , " that you will consent , Sir Austin , to see he and receive he again ? " 
 " certainly , " the baronet reply . " why not ? this by no means astonish I . when there be no long danger to my son he will be welcome as he be before . he be a schoolboy . I know it . I expect it . the result of your principle , Thompson ! " 
 " one of the very bad book of that abominable class ! " exclaim the old lawyer , open at the coloured frontispiece , from which brazen Miss Random smile bewitchingly out , as if she have no doubt of captivate Time and all his veteran on a fair field . " Pah ! " he shut she to with the energy he would have give to the office of publicly slap her face ; " from this day I diet he on bread and water rescind his pocket - money ! how he could have get hold of such a book ! how he ! and what idea ! conceal they from I as he have do so cunningly ! he trifle with vice ! his mind be in a putrid state ! I might have believe I do believe I might have go on believe my son Ripton to be a moral young man ! " the old lawyer interject on the delusion of father , and sit down in a lamentable abstraction . 
 " the lad have come out ! " say Sir Austin . " his adoption of the legal form be amusing . he trifle with vice , true : people newly initiate be as hardy as its intimate , and a young sinner 's amusement will resemble those of a confirm debauchee . the satiate , and the insatiate , appetite alike appeal to extreme . you be astonish at this revelation of your son 's condition . I expect it ; though assuredly , believe I , not this sudden and indisputable proof of it . but I know that the seed be in he , and therefore I have not latterly invite he to Raynham . school , and the corruption there , will bear its fruit soon or later . I could advise you , Thompson , what to do with he : it would be my plan . " 
 Mr. Thompson murmur , like a true courtier , that he should esteem it an honour to be favour with Sir Austin Feverel 's advice : secretly resolute , like a true Briton , to follow his own . 
 " let he , then , " continue the baronet , ' see vice in its nakedness . while he have yet some innocence , nauseate he ! Vice , take little by little , usurp gradually the whole creature . my counsel to you , Thompson , would be , to drag he through the sink of town . " 
 Mr. Thompson begin to blink again . 
 " oh , I shall punish he , Sir Austin ! do not fear I , air . I have no tenderness for vice . " 
 " that be not what be want , Thompson . you mistake I . he should be deal with gently . heaven ! do you hope to make he hate vice by make he a martyr for its sake ? you must descend from the pedestal of age to become his mentor : cause he to see how certainly and pitilessly vice itself punish : accompany he into its haunt " 
 " over town ? " break forth Mr. Thompson . 
 " over town , " say the baronet . 
 " and depend upon it , " he add , " that , until father act thoroughly up to their duty , we shall see the sight we see in great city , and hear the tale we hear in little village , with death and calamity in our home , and a legacy of sorrow and shame to the generation to come . I do aver , " he exclaim , become excited , " that , if it be not for the duty to my son , and the hope I cherish in he , I , see the accumulation of misery we be hand down to an innocent posterity to whom , through our sin , the fresh breath of life will be foul I yes ! I would hide my name ! for whither be we tend ? what home be pure absolutely ? what can not our doctor and lawyer tell we ? " 
 Mr. Thompson acquiesce significantly . 
 " and what be to come of this ? " Sir Austin continue . " when the sin of the father be multiply by the son , be not perdition the final sum of thing ? and be not life , the boon of heaven , grow to be the devil 's game utterly ? but for my son , I would hide my name . I would not bequeath it to be curse by they that walk above my grave ! " 
 this be indeed a terrible view of existence . Mr. Thompson feel uneasy . there be a dignity in his client , an impressiveness in his speech , that silence remonstrate reason and the cry of long year of comfortable respectability . Mr. Thompson go to church regularly ; pay his rate and due without overmuch , or at least more than common , grumble . on the surface he be a good citizen , fond of his child , faithful to his wife , devoutly march to a fair seat in heaven on a path pave by something well than a thousand a year . but here be a man sight he from below the surface , and though it be an unfair , unaccustomed , not to say un - English , method of regard one 's fellow - man , Mr. Thompson be trouble by it . what though his client exaggerate ? fact be at the bottom of what he say . and he be acute he have unmask Ripton ! since Ripton 's exposure he wince at a personal application in the text his client preach from . possibly this be the secret source of part of his anger against that peccant youth . 
 Mr. Thompson shake his head , and , with dolefully pucker visage and a pitiable contraction of his shoulder , rise slowly up from his chair . apparently he be about to speak , but he straightway turn and go meditatively to a side - recess in the room , whereof he open a door , draw forth a tray and a decanter label Port , fill a glass for his client , deferentially invite he to partake of it ; fill another glass for himself , and drank . 
 that be his reply . 
 Sir Austin never take wine before dinner . Thompson have look as if he mean to speak : he wait for Thompson 's word . 
 Mr. Thompson see that , as his client do not join he in his glass , the eloquence of that Porty reply be lose on his client . 
 have slowly ingurgitate and meditate upon this precious draught , and turn its flavour over and over with an aspect of potent judicial wisdom   one might have think that he be weigh mankind m the balance , the old lawyer heave , and say , sharpen his lip over the admirable vintage , " the world be in a very sad state , I fear , Sir Austin ! " 
 his client gaze at he queerly . 
 " but that , " Mr. Thompson add immediately , ill - conceal by his gaze the glow intestinal congratulation go on within he , " that be , I think you would say , Sir Austin if I could but prevail upon you a tolerably good character wine ! " 
 " there be virtue somewhere , I see , Thompson ! " Sir Austin murmur , without disturb his legal adviser 's dimple . 
 the old lawyer sit down to finish his glass , say , that such a wine be not to be have everywhere . 
 they be then outwardly silent for a apace . inwardly one of they be full of riot and jubilant uproar : as if the solemn field of law be suddenly to be invade and possess by troop of Bacchanals : and to preserve a decently wretched physiognomy over it , and keep on term with his companion , he have to grimace like a melancholy clown in a pantomime . 
 Mr. Thompson brush back his hair . the baronet be still expectant . Mr. Thompson sigh deeply , and empty his glass . he combat the change that have come over he . he try not to see Ruby . he try to feel miserable , and it be not in he . he speak , draw what appropriate inspiration he could from his client 's countenance , to show that they have view in common : " degenerate sadly , I fear ! " 
 the baronet nod . 
 " accord to what my wine - merchant say , " continue Mr. Thompson , " there can be no doubt about it . " 
 Sir Austin star . 
 " it be the grape , or the ground , or something , " Mr. Thompson go on . " all I can say be , our youngster will have a bad look - out ! in my opinion Government should be compel to send out a Commission to inquire into the cause . to Englishmen it would be a public calamity . it surprise I I hear man sit and talk despondently of this extraordinary disease of the vine , and not one of they seem to think it incumbent on he to act , and do his good to stop it . " he front his client like a man who accuse an enormous public delinquency . " nobody make a stir ! the apathy of Englishmen will become proverbial . pray , try it , Sir Austin ! Pray , allow I . such a wine can not disagree at any hour . do ! I be allowance two glass three hour before dinner . Stomachic . I find it agree with I surprisingly : quite a new man . I suppose it will last our time . it must ! what should we do ? there be no Law possible without it . not a lawyer of we could live . ours be an occupation which dry the blood . " 
 the scene with Ripton have unnerve he , the wine have renovate , and gratitude to the wine inspire his tongue . he think that his client , of the whimsical mind , though undoubtedly correct moral view , have need of a glass . 
 " now that very wine Sir Austin I think I do not err in say , that very wine your respected father , Sir Pylcher Feverel , use to taste whenever he come to consult my father , when I be a boy . and I remember one day be call in , and Sir Pylcher himself pour I out a glass . I wish I could call in Ripton now , and do the same . no ! Leniency in such a case as that ! the wine would not hurt he I doubt if there be much leave for he to welcome his guest with . ha ! ha ! now if I could persuade you , Sir Austin , as you do not take wine before dinner , some day to favour I with your company at my little country cottage I have a wine there the fellow to that I think you would , I do think you would " Mr. Thompson mean to say , he think his client would arrive at something of a similar jocund contemplation of his fellow in their degeneracy that inspirit lawyer after potation , but condense the sensual promise into " highly approve . " 
 Sir Austin speculate on his legal adviser with a sour mouth comically compress . 
 it stand clear to he that Thompson before his Port , and Thompson after , be two different man . to indoctrinate he now be too late : it be perhaps the time to make the positive use of he he want . 
 he pencil on a handy slip of paper : " two prong of a fork ; the World stick between they Port and the Palate : ' tis one which fail first down go World ; " and again the hieroglyph " port - spectacle . " he say , " I shall gladly accompany you this evening , Thompson , " word that transfigure the delighted lawyer , and ensigne the skeleton of a great Aphorism to his pocket , there to gather flesh and form , with numberless other in a like condition . 
 " I come to visit my lawyer , " he say to himself . " I think I have be deal with the World in epitome ! " 




 CHAPTER xviii 

 the rumour circulate that Sir Austin Feverel , the recluse of Raynham , the rank misogynist , the rich baronet , be in town , look out a bride for his only son and uncorrupted heir . Doctor Benjamin Bairam be the excellent authority . Doctor Bairam have safely deliver Mrs. Deborah Gossip of this interesting bantling , which be forthwith dandle in dozen of feminine lap . Doctor Bairam could boast the first interview with the famous recluse . he have it from his own lip that the object of the baronet be to look out a bride for his only son and uncorrupted heir ; " and , " add the doctor , ' she will be lucky who get he . " which be interpret to mean , that he would be a catch ; the doctor probably intend to allude to certain extraordinary difficulty in the way of a choice . 
 a demand be make on the publisher of the Pilgrim 's Scrip for all his outstanding copy . conventionality be defy . a summer - shower of card fall on the baronet 's table . 
 he have few male friend . he shun the Clubs as nest of scandal . the card he contemplate be mostly those of the sex , with the husband , if there be a husband , evidently drag in for propriety 's sake . he peruse the card and smile . he know their purpose . what terrible light Thompson and Bairam have throw on some of they ! heaven ! in what a state be the blood of this empire . 
 before commence his campaign he call on two ancient intimate , Lord Heddon , and his distant cousin Darley Absworthy , both member of Parliament , useful man , though gouty , who have sow in their time a fine crop of wild oat , and advocate the advantage of do so , see that they do not fancy themselves the bad for it . he find one with an imbecile son and the other with consumptive daughter . " so much , " he write in the note - book , " for the Wild Oats theory ! " 
 Darley be proud of his daughter ' white and pink skin . " beautiful complexion , " he call they . the eld be in the market , immensely admire . Sir Austin be introduce to she . she talk fluently and sweetly . a youth not on his guard , a simple school - boy youth , or even a man , might have fall in love with she , she be so affable and fair . there be something poetic about she . and she be quite well , she say , the baronet frequently question she on that point . she intimate that she be robust ; but towards the close of their conversation her hand would now and then travel to her side , and she breathe painfully an instant , say , " be not   it odd ? Dora , Adela , and myself , we all feel the same queer sensation about the heart , I think it be after talk much . " 
 Sir Austin nod and blink sadly , exclaim to his soul , " wild oats ! wild oat ! " 
 he do not ask permission to see Dora and Adela . 
 Lord Heddon vehemently preach wild oat . 
 " it be all nonsense , Feverel , " he say , " about bring up a lad out of the common way . he be all the well for a little racketing when he be green feel his bone and muscle learn to know the world . he will never be a man if he have not   play at the old game one time in his life , and the early the well . I have   always find the good fellow be wildish once . I do not   care what he do when he be a green - horn ; besides , he be get an excuse for it then . you can not   expect to have a man , if he do not   take a man 's food . you will have a milksop . and , depend upon it , when he do break out he will go to the devil , and nobody pity he . look what those fellow the grocer , do when they get hold of a young what d'ye call them ? apprentice . they know the scoundrel be bear with a sweet tooth . well ! they give he the run of the shop , and in a very short time he soberly deal out the good , a devilish deal too wise to abstract a morsel even for the pleasure of steal . I know you have contrary theory . you hold that the young grocer should have a soul above sugar . it will not   do ! take my word for it , Feverel , it be a dangerous experiment , that of bring up flesh and blood in harness . no colt will bear it , or he be a tame beast . and look you : take it on medical ground . early excesse the frame will recover from : late one break the constitution . there be the case in a nutshell . how be your son ? " 
 " sound and well ! " reply Sir Austin . " and your ? " 
 " oh , Lipscombe be always the same ! " Lord Heddon sigh peevishly . " he be quiet that be one good thing ; but there be no get the country to take he , so I must give up hope of that . " 
 Lord Lipscombe enter the room just then , Sir Austin survey he , and be not astonish at the refusal of the country to take he . 
 " wild oats ! " he think , as he contemplate the headless , degenerate , weedy issue and result . 
 both Darley Absworthy and Lord Heddon speak of the marriage of their offspring as a matter of course . " and if I be not a coward , " Sir Austin confess to himself , " I should stand forth and forbid the bann ! this universal ignorance of the inevitable consequence of sin be frightful ! the wild oats plea be a torpedo that seem to have strike the world , and render it morally insensible . " however , they silence he . he be oblige to spare their feeling on a subject to he so deeply sacred . the healthful image of his noble boy rise before he , a triumphant live rejoinder to any hostile argument . 
 he be content to remark to his doctor , that he think the third generation of wild oats would be a pretty thin crop ! 
 family against whom neither Thompson lawyer nor Bairam physician could recollect a progenitorial blot , either on the male or female side , be not numerous . " only , " say the doctor " you really must not be too exact in these day , my dear Sir Austin . it be impossible to contest your principle , and you be do mankind incalculable service in call its attention to this the grave of its duty : but as the stream of civilization progress we must be a little take in the lump , as it be . the world be , I can assure you and I do not look only above the surface , you can believe the world be awaken to the vital importance of the question . " 
 " Doctor , " reply Sir Austin , " if you have a pure - blood arab barb would you cross he with a screw ? " 
 " decidedly not , " say the doctor . 
 " then permit I to say , I shall employ every care to match my son accord to his merit , " Sir Austin return . " I trust the world be awakening , as you observe . I have be to my publisher , since my arrival in town , with a manuscript ' proposal for a New System of Education of our British Youth , ' which may come in opportunely . I think I be entitle to speak on that subject . " 
 " certainly , " say the doctor . " you will admit , Sir Austin , that , compare with continental nation our neighbour , for instance we shine to advantage , in moral , as in everything else . I hope you admit that ? " 
 " I find no consolation in shin by comparison with a low standard , " say the baronet . " if I compare the enlightenment of your view for you admit my principle with the obstinate incredulity of a country doctor 's , who see nothing of the world , you be hardly flattered , I presume ? " 
 Doctor Bairam would hardly be flatter at such a comparison , assuredly , he interject . 
 " besides , " add the baronet , " the French make no pretence , and thereby escape one of the main penalty of hypocrisy . whereas we ! but I be not their advocate , credit I . it be well , perhaps , to pay our homage to virtue . at least it delay the spread of entire corruptness . " 
 Doctor Bairam wish the baronet success , and diligently endeavour to assist his search for a mate worthy of the pure - blood barb , by put several mama , whom he visit , on the alert . 




 CHAPTER XIX 

 away with Systems ! away with a corrupt world ! let we breathe the air of the Enchanted Island . 
 golden lie the meadow : golden run the stream ; red gold be on the pine - stem . the sun be come down to earth , and walk the field and the water . 
 the sun be come down to earth , and the field and the water shout to he golden shout . he come , and his herald run before he , and touch the leaf of oak and plane and beeche lucid green , and the pine - stem redder gold ; leave bright footprint upon thickly - weed bank , where the foxglove 's last upper - bell incline , and bramble - shoot wander amid moist rich herbage . the plume of the woodland be alight ; and beyond they , over the open , ' tis a race with the long - throw shadow ; a race across the heath and up the hill , till , at the farth bourne of mount eastern cloud , the herald of the sun lie rosy finger and rest . 
 Sweet be the shy recess of the woodland . the ray tread softly there . a film athwart the pathway quiver many - hue against purple shade fragrant with warm pine , deep moss - bed , feathery fern . the little brown squirrel drop tail , and leap ; the inmost bird be startled to a chance tuneless note . from silence into silence thing move . 
 Peeps of the revel splendour above and around enliven the conscious full heart within . the flaming West , the crimson height , shower their glory through voluminous leafage . but these be bower where deep bliss dwell , imperial joy , that owe no fealty to yonder glory , in which the young lamb gambol and the spirit of man be glad . descend , great Radiance ! embrace creation with beneficent fire , and pass from we ! you and the vice - regal light that succeed to you , and all heavenly pageant , be the minister and the slave of the throb content within . 
 for this be the home of the enchantment . here , seclude from vex shore , the prince and princess of the island meet : here like darkle nightingale they sit , and into eye and ear and hand pour endless ever - fresh treasure of their soul . 
 roll on , grind wheel of the world : cry of ship go down in a calm , groan of a system which will not know its rightful hour of exultation , complain to the universe . you be not hear here . 
 he call she by her name , Lucy : and she , blush at her great boldness , have call he by his , Richard . those two name be the key - note of the wonderful harmony the angel sing aloft . 
 " Lucy ! my beloved ! " 
 " o Richard ! " 
 out in the world there , on the skirt of the woodland , a sheep - boy pipe to meditative eve on a penny - whistle . 
 Love 's musical instrument be as old , and as poor : it have but two stop ; and yet , you see , the cunning musician do thus much with it ! 
 other speech they have little ; light foam playing upon wave of feeling , and of feel compact , that burst only when the sweeping volume be too wild , and be no more than their sigh of tenderness speak . 
 perhaps love play his tune so well because their nature have unblunted edge , and be keen for bliss , confide in it as natural food . to gentleman and lady he fine - draw upon the viol , ravishingly ; or blow into the mellow bassoon ; or rouse the heroic ardour of the trumpet ; or , it may be , command the whole Orchestra for they . and they be pleased . he be still the cunning musician . they languish , and taste ecstasy : but it be , however sonorous , an earthly concert . for they the sphere move not to two note . they have lose , or forfeit and never know , the first super - sensual spring of the ripe sens into passion ; when they carry the soul with they , and have the privilege of spirit to walk disembodied , boundlessly to feel . or one have it , and the other be a dead body . Ambrosia let they eat , and drink the nectar : here sit a couple to whom love 's simple bread and water be a fine feast . 
 Pipe , happy sheep - bop , Love ! irradiated angel , unfold your wing and lift your voice ! 
 they have out - fly philosophy . their instinct have shoot beyond the ken of science . they be make for their Eden . 
 " and this divine gift be in store for I ! " 
 so run the internal outcry of each , clasp each : it be their recur refrain to the harmony . how it illumine the year go by and suffuse the live future ! 
 " you for I : I for you ! " 
 " we be bear for each other ! " 
 they believe that the angel have be busy about they from their cradle . the celestial host have worthily strive to bring they together . and , o victory ! o wonder ! after toil and pain , and difficulty exceed , the celestial host have succeed ! 
 " here we two sit who be write above as one ! " 
 Pipe , happy Love ! pipe on to these dear innocent ! 
 the tide of colour have ebb from the upper sky . in the West the sea of sunken fire draw back ; and the star leap forth , and tremble , and retire before the advance moon , who slip the silver train of cloud from her shoulder , and , with her foot upon the pine - top , survey heaven . 
 " Lucy , do you never dream of meet I ? " 
 " o Richard ! yes ; for I remember you . " 
 " Lucy ! and do you pray that we might meet ? " 
 " I do ! " 
 Young as when she look upon the lover in Paradise , the fair immortal journey onward . front she , it be not night but veil day . full half the sky be flushed . not darkness , not day , but the nuptial of the two . 
 " my own ! my own for ever ! you be pledge to I ? Whisper ! " 
 he hear the delicious music . 
 " and you be mine ? " 
 a soft beam travel to the fern - covert under the pinewood where they sit , and for answer he have her eye turn to he an instant , timidly flutter over the depth of his , and then downcast ; for through her eye her soul be naked to he . 
 " Lucy ! my bride ! my life ! " 
 the night - jar spin his dark monotony on the branch of the pine . the soft beam travel round they , and listen to their heart . their lip be lock . 
 Pipe no more , Love , for a time ! Pipe as you will you can not express their first kiss ; nothing of its sweetness , and of the sacredness of it nothing . St. Cecilia up aloft , before the silver organ - pipe of Paradise , press finger upon all the note of which love be but one , from she you may hear it . 
 so Love be silent . out in the world there , on the skirt of the woodland , the self - satisfy sheep - boy deliver a last complacent squint down the length of his penny - whistle , and , with a flourish correspondingly awry , he also march into silence , hail by supper . the wood be still . there be hear but the night - jar spinning on the pine - branch , circle by moonlight . 




 CHAPTER XX 

 Enchanted Islands have not yet root out their old brood of dragon . wherever there be romance , these monster come by inimical attraction . because the heaven be certainly propitious to true lover , the beast of the abyss be band to destroy they , stimulate by innumerable sad victory ; and every love - tale be an Epic Par of the upper and low power . I wish good fairy be a little more active . they seem to be cajole into security by the happiness of their favourite ; whereas the wicked be always alert , and circumspect . they let the little one shut their eye to fancy they be not see , and then commence . 
 these appointment and meeting , involve a start from the dinner - table at the hour of contemplative digestion and prime claret ; the hour when the wise youth Adrian delight to talk at his ease to recline in dreamy consciousness that a work of good be go on inside he ; these abstraction from his study , excess of gaiety , and glumness , heaving of the chest , and other odd sign , but mainly the disgusting behaviour of his pupil at the dinner - table , teach Adrian to understand , though the young gentleman be clever in excuse , that he have somehow learn there be another half to the divided Apple of Creation , and have embark upon the great voyage of discovery of the difference between the two half . with his usual coolness Adrian debate whether he might be in the observatory or the practical stage of the voyage . for himself , as a man and a philosopher , Adrian have no objection to its being either ; and he have only to consider which be temporarily most threatening to the ridiculous system he have to support . Richard 's absence annoy he . the youth be vivacious , and his enthusiasm good fun ; and besides , when he leave table , Adrian have to sit alone with Hippias and the Eighteenth Century , from both of whom he have extract all the amusement that could be get , and he see his digestion menace by the society of two ruin stomach , who bore he just when he love himself most . poor Hippias be now so reduce that he have profoundly to calculate whether a particular dish , or an extra - glass of wine , would have a bitter effect on he and be feel through the remainder of his year . he be in the habit of utter his calculation half aloud , wherein the prophetic doubt of experience , and the succulent insinuation of appetite , contend hotly . it be horrible to hear he , so let we pardon Adrian for tempt he to a decision in favour of the moment . 
 " happy to take wine with you , " Adrian would say , and Hippias would regard the decanter with a pained forehead , and put up the doctor . 
 " drink , nephew Hippy , and think of the doctor to - morrow ! " the Eighteenth Century cheerily ruffle her cap at he , and recommend her own practice . 
 " it be this literary work ! " interject Hippias , handle his glass of remorse . " I do not   know what else it can be . you have no idea how anxious I feel . I have frightful dream . I be perpetually anxious . " 
 " no wonder , " say Adrian , who enjoy the childish simplicity to which an absorbed study of his sensational existence have bring poor Hippias . " no wonder . ten year of Fairy Mythology ! could anyone hope to sleep in peace after that ? as to your digestion , no one have a digestion who be in the doctor 's hand . they prescribe from dogma , and do not   count on the system . they have cut you down from two bottle to two glass . it be absurd . you can not   sleep , because your system be cry out for what it be accustom to . " 
 Hippias sip his Madeira with a niggerdly confidence , but assure Adrian that he really should not like to venture on a bottle now : it would be rank madness to venture on a bottle now , he think . last night only , after partaking , under protest , of that rich french dish , or be it the duck ? Adrian advise he to throw the blame on that vulgar bird . say the duck , then . last night , he be no soon stretch in bed , than he seem to be of an enormous size all his limb his nose , his mouth , his toe be elephantine ! an elephant be a pigmy to he . and his hugeousness seem to increase the instant he shut his eye . he turn on this side ; he turn on that . he lie on his back ; he try put his face to the pillow ; and he continue to swell . he wonder the room could hold he he think he must burst it and absolutely light a candle , and go to the look - glass to see whether he be bearable . 
 by this time Adrian and Richard be laugh uncontrollably . he have , however , a genial auditor in the Eighteenth Century , who declare it to be a new disease , not know in her day , and deserve investigation . she be happy to compare sensation with he , but hers be not of the complex order , and a potion soon right she . in fact , her system appear to be a debatable ground for aliment and medicine , on which the battle be fight , and , when over , she be none the bad , as she joyfully tell Hippias . never look ploughman on prince , or village belle on Court Beauty , with half the envy poor nineteenth - century Hippias expend in his gaze on the Eighteenth . he be too serious to note much the laughter of the young man . 
 this ' Tragedy of a Cooking - Apparatus , ' as Adrian designate the malady of Hippias , be repeat regularly ever evening . it be natural for any youth to escape as quick as he could from such a table of stomach . 
 adrian bore with his conduct considerately , until a letter from the baronet , describe the house and maternal System of a Mrs. Caroline Grandison , and the rough grain of hopefulness in her young daughter , spur he to think of his duty , and see what be go on . he give Richard half - an - hour 's start , and then put on his hat to follow his own keen scent , leave Hippias and the Eighteenth Century to piquet . 
 in the lane near Belthorpe he meet a maid of the farm not unknown to he , one Molly Davenport by name , a buxom lass , who , on see he , invoke she good Gracious , the generic maid 's familiar , and be instruct by reminiscence vivid , if ancient , to giggle . 
 " be you look for your young gentleman ? " Molly presently ask . 
 Adrian glance about the lane like a cool brigand , to see if the coast be clear , and reply to she , " I be , miss . I want you to tell I about he . " 
 " dear ! " say the buxom lass , " be you come for I to - night to know ? " 
 Adrian rebuke she : for her bad grammar , apparently . 
 " 'cause I can not   stop out long to - night , " molly explain , take the rebuke to refer altogether to her bad grammar . 
 " you may go in when you please , miss . be that any one come ? come here in the shade . " 
 " now , get along ! " say Miss Molly . 
 Adrian speak with resolution . " listen to I , Molly Davenport ! " he put a coin in her hand , which have a medical effect in calm she to attention . " I want to know whether you have see he at all ? " 
 " who ? your young gentleman ? I sh'd think I do . I see he to - night only . ai not   he groove handsome . he be al'ays about Beltharp now . it be not   to fire no more rick . he be afire ' unself . ai not   you see them together ? he be after the missis " 
 Adrian request Miss Davenport to be respectful , and confine herself to particular . this buxom lass then tell he that her young missis and Adrian 's young gentleman be a pretty couple , and meet one another every night . the girl swear for their innocence . 
 " as for Miss Lucy , she have not   a bit of art in she , nor have he . " 
 " they be all nature , I suppose , " say Adrian . " how be it I do not   see she at church ? " 
 " she be Catholic , or some think , " say Molly . " her father be , and a leftenant . She've   a Cross in her bedroom . she do not   go to church . I see you there last Sunday a - lookin ' so solemn , " and molly stroke her hand down her chin to give it length . 
 Adrian insist on her keeping to fact . it be dark , and in the dark he be indifferent to the striking contrast suggest by the lass , but he want to hear fact , and he again bribe she to impart nothing but fact . upon which she tell he far , that her young lady be an innocent artless creature who have be to school upwards of three year with the nun , and have a little money of her own , and be beautiful enough to be a lord 's lady , and have be in love with Master Richard ever since she be a little girl . molly have get from a friend of hers up at the Abbey , Mary Garner , the housemaid who clean Master Richard 's room , a bit of paper once with the young gentleman 's handwriting , and have give it to her Miss Lucy , and Miss Lucy have give she a gold sovereign for it just for his handwriting ! Miss Lucy do not seem happy at the farm , because of that young Tom , who be always leer at she , and to be sure she be quite a lady , and could play , and sing , and dress with the good . 
 " she look like angel in her nightgown ! " molly wind up . 
 the next moment she run up close , and speak for the first time as if there be a distinction of position between they , petitioned : " Mr. Harley ! you will not   go for do any harm to them 'cause of what I say , will you now ? do say you will not   now , Mr. Harley ! she be good , though she be a Catholic . she be kind to I when I be ill , and I would not   have she cross I would rather be show up myself , I would ! " 
 the wise youth give no positive promise to Molly , and she have to read his consent in a relaxation of his austerity . the noise of a lumber foot plod down the lane cause she to be abruptly dismiss . molly take to flight , the lumber foot accelerate its pace , and the pastoral appeal to her fly skirt be hear " Moll ! you they re ! it be I Bantam ! " but the sprightly Silvia would not stop to his wooing , and Adrian turn away laugh at these Arcadians . 
 Adrian be a lazy dragon . all he do for the present be to hint and tease . " it be the inevitable ! " he say , and ask himself why he should seek to arrest it . he have no faith in the System . Heavy Benson have . Benson of the slow thick - lidde antediluvian eye and loose - crumpled skin ; Benson , the Saurian , the woman - hater ; Benson be wide awake . a sort of rivalry exist between the wise youth and heavy Benson . the fidelity of the latter dependant have move the baronet to commit to he a portion of the management of the Raynham estate , and this Adrian do not like . no one who aspire to the honourable office of lead another by the nose can tolerate a party in his ambition . Benson 's surly instinct tell he he be in the wise youth 's way , and he resolve to give his master a striking proof of his superior faithfulness . for some week the saurian eye have be on the two secret creature . Heavy Benson see letter come and go in the day , and now the young gentleman be off and out every night , and seem to be on wing . Benson know whither he go , and the object he go for . it be a woman that be enough . the saurian eye have actually see the sinful thing lure the hope of Raynham into the shade . he compose several epistle of warn to the baronet of the work that be go on ; but before send one he wish to record a little of their guilty conversation ; and for this purpose the faithful fellow trot over the dew to eavesdrop , and thereby arouse the good fairy , in the person of Tom Bakewell , the sole confidant of Richard 's state . 
 Tom say to his young master , " do you know what , sir ? you be watch ! " 
 Richard , in a fury , bid he name the wretch , and Tom hang his arm , and ape the respectable protrusion of the butler 's head . 
 " it be he , be it ? " cry Richard . " he shall rue it , Tom . if I find he near I when we be together he shall never forget it . " 
 " do not   hit too hard , sir , " Tom suggest . " you hit mortal hard when you be in earnest , you know . " 
 Richard aver he would forgive anything but that , and tell Tom to be within hail to - morrow night he know where . by the hour of the appointment it be out of the lover 's mind . 
 Lady Blandish din that evening at Raynham , by Adrian 's pointed invitation . accord to custom , Richard start up and off , with few excuse . the lady exhibit no surprise . she and Adrian likewise stroll forth to enjoy the air of the Summer night . they have no intention of spying . still they may have think , by meet Richard and his inamorata , there be a chance of lay a foundation of ridicule to sap the passion . they may have think so they be on no spoken understanding . 
 " I have see the little girl , " say Lady Blandish . " she be pretty she would be tell if she be well set up . she speak well . how absurd it be of that class to educate their woman above their station ! the child be really too good for a farmer . I notice she before I know of this ; she have enviable hair . I suppose she do not   paint her eyelid . just the sort of person to take a young man . I think there be something wrong . I receive , the day before yesterday , an impassioned poem evidently not intend for I . my hair be gold . my meeting he be foretell . my eye be home of light fringe with night . I send it back , correct the colour . " 
 " which be death to the rhyme , " say Adrian . " I see she this morning . the boy have not   bad taste . as you say , she be too good for a farmer . such a spark would explode any system . she slightly affect mine . the Huron be stark mad about she . " 
 " but we must positively write and tell his father , " say Lady Blandish . 
 the wise youth do not see why they should exaggerate a trifle . the lady say she would have an interview with Richard , and then write , as it be her duty to do . Adrian shrug , and be for go into the scientific explanation of Richard 's conduct , in which the lady have to discourage he . 
 " poor boy ! " she sigh . " I be really sorry for he . I hope he will not feel it too strongly . they feel strongly , father and son . " 
 " and select wisely , " Adrian add . 
 " that be another thing , " say Lady Blandish . 
 their talk be then of the dulness of neighbouring county people , about whom , it seem , there be little or no scandal afloat : of the lady 's loss of the season in town , which she profess not to regret , though she complain of her general weariness : of whether Mr. Morton of Poer Hall would propose to Mrs. Doria , and of the probable despair of the hapless curate of Lobourne ; and other gossip , partly in French . 
 they round the lake , and get upon the road through the park to Lobourne . the moon have rise . the atmosphere be warm and pleasant . 
 " quite a lover 's night , " say Lady Blandish . 
 " and I , who have none to love pity I ! " the wise youth attempt a sigh . 
 " and never will have , " say Lady Blandish , curtly . " you buy your love . " 
 Adrian protest . however , he do not plead verbally against the impeachment , though the lady 's decisive insight astonish he . he begin to respect she , relish her exquisite contempt , and he reflect that widow could be terrible creature . 
 he have hop to be a little sentimental with Lady Blandish , know her romantic . this mixture of the harsh common sense and an air of " I know you man , " with romance and refined temperament , subdue the wise youth more than a positive accusation support by witness would have do . he look at the lady . her face be raise to the moon . she know nothing she have simply speak from the fulness of her human knowledge , and have forget her word . perhaps , after all , her admiration , or whatever feel it be , for the baronet , be sincere , and really the longing for a virtuous man . perhaps she have try the opposite set pretty much . Adrian shrug . whenever the wise youth encounter a mental difficulty he instinctively lift his shoulder to equal altitude , to show that he have no doubt there be a balance in the case plenty to be say on both side , which be the same to he as a definite solution . 
 at their tryst in the wood , abut on Raynham Park , wrap in themselves , pip to by tireless Love , Richard and Lucy sit , toy with eternal moment . how they seem as if they would never end ! what mere spark they be when they have die out ! and how in the distance of time they revive , and extend , and glow , and make we think they full the half , and the good of the fire , of our life ! 
 with the onward flow of intimacy , the two happy lover cease to be so shy of common theme , and their speech do not reject all as dross that be not pure gold of emotion . 
 Lucy be very inquisitive about everything and everybody at Raynham . whoever have be about Richard since his birth , she must know the history of , and he for a kiss will do her bidding . 
 thus go the tender duet : 
 " you should know my cousin Austin , Lucy . darling ! beloved ! " 
 " my own ! Richard ! " 
 " you should know my cousin Austin . you shall know he . he would take to you good of they all , and you to he . he be in the tropic now , look out a place it be a secret for poor English working - man to emigrate to and find a colony in that part of the world : my white angel ! " 
 " dear love ! " 
 " he be such a noble fellow ! nobody here understand he but I . be not   it strange ? since I meet you I love he well ! that be because I love all that be good and noble well now beautiful ! I love I love you ! " 
 " my Richard ! " 
 " what do you think I have   determine , Lucy ? if my father but no ! my father do love I . no ! he will not ; and we will be happy together here . and I will win my way with you . and whatever I win will be your ; for it will be owe to you . I feel as if I have no strength but yours none ! and you make I o Lucy ! " 
 his voice ebb . presently Lucy murmur 
 " your father , Richard . " 
 " yes , my father ? " 
 " Dearest Richard ! I feel so afraid of he . " 
 " he love I , and will love you , Lucy . " 
 " but I be so poor and humble , Richard . " 
 " no one I have ever see be like you , Lucy . " 
 " you think so , because you " 
 " what ? " 
 " love I , " come the blush whisper , and the duet give place to dumb variation , perform equally in concert . 
 it be resume . 
 " you be fond of the knight , Lucy . Austin be as brave as any of they . my own bride ! oh , how I adore you ! when you be go , I could fall upon the grass you tread upon , and kiss it . my breast feel empty of my heart Lucy ! if we live in those day , I should have be a knight , and have win honour and glory for you . oh ! one can do nothing now . my lady - love ! my lady - love ! a tear ? Lucy ? " 
 " Dearest ! ah , Richard ! I be not a lady . " 
 " who dare say that ? not a lady the angel I love ! " 
 " think , Richard , who I be . " 
 " my beautiful ! I think that God make you , and have give you to I . " 
 her eye fill with tear , and , as she lift they heavenward to thank her God , the light of heaven strike on they , and she be so radiant in her pure beauty that the limb of the young man tremble . 
 " Lucy ! o heavenly spirit ! Lucy ! " 
 tenderly her lip part " I do not weep for sorrow . " 
 the big bright drop lighten , and roll down , image in his soul . 
 they lean together shadow of ineffable tenderness play on their thrilled cheek and brow . 
 he lift her hand , and press his mouth to it . she have see little of mankind , but her soul tell she this one be different from other , and at the thought , in her great joy , tear must come fast , or her heart will break tear of boundless thanksgiving . and he , gaze on those soft , ray - illumine , dark - edge eye , and the grace of her loose fall tress , feel a scarce - sufferable holy fire stream through his member . 
 it be long ere they speak in open tone . 
 " o happy day when we meet ! " 
 what say the voice of one , the soul of the other echo . 
 " o glorious heaven look down on we ! " 
 their soul be join , be make one for evermore beneath that bend benediction . 
 " o eternity of bliss ! " 
 then the diviner mood pass , and they drop to earth . 
 " Lucy ! come with I to - night , and look at the place where you be some day to live . come , and I will row you on the lake . you remember what you say in your letter that you dream ? that we be float over the shadow of the Abbey to the nun at work by torchlight fell the cypress , and they hand we each a sprig . why , darling , it be the good omen in the world , their fell the old tree . and you write such lovely letter . so pure and sweet they be . I love the nun for have teach you . " 
 " ah , Richard ! see ! we forget ! ah ! " she lift up her face pleadingly , as to plead against herself , " even if your father forgive my birth , he will not my religion . and , dearest , though I would die for you I can not change it . it would seem that I be deny God ; and oh ! it would make I ashamed of my love . " 
 " fear nothing ! " he wind she about with his arm . " come ! he will love we both , and love you the more for be faithful to your father 's creed . you do not   know he , Lucy . he seem harsh and stern he be full of kindness and love . he be not   at all a bigot . and besides , when he hear what the nun have do for you , will not   he thank they , as I do ? and oh ! I must speak to he soon , and you must be prepare to see he soon , for I can not bear your remain at Belthorpe , like a jewel in a sty . mind ! I be not say a word against your uncle . I declare I love everybody and everything that see you and touch you . stay ! it be a wonder how you could have grow there . but you be not bear there , and your father have good blood . desborough ! here be a Colonel Desborough never mind ! come ! " 
 she dread to . she beg not to . she be draw away . 
 the wood be silent , and then 
 " what think you of that for a pretty pastoral ? " say a very different voice . 
 Adrian recline against a pine overlook the fern - covert . Lady Blandish be recumbent upon the brown pine - dropping , gaze through a vista of the low greenwood which open out upon the moon - light valley , her hand clasp round one knee , her feature almost stern in their set hard expression . 
 they have hear , by involuntarily overhear about as much as may be hear in such position , a luminous word or two . 
 the lady do not answer . a movement among the fern attract Adrian , and he step down the decline across the pine - root to behold heavy Benson below ; shake fern - seed and spidery substance off his crumpled skin . 
 " be that you , Mr. Hadrian ? " call Benson , start , as he puff , and exercise his handkerchief . 
 " be it you , Benson , who have have the audacity to spy upon these mystery ? " Adrian call back , and come close to he , add , " you look as if you have just be well thrash . " 
 " be not   it dreadful , sir ? " snuffle Benson . " and his father in ignorance , Mr. Hadrian ! " 
 " he shall know , Benson ! he shall know how , you have endanger your valuable skin in his service . if Mr. Richard have find you there just now I would not   answer for the consequence . " 
 " ha ! " Benson spitefully retort . " this will not   go on ; Mr. Hadrian . it shall not , sir . it will be put a stop to tomorrow , sir . I call it corruption of a young gentleman like he , and harlotry , sir , I call it . I would have every jade flog that make a young innocent gentleman go on like that , sir . " 
 " then , why do not   you stop it yourself , Benson ? ah , I see ! you wait what ? this be not the first time you have be attendant on Apollo and Miss Dryope ? you have write to headquarter ? " 
 " I do my duty , Mr. Hadrian . " 
 the wise youth return to Lady Blandish , and inform she of Benson 's zeal . the lady 's eye flash . " I hope Richard will treat he as he deserve , " she say . 
 " shall we home ? " Adrian inquire . 
 " do I a favour ; " the lady reply . " get my carriage send round to meet I at the park - gates . " 
 " will not   you ? " 
 " I want to be alone . " 
 Adrian bow and leave she . she be still sit with her hand clasp round one knee , gaze towards the dim ray - strew valley . 
 " an odd creature ! " mutter the wise youth . " she be as odd as any of they . she ought to be a Feverel . I suppose she be graduate for it . Hang that confound old ass of a Benson ! he have have the impudence to steal a march on I ! " 
 the shadow of the cypress be lessen on the lake . the moon be climb high . as Richard row the boat , Lucy , sing to he softly . she sing first a fresh little french song , remind he of a day when she have be ask to sing to he before , and he do not care to hear . " do I live ? " he think . then she sing to he a bit of one of those majestic old gregorian chant , that , wherever you may hear they , seem to build up cathedral wall about you . the young man drop the scull . the strange solemn note give a religion tone to his love , and waft he into the knightly age and the reverential heart of chivalry . 
 hang between two heaven on the lake : float to her voice : the moon step over and through white shoal 's of soft high cloud above and below : float to her void no other breath abroad ! his soul go out of his body as he listen . 
 they must part . he row she gently shoreward . 
 " I never be so happy as to - night , " she murmur . 
 " look , my Lucy . the light of the old place be on the lake . look where you be to live . " 
 " which be your room , Richard ? " 
 he point it out to she . 
 " o Richard ! that I be one of the woman who wait on you ! I should ask nothing more . how happy she must be ! " 
 " my darling angel - love . you shall be happy ; but all shall wait on you , and I foremost , Lucy . " 
 " Dearest ! may I hope for a letter ? " 
 " by eleven to - morrow . and I ? " 
 " oh ! you will have mine , Richard . " 
 " Tom shall wait far it . a long one , mind ! do you like my last song ? " 
 she pat her hand quietly against her bosom , and he know where it rest . o love ! o heaven ! 
 they be arouse by the harsh grating of the bow of the boat against the shingle . he jump out , and lift she ashore . 
 " see ! " she say , as the blush of his embrace subside " see ! " and prettily she mimic awe and feel it a little , " the cypress do point towards we . o Richard ! it do ! " 
 and he , look at she rather than at the cypress , delight in her arch grave way 
 " why , there be hardly any shadow at all , Lucy . she must not   dream , my darling ! or dream only of I . " 
 " Dearest ! but I do . " 
 " to - morrow , Lucy ! the letter in the morning , and you at night . o happy to - morrow ! " 
 " you will be sure to be there , Richard ? " 
 " if I be not dead , Lucy . " 
 " o Richard ! pray , pray do not speak of that . I shall not survive you . " 
 " let we pray , Lucy , to die together , when we be to die . death or life , with you ! who be it yonder ? I see some one be it Tom ? it be adrian ! " 
 " be it Mr. Harley ? " the fair girl shiver . 
 " how dare he come here ! " cry Richard . 
 the figure of Adrian , instead of advance , discreetly circle the lake . they be steal away when he call . his call be repeat . Lucy entreat Richard to go to he ; but the young man prefer to summon his attendant , Tom , from within hail , and send he to know what be want . 
 " will he have see I ? will he have know I ? " whisper Lucy , tremulously . 
 " and if he do , love ? " say Richard . 
 " oh ! if he do , dearest I do not   know , but I feel such a presentiment . you have not speak of he to - night , Richard . be he good ? " 
 " good ? " Richard clutch her hand for the innocent maiden phrase . " he be very fond of eat ; that be all I know of Adrian . " 
 her hand be at his lip when Tom return . 
 " well , Tom ? " 
 " Mr. Adrian wish particular to speak to you , sir , " say Tom . 
 " do go to he , dearest ! do go ! " Lucy beg he . 
 " oh , how I hate Adrian ! " the young man grind his tooth . 
 " do go ! " Lucy urge he . " Tom good Tom will see I home . to - morrow , dear love ! to - morrow ! " 
 " you wish to part from I ? " 
 " oh , unkind ! but you must not come with I now . it may be news of importance , dearest . think , Richard ! " 
 " Tom ! go back ! " 
 at the imperious command the well - drill Tom stride off a dozen pace , and see nothing . then the precious charge be confide to he . a heart be cut in twain . 
 Richard make his way to Adrian . " what be it you want with I , Adrian ? " 
 " be we second , or principal , o fiery one ? " be Adrian 's answer . " I want nothing with you , except to know whether you have see Benson . " 
 " where should I see Benson ? what do I know of Benson 's doing ? " 
 " of course not such a secret old fist as he be ! I want some one to tell he to order Lady Blandish 's carriage to be send round to the park - gates . I think he might be round your way over there I come upon he accidentally just now in Abbey - wood . what be the matter , boy ? " 
 " you see he there ? " 
 " hunt Diana , I suppose . he think she be not so chaste as they say , " continue Adrian . " be you go to knock down that tree ? " 
 Richard have turn to the cypress , and be tug at the tough wood . he leave it and go to an ash . 
 " you will spoil that weeper , " Adrian cry . " down she come ! but good - night , Ricky . if you see Benson mind you tell he . " 
 doom Benson follow his burly shadow hove in sight on the white road while Adrian speak . the wise youth chuckle and stroll round the lake , glance over his shoulder every now and then . 
 it be not long before he hear a bellow for help the roar of a dragon in his throe . Adrian placidly sit down on the grass , and fix his eye on the water . there , as the roar be be repeat amid horrid resounding echo , the wise youth muse in this wise 
 " ' the Fates be Jews with we when they delay a punishment , ' say the Pilgrim 's Scrip , or word to that effect . the heaven evidently love Benson , see that he get his punishment on the spot . Master Ricky be a peppery young man . he get it from the apt Gruffudh . I rather believe in race . what a noise that old ruffian make ! he will require poultice with the Pilgrim 's Scrip . we shall have a message to - morrow , and a hubbub , and perhaps all go to town , which will not   be bad for one who be be a prey to all the desire bear of dulness . Benson howl : there be life in the old dog yet ! he bay the moon . look at she . she do not   care . it be the same to she whether we coo like turtle - dove or roar like twenty lion . how complacent she look ! and yet she have dust as much sympathy for Benson as for Cupid . she would smile on if both be be birch . be that a raven or Benson ? he howl no more . it sound guttural : frog - like something between the brek - kek - kek and the hoarse raven 's croak . the fellow'll be kill he . it be time to go to the rescue . a deliverer get more honour by come in at the last gasp than if he forestall catastrophe . Ho , there , what be the matter ? " 
 so say , the wise youth rise , and leisurely trot to the scene of battle , where stand St. George puff over the prostrate Dragon . 
 " Holloa , Ricky ! be it you ? " say Adrian . " what be this ? whom have we here ? Benson , as I live ! " 
 " make this beast get up , " Richard return , breathe hard , and shake his great ash - branch . 
 " he seem incapable , my dear boy . what have you be up to ? Benson ! Benson ! I say , Ricky , this look bad . " 
 " he be sham ! " Richard clamour like a savage . " spy upon I , will he ? I tell you , he be sham . he have not   have half enough . nothing be too bad for a spy . let he getup ! " 
 " insatiate youth ! do throw away that enormous weapon . " 
 " he have write to my father , " Richard shout . " the miserable spy ! let he get up ! " 
 " Ooogh ? I will not ! " huskily groan Benson . " Mr. Hadrian , you be a witness he be my back ! " cavernous noise take up the tale of his maltreatment . 
 " I daresay you love your back well than any part of your body now , " Adrian mutter . " come , Benson ! be a man . Mr. Richard have throw away the stick . come , and get off home , and let us see the extent of the damage . " 
 " Ooogh ! he be a devil ! Mr. Hadrian , sir , he be a devil ! " groan Benson , turn half over in the road to ease his ache . 
 Adrian catch hold of Benson 's collar and lift he to a sit posture . he then have a glimpse of what his hopeful pupil 's hand could do in wrath . the wretched butler 's coat be slit and welt ; his hat knock in ; his flabby spirit so broken that he start and tremble if his pitiless executioner stir a foot . Richard stand over he , grasp his great stick ; no dawn of mercy for Benson in any corner of his feature . 
 Benson screw his neck round to look up at he , and immediately gasp , " I will not   get up ! I will not ! he be ready to murder I again ! Mr. Hadrian ! if you stand by and see it , you be liable to the law , sir I will not   get up while he be near . " no persuasion could induce Benson to try his leg while his executioner stand by . 
 Adrian take Richard aside : " you have   almost kill the poor devil , Ricky . you must be satisfied with that . look at his face . " 
 " the coward bobbed while I strike " say Richard . " I mark his back . he duck . I tell he he be get it bad . " 
 at so civilized piece of savagery , Adrian open his mouth wide . 
 " do you really ? I admire that . you tell he he be get it bad ? " 
 Adrian open his mouth again to shake another roll of laughter out . 
 " come , " he say , " Excalibur have do his word . pitch he into the lake . and see here come the Blandish . you can not   be at it again before a woman . go and meet she , and tell she the noise be an ox be slaughter . or say Argus . " 
 with a whirr that make all Benson 's bruise moan and quiver , the great ash - branch shot aloft , and Richard swing off to intercept Lady Blandish . 
 Adrian get Benson on his foot . the heavy butler be disposed to summon all the commiseration he could feel for his bruised flesh . every half - step he attempt be like a dislocation . his groan and grunt be frightful . 
 " how much do that hat cost , Benson ? " say Adrian , as he put it on his head . 
 " a five - and - twenty shilling beaver , Mr. Hadrian ! " Benson caress its injury . 
 " the cheap policy of insurance I remember to have hear of ! " say Adrian . 
 Benson stagger , moan at interval to his cruel comforter . 
 " he be a devil , Mr. Hadrian ! he be a devil , sir , I do believe , sir . Ooogh ! he be a devil ! I can not   move , Mr. Hadrian . I must be fetch . and Dr. Clifford must be send for , sir . I shall never be fit for work again . I have not   a sound bone in my body , Mr. Hadrian . " 
 " you see , Benson , this come of your declare war upon Venus . I hope the maid will nurse you properly . let I see : you be friend with the housekeeper , be not   you ? all depend upon that . " 
 " I be only a faithful servant , Mr. Hadrian , " the miserable butler snarl . 
 " then you have   get no friend but your bed . get to it as quick as possible , Benson . " 
 " I can not   move . " Benson make a resolute halt . " I must be fetch , " he whinny . " it be a shame to ask I to move , Mr. Hadrian . " 
 " you will admit that you be heavy , Benson , " say Adrian , ' so I can not   carry you . however , I see Mr. Richard be very kindly return to help I . " 
 at these word heavy Benson instantly find his leg , and shamble on . 
 Lady Blandish meet Richard in dismay . 
 " I have be horribly frightened , " she say . " tell I , what be the meaning of those cry I hear ? " 
 " only some one do justice on a spy , " say Richard , and the lady smile , and look on he fondly , and put her hand through his hair . 
 " be that all ? I should have do it myself if I have be a man . kiss I . " 




 CHAPTER XXI 

 by twelve o'clock at noon next day the inhabitant of Raynham Abbey know that Berry , the baronet 's man , have arrive post - haste from town , with order to conduct Mr. Richard thither , and that Mr. Richard have refuse to go , have swear he would not , defy his father , and despatch Berry to the Shades . Berry be all that Benson be not . whereas Benson hat woman , Berry admire she warmly . second to his own stately person , woman occupy his reflection , and command his homage . berry be of majestic port , and use dictionary word . among the maid of Raynham his conscious calf produce all the discord and the frenzy those adornment seem destine to create in tender bosom . he have , moreover , the reputation of have suffer for the sex ; which assist his object in induce the sex to suffer for he . what with his calf , and his dictionary word , and the attractive halo of the mysterious vindictiveness of Venus surround he , this Adonis of the low household be a mighty man below , and he move as one . 
 on hear the tumult that follow Berry 's arrival , Adrian send for he , and be inform of the nature of his mission , and its result . 
 " you should come to I first , " say Adrian . " I should have imagine you be shrewd enough for that , Berry ? " 
 " pardon I , Mr. Adrian , " Berry double his elbow to explain . " pardon I , sir . act recipient of special injunction I be not a free agent . " 
 " go to Mr. Richard again , Berry . there will be a little confusion if he hold back . perhaps you have well throw out a hint or so of apoplexy . a slight hint will do . and here Berry ! when you return to town , you have well not mention anything to quote Johnson of Benson 's spiflication . " 
 " certainly not , sir . " 
 the wise youth 's hint have the desire effect on Richard . 
 he dash off a hasty letter by Tom to Belthorpe , and , mount his horse , gallop to the Bellingham station . 
 Sir Austin be sit down to a quiet early dinner at his hotel , when the Hope of Raynham burst into his room . 
 the baronet be not angry with his son . on the contrary , for he be singularly just and self - accuse while pride be not up in arm , he have be think all day after the receipt of Benson 's letter that he be deficient in cordiality , and do not , by reason of his excessive anxiety , make himself sufficiently his son 's companion : be not enough , as he strove to be , mother and father to he ; preceptor and friend ; previsor and associate . he have not to ask his conscience where he have lately be to blame towards the System . he have slink away from Raynham in the very crisis of the Magnetic Age , and this young woman of the parish   as Benson have term sweet Lucy in his letter   be the consequence . 
 yes ! pride and sensitiveness be his chief foe , and he would trample on they . to begin , he embrace his son : hard upon an Englishman at any time doubly so to one so shamefaced at emotion in cool blood , as it be . it give he a strange pleasure , nevertheless . and the youth seem to answer to it ; he be excited . be his love , then , begin to correspond with his father 's as in those intimate day before the Blossoming Season ? 
 but when Richard , inarticulate at first in his haste , cry out , " my dear , dear father ! you be safe ! I fear you be well , sir ? thank God ! " Sir Austin stand away from he . 
 " safe ? " he say . " what have alarm you ? " 
 instead of reply , Richard drop into a chair , and seize his hand and kiss it . 
 Sir Austin take a seat , and wait for his son to explain . 
 " those doctor be such fool ! " Richard break out . " I be sure they be wrong . they do not   know headache from apoplexy . it be worth the ride , sir , to see you . you leave Raynham so suddenly . but you be well ! it be not an attack of real apoplexy ? " 
 his father 's brow contort , and he say , no , it be not . Richard pursue : 
 " if you be ill , I could not   come too soon , though , if coroner ' inquest sit on horse , those doctor would be find guilty of mare - slaughter . Cassandra'll be knock up . I be too early for the train at Bellingham , and I would not   wait . she do the distance in four hour and three - quarter . pretty good , sir , be not   it ? " 
 " it have give you appetite for dinner , I hope , " say the baronet , not so well pleased to find that it be not simple obedience that have bring the youth to he in such haste . 
 " I be ready , " reply Richard . " I shall be in time to return by the last train to - night . I will leave Cassandra in your charge for a rest . " 
 his father quietly help he to soup , which he commence gobble with an eagerness that might pass for appetite . 
 " all well at Raynham ? " say the baronet . 
 " quite , sir . " 
 " nothing new ? " 
 " nothing , sir . " 
 " the same as when I leave ? " 
 " no change whatever ! " 
 " I shall be glad to get back to the old place , " say the baronet . " my stay in town have certainly be profitable . I have make some pleasant acquaintance who may probably favour we with a visit there in the late autumn people you may be pleased to know . they be very anxious to see Raynham . " 
 " I love the old place , " cry Richard . " I never wish to leave it . " 
 " why , boy , before I leave you be constantly beg to see town . " 
 " be I , sir ? how odd ! well ! I do not   want to remain here . I have   see enough of it . " 
 " how do you find your way to I ? " 
 Richard laugh , and relate his bewilderment at the mile of brick , and the noise , and the troop of people , conclude , " there be no place like home ! " 
 the baronet watch his symptomatic brilliant eye , and favour he with a double - deal sentence 
 " to anchor the heart by any object ere we have half traverse the world , be youth 's foolishness , my son . reverence time ! a well maxim that than your Horatian . " 
 " he know all ! " think Richard , and instantly draw away league from his father , and throw up fortification round his love and himself . 
 Dinner over , Richard look hurriedly at his watch , and say , with much briskness , " I shall just be in time , sir , if we walk . will you come with I to the station ? " 
 the baronet do not answer . 
 Richard be go to repeat the question , but find his father 's eye fix on he so meaningly that he waver , and play with his empty glass . 
 " I think we will have a little more claret , " say the baronet . 
 Claret be bring , and they be leave alone . 
 the baronet then draw within arm' - reach of his son , and begin : 
 " I be not aware what you may have think of I , Richard , during the year we have live together ; and indeed I have never be in a hurry to be know to you ; and , if I have die before my work be do , I should not have complain at lose half my reward , in hear you thank I . perhaps , as it be , I never may . everything , save selfishness , have its recompense . I shall be content if you prosper . " 
 he fetch a breath and continue : " you have in your infancy a great loss . " Father and son colour simultaneously . " to make that good to you I choose to isolate myself from the world , and devote myself entirely to your welfare ; and I think it be not vanity that tell I now that the son I have rear be one of the most hopeful of God 's creature . but for that very reason you be open to be tempt the most , and to sink the deep . it be the first of the angel who make the road to hell . " 
 he pause again . Richard finger at his watch . 
 " in our House , my son , there be peculiar blood . we go to wreck very easily . it sound like superstition ; I can not but think we be try as most man be not . I see it in we all . and you , my son , be compound of two race . your passion be violent . you have have a taste of revenge . you have see , in a small way , that the pound of flesh draw river of blood . but there be now in you another power . you be mount to the table - land of life , where mimic battle be change to real one . and you come upon it lade equally with force to create and to destroy . " he deliberate to announce the intelligence , with deep meaning : " there be woman in the world , my son ! " 
 the young man 's heart gallop back to Raynham . 
 " it be when you encounter they that you be thoroughly on trial . it be when you know they that life be either a mockery to you , or , as some find it , a gift of blessedness . they be our ordeal . love of any human object be the soul 's ordeal ; and they be ours , love they , or not . " 
 the young man hear the whistle of the train . he see the moon - light wood , and the vision of his beloved . he could barely hold himself down and listen . 
 " I believe , " the baronet speak with little of the cheerfulness of belief , " good woman exist . " 
 oh , if he know Lucy ! 
 " but , " and he gaze on Richard intently , " it be give to very few to meet they on the threshold I may say , to none . we find they after hard buffeting , and usually , when we find the one fit for we , our madness have misshape our destiny , our lot be cast . for woman be not the end , but the mean , of life . in youth we think they the former , and thousand , who have not even the excuse of youth , select a mate or bad with that sole view . I believe woman punish we for so pervert their us . they punish Society . " 
 the baronet put his hand to his brow as his mind travel into consequence . 
 ' our most diligent pupil learn not so much as an earnest teacher , ' say the Pilgrim 's Scrip ; and Sir Austin , in school himself to speak with moderation of woman , be begin to get a glimpse of their side of the case . 
 cold Blood now touch on love to Hot Blood . 
 Cold Blood say , " it be a passion come in the order of nature , the ripe fruit of our animal being . " 
 Hot Blood feel : " it be a divinity ! all that be worth live for in the world . " 
 Cold blood say : " it be a fever which test our strength , and too often lead to perdition . " 
 Hot Blood feel : " lead whither it will , I follow it . " 
 Cold blood say : " it be a name man and woman be much in the habit of employ to sanctify their appetite . " 
 Hot Blood feel : " it be worship ; religion ; life ! " 
 and so the two parallel line run on . 
 the baronet become more personal : 
 " you know my love for you , my son . the extent of it you can not know ; but you must know that it be something very deep , and I do not wish to speak of it but a father must sometimes petition for gratitude , since the only true expression of it be his son 's moral good . if you care for my love , or love I in return , aid I with all your energy to keep you what I have make you , and guard you from the snare beset you . it be in my hand once . it be cease to be so . remember , my son , what my love be . it be different , I fear , with most father : but I be bind up in your welfare : what you do affect I vitally . you will take no step that be not intimate with my happiness , or my misery . and I have have great disappointment , my son . " 
 so far it be well . Richard love his father , and even in his frenzied state he could not without emotion hear he thus speak . 
 unhappily , the baronet , who by some fatality never could see when he be win the battle , think proper in his wisdom to water the dryness of his sermon with a little jocoseness , on the subject of young man fancy themselves in love , and , when they be raw and green , absolutely want to be that most awful thing , which the wise and strong of man undertake in hesitation and after self - mortification and penance marry ! he sketch the Foolish Young Fellow the object of general ridicule and covert contempt . he sketch the Woman the strange thing make in our image , and with all our faculty pass to the rule of one who in take she prove that he could not rule himself , and have no knowledge of her save as a choice morsel which he would burn the whole world , and himself in the bargain , to possess . he harp upon the Foolish Young Fellow , till the foolish young fellow feel his skin tingle and be half suffocate with shame and rage . 
 after this , the baronet might be as wise as he please : he have quite undo his work . he might analyze Love and anatomize woman . he might accord to her her due position , and paint her fair : he might be shrewd , jocose , gentle , pathetic , wonderfully wise : he speak to deaf ear . 
 close his sermon with the question , softly utter : " have you anything to tell I , Richard ? " and hop for a confession , and a thorough re - establishment of confidence , the callous answer strike he cold : " I have not . " 
 the baronet relapse in his chair , and make diagram of his finger . 
 Richard turn his back on further dialogue by go to the window . in the section of sky over the street twinkle two or three star ; shin faintly , feel the moon . the moon be rise : the wood be lift up to she : his star of the wood would be there . a bed of moss set about flower in a basket under he breathe to his nostril of the woodland keenly , and fill he with delirious longing . 
 a succession of hard sigh bring his father 's hand on his shoulder . 
 " you have nothing you could say to I , my son ? tell I , Richard ! remember , there be no home for the soul where dwell a shadow of untruth ! " 
 " nothing at all , sir , " the young man reply , meet he with the full orb of his eye . 
 the baronet withdraw his hand , and pace the room . 
 at last it grow impossible for Richard to control his impatience , and he say : " do you intend I to stay here , sir ? be I not to return to Raynham at all to - night ? " 
 his father be again falsely jocular : 
 " what ? and catch the train after give it ten minute ' start ? " 
 " Cassandra will take I , " say the young man earnestly . " I need not   ride she hard , sir . or perhaps you would lend I your Winkelried ? I should be down with he in little well than three hour . " 
 " even then , you know , the park - gate would be lock . " 
 " well , I could stable he in the village . dowle know the horse , and would treat he properly . may I have he , sir ? " 
 the cloud clear off Richard 's face as he ask . at least , if he miss his love that night he would be near she , breathe the same air , mark what star be above her bedchamber , hear the hush night - talk of the tree about her dwelling : look on the distance that be like hope half fulfil and a bodily presence bright as Hesper , since he know she . there be two swallow under the eave shadow Lucy 's chamber - windows : two swallow , mate in one nest , blissful bird , who twitter and cheep - cheep to the sole - lie beauty in her bed . around these bird the lover 's heart revolve , he know not why . he associate they with all his close - veil dream of happiness . seldom a morning pass when he do not watch they leave the nest on their breakfast - flight , busy in the happy stillness of dawn . it seem to he now that if he could be at Raynham to see they in to - morrow 's dawn he would be compensate for his incalculable loss of to - night : he would forgive and love his father , London , the life , the world . just to see those purple back and white breast flash out into the quiet morning air ! he want no more . 
 the baronet 's trifling have place this enormous boon within the young man 's visionary grasp . 
 he still go on try the boy 's temper . 
 " you know there would be nobody ready for you at Raynham . it be unfair to disturb the maid . " 
 Richard overrode every objection . 
 " well , then , my son , " say the baronet , preserve his half - jocular air , " I must tell you that it be my wish to have you in town . " 
 " then you have not be ill at all , sir ! " cry Richard , as in his despair he seize the whole plot . 
 " I have be as well as you could have desire I to be , " say his father . 
 " why do they lie to I ? " the young man wrathfully exclaim . 
 " I think , Richard , you can well answer that , " rejoin Sir Austin , kindly severe . 
 Dread of be signalize as the Foolish Young Fellow prevent Richard from expostulate far . Sir Austin see he grind his passion into powder for future explosion , and think it well to leave he for awhile . 




 CHAPTER XXII 

 for three week Richard have to remain in town and endure the teaching of the System in a new atmosphere . he have to sit and listen to man of science who come to renew their intimacy with his father , and whom of all man his father wish he to respect and study ; practically scientific man be , in the baronet 's estimation , the only mind thoroughly mat and enviable . he have to endure an introduction to the Grandisons , and meet the eye of his kind , haunt as he be by the Foolish Young Fellow . the idea that he might by any chance be identify with he hold the poor youth in silent subjection . and it be horrible . for it be a continued outrage on the fair image he have in his heart . the notion of the world laugh at he because he love sweet Lucy sting he to momentary frenzy , and develop premature misanthropy in his spirit . also the System desire to show he whither young woman of the parish lead we , and he be drag about at nighttime to see the son and daughter of darkness , after the fashion prescribe to Mr. Thompson ; how they dance and ogle down the high road to perdition . but from this sight possibly the teacher learn more than his pupil , since we find he seriously ask his meditative hour , in the note - book : " Wherefore Wild Oats be only of one gender ? " a question certainly not suggest to he at Raynham ; and again " whether man might not be attach too rigid an importance?" ... to a subject with a dotted tail apparently , for he give it no other in the note - book . but , as I apprehend , he have come to plead in behalf of woman here , and have deduce something from positive observation . to Richard the scene he witness be strange wild picture , likely if anything to have increase his misanthropy , but for his love . 
 certain sweet little note from Lucy sustain the lover during the first two week of exile . they cease ; and now Richard fall into such despondency that his father in alarm have to take measure to hasten their return to Raynham . at the close of the third week Berry lay a pair of letter , bear the Raynham post - mark , on the breakfast - table , and , after read one attentively , the baronet ask his son if he be inclined to quit the metropolis . 
 " for Raynham , air ? " cry Richard , and relapse , say , " as you will ! " aware that he have give a glimpse of the Foolish Young Fellow . 
 Berry accordingly receive order to make arrangement for their instant return to Raynham . 
 the letter Sir Austin lift his head from to bespeak his son 's wish be a composition of the wise youth Adrian 's , and run thus : 
 " Benson be doggedly recover . he require great indemnity . happy when a faithful fool be the main sufferer in a household ! I quite agree with you that our faithful fool be the good servant of great scheme . Benson be now a piece of history . I tell he that this be indemnity enough , and that the sweet Muse usually insist upon gentleman be half - flayed before she will condescend to notice they ; but Benson , I regret to say , reject the comfort so fine a reflection should offer , and have rather keep his skin and live opaque . Heroism seem partly a matter of training . faithful folly be Benson 's nature : the rest have be thrust upon . 
 " the young person have resign the neighbourhood . I have an interview with the fair Papist myself , and also with the man Blaize . they be both sensible , though one swear and the other sigh . she be pretty . I hope she do not paint . I can affirm that her leg be strong , for she walk to Bellingham twice a week to take her scarlet bath , when , have confess and be make clean by the romish unction , she walk back the brisker , of which my protestant muscular system be yet aware . it be on the road to Bellingham I engage she . she be well in the matter of hair . Madam Godiva might challenge she , it would be a fair match . have it never strike you that woman be near the vegetable than Man ? Mr. Blaize intend she for his son a junction that every lover of fairy mythology must desire to see consummate . Young Tom be heir to all the agremen of the Beast . the maid of Lobourne say   I hear   that he be a very Proculus among they . possibly the envious man say it for the maid . Beauty do not speak bad grammar and altogether she be well out of the way . " 
 the other letter be from Lady Blandish , a lady 's letter , and say : 
 " I have fulfil your commission to the good of my ability , and heartily sad it have make I . she be indeed very much above her station pity that it be so ! she be almost beautiful quite beautiful at time , and not in any way what you have be lead to fancy . the poor child have no story to tell . I have again see she , and talk with she for an hour as kindly as I could . I could gather nothing more than we know . it be just a woman 's history as it invariably commence . Richard be the god of her idolatry . she will renounce he , and sacrifice herself for his sake . be we so bad ? she ask I what she be to do . she would do whatever be impose upon she all but pretend to love another , and that she never would , and , I believe , never will . you know I be sentimental , and I confess we drop a few tear together . her uncle have send she for the Winter to the institution where it appear she be educate , and where they be very fond of she and want to keep she , which it would be a good thing if they be to do . the man be a good sort of man . she be entrust to he by her father , and he never interfere with her religion , and be very scrupulous about all that pertain to it , though , as he say , he be a Christian himself . in the spring   but the poor child do not know this   she be to come back , and be married to his lout of a son . I be determined to prevent that . may I not reckon on your promise to aid I ? when you see she , I be sure you will . it would be sacrilege to look on and permit such a thing . you know , they be cousin . she ask I , where in the world there be one like Richard ? what could I answer ? they be your own word , and speak with a depth of conviction ! I hope he be really calm . I shudder to think of he when he come , and discover what I have be do . I hope I have be really do right ! a good deed , you say , never die ; but we can not always know I must rely on you . yes , it be ; I should think , easy to suffer martyrdom when one be sure of one 's cause ! but then one must be sure of it . I have do nothing lately but to repeat to myself that say of your , no . 54 , C. 7 , P.S. ; and it have console I , I can not say why , except that all wisdom console , whether it apply directly or not : 
 " ' for this reason so many fall from God , who have attain to he ; that they cling to he with their weakness , not with their strength . ' 
 " I like to know of what you be think when you compose this or that say what suggest it . may not one be admit to inspect the machinery of wisdom ? I feel curious to know how thought real thought be bear . not that I hope to win the secret . here be the beginning of one   but we poor woman can never put together even two of the three idea which you say go to form a thought : ' when a wise man make a false step , will he not go far than a fool ? ' it have just flit through I . 
 " I can not get on with Gibbon , so wait your return to recommence the reading . I dislike the sneer essence of his writing . I keep refer to his face , until the dislike seem to become personal . how different be it with Wordsworth ! and yet I can not escape from the thought that he be always solemnly think of himself   but I do reverence he . but this be curious ; Byron be a great egoist , and yet I do not feel the same with he . he remind I of a beast of the desert , savage and beautiful ; and the former be what one would imagine a superior donkey reclaim from the heathen to be a very superior donkey , I mean , with great power of speech and great natural complacency , and whose stubbornness you must admire as part of his mission . the bad be that no one will imagine anything sublime in a superior donkey , so my simile be unfair and false . be it not strange ? I love Wordsworth well , and yet Byron have the great power over I . how be that ? " 
  " because , " Sir Austin write beside the query in pencil , " woman be coward , and succumb to Irony and Passion , rather than yield their heart to Excellence and Nature 's Inspiration . " 
 the letter pursue : 
 " I have finish Boiardo and have take up Berni . the latter offend I . I suppose we woman do not really care for humour . you be right in say we have none ourselves , and ' cackle ' instead of laugh . it be true   of I , at least   that ' Falstaff be only to we an incorrigible fat man . ' I want to know what he illustrate . and Don Quixote what end can be serve in make a noble mind ridiculous ? I hear you say practical . so it be . we be very narrow , I know . but we like wit practical again ! or in your word   when I really think they generally come to my aid perhaps it be that it be often all your thought ; we ' prefer the rapi thrust , to the broad embrace , of Intelligence . ' " 
 he trifle with the letter for some time , re - reading choose passage as he walk about the room , and consider he scarce know what . there be idea language be too gross for , and shape too arbitrary , which come to we and have a definite influence upon we , and yet we can not fasten on the filmy thing and make they visible and distinct to ourselves , much less to other . why do he twice throw a look into the glass in the act of pass it ? he stand for a moment with head erect face it . his eye for the nonce seem little to peruse his outer feature ; the grey gather brow , and the wrinkles much action of they have trace over the circle half up his high straight forehead ; the iron - grey hair that rise over his forehead and fall away in the fashion of Richard 's plume . his general appearance show the tint of year ; but none of their weight , and nothing of the dignity of his youth , be go . it be so far satisfactory , but his eye be wide , as one who look at his essential self through the mask we wear . 
 perhaps he be speculate as he look on the sort of aspect he present to the lady 's discriminative regard . of her feeling he have not a suspicion . but he know with what extraordinary lucidity woman can , when it please they , and when their feeling be not quite boil under the noonday sun , seize all the side of a character , and put their finger on its weak point . he be cognizant of the total absence of the humorous in himself   the want that most shut he out from his fellow , and perhaps the clear - thoughte , intensely self - examine gentleman filmily conceive , I also , in common with the poet , she gaze on as one of the superior grey beast ! 
 he may have so conceive the case ; he be capable of that great - mindedness , and could snatch at time very luminous glance at the broad reflector which the world of fact lie outside our narrow compass hold up for we to see ourselves in when we will . unhappily , the faculty of laughter , which be due to this gift , be deny he ; and have see , he , like the companion of friend Balsam , could go no far . for a good wind of laughter have relieve he of much of the blight of self - deception , and oddness , and extravagance ; have give a healthy view of our atmosphere of life ; but he have it not . 
 journey back to Bellingham in the train , with the heated brain and brilliant eye of his son beside he , Sir Austin try hard to feel infallible , as a man with a system should feel ; and because he could not do so , after much mental conflict , he descend to entertain a personal antagonism to the young woman who have step in between his experiment and success . he do not think kindly of she . Lady Blandish 's encomium of her behaviour and her beauty annoy he . forgetful that he have in a measure forfeit his right to it , he take the common ground of father , and demand , " why he be not justify in do all that lie in his power to prevent his son from cast himself away upon the first creature with a pretty face he encounter ? " deliberate thus , he lose the tenderness he should have have for his experiment the living , burn youth at his elbow , and his excessive love for he take a rigorous tone . it appear to he politic , reasonable , and just , that the uncle of this young woman , who have so long nurse the prudent scheme of marry she to his son , should not only not be thwart in his object but encouraged and even assist . at least , not thwart . Sir Austin have no glass before he while these idea harden in his mind , and he have rather forget the letter of Lady Blandish . 
 Father and son be alone in the railway carriage . both be too preoccupied to speak . as they near Bellingham the dark be fill the hollow of the country . over the pine - hill beyond the station a last rosy streak linger across a green sky . Richard eye it while they fly along . it catch he forward : it seem full of the spirit of his love , and bring tear of mournful longing to his eyelid . the sad beauty of that one spot in the heaven seem to call out to his soul to swear to his Lucy 's truth to he : be like the sorrowful visage of his fleur - de - luce as he call she , appeal to he for faith . that tremulous tender way she have of half - close and catch light on the nether - lid , when sometimes she look up in her lover 's face as look so mystic - sweet that it have grow to be the fountain of his dream : he see it yonder , and his blood thrill . 
 know you those wand - like touch of I know not what , before which our gross being melt ; and we , much as we hope to be in the awake , stand etherealized , tremble with new joy ? they come but rarely ; rarely even in love , when we fondly think they revelation . mere sensation they be , doubtless : and we rank for they no higher in the spiritual scale than so many translucent glorious polypi that quiver on the shore , the hue of heaven run through they . yet in the harvest of our day it be something for the animal to have have such mere fleshly polypian experience to look back upon , and they give he an horizon pale sea of lure splendour . one who have have they   when they do not bind he   may find the Isles of Bliss soon than another . sensual faith in the upper glory be something . " let we remember , " say the Pilgrim 's Scrip , " that nature , though heathenish , reach at her good to the footstool of the high . she be not all dust , but a live portion of the sphere . in aspiration it be our error to despise she , forget that through Nature only can we ascend . Cherished , train , and purify , she be then partly worthy the divine mate who be to make she wholly so . St. Simeon see the Hog in Nature , and take Nature for the Hog . " 
 it be one of these strange bodily exaltation which thrill the young man , he know not how it be , for sadness and his foreboding vanish . the soft wand touch he . at that moment , have Sir Austin speak openly , Richard might have fall upon his heart . he could not . 
 he choose to feel injured on the common ground of father , and to pursue his system by plot . Lady Blandish have revive his jealousy of the creature who menace it , and jealousy of a System be unreflecte and vindictive as jealousy of woman . 
 heath - root and pine breathe sharp in the cool autumn evening about the Bellingham station . Richard stand a moment as he step from the train , and draw the country air into his lung with large heave of the chest . leave his father to the felicitation of the station - master , he go into the Lobourne road to look for his faithful Tom , who have receive private order through Berry to be in attendance with his young master 's mare , Cassandra , and be lurk in a plantation of fir unenclose on the border of the road , where Richard , know his retainer 's zest for conspiracy too well to seek he anywhere but in the part most favour with shelter and concealment , find he furtively whiffing tobacco . 
 " what news , Tom ? be there an illness ? " 
 Tom send his undress cap on one side to scratch at dilemma , an old agricultural habit to which he be still a slave in moment of abstract thought or sudden difficulty . 
 " no , I do not   want the rake , Mr. Richard , " he whinny with a false grin , as he behold his master 's eye vacantly follow the action . 
 " speak out ! " he be command . " I have not   have a letter for a week ! " 
 Richard learn the news . he take it with surprising outward calm , only get a little close to Cassandra 's neck , and look very hard at Tom without see a speck of he , which have the effect on Tom of make he sincerely wish his master would punch his head at once rather than fix he in that owl - like way . 
 " go on ! " say Richard , huskily . " yes ? she be go ! well ? " 
 Tom be bring to understand he must make the most of trifle , and recite how he have hear from a female domestic at Belthorpe of the name of Davenport , formerly know to he , that the young lady never sleep a wink from the hour she know she be go , but sit up in her bed till morning cry most pitifully , though she never complain . hereat the tear unconsciously stream down Richard 's cheek . Tom say he have try to see she , but Mr. Adrian keep he at work , cipher at a terrible sum that and nothing else all day ! say , it be to please his young master on his return . " likewise something in Lat'n , " add Tom . " Nom'tive Mouser ! ' nough to make ye mad , sir ! " he exclaim with pathos . the wretch have be put to acquire a latin declension . 
 Tom see she on the morning she go away , he say : she be very sorrowful - looking , and nod kindly to he as she pass in the fly along with young Tom Blaize . " she have get uncommon kind eye , sir , " say Tom , " and cryin ' do not   spoil they . " for which his hand be wrench . 
 Tom have no more to tell , save that , in round the road , the young lady have hang out her hand , and seem to move it forward and back , as much as to sap , Good - bye , Tom ! " and though she could not   see I , " say Tom , " I take off my hat . I do take it so kind of she to think of a chap like I . " he be at high - pressure sentiment what with his education for a hero and his master 's love - stricken state . 
 " you see no more of she , Tom ? " 
 " no , sir . that be the last ! " 
 " that be the last you see of she , Tom ? " 
 " well , sir , I see nothing more . " 
 " and so she go out of sight ! " 
 " Clean gone , that she be , sir . " 
 " why do they take she away ? what have they do with she ? where have they take she to ? " 
 these red - hot questioning be address to the universal heaven rather than to Tom . 
 " why do not   she write ? " they be resume . " why do she leave ? she be mine . she belong to I ! who dare take she away ? why do she leave without write ? Tom ! " 
 " yes , sir , " say the well - drill recruit , dress himself up to the word of command . he expect a variation of the theme from the change of tone with which his name have be pronounce , but it be again , " where have they take she to ? " and this be even more perplexing to Tom than his hard sum in arithmetic have be . he could only draw down the corner of his mouth hard , and glance up queerly . 
 " she have be cry you see that , Tom ? " 
 " no mistake about that , Mr. Richard . Cryin ' all night and all day , I sh'd say . " 
 " and she be cry when you see she ? " 
 " she look'd as if she have just do for a moment , sir . " 
 " but her face be white ? " 
 " white as a sheet . " 
 Richard pause to discover whether his instinct have catch a new view from these fact . he be in a cage , always knock against the same bar , fly as he might . her tear be the star in his black night . he cling to they as golden orb . inexplicable as they be , they be at least pledge of love . 
 the hue of sunset have leave the West . no light be there but the steadfast pale eye of twilight . Thither he be draw . he mount Cassandra , say : " tell they something , Tom . I shall not   be home to dinner , " and ride off toward the forsaken home of light over Belthorpe , whereat he see the wan hand of his Lucy , wave farewell , recede as he advance . his jewel be steal , he must gaze upon the empty box . 




 CHAPTER XXIII 

 Night have come on as Richard enter the old elm - shade , grass - border lane lead down from Raynham to Belthorpe . the pale eye of twilight be shut . the wind have toss up the bank of western cloud , which be now fly broad and unlighte across the sky , broad and balmy the charioted South - west at full charge behind his pant courser . as he near the farm his heart flutter and leapt up . he be sure she must be there . she must have return . why should she have leave for good without write ? he catch suspicion by the throat , make it voiceless , if it live : he silence reason . she not write be now a proof that she have return . he listen to nothing but his imperious passion , and murmur sweet word for she , as if she be by : tender cherishing epithet 's of love in the nest . she be there she move somewhere about like a silver flame in the dear old house , do her sweet household duty . his blood begin to sing : o happy those within , to see she , and be about she ! by some extraordinary process he contrive to cast a sort of glory round the burly person of Farmer Blaize himself . and oh ! to have companionship with a seraph one must know a seraph 's bliss , and be not young Tom to be envy ? the smell of late clematis bring on the wind enwrap he , and go to his brain , and throw a light over the old red - brick house , for he remember where it grow , and the winter rise - tree , and the jessamine , and the passion - flower : the garden in front with the standard rose tend by her hand ; the long wall to the left strip by the branch of the cherry , the peep of a further garden through the wall , and then the orchard , and the field beyond the happy circle of her dwelling ! it flash before his eye while he look on the darkness . and yet it be the reverse of hope which kindle this light and inspire the momentary calm he experience : it be despair exaggerating delusion , wilfully build up on a groundless basis . " for the tenacity of true passion be terrible , " say the Pilgrim 's scrip : " it will stand against the host of heaven , God 's great array of fact , rather than surrender its aim , and must be crush before it will succumb send to the low pit ! " he know she be not there ; she be go . but the power of a will strain to madness fight at it , keep it down , conjure forth her ghost , and would have it as he dictate . poor youth ! the great array of fact be in due order of march . 
 he have breathe her name many time , and once over - loud ; almost a cry for she escape he . he have not notice the opening of a door and the noise of a foot along the gravel walk . he be lean over Cassandra 's uneasy neck watch the one window intently , when a voice address he out of the darkness . 
 " be that you , young gentleman ? Mr. Fev'rel ? " 
 Richard 's trance be break . " Mr. Blaize ! " he say ; recognize the farmer 's voice . 
 " good even'n t ' you , sir , " return the farmer . " I know the mare though I do not   know you . rather bluff to - night it be . will ye step in , Mr. Fev'rel ? it be begin ' to spit , go to be a wildish night , I reckon . " 
 Richard dismount . the farmer call one of his man to hold the mare , and usher the young man in . once there , Richard 's conjuration cease . there be a deadness about the room and passage that tell of her absence . the wall he touch these be the vacant shell of she . he have never be in the house since he know she , and now what strange sweetness , and what pang ! 
 Young Tom Blaize be in the parlour , square over the table in open - mouthed examination of an ancient book of the fashion for a summer month which have elapse during his mother 's minority . Young Tom be respectfully study the aspect of the radiant beauty of the polite work . he also be a thrall of woman , newly enrol , and full of wonder . 
 " what , Tom ! " the farmer sing out as soon as he have open the door ; " there ye be ! at yer Folly agin , be ye ? what good'll they fashen do to you , I would like t'know ? come , shut up , and go and see to Mr. Fev'rel 's mare . he be al'ays at that ther ' Folly now . I say there never be a well name for a book than that ther ' Folly ! talk about attitude ! " 
 the farmer laugh his fat side into a chair , and motion his visitor to do likewise . 
 " it be a comfort they be most on them female , " he pursue , sound a thwack on his knee as he settle himself agreeably in his seat . " it do not   matter much what they do , except pinchin ' in waspin ' it at the waist . give I nature , I say woman as she be make ! eh , young gentleman ? " 
 " you seem very lonely here , " say Richard , glance round , and at the ceiling . 
 " lonely ? " quoth the farmer . " well , for the matter o ' that , we be ! jest now , so't happen ; I have   get my pipe , and Tom've   get his Folly . he be on one side the table , and I be on t'other . he gap , and I gaze . we be a bit lonesome . but there it be for the good ! " 
 Richard resume , " I hardly expect to see you to - night , Mr. Blaize . " 
 " y'acte like a man in come , young gentleman , and I do ye honour for it ! " say Farmer Blaize with sudden energy and directness . 
 the thing imply by the farmer 's word cause Richard to take a quick breath . they look at each other , and look away , the farmer thrumming on the arm of his chair . 
 above the mantel - piece , surround by tarnish indifferent miniature of high - collared , well - to - do yeoman of the anterior generation , try their good not to grin , and high - waiste old lady smile an encouraging smile through plentiful cap - pucker , there hang a passably execute half - figure of a naval officer in uniform , grasp a telescope under his left arm , who stand forth clearly as not of their kith and kin . his eye be blue , his hair light , his bearing that of a man who know how to carry his head and shoulder . the artist , while give he an epaulette to indicate his rank , have also record the juvenility which a lieutenant in the naval service can retain after arrive at that position , by paint he with smooth cheek and fresh ruddy lip . to this portrait Richard 's eye be direct . Farmer Blaize observe it , and say 
 " her father , sir ! " 
 Richard moderate his voice to praise the likeness . 
 " yes , " say the farmer , " pretty well . next well to havin' she , though it be a long way off that ! " 
 " an old family , Mr. Blaize be it not ? " Richard ask in as careless a tone as he could assume . 
 " gentlefolk what be leave of them , " reply the farmer with an equally affected indifference . 
 " and that be her father ? " say Richard , grow bold to speak of she . 
 " that be her father , young gentleman ! " 
 " Mr. Blaize , " Richard turn to face he , and burst out , " where be she ? " 
 " Gone , sir ! pack off ! can not   have she here now . " the farmer thrum a step brisker , and eye the young man 's wild face resolutely . 
 " Mr. Blaize , " Richard lean forward to get close to he . he be stun , and hardly aware of what he be say or do : " where have she go ? why do she leave ? " 
 " you need not   to ask , sir ye know , " say the farmer , with a side shot of his head . 
 " but she do not it be not her wish to go ? " 
 " no ! I think she like the place . mayhap she likes't too well ! " 
 " why do you send she away to make her unhappy , Mr. Blaize ? " 
 the farmer bluntly deny it be he be the party who make her unhappy . " nobody can not   accuse I . tell ye what , sir . I wunt have the busybody set to work about she , and there be all the matter . so let you and I come to an understandin ' . " 
 a blind inclination to take offence make Richard sit upright . he forget it the next minute , and say humbly : " be I the cause of she go ? " 
 " well ! " return the farmer , " to speak straight ye be ! " 
 " what can I do , Mr. Blaize , that she may come back again " the young hypocrite ask . 
 " now , " say the farmer , " you be come to business . glad to hear ye talk in that sensible way , Mr. Feverel . you may guess I want she bad enough . the house be not   itself now she be away , and I be not   myself . well , sir ! this ye can do . if you give I your promise not to meddle with she at all I can not   mak ' out how you come to be acquaint ; not to try to get she to be meetin ' you and if you would ' a see she when she leave , you would when do ye meet ? last grass , be not   it ? your word as a gentleman not to be write letter , and spyin ' after she I will have she back at once . back she shall come ! " 
 " give she up ! " cry Richard . 
 " ay , that be it ! " say the farmer . " give she up . " 
 the young man check the annihilation of time that be on his mouth . 
 " you send she away to protect she from I , then ? " he say savagely . 
 " that be not quite it , but that will do , " rejoin the farmer . 
 " do you think I shall harm she , sir ? " 
 " People seem to think she will harm you , young gentleman , " the farmer say with some irony . 
 " harm I she ? what people ? " 
 " People pretty intimate with you , sir . " 
 " what people ? who speak of we ? " Richard begin to scent a plot , and would not be balk . 
 " well , sir , look here , " say the farmer . " it be not   no secret , and if it be , I do not   see why I be to keep it . it appear your education 's peculiar ! " the farmer drawl out the word as if he be describe the figure of a snake . " you be not   to be as other young gentleman . all the well ! you be a fine bold young gentleman , and your father 's a right to be proud of ye . well , sir I be sure I thank he for't he come to hear of you and Luce , and of course he do not   want nothing o ' that more do I. I meet he there ! what be more I will not   have nothing of it . she be my gal . she be leave to my protection . and she be a lady , sir . let I tell ye , ye will not   find many on them so well look to as she be my luce ! well , Mr. Fev'rel , it be you , or it be her one of ye must be out o ' the way . so we be tell . and Luce I do believe she be just as anxious about yer education as yer father she say she will go , and would not   write , and'd break it off for the sake o ' your education . and she've   kep ' her word , have not   she ? she be a true'n . what she say she will do ! true blue she be , my luce ! so now , sir , you do the same , and I will thank ye . " 
 any one who have toss a sheet of paper into the fire , and see it gradually brown with heat , and strike to flame , may conceive the mind of the lover as he listen to this speech . 
 his anger do not evaporate in word , but condense and sink deep . " Mr. Blaize , " he say , " this be very kind of the people you allude to , but I be of an age now to think and act for myself I love she , sir ! " his whole countenance change , and the muscle of his face quiver . 
 " well ! " say the farmer , appeasingly , " we all do at your age somebody or other . it be natural ! " 
 " I love she ! " the young man thunder afresh , too much possess by his passion to have a sense of shame in the confession . " Farmer ! " his voice fall to supplication , " will you bring she back ? " 
 Farmer Blaize make a queer face . he ask what for ? and where be the promise require ? but be not the lover 's argument conclusive ? he say he love she ! and he could not see why her uncle should not in consequence immediately send for she , that they might be together . all very well , quoth the farmer , but what be to come of it ? what be to come of it ? why , love , and more love ! and a bit too much ! the farmer add grimly . 
 " then you refuse I , farmer , " say Richard . " I must look to you for keep she away from I , not to to these people . you will not have she back , though I tell you I love she well than my life ? " 
 Farmer Blaize now have to answer he plainly , he have a reason and an objection of his own . and it be , that her character be at stake , and God know whether she herself might not be in danger . he speak with a kindly candour , not without dignity . he compliment Richard personally , but young people be young people ; baronet ' son be not in the habit of marry farmer ' niece . 
 at first the son of a System do not comprehend he . when he do , he say : " Farmer ! if I give you my word of honour , as I hope for heaven , to marry she when I be of age , will you have she back ? " 
 he be so fervid that , to quiet he , the farmer only shake his head doubtfully at the bar of the grate , and let his chest fall slowly . Richard catch what seem to he a glimpse of encouragement in these sign , and observe : " it be not because you object to I , Mr. Blaize ? " 
 the farmer signify it be not that . 
 " it be because my father be against I , " Richard go on , and undertake to show that love be so sacred a matter that no father could entirely and for ever resist his son 's inclination . Argument be a cool field where the farmer could meet and match he , the young man get on the tramroad of his passion , and go ahead . he draw picture of Lucy , of her truth , and his own . he take leap from life to death , from death to life , mix imprecation and prayer in a torrent . perhaps he do move the stolid old Englishman a little , he be so vehement , and make so visible a sacrifice of his pride . 
 Farmer Blaize try to pacify he , but it be useless . his jewel he must have . 
 the farmer stretch out his hand for the pipe that allayeth botheration . " may smoke heer now , " he say . " not when somebody 's present . smoke in the kitchen then . do not   mind smell ? " 
 Richard nod , and watch the operation while the farmer fill , and light , and begin to puff , as if his fate hang on they . 
 " who would a ' thought , when you sit over there once , of its comin ' to this ? " ejaculate the farmer , draw ease and reflection from tobacco . " you do not   think much of she that day , young gentleman ! I introduce ye . well ! thing come about . can not   you wait till she return in due course , now ? " 
 this suggestion , the work of the pipe , do but bring on he another torrent . 
 " it be queer , " say the farmer , put the mouth of the pipe to his wrinkle - up temple . 
 Richard wait for he , and then he lay down the pipe altogether , as no aid in perplexity , and say , after lean his arm on the table and star at Richard an instant : 
 " look , young gentleman ! my word 's go . I have   speak it . I have   give them the ' surance she shall not   be back till the Spring , and then I will have she , and then well ! I do hope , for more reason than one , ye'll both be wise I have   get my own notion about she . but I an't   the man to force a gal to marry ' gainst her incline . depend upon it I be not your enemy , Mr. Fev'rel . you be jest the one to mak ' a young gal proud . so wait , and see . that be my ' dvice . Jest tak ' and wait . I have   no more to say . " 
 Richard 's impetuosity have make he really afraid of speak his notion concern the project felicity of young Tom , if indeed they be serious . 
 the farmer repeat that he have no more to say ; and Richard , with " wait till the Spring ! wait till the Spring ! " din despair in his ear , stand up to depart . Farmer Blaize shake his slack hand in a friendly way , and call out at the door for young Tom , who , dread allusion to his Folly , do not appear . a maid rush by Richard in the passage , and slip something into his grasp , which fix on it without further consciousness than that of touch . the mare be lead forth by the Bantam . a light rain be fall down strong warm gust , and the tree be noisy in the night . Farmer Blaize request Richard at the gate to give he his hand , and say all be well . he like the young man for his earnestness and honest outspeake . Richard could not say all be well , but he give his hand , and knit it to the farmer 's in a sharp squeeze , when he get upon Cassandra , and ride into the tumult . 
 a calm , clear dawn succeed the roar West , and throw its glow grey image on the water of the Abbey - lake . before sunrise Tom Bakewell be abroad , and meet the miss youth , his master , jog Cassandra leisurely along the Lobourne park - road , a sorry couple to look at . Cassandra 's flank be cake with mud , her head droop : all that be in she have be take out by that wild night . on what heath and heavy fallow have she not spend her noble strength , recklessly fret through the darkness ! 
 " take the mare , " say Richard , dismounting and pat she between the eye . " she be do up , poor old gal ! look to she , Tom , and then come to I in my room . " 
 Tom ask no question . 
 three day would bring the anniversary of Richard 's birth , and though Tom be close , the condition of the mare , and the young gentleman 's strange freak in rid she out all night become know , prepare everybody at Raynham for the usual bad - luck birthday , the prophet of which be full of sad gratification . Sir Austin have an unpleasant office to require of his son ; no other than that of humbly beg Benson 's pardon , and wash out the undue blood he have spill in take his Pound of Flesh . Heavy Benson be tell to anticipate the demand for pardon , and practise in his mind the most melancholy christian deportment he could assume on the occasion . but while his son be in this state , Sir Austin consider that he would hardly be bring to see the virtue of the act , and do not make the requisition of he , and heavy Benson remain draw up solemnly expectant at doorway , and at the foot of the staircase , a saurian Caryatid , wherever he could get a step in advance of the young man , while Richard heedlessly pass he , as he pass everybody else , his head bent to the ground , and his leg bear he like random instrument of whose service he be unconscious . it be a shock to Benson 's implicit belief in his patron ; and he be not console by the philosophic explanation , " that good in a strong many - compound nature be of slow growth than any other mortal thing , and must not be force . " damnatory doctrine well please Benson . he be ready to pardon , as a Christian should , but he do want his enemy before he on his knee . and now , though the Saurian Eye see more than all the other eye in the house , and see that there be matter in hand between Tom and his master to breed exceed discomposure to the System , Benson , as he have not receive his indemnity , and do not wish to encounter fresh peril for nothing , hold his peace . 
 Sir Austin partly divine what be go on in the breast of his son , without conceive the depth of distrust his son cherish or quite measure the intensity of the passion that consume he . he be very kind and tender with he . like a cunning physician who have , nevertheless , overlook the change in the disease superinduce by one false dose , he meditate his prescription carefully and confidently , sure that he know the case , and be a match for it . he decree that Richard 's erratic behaviour should pass unnoticed . two day before the birthday , he ask he whether he would object to have company ? to which Richard say : " have whom you will , sir . " the preparation for festivity commence accordingly . 
 on the birthday eve he din with the rest . Lady Blandish be there , and sit penitently at his right . Hippias prognosticate certain indigestion for himself on the morrow . the Eighteenth Century wonder whether she should live to see another birthday . Adrian drink the two - year ' distant term of his tutorship , and Algernon go over the list of the lobourne man who would cope with Bursley on the morrow . Sir Austin give ear and a word to all , keep his mental eye for his son . to please Lady Blandish also , Adrian venture to make trifling joke about London 's Mrs. Grandison ; joke delicately not decent , but so delicately so , that it be not decent to perceive it . 
 after dinner Richard leave they . nothing more than commonly peculiar be observe about he , beyond the excessive glitter of his eye , but the baronet say , " yes , yes ! that will pass . " he and Adrian , and Lady Blandish , take tea in the library , and sit till a late hour discuss casuistry relate mostly to the Apple - disease . converse very amusing to the wise youth , who could suggest to the two chaste mind situation of the shady character , with the air of a seeker after truth , and lead they , unsuspecting , where they dare not look about they . the Aphorist have elate the heart of his constant fair worshipper with a newly rounded if not newly conceive sentence , when they become aware that they be four . Heavy Benson stand among they . he say he have knock , but receive no answer . there be , however , a vestige of surprise and dissatisfaction on his face behold Adrian of the company , which have not quite wear away , and give place , when it do vanish , to an aspect of flabby severity . 
 " well , Benson ? well ? " say the baronet . 
 the unmoving man reply : " if you please , Sir Austin Mr. Richard ! " 
 " well ! " 
 " he be out ! " 
 " well ? " 
 " with Bakewell ! " 
 " well ? " 
 " and a carpet - bag ! " 
 the carpet - bag might be suppose to contain that funny thing call a young hero 's romance in the making . 
 out Richard be , and with a carpet - bag , which Tom Bakewell carry . he be on the road to Bellingham , under heavy rain , haste like an escape captive , wild with joy , while Tom shake his skin , and grunt at his discomfort . the mail train be to be catch at Bellingham . he know where to find she now , through the intervention of Miss Davenport , and thither he be fly , an arrow loose from the bow : thither , in spite of father and friend and plotter , to claim she , and take she , and stand with she against the world . 
 they be both thoroughly wet when they enter Bellingham , and Tom 's vision be of hot drink . he hint the necessity for inward consolation to his master , who could answer nothing but " Tom ! Tom ! I shall see she tomorrow ! " it be bad travel in the wet , Tom hint again , to provoke the same insane outcry , and have his arm seize and furiously shake into the bargain . pass the principal inn of the place , Tom speak plainly for brandy . 
 " no ! " cry Richard , " there be not a moment to be lose ! " and as he say it , he reel , and fall against Tom , mutter indistinctly of faintness , and that there be no time to lose . Tom lift he in his arm , and get admission to the inn . Brandy , the country 's specific , be advise by host and hostess , and force into his mouth , revive he sufficiently to cry out , " Tom ! the bell 's ringing : we shall be late , " after which he fall back insensible on the sofa where they have stretch he . excitement of blood and brain have do its work upon he . the youth suffer they to undress he and put he to bed , and there he lay , forgetful even of love ; a drown weed bear onward by the tide of the hour . there his father find he . 
 be the scientific humanist remorseful ? he have look forward to such a crisis as that point in the disease his son be the victim of , when the body would fail and give the spirit calm to conquer the malady , know very well that the seed of the evil be not of the spirit . moreover , to see he and have he be a repose after the alarm Benson have sound . " Mark ! " he say to Lady Blandish , " when he recover he will not care for she . " 
 the lady have accompany he to the Bellingham inn on first hearing of Richard 's seizure . 
 " what an iron man you can be , " she exclaim , smother her intuition . she be for give the boy his bauble ; promise it he , at least , if he would only get well and be the bright flower of promise he once be . 
 " can you look on he , " she plead , " can you look on he and persevere ? " 
 it be a hard sight for this man who love his son so deeply . the youth lie in his strange bed , straight and motionless , with fever on his cheek , and alter eye . 
 Old Dr. Clifford of Lobourne be the medical attendant , who , with head - shake , and gathering of lip , and reminiscence of ancient argument , guarantee to do all that leech could do in the matter . the old doctor do admit that Richard 's constitution be admirable , and answer to his prescription like a piano to the musician . " but , " he say at a family consultation , for Sir Austin have tell he how it stand with the young man , " drug be not much in case of this sort . change ! that be what be want , and as soon as may be . distraction ! he ought to see the world , and know what he be make of . it be no use my talking , I know , " add the doctor . 
 " on the contrary , " say Sir Austin , " I be quite of your persuasion . and the world he shall see now . " 
 " we have dip he in Styx , you know , doctor , " Adrian remark . 
 " but , doctor , " say Lady Blandish , " have you know a case of this sort before . " 
 " never , my lady , " say the doctor , " they be not common in these part . country people be tolerably healthy - minded . " 
 " but people and country people have die for love , doctor ? " 
 the doctor have not meet any of they . 
 " man , or woman ? " inquire the baronet . 
 Lady Blandish believe mostly woman . 
 " ask the doctor whether they be healthy - minded woman , " say the baronet . " no ! you be both look at the wrong end . between a highly - cultured being , and an emotionless animal , there be all the difference in the world . but of the two , the doctor be near the truth . the healthy nature be pretty safe . if he allow for organization he would be right altogether . to feel , but not to feel to excess , that be the problem . " 
  " if I can not   have the one I choose , 
  to some fresh maid I will propose , " 
 Adrian hum a country ballad . 




 CHAPTER XXIV 

 when the young Experiment again know the hour that roll he onward , he be in his own room at Raynham . nothing have change : only a strong fist have knock he down and stun he , and he open his eye to a grey world : he have forget what he live for . he be weak and thin , and with a pale memory of thing . his function be the same , everything surround he be the same : he look upon the old blue hill , the far - lie fallow , the river , and the wood : he know they , they seem to have lose recollection of he . nor could he find in familiar human face the secret of intimacy of heretofore . they be the same face : they nod and smile to he . what be lose he could not tell . something have be knock out of he ! he be sensible of his father 's sweetness of manner , and he be grieve that he could not reply to it , for every sense of shame and reproach have strangely go . he feel very useless . in place of the fiery love for one , he now bear about a cold charity to all . 
 thus in the heart of the young man die the Spring Primrose , and while it die another heart be push forth the Primrose of Autumn . 
 the wonderful change in Richard , and the wisdom of her admirer , now positively prove , be exciting matter to Lady Blandish . she be rebuke for certain little rebellious fancy concern he that have come across her enslaved mind from time to time . for be he not almost a prophet ? it distress the sentimental lady that a love like Richard 's could pass off in mere smoke , and word such as she have hear he speak in Abbey - wood resolve to emptiness . Nay , it humiliate she personally , and the baronet 's shrewd prognostication humiliate she . for how should he know , and dare to say , that love be a thing of the dust that could be trodden out under the heel of science ? but he have say so ; and he have prove himself right . she hear with wonderment that Richard of his own accord have speak to his father of the folly he have be guilty of , and have beg his pardon . the baronet tell she this , add that the youth have do it in a cold unwavering way , without a movement of his feature : have evidently do it to throw off the burden of the duty , he have conceive . he have think himself bind to acknowledge that he have be the Foolish Young Fellow , wishing , possibly , to abjure the fact by an set of penance . he have also give satisfaction to Benson , and be become a renovated peaceful spirit , whose main object appear to be to get up his physical strength by exercise and no expenditure of speech . 
 in her company he be compose and courteous ; even when they be alone together , he do not exhibit a trace of melancholy . Sober he seem , as one who have recover from a drunkenness and have determine to drink no more . the idea strike she that he might be play a part , but Tom Bakewell , in a private conversation they have , inform she that he have receive an order from his young master , one day while box with he , not to mention the young lady 's name to he as long as he live ; and Tom could only suppose that she have offend he . theoretically wise Lady Blandish have always think the baronet ; she be unprepared to find he thus practically sagacious . she fall many degree ; she want something to cling to ; so she cling to the man who strike her low . love , then , be earthly ; its depth could be probe by science ! a man live who could measure it from end to end ; foretell its term ; handle the young cherub as be he a shot owl ! we who have fly into cousinship with the empyrean , and disport among immortal host , our base birth as a child of Time be make bare to we ! our wing be cut ! oh , then , if science be this victorious enemy of love , let we love science ! be the logic of the lady 's heart ; and secretly cherish the assurance that she should confute he yet , and prove he utterly wrong , she give he the fruit of present success , as it be a habit of woman to do ; involuntarily partly . the fire take hold of she . she feel soft emotion such as a girl feel , and they flatter she . it be like youth come back . pure woman have a second youth . the Autumn primrose flourish . 
 we be advise by the Pilgrim 's Scrip that 
 " the way of woman , which be Involution , and their practice , which be opposition , be generally well hit upon by guess work , and a bold word ; " it be impossible to track they and hunt they down in the ordinary style . 
 so that we may not ourselves become involved and oppose , let we each of us venture a guess and say a bold word as to how it come that the lady , who trust love to be eternal , grovel to he that shatter her tender faith , and love he . 
 Hitherto it have be simply a sentimental dalliance , and gossip have malign the lady . just when the gossip grow tired of their slander , and incline to look upon she charitably , she set about to deserve every word they have say of she ; which may instruct we , if you please , that gossip have only to persist in lie to be crown with verity , or that one have only to endure evil mouth for a period to gain impunity . she be always at the Abbey now . she be much closet with the baronet . it seem to be understand that she have take Mrs. Doria 's place . Benson in his misogynic soul perceive that she be take Lady Feverel 's : but any report circulate by Benson be sure to meet discredit , and draw the gossip upon himself ; which make his meditation tragic . no soon be one woman defeat than another take the field ! the object of the System be no soon safe than its great author be in danger ! 
 " I can not   think what have come to Benson " he say to Adrian . 
 " he seem to have receive a fresh legacy of several pound of lead , " return the wise youth , and imitate Dr. Clifford 's manner . " Change be what he want ! distraction ! send he to Wales for a month , sir , and let Richard go with he . the two victim of woman may do each other good . " 
 " unfortunately I can not   do without he , " say the baronet . 
 " then we must continue to have he on our shoulder all day , and on our chest all night ! " Adrian ejaculate . 
 " I think while he preserve this aspect we will not   have he at the dinner - table , " say the baronet . 
 Adrian think that would be a relief to their digestion ; and add : " you know , sir , what he say ? " 
 receive a negative , Adrian delicately explain to he that Benson 's excessive ponderosity of demeanour be cause by anxiety for the safety of his master . 
 " you must pardon a faithful fool , sir , " he continue , for the baronet become red , and exclaim : 
 " his stupidity be past belief ! I have absolutely to bolt my study - door against he . " 
 Adrian at once behold a charming scene in the interior of the study , not unlike one that Benson have visually witness . for , like a wary prophet , Benson , that he might have warrant for what he foretell of the future , have a care to spy upon the present : warn haply by the Pilgrim 's Scrip , of which he be a diligent reader , and which say , rather emphatically : " could we see Time 's full face , we be wise of he . " now to see Time 's full face , it be sometimes necessary to look through keyhole , the veteran have a trick of smile peace to you on one cheek and grimace confusion on the other behind the curtain . Decency and a sense of honour restrain most of we from be thus wise and miserable for ever . Benson 's excuse be that he believe in his master , who be menace . and moreover , notwithstanding his previous tribulation , to spy upon Cupid be sweet to he . so he peep , and he see a sight . he see Time 's full face ; or , in other word , he see the wile of woman and the weakness of man : which be our history , as Benson would have write it , and a great many poet and philosopher have write it . 
 yet it be but the plucking of the Autumn primrose that Benson have see : a somewhat different operation from the plucking of the Spring one : very innocent ! our staid elderly sister have paler blood , and have , or think she have , a reason or two about the root . she be not all instinct . " for this high cause , and for that I know man , and know he to be the flower of man , I give myself to he ! " she make that lofty inward exclamation while the hand be detach she from the root . even so strong a self - justification she require . she have not that blind glory in excess which her young sister can gild the long leap with . and if , moth - like , she desire the star , she be nervously cautious of candle . hence her circle about the dangerous human flame be wide and shy . she must be draw near and nearer by a fresh reason . she love to sentimentalize . Lady Blandish have be sentimentalize for ten year . she would have prefer to pursue the game . the dark - eyed dame be pleased with her smooth life and the soft excitement that do not ruffle it . not willingly do she let herself be win . 
 " sentimentalist , " say the Pilgrim 's Scrip , " be they who seek to enjoy without incur the Immense Debtorship for a thing do . " 
 " it be , " the writer say of sentimentalism elsewhere , " a happy pastime and an important science to the timid , the idle , and the heartless ; but a damn one to they who have anything to forfeit . " 
 however , one who could set down the dying for love , as a sentimentalism , can hardly be accept as a clear authority . assuredly he be not one to avoid the incurring of the immense debtorship in any way : but he be a bondsman still to the woman who have forsake he , and a spoken word would have make it seem his duty to face that public scandal which be the last evil to he . what have so horrify the virtuous Benson , Richard have already behold in Daphne 's Bower ; a simple kissing of the fair white hand ! doubtless the keyhole somehow add to Benson 's horror . the two similar performance , so very innocent , have wondrous opposite consequence . the first kindle Richard to adore Woman ; the second destroy Benson 's faith in Man . but Lady Blandish know the difference between the two . she understand why the baronet do not speak ; excuse , and respect he for it . she be content , since she must love , to love humbly , and she have , besides , her pity for his sorrow to comfort she . a hundred fresh reason for love he arise and multiply every day . he read to she the secret book in his own handwriting , compose for Richard 's Marriage Guide : contain Advice and Directions to a Young Husband , full of the most tender wisdom and delicacy ; so she think ; nay , not want in poetry , though neither rhyme nor measure . he expound to she the distinctive character of the diver age of love , give the palm to the flower she put forth , over that of Spring , or the Summer rise . and while they sit and talk ; " my wound have heal , " he say . " how ? " she ask . " at the fountain of your eye , " he reply , and draw the joy of new life from her blush , without incur further debtor ship for a thing do . 




 CHAPTER XXV 

 let it be some apology for the damage cause by the career hero , and a consolation to the quiet wretch , drag along with he at his chariot - wheel , that he be generally the last to know when he have make an actual start ; such a mere creature be he , like the rest of we , albeit the head of our fate . by this you perceive the true hero , whether he be a prince or a pot - boy , that he do not plot ; Fortune do all for he . he may be compare to one to whom , in an electric circle , it be give to carry the battery . 
 we caper and grimace at his will ; yet not his the will , not his the power . ' tis all Fortune 's , whose puppet he be . she deal her dispensation through he . yea , though our caper be never so comical , he laugh not . intent upon his own business , the true hero ask little service of we here and there ; think it quite natural that they should be accede to , and see nothing ridiculous in the lamentable contortion we must go through to fulfil they . probably he be the elect of Fortune , because of that notable faculty of be intent upon his own business : " which be , " say the Pilgrim 's Scrip , " with man to be value equal to that force which in water make a stream . " this prelude be necessary to the present chapter of Richard 's history . 
 it happen that in the turn of the year , and while old earth be busy with her flower , the fresh wind blow , the little bird sing , and Hippias Feverel , the Dyspepsy , amazed , feel the Spring move within he . he communicate his delightful new sensation to the baronet , his brother , whose constant exclamation with regard to he , be : " Poor Hippias ! all his machinery be bare ! " and have no hope that he would ever be in a condition to defend it from view . nevertheless Hippias have that hope , and so he tell his brother , make great exposure of his machinery to effect the explanation . he speak of all his physical experience exultingly , and with wonder . the achievement of common effort , not usually blazon , he celebrate as triumph , and , of course , have Adrian on his back very quickly . but he could bear he , or anything , now . it be such ineffable relief to find himself look out upon the world of mortal instead of into the black phantasmal abyss of his own complicated frightful structure . " my mind do not   so much seem to haunt itself , now , " say Hippias , nod shortly and peer out of intense pucker to convey a glimpse of what hellish suffering his have be : " I feel as if I have come aboveground . " 
 a poor Dyspepsy may talk as he will , but he be the one who never get sympathy , or experience compassion : and it be he whose groan petition for charity do at last rout that Christian virtue . Lady Blandish , a charitable soul , could not listen to Hippias , though she have a heart for little mouse and fly , and Sir Austin have also small patience with his brother 's gleam of health , which be just enough to make his disease visible . he remember his early folly and excess , and bent his ear to he as one man do to another who complain of have to pay a debt legally incur . 
 " I think , " say Adrian , see how the communication of Hippias be receive , " that when our Nemesis take lodging in the stomach , it be good to act the Spartan , smile hard , and be silent . " 
 Richard alone be decently kind to Hippias ; whether from opposition , or real affection , could not be say , as the young man be mysterious . he advise his uncle to take exercise , walk with he , cultivate cheerful impression in he , and point out innocent pursuit . he make Hippias visit with he some of the poor old folk of the village , who bewail the loss of his cousin Austin Wentworth , and do his good to waken he up , and give the outer world a strong hold on he . he succeed in nothing but in win his uncle 's gratitude . the season bloom scarce long than a week for Hippias , and then begin to languish . the poor Dyspepsy 's eager grasp at beatification relax : he go underground again . he announce that he feel ' spongy thing " one of the more constant throe of his malady . his bitter face recur : he chew the cud of horrid hallucination . he tell Richard he must give up go about with he : people tell of their ailment make he so uncomfortable the bird be so noisy , pair the rude bare soil sicken he . 
 Richard treat he with a gravity equal to his father 's . he ask what the doctor say . 
 " oh ! the doctor ! " cry Hippias with vehement scepticism . " no man of sense believe in medicine for chronic disorder . do you happen to have hear of any new remedy then , Richard ? no ? they advertise a great many cure for indigestion , I assure you , my dear boy . I wonder whether one can rely upon the authenticity of those signature ? I see no reason why there should be no cure for such a disease ? eh ? and it be just one of the thing a quack , as they call they , would hit upon soon than one who be in the beat track . do you know , Richard , my dear boy , I have   often think that if we could by any mean appropriate to our use some of the extraordinary digestive power that a boa constrictor have in his gastric juice , there be really no manner of reason why we should not comfortably dispose of as much of an ox as our stomach will hold , and one might eat french dish without the wretchedness of think what be to follow . and this make I think that those fellow may , after all , have get some truth in they : some secret that , of course , they require to be pay for . we distrust each other in this world too much , Richard . I have   feel incline once or twice but it be absurd ! if it only alleviate a few of my suffering I should be satisfied . I have   no hesitation in say that I should be quite satisfied if it only do away with one or two , and leave I free to eat and drink as other people do . not that I mean to try they . it be only a fancy eh ? what a thing health be , my dear boy ! ah ! if I be like you ! I be in love once ! " 
 " be you ! " say Richard , coolly regard he . 
 " I have   forget what I feel ! " Hippias sigh . " you have   very much improve , my dear boy . " 
 " so people say , " quoth Richard . 
 Hippias look at he anxiously : " if I go to town and get the doctor 's opinion about try a new course Eh , Richard ? will you come with I ? I should like your company . we could see London together , you know . enjoy ourselves , " and Hippias rub his hand . 
 Richard smile at the feeble glimmer of enjoyment promise by his uncle 's eye , and say he think it well they should stay where they be an answer that might mean anything . Hippias immediately become possess by the beguiling project . he go to the baronet , and put the matter before he , instance doctor as the object of his journey , not quack , of course ; and request leave to take Richard . Sir Austin be get uneasy about his son 's manner . it be not natural . his heart seem to be frozen : he have no confidence : he appear to have no ambition to have lose the virtue of youth with the poison that have pass out of he . he be disposed to try what effect a little travel might have on he , and have himself once or twice hint to Richard that it would be good for he to move about , the young man quietly reply that he do not wish to quit Raynham at all , which be too strict a fulfilment of his father 's original view in educate he there entirely . on the day that Hippias make his proposal , Adrian , second by Lady Blandish , also make one . the sweet Spring season stir in Adrian as well as in other : not to pastoral measure : to the joy of the operatic world and bravura glory . he also suggest that it would be advisable to carry Richard to town for a term , and let he know his position , and some freedom . Sir Austin weigh the two proposal . he be pretty certain that Richard 's passion be consume , and that the youth be now only under the burden of its ash . he have find against his heart , at the Bellingham inn : a great lock of golden hair . he have take it , and the lover , after feel about for it with faint hand , never ask for it . this precious lock   Miss Davenport have thrust it into his hand at Belthorpe as Lucy 's last gift , what sigh and tear it have weather ! the baronet lay it in Richard 's sight one day , and behold he take it up , turn it over , and drop it down again calmly , as if he be handle any common curiosity . it pacify he on that score . the young man 's love be dead . Dr. Clifford say rightly : he want distraction . the baronet determine that Richard should go . Hippias and Adrian then press their several suit as to which should have he . Hippias , when he could forget himself , do not lack sense . he observe that Adrian be not at present a proper companion for Richard , and would teach he to look on life from the false point . 
 " you do not   understand a young philosopher , " say the baronet . 
 " a young philosopher be an old fool ! " return Hippias , not think that his growl have beget a phrase . 
 his brother smile with gratification , and applaud he loudly : " excellent ! worthy of your good day ! you be wrong , though , in apply it to Adrian . he have never be precocious . all he have do have be to bring sound common sense to bear upon what he hear and see . I think , however , " the baronet add , " he may want faith in the well quality of man . " and this reflection incline he not to let his son be alone with Adrian . he give Richard his choice , who see which way his father 's wish tend , and decide so to please he . naturally it annoy Adrian extremely . he say to his chief : 
 " I suppose you know what you be do , sir . I do not   see that we derive any advantage from the family name be make notorious for twenty year of obscene suffering , and become a byword for our constitutional tendency to stomachic distension before we fortunately encounter Quackem 's pill . my uncle 's torture have be huge , but I would rather society be not intimate with they under their several heading . " Adrian enumerate some of the most abhorrent . " you know he , sir . if he conceive a duty , he will do it in the face of every decency all the more obstinate because the conception be rare . if he feel a little brisk the morning after the pill , he send the letter that make we famous ! we go down to posterity with heighten characteristic , to say nothing of a contemporary celebrity nothing less than our be turn inside - out to the rabble . I confess I do not   desire to have my machinery make bare to they . " 
 Sir Austin assure the wise youth that Hippias have arrange to go to Dr. Bairam . he soften Adrian 's chagrin by tell he that in about two week they would follow to London : hint also at a prospective Summer campaign . the day be fix for Richard to depart , and the day come . Madame the Eighteenth Century call he to her chamber and put into his hand a fifty - pound note , as her contribution toward his pocket - expense . he do not want it , he say , but she tell he he be a young man , and would soon make that fly when he stand on his own foot . the old lady do not at all approve of the System in her heart , and she give her grandnephew to understand that , should he require more , he know where to apply , and secret would be keep . his father present he with a hundred pound which also Richard say he do not want he do not care for money . " spend it or not , " say the baronet , perfectly secure in he . 
 Hippias have few injunction to observe . they be to take up quarter at the hotel , Algernon 's general run of company at the house not be altogether wholesome . the baronet particularly forewarn Hippias of the imprudence of attempt to restrict the young man 's movement , and let he imagine he be under surveillance . Richard have be , as it be , pollard by despotism , be now to grow up straight , and bloom again , in complete independence , as far as he could feel . so do the sage decree ; and we may pause a moment to reflect how wise be his prevision , and how successful they must have be , have not Fortune , the great foe to human cleverness , turn against he , or he against himself . 
 the departure take place on a fine March morning . the bird of Winter sing from the bud tree ; in the blue sky sing the bird of Summer . Adrian ride between Richard and Hippias to the Bellingham station , and vent his disgust on they after his own humorous fashion , because it do not rain and damp their ardour . in the rear come Lady Blandish and the baronet , converse on the calm summit of success . 
 " you have shape he exactly to resemble yourself , " she say , point with her riding - whip to the grave stately figure of the young man . 
 " outwardly , perhaps , " he answer , and lead to a discussion on Purity and Strength , the lady say that she prefer Purity . 
 " but you do not , " say the baronet . " and there I admire the always true instinct of woman , that they all worship Strength in whatever form , and seem to know it to be the child of heaven ; whereas purity be but a characteristic , a garment , and can be spot how soon ! for there be question in this life with which we must grapple or be lose , and when , hunt by that cold eye of intense inner - consciousness , the clear soul become a cunning fox , if it have not courage to stand and do battle . Strength indicate a boundless nature like the Maker . Strength be a God to you Purity a toy . a pretty one , and you seem to be fond of play with it , " he add , with unaccustomed slyness . 
 the lady listen , please at the sportive malice which show that the constraint on his mind have leave he . it be for woman to fight their fight now ; she only take part in it for amusement . this be how the rank of our enemy be thin ; no soon do poor woman put up a champion in their midst than she betray they . 
 " I see , " she say archly , " we be the lovelier vessel ; you claim the more direct descent . man be seedling : woman slip ! Nay , you have say so , " she cry out at his gesture protestation , laugh . 
 " but I never print it . " 
 " oh ! what you speak answer for print with I . " 
 Exquisite Blandish ! he could not choose but love she . 
 " tell I what be your plan ? " she ask . " may a woman know ? " 
 he reply , " I have none or you would share they . I shall study he in the world . this indifference must wear off . I shall mark his inclination now , and he shall be what he incline to . Occupation will be his prime safety . his cousin Austin 's plan of life appear most to his taste , and he can serve the people that way as well as in Parliament , should he have no strong ambition . the clear duty of a man of any wealth be to serve the people as he well can . he shall go among Austin 's set , if he wish it , though personally I find no pleasure in rash imagination , and undigeste scheme build upon the mere instinct of principle . " 
 " look at he now , " say the lady . " he seem to care for nothing ; not even for the beauty of the day . " 
 " or Adrian 's joke , " add the baronet . 
 Adrian could be see to be try zealously to torment a laugh , or a confession of irritation , out of his hearer , stretch out his chin to one , and to the other , with audible aside . Richard he treat as a new instrument of destruction about to be let loose on the slumber metropolis ; Hippias as one in an interesting condition ; and he get so much fun out of the notion of these two journeying together , and the mishap that might occur to they , that he esteem it almost a personal insult for his hearer not to laugh . the wise youth 's dull life at Raynham have afflict he with many peculiarity of the professional joker . 
 " oh ! the Spring ! the Spring ! " he cry , as in scorn of his sally they exchange their unmeaning remark on the sweet weather across he . " you seem both to be uncommonly excite by the operation of turtle , rook , and daw . why can not   you let they alone ? " 
  ' wind bloweth , 
  Cock croweth , 
  Doodle - doo ; 
  hippy verteth , 
  Ricky sterteth , 
  sing cuckoo ! ' 
 there be an old native pastoral ! why do not   you write a Spring sonnet , Ricky ? the asparagus - bed be full of promise , I hear , and eke the strawberry . berry I fancy your Pegasus have a taste for . what kind of berry be that I see some verse of your about once ? amatory verse to some kind of berry yewberry , blueberry , glueberry ! pretty verse , decidedly warm . lip , eye , bosom , leg leg ? I do not   think you give she any leg . no leg and no nose . that appear to be the poetic taste of the day . it shall be admit that you create the very beauty for a chaste people . 
  ' o might I lie where lean her lute ! ' 
 and offend no moral community . that be not a bad image of your , my dear boy : 
  ' her shape be like an antelope 
  upon the Eastern hill . ' 
 but as a candid critic , I would ask you if the likeness can be consider correct when you give she no leg ? you will see at the ballet that you be in error about woman at present , Richard . that admirable institution which our venerable elder have import from Gallia for the instruction of our gap youth , will edify and astonish you . I assure you I use , from read the Pilgrim 's Scrip , to imagine all sort of thing about they , till I be take there , and learn that they be very like we after all , and then they cease to trouble I . Mystery be the great danger to youth , my son ! Mystery be woman 's redoubtable weapon , o Richard of the Ordeal ! I be aware that you have   have your lesson in anatomy , but nothing will persuade you that an anatomical figure mean flesh and blood . you can not   realize the fact . do you intend to publish when you be in town ? it will be well not to put your name . have one 's name to a volume of poem be as bad as to an advertising pill . " 
 " I will send you an early copy , Adrian , when I publish , " quoth Richard . " Hark at that old blackbird , uncle . " 
 " yes ! " Hippias quaver ; look up from the usual subject of his contemplation , and try to take an interest in he , " fine old fellow ! " 
 " what a chuckle he give out before he fly ! not unlike July nightingale . you know that bird I tell you of the blackbird that have its mate shot , and use to come to sing to old Dame Bakewell 's bird from the tree opposite . a rascal knock it over the day before yesterday , and the dame say her bird have not   sing a note since . " 
 " Extraordinary ! " Hippias mutter abstractedly . " I remember the verse . " 
 " but where be your moral ? " interpose the wrathful Adrian . " where 's constancy reward ? 
  ' the ouzel - cock so black of hue , 
  with orange - tawny bill ; 
  the rascal with his aim so true ; 
  the Poet 's little quill ! ' 
 " where be the moral of that ? except that all 's game to the poet ! certainly we have a noble example of the devotedness of the female , who for three entire day refuse to make herself hear , on account of a defunct male . I suppose that be what Ricky dwell on . " 
 " as you please , my dear Adrian , " say Richard , and point out larch - bud to his uncle , as they ride by the young green wood . 
 the wise youth be drive to extremity . such a lapse from his pupil 's heroic to this last verge of arcadian coolness , Adrian could not believe in . " Hark at this old blackbird ! " he cry , in his turn , and pretend to interpret his fit of song : 
 " oh , what a pretty comedy ! do not   we wear the mask well , my Fiesco ? Genoa will be our own to - morrow ! only wait until the train have start jolly ! jolly ! jolly ! we will be winner yet ! 
 " not a bad verse eh , Ricky ? my Lucius Junius ! " 
 " you do the blackbird well , " say Richard , and look at he in a manner mildly affable . 
 Adrian shrug . " you be a young man of wonderful power , " he emphatically observe ; mean to say that Richard quite beat he ; for which opinion Richard gravely thank he , and with this they ride into Bellingham . 
 there be young Tom Blaize at the station , in his Sunday beaver and gala waistcoat and neckcloth , come the lord over Tom Bakewell , who have precede his master in charge of the baggage . he likewise be bind for London . Richard , as he be dismount , hear Adrian say to the baronet : " the Beast , sir , appear to be go to fetch beauty ; " but he pay no heed to the word . whether young Tom hear they or not , Adrian 's look take the lord out of he , and he shrink away into obscurity , where the near approach to the fashion which the tailor of Bellingham could supply to he , sit upon he more easily , and he be not stiffen by the eye of the superior whom he seek to rival . the baronet , Lady Blandish , and Adrian remain on horseback , and receive Richard 's adieux across the paling . he shake hand with each of they in the same kindly cold way , elicitate from Adrian a marked encomium on his style of do it . the train come up , and Richard step after his uncle into one of the carriage . 
 now surely there will come an age when the presentation of science at war with Fortune and the Fates , will be deem the true epic of modern life ; and the aspect of a scientific humanist who , by dint of incessant watchfulness , have maintain a system against those active forty , can not be reckon less than sublime , even though at the moment he but sit upon his horse , on a fine March morning such as this , and smile wistfully to behold the son of his heart , his system incarnate , wave a serene adieu to tutelage , neither too eager nor morbidly unwilling to try his luck alone for a term of two week . at present , I be aware , an audience impatient for blood and glory scorn the stress I be put on incident so minute , a picture so little impose . an audience will come to whom it will be give to see the elementary machinery at work : who , as it be , from some slight hint of the straw , will feel the wind of March when they do not blow . to they will nothing be trivial , see that they will have in their eye the invisible conflict go on around we , whose feature a nod , a smile , a laugh of ours perpetually change . and they will perceive , moreover , that in real life all hang together : the train be lay in the lifting of an eyebrow , that burst upon the field of thousand . they will see the link of thing as they pass , and wonder not , as foolish people now do , that this great matter come out of that small one . 
 such an audience , then , will participate in the baronet 's gratification at his son 's demeanour , wherein he note the calm bearing of experience not gain in the usual wanton way : and will not be without some excited apprehension at his twinge of astonishment , when , just as the train go slide into swiftness , he behold the grave , cold , self - possess young man throw himself back in the carriage violently laugh . science be at a loss to account for that . Sir Austin check his mind from inquire , that he might keep suspicion at a distance , but he think it odd , and the jarring sensation that run along his nerve at the sight , remain with he as he ride home . 
 Lady Blandish 's tender womanly intuition bade she say : " you see it be the very thing he want . he have get his natural spirit already . " 
 " it be , " Adrian put in his word , " the exact thing he want . his spirit have return miraculously . " 
 " something amuse he , " say the baronet , with an eye on the puff train . 
 " probably something his uncle say or do , " Lady Blandish suggest , and lead off at a gallop . 
 her conjecture chance to be quite correct . the cause for Richard 's laughter be simple enough . Hippias , on find the carriage - door close on he , become all at once aware of the bright - haired hope which dwell in Change ; for one who do not woo she too frequently ; and to express his sudden relief from mental despondency at the amorous prospect , the Dyspepsy bent and give his hand a sharp rub between his leg : which unlucky action bring Adrian 's pastoral , 
  " hippy verteth , 
  sing cuckoo ! " 
 in such comic colour before Richard , that a demon of laughter seize he . 
  " hippy verteth ! " 
 every time he glance at his uncle the song spring up , and he laugh so immoderately that it look like madness come upon he . 
 " why , why , why , what be you laugh at , my dear boy , " say Hippias , and be provoke by the contagious exercise to a modest " ha ! ha ! " 
 " why , what be you laugh at , uncle ? " cry Richard . 
 " I really do not   know , " Hippias chuckle . 
 " nor I , uncle ! sing , cuckoo ! " 
 they laugh themselves into the pleasantest mood imaginable . Hippias not only come aboveground , he fly about in the very sky , verte like any blithe creature of the season . he remember old legal joke , and anecdote of Circuit ; and Richard laugh at they all , but more at he he be so genial , and childishly fresh , and innocently joyful at his own transformation , while a lurking doubt in the bottom of his eye , now and then , that it might not last , and that he must go underground again , lend he a look of pathos and humour which tickle his youthful companion irresistibly , and make his heart warm to he . 
 " I tell you what , uncle , " say Richard , " I think travel be a capital thing . " 
 " the good thing in the world , my dear boy , " Hippias return . " it make I wish I have give up that work of mine , and try it before , instead of chain myself to a task . we be quite different being in a minute . I be . Hem ! what shall we have for dinner ? " 
 " leave that to I , uncle . I shall order for you . you know , I intend to make you well . how gloriously we go along ! I should like to ride on a railway every day . " 
 Hippias remark : " they say it rather injure the digestion . " 
 " nonsense ! see how you will digest to - night and to - morrow . " 
 " perhaps I shall do something yet , " sigh Hippias , allude to the vast literary fame he have aforetime dream of . " I hope I shall have a good night to - night . " 
 " of course you will ! what ! after laugh like that ? " 
 " Ugh ! " Hippias grunt , " I daresay , Richard , you sleep the moment you get into bed ! " 
 " the instant my head be on my pillow , and up the moment I wake . Health 's everything ! " 
 " Health 's everything ! " echo Hippias , from his immense distance . 
 " and if you will put yourself in my hand , " Richard continue , " you shall do just as I do . you shall be well and strong , and sing ' jolly ! ' like Adrian 's blackbird . you shall , upon my honour , uncle ! " 
 he specify the hour of devotion to his uncle 's recovery no less than twelve a day that he intend to expend , and his cheery robustness almost win his uncle to leap up recklessly and clutch health as his own . 
 " mind , " quoth Hippias , with a half - seduce smile , " mind your dish be not too savoury ! " 
 " light food and claret ! regular meal and amusement ! lend your heart to all , but give it to none ! " exclaim young wisdom , and Hippias mutter , " yes ! yes ! " and intimate that the origin of his malady lie in his not follow that maxim early . 
 " love ruin we , my dear boy , " he say , think to preach Richard a lesson , and Richard boisterously break out : 
  " the love of Monsieur Francatelli , 
  it be the ruin of et coetera . " 
 Hippias blink , exclaim , " really , my dear boy ! I never see you so excited . " 
 " it be the railway ! it be the fun , uncle ! " 
 " ah ! " Hippias wag a melancholy head , " you have   get the Golden Bride ! keep she if you can . that be a pretty fable of your father 's . I give he the idea , though . Austin filch a great many of my idea ! " 
 " here be the idea in verse , uncle : 
  ' o sunless walker by the tide ! 
  o have you see the Golden Bride ! 
  they say that she be fair beyond 
  all woman ; faithful , and more fond ! 
 " you know , the young inquirer come to a group of penitent sinner by the brink of a stream . they howl , and answer : 
  faithful she be , but she forsake : 
  and fond , yet endless woe she make : 
  and fair ! but with this curse she be cross'd ; 
  to know she not till she be lose ! ' 
 " then the doleful party march off in single file solemnly , and the fabulist pursue : 
  ' she hath a palace in the West : 
  Bright Hesper light she to her rest : 
  and he the Morning Star awake 
  whom to her charm arm she take . 

  so live he till he see , alas ! 
  the maid of base metal pass . ' 
 " and prodigal of the happiness she lend he , he ask to share it with one of they . there be the Silver Maid , and the Copper , and the Brassy Maid , and other of they . first , you know , he try Argentine , and find she only twenty to the pound , and have a bad experience with Copperina , till he descend to the scullery ; and the low he go , the less obscure become the feature of his Bride of Gold , and all her radiance shin forth , my uncle . " 
 " verse rather blunt the point . well , keep to she , now you have   get she , " say Hippias . 
 " we will , uncle ! look how the farm fly past ! look at the cattle in the field ! and how the line duck , and swim up ! 
  ' she claim the whole , and not the part 
  the coin of an unused heart ! 
  to gain his Golden Bride again , 
  he hunt with melancholy man , ' 
  and be wake no long by the Morning Star ! " 
 " not if he do not   sleep till an hour before it rise ! " Hippias interject . " you do not   rhyme badly . but stick to prose . Poetry 's a Base - metal maid . I be not sure that any writing 's good for the digestion . I be afraid it have spoil mine . " 
 " fear nothing , uncle ! " laugh Richard . " you shall ride in the park with I every day to get an appetite . you and I and the Golden Bride . you know that little poem of Sandoe 's ? 
  ' she rid in the park on a prance bay , 
  she and her squire together ; 
  her dark lock gleam from a bonnet of grey , 
  and toss with the tossing feather . 

  ' too calmly proud for a glance of pride 
  be the beautiful face as it pass ; 
  the cockney nod to each other aside , 
  the coxcomb lift their glass . 

  ' and throng to she , sigh to she , you that can breach 
  the ice - wall that guard she securely ; 
  you have not such bliss , though she smile on you each , 
  as the heart that can image she purely . ' 
 " be not   sandoe once a friend of my father 's ? I suppose they quarrel . he understand the heart . what do he make his ' Humble Lover ' say ? 
  ' true , Madam , you may think to part 
  Conditions by a glaci - ridge , 
  but Beauty 's for the large heart , 
  and all abyss Love can bridge ! 
 " Hippias now laugh ; grimly , as man laugh at the emptiness of word . " 
 " large heart ! " he sneer . " what be a ' glaci - ridge ' ? I have   never see one . I can not   deny it rhyme with ' bridge . ' but do not   go parade your admiration of that person , Richard . your father will speak to you on the subject when he think fit . " 
 " I think they have quarrel , " say Richard . " what a pity ! " and he murmur to a pleased ear : 
  " Beauty 's for the large heart ! " 
 the flow of their conversation be interrupt by the entrance of passenger at a station . Richard examine their face with pleasure . all face please he . human nature sit tributary at the foot of he and his Golden Bride . as he could not well talk his thought before they , he look out at the window , and enjoy the change landscape , project all sort of delight for his old friend Ripton , and muse hazily on the wondrous thing he be to do in the world ; of the great service he be to be to his fellow - creature . in the midst of his revery he be land in London . Tom Bakewell stand at the carriage door . a glance tell Richard that his squire have something curious on his mind ; and he give Tom the word to speak out . Tom edge his master out of hearing , and begin sputter a laugh . 
 " dash'd if I can help it , sir ! " he say . " that young Tom ! he've   come to town dress that spicy ! and he do not   know his way about no more than a stag . he be come to fetch somebody from another rail , and he do not   know how to get there , and he be not   sure about which rail ' tis . look at he , Mr. Richard ! there he go . " 
 Young Tom appear to have the weight of all London on his beaver . 
 " who have he come for ? " Richard ask . 
 " do not   you know , sir ? you do not   like I to mention the name , " mumble Tom , burst to be perfectly intelligible . 
 " be it for she , Tom ? " 
 " Miss Lucy , sir . " 
 Richard turn away , and be seize by Hippias , who beg he to get out of the noise and pother , and catch hold of his slack arm to bear he into a conveyance ; but Richard , by wheel half to the right , or left , always get his face round to the point where young Tom be manoeuvre to appear at his ease . even when they be seat in the conveyance , Hippias could not persuade he to drive off . he make the excuse that he do not wish to start till there be a clear road . at last young Tom cast anchor by a policeman , and , doubtless at the official 's suggestion , bashfully take seat in a cab , and be shoot into the whirlpool of London . Richard then angrily ask his driver what he be wait for . 
 " be you ill , my boy ? " say Hippias . " where be your colour ? " 
 he laugh oddly , and make a random answer that he hop the fellow would drive fast . 
 " I hate slow motion after be in the railway , " he say . 
 Hippias assure he there be something the matter with he . 
 " nothing , uncle ! nothing ! " say Richard , look fiercely candid . 
 they say , that when the skill and care of man rescue a drown wretch from extinction , and warm the flickering spirit into steady flame , such pain it be , the blood force its way along the dry channel , and the heavily - tick nerve , and the sullen heart the struggle of life and death in he grim death relax his gripe ; such pain it be , he cry out no thank to they that pull he by inch from the depth of the dead river . and he who have think a love extinct , and be surprise by the old fire , and the old tyranny , he rebel , and strive to fight clear of the cloud of forget sensation that settle on he ; such pain it be , the old sweet music revive through his frame , and the charm of his passion file he afresh . still be fair Lucy the one woman to Richard . he have forbid her name but from an instinct of self - defence . must the maid of base metal dominate he anew , it be in Lucy 's shape . think of she now so near he his darling ! all her grace , her sweetness , her truth ; for , despite his bitter blame of she , he know her true swam in a thousand vision before his eye ; vision pathetic , and full of glory , that now wring his heart , and now elate it . as well might a ship attempt to calm the sea , as this young man the violent emotion that begin to rage in his breast . " I shall not see she ! " he say to himself exultingly , and at the same instant thought , how black be every corner of the earth but that one spot where Lucy stand ! how utterly cheerless the place he be go to ! then he determine to bear it ; to live in darkness ; there be a refuge in the idea of a voluntary martyrdom . " for if I choose I could see she this day within an hour ! I could see she , and touch her hand , and , oh , heaven ! but I do not choose . " and a great wave swell through he , and be crush down only to swell again more stormily . 
 then Tom Bakewell 's word recur to he that young Tom Blaize be uncertain where to go for she , and that she might be throw on this Babylon alone . and fly from point to point , it strike he that they have know at Raynham of her return , and have send he to town to be out of the way they have be miserably plot against he once more . " they shall see what right they have to fear I . I will shame they ! " be the first turn take by his wrathful feeling , as he resolve to go , and see her safe , and calmly return to his uncle , whom he sincerely believe not to be one of the conspirator . nevertheless , after form that resolve , he sit still , as if there be something fatal in the wheel that bear he away from it perhaps because he know , as some do when passion be lord , that his intelligence juggle with he ; though none the less keenly do he feel his wrong and suspicion . his Golden Bride be wan fast . but when Hippias ejaculate to cheer he : " we shall soon be there ! " the spell break . Richard stop the cab , say he want to speak to Tom , and would ride with he the rest of the journey . he know well enough which line of railway his Lucy must come by . he have study every town and station on the line . before his uncle could express more than a mute remonstrance , he jump out and hail Tom Bakewell , who come behind with the box and baggage in a companion cab , his head a yard beyond the window to make sure of his ark of safety , the vehicle precede . 
 " what an extraordinary , impetuous boy it be , " say Hippias . " we be in the very street ! " 
 within a minute the stalwart Berry , despatch by the baronet to arrange everything for their comfort , have open the door , and make his bow . 
 " Mr. Richard , sir ? evaporate ? " be Berry 's modulate inquiry . 
 " behind among the box , fool ! " Hippias growl , as he receive Berry 's muscular assistance to alight . " Lunch ready eh ! " 
 " Luncheon be order precise at two o'clock , sir be in attendance one quarter of an hour . Heah ! " Berry sing out to the second cab , which , with its pyramid of luggage , remain stationary some thirty pace distant . at his voice the majestic pile deliberately turn its back on they , and go off in a contrary direction . 




 CHAPTER XXVI 

 on the stroke of the hour when Ripton Thompson be accustom to consult his gold watch for practical purpose , and sniff freedom and the forthcoming dinner , a burglarious foot enter the clerk 's office where he sit , and a man of a scowling countenance , who look a villain , and whom he be afraid he know , slide a letter into his hand , nod that it would be prudent for he to read , and be silent . Ripton obey in alarm . apparently the content of the letter relieve his conscience ; for he reach down his hat , and tell Mr. Beazley to inform his father that he have business of press importance in the West , and should meet he at the station . Mr. Beazley zealously wait upon the paternal Thompson without delay , and together make their observation from the window , they behold a cab of many box , into which Ripton dart and be follow by one in groom 's dress . it be Saturday , the day when Ripton give up his law - reading , magnanimously to bestow himself upon his family , and Mr. Thompson like to have his son 's arm as he walk down to the station ; but that third glass of port which always stand for his second , and the groom 's suggestion of aristocratic acquaintance , prevent Mr. Thompson from interfere : so Ripton be permit to depart . 
 in the cab Ripton make a study of the letter he hold . it have the preciseness of an imperial mandate . 
 " Dear Ripton , you be to get lodging for a lady immediately . not a word to a soul . then come along with Tom . R.D.F. " 
 " lodging for a lady ! " Ripton meditate aloud : " what sort of lodging ? where be I to get lodging ? who be the lady ? I say ! " he address the mysterious messenger . " so you be Tom Bakewell , be you , Tom ? " 
 Tom grin his identity . 
 " do you remember the rick , Tom ? ha ! ha ! we get out of that neatly . we might all have be transport , though . I could have convict you , Tom , safe ! it be no use come across a practised lawyer . now tell I . " Ripton have flourish his power , commence his examination : " who be this lady ? " 
 " well wait till you see Mr. Richard , sir , " Tom resume his scowl to reply . 
 " ah ! " Ripton acquiesce . " be she young , Tom ? " 
 Tom say she be not old . 
 " handsome , Tom ? " 
 " some might think one thing , some another , " Tom say . 
 " and where do she come from now ? " ask Ripton , with the friendly cheerfulness of a baffle counsellor . 
 " come from the country , sir . " 
 " a friend of the family , I suppose ? a relation ? " 
 Ripton leave this insinuate query to be answer by a look . Tom 's face be a dead blank . 
 " ah ! " Ripton take a breath , and eye the mask opposite he . " why , you be quite a scholar , Tom ! Mr. Richard be well . all right at home ? " 
 " come to town this mornin ' with his uncle , " say Tom . " all well , thank ye , sir . " 
 " ha ! " cry Ripton , more than ever puzzle , " now I see . you all come to town to - day , and these be your box outside . so , so ! but Mr. Richard write for I to get lodging for a lady . there must be some mistake he write in a hurry . he want lodging for you all eh ? " 
 " ' m sure I d'n know what he want , " say Tom . " you would well go by the letter , sir . " 
 Ripton re - consult that document . " ' lodging for a lady , and then come along with Tom . not a word to a soul . ' I say ! that look like but he never care for they . you do not   mean to say , Tom , he be be run away with anybody ? " 
 Tom fall back upon his first reply : " well wait till ye see Mr. Richard , sir , " and Ripton exclaim : " hang if you be not   the tight witness I ever see ! I should not   like to have you in a box . some of you country fellow beat any number of cockney . you do ! " 
 Tom receive the compliment stubbornly on his guard , and Ripton , as nothing be to be get out of he , set about consider how to perform his friend 's injunction ; decide firstly , that a lady fresh from the country ought to lodge near the park , in which direction he tell the cabman to drive . thus , unaware of his high destiny , Ripton join the hero , and accept his character in the New Comedy . 
 it be , nevertheless , true that certain favoured people do have beneficent omen to prepare they for their part when the hero be in full career , so that they really may be nerve to meet he ; ay , and to check he in his course , have they that signal courage . for instance , Mrs. Elizabeth Berry , a ripe and wholesome landlady of advertise lodging , on the border of Kensington , note , as she sit rock her contemplative person before the parlour fire this very March afternoon , a supernatural tendency in that fire to burn all on one side : which signify that a wedding approach the house . why who shall say ? omen be as impassable as hero . it may be because in these affair the fire be think to be all on one side . enough that the omen exist , and speak its solemn warning to the devout woman . Mrs. Berry , in her circle , be know as a certificate lecturer against the snare of matrimony . still that be no reason why she should not like a wedding . Expectant , therefore , she watch the one glow cheek of Hymen , and with pleasing tremour beheld a cab of many box draw up by her bit of garden , and a gentleman emerge from it in the set of consult an advertisement paper . the gentleman require lodging for a lady . lodging for a lady Mrs. Berry could produce , and a very roseate smile for a gentleman ; so much so that Ripton forget to ask about the term , which make the landlady in Mrs. Berry leap up to embrace he as the happy man . but her experienced woman 's eye check her enthusiasm . he have not the air of a bridegroom : he do not seem to have a weight on his chest , or an itch to twiddle everything with his finger . at any rate , he be not the bridegroom for whom omen fly abroad . promise to have all ready for the lady within an hour , Mrs. Berry fortify he with her card , curtsy he back to his cab , and float he off on her smile . 
 the remarkable vehicle which have weave this thread of intrigue through London street , now proceed sedately to finish its operation . Ripton be land at a hotel in Westminster . Ere he be halfway up the stair , a door open , and his old comrade in adventure rush down . Richard allow no time for salutation . " have you do it ? " be all he ask . for answer Ripton hand he Mrs. Berry 's card . Richard take it , and leave he stand there . five minute elapse , and then Ripton hear the gracious rustle of feminine garment above . Richard come a little in advance , lead and half - support a figure in a black - silk mantle and small black straw bonnet ; young that be certain , though she hold her veil so close he could hardly catch the outline of her face ; girlishly slender , and sweet and simple in appearance . the hush that come with she , and her soft manner of move , stir the silly youth to some of those ardour that awaken the Knight of Dames in our bosom . he feel that he would have give considerable sum for she to lift her veil . he could see that she be tremble perhaps weep . it be the master of her fate she cling to . they pass he without speak . as she go by , her head passively bent , Ripton have a glimpse of noble tress and a lovely neck ; great golden curl hang loosely behind , pour from under her bonnet . she look a captive borne to the sacrifice . what Ripton , after a sight of those curl , would have give for she just to lift her veil an instant and strike he blind with beauty , be , fortunately for his exchequer , never demand of he . and he have absolutely be compose speech as he come along in the cab ! gallant speech for the lady , and sly congratulatory one for his friend , to be deliver as occasion should serve , that both might know he a man of the world , and be at their ease . he forget the smirk immorality he have revel in . this be clearly serious . Ripton do not require to be tell that his friend be in love , and mean that life and death business call marriage , parent and guardian consent or not . 
 presently Richard return to he , and say hurriedly , " I want you now to go to my uncle at our hotel . keep he quiet till I come . say I have to see you say anything . I shall be there by the dinner hour . Rip ! I must talk to you alone after dinner . " 
 Ripton feebly attempt to reply that he be due at home . he be very curious to hear the plot of the New Comedy ; and besides , there be Richard 's face question he sternly and confidently for sign of unhesitate obedience . he finish his grimace by ask the name and direction of the hotel . Richard press his hand . it be much to obtain even that recognition of our devotion from the hero . 
 Tom Bakewell also receive his priming , and , to judge by his chuckle and grin , rather appear to enjoy the work cut out for he . in a few minute they have drive to their separate destination ; Ripton be leave to the unusual exercise of his fancy . such be the nature of youth and its thirst for romance , that only to act as a subordinate be pleasant . when one unfurls the standard of defiance to parent and guardian , he may be sure of raise a lawless troop of adolescent ruffian , bear rebel , to any amount . the beardless crew know that they have not a chance of pay ; but what of that when the rosy prospect of thwart their elder be in view ? though it be to see another eat the Forbidden Fruit , they will run all his risk with he . Gaily Ripton take rank as lieutenant in the enterprise , and the moment his heart have swear the oath , he be reward by an exquisite sense of the charm of existence . London street wear a sly laugh to he . he walk with a dandified heel . the generous youth ogle aristocratic carriage , and glance intimately at the lady , overflowingly happy . the crossing - sweeper bless he . he hum lively tune , he turn over old joke in his mouth unctuously , he hug himself , he have a mind to dance down Piccadilly , and all because a friend of his be run away with a pretty girl , and he be in the secret . 
 it be only when he stand on the doorstep of Richard 's hotel , that his jocund mood be a little dash by remember that he have then to commence the duty of his office , and must fabricate a plausible story to account for what he know nothing about a part that the great of sage would find it difficult to perform . the young , however , whom sag well may envy , seldom fail in lift their inventive faculty to the level of their spirit , and two minute of Hippias 's angry complaint against the friend he serenely inquire for , give Ripton his cue . 
 " we be in the very street within a stone's - throw of the house , and he jump like a harlequin out of my cab into another ; he must be mad that boy 's get madness in he ! and carry off all the box my dinner - pill , too ! and keep away the whole of the day , though he promise to go to the doctor , and have a dozen engagement with I , " say Hippias , vent an enrage snarl to sum up his grievance . 
 Ripton at once tell he that the doctor be not at home . 
 " why , you do not   mean to say he be be to the doctor ? " Hippias cry out . 
 " he have call on he twice , sir , " say Ripton , expressively . " on leave I he be go a third time . I should not   wonder that be what detain he he be so determined . " 
 by fine degree Ripton venture to grow circumstantial , say that Richard 's case be urgent and required immediate medical advice ; and that both he and his father be of opinion Richard should not lose an hour in obtain it . 
 " he be alarmed about himself , " say Ripton , and tap his chest . 
 Hippias protest he have never hear a word from his nephew of any physical affliction . 
 " he be afraid of make you anxious , I think , sir . " 
 Algernon Feverel and Richard come in while he be hammer at the alphabet to recollect the first letter of the doctor 's name . they have meet in the hall below , and be laugh heartily as they enter the room . Ripton jump up to get the initiative . 
 " have you see the doctor ? " he ask , significantly pluck at Richard 's finger . 
 Richard be all abroad at the question . 
 Algernon clap he on the back . " what the deuce do you want with doctor , boy ? " 
 the solid thump awaken he to see matter as they be . " oh , ay ! the doctor ! " he say , smile frankly at his lieutenant . " why , he tell I he would back I to do Milo 's trick in a week from the present day . Uncle , " he come forward to Hippias , " I hope you will excuse I for run off as I do . I be in a hurry . I leave something at the railway . this stupid Rip think I go to the doctor about myself . the fact be , I want to fetch the doctor to see you here so that you might have no trouble , you know . you can not   bear the sight of his instrument and skeleton I have   hear you say so . you say it set all your marrow in revolt ' fry your marrow , ' I think be the word , and make you see twenty thousand different way of slide down to the chamber of the Grim King . do not   you remember ? " 
 Hippias emphatically do not remember , and he do not believe the story . irritation at the mad ravishment of his pill - box render he incredulous . as he have no mean of confute his nephew , all he could do safely to express his disbelief in he , be to utter petulant remark on his powerlessness to appear at the dinner - table that day : upon which Berry just then trumpet dinner Algernon seize one arm of the Dyspepsy , and Richard another , and the laugh couple bear he into the room where dinner be lay , Ripton snigger in the rear , the really happy man of the party . 
 they have fun at the dinner - table . Richard would have it ; and his gaiety , his by - play , his princely superiority to truth and heroic promise of override all our law , his handsome face , the lord and possessor of beauty that he look , as it be a star shin on his forehead , gain the old complete mastery over Ripton , who have be , mentally at least , half patronize he till then , because he know more of London and life , and be aware that his friend now depend upon he almost entirely . 
 after a second circle of the claret , the hero catch his lieutenant 's eye across the table , and say : 
 " we must go out and talk over that law - business , Rip , before you go . do you think the old lady have any chance ? " 
 " not a bit ! " say Ripton , authoritatively . 
 " but it be worth fight eh , Rip ? " 
 " oh , certainly ! " be Ripton 's mature opinion . 
 Richard observe that Ripton 's father seem doubtful . Ripton cite his father 's habitual caution . Richard make a playful remark on the necessity of sometimes act in opposition to father . Ripton agree to it in certain case . 
 " yes , yes ! in certain case , " say Richard . 
 " pretty legal morality , gentleman ! " Algernon interject ; Hippias add : " and lay , too ! " 
 the pair of uncle listen far to the fictitious dialogue , well keep up on both side , and in the end desire a statement of the old lady 's garrulous case ; Hippias offer to decide what her chance be in law , and Algernon to give a common - sense judgment . 
 " Rip will tell you , " say Richard , deferentially signal the lawyer . " I be a bad hand at these matter . tell they how it stand , Rip . " 
 Ripton disguise his excessive uneasiness under endeavour to right his position on his chair , and , inwardly pray speed to the claret jug to come and strengthen his wit , begin with a careless aspect : " oh , nothing ! she very curious old character ! she a wear a wig . she a very curious old character indeed ! she a quite the old style . there be no do anything with she ! " and Ripton take a long breath to relieve himself after his elaborate fiction . 
 " so it appear , " Hippias comment , and Algernon ask : " well ? and about her wig ? somebody steal it ? " while Richard , whose feature be grim with suppress laughter , bid the narrator continue . 
 Ripton lunge for the claret jug . he have get an old lady like an oppressive bundle on his brain , and he be as helpless as she be . in the pang of ineffectual authorship his idea shoot at her wig , and then at her one characteristic of extreme obstinacy , and tear back again at her wig , but she would not be animate . the obstinate old thing would remain a bundle . law study seem light in comparison with this tremendous task of change an old lady from a doll to a human creature . he fling off some claret , perspire freely , and , with a mental tribute to the cleverness of those author fellow , recommence : " oh , nothing ! she Richard know she well than I do an old lady somewhere down in Suffolk . I think we have well advise she not to proceed . the expense of litigation be enormous ! she I think we have well advise she to stop short , and not make any scandal . " 
 " and not make any scandal ! " Algernon take he up . " come , come ! there be something more than a wig , then ? " 
 Ripton be command to proceed , whether she do or no . the luckless fictionist look straight at his pitiless leader , and blurt out dubiously , " she there be a daughter . " 
 " bear with effort ! " ejaculate Hippias . " must give she pause after that ! and I will take the opportunity to stretch my length on the sofa . Heigho ! that be true what Austin say : ' the general prayer should be for a full stomach , and the individual for one that work well ; for on that basis only be we a match for temporal matter , and able to contemplate eternal . ' sententious , but true . I give he the idea , though ! take care of your stomach , boy ! and if ever you hear of a monument propose to a scientific cook or gastronomic doctor , send in your subscription . or say to he while he live , go forth , and be a Knight ! ha ! they have a good cook at this house . he suit I well than our at Raynham . I almost wish I have bring my manuscript to town , I feel so much well . aha ! I do not   expect to digest at all without my regular incentive . I think I shall give it up . what do you say to the theatre to - night , boy ! " 
 Richard shout , " Bravo , uncle ! " 
 " let Mr. Thompson finish first , " say Algernon . " I want to hear the conclusion of the story . the old girl have a wig and a daughter . I will swear somebody run away with one of the two ! fill your glass , Mr. Thompson , and forward ! " 
 " so somebody do , " Ripton receive his impetus . " and they be find in town together , " he make a fresh jerk . " she a that be , the old lady find they in company . " 
 " she find he with her wig on in company ! " say Algernon . " Capital ! here 's matter for the lawyer ! " 
 " and you advise she not to proceed , under such circumstance of aggravation ? " Hippias observe , humorously twinkle with his stomachic contentment . 
 " it be the daughter , " Ripton sigh , and surrender to pressure , hurry on recklessly , " a runaway match beautiful girl ! the only son of a baronet marry by special licence . a the point be , " he now brighten and speak from his own element , " the point be whether the marriage can be annul , as she be of the catholic persuasion and he be a protestant , and they be both marry under age . that be the point . " 
 have come to the point he breathe extreme relief , and see thing more distinctly ; not a little amazed at his leader 's horrified face . 
 the two elder be make various absurd inquiry , when Richard send his chair to the floor , cry , " what a muddle you be in , Rip ! you be mix half - a - dozen story together . the old lady I tell you about be old Dame Bakewell , and the dispute be concern a neighbour of hers who encroach on her garden , and I say I would pay the money to see she right ! " 
 " ah , " say Ripton , humbly , " I be think of the other . her garden ! cabbage do not   interest I " 
 " here , come along , " Richard beckon to he savagely . " I will be back in five minute , uncle , " he nod coolly to either . 
 the young man leave the room . in the hall - passage they meet Berry , dress to return to Raynham . Richard drop a helper to the intelligence into his hand , and warn he not to gossip much of London . berry bow perfect discreetness . 
 " what on earth induce you to talk about Protestants and Catholics marrying , Rip ? " say Richard , as soon as they be in the street . 
 " why , " Ripton answer , " I be so hard push for it , ' pon my honour , I do not   know what to say . I be not   an author , you know ; I can not   make a story . I be try to invent a point , and I could not   think of any other , and I think that be just the point likely to make a jolly good dispute . capital dinner they give at those crack hotel . why do you throw it all upon I ? I do not   begin on the old lady . " 
 the hero muse , " it be odd ! it be impossible you could have know ! I will tell you why , Rip ! I want to try you . you fib well at long range , but you do not   do at close quarter and single combat . you be good behind wall , but not worth a shot in the open . I just see what you be fit for . you be staunch that I be certain of . you always be . lead the way to one of the park down in that direction . you know ? where she be ! " 
 Ripton lead the way . his dinner have prepare this young Englishman to defy the whole artillery of establish moral . with the muffled roar of London around they , alone in a dark slope of green , the hero , lean on his henchman , and speak in a harsh clear undertone , deliver his explanation . doubtless the true heroic insignia and point of view will be discern , albeit in common private 's uniform . 
 " they have   be plot against I for a year , Rip ! when you see she , you will know what it be to have such a creature take away from you . it nearly kill I . never mind what she be . she be the most perfect and noble creature God ever make ! it be not only her beauty I do not   care so much about that ! but when you have   once see she , she seem to draw music from all the nerve of your body ; but she be such an angel . I worship she . and her mind be like her face . she be pure gold . there , you will see she to - night . 
 " well , " he pursue , after inflate Ripton with this rapturous prospect , " they get she away , and I recover . it be Mister Adrian 's work . what be my father 's objection to she ? because of her birth ? she be educate ; her manner be beautiful full of refinement quick and soft ! can they show I one of their lady like she ? she be the daughter of a naval lieutenant ! because she be a Catholic ? what have religion to do with " he pronounce " Love ! " a little modestly as it be a blush in his voice . 
 " well , when I recover I think I do not care for she . it show how we know ourselves ! and I care for nothing . I feel as if I have no blood . I try to imitate my dear Austin . I wish to God he be here . I love Austin . he would understand she . he be come back this year , and then but it will be too late then . well , my father 's always scheme to make I perfect he have never speak to I a word about she , but I can see she in his eye he want to give I a change , he say , and ask I to come to town with my uncle Hippy , and I consent . it be another plot to get I out of the way ! as I live , I have no more idea of meet she than of fly to heaven ! " 
 he lift his face . " look at those old elm branch ! how they seem to mix among the star ! glitter fruit of Winter ! " 
 Ripton tip his comical nose upward , and be in duty bind to say , yes ! though he observe no connection between they and the narrative . 
 " well , " the hero go on , " I come to town . there I hear she be come , too come home . it must have be fate , Ripton ! Heaven forgive I ! I be angry with she , and I think I should like to see she once only once and reproach she for be false for she never write to I . and , oh , the dear angel ! what she must have suffer ! I give my uncle the slip , and get to the railway she be come by . there be a fellow go to meet she a farmer 's son and , good God ! they be go to try and make she marry he ! I remember it all then . a servant of the farm have tell I . that fellow go to the wrong station , I suppose , for we see nothing of he . there she be not change a bit ! look lovely than ever ! and when she see I , I know in a minute that she must love I till death ! you do not   know what it be yet , Rip ! will you believe , it ? though I be as sure she love I and have be true as steel , as that I shall see she to - night , I speak bitterly to she . and she bear it meekly she look like a saint . I tell she there be but one hope of life for I she must prove she be true , and as I give up all , so must she . I do not   know what I say . the thought of lose she make I mad . she try to plead with I to wait it be for my sake , I know . I pretend , like a miserable hypocrite , that she do not love I at all . I think I say shameful thing . oh what noble creature woman be ! she hardly have strength to move . I take she to that place where you find we , Rip ! she go down on her knee to I , I never dream of anything in life so lovely as she look then . her eye be throw up , bright with a crowd of tear her dark brow bent together , like Pain and Beauty meeting in one ; and her glorious golden hair sweep off her shoulder as she hang forward to my hand . could I lose such a prize . if anything could have persuade I , would not that ? I think of Dante 's Madonna Guido 's Magdalen . be there sin in it ? I see none ! and if there be , it be all mine ! I swear she be spotless of a thought of sin . I see her very soul ? cease to love she ? who dare ask I ? cease to love she ? why , I live on she ! to see she little chin strain up from her throat , as she kneel to I ! there be one curl that fall across her throat " .... 
 Ripton listen for more . Richard have go off in a muse at the picture . 
 " well ? " say Ripton , " and how about that young farmer fellow ? " 
 the hero 's head be again contemplate the starry branch . his lieutenant 's question come to he after an interval . 
 " Young Tom ? why , it be young Torn Blaize son of our old enemy , Rip ! I like the old man now . oh ! I see nothing of the fellow . " 
 " Lord ! " cry Ripton , " be we go to get into a mess with Blaizes again ? I do not   like that ! " 
 his commander quietly pass his like or dislike . 
 " but when he go to the train , and find she be not there ? " Ripton suggest . 
 " I have   provide for that . the fool go to the South - east instead of the South - west . all warmth , all sweetness , come with the South - west ! I have   provide for that , friend Rip . my trusty Tom await he there , as if by accident . he tell he he have not see she , and advise he to remain in town , and go for she there to - morrow , and the day follow . Tom have money for the work . Young Tom ought to see London , you know , Rip ! like you . we shall gain some good clear day . and when old Blaize hear of it what then ? I have she ! she be mine ! besides , he will not   hear for a week . this Tom beat that Tom in cunning , I will wager . ha ! ha ! " the hero burst out at a recollection . " what do you think , Rip ? my father have some sort of system with I , it appear , and when I come to town the time before , he take I to some people the Grandisons and what do you think ? one of the daughter be a little girl a nice little thing enough very funny and he want I to wait for she ! he have not   say so , but I know it . I know what he mean . nobody understand he but I . I know he love I , and be one of the good of man but just consider ! a little girl who just come up to my elbow . be not   it ridiculous ? do you ever hear such nonsense ? " 
 Ripton emphasize his opinion that it certainly be foolish . 
 " no , no ! the die 's cast ! " say Richard . " they have   be plot for a year up to this day , and this be what come of it ! if my father love I , he will love she . and if he love I , he will forgive my acting against his wish , and see it be the only thing to be do . come ! step out ! what a time we have   be ! " and away he go , compelling Ripton to the sort of stride a drummer - boy have to take beside a column of grenadier . 
 Ripton begin to wish himself in love , see that it endow a man with wind so that he could breathe great sigh , while go at a tremendous pace , and experience no sensation of fatigue . the hero be commune with the element , his familiar , and allow he to pant as he please . some keen - eyed Kensington urchin , notice the discrepancy between the pedestrian power of the two , aim their wit at Mr. Thompson junior 's expense . the pace , and nothing but the pace , induce Ripton to proclaim that they have go too far , when they discover that they have over shoot the mark by half a mile . in the street over which stand love 's star , the hero thunder his presence at a door , and evoke a fly housemaid , who know not Mrs. Berry . the hero attach significance to the fact that his instinct should have betray he , for he could have swear to that house . the door be shut he stand in dead silence . 
 " have not   you get her card ? " Ripton inquire , and hear that it be in the custody of the cabman . neither of they could positively bring to mind the number of the house . 
 " you ought to have chalk it , like that fellow in the Forty Thieves , " Ripton hazard a pleasantry which meet with no response . 
 betray by his instinct , the magic slave of Love ! the hero heavily descend the step . 
 Ripton murmur that they be do for . his commander turn on he , and say : " take all the house on the opposite side , one after another . I will take these . " with a wry face Ripton cross the road , altogether subdue by Richard 's native superiority to adverse circumstance . 
 then be family arouse . then do mortal dimly guess that something portentous be abroad . then be labourer all day in the vineyard , harshly waken from their evening 's nap . Hope and Fear stalk the street , as again and again the loud companion summons resound . finally Ripton sing out cheerfully . he have Mrs. Berry before he , profuse of mellow curtsy . 
 Richard run to she and catch her hand : " she be well ? upstairs ? " 
 " oh , quite well ! only a trifle tired with her journey , and flutter - like , " Mrs. Berry reply to Ripton alone . the lover have fly aloft . 
 the wise woman sagely usher Ripton into her own private parlour , there to wait till he be want . 




 CHAPTER XXVII 

 " in all case where two have join to commit an offence , punish one of the two lightly , " be the dictum of the Pilgrim 's 's Scrip . 
 it be possible for young head to conceive proper plan of action , and occasionally , by sheer force of will , to check the wild horse that be ever fret to gallop off with they . but when they have give the rein and the whip to another , what be they to do ? they may go down on their knee , and beg and pray the furious charioteer to stop , or moderate his pace . alas ! each fresh thing they do redouble his ardour : there be a power in their troubled beauty woman learn the use of , and what wonder ? they have see it kindle Ilium to flame so often ! but ere they grow matronly in the house of Menelaus , they weep , and implore , and do not , in truth , know how terribly two - edged be their gift of loveliness . they resign themselves to an incomprehensible frenzy ; pleasant to they , because they attribute it to excessive love . and so the very sensible thing which they can and do say , be vain . 
 I reckon it absurd to ask they to be quite in earnest . be not those their own horse in yonder team ? certainly , if they be quite in earnest , they might soon have my gentleman as sober as a carter . a hundred different way of disenchant he exist , and Adrian will point you out one or two that shall be instantly efficacious . for Love , the charioteer , be easily trip , while honest jog - trot Love keep his leg to the end . grant dear woman be not quite in earnest , still the mere word they utter should be put to their good account . they do mean they , though their heart be set the wrong way . ' tis a despairing , pathetic homage to the judgment of the majority , in whose face they be fly . Punish Helen , very young , lightly . after a certain age you may select she for special chastisement . an innocent with Theseus , with Paris she be an advanced incendiary . 
 the fair young girl be sit as her lover have leave she ; try to recall she stunned sens . her bonnet be un - removed , her hand clasp on her knee ; dry tear in her eye . like a dutiful slave , she rise to he . and first he claim her mouth . there be a speech , make up of all the pretty wisdom her wild situation and true love could gather , await he there ; but his kiss scatter it to fragment . she drop to her seat weeping , and hide she sham cheek . 
 by his silence she divine his thought , and take his hand and draw it to her lip . 
 he bend beside she , bid her look at he . 
 " keep your eye so . " 
 she could not . 
 " do you fear I , Lucy ? " 
 a throb pressure answer he . 
 " do you love I , darling ? " 
 she tremble from head to foot . 
 " then why do you turn from I ? " 
 she weep : " o Richard , take I home ! take I home ! " 
 " look at I , Lucy ! " 
 her head shrink timidly round . 
 " keep your eye on I , darling ! now speak ! " 
 but she could not look and speak too . the lover know his mastery when he have her eye . 
 " you wish I to take you home ? " 
 she falter : " o Richard ? it be not too late . " 
 " you regret what you have do for I ? " 
 " Dearest ! it be ruin . " 
 " you weep because you have consent to be mine ? " 
 " not for I ! o Richard ! " 
 " for I you weep ? look at I ! for I ? " 
 " how will it end ! o Richard ! " 
 " you weep for I ? " 
 " Dearest ! I would die for you ! " 
 " would you see I indifferent to everything in the world ? would you have I lose ? do you think I will live another day in England without you ? I have stake all I have on you , Lucy . you have nearly kill I once . a second time , and the earth will not be trouble by I . you ask I to wait , when they be plot against we on all side ? Darling Lucy ! look on I . fix your fond eye on I . you ask I to wait when here you be give to I when you have prove my faith when we know we love as none have love . give I your eye ! let they tell I I have your heart ! " 
 where be her wise little speech ? how could she match such mighty eloquence ? she seek to collect a few more of the scatter fragment . 
 " Dearest ! your father may be bring to consent by and by , and then oh ! if you take I home now " 
 the lover stand up . " he who have be arrange that fine scheme to disgrace and martyrize you ? true , as I live ! that be the reason of their have you back . your old servant hear he and your uncle discuss it . he ! Lucy ! he be a good man , but he must not step in between you and I . I say God have give you to I . " 
 he be down by her side again , his arm enfold she . 
 she have hop to fight a well battle than in the morning , and she be weak and soft . 
 ah ! why should she doubt that his great love be the first law to she ? why should she not believe that she would wreck he by resist ? and if she suffer , oh sweet to think it be for his sake ! sweet to shut out wisdom ; accept total blindness , and be lead by he ! 
 the hag Wisdom annoy they little far . she rustle her garment ominously , and vanish . 
 " oh , my own Richard ! " the fair girl just breathe . 
 he whisper , " call I that name . " 
 she blush deeply . 
 " call I that name , " he repeat . " you say it once today . " 
 " Dearest ! " 
 " not that . " 
 " o darling ! " 
 " not that . " 
 " Husband ! " 
 she be win . the rosy gate from which the word have issue be close with a seal . 
 Ripton do not enjoy his introduction to the cage bird of beauty that night . he receive a lesson in the art of pump from the worthy landlady below , up to an hour when she yawn , and he blink , and their common candle wear with dignity the brigand 's hat of midnight , and cock a drunken eye at they from under it . 




 CHAPTER XXVIII 

 Beauty , of course , be for the hero . nevertheless , it be not always he on whom beauty work its most conquering influence . it be the dull commonplace man into whose slow brain she drop like a celestial light , and burn lastingly . the poet , for instance , be a connoisseur of beauty : to the artist she be a model . these gentleman by much contemplation of her charm wax critical . the day when they have heart be go , they be haply divide between the blonde and the brunette ; the aquiline nose and the Proserpine ; this shaped eye and that . but go about among simple unprofessional fellow , boor , dunderhead , and here and there you shall find some barbarous intelligence which have have just strength enough to conceive , and have take Beauty as its Goddess , and know but one form to worship , in its poor stupid fashion , and would perish for she . Nay , more : the man would devote all his day to she , though he be dumb as a dog . and , indeed , he be Beauty 's Dog . almost every Beauty have her Dog . the hero possess she ; the poet proclaim she ; the painter put she upon canvas ; and the faithful Old Dog follow she : and the end of it all be that the faithful Old Dog be her single attendant . Sir Hero be revel in the war , or in Armida 's bower ; Mr. Poet have spy a wrinkle ; the brush be for the rose in its season . she turn to her Old Dog then . she hug he ; and he , who have subsist on a bone and a pat till there he squat decrepit , he turn his grateful old eye up to she , and have not a notion that she be hug sad memory in he : Hero , Poet , Painter , in one scrubby one ! then be she bury , and the village hear languid howl , and there be a paragraph in the newspaper concern the extraordinary fidelity of an Old Dog . 
 excite by suggestive recollection of Nooredeen and the Fair Persian , and the change in the obscure monotony of his life by his have quarter in a crack hotel , and live familiarly with west - end people live on the fat of the land   which form a stout portion of an honest youth 's romance , Ripton Thompson breakfast next morning with his chief at half - past eight . the meal have be fix overnight for seven , but Ripton sleep a great deal more than the nightingale , and   to chronicle his exact state   even half - past eight rather afflict his new aristocratic sens and remind he too keenly of law and bondage . he have prefer to breakfast at Algernon 's hour , who have leave word for eleven . he , however , it be Richard 's object to avoid , so they fall to , and Ripton no long envy Hippias in bed . Breakfast do , they bequeath the console information for Algernon that they be off to hear a popular preacher , and depart . 
 " how happy everybody look ! " say Richard , in the quiet Sunday street . 
 " yes jolly ! " say Ripton . 
 " when I be when this be over , I will see that they be , too as many as I can make happy , " say the hero ; add softly : " her blind be down at a quarter to six . I think she sleep well ! " 
 " you have   be there this morning ? " Ripton exclaim ; and an idea of what love be dawn upon his dull brain . 
 " will she see I , Ricky ? " 
 " yes . she will see you to - day . she be tired last night . " 
 " positively ? " 
 Richard assure he that the privilege would be his . 
 " here , " he say , come under some tree in the park , " here be where I talk to you last night . what a time it seem ! how I hate the night ! " 
 on the way , that Richard might have an exalt opinion of he , Ripton hint decorously at a somewhat intimate and mysterious acquaintance with the sex . heading of certain random adventure he give . 
 " well ! " say his chief , " why not marry she ? " 
 then be Ripton shock , and cry , " oh ! " and have a taste of the feeling of superiority , destine that day to be crush utterly . 
 he be again deposit in Mrs. Berry 's charge for a term that cause he dismal fear that the Fair Persian still refuse to show her face , but Richard call out to he , and up Ripton go , unaware of the transformation he be to undergo . Hero and Beauty stand together to receive he . from the bottom of the stair he have his vivaciously agreeable smile ready for they , and by the time he enter the room his cheek be painfully stiff , and his eye have strain beyond their exact meaning . Lucy , with one hand anchor to her lover , welcome he kindly . he relieve her shyness by look so extremely silly . they sit down , and try to commence a conversation , but Ripton be as little master of his tongue as he be of his eye . after an interval , the Fair Persian have do duty by show herself , be glad to quit the room . her lord and possessor then turn inquiringly to Ripton . 
 " you do not   wonder now , Rip ? " he say . 
 " no , Richard ! " Ripton wait to reply with sufficient solemnity , " indeed I do not ! " 
 he speak differently ; he look differently . he have the Old Dog 's eye in his head . they watch the door she have pass through ; they listen for she , as dog ' eye do . when she come in , bonnet for a walk , his agitation be dog - like . when she hang on her lover timidly , and go forth , he follow without an idea of envy , or anything save the secret rapture the sight of she give he , which be the Old Dog 's own . for beneficent nature requite he : his sensation can not be heroic , but they have a fulness and a wag delight as good in their way . and this capacity for humble unaspire worship have its peculiar guerdon . when Ripton come to think of Miss Random now , what will he think of himself ? let no one despise the Old Dog . through he doth Beauty vindicate her sex . 
 it do not please Ripton that other should have the bliss of behold she , and as , to his perception , everybody do , and observe she offensively , and star , and turn their head back , and interchanged comment on she , and become in a minute madly in love with she , he have to smother low growl . they stroll about the pleasant garden of Kensington all the morning , under the young chestnut bud , and round the windless water , talking , and soothe the wild excitement of their heart . if Lucy speak , Ripton prick up his ear . she , too , make the remark that everybody seem to look happy , and he hear it with thrill of joy . " so everybody be , where you be ! " he would have wish to say , if he dare , but be restrain by fear that his burn eloquence would commit he . Ripton know the people he meet twice . it would have be difficult to persuade he they be the creature of accident . 
 from the Gardens , in contempt of Ripton 's frowned protest , Richard boldly strike into the park , where solitary carriage be begin to perform the circuit . here Ripton have some justification for his jealous pang . the young girl 's golden lock of hair ; her sweet , now dreamily sad , face ; her gentle graceful figure in the black straight dress she wear ; a sort of half - conventual air she have a mark of something not of class , that be partly beauty 's , partly maiden innocence grow conscious , partly remorse at her weakness and dim fear of the future it be sow do attract the eye - glass . Ripton have to learn that eye be bearable , but eye - glass an abomination . they fix a spell upon his courage ; for somehow the youth have always rank they as emblem of our nobility , and hear two exquisite eye - glass , who have be to front and rear several time , drawl in gibberish generally impute to lord , that his heroine be a charming little creature , just the size , but have no style , he be abash ; he do not fly at they and tear they . he become dejected . Beauty 's dog be affect by the eye - glass in a manner not unlike the common animal 's terror of the human eye . 
 Richard appear to hear nothing , or it be homage that he hear . he repeat to Lucy Diaper Sandoe 's verse 
  " the cockney nod to each other aside , 
  the coxcomb lift their glass , " 
 and project hire a horse for she to ride every day in the park , and shine among the high . 
 they have turn to the West , against the sky glitter through the bare tree across the water , and the bright - edge rack . the lover , his imagination just then occupy in clothing earthly glory in celestial , feel where his sens be sharp the hand of his darling falter , and instinctively look ahead . his uncle Algernon be leisurely jolt towards they on his one sound leg . the dismember Guardsman talk to a friend whose arm support he , and speculate from time to time on the fair lady drive by . the two white face pass he unobserved . unfortunately Ripton , come behind , go plump upon the Captain 's live toe or so he pretend , cry , " confound it , Mr. Thompson ! you might have choose the other . " 
 the horrible apparition do confound Ripton , who stammer that it be extraordinary . 
 " not at all , " say Algernon . " everybody make up to that fellow . Instinct , I suppose ! " 
 he have not to ask for his nephew . Richard turn to face the matter . 
 " sorry I could not   wait for you this morning , uncle , " he say , with the coolness of relationship . " I think you never walk so far . " 
 his voice be in perfect tone the heroic mask admirable . 
 Algernon examine the downcast visage at his side , and contrive to allude to the popular preacher . he be instantly introduce to Ripton 's sister , Miss Thompson . 
 the Captain bow , smile melancholy approval of his nephew 's choice of a minister . after a few stray remark , and an affable salute to Miss Thompson , he hobble away , and then the three seal volcano breathe , and Lucy 's arm cease to be squeeze quite so much up to the heroic pitch . 
 this incident quicken their step homeward to the shelter wing of Mrs. Berry . all that pass between they on the subject comprise a stammer excuse from Ripton for his conduct , and a good - humour rejoinder from Richard , that he have gain a sister by it : at which Ripton venture to wish aloud Miss Desborough would only think so , and a faint smile twitch poor Lucy 's lip to please he . she hardly have strength to reach her cage . she have none to eat of Mrs. Berry 's nice little dinner . to be alone , that she might cry and ease her heart of its accuse weight of tear , be all she pray for . Kind Mrs. Berry , slip into her bedroom to take off her thing , find the fair body in a fevere shudder , and finish by undress she completely and put she to bed . 
 " just an hour 's sleep , or so , " the mellifluous woman explain the case to the two anxious gentleman . " a quiet sleep and a cup of warm tea go for more than twenty doctor , it do when there be the flutter , " she pursue . " I know it by myself . and a good cry beforehand be well than the good of medicine . " 
 she nurse they into a make - believe of eating , and retire to her soft charge and sweet babe , reflect , " Lord ! Lord ! the three of them do not   make fifty ! I be as old as two and a half of them , to say the least . " Mrs. Berry use her apron , and by virtue of their tender year take they all three into her heart . 
 leave alone , neither of the young man could swallow a morsel . 
 " do you see the change come over she ? " Richard whisper . 
 Ripton fiercely accuse his prodigious stupidity . 
 the lover fling down his knife and fork : " what could I do ? if I have say nothing , we should have be suspect . I be oblige to speak . and she hat a lie ! see ! it have strike she down . God forgive I ! " 
 Ripton affect a serene mind : " it be a fright , Richard , " he say . " that be what Mrs. Berry mean by flutter . those old woman talk in that way . you hear what she say . and these old woman know . I will tell you what it be . it be this , Richard ! it be because you have   get a fool for your friend ! " 
 " she regret it , " mutter the lover . " Good God ! I think she fear I . " he drop his face in his hand . 
 Ripton go to the window , repeat energetically for his comfort : " it be because you have   get a fool for your friend ! " 
 Sombre grow the street they have last night arouse . the sun be bury alive in cloud . Ripton see himself no more in the opposite window . he watch the deplorable object pass on the pavement . his aristocratic vision have go like his breakfast . Beauty have be strike down by his egregious folly , and there he stand a wretch ! 
 Richard come to he : " do not   mumble on like that , Rip ! " he say . " nobody blame you . " 
 " ah ! you be very kind , Richard , " interpose the wretch , move at the face of misery he behold . 
 " listen to I , Rip ! I shall take her home to - night . yes ! if she be happy away from I ! do you think I a brute , Ripton ? rather than have she shed a tear , I would ! I will take her home to - night ! " 
 Ripton suggest that it be sudden ; add from his large experience , people perhaps might talk . 
 the lover could not understand what they should talk about , but he say : " if I give he who come for she yesterday the clue ? if no one see or hear of I , what can they say ? o Rip ! I will give she up . I be wreck for ever ! what of that ? yes let they take she ! the world in arm should never have tear she from I , but when she cry yes ! all be over . I will find he at once . " 
 he search in out - of - the - way corner for the hat of resolve . Ripton look on , wretcheder than ever . 
 the idea strike he : " suppose , Richard , she do not   want to go ? " 
 it be a moment when , perhaps , one who side with parent and guardian and the old wise world , might have incline they to pursue their righteous wretched course , and have give small Cupid a smack and send he home to his naughty mother . alas ! it be the Pilgrim 's Scrip interject   woman be the bear accomplice of mischief ! in bustle Mrs. Berry to clear away the refection , and find the two knight helm , and see , though ' tis dusk , that they wear doubtful brow , and guess bad thing for her dear God Hymen in a twinkling . 
 " dear ! dear ! " she exclaim , " and neither of you eaten a scrap ! and there be my dear young lady off into the prettiest sleep you ever see ! " 
 " ha ? " cry the lover , illuminate . 
 " Soft as a baby ! " Mrs. Berry aver . " I go to look at she this very moment , and there be not a bit of trouble in her breath . it come and it go like the sweetest regular instrument ever make . the Black Ox have not   trod on her foot yet ! Most like it be the air of London . but only fancy , if you have call in a doctor ! why , I should not   have let she take any of his quackery . now , there ! " 
 Ripton attentively observe his chief , and see he doff his hat with a curious caution , and peer into its recess , from which , during Mrs. Berry 's speech , he draw forth a little glove drop there by some freak of chance . 
 " keep I , keep I , now you have I ! " sing the little glove , and amuse the lover with a thousand conceit . 
 " when will she wake , do you think , Mrs. Berry ? " he ask . 
 " oh ! we must not   go for disturb she , " say the guileful good creature . " bless ye ! let she sleep it out . and if you young gentleman be to take my advice , and go and take a walk for to get a appetite everybody should eat ! it be their sacred duty , no matter what their feeling be ! and I say it who'm no chicken ! I will frickashee this which be a chicken against your return . I be a cook , I can assure ye ! " 
 the lover seize her two hand . " you be the good old soul in the world ! " he cry . Mrs. Berry appear willing to kiss he . " we will not   disturb she . let her sleep . keep she in bed , Mrs. Berry . will you ? and we will call to inquire after she this evening , and come and see she to - morrow . I be sure you will be kind to she . there ! there ! " Mrs. Berry be prepare to whimper . " I trust she to you , you see . good - bye , you dear old soul . " 
 he smuggle a handful of gold into her keeping , and go to dine with his uncle , happy and hungry . 
 before they reach the hotel , they have agree to draw Mrs. Berry into their confidence , tell she   with embellishment   all save their name , so that they might enjoy the counsel and assistance of that trump of a woman , and yet have nothing to fear from she . Lucy be to receive the name of Letitia , Ripton 's young and well - look sister . the heartless fellow propose it in cruel mockery of an old weakness of her . 
 " Letitia ! " muse Richard . " I like the name . both begin with L. there be something soft womanlike in the L. 's . " 
 Material Ripton remark that they look like pound on paper . the lover roam through his golden grove . " Lucy Feverel ! that sound well ! I wonder where Ralph be . I should like to help he . he be in love with my cousin Clare . he will never do anything till he marry . no man can . I be go to do a hundred thing when it be over . we shall travel first . I want to see the Alps . one do not   know what the earth be till one have see the Alps . what a delight it will be to she ! I fancy I see her eye gaze up at they . 
  ' and oh , your dear blue eye , that heavenward glance 
  with kindre beauty , banish humbleness , 
  past weep for mortality 's distress 
  yet from your soul a tear hang there in trance . 
  and fill , but do not fall ; 
  softly I hear it call 
  at heaven 's gate , till Sister Seraphs press 
  to look on you their old love from the sky : 
  those be the eye of Seraphs bright on your blue eye ! 
 " beautiful ! these line , Rip , be write by a man who be once a friend of my father 's . I intend to find he and make they friend again . you do not   care for poetry . it be no use your try to swallow it , Rip ! " 
 " it sound very nice , " say Ripton , modestly shut his mouth . 
 " the Alps ! Italy ! Rome ! and then I shall go to the East , " the hero continue . " she be ready to go anywhere with I , the dear brave heart ! oh , the glorious golden East ! I dream of the desert . I dream I be chief of an arab tribe , and we fly all white in the moonlight on our mare , and hurry to the rescue of my darling ! and we push the spear , and we scatter they , and I come to the tent where she crouch , and catch she to my saddle , and away ! Rip ! what a life ! " 
 Ripton strove to imagine he could enjoy it . 
 " and then we shall come home , and I shall lead Austin 's life , with she to help I . first be virtuous , Rip ! and then serve your country heart and soul . a wise man tell I that . I think I shall do something . " 
 Sunshine and cloud , cloud and sunshine , pass over the lover . now life be a narrow ring ; now the distance extend , be wing , fly illimitably . an hour ago and food be hateful . now he manfully refresh his nature , and join in Algernon 's encomium on Miss Letitia Thompson . 
 Meantime Beauty sleep , watch by the veteran volunteer of the hero 's band . Lucy awake from dream which seem reality , to the reality which be a dream . she awake call for some friend , " Margaret ! " and hear one say , " my name be Bessy Berry , my love ! not Margaret . " then she ask piteously where she be , and where be Margaret , her dear friend , and Mrs. Berry whisper , " sure you have   get a dearer ! " 
 " ah ! " sigh Lucy , sink on her pillow , overwhelm by the strangeness of her state . 
 Mrs. Berry close the frill of her nightgown and adjust the bedclothe quietly . 
 her name be breathe . 
 " yes , my love ? " she say . 
 " be he here ? " 
 " he be go , my dear . " 
 " Gone ? oh , where ? " the young girl start up in disorder . 
 " Gone , to be back , my love ! ah ! that young gentleman ! " Mrs. Berry chant : " not a morsel have he eat ; not a drop have he drunk ! " 
 " o Mrs. Berry ! why do you not make he ? " Lucy weep for the famine - strike hero , who be just then feed mightily . 
 Mrs. Berry explain that to make one eat who think the darling of his heart like to die , be a sheer impossibility for the cleverest of woman ; and on this deep truth Lucy reflect , with her eye wide at the candle . she want one to pour her feeling out to . she slide her hand from under the bedclothe , and take Mrs. Berry 's , and kiss it . the good creature require no further avowal of her secret , but forthwith lean her consummate bosom to the pillow , and petitioned heaven to bless they both ! then the little bride be alarmed , and wonder how Mrs. Berry could have guess it . 
 " why , " say Mrs. Berry , " your love be out of your eye , and out of everything ye do . " and the little bride wonder more . she think she have be so very cautious not to betray it . the common woman in they make cheer together after their own April fashion . follow which Mrs. Berry probe for the sweet particular of this beautiful love - match ; but the little bride 's lip be lock . she only say her lover be above she in station . 
 " and you be a Catholic , my dear ! " 
 " yes , Mrs. Berry ! " 
 " and he a protestant . " 
 " yes , Mrs. Berry ! " 
 " dear , dear ! and why should not   ye be ? " she ejaculate , see sadness return to the bridal babe . " so as you be bear , so shall ye be ! but you will have to make your arrangement about the child . the girl to worship with yet , the boy with he . it be the same God , my dear ! you must not   blush at it , though you do look so pretty . if my young gentleman could see you now ! " 
 " please , Mrs. Berry ! " Lucy murmur . 
 " why , he will , you know , my dear ! " 
 " oh , please , Mrs. Berry ! " 
 " and you that can not   bear the thought of it ! well , I do wish there be father and mother on both side and dock - ment sign , and bridesmaid , and a breakfast ! but love be love , and ever will be , in spite of they . " 
 she make other and deep dive into the little heart , but though she draw up pearl , they be not of the kind she search for . the one fact that hang as a fruit upon her tree of Love , Lucy have give she ; she would not , in fealty to her lover , reveal its growth and history , however sadly she yearn to pour out all to this dear old Mother Confessor . 
 her conduct drive Mrs. Berry from the rosy to the autumnal view of matrimony , generally herald by the announcement that it be a lottery . 
 " and when you see your ticket , " say Mrs. Berry , " you shall not   know whether it be a prize or a blank . and , Lord know ! some go on think it be a prize when it turn on them and tear them . I be one of the blank , my dear ! I draw a blank in Berry . he be a black Berry to I , my dear ! smile away ! he truly be , and I a - prizin ' he as proud as you can conceive ! my dear ! " Mrs. Berry press her hand flat on her apron . " we have not   be a three month man and wife , when that man it be not   the honeymoon , which some can not   say that man yes ! he kick I . his wed wife he kick ! ah ! " she sigh to Lucy 's large eye , " I could have bear that . a blow do not   touch the heart , " the poor creature tap her sensitive side . " I go on love of he , for I be a soft one . tall as a Grenadier he be , and when out of service grow his moustache . I use to call he my body - guardsman like a Queen ! I flatter he like the fool we woman be . for , take my word for it , my dear , there be nothing here below so vain as a man ! that I know . but I do not   deserve it .... I be a superior cook .... I do not deserve that noway . " Mrs. Berry thump her knee , and accentuate up her climax : " I mend his linen . I see to his adornment he call his clothe , the bad man ! I be a servant to he , my dear ! and there it be nine month nine month from the day he swear to protect and cherish and that nine calendar month , and my gentleman be off with another woman ! bone of his bone ! pish ! " exclaim Mrs. Berry , reckon her wrong over vividly . " here be my ring . a pretty ornament ! what do it mean ? I be for tearin ' it off my finger a dozen time in the day . it be a symbol ? I call it a tomfoolery for the dead - alive to wear it , that be a widow and not a widow , and have not   get a name for what she be in any Dixonary , I have   look , my dear , and " she spread out her arm " Johnson have not   get a name for I ! " 
 at this impressive woe Mrs. Berry 's voice quaver into sob . Lucy speak gentle word to the poor outcast from Johnson . the sorrow of Autumn have no warning for April . the little bride , for all her tender pity , feel happy when she have hear her landlady 's move tale of the wickedness of man , which cast in bright relief the glory of that one hero who be her . then from a short flight of inconceivable bliss , she fall , shoot by one of her hundred argus - eyed fear . 
 " o Mrs. Berry ! I be so young ! think of I only just seventeen ! " 
 Mrs. Berry immediately dry her eye to radiance . " Young , my dear ! nonsense ! there be no so much harm in be young , here and there . I know an irish lady be marry at fourteen . her daughter marry close over fourteen . she be a grandmother by thirty ! when any strange man begin , she use to ask he what pattern cap grandmother wear . they would stare ! bless you ! the grandmother could have marry over and over again . it be her daughter 's fault , not her , you know . " 
 " she be three year young , " muse Lucy . 
 " she marry beneath she , my dear . ran off with her father 's bailiff 's son . ' ah , Berry ! ' she would say , ' if I have not   be foolish , I should be my lady now not granny ! ' her father never forgave she leave all his estate out of the family . " 
 " do her husband always love she ? " Lucy prefer to know . 
 " in his way , my dear , he do , " say Mrs. Berry , come upon her matrimonial wisdom . " he could not   help himself . if he leave off , he begin again . she be so clever , and do make he so comfortable . cook ! there be not   such another cook out of a Alderman 's kitchen ; no , indeed ! and she a bear lady ! that tell ye it be the duty of all woman ! she have she say ' when the parlour fire get low , put coal on the ketchen fire ! ' and a good say it be to treasure . such be man ! no use in havin' their heart if ye do not   have their stomach . " 
 perceive that she grow abstruse , Mrs. Berry add briskly : " you know nothing about that yet , my dear . only mind I and mark I : do not   neglect your cookery . kissing do not   last : cookery do ! " 
 here , with an aphorism worthy a place in the Pilgrim 'S Scrip , she break off to go possete for her dear invalid . Lucy be quite well ; very eager to be allow to rise and be ready when the knock should come . Mrs. Berry , in her love considerateness for the little bride , positively command she to lie down , and be quiet , and submit to be nurse and cherish . for Mrs. Berry well know that ten minute alone with the hero could only be have while the little bride be in that unattainable position . 
 thank to her strategy , as she think , her object be gain . the night do not pass before she learn , from the hero 's own mouth , that Mr. Richards , the father of the hero , and a stern lawyer , be adverse to his union with this young lady he love , because of a ward of his , heiress to an immense property , whom he desire his son to espouse ; and because his darling Letitia be a Catholic Letitia , the sole daughter of a brave naval officer deceased , and in the hand of a savage uncle , who want to sacrifice this beauty to a brute of a son . Mrs. Berry listen credulously to the emphatic narrative , and speak to the effect that the wickedness of old people form the excuse for the wildness of young one . the ceremonious administration of oath of secrecy and devotion over , she be enrol in the hero 's band , which now number three , and enter upon the duty with feminine energy , for there be no conspirator like woman . Ripton 's lieutenancy become a sinecure , his rank merely titular . he have never be marry he know nothing about licence , except that they must be obtain , and be not difficult he have not an idea that so many day ' warning must be give to the clergyman of the parish where one of the party be resident . how should he ? all his forethought be comprise in the ring , and whenever the discussion of arrangement for the great event grow particularly hot and important , he would say , with a shrewd nod : " we must not   forget the ring , you know , Mrs. Berry ! " and the new member be only prevent by natural complacence from shout : " oh , drat ye ! and your ring too . " Mrs. Berry have act conspicuously in fifteen marriage , by bann , and by licence , and to have such an obvious requisite din in her ear be exasperate . they could not have contract alliance with an auxiliary more invaluable , an authority so profound ; and they acknowledge it to themselves . the hero march like an automaton at her bidding ; Lieutenant Thompson be rejoice to perform service as errand - boy in the enterprise . 
 " it be in hope you will be happy than I , I do it , " say the devout and charitable berry . " marriage be make in heaven , they say ; and if that be the case , I say they do not   take much account of we below ! " 
 her own woeful experience have be give to the hero in exchange for his story of cruel parent . 
 Richard vow to she that he would henceforth hold it a duty to hunt out the wanderer from wed bond , and bring he back bound and suppliant . 
 " oh , he will come ! " say Mrs. Berry , purse prophetic wrinkle : " he will come of his own accord . never anywhere will he meet such a cook as Bessy Berry ! and he know her value in his heart of heart . and I do believe , when he do come , I shall be open these arm to he again , and not slap his impidence in the face I be that soft ! I always be in matrimony , Mr. Richards ! " 
 as when nation be secretly prepare for war , the dock and arsenal hammer night and day , and busy contractor measure time by inch , and the air hum around : for league as it be myriad of bee , so the house and neighbourhood of the matrimonial soft one resound in the heroic style , and know little of the change of light decreed by Creation . Mrs. Berry be the general of the hour . down to doctor ' Commons she expedite the hero , instruct he how boldly to face the Law , and fib : for that the Law never could mist a fib and a bold face . down the hero go , and proclaim his presence . and lo ! the Law dance to he its sedatest lovely bear's - dance . think ye the lawless susceptible to he than flesh and blood ? with a beautiful confidence it put the few familiar question to he , and nod to his reply : then stamp the bond , and take the fee . it must be an old vagabond at heart that can permit the irrevocable to go so cheap , even to a hero . for only mark he when he be petition by hero and heroine to undo what he do so easily ! that small archway of doctor ' Commons seem the eye of a needle , through which the lean purse have a way , somehow , of slip more readily than the portly ; but once through , all be camel alike , the lean purse an especially big camel . dispense tremendous marriage as it do , the Law can have no conscience . 
 " I have not   the slight difficulty , " say the exult hero . 
 " of course not ! " return Mrs. Berry . " it be as easy , if ye're in earnest , as buy a plum bun . " 
 likewise the ambassador of the hero go to claim the promise of the Church to be in attendance on a certain spot , on a certain day , and there hear oath of eternal fealty , and gird he about with all its force : which the Church , receive a wink from the Law , obsequiously engage to do , for less than the price of a plum - cake . 
 meantime , while craftsman and skilled woman , direct by Mrs. Berry , be toil to deck the day at hand , Raynham and Belthorpe sleep , the former soundly ; and one day be as another to they . regularly every morning a letter arrive from Richard to his father , contain observation on the phenomena of London ; remark   mainly cynical   on the speech and act of Parliament ; and reason for not have yet be able to call on the Grandisons . they be certainly rather monotonous and spiritless . the baronet do not complain . that cold dutiful tone assure he there be no internal trouble or distraction . " the letter of a healthful physique ! " he say to Lady Blandish , with sure insight . complacently he sit and smile , little witting that his son 's ordeal be imminent , and that his son 's ordeal be to be his own . Hippias write that his nephew be kill he by make appointment which he never keep , and altogether neglect he in the most shameless way , so that his ganglionic centre be in a ten time bad state than when he leave Raynham . he write very bitterly , but it be hard to feel compassion for his offend stomach . 
 on the other hand , young Tom Blaize be not forthcoming , and have despatch no tiding whatever . Farmer Blaize smoke his pipe evening after evening , vastly disturb . London be a large place young Tom might be lose in it , he think ; and young Tom have his weakness . a wolf at Belthorpe , he be likely to be a sheep in London , as yokel have prove . but what have become of Lucy ? this consideration almost send Farmer Blaize off to London direct , and he would have go have not his pipe enlighten he . a young fellow might play truant and get into a scrape , but a young man and a young woman be sure to be hear of , unless they be act in complicity . why , of course , young Tom have behave like a man , the rascal ! and marry she outright there , while he have the chance . it be a long guess . still it be the only reasonable way of accounting for his extraordinary silence , and therefore the farmer hold to it that he have do the deed . he argue as modern man do who think the hero , the upsetter of ordinary calculation , be go from we . so , after despatch a letter to a friend in town to be on the outlook for son Tom , he continue awhile to smoke his pipe , rather elated than not , and muse on the shrewd manner he should adopt when Master Honeymoon do appear . 
 toward the middle of the second week of Richard 's absence , Tom Bakewell come to Raynham for Cassandra , and privately hand a letter to the Eighteenth Century , contain a request for money , and a round sum . the Eighteenth Century be as good as her word , and give Tom a letter in return , enclose a cheque on her banker , amply provide to keep the heroic engine in motion at a moderate pace . Tom go back , and Raynham and Lobourne sleep and dream not of the morrow . the System , wed to Time , sleep , and know not how he have be outrage anticipate by seven pregnant season . for Time have hear the hero swear to that legalize instrument , and have also register an oath . ah I ! venerable Hebrew Time ! he be unforgive . half the confusion and fever of the world come of this vendetta he declare against the hapless innocent who have once do he a wrong . they can not escape he . they will never outlive it . the father of joke , he be himself no joke ; which it seem the business of man to discover . 
 the day roll round . he be their servant now . Mrs. Berry have a new satin gown , a beautiful bonnet , a gold brooch , and sweet glove , present to she by the hero , wherein to stand by his bride at the altar to - morrow ; and , instead of be an old wary hen , she be as much a chicken as any of the party , such have be the magic of these article . father she see accept the fact produce for they by their child ; a world content to be carve out as it please the hero . 
 at last Time bring the bridal eve , and be bl as a benefactor . the final arrangement be make ; the bridegroom do depart ; and Mrs. Berry light the little bride to her bed . Lucy stop on the landing where there be an old clock eccentrically correct that night . ' tis the palpitating pause before the gate of her transfiguration . Mrs. Berry see she put her rosy finger on the one about to strike , and touch all the hour successively till she come to the twelve that shall sound " Wife " in her ear on the morrow , move her lip the while , and look round archly solemn when she have do ; and that sight so catch at Mrs. Berry 's heart that , not guess Time to be the poor child 's enemy , she endanger her candle by fold Lucy warmly in her arm , whimpering ; " bless you for a darling ! you innocent lamb ! you shall be happy ! you shall ! " 
 Old Time gaze grimly ahead . 




 CHAPTER XXIX 

 although it blow hard when Caesar cross the Rubicon , the passage of that river be commonly calm ; calm as Acheron . so long as he get his fare , the ferryman do not need to be tell whom he carry : he pull with a will , and hero may be over in half - an - hour . only when they stand on the opposite bank , do they see what a leap they have take . the shore they have relinquish shrink to an infinite remoteness . there they have dream : here they must act . there lie youth and irresolution : here manhood and purpose . they be veritably in another land : a moral Acheron divide their life . their memory scarce seem their own ! the Philosophical Geography   about to be publish   observe that each man have , one time or other , a little Rubicon a clear or a foul water to cross . it be ask he : " wilt thou we d this fate , and give up all behind thee ? " and " I will , " firmly pronounce , speed he over . the above - name manuscript authority inform we , that by far the great number of caress roll by this heroic flood to its sister stream below , be those of fellow who have repent their pledge , and have try to swim back to the bank they have blot out . for though every man of we may be a hero for one fatal minute , very few remain so after a day 's march even : and who wonder that Madam Fate be indignant , and wear the feature of the terrible Universal Fate to he ? fail before she , either in heart or in act , and lo , how the alluring love in her visage wither and sicken to what it be model on ! be your Rubicon big or small , clear or foul , it be the same : you shall not return . on or to Acheron ! I subscribe to that saying of the Pilgrim 's scrip : 
 " the danger of a little knowledge of thing be disputable : but beware the little knowledge of one 's self ! " 
 Richard Feverel be now cross the River of his Ordeal . already the mist be steal over the land he have leave : his life be cut in two , and he breathe but the air that meet his nostril . his father , his father 's love , his boyhood and ambition , be shadowy . his poetic dream have take a live attainable shape . he have a distincter impression of the Autumnal Berry and her household than of anything at Raynham . and yet the young man love his father , love his home : and I daresay Caesar love Rome : but whether he do or no , Caesar when he kill the Republic be quite bald , and the hero we be deal with be scarce begin to feel his despotic moustache . do he know what he be make of ? Doubtless , nothing at all . but honest passion have an instinct that can be safe than conscious wisdom . he be an arrow draw to the head , fly from the bow . his audacious mendacity and subterfuge do not strike he as in any way criminal ; for he be perfectly sure that the winning and securing of Lucy would in the end be boisterously approve of , and in that case , be not the mean justify ? not that he take trouble to argue thus , as old hero and self - convict villain be in the habit of do ; to deduce a clear conscience . Conscience and Lucy go together . 
 it be a soft fair day . the Rubicon sparkle in the morning sun . one of those day when London embrace the prospect of summer , and troop forth all its baby . the pavement , the square , the park , be early alive with the cry of young Britain . Violet and primrose girl , and organ boy with military monkey , and systematic band very determined in tone if not in tune , fill the atmosphere , and crown the blaze procession of omnibus , freight with business man , Cityward , where a column of reddish brown smoke , blow aloft by the South - west , mark the scene of conflict to which these persistent warrior repair . Richard have see much of early London that morning . his plan be lay . he have take care to ensure his personal liberty against accident , by leave his hotel and his injure uncle Hippias at sunrise . to - day or to - morrow his father be to arrive . Farmer Blaize , Tom Bakewell report to he , be rag in town . another day and she might be tear from he : but to - day this miracle of creation would be his , and then from those glitter bank yonder , let they summon he to surrender she who dare ! the position of thing look so propitious that he naturally think the power wait on love conspire in his behalf . and she , too since she must cross this river , she have swear to he to be brave , and do he honour , and wear the true gladness of her heart in her face . without a suspicion of folly in his act , or fear of result , Richard stroll into Kensington Gardens , breakfast on the foreshadow of his great joy , now with a vision of his bride , now of the new life open to he . mountain mass of cloud , round in sunlight , swing up the blue . the flower chestnut pavilion overhead rustle and hum . a sound in his ear as of a banner unfold in the joyful distance lull he . 
 he be to meet his bride at the church at a quarter past eleven . his watch say a quarter to ten . he stroll on beneath the long - stem tree toward the well dedicated to a saint obscure . some people be drink at the well . a florid lady stand by a young one , who have a little silver mug half - way to her mouth , and evince undisguised dislike to the liquor of the salutary saint . 
 " drink , child ! " say the mature lady . " that be only your second mug . I insist upon your drink three full one every morning we be in town . your constitution positively require iron ! " 
 " but , mama , " the other expostulate , " it be so nasty . I shall be sick . " 
 " drink ! " be the harsh injunction . " nothing to the german water , my dear . here , let I taste . " she take the mug and give it a fly kiss . " I declare I think it almost nice not at all objectionable . pray , taste it , " she say to a gentleman stand below they to act as cup - bearer . 
 an unmistakable cis - Rubicon voice reply : " certainly , if it be good fellowship ; though I confess I do not   think mutual sickness a very engaging ceremony . " 
 can one never escape from one 's relative ? Richard ejaculate inwardly . 
 without a doubt those people be Mrs. Doria , Clare , and Adrian . he have they under his eye . 
 Clare , peep up from her constitutional dose to make sure no man be near to see the possible consequence of it , be the first to perceive he . her hand drop . 
 " now , pray , drink , and do not fuss ! " say Mrs. Doria . 
 " Mama ! " Clare gasp . 
 Richard come forward and capitulate honourably , since retreat be out of the question . Mrs. Doria swam to meet he : " my own boy ! my dear Richard ! " profuse of exclamation . Clare shyly greet he . Adrian keep in the background . 
 " why , we be come for you to - day , Richard , " say Mrs. Doria , smile effusion ; and rattle on , " we want another cavalier . this be delightful ! my dear nephew ! you have grow from a boy to a man . and there be down on his lip ! and what bring you here at such an hour in the morning ? Poetry , I suppose ! here , take my arm , child . Clare ! finish that mug and thank your cousin for spar you the third . I always bring she , when we be by a chalybeate , to take the water before breakfast . we have to get up at unearthly hour . think , my dear boy ! mother be sacrifice ! and so you have   be alone a fortnight with your agreeable uncle ! a charming time of it you must have have ! poor Hippias ! what may be his last nostrum ? " 
 " Nephew ! " Adrian stretch his head round to the couple . " dos of nephew take morning and night fourteen day ! and he guarantee that it shall destroy an iron constitution in a month . " 
 Richard mechanically shake Adrian 's hand as he speak . 
 " quite well , Ricky ? " 
 " yes : well enough , " Richard answer . 
 " well ? " resume his vigorous aunt , walk on with he , while Clare and Adrian follow . " I really never see you look so handsome . there be something about your face look at I you need not   blush . you have   grow to an Apollo . that blue button - up frock coat become you admirably and those glove , and that easy neck - tie . your style be irreproachable , quite a style of your own ! and nothing eccentric . you have the instinct of dress . dress show blood , my dear boy , as much as anything else . boy ! you see , I can not   forget old habit . you be a boy when I leave , and now ! do you see any change in he , Clare ? " she turn half round to her daughter . 
 " Richard be look very well , mama , " say Clare , glance at he under her eyelid . 
 " I wish I could say the same of you , my dear . take my arm , Richard . be you afraid of your aunt ? I want to get use to you . will not   it be pleasant , our be all in town together in the season ? how fresh the Opera will be to you ! Austin , I hear , take stall . you can come to the Forey 's box when you like . we be stay with the Foreys close by here . I think it be a little too far out , you know ; but they like the neighbourhood . this be what I have always say : give he more liberty ! Austin have see it at last . how do you think Clare look ? " 
 the question have to be repeat . Richard survey his cousin hastily , and praise her look . 
 " Pale ! " Mrs. Doria sigh . 
 " rather pale , aunt . " 
 " grow very much do not   you think , Richard ? " 
 " very tall girl indeed , aunt . " 
 " if she have but a little more colour , my dear Richard ! I be sure I give she all the iron she can swallow , but that pallor still continue . I think she do not prosper away from her old companion . she be accustom to look up to you , Richard " 
 " do you get Ralph 's letter , aunt ? " Richard interrupt she . 
 " Absurd ! " Mrs. Doria press his arm . " the nonsense of a boy ! why do you undertake to forward such stuff ? " 
 " I be certain he love she , " say Richard , in a serious way . 
 the maternal eye narrow on he . " life , my dear Richard , be a game of cross - purpose , " she observe , drop her fluency , and be rather angered to hear he laugh . he excuse himself by say that she speak so like his father . 
 " you breakfast with we , " she freshen off again . " the Foreys wish to see you ; the girl be die to know you . do you know , you have a reputation on account of that " she crush an intrude adjective " system you be bring up on . you must not   mind it . for my part , I think you look a credit to it . do not   be bashful with young woman , mind ! as much as you please with the old one . you know how to behave among man . there you have your drawing - room Guide ! I be sure I shall be proud of you . be I not ? " 
 Mrs. Doria address his eye coaxingly . 
 a benevolent idea strike Richard , that he might employ the minute to spare , in plead the case of poor Ralph ; and , as he be draw along , he pull out his watch to note the precise number of minute he could dedicate to this charitable office . 
 " pardon I , " say Mrs. Doria . " you want manner , my dear boy . I think it never happen to I before that a man consult his watch in my presence . " 
 Richard mildly reply that he have an engagement at a particular hour , up to which he be her servant . 
 " Fiddlededee ! " the vivacious lady sang . " now I have   get you , I mean to keep you . oh ! I have   hear all about you . this ridiculous indifference that your father make so much of ! why , of course , you want to see the world ! a strong healthy young man shut up all his life in a lonely house no friend , no society , no amusement but those of rustic ! of course you be indifferent ! your intelligence and superior mind alone save you from become a dissipated country boor . where be the other ? " 
 Clare and Adrian come up at a quick pace . 
 " my damozel drop something , " Adrian explain . 
 her mother ask what it be . 
 " nothing , mama , " say Clare , demurely , and they proceed as before . 
 overbear by his aunt 's fluency of tongue , and occupy in acute calculation of the fly minute , Richard let many pass before he edge in a word for Ralph . when he do , Mrs. Doria stop he immediately . 
 " I must tell you , child , that I refuse to listen to such rank idiotcy . " 
 " it be nothing of the kind , aunt . " 
 " the fancy of a boy . " 
 " he be not a boy . he be half - a - year old than I be ! " 
 " you silly child ! the moment you fall in love , you all think yourself man . " 
 " on my honour , aunt ! I believe he love she thoroughly . " 
 " do he tell you so , child ? " 
 " man do not   speak openly of those thing , " say Richard . 
 " boy do , " say Mrs. Doria . 
 " but listen to I in earnest , aunt . I want you to be kind to Ralph . do not   drive he to you maybe sorry for it . let he do let he write to she , and see she . I believe woman be as cruel as man in these thing . " 
 " I never encourage absurdity , Richard . " 
 " what objection have you to Ralph , aunt ? " 
 " oh , they be both good family . it be not that absurdity , Richard . it will be to his credit to remember that his first fancy be not   a dairymaid . " Mrs. Doria pitch her accent tellingly . it do not touch her nephew . 
 " do not   you want Clare ever to marry ? " he put the last point of reason to she . 
 Mrs. Doria laugh . " I hope so , child . we must find some comfortable old gentleman for she . " 
 " what infamy ! " mutter Richard . 
 " and I engage Ralph shall be ready to dance at her wedding , or eat a hearty breakfast we do not   dance at wedding now , and very properly . it be a horrid sad business , not to be treat with levity . be that his regiment ? " she say , as they pass out of the hussar - sentinelle garden . " tush , tush , child ! Master Ralph will recover , as hem ! other have do . a little headache you call it heartache and up you rise again , look well than ever . no doubt , to have a grain of sense force into your brain , you poor dear child ! must be painful .. girl suffer as much as boy , I assure you . More , for their head be weak , and their appetite less constant . do I talk like your father now ? whatever make the boy fidget at his watch so ? " 
 Richard stop short . Time speak urgently . 
 " I must go , " he say . 
 his face do not seem good for trifling . Mrs. Doria would trifle in spite . 
 " Listen , Clare ! Richard be go . he say he have an engagement . what possible engagement can a young man have at eleven o'clock in the morning ? unless it be to be marry ! " Mrs. Doria laugh at the ingenuity of her suggestion . 
 " be the church handy , Ricky ? " say Adrian . " you can still give we half - an - hour if it be . the celibate hour strike at twelve . " and he also laugh in his fashion . 
 " will not   you stay with we , Richard ? " Clare ask . she blush timidly , and her voice shake . 
 something indefinite a sharp - edge thrill in the tone make the burn bridegroom speak gently to she . 
 " indeed , I would , Clare ; I should like to please you , but I have a most imperative appointment that be , I promise I must go . I shall see you again " 
 Mrs. Doria , take forcible possession of he . " now , do come , and do not   waste word . I insist upon your have some breakfast first , and then , if you really must go , you shall . look ! there be the house . at least you will accompany your aunt to the door . " 
 Richard concede this . she little imagine what she require of he . two of his golden minute melt into nothingness . they be grow to be jewel of price , one by one more and more precious as they run , and now so costly - rare rich as his blood ! not to kind relation , dearest friend , could he give another . the die be cast ! Ferryman ! push off . 
 " good - bye ! " he cry , nod bluffly at the three as one , and flee . 
 they watch his abrupt muscular stride through the ground of the house . he look like resolution on the march . Mrs. Doria , as usual with she out of her brother 's hearing , begin rat the System . 
 " see what become of that nonsensical education ! the boy really do not know how to behave like a common mortal . he have some paltry appointment , or be mad after some ridiculous idea of his own , and everything must be sacrifice to it ! that be what Austin call concentration of the faculty . I think it be more likely to lead to downright insanity than to greatness of any kind . and so I shall tell Austin . it be time he should be speak to seriously about he . " 
 " he be an engine , my dear aunt , " say Adrian . " he be not   a boy , or a man , but an engine . and he appear to have be at high pressure since he come to town out all day and half the night . " 
 " he be mad ! " Mrs. Doria interject . 
 " not at all . extremely shrewd be Master Ricky , and carry as open an eye ahead of he as the ship before Troy . he be more than a match for any of we . he be for I , I confess . " 
 " then , " say Mrs. Doria , " he do astonish I ! " 
 Adrian beg she to retain her astonishment till the right season , which would not be long arrive . 
 their common wisdom counsel they not to tell the Foreys of their hopeful relative 's ungracious behaviour . Clare have leave they . when Mrs. Doria go to her room her daughter be there , gaze down at something in her hand , which she guiltily close . 
 in answer to an inquiry why she have not go to take off her thing , Clare say she be not hungry . Mrs. Doria lament the obstinacy of a constitution that no quantity of iron could affect , and eclipse the look - glass , say : " take they off here , child , and learn to assist yourself . " 
 she disentangle her bonnet from the array of her spread hair , talk of Richard , and his handsome appearance , and extraordinary conduct . Clare keep open and shut her hand , in an attitude half - pensive , half - listless . she do not stir to undress . a joyless dimple hang in one pale cheek , and she draw long even breath . 
 Mrs. Doria , assure by the glass that she be ready to show , come to her daughter . 
 " now , really , " she say , " you be too helpless , my dear . you can not do a thing without a dozen woman at your elbow . what will become of you ? you will have to marry a millionaire . what be the matter with you , child ? " 
 Clare undo her tight - shut finger , as if to some attraction of her eye , and display a small gold hoop on the palm of a green glove . 
 " a wedding - ring ! " exclaim Mrs. Doria , inspect the curiosity most daintily . 
 there on Clare 's pale green glove lie a wedding - ring ! 
 Rapid question as to where , when , how , it be find , beset Clare , who reply : " in the Gardens , mama . this morning . when I be walk behind Richard . " 
 " be you sure he do not give it you , Clare ? " 
 " oh no , mama ! he do not give it I . " 
 " of course not ! only he do such absurd thing ! I think , perhaps these boy be so exceedingly ridiculous ! Mrs. Doria have an idea that it might have be concert between the two young gentleman , Richard and Ralph , that the former should present this token of hymeneal devotion from the latter to the young lady of his love ; but a moment 's reflection exonerate boy even from such preposterous behaviour . 
 " now , I wonder , " she speculate on Clare 's cold face , " I do wonder whether it be lucky to find a wedding - ring . what very quick eye you have , my darling ! " Mrs. Doria kiss she . she think it must be lucky , and the circumstance make she feel tender to her child . her child do not move to the kiss . 
 " let us see whether it fit , " say Mrs. Doria , almost infantine with surprise and pleasure . 
 Clare suffer her glove to be draw off . the ring slide down her long thin finger , and settle comfortably . 
 " it do ! " Mrs. Doria whisper . to find a wedding ring be open to any woman ; but to find a wedding - ring that fit may well cause a superstitious emotion . moreover , that it should be find while walk in the neighbourhood of the identical youth whom a mother have destine for her daughter , give significance to the gentle perturbation of idea consequent on such a hint from Fortune . 
 " it really fit ! " she pursue . " now I never pay any attention to the nonsense of omen and that kind of thing "   have the ring be a horseshoe Mrs. Doria would have pink it up and drag it obediently home , " but this , I must say , be odd to find a ring that fit ! singular ! it never happen to I . Sixpence be the most I ever discover , and I have it now . mind you keep it , clare this ring : and , " she laugh , " offer it to Richard when he come ; say , you think he must have drop it . " 
 the dimple in Clare 's cheek quiver . 
 Mother and daughter have never speak explicitly of Richard . Mrs. Doria , by exquisite management , have contrive to be sure that on one side there would be no obstacle to her project of general happiness , without , as she think , compromise her daughter 's feeling unnecessarily . it could do no harm to an obedient young girl to hear that there be no youth in the world like a certain youth . he the prince of his generation , she might softly consent , when request , to be his princess ; and if never request   for Mrs. Doria envisage failure , she might easily transfer her softness to squire of low degree . Clare have always be blindly obedient to her mother   Adrian call they Mrs. Doria Battledoria and the fair Shuttlecockiana , and her mother accept in this blind obedience the text of her entire character . it be difficult for those who think very earnestly for their child to know when their child be think on their own account . the exercise of their volition we construe as revolt . our love do not like to be invalid and depose from its command , and here I think yonder old thrush on the lawn who have just kick the last of her lank offspring out of the nest to go shift for itself , much the kinder of the two , though sentimental people do shrug their shoulder at these unsentimental act of the creature who never wander from nature . now , excess of obedience be , to one who manage most exquisitely , as bad as insurrection . happily Mrs. Doria see nothing in her daughter 's manner save a want of iron . her pallor , her lassitude , the tremulous nerve in her face , exhibit an imperious requirement of the mineral . 
 " the reason why man and woman be mysterious to we , and prove disappointing , " we learn from the Pilgrim 's Scrip , " be , that we will read they from our own book ; just as we be perplex by read ourselves from theirs . " 
 Mrs. Doria read her daughter from her own book , and she be gay ; she laugh with Adrian at the breakfast - table , and mock - seriously join in his jocose assertion that Clare be positively and by all hymeneal auspex betroth to the owner of that ring , be he who he may , and must , whenever he should choose to come and claim she , give her hand to he   for everybody agree the owner must be masculine , as no woman would drop a wedding - ring , and follow he whither he list all the world over . amiable giggle Forey girl call Clare , the Betrothed . dark man , or fair ? be moot . adrian throw off the first strophe of Clare 's fortune in burlesque rhyme , with an insinuate gipsy twang . her aunt Forey warn she to have her dress in readiness . her grandpapa Forey pretend to grumble at bridal present be expect from grandpapas . 
 this one smell orange - flower , another speak solemnly of an old shoe . the finding of a wedding - ring be celebrate through all the palpitating accessory and rosy ceremony involve by that famous instrument . in the midst of the general hilarity , Clare show her deplorable want of iron by burst into tear . 
 do the poor mock - at heart divine what might be then enact ? perhaps , dimly , as we say : that be , without eye . 
 at an altar stand two fair young creature , ready with their oath . they be ask to fix all time to the moment , and they do so . if there be hesitation at the immense undertaking , it be but maidenly . she conceive as little mental doubt of the sanity of the act as he . over they hang a cool young curate in his raiment of office . behind be two apparently lucid people , distinguish from each other by sex and age : the foremost a bunch of simmer black satin ; under her shadow a cock - robin in the dress of a gentleman , big joy swell out his chest , and pert satisfaction cock his head . these be they who stand here in place of parent to the young couple . all be well . the service proceed . 
 firmly the bridegroom tell forth his word . this hour of the complacent giant at least be his , and that he mean to hold he bind through the eternity , man may hear . clearly , and with brave modesty , speak she : no less firmly , though her body tremble : her voice just vibrate while the tone travel on , like a smite vase . 
 Time hear sentence pronounce on he : the frail hand bind his huge limb and lock the chain . he be use to it : he let they do as they will . 
 then come that period when they be to give their troth to each other . the Man with his right hand take the Woman by her right hand : the Woman with her right hand take the Man by his right hand . devil dare not laugh at whom Angels crowd to contemplate . 
 their hand be join ; their blood flow as one stream . Adam and fair Eve front the generation . be they not lovely ? purer fountain of life be never in two bosom . 
 and then they loose their hand , and the cool curate doth bid the Man to put a ring on the Woman 's fourth finger , count thumb . and the Man thrust his hand into one pocket , and into another , forward and back many time into all his pocket . he remember that he feel for it , and feel it in his waistcoat pocket , when in the Gardens . and his hand come forth empty . and the Man be ghastly to look at ! 
 yet , though Angels smile , shall not devil laugh ! the curate deliberate . the black satin bunch cease to simmer . he in her shadow change from a beam cock - robin to an inquisitive sparrow . eye multiply question : lip have no reply . time ominously shake his chain , and in the pause a sound of mockery sting their ear . 
 think ye a hero be one to be defeat in his first battle ? look at the clock ! there be but seven minute to the stroke of the celibate hour : the veteran be surely lift his two hand to deliver fire , and his shot will sunder they in twain so nearly united . all the jeweller of London speed down with sack full of the nuptial circlet can not save they ! 
 the battle must be win on the field , and what do the hero now ? it be an inspiration ! for who else would dream of such a reserve in the rear ? none see what he do ; only that the black - satin bunch be remonstratingly agitated , stormily shaken , and subdue : and as though the menacing cloud have open , and drop the dear token from the sky at his demand , he produce the symbol of their consent , and the service proceed : " with this ring I thee we d. " 
 they be pray over and blest . for good , or for ill , this deed be do . the name be register ; fee fly right and leave : they thank , and salute , the curate , whose official coolness melt into a smile of monastic gallantry : the beadle on the step wave off a gap world as they issue forth bridegroom and bridesman recklessly scatter gold on he : carriage door be bang to : the coachman drive off , and the scene close , everybody happy . 




 CHAPTER XXX 

 and the next moment the bride be weep as if she would dissolve to one of Dian 's Virgin Fountains from the clasp of the Sun - God . she have nobly preserve the mask impose by comedy , till the curtain have fall , and now she weep , stream with tear . have patience , o impetuous young man ! it be your profession to be a hero . this poor heart be new to it , and her duty involve such wild act , such brigandage , such terror and task , she be quite unnerved . she do you honour till now . Bear with she now . she do not cry the cry of ordinary maiden in like case . while the struggle go on her tender face be brave ; but , alas ! omen be against she : she hold an ever - present dreadful one on that fatal fourth finger of her , which have coil itself round her dream of delight , and take she in its clutch like a horrid serpent . and yet she must love it . she dare not part from it . she must love and hug it , and feed on its strange honey , and all the bliss it give she cast all the deep shadow on what be to come . 
 say : be it not enough to cause feminine apprehension , for a woman to be marry in another woman 's ring ? 
 you be amazon , lady , at Saragossa , and a thousand citadel wherever there be strife , and Time be to be take by the throat . then shall few man match your sublime fury . but what if you see a vulture , visible only to yourself , hover over the house you be gaily lead by the torch to inhabit ? will you not crouch and be coward ? 
 as for the hero , in the hour of victory he pay no heed to omen . he do his good to win his darling to confidence by caress . be she not his ? be he not her ? and why , when the battle be win , do she weep ? do she regret what she have do ? 
 oh , never ! never ! her soft blue eye assure he , steadfast love see swim on clear depth of faith in they , through the shower . 
 he be silence by her exceed beauty , and sit perplex wait for the shower to pass . 
 alone with Mrs. Berry , in her bedroom , Lucy give tongue to her distress , and a second character in the comedy change her face . 
 " o Mrs. Berry ! Mrs. Berry ! what have happen ! what have happen ! " 
 " my darlin ' child ! " the bridal Berry gaze at the finger of doleful joy . " I would forgot all about it ! and that be what have   make I feel so queer ever since , then ! I have   be seemin ' as if I be not   myself somehow , without my ring . dear ! dear ! what a wilful young gentleman ! we be not   a match for man in that state Lord help we ! " 
 Mrs. Berry sit on the edge of a chair : Lucy on the edge of the bed . 
 " what do you think of it , Mrs. Berry ? be it not terrible ? " 
 " I can not   say I should ' a like it myself , my dear , " Mrs. Berry candidly respond . 
 " oh ! why , why , why do it happen ! " the young bride bend to a flood of fresh tear , murmur that she feel already old forsaken . 
 " have not   you get a comfort in your religion for all accident ? " Mrs. Berry inquire . 
 " none for this . I know it be wrong to cry when I be so happy . I hope he will forgive I . " 
 Mrs. Berry vow her bride be the sweetest , softest , beautiful thing in life . 
 " I will cry no more , " say Lucy . " leave I , Mrs. Berry , and come back when I ring . " 
 she draw forth a little silver cross , and fall upon her knee to the bed . Mrs. Berry leave the room tiptoe . 
 when she be call to return , Lucy be calm and tearless , and smile kindly to she . 
 " it be over now , " she say . 
 Mrs. Berry sedately look for her ring to follow . 
 " he do not wish I to go in to the breakfast you have prepare , Mrs. Berry . I beg to be excuse . I can not eat . " 
 Mrs. Berry very much deplore it , as she have lay out a superior nuptial breakfast , but with her mind on her ring she nod assentingly . 
 " we shall not have much packing to do , Mrs. Berry . " 
 " no , my dear . it be pretty well all do . " 
 " we be go to the Isle of Wight , Mrs. Berry . " 
 " and a very suitable spot ye've   choose , my dear ! " 
 " he love the sea . he wish to be near it . " 
 " do not   ye cross to - night , if it be anyways rough , my dear . it be not   advisable . " Mrs. Berry sink her voice to say , " do not   ye be soft and give way to he there , or you will both be repent it . " 
 Lucy have only be stave off the unpleasantness she have to speak . she see Mrs. Berry 's eye pursue her ring , and screw up her courage at last . 
 " Mrs. Berry . " 
 " yes , my dear . " 
 " Mrs. Berry , you shall have another ring . " 
 " another , my dear ? " Berry do not comprehend . " one be quite enough for the objeck , " she remark . 
 " I mean , " Lucy touch her fourth finger , " I can not part with this . " she look straight at Mrs. Berry . 
 that bewildered creature gaze at she , and at the ring , till she have thoroughly exhaust the meaning of the word , and then exclaim , horror - strike : " deary I , now ! you do not   say that ? you be to be marry again in your own religion . " 
 the young wife repeat : " I can never part with it . " 
 " but , my dear ! " the wretched Berry wring her hand , divide between compassion and a sense of injury . " my dear ! " she keep expostulate like a mute . 
 " I know all that you would say , Mrs. Berry . I be very grieve to pain you . it be mine now , and must be mine . I can not give it back . " 
 there she sit , suddenly develop to the most inflexible little heroine in the three kingdom . 
 from her first perception of the meaning of the young bride 's word , Mrs. Berry , a shrewd physiognomist , know that her case be hopeless , unless she treat she as she herself have be treat , and seize the ring by force of arm ; and that she have not heart for . 
 " what ! " she gasp faintly , " one 's own lawful wedding - ring you would not   give back to a body ? " 
 " because it be mine , Mrs. Berry . it be your , but it be mine now . you shall have whatever you ask for but that . pray , forgive I ! it must be so . " 
 Mrs. Berry rock on her chair , and sound her hand together . it amaze she that this soft little creature could be thus firm . she try argument . 
 " do not   ye know , my dear , it be the fatal thing you be inflictin ' upon I , reelly ! do not   ye know that bein ' bereft of one 's own lawful wedding - ring 's the fatal thing in life , and there be no prosperity after it ! for what stand in place o ' that , when that be go , my dear ? and what could ye give I to compensate a body for the loss o ' that ? do not   ye know oh , deary I ! " the little bride 's face be so set that poor Berry wail off in despair . 
 " I know it , " say Lucy . " I know it all . I know what I do to you . dear , dear Mrs. Berry ! forgive I ! if I part with my ring I know it would be fatal . " 
 so this fair young freebooter take possession of her argument as well as her ring . 
 Berry rack her distracted wit for a further appeal . 
 " but , my child , " she counter - argue , " you do not   understand . it be not   as you think . it be not   a hurt to you now . not a bit , it be not . it make no difference now ! any ring do while the wearer 's a maid . and your Mr. Richard will find the very ring he intend for ye . and , of course , that be the one you will wear as his wife . it be all the same now , my dear . it be no shame to a maid . now do now do there be a darlin ' ! " 
 wheedle avail as little as argument . 
 " Mrs. Berry , " say Lucy , " you know what my he speak : ' with this ring I thee we d. ' it be with this ring . then how could it be with another ? " 
 Berry be constrain despondently to acknowledge that be logic . 
 she hit upon an artful conjecture : 
 " will not   it be unlucky your wearin ' of the ring which serve I so ? think o ' that ! " 
 " it may ! it may ! it may ! " cry Lucy . 
 " and arn't   you rushin ' into it , my dear ? " 
 " Mrs. Berry , " Lucy say again , " it be this ring . it can not it never can be another . it be this . what it bring I I must bear . I shall wear it till I die ! " 
 " then what be I to do ? " the ill - use woman groan . " what shall I tell my husband when he come back to I , and see I have   get a new ring waitin ' for he ? will not   that be a welcome ? " 
 Quoth Lucy : " how can he know it be not the same ; in a plain gold ring ? " 
 " you never see so keen a eyed man in joolry as my Berry ! " return his solitary spouse . " not know , my dear ? why , any one would know that've   get eye in his head . there be as much difference in wedding - ring as there be in wedding people ! now , do pray be reasonable , my own sweet ! " 
 " pray , do not ask I , " plead Lucy . 
 " pray , do think well of it , " urge Berry . 
 " pray , pray , Mrs. Berry ! " plead Lucy . 
 " and not leave your old berry all forlorn just when you be so happy ! " 
 " indeed I would not , you dear , kind old creature ! " Lucy falter . 
 Mrs. Berry think she have she . 
 " just when you be go to be the happy wife on earth all you want your ! " she pursue the tender strain . " a handsome young gentleman ! Love and Fortune smilin ' on ye ! " 
 Lucy rise up . 
 " Mrs. Berry , " she say , " I think we must not lose time in get ready , or he will be impatient . " 
 Poor Berry survey she in abject wonder from the edge of her chair . dignity and resolve be in the ductile form she have hitherto fold under her wing . in an hour the heroine have rise to the measure of the hero . without be exactly aware what creature she be deal with , Berry acknowledge to herself it be not one of the common run , and sigh , and submit . 
 " it be like a divorce , that it be ! " she sob . 
 after put the corner of her apron to her eye , Berry bustle humbly about the packing . then Lucy , whose heart be full to she , come and kiss she , and Berry bump down and regularly cry . this over , she have recourse to fatalism . 
 " I suppose it be to be , my dear ! it be my punishment for meddlin ' wi ' such matter . no , I be not sorry . bless ye both . who would ' a thought you be so wilful ? you that any one might have take for one of the silly - soft ! you be a pair , my dear ! indeed you be ! you be make to meet ! but we must not   show he we have   be cry . man do not   like it when they be happy . let us wash our face and try to bear our lot . " 
 so say the black - satin bunch careen to a renew deluge . she deserve some sympathy , for if it be sad to be marry in another person 's ring , how much sad to have one 's own old accustomed lawful ring violently tear off one 's finger and eternally sever from one ! but where you have hero and heroine , these terrible complication ensue . 
 they have now both fight their battle of the ring , and with equal honour and success . 
 in the chamber of banquet Richard be give Ripton his last direction . though it be a private wedding , Mrs. Berry have prepare a sumptuous breakfast . chicken offer their breast : pie hint savoury secret : thing mystic , in a mash , with Gallic appellative , jelly , cream , fruit , strew the table : as a tower in the midst , the cake colossal : the priestly vesture of its nuptial white relieve by hymeneal splendour . 
 many hour , much labour and anxiety of mind , Mrs. Berry have expend upon this breakfast , and why ? there be one who come to all feast that have their basis in Folly , whom criminal of train instinct be careful to provide against : who will speak , and whose hateful voice must somehow be silence while the feast be go on . this personage be the Philosopher . Mrs. Berry know he . she know that he would come . she provide against he in the manner she think most efficacious : that be , by cheat her eye and intoxicate her conscience with the due and proper glory incident to wedding where father dilate , mother collapse , and marriage settlement be flourish on high by the family lawyer : and have there be no show of the kind to greet she on her return from the church , she would , and she foresaw she would , have star at squalor and emptiness , and repent her work . the Philosopher would have lay hold of she by the ear , and call she bad name . entrench behind a breakfast - table so legitimately adorn , Mrs. Berry defy he . in the presence of that cake he dare not speak above a whisper . and there be wine to drown he in , should he still think of protest ; fiery wine , and cool : claret send purposely by the bridegroom for the delectation of his friend . 
 for one good hour , therefore , the labour of many hour keep he dumb . Ripton be fortify himself so as to forget he altogether , and the world as well , till the next morning . Ripton be excited , overdone with delight . he have already finish one bottle , and listen , pleasantly flushed , to his emphatic and more abstemious chief . he have nothing to do but to listen , and to drink . the hero would not allow he to shout victory ! or hear a word of toast ; and as , from the quantity of oil pour on it , his eloquence be become a natural force in his bosom , the poor fellow be afflict with a sort of elephantiasis of suppress emotion . at time he half - rise from his chair , and fall vacuously into it again ; or he chuckle in the face of weighty , severely - word instruction ; tap his chest , stretch his arm , yawn , and in short behave so singularly that Richard observe it , and say : " on my soul , I do not   think you know a word I be say . " 
 " every word , Ricky ! " Ripton spirt through the opening . " I be go down to your governor , and tell he : Sir Austin ! here be your only chance of be a happy father no , no ! oh ! do not   you fear I , Ricky ! I shall talk the old gentleman over . " 
 his chief say : 
 " look here . you have well not go down to - night . go down the first thing to - morrow , by the six o'clock train . give he my letter . listen to I give he my letter , and do not   speak a word till he speak . his eyebrow will go up and down , he will not   say much . I know he . if he ask you about she , do not   be a fool , but say what you think of she sensibly " 
 no cork could hold in Ripton when she be allude to . he shout : " she be an angel ! " 
 Richard check he : " speak sensibly , I say quietly . you can say how gentle and good she be my fleur - de - luce ! and say , this be not she do . if any one 's to blame , it be I. I make she marry I . then go to Lady Blandish , if you do not   find she at the house . you may say whatever you please to she . give she my letter , and tell she I want to hear from she immediately . she have see Lucy , and I know what she think of she . you will then go to Farmer Blaize . I tell you Lucy happen to be his niece she have not live long there . she live with her aunt Desborough in France while she be a child , and can hardly be call a relative to the farmer there be not a point of likeness between they . poor darling ! she never know her mother . go to Mr. Blaize , and tell he . you will treat he just as you would treat any other gentleman . if you be civil , he be sure to be . and if he abuse I , for my sake and hers you will still treat he with respect . you hear ? and then write I a full account of all that have be say and do . you will have my address the day after to - morrow . by the way , Tom will be here this afternoon . write out for he where to call on you the day after to - morrow , in case you have hear anything in the morning you think I ought to know at once , as Tom will join I that night . do not   mention to anybody about my lose the ring , Ripton . I would not   have Adrian get hold of that for a thousand pound . how on earth I come to lose it ! how well she bear it , Rip ! how beautifully she behave ! " 
 Ripton again shout : " an angel ! " throw up the heel of his second bottle , he say : 
 " you may trust your friend , Richard . aha ! when you pull at old Mrs. Berry I do not   know what be up . I do wish you would let I drink her health ? " 
 " here be to Penelope ! " say Richard , just wet his mouth . the carriage be at the door : a couple of dire organ , each grind the same tune , and a vulture - scented itinerant band   from which not the secret veil wedding can escape   work harmoniously without in the production of discord , and the noise act on his nervous state make he begin to fume and send in message for his bride by the maid . 
 by and by the lovely young bride present herself dress for her journey , and smile from stained eye . 
 Mrs. Berry be request to drink some wine , which Ripton pour out for she , enable Mrs. Berry thereby to measure his condition . 
 the bride now kiss Mrs. Berry , and Mrs. Berry kiss the bridegroom , on the plea of her softness . Lucy give Ripton her hand , with a musical " good - bye , Mr. Thompson , " and her extreme graciousness make he just sensible enough to sit down before he murmur his fervent hope for her happiness . 
 " I shall take good care of he , " say Mrs. Berry , focusse her eye to the comprehension of the company . 
 " Farewell , Penelope ! " cry Richard . " I shall tell the police everywhere to look out for your lord . " 
 " oh my dear ! good - bye , and Heaven bless ye both ! " 
 Berry quaver , touch with compunction at the thought of approach loneliness . Ripton , his mouth draw like a bow to his ear , bring up the rear to the carriage , receive a fair slap on the cheek from an old shoe precipitate by Mrs. Berry 's enthusiastic female domestic . 
 white handkerchief be wave , the adieux have fall to sign : they be off . then do a thought of such urgency illumine Mrs. Berry , that she telegraph , hand in air ; awaken Ripton 's lung , for the coachman to stop , and run back to the house . Richard chafe to be go , but at his bride 's intercession he consent to wait . presently they behold the old black - satin bunch stream through the street - door , down the bit of garden , and up the astonished street ; halting , panting , capless at the carriage door , a book in her hand , a much - use , dog - leave , steamy , greasy book , which ; at the same time call out in breathless jerk , " there ! never ye mind look ! I be not   get a new one . read it , and do not   ye forget it ! " she discharge into Lucy 's lap , and retreat to the railing , a signal for the coachman to drive away for good . 
 how Richard laugh at the Berry 's bridal gift ! Lucy , too , lose the omen at her heart as she glance at the title of the volume . it be Dr. Kitchener on Domestic Cookery ! 




 CHAPTER XXXI 

 General withdraw of head from street - window , emigration of organ and band , and a relaxed atmosphere in the circle of Mrs. Berry 's abode , prove that Dan Cupid have veritably fly to suck the life of fresh region . with a pensive mind she grasp Ripton 's arm to regulate his step , and return to the room where her creditor await she . in the interval he have storm her undefended fortress , the cake , from which altitude he shake a dolorous head at the guilty woman . she smooth her excited apron , sigh . let no one imagine that she regret her complicity . she be ready to cry torrent , but there must be absolute castigation before this criminal shall conceive the sense of regret ; and probably then she will cling to her wickedness the more such be the bear Pagan 's tenacity ! Mrs. Berry sigh , and give he back his shake of the head . o you wanton , improvident creature ! say he . o you very wise old gentleman ! say she . he ask she the thing she have be do . she enlighten he with the fatalist 's reply . he sound a bogey 's alarm of contingent grave result . she retreat to the entrenched camp of the fact she have help to make . 
 " it be do ! " she exclaim . how could she regret what she feel comfort to know be do ? convince that event alone could stamp a mark on such stubborn flesh , he determine to wait for they , and crouch silent on the cake , with one finger downward at Ripton 's incision there , show a crumble chasm and gloomy rich recess . 
 the eloquent indication be understand . " dear ! dear ! " cry Mrs. Berry , " what a heap o ' cake , and no one to send it to ! " 
 Ripton have resume his seat by the table and his embrace of the claret . clear idea of satisfaction have leave he and resolve to a boiling geysir of indistinguishable transport . he bubble , and waggle , and nod amicably to nothing , and successfully , though not without effort , preserve his uppermost member from the seduction of the nymph , Gravitation , who be on the look - out for his whole length shortly . 
 " ha ! ha ! " he shout , about a minute after Mrs. Berry have speak , and almost abandon himself to the nymph on the spot . Mrs. Berry 's word have just reach his wit . 
 " why do you laugh , young man ? " she inquire , familiar and motherly on account of his condition . 
 Ripton laugh louder , and catch his chest on the edge of the table and his nose on a chicken . " that be goo ' ! " he say , recover , and rock under Mrs. Berry 's eye . " no friend ! " 
 " I do not say , no friend , " she remark . " I say , no one ; meanin ' , I know not where for to send it to . " 
 Ripton 's response to this be : " you put a Griffin on that cake . wheatsheave each side . " 
 " his crest ? " Mrs. Berry say sweetly . 
 " old baronetcy ' n England ! " wave Ripton . 
 " yes ? " Mrs. Berry encourage he on . 
 " you think he be richard . we be oblige ' be very close . and she be the most lovely ! if I hear man say thing ' gainst she . " 
 " you need not   for to cry over she , young man , " say Mrs. Berry . " I want for to drink their right health by their right name , and then go about my day 's work , and I do hope you will not   keep I . " 
 Ripton stand bolt upright at her word . 
 " you do ? " he say , and fill a bumper he with cheerfully vinous articulation and glibness of tongue propose the health of Richard and Lucy Feverel , of Raynham Abbey ! and that mankind should not require an expeditious example of the way to accept the inspire toast , he drain his bumper at a gulp . it finish he . the farthing rushlight of his reason leapt and expire . he tumble to the sofa and there stretch . 
 some minute subsequent to Ripton 's signalization of his devotion to the bridal pair , Mrs. Berry 's maid enter the room to say that a gentleman be inquire below after the young gentleman who have depart , and find her mistress with a tottering wineglass in her hand , exhibit every symptom of unconsoled hysteric . her mouth gap , as if the fell creditor have she by the swallow . she ejaculate with horrible exultation that she have be and do it , as her disastrous aspect seem to testify , and her evident , but inexplicable , access of misery induce the sympathetic maid to tender those caressing word that be all Mrs. Berry want to go off into the self - caress fit without delay ; and she have already give the preluding demoniac ironic outburst , when the maid call heaven to witness that the gentleman would hear she ; upon which Mrs. Berry violently control her bosom , and order that he should be show upstairs instantly to see she the wretch she be . she repeat the injunction . 
 the maid do as she be tell , and Mrs. Berry , wish first to see herself as she be , mutely accost the look - glass , and try to look a very little well . she drop a shawl on Ripton and be settle , smooth her agitation when her visitor be announce . 
 the gentleman be Adrian Harley . an interview with Tom Bakewell have put he on the track , and now a momentary survey of the table , and its white - vesture cake , make he whistle . 
 Mrs. Berry plaintively beg he to do she the favour to be seat . 
 " a fine morning , ma'am , " say Adrian . 
 " it have be ! " Mrs. Berry answer , glance over her shoulder at the window , and gulp as if to get her heart down from her mouth . 
 " a very fine spring , " pursue Adrian , calmly anatomize her countenance . 
 Mrs. Berry smother an adjective to " weather " on a deep sigh . her wretchedness be palpable . in proportion to it , Adrian wan cheerful and brisk . he divine enough of the business to see that there be some strange intelligence to be fish out of the culprit who sit compress hysteric before he ; and as he be never more in his element than when he have a sinner , and a repentant prostrate abject sinner in hand , his affable countenance might well deceive poor Berry . 
 " I presume these be Mr. Thompson 's lodging ? " he remark , with a look at the table . 
 Mrs. Berry 's head and the white of her eye inform he that they be not Mr. Thompson 's lodging . 
 " no ? " say Adrian , and throw a carelessly inquisitive eye about he . " Mr. Feverel be out , I suppose ? " 
 a convulsive start at the name , and two corroborate hand drop on her knee , form Mrs. Berry 's reply . 
 " Mr. Feverel 's man , " continue Adrian , " tell I I should be certain to find he here . I think he would be with his friend , Mr. Thompson . I be too late , I perceive . their entertainment be over . I fancy you have be have a party of they here , ma'am ? a bachelor ' breakfast ! " 
 in the presence of that cake this observation seem to mask an irony so shrewd that Mrs. Berry could barely contain herself . she feel she must speak . make her face as deplorably propitiate as she could , she begin : 
 " Sir , may I beg for to know your name ? " 
 Mr. Harley accord her request . 
 groan in the clutch of a pitiless truth , she continue : 
 " and you be Mr. Harley , that be oh ! and you have   come for Mr. ? " 
 Mr. Richard Feverel be the gentleman Mr. Harley have come for . 
 " oh ! and it be no mistake , and he be of Raynham Abbey ? " Mrs. Berry inquire . 
 Adrian , very much amuse , assure she that he be bear and breed there . 
 " his father 's Sir Austin ? " wail the black - satin bunch from behind her handkerchief . 
 Adrian verify Richard 's descent . 
 " oh , then , what have I be and do ! " she cry , and star blankly at her visitor . " I been and marry my baby ! I been and marry the bread out of my own mouth . o Mr. Harley ! Mr. Harley ! I know you when you be a boy that big , and wear jacket ; and all of you . and it be my softness that be my ruin , for I never can resist a man 's asking . look at that cake , Mr. Harley ! " 
 Adrian follow her direction quite coolly . " wedding - cake , ma'am ! " he say . 
 " bride - cake it be , Mr. Harley ! " 
 " do you make it yourself , ma'am ? " 
 the quiet ease of the question overwhelm Mrs. Berry and upset that train of symbolic representation by which she be seek to make he guess the catastrophe and spare she the furnace of confession . 
 " I do not make it myself , Mr. Harley , " she reply . " it be a buy cake , and I be a lost woman . little I dream when I have he in my arm a baby that I should some day be marry he out of my own house ! I little dream that ! oh , why do he come to I ! do not   you remember his old nurse , when he be a baby in arm , that go away so sudden , and no fault of her , Mr. Harley ! the very mornin ' after the night you get into Mr. Benson 's cellar , and get so tipsy on his Madeary I remember it as clear as yesterday ! and Mr. Benson be that angry he threaten to use the whip to you , and I help put you to bed . I be that very woman . " 
 Adrian smile placidly at these reminiscence of his guileless youthful life . 
 " well , ma'am ! well ? " he say . he would bring she to the furnace . 
 " will not   you see it all , kind sir ? " Mrs. Berry appeal to he in pathetic dumb show . 
 Doubtless by this time Adrian do see it all , and be mentally curse at Folly , and reckon the immediate consequence , but he look uninstructed , his peculiar dimple - smile be undisturbed , his comfortable full - bodied posture be the same . " well , ma'am ? " he spur she on . 
 Mrs. Berry burst forth : " it be do this mornin ' , Mr. Harley , in the church , at half - past eleven of the clock , or twenty to , by licence . " 
 Adrian be now oblige to comprehend a case of matrimony . " oh ! " he say , like one who be as hard as fact , and as little to be move : " somebody be marry this morning ; be it Mr. Thompson , or Mr. Feverel ? " 
 Mrs. Berry shuffle up to Ripton , and remove the shawl from he , say : " do he look like a new married bridegroom , Mr. Harley ? " 
 Adrian inspect the oblivious Ripton with philosophic gravity . 
 " this young gentleman be at church this morning ? " he ask . 
 " oh ! quite reasonable and proper then , " Mrs. Berry beg he to understand . 
 " of course , ma'am . " Adrian lift and let fall the stupid inanimate limb of the go wretch , pucker his mouth queerly . " you be all reasonable and proper , ma'am . the principal male performer , then , be my cousin , Mr. Feverel ? he be marry by you , this morning , by licence at your parish church , and come here , and eat a hearty breakfast , and leave intoxicate . " 
 Mrs. Berry fly out . " he never drink a drop , sir . a more moderate young gentleman you never see . oh ! do not   ye think that now , Mr. Harley . he be as upright and master of his mind as you be . " 
 " ay ! " the wise youth nod thank to she for the comparison , " I mean the other form of intoxication . " 
 Mrs. Berry sigh . she could say nothing on that score . 
 Adrian desire she to sit down , and compose herself , and tell he circumstantially what have be do . 
 she obey , in utter perplexity at his perfectly compose demeanour . 
 Mrs. Berry , as her recital declare , be no other than that identical woman who once in old day have dare to behold the baronet behind his mask , and have ever since live in exile from the Raynham world on a little pension regularly pay to she as an indemnity . she be that woman , and the thought of it make she almost accuse Providence for the betraying excess of softness it have endow she with . how be she to recognize her baby grow a man ? he come in a feigned name ; not a word of the family be mention . he come like an ordinary mortal , though she feel something more than ordinary to he she know she do . he come bring a beautiful young lady , and on what ground could she turn she back on they ? why , see that all be chaste and legal , why should she interfere to make they unhappy so few the chance of happiness in this world ! Mrs. Berry relate the seizure of her ring . 
 " one wrench , " say the sobbing culprit , " one , and my ring be off ! " 
 she have no suspicion , and the task of write her name in the vestry - book have be too enact for a thought upon the other signature . 
 " I daresay you be exceedingly sorry for what you have do , " say Adrian . 
 " indeed , sir , " moan Berry , " I be , and be . " 
 " and would do your good to rectify the mischief eh , ma'am ? " 
 " indeed , and indeed , sir , I would , " she protest solemnly . 
 " as , of course , you should know the family . where may these lunatic have go to spend the Moon ? " 
 Mrs. Berry swimmingly reply : " to the Isle I do not   quite know , sir ! " she snap the indication short , and jump out of the pit she have fall into . Repentant as she might be , those dear should not be pursue and cruelly balk of their young bliss ! " to - morrow , if you please , Mr. Harley : not to - day ! " 
 " a pleasant spot , " Adrian observe , smile at his easy prey . 
 by a measurement of date he discover that the bridegroom have bring his bride to the house on the day he have quit Raynham , and this be enough to satisfy Adrian 's mind that there have be concoction and chicanery . Chance , probably , have bring he to the old woman : chance certainly have not bring he to the young one . 
 " very well , ma'am , " he say , in answer to her petition for his favourable office with Sir Austin in behalf of her little pension and the bridal pair , " I will tell he you be only a blind agent in the affair , be naturally soft , and that you trust he will bless the consummation . he will be in town to - morrow morning ; but one of you two must see he to - night . an emetic kindly administer will set our friend here on his leg . a bath and a clean shirt , and he might go . I do not   see why your name should appear at all . brush he up , and send he to Bellingham by the seven o'clock train . he will find his way to Raynham ; he know the neighbourhood good in the dark . let he go and state the case . remember , one of you must go . " 
 with this fair prospect of leave a choice of a perdition between the couple of unfortunate , for they to fight and lose all their virtue over , Adrian say , " good morning . " 
 Mrs. Berry touchingly arrest he . " you will not   refuse a piece of his cake , Mr. Harley ? " 
 " oh , dear , no , ma'am , " Adrian turn to the cake with alacrity . " I shall claim a very large piece . Richard have a great many friend who will rejoice to eat his wedding - cake . cut I a fair quarter , Mrs. Berry . put it in paper , if you please . I shall be delighted to carry it to they , and apportion it equitably accord to their several degree of relationship . " 
 Mrs. Berry cut the cake . somehow , as she slice through it , the sweetness and hapless innocence of the bride be present to she , and she launch into eulogy of Lucy , and clearly show how little she regret her conduct . she vow that they seem make for each other ; that both , be beautiful ; both have spirit ; both be innocent ; and to part they , or make they unhappy , would be , Mrs. Berry work herself to cry aloud , oh , such a pity ! 
 Adrian listen to it as the expression of a matter - of - fact opinion . he take the huge quarter of cake , nod multitudinous promise , and leave Mrs. Berry to bless his good heart . 
 " so die the system ! " be Adrian 's comment in the street . " and now let prophet roar ! he die respectably in a marriage - bed , which be more than I should have foretell of the monster . meantime , " he give the cake a dramatic tap , " I will go sow nightmare . " 




 CHAPTER XXXII 

 Adrian really bear the news he have hear with creditable disinterestedness , and admirable repression of anything beneath the dignity of a philosopher . when one have attain that felicitous point of wisdom from which one see all mankind to be fool , the diminutive object may make what new move they please , one do not marvel at they : their sedateness be as comical as their frolic , and their frenzy more comical still . on this intellectual eminence the wise youth have build his castle , and he have live in it from an early period . Astonishment never shake the foundation , nor do envy of great height tempt he to relinquish the security of his stronghold , for he see none . juggler he see run up ladder that overtop he , and air - balloon scale the empyrean ; but the former come precipitately down again , and the latter be at the mercy of the wind ; while he remain tranquil on his solid unambitious ground , fit his morality to the law , his conscience to his morality , his comfort to his conscience . not that voluntarily he cut himself off from his fellow : on the contrary , his sole amusement be their society . alone he be rather dull , as a man who behold but one thing must naturally be . study of the animate variety of that one thing excite he sufficiently to think life a pleasant play ; and the faculty he have forfeit to hold his elevated position he could serenely enjoy by contemplation of they in other . thus : wonder at Master Richard 's madness : though he himself do not experience it , he be eager to mark the effect on his beloved relative . as he carry along his vindictive hunch of cake , he shape out their different attitude of amaze , bewilderment , horror ; pass by some personal chagrin in the prospect . for his patron have project a journey , commence with Paris , culminate on the Alps , and lapsing in Rome : a delightful journey to show Richard the highway of history and tear he from the risk of further ignoble fascination , that his spirit might be altogether bath in freshness and revive . this have be plan during Richard 's absence to surprise he . 
 now the dream of travel be to adrian what the love of woman be to the race of young man . it supplant that foolishness . it be his Romance , as we say ; that buoyant anticipation on which in youth we ride the air , and which , as we wax old and too heavy for our atmosphere , harden to the Hobby , which , if an obstinate animal , be a safe horse , and conduct man at a slow pace to the sexton . Adrian have never travel . he be aware that his romance be earthly and have discomfort only to be evade by the one potent talisman possess by his patron . his Alp would hardly be grand to he without an obsequious landlord in the foreground : he must recline on Mammon 's imperial cushion in order to moralize becomingly on the ancient world . the search for pleasure at the expense of discomfort , as frantic lover woo their mistress to partake the shelter of a but and batten on a crust , Adrian deem the bitterness of beggarliness . let his sweet mistress be give he in the pomp and splendour due to his superior emotion , or not at all . consequently the wise youth have long nurse an ineffectual passion , and it argue a great nature in he , that at the moment when his wish be to be crown , he should look with such slight touch of spleen at the gorgeous composite fabric of parisian cookery and roman antiquity crumble into unsubstantial mockery . assuredly very few even of the philosopher would have turn away uncomplainingly to mean delight the moment after . 
 Hippias receive the first portion of the cake . 
 he be sit by the window in his hotel , reading . he have fight down his breakfast with more than usual success , and be look forward to his dinner at the Foreys ' with less than usual timidity . 
 " ah ! glad you have   come , adrian , " he say , and expand his chest . " I be afraid I should have to ride down . this be kind of you . we will walk down together through the park . it be absolutely dangerous to walk alone in these street . my opinion be , that orange - peel last all through the year now , and will till legislation put a stop to it . I give you my word I slip on a piece of orange - peel yesterday afternoon in Piccadilly , and I think I be down ! I save myself by a miracle . " 
 " you have an appetite , I hope ? " ask Adrian . 
 " I think I shall get one , after a bit of a walk , " chirp Hippias . " yes . I think I feel hungry now . " 
 " charm to hear it , " say Adrian , and begin unpin his parcel on his knee . " how should you define Folly ? " he check the process to inquire . 
 " Hm ! " Hippias meditate ; he pride himself on be oracular when such question be address to he . " I think I should define it to be a slide . " 
 " very good definition . in other word , a piece of orange - peel ; once on it , your life and limb be in danger , and you be save by a miracle . you must present that to the Pilgrim . and the monument of folly , what would that be ? " 
 Hippias meditate anew . " all the human race on one another 's shoulder . " he chuckle at the sweep sourness of the instance . 
 " very good , " Adrian applaud , " or in default of that , some symbol of the thing , say ; such as this of which I have here bring you a chip . " 
 Adrian display the quarter of the cake . 
 " this be the monument make portable eh ? " 
 " Cake ! " cry Hippias , retreat to his chair to dramatize his intense disgust . " you be right of they that eat it . if I if I do not   mistake , " he peer at it , " the noxious composition bedizen in that way be what they call wedding - cake . it be arrant poison ! who be it you want to kill ? what be you carry such stuff about for ? " 
 Adrian ring the bell for a knife . " to present you with your due and proper portion . you will have friend and relative , and can not   be save from they , not even by miracle . it be a habit which exhibit , perhaps , the unconscious inherent cynicism of the human mind , for people who consider that they have reach the acme of mundane felicity , to distribute this token of esteem to their friend , with the object probably "   he take the knife from a waiter and go to the table to slice the cake   " of enable those friend   these edifice require very delicate incision each particular currant and subtle condiment hang to its neighbour a wedding - cake be evidently the most highly civilized of cake , and partake of the evil as well as the advantage of civilization !   I be say , they send we these love - token , no doubt   we shall have to weigh out the crumb , if each be to have his fair share   that we may the well estimate their state of bliss by pass some hour in purgatory . this , as far as I can apportion it without weight and scale , be your share , my uncle ! " 
 he push the corner of the table bear the cake towards Hippias . 
 " get away ! " Hippias vehemently motion , and start from his chair . " I will have none of it , I tell you ! it be death ! it be fifty time bad than that beastly compound Christmas pudding ! what fool have be do this , then ? who dare send I cake ? I ! it be an insult . " 
 " you be not compel to eat any before dinner , " say Adrian , point the corner of the table after he , " but your share you must take , and appear to consume . one who have do so much to bring about the marriage can not in conscience refuse his allotment of the fruit . Maidens , I hear , first cook it under their pillow , and extract nuptial dream therefrom say to be of a light class , take that way . it be a capital cake , and , upon my honour , you have help to make it you have indeed ! so here it be . " 
 the table again go at Hippias . he run nimbly round it , and fling himself on a sofa exhaust , cry : " there ! ... my appetite be go for to - day ! " 
 " then shall I tell Richard that you will not   touch a morsel of his cake ? " say Adrian , lean on his two hand over the table and look at his uncle . 
 " Richard ? " 
 " yes , your nephew : my cousin : Richard ! your companion since you have   be in town . he be marry , you know . marry this morning at Kensington parish church , by licence , at half - past eleven of the clock , or twenty to . marry , and go to spend his honeymoon in the Isle of Wight , a very delectable place for a month 's residence . I have to announce to you that , thank to your assistance , the experiment be launch , sir ! " 
 " Richard marry ! " 
 there be something to think and to say in objection to it , but the wit of poor Hippias be soften by the shock . his hand travel half - way to his forehead , spread out to smooth the surface of that seat of reason , and then fall . 
 " surely you know all about it ? you be so anxious to have he in town under your charge .... " 
 " married ? " Hippias jump up he have it . " why , he be under age ! he be an infant . " 
 " so he be . but the infant be not the less married . fib like a man and pay your fee what do it matter ? any one who be breeched can obtain a licence in our noble country . and the interest of morality demand that it should not be difficult . be it true can you persuade anybody that you have know nothing about it ? " 
 " ha ! infamous joke ! I wish , sir , you would play your prank on somebody else , " say Hippias , sternly , as he sink back on the sofa . " you have   do I up for the day , I can assure you . " 
 Adrian sit down to instil belief by gentle degree , and put an artistic finish to the work . he have the gratification of pass his uncle through varied contortion , and at last Hippias perspire in conviction , and exclaim , " this account for his conduct to I . that boy must have a cunning nothing short of infernal ! I feel ... I feel it just here , he draw a hand along his midriff . 
 " I be not equal to this world of fool , " he add faintly , and shut his eye . " no , I can not   dine . Eat ? ha ! ... no . go without I ! " 
 shortly after , Hippias go to bed , say to himself , as he undress , " see what come of our fine scheme ! Poor Austin ! " and as the pillow swell over his ear , " I be not sure that a day 's fast will not   do I good . " the Dyspepsy have buy his philosophy at a heavy price ; he have a right to use it . 
 Adrian resume the procession of the cake . 
 he sight his melancholy uncle Algernon hunt an appetite in the row , and look as if the hope ahead of he be also one - legged . the Captain do not pass with out query the ungainly parcel . 
 " I hope I carry it ostentatiously enough ? " say Adrian . 
 " enclose be wherewithal to quiet the alarm of the land . now may the maid and wife of Merry England sleep secure . I have half a mind to fix it on a pole , and engage a band to parade it . this be our dear Richard 's wedding - cake . marry at half - past eleven this morning , by licence , at the Kensington parish church ; his own ring be lose he employ the ring of his beautiful bride 's lachrymose land - lady , she stand adjacent by the altar . his farewell to you as a bachelor , and her as a maid , you can claim on the spot if you think proper , and digest accord to your power . " 
 Algernon let off steam in a whistle . " Thompson , the solicitor 's daughter ! " he say . " I meet they the other day , somewhere about here . he introduce I to she . a pretty little baggage . 
 " no . " Adrian set he right . " ' tis a Miss Desborough , a Roman Catholic dairymaid . remind one of pastoral England in the time of the Plantagenets ! he be quite equal to introduce she as Thompson 's daughter , and himself as Beelzebub 's son . however , the wild animal be in Hymen 's chain , and the cake be cut . will you have your morsel ? " 
 " oh , by all mean ! not now . " Algernon have an unwonted air of reflection . " Father know it ? " 
 " not yet . he will to - night by nine o'clock . " 
 " then I must see he by seven . do not   say you meet I . " he nod , and prick his horse . 
 " want money ! " say Adrian , put the combustible he carry once more in motion . 
 the woman be the crown joy of his contemplative mind . he have reserve they for his final discharge . dear demonstrative creature ! Dyspepsia would not weaken their poignant outcry , or self - interest check their fainting fit . on the generic woman one could calculate . well might the Pilgrim 's Scrip say of she that , " she be always at Nature 's breast " ; not intend it as a compliment . each woman be Eve throughout the age ; whereas the Pilgrim would have we believe that the Adam in man have become wary , if not wise ; and weak as he be , have learn a lesson from time . probably the Pilgrim 's meaning may be take to be , that Man grow , and Woman do not . 
 at any rate , Adrian hop for such natural chorus as you hear in the nursery when a bauble be lose . he be awake to Mrs. Doria 's maternal predestination , and guess that Clare stand ready with the good form of filial obedience . they be only a poor couple to gratify his mephistophelian humour , to be sure , but Mrs. Doria be equal to twenty , and they would proclaim the diverse way with which maidenhood and womanhood take disappointment , while the surround Forey girl and other female of the family assembly be expect to develop the fine shade and taper edge of an agitation to which no woman could be cold . 
 all go well . he manage cleverly to leave the cake unchallenged in a conspicuous part of the drawing - room , and step gaily down to dinner . much of the conversation advert to Richard . Mrs. Doria ask he if he have see the youth , or hear of he . 
 " seen he ? no ! hear of he ? yes ! " say Adrian . " I have hear of he . I hear that he be sublimely happy , and have eat such a breakfast that dinner be impossible ; claret and cold chicken , cake and " 
 " Cake at breakfast ! " they all interject . 
 " that seem to be his fancy just now . " 
 " what an extraordinary taste ! " 
 " you know , he be educate on a system . " 
 one fast young male Forey ally the System and the cake in a miserable pun . Adrian , a hater of pun , look at he , and hold the table silent , as if he be go to speak ; but he say nothing , and the young gentleman vanish from the conversation in a blush , extinguish by his own spark . 
 Mrs. Doria peevishly exclaim , " oh ! fish - cake , I suppose ! I wish he understand a little well the obligation of relationship . " 
 " whether he understand they , I can not   say , " observe Adrian , " but I assure you he be very energetic in extend they . " 
 the wise youth talk innuendo whenever he have an opportunity , that his dear relative might be render sufficiently inflammable by and by at the aspect of the cake ; but he be not think more than commonly mysterious and deep . 
 " be his appointment at the house of those Grandison people ? " Mrs. Doria ask , with a hostile upper - lip . 
 Adrian warm the blindfold party by reply , " do they keep a beadle at the door ? " 
 Mrs. Doria 's animosity to Mrs. Grandison make she treat this as a piece of satirical ingenuousness . " I daresay they do , " she say . 
 " and a curate on hand ? " 
 " oh , I should think a dozen ! " 
 Old Mr. Forey advise his pun grandson Clarence to give that house a wide berth , where he might be dispose of and dish - up at a moment 's notice , and the scent run off at a jest . 
 the Foreys give good dinner , and with the old gentleman the excellent old fashion remain in permanence of troop off the lady as soon as they have take their sustenance and just exchange a smile with the flower and the dessert , when they rise to fade with a beautiful accord , and the gallant male breathe under easy waistcoat , and settle to the business of the table , sure that an hour for unbosom and imbibing be their own . Adrian take a chair by Brandon Forey , a barrister of standing . 
 " I want to ask you , " he say , " whether an infant in law can legally bind himself . " 
 " if he be old enough to affix his signature to an instrument , I suppose he can , " yawn Brandon . 
 " be he responsible for his act ? " 
 " I have   no doubt we could hang he . " 
 " then what he could do for himself , you could do for he ? " 
 " not quite so much ; pretty near . " 
 " for instance , he can marry ? " 
 " that be not a criminal case , you know . " 
 " and the marriage be valid ? " 
 " you can dispute it . " 
 " yes , and the Greeks and the Trojans can fight . it hold then ? " 
 " both water and fire ! " 
 the patriarch of the table sing out to Adrian that he stop the vigorous circulation of the claret . 
 " dear I , sir ! " say Adrian , " I beg pardon . the circumstance must excuse I . the fact be , my cousin Richard get married to a dairymaid this morning , and I want to know whether it hold in law . " 
 it be amusing to watch the manly coolness with which the announcement be take . nothing be hear more energetic than , " deuce he have ! " and , " a dairymaid ! " 
 " I think it well to let the lady dine in peace , " Adrian continue . " I want to be able to console my aunt " 
 " well , but well , but , " the old gentleman , much the most excited , puff " eh , Brandon ? he be a boy , this young ass ! do you mean to tell I a boy can go and marry when he please , and any troll he please , and the marriage be good ? if I think that I would turn every woman off my premise . I would ! from the housekeeper to the scullery - maid . I would have no woman near he till till " 
 " till the young greenhorn be grey , sir ? " suggest Brandon . 
 " till he know what woman be make of , sir ! " the old gentleman finish his sentence vehemently . " what , d'ye think , will Feverel say to it , Mr. Adrian ? " 
 " he have be try the very system you have propose sir one that do not reckon on the powerful action of curiosity on the juvenile intelligence . I be afraid it be the very bad way of solve the problem . " 
 " of course it be , " say Clarence . " none but a fool ! " 
 " at your age , " Adrian relieve his embarrassment , " it be natural , my dear Clarence , that you should consider the idea of an isolated or imprison manhood something monstrous , and we do not expect you to see what amount of wisdom it contain . you follow one extreme , and we the other . I do not   say that a middle course exist . the history of mankind show our painful effort to find one , but they have invariably resolve themselves into asceticism , or laxity , acting and react . the moral question be , if a naughty little man , by reason of his naughtiness , release himself from foolishness , do a foolish little man , by reason of his foolishness , save himself from naughtiness ? " 
 a discussion , peculiar to man of the world , succeed the laugh at Mr. Clarence . then coffee be hand round and the footman inform Adrian , in a low voice , that Mrs. Doria Forey particularly wish to speak with he . adrian prefer not to go in alone . " very well , " he say , and sip his coffee . they talk on , sound the depth of law in Brandon Forey , and receive nought but hollow echo from that profound cavity . he would not affirm that the marriage be invalid : he would not affirm that it could not be annul . he think not : still he think it would be worth try . a consummated and a non - consummated union be two different thing .... 
 " dear I ! " say Adrian , " do the Law recognize that ? why , that be almost human ! " 
 another message be bring to Adrian that Mrs. Doria Forey very particularly wish to speak with he . 
 " what can be the matter ? " he exclaim , please to have his faith in woman strengthen . the cake have explode , no doubt . 
 so it prove , when the gentleman join the fair society . all the young lady stand about the table , whereon the cake stand display , gap be leave for those sit to feast their vision , and intrude the comment and speculation continually arise from fresh shock of wonder at the unaccountable apparition . enter with the half - guilty air of man who know they have come from a gross atmosphere , the gallant male also range themselves round the common object of curiosity . 
 " here ! adrian ! " Mrs. Doria cry . " where be adrian ? pray , come here . tell I ! where do this cake come from ? whose be it ? what do it do here ? you know all about it , for you bring it . Clare see you bring it into the room . what do it mean ? I insist upon a direct answer . now do not make I impatient , Adrian . " 
 certainly Mrs. Doria be equal to twenty . by her concentrated rapidity and volcanic complexion it be evident that suspicion have kindle . 
 " I be really bind to bring it , " Adrian protest . 
 " answer I ! " 
 the wise youth bow : " categorically . this cake come from the house of a person , a female , of the name of Berry . it belong to you partly , partly to I , partly to Clare , and to the rest of our family , on the principle of equal division for which purpose it be present .... " 
 " yes ! speak ! " 
 " it mean , my dear aunt , what that kind of cake usually do mean . " 
 " this , then , be the Breakfast ! and the ring ! Adrian ! where be Richard ? " 
 Mrs. Doria still cling to unbelief in the monstrous horror . 
 but when Adrian tell she that Richard have leave town , her struggle hope sink . " the wretched boy have ruin himself ! " she say , and sit down tremble . 
 oh ! that system ! the delicate vituperation gentle lady use instead of oath , Mrs. Doria shower on that system . she hesitate not to say that her brother have get what he deserve . opinionate , morbid , weak , justice have overtake he . now he would see ! but at what a price ! at what a sacrifice ! 
 Mrs. Doria , command Adrian to confirm her fear . 
 sadly the wise youth recapitulate Berry 's word . " he be marry this morning at half - past eleven of the clock , or twenty to twelve , by licence , at the Kensington parish church . " 
 " then that be his appointment ! " Mrs. Doria murmur . 
 " that be the cake for breakfast ! " breathe a second of her sex . 
 " and it be his ring ! " exclaim a third . 
 the man be silent , and make long face . 
 Clare stand cold and sedate . she and her mother avoid each other 's eye . 
 " be it that abominable country person , Adrian ? " 
 " the happy damsel be , I regret to say , the Papist dairymaid , " say Adrian , in sorrowful but deliberate accent . 
 then arise a feminine hum , in the midst of which Mrs. Doria cry , " Brandon ! " she be a woman of energy . her thought resolve to action spontaneously . 
 " Brandon , " she draw the barrister a little aside , " can they not be follow , and separate ? I want your advice . can not we separate they ? a boy ! it be really shameful if he should be allow to fall into the toil of a designing creature to ruin himself irrevocably . can we not , Brandon ? " 
 the worthy barrister feel inclined to laugh , but he answer her entreaty : " from what I hear of the young groom I should imagine the office perilous . " 
 " I be speak of law , Brandon . can we not obtain an order from one of your Courts to pursue they and separate they instantly ? " 
 " this evening ? " 
 " yes ! " 
 Brandon be sorry to say she decidedly could not . 
 " you might call on one of your Judges , Brandon . " 
 Brandon assure she that the Judges be a hard - worked race , and to a man sleep heavily after dinner . 
 " will you do so to - morrow , the first thing in the morning ? will you promise I to do so , Brandon ? or a magistrate ! a magistrate would send a policeman after they . my dear Brandon ! I beg I beg you to assist we in this dreadful extremity . it will be the death of my poor brother . I believe he would forgive anything but this . you have no idea what his notion be of blood . " 
 Brandon tip Adrian a significant nod to step in and aid . 
 " what be it , aunt ? " ask the wise youth . " you want they follow and tear asunder by wild policeman ? " 
 " to - morrow ! " Brandon queerly interpose . 
 " will not   that be just too late ? " Adrian suggest . 
 Mrs. Doria , sigh out her last spark of hope . 
 " you see , " say Adrian .... 
 " yes ! yes ! " Mrs. Doria do not require any of his elucidation . " pray be quiet , adrian , and let I speak . Brandon ! it can not be ! it be quite impossible ! can you stand there and tell I that boy be legally marry ? I never will believe it ! the law can not be so shamefully bad as to permit a boy a mere child to do such absurd thing . Grandpapa ! " she beckon to the old gentleman . " Grandpapa ! pray do make Brandon speak . these lawyer never will . he might stop it , if he would . if I be a man , do you think I would stand here ? " 
 " well , my dear , " the old gentleman toddle to compose she , " I be quite of your opinion . I believe he know no more than you or i. my belief be they none of they know anything till they join issue and go into Court . I want to see a few female lawyer . " 
 " to encourage the bankrupt perruquier , sir ? " say Adrian . " they would have to keep a large supply of wig on hand . " 
 " and you can jest , Adrian ! " his aunt reproach he . " but I will not be beat . I know I be firmly convinced that no law would ever allow a boy to disgrace his family and ruin himself like that , and nothing shall persuade I that it be so . now , tell I , Brandon , and pray do speak in answer to my question , and please to forget you be deal with a woman . can my nephew be rescue from the consequence of his folly ? be what he have do legitimate ? be he bind for life by what he have do while a boy ? 
 " well a , " Brandon breathe through his tooth . " a hm ! the matter 's so very delicate , you see , Helen . " 
 " you be to forget that , " Adrian remark . 
 " a hm ! well ! " pursue Brandon . " perhaps if you could arrest and divide they before nightfall , and make affidavit of certain fact " ... 
 " yes ? " the eager woman hasten his lag mouth . 
 " well ... hm ! a ... in that case ... a ... or if a lunatic , you could prove he to have be of unsound mind . " ... 
 " oh ! there be no doubt of his madness on my mind , Brandon . " 
 " yes ! well ! in that case ... or if of different religious persuasion " ... 
 " she be a Catholic ! " Mrs. Doria joyfully interject . 
 " yes ! well ! in that case ... objection might be take to the form of the marriage ... might be prove fictitious ... or if he be under , say , eighteen year " ... 
 " he can not   be much more , " cry Mrs. Doria . " I think , " she appear to reflect , and then falter imploringly to Adrian , " what be Richard 's age ? " 
 the kind wise youth could not find it in his heart to strike away the phantom straw she catch at . 
 " oh ! about that , I should fancy , " he mutter ; and find it necessary at the same time to duck and turn his head for concealment . Mrs. Doria surpass his expectation . 
 " yes I well , then ... " Brandon be resume with a shrug , which be mean to say he still pledge himself to nothing , when Clare 's voice be hear from out the buzz circle of her cousin : " Richard be nineteen year and six month old to - day , mama . " 
 " nonsense , child . " 
 " he be , mama . " Clare 's voice be very steadfast . 
 " Nonsense , I tell you . how can you know ? " 
 " Richard be one year and nine month old than I , mama . " 
 Mrs. Doria fight the fact by year and finally by month . Clare be too strong for she . 
 " Singular child ! " she mentally apostrophize the girl who scornfully reject straw while drown . 
 " but there be the religion still ! " she comfort herself , and sit down to cogitate . 
 the man smile and look vacuous . 
 Music be propose . there be time when soft music hath not charm ; when it be put to as base us as Imperial Caesar 's dust and be take to fill horrid pause . Angelica Forey thump the piano , and sing : " I be a laugh Gitana , ha - ha ! ha - ha ! " Matilda Forey and her cousin Mary Branksburne wed their voice , and songfully incite all young people to Haste to the bower that love have build , and defy the wise one of the world ; but the wise one of the world be in a majority there , and very few place of assembly will be find where they be not ; so the glow appeal of the british ballad - monger pass into the bosom of the emptiness he address . Clare be ask to entertain the company . the singular child calmly march to the instrument , and turn over the appropriate illustration to the ballad - monger 's repertory . 
 Clare sing a little irish air . her duty do , she march from the piano . mother be rarely deceive by their daughter in these matter ; but Clare deceive her mother ; and Mrs. Doria only persist in feel an agony of pity for her child , that she might the more warrantably pity herself a not uncommon form of the emotion , for there be no juggler like that heart the ballad - monger put into our mouth so boldly . remember that she see year of self - denial , year of a ripen scheme , render fruitless in a minute , and by the system which have almost reduce she to the condition of constitutional hypocrite . she have enough of bitterness to brood over , and some excuse for self - pity . 
 still , even when she be cool , Mrs. Doria 's energetic nature prevent she from give up . straw be straw , and the frailer they be the hard she clutch they . 
 she rise from her chair , and leave the room , call to Adrian to follow she . 
 " Adrian , " she say , turn upon he in the passage , " you mention a house where this horrible cake ... where he be this morning . I desire you to take I to that woman immediately . " 
 the wise youth have not bargain for personal servitude . he have hop he should be in time for the last act of the opera that night , after enjoy the comedy of real life . 
 " my dear aunt" ... he be begin to insinuate . 
 " order a cab to be send for , and get your hat , " say Mrs. Doria . 
 there be nothing for it but to obey . he stamp his assent to the Pilgrim 's dictum , that woman be practical creature , and now reflect on his own account , that relationship to a young fool may be a vexation and a nuisance . however , Mrs. Doria compensate he . 
 what Mrs. Doria intend to do , the practical creature do not plainly know ; but her energy positively demand to be use in some way or other , and her instinct direct she to the offender on whom she could use it in wrath . she want somebody to be angry with , somebody to abuse . she dare not abuse her brother to his face : he she would have to console . Adrian be a fellow - hypocrite to the System , and would , she be aware , bring she into painfully delicate , albeit highly philosophic , ground by a discussion of the case . so she drive to Bessy Berry simply to inquire whither her nephew have fly . 
 when a soft woman , and that soft woman a sinner , be match with a woman of energy , she do not show much fight , and she meet no mercy . Bessy Berry 's creditor come to she in female form that night . she then behold it in all its terror . Hitherto it have appear to she as a male , a disembody spirit of her imagination possess male attribute , and the peculiar male characteristic of be move , and ultimately silence , by tear . as female , her creditor be terrible indeed . still , have it not be a late hour , Bessy Berry would have die rather than speak openly that her babe have speed to make their nest in the Isle of Wight . they have a long start , they be out of the reach of pursuer , they be safe , and she tell what she have to tell . she tell more than be wise of she to tell . she make mention of her early service in the family , and of her little pension . alas ! her little pension ! her creditor have come expect no payment come ; as creditor be will not in such mood , just to take it out of she to employ the familiar term . at once Mrs. Doria pounce upon the pension . 
 " that , of course , you know be at an end , " she say in the calm manner , and Berry do not plead for the little bit of bread to she . she only ask a little consideration for her feeling . 
 true admirer of woman have well stand aside from the scene . undoubtedly it be very sad for Adrian to be compel to witness it . Mrs. Doria be not generous . the Pilgrim may be wrong about the sex not grow ; but its fashion of conduct warfare we must allow to be barbarous , and accord to what be deem the pristine , or wild cat , method . Ruin , nothing short of it , accompany poor Berry to her bed that night , and her character bleed till morning on her pillow . 
 the scene over , Adrian reconducte Mrs. Doria to her home . mouse have be at the cake during her absence apparently . the lady and gentleman present put it on the greedy mouse , who be accuse of have gorge and go to bed . 
 " I be sure they be quite welcome , " say Mrs. Doria . " it be a farce , this marriage , and Adrian have quite come to my way of thinking . I would not touch an atom of it . why , they be marry in a married woman 's ring ! can that be legal , as you call it ? oh , I be convinced ! do not   tell I . Austin will be in town to - morrow , and if he be true to his principle , he will instantly adopt measure to rescue his son from infamy . I want no legal advice . I go upon common sense , common decency . this marriage be false . " 
 Mrs. Doria 's fine scheme have become so much a part of her life , that she could not give it up . she take Clare to her bed , and caress and weep over she , as she would not have do have she know the singular child , say , " Poor Richard ! my dear poor boy ! we must save he , Clare ! we must save he ! " of the two the mother show the great want of iron on this occasion . Clare lie in her arm rigid and emotionless , with one of her hand tight - locked . all she say be : " I know it in the morning , mama . " she sleep clasp Richard 's nuptial ring . 
 by this time all specially concerned in the System know it . the honeymoon be shore placidly above they . be not happiness like another circulate medium ? when we have a very great deal of it , some poor heart be ache for what be take away from they . when we have go out and seize it on the highway , certain inscrutable law be sure to be at work to bring we to the criminal bar , soon or later . who know the honeymoon that do not steal somebody 's sweetness ? Richard Turpin go forth , sing " money or life " to the world : Richard Feverel have do the same , substitute " happiness " for " money , " frequently synonyms . the coin he want he would have , and be just as much a highway robber as his fellow Dick , so that those who have fail to recognize he as a hero before , may now regard he in that light . meanwhile the world he have squeeze look exceedingly patient and beautiful . his coin chink delicious music to he . nature and the order of thing on earth have no warm admirer than a jolly brigand or a young man make happy by the Jews . 




 CHAPTER XXXIII 

 and now the author of the System be on trial under the eye of the lady who love he . what so kind as they ? yet be they very rigorous , those soft watchful woman 's eye . if you be below the measure they have make of you , you will feel it in the fulness of time . she can not but show you that she take you for a giant , and have have to come down a bit . you feel yourself strangely diminish in those sweet mirror , till at last they drop on you complacently level . but , oh beware , vain man , of ever wax enamour of that wonderful elongation of a male creature you see reflect in her adore upcast orb ! beware of assist to delude she ! a woman who be not quite a fool will forgive your being but a man , if you be surely that : she will haply learn to acknowledge that no mortal tailor could have fit that figure she make of you respectably , and that practically   though she sigh to think it   her ideal of you be on the pattern of an overgrown charity - boy in the regulation jacket and breech . for this she first scorn the narrow capacity of the tailor , and then smile at herself . but shouldst thou , when the hour say plainly , be thyself , and the woman be willing to take thee as thou art , shouldst thou still aspire to be that thing of shank and wrest , wilt thou not seem contemptible as well as ridiculous ? and when the fall come , will it not be flat on thy face , instead of to the common height of man ? you may fall mile below her measure of you , and be safe : nothing be damage save an overgrown charity - boy ; but if you fall below the common height of man , you must make up your mind to see her rustle her gown , spy at the look - glass , and transfer her allegiance . the moral of which be , that if we pretend to be what we be not , woman , for whose amusement the farce be perform , will find we out and punish we for it . and it be usually the end of a sentimental dalliance . 
 have Sir Austin give vent to the pain and wrath it be natural he should feel , he might have go to unphilosophic excess , and , however much he lower his reputation as a sage , Lady Blandish would have excuse he : she would not have love he less for see he close . but the poor gentleman task his soul and stretch his muscle to act up to her conception of he . he , a man of science in life , who be bind to be surprise by nothing in nature , it be not for he to do more than lift his eyebrow and draw in his lip at the news deliver by Ripton Thompson , that ill bird at Raynham . 
 all he say , after Ripton have hand the letter and carry his penitential headache to bed , be : " you see , Emmeline , it be useless to base any system on a human being . " 
 a very philosophical remark for one who have be busily at work build for nearly twenty year . too philosophical to seem genuine . it reveal where the blow strike sharpest . Richard be no long the Richard of his creation his pride and his joy but simply a human be with the rest . the bright star have sink among the mass . 
 and yet , what have the young man do ? and in what have the System fail ? 
 the lady could not but ask herself this , while she condole with the offended father . 
 " my friend , " she say , tenderly take his hand before she retire , " I know how deeply you must be grieve . I know what your disappointment must be . I do not beg of you to forgive he now . you can not doubt his love for this young person , and accord to his light , have he not behave honourably , and as you would have wish , rather than bring she to shame ? you will think of that . it have be an accident a misfortune a terrible misfortune " ... 
 " the God of this world be in the machine not out of it , " Sir Austin interrupt she , and press her hand to get the good - night over . 
 at any other time her mind would have be arrest to admire the phrase ; now it seem perverse , vain , false , and she be tempt to turn the meaning that be in it against himself , much as she pity he . 
 " you know , Emmeline , " he add , " I believe very little in the fortune , or misfortune , to which man attribute their success and revers . they be useful impersonation to novelist ; but my opinion be sufficiently high of flesh and blood to believe that we make our own history without intervention . accident ? terrible misfortune ? what be they ? good - night . " 
 " good - night , " she say , look sad and troubled . " when I say , ' misfortune , ' I mean , of course , that he be to blame ; but shall I leave you his letter to I ? " 
 " I think I have enough to meditate upon , " he reply , coldly bow . 
 " God bless you , " she whisper . " and may I say it ? do not shut your heart . " 
 he assure she that he hop not to do so and the moment she be go he set about shut it as tight as he could . 
 if , instead of say , base no system on a human being , he have say , never experimentalize with one , he would have be near the truth of his own case . he have experiment on humanity in the person of the son he love as his life , and at once , when the experiment appear to have fail , all humanity 's failing fall on the shoulder of his son . Richard 's parting laugh in the train it be explicable now : it sound in his ear like the mockery of this base nature of our at every endeavour to exalt and chasten it . the young man have plot this . from step to step Sir Austin trace the plot . the curious mask he have wear since his illness ; the selection of his incapable uncle Hippias for a companion in preference to Adrian ; it be an evident , well - perfect plot . that hideous laugh would not be silence : Base , like the rest , treacherous , a creature of passion use his ability solely to gratify they never surely have humanity such chance as in he ! a manichaean tendency , from which the sententious eulogist of nature have be struggle for year   and which be partly at the bottom of the System , now begin to cloud and usurp dominion of his mind . as he sit alone in the forlorn dead - hush of his library , he see the devil . 
 how be we to know when we be at the head and fountain of the fate of they we love ? 
 there by the spring of Richard 's future , his father sit : and the devil say to he : " only be quiet : do nothing : resolutely do nothing : your object now be to keep a brave face to the world , so that all may know you superior to this human nature that have deceive you . for it be the shameless deception , not the marriage , that have wound you . " 
 " ay ! " answer the baronet , " the shameless deception , not the marriage : wicked and ruinous as it must be ; a destroyer of my tender hope ! my dear scheme ! not the marriage the shameless deception ! " and he crumple up his son 's letter to he , and toss it into the fire . 
 how be we to distinguish the dark chief of the Manichaeans when he talk our own thought to we ? 
 far he whisper , " and your system : if you would be brave to the world , have courage to cast the dream of it out of you : relinquish an impossible project ; see it as it be dead : too good for man ! " 
 " ay ! " mutter the baronet : " all who would save they perish on the Cross ! " 
 and so he sit nurse the devil . 
 by and by he take his lamp , and put on the old cloak and cap , and go to gaze at Ripton . that exhausted debauchee and youth without a destiny sleep a dead sleep . a handkerchief be bind about his forehead , and his helpless sunken chin and snore nose project up the pillow , make he look absurdly piteous . the baronet remember how often he have compare his boy with this one : his own bright boy ! and where be the difference between they ? 
 " mere outward gilding ! " say his familiar . 
 " yes , " he respond , " I daresay this one never positively plot to deceive his father : he follow his appetite unchecked , and be internally the sounder of the two . " 
 Ripton , with his sunken chin and snore nose under the light of the lamp , stand for human nature , honest , however abject . 
 " Miss Random , I fear very much , be a necessary establishment ! " whisper the monitor . 
 " do the evil in we demand its natural food , or it corrupt the whole ? " ejaculate Sir Austin . " and be no angel of avail till that be draw off ? and be that our conflict to see whether we can escape the contagion of its embrace , and come uncorrupted out of that ? " 
 " the world be wise in its way , " say the voice . 
 " though it look on itself through Port wine ? " he suggest , remember his lawyer Thompson . 
 " wise in not seek to be too wise , " say the voice . 
 " and get intoxicate on its drug of comfort ! " 
 " human nature be weak . " 
 " and Miss Random be an establishment , and Wild Oats an institution ! " 
 " it always have be so . " 
 " and always will be ? " 
 " so I fear ! in spite of your very noble effort . " 
 " and lead whither ? and end where ? " 
 Richard 's laugh , take up by horrid reverberation , as it be through the length of the Lower Halls , reply . 
 this colloquy of two voice in a brain be conclude by Sir Austin ask again if there be no actual difference between the flower of his hope and yonder drunken weed , and receive for answer that there be a decided dissimilarity in the smell of the couple ; become cognizant of which he retreat . 
 Sir Austin do not battle with the tempter . he take he into his bosom at once , as if he have be ripe for he , and receive his suggestion and bow to his dictate . because he suffer , and decreed that he would suffer silently , and be the only sufferer , it seem to he that he be great - minded in his calamity . he have stand against the world . the world have beat he . what then ? he must shut his heart and mask his face ; that be all . to be far in advance of the mass , be as fruitless to mankind , he reflect , as straggle in the rear . for how do we know that they move behind we at all , or move in our track ? what we win for they be lose ; and where we be overthrow we lie ! 
 it be thus that a fine mind and a fine heart at the bound of a nature not great , choose to colour his retrogression and countenance his shortcoming ; and it be thus that he set about ruin the work he have do . he might well say , as he once do , that there be hour when the clear soul become a cunning fox . for a grief that be private and peculiar , he unhesitatingly cast the blame upon humanity ; just as he have accuse it in the period of what he term his own ordeal . how have he bear that ? by mask his face . and he prepare the ordeal for his son by do the same . this be by no mean his idea of a man 's duty in tribulation , about which he could be strenuously eloquent . 
 but it be his instinct so to act , and in time of trial great nature alone be not at the mercy of their instinct . moreover it would cost he pain to mask his face ; pain bad than that he endure when there still remain an object for he to open his heart to in proportion ; and he always repose upon the Spartan comfort of bear pain and be passive . " do nothing , " say the devil he nurse ; which mean in his case , " take I into you and do not   cast I out . " excellent and sane be the outburst of wrath to man , when it stop short of slaughter . for who that lock it up to eat in solitary , can say that it be consume ? Sir Austin have as weak a digestion for wrath , as poor Hippias for a green duckling . instead of eat it , it eat he . the wild beast in he be not the less deadly because it do not roar , and the devil in he not the less active because he resolve to do nothing . 
 he sit at the spring of Richard 's future , in the forlorn dead - hush of his library there , hear the cinder click in the extinguished fire , and that hum stillness in which one may fancy one hear the midnight fate busily stir their embryo . the lamp glow mildly on the bust of Chatham . 
 toward morning a gentle knock fall at his door . Lady Blandish glide in . with hasty step she come straight to he , and take both his hand . 
 " my friend , " she say , speak tearfully , and tremble , " I fear I should find you here . I could not sleep . how be it with you ? " 
 " well ! emmeline , well ! " he reply , torture his brow to fix the mask . 
 he wish it have be Adrian who have come to he . he have an extraordinary longing for Adrian 's society . he know that the wise youth would divine how to treat he , and he mentally confess to just enough weakness to demand a certain kind of management . besides , Adrian , he have not a doubt , would accept he entirely as he seem , and not pester he in any way by try to unlock his heart ; whereas a woman , he fear , would be wax too womanly , and swell from tear and supplication to a scene , of all thing abhor by he the most . so he rap the floor with his foot , and give the lady no very welcome face when he say it be well with he . 
 she sit down by his side , still hold one hand firmly , and softly detain the other . 
 " oh , my friend ! may I believe you ? may I speak to you ? " she lean close to he . " you know my heart . I have no well ambition than to be your friend . surely I divide your grief , and may I not claim your confidence ? who have weep more over your great and dreadful sorrow ? I would not have come to you , but I do believe that sorrow share relieve the burden , and it be now that you may feel a woman 's aid , and something of what a woman could be to you .... " 
 " be assure , " he gravely say , " I thank you , Emmeline , for your intention . " 
 " no , no ! not for my intention ! and do not thank I . think of he ... think of your dear boy ... our Richard , as we have call he . oh ! do not think it a foolish superstition of mine , but I have have a thought this night that have keep I in torment till I rise to speak to you ... tell I first you have forgive he . " 
 " a father bear no malice to his son , Emmeline . " 
 " your heart have forgive he ? " 
 " my heart have take what he give . " 
 " and quite forgive he ? " 
 " you will hear no complaint of mine . " 
 the lady pause despondingly , and look at he in a wistful manner , say with a sigh , " yes ! I know how noble you be , and different from other ! " 
 he draw one of his hand from her relaxed hold . 
 " you ought to be in bed , Emmeline . " 
 " I can not sleep . " 
 " go , and talk to I another time . " 
 " no , it must be now . you have help I when I struggle to rise into a clear world , and I think , humble as I be , I can help you now . I have have a thought this night that if you do not pray for he and bless he ... it will end miserably . my friend , have you do so ? " 
 he be sting and offend , and could hardly help show it in spite of his mask . 
 " have you do so , Austin ? " 
 " this be assuredly a new way of commit father to the folly of their son , Emmeline ! " 
 " no , not that . but will you pray for your boy , and bless he , before the day come ? " 
 he restrain himself to pronounce his word calmly : " and I must do this , or it will end in misery ? how else can it end ? can I save he from the seed he have sow ? consider , Emmeline , what you say . he have repeat his cousin 's sin . you see the end of that . " 
 " oh , so different ! this young person be not , be not of the class poor Austin Wentworth ally himself to . indeed it be different . and he be just and admit his nobleness . I fancy you do . this young person have great beauty , she have the element of good breeding , she indeed I think , have she be in another position , you would not have look upon she unfavourably . " 
 " she may be too good for my son ! " the baronet speak with sublime bitterness . 
 " no woman be too good for Richard , and you know it . " 
 " pass she . " 
 " yes , I will speak only of he . he meet she by a fatal accident . we think his love dead , and so do he till he see she again . he meet she , he think we be plot against he , he think he should lose she for ever , and be the madness of an hour he do this .... " 
 " my Emmeline plead bravely for clandestine match . " 
 " ah ! do not trifle , my friend . say : would you have have he act as young man in his position generally do to young woman beneath they ? " 
 Sir Austin do not like the question . it probe he very severely . 
 " you mean , " he say , " that father must fold their arm , and either submit to infamous marriage , or have these creature ruin . " 
 " I do not mean that , " exclaim the lady , strive for what she do mean , and how to express it . " I mean that he love she . be it not a madness at his age ? but what I chiefly mean be save he from the consequence . no , you shall not withdraw your hand . think of his pride , his sensitiveness , his great wild nature wild when he be set wrong : think how intense it be , set upon love ; think , my friend , do not forget his love for you . " 
 Sir Austin smile an admirable smile of pity . 
 " that I should save he , or any one , from consequence , be ask more than the order of thing will allow to you , Emmeline , and be not in the disposition of this world . I can not . consequence be the natural offspring of act . my child , you be talk sentiment , which be the distraction of our modern age in everything a phantasmal vapour distort the image of the life we live . you ask I to give he a golden age in spite of himself . all that could be do , by keep he in the path of virtue and truth , I do . he be become a man , and as a man he must reap his own sowing . " 
 the baffled lady sigh . he sit so rigid : he speak so securely , as if wisdom be to he more than the love of his son . and yet he do love his son . feel sure that he love his son while he speak so loftily , she reverence he still , baffle as she be , and sensible that she have be quibble with . 
 " all I ask of you be to open your heart to he , " she say . 
 he keep silent . 
 " call he a man , he be , and must ever be the child of your education , my friend . " 
 " you would console I , Emmeline , with the prospect that , if he ruin himself , he spar the world of young woman . yes , that be something ! " 
 closely she scan the mask . it be impenetrable . he could meet her eye , and respond to the pressure of her hand , and smile , and not show what he feel . nor do he deem it hypocritical to seek to maintain his elevation in her soft soul , by simulate supreme philosophy over offend love . nor do he know that he have an angel with he then : a blind angel , and a weak one , but one who strike upon his chance . 
 " be I pardon for come to you ? " she say , after a pause . 
 " surely I can read my Emmeline 's intention , " he gently reply . 
 " very poor one . I feel my weakness . I can not utter half I have be think . oh , if I could ! " 
 " you speak very well , Emmeline . " 
 " at least , I be pardon ! " 
 " surely so . " 
 " and before I leave you , dear friend , shall I be forgive ? may I beg it ? will you bless he ? " 
 he be again silent . 
 " pray for he , Austin ! pray for he ere the night be over . " 
 as she speak she slide down to his foot and press his hand to her bosom . 
 the baronet be startle . in very dread of the soft fit that woo he , he push back his chair , and rise , and go to the window . 
 " it be day already ! " he say with assumed vivacity , throw open the shutter , and display the young light on the lawn . 
 Lady Blandish dry her tear as she knelt , and then join he , and glance up silently at Richard 's moon stand in wane toward the West . she hop it be because of her have be premature in plead so earnestly , that she have fail to move he , and she accuse herself more than the baronet . but in act as she have do , she have treat he as no common man , and she be compel to perceive that his heart be at present hardly superior to the heart of ordinary man , however compose his face might be , and apparently serene his wisdom . from that moment she grow critical of he , and begin to study her idol a process dangerous to idol . he , now that she seem to have relinquish the painful subject , draw to she , and as one who wish to smooth a foregone roughness , murmur : " God 's rare blessing be , after all , a good woman ! my Emmeline bear she sleepless night well . she do not shame the day . " he gaze down on she with a fondling tenderness . 
 " I could bear many , many ! " she reply , meet his eye , " and you would see I look well and well , if ... if only ... " but she have no encouragement to end the sentence . 
 perhaps he want some mute form of consolation ; perhaps the handsome placid feature of the dark - eyed dame touch he : at any rate their Platonism be advance by his put an arm about she . she feel the arm and talk of the morning . 
 thus proximate , they by and by both hear something very like a groan behind they , and look round , beheld the saurian eye . Lady Blandish smile , but the baronet 's discomposure be not to be conceal . by a strange fatality every stage of their innocent love be certain to have a human beholder . 
 " oh , I be sure I beg pardon , " Benson mumble , arrest his head in a melancholy pendulosity . he be order out of the room . 
 " and I think I shall follow he , and try to get forty wink , " say Lady Blandish . they part with a quiet squeeze of hand . 
 the baronet then call in Benson . 
 " get I my breakfast as soon as you can , " he say , regardless of the aspect of injure conscience Benson sombrely present to he . " I be go to town early . and , Benson , " he add , " you will also go to town this afternoon , or to - morrow , if it suit you , and take your book with you to Mr. Thompson . you will not return here . a provision will be make for you . you can go . " 
 the heavy butler essay to speak , but the tremendous blow and the baronet 's gesture choke he . at the door he make another effort which shake the roll of his loose skin pitiably . an impatient signal send he out dumb , and Raynham be quit of the one believer in the Great Shaddock dogma . 




 CHAPTER XXXIV 

 it be the month of July . the Solent run up green wave before a full - blow South - wester . gay little yacht bound out like foam , and flash their sail , light as sea - nymph . a crown of deep Summer blue top the fly mountain of cloud . 
 by an open window that look on the brine through nodding rose , our young bridal pair be at breakfast , regale worthily , both of they . have the Scientific Humanist observe they , he could not have contest the fact , that as a couple who have set up to be father and mother of Britons , they be do their duty . file of egg - cup with disintegrate shell bear witness to it , and they be still at work , hardly talk from rapidity of exercise . both be dress for an expedition . she have her bonnet on , and he his yachting - hat . his sleeve be turn over at the wrist , and her gown show its lining on her lap . at time a chance word might spring a laugh , but eat be the business of the hour , as I would have you to know it always will be where Cupid be in earnest . tribute flow in to they from the subject land . Neglected lie Love 's penny - whistle on which they play so prettily and charm the sphere to hear they . what do they care for the sphere , who have one another ? Come , egg ! come , bread and butter ! come , tea with sugar in it and milk ! and welcome , the jolly hour . that be a fair interpretation of the music in they just now . yonder instrument be good only for the overture . after all , what fine aspiration can lover have , than to be free man and woman in the heart of plenty ? and be it not a glorious level to have attain ? ah , wretche Scientific Humanist ! not to be by and mark the admirable sight of these young creature feed . it would have be a spell to exorcise the Manichee , methink . 
 the mighty performance come to an end , and then , with a flourish of his table - napkin , husband stand over wife , who meet he on the confident budding of her mouth . the poetry of mortal be their daily prose . be it not a glorious level to have attain ? a short , quick - blooded kiss , radiant , fresh , and honest as Aurora , and then Richard say without lack of cheer , " no letter to - day , my Lucy ! " whereat her sweet eye dwell on he a little seriously , but he cry , " never mind ! he will be come down himself some morning . he have only to know she , and all be well ! eh ? " and so say he put a hand beneath her chin , and seem to frame her fair face in fancy , she smile up to be look at . 
 " but one thing I do want to ask my darling , " say Lucy , and drop into his bosom with hand of petition . " take I on board his yacht with he to - day not leave I with those people ! will he ? I be a good sailor , he know ! " 
 " the good afloat ! " laugh Richard , hug she , " but , you know , you darle bit of a sailor , they do not   allow more than a certain number on board for the race , and if they hear you have   be with I , there will be cry of foul play ! besides , there be Lady Judith to talk to you about Austin , and Lord Mountfalcon 's compliment for you to listen to , and Mr. Morton to take care of you . " 
 Lucy 's eye fix sideways an instant . 
 " I hope I do not   frown and blush as I do ? " she say , screw her pliable brow up to he winningly , and he bend his cheek against her , and murmur something delicious . 
 " and we shall be separate for how many hour ? one , two , three hour ! " she pout to his flattery . 
 " and then I shall come on board to receive my bride 's congratulation . " 
 " and then my husband will talk all the time to Lady Judith . " 
 " and then I shall see my wife frown and blush at Lord Mountfalcon . " 
 " be I so foolish , Richard ? " she forget her trifle to ask in an earnest way , and have another Aurorean kiss , just brush the dew on her lip , for answer . 
 after hide a month in shy shade , the pair of happy sinner have wander forth one day to look on man and marvel at they , and have chance to meet Mr. Morton of Poer Hall , Austin Wentworth 's friend , and Ralph 's uncle . Mr. Morton have once be intimate with the baronet , but have give he up for many year as impracticable and hopeless , for which reason he be the more inclined to regard Richard 's misdemeanour charitably , and to lay the fault of the son on the father ; and think society to be the one thing requisite to the young man , he have introduce he to the people he know in the island ; among other to the Lady Judith Felle , a fair young dame , who introduce he to Lord Mountfalcon , a puissant nobleman ; who introduce he to the yachtsman begin to congregate ; so that in a few week he find himself in the centre of a brilliant company , and for the first time in his life taste what it be to have free intercourse with his fellow - creature of both sew . the son of a System be , therefore , launch ; not only through the surf , but in deep water . 
 now the baronet have so far compromise between the recurrence of his soft feeling and the suggestion of his new familiar , that he have determine to act toward Richard with justness . the world call it magnanimity , and even Lady Blandish have some thought of the same kind when she hear that he have decree to Richard a handsome allowance , and have scout Mrs. Doria 's proposal for he to contest the legality of the marriage ; but Sir Austin know well he be simply just in not withhold money from a youth so situated . and here again the world deceive he by embellish his conduct . for what be it to be just to whom we love ! he know it be not magnanimous , but the cry of the world somehow fortify he in the conceit that in deal perfect justice to his son he be do all that be possible , because so much more than common father would have do . he have shut his heart . 
 consequently Richard do not want money . what he want more , and do not get , be a word from his father , and though he say nothing to sadden his young bride , she feel how much it prey upon he to be at variance with the man whom , now that he have offend he and go against he , he would have fall on his knee to ; the man who be as no other man to he . she hear he of night when she lie by his side , and the darkness , and the broken muttering , of those night clothe the figure of the strange stern man in her mind . not that it affect the appetite of the pretty pair . we must not expect that of Cupid enthrone and in condition ; under the influence of sea - air , too . the file of egg - cup laugh at such an idea . still the worm do gnaw they . Judge , then , of their delight when , on this pleasant morning , as they be issue from the garden of their cottage to go down to the sea , they catch sight of Tom Bakewell rush up the road with a portmanteau on his shoulder , and , some distance behind he , discern Adrian . 
 " it be all right ! " shout Richard , and run off to meet he , and never leave his hand till he have haul he up , fire question at he all the way , to where Lucy stand . 
 " Lucy ! this be adrian , my cousin . " " be not   he an angel ? " his eye seem to add ; while Lucy 's clearly answer , " that he be ! " 
 the full - bodied angel ceremoniously bow to she , and act with reserved unction the benefactor he see in their greeting . " I think we be not stranger , " he be good enough to remark , and very quickly let they know he have not breakfast ; on hear which they hurry he into the house , and Lucy put herself in motion to have he serve . 
 " dear old Rady , " say Richard , tug at his hand again , " how glad I be you have   come ! I do not   mind tell you we have   be horridly wretche . " 
 " six , seven , eight , nine egg , " be Adrian 's comment on a survey of the breakfast - table . 
 " why would not   he write ? why do not   he answer one of my letter ? but here you be , so I do not   mind now . he want to see we , do he ? we will go up to - night . I have   a match on at eleven ; my little yacht I have   call she the ' Blandish ' against Fred Cuirie 's ' Begum . ' I shall beat , but whether I do or not , we will go up to - night . what be the news ? what be they all do ? " 
 " my dear boy ! " Adrian return , sit comfortably down , " let I put myself a little more on an equal footing with you before I undertake to reply . half that number of egg will be sufficient for an unmarried man , and then we will talk . they be all very well , as well as I can recollect after the shake my total vacuity have have this morning . I come over by the first boat , and the sea , the sea have make I love mother earth , and desire of her fruit . " 
 Richard fret restlessly opposite his cool relative . 
 " Adrian ! what do he say when he hear of it ? I want to know exactly what word he say . " 
 " well say the sage , my son ! ' Speech be the small change of Silence . ' he say less than I do . " 
 " that be how he take it ! " cry Richard , and plunge in meditation . 
 soon the table be clear , and lay out afresh , and Lucy precede the maid bear egg on the tray , and sit down unbonneted , and like a thorough - breed housewife , to pour out the tea for he . 
 " now we will commence , " say Adrian , tap his egg with meditative cheerfulness ; but his expression soon change to one of pain , all the more alarming for his benevolent effort to conceal it . could it be possible the egg be bad ? oh , horror ! Lucy watch he , and wait in trepidation . 
 " this egg have boil three minute and three - quarter , " he observe , cease to contemplate it . 
 " dear , dear ! " say Lucy , " I boil they myself exactly that time . Richard like they so . and you like they hard , Mr. Harley ? " 
 " on the contrary , I like they soft . two minute and a half , or three - quarter at the outside . an egg should never rashly verge upon hardness never . three minute be the excess of temerity . " 
 " if Richard have tell I ! if I have only know ! " the lovely little hostess interject ruefully , bite her lip . 
 " we must not   expect he to pay attention to such matter , " say Adrian , try to smile . 
 " hang it ! there be more egg in the house , " cry Richard , and pull savagely at the bell . 
 Lucy jump up , say , " oh , yes ! I will go and boil some exactly the time you like . pray let I go , Mr. Harley . " 
 Adrian restrain her departure with a motion of his hand . " no , " he say , " I will be rule by Richard 's taste , and heaven grant I his digestion ! " 
 Lucy throw a sad look at Richard , who stretch on a sofa , and leave the burden of the entertainment entirely to she . the egg be a melancholy beginning , but her ardour to please Adrian would not be damp , and she deeply admire his resignation . if she fail in please this glorious herald of peace , no matter by what small misadventure , she apprehend calamity ; so there sit this fair dove with brow at work above her serious smile blue eye , covertly study every aspect of the plump - face epicure , that she might learn to propitiate he . " he shall not think I timid and stupid , " think this brave girl , and indeed Adrian be astonish to find that she could both chat and be useful , as well as look ornamental . when he have finish one egg , behold , two fresh one come in , boil accord to his prescription . she have quietly give her order to the maid , and he have they without fuss . possibly his look of dismay at the offend egg have not be altogether involuntary , and her woman 's instinct , inexperienced as she be , may have tell she that he have come prepared to be not very well satisfied with anything in love 's cottage . there be mental faculty in those pliable brow to see through , and combat , an unwitting wise youth . 
 how much she have achieve already she partly divine when Adrian say : " I think now I be in case to answer your question , my dear boy thank to Mrs. Richard , " and he bow to she his first direct acknowledgment of her position . Lucy thrill with pleasure . 
 " ah ! " cry Richard , and settle easily on his back . 
 " to begin , the Pilgrim have lose his note - book , and have be persuade to offer a reward which shall maintain the happy finder thereof in an asylum for life . Benson superlative Benson have turn his shoulder upon Raynham . none know whither he have depart . it be believe that the sole survive member of the sect of the Shaddock - Dogmatists be under a total eclipse of Woman . " 
 " Benson go ? " Richard exclaim . " what a tremendous time it seem since I leave Raynham ! " 
 " so it be , my dear boy . the honeymoon be Mahomet 's minute ; or say , the Persian King 's water - pail that you read of in the story : you dip your head in it , and when you draw it out , you discover that you have live a life . to resume your uncle Algernon still roam in pursuit of the lost one I should say , hop . your uncle Hippias have a new and most perplexing symptom ; a determination of bride - cake to the nose . ever since your generous present to he , though he declare he never consume a morsel of it , he have be under the distressing illusion that his nose be enormous , and I assure you he exhibit quite a maidenly timidity in follow it through a doorway , for instance . he complain of its terrible weight . I have conceive that Benson invisible might be sit on it . his hand , and the doctor 's , be in hourly consultation with it , but I fear it will not grow small . the Pilgrim have beget upon it a new Aphorism : that Size be a matter of opinion . " 
 " poor uncle Hippy ! " say Richard , " I wonder he do not   believe in magic . there be nothing supernatural to rival the wonderful sensation he do believe in . good God ! fancy come to that ! " 
 " I be sure I be very sorry , " Lucy protest , " but I can not   help laugh . " 
 Charming to the wise youth her pretty laughter sound . 
 " the Pilgrim have your notion , Richard . whom do he not forestall ? ' confirmed dyspepsia be the apparatus of illusion , ' and he accuse the Ages that put faith in sorcery , of universal indigestion , which may have be the case , owe to their infamous cookery . he say again , if you remember , that our own age be travel back to darkness and ignorance through dyspepsia . he lay the seat of wisdom in the centre of our system , Mrs. Richard : for which reason you will understand how sensible I be of the vast obligation I be under to you at the present moment , for your especial care of mine . " 
 Richard look on at Lucy 's little triumph , attribute Adrian 's subjugation to her beauty and sweetness . she have latterly receive a great many compliment on that score , which she do not care to hear , and Adrian 's homage to a practical quality be far pleasanter to the young wife , who shrewdly guess that her beauty would not help she much in the struggle she have now to maintain . adrian continue to lecture on the excelling virtue of wise cookery , a thought strike she : where , where have she toss Mrs. Berry 's book ? 
 " so that be all about the home - people ? " say Richard . 
 " All ! " reply Adrian . " or stay : you know Clare 's go to be marry ? not ? your Aunt Helen " 
 " oh , bother my Aunt Helen ! what do you think she have the impertinence to write but never mind ! be it to Ralph ? " 
 " your Aunt Helen , I be go to say , my dear boy , be an extraordinary woman . it be from she originally that the Pilgrim first learn to call the female the practical animal . he study we all , you know . the Pilgrim 's Scrip be the abstract portraiture of his surround relative . well , your Aunt Helen " 
 " Mrs. Doria Battledoria ! " laugh Richard . 
 " be foil in a little pet scheme of her own call it a system if you like of some ten or fifteen year ' standing , with regard to Miss Clare ! " 
 " the fair Shuttlecockiana ! " 
 " instead of fret like a man , and question Providence , and turn herself and everybody else inside out , and see the world upside down , what do the practical animal do ? she want to marry she to somebody she could not   marry she to , so she resolve instantly to marry she to somebody she could marry she to : and as old gentleman enter into these transaction with the practical animal the most readily , she fix upon an old gentleman ; an unmarried old gentleman , a rich old gentleman , and now a captive old gentleman . the ceremony take place in about a week from the present time . no doubt you will receive your invitation in a day or two . " 
 " and that cold , icy , wretched Clare have consent to marry an old man ! " groan Richard . " I will put a stop to that when I go to town . " 
 Richard get up and stride about the room . then he bethink he it be time to go on board and make preparation . 
 " I be off , " he say . " Adrian , you will take she . she go in the Empress , Mountfalcon 's vessel . he start we . a little schooner - yacht such a beauty ! I will have one like she some day . good - bye , darling ! " he whisper to Lucy , and his hand and eye linger on she , and her on he , seek to make up for the priceless kiss they be debar from . but she quickly look away from he as he hold she : Adrian stand silent : his brow be up , and his mouth dubiously contract . he speak at last . 
 " go on the water ? " 
 " yes . it be only to St. Helen 's . short and sharp . " 
 " do you grudge I the nourishment my poor system have just receive , my son ? " 
 " oh , bother your system ! put on your hat , and come along . I will put you on board in my boat . " 
 " Richard ! I have already pay the penalty of they who be condemn to come to an island . I will go with you to the edge of the sea , and I will meet you there when you return , and take up the Tale of the Tritons : but , though I forfeit the pleasure of Mrs. Richard 's company , I refuse to quit the land . " 
 " yes , oh , Mr. Harley ! " Lucy break from her husband , " and I will stay with you , if you please . I do not   want to go among those people , and we can see it all from the shore . 
 " Dearest ! I do not   want to go . you do not   mind ? of course , I will go if you wish , but I would so much rather stay ; " and she lengthen her plea in her attitude and look to melt the discontent she see gathering . 
 Adrian protest that she have much well go ; that he could amuse himself very well till their return , and so forth ; but she have scheme in her pretty head , and hold to it to be allow to stay in spite of Lord Mountfalcon 's disappointment , cite by Richard , and at the great risk of vex her darling , as she see . Richard pishe , and glance contemptuously at Adrian . he give way ungraciously . 
 " there , do as you like . get your thing ready to leave this evening . no , I be not angry . " who could be ? he seem as he look up from her modest fondling to ask Adrian , and seize the indemnity of a kiss on her forehead , which , however , do not immediately disperse the shade of annoyance he feel . 
 " good heaven ! " he exclaim . " such a day as this , and a fellow refuse to come on the water ! well , come along to the edge of the sea . " Adrian 's angelic quality have quite wear off to he . he never think of devote himself to make the most of the material there be : but somebody else do , and that fair somebody succeed wonderfully in a few short hour . she induce Adrian to reflect that the baronet have only to see she , and the family muddle would be smooth at once . he come to it by degree ; still the gradation be rapid . her manner he like ; she be certainly a nice picture : good of all , she be sensible . he forget the farmer 's niece in she , she be so very sensible . she appear really to understand that it be a woman 's duty to know how to cook . 
 but the difficulty be , by what mean the baronet could be bring to consent to see she . he have not yet consent to see his son , and Adrian , spur by Lady Blandish , have venture something in come down . he be not inclined to venture more . the small debate in his mind end by his throw the burden on time . time would bring the matter about . christian as well as Pagans be in the habit of phrase this excuse for fold their arm ; " forgetful , " say the Pilgrim 's Scrip , " that the devil 's imp enter into no such armistice . " 
 as she loiter along the shore with her amusing companion , Lucy have many thing to think of . there be her darling 's match . the yacht be start by pistol - shot by Lord Mountfalcon on board the Empress , and her little heart beat after Richard 's strain sail . then there be the strangeness of walk with a relative of Richard 's , one who have live by his side so long . and the thought that perhaps this night she would have to appear before the dreaded father of her husband . 
 " o Mr. Harley ! " she say , " be it true be we to go tonight ? and I , " she falter , " will he see I ? " 
 " ah ! that be what I want to talk to you about , " say Adrian . " I make some reply to our dear boy which he have slightly misinterpret . our second person plural be liable to misconstruction by an ardent mind . I say ' see you , ' and he suppose now , Mrs. Richard , I be sure you will understand I . just at present perhaps it would be advisable when the father and son have settle their account , the daughter - in - law can not   be a debtor . " ... 
 Lucy throw up her blue eye . a half - cowardly delight at the chance of a respite from the awful interview make she quickly apprehensive . 
 " o Mr. Harley ! you think he should go alone first ? " 
 " well , that be my notion . but the fact be , he be such an excellent husband that I fancy it will require more than a man 's power of persuasion to get he to go . " 
 " but I will persuade he , Mr. Harley . " " perhaps , if you would ... " 
 " there be nothing I would not do for his happiness , " murmur Lucy . 
 the wise youth press her hand with lymphatic approbation . they walk on till the yacht have round the point . 
 " be it to - night , Mr. Harley ? " she ask with some trouble in her voice now that her darling be out of sight . 
 " I do not   imagine your eloquence even will get he to leave you to - night , " Adrian reply gallantly . " besides , I must speak for myself . to achieve the passage to an island be enough for one day . no necessity exist for any hurry , except in the brain of that impetuous boy . you must correct it , Mrs. Richard . man be make to be manage , and woman be bear manager . now , if you be to let he know that you do not   want to go to - night , and let he guess , after a day or two , that you would very much rather ... you might affect a peculiar repugnance . by take it on yourself , you see , this wild young man will not require such frightful effort of persuasion . both his father and he be exceedingly delicate subject , and his father unfortunately be not in a position to be manage directly . it be a strange office to propose to you , but it appear to devolve upon you to manage the father through the son . Prodigal have make his peace , you , who have do all the work from a distance , naturally come into the circle of the paternal smile , know it due to you . I see no other way . if Richard suspect that his father object for the present to welcome his daughter - in - law , hostility will be continue , the breach will be widen , bad will grow to bad , and I see no end to it . " 
 Adrian look in her face , as much as to say : now be you capable of this piece of heroism ? and it do seem hard to she that she should have to tell Richard she shrink from any trial . but the proposition chime in with her fear and her wish : she think the wise youth very wise : the poor child be not insensible to his flattery , and the subtler flattery of make herself in some measure a sacrifice to the home she have disturb . she agree to simulate as Adrian have suggest . 
 victory be the common heritage of the hero , and when Richard come on shore proclaim that the Blandish have beat the Begum by seven minute and three - quarter , he be hastily kiss and congratulate by his bride with her finger among the leaf of Dr. Kitchener , and anxiously question about wine . 
 " Dearest ! Mr. Harley want to stay with we a little , and he think we ought not to go immediately that be , before he have have some letter , and I feel ... I would so much rather ... " 
 " ah ! that be it , you coward ! " say Richard . " well , then , to - morrow . we have a splendid race . do you see we ? " 
 " oh , yes ! I see you and be sure my darling would win . " and again she throw on he the cold water of that solicitude about wine . " Mr. Harley must have the good , you know , and we never drink it , and I be so silly , I do not   know good wine , and if you would send Tom where he can get good wine . I have see to the dinner . " 
 " so that be why you do not   come to meet I ? " 
 " pardon I , darling . " 
 " well , I do , but Mountfalcon do not , and Lady Judith think you ought to have be there . " 
 " ah , but my heart be with you ! " 
 Richard put his hand to feel for the little heart : her eyelid soften , and she run away . 
 it be to say much of the dinner that Adrian find no fault with it , and be in perfect good - humour at the conclusion of the service . he do not abuse the wine they be able to procure for he , which be also much . the coffee , too , have the honour of pass without comment . these be sound first step toward the conquest of an epicure , and as yet Cupid do not grumble . 
 after coffee they stroll out to see the sun set from Lady Judith 's ground . the wind have drop . the cloud have roll from the zenith , and range in amphitheatre with distant flushed body over sea and land : titanic crimson head and chest rise from the wave face Hyperion fall . there hang Briareus with deep - indent trunk and ravined brow , stretch all his hand up to unattainable blue summit . north - west the range have a rich white glow , as if shin to the moon , and westward , stream of amber , melt into upper rose , shoot out from the dipping disk . 
 " what Sandoe call the passion - flower of heaven , " say Richard under his breath to Adrian , who be serenely chant greek hexameter , and answer , in the swing of the caesura , " he might as well have say cauliflower . " 
 Lady Judith , with a black lace veil tie over her head , meet they in the walk . she be tall and dark ; dark - haired , dark - eye , sweet and persuasive in her accent and manner . " a second edition of the Blandish , " think Adrian . she welcome he as one who have claim on her affability . she kiss Lucy protectingly , and remark on the wonder of the evening , appropriate her husband . Adrian and Lucy find themselves walk behind they . 
 the sun be under . all the space of the sky be alight , and Richard 's fancy flamed . 
 " so you be not intoxicate with your immense triumph this morning ? " say Lady Judith . 
 " do not   laugh at I . when it be over I feel ashamed of the trouble I have   take . look at that glory ! I be sure you despise I for it . " 
 " be I not there to applaud you ? I only think such energy should be turn into some definitely useful channel . but you must not go into the Army . " 
 " what else can I do ? " 
 " you be fit for so much that be well . " 
 " I never can be anything like Austin . " 
 " but I think you can do more . " 
 " well , I thank you for think it , Lady Judith . something I will do . a man must deserve to live , as you say . 
 " sauce , " Adrian be hear to articulate distinctly in the rear , " sauce be the top tree of this science . a woman who have master sauce sit on the apex of civilization . " 
 Briareus redden duskily seaward . the West be all a burning rose . 
 " how can man see such sight as those , and live idle ? " Richard resume . " I feel ashamed of ask my man to work for I . or I feel so now . " 
 " not when you be race the Begum , I think . there be no necessity for you to turn democrat like Austin . do you write now ? " 
 " no . what be write like mine ? it do not   deceive I . I know it be only the excuse I be make to myself for remain idle . I have not   write a line since lately . " 
 " because you be so happy . " 
 " no , not because of that . of course I be very happy ... " he do not finish . 
 Vague , shapeless ambition have replace love in yonder sky . no Scientific Humanist be by to study the natural development , and guide he . this lady would hardly be deem a very proper guide to the undirected energy of the youth , yet they have establish relation of that nature . she be five year old than he , and a woman , which may explain her serene presumption . 
 the cloud - giant have break up : a brawny shoulder smoulder over the sea . 
 " we will work together in town , at all event , " say Richard , 
 " why can not   we go about together at night and find out people who want help ? " 
 Lady Judith smile , and only correct his nonsense by say , " I think we must not   be too romantic . you will become a knight - errant , I suppose . you have the characteristic of one . " 
 " especially at breakfast , " Adrian 's unnecessarily emphatic gastronomical lesson to the young wife here come in . 
 " you must be our champion , " continue Lady Judith : " the rescuer and succourer of distressed dame and damsel . we want one badly . " 
 " you do , " say Richard , earnestly : " from what I hear : from what I know ! " his thought fly off with he as knight - errant hail shrilly at exceed critical moment by distressed dame and damsel . image of airy tower hang around . his fancy perform miraculous feat . the tower crumble . the star grow large , seem to throb with lustre . his fancy crumble with the tower of the air , his heart give a leap , he turn to Lucy . 
 " my darling ! what have you be do ? " and as if to compensate she for his little knight - errant infidelity , he press very tenderly to she . 
 " we have be engage in a charming conversation on domestic cookery , " interpose Adrian . 
 " Cookery ! such an evening as this ? " his face be a handsome likeness of Hippias at the presentation of bridecake . 
 " Dearest ! you know it be very useful , " Lucy mirthfully plead . 
 " indeed I quite agree with you , child , " say Lady Judith , " and I think you have the laugh of we . I certainly will learn to cook some day . " 
 " woman 's mission , in so many word , " ejaculate Adrian . 
 " and pray , what be man 's ? " 
 " to taste thereof , and pronounce thereupon . " 
 " let we give it up to they , " say Lady Judith to Richard . " you and I never will make so delightful and beautifully balance a world of it . " 
 Richard appear to have grow perfectly willing to give everything up to the fair face , his bridal Hesper . 
 neat day Lucy have to act the coward anew , and , as she do so , her heart sink to see how painfully it affect he that she should hesitate to go with he to his father . he be patient , gentle ; he sit down by her side to appeal to her reason , and use all the argument he could think of to persuade she . 
 " if we go together and make he see we both : if he see he have nothing to be ashamed of in you rather everything to be proud of ; if you be only near he , you will not have to speak a word , and I be certain as certain as that I live that in a week we shall be settle happily at Raynham . I know my father so well , Lucy . nobody know he but I. " 
 Lucy ask whether Mr. Harley do not . 
 " Adrian ? not a bit . adrian only know a part of people , Lucy ; and not the good part . " 
 Lucy be dispose to think more highly of the object of her conquest . 
 " be it he that have be frightening you , Lucy ? " 
 " no , no , Richard ; oh , dear no ! " she cry , and look at he more tenderly because she be not quite truthful . 
 " he do not   know my father at all , " say Richard . but Lucy have another opinion of the wise youth , and secretly maintain it . she could not be win to imagine the baronet a man of human mould , generous , forgiving , full of passionate love at heart , as Richard try to picture he , and think he , now that he behold he again through Adrian 's embassy . to she he be that awful figure , shroud by the midnight . " why be you so harsh ? " she have hear Richard cry more than once . she be sure that Adrian must be right . 
 " well , I tell you I will not   go without you , " say Richard , and Lucy beg for a little more time . 
 Cupid now begin to grumble , and with cause . Adrian positively refuse to go on the water unless that element be smooth as a plate . the South - west still joke boisterously at any comparison of the sort ; the day be magnificent ; Richard have yacht engagement ; and Lucy always petition to stay to keep adrian company , concern it her duty as hostess . argue with Adrian be an absurd idea . if Richard hint at his retain Lucy , the wise youth would remark : " it be a wholesome interlude to your extremely cupidinous behaviour , my dear boy . " 
 Richard ask his wife what they could possibly find to talk about . 
 " all manner of thing , " say Lucy ; " not only cookery . he be so amusing , though he do make fun of the Pilgrim 's Scrip , and I think he ought not . and then , do you know , darle you will not   think I vain ? I think he be begin to like I a little . " 
 Richard laugh at the humble mind of his beauty . 
 " do not   everybody like you , admire you ? do not   Lord Mountfalcon , and Mr. Morton , and Lady Judith ? " 
 " but he be one of your family , Richard . " 
 " and they all will , if she be not   a coward . " 
 " ah , no ! " she sigh , and be chidden . 
 the conquest of an epicure , or any young wife 's conquest beyond her husband , however loyally devise for their mutual happiness , may be costly to she . Richard in his hour of excitement be throw very much with Lady Judith . he consult she regard what he term Lucy 's cowardice . Lady Judith say : " I think she be wrong , but you must learn to humour little woman . " 
 " then would you advise I to go up alone ? " he ask , with a cloudy forehead . 
 " what else can you do ? be reconcile yourself as quickly as you can . you can not   drag she like a captive , you know ? " 
 it be not pleasant for a young husband , fancy his bride the peerless flower of Creation , to learn that he must humour a little woman in she . it be revolt to Richard . 
 " what I fear , " he say , " be , that my father will make it smooth with I , and not acknowledge she : so that whenever I go to he , I shall have to leave she , and tit for tat an abominable existence , like a ball on a billiard - table . I will not   bear that ignominy . and this I know , I know ! she might prevent it at once , if she would only be brave , and face it . you , you , Lady Judith , you would not   be a coward ? " 
 " where my old lord tell I to go , I go , " the lady coldly reply . " there be not much merit in that . pray , do not   cite I . woman be bear coward , you know . " 
 " but I love the woman who be not coward . " 
 " the little thing your wife have not refuse to go ? " 
 " no but tear ! who can stand tear ? " 
 Lucy have come to drop they . unaccustomed to have his will thwart , and urgent where he see the thing to do so clearly , the young husband have speak strong word : and she , who know that she would have give her life by inch for he ; who know that she be play a part for his happiness , and hide for his sake the nature that be worthy his esteem ; the poor little martyr have be weak a moment . 
 she have Adrian 's support . the wise youth be very comfortable . he like the air of the Island , and he like be pet . " a nice little woman ! a very nice little woman ! " Tom Bakewell hear he murmur to himself accord to a habit he have ; and his air of rather succulent patronage as he walk or sit beside the innocent Beauty , with his head throw back and a smile that seem always to be in secret communion with his marked abdominal prominence , show that she be gain part of what she play for . wise youth who buy their love , be not unwilling , when opportunity offer , to try and obtain the commodity for nothing . examination of her hand , as for some occult purpose , and unctuous patting of the same , be not infrequent . Adrian wax now and then anacreontic in his compliment . Lucy would say : " that be bad than Lord Mountfalcon . " 
 " well English than the noble lord deign to employ allow that ? " quoth Adrian . 
 " he be very kind , " say Lucy . 
 " to all , save to our noble vernacular , " add Adrian . " he seem to scent a rival to his dignity there . " 
 it may be that Adrian scent a rival to his lymphatic emotion . 
 " we be at our ease here in excellent society , " he write to Lady Blandish . " I be bind to confess that the Huron have a happy fortune , or a superlative instinct . Blindfold he have seize upon a suitable mate . she can look at a lord , and cook for an epicure . besides Dr. Kitchener , she read and comment on the Pilgrim 's Scrip . the ` love ' chapter , of course , take her fancy . that picture of woman , ` draw by Reverence and colour by love , ' she think beautiful , and repeat it , toss up pretty eye . also the lover 's petition : ' give I purity to be worthy the good in she , and grant her patience to reach the good in I . ' ' tis quite take to hear she lisp it . be sure that I be repeat the petition ! I make she read I her choice passage . she have not a bad voice . 
 " the Lady Judith I speak of be Austin 's Miss Menteith , marry to the incapable old Lord Felle , or Fellow , as the wit here call he . Lord Mountfalcon be his cousin , and her what ? she have be try to find out , but they have both get over their perplexity , and act respectively the bad man reprove and the chaste counsellor ; a position in which our young couple find they , and haply divert its peril . they have quite take they in hand . Lady Judith undertake to cure the fair Papist of a pretty , modest trick of frown and blush when address , and his lordship direct the exuberant energy of the original man . ' tis thus we fulfil our destiny , and be content . sometimes they change pupil ; my lord educate the little dame , and my lady the hope of Raynham . Joy and blessing unto all ! as the german poet sing . Lady Judith accept the hand of her decrepit lord that she might be of potent service to her fellow - creature . Austin , you know , have great hope of she . 
 " I have for the first time in my career a field of lord to study . I think it be not without mean that I be introduce to it by a yeoman 's niece . the language of the two social extreme be similar . I find it to consist in an instinctively lavish use of vowel and adjective . my lord and Farmer Blaize speak the same tongue , only my lord 's have lose its backbone , and be limp , though fluent . their pursuit be identical ; but that one have money , or , as the Pilgrim term it , vantage , and the other have not . their idea seem to have a special relationship in the peculiarity of stop where they have begin . Young Tom Blaize with vantage would be Lord Mountfalcon . even in the character of their parasite I see a resemblance , though I be bind to confess that the Hon . Peter Brayder , who be my lord 's parasite , be by no mean noxious . 
 " this sound dreadfully democrat . pray , do not   be alarm . the discovery of the affinity between the two extreme of the Royal British Oak have make I thrice conservative . I see now that the national love of a lord be less subservience than a form of self - love ; put a gold - lace hat on one 's image , as it be , to bow to it . I see , too , the admirable wisdom of our system : could there be a fine balance of power than in a community where man intellectually nil , have lawful vantage and a gold - lace hat on ? how soothing it be to intellect that noble rebel , as the Pilgrim have it to stand , and bow , and know itself superior ! this exquisite compensation maintain the balance : whereas that period anticipate by the Pilgrim , when science shall have produce an intellectual aristocracy , be indeed horrible to contemplate . for what despotism be so black as one the mind can not challenge ? ' twill be an iron Age . wherefore , madam , I cry , and shall continue to cry , ' Vive Lord Mountfalcon ! long may he sip his Burgundy ! long may the bacon - fed carry he on their shoulder ! ' 
 " Mr. Morton   who do I the honour to call I Young Mephisto , and Socrates miss   leaf to - morrow to get Master Ralph out of a scrape . our Richard have just be elect member of a Club for the promotion of nausea . be he happy ? you ask . as much so as one who have have the misfortune to obtain what he want can be . speed be his passion . he race from point to point . in emulation of Leander and Don Juan , he swam , I hear , to the opposite shore the other day , or some world - shake feat of the sort : himself the Hero whom he go to meet : or , as they who pun say , his Hero be a Bet . a pretty little domestic episode occur this morning . he find she abstract in the fire of his caress : she turn shy and seek solitude : green jealousy take hold of he : he lie in wait , and discover she with his new rival a veteran edition of the culinary Doctor ! blind to the Doctor 's great national service , deaf to her wild music , he grasp the intruder , dismember he , and perform upon he the treatment he have recommend for dress cucumber . tear and shriek accompany the descent of the gastronome . down she rush to secure the cherished fragment : he follow : they find he , true to his character , alight and straggle over a bed of bloom flower . yet ere a fairer flower can gather he , a heel black as Pluto stamp he into earth , flower and all : happy burial ! pathetic tribute to his merit be water his grave , when by saunter my Lord Mountfalcon . ' what be the mattah ? ' say his lordship , soothe his moustache . they break apart , and ' tis leave to I to explain from the window . my lord look shocked , Richard be angry with she for have to be ashamed of himself , Beauty dry her eye , and after a pause of general foolishness , the business of life be resume . I may add that the Doctor have just be dig up , and we be busy , in the enemy 's absence , renew old Aeson with enchant thread . by the way , a Papist priest have bl they . " 
 a month have pass when Adrian write this letter . he be very comfortable ; so of course he think Time be do his duty . not a word do he say of Richard 's return , and for some reason or other neither Richard nor Lucy speak of it now . 
 Lady Blandish write back : " his father think he have refuse to come to he . by your utter silence on the subject , I fear that it must be so . make he come . bring he by force . insist on his coming . be he mad ? he must come at once . " 
 to this Adrian reply , after a contemplative comfortable lapse of a day or two , which might be lay to his effort to adopt the lady 's advice , " the point be that the half man decline to come without the whole man . the terrible question of sex be our obstruction . " 
 Lady Blandish be in despair . she have no positive assurance that the baronet would see his son ; the mask put they all in the dark ; but she think she see in Sir Austin irritation that the offender , at least when the opening to come and make his peace seem to be before he , should let day and week go by . she see through the mask sufficiently not to have any hope of his consent to receive the couple at present ; she be sure that his equanimity be fictitious ; but she pierce no far , or she might have start and ask herself , be this the heart of a woman ? 
 the lady at last write to Richard . she say : " come instantly , and come alone . " then Richard , against his judgment , give way . " my father be not the man I think he ! " he exclaim sadly , and Lucy feel his eye say to she : " and you , too , be not the woman I think you . " nothing could the poor little heart reply but strain to his bosom and sleeplessly pray in his arm all the night . 




 CHAPTER XXXV 

 three week after Richard arrive in town , his cousin Clare be marry , under the blessing of her energetic mother , and with the approbation of her kinsfolk , to the husband that have be expeditiously choose for she . the gentleman , though something more than twice the age of his bride , have no idea of approach senility for many long connubial year to come . back by his tailor and his hairdresser , he present no such bad figure at the altar , and none would have think that he be an ancient admirer of his bride 's mama , as certainly none know he have lately propose for Mrs. Doria before there be any question of her daughter . these thing be secret ; and the elastic and happy appearance of Mr. John Todhunter do not betray they at the altar . perhaps he would rather have marry the mother . he be a man of property , well bear , tolerably well educate , and have , when Mrs. Doria reject he for the first time , the reputation of be a fool which a wealthy man may have in his youth ; but as he live on , and do not squander his money amass it , on the contrary , and do not seek to go into Parliament , and do other negative wise thing , the world 's opinion , as usual , veer completely round , and John Todhunter be esteem a shrewd , sensible man only not brilliant ; that he be brilliant could not be say of he . in fact , the man could hardly talk , and it be a fortunate provision that no impromptu delivery be require of he in the marriage - service . 
 Mrs. Doria have her own reason for be in a hurry . she have discover something of the strange impassive nature of her child ; not from any confession of Clare 's , but from sign a mother can read when , her eye be not resolutely shut . she see with alarm and anguish that Clare have fall into the pit she have be dig for she so laboriously . in vain she entreat the baronet to break the disgraceful , and , as she say , illegal alliance his son have contract . Sir Austin would not even stop the little pension to poor berry . " at least you will do that , Austin , " she beg pathetically . " you will show your sense of that horrid woman 's conduct ? " he refuse to offer up any victim to console she . then Mrs. Doria tell he her thought , and when an outraged energetic lady be finally bring to exhibit these painfully hoard treasure , she do not use half word as a medium . his system , and his conduct generally be denounce to he , without analysis . she let he understand that the world laugh at he ; and he hear this from she at a time when his mask be still soft and liable to be act on by his nerve . " you be weak , Austin ! weak , I tell you ! " she say , and , like all angry and self - interested people , prophecy come easy to she . in her heart she accuse he of her own fault , in impute to he the wreck of her project . the baronet allow she to revel in the proclamation of a dire future , and quietly counsel she to keep apart from he , which his sister assure he she would do . 
 but to be passive in calamity be the province of no woman . mark the race at any hour . " what revolution and hubbub do not that little instrument , the needle , avert from we ! " say the Pilgrim 's Scrip . alas , that in calamity woman can not stitch ! now that she see Clare want other than iron , it strike she she must have a husband , and be make secure as a woman and a wife . this seem the thing to do : and , as she have force the iron down Clare 's throat , so she force the husband , and Clare gulp at the latter as she have at the former . on the very day that Mrs. Doria have this new track shape out before she , John Todhunter call at the Foreys ' . " Old John ! " sing out Mrs. Doria , ' show he up to I . I want to see he particularly . " he sit with she alone . he be a man multitude of woman would have marry whom will they not ? and who would have marry any presentable woman : but woman do want ask , and John never have the word . the rape of such man be leave to the practical animal . so John sit alone with his old flame . he have become resign to her perpetual lamentation and living Suttee for his defunct rival . but , ha ! what mean those soft glance now address to he ? his tailor and his hairdresser give youth to John , but they have not the art to bestow upon he distinction , and an undistinguished man what woman look at ? John be an indistinguishable man . for that reason he be dry wood to a soft glance . 
 and now she say : " it be time you should marry ; and you be the man to be the guide and helper of a young woman , John . you be well preserve young than most of the young man of our day . you be eminently domestic , a good son , and will be a good husband and good father . some one you must marry . what do you think of Clare for a wife for you ? " 
 at first John Todhunter think it would be very much like his marry a baby . however , he listen to it , and that be enough for Mrs. Doria . 
 she go down to John 's mother , and consult with she on the propriety of the scheme of wed her daughter to John in accordance with his proposition . Mrs. Todhunter 's jealousy of any disturbing force in the influence she hold over her son Mrs. Doria know to be one of the cause of John 's remain constant to the impression she have afore - time produce on he . she speak so kindly of John , and lay so much stress on the ingrained obedience and passive disposition of her daughter , that Mrs. Todhunter be lead to admit she do think it almost time John should be seek a mate , and that he all thing consider would hardly find a fitter one . and this , John Todhunter old John no more hear to his amazement when , a day or two subsequently , he instance the probable disapproval of his mother . 
 the match be arrange . Mrs. Doria do the wooing . it consist in tell Clare that she have come to year when marriage be desirable , and that she have fall into habit of moping which might have the bad effect on her future life , as it have on her present health and appearance , and which a husband would cure . Richard be tell by Mrs. Doria that Clare have instantaneously consent to accept Mr. John Todhunter as lord of her day , and with more than obedience with alacrity . at all event , when Richard speak to Clare , the strange passive creature do not admit constraint on her inclination . Mrs. Doria allow Richard to speak to she . she laugh at his futile endeavour to undo her work , and the boyish sentiment he utter on the subject . " let we see , child , " she say , " let we see which turn out the good ; a marriage of passion , or a marriage of common sense . " 
 heroic effort be not want to arrest the union . Richard make repeat journey to Hounslow , where Ralph be quarter , and if Ralph could have be persuade to carry off a young lady who do not love he , from the bridegroom her mother aver she do love , Mrs. Doria might have be defeat . but Ralph in his cavalry quarter be cool than Ralph in the Bursley meadow . " woman be oddity , Dick , " he remark , run a finger right and leave along his upper lip . " good leave they to their own freak . she be a dear girl , though she do not   talk : I like she for that . if she care for I I would go the race . she never do . it be no use ask a girl twice . she know whether she care a fig for a fellow . " 
 the hero quit he with some contempt , as Ralph Morton be a young man , and he have determine that John Todhunter be an old man , he seek another private interview with Clare , and get she alone , say : " Clare , I have   come to you for the last time . will you marry Ralph Morton ? " 
 to which Clare reply , " I can not marry two husband , Richard . " 
 " will you refuse to marry this old man ? " 
 " I must do as mama wish . " 
 " then you be go to marry an old man a man you do not   love , and can not   love ! oh , good God ! do you know what you be do ? " he fling about in a fury . " do you know what it be ? Clare ! " he catch she two hand violently , " have you any idea of the horror you be go to commit ? " 
 she shrink a little at his vehemence , but neither blush nor stammer : answer : " I see nothing wrong in do what mama think right , Richard . " 
 " your mother ! I tell you it be an infamy , Clare ! it be a miserable sin ! I tell you , if I have do such a thing I would not live an hour after it . and coldly to prepare for it ! to be busy about your dress ! they tell I when I come in that you be with the milliner . to be smile over the horrible outrage ! decorate yourself ! " ... 
 " Dear Richard , " say Clare , " you will make I very unhappy . " 
 " that one of my blood should be so debase ! " he cry , brush angrily at his face . " Unhappy ! I beg you to feel for yourself , Clare . but I suppose , " and he say it scornfully , " girl do not   feel this sort of shame . " 
 she grow a trifle paler . 
 " next to mama , I would wish to please you , dear Richard . " 
 " have you no will of your own ? " he exclaim . 
 she look at he softly ; a look he interpret for the meekness he detest in she . 
 " no , I believe you have none ! " he add . " and what can I do ? I can not   step forward and stop this accursed marriage . if you would but say a word I would save you ; but you tie my hand . and they expect I to stand by and see it do ! " 
 " will you not be there , Richard ? " say Clare , follow the question with her soft eye . it be the same voice that have so thrill he on his marriage morn . 
 " oh , my darling Clare ! " he cry in the kind way he have ever use to she , " if you know how I feel this ! " and now as he weep she weep , and come insensibly into his arm . 
 " my darling Clare ! " he repeat . 
 she say nothing , but seem to shudder , weeping . 
 " you will do it , Clare ? you will be sacrifice ? so lovely as you be , too ! ... Clare ! you can not be quite blind . if I dare speak to you , and tell you all .... look up . can you still consent ? " 
 " I must not disobey mama , " Clare murmur , without look up from the nest her cheek have make on his bosom . 
 " then kiss I for the last time , " say Richard . " I will never kiss you after it , Clare . " 
 he bend his head to meet her mouth , and she throw her arm wildly round he , and kiss he convulsively , and clung to his lip , shut her eye , her face suffuse with a burn red . 
 then he leave she , unaware of the meaning of those passionate kiss . 
 Argument with Mrs. Doria be like fire paper - pellet against a stone wall . to she indeed the young married hero speak almost indecorously , and that which his delicacy withhold he from speak to Clare . he could provoke nothing more responsive from the practical animal than " Pooh - pooh ! tush , tush ! and Fiddlededee ! " 
 " really , " Mrs. Doria say to her intimate , " that boy 's education act like a disease on he . he can not regard anything sensibly . he be for ever in some mad excess of his fancy , and what he will come to at last heaven only know ! I sincerely pray that Austin will be able to bear it . " 
 Threats of prayer , however , that harp upon their sincerity , be not very well worth have . Mrs. Doria have embark in a practical controversy , as it be , with her brother . Doubtless she do trust he would be able to bear his sorrow to come , but one who have utter prophecy can barely help hop to see it fulfil : she have prophecie much grief to the baronet . 
 Poor John Todhunter , who would rather have marry the mother , and have none of your heroic notion about the sacred necessity for love in marriage , move as one guiltless of offence , and deserve his happiness . Mrs. Doria shield he from the hero . to see he smile at Clare 's obedient figure , and try not to look paternal , be touching . 
 Meantime Clare 's marriage serve one purpose . it completely occupy Richard 's mind , and prevent he from chafe at the vexation of not find his father ready to meet he when he come to town . a letter have await Adrian at the hotel , which say , " detain he till you hear far from I . take he about with you into every form of society . " no more than that . Adrian have to extemporize , that the baronet have go down to Wales on press business , and would be back in a week or so . for ulterior invention and device wherewith to keep the young gentleman in town , he apply to Mrs. Doria . " leave he to I , " say Mrs. Doria , " I will manage he . " and she do . 
 " who can say , " ask the Pilgrim 's Scrip , " when he be not walk a puppet to some woman ? " 
 Mrs. Doria would hear no good of Lucy . " I believe , " she observe , as Adrian venture a shrug protest in her behalf , " it be my firm opinion , that a scullery - maid would turn any of you man round her little finger only give her time and opportunity . " by dwell on the art of woman , she reconcile it to her conscience to do she good to divide the young husband from his wife till it please his father they should live their unhallowed union again . without compunction , or a sense of incongruity , she abuse her brother and assist the fulfilment of his behest . 
 so the puppet be marshal by Mrs. Doria , happy , or sad , or indifferent . quite against his set resolve and the tide of his feeling , Richard find himself stand behind Clare in the church the very edifice that have witness his own marriage , and hear , " I , Clare Doria , take thee John Pemberton , " clearly pronounce . he stand with black brow dissect the art of the tailor and hairdresser on unconscious John . the back , and much of the middle , of Mr. Todhunter 's head be bald ; the back shone like an egg - shell , but across the middle the artist have draw two long dab of hair from the side , and plaster they cunningly , so that all save wilful eye would have acknowledge the head to be cover . the man 's only pretension be to a respectable juvenility . he have a good chest , stout limb , a face incline to be jolly . Mrs. Doria have no cause to be put out of countenance at all by the exterior of her son - in - law : nor be she . her splendid hair and gratified smile make a light in the church . play puppet must be an immense pleasure to the practical animal . the Forey bridesmaid , five in number , and one Miss Doria , their cousin , stand as girl do stand at these sacrifice , whether happy , sad , or indifferent ; a smile on their lip and tear in attendance . Old Mrs. Todhunter , an exceedingly small ancient woman , be also there . " I can not   have my boy John marry without see it do , " she say , and throughout the ceremony she be mutter audible encomium on her John 's manly behaviour . 
 the ring be affix to Clare 's finger ; there be no ring lose in this common - sense marriage . the instant the clergyman bid he employ it , John draw the ring out , and drop it on the finger of the cold passive hand in a businesslike way , as one who have study the matter . Mrs. Doria glance aside at Richard . Richard observe Clare spread out her finger that the operation might be the more easily effect . 
 he do duty in the vestry a few minute , and then say to his aunt : 
 " now I will go . " 
 " you will come to the breakfast , child ? the Foreys " 
 he cut her short . " I have   stand for the family , and I will do no more . I will not   pretend to eat and make merry over it . " 
 " Richard ! " 
 " good - bye . " 
 she have attain her object and she wisely give way . 
 " well . go and kiss Clare , and shake his hand . pray , pray be civil . " 
 she turn to Adrian , and say : " he be go . you must go with he , and find some mean of keep he , or he will be run off to that woman . now , no word go ! " 
 Richard bade Clare farewell . she put up her mouth to he humbly , but he kiss she on the forehead . 
 " do not cease to love I , " she say in a quavering whisper in his ear . 
 Mr. Todhunter stand beam and endanger the art of the hairdresser with his pocket - handkerchief . now he positively be marry , he think he would rather have the daughter than the mother , which be a reverse of the order of human thankfulness at a gift of the Gods . 
 " Richard , my boy ! " he say heartily , " congratulate I . " 
 " I should be happy to , if I could , " sedately reply the hero , to the consternation of those around . nod to the bridesmaid and bow to the old lady , he pass out . 
 Adrian , who have be behind he , depute to watch for a possible unpleasantness , just hint to John : " you know , poor fellow , he have get into a mess with his marriage . " 
 " oh ! ah ! yes ! " kindly say John , " poor fellow ! " 
 all the puppet then roll off to the breakfast . 
 Adrian hurry after Richard in an extremely discontent state of mind . not to be at the breakfast and see the good of the fun , disgust he . however , he remember that he be a philosopher , and the strong disgust he feel be only express in concentrated cynicism on every earthly matter engender by the conversation . they walk side by side into Kensington Gardens . the hero be mouth away to himself , talk by fit . 
 presently he face Adrian , cry : " and I might have stop it ! I see it now ! I might have stop it by go straight to he , and ask he if he dare marry a girl who do not love he . and I never think of it . good heaven ! I feel this miserable affair on my conscience . " 
 " ah ! " groan Adrian . " an unpleasant cargo for the conscience , that ! I would rather carry anything on mine than a married couple . do you purpose go to he now ? " 
 the hero soliloquize : " he be not a bad sort of man . " ... 
 " well , he be not a Cavalier , " say Adrian , " and that be why you wonder your aunt select he , no doubt ? he be decidedly of the Roundhead type , with the Puritan extract , or inoffensive , if latent . " 
 " there be the double infamy ! " cry Richard , " that a man you can not   call bad , should do this damned thing ! " 
 " well , it be hard we can not   find a villain . " 
 " he would have listen to I , I be sure . " 
 " go to he now , Richard , my son . go to he now . it be not yet too late . who know ? if he really have a noble elevated superior mind though not a Cavalier in person , he may be one at heart he might , to please you , and since you put such stress upon it , abstain ... perhaps with some loss of dignity , but never mind . and the request might be singular , or seem so , but everything have happen before in this world , you know , my dear boy . and what an infinite consolation it be for the eccentric , that reflection ! " 
 the hero be impervious to the wise youth . he star at he as if he be but a speck in the universe he visione . 
 it be provoke that Richard should be Adrian 's good subject for cynical pastime , in the extraordinary heterodoxy he start , and his bad in the way he take it ; and the wise youth , against his will , have to feel as conscious of the young man 's imaginative mental armour , as he be of his muscular physical . 
 " the same sort of day ! " muse Richard , look up . " I suppose my father 's right . we make our own fate , and nature have nothing to do with it . " 
 Adrian yawn . 
 " some difference in the tree , though , " Richard continue abstractedly . 
 " grow bald at the top , " say Adrian . 
 " will you believe that my aunt Helen compare the conduct of that wretched slave Clare to Lucy 's , who , she have the cruel insolence to say , entangle I into marriage ? " the hero break out loudly and rapidly . " you know I tell you , Adrian how I have to threaten and insist , and how she plead , and implore I to wait . " 
 " ah ! hum ! " mumble Adrian . 
 " you remember my tell you ? " Richard be earnest to hear she exonerated . 
 " plead and implore , my dear boy ? oh , no doubt she do . where be the lass that do not . " 
 " call my wife by another name , if you please . " 
 " the generic title can not   be cancel because of your have marry one of the body , my son . " 
 " she do all she could to persuade I to wait ! " emphasize Richard . 
 Adrian shake his head with a deplorable smile . 
 " come , come , my good Ricky ; not all ! not all ! " 
 Richard bellow : " what more could she have do ? " 
 " she could have shave her head , for instance . " 
 this happy shaft do stick . with a furious exclamation Richard shoot in front , adrian follow he ; and ask he   merely to have his assumption verify , whether he do not think she might have shave her head ? and , presume she to have do so , whether , in candour , he do not think he would have wait at least till she look less of a rank lunatic ? 
 after a minute or so , the wise youth be but a fly buzz about Richard 's head . three week of separation from Lucy , and an excitement decease , cause he to have soft yearning for the dear lovely home - face . he tell Adrian it be his intention to go down that night . Adrian immediately become serious . he be at a loss what to invent to detain he , beyond the stale fiction that his father be come to - morrow . he render homage to the genius of woman in these strait . " my aunt , " he think , " would have the lie ready ; and not only that , but she would take care it do its work . " 
 at this juncture the voice of a cavalier in the row hail they , prove to be the Honourable Peter Brayder , Lord Mountfalcon 's parasite . he greet they very cordially ; and Richard , remember some fun they have in the Island , ask he to dine with they ; postpone his return till the next day . Lucy be his . it be even sweet to dally with the delight of see she . 
 the Hon . Peter be one who do honour to the body he belong to . though not so tall as a west of London footman , he be as shapely ; and he have a power of make his voice insinuate , or arrogant , as it suit the exigency of his profession . he have not a rap of money in the world ; yet he ride a horse , live high , expend largely . the world say that the Hon . Peter be salary by his Lordship , and that , in common with that of Parasite , he exercise the ancient companion profession . this the world say , and still smile at the Hon . Peter ; for he be an engaging fellow , and where he go not Lord Mountfalcon would not go . 
 they have a quiet little hotel dinner , order by Adrian , and make a square at the table , Ripton Thompson be the fourth . Richard send down to his office to fetch he , and the two friend shake hand for the first time since the great deed have be execute . Deep be the Old Dog 's delight to hear the praise of his Beauty sound by such aristocratic lip as the Hon . Peter Brayder 's . all through the dinner he be throw out hint and small query to get a full account of she ; and when the claret have circulate , he speak a word or two himself , and hear the Hon . Peter eulogize his taste , and wish he a bride as beautiful ; at which Ripton blush , and say , he have no hope of that , and the Hon . Peter assure he marriage do not break the mould . 
 after the wine this gentleman take his cigar on the balcony , and find occasion to get some conversation with Adrian alone . 
 " our young friend here make it all right with the governor ? " he ask carelessly . 
 " oh yes ! " say Adrian . but it strike he that Brayder might be of assistance in show Richard a little of the ` society in every form ' require by his chief 's prescript . " that be , " he continue , " we be not yet permit an interview with the august author of our being , and I have rather a difficult post . ' tis mine both to keep he here , and also to find he the opportunity to measure himself with his fellow - man . in other word , his father want he to see something of life before he enter upon housekeeping . now I be proud to confess that I be hardly equal to the task . the demi , or damnedmonde if it be that lie want he to observe be one that I leave not get the walk to . " 
 " ha ! ha ! " laugh Brayder . " you do the keeping , I offer to parade the demi . I must say , though , it be a queer notion of the old gentleman . " 
 " it be the continuation of a philosophic plan , " say Adrian . 
 Brayder follow the curving of the whiff of his cigar with his eye , and ejaculate , " infernally philosophic ! " 
 " have Lord Mountfalcon leave the island ? " Adrian inquire . 
 " Mount ? to tell the truth I do not   know where he be . chase some light craft , I suppose . that be poor Mount 's weakness . it be his ruin , poor fellow ! he be so confoundedly in earnest at the game . " 
 " he ought to know it by this time , if fame speak true , " remark Adrian . 
 " he be a baby about woman , and always will be , " say Brayder . " he be be once or twice want to marry they . now there be a woman you have   hear of Mrs. Mount ? all the world know she . if that woman have not   scandalize . " the young man join they , and check the communication . Brayder wink to Adrian , and pitifully indicate the presence of an innocent . 
 " a married man , you know , " say Adrian . 
 " yes , yes ! we will not   shock he , " Brayder observe . he appear to study the young man while they talk . 
 next morning Richard be surprise by a visit from his aunt . Mrs. Doria take a seat by his side and speak as follow : 
 " my dear nephew . now you know I have always love you , and think of your welfare as if you have be my own child . More than that , I fear . well , now , you be think of return to to that place be you not ? yes . it be as I think . very well now , let I speak to you . you be in a much more dangerous position than you imagine . I do not   deny your father 's affection for you . it would be absurd to deny it . but you be of an age now to appreciate his character . whatever you may do he will always give you money . that you be sure of ; that you know . very well . but you be one to want more than money : you want his love . Richard , I be convinced you will never be happy , whatever base pleasure you may be lead into , if he should withhold his love from you . now , child , you know you have grievously offend he . I wish not to animadvert on your conduct . you fancy yourself in love , and so on , and you be rash . the less say of it the well now . but you must now it be your duty now to do something to do everything that lie in your power to show he you repent . no interruption ! listen to I . you must consider he . Austin be not like other man . Austin require the most delicate management . you must whether you feel it or no present an appearance of contrition . I counsel it for the good of all . he be just like a woman , and where his feeling be offend he want utter subservience . he have you in town , and he do not see you : now you know that he and I be not in communication : we have likewise our difference : well , he have you in town , and he hold aloof : he be try you , my dear Richard . no : he be not at Raynham : I do not know where he be . he be try you , child , and you must be patient . you must convince he that you do not care utterly for your own gratification . if this person I wish to speak of she with respect , for your sake well , if she love you at all if , I say , she love you one atom , she will repeat my solicitation for you to stay and patiently wait here till he consent to see you . I tell you candidly , it be your only chance of ever get he to receive she . that you should know . and now , Richard , I may add that there be something else you should know . you should know that it depend entirely upon your conduct now , whether you be to see your father 's heart for ever divide from you , and a new family at Raynham . you do not understand ? I will explain . brother and sister be excellent thing for young people , but a new brood of they can hardly be acceptable to a young man . in fact , they be , and must be , alien . I only tell you what I have hear on good authority . do not   you understand now ? foolish boy ! if you do not humour he , he will marry she . oh ! I be sure of it . I know it . and this you will drive he to . I do not warn you on the score of your prospect , but of your feeling . I should regard such a contingency , Richard , as a final division between you . think of the scandal ! but alas , that be the least of the evil . " 
 it be Mrs. Doria 's object to produce an impression , and avoid an argument . she therefore leave he as soon as she have , as she suppose , make her mark on the young man . Richard be very silent during the speech , and save for an exclamation or so , have listen attentively . he ponder on what his aunt say . he love Lady Blandish , and yet he do not wish to see her Lady Feverel . Mrs. Doria lay painful stress on the scandal , and though he do not give his mind to this , he think of it . he think of his mother . where be she ? but most his thought recur to his father , and something akin to jealousy slowly awaken his heart to he . he have give he up , and have not latterly feel extremely filial ; but he could not bear the idea of a division in the love of which he have ever be the idol and sole object . and such a man , too ! so good ! so generous ! if it be jealousy that rouse the young man 's heart to his father , the well part of love be also revive in it . he think of old day : of his father 's forbearance , his own wilfulness . he look on himself , and what he have do , with the eye of such a man . he determine to do all he could to regain his favour . 
 Mrs. Doria learn from Adrian in the evening that her nephew intend wait in town another week . 
 " that will do , " smile Mrs. Doria . " he will be more patient at the end of a week . " 
 " oh ! do patience beget patience ? " say Adrian . " I be not aware it be a propagate virtue . I surrender he to you . I shall not   be able to hold he in after one week more . I assure you , my dear aunt , he be already " ... 
 " thank you , no explanation , " Mrs. Doria beg . 
 when Richard see her nest , he be inform that she have receive a most satisfactory letter from Mrs. John Todhunter : quite a glowing account of John 's behaviour : but on Richard 's desiring to know the word Clare have write , Mrs. Doria object to be explicit , and shoot into worldly gossip . 
 " Clare seldom glow , " say Richard . 
 " no , I mean for she , " his aunt remark . " do not   look like your father , child . " 
 " I should like to have see the letter , " say Richard . 
 Mrs. Doria do not propose to show it . 




 CHAPTER xxxvi 

 a Lady drive a pair of grey be notice by Richard in his ride and walk . she pass he rather obviously and often . she be very handsome ; a bold beauty , with shin black hair , red lip , and eye not afraid of man . the hair be brush from her temple , leave one of those fine reckless outline which the action of driving , and the pace , admirably set off . she take his fancy . he like the air of petulant gallantry about she , and muse upon the picture , rare to he , of a glorious dash woman . he think , too , she look at he . he be not at the time incline to be vain , or he might have be sure she do . once it strike he she nod slightly . 
 he ask Adrian one day in the park who she be . 
 " I do not   know she , " say Adrian . " probably a superior priestess of Paphos . " 
 " now that be my idea of Bellona , " Richard exclaim . " not the fury they paint , but a spirited , dauntless , eager - look creature like that . " 
 " Bellona ? " return the wise youth . " I do not   think her hair be black . Red , be not   it ? I should not   compare she to Bellona ; though , no doubt , she be as ready to spill blood . look at she ! she do seem to scent carnage . I see your idea . no ; I should liken she to Diana emerge from the tutorship of Master Endymion , and at nice play among the god . depend upon it they tell we nothing of the matter Olympus shroud the story but you may be certain that when she leave the pretty shepherd she have great vogue than Venus up aloft . " 
 Brayder join they . 
 " see Mrs. Mount go by ? " he say . 
 " oh , that be Mrs. Mount ! " cry Adrian . 
 " who be Mrs. Mount ? " Richard inquire . 
 " a sister to Miss Random , my dear boy . " 
 " like to know she ? " drawl the Hon . Peter . 
 Richard reply indifferently , " no , " and Mrs. Mount pass out of sight and out of the conversation . 
 the young man write submissive letter to his father . " I have remain here wait to see you now five week , " he write . " I have write to you three letter , and you do not reply to they . let I tell you again how sincerely I desire and pray that you will come , or permit I to come to you and throw myself at your foot , and beg my forgiveness , and her . she as earnestly implore it . indeed , I be very wretched , sir . believe I , there be nothing I would not do to regain your esteem and the love I fear I have unhappily forfeit . I will remain another week in the hope of hear from you , or see you . I beg of you , sir , not to drive I mad . whatever you ask of I I will consent to . " 
 " nothing he would not do ! " the baronet comment as he read . " there be nothing he would not do ! he will remain another week and give I that final chance ! and it be I who drive he mad ! already he be begin to cast his retribution on my shoulder . " 
 Sir Austin have really go down to Wales to be out of the way . a Shaddock - Dogmatist do not meet misfortune without hearing of it , and the author of the Pilgrim 's Scrip in trouble find London too hot for he . he quit London to take refuge among the mountain ; live there in solitary commune with a virgin note - book . 
 some indefinite scheme be in his head in this treatment of his son . have he construe it , it would have look ugly ; and it settle to a vague principle that the young man should be try and test . 
 " let he learn to deny himself something . let he live with his equal for a term . if he love I he will read my wish . " thus he explain his principle to Lady Blandish . 
 the lady write : " you speak of a term . till when ? may I name one to he ? it be the dreadful uncertainty that reduce he to despair . that , and nothing else . pray be explicit . " 
 in return , he distantly indicate Richard 's majority . 
 how could Lady Blandish go and ask the young man to wait a year away from his wife ? her instinct begin to open a wide eye on the idol she worship . 
 when people do not themselves know what they mean , they succeed in deceive and impose upon other . not only be Lady Blandish mystify ; Mrs. Doria , who pierce into the recess of everybody 's mind , and have always be in the habit of read off her brother from infancy , and have never know herself to be once wrong about he , she confess she be quite at a loss to comprehend Austin 's principle . " for principle he have , " say Mrs. Doria ; " he never act without one . but what it be , I can not at present perceive . if he would write , and command the boy to await his return , all would be clear . he allow we to go and fetch he , and then leave we all in a quandary . it must be some woman 's influence . that be the only way to account for it . " 
 " Singular ! " interject Adrian , " what pride woman have in their sex ! well , I have to tell you , my dear aunt , that the day after to - morrow I hand my charge over to your keeping . I can not   hold he in an hour long . I have   have to leash he with lie till my invention 's exhausted . I petition to have they put down to the chief 's account , but when the stream run dry I can do no more . the last be , that I have hear from he desire I to have the south - west bedroom ready for he on Tuesday proximate . ' so ! ' say my son , ' I will wait till then , ' and from the gigantic effort he exhibit in come to it , I doubt any human power 's get he to wait long . " 
 " we must , we must detain he , " say Mrs. Doria . " if we do not , I be convince Austin will do something rash that he will for ever repent . he will marry that woman , Adrian . mark my word . now with any other young man ! ... but Richard 's education ! that ridiculous system ! ... have he no distraction ? nothing to amuse he ? " 
 " poor boy ! I suppose he want his own particular playfellow . " 
 the wise youth have to bow to a reproof . 
 " I tell you , Adrian , he will marry that woman . " 
 " my dear aunt ! can a chaste man do aught more commendable ? " 
 " have the boy no object we can induce he to follow ? if he have but a profession ! " 
 " what say you to the regeneration of the street of London , and the profession of moral - scavenger , aunt ? I assure you I have serve a month 's apprenticeship with he . we sally forth on the tenth hour of the night . a female pass . I hear he groan . ' be she one of they , Adrian ? ' I be compel to admit she be not the saint he deem it the portion of every creature wear petticoat to be . another groan ; an evident internal , ' it can not be and yet!' ... that we hear on the stage . rolling of eye : impious questioning of the Creator of the universe ; savage muttering against brutal male ; and then we meet a second young person , and repeat the performance of which I be rather tired . it would be all very well , but he turn upon I , and lecture I because I do not   hire a house , and furnish it for all the woman one meet to live in in purity . now that be too much to ask of a quiet man . Master Thompson have latterly relieve I , I be happy to say . " 
 Mrs. Doria think her thought . 
 " have Austin write to you since you be in town ? " 
 " not an Aphorism ! " return Adrian . 
 " I must see Richard to - morrow morning , " Mrs. Doria end the colloquy by say . 
 the result of her interview with her nephew be , that Richard make no allusion to a departure on the Tuesday ; and for many day afterward he appear to have an absorbing business on his hand : but what it be Adrian do not then learn , and his admiration of Mrs. Doria 's genius for management rise to a very high pitch . 
 on a morning in October they have an early visitor in the person of the Hon . Peter , whom they have not see for a week or more . 
 " gentleman , " he say , flourish his cane in his most affable manner , " I have   come to propose to you to join we in a little dinner - party at Richmond . nobody be in town , you know . London 's as dead as a stock - fish . nothing but the scraping to offer you . but the weather 's fine : I flatter myself you will find the company agreeable , what say my friend Feverel ? " 
 Richard beg to be excuse . 
 " no , no : positively you must come , " say the Hon . Peter . " I have   have some trouble to get they together to relieve the dulness of your incarceration . Richmond 's within the rule of your prison . you can be back by night . moonlight on the water lovely woman . we have   engage a city - barge to pull we back . eight oar I be not sure it be not   sixteen . come the word ! " 
 Adrian be for go . Richard say he have an appointment with Ripton . 
 " you be in for another rick , you two , " say Adrian . " arrange that we go . you have not   see the cockney 's Paradise . Abjure blaze , and taste of peace , my son . " 
 after some persuasion , Richard yawn wearily , and get up , and throw aside the care that be on he , say , " very well . just as you like . we will take old Rip with we . " 
 Adrian consult Brayder 's eye at this . the Hon . Peter briskly declare he should be delighted to have Feverel 's friend , and offer to take they all down in his drag . 
 " if you do not   get a match on to swim there with the tide eh , Feverel , my boy ? " 
 Richard reply that he have give up that sort of thing , at which Brayder communicate a queer glance to Adrian , and applaud the youth . 
 Richmond be under a still October sun . the pleasant landscape , bath in Autumn , stretch from the foot of the hill to a red horizon haze . the day be like none that Richard vividly remember . it touch no link in the chain of his recollection . it be quiet , and belong to the spirit of the season . 
 Adrian have divine the character of the scraping they be to meet . Brayder introduce they to one or two of the man , hastily and in rather an undervoice , as a thing to get over . they make their bow to the first knot of lady they encounter . propriety be observe strictly , even to severity . the general talk be of the weather . here and there a lady would seize a button - hole or any little bit of the habiliment , of the man she be address ; and if it come to she to chide he , she do it with more than a forefinger . this , however , be only here and there , and a privilege of intimacy . 
 where lady be gather together , the Queen of the assemblage may be know by her Court of male . the Queen of the present gathering lean against a corner of the open window , surround by a stalwart Court , in whom a practised eye would have discern guardsman , and Ripton , with a sinking of the heart , apprehend lord . they be fine man , offer inanimate homage . the trim of their whiskerage , the cut of their coat , the high - breed indolence in their aspect , eclipse Ripton 's sense of self - esteem . but they kindly look over he . occasionally one commit a momentary outrage on he with an eye - glass , seem to cry out in a voice of scathing scorn , " who be this ? " and Ripton get close to his hero to justify his humble pretension to existence and an identity in the shadow of he . Richard gaze about . hero do not always know what to say or do ; and the cold bath before dinner in strange company be one of the instance . he have recognize his superb Bellona in the lady by the garden window . for Brayder the man have nod and yoke , the lady a pretty playfulness . he be very busy , pass between the group , chat , laugh , take the feminine tap he receive , and sometimes return they in sly whisper . Adrian sit down and cross his leg , look amused and benignant . 
 " whose dinner be it ? " Ripton hear a mignonne beauty ask of a cavalier . 
 " Mount 's , I suppose , " be the answer . 
 " where be he ? why do not   he come ? " 
 " an affaire , I fancy . " 
 " there he be again ! how shamefully he treat Mrs. Mount ! " 
 " she do not   seem to cry over it . " 
 Mrs. Mount be flash her tooth and eye with laughter at one of her Court , who appear to be Fool . 
 Dinner be announce . the lady proclaim extravagant appetite . Brayder post his three friend . Ripton find himself under the lee of a dame with a bosom . on the other aide of he be the mignonne . Adrian be at the low end of the table . lady be in profusion , and he have his share . Brayder draw Richard from seat to seat . a happy man have establish himself next to Mrs. Mount . Him Brayder hail to take the head of the table . the happy man object , Brayder continue urgent , the lady tenderly insist , the happy man grimace , drop into the post of honour , strove to look placable . Richard usurp his chair , and be not badly welcome by his neighbour . 
 then the dinner commence , and have all the attention of the company , till the flying of the first champagne - cork give the signal , and a hum begin to spread . sparkle wine , that looseneth the tongue , and displayeth the verity , hath also the quality of colour it . the lady laugh high ; Richard only think they gay and natural . they fling back in their chair and laugh to tear ; Ripton think only of the pleasure he have in their society . the champagne - cork continue a regular file - firing . 
 " where have you be lately ? I have not   see you in the park , " say Mrs. Mount to Richard . 
 " no , " he reply , " I have   not be there . " the question seem odd : she speak so simply that it do not impress he . he empty his glass , and have it fill again . 
 the Hon . Peter do most of the open talking , which relate to horse , yachting , opera , and sport generally : who be ruin ; by what horse , or by what woman . he tell one or two of Richard 's feat . fair smile reward the hero . 
 " do you bet ? " say Mrs. Mount . 
 " only on myself , " return Richard . 
 " Bravo ! " cry his Bellona , and her eye send a linger delirious sparkle across her brimming glass at he . 
 " I be sure you be a safe one to back , " she add , and seem to scan his point approvingly . 
 Richard 's cheek mount bloom . 
 " do not   you adore champagne ? " quoth the dame with a bosom to Ripton . 
 " oh , yes ! " answer Ripton , with more candour than accuracy , " I always drink it . " 
 " do you indeed ? " say the enraptured bosom , ogle he . " you would be a friend , now ! I hope you do not   object to a lady join you now and then . Champagne 's my folly . " 
 a laugh be circle among the lady of whom Adrian be the centre ; first low , and as he continue some narration , peal resound , till those exclude from the fun demand the cue , and lady lean behind gentleman to take it up , and form an electric chain of laughter . each one , as her ear receive it , catch up her handkerchief , and laugh , and look shocked afterwards , or look shocked and then spout laughter . the anecdote might have be communicate to the bewildered cavalier , but come to a lady of a demurer cast , she look shocked without laugh , and reprove the female table , in whose breast it be consign to burial : but here and there a man 's head be see bent , and a lady 's mouth move , though her face be not turn toward he , and a man 's broad laugh be presently hear , while the lady gaze unconsciously before she , and preserve her gravity if she could escape any other lady 's eye ; fail in which , handkerchief be simultaneously seize , and a second chime arise , till the tickling force subside to a few chance burst . 
 what nonsense it be that my father write about woman ! think Richard . he say they can not   laugh , and do not   understand humour . it come , he reflect , of his shut himself from the world . and the idea that he be see the world , and feel wise , flatter he . he talk fluently to his dangerous Bellona . he give she some reminiscence of Adrian 's whimsy . 
 " oh ! " say she , " that be your tutor , be it ! " she eye the young man as if she think he must go far and fast . 
 Ripton feel a push . " look at that , " say the bosom , fume utter disgust . he be direct to see a manly arm round the waist of the mignonne . " now that be what I do not   like in company , " the bosom inflate to observe with sufficient emphasis . " she always will allow it with everybody . give she a nudge . " 
 Ripton protest that he dare not ; upon which she say , " then I will " ; and incline her sumptuous bust across his lap , breathe wine in his face , and give the nudge . the mignonne turn an inquire eye on Ripton ; a mischievous spark shot from it . she laugh , and say ; " be not   you satisfied with the old girl ? " 
 " impudence ! " mutter the bosom , grow grander and redder . 
 " do , do fill her glass , and keep she quiet she drink port when there be no more champagne , " say the mignonne . 
 the bosom revenge herself by whisper to Ripton scandal of the mignonne , and between they he be enable to form a correcter estimate of the company , and quite recover from his original awe : so much so as to feel a touch of jealousy at see his lively little neighbour still hold in absolute possession . 
 Mrs. Mount do not come out much ; but there be a deferential manner in the bearing of the man toward she , which those haughty creature accord not save to clever woman ; and she contrive to hold the talk with three or four at the head of the table while she still have passage aside with Richard . 
 the port and claret go very well after the champagne . the lady here do not ignominiously surrender the field to the gentleman ; they maintain their position with honour . Silver be see far out on Thames . the wine ebb , and the laughter . Sentiment and cigar take up the wondrous tale . 
 " oh , what a lovely night ! " say the lady , look above . 
 " Charming , " say the gentleman , look below . 
 the faint - smell cool Autumn air be pleasant after the feast . fragrant weed burn bright about the garden . 
 " we be split into couple , " say Adrian to Richard , who be stand alone , eye the landscape . " tis the influence of the moon ! apparently we be in Cyprus . how have my son enjoy himself ? how like he the society of Aspasia ? I feel like a wise Greek to - night . " 
 Adrian be jolly , and roll comfortably as he talk . Ripton have be carry off by the sentimental bosom . he come up to they and whisper : " by Jove , Ricky ! do you know what sort of woman these be ? " 
 Richard say he think they a nice sort . 
 " Puritan ! " exclaim Adrian , slap Ripton on the back . " why do not   you get tipsy , sir ? do not   you ever intoxicate yourself except at lawful marriage ? reveal to we what you have do with the portly dame ? " 
 Ripton endure his bantering that he might hang about Richard , and watch over he . he be jealous of his innocent Beauty 's husband be in proximity with such woman . murmur couple pass they to and fro . 
 " by Jove , Ricky ! " Ripton favour his friend with another hard whisper , " there be a woman smoking ! " 
 " and why not , o Riptonus ? " say Adrian . " art unaware that woman cosmopolitan be woman consummate ? and dost grumble to pay the small price for the splendid gem ? " 
 " well , I do not   like woman to smoke , " say plain Ripton . 
 " why may not   they do what man do ? " the hero cry impetuously . " I hate that contemptible narrow - mindedness . it be that make the ruin and horror I see . why may not   they do what man do ? I like the woman who be brave enough not to be hypocrite . by heaven ! if these woman be bad , I like they well than a set of hypocritical creature who be all show , and deceive you in the end . " 
 " Bravo ! " shout Adrian . " there speak the regenerator . " 
 Ripton , as usual , be crush by his leader . he have no argument . he still think woman ought not to smoke ; and he think of one far away , lonely by the sea , who be perfect without be cosmopolitan . 
 the Pilgrim 's Scrip remark that : " young man take joy in nothing so much as the thinking woman Angels : and nothing sour man of experience more than know that all be not quite so . " 
 the Aphorist would have pardon Ripton Thompson his first Random extravagance , have he perceive the simple warm - hearted worship of feminine goodness Richard 's young bride have inspire in the breast of the youth . it might possibly have teach he to put deep trust in our nature . 
 Ripton think of she , and have a feeling of sadness . he wander about the ground by himself , go through an open postern , and throw himself down among some bush on the slope of the hill . lie there , and meditating , he become aware of voice converse . 
 " what do he want ? " say a woman 's voice . " it be another of his villanie , I know . upon my honour , Brayder , when I think of what I have to reproach he for , I think I must go mad , or kill he . " 
 " Tragic ! " say the Hon . Peter . " have not   you revenge yourself , Bella , pretty often ? good deal openly . this be a commercial transaction . you ask for money , and you be to have it on the condition : double the sum , and debt pay . " 
 " he apply to I ! " 
 " you know , my dear Bella , it have long be all up between you . I think Mount have behave very well , consider all he know . he be not easily hoodwink , you know . he resign himself to his fate and follow other game . " 
 " then the condition be , that I be to seduce this young man ? " 
 " my dear Bella ! you strike your bird like a hawk . I do not   say seduce . hold he in play with he . amuse he . " 
 " I do not   understand half - measure . " 
 " woman seldom do . " 
 " how I hate you , Brayder ! " 
 " I thank your ladyship . " 
 the two walk far . Ripton have hear some little of the colloquy . he leave the spot in a serious mood , apprehensive of something dark to the people he love , though he have no idea of what the Hon . Peter 's stipulation involve . 
 on the voyage back to town , Richard be again select to sit by Mrs. Mount . Brayder and Adrian start the joke . the pair of parasite get on extremely well together . Soft fall the plash of the oar ; softly the moonlight curl around they ; softly the bank glide by . the lady be in a state of high sentiment . they sing without request . all deem the british ballad - monger an appropriate interpreter of their emotion . after good wine , and plenty thereof , fair throat will make man of taste swallow that remarkable composer . eye , lip , heart ; dart and smart and sigh ; beauty , duty ; bosom , blossom ; false one , farewell ! to this pathetic strain they melt . Mrs. Mount , though strongly request , decline to sing . she preserve her state . under the tall aspen of Brentford - ait , and on they sweep , the white moon in their wake . Richard 's hand lie open by his side . Mrs. Mount 's little white hand by misadventure fall into it . it be not press , or soothe for its fall , or make intimate with eloquent finger . it lie there like a bit of snow on the cold ground . a yellow leaf waver down from the aspen strike Richard 's cheek , and he draw away the very hand to throw back his hair and smooth his face , and then fold his arm , unconscious of offence . he be think ambitiously of his life : his blood be untroubled , his brain calmly work . 
 " which be the more perilous ? " be a problem put by the Pilgrim : " to meet the tempting of Eve , or to pique she ? " 
 Mrs. Mount star at the young man as at a curiosity , and turn to flirt with one of her Court . the Guardsmen be mostly sentimental . one or two rattle , and one be such a good - humour fellow that Adrian could not make he ridiculous . the other seem to give themselves up to a silent waxing in length of limb . however far they sit remove , everybody be entangle in their leg . pursue his study , Adrian come to the conclusion , that the same close intellectual and moral affinity which he have discover to exist between our nobility and our yeomanry , be to be observe between the Guardsman class , and that of the corps de ballet : they both live by the strength of their leg , where also their wit , if they do not altogether reside there , be principally develop : both be volage ; wine , tobacco , and the moon , influence both alike ; and admit the one mark difference that do exist , it be , after all , pretty nearly the same thing to be coquet and sin on two leg as on the point of a toe . 
 a long Guardsman with a deep bass voice sing a doleful song about the twining tendril of the heart ruthlessly tear , but require urgent persuasion and heavy trumpeting of his lung to get to the end : before he have accomplish it , Adrian have contrive to raise a laugh in his neighbourhood , so that the company be divide , and the camp split : jollity return to one - half , while sentiment hold the other . Ripton , blot behind the bosom , be only lucky in secure a high degree of heat than be possible for the rest . " be you cold ? " she would ask , smile charitably . 
 " I be , " say the mignonne , as if to excuse her conduct . 
 " you always appear to be , " the fat one sniff and snap . 
 " will not   you warm two , Mrs. Mortimer ? " say the naughty little woman . 
 Disdain prevent any further notice of she . those familiar with the lady enjoy their sparring , which be frequent . the mignonne be hear to whisper : " that poor fellow will certainly be stew . " 
 very prettily the lady take and give warmth , for the air on the water be chill and misty . Adrian have beside he the demure one who have stop the circulation of his anecdote . she in nowise object to the fair exchange , but say " hush ! " betweenwhile . 
 Past Kew and Hammersmith , on the cool smooth water ; across Putney reach ; through Battersea bridge ; and the City grow around they , and the shadow of great mill - factory sleep athwart the moonlight . 
 all the lady prattle sweetly of a charming day when they alight on land . several cavalier crush for the honour of conduct Mrs. Mount to her home . 
 " my brougham 's here ; I shall go alone , " say Mrs. Mount . " some one arrange my shawl . " 
 she turn she back to Richard , who have a view of a delicate neck as he manipulate with the bearing of a mail knight . 
 " which way be you go ? " she ask carelessly , and , to his reply as to the direction , say : " then I can give you a lift , " and she take his arm with a matter - of - course air , and walk up the stair with he . 
 Ripton see what have happen . he be go to follow : the portly dame retain he , and desire he to get she a cab . 
 " oh , you happy fellow ! " say the bright - eyed mignonne , pass by . 
 Ripton procure the cab , and stuff it full without have to get into it himself . 
 " try and let he come in too ? " say the persecuting creature , again pass . 
 " take liberty with pour man you shall not   with I , " retort the angry bosom , and drive off . 
 " so she be be and go and run away and leave he after all his trouble ! " cry the pert little thing , peer into Ripton 's eye . " now you will never be so foolish as to pin your faith to fat woman again . there ! he shall be make happy another time . " she give his nose a comical tap , and trip away with her possessor . 
 Ripton rather forget his friend for some minute : random thought lay hold of he . cab and carriage rattle past . he be sure he have be among member of the nobility that day , though when they go by he now they only recognize he with an effort of the eyelid . he begin to think of the day with exultation , as an event . recollection of the mignonne be captivate . " blue eye just what I like ! and such a little impudent nose , and red lip , pout the very thing I like ! and her hair ? darkish , I think say brown . and so saucy , and light on her foot . and kind she be , or she would not   have talk to I like that . " thus , with a groan soul , he picture she . his reason voluntarily consign she to the aristocracy as a natural appanage : but he do amorously wish that Fortune have make a lord of he . 
 then his mind revert to Mrs. Mount , and the strange bit of the conversation he have hear on the hill . he be not one to suspect anybody positively . he be timid of fix a suspicion . it hover indefinitely , and cloud people , without stir he to any resolve . still the attention of the lady toward Richard be queer . he endeavour to imagine they be in the nature of thing , because Richard be so handsome that any woman must take to he . " but he be marry , " say Ripton , " and he must not   go near these people if he be marry . " not a high morality , perhaps well than none at all : well for the world be it practise more . he think of Richard along with that sparkle dame , alone with she . the adorable beauty of his dear bride , her pure heavenly face , swam before he . think of she , he lose sight of the mignonne who have make he giddy . 
 he walk to Richard 's hotel , and up and down the street there , hop every minute to hear his step ; sometimes fancy he might have return and go to bed . two o'clock strike . Ripton could not go away . he be sure he should not sleep if he do . at last the cold send he homeward , and leave the street , on the moonlight side of Piccadilly he meet his friend patrol with his head up and that swing of the foot proper to man who be chant verse . 
 " Old Rip ! " cry Richard , cheerily . " what on earth be you do here at this hour of the morning ? " 
 Ripton mutter of his pleasure at meet he . " I want to shake your hand before I go home . " 
 Richard smile on he in an amuse kindly way . " that all ? you may shake my hand any day , like a true man as you be , old Rip ! I have   be speak about you . do you know , that Mrs. Mount never see you all the time at Richmond , or in the boat ! " 
 " oh ! " Ripton say , well assure that he be a dwarf " you see her safe home ? " 
 " yes . I have   be there for the last couple of hour talk . she talk capitally : she be wonderfully clever . she be very like a man , only much nice . I like she . " 
 " but , Richard , excuse I I be sure I do not   mean to offend you but now you be marry ... perhaps you could not   help see her home , but I think you really indeed ought not   to have go upstairs . " 
 Ripton deliver this opinion with a modest impressiveness . 
 " what do you mean ? " say Richard . " you do not   suppose I care for any woman but my little darling down there . " he laugh . 
 " no ; of course not . that be absurd . what I mean be , that people perhaps will you know , they do they say all manner of thing , and that make unhappiness ; and I do wish you be go home to - morrow , Ricky . I mean , to your dear wife . " Ripton blush and look away as he speak . 
 the hero give one of his scornful glance . " so you be anxious about my reputation . I hate that way of look on woman . because they have be once mislead look how much weak they be ! because the world have give they an ill fame , you would treat they as contagious and keep away from they for the sake of your character ! 
 " it would be different with I , " quoth Ripton . 
 " how ? " ask the hero . 
 " because I be bad than you , " be all the logical explanation Ripton be capable of . 
 " I do hope you will go home soon , " he add . 
 " yes , " say Richard , " and I , so do I hope so . but I have   work to do now . I dare not , I can not , leave it . Lucy would be the last to ask I ; you see her letter yesterday . now listen to I , Rip . I want to make you be just to woman . " 
 then he read Ripton a lecture on err woman , speak of they as if he have know they and study they for year . clever , beautiful , but betray by love , it be the first duty of all true man to cherish and redeem they . " we turn they into curse , Rip ; these divine creature . " and the world suffer for it . that that be the root of all the evil in the world ! 
 " I do not   feel anger or horror at these poor woman , Rip ! it be strange . I know what they be when we come home in the boat . but I do it tear my heart to see a young girl give over to an old man a man she do not   love . that be shame ! do not   speak of it . " 
 forget to contest the premiss , that all betray woman be betray by love , Ripton be quite silence . he , like most young man , have ponder somewhat on this matter , and be inclined to be sentimental when he be not hungry . they walk in the moonlight by the railing of the park . Richard harangue at leisure , while Ripton 's tooth chatter . chivalry might be dead , but still there be something to do , go the strain . the lady of the day have not be throw in the hero 's path without an object , he say ; and he be sadly right there . he do not express the thing clearly ; nevertheless Ripton understand he to mean , he intend to rescue that lady from further transgression , and show a certain scorn of the world . that lady , and then other lady unknown , be to be rescue . Ripton be to help . he and Ripton be to be the knight of this enterprise . when appeal to , Ripton acquiesce , and shiver . not only be they to be knight , they would have to be Titans , for the power of the world , the spurious ruling Social Gods , would have to be defy and overthrow . and Titan number one fling up his handsome bold face as if to challenge base Jove on the spot ; and Titan number two strain the upper button of his coat to meet across his pocket - handkerchief on his chest , and warm his finger under his coat - tail . the moon have fall from her high seat and be in the mist of the West , when he be allow to seek his blanket , and the cold act on his friend 's eloquence make Ripton 's flesh very contrite . the poor fellow have thin blood than the hero ; but his heart be good . by the time he have get a little warmth about he , his heart gratefully strove to encourage he in the conception of become a knight and a Titan ; and so strive Ripton fall asleep and dreamed . 




 CHAPTER XXXVII 

 Behold the hero embark in the redemption of an err beautiful woman . 

 " alas ! " write the Pilgrim at this very time to Lady Blandish , " I can not get that legend of the Serpent from I , the more I think . have he not catch you , and rank you foremost in his legion ? for see : till you be fashion , the fruit hang immobile on the bough . they sway before we , glisten and cold . the hand must be eager that pluck they . they do not come down to we , and smile , and speak our language , and read our thought , and know when to fly , when to follow ! how surely to have we ! 
 " do but mark one of you stand openly in the track of the Serpent . what shall be do with she ? I fear the world be wise than its judge ! turn from she , say the world . by day the son of the world do . it darken , and they dance together downward . then come there one of the world 's elect who deem old counsel devilish ; indifference to the end of evil bad than its pursuit . he come to reclaim she . from deep bane will he bring she back to high blessing . be not that a bait already ? poor fish ! ' tis wondrous flattering . the Serpent have slim she so to secure he ! with slow weary step he draw she into light : she cling to he ; she be human ; part of his work , and he love it . as they mount upward , he look on her more , while she , it may be , look above . what have touch he ? what have pass out of she , and into he ? the Serpent laugh below . at the gateway of the Sun they fall together ! " 
 this alliterative production be write without any sense of the peril that make prophecy . 
 it suit Sir Austin to write thus . it be a channel to his acrimony moderate through his philosophy . the letter be a reply to a vehement entreaty from Lady Blandish for he to come up to Richard and forgive he thoroughly : Richard 's name be not mention in it . 
 " he try to be more than he be , " think the lady : and she begin insensibly to conceive he less than he be . 
 the baronet be conscious of a certain false gratification in his son 's apparent obedience to his wish and complete submission ; a gratification he choose to accept as his due , without dissect or account for it . the intelligence reiterate that Richard wait , and still wait ; Richard 's letter , and more his dumb abiding and practical penitence ; vindicate humanity sufficiently to stop the course of virulent aphorism . he could speak , we have see , in sorrow for this frail nature of ours , that he have once stand forth to champion . " but how long will this last ? " he demand , with the air of Hippias . he do not reflect how long it have last . indeed , his indigestion of wrath have make of he a moral Dyspepsy . 
 it be not mere obedience that hold Richard from the aim of his young wife : nor be it this new knightly enterprise he have presume to undertake . hero as he be , a youth , open to the insane prompting of hot blood , he be not a fool . there have be talk between he and Mrs. Doria of his mother . now that he have break from his father , his heart speak for she . she live , he know : he know no more . word painfully hover along the border of plain speech have be communicate to he , fill he with moody imagining . if he think of she , the red be on his face , though he could not have say why . but now , after canvass the conduct of his father , and throw he aside as a terrible riddle , he ask Mrs. Doria to tell he of his other parent . as softly as she could she tell the story . to she the shame be past : she could weep for the poor lady . Richard drop no tear . Disgrace of this kind be always present to a son , and , educate as he have be , these tiding be a vivid fire in his brain . he resolve to hunt she out , and take she from the man . here be work set to his hand . all her dear husband do be right to Lucy . she encourage he to stay for that purpose , think it also serve another . there be Tom Bakewell to watch over Lucy : there be work for he to do . whether it would please his father he do not stop to consider . as to the justice of the act , let we say nothing . 
 on Ripton devolve the humbler task of grub for Sandoe 's place of residence ; and as he be unacquainted with the name by which the poet now go in private , his endeavour be not immediately successful . the friend meet in the evening at Lady Blandish 's town - house , or at the Foreys ' , where Mrs. Doria procure the reverer of the Royal Martyr , and staunch conservative , a favourable reception . pity , deep pity for Richard 's conduct Ripton see breathe out of Mrs. Doria . Algernon Feverel treat his nephew with a sort of rough commiseration , as a young fellow who have run off the road . 
 Pity be in Lady Blandish 's eye , though for a different cause . she doubt if she do well in second his father 's unwise scheme suppose he to have a scheme . she see the young husband encompass by danger at a critical time . not a word of Mrs. Mount have be breathe to she , but the lady have some knowledge of life . she touch on delicate verge to the baronet in her letter , and he understand she well enough . " if he love this person to whom he have bind himself , what fear for he ? or be you come to think it something that bear the name of love because we have to veil the rightful appellation ? " so he respond , remote among the mountain . she try very hard to speak plainly . finally he come to say that he deny himself the pleasure of see his son specially , that he for a time might be put to the test the lady seem to dread . this be almost too much for Lady Blandish . Love 's charity boy so loftily serene now that she see he half denude a thing of shank and wrist be a trial for her true heart . 
 go home at night Richard would laugh at the face make about his marriage . " we will carry the day , Rip , my Lucy and I ! or I will do it alone what there be to do . " he slightly advert to a natural want of courage in woman , which Ripton take to indicate that his Beauty be deficient in that quality . up leapt the Old Dog ; " I be sure there never be a braver creature upon earth , Richard ! she be as brave as she be lovely , I will swear she be ! look how she behave that day ! how her voice sound ! she be tremble ... Brave ? she would follow you into battle , Richard ! " 
 and Richard rejoin : " talk on , dear old Rip ! she be my darling love , whatever she be ! and she be gloriously lovely . no eye be like her . I will go down to - morrow morning the first thing . " 
 Ripton only wonder the husband of such a treasure could remain apart from it . so think Richard for a space . 
 " but if I go , Rip , " he say despondently , " if I go for a day even I shall have undo all my work with my father . she say it herself you see it in her last letter . " 
 " yes , " Ripton assent , and the word " please remember I to dear Mr. Thompson , " flutter about the Old Dog 's heart . 
 it come to pass that Mrs. Berry , have certain business that lead she through Kensington Gardens , spy a figure that she have once dandle in long clothe , and help make a man of , if ever woman do . he be walk under the tree beside a lady , talk to she , not indifferently . the gentleman be her bridegroom and her babe . " I know his back , " say Mrs. Berry , as if she have brand a mark on it in infancy . but the lady be not her bride . Mrs. Berry diverge from the path , and get before they on the left flank ; she star , retreat , and come round upon the right . there be that in the lady 's face which Mrs. Berry do not like . her innermost question be , why he be not walk with his own wife ? she stop in front of they . they break , and pass about she . the lady make a laugh remark to he , whereat he turn to look , and Mrs. Berry bob . she have to bob a second time , and then he remember the worthy creature , and hail she Penelope , shake her hand so that he put she in countenance again . Mrs. Berry be extremely agitated . he dismiss she , promise to call upon she in the evening . she hear the lady slip out something from a side of her lip , and they both laugh as she toddle off to a shelter tree to wipe a corner of each eye . " I do not   like the look of that woman , " she say , and repeat it resolutely . 
 " why do not   he walk arm - in - arm with she ? " be her neat inquiry . " where be his wife ? " succeed it . after many interrogation of the sort , she arrive at name the lady a bold - faced thing ; add subsequently , brazen . the lady have apparently show Mrs. Berry that she wish to get rid of she , and have check the outpouring of her emotion on the breast of her babe . " I know a lady when I see one , " say Mrs. Berry . " I have not   live with them for nothing ; and if she be a lady breed and bear , I be not   marry in the church alive . " 
 then , if not a lady , what be she ? Mrs. Berry desire to know : " she 's imitation lady , I be sure she be ! " Berry vow . " I say she do not   look proper . " 
 establish the lady to be a spurious article , however , what be one to think of a married man in company with such ? " oh no ! it be not   that ! " Mrs. Berry return immediately on the charitable tack . " belike it be some one of his acquaintance ' ve   marry she for her look , and he've   just meet she .... why it would be as bad as my Berry ! " the relinquished spouse of Berry ejaculate , in horror at the idea of a second man be so monstrous in wickedness . " just couple , too ! " Mrs. Berry groan on the suspicious side of the debate . " and such a sweet young thing for his wife ! but no , I will never believe it . not if he tell I so himself ! and man do not   do that , " she whimper . 
 woman be swift at come to conclusion in these matter ; soft woman exceedingly swift : and soft woman who have be betray be rapid beyond measure . Mrs. Berry have not cogitate long ere she pronounce distinctly and without a shadow of dubiosity : " my opinion be married or not marry , and wheresomever he pick she up she be nothing more nor less than a Bella Donna ! " as which poisonous plant she forthwith register the lady in the botanical note - book of her brain . it would have astonish Mrs. Mount to have hear her person so accurately hit off at a glance . 
 in the evening Richard make good his promise , accompany by Ripton . Mrs. Berry open the door to they . she could not wait to get he into the parlour . " you be my own blessed babe ; and I be as good as your mother , though I do not   suck ye , bein ' a maid ! " she cry , fall into his arm , while Richard do his good to support the unexpected burden . then reproach he tenderly for his guile at mention of which Ripton chuckle , deem it his own most honourable portion of the plot Mrs. Berry lead they into the parlour , and reveal to Richard who she be , and how she have toss he , and hug he , and kiss he all over , when he be only that big show he her stumpy fat arm . " I kiss ye from head to tail , I do , " say Mrs. Berry , " and you need not   be ashamed of it . it be be hop you will never have nothing bad come t'ye , my dear ! " 
 Richard assure she he be not a bit ashamed , but warn she that she must not do it now , Mrs. Berry admit it be out of the question now , and now that he have a wife , moreover . the young man laugh , and Ripton laugh over - loudly draw on himself Mrs. Berry 's attention : " but that Mr. Thompson there however he can look I in the face after his inn'cence ! help blindfold an old woman ! though I be not   sorry for what I do that I be free for to say , and its ' over , and bless be all ! amen ! so now where be she and how be she , Mr. Richard , my dear it be only cuttin ' off the 's ' and you be as you be . why do not   ye bring she with ye to see her old berry ? " 
 Richard hurriedly explain that Lucy be still in the Isle of Wight . 
 " oh ! and you have   leave she for a day or two ? " say Mrs. Berry . 
 " good God ! I wish it have be a day or two , " cry Richard . 
 " ah ! and how long have it be ? " ask Mrs. Berry , her heart begin to beat at his manner of speak . 
 " do not   talk about it , " say Richard . 
 " oh ! you never be dudgeonin ' already ? oh ! you have not   be peckin ' at one another yet ? " Mrs. Berry exclaim . 
 Ripton interpose to tell she such fear be unfounded . 
 " then how long ha ' you be divide ? " 
 in a guilty voice Ripton stammer ' since September . " 
 " September ! " breathe Mrs. Berry , count on her finger , " September , October , Nov two month and more ! nigh three ! a young married husband away from the wife of his bosom nigh three month ! oh my ! oh my ! what do that mean ? " 
 " my father send for I I be wait to see he , " say Richard . a few more word help Mrs. Berry to comprehend the condition of affair . then Mrs. Berry spread her lap , flatten out her hand , fix her eye , and speak . 
 " my dear young gentleman ! I would like to call ye my darlin ' babe ! I be go to speak as a mother to ye , whether ye like it or no ; and what old Berry say , you will not   mind , for she be have ye when there be no conventional about ye , and she have the feelin 's of a mother to you , though humble her state . if there be one that know matrimony it be I , my dear , though Berry do give I no more but nine month of it and I have   know the bad of matrimony , which , if you want to be woeful wise , there it be for ye . for what have be my gain ? that man give I nothing but his name ; and Bessy Andrews be as good as Bessy Berry , though both be ' bs , ' and say he , you be ' a , ' and now you be ' b , ' so you be my a b , he say , write yourself down that , he say , the bad man , with his joke ! berry go to service . " Mrs. Berry 's softness come upon she . " so I tell ye , Berry go to service . he leave the wife of his bosom forlorn and he go to service ; because he be allay an ambitious man , and be not , so to speak , happy out of his uniform which be his livery not even in my arm : and he let I know it . he get among they kitchen slut , which be my mournin ' ready make , and bad than a widow 's cap to I , which be no shame to wear , and some say become . there be no man as ever live know well than my berry how to show his leg to advantage , and gal look at them . I do not   wonder now that Berry be prostrate . his temptation be strong , and his flesh be weak . then what I say be , that for a young married man be he whomsoever he may be to be separate from the wife of his bosom a young sweet thing , and he an innocent young gentleman ! so to sunder , in their state , and be kep ' from each other , I say it be as bad as bad can be ! for what be matrimony , my dear ? we be tell it be a holy ordnance . and why be ye so comfortable in matrimony ? for that ye be not a sinnin ' ! and they that sever ye they tempt ye to stray : and you learn too late the meanin ' o ' they blessin 's of the priest as it be ordain . Separate what come ? fust it be like the circulation of your blood a - stoppin ' all go wrong . then there be misunderstanding ye've   both lose the key . then , behold ye , there 's bird o ' prey hoverin ' over each on ye , and it be which'll be snap up fust . then oh , dear ! oh , dear ! it be like the devil come into the world again . " Mrs. Berry strike her hand and moan . " a day I will give ye : I will go so far as a week : but there be the outside . three month dwellin ' apart ! that be not matrimony , it be divorcin ' ! what can it be to she but widowhood ? widowhood with no cap to show for it ! and what can it be to you , my dear ? think ! you be a bachelor three month ! and a bachelor man , " Mrs. Berry shake her head most dolefully , " he be not   widow woman . I do not   go to compare you to Berry , my dear young gentleman . some man 's heart be vagabond bear they must go astray it be their natur ' to . but all man be man , and I know the foundation of them , by reason of my woe . " 
 Mrs. Berry pause . Richard be humorously respectful to the sermon . the truth in the good creature 's address be not to be dispute , or despise , notwithstanding the inclination to laugh provoke by her quaint way of put it . Ripton nod encouragingly at every sentence , for he see her drift , and wish to second it . 
 seek for an illustration of her meaning , Mrs. Berry solemnly continue : " we all know what check prespiration be . " but neither of the young gentleman could resist this . out they burst in a roar of laughter . 
 " laugh away , " say Mrs. Berry . " I do not   mind ye . I say again , we all do know what check prespiration be . it fly to the lung , it give ye mortal inflammation , and it carry ye off . then I say check matrimony be as bad . it fly to the heart , and it carry off the virtue that be in ye , and you might as well be dead ! they that be join it be their salvation not to separate ! it do not   so much matter before it . that Mr. Thompson there if he go astray , it be not   from the bless fold . he hurt himself alone not double , and belike treble , for who can say now what may be ? there be time for it . I be for hold back young people so that they know their mind , howsomever they rattle about their heart . I be not   a speeder of matrimony , and good be my reason ! but where it be be do where they be lawfully join , and their body make one , I do say this , that to put division between them then , it be to make wanderin ' comet of them creature without a objeck , and no soul can say what they be good for but to rush about ! " 
 Mrs. Berry here take a heavy breath , as one who have say her utmost for the time be . 
 " my dear old girl , " Richard go up to she and , applaud she on the shoulder , " you be a very wise old woman . but you must not   speak to I as if I want to stop here . I be compel to . I do it for her good chiefly . " 
 " it be your father that be do it , my dear ? " 
 " well , I be wait his pleasure . " 
 " a pretty pleasure ! puttin ' a snake in the nest of young turtle - dove ! and why do not   she come up to you ? " 
 " well , that you must ask she . the fact be , she be a little timid girl she want I to see he first , and when I have   make all right , then she will come . " 
 " a little timid girl ! " cry Mrs. Berry . " oh , lor ' , how she must ha ' deceive ye to make ye think that ! look at that ring , " she hold out her finger , " he be a stranger : he be not my lawful ! you know what ye do to I , my dear . could I get my own wedding - ring back from she ? ' no ! ' say she , firm as a rock , ' he say , with this ring I thee we d ' I think I see she now , with her pretty eye and lovesome lock a darlin ' ! and that ring she would keep to , come life , come death . and she must ha ' be a rock for I to give in to she in that . for what be the consequence ? here be I , " Mrs. Berry smooth down the back of her hand mournfully , " here be I in a strange ring , that be like a strange man holdin ' of I , and I a - wearin ' of it just to seem decent , and feelin ' all over no well than a b a big that nasty come I can not   abide ! I tell you , my dear , she be not   soft , no ! except to the man of her heart ; and the good of woman 's too soft there more our sorrow ! " 
 " well , well ! " say Richard , who think he know . 
 " I agree with you , Mrs. Berry , " Ripton strike in , " Mrs. Richard would do anything in the world her husband ask she , I be quite sure . " 
 " bless you for your good opinion , Mr. Thompson ! why , see she ! she be not   frail on her foot ; she look ye straight in the eye ; she be not   one of your hang - down miss . look how she behave at the ceremony ! " 
 " ah ! " sigh Ripton . 
 " and if you would ha ' see she when she speak to I about my ring ! depend upon it , my dear Mr. Richard , if she blind you about the nerve she've   get , it be something she think she ought to do for your sake , and I wish I have be by to counsel she , poor blessed babe ! and how much long , now , can ye stay divided from that darlin ' ? " 
 Richard pace up and down . 
 " a father 's will , " urge Mrs. Berry , " that be a son 's law ; but he must not   go again ' the law of his nature to do it . " 
 " just be quiet at present talk of other thing , there be a good woman , " say Richard . 
 Mrs. Berry meekly fold her arm . 
 " how strange , now , our meetin ' like this ! meetin ' at all , too ! " she remark contemplatively . " it be they advertisement ! they bring people together from the end of the earth , for good or for bad . I often say , there be more lucky accident , or unlucky one , since advertisement be the rule , than ever there be before . they make a number of romance , depend upon it ! do you walk much in the Gardens , my dear ? " 
 " now and then , " say Richard . 
 " very pleasant it be there with the fine folk and flower and title people , " continue Mrs. Berry . " that be a handsome woman you be a - walkin ' beside , this mornin ' . " 
 " very , " say Richard . 
 " she be a handsome woman ! or I should say , be , for her day be not   past , and she know it . I think at first by she back it might ha ' be your aunt , Mrs. Forey ; for she do step out well and hold up her shoulder : straight as a dart she be ! but when I come to see her face oh , dear I ! say I , this be not   one of the family . they none of them get such bold face nor no lady as I know have . but she be a fine woman that nobody can gainsay . " 
 Mrs. Berry talk far of the fine woman . it be a liberty she take to speak in this disrespectful tone of she , and Mrs. Berry be quite aware that she be lay herself open to rebuke . she have her end in view . no rebuke be utter , and during her talk she observe intercourse pass between the eye of the young man . 
 " look here , Penelope , " Richard stop she at last . " will it make you comfortable if I tell you I will obey the law of my nature and go down at the end of the week ? " 
 " I will thank the Lord of heaven if you do ! " she exclaim . 
 " very well , then be happy I will . now listen . I want you to keep your room for I those she have . I expect , in a day or two , to bring a lady here " 
 " a lady ? " falter Mrs. Berry . 
 " yes . a lady . " 
 " may I make so bold as to ask what lady ? " 
 " you may not . not now . of course you will know . " 
 Mrs. Berry 's short neck make the good imitation it could of an offended swan 's action . she be very angry . she say she do not like so many lady , which natural objection Richard meet by say that there be only one lady . 
 " and Mrs. Berry , " he add , drop his voice . " you will treat she as you do my dear girl , for she will require not only shelter but kindness . I would rather leave she with you than with any one . she have be very unfortunate . " 
 his serious air and habitual tone of command fascinate the softness of Berry , and it be not until he have go that she speak out . " unfort'nate ! he be go to bring I an unfort'nate female ! oh ! not from my babe can I bear that ! never will I have she here ! I see it . it be that bold - face woman he be get mix up in , and she've   be and make the young man think he will go for to reform she . it be one o ' their art that be ; and he be too innocent a young man to mean anythin ' else . but I be not   a house of Magdalens no ! and soon than have she here I would have the roof fall over I , I would . " 
 she sit down to eat her supper on the sublime resolve . 
 in love , Mrs. Berry 's charity be all on the side of the law , and this be the case with many of her sister . the Pilgrim sneer at they for it , and would have we credit that it be their admirable instinct which , at the expense of every virtue save one , preserve the artificial barrier simply to impose upon we . man , I presume , be hardly fair judge , and should stand aside and mark . 
 early next day Mrs. Berry bundle off to Richard 's hotel to let he know her determination . she do not find he there . return homeward through the park , she behold he on horseback riding by the side of the identical lady . 
 the sight of this public exposure shock she more than the secret walk under the tree ... " you do not   look near your reform yet , " Mrs. Berry apostrophize she . " you do not   look to I one that would come the Fair Penitent till you have   leave off bein ' fair if then you do , which some of ye do not . laugh away and show yet air ! Spite o ' your hat and feather , and your ridin ' habit , you be a Belle Donna . " set she down again absolutely for such , whatever it might signify , Mrs. Berry have a virtuous glow . 
 in the evening she hear the noise of wheel stop at the door . " never ! " she rise from her chair to exclaim . " he be not   rid she out in the mornin ' , and be and make a Magdalen of her afore dark ? " 
 a lady veil be bring into the house by Richard . Mrs. Berry feebly try to bar his progress in the passage . he push past she , and conduct the lady into the parlour without speak . Mrs. Berry do not follow . she hear he murmur a few sentence within . then he come out . all her crest stand up , as she whisper vigorously , " Mr. Richard ! if that woman stay here , I go forth . my house be not   a penitentiary for unfort'nate female , sir " 
 he frown at her curiously ; but as she be on the point of renew her indignant protest , he clap his hand across her mouth , and speak word in her ear that have awful import to she . she tremble , breathe low : " my God , forgive , I ! 
 " Richard ? " and her virtue be humble . " Lady Feverel be it ? your mother , Mr. Richard ? " and her virtue be humble . 




 CHAPTER XXXVIII 

 one may suppose that a prematurely aged , oily little man ; a poet in bad circumstance ; a decrepit butterfly chain to a disappointed inkstand , will not put out strenuous energy to retain his ancient paramour when a robust young man come imperatively to demand his mother of he in her person . the colloquy be short between Diaper Sandoe and Richard . the question be refer to the poor spiritless lady , who , see that her son make no question of it , cast herself on his hand . small loss to she be diaper ; but he be the loss of habit , and that be something to a woman who have live . the blood of her son have be run so long alien from she that the sense of her motherhood smite he now with strangeness , and Richard 's stern gentleness seem like dreadful justice come upon she . her heart have almost forget its maternal function . she call he Sir , till he bid she remember he be her son . her voice sound to he like that of a break - throate lamb , so painful and weak it be , with the plaintive stop in the utterance . when he kiss she , her skin be cold . her thin hand fall out of his when his grasp relate . " can sin hunt one like this ? " he ask , bitterly reproach himself for the shame she have cause he to endure , and a deep compassion fill his breast . 
 poetic justice have be deal to Diaper the poet . he think of all he have sacrifice for this woman the comfortable quarter , the friend , the happy flight . he could not but accuse she of unfaithfulness in leave he in his old age . Habit have legalize his union with she . he write as pathetically of the break of habit as man feel at the death of love , and when we be old and have no fair hope toss golden lock before we , a wound to this our second nature be quite as sad . I know not even if it be not actually sad . 
 day by day Richard visit his mother . Lady Blandish and Ripton alone be in the secret . Adrian let he do as he please . he think proper to tell he that the public recognition he accord to a particular lady be , in the present state of the world , scarcely prudent . 
 " ' tis a proof to I of your moral rectitude , my son , but the world will not think so . no one character be sufficient to cover two in a protestant country especially . the divinity that doth hedge a Bishop would have no chance , in contact with your Madam Danae . drop the woman , my son . or permit I to speak what you would have her hear . " 
 Richard listen to he with disgust . " well , you have   have my doctorial warning , " say Adrian ; and plunge back into his book . 
 when Lady Feverel have revive to take part in the consultation Mrs. Berry perpetually open on the subject of Richard 's matrimonial duty , another chain be cast about he . " do not , oh , do not offend your father ! " be her one repeat supplication . Sir Austin have grow to be a vindictive phantom in her mind . she never weep but when she say this . 
 so Mrs. Berry , to whom Richard have once make mention of Lady Blandish as the only friend he have among woman , bundle off in her black - satin dress to obtain an interview with she , and an ally . after come to an understanding on the matter of the visit , and reiterate many of her view concern young married people , Mrs. Berry say : " my lady , if I may speak so bold , I would say the sin that be bein ' do be the sin o ' the looker - on . and when everybody appear frightened by that young gentleman 's father , I will say hopin ' your pardon they no cause be fright at all . for though it be nigh twenty year since I know he , and I know he then just sixteen month no more I will say his heart 's as soft as a woman 's , which I have   cause for to know . and that be it . that be where everybody be deceive by he , and I be . it be because he keep his face , and make ye think you be dealin ' with a man of iron , and all the while there be a woman underneath . and a man that be like a woman he be the puzzle o ' life ! we can see through ourselves , my lady , and we can see through man , but one o ' that sort he be like something out of nature . then I say hopin ' be excuse what be to do be for to treat he like a woman , and not for to let he have his own way which he do not   know himself , and be why nobody else do . let that sweet young couple come together , and be wholesome in spite of he , I say ; and then give he time to come round , just like a woman ; and round he will come , and give them his blessin ' , and we shall know we have   make he comfortable . he be angry because matrimony have come between he and his son , and he , woman - like , he be wantin ' to treat what be as if it be not . but matrimony be a holier than he . it begin long long before he , and it be be hop will endoor long the time after , if the world be not come to rack wishin ' he no harm . " 
 now Mrs. Berry only put Lady Blandish 's thought in bad English . the lady take upon herself seriously to advise Richard to send for his wife . he write , bid she come . Lucy , however , have wit , and inexperienced wit be as a little knowledge . in pursuance of her sage plan to make the family feel her worth , and to conquer the member of it one by one , she have get up a correspondence with Adrian , whom it tickle . Adrian constantly assure she all be go well : time would heal the wound if both the offender have the fortitude to be patient : he fancy he see sign of the baronet 's relenting : they must do nothing to arrest those favourable symptom . indeed the wise youth be languidly seek to produce they . he write , and feel , as Lucy 's benefactor . so Lucy reply to her husband a cheerful rigmarole he could make nothing of , save that she be happy in hope , and still have fear . then Mrs. Berry train her fist to indite a letter to her bride . her bride answer it by say she trust to time . " you poor marter " Mrs. Berry write back , " I know what your sufferin 's be . they be the only kind a wife should never hide from her husband . he think all sort of thing if she can abide be away . and you trust to time , why it be like trust not to catch cold out of your natural clothe . " there be no shake Lucy 's firmness . 
 Richard give it up . he begin to think that the life lie behind he be the life of a fool . what have he do in it ? he have burn a rick and get marry ! he associate the two act of his existence . where be the hero he be to have carve out of Tom Bakewell ! a wretch he have teach to lie and chicane : and for what ? great heaven ! how ignoble do a flash from the light of his aspiration make his marriage appear ! the young man seek amusement . he allow his aunt to drag he into society , and sick of that he make late evening call on Mrs. Mount , oblivious of the purpose he have in visit she at all . her man - like conversation , which he take for honesty , be a refreshing change on fair lip . 
 " call I Bella : I will call you Dick , " say she . and it come to be Bella and Dick between they . no mention of Bella occur in Richard 's letter to Lucy . 
 Mrs. Mount speak quite openly of herself . " I pretend to be no well than I be , " she say , " and I know I be no bad than many a woman who hold her head high . " to back this she tell he story of bloom dame of good repute , and pour a little social sewerage into his ear . 
 also she understand he . " what you want , my dear Dick , be something to do . you go and get marry like a hum ! friend must be respectful . go into the Army . try the turf . I can put you up to a trick or two friend should make themselves useful . " 
 she tell he what she like in he . " you be the only man I be ever alone with who do not   talk to I of love and make I feel sick . I hate man who can not   speak to a woman sensibly . just wait a minute . " she leave he and presently return with , " ah , Dick ! old fellow ! how be you ? " array like a cavalier , one arm stick in her side , her hat jauntily cock , and a pretty oath on her lip to give reality to the costume . " what do you think of I ? be not   it a shame to make a woman of I when I be bear to be a man ? " 
 " I do not   know that , " say Richard , for the contrast in her attire to those shoot eye and lip , air her sex bewitchingly . 
 " what ! you think I do not   do it well ? " 
 " Charming ! but I can not   forget ... " 
 " now that be too bad ! " she pout . 
 then she propose that they should go out into the midnight street arm - in - arm , and out they go and have great fit of laughter at her impertinent manner of use her eyeglass , and outrageous affectation of the supreme dandy . 
 " they take up man , Dick , for go about in woman 's clothe , and vice versaw , I suppose . you will bail I , old fellaa , if I have to make my bow to the beak , will not   you ? say it be beca I be an honest woman and do not   care to hide the a unmentionable when I wear they as the t'other do , " sprinkle with the dandy 's famous invocation . 
 he begin to conceive romance in that sort of fun . 
 " you be a wopper , my brave Dick ! will not   let any peel take I ? by Jove ! " 
 and he with many assurance guarantee to stand by she , while she bend her thin finger try the muscle of his arm ; and repose upon it more . there be delicacy in her dandyism . she be a graceful cavalier . 
 " Sir Julius , " as they name the dandy 's attire , be frequently call for on his evening visit to Mrs. Mount . when he behold Sir Julius he think of the lady , and " vice versaw , " as Sir Julius be fond of exclaim . 
 be ever hero in this fashion woo ? 
 the woman now and then would peep through Sir Julius . or she would sit , and talk , and altogether forget she be impersonate that worthy fop . 
 she never utter an idea or a reflection , but Richard think she the clever woman he have ever meet . 
 all kind of problematic notion beset he . she be cold as ice , she hat talk about love , and she be brand by the world . 
 a rumour spread that reach Mrs. Doria 's ear . she rush to Adrian first . the wise youth believe there be nothing in it . she sail down upon Richard . " be this true ? that you have be see go publicly about with an infamous woman , Richard ? tell I ! pray , relieve I ! " 
 Richard know of no person answer to his aunt 's description in whose company he could have be see . 
 " tell I , I say ! do not   quibble . do you know any woman of bad character ? " 
 the acquaintance of a lady very much misjudged and ill - use by the world , Richard admit to . 
 urgent grave advice Mrs. Doria tender her nephew , both from the moral and the worldly point of view , mentally ejaculate all the while : " that ridiculous system ! that disgraceful marriage ! " Sir Austin in his mountain solitude be furnish with serious stuff to brood over . 
 the rumour come to Lady Blandish . she likewise lecture Richard , and with she he condescend to argue . but he find himself oblige to instance something he have quite neglect . " instead of she do I harm , it be I that will do she good . " 
 Lady Blandish shake her head and hold up her finger . " this person must be very clever to have give you that delusion , dear . " 
 " she be clever . and the world treat she shamefully . " 
 " she complain of her position to you ? " 
 " not a word . but I will stand by she . she have no friend but I . " 
 " my poor boy ! have she make you think that ? " 
 " how unjust you all be ! " cry Richard . 
 " how mad and wicked be the man who can let he be tempt so ! " think Lady Blandish . 
 he would pronounce no promise not to visit she , not to address she publicly . the world that condemn she and cast she out be no well bad for its miserable hypocrisy . he know the world now , the young man say . 
 " my child ! the world may be very bad . I be not go to defend it . but you have some one else to think of . have you forget you have a wife , Richard ? " 
 " ay ! you all speak of she now . there be my aunt : ' remember you have a wife ! ' do you think I love any one but Lucy ? poor little thing ! because I be married be I to give up the society of woman ? " 
 " of woman ! " 
 " be not   she a woman ? " 
 " too much so ! " sigh the defender of her sex . 
 Adrian become more emphatic in his warning . Richard laugh at he . the wise youth sneer at Mrs. Mount . the hero then favour he with a warning equal to his own in emphasis , and surpass it in sincerity . 
 " we will not   quarrel , my dear boy , " say Adrian . " I be a man of peace . besides , we be not fairly proportion for a combat . ride your steed to virtue 's goal ! all I say be , that I think he will upset you , and it be well to go at a slow pace and in companionship with the child of the sun . you have a very nice little woman for a wife well , good - bye ! " 
 to have his wife and the world throw at his face , be unendurable to Richard ; he associate they somewhat after the manner of the rick and the marriage . Charming Sir Julius , always gay , always honest , disperse his black mood . 
 " why , you be tall , " Richard make the discovery . 
 " of course I be . do not   you remember you say I be such a little thing when I come out of my woman 's shell ? " 
 " and how have you do it ? " 
 " grown to please you . " 
 " now , if you can do that , you can do anything . " 
 " and so I would do anything . " 
 " you would ? " 
 " Honour ! " 
 " Then" ... his project recur to he . but the incongruity of speak seriously to Sir Julius strike he dumb . 
 " then what ? " ask she . 
 " then you be a gallant fellow . " 
 " that all ? " 
 " be not   it enough ? " 
 " not quite . you be go to say something . I see it in your eye . " 
 " you see that I admire you . " 
 " yes , but a man must not   admire a man . " 
 " I suppose I have an idea you be a woman . " 
 " what ! when I have the heel of my boot raise half an inch , " Sir Julius turn one heel , and volley out silver laughter . 
 " I do not   come much above your shoulder even now , " she say , and proceed to measure her height beside he with arch up - glance . 
 " you must grow more . " 
 " ' Fraid I can not , Dick ! bootmaker can not   do it . " 
 " I will show you how , " and he lift Sir Julius lightly , and bear the fair gentleman to the look - glass , hold he there exactly on a level with his head . " will that do ? " 
 " yes ! oh but I can not   stay here . " 
 " why can not   you ? " 
 " why can not   I ? " 
 he should have know then it be thunder at a closed door in he , that he play with fire . but the door be close , he think himself internally secure . 
 their eye meet . he put she down instantly . 
 Sir Julius , charming as he be , lose his vogue . see that , the wily woman resume her shell . the memory , of Sir Julius breathing about she still , double the feminine attraction . 
 " I ought to have be an actress , " she say . 
 Richard tell she he find all natural woman have a similar wish . 
 " yes ! ah ! then ! if I have be ! " sigh Mrs. Mount , gaze on the pattern of the carpet . 
 he take her hand , and press it . 
 " you be not happy as you be ? " 
 " no . " 
 " may I speak to you ? " 
 " yes . " 
 her near eye , set a dimple of her cheek in motion , slide to the corner toward her ear , as she sit with her head sideways to he , listen . when he have go , she say to herself : " old hypocrite talk in that way ; but I never hear of a young man do it , and not make love at the same time . " 
 their next meeting display her quieter : subdue as one who have be set think . he laud her fair look . 
 " do not   make I thrice ashame , " she petitioned . 
 but it be not only that mood with she . dauntless defiance , that splendidly befit her gallant outline and give a wildness to her bright bold eye , when she would call out : " Happy ? who dare say I be not happy ? d'you think if the world whip I I will wince ? d'you think I care for what they say or do ? let they kill I ! they shall never get one cry out of I ! " and flash on the young man as if he be the congregated enemy , add : " there ! now you know I ! " that be a mood that well become she , and help the work . she ought to have be an actress . 
 " this must not go on , " say Lady Blandish and Mrs. Doria in unison . a common object bring they together . they confine their talk to it , and do not disagree . Mrs. Doria engage to go down to the baronet . both lady know it be a dangerous , likely to turn out a disastrous , expedition . they agree to it because it be something to do , and do anything be well than do nothing . " do it , " say the wise youth , when they make he a third , " do it , if you want he to be a hermit for life . you will bring back nothing but his dead body , ladie a Hellenic , rather than a Roman , triumph . he will listen to you he will accompany you to the station he will hand you into the carriage and when you point to his seat he will bow profoundly , and retire into his congenial mist . " 
 Adrian speak their thought . they fret ; they relapse . 
 " speak to he , you , Adrian , " say Mrs. Doria . " speak to the boy solemnly . it would be almost well he should go back to that little thing he have marry . " 
 " almost ? " Lady Blandish open her eye . " I have be advise it for the last month and more . " 
 " a choice of evil , " say Mrs. Doria 's sour - sweet face and shake of the head . 
 each lady see a point of dissension , and mutually agree , with heroic effort , to avoid it by shut their mouth . what be more , they preserve the peace in spite of Adrian 's artifice . 
 " well , I will talk to he again , " he say . " I will try to get the Engine on the conventional line . " 
 " command he ! " exclaim Mrs. Doria . 
 " gentle mean be , I think , the only mean with Richard , " say Lady Blandish . 
 throw banter aside , as much as he could , Adrian speak to Richard . " you want to reform this woman . her manner be open fair and free the traditional characteristic . we will not   stop to canvass how that particular honesty of deportment that win your approbation have be gain . in her college it be not uncommon . girl , you know , be not like boy . at a certain age they can not   be quite natural . it be a bad sign if they do not   blush , and fib , and affect this and that . it wear off when they be woman . but a woman who speak like a man , and have all those excellent virtue you admire where have she learn the trick ? she tell you . you do not   surely approve of the school ? well , what be there in it , then ? reform she , of course . the task be worthy of your energy . but , if you be appoint to do it , do not   do it publicly , and do not   attempt it just now . may I ask you whether your wife participate in this undertaking ? " 
 Richard walk away from the interrogation . the wise youth , who hat long unrelieved speech and have heal his conscience , say no more . 
 dear tender Lucy ! poor darling ! Richard 's eye moisten . her letter seem sadder latterly . yet she never call to he to come , or he would have go . his heart leapt up to she . he announce to Adrian that he should wait no long for his father . Adrian placidly nod . 
 the enchantress observe that her knight have a clouded brow and an absent voice . 
 " Richard I can not   call you Dick now , I really do not   know why " she say , " I want to beg a favour of you . " 
 " name it . I can still call you Bella , I suppose ? " 
 " if you care to . what I want to say be this : when you meet I out to cut it short please not to recognize I . " 
 " and why ? " 
 " do you ask to be tell that ? " 
 " certainly I do . " 
 " then look : I will not   compromise you . " 
 " I see no harm , Bella . " 
 " no , " she caress his hand , " and there be none . I know that . but , " modest eyelid be droop , " other people do , " struggle eye be raise . 
 " what do we care for other people ? " 
 " nothing . I do not . not that ! " snap her finger , " I care for you , though . " a prolonged look follow the declaration . 
 " you be foolish , Bella . " 
 " not quite so giddy that be all . " 
 he do not combat it with his usual impetuosity . Adrian 's abrupt inquiry have sink in his mind , as the wise youth intend it should . he have instinctively refrain from speak to Lucy of this lady . but what a noble creature the woman be ! 
 so they meet in the park ; Mrs. Mount whip past he ; and secresy add a new sense to their intimacy . 
 Adrian be gratify at the result produce by his eloquence . 
 though this lady never express an idea , Richard be not mistaken in her cleverness . she could make evening pass gaily , and one be not the fellow to the other . she could make you forget she be a woman , and then bring the fact startlingly home to you . she could read man with one quiver of her half - close eye - lash . she could catch the come mood in a man , and fit herself to it . what do a woman want with idea , who can do thus much ? keenness of perception , conformity , delicacy of handling , these be all the quality necessary to parasite . 
 Love would have scar the youth : she banish it from her tongue . it may also have be true that it sicken she . she play on his high nature . she understand spontaneously what would be most strange and take to he in a woman . various as the Serpent of old Nile , she act fallen beauty , humorous indifference , reckless daring , arrogance in ruin . and act thus , what think you ? she do it so well because she be grow half in earnest . 
 " Richard ! I be not what I be since I know you . you will not give I up quite ? " 
 " never , Bella . " 
 " I be not so bad as I be paint ! " 
 " you be only unfortunate . " 
 " now that I know you I think so , and yet I be happy . " 
 she tell he her history when this soft horizon of repentance seem to throw heaven 's twilight across it . a woman 's history , you know : certain chapter expunge . it be dark enough to Richard . 
 " do you love the man ? " he ask . " you say you love no one now . " 
 " do I love he ? he be a nobleman and I a tradesman 's daughter . no . I do not love he . I have live to learn it . and now I should hate he , if I do not despise he . " 
 " can you be deceive in love ? " say Richard , more to himself than to she . 
 " yes . when we be young we can be very easily deceive . if there be such a thing as love , we discover it after we have toss about and rough it . then we find the man , or the woman , that suit we : and then it be too late ! we can not   have he . " 
 " Singular ! " murmur Richard , ' she say just what my father say . " 
 he speak aloud : " I could forgive you if you have love he . " 
 " do not   be harsh , grave judge ! how be a girl to distinguish ? " 
 " you have some affection for he ? he be the first ? " 
 she choose to admit that . " yes . and the first who talk of love to a girl must be a fool if he do not   blind she . " 
 " that make what be call first love nonsense . " 
 " be not   it ? " 
 he repel the insinuation . " because I know it be not , Bella . " 
 nevertheless she have open a wide view of the world to he , and a colder . he think poorly of girl . a woman a sensible , brave , beautiful woman seem , on comparison , infinitely noble than those weak creature . 
 she be good in her character of lovely rebel accuse foul injustice . " what be I to do ? you tell I to be different . how can I ? what be I to do ? will virtuous people let I earn my bread ? I could not get a housemaid 's place ! they would not   have I I see their nose smell ! yes I can go to the hospital and sing behind a screen ! do you expect I to bury myself alive ? why , man , I have blood : I can not   become a stone . you say I be honest , and I will be . then let I till you that I have be use to luxury , and I can not   do without they . I might have marry man lot would have have I . but who marry one like I but a fool ? and I could not marry a fool . the man I marry I must respect . he could not respect I I should know he to be a fool and I should be bad off than I be now . as I be now , they may look as pious as they like I laugh at they ! " 
 and so forth : direr thing . imputation upon wife : horrible exultation at the universal peccancy of husband . this lovely outcast almost make he think she have the right on her side , so keenly her parthian arrow pierce the holy centre of society , and expose its rottenness . 
 Mrs. Mount 's house be discreetly conduct : nothing ever occur to shock he there . the young man would ask himself where the difference be between she and the Women of society ? how base , too , be the army of band hypocrite ! he be ready to declare war against they on her behalf . his casus beli , accurately word , would have read curiously . because the world refuse to lure the lady to virtue with the offer of a housemaid 's place , our knight throw down his challenge . but the lady have scornfully rebut this prospect of a return to chastity . then the form of the challenge must be : because the world decline to support the lady in luxury for nothing ! but what do that mean ? in other word : she be to receive the devil 's wage without render he her service . such an arrangement appear hardly fair on the world or on the devil . hero will have to conquer both before they will get they to subscribe to it . 
 hero , however , be not in the habit of word their declaration of war at all . Lance in rest they challenge and they charge . like woman they trust to instinct , and graft on it the muscle of man . wide fly the leisurely - remonstrate host : institution be scatter , they know not wherefore , head be break that have not the balm of a reason why . ' tis instinct strike ! surely there be something divine in instinct . 
 still , war declare , where be these host ? the hero could not charge down on the lady and gentleman in a ballroom , and spoil the quadrille . he have sufficient reticence to avoid sound his challenge in the Law Courts ; nor could he well go into the Houses of Parliament with a trumpet , though to come to a tussle with the nation 's direct representative do seem the likeli method . it be likewise out of the question that he should enter every house and shop , and battle with its master in the cause of Mrs. Mount . where , then , be his enemy ? everybody be his enemy , and everybody be nowhere ! shall he convoke multitude on Wimbledon Common ? Blue Policemen , and a distant dread of ridicule , bar all his project . Alas for the hero in our day ! 
 nothing teach a strong arm its impotence so much as knock at empty air . 
 " what can I do for this poor woman ? " cry Richard , after fight his phantom enemy till he be wear out . 
 " o Rip ! old Rip ! " he address his friend , " I be distract . I wish I be dead ! what good be I for ? miserable ! selfish ! what have I do but make every soul I know wretched about I ? I follow my own inclination I make people help I by lie as hard as they can and I be a liar . and when I have   get it I be ashamed of myself . and now when I do see something unselfish for I to do , I come upon grin I do not   know where to turn how to act and I laugh at myself like a devil ! " 
 it be only friend Ripton 's ear that be require , so his word go for little : but Ripton do say he think there be small matter to be ashamed of in win and wear the Beauty of Earth . Richard add his customary comment of " poor little thing ! " 
 he fight his duello with empty air till he be exhaust . a last letter write to his father procure he no reply . then , say he , I have try my utmost . I have try to be dutiful my father will not   listen to I . one thing I can do I can go down to my dear girl , and make she happy , and save she at least from some of the consequence of my rashness . 
 " there be nothing well for I ! " he groan . his great ambition must be cover by a house - top : he and the cat must warm themselves on the domestic hearth ! the hero be not aware that his heart move he to this . his heart be not now in open communion with his mind . 
 Mrs. Mount hear that her friend be go would go . she know he be go to his wife . far from discourage he , she say nobly : " go I believe I have keep you . let we have an evening together , and then go : for good , if you like . if not , then to meet again another time . forget I . I shall not   forget you . you be the good fellow I ever know , Richard . you be , on my honour ! I swear I would not step in between you and your wife to cause either of you a moment 's unhappiness . when I can be another woman I will , and I shall think of you then . " 
 Lady Blandish hear from Adrian that Richard be positively go to his wife . the wise youth modestly veil his own merit in bring it about by say : " I could not   see that poor little woman leave alone down there any long . " 
 " well ! yes ! " say Mrs. Doria , to whom the modest speech be repeat , " I suppose , poor boy , it be the good he can do now . " 
 Richard bid they adieu , and go to spend his last evening with Mrs. Mount . 
 the enchantress receive he in state . 
 " do you know this dress ? no ? it be the dress I wear when I first meet you not when I first see you . I think I remark you , sir , before you deign to cast an eye upon humble I . when we first meet we drink champagne together , and I intend to celebrate our parting in the same liquor . will you liquor with I , old boy ? " 
 she be gay . she revive Sir Julius occasionally . he , dispirit , leave the talk all to she . 
 Mrs. Mount keep a footman . at a late hour the man of calf dress the table for supper . it be a point of honour for Richard to sit down to it and try to eat . drinking , thank to the kindly mother nature , who love to see her child make fool of , be always an easy matter . the footman be diligent ; the champagne cork feebly recall the file - firing at Richmond . 
 " we will drink to what we might have be , Dick , " say the enchantress . 
 oh , the glorious wreck she look . 
 his heart choke as he gulp the buzz wine . 
 " what ! down , my boy ? " she cry . " they shall never see I hoist signal of distress . we must all die , and the secret of the thing be to die game , by Jove ! do you ever hear of Laura Fern ? a superb girl ! handsomer than your humble servant if you will believe it a ' Miss ' in the bargain , and as a consequence , I suppose , a much great rake . she be in the hunting - field . her horse throw she , and she fall plump on a stake . it go into her left breast . all the fellow crowd round she , and one young man , who be in love with she he sit in the House of Peers now we use to call he ` Duck ' because he be such a dear he drop from his horse to his knee : ' Laura ! Laura ! my darling ! speak a word to I ! the last ! ' she turn over all white and bloody ! ' I I shall not   be in at the death ! ' and give up the ghost ! be not   that die game ? here be to the example of Laura Fenn ! why , what be the matter ? see ! it make a man turn pale to hear how a woman can die . fill the glass , John . why , you be as bad ! " 
 " it be give I a turn , my lady , " plead John , and the man 's hand be unsteady as he pour out the wine . 
 " you ought not to listen . go , and , drink some brandy . " 
 John footman go from the room . 
 " my brave Dick ! Richard ! what a face you have   get ! " 
 he show a deep frown on a colourless face . 
 " can not   you bear to hear of blood ? you know , it be only one naughty woman out of the world . the clergyman of the parish do not   refuse to give her decent burial . we Christians ! Hurrah ! " 
 she cheer , and laugh . a lurid splendour glance about she like light from the pit . 
 " Pledge I , Dick ! drink , and recover yourself . who mind ? we must all die the good and the bad . ash to ash dust to dust and wine for living lip ! that be poetry almost . sentiment : ` may we never say die till we have   drunk our fill ! not bad eh ? a little vulgar , perhaps , by Jove ! do you think I horrid ? " 
 " where be the wine ? " Richard shout . he drink a couple of glass in succession , and star about . be he in hell , with a lost soul rave to he ? 
 " nobly speak ! and nobly act upon , my brave Dick ! now we will be companion . " she wish that heaven have make she such a man . " ah ! Dick ! Dick ! too late ! too late ! " 
 softly fall her voice . her eye throw slanting beam . 
 " do you see this ? " 
 she point to a symbolic golden anchor stud with gem and coil with a rope of hair in her bosom . it be a gift of his . 
 " do you know when I steal the lock ? foolish Dick ! you give I an anchor without a rope . come and see . " 
 she rise from the table , and throw herself on the sofa . 
 " do not   you recognize your own hair ! I should know a thread of mine among a million . " 
 something of the strength of Samson go out of he as he inspect his hair on the bosom of Delilah . 
 " and you know nothing of it ! you hardly know it now you see it ! what could not   a woman steal from you ? but you be not vain , and that be a protection . you be a miracle , Dick : a man that be not vain ! sit here . " she curl up her foot to give he place on the sofa . " now let we talk like friend that part to meet no more . you find a ship with fever on board , and you be not   afraid to come alongside and keep her company . the fever be not   catch , you see . let we mingle our tear together . ha ! ha ! a man say that once to I . the hypocrite want to catch the fever , but he be too old . how old be you , Dick ? " 
 Richard push a few month forward . 
 " twenty - one ? you just look it , you bloom boy . now tell I my age , Adonis ! twenty what ? " 
 Richard have give the lady twenty - five year . 
 she laugh violently . " you do not   pay compliment , Dick . good to be honest ; guess again . you do not   like to ? not twenty - five , or twenty - four , or twenty - three , or see how he begin to stare ! -twenty - two . just twenty - one , my dear . I think my birthday 's somewhere in next month . why , look at I , close close . have I a wrinkle ? " 
 " and when , in heaven 's name!" ... he stop short . 
 " I understand you . when do I commence for to live ? at the ripe age of sixteen I see a nobleman in despair because of my beauty . he vow he would die . I do not   want he to do that . so to save the poor man for his family , I run away with he , and I dare say they do not   appreciate the sacrifice , and he soon forget to , if he ever do . it be the way of the world ! " 
 Richard seize some dead champagne , empty the bottle into a tumbler , and drink it off . 
 John footman enter to clear the table , and they be leave without further interruption . 
 " Bella ! Bella ! " Richard utter in a deep sad voice , as he walk the room . 
 she lean on her arm , her hair crush against a reddened cheek , her eye half - shut and dreamy . 
 " Bella ! " he drop beside she . " you be unhappy . " 
 she blink and yawn , as one who be awaken suddenly . " I think you speak , " say she . 
 " you be unhappy , Bella . you can not   conceal it . your laugh sound like madness . you must be unhappy . so young , too ! only twenty - one ! " 
 " what do it matter ? who care for I ? " 
 the mighty pity fall from his eye take in her whole shape . she do not mistake it for tenderness , as another would have do . 
 " who care for you , Bella ? I do . what make my misery now , but to see you there , and know of no way of help you ? Father of mercy ! it seem too much to have to stand by powerless while such ruin be go on ! " 
 her hand be shake in his by the passion of torment with which his frame quake . 
 involuntarily a tear start between her eyelid . she glance up at he quickly , then look down , draw her hand from his , and smooth it , eye it . 
 " Bella ! you have a father alive ! " 
 " a linendraper , dear . he wear a white neck - cloth . " 
 this article of apparel instantaneously change the tone of the conversation , for he , rise abruptly , nearly squash the lady 's lap - dog , whose squeak and howl be piteous , and demand the most fervent caress of its mistress . it be : " oh , my poor pet Mumpsy , and he do not   like a nasty great big ugly heavy foot an his poor soft silky mum mum back , he do not , and he soodn't   that he mum mum soodn't ; and he cry out and know the place to come to , and be oh so sorry for what have happen to he mum mum mum and now he be go to be make happy , his mistress make he happy mum mum mum moo - o - o - o. " 
 " yes ! " say Richard , savagely , from the other end of the room , " you care for the happiness of your dog . " 
 " a course se do , " Mumpsy be simperingly assure in the thick of his silky flank . 
 Richard look for his hat . Mumpsy be deposit on the sofa in a twinkling . 
 " now , " say the lady , " you must come and beg Mumpsy 's pardon , whether you mean to do it or no , because little doggy can not   tell that how should they ? and there be poor Mumpsy think you be a great terrible rival that try to squash he all flat to nothing , on purpose , pretend you do not   see ; and he be tremble , poor dear wee pet ! and I may love my dog , sir , if I like ; and I do ; and I will not   have he ill - treat , for he be never be jealous of you , and he be a darling , ten time truer than man , and I love he fifty time well . so come to he with I . " 
 first a smile change Richard 's face ; then laugh a melancholy laugh , he surrender to her humour , and go through the form of beg Mumpsy 's pardon . 
 " the dear dog ! I do believe he see we be get dull , " say she . 
 " and immolate himself intentionally ? noble animal ! " 
 " well , we will act as if we think so . let we be gay , Richard , and not part like ancient fogy . where be your fun ? you can rattle ; why do not   you ? you have not   see I in one of my character not Sir Julius : wait a couple of minute . " she run out . 
 a white visage reappear behind a spring of flame . her black hair be scatter over her shoulder and fall half across her brow . she move slowly , and come up to he , fasten weird eye on he , point a finger at the region of witch . sepulchral cadence accompany the representation . he do not listen , for he be think what a deadly charming and exquisitely horrid witch she be . something in the way her underlid work seem to remind he of a forget picture ; but a veil hang on the picture . there could be no analogy , for this be beautiful and devilish , and that , if he remember rightly , have the beauty of seraph . 
 his reflection and her performance be stay by a shriek . the spirit of wine have run over the plate she hold to the floor . she have the coolness to put the plate down on the table , while he stamp out the flame on the carpet . again she shriek : she think she be on fire . he fall on his knee and clasp her skirt all round , draw his arm down they several time . 
 still kneel , he look up , and ask , " do you feel safe now ? " 
 she bent her face glare down till the end of her hair touch his cheek . 
 say she , " do you ? " 
 be she a witch verily ? there be sorcery in her breath ; sorcery in her hair : the end of it sting he like little snake . 
 " how do I do it , Dick ? " she fling back , laugh . 
 " like you do everything , Bella , " he say , and take breath . 
 " there ! I will not   be a witch ; I will not   be a witch : they may burn I to a cinder , but I will not   be a witch ! " 
 she sing , throw her hair about , and stamp her foot . 
 " I suppose I look a figure . I must go and tidy myself . " 
 " no , do not   change . I like to see you so . " he gaze at she with a mixture of wonder and admiration . " I can not   think you the same person not even when you laugh . " 
 " Richard , " her tone be serious , " you be go to speak to I of my parent . " 
 " how wild and awful you look , Bella ! " 
 " my father , Richard , be a very respectable man . " 
 " Bella , you will haunt I like a ghost . " 
 " my mother die in my infancy , Richard . " 
 " do not   put up your hair , Bella . " 
 " I be an only child ! " 
 her head shake sorrowfully at the glistening fire - iron . he follow the abstract intentness of her look , and come upon her word . 
 " ah , yes ! speak of your father , Bella . speak of he . " 
 " shall I haunt you , and come to your bedside , and cry , ' ` tis time ' ? " 
 " Dear Bella ! if you will tell I where he live , I will go to he . he shall receive you . he shall not refuse he shall forgive you . " 
 " if I haunt you , you can not   forget I , Richard . " 
 " let I go to your father , Bella let I go to he to - morrow . I will give you my time . it be all I can give . o Bella ! let I save you . " 
 " so you like I well dishevel , do you , you naughty boy ! ha ! ha ! " and away she burst from he , and up fly her hair , as she dance across the room , and fall at full length on the sofa . 
 he feel giddy : bewitch . 
 " we will talk of everyday thing , Dick , " she call to he from the sofa . " it be our last evening . our last ? Heigho ! it make I sentimental . how be that Mr. Ripson , Pipson , Nipson ? it be not complimentary , but I can not   remember name of that sort . why do you have friend of that sort ? he be not a gentleman . well be he ? well , he be rather too insignificant for I . why do you sit off there ? come to I instantly . there I will sit up , and be proper , and you will have plenty of room . talk , Dick ! " 
 he be reflect on the fact that her eye be brown . they have a haughty sparkle when she please , and when she please a soft languor circle they . Excitement have dye her cheek deep red . he be a youth , and she an enchantress . he a hero ; she a female will - o'-the - wisp . 
 the eye be languid now , set in rosy colour . 
 " you will not leave I yet , Richard ? not yet ? " 
 he have no thought of depart : 
 " it be our last night I suppose it be our last hour together in this world and I do not   want to meet you in the next , for poor Dick will have to come to such a very , very disagreeable place to make the visit . " 
 he grasp her hand at this . 
 " yes , he will ! too true ! can not   be help : they say I be handsome . " 
 " you be lovely , Bella . " 
 she drink in his homage . 
 " well , we will admit it . his Highness below like lovely woman , I hear say . a gentleman of taste ! you do not   know all my accomplishment yet , Richard . " 
 " I shall not   be astonish at anything new , Bella . " 
 " then hear , and wonder . " her voice troll out some lively roulade . " do not   you think he will make I his prima donna below ? it be nonsense to tell I there be no singing there . and the atmosphere will be favourable to the voice . no damp , you know . you see the piano why do not   you ask I to sing before ? I can sing italian . I have a master who make love to I . I forgive he because of the music - stool man can not   help it on a music - stool , poor dear ! " 
 she go to the piano , strike the note , and sing 
  " ' my heart , my heart I think ' twill break . ' 
 " because I be such a rake . I do not   know any other reason . no ; I hate sentimental song . will not   sing that . ta - tiddy - tiddy - iddy a ... e ! how ridiculous those woman be , come home from Richmond ! 
  ' once the sweet romance of story 
  Clad thy move form with grace ; 
  once the world and all its glory 
  be but framework to thy face . 
  ah , too fair ! what I remember 
  might my soul recall but no ! 
  to the wind this wretched ember 
  of a fire that fall so low ! ' 
 " Hum ! do not   much like that . Tum - te - tum - tum accanto al fuoco heigho ! I do not   want to show off , Dick or to break down so I will not   try that . 
  ' oh ! but for thee , oh ! but for thee , 
  I might have be a happy wife , 
  and nurse a baby on my knee , 
  and never blush to give it life . ' 
 " I use to sing that when I be a girl , sweet Richard , and do not   know at all , at all , what it mean . must not   sing that sort of song in company . we be oh ! so proper even we ! 
  ' if I have a husband , what think you I would do ? 
  I would make it my business to keep he a lover ; 
  for when a young gentleman cease to woo , 
  some other amusement he will quickly discover . ' 
 " for such be young gentleman make of make of : such be young gentleman make of ! " 
 after this trifling she sing a spanish ballad sweetly . he be in the mood when imagination intensely vivify everything . mere suggestion of music suffice . the lady in the ballad have be wrong . Lo ! it be the lady before he ; and soft horn blow ; he smell the languid night - flower ; he see the star crowd large and close above the arid plain this lady lean at her window desolate , pour out her abandon heart . 
 hero know little what they owe to champagne . 
 the lady wander to Venice . Thither he follow she at a leap . in Venice she be not happy . he be prepare for the misery of any woman anywhere . but , oh ! to be with she ! to glide with phantom - motion through throb street ; past house muffle in shadow and gloomy legend ; under storied bridge ; past palace charge with full life in dead quietness ; past grand old tower , colossal square , gleam quay , and out , and on with she , on into the silver infinity shake over sea ! 
 be it the champagne ? the music ? or the poetry ? something of the two former , perhaps : but most the enchantress playing upon he . how many instrument can not clever woman play upon at the same moment ! and this enchantress be not too clever , or he might have feel her touch . she be no long absolutely bent on win he , or he might have see a manoeuvre . she like he like none well . she wish he well . her pique be satisfied . still he be handsome , and he be go . what she like he for , she rather very slightly wish to do away with , or see if it could be do away with : just as one wish to catch a pretty butterfly , without hurt its patterned wing . no harm intend to the innocent insect , only one want to inspect it thoroughly , and enjoy the marvel of it , in one 's tender possession , and have the felicity of think one could crush it , if one would . 
 he know she what she be , this lady . in Seville , or in Venice , the spot be on she . sail the pathway of the moon it be not celestial light that illumine her beauty . her sin be there : but in dream to save , he be soft to her sin drown it in deep mournfulness . 
 Silence , and the rustle of her dress , awake he from his musing . she swam wave - like to the sofa . she be at his foot . 
 " I have be light and careless to - night , Richard . of course I mean it . I must be happy with my good friend go to leave I . " 
 those witch underlid be work brightly . 
 " you will not forget I ? and I shall try ... try ... " 
 her lip twitch . she think he such a very handsome fellow . 
 " if I change if I can change ... oh ! if you could know what a net I be in , Richard ! " 
 now at those word , as he look down on her haggard loveliness , not divine sorrow but a devouring jealousy spring like fire in his breast , and set he rock with horrid pain . he bend close to her pale beseech face . her eye still draw he down . 
 " Bella ! no ! no ! promise I ! swear it ! " 
 " Lost , Richard ! lose for ever ! give I up ! " 
 he cry : " I never will ! " and strain she in his arm , and kiss she passionately on the lip . 
 she be not act now as she sidle and slunk her half - avert head with a kind of maiden shame under his arm , sigh heavily , weeping , cling to he . it be wicked truth . 
 not a word of love between they ! 
 be ever hero in this fashion win ? 




 CHAPTER XXXIX 

 at a season when the pleasant south - western Island have few attraction to other than invalid and hermit enamour of wind and rain , the potent nobleman , Lord Mountfalcon , still linger there to the disgust of his friend and special parasite . " Mount 's in for it again , " they say among themselves . " hang the woman ! " be a natural sequence . for , do not   you see , what a shame it be of the woman to be always kindle such a very inflammable subject ! all understand that Cupid have twang his bow , and transfix a peer of Britain for the fiftieth time : but none would perceive , though he vouch for it with his most eloquent oath , that this be a totally different case from the antecedent one . so it have be swear to they too frequently before . he be as a man with mighty tiding , and no language : intensely communicative , but inarticulate . good round oath have formerly compass and expound his noble emotion . they be now quite beyond the comprehension of blasphemy , even when emphasize , and by this the poor lord divinely feel the case be different . there be something impressive in a great human hulk writhe under the unutterable torment of a mastery he can not contend with , or account for , or explain by mean of intelligible word . at first he take refuge in the depth of his contempt for woman . Cupid give he line . when he have come to vent his bad of they , the fair face now stamp on his brain beam the more triumphantly : so the harpooned whale rise to the surface , and after a few convulsion , surrender his huge length . my lord be in love with Richard 's young wife . he give proof of it by bury himself beside she . to she , could she have see it , he give further proof of a real devotion , in affect , and in her presence feeling , nothing beyond a lively interest in her well - being . this wonder , that when near she he should be cool and compose , and when away from she wrap in a tempest of desire , be matter for what power of cogitation the heavy nobleman possess . 
 the Hon . Peter , tired of his journey to and fro , urge he to press the business . Lord Mountfalcon be wise , or more scrupulous , than his parasite . almost every evening he see Lucy . the inexperienced little wife apprehend no harm in his visit . moreover , Richard have commend she to the care of Lord Mountfalcon , and Lady Judith . Lady Judith have leave the Island for London : Lord Mountfalcon remain . there could be no harm . if she have ever think so , she no long do . secretly , perhaps , she be flatter . Lord Mountfalcon be as well educate as it be the fortune of the run of title eld son to be : he could talk and instruct : he be a lord : and he let she understand that he be wicked , very wicked , and that she improve he . the heroine , in common with the hero , have her ambition to be of use in the world to do some good : and the task of reclaim a bad man be extremely seductive to good woman . dear to their tender bosom as old china be a bad man they be mend ! Lord Mountfalcon have none of the art of a libertine : his gold , his title , and his person have hitherto preserve he from have long to sigh in vain , or sigh at all , possibly : the Hon . Peter do his villanie for he . no alarm be give to Lucy 's pure instinct , as might have be the case have my lord be over - adept . it be nice in her martyrdom to have a true friend to support she , and really to be able to do something for that friend . too simple - minded to think much of his lordship 's position , she be yet a woman . " he , a great nobleman , do not scorn to acknowledge I , and think something of I , " may have be one of the half - thought pass through she now and then , as she reflect in self - defence on the proud family she have marry into . 
 January be water and freeze old earth by turn , when the Hon . Peter travel down to the sun of his purse with great news . he have no soon broach his lordship 's immediate weakness , than Mountfalcon begin to plunge like a heavy dragoon in difficulty . he swear by this and that he have come across an angel for his sin , and would do she no hurt . the next moment he swear she must be his , though she curse like a cat . his lordship 's illustration be not choice . " I have not   advance an inch , " he groan . " Brayder ! upon my soul , that little woman could do anything with I . by heaven ! I would marry she to - morrow . here I be , see she every day in the week out or in , and what do you think she get I to talk about ? history ! be not   it enough to make a fellow mad ? and there be I lecture like a prig , and by heaven ! while I be at it I feel a pleasure in it ; and when I leave the house I should feel an immense gratification in shoot somebody . what do they say in town ? " 
 " not much , " say Brayder , significantly . 
 " when be that fellow her husband come down ? " 
 " I rather hope we have   settle he for life , Mount . " 
 Nobleman and parasite exchange look . 
 " how d'ye mean ? " 
 Brayder hum an air , and break it to say , " he be in for Don Juan at a gallop , that be all . " 
 " the deuce ! have Bella get he ? " Mountfalcon ask with eagerness . 
 Brayder hand my lord a letter . it be date from the Sussex coast , sign " Richard , " and be word thus : 
 " my beautiful Devil ! 
 " since we be both devil together , and have find each other out , come to I at once , or I shall be go somewhere in a hurry . come , my bright hell - star ! I run away from you , and now I ask you to come to I ! you have teach I how devil love , and I can not   do without you . come an hour after you receive this . " 
 Mountfalcon turn over the letter to see if there be any more . " complimentary love - epistle ! " he remark , and rise from his chair and stride about , mutter , " the dog ! how infamously he treat his wife ! " 
 " very bad , " say Brayder . 
 " how do you get hold of this ? " 
 " stroll into Belle 's dressing - room , wait for she turn over her pincushion hap - hazard . you know her trick . " 
 " by Jove ! I think that girl do it on purpose . thank heaven , I have not   write she any letter for an age . be she go to he ? " 
 " not she ! but it be odd , Mount ! do you ever know she refuse money before ? she tear up the cheque in style , and present I the fragment with two or three of the delicacy of language she learn at your Academy . I rather like to hear a woman swear . it embellish she ! " 
 Mountfalcon take counsel of his parasite as to the end the letter could be make to serve . both conscientiously agree that Richard 's behaviour to his wife be infamous , and that he at least deserve no mercy . " but , " say his lordship , " it will not   do to show the letter . at first she will be swear it be false , and then she will stick to he close . I know the slut . " 
 " the rule of contrary , " say Brayder , carelessly . " she must see the trahison with her eye . they believe their eye . there be your chance , Mount . you step in : you give her revenge and consolation two bird at one shot . that be what they like . " 
 " you be an ass , Brayder , " the nobleman exclaim . " you be an infernal blackguard . you talk of this little woman as if she and other woman be all of a piece . I do not   see anything I gain by this confounded letter . her husband be a brute that be clear . " 
 " will you leave it to I , Mount ? " 
 " be damned before I do ! " mutter my lord . 
 " thank you . now see how this will end : you be too soft , Mount . you will be make a fool of . " 
 " I tell you , Brayder , there be nothing to be do . if I carry she off I have   be on the point of do it every day what will come of that ? she will look I can not   stand her eye I shall be a fool bad off with she than I be now . " 
 Mountfalcon yawn despondently . " and what do you think ? " he pursue . " be not   it enough to make a fellow gnash his tooth ? She's" ... he mention something in an underbreath , and turn red as he say it . 
 " Hm ! " Brayder put up his mouth and rap the handle of his cane on his chin . " that be disagreeable , Mount . you do not   exactly want to act in that character . you have not   get a diploma . Bother ! " 
 " do you think I love she a bit less ? " break out my lord in a frenzy . " by heaven ! I would read to she by her bedside , and talk that infernal history to she , if it please she , all day and all night . " 
 " you be evidently graduate for a midwife , Mount . " 
 the nobleman appear silently to accept the imputation . 
 " what do they say in town ? " he ask again . 
 Brayder say the sole question be , whether it be maid , wife , or widow . 
 " I will go to she this evening , " Mountfalcon resume , after to judge by the cast of his face reflect deeply . " I will go to she this evening . she shall know what infernal torment she make I suffer . " 
 " do you mean to say she do not   know it ? " 
 " have not   an idea think I a friend . and so , by heaven ! I will be to she . " 
 " a hm ! " go the Honourable Peter . " this way to the sign of the Green Man , lady ! " 
 " do you want to be pitch out of the window , Brayder ? " 
 " once be enough , Mount . the Salvage Man be strong . I may have forget the trick of alight on my foot . there there ! I will be swear she be excessively innocent , and think you a disinterested friend . " 
 " I will go to she this evening , " Mountfalcon repeat . " she shall know what damned misery it be to see she in such a position . I can not   hold out any long . Deceit 's horrible to such a girl as that . I would rather have she curse I than speak and look as she do . dear little girl ! she be only a child . you have not   an idea how sensible that little woman be . " 
 " have you ? " inquire the cunning one . 
 " my belief be , Brayder , that there be angel among woman , " say Mountfalcon , evade his parasite 's eye as he speak . 
 to the world , Lord Mountfalcon be the thoroughly wicked man ; his parasite simply ingeniously dissipate . full many a man of God have think it the easy task to reclaim the Hon . Peter . 
 Lucy receive her noble friend by firelight that evening , and sit much in the shade . she offer to have the candle bring in . he beg she to allow the room to remain as it be . " I have something to say to you , " he observe with a certain solemnity . 
 " yes to I ? " say Lucy , quickly . 
 Lord Mountfalcon know he have a great deal to say , but how to say it , and what it exactly be , he do not know . ' 
 " you conceal it admirably , " he begin , " but you must be very lonely here I fear , unhappy . " 
 " I should have be lonely , but for your kindness , my lord , " say Lucy . " I be not unhappy . " her face be in shade and could not belie she . 
 " be there any help that one who would really be your friend might give you , Mrs. Feverel ? " 
 " none indeed that I know of , " Lucy reply . " who can help we to pay for our sin ? " 
 " at least you may permit I to endeavour to pay my debt , since you have help I to wash out some of any sin . " 
 " ah , my lord ! " say Lucy , not displeased . it be sweet for a woman to believe she have draw the serpent 's tooth . 
 " I tell you the truth , " Lord Mountfalcon go on . " what object could I have in deceive you ? I know you quite above flattery so different from other woman ! " 
 " oh , pray , do not say that , " interpose Lucy . 
 " accord to my experience , then . " 
 " but you say you have meet such such very bad woman . " 
 " I have . and now that I meet a good one , it be my misfortune . " 
 " your misfortune , Lord Mountfalcon ? " 
 " yes , and I might say more . " 
 his lordship hold impressively mute . 
 " how strange man be ! " think Lucy . " he have some unhappy secret . " 
 Tom Bakewell , who have a habit of come into the room on various pretence during the nobleman 's visit , put a stop to the revelation , if his lordship intend to make any . 
 when they be alone again , Lucy say , smile : " do you know , I be always ashamed to ask you to begin to read . " 
 Mountfalcon star . " to read ? oh ! ha ! yes ! " he remember his evening duty . " very happy , I be sure . let I see . where be we ? " 
 " the life of the Emperor Julian . but indeed I feel quite ashamed to ask you to read , my lord . it be new to I ; like a new world hear about emperor , and army , and thing that really have be on the earth we walk upon . it fill my mind . but it must have cease to interest you , and I be think that I would not tease you any more . " 
 " your pleasure be mine , Mrs. Feverel . ' pon my honour , I would read till I be hoarse , to hear your remark . " 
 " be you laugh at I ? " 
 " do I look so ? " 
 Lord Mountfalcon have fine full eye , and by merely drop the lid he could appear to endow they with mental expression . 
 " no , you be not , " say Lucy . " I must thank you for your forbearance . " 
 the nobleman go on his honour loudly . 
 now it be an object of Lucy 's to have he read ; for his sake , for her sake , and for somebody else 's sake ; which somebody else be probably consider first in the matter . when he be read to she , he seem to be legitimize his presence there ; and though she have no doubt or suspicion whatever , she be easy in her heart while she have he employ in that office . so she rise to fetch the book , lay it open on the table at his lordship 's elbow , and quietly wait to ring for candle when he should be willing to commence . 
 that evening Lord Mountfalcon could not get himself up to the farce , and he feel a pity for the strangely innocent unprotected child with anguish hang over she , that withhold the word he want to speak , or insinuate . he sit silent and do nothing . 
 " what I do not like he for , " say Lucy , meditatively , " be his change his religion . he would have be such a hero , but for that . I could have love he . " 
 " who be it you could have love , Mrs. Feverel ? " Lord Mountfalcon ask . 
 " the Emperor Julian . " 
 " oh ! the Emperor Julian ! well , he be an apostate but then , you know , he mean what he be about . he do not   even do it for a woman . " 
 " for a woman ! " cry Lucy . " what man would for a woman ? " 
 " I would . " 
 " you , Lord Mountfalcon ? " 
 " yes . I would turn Catholic to - morrow . " 
 " you make I very unhappy if you say that , my lord . " 
 " then I will unsay it . " 
 Lucy slightly shudder . she put her hand upon the bell to ring for light . 
 " do you reject a convert , Mrs. Feverel ? " say the nobleman . 
 " oh yes ! yes ! I do . one who do not give his conscience I would not have . " 
 " if he give his heart and body , can he give more ? " 
 Lucy 's hand press the bell . she do not like the doubtful light with one who be so unscrupulous . Lord Mountfalcon have never speak in this way before . he speak well , too . she miss the aristocratic twang in his voice , and the hesitation for word , and the fluid lordliness with which he roll over difficulty in speech . 
 simultaneously with the sounding of the bell the door open , and present Tom Bakewell . there be a double knock at the same instant at the street door . Lucy delay to give order . 
 " can it be a letter , Tom ! so late ? " she say , change colour . " pray run and see . " 
 " that an't   powst " Tom remark , as he obey his mistress . 
 " be you very anxious for a letter , Mrs. Feverel ? " Lord Mountfalcon inquire . 
 " oh , no ! yes , I be , very , " say Lucy . her quick ear catch the tone of a voice she remember . " that dear old thing have come to see I , " she cry , start up . 
 Tom usher a bunch of black satin into the room . 
 " Mrs. Berry ! " say Lucy , run up to she and kiss she . 
 " I , my darlin ' ! " Mrs. Berry , breathless and rosy with her journey , return the salute . " I truly it be , in fault of a well , for I be not   one to stand by and give the devil his licence roamin ' ! and the salt sure enough have spilte my bride - gown at the beginnin ' , which be not   the good sign . bless ye ! oh , here he be . " she behold a male figure in a chair by the half light , and swing around to address he . " you bad man ! " she hold aloft one of her fat finger , " I have   come on ye like a bolt , I have , and go to make ye do your duty , naughty boy ! but your my darlin ' babe , " she melt , as be her custom , " and I will never meet you and not give to ye the kiss of a mother . " 
 before Lord Mountfalcon could find time to expostulate the soft woman have he by the neck , and be down among his luxurious whisker . 
 " ha ! " she give a smothered shriek , and fall back . " what hair be that ? " 
 Tom Bakewell just then illumine the transaction . 
 " oh , my gracious ! " Mrs. Berry breathe with horror , " I been and kiss a strange man ! " 
 Lucy , half - laugh , but in dreadful concern , beg the noble lord to excuse the woful mistake . 
 " extremely flattered , highly favour , I be sure ; " say his lordship , re - arrange his disconcerted moustache ; " may I beg the pleasure of an introduction ? " 
 " my husband 's dear old nurse Mrs. Berry , " say Lucy , take her hand to lend her countenance . " Lord Mountfalcon , Mrs. Berry . " 
 Mrs. Berry seek grace while she perform a series of apologetic bobs , and wipe the perspiration from her forehead . 
 Lucy put she into a chair : Lord Mountfalcon ask for an account of her passage over to the Island ; receive distressingly full particular , by which it be reveal that the softness of her heart be only equal by the weakness of her stomach . the recital calm Mrs. Berry down . 
 " well , and where be my where be Mr. Richard ? yer husband , my dear ? " Mrs. Berry turn from her tale to question . 
 " do you expect to see he here ? " say Lucy , in a broken voice . 
 " and where else , my love ? since he have not   be see in London a whole fortnight . " 
 Lucy do not speak . 
 " we will dismiss the Emperor Julian till to - morrow , I think , " say Lord Mountfalcon , rise and bow . 
 Lucy give he her hand with mute thank . he touch it distantly , embrace Mrs. Berry in a farewell bow , and be show out of the house by Tom Bakewell . 
 the moment he be go , Mrs. Berry throw up her arm . " do ye ever know sich a horrid thing to go and happen to a virtuous woman ! " she exclaim . " I could cry at it , I could ! to be go and kissin ' a strange hairy man ! oh dear I ! what be cornin ' next , I wonder ? whisker ! think I for I know the touch o ' whisker ' t be not   like other hair what ! have he grow a crop that sudden , I say to myself ; and it flash on I I be and make a awful mistake ! and the light come in , and I see that great hairy man beggin ' his pardon nobleman , and if I could ' a drop through the floor out o ' sight o ' man , drat them ! they be al'ays in the way , that they be ! " 
 " Mrs. Berry , " Lucy check she , " do you expect to find he here ? " 
 " Askin ' that solemn ? " retort Berry . " what he ? your husband ? o ' course I do ! and you get he somewhere hide . " 
 " I have not hear from my husband for fifteen day , " say Lucy , and her tear roll heavily off her cheek . 
 " not heer from he ! fifteen day ! " Berry echo . 
 " o Mrs. Berry ! dear kind Mrs. Berry ! have you no news ? nothing to tell I ! I have   bear it so long . they be cruel to I , Mrs. Berry . oh , do you know if I have offend he my husband ? while he write I do not complain . I could live on his letter for year . but not to hear from he ! to think I have ruin he , and that he repent ! do they want to take he from I ? do they want I dead ? o Mrs. Berry ! I have   have no one to speak out my heart to all this time , and I can not , can not help cry , Mrs. Berry ! " 
 Mrs. Berry be inclined to be miserable at what she hear from Lucy 's lip , and she be herself full of dire apprehension ; but it be never this excellent creature 's system to be miserable in company . the sight of a sorrow that be not positive , and could not refer to proof , set she resolutely the other way . 
 " fiddle - faddle , " she say . " I would like to see he repent ! he will not   find anywhere a beauty like his own dear little wife , and he know it . now , look you here , my dear you bless weepin ' pet the man that could see ye with that hair of yours there in ruin , and he back by the law , and not rush into your arm and hold ye squeeze for life , he be not   get much man in he , I say ; and no one can say that of my babe ! I be sayin ' , look here , to comfort ye oh , why , to be sure he've   get some surprise for ye . and so've   I , my lamb ! Hark , now ! his father've   come to town , like a good reasonable man at last , to u - nite ye both , and bring your body together , as your heart be , for everlastin ' . now be not   that news ? " 
 " oh ! " cry Lucy , " that take my last hope away . I think he have go to his father . " she burst into fresh tear . 
 Mrs. Berry pause , disturb . 
 " belike he be travellin ' after he , " she suggest . 
 " fifteen day , Mrs. Berry ! " 
 " ah , fifteen week , my dear , after sieh a man as that . he be a regular meteor , be Sir Austin Feverel , Raynham Abbey . well , so hark you here . I say to myself , that know he for I do think my babe be in his natural nest I say , the bar'net'll never write for you both to come up and beg forgiveness , so down I will go and fetch you up . for there be your mistake , my dear , ever to leave your husband to go away from ye one hour in a young marriage . it be dangerous , it be mad , it be wrong , and it be only to be right by your obeyin ' of I , as I command it : for I have my fit , though I be a soft ' un . obey I , and ye'll be happy tomorrow or the next to it . " 
 Lucy be willing to see comfort . she be weary of her self - inflict martyrdom , and glad to give herself up to somebody else 's guidance utterly . 
 " but why do he not write to I , Mrs. Berry ? " 
 " 'cause , 'cause who can tell the why of man , my dear ? but that he love ye faithful , I will swear . have not   he groan in my arm that he could not   come to ye ? weak wretch ! have not   he swear how he love ye to I , poor young man ! but this be your fault , my sweet . yes , it be . you should ' a follow my ' dvice at the fust ' stead o ' go into your ' eroic about this and t'other . " here Mrs. Berry pour forth fresh sentence on matrimony , point especially at young couple . " I should ' a be a fool if I have not   suffer myself , " she confess , ' so I will thank my berry if I make you wise in season . " 
 Lucy smooth her ruddy plump cheek , and gaze up affectionately into the soft woman 's kind brown eye . endear phrase pass from mouth to mouth . and as she gaze Lucy blush , as one who have something very secret to tell , very sweet , very strange , but can not quite bring herself to speak it . 
 " well ! these 's three man in my life I kiss , " say Mrs. Berry , too much absorb in her extraordinary adventure to notice the young wife 's struggle bosom , " three man , and one a nobleman ! He've   get more whisker than my Berry , I wonder what the man think . ten to one he will think , now , I be glad o ' my chance they be that vain , whether they be lord or common . how be I to know ? I nat'ral think none but her husband'd sit in that chair . ha ! and in the dark ? and alone with ye ? " Mrs. Berry harden her eye , " and your husband away ? what do this mean ? tell to I , child , what it mean his bein ' here alone without ere a candle ? " 
 " Lord Mountfalcon be the only friend I have here , " say Lucy . " he be very kind . he come almost every evening . " 
 " Lord Montfalcon that his name ! " Mrs. Berry exclaim . " I be that flurry by the man , I do not   mind it at first . he come every evenin ' , and your husband out o ' sight ! my goodness I ! it be gettin ' bad and bad . and what do he come for , now , ma'am ? now tell I candid what ye do together here in the dark of an evenin ' . " 
 Mrs. Berry glance severely . 
 " o Mrs. Berry ! please not to speak in that way I do not   like it , " say Lucy , pouting . 
 " what do he come for , I ask ? " 
 " because he be kind , Mrs. Berry . he see I very lonely , and wish to amuse I . and he tell I of thing I know nothing about and " 
 " and want to be a - teachin ' some of his thing , mayhap , " Mrs. Berry interrupt with a ruffled breast . 
 " you be a very ungenerous , suspicious , naughty old woman , " say Lucy , chide she . 
 " and you be a silly , unsuspectin ' little bird , " Mrs. Berry retort , as she return her tap on the cheek . " you have not   tell I what ye do together , and what be his excuse for comin ' . " 
 " well , then , Mrs. Berry , almost every evening that he come we read history , and he explain the battle , and talk to I about the great man . and he say I be not silly , Mrs. Berry . " 
 " that be one bit o ' lime on your wing , my bird . history , indeed ! history to a young married lovely woman alone in the dark ! a pretty history ! why , I know that man 's name , my dear . he be a notorious live rake , that Lord Montfalcon . no woman 's safe with he . " 
 " ah , but he have not   deceive I , Mrs. Berry . he have not pretend he be good . " 
 " More be his art , " quoth the experienced dame . " so you read history together in the dark ; my dear ! " 
 " I be unwell to - night , Mrs. Berry . I want he not to see my face . look ! there be the book open ready for he when the candle come in . and now , you dear kind darle old thing , let I kiss you for come to I . I do love you . talk of other thing . " 
 " so we will , " say Mrs. Berry soften to Lucy 's caress . " so let we . a nobleman , indeed , alone with a young wife in the dark , and she sich a beauty ! I say this shall be put a stop to now and henceforth , on the spot it shall ! he will not   meneuvele Bessy Berry with his art . there ! I drop he . I be dyin ' for a cup o ' tea , my dear . " 
 Lucy get up to ring the bell , and as Mrs. Berry , incapable of quite drop he , be continue to say : " let he go and boast I kiss he ; he be not   nothing to be ' sham of in a chaste woman 's kiss unawares which man do not   get too often in their life , I can assure them ; " her eye survey Lucy 's figure . 
 Lo , when Lucy return to she , Mrs. Berry surround she with her arm , and draw she into feminine depth . " oh , you bless ! " she cry in most meaning tone , " you good , lovin' , proper little wife , you ! " 
 " what be it , Mrs. Berry ! " lisp Lucy , open the most innocent blue eye . 
 " as if I could not   see , you pet ! it be my flurry blind I , or I would ' a marked ye the fast shock . Thinkin ' to deceive I ! " 
 Mrs. Berry 's eye speak generation . Lucy 's waver ; she colour all over , and hide her face on the bounteous breast that mount to she . 
 " you be a sweet one , " murmur the soft woman , pat she back , and rock she . " you be a rose , you be ! and a bud on your stalk . have not   tell a word to your husband , my dear ? " she ask quickly . 
 Lucy shake her head , look sly and shy . 
 " that be right . we will give he a surprise ; let it come all at once on he , and think he losin ' breath ' I be a father ! ' nor a hint even you have not   give he ? " 
 Lucy kiss she , to indicate it be quite a secret . 
 " oh ! you be a sweet one , " say Bessy Berry , and rock she more closely and lovingly . 
 then these two have a whisper conversation , from which let all of male persuasion retire a space nothing under one mile . 
 return , after a due interval , we see Mrs. Berry count on her finger ' end . conclude the sum , she cry prophetically : " now this right everything a baby in the balance ! now I say this angel - infant come from on high . it be God 's messenger , my love ! and it be not wrong to say so . he think you worthy , or you would not   ' a have one not for all the tryin ' in the world , you would not , and some try hard enough , poor creature ! now let we rejice and make merry ! I be for cryin ' and laughin ' , one and the same . this be the blessed seal of matrimony , which berry never stamp on I . it be be hop it be a boy . make that man a grandfather , and his grandchild a son , and you get he safe . oh ! this be what I call happiness , and I will have my tea a little strong in consequence . I declare I could get tipsy to know this joyful news . " 
 so Mrs. Berry carol . she have her tea a little strong . she eat and she drank ; she rejoice and make merry . the bliss of the chaste be her . 
 say Lucy demurely : " now you know why I read history , and that sort of book . " 
 " do I ? " reply Berry . " belike I do . since what you do 's so good , my darlin ' , I be agreeable to anything . a fig for all the lord ! they can not   come anigh a baby . you may read Voyages and Travels , my dear , and Romances , and Tales of Love and War . you cut the riddle in your own dear way , and that be all I care for . " 
 " no , but you do not   understand , " persist Lucy . " I only read sensible book , and talk of serious thing , because I be sure ... because I have hear say ... dear Mrs. Berry ! do not   you understand now ? " 
 Mrs. Berry smack her knee . " only to think of her bein ' that thoughtful ! and she a Catholic , too ! never tell I that people of one religion be not   as good as another , after that . why , you want to make he a historian , to be sure ! and that rake of a lord who have   be comin ' here playin ' at wolf , you be and make he unbeknown to himself sort o ' tutor to the unborn bless ! ha ! ha ! say that little woman be not   get art ekal to the cunningest of them . oh ! I understand . why , to be sure , do not   I know a lady , a widow of a clergyman : he be a postermost child , and afore his birth that woman read nothing but Blair 's ' Grave ' over and over again , from the end to the beginnin ' ; that be a serious book ! very hard readin ' ! and at four year of age that child that come of it reelly be the pious infant ! he be like a little curate . his eye be up ; he talk so solemn . " Mrs. Berry imitate the little curate 's appearance and manner of speak . " so she get her wish , for one ! " 
 but at this lady Lucy laugh . 
 they chatter on happily till bedtime . Lucy arrange for Mrs. Berry to sleep with she . " if it be not dreadful to ye , my sweet , sleepin ' beside a woman , " say Mrs. Berry . " I know it be to I shortly after my Berry , and I feel it . it do not   somehow seem nat'ral after matrimony a woman in your bed ! I be oblige to have somebody , for the cold sheet do give ye the creep when you have   be use to that that be different . " 
 Upstairs they go together , Lucy not share these objection . then Lucy open certain drawer , and exhibit pretty cap , and laced linen , all adapt for a very small body , all the work of her own hand : and Mrs. Berry praise they and she . " you been guess a boy woman - like , " she say . then they coo , and kiss , and undressed by the fire , and kneel at the bedside , with their arm about each other , pray ; both pray for the unborn child ; and Mrs. Berry press Lucy 's waist the moment she be about to breathe the petition to heaven to shield and bless that come life ; and thereat Lucy close to she , and feel a strong love for she . then Lucy get into bed first , leave Berry to put out the light , and before she do so , Berry lean over she , and eye she roguishly , say , " I never see ye like this , but I be half in love with ye myself , you blushin ' beauty ! Sweet be your eye , and your hair do take one so lyin ' back . I would never forgive my father if he kep I away from ye four - and - twenty hour just . husband o ' that ! " Berry point at the young wife 's loveliness . " ye look so ripe with kiss , and there they be a - languishin ' ! ... you never look so but in your bed , ye beauty ! just as it ought to be . " Lucy have to pretend to rise to put out the light before Berry would give up her amorous chaste soliloquy . then they lie in bed , and Mrs. Berry fondle she , and arrange for their departure to - morrow , and review Richard 's emotion when he come to hear he be go to be make a father by she , and hint at Lucy 's delicious shiver when Richard be again in his rightful place , which she , Bessy Berry , now usurped ; and all sort of amorous sweet thing ; enough to make one fancy the adage subvert , that steal fruit be sweetest ; she draw such glowing picture of bliss within the law and the limit of the conscience , till at last , wear out , Lucy murmur " Peepy , dear berry , " and the soft woman gradually cease her chirp . 
 Bessy Berry do not sleep . she lie thinking of the sweet brave heart beside she , and listen to Lucy 's breath as it come and go ; squeeze the fair sleeper 's hand now and then , to ease her love as her reflection warm . a storm of wind come howl over the Hampshire hill , and spring white foam on the water , and shake the bare tree . it pass , leave a thin cloth of snow on the wintry land . the moon shine brilliantly . Berry hear the house - dog bark . his bark be savage and persistent . she be rouse by the noise . by and by she fancy she hear a movement in the house ; then it seem to she that the house - door open . she cock her ear , and could almost make out voice in the midnight stillness . she slip from the bed , lock and bolt the door of the room , assure herself of Lucy 's unconsciousness , and go on tiptoe to the window . the tree all stand white to the north ; the ground glitter ; the cold be keen . Berry wrap her fat arm across her bosom , and peep as close over into the garden as the situation of the window permit . Berry be a soft , not a timid , woman : and it happen this night that her thought be above the fear of the dark . she be sure of the voice ; curiosity without a shade of alarm hold she on the watch ; and gather bundle of her day - apparel round her neck and shoulder , she silence the chattering of her tooth as well as she could , and remain stationary . the low hum of the voice come to a break ; something be say in a loud tone ; the house - door quietly shut ; a man walk out of the garden into the road . he pause opposite her window , and Berry let the blind go back to its place , and peep from behind an edge of it . he be in the shadow of the house , so that it be impossible to discern much of his figure . after some minute he walk rapidly away , and Berry return to the bed an icicle , from which Lucy 's limb sensitively shrank . 
 next morning Mrs. Berry ask Tom Bakewell if he have be disturb in the night . Tom , the mysterious , say he have sleep like a top . Mrs. Berry go into the garden . the snow be partially melt ; all save one spot , just under the portal , and there she see the print of a man 's foot . by some strange guidance it occur to she to go and find one of Richard 's boot . she do so , and , unperceived , she measure the sole of the boot in that solitary footmark . there could be no doubt that it fit . she try it from heel to toe a dozen time . 




 CHAPTER XL 

 Sir Austin Feverel have come to town with the serenity of a philosopher who say , ' tis now time ; and the satisfaction of a man who have not arrive thereat without a struggle . he have almost forgive his son . his deep love for he have well - nigh shake loose from wounded pride and more tenacious vanity . stirring of a remote sympathy for the creature who have rob he of his son and hew at his system , be in his heart of heart . this he know ; and in his own mind he take credit for his softness . but the world must not suppose he soft ; the world must think he be still act on his system . otherwise what would his long absence signify ? something highly unphilosophical . so , though love be strong , and be move he to a straightforward course , the last tug of vanity draw he still aslant . 
 the Aphorist read himself so well , that to juggle with himself be a necessity . as he wish the world to see he , he behold himself : one who entirely put aside mere personal feeling : one in whom parental duty , base on the science of life , be paramount : a Scientific Humanist , in short . 
 he be , therefore , rather surprised at a coldness in Lady Blandish 's manner when he do appear . " at last ! " say the lady , in a sad way that sound reproachfully . now the Scientific Humanist have , of course , nothing to reproach himself with . 
 but where be Richard ? 
 Adrian positively aver he be not with his wife . 
 " if he have go , " say the baronet , " he would have anticipate I by a few hour . " 
 this , when repeat to Lady Blandish , should have propitiate she , and show his great forgiveness . she , however , sigh , and look at he wistfully . 
 their converse be not happy and deeply intimate . philosophy do not seem to catch her mind ; and fine phrase encounter a rueful assent , more flattering to their grandeur than to their influence . 
 day go by . Richard do not present himself . Sir Austin 's pitch of self - command be to await the youth without sign of impatience . 
 see this , the lady tell he her fear for Richard , and mention the rumour of he that be about . 
 " if , " say the baronet , " this person , his wife , be what you paint she , I do not share your fear for he . I think too well of he . if she be one to inspire the sacredness of that union , I think too well of he . it be impossible . " 
 the lady see one thing to be do . 
 " call she to you , " she say . " have she with you at Raynham . recognize she . it be the disunion and doubt that so confuse he and drive he wild . I confess to you I hop he have go to she . it seem not . if she be with you his way will be clear . will you do that ? " 
 science be notoriously of slow movement . Lady Blandish 's proposition be far too hasty for Sir Austin . woman , rapid by nature , have no idea of science . 
 " we shall see she there in time , Emmeline . at present let it be between I and my son . " 
 he speak loftily . in truth it offend he to be ask to do anything , when he have just bring himself to do so much . 
 a month elapse , and Richard appear on the scene . 
 the meeting between he and his father be not what his father have expect and have croon over in the Welsh mountain . Richard shake his hand respectfully , and inquire after his health with the common social solicitude . he then say : " during your absence , sir , I have take the liberty , without consult you , to do something in which you be more deeply concerned than myself . I have take upon myself to find out my mother and place she under my care . I trust you will not think I have do wrong . I act as I think well . " 
 Sir Austin reply : " you be of an age , Richard , to judge for yourself in such a case . I would have you simply beware of deceive yourself in imagine that you consider any one but yourself in act as you do . " 
 " I have not deceive myself , sir , " say Richard , and the interview be over . both hat an exposure of the feeling , and in that both be satisfied : but the baronet , as one who love , hop and look for tone indicative of trouble and delight in the deep heart ; and Richard give he none of those . the young man do not even face he as he speak : if their eye meet by chance , Richard 's be defiantly cold . his whole bearing be change . 
 " this rash marriage have alter he , " say the very just man of science in life : and that mean : " it have debase he . " 
 he pursue his reflection . " I see in he the desperate maturity of a suddenly - ripen nature : and but for my faith that good work be never lose , what should I think of the toil of my year ? lost , perhaps to I ! lose to he ! it may show itself in his child . " 
 the Philosopher , we may conceive , have contentment in benefit embryo : but it be a somewhat bitter prospect to Sir Austin . bitterly he feel the injury to himself . 
 one little incident speak well of Richard . a poor woman call at the hotel while he be miss . the baronet see she , and she tell he a tale that throw christian light on one part of Richard 's nature . but this might gratify the father in Sir Austin ; it do not touch the man of science . a Feverel , his son , would not do less , he think . he sit down deliberately to study his son . 
 no definite observation enlighten he . Richard eat and drank ; joke and laugh . he be generally before Adrian in call for a fresh bottle . he talk easily of current topic ; his gaiety do not sound forced . in all he do , nevertheless , there be not the air of a youth who see a future before he . Sir Austin put that down . it might be carelessness , and wanton blood , for no one could say he have much on his mind . the man of science be not reckon that Richard also might have learn to act and wear a mask . dead subject this be to say , people not on their guard he could penetrate and dissect . it be by a rare chance , as scientific man well know , that one have an opportunity of examine the structure of the living . 
 however , that rare chance be grant to Sir Austin . they be engage to dine with Mrs. Doria at the Foreys ' , and walk down to she in the afternoon , father and son arm - in - arm , Adrian beside they . previously the offended father have condescend to inform his son that it would shortly be time for he to return to his wife , indicate that arrangement would ultimately be order to receive she at Raynham . Richard have reply nothing ; which might mean excess of gratitude , or hypocrisy in conceal his pleasure , or any one of the thousand shift by which gratify human nature express itself when all be make to run smooth with it . now Mrs. Berry have her surprise ready charge for the young husband . she have Lucy in her own house wait for he . every day she expect he to call and be overcome by the rapturous surprise , and every day , know his habit of frequent the park , she march Lucy thither , under the plea that Master Richard , whom she have already christen , should have an airing . 
 the round of the red winter sun be behind the bare Kensington chestnut , when these two party meet . happily for Lucy and the hope she bear in her bosom , she be perversely admire a fair horsewoman gallop by at the moment . Mrs. Berry pluck at her gown once or twice , to prepare her eye for the shock , but Lucy 's head be still half avert , and think Mrs. Berry , " twon't   hurt she if she go into his arm head foremost . " they be close ; Mrs. Berry perform the bob preliminary . Richard hold she silent with a terrible face ; he grasp her arm , and put she behind he . other people intervene . Lucy see nothing to account for Berry 's excessive flutter . berry throw it on the air and some breakfast bacon , which , she say , she know in the morning while she eat it , be bad for the bile , and which probably be the cause of she burst into tear , much to Lucy 's astonishment . 
 " what you eat make you cry , Mrs. Berry ? " 
 " it be all " Mrs. Berry press at her heart and lean sideways , " it be all stomach , my dear . do not   ye mind , " and become aware of her unfashionable behaviour , she trail off to the shelter of the elm . 
 " you have a singular manner with old lady , " say Sir Austin to his son , after Berry have be sweep aside . 
 scarcely courteous . she behave like a mad woman , certainly . " be you ill , my son ? " 
 Richard be death - pale , his strong form smite through with weakness . the baronet seek Adrian 's eye . Adrian have see Lucy as they pass , and he have a glimpse of Richard 's countenance while dispose of Berry . have Lucy recognize they , he would have go to she unhesitatingly . as she do not , he think it well , under the circumstance , to leave matter as they be . he answer the baronet 's look with a shrug . 
 " be you ill , Richard ? " Sir Austin again ask his son . 
 " come on , sir ! come on ! " cry Richard . 
 his father 's further meditation , as they step briskly to the Foreys ' , give poor ferry a character which one who lecture on matrimony , and have kiss but three man in her life , shriek to hear the very title of . 
 " Richard will go to his wife to - morrow , " Sir Austin say to Adrian some time before they go in to dinner . 
 Adrian ask he if he have chance to see a young fair - haired lady by the side of the old one Richard have treat so peculiarly ; and to the baronet 's acknowledgment that he remember to have observe such a person , Adrian say : " that be his wife , sir . " 
 Sir Austin could not dissect the live subject . as if a bullet have tear open the young man 's skull , and some blast of battle lay his palpitating organization bare , he watch every motion of his brain and his heart ; and with the grief and terror of one whose mental habit be ever to pierce to extreme . not altogether conscious that he have hitherto play with life , he feel that he be suddenly plunge into the stormful reality of it . he project to speak plainly to his son on all point that night . 
 " Richard be very gay , " Mrs. Doris , whisper her brother . 
 " all will be right with he to - morrow , " he reply ; for the game have be in his hand so long , so long have he be the God of the machine , that have once resolve to speak plainly and to act , he be to a certain extent secure , bad as the thing to mend might be . 
 " I notice he have rather a wild laugh I do not   exactly like his eye , " say Mrs. Doria . 
 " you will see a change in he to - morrow , " the man of science remark . 
 it be reserve for Mrs. Doria herself to experience that change . in the middle of the dinner a telegraphic message from her son - in - law , worthy John Todhunter , reach the house , state that Clare be alarmingly ill , bid she come instantly . she cast about for some one to accompany she , and fix on Richard . before he would give his consent for Richard to go , Sir Austin desire to speak with he apart , and in that interview he say to his son : " my dear Richard ! it be my intention that we should come to an understanding together this night . but the time be short poor Helen can not spare many minute . let I then say that you deceive I , and that I forgive you . we fix our seal on the past . you will bring your wife to I when you return . " and very cheerfully the baronet look down on the generous future he thus found . 
 " will you have she at Raynham at once , sir ? " say Richard . 
 " yes , my son , when you bring she . " 
 " be you mock I , sir ? " 
 " pray , what do you mean ? " 
 " I ask you to receive she at once . " 
 " well ! the delay can not be long . I do not apprehend that you will be keep from your happiness many day . " 
 " I think it will be some time , sir ! " say Richard , sigh deeply . 
 " and what mental freak be this that can induce you to postpone it and play with your first duty ? " 
 " what be my first duty , sir ? " 
 " since you be marry , to be with your wife . " 
 " I have hear that from an old woman call Berry ! " say Richard to himself , not intend irony . 
 " will you receive she at once ? " he ask resolutely . 
 the baronet be cloud by his son 's reception of his graciousness . his grateful prospect have formerly be Richard 's marriage the culmination of his system . Richard have destroy his participation in that . he now look for a pretty scene in recompense : Richard lead up his wife to he , and both be welcome by he paternally , and so hold one ostentatious minute in his embrace . 
 he say : " before you return , I demur to receive she . " 
 " very well , sir , " reply his son , and stand as if he have speak all . 
 " really you tempt I to fancy you already regret your rash proceeding ! " the baronet exclaim ; and the next moment it pain he he have utter the word , Richard 's eye be so sorrowfully fierce . it pain he , but he divine in that look a history , and he could not refrain from glance acutely and ask : " do you ? " 
 " regret it , sir ? " the question arouse one of those struggle in the young man 's breast which a passionate storm of tear may still , and which sink like leaden death into the soul when tear come not . Richard 's eye have the light of the desert . 
 " do you ? " his father repeat . " you tempt I I almost fear you do . " at the thought for he express his mind the pity that he have for Richard be not pure gold . 
 " ask I what I think of she , sir ! ask I what she be ! ask I what it be to have take one of God 's precious angel and chain she to misery ! ask I what it be to have plunge a sword into her heart , and to stand over she and see such a creature bleeding ! do I regret that ? why , yes , I do ! would you ? " 
 his eye fly hard at his father under the ridge of his eyebrow . 
 Sir Austin wince and redden . do he understand ? there be ever in the mind 's eye a certain wilfulness . we see and understand ; we see and will not   understand . 
 " tell I why you pass by she as you do this afternoon , " he say gravely : and in the same voice Richard answer : " I pass she because I could not do otherwise . " 
 " your wife , Richard ? " 
 " yes ! my wife ! " 
 " if she have see you , Richard ? " 
 " God spar she that ! " 
 Mrs. Doria , bustle in practical haste , and bear Richard 's hat and greatcoat in her energetic hand , come between they at this juncture . dimple of commiseration be in her cheek while she kiss her brother 's perplexed forehead . she forget her trouble about Clare , deplore his fatuity . 
 Sir Austin be force to let his son depart . as of old , he take counsel with Adrian , and the wise youth be soothe . " somebody have kiss he , sir , and the chaste boy can not   get over it . " this absurd suggestion do more to appease the baronet than if Adrian have give a veritable reasonable key to Richard 's conduct . it set he think that it might be a prudish strain in the young man 's mind , due to the System in difficulty . 
 " I may have be wrong in one thing , " he say , with an air of the utmost doubt of it . " I , perhaps , be wrong in allow he so much liberty during his probation . " 
 Adrian point out to he that he have distinctly command it . 
 " yes , yes ; that be on I . " 
 his be an order of mind that would accept the most burdensome charge , and by some specie of moral usury make a profit out of they . 
 Clare be little talk of . Adrian attribute the employment of the telegraph to John Todhunter 's uxorious distress at a toothache , or possibly the first symptom of an heir to his house . 
 " that child 's mind have disease in it ... she be not sound , " say the baronet . 
 on the door - step of the hotel , when they return , stand Mrs. Berry . her wish to speak a few word with the baronet reverentially communicate , she be usher upstairs into his room . 
 Mrs. Berry compress her person in the chair she be beckon to occupy . 
 " well ' ma'am , you have something to say , " observe the baronet , for she seem loth to commence . 
 " Wishin ' I have not   " Mrs. Berry take he up , and mindful of the good rule to begin at the beginning , pursue : " I dare say , Sir Austin , you do not   remember I , and I little think when last we part our meeting would be like this . twenty year do not   go over one without showin ' it , no more than twenty ox . it be a might o ' time , twenty year ! leastway not quite twenty , it be not . " 
 " round figure be good , " Adrian remark . 
 " in they round figure a be - love son have grow up , and get himself marry ! " say Mrs. Berry , diving straight into the case . 
 Sir Austin then learn that he have before he the culprit who have assist his son in that venture . it be a stretch of his patience to hear himself address on a family matter ; but he be naturally courteous . 
 " he come to my house , Sir Austin , a stranger ! if twenty year alter we as have know each other on the earth , how must they alter they that we part with just come from heaven ! and a heavenly babe he be ! so sweet ! so strong ! so fat ! " 
 Adrian laugh aloud . 
 Mrs. Berry bump a curtsey to he in her chair , continue : " I wish afore I speak to say how thankful be I bind to be for my pension not cut short , as have offend so , but that I know Sir Austin Feverel , Raynham Abbey , be not   one o ' they that like to hear their good deed pumlishe . and a pension to I now , it be something more than it be . for a pension and pretty rosy cheek in a maid , which I be that be a bait many a man'll bite , that will not   so a forsaken wife ! " 
 " if you will speak to the point , ma'am , I will listen to you , " the baronet interrupt she . 
 " it be the beginnin ' that be the bad , and that be over , thank the Lord ! so I will speak , Sir Austin , and say my say : Lord speed I ! Believin ' our idee o ' matrimony to be sim'lar , then , I will say , once marry marry for life ! yes ! I do not   even like widow . for I can not   stop at the grave . not at the tomb I can not   stop . my husband 's my husband , and if I be a body at the Resurrection , I say , speak humbly , my Berry be the husband o ' my body ; and to think of two claimin ' of I then it make I hot all over . such be my notion of that state ' tween man and woman . no givin ' in marriage , o ' course I know ; and if so I be single . " 
 the baronet suppress a smile . " really , my good woman , you wander very much . " 
 " Beggin ' pardon , Sir Austin ; but I have my point before I all the same , and I be comin ' to it . ac - knowledgin ' our error , it would do , and bein ' do , it be writ aloft . oh ! if you ony know what a sweet young creature she be ! indeed ; ' taint all of humble birth that be unworthy , Sir Austin . and she get her idee , too : she read history ! she talk that sensible as would surprise ye . but for all that she be a prey to the artful o ' man unpertecte . and it be a young marriage but there be no fear for she , as far as she go . the fear 's t'other way . there be that in a man at the commencement which make of he Lord know what if you any way interfere : whereas a woman bid quiet ! it be consolation catch she , which be what we mean by seduein ' . whereas a man he be a savage ! " 
 Sir Austin turn his face to Adrian , who be listen with huge delight . 
 " well , ma'am , I see you have something in your mind , if you would only come to it quickly . " 
 " then here be my point , Sir Austin . I say you breed he so as there be not   another young gentleman like he in England , and proud he make I . and as for she , I will risk sayin ' it be do , and no harm you might search England through , and nowhere will ye find a maid that be his match like his own wife . then there they be . be they together as should be ? o Lord no ! month they be divide . then she all lonely and expose , I go , and fetch she out of seducer ' way which they may say what they like , but the inn'cent be most open to when they be healthy and confidin ' I fetch she , and the liberty box she safe in my own house . so much for that sweet ! that you may do with woman . but it be he Mr. Richard I be bold , I know , but there I be in for it , and the Lord'll help I ! it be he , Sir Austin , in this great metropolis , warm from a young marriage . it be he , and I say nothing of she , and how sweet she bear it , and it be eat she at a time when Natur ' should have no other trouble but the one that be go on it be he , and I ask so bold shall there and a christian gentleman his father shall there be a tug ' tween he as a son and he as a husband soon to be something else ? I speak bold out I would have son obey their father , but a priest 's word speak over they , which they be now in my ear , I say I be not   a doubt on earth I be sure there be not   one in heaven which dooty be the holier of the two . " 
 Sir Austin hear she to an end . their view on the junction of the sex be undoubtedly akin . to be lecture on his prime subject , however , be slightly disagreeable , and to be oblige mentally to assent to this old lady 's doctrine be rather humiliating , when it could not be aver that he have latterly follow it out . he sit cross - legged and silent , a finger to his temple . 
 " one get so addle - gate thinkin ' many thing , " say Mrs. Berry , simply . " that be why we see wonder clever people go wrong to my mind . I think it be al'ay the plan in a dielemmer to pray God and walk forward . " 
 the keen - witted soft woman be track the baronet 's thought , and she have absolutely run he down and take an explanation out of his mouth , by which Mrs. Berry be to have be inform that he have act from a principle of his own , and devolve a wisdom she could not be expect to comprehend . 
 of course he become advise immediately that it would be waste of time to direct such an explanation to her inferior capacity . 
 he give she his hand , say , " my son have go out of town to see his cousin , who be ill . he will return in two or three day , and then they will both come to I at Raynham . " 
 Mrs. Berry take the tip of his finger , and go half - way to the floor perpendicularly . " he pass she like a stranger in the park this evenin ' , " she falter . 
 " ah ? " say the baronet . " yes , well ! they will be at Raynham before the week be over . " 
 Mrs. Berry be not quite satisfied . " not of his own accord he pass that sweet young wife of his like a stranger this day , Sir Austin ! " 
 " I must beg you not to intrude far , ma'am . " 
 Mrs. Berry bob her bunch of a body out of the room . 
 " All be well that end well , " she say to herself . " it be just bad inquirin ' too close among man . we must take them something like Providence as they come . thank heaven ! I kep ' back the baby . " 
 in Mrs. Berry 's eye the baby be the victorious reserve . 
 Adrian ask his chief what he think of that speciman of woman . 
 " I think I have not meet a well in my life , " say the baronet , mingle praise and sarcasm . 
 Clare lie in her bed as placid as in the day when she breathe ; her white hand stretch their length along the sheet , at peace from head to foot . she need iron no more . Richard be face to face with death for the first time . he see the sculpture of clay the spark go . 
 Clare give her mother the welcome of the dead . this child would have speak nothing but kind commonplace have she be alive . she be dead , and none know her malady . on her fourth finger be two wedding - ring . 
 when hour of weeping have silence the mother 's anguish , she , for some comfort she see in it , point out that strange thing to Richard , speak low in the chamber of the dead ; and then he learn that it be his own lose ring Clare wear in the two world . he learn from her husband that Clare 's last request have be that neither of the ring should be remove . she have write it ; she would not speak it . 
 " I beg of my husband , and all kind people who may have the care of I between this and the grave , to bury I with my hand untouched . " 
 the tracing of the word show the bodily torment she be suffer , as she write they on a scrap of paper find beside her pillow . 
 in wonder , as the dim idea grow from the waving of Clare 's dead hand , Richard pace the house , and hang about the awful room ; dread to enter it , reluctant to quit it . the secret Clare have bury while she live , arise with her death . he see it play like flame across her marble feature . the memory of her voice be like a knife at his nerve . his coldness to she start up accusingly : her meekness be bitter blame . 
 on the evening of the fourth day , her mother come to he in his bedroom , with a face so white that he ask himself if aught bad could happen to a mother than the loss of her child . choke she say to he , " read this , " and thrust a leather - bind pocket - book trembling in his hand . she would not breathe to he what it be . she entreat he not to open it before she . 
 " tell I , " she say , " tell I what you think . John must not hear of it . I have nobody to consult but you o Richard ! " 
 " my Diary " be write in the round hand of Clare 's childhood on the first page . the first name his eye encounter be his own . 
 " Richard 's fourteenth birthday . I have work he a purse and put it under his pillow , because he be go to have plenty of money . he do not notice I now because he have a friend now , and he be ugly , but Richard be not , and never will be . " 
 the occurrence of that day be subsequently record , and a childish prayer to God for he set down . step by step he see her grow mind in his history . as she advance in year she begin to look back , and make much of little trivial remembrance , all bear upon he . 
 " we go into the field and gather cowslip together , and pelt each other , and I tell he he use to call they ' coal - sleep ' when he be a baby , and he be angry at my tell he , for he do not like to be tell he be ever a baby . " 
 he remember the incident , and remember his stupid scorn of her meek affection . Little Clare ! how she live before he in her white dress and pink ribbon , and soft dark eye ! Upstairs she be lie dead . he read on : 
 " Mama say there be no one in the world like Richard , and I be sure there be not , not in the whole world . he say he be go to be a great general and go to the war . if he do I shall dress myself as a boy and go after he , and he will not know I till I be wound . oh I pray he will never , never be wound . I wonder what I should feel if Richard be ever to die . " 
 Upstairs Clare be lie dead . 
 " Lady Blandish say there be a likeness between Richard and I . Richard say I hope I do not hang down my head as she do . he be angry with I because I do not look people in the face and speak out , but I know I be not look after earthworm . " 
 yes . he have tell she that . a shiver seize he at the recollection . 
 then it come to a period when the word : " Richard kiss I , " stand by themselves , and mark a day in her life . 
 afterwards it be solemnly discover that Richard write poetry . he read one of his old forget composition pen when he have that ambition . 
  " thy truth to I be truer 
  than horse , or dog , or blade ; 
  Thy vow to I be few 
  than ever maiden make . 

  Thou stepp from thy splendour 
  to make my life a song : 
  my bosom shall be tender 
  as thine have rise strong . " 
 all the verse be transcribe . " it be he who be the humble knight , " Clare explain at the close , " and his lady , be a Queen . any Queen would throw her crown away for he . " 
 it come to that period when Clare leave Raynham with her mother . 
 " Richard be not sorry to lose I . he only love boy and man . something tell I I shall never see Raynham again . he be dress in blue . he say Good - bye , Clare , and kiss I on the cheek . Richard never kiss I on the mouth . he do not know I go to his bed and kiss he while he be asleep . he sleep with one arm under his head , and the other out on the bed . I move away a bit of his hair that be over his eye . I want to cut it . I have one piece . I do not let anybody see I be unhappy , not even mama . she say I want iron . I be sure I do not . I like to write my name . Clare Doria Forey . Richard 's be Richard Doria Feverel . " 
 his breast rise convulsively . Clare Doria Forey ! he know the music of that name . he have hear it somewhere . it sound faint and mellow now behind the hill of death . 
 he could not read for tear . it be midnight . the hour seem to belong to she . the awful stillness and the darkness be Clare 's . Clare 's voice clear and cold from the grave possess it . 
 painfully , with blinded eye , he look over the breathless page . she speak of his marriage , and her find the ring . 
 " I know it be his . I know he be go to be marry that morning . I see he stand by the altar when they laugh at breakfast . his wife must be so beautiful ! Richard 's wife ! perhaps he will love I well now he be marry . Mama say they must be separate . that be shameful . if I can help he I will . I pray so that he may be happy . I hope God hear poor sinner ' prayer . I be very sinful . nobody know it as I do . they say I be good , but I know . when I look on the ground I be not look after earthworm , as he say . oh , do forgive I , God ! " 
 then she speak of her own marriage , and that it be her duty to obey her mother . a blank in the Diary ensue . 
 " I have see Richard . Richard despise I , " be the next entry . 
 but now as he read his eye be fix , and the delicate feminine handwriting like a black thread draw on his soul to one terrible conclusion . 
 " I can not live . Richard despise I . I can not bear the touch of my finger or the sight of my face . oh ! I understand he now . he should not have kiss I so that last time . I wish to die while his mouth be on mine . " 
 far : " I have no escape . Richard say he would die rather than endure it . I know he would . why should I be afraid to do what he would do ? I think if my husband whip I I could bear it well . he be so kind , and try to make I cheerful . he will soon be very unhappy . I pray to God half the night . I seem to be lose sight of my God the more I pray . " 
 Richard lay the book open on the table . Phantom surge seem to be mount and travel for his brain . have Clare take his wild word in earnest ? do she lie there dead he shroud the thought . 
 he wrap the thought in shroud , but he be again read . 
 " a quarter to one o'clock . I shall not be alive this time to - morrow . I shall never see Richard now . I dream last night we be in the field together , and he walk with his arm round my waist . we be child , but I think we be marry , and I show he I wear his ring , and he say if you always wear it , Clare , you be as good as my wife . then I make a vow to wear it for ever and ever ... it be not mama 's fault . she do not think as Richard and I do of these thing . he be not a coward , nor be I. he hat coward . 
 " I have write to his father to make he happy . perhaps when I be dead he will hear what I say . 
 " I hear just now Richard call distinctly Clare , come out to I . surely he have not go . I be go I know not where . I can not think . I be very cold . " 
 the word be write large , and stagger towards the close , as if her hand have lose mastery over the pen . 
 " I can only remember Richard now a boy . a little boy and a big boy . I be not sure now of his voice . I can only remember certain word . ' Clari , ' and ' Don Ricardo , ' and his laugh . he use to be full of fun . once we laugh all day together tumble in the hay . then he have a friend , and begin to write poetry , and be proud . if I have marry a young man he would have forgive I , but I should not have be happy . I must have die . God never look on I . 
 " it be past two o'clock . the sheep be bleat outside . it must be very cold in the ground . good - bye , Richard . " 
 with his name it begin and end . even to herself Clare be not over - communicative . the book be slender , yet her nineteen year of existence leave half the number of page white . 
 those last word draw he irresistibly to gaze on she . there she lay , the same impassive clare . for a moment he wonder she have not move to he she have become so different . she who have just fill his ear with strange tiding it be not possible to think she dead ! she seem to have be speak to he all through his life . his image be on that still heart . 
 he dismiss the night - watcher from the room , and remain with she alone , till the sense of death oppress he , and then the shock send he to the window to look for sky and star . behind a low broad pine , hang with frosty mist , he hear a bell - wether of the flock in the silent fold . death in life it sound . 
 the mother find he pray at the foot of Clare 's bed . she kneel by his side , and they pray , and their joint sob shake their body , but neither of they shed many tear . they hold a dark unspoken secret in common . they pray God to forgive she . 
 Clare be bury in the family vault of the Todhunters . her mother breathe no wish to have she lie at Lobourne . 
 after the funeral , what they alone upon earth know bring they together . 
 " Richard , " she say , " the bad be over for I . I have no one to love but you , dear . we have all be fight against God , and this ... Richard ! you will come with I , and be unite to your wife , and spare my brother what I suffer . " 
 he answer the broken spirit : " I have kill one . she see I as I be . I can not go with you to my wife , because I be not worthy to touch her hand , and be I to go , I should do this to silence my self - contempt . go you to she , and when she ask of I , say I have a death upon my head that no ! say that I be abroad , seek for that which shall cleanse I . if I find it I shall come to claim she . if not , God help we all ! " 
 she have no strength to contest his solemn word , or stay he , and he go forth . 




 CHAPTER XLI 

 a man with a beard salute the wise youth adrian in the full blaze of Piccadilly with a clap on the shoulder . Adrian glance leisurely behind . 
 " do you want to try my nerve , my dear fellow ? I be not a man of fashion , happily , or you would have strike the seat of they . how be you ? " 
 that be his welcome to Austin Wentworth after his long absence . 
 Austin take his arm , and ask for news , with the hunger of one who have be in the wilderness five year . 
 " the whig have give up the ghost , my dear Austin . the free Briton be to receive Liberty 's pearl , the ballot . the Aristocracy have have a cycle 's notice to quit . the Monarchy and old Madeira be go out ; Demos and Cape wine be come in . they call it reform . so , you see , your absence have work wonder . depart for another five year , and you will return to ruined stomach , crack sconce , general upset , an equality make perfect by universal prostration . " 
 Austin indulge he in a laugh . " I want to hear about ourselves . how be old Ricky ? " 
 " you know of his what do they call it when greenhorn be license to jump into the milkpail of dairymaid ? a very charming little woman she make , by the way presentable ! quite old Anacreon 's rise in milk . well ! everybody think the system must die of it . not a bit . it continue to flourish in spite . it be in a consumption now , though emaciated , lean , raw , spectral ! I have   this morning escape from Raynham to avoid the sight of it . I have bring our genial uncle Hippias to town a delightful companion ! I say to he : ' we have   have a fine spring . ' ' ugh ! ' he answer , ' there be a time when you come to think the spring old . ' you should have hear how he train out the ' old . ' I feel something like decay in my sap just to hear he . in the prize - fight of life , my dear Austin , our uncle Hippias have be unfairly hit below the belt . let us guard ourselves there , and go and order dinner . " 
 " but where be Ricky now , and what be he do ? " say Austin . 
 " ask what he have do . the miraculous boy have go and get a baby ! " 
 " a child ? Richard have one ? " Austin 's clear eye shine with pleasure . 
 " I suppose it be not common among your tropical savage . he have one : one as big as two . that have be the death - blow to the System . it bear the marriage the baby be too much for it . could it swallow the baby , ' twould live . she , the wonderful woman , have produce a large boy . I assure you it be quite amusing to see the system open its mouth every hour of the day , try to gulp he down , aware that it would be a consummate cure , or a happy release . " 
 by degree Austin learn the baronet 's proceeding , and smile sadly . 
 " how have Ricky turn out ? " he ask . " what sort of a character have he ? " 
 " the poor boy be ruin by his excessive anxiety about it . character ? he have the character of a bullet with a treble charge of powder behind it . Enthusiasm be the powder . that boy could get up an enthusiasm for the maiden day of Ops ! he be go to reform the world , after your fashion , Austin , you have something to answer for . unfortunately he begin with the feminine side of it . cupid proud of Phoebus newly slay , or Pluto wish to people his kingdom , if you like , put it into the soft head of one of the guileless grateful creature to kiss he for his good work . oh , horror ! he never expect that . conceive the System in the flesh , and you have our Richard . the consequence be , that this male Peri refuse to enter his Paradise , though the gate be open for he , the trumpet blow , and the fair unspotted one await he fruitful within . we hear of he last that he be try the german water preparatory to his undertaking the release of Italy from the subjugation of the Teuton . let us hope they will wash he . he be in the company of Lady Judith Felle your old friend , the ardent female Radical who marry the decrepit to carry out her principle . they always marry english lord , or foreign prince : I admire their tactic . " 
 " Judith be bad for he in such a state . I like she , but she be always too sentimental , " say Austin . 
 " Sentiment make she marry the old lord , I suppose ? I like she for her sentiment , Austin . sentimental people be sure to live long and die fat . feel , that be the slayer , coz . Sentiment ! ' tis the cajolery of existence : the soft bloom which whoso weareth , he or she be enviable . would that I have more ! " 
 " you be not much change , Adrian . " 
 " I be not a Radical , Austin . " 
 further inquiry , respond to in Adrian 's figurative speech , instruct Austin that the baronet be wait for his son , in a posture of statuesque offend paternity , before he would receive his daughter - in - law and grandson . that be what Adrian mean by the effort of the System to swallow the baby . 
 " we be in a tangle , " say the wise youth . " Time will extricate we , I presume , or what be the venerable signor good for ? " 
 Austin muse some minute , and ask for Lucy 's place of residence . 
 " we will go to she by and by , " say Adrian . 
 " I shall go and see she now , " say Austin . 
 " well , we will go and order the dinner first , coz . " 
 " give I her address . " 
 " really , Austin , you carry matter with too long a beard , " Adrian object . " do not   you care what you eat ? " he roar hoarsely , look humorously hurt . " I daresay not . a slice out of he that be handy sauce du ciel ! Go , batten on the baby , cannibal . dinner at seven . " 
 Adrian give he his own address , and Lucy 's , and stroll off to do the well thing . 
 Overnight Mrs. Berry have observe a long stranger in her tea - cup . post he on her finger and start he with a smack , he have vault lightly and thereby indicate that he be positively come the next day . she forget he in the bustle of her duty and the absorption of her faculty in thought of the incomparable stranger Lucy have present to the world , till a knock at the street - door remind she . " there he be ! " she cry , as she run to open to he . " there be my stranger come ! " never be a woman 's faith in omen so justified . the stranger desire to see Mrs. Richard Feverel . he say his name be Mr. Austin Wentworth . Mrs. Berry clasp her hand , exclaim , " come at last ! " and run bolt out of the house to look up and down the street . presently she return with many excuse for her rudeness , say : " I expect to see her comin ' home , Mr. Wentworth . every day twice a day she go out to give her bless angel an airing . no leavin ' the child with nursemaid for she ! she be a mother ! and good milk , too , thank the Lord ! though her heart 's so low . " 
 Indoors Mrs. Berry state who she be , relate the history of the young couple and her participation in it , and admire the beard . " although I would swear you do not   wear it for ornament , now ! " she say , have in the first impulse design a stroke at man 's vanity . 
 ultimately Mrs. Berry speak of the family complication , and with deject head and join hand throw out dark hint about Richard . 
 while Austin be give his cheerfuller view of the case , Lucy come in precede the baby . 
 " I be Austin Wentworth , " he say , take her hand . they read each other 's face , these two , and smile kinship . 
 " your name be Lucy ? " 
 she affirm it softly . 
 " and mine be Austin , as you know . " 
 Mrs. Berry allow time for Lucy 's charm to subdue he , and present Richard 's representative , who , see a new face , suffer himself to be contemplate before he commence cry aloud and knock at the door of Nature for something that be due to he . 
 " be not   he a lusty darlin ' ? " say Mrs. Berry . " be not   he like his own father ? there can not   be no doubt about zoo , zoo pitty pet . look at his fist . be not   he get passion ? ai not   he a splendid roarer ? oh ! " and she go off rapturously into baby - language . 
 a fine boy , certainly . Mrs. Berry exhibit his leg for further proof , desire Austin 's confirmation as to their being dumpling . 
 Lucy murmur a word of excuse , and bear the splendid roarer out of the room . 
 " she might a do it here , " say Mrs. Berry . " there be no pretty sight , I say . if her dear husband could but see that ! he be off in his heroic he want to be do all sort o ' thing : I say he will never do anything grander than that baby . you should ' a see her uncle over that baby he come here , for I say , you shall see your own family , my dear , and so she think . he come , and he laugh over that baby in the joy of his heart , poor man ! he cry , he do . you should see that Mr. Thompson , Mr. Wentworth a friend o ' Mr. Richard 's , and a very modest - minded young gentleman he worship she in his innocence . it be a sight to see he with that baby . my belief be he be unhappy 'cause he can not   anyways be nurse - maid to he . o Mr. Wentworth ! what do you think of she , sir ? " 
 Austin 's reply be as satisfactory as a man 's poor speech could make it . he hear that Lady Feverel be in the house , and Mrs. Berry prepare the way for he to pay his respect to she . then Mrs. Berry run to Lucy , and the house buzz with new life . the simple creature feel in Austin 's presence something good among they . " he do not   speak much , " say Mrs. Berry , " but I see by his eye he mean a deal . he be not   one o ' yer long - word gentry , who be all gay deceiver , every one of them . " 
 Lucy press the hearty suckle into her breast . " I wonder what he think of I , Mrs. Berry ? I could not speak to he . I love he before I see he . I know what his face be like . " 
 " he look proper even with a beard , and that be a trial for a virtuous man , " say Mrs. Berry . " one see straight through the hair with he . think ! he will think what any man'd think you a - suckin spite o ' all your sorrow , my sweet , and my Berry talkin ' of his roman matron ! here be a English wife'll match them all ! that be what he think . and now that leetle dark under yer eye'll clear , my darlin ' , now he've   come . " 
 Mrs. Berry look to no more than that ; Lucy to no more than the peace she have in be near Richard 's good friend . when she sit down to tea it be with a sense that the little room that hold she be her home perhaps for many a day . 
 a chop procure and cook by Mrs. Berry form Austin 's dinner . during the meal he entertain they with anecdote of his travel . poor Lucy have no temptation to try to conquer Austin . that heroic weakness of hers be go . 
 Mrs. Berry have say : " three cup I go no far , " and Lucy have reject the proffer of more tea , when Austin , who be in the thick of a brazilian forest , ask she if she be a good traveller . 
 " I mean , can you start at a minute 's notice ? " 
 Lucy hesitate , and then say ; " yes , " decisively , to which Mrs. Berry add , that she be not a " luggage - woman . " 
 " there use to be a train at seven o'clock , " Austin remark , consult his watch . 
 the two woman be silent . 
 " could you get ready to come with I to Raynham in ten minute ? " 
 Austin look as if he have ask a commonplace question . 
 Lucy 's lip part to speak . she could not answer . 
 Loud rattle the teaboard to Mrs. Berry 's drop hand . 
 " Joy and deliverance ! " she exclaim with a foundering voice . 
 " will you come ? " Austin kindly ask again . 
 Lucy try to stop her beat heart , as she answer , " yes . " Mrs. Berry cunningly pretend to interpret the irresolution in her tone with a mighty whisper : " she be think what be to be do with baby . " 
 " he must learn to travel , " say Austin . 
 " oh ! " cry Mrs. Berry , " and I will be his nuss , and bear he , a sweet ! oh ! and think of it ! I nurse - maid once more at Raynham Abbey ! but it be nurse - woman now , you must say . let we be go on the spot . " 
 she start up and away in hot haste , fear delay would cool the heaven - send resolve . Austin smile , eye his watch and Lucy alternately . she be wish to ask a multitude of question . his face reassure she , and say : " I will be dress instantly , " she also leave the room . talk , bustling , prepare , wrap up my lord , and look to their neatness , they be nevertheless ready within the time prescribe by Austin , and Mrs. Berry stand hum over the baby . " he will sleep it through , " she say . " he be have enough for an alderman , and go to sleep sound after his dinner , he do , a duck ! " before they depart , Lucy run up to Lady Feverel . she return for , the small one . 
 " one moment , Mr. Wentworth ? " 
 " just two , " say Austin . 
 Master Richard be take up , and when Lucy come back her eye be full of tear . 
 " she think she be never to see he again , Mr. Wentworth . " 
 " she shall , " Austin say simply . 
 off they go , and with Austin near she , Lucy forget to dwell at all upon the great act of courage she be perform . 
 " I do hope baby will not wake , " be her chief solicitude . 
 " he ! " cry nurse - woman Berry , from the rear , " his little tum - tum 's as tight as he can hold , a pet ! a lamb ! a bird ! a beauty ! and ye may take yer oath he never wake till that 's slack . he've   get character of his own , a blessed ! " 
 there be some tremendous citadel that only want to be take by storm . the baronet sit alone in his library , sick of resistance , and rejoice in the pride of no surrender ; a terror to his friend and to himself . hear Austin 's name sonorously pronounce by the man of calf , he look up from his book , and hold out his hand . " glad to see you , Austin . " his appearance betoken complete security . the next minute he find himself escalade . 
 it be a cry from Mrs. Berry that tell he other be in the room besides Austin . Lucy stand a little behind the lamp : Mrs. Berry close to the door . the door be half open , and pass through it might be see the petrified figure of a fine man . the baronet glance over the lamp rise at Mrs. Berry 's signification of a woman 's personality . Austin step back and lead Lucy to he by the hand . " I have bring Richard 's wife , sir , " he say with a please , perfectly uncalculating , countenance , that be disarm . very pale and tremble Lucy bow . she feel her two hand take , and hear a kind voice . could it be possible it belong to the dreadful father of her husband ? she lift her eye nervously : her hand be still detain . the baronet contemplate Richard 's choice . have he ever have a rivalry with those pure eye ? he see the pain of her position shoot across her brow , and , uttering - gentle inquiry as to her health , place she in a seat . Mrs. Berry have already fall into a chair . 
 " what aspect do you like for your bedroom ? East ? " say the baronet . 
 Lucy be ask herself wonderingly : " be I to stay ? " 
 " perhaps you have well take to Richard 's room at once , " he pursue . " you have the Lobourne valley there and a good morning air , and will feel more at home . " 
 Lucy 's colour mount . Mrs. Berry give a short cough , as one who should say , " the day be ours ! " undoubtedly strange as it be to think it the fortress be carry . 
 " Lucy be rather tired , " say Austin , and to hear her christian name thus bravely speak bring grateful dew to her eye . 
 the baronet be about to touch the bell . " but have you come alone ? " he ask . 
 at this Mrs. Berry come forward . not immediately : it seem to require effort for she to move , and when she be within the region of the lamp , her agitation could not escape notice . the blissful bundle shake in her arm . 
 " by the way , what be he to I ? " Austin inquire generally as he go and unveil the young hope of Raynham . " my relationship be not so defined as your , sir . " 
 an observer might have suppose that the baronet peep at his grandson with the courteous indifference of one who merely wish to compliment the mother of anybody 's child . 
 " I really think he be like Richard , " Austin laugh . Lucy look : I be sure he be ! 
 " as like as one to one , " Mrs. Berry murmur feebly ; but Grandpapa not speak she think it incumbent on she to pluck up . " and he be as healthy as his father be , Sir Austin spite o ' the might ' a been . reg'lar as the clock ! we never want a clock since he come . we know the hour o ' the day , and of the night . " 
 " you nurse he yourself , of course ? " the baronet speak to Lucy , and be satisfied on that point . 
 Mrs. Berry be go to display his prodigious leg . Lucy , fear the consequent effect on the prodigious lung , beg she not to wake he . " ' T'd take a deal to do that , " say Mrs. Berry , and harp on Master Richard 's health and the small wonder it be that he enjoy it , consider the superior quality of his diet , and the lavish attention of his mother , and then suddenly fall silent on a deep sigh . 
 " he look healthy , " say the baronet , " but I be not a judge of baby . " 
 thus , have capitulate , Raynham choose to acknowledge its new commandant , who be now bear away , under the direction of the housekeeper , to occupy the room Richard have sleep in when an infant . 
 Austin cast no thought on his success . the baronet say : " she be extremely well - looking . " he reply : " a person you take to at once . " there it end . 
 but a much more animate colloquy be take place aloft , where Lucy and Mrs. Berry sit alone . Lucy expect she to talk about the reception they have meet with , and the house , and the peculiarity of the room , and the solid happiness that seem in store . Mrs. Berry all the while would persist in consult the look - glass . her first distinct answer be , " my dear ! tell I candid , how do I look ? " 
 " very nice indeed , Mrs. Berry ; but could you have believe he would be so kind , so considerate ? " 
 " I be sure I look a frump , " return Mrs. Berry . " oh dear ! two bird at a shot . what do you think , now ? " 
 " I never see so wonderful a likeness , " say Lucy . 
 " Likeness ! look at I . " Mrs. Berry be tremble and hot in the palm . 
 " you be very feverish , dear Berry . what can it be ? " 
 " be not   it like the love - flutter of a young gal , my dear . " 
 " go to bed , Berry , dear , " say Lucy , pout in her soft caressing way . " I will undress you , and see to you , dear heart ! you have   have so much excitement . " 
 " ha ! ha ! " Berry laugh hysterically ; ' she think it be about this business of her . why , it be child's - play , my darlin ' . but I do not   look for tragedy to - night . sleep in this house I can not , my love ! " 
 Lucy be astonish . " not sleep here , Mrs. Berry ? oh ! why , you silly old thing ? I know . " 
 " do ye ! " say Mrs. Berry , with a sceptical nose . 
 " you be afraid of ghost . " 
 " belike I be when they be six foot two in their shoe , and bellow when you stick a pin into their calf . I see my berry ! " 
 " your husband ? " 
 " large as life ! " 
 Lucy meditate on optical delusion , but Mrs. Berry describe he as the Colossus who have march they into the library , and vow that he have recognize she and quake . " time be not   aged he , " say Mrs. Berry , " whereas I ! he've   get his excuse now . I know I look a frump . " 
 Lucy kiss she : " you look the nice , dear old thing . " 
 " you may say an old thing , my dear . " 
 " and your husband be really here ? " 
 " Berry be below ! " 
 profoundly utter as this be , it chase every vestige of incredulity . 
 " what will you do , Mrs. Berry ? " 
 " go , my dear . leave he to be happy in his own way . it be over atween we , I see that . when I enter the house I feel there be something comin ' over I , and lo and behold ye ! no soon be we in the hall - passage if it have not   be for that bless infant I should ' a drop . I must ' a know his step , for my heart begin thumpin ' , and I know I have not   get my hair straight that Mr. Wentworth be in such a hurry nor my good gown . I know he would scorn I . he hat frump . " 
 " scorn you ! " cry Lucy , angrily . " he who have behave so wickedly ! " 
 Mrs. Berry attempt to rise . " I may as well go at once , " she whimper . " if I see he I shall only be disgracin ' of myself . I feel it all on my side already . do ye mark he , my dear ? I know I be vexin ' to he at time , I be . those big man be so touchy about their dignity nat'ral . Hark at I ! I be go all soft in a minute . let I leave the house , my dear . I daresay it be good half my fault . young woman do not   understand man sufficient not altogether and I be a young woman then ; and then what they go and do they ai not   quite answerable for : they , feel , I daresay , push from behind . yes . I will go . I be a frump . I will go . ' tain't   in natur ' for I to sleep in the same house . " 
 Lucy lay her hand on Mrs. Berry 's shoulder , and forcibly fix she in her seat . " leave baby , naughty woman ? I tell you he shall come to you , and fall on his knee to you and beg your forgiveness . " 
 " berry on his knee ! " 
 " yes . and he shall beg and pray you to forgive he . " 
 " if you get more from Martin Berry than breath - away word , great'll be my wonder ! " say Mrs. Berry . 
 " we will see , " say Lucy , thoroughly determined to do something for the good creature that have befriend she . 
 Mrs. Berry examine her gown . " will not   it seem we be runnin ' after he ? " she murmur faintly . 
 " he be your husband , Mrs. Berry . he may be want to come to you now . " 
 " oh ! where be all I be go to say to that man when we meet . " Mrs. Berry ejaculate . Lucy have leave the room . 
 on the landing outside the door Lucy meet a lady dress in black , who stop she and ask if she be Richard 's wife , and kiss she , pass from she immediately . Lucy despatch a message for Austin , and relate the Berry history . Austin send for the great man and say : " do you know your wife be here ? " before Berry have time to draw himself up to enunciate his long , he be request to step upstairs , and as his young mistress at once lead the way , Berry could not refuse to put his leg in motion and carry the stately edifice aloft . 
 of the interview Mrs. Berry give Lucy a slight sketch that night . " he begin in the old way , my dear , and say I , a true heart and plain word , Martin Berry . so there he cut himself and his Johnson short , and down he go down on his knee . I never could ' a believe it . I kep my dignity as a woman till I see that sight , but that do for I . I be a ripe apple in his arm ' fore I know where I be . there be something about a fine man on his knee that be too much for we woman . and it reely be the penitent on his two knee , not the lover on his one . if he mean it ! but ah ! what do you think he beg of I , my dear ? not to make it know in the house just yet ! I can not , I can not   say that look well . " 
 Lucy attribute it to his sense of shame at his conduct , and Mrs. Berry do she good to look on it in that light . 
 " do the bar'net kiss ye when you wish he goodnight ? " she ask . Lucy say he have not . " then bide awake as long as ye can , " be Mrs. Berry 's rejoinder . " and now let we pray blessing on that simple - speak gentleman who do so much 'cause he say so little . " 
 like many other natural people , Mrs. Berry be only silly where her own soft heart be concern . as she secretly anticipate , the baronet come into her room when all be quiet . she see he go and bend over Richard the Second , and remain earnestly watch he . he then go to the half - open door of the room where Lucy sleep , lean his ear a moment , knock gently , and enter . Mrs. Berry hear low word interchange within . she could not catch a syllable , yet she would have swear to the context . " He've   call she his daughter , promise her happiness , and give a father 's kiss to she . " when Sir Austin pass out she be in a deep sleep . 




 CHAPTER XLII 

 Briareus redden angrily over the sea what be that vaporous Titan ? and Hesper set in his rosy garland why look he so implacably sweet ? it be that one have leave that bright home to go forth and do cloudy work , and he have get a stain with which he dare not return . far in the west fair Lucy beckon he to come . ah , heaven ! if he might ! how strong and fierce the temptation be ! how subtle the sleepless desire ! it drug his reason , his honour . for he love she ; she be still the first and only woman to he . otherwise would this black spot be hell to he ? otherwise would his limb be chain while her arm be spread open to he . and if he love she , why then what be one fall in the pit , or a thousand ? be not love the password to that beckon bliss ? so may we say ; but here be one whose body have be make a temple to he , and it be desecrate . 
 a temple , and desecrate ! for what be it fit for but for a dance of devil ? his education have thus work he to think . 
 he can blame nothing but his own baseness . but to feel base and accept the bliss that beckon he have not fall so low as that . 
 ah , happy English home ! sweet wife ! what mad miserable Wisp of the Fancy lead he away from you , high in his conceit ? poor wretch ! that think to be he of the hundred hand , and war against the absolute god . Jove whisper a light commission to the Laughing Dame ; she meet he ; and how do he shake Olympus ? with laughter ? 
 sure it be well to be Orestes , the Furies howl in his ear , than one call to by a heavenly soul from whom he be for ever outcast . he have not the oblivion of madness . clothe in the light of his first passion , rob in the splendour of old sky , she meet he everywhere ; morning , evening , night , she shin above he ; waylays he suddenly in forest depth ; drop palpably on his heart . at moment he forget ; he rush to embrace she ; call she his beloved , and lo , her innocent kiss bring agony of shame to his face . 
 Daily the struggle endure . his father write to he , beg he by the love he have for he to return . from that hour Richard burn unread all the letter he receive . he know too well how easily he could persuade himself : word from without might tempt he and quite extinguish the spark of honourable feeling that torture he , and that he cling to in desperate self - vindication . 
 to arrest young gentleman on the downward slope be both a dangerous and thankless office . it be , nevertheless , one that fair woman greatly prize , and certain of they professionally follow . Lady Judith , as far as her sex would permit , be also of the Titans in their battle against the absolute Gods ; for which purpose , mark you , she have marry a lord incapable in all save his acre . her achievement she keep to her own mind : she do not look happy over they . she meet Richard accidentally in Paris ; she see his state ; she let he learn that she alone on earth understand he . the consequence be that he be forthwith enrol in her train . it soothe he to be near a woman . do she venture her guess as to the cause of his conduct , she blot it out with a facility woman have , and cast on it a melancholy hue he be teach to participate in . she speak of sorrow , personal sorrow , much as he might speak of his vaguely , and with self - blame . and she understand he . how the dark unfathomed wealth within us gleam to a woman 's eye ! we be at compound interest immediately : so much rich than we know ! almost as rich as we dream ! but then the instant we be away from she we find ourselves bankrupt , beggared . how be that ? we do not ask . we hurry to she and bask hungrily in her orb . the eye must be feminine to be thus creative : I can not say why . Lady Judith understand Richard , and he feel infinitely vile , somehow hold to she more feverishly , as one who dread the bad in miss she . the spirit must rest ; he be weak with what he suffer . 
 Austin find they among the hill of Nassau in Rhineland : Titans , male and female , who have not displace Jove , and be now adrift , prone on flood of sentiment . the blue - flocked peasant swing behind his oxen of a morning , the gaily - kerchiefe fruit - woman , the jackass - driver , even the doctor of those region , have do more for their fellow . horrible reflection ! Lady Judith be serene above it , but it fret at Richard when he be out of her shadow . often wretchedly he watch the young man of his own age troop to their work . not cloud - work theirs ! work solid , unambitious , fruitful ! 
 Lady Judith have a nobler in prospect for the hero . he gap blindfold for anything , and she give he the map of Europe in tatter . he swallow it comfortably . it be an intoxicate cordial . himself on horseback override wreck of empire ! well might common sense cower with the mean animal at the picture . tacitly they agree to recast the civilized globe . the quality of vapour be to melt and shape itself anew ; but it be never the quality of vapour to reassume the same shape . briareus of the hundred unoccupied hand may turn to a monstrous donkey with his hind leg aloft , or twenty thousand jabbering ape . the phantasmic grouping of the young brain be very like those we see in the sky , and equally the sport of the wind . Lady Judith blow . there be plenty of vapour in he , and it always resolve into some shape or other . you that mark those cloud of eventide , and know youth , will see the similitude : it will not be strange , it will barely seem foolish to you , that a young man of Richard 's age , Richard 's education and position , should be in this wild state . have he not be nurse to believe he be bear for great thing ? do she not say she be sure of it ? and to feel base , yet bear for well , be enough to make one grasp at anything cloudy . suppose the hero with a game leg . how intense be his faith to quack ! with what a passion of longing be he not seize to break somebody 's head ! they speak of Italy in low voice . " the time will come , " say she . " and I shall be ready , " say he . what rank be he to take in the liberating army ? Captain , colonel , general in chief , or simple private ? here , as become he , he be much more positive and specific than she be : simple private , he say . yet he save himself caracole on horseback . private in the cavalry , then , of course . private in the cavalry over - rid wreck of empire . she look forth under her brow with mournful indistinctness at that object in the distance . they read Petrarch to get up the necessary fire . Italia mia ! Vain indeed be this speak to those thick and mortal wound in her fair body , but their sigh go with the Tiber , the Arno , and the Po , and their hand join . who have not weep for Italy ? I see the aspiration of a world arise for she , thick and frequent as the puff of smoke from cigar of pannonian sentry ! 
 so when Austin come Richard say he could not leave Lady Judith , Lady Judith say she could not part with he . for his sake , mind ! this Richard verify . perhaps he have reason to be grateful . the high road of Folly may have lead he from one that terminate bad . he be foolish , God know ; but for my part I will not laugh at the hero because he have not get his occasion . meet he when he be , as it be , anoint by his occasion , and he be no laugh matter . 
 Richard feel his safety in this which , to please the world , we must term folly . exhalation of vapour be a wholesome process to he , and somebody who give they shape and hue a beneficent Iris . he tell Austin plainly he could not leave she , and do not anticipate the day when he could . 
 " why can not   you go to your wife , Richard ? " 
 " for a reason you would be the first to approve , Austin . " 
 he welcome Austin with every show of manly tenderness , and sadness at heart . Austin he have always associate with his Lucy in that hesperian palace of the West . Austin wait patiently . Lady Judith 's old lord play on all the bath in Nassau without evoke the tune of health . Whithersoever he list she change her abode . so admirable a wife be to be pardon for espouse an old man . she be an enthusiast even in her connubial duty . she have the brow of an enthusiast . with occasion she might have be a Charlotte Corday . so let she also be shield from the ban of ridicule . nonsense of enthusiast be very different from nonsense of ninny . she be truly a high - minded person , of that order who always do what they see to be right , and always have confidence in their optic . she be not unworthy of a young man 's admiration , if she be unfit to be his guide . she resume her ancient intimacy with Austin easily , while she preserve her new footing with Richard . she and Austin be not unlike , only Austin never dream , and have not marry an old lord . 
 the three be walk on the bridge at Limburg on the Lahn , where the shadow of a stone bishop be throw by the moonlight on the water brawl over slab of slate . a woman pass they bear in her arm a baby , whose mighty size draw their attention . 
 " what a wopper ! " Richard laugh . 
 " well , that be a fine fellow , " say Austin , " but I do not   think he be much big than your boy . " 
 " he will do for a nineteenth - century Arminius , " Richard be say . then he look at Austin . 
 " what be that you say ? " Lady Judith ask of Austin . 
 " what have I say that deserve to be repeat ? " Austin counterquerie quite innocently . 
 " Richard have a son ? " 
 " you do not   know it ? " 
 " his modesty go very far , " say Lady Judith , sweep the shadow of a curtsey to Richard 's paternity . 
 Richard 's heart throb with violence . he look again in Austin 's face . Austin take it so much as a matter of course that he say nothing more on the subject . 
 " well ! " murmur Lady Judith . 
 when the two man be alone , Richard say in a quick voice : " Austin ! you be in earnest ? " 
 " you do not   know it , Richard ? " 
 " no . " 
 " why , they all write to you . Lucy write to you : your father , your aunt . I believe Adrian write too . " 
 " I tear up their letter , " say Richard . 
 " he be a noble fellow , I can tell you . you have   nothing to be ashamed of . he will soon be come to ask about you . I make sure you know . " 
 " no , I never know . " Richard walk away , and then say : " what be he like ? " 
 " well , he really be like you , but he have his mother 's eye . " 
 " and she be " 
 " yes . I think the child have keep she well . " 
 " they be both at Raynham ? " 
 " Both . " 
 hence fantastic vapour ! what be ye to this ! where be the dream of the hero when he learn he have a child ? nature be take he to her bosom . she will speak presently . every domesticate boor in these hill can boast the same , yet marvel the hero at none of his visioned prodigy as he do when he come to hear of this most common performance . a father ? Richard fix his eye as if he be try to make out the lineament of his child . 
 tell Austin he would be back in a few minute , he sally into the air , and walk on and on . " a father ! " he keep repeat to himself : " a child ! " and though he know it not , he be strike the keynote of Nature . but he do know of a singular harmony that suddenly burst over his whole being . 
 the moon be surpassingly bright : the summer air heavy and still . he leave the high road and pierce into the forest . his walk be rapid : the leaf on the tree brush his cheek ; the dead leaf heap in the dell noise to his foot . something of a religious joy a strange sacred pleasure be in he . by degree it wear ; he remember himself : and now he be possess by a proportionate anguish . a father ! he dare never see his child . and he have no long his phantasy to fall upon . he be utterly bare to his sin . in his troubled mind it seem to he that Clare look down on he Clare who see he as he be ; and that to her eye it would be infamy for he to go and print his kiss upon his child . then come stern effort to command his misery and make the nerve of his face iron . 
 by the log of an ancient tree half bury in dead leaf of past summer , beside a brook , he halt as one who have reach his journey 's end . there he discover he have a companion in Lady Judith 's little dog . he give the friendly animal a pat of recognition , and both be silent in the forest - silence . 
 it be impossible for Richard to return ; his heart be surcharge . he must advance , and on he foot , the little dog follow . 
 an oppressive slumber hung about the forest - branch . in the dell and on the height be the same dead heat . here where the brook tinkle it be no cool - lipped sound , but metallic , and without the spirit of water . yonder in a space of moonlight on lush grass , the beam be as white fire to sight and feeling . no haze spread around . the valley be clear , define to the shadow of their verge , the distance sharply distinct , and with the colour of day but slightly soften . Richard behold a roe move across a slope of sward far out of rifle - mark . the breathless silence be significant , yet the moon shine in a broad blue heaven . tongue out of mouth trot the little dog after he ; crouch pant when he stop an instant ; rise weariedly when he start afresh . now and then a large white night - moth flit through the dusk of the forest . 
 on a barren corner of the woode highland look inland stand grey topless ruin set in nettle and rank grass - blade . Richard mechanically sit down on the crumble flint to rest , and listen to the panting of the dog . sprinkle at his foot be emerald light : hundred of glow - worm stud the dark dry ground . 
 he sit and eye they , think not at all . his energy be expend in action . he sit as a part of the ruin , and the moon turn his shadow Westward from the South . Overhead , as she decline , long ripple of silver cloud be imperceptibly steal toward she . they be the van of a temp . he do not observe they or the leaf begin to chatter . when he again pursue his course with his face to the Rhine , a huge mountain appear to rise sheer over he , and he have it in his mind to scale it . he get no nearer to the base of it for all his vigorous outstepping . the ground begin to dip ; he lose sight of the sky . then heavy , thunder - drop streak his cheek , the leaf be sing , the earth breathe , it be black before he , and behind . all at once the thunder speak . the mountain he have mark be burst over he . 
 up startle the whole forest in violet fire . he see the country at the foot of the hill to the bound Rhine gleam , quiver , extinguish . then there be pause ; and the lightning seem as the eye of heaven , and the thunder as the tongue of heaven , each alternately address he ; fill he with awful rapture . alone there sole human creature among the grandeur and mystery of storm he feel the representative of his kind , and his spirit rise , and march , and exult , let it be glory , let it be ruin ! lower down the lightened abyss of air roll the wrathful crash ; then white thrust of light be dart from the sky , and great curve fern , see steadfast in pallor a second , be supernaturally agitated , and vanish . then a shrill song rouse in the leaf and the herbage . prolong and louder it sound , as deep and heavy the deluge press . a mighty force of water satisfy the desire of the earth . even in this , drench as he be by the first outpouring , Richard have a savage pleasure . keep in motion , he be scarcely conscious of the wet , and the grateful breath of the weed be refresh . suddenly he stop short , lift a curious nostril . he fancy he smell meadow - sweet . he have never see the flower in Rhineland never think of it ; and it would hardly be meet with in a forest . he be sure he smell it fresh in dew . his little companion wag a miserable wet tail some way in advance . he go an slowly , think indistinctly . after two or three step he stoop and stretch out his hand to feel for the flower , have , he know not why , a strong wish to verify its growth there . grope about , his hand encounter something warm that start at his touch , and he , with the instinct we have , seize it , and lift it to look at it . the creature be very small , evidently quite young . Richard 's eye , now accustomed to the darkness , be able to discern it for what it be , a tiny leveret , and ha suppose that the dog have probably frighten its dam just before he find it . he put the little thing on one hand in his breast , and step out rapidly as before . 
 the rain be now steady ; from every tree a fountain pour . so cool and easy have his mind become that he be speculate on what kind of shelter the bird could find , and how the butterfly and moth save their coloured wing from washing . fold close they might hang under a leaf , he think . lovingly he look into the dripping darkness of the covert on each side , as one of their child . he be next musing on a strange sensation he experience . it run up one arm with an indescribable thrill , but communicate nothing to his heart . it be purely physical , cease for a time , and recommence , till he have it all through his blood , wonderfully thrilling . he grow aware that the little thing he carry in his breast be lick his hand there . the small rough tongue go over and over the palm of his hand produce the strange sensation he feel . now that he know the cause , the marvel end ; but now that he know the cause , his heart be touch and make more of it . the gentle scraping continue without intermission as on he walk . what do it say to he ? human tongue could not have say so much just then . 
 a pale grey light on the skirt of the fly tempest display the dawn . Richard be walk hurriedly . the green drench weed lie all about in his path , bent thick , and the forest droop glimmeringly . impel as a man who feel a revelation mount obscurely to his brain , Richard be pass one of those little forest - chapel , hang with votive wreath , where the peasant halt to kneel and pray . Cold , still , in the twilight it stand , rain - drop pattering round it . he look within , and see the Virgin hold her child . he move by . but not many step have he go ere his strength go out of he , and he shudder . what be it ? he ask not . he be in other hand . Vivid as lightne the Spirit of Life illumine he . he feel in his heart the cry of his child , his darling 's touch . with shut eye he see they both . they draw he from the depth ; they lead he a blind and totter man . and as they lead he he have a sense of purification so sweet he shudder again and again . 
 when he look out from his trance on the breathing world , the small bird hop and chirp : warm fresh sunlight be over all the hill . he be on the edge of the forest , enter a plain clothe with ripe corn under a spacious morning sky . 




 CHAPTER XLIII 

 they hear at Raynham that Richard be come . Lucy have the news first in a letter from Ripton Thompson , who meet he at Bonn . Ripton do not say that he have employ his vacation holiday on purpose to use his effort to induce his dear friend to return to his wife ; and find Richard already on his way , of course Ripton say nothing to he , but affect to be travel for his pleasure like any cockney . Richard also write to she . in case she should have go to the sea he direct she to send word to his hotel that he might not lose an hour . his letter be sedate in tone , very sweet to she . assist by the faithful female berry , she be conquer an Aphorist . 
 " Woman 's reason be in the milk of her breast , " be one of his rough note , due to an observation of Lucy 's maternal care . let we remember , therefore , we man who have drunk of it largely there , that she have it . 
 Mrs. Berry zealously apprise he how early Master Richard 's education have commence , and the great future historian he must consequently be . this trait in Lucy be of itself sufficient to win Sir Austin . 
 " here my plan with Richard be false , " he reflect : " in presume that anything save blind fortuity would bring he such a mate as he should have . " he come to add : " and have get ! " 
 he could admit now that instinct have so far beat science ; for as Richard be come , as all be to be happy , his wisdom embrace they all paternally as the author of their happiness . between he and Lucy a tender intimacy grow . 
 " I tell you she could talk , sir , " say Adrian . 
 " she think ! " say the baronet . 
 the delicate question how she be to treat her uncle , he settle generously . Farmer Blaize should come up to Raynham when he would : Lucy must visit he at least three time a week . he have Farmer Blaize and Mrs. Berry to study , and really excellent Aphorisms spring from the plain human basis this natural couple present . 
 " it will do we no harm , " he think , ' some of the honest blood of the soil in our vein . " and he be content in musing on the parentage of the little cradled boy . a common sight for those who have the entry to the library be the baronet cherish the hand of his daughter - in - law . 
 so Richard be cross the sea , and heart at Raynham be beat quick measure as the minute progress . that night he would be with they . Sir Austin give Lucy a long , warm salute when she come down to breakfast in the morning . Mrs. Berry wax thrice amorous . " it be your second bridal , ye sweet livin ' widow ! " she say . " thank be the Lord ! it be the same man too ! and a baby over the bed - post , " she append seriously . 
 " strange , " Berry declare it to be , ' strange I feel none o ' this to my Berry now . all my feelin 's o ' love seem t'ave go into you two sweet chick . " 
 in fact , the faithless male Berry complain of be treat badly , and affect a superb jealousy of the baby ; but the good dame tell he that if he suffer at all he suffer his due . Berry 's position be decidedly uncomfortable . it could not be conceal from the low household that he have a wife in the establishment , and for the complication this give rise to , his wife would not legitimately console he . Lucy do intercede , but Mrs. Berry , be obdurate . she aver she would not give up the child till he be wean . " then , perhaps , " she say prospectively . " you see I be not   so soft as you think for . " 
 " you be a very unkind , vindictive old woman , " say Lucy . 
 " belike I be , " Mrs. Berry be proud to agree . we like a new character , now and then . Berry have delay too long . 
 be it not notorious that the straightlaced prudish dare not listen to , the natural chaste , certain thing Mrs. Berry think it advisable to impart to the young wife with regard to Berry 's infidelity , and the charity woman should have toward sinful man , might here be reproduce . enough that she think proper to broach the matter , and cite her own christian sentiment , now that she be indifferent in some degree . 
 oily calm be on the sea . at Raynham they look up at the sky and speculate that Richard be approach fairly speed . he come to throw himself on his darling 's mercy . Lucy irradiate over forest and sea , tempest and peace to she the hero come humbly . great be that day when we see our folly ! Ripton and he be the friend of old . Richard encourage he to talk of the two he could be eloquent on , and Ripton , whose secret vanity be in his power of speech , never tired of enumerate Lucy 's virtue , and the peculiar attribute of the baby . 
 " she do not say a word against I , Rip ? " 
 " against you , Richard ! the moment she know she be to be a mother , she think of nothing but her duty to the child . she be one who can not   think of herself . " 
 " you have   see she at Raynham , Rip ? " 
 " yes , once . they ask I down . and your father 's so fond of she I be sure he think no woman like she , and he be right . she be so lovely , and so good . " 
 Richard be too full of blame of himself to blame his father : too british to expose his emotion . Ripton divine how deep and change they be by his manner . he have cast aside the hero , and however Ripton have obey he and look up to he in the heroic time , he love he tenfold now . he tell his friend how much Lucy 's mere womanly sweetness and excellence have do for he , and Richard contrast his own profitless extravagance with the patient beauty of his dear home angel . he be not one to take she on the easy term that offer . there be that to do which make his cheek burn as he think of it , but he be go to do it , even though it lose she to he . just to see she and kneel to she be joy sufficient to sustain he , and warm his blood in the prospect . they mark the white cliff grow over the water . Nearer , the sun make they lustrous . house and people seem to welcome the wild youth to common sense , simplicity , and home . 
 they be in town by mid - day . Richard have a momentary idea of not drive to his hotel for letter . after a short debate he determine to go there . the porter say he have two letter for Mr. Richard Feverel one have be wait some time . he go to the box and fetch they . the first Richard open be from Lucy , and as he read it , Ripton observe the colour deepen on his face , while a quivering smile play about his mouth . he open the other indifferently . it begin without any form of address . Richard 's forehead darken at the signature . this letter be in a slop feminine hand , and flourish with light stroke all over , like a field of the bearded barley . thus it run : 
 " I know you be in a rage with I because I would not consent to ruin you , you foolish fellow . what do you call it ? go to that unpleasant place together . thank you , my milliner be not ready yet , and I want to make a good appearance when I do go . I suppose I shall have to some day . your health , Sir Richard . now let I speak to you seriously . go home to your wife at once . but I know the sort of fellow you be , and I must be plain with you . do I ever say I love you ? you may hate I as much as you please , but I will save you from be a fool . 
 " now listen to I . you know my relation with Mount . that beast Brayder offer to pay all my debt and set I afloat , if I would keep you in town . I declare on my honour I have no idea why , and I do not agree to it . but you be such a handsome fellow I notice you in the park before I hear a word of you . but then you fight shy you be just as tempting as a girl . you sting I . do you know what that be ? I would make you care for I , and we know how it end , without any intention of mine , I swear . I would have cut off my hand rather than do you any harm , upon my honour . circumstance ! then I see it be all up between we . Brayder come and begin to chaff about you . I deal the animal a stroke on the face with my riding - whip I shut he up pretty quick . do you think I would let a man speak about you ? I be go to swear . you see I remember Dick 's lesson . o my God ! I do feel unhappy . Brayder offer I money . go and think I take it , if you like . what do I care what anybody think ! something that black - guard say make I suspicious . I go down to the Isle of Wight where Mount be , and your wife be just go with an old lady who come and take she away . I should so have like to see she . you say , you remember , she would take I as a sister , and treat I I laugh at it then . my God ! how I could cry now , if water do any good to a devil , as you politely call poor I . I call at your house and see your man - servant , who say Mount have just be there . in a minute it strike I . I be sure Mount be after a woman , but it never strike I that woman be your wife . then I see why they want I to keep you away . I go to Brayder . you know how I hate he . I make love to the man to get it out of he . Richard ! my word of honour , they have plan to carry she off , if Mount find he can not seduce she . talk of devil ! he be one ; but he be not so bad as Brayder . I can not forgive a mean dog his villany . 
 " now after this , I be quite sure you be too much of a man to stop away from she another moment . I have no more to say . I suppose we shall not see each other again , so good - bye , Dick ! I fancy I hear you curse I . why can not   you feel like other man on the subject ? but if you be like the rest of they I should not have care for you a farthing . I have not wear lilac since I see you last . I will be bury in your colour , Dick . that will not offend you will it ? 
 " you be not go to believe I take the money ? if I think you think that it make I feel like a devil only to fancy you think it . 
 " the first time you meet Brayder , cane he publicly . 
 " adieu ! say it be because you do not   like his face . I suppose devil must not say Adieu . here be plain old good - bye , then , between you and I . good - bye , dear Dick ! you will not   think that of I ? 
 " may I eat dry bread to the day of my death if I take or ever will touch a scrap of their money . BELLA . " 
 Richard fold up the letter silently . 
 " jump into the cab , " he say to Ripton . 
 " anything the matter , Richard ? " 
 " no . " 
 the driver receive direction . Richard sit without speak . his friend know that face . he ask whether there be bad news in the letter . for answer , he have the lie circumstancial . he venture to remark that they be go the wrong way . 
 " it have the right way , " cry Richard , and his jaw be hard and square , and his eye look heavy and full . 
 Ripton say no more , but think . 
 the cabman pull up at a Club . a gentleman , in whom Ripton recognize the Hon . Peter Brayder , be just then swing a leg over his horse , with one foot in the stirrup . hear his name call , the Hon . Peter turn about , and stretch an affable hand . 
 " be Mountfalcon in town ? " say Richard take the horse 's rein instead of the gentlemanly hand . his voice and aspect be quite friendly . 
 " Mount ? " Brayder reply , curiously watch the action ; " yes . he be off this evening . " 
 " he be in town ? " Richard release his horse . " I want to see he . where be he ? " 
 the young man look pleasant : that which might have arouse Brayder 's suspicion be an old affair in parasitical register by this time . " want to see he ? what about ? " he say carelessly , and give the address . 
 " by the way , " he sing out , " we think of put your name down , Feverel . " he indicate the lofty structure . " what do you say ? " 
 Richard nod back at he , cry , " hurry . " Brayder return the nod , and those who promenade the district soon behold his body in elegant motion to the stepping of his well - earn horse . 
 " what do you want to see Lord Mountfalcon for , Richard ? " say Ripton . 
 " I just want to see he , " Richard reply . 
 Ripton be leave in the cab at the door of my lord 's residence . he have to wait there a space of about ten minute , when Richard return with a clear visage , though somewhat heated . he stand outside the cab , and Ripton be conscious of be examine by those strong grey eye . as clear as speech he understand they to say to he , " you will not   do , " but which of the many thing on earth he would not do for he be at a loss to think . 
 " go down to Raynham , Ripton . say I shall be there tonight certainly . do not   bother I with question . drive off at once . or wait . get another cab . I will take this . " 
 Ripton be eject , and find himself stand alone in the street . as he be on the point of rush after the gallop cab - horse to get a word of elucidation , he hear some one speak behind he . 
 " you be Feverel 's friend ? " 
 Ripton have an eye for lord . an ambrosial footman , stand at the open door of Lord Mountfalcon 's house , and a gentleman stand on the doorstep , tell he that he be address by that nobleman . he be request to step into the house . when they be alone , Lord Mountfalcon , slightly ruffle , say : " Feverel have insult I grossly . I must meet he , of course . it be a piece of infernal folly ! I suppose he be not quite mad ? " 
 Ripton 's only definite answer be , a gasp iteration of " my lord . " 
 my lord resume : " I be perfectly guiltless of offend he , as far as I know . in fact , I have a friendship for he . be he liable to fit of this sort of thing ? " 
 not yet at conversation - point , Ripton stammer : " fit , my lord ? " 
 " ah ! " go the other , eye Ripton in lordly cognizant style . " you know nothing of this business , perhaps ? " 
 Ripton say he do not . 
 " have you any influence with he ? " 
 " not much , my lord . only now and then a little . " 
 " you be not in the Army ? " 
 the question be quite unnecessary . Ripton confess to the law , and my lord do not look surprised . 
 " I will not detain you , " he say , distantly bow . 
 Ripton give he a commoner 's obeisance ; but get to the door , the sense of the matter enlighten he . 
 " it be a duel , my lord ? " 
 " no help for it , if his friend do not   shut he up in Bedlam between this and to - morrow morning . " 
 of all horrible thing a duel be the bad in Ripton 's imagination . he stand hold the handle of the door , revolve this last chapter of calamity suddenly open where happiness have promise . 
 " a duel ! but he will not , my lord , he must not   fight , my lord . " 
 " he must come on the ground , " say my lord , positively . 
 Ripton ejaculate unintelligible stuff . finally Lord Mountfalcon say : " I go out of my way , sir , in speak to you . I see you from the window . your friend be mad . deuced methodical , I admit , but mad . I have particular reason to wish not to injure the young man , and if an apology be to be get out of he when we be on the ground , I will take it , and we will stop the damned scandal , if possible . you understand ? I be the insulted party , and I shall only require of he to use formal word of excuse to come to an amicable settlement . let he just say he regret it . now , sir , " the nobleman speak with considerable earnestness , ' should anything happen I have the honour to be know to Mrs. Feverel and I beg you will tell she . I very particularly desire you to let she know that I be not to blame . " 
 Mountfalcon ring the bell , and bow he out . with this on his mind Ripton hurry down to those who be wait in joyful trust at Raynham . 




 CHAPTER XLIV 

 the watch consult by Hippias alternately with his pulse , in occult calculation hideous to mark , say half - past eleven on the midnight . Adrian , wear a composedly amuse expression on his dimpled plump face , hold slightly sideways , aloof from paper and pen , sit write at the library table . round the baronet 's chair , in a semi - circle , be Lucy , Lady Blandish , Mrs. Doria , and Ripton , that very ill bird at Raynham . they be silent as those who question the fly minute . Ripton have say that Richard be sure to come ; but the feminine eye read he ever and anon , have gather matter for disquietude , which increase as time speed . Sir Austin persist in his habitual air of speculative repose . 
 Remote as he appear from vulgar anxiety , he be the first to speak and betray his state . 
 " pray , put up that watch . impatience serve nothing , " he say , half - turn hastily to his brother behind he . 
 Hippias relinquish his pulse and mildly groaned : " it be no nightmare , this ! " 
 his remark be unheard , and the bearing of it remain obscure . Adrian 's pen make a loud flourish on his manuscript ; whether in commiseration or infernal glee , none might say . 
 " what be you write ? " the baronet inquire testily of Adrian , after a pause ; twitched , it may be , by a sort of jealousy of the wise youth 's coolness . 
 " do I disturb you , sir ? " rejoin Adrian . " I be engage on a portion of a Proposal for unite the Empires and Kingdoms of Europe under one paternal Head , on the model of the ever - to - be - admire and lament Holy Roman . this treat of the management of Youths and Maids , and of certain magisterial function connect therewith . ' it be decreed that these officer be all and every man of science , ' etc . " and Adrian cheerily drive his pen afresh . 
 Mrs. Doria take Lucy 's hand , mutely address encouragement to she , and Lucy bring as much of a smile as she could command to reply with . 
 " I fear we must give he up to - night , " observe Lady Blandish . 
 " if he say he would come , he will come , " Sir Austin interject . between he and the lady there be something of a contest secretly go on . he be conscious that nothing save perfect success would now hold this self - emancipate mind . she have see he through . 
 " he declare to I he would be certain to come , " say Ripton ; but he could look at none of they as he say it , for he be grow aware that Richard might have deceive he , and be feel like a black conspirator against their happiness . he determine to tell the baronet what he know , if Richard do not come by twelve . 
 " what be the time ? " he ask Hippias in a modest voice . 
 " time for I to be in bed , " growl Hippias , as if everybody present have be treat he badly . 
 Mrs. Berry come in to apprise Lucy that she be want above . she quietly rise . Sir Austin kiss she on the forehead , say : " you have well not come down again , my child . " she keep her eye on he . " oblige I by retire for the night , " he add . Lucy shake their hand , and go out , accompany by Mrs. Doria . 
 " this agitation will be bad for the child , " he say , speak to himself aloud . 
 Lady Blandish remark : " I think she might just as well have return . she will not sleep . " 
 " she will control herself for the child 's sake . " 
 " you ask too much of she . " 
 " of she , not , " he emphasize . 
 it be twelve o'clock when hippy shut his watch , and say with vehemence : " I be convince my circulation gradually and steadily decrease ! " 
 " go back to the pre - harvey period ! " murmur Adrian as he write . 
 Sir Austin and Lady Blandish know well that any comment would introduce they to the interior of his machinery , the eternal view of which be sufficiently harrowing ; so they maintain a discreet reserve . take it for acquiescence in his deplorable condition , hippy resume despairingly : " it be a fact . I have   bring you to see that . no one can be more moderate than I be , and yet I get bad . my system be organically sound I believe : I do every possible thing , and yet I get bad . nature never forgive ! I will go to bed . " 
 the Dyspepsy depart unconsoled . 
 Sir Austin take up his brother 's thought : " I suppose nothing short of a miracle help we when we have offend she . " 
 " nothing short of a quack satisfy we , " say Adrian , apply wax to an envelope of official dimension . 
 Ripton sit accuse his soul of cowardice while they talk ; haunt by Lucy 's last look at he . he get up his courage presently and go round to Adrian , who , after a few whisper word , deliberately rise and accompany he out of the room , shrug . when they have go , Lady Blandish say to the baronet : " he be not come . " 
 " to - morrow , then , if not tonight , " he reply . " but I say he will come to - night . " 
 " you do really wish to see he united to his wife ? " 
 the question make the baronet raise his brow with some displeasure . 
 " can you ask I ? " 
 " I mean , " say , the ungenerous woman , " your System will require no further sacrifice from either of they ? " 
 when he do answer , it be to say : " I think she altogether a superior person . I confess I should scarcely have hop to find one like she . " 
 " admit that your science do not accomplish everything . " 
 " no : it be presumptuous beyond a certain point , " say the baronet , mean deep thing . 
 Lady Blandish eye he . " ah I ! " she sigh , " if we would always be true to our own wisdom ! " 
 " you be very singular to - night , Emmeline . " Sir Austin stop his walk in front of she . 
 in truth , be she not unjust ? here be an offend son freely forgive . here be a young woman of humble birth , freely accept into his family and permit to stand upon her quality . who would have do more or as much ? this lady , for instance , have the case be her , would have fight it . all the people of position that he be acquaint with would have fight it , and that without feel it so peculiarly . but while the baronet think this , he do not think of the exceptional education his son have receive . he , take the common ground of father , forget his system when it be absolutely on trial . false to his son it could not be say that he have be false to his system he be . other see it plainly , but he have to learn his lesson by and by . 
 Lady Blandish give he her face ; then stretch her hand to the table , say , " well ! well ! " she finger a half - open parcel lie there , and draw forth a little book she recognize . " ha ! what be this ? " she say . 
 " Benson return it this morning , " he inform she . " the stupid fellow take it away with he by mischance , I be bind to believe . " 
 it be nothing other than the old note - book . Lady Blandish turn over the leaf , and come upon the later jotting . 
 she read : " a maker of Proverbs what be he but a narrow mind with the mouthpiece of narrow ? " 
 " I do not agree with that , " she observe . he be in no humour for argument . 
 " be your humility feign when you write it ? " 
 he merely say : " consider the sort of mind influence by set saying . a proverb be the half - way - house to an Idea , I conceive ; and the majority rest there content : can the keeper of such a house be flatter by his company ? " 
 she feel her feminine intelligence sway under he again . there must be greatness in a man who could thus speak of his own special and admirable aptitude . 
 far she read , " which be the coward among we ? he who sneer at the failing of Humanity ! " 
 " oh ! that be true ! how much I admire that ! " cry the dark - eyed dame as she beam intellectual rapture . 
 another Aphorism seem closely to apply to he : " there be no more grievous sight , as there be no great perversion , than a wise man at the mercy of his feeling . " 
 " he must have write it , " she think , " when he have himself for an example strange man that he be ! " 
 Lady Blandish be still inclined to submission , though decidedly insubordinate . she have once be fairly conquer : but if what she reverence as a great mind could conquer she , it must be a great man that should hold her captive . the Autumn Primrose bloom for the lofty manhood ; be a vindictive flower in less hand . nevertheless Sir Austin have only to be successful , and this lady 's allegiance be his for ever . the trial be at hand . 
 she say again : " he be not come to - night , " and the baronet , on whose visage a contemplative pleased look have be rise for a minute past , quietly add : " he be come . " 
 Richard 's voice be hear in the hall . 
 there be commotion all over the house at the return of the young heir . Berry , seize every possible occasion to approach his Bessy now that her involuntary coldness have enhance her value " such be man ! " as the soft woman reflect Berry ascend to she and deliver the news in pompous tone and wheedle gesture . " the good word you have   speak for many a day , " say she , and leave he unfee'd , in an attitude , to hurry and pour bliss into Lucy 's ear . 
 " Lord be praise ! " she enter the adjoining room exclaim , " we be get to be happy at last . they man have come to their sens . I could cry to your Virgin and kiss your Cross , you sweet ! " 
 " hush ! " Lucy admonish she , and croon over the child on her knee . the tiny open hand , full of sleep , clutch ; the large blue eye start awake ; and his mother , all tremble and palpitating , know , but thirst to hear it , cover he with her tress , and try to still her frame , and rock , and sing low , interdict even a whisper from burst Mrs. Berry . 
 Richard have come . he be under his father 's roof , in the old home that have so soon grow foreign to he . he stand close to his wife and child . he might embrace they both : and now the fulness of his anguish and the madness of the thing he have do smote the young man : now first he taste hard earthly misery . 
 have not God speak to he in the temp ? have not the finger of heaven direct he homeward ? and he have come : here he stand : congratulation be thick in his ear : the cup of happiness be hold to he , and he be invite to drink of it . which be the dream ? his work for the morrow , or this ? but for a leaden load that he feel like a bullet in his breast , he might have think the morrow with death sit on it be the dream . yes ; he be awake . now first the cloud of phantasm clear away : he behold his real life , and the colour of true human joy : and on the morrow perhaps he be to close his eye on they . that leaden bullet disperse all unreality . 
 they stand about he in the hall , his father , Lady Blandish , Mrs. Doria , Adrian , Ripton ; people who have know he long . they shake his hand : they give he greeting he have never before understand the worth of or the meaning . now that he do they mock he . there be Mrs. Berry in the background bob , there be Martin Berry bow , there be Tom Bakewell grinning . somehow he love the sight of these well . 
 " ah , my old Penelope ! " he say , break through the circle of his relative to go to she . " Tom ! how be you ? " 
 " bless ye , my Mr. Richard , " whimper Mrs. Berry , and whisper , rosily , " all be agreeable now . she be wait up in bed for ye , like a new - bear . " 
 the person who betray most agitation be , Mrs. Doria . she hold close to he , and eagerly study his face and every movement , as one accustom to mask . " you be pale , Richard ? " he plead exhaustion . " what detain you , dear ? " " business , " he say . she draw he imperiously apart from the other . " Richard ! be it over ? " he ask what she mean . " the dreadful duel , Richard . " he look darkly . " be it over ? be it do , Richard ? " get no immediate answer , she continue and such be her agitation that the word be shake by piece from her mouth : " do not   pretend not to understand I , Richard ! be it over ? be you go to die the death of my child Clare 's death ? be not one in a family enough ? think of your dear young wife we love she so ! your child ! your father ! will you kill we all ? " 
 Mrs. Doria have chance to overhear a trifle of Ripton 's communication to Adrian , and have build thereon with the dark force of a stricken soul . 
 wonder how this woman could have divine it , Richard calmly say : " it be arrange the matter you allude to . " 
 " indeed ! truly , dear ? " 
 " yes . " 
 " tell I " but he break away from she , say : " you shall hear the particular to - morrow , " and she , not alive to double meaning just then , allow he to leave she . 
 he have eat nothing for twelve hour , and call for food , but he would take only dry bread and claret , which be serve on a tray in the library . he say , without any show of feeling , that he must eat before he see the young hope of Raynham : so there he sit , break bread , and eat great mouthful , and wash they down with wine , talk of what they would . his father 's studious mind feel itself year behind he , he be so completely alter . he have the precision of speech , the bearing of a man of thirty . indeed he have all that the necessity for cloak an infinite misery give . but let thing be as they might , he be , there . for one night in his life Sir Austin 's perspective of the future be bound by the night . 
 " will your go to your wife now ? " he have ask and Richard have reply with a strange indifference . the baronet think it well that their meeting should be private , and send word for Lucy to wait upstairs . the other perceive that father and son should now be leave alone . Adrian go up to he , and say : " I can no long witness this painful sight , so good - night , Sir Famish ! you may cheat yourself into the belief that you have   make a meal , but depend upon it your progeny and it threaten to be numerous will cry aloud and rue the day . nature never forgive ! a lost dinner can never be replace ! good - night , my dear boy . and here oblige I by take this , " he hand Richard the enormous envelope contain what he have write that evening . " credential ! " he exclaim humorously , slap Richard on the shoulder . Ripton hear also the word " propagator specie , " but have no idea of their import . the wise youth look : you see we have   make matter all right for you here , and quit the room on that unusual gleam of earnestness . 
 Richard shake his hand , and Ripton 's . then Lady Blandish say her good - night , praise Lucy , and promise to pray for their mutual happiness . the two man who know what be hang over he , speak together outside . Ripton be for get a positive assurance that the duel would not be fight , but Adrian say : " time enough tomorrow . he be safe enough while he be here . I will stop it to - morrow : " end with banter of Ripton and allusion to his adventure with Miss Random , which must , Adrian say , have lead he into many affair of the sort . certainly Richard be there , and while he be there he must be safe . so think Ripton , and go to his bed . Mrs. Doria deliberate likewise , and likewise think he safe while he be there . for once in her life she think it well not to trust to her instinct , for fear of useless disturbance where peace should be . so she say not a syllable of it to her brother . she only look more deeply into Richard 's eye , as she kiss he , praise Lucy . " I have find a second daughter in she , dear . oh ! may you both be happy ! " 
 they all praise Lucy , now . his father commence the moment they be alone . " Poor Helen ! your wife have be a great comfort to she , Richard . I think Helen must have sink without she . so lovely a young person , possess mental faculty , and a conscience for her duty , I have never before meet . " 
 he wish to gratify his son by these eulogy of Lucy , and some hour back he would have succeed . now it have the contrary effect . 
 " you compliment I on my choice , sir ? " 
 Richard speak sedately , but the irony be perceptible and he could speak no other way , his bitterness be so intense . 
 " I think you very fortunate , " say his father . 
 Sensitive to tone and manner as he be , his ebullition of paternal feeling be frozen . Richard do not approach he . he lean against the chimney - piece , glance at the floor , and lift his eye only when he speak . fortunate ! very fortunate ! as he revolve his later history , and remember how clearly he have see that his father must love Lucy if he but know she , and remember his effort to persuade she to come with he , a sting of miserable rage blacken his brain . but could he blame that gentle soul ? whom could he blame ? himself ? not utterly . his father ? yes , and no . the blame be here , the blame be there : it be everywhere and nowhere , and the young man cast it on the Fates , and look angrily at heaven , and grow reckless . 
 " Richard , " say his father , come close to he , " it be late to - night . I do not wish Lucy to remain in expectation long , or I should have explain myself to you thoroughly , and I think or at least hope you would have justify I . I have cause to believe that you have not only violate my confidence , but grossly deceive I . it be not so , I now know . I be mistaken . much of our misunderstanding have result from that mistake . but you be marry a boy : you know nothing of the world , little of yourself . to save you in after - life for there be a period when mature man and woman who have marry young be more impel to temptation than in youth , though not so exposed to it , to save you , I say , I decreed that you should experience self - denial and learn something of your fellow of both sex , before settle into a state that must have be otherwise precarious , however excellent the woman who be your mate . my system with you would have be otherwise imperfect , and you would have feel the effect of it . it be over now . you be a man . the danger to which your nature be open be , I trust , at an end . I wish you to be happy , and I give you both my blessing , and pray God to conduct and strengthen you both . " 
 Sir Austin 's mind be unconscious of not have speak devoutly . true or not , his word be idle to his son : his talk of danger over , and happiness , mockery . 
 Richard coldly take his father 's extended hand . 
 " we will go to she , " say the baronet . " I will leave you at her door . " 
 not move : look fixedly at his father with a hard face on which the colour rush , Richard say : " a husband who have be unfaithful to his wife may go to she there , sir ? " 
 it be horrible , it be cruel : Richard know that . he want no advice on such a matter , have fully resolve what to do . yesterday he would have listen to his father , and blame himself alone , and do what be to be do humbly before God and she : now in the recklessness of his misery he have as little pity for any other soul as for his own . Sir Austin 's brow be deep draw down . 
 " what do you say , Richard ? " 
 clearly his intelligence have take it , but this the bad he could hear this that he have dread once and doubt , and smooth over , and cast aside could it be ? 
 Richard say : " I tell you all but the very word when we last part . what else do you think would have keep I from she ? " 
 anger at his callous aspect , his father cry : " what bring you to she now ? " 
 " that will be between we two , " be the reply . 
 Sir Austin fall into his chair . meditation be impossible . he speak from a wrathful heart : " you will not dare to take she without " 
 " no , sir , " Richard interrupt he , " I shall not . have no fear . " 
 " then you do not love your wife ? " 
 " do I not ? " a smile pass faintly over Richard 's face . 
 " do you care so much for this this other person ? " 
 " so much ? if you ask I whether I have affection for she , I can say I have none . " 
 o base human nature ! then how ? then why ? a thousand question rise in the baronet 's mind . Bessy Berry could have answer they every one . 
 " poor child ! poor child ! " he apostrophize Lucy , pace the room . think of she , know her deep love for his son her true forgiving heart it seem she should be spar this misery . 
 he propose to Richard to spare she . Vast be the distinction between woman and man in this one sin , he say , and support it with physical and moral citation . his argument carry he so far , that to hear he one would have imagine he think the sin in man small indeed . his word be idle . 
 " she must know it , " say Richard , sternly . " I will go to she now , sir , if you please . " 
 Sir Austin detain he , expostulate , contradict himself , confound his principle , make nonsense of all his theory . he could not induce his son to waver in his resolve . ultimately , their good - night be interchange , he understand that the happiness of Raynham depend on Lucy 's mercy . he have no fear of her sweet heart , but it be a strange thing to have come to . on which should the accusation fall on science , or on human nature ? 
 he remain in the library ponder over the question , at time breathe contempt for his son , and again seize with unwonted suspicion of his own wisdom : trouble , much to be pity , even if he deserve that blow from his son which have plunge he into wretchedness . Richard go straight to Tom Bakewell , rouse the heavy sleeper , and tell he to have his mare saddle and wait at the park gate East within an hour . Tom 's near approach to a hero be to be a faithful slave to his master , and in do this he act to his conception of that high and glorious character . he get up and heroically dash his head into cold water . " she shall be ready , sir , " he nod . 
 " Tom ! if you do not   see I back here at Raynham , your money will go on be pay to you . " 
 " rather see you than the money , Mr. Richard , " say Tom . 
 " and you will always watch and see no harm come to she , Tom . " 
 " Mrs. Richard , sir ? " Tom star . " God bless I , Mr. Richard " 
 " no question . you will do what I say . " 
 " ay , sir ; that I will . Did'n Isle o ' Wight . " 
 the very name of the Island shock Richard 's blood ; and he have to walk up and down before he could knock at Lucy 's door . that infamous conspiracy to which he owe his degradation and misery scarce leave he the feeling of a man when he think of it . 
 the soft beloved voice respond to his knock . he open the door , and stand before she . Lucy be half - way toward he . in the moment that pass ere she be in his arm , he have time to observe the change in she . he have leave she a girl : he behold a woman a bloom woman : for pale at first , no soon do she see he than the colour be rich and deep on her face and neck and bosom half show through the loose dressing - robe , and the sense of her exceed beauty make his heart thump and his eye swim . 
 " my darling ! " each cry , and they clung together , and her mouth be fasten on his . 
 they speak no more . his soul be drown in her kiss . support she , whose strength be go , he , almost as weak as she , hang over she , and clasp her close , close , till they be as one body , and in the oblivion her lip put upon he he be free to the bliss of her embrace . Heaven grant he that . he place she in a chair and knelt at her foot with both arm around she . her bosom heave ; her eye never quit he : their light as the light on a rolling wave . this young creature , commonly so frank and straightforward , be break with bashfulness in her husband 's arm womanly bashfulness on the torrent of womanly love ; tenfold more seductive than the bashfulness of girlhood . terrible tenfold the loss of she seem now , as distantly far on the horizon of memory the fatal truth return to he . 
 lose she ? lose this ? he look up as if to ask God to confirm it . 
 the same sweet blue eye ! the eye that he have often see in the die glory of evening ; on he they dwelt , shift , and fluttering , and glitter , but constant : the light of they as the light on a rolling wave . 
 and true to he ! true , good , glorious , as the angel of heaven ! and his she be ! a woman his wife ! the temptation to take she , and be dumb , be all powerful : the wish to die against her bosom so strong as to be the prayer of his vital force . again he strain she to he , but this time it be as a robber grasp priceless treasure with exultation and defiance . one instant of this . Lucy , whose pure tenderness have now surmount the first wild passion of their meeting , bent back her head from her surrendered body , and say almost voicelessly , her underlid wistfully quiver : " come and see he baby ; " and then in great hope of the happiness she be go to give her husband , and share with he , and in tremour and doubt of what his feeling would be , she blush , and her brow work : she try to throw off the strangeness of a year of separation , misunderstanding , and uncertainty . 
 " Darling ! come and see he . he be here . " she speak more clearly , though no louder . 
 Richard have release she , and she take his hand , and he suffer himself to be lead to the other side of the bed . his heart begin rapidly throb at the sight of a little rosy - curtain cot cover with lace like milky summer cloud . 
 it seem to he he would lose his manhood if he look on that child 's face . 
 " stop ! " he cry suddenly . 
 Lucy turn first to he , and then to her infant , fear it should have be disturb . 
 " Lucy , come back . " 
 " what be it , darling ? " say she , in alarm at his voice and the grip he have unwittingly give her hand . 
 o God ! what an Ordeal be this ! that to - morrow he must face death , perhaps die and be tear from his darling his wife and his child ; and that ere he go forth , ere he could dare to see his child and lean his head reproachfully on his young wife 's breast for the last time , it might be he must stab she to the heart , shatter the image she hold of he . 
 " Lucy ! " she see he wrench with agony , and her own face take the whiteness of his she bend forward to he , all her faculty string to hearing . 
 he hold she two hand that she might look on he and not spare the horrible wound he be go to lay open to her eye . 
 " Lucy . do you know why I come to you to - night ? " 
 she move her lip repeat his word . 
 " Lucy . have you guess why I do not come before ? " 
 her head shake widened eye . 
 " Lucy . I do not come because I be not worthy of my wife ! do you understand ? " 
 " darling , " she falter plaintively , and hang crouch under he , " what have I do to make you angry with I ? " 
 " o beloved ! " cry he , the tear burst out of his eye . " o beloved ! " be all he could say , kiss her hand passionately . 
 she wait , reassure , but in terror . 
 " Lucy . I stay away from you I could not come to you , because ... I dare not come to you , my wife , my beloved ! I could not come because I be a coward : because hear I this be the reason : I have break my marriage oath . " 
 again her lip move . she catch at a dim fleshless mean in they . " but you love I ? Richard ! my husband ! you love I ? " 
 " yes . I have never love , I never shall love , woman but you . " 
 " Darling ! kiss I . " 
 " have you understand what I have tell you ? " 
 " kiss I , " she say . 
 he do not join lip . " I have come to you to - night to ask your forgiveness . " 
 her answer be : " kiss I . " 
 " can you forgive a man so base ? " 
 " but you love I , Richard ? " 
 " yes : that I can say before God . I love you , and I have betray you , and be unworthy of you not worthy to touch your hand , to kneel at your foot , to breathe the same air with you . " 
 her eye shine brilliantly . " you love I ! you love I , darling ! " and as one who have sail through dark fear into daylight , she say : " my husband ! my darling ! you will never leave I ? we never shall be part again ? " 
 he draw his breath painfully . to smooth her face grow rigid with fresh fear at his silence , he meet her mouth . that kiss in which she speak what her soul have to say , calm she , and she smile happily from it , and in her manner remind he of his first vision of she on the summer morning in the field of the meadow - sweet . he hold she to he , and think then of a holier picture : of Mother and child : of the sweet wonder of life she have make real to he . 
 have he not absolve his conscience ? at least the pang to come make he think so . he now follow her lead hand . Lucy whisper : " you must not   disturb he must not   touch he , dear ! " and with dainty finger draw off the covering to the little shoulder . one arm of the child be out along the pillow ; the small hand open . his baby - mouth be pout full ; the dark lash of his eye seem to lie on his plump cheek . Richard stoop lower down to he , hunger for some movement as a sign that he live . Lucy whisper . " he sleep like you , Richard one arm under his head . " great wonder , and the stir of a grasp tenderness be in Richard . he breathe quick and soft , bend lower , till Lucy 's curl , as she nestle and bend with he , roll on the crimson quilt of the cot . a smile go up the plump cheek : forthwith the bud of a mouth be in rapid motion . the young mother whisper , blush : " he be dream of I , " and the simple word do more than Richard 's eye to make he see what be . then Lucy begin to hum and buzz sweet baby - language , and some of the tiny finger stir , and he make as if to change his cosy position , but reconsider , and defer it , with a peaceful little sigh . Lucy whisper : " he be such a big fellow . oh ! when you see he awake he be so like you , Richard . " 
 he do not hear she immediately : it seem a bit of heaven drop there in his likeness : the more human the fact of the child grow the more heavenly it seem . his son ! his child ! should he ever see he awake ? at the thought , he take the word that have be speak , and start from the dream he have be in . " will he wake soon , Lucy ? " 
 " oh no ! not yet , dear : not for hour . I would have keep he awake for you , but he be so sleepy . " 
 Richard stand back from the cot . he think that if he see the eye of his boy , and have he once on his heart , he never should have force to leave he . then he look down on he , again struggle to tear himself away . two nature war in his bosom , or it may have be the magian Conflict still go on . he have come to see his child once and to make peace with his wife before it should be too late . might he not stop with they ? might he not relinquish that devilish pledge ? be not divine happiness here offer to he ? if foolish Ripton have not delay to tell he of his interview with Mountfalcon all might have be well . but pride say it be impossible . and then injury speak . for why be he thus base and spot to the darling of his love ? a mad pleasure in the prospect of wreak vengeance on the villain who have lay the trap for he , once more blacken his brain . if he would stay he could not . so he resolve , throw the burden on Fate . the struggle be over , but oh , the pain ! 
 Lucy behold the tear stream hot from his face on the child 's cot . she marvel at such excess of emotion . but when his chest heave , and the extremity of mortal anguish appear to have seize he , her heart sink , and she try to get he in her arm . he turn away from she and go to the window . a half - moon be over the lake . 
 " look ! " he say , " do you remember our rowing there one night , and we see the shadow of the cypress ? I wish I could have come early to - night that we might have have another row , and I have hear you sing there ! " 
 " Darling ! " say she , " will it make you happy if I go with you now ? I will . " 
 " no , Lucy . Lucy , you be brave ! " 
 " oh , no ! that I be not . I think so once . I know I be not now . " 
 " yes ! to have live the child on your heart and never to have utter a complaint ! you be brave . o my Lucy ! my wife ! you that have make I man ! I call you a coward . I remember it . I be the coward I the wretched vain fool ! darling ! I be go to leave you now . you be brave , and you will bear it . listen : in two day , or three , I may be back back for good , if you will accept I . promise I to go to bed quietly . kiss the child for I , and tell he his father have see he . he will learn to speak soon . will he soon speak , Lucy ? " 
 dreadful suspicion keep she speechless ; she could only clutch one arm of his with both her hand . 
 " go ? " she presently gasp . 
 " for two or three day . no more I hope . " 
 " to - night ? " 
 " yes . now . " 
 " go now ? my husband ! " her faculty abandon she . 
 " you will be brave , my Lucy ! " 
 " Richard ! my darling husband ! go ? what be it take you from I ? " but question no far , she fall on her knee , and cry piteously to he to stay not to leave they . then she drag he to the little sleeper , and urge he to pray by his side , and he do , but rise abruptly from his prayer when he have mutter a few break word she pray on with tight - string nerve , in the faith that what she say to the interceding Mother above would be strong than human hand on he . nor could he go while she kneel there . 
 and he waver . he have not reckon on her terrible suffering . she come to he , quiet . " I know you would remain . " and take his hand , innocently fondle it : " be I so changed from she he love ? you will not leave I , dear ? " but dread return , and the word quaver as she speak they . 
 he be almost vanquish by the loveliness of her womanhood . she draw his hand to her heart , and strain it there under one breast . " come : lie on my heart , " she murmur with a smile of holy sweetness . 
 he waver more , and droop to she , but summon the power of hell , kiss she suddenly , cry the word of parting , and hurry to the door . it be over in an instant . she cry out his name , cling to he wildly , and be adjure to be brave , for he would be dishonour if he do not go . then she be shake off . 
 Mrs. Berry be arouse by an unusual prolong wailing of the child , which show that no one be comfort it , and fail to get any answer to her application for admittance , she make bold to enter . there she see Lucy , the child in her lap , sit on the floor senseless : she have take it from its sleep and try to follow her husband with it as her strong appeal to he , and have faint . 
 " oh my ! oh my ! " Mrs. Berry moan , " and I just now thinkin ' they be so happy ! " 
 Warming and caress the poor infant , she manage by degree to revive Lucy , and hear what have bring she to that situation . 
 " go to his father , " say Mrs. Berry . " Ta - te - tiddle - te - heighty - o ! go , my love , and every horse in Raynham shall be out after ' m. this be what man bring we to ! Heighty - oighty - iddlety - ah ! or you take blessed baby , and I will go . " 
 the baronet himself knock at the door . " what be this ? " he say . " I hear a noise and a step descend . " 
 " it be Mr. Richard have go , Sir Austin ! have go from his wife and babe ! Rum - te - um - te - iddledy Oh , my goodness ! what sorrow be come on we ! " and Mrs. Berry weep , and sing to baby , and baby cry vehemently , and Lucy , sobbing , take he and dance he and sing to he with draw lip and tear drop over he . and if the scientific Humanist to the day of his death forget the sight of those two poor true woman jig on their wretched heart to calm the child , he must have very little of the human in he . 
 there be no more sleep for Raynham that night . 




 CHAPTER XLV 

 " his ordeal be over . I have just come from his room and see he bear the bad that could be . return at once he have ask for you . I can hardly write intelligibly , but I will tell you what we know . 
 " two day after the dreadful night when he leave we , his father hear from Ralph Morton . Richard have fight a duel in France with Lord Mountfalcon , and be lie wound at a hamlet on the coast . his father start immediately with his poor wife , and I follow in company with his aunt and his child . the wound be not dangerous . he be shoot in the side somewhere , but the ball injure no vital part . we think all would be well . oh ! how sick I be of theory , and Systems , and the pretension of man ! there be his son lie all but dead , and the man be still unconvinced of the folly he have be guilty of . I could hardly bear the sight of his composure . I shall hate the name of Science till the day I die . give I nothing but commonplace unpretende people ! 
 " they be at a wretched french cabaret , smell vilely , where we still remain , and the people try as much as they can do to compensate for our discomfort by their kindness . the french poor people be very considerate where they see suffering . I will say that for they . the doctor have not allow his poor Lucy to go near he . she sit outside his door , and none of we dare disturb she . that be a sight for Science . his father and myself , and Mrs. Berry , be the only one permit to wait on he , and whenever we come out , there she sit , not speak a word for she have be tell it would endanger his life but she look such awful eagerness . she have the sort of eye I fancy mad person have . I be sure her reason be go . we do everything we could think of to comfort she . a bed be make up for she and her meal be bring to she there . of course there be no get she to eat . what do you suppose his alarm be fix on ? he absolutely say to I but I have not patience to repeat his word . he think she to blame for not command herself for the sake of her maternal duty . he have absolutely an idea of insist that she should make an effort to suckle the child . I shall love that Mrs. Berry to the end of my day . I really believe she have twice the sense of any of we Science and all . she ask he plainly if he wish to poison the child , and then he give way , but with a bad grace . 
 " poor man ! perhaps I be hard on he . I remember that you say Richard have do wrong . yes ; well , that may be . but his father eclipse his wrong in a great wrong a crime , or quite as bad ; for if he deceive himself in the belief that he be act righteously in separate husband and wife , and expose his son as he do , I can only say that there be some who be bad than people who deliberately commit crime . no doubt Science will benefit by it . they kill little animal for the sake of Science . 
 " we have with we Doctor Bairam , and a french physician from Dieppe , a very skilful man . it be he who tell we where the real danger lie . we think all would be well . a week have pass , and no fever supervene . we tell Richard that his wife be come to he , and he could bear to hear it . I go to she and begin to circumlocute , think she listen she have the same eager look . when I tell she she might go in with I to see her dear husband , her feature do not change . M. Despres , who hold her pulse at the time , tell I , in a whisper , it be cerebral fever brain fever come on . we have talk of she since . I notice that though she do not seem to understand I , her bosom heave , and she appear to be try to repress it , and choke something . I be sure now , from what I know of her character , that she even in the approach of delirium be prevent herself from cry out . her last hold of reason be a thought for Richard . it be against a creature like this that we plot ! I have the comfort of know that I do my share in help to destroy she . have she see her husband a day or two before but no ! there be a new system to interdict that ! or have she not so violently control her nature as she do , I believe she might have be save . 
 " he say once of a man , that his conscience be a coxcomb . will you believe that when he see his son 's wife poor victim ! lie delirious , he could not even then see his error . you say he wish to take Providence out of God 's hand . his mad self - deceit would not leave he . I be positive , that while he be stand over she , he be blame she for not have consider the child . indeed he make a remark to I that it be unfortunate ' disastrous , ' I think he say that the child should have to be feed by hand . I dare say it be . all I pray be that this young child may be save from he . I can not bear to see he look on it . he do not spare himself bodily fatigue but what be that ? that be the vulgar form of love . I know what you will say . you will say I have lose all charity , and I have . but I should not feel so , Austin , if I could be quite sure that he be an altered man even now the blow have strike he . he be reserve and simple in his speech , and his grief be evident , but I have doubt . he hear she while she be senseless call he cruel and harsh , and cry that she have suffer , and I see then his mouth contract as if he have be touch . perhaps , when he think , his mind will be clear , but what he have do can not be undo . I do not imagine he will abuse woman any more . the doctor call she a ' forte et belle jeune femme : ' and he say she be as noble a soul as ever God mould clay upon . a noble soul ' forte et belle ! ' she lie upstairs . if he can look on she and not see his sin , I almost fear God will never enlighten he . " 
 she die five day after she have be remove . the shock have utterly derange she . I be with she . she die very quietly , breathe her last breath without pain ask for no one a death I should like to die . 
 " her cry at one time be dreadfully loud . she scream that she be ' drown in fire , ' and that her husband would not come to she to save she . we deaden the sound as much as we could , but it be impossible to prevent Richard from hear . he know her voice , and it produce an effect like fever on he . whenever she call he answer . you could not hear they without weep . Mrs. Berry sit with she , and I sit with he , and his father move from one to the other . 
 " but the trial for we come when she be go . how to communicate it to Richard or whether to do so at all ! his father consult with we . we be quite decide that it would be madness to breathe it while he be in that state . I can admit now as thing have turn out we be wrong . his father leave we I believe he spend the time in prayer and then lean on I , he go to Richard , and say in so many word , that his Lucy be no more . I think it must kill he . he listen , and smile . I never see a smile so sweet and so sad . he say he have see she die , as if he have pass through his suffering a long time ago . he shut his eye . I could see by the motion of his eyeball up that he be strain his sight to some inner heaven . I can not go on . 
 " I think Richard be safe . have we postpone the tiding , till he come to his clear sens , it must have kill he . his father be right for once , then . but if he have save his son 's body , he have give the death - blow to his heart . Richard will never be what he promise . 
 " a letter find on his clothe tell we the origin of the quarrel . I have have an interview with Lord M. this morning . I can not say I think he exactly to blame : Richard force he to fight . at least I do not select he the foremost for blame . he be deeply and sincerely affect by the calamity he have cause . alas ! he be only an instrument . your poor aunt be utterly prostrate and talk strange thing of her daughter 's death . she be only happy in drudge . Dr. Bairam say we must under any circumstance keep she employ . whilst she be do something , she can chat freely , but the moment her hand be not occupy she give I an idea that she be go into a fit . 
 " we expect the dear child 's uncle to - day . Mr. Thompson be here . I have take he upstairs to look at she . that poor young man have a true heart . 
 " come at once . you will not be in time to see she . she will lie at Raynham . if you could you would see an angel . he sit by her side for hour . I can give you no description of her beauty . 
 " you will not delay , I know , dear Austin , and I want you , for your presence will make I more charitable than I find it possible to be . have you notice the expression in the eye of blind man ? that be just how Richard look , as he lie there silent in his bed strive to image she on his brain . " 
 the END